
HANDBOOK
of
PSYCHOLOGY
VOLUME 6
DEVELOPMENTAL PSYCHOLOGY
Richard M. Lerner
M. Ann Easterbrooks
Jayanthi Mistry
Volume Editors
Irving B. Weiner
Editor-in-Chief
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.


HANDBOOK
of
PSYCHOLOGY


HANDBOOK
of
PSYCHOLOGY
VOLUME 6
DEVELOPMENTAL PSYCHOLOGY
Richard M. Lerner
M. Ann Easterbrooks
Jayanthi Mistry
Volume Editors
Irving B. Weiner
Editor-in-Chief
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

This book is printed on acid-free paper.
Copyright © 2003 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey. All rights reserved.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United
States Copyright Act, without either the prior written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the
appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, 
fax (978) 750-4470, or on the web at www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the
Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, (201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, 
e-mail: permcoordinator@wiley.com.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best efforts in preparing this book, they
make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this book and specifically
disclaim any implied warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by
sales representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable for your situation.
You should consult with a professional where appropriate. Neither the publisher nor author shall be liable for any loss of profit or
any other commercial damages, including but not limited to special, incidental, consequential, or other damages.
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold
with the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering professional services. If legal, accounting, medical,
psychological or any other expert assistance is required, the services of a competent professional person should be sought.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. In all instances where John Wiley &
Sons, Inc. is aware of a claim, the product names appear in initial capital or all capital letters. Readers, however, should contact the
appropriate companies for more complete information regarding trademarks and registration.
For general information on our other products and services please contact our Customer Care Department within the U.S. at 
(800) 762-2974, outside the United States at (317) 572-3993 or fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may not be available in
electronic books.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:
Handbook of psychology / Irving B. Weiner, editor-in-chief.
p.
cm.
Includes bibliographical references and indexes.
Contents: v. 1. History of psychology / edited by Donald K. Freedheim — v. 2. Research
methods in psychology / edited by John A. Schinka, Wayne F. Velicer — v. 3. Biological
psychology / edited by Michela Gallagher, Randy J. Nelson — v. 4. Experimental
psychology / edited by Alice F. Healy, Robert W. Proctor — v. 5. Personality and social
psychology / edited by Theodore Millon, Melvin J. Lerner — v. 6. Developmental
psychology / edited by Richard M. Lerner, M. Ann Easterbrooks, Jayanthi Mistry — v. 7.
Educational psychology / edited by William M. Reynolds, Gloria E. Miller — v. 8.
Clinical psychology / edited by George Stricker, Thomas A. Widiger — v. 9. Health psychology /
edited by Arthur M. Nezu, Christine Maguth Nezu, Pamela A. Geller — v. 10. Assessment
psychology / edited by John R. Graham, Jack A. Naglieri — v. 11. Forensic psychology /
edited by Alan M. Goldstein — v. 12. Industrial and organizational psychology / edited
by Walter C. Borman, Daniel R. Ilgen, Richard J. Klimoski.
ISBN 0-471-17669-9 (set) — ISBN 0-471-38320-1 (cloth : alk. paper : v. 1) 
— ISBN 0-471-38513-1 (cloth : alk. paper : v. 2) — ISBN 0-471-38403-8 (cloth : alk. paper : v. 3) 
— ISBN 0-471-39262-6 (cloth : alk. paper : v. 4) — ISBN 0-471-38404-6 (cloth : alk. paper : v. 5) 
— ISBN 0-471-38405-4 (cloth : alk. paper : v. 6) — ISBN 0-471-38406-2 (cloth : alk. paper : v. 7) 
— ISBN 0-471-39263-4 (cloth : alk. paper : v. 8) — ISBN 0-471-38514-X (cloth : alk. paper : v. 9) 
— ISBN 0-471-38407-0 (cloth : alk. paper : v. 10) — ISBN 0-471-38321-X (cloth : alk. paper : v. 11) 
— ISBN 0-471-38408-9 (cloth : alk. paper : v. 12)
1. Psychology. I. Weiner, Irving B.
BF121.H1955 2003
150—dc21
2002066380
Printed in the United States of America.
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
➇

Editorial Board
Volume 1
History of Psychology
Donald K. Freedheim, PhD
Case Western Reserve University
Cleveland, Ohio
Volume 2
Research Methods in Psychology
John A. Schinka, PhD
University of South Florida
Tampa, Florida
Wayne F. Velicer, PhD
University of Rhode Island
Kingston, Rhode Island
Volume 3
Biological Psychology
Michela Gallagher, PhD
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, Maryland
Randy J. Nelson, PhD
Ohio State University
Columbus, Ohio
Volume 4
Experimental Psychology
Alice F. Healy, PhD
University of Colorado
Boulder, Colorado
Robert W. Proctor, PhD 
Purdue University
West Lafayette, Indiana
Volume 5
Personality and Social Psychology
Theodore Millon, PhD
Institute for Advanced Studies in
Personology and Psychopathology
Coral Gables, Florida
Melvin J. Lerner, PhD
Florida Atlantic University
Boca Raton, Florida
Volume 6
Developmental Psychology
Richard M. Lerner, PhD
M. Ann Easterbrooks, PhD
Jayanthi Mistry, PhD
Tufts University
Medford, Massachusetts
Volume 7
Educational Psychology
William M. Reynolds, PhD
Humboldt State University
Arcata, California
Gloria E. Miller, PhD
University of Denver
Denver, Colorado
Volume 8
Clinical Psychology
George Stricker, PhD
Adelphi University
Garden City, New York
Thomas A. Widiger, PhD
University of Kentucky
Lexington, Kentucky
Volume 9
Health Psychology
Arthur M. Nezu, PhD
Christine Maguth Nezu, PhD
Pamela A. Geller, PhD
Drexel University
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
Volume 10
Assessment Psychology
John R. Graham, PhD
Kent State University
Kent, Ohio
Jack A. Naglieri, PhD
George Mason University
Fairfax, Virginia
Volume 11
Forensic Psychology
Alan M. Goldstein, PhD
John Jay College of Criminal
Justice–CUNY
New York, New York
Volume 12
Industrial and Organizational
Psychology
Walter C. Borman, PhD
University of South Florida
Tampa, Florida
Daniel R. Ilgen, PhD
Michigan State University
East Lansing, Michigan 
Richard J. Klimoski, PhD
George Mason University
Fairfax, Virginia
v


Handbook of Psychology Preface
Psychology at the beginning of the twenty-ﬁrst century has
become a highly diverse ﬁeld of scientiﬁc study and applied
technology. Psychologists commonly regard their discipline
as the science of behavior, and the American Psychological
Association has formally designated 2000 to 2010 as the
“Decade of Behavior.” The pursuits of behavioral scientists
range from the natural sciences to the social sciences and em-
brace a wide variety of objects of investigation. Some psy-
chologists have more in common with biologists than with
most other psychologists, and some have more in common
with sociologists than with most of their psychological col-
leagues. Some psychologists are interested primarily in the be-
havior of animals, some in the behavior of people, and others
in the behavior of organizations. These and other dimensions
of difference among psychological scientists are matched by
equal if not greater heterogeneity among psychological practi-
tioners, who currently apply a vast array of methods in many
different settings to achieve highly varied purposes.
Psychology has been rich in comprehensive encyclope-
dias and in handbooks devoted to speciﬁc topics in the ﬁeld.
However, there has not previously been any single handbook
designed to cover the broad scope of psychological science
and practice. The present 12-volume Handbook of Psychol-
ogy was conceived to occupy this place in the literature.
Leading national and international scholars and practitioners
have collaborated to produce 297 authoritative and detailed
chapters covering all fundamental facets of the discipline,
and the Handbook has been organized to capture the breadth
and diversity of psychology and to encompass interests and
concerns shared by psychologists in all branches of the ﬁeld. 
Two unifying threads run through the science of behavior.
The ﬁrst is a common history rooted in conceptual and em-
pirical approaches to understanding the nature of behavior.
The specific histories of all specialty areas in psychology
trace their origins to the formulations of the classical philoso-
phers and the methodology of the early experimentalists, and
appreciation for the historical evolution of psychology in all
of its variations transcends individual identities as being one
kind of psychologist or another. Accordingly, Volume 1 in
the Handbook is devoted to the history of psychology as
it emerged in many areas of scientific study and applied
technology. 
A second unifying thread in psychology is a commitment
to the development and utilization of research methods
suitable for collecting and analyzing behavioral data. With
attention both to specific procedures and their application
in particular settings, Volume 2 addresses research methods
in psychology.
Volumes 3 through 7 of the Handbook present the sub-
stantive content of psychological knowledge in five broad
areas of study: biological psychology (Volume 3), experi-
mental psychology (Volume 4), personality and social psy-
chology (Volume 5), developmental psychology (Volume 6),
and educational psychology (Volume 7). Volumes 8 through
12 address the application of psychological knowledge in
ﬁve broad areas of professional practice: clinical psychology
(Volume 8), health psychology (Volume 9), assessment psy-
chology (Volume 10), forensic psychology (Volume 11), and
industrial and organizational psychology (Volume 12). Each
of these volumes reviews what is currently known in these
areas of study and application and identiﬁes pertinent sources
of information in the literature. Each discusses unresolved is-
sues and unanswered questions and proposes future direc-
tions in conceptualization, research, and practice. Each of the
volumes also reﬂects the investment of scientiﬁc psycholo-
gists in practical applications of their ﬁndings and the atten-
tion of applied psychologists to the scientiﬁc basis of their
methods.
The Handbook of Psychology was prepared for the pur-
pose of educating and informing readers about the present
state of psychological knowledge and about anticipated ad-
vances in behavioral science research and practice. With this
purpose in mind, the individual Handbook volumes address
the needs and interests of three groups. First, for graduate stu-
dents in behavioral science, the volumes provide advanced
instruction in the basic concepts and methods that deﬁne the
ﬁelds they cover, together with a review of current knowl-
edge, core literature, and likely future developments. Second,
in addition to serving as graduate textbooks, the volumes
offer professional psychologists an opportunity to read and
contemplate the views of distinguished colleagues concern-
ing the central thrusts of research and leading edges of prac-
tice in their respective ﬁelds. Third, for psychologists seeking
to become conversant with ﬁelds outside their own specialty
vii

viii
Handbook of Psychology Preface
and for persons outside of psychology seeking informa-
tion about psychological matters, the Handbook volumes
serve as a reference source for expanding their knowledge
and directing them to additional sources in the literature. 
The preparation of this Handbook was made possible by
the diligence and scholarly sophistication of the 25 volume
editors and co-editors who constituted the Editorial Board.
As Editor-in-Chief, I want to thank each of them for the plea-
sure of their collaboration in this project. I compliment them
for having recruited an outstanding cast of contributors to
their volumes and then working closely with these authors to
achieve chapters that will stand each in their own right as
valuable contributions to the literature. I would like ﬁnally to
express my appreciation to the editorial staff of John Wiley
and Sons for the opportunity to share in the development of
this project and its pursuit to fruition, most particularly to
Jennifer Simon, Senior Editor, and her two assistants, Mary
Porterﬁeld and Isabel Pratt. Without Jennifer’s vision of the
Handbook and her keen judgment and unﬂagging support in
producing it, the occasion to write this preface would not
have arrived.
IRVING B. WEINER
Tampa, Florida

Volume Preface
ix
At this writing, at the beginning of the twenty-ﬁrst century,
the study of human development is framed by theoretical
models that stress that dynamic, integrated relations across
all the distinct but fused levels of organization involved in
human life. The relations among these levels constitute the
basic process of development. The levels include biology,
individual psychological and behavioral functioning, social
relationships and institutions, the natural and designed phys-
ical ecology, culture, and history.
Indeed, from the beginning of the last century to the pre-
sent one, the history of developmental psychology has been
marked by an increasing interest in the role of history. Schol-
ars have been concerned with how temporal changes in the
familial, social, and cultural contexts of life shape the quality
of the trajectories of change that individuals traverse across
their life spans. Scholars of human development have incor-
porated into their causal schemas about ontogenetic change a
nonreductionistic and synthetic conception about the inﬂu-
ence of context—of culture and history—on ontogenetic
change. In contrast to models framed by a Cartesian split
view of the causes of change, cutting-edge thinking in the
ﬁeld of human development has altered its essential ontology.
The relational view of being that now predominates the ﬁeld
has required epistemological revisions in the ﬁeld as well.
Both qualitative understanding and quantitative understand-
ing have been legitimized as scholars have sought an inte-
grated understanding of the multiple levels of organization
comprising the ecology of human development.
The integrated relations studied in contemporary scholar-
ship are embedded in the actual ecology of human develop-
ment. As a consequence, policies and programs represent
both features of the cultural context of this ecology and
methodological tools for understanding how variations in
individual-context relations may impact the trajectory of
human life. As such, the application of developmental sci-
ence (through policy and program innovations and evalua-
tions) is part of—synthesized with—the study of the basic,
relational processes of human development.
In essence, then, as we pursue our scholarship about
human development at this early part of a new century, we do
so with an orientation to the human life span that is charac-
terized by (a) integrated, relational models of human life,
perspectives synthesizing biological-through-physical eco-
logical inﬂuences on human development in nonreductionis-
tic manners; (b) a broad array of qualitative and quantitative
methodologies necessary for attaining knowledge about
these fused, biopsychoecological relations; (c) a growing ap-
preciation of the importance of the cultural and historical in-
ﬂuences on the quality and trajectory of human development
across the course of life; and (d) a synthesis of basic and ap-
plied developmental science. 
These four deﬁning themes in the study of human devel-
opment are represented in contemporary developmental sys-
tems theories, perspectives that constitute the overarching
conceptual frames of modern scholarship in the study of
human development. We believe that the chapters in this vol-
ume reﬂect and extend this integrative systems view of basic
and applied developmental scholarship.
Part I of this volume, “Foundations of Development
Across the Life Span,” describes the ontological and episte-
mological features of this synthetic approach to developmen-
tal science. The following four parts of the volume provide
evidence, within and across successive portions of the life
span, of the rich scholarship conducted to describe and explain
dynamic relations between developing individuals and their
complex contexts. The final part of the volume, “Applied
Developmental Psychology Across the Life Span,” extends
the age-speciﬁc discussions of basic person-context relational
processes to multiple portions of the life span. Chapters in this
section focus on the use of concepts and research associated
with developmental systems thinking in applied efforts aimed
at enhancing relational processes and promoting positive,
healthy developmental trajectories across life.
In sum, by focusing on the four themes of contemporary
human development theory and research just described,
chapters in this volume reﬂect and offer a foundation for con-
tinued contributions to developmental scholarship aimed at
understanding the dynamic relations between individuals and
contexts. As we believe is persuasively demonstrated by the
chapters in this volume, contemporary human developmental
science provides rigorous and important scholarship about
the process of human development and applications across
the life span. Together, these advances in the scholarship of
knowledge generation and knowledge application serve as an

x
Volume Preface
invaluable means for advancing science and service pertinent
to people across the breadth of their lives. 
There are numerous people to thank in regard to the prepa-
ration of this book. First and foremost we are indebted to the
volume’s contributors. Their scholarship and dedication to
excellence and social relevance in developmental science and
its application enabled this work to be produced. The contri-
butions serve as models of how scholarship may contribute
both to knowledge and to the positive development of people
across their life spans. We also owe a great debt to editor-in-
chief Irving Weiner, both for giving us the opportunity to edit
this volume of the Handbook and for his unﬂagging support
and superb scholarly advice and direction throughout the en-
tire project. We are especially indebted to our colleague in the
Eliot-Pearson Department of Child Development at Tufts
University, Professor David Elkind, for his generous and
insightful foreword to this volume.
Our colleagues and students in Eliot-Pearson were great
resources to us in the development of this volume. We thank
Karyn Lu, managing editor of the Applied Developmental
Science Publications Program in Eliot-Pearson, for her ex-
pert editorial support and guidance. Jennifer Simon, our
publisher at Wiley, was a constant source of excellent advice,
encouragement, and collegial support, and we are pleased to
acknowledge our gratitude to her.
Finally, we deeply appreciate the love and support given
to us by our families during our work on this volume. They
remain our most cherished developmental assets, and we
gratefully dedicate this book to them.
RICHARD M. LERNER
M. ANN EASTERBROOKS
JAYANTHI MISTRY

Foreword
Longevity within a discipline carries with it certain advan-
tages. Not the least of these is the luxury of a historical per-
spective. I was increasingly drawn to this perspective as I
read over the topics of this sixth volume of the Handbook of
Psychology: Developmental Psychology. What impressed
me, from a perspective of 40 years, was both how much had
changed and how much had remained the same. Accordingly,
in this foreword I want to take the opportunity to reflect
brieﬂy, for each of the major domains covered by the text,
both on the progress that has been made and on what remains
to be accomplished.
If I were to use one concept to describe the difference be-
tween the developmental psychology of today and that of
40 years ago, it would be the movement from simplicity to
complexity. When I was going to school, positivism was in
vogue. One facet was the belief in Occam’s razor: “Simplify,
simplify” was the dictum—that is, reduce everything to the
simplest, most basic formulation. Today, in our postmodern
world, we recognize that the goal of simplicity was mis-
guided. In all domains of psychological investigation the fur-
ther we progress, the more we discover the multiplicity, and
intricacy, of variables and factors that must be taken into ac-
count in the understanding and prediction of human behavior.
Complexity, moreover, also entails the breakdown of disci-
plinary boundaries and the rapid rise of interdisciplinary
research and theory. 
In their introductory chapter Lerner, Easterbrooks, and
Mistry give a comprehensive overview of the multifaceted
nature of human development. Development has to be histor-
ically situated and connected to the social, cultural, political,
and economic forces that are in play at that time in history.
Complexity is at play in the psychological processes them-
selves. Learning, perception, and cognition, as well as other
psychological dispositions, are all much more involved than
we once supposed them to be. Indeed, each of the chapters in
this book is a testament to this new respect for complexity.
Our discipline is also much broader than it was in the past.
A case in point is the relatively new interest in human devel-
opment across the life span. Today, we take this extension of
our area of research and theory across the whole life cycle as
a given. However, it was not always so. As late as 1954 David
Wechsler could still write that intelligence peaked at the age
of 18 years and declined thereafter. This psychometric view
contributed to a neglect of the psychology of adulthood.
Likewise, the prevalence of Freudian psychology contributed
to the view that adult personality could be understood
completely in terms of childhood experience. Human devel-
opment after adolescence, in and of itself, was generally re-
garded as uninteresting if not boring. Erikson’s work on the
human life cycle was one of the major impetuses to studying
adulthood in all of its psychological vicissitudes. In addition,
the fact that people live longer and healthier lives has con-
tributed to the concern with development across the whole
life cycle. 
Today, as Overton describes it, the ﬁeld is rich in both re-
search and theory. The life-span approach to development
has raised a whole new set of questions and theoretical issues
that will act back on what we know and think about develop-
ment from infancy to adolescence. Although developmental
psychology has always had an applied dimension, given its
close association with both pediatrics and education, that di-
mension was always subordinate to purely disciplinary con-
cerns. In his chapter, Donald Wertlieb makes clear that that
situation has changed and that applied concerns now dictate a
great deal of developmental research. This applied emphasis
is illustrated not only by Wertlieb’s examples but also by a
great many chapters in the book wherein the authors draw
implication for policy and practice.
Infancy has been one of the most intensely studied and
conceptualized ﬁelds of developmental psychology. Again,
our knowledge in this domain, as in so many others, contin-
ues to grow and to demonstrate the complexity of behavior at
the infancy level. The chapter titled “Infant Perception and
Cognition,” by Cohen and Cashon, describes the many con-
temporary research technologies and theoretical models em-
ployed in the study of infants’ progress in cognitive ability
and conceptual understanding. In the next chapter, titled
“Social and Emotional Development in Infancy,” Thompson,
Easterbrooks, and Padilla-Walker emphasize the contextual
variables that have to be considered in understanding attach-
ment and the evolution of self-other understanding. 
The interdisciplinary nature of much of today’s develop-
mental psychology is nicely evidenced by the Gunnar
and Davis chapter titled “Stress and Emotion in Early
xi

xii
Foreword
Childhood.” Workers in this area are bringing together psy-
chological, biological, and neurological concepts to provide a
deeper understanding of the dynamics of stress. The next
chapter in this section, “Diversity in Caregiving Contexts,”
by Fitzgerald, Mann, Cabrera, and Wong, is yet another ex-
ample of the emergence of applied studies. With more than
85% of young children in one or another form of child
care, the need to assess the effects of amount and quality of
early child care is imperative. This chapter not only reviews
the few longitudinal studies in this field but also suggests
important caveats in the interpretation of data from such
investigations.
In the third part of the book, which deals with childhood
proper (ages 6–12), we again see how the study of this stage
of development has grown in both breadth and complexity.
The ﬁrst chapter in this section, by Hoff, summarizes con-
temporary research and theory on language development in
childhood. In so doing, Hoff highlights the biological, lin-
guistic, social, and cognitive approaches to this topic as well
as the many questions that still remain in the attempts to
discover how children learn to talk. In his chapter titled
“Cognitive Development in Childhood,” Feldman summa-
rizes the many changes undergone in a ﬁeld that was once
dominated by Piagetian research and theory. Neo-Piagetian
approaches, information theory models, the individualization
of normative development, and the use of brain imaging to
study the development of mental processes are but some of
the innovations that have transformed this area of investiga-
tion over the last few decades. 
Likewise, the chapter “Emotion and Personality Develop-
ment in Childhood,” by Cummings, Braungart-Rieker, and
Du Rocher-Schudlich, goes well beyond the identiﬁcation of
the primary emotions and their differentiation with age,
which once characterized this ﬁeld. Now researchers look at
emotion in connection with many other facets of develop-
ment from psychobiology to personality. Social-cultural
variables are taken into account as well. What is striking with
respect to emotions, as with so many other topics covered in
this book, is how contextualized the treatment of this topic
now is in contrast to the isolated way in which it was once
approached.
The following chapter, “Social Development and Social
Relationships in Middle Childhood,” by McHale, Dariotis,
and Kauh, is quite striking in its break with the past. For
many decades childhood was a relatively neglected stage ex-
cept perhaps for cognitive and moral development. But these
authors make a strong case for the crucial importance of
this period for the development of independence, work
habits, self-regulation, and social skills. In their chapter titled
“The Cultural Context of Child Development,” Mistry and
Saraswathi give evidence that the road to cross-disciplinary
research is not always smooth. They illustrate how the
ﬁelds of cross-cultural psychology, cultural psychology, and
developmental psychology do not always map easily on to
one another. They give challenging examples of the kinds of
research paradigms that might ease the integration of culture
and development.
Part IV of the text deals with adolescence. The ﬁrst chap-
ter, “Puberty, Sexuality, and Health,” by Susman, Dorn, and
Schiefelbein, is a testament to the complexity with which we
now view development. In addition to biopsychosocial mod-
els, the paper also includes the perspectives of developmental
contextualism and holistic interactionism. It also reﬂects the
new applied emphasis by suggesting some of the policy, and
educational implications, of current research on pubertal
timing. In their chapter titled “Cognitive Development in
Adolescence,” Eccles, Wigﬁeld, and Byrnes focus upon the
relation of cognitive growth and achievement as this relation-
ship is mediated by gender and ethnic group differences.
Again we see that cognitive development, once considered
pretty much in isolation, is now placed in a much broader
personal-social context.
Galambos and Costigan also demonstrate the new multi-
variate approach to developmental issues in their chapter
titled “Emotion and Personality Development in Adoles-
cence.” Among the new themes emerging from this contex-
tual approach are a focus on optimal development, cultural
variations, the relation of emotion to temperament, and the
person approach. The applied dimension is reﬂected in the
author’s suggestions for intervention and prevention pro-
grams. In their chapter titled “Positive Behaviors, Problem
Behaviors, and Resiliency in Adolescence,” Perkins and
Borden give the lie to the naive notion that educational
curricula are the panacea for all of adolescent problem be-
haviors. On the contrary, this chapter reflects our current
understanding that the real issue is why young people take
risks. Perkins and Borden detail the risk factors revealed by
contemporary research. They also provide a brief history of
the development of resiliency research. In this review they
highlight the many forms of social capital that support
invulnerability. Authors Kerr, Stattin, Biesecker, and Ferrer-
Wreder provide a groundbreaking integration of the parent-
ing and the peer interaction literature in their chapter titled
“Relationships with Parents and Peers in Adolescence.”
Up until very recently these two topics were dealt with as
independent issues. This chapter provides a ﬁne example of
the integrative work going on both within and between
disciplines.

Foreword
xiii
Part V of the text looks at research and theory on adult-
hood and aging. In their chapter titled “Disease, Health, and
Aging,” Siegler, Bosworth, and Poon look at the variables
coming into play in the study of aging during this new
century. These variables include the input from multiple
disciplines, a focus on Alzheimer’s, the social context of
aging, and the impact of new discoveries in medicine and
genetics. Dixon and Cohen, in their chapter titled “Cognitive
Development in Adulthood,” summarize ﬁndings from a very
active ﬁeld of research. Both studies dealing with classical
and emerging issues are reviewed. One of the classical issues
is the study of patterns of intellectual aging. Among the
emerging issues are the study of metamemory and social
interactive memory. 
A major issue of personality research in adulthood is the
stability and change of attitudes and traits over time. In their
chapter titled “Personality Development in Adulthood and
Old Age,” Bertrand and Lachman review several ap-
proaches, theories, and models that have been put forward to
address this issue. They also review ﬁndings regarding the
relation of identity, self-efficacy, and other variables on
the development of adult personality. A novel approach to
the study of aging is introduced by Pruchno and Rosenbaum
in their chapter titled “Social Relationships in Adulthood
and Old Age.” These authors focus on research on adult so-
cial relations in which at least one of the participants is el-
derly. They look at relations among spouses, parents and
children, siblings, and friends. Their aim is not only to dis-
cern patterns but also to identify key research questions that
have yet to be addressed.
Part VI of the book is devoted to applied issues. Hauser-
Cram and Howell, in their chapter titled “Disabilities and
Development,” review the history and current state or re-
search on children with disabilities. Although the authors
welcome the research relating disabilities to family influ-
ences and family health, they cite the lack of research relating
disabilities to cultural conceptions of challenged children.
The next chapter, “Applied Developmental Science of Posi-
tive Human Development,” by Lerner, Anderson, Balsano,
Dowling, and Bobek, is conceptual and theoretical rather
than empirical. A number of different person-context models
are reviewed, and the authors use the youth charter model as
an example of how the person-context approach can be em-
ployed to promote adolescent health. In his chapter titled
“Child Development and the Law,” Lamb illustrates how de-
velopmental research and theory can be invaluable in making
legal decisions affecting the family. As cases in point he
reviews the research regarding child witness testimony and
divorce and custody. This review makes his case that the
legal system might well look to developmental science for
important information and guidance.
A very interesting approach to life-span development is
offered by Connell and Janevic in their chapter titled “Health
and Human Development.” These authors look at the impor-
tant issue of how health habits, social involvement, and atti-
tudes at one age period affect health at later periods. A telling
example is the relation between a relative lack of physical ac-
tivity in the early adult years and the contraction of diabetes
at middle age. The authors suggest important contextual is-
sues such as socioeconomic status, race, culture, and gender
as other variables that enter into the health-aging connec-
tion. The ﬁnal chapter, “Successful Aging,” ends on a posi-
tive note. In this chapter Freund and Riediger deal with
models that have been suggested for successful aging. These
models emphasize the importance of actively taking charge
of one’s life and of continued engagement with the world. In
so doing, older people can maintain high-level functioning
and well-being. Further research in this area will be espe-
cially important as the proportion of our aging population
increases with the entrance of the baby boomers into the se-
nior citizen category.
The review of these chapters thus gives evidence of the
vigorous growth of child development as a discipline. Com-
plexity of conceptualization and research design, interdisci-
plinary research, and an applied emphasis all characterize the
field today. Although there is so much to admire in the
progress we have made, it is perhaps a bit unappreciative to
remark on an area that I feel continues to be neglected. This
neglected area is education. Child development has so much
to contribute to education, yet we continue to remain on the
sidelines and limit our involvement to such issues as disabil-
ities or reading problems. The reason may be that there is a
whole ﬁeld of educational research that purportedly is the sci-
ence of education. But much of educational research is unin-
formed by developmental psychology. This is particularly
true in the domain of content, where educational psychology
is particularly remiss. Developmental psychology has a
tremendous role to play. We need to explore how children
learn different subject matters and look at this learning in the
contextual framework that has become so prominent in so
many other areas. It is sad to see so much ﬁne developmental
research with such clear implications for education, to never
be employed in this way. I believe it is time to make educa-
tion an important field for applied developmental science.
The foregoing remarks are in no way a criticism of this re-
markable volume. Rather, they are addressed to the ﬁeld as a
whole. What is so satisfying about this Handbook is how so
much of what is new and invigorating in the ﬁeld is now a

xiv
Foreword
part of our conventional wisdom. We are no longer bound by
the early constraints of psychology that identified science
with experimentation and quantification and operationally
defined variables. Observation, ethnographic studies and
narrative, and other qualitative methodologies are now
part of the developmentalist’s tool kit. And we no longer
have only the grand theories of Freud, Piaget, and Erikson;
we also appreciate the domain specificity of so much of
human thought and behavior. This book is not only a solid
summary of where we stand with regard to our knowledge of
human development today, but also a powerful witness for
the readiness of the ﬁeld itself to grow and to mature.
DAVID ELKIND

Handbook of Psychology Preface
vii
Irving B. Weiner
Volume Preface
ix
Richard M. Lerner, M. Ann Easterbrooks, and Jayanthi Mistry
Foreword
xi
David Elkind
Contributors
xix
INTRODUCTION: DIMENSIONS OF DEVELOPMENTAL PSYCHOLOGY
1
Richard M. Lerner, M. Ann Easterbrooks, and Jayanthi Mistry
PART ONE
FOUNDATIONS OF DEVELOPMENT ACROSS THE LIFE SPAN
1
DEVELOPMENT ACROSS THE LIFE SPAN
13
Willis F. Overton
2
APPLIED DEVELOPMENTAL SCIENCE
43
Donald Wertlieb
PART TWO
INFANCY
3
INFANT PERCEPTION AND COGNITION
65
Leslie B. Cohen and Cara H. Cashon
4
SOCIALAND EMOTIONAL DEVELOPMENT IN INFANCY
91
Ross A. Thompson, M. Ann Easterbrooks, and Laura M. Padilla-Walker
5
STRESS AND EMOTION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD
113
Megan R. Gunnar and Elysia Poggi Davis
6
DIVERSITY IN CAREGIVING CONTEXTS
135
Hiram Fitzgerald, Tammy Mann, Natasha Cabrera, and Maria M. Wong
Contents
xv

xvi
Contents
PART THREE
CHILDHOOD
7
LANGUAGE DEVELOPMENT IN CHILDHOOD
171
Erika Hoff
8
COGNITIVE DEVELOPMENT IN CHILDHOOD
195
David Henry Feldman
9
EMOTION AND PERSONALITY DEVELOPMENT IN CHILDHOOD
211
E. Mark Cummings, Julia M. Braungart-Rieker, and Tina Du Rocher-Schudlich
10
SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT AND SOCIAL RELATIONSHIPS IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD
241
Susan M. McHale, Jacinda K. Dariotis, and Tina J. Kauh
11
THE CULTURAL CONTEXT OF CHILD DEVELOPMENT
267
Jayanthi Mistry and T. S. Saraswathi
PART FOUR
ADOLESCENCE
12
PUBERTY, SEXUALITY, AND HEALTH
295
Elizabeth J. Susman, Lorah D. Dorn, and Virginia L. Schiefelbein
13
COGNITIVE DEVELOPMENT IN ADOLESCENCE
325
Jacquelynne Eccles, Allan Wigﬁeld, and James Byrnes
14
EMOTIONALAND PERSONALITY DEVELOPMENT IN ADOLESCENCE
351
Nancy L. Galambos and Catherine L. Costigan
15
POSITIVE BEHAVIORS, PROBLEM BEHAVIORS, AND RESILIENCY IN ADOLESCENCE
373
Daniel F. Perkins and Lynne M. Borden
16
RELATIONSHIPS WITH PARENTS AND PEERS IN ADOLESCENCE
395
Margaret Kerr, Håkan Stattin, Gretchen Biesecker, and Laura Ferrer-Wreder
PART FIVE
ADULTHOOD AND AGING
17
DISEASE, HEALTH, AND AGING
423
Ilene Siegler, Hayden B. Bosworth, and Leonard W. Poon
18
COGNITIVE DEVELOPMENT IN ADULTHOOD
443
Roger A. Dixon and Anna-Lisa Cohen
19
PERSONALITY DEVELOPMENT IN ADULTHOOD AND OLD AGE
463
Rosanna M. Bertrand and Margie E. Lachman

Contents
xvii
20
SOCIAL RELATIONSHIPS IN ADULTHOOD AND OLD AGE
487
Rachel Pruchno and Jennifer Rosenbaum
PART SIX
APPLIED DEVELOPMENTAL PSYCHOLOGY ACROSS THE LIFE SPAN
21
DISABILITIES AND DEVELOPMENT
513
Penny Hauser-Cram and Angela Howell
22
APPLIED DEVELOPMENTAL SCIENCE OF POSITIVE HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
535
Richard M. Lerner, Pamela M. Anderson, Aida Bilalbegovic´ Balsano,
Elizabeth M. Dowling, and Deborah L. Bobek
23
CHILD DEVELOPMENT AND THE LAW
559
Michael E. Lamb
24
HEALTH AND HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
579
Cathleen M. Connell and Mary R. Janevic
25
SUCCESSFULAGING
601
Alexandra M. Freund and Michaela Riediger
Author Index
629
Subject Index
657


Pamela M. Anderson, MS
Eliot-Pearson Department of Child Development
Tufts University
Medford, Massachusetts
Aida Bilalbegovic´ Balsano, MS
Eliot-Pearson Department of Child Development
Tufts University
Medford, Massachusetts
Rosanna M. Bertrand, PhD
Department of Psychology
Brandeis University
Waltham, Massachusetts
Gretchen Biesecker, PhD
Department of Social Science
Örebro University
Örebro, Sweden
Deborah L. Bobek, MS
Eliot-Pearson Department of Child Development
Tufts University
Medford, Massachusetts
Lynne M. Borden, PhD
Children, Youth, and Family Programs
Michigan State University
East Lansing, Michigan
Hayden B. Bosworth, PhD
Duke University Medical Center
Durham, North Carolina
Julia M. Braungart-Rieker, PhD
Department of Psychology
University of Notre Dame
Notre Dame, Indiana
James Byrnes, PhD
Department of Human Development/
Institute for Child Study
University of Maryland
College Park, Maryland
Natasha Cabrera, PhD
National Institute of Child Health and Development
Bethesda, Maryland
Cara H. Cashon, BS
Department of Psychology
University of Texas
Austin, Texas
Anna-Lisa Cohen, MS
Department of Psychology
University of Victoria
Victoria, British Columbia
Canada
Leslie B. Cohen, PhD
Department of Psychology
University of Texas
Austin, Texas
Cathleen M. Connell, PhD
School of Public Health
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, Michigan
Catherine L. Costigan, PhD
Department of Psychology
University of Victoria
Victoria, British Columbia
Canada
E. Mark Cummings, PhD
Department of Psychology
University of Notre Dame
Notre Dame, Indiana
Jacinda K. Dariotis, MA
Human Development and Family Studies
Pennsylvania State University
University Park, Pennsylvania
Elysia Poggi Davis, BA
Institute of Child Development
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, Minnesota
Contributors
xix

xx
Contributors
Roger A. Dixon, PhD
Department of Psychology
University of Victoria
Victoria, British Columbia
Canada
Lorah D. Dorn, PhD
School of Nursing
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Elizabeth M. Dowling, MS
Eliot-Pearson Department of Child Development
Tufts University
Medford, Massachusetts
M. Ann Easterbrooks, PhD
Eliot-Pearson Department of Child Development
Tufts University
Medford, Massachusetts
Jacquelynne Eccles, PhD
Department of Human Development and Social Policy
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, Michigan
David Elkind, PhD
Eliot-Pearson Department of Child Development
Tufts University
Medford, Massachusetts
David Henry Feldman, PhD
Eliot-Pearson Department of Child Development
Tufts University
Medford, Massachusetts
Laura Ferrer-Wreder, PhD
Department of Social Science
Örebro University
Örebro, Sweden
Hiram Fitzgerald, PhD
Department of Psychology
Michigan State University
East Lansing, Michigan
Alexandra M. Freund, PhD
Max Planck Institute for Human Development
Berlin, Germany
Nancy L. Galambos, PhD
Department of Psychology
University of Victoria
Victoria, British Columbia
Canada
Megan R. Gunnar, PhD
Institute of Child Development
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, Minnesota
Penny Hauser-Cram, PhD
Lynch School of Education
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts
Erika Hoff, PhD
Department of Psychology
Florida Atlantic University
Davie, Florida
Angela Howell, MA
Lynch School of Education
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts
Mary R. Janevic, MPH
School of Public Health
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, Michigan
Tina J. Kauh, BA
Human Development and Family Studies
Pennsylvania State University
University Park, Pennsylvania
Margaret Kerr, PhD
Department of Social Science
Örebro University
Örebro, Sweden
Margie E. Lachman, PhD
Department of Psychology
Brandeis University
Waltham, Massachusetts
Michael E. Lamb, PhD
National Institute of Child Health and
Human Development
Bethesda, Maryland
Richard M. Lerner, PhD
Eliot-Pearson Department of
Child Development
Tufts University
Medford, Massachusetts
Tammy Mann, PhD
Zero to Three
Washington, DC

Contributors
xxi
Susan M. McHale, PhD
Human Development and Family Studies
Pennsylvania State University
University Park, Pennsylvania
Jayanthi Mistry, PhD
Eliot-Pearson Department of Child Development
Tufts University
Medford, Massachusetts
Willis F. Overton, PhD
Department of Psychology
Temple University
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
Laura M. Padilla-Walker, PhD
Department of Psychology
University of Nebraska
Lincoln, Nebraska
Daniel F. Perkins, PhD
Department of Agricultural and Extension Education
Pennsylvania State University
University Park, Pennsylvania
Leonard W. Poon, PhD
Department of Psychology
University of Georgia
Athens, Georgia
Rachel Pruchno, PhD
The Center for Work and Family
Boston College
Newton Centre, Massachusetts
Michaela Riediger, PhD
Max Planck Institute for Human Development
Berlin, Germany
Tina Du Rocher-Schudlich, MA
Department of Psychology
University of Notre Dame
Notre Dame, Indiana
Jennifer Rosenbaum, MA
The Center for Work and Family
Boston College
Newton Centre, Massachusetts
T. S. Saraswathi, PhD
Department of Human Development and Family Relations
MS University of Baroda
Gujarat, India
Virginia L. Schiefelbein, BS
Department of Biobehavioral Health
Pennsylvania State University
University Park, Pennsylvania
Ilene Siegler, PhD
Duke University Medical Center
Durham, North Carolina
Håkan Stattin, PhD
Department of Social Science
Örebro University
Örebro, Sweden
Elizabeth J. Susman, PhD
Health and Human Development
The Pennsylvania State University
University Park, Pennsylvania
Ross A. Thompson, PhD
Department of Psychology
University of Nebraska
Lincoln, Nebraska
Donald Wertlieb, PhD
Eliot-Pearson Department of Child Development
Tufts University
Medford, Massachusetts
Allan Wigﬁeld, PhD
Department of Human Development/
Institute for Child Study
University of Maryland
College Park, Maryland
Maria M. Wong, PhD
Alcohol Research Center
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, Michigan


Introduction: Dimensions of Developmental Psychology
RICHARD M. LERNER, M. ANN EASTERBROOKS, AND JAYANTHI MISTRY
1
Wilhelm Wundt labeled the science he is typically credited
with launching as physiological psychology (Boring, 1950).
In turn, at the end of his career Wundt sought to understand
the science he had launched within the frame of cultural
anthropology (Misiak & Sexton, 1966). Even in its early
history, then, psychology has been a ﬁeld whose individual-
level scholarship has been linked to phenomena at levels of
organization either more micro or more macro than its own. 
Often, however, mechanistic and reductionist models
were used to conceptualize the relations among levels. For
example, Homans’s (1961) social exchange theory used prin-
ciples of operant learning to reduce dyadic relationships to
psychogenic terms. Wilson (1975), in turn, reduced instances
of (seemingly) moral behaviors (labeled as altruistic) to pur-
ported biogenic explanations (involving the concepts of ga-
metic potential and inclusive ﬁtness).
The ﬁeld of developmental psychology has been an in-
stance of this general approach in psychology, that is, of the
orientation to explain the phenomena of one level of organi-
zation by reductive reference to terms associated with an-
other level. Bijou and Baer (1961) attempted to explain all
phenomena associated with psychological and behavioral
development during infancy and childhood by reduction to
the principles of classical and operant conditioning. Rowe
(1994) sought to reduce parent-child relations and, in fact, all
socialization experiences of childhood by reference to ge-
netic inheritance, as represented by estimates of heritability.
The attempts by such developmental psychologists to por-
tray the phenomena of one level of organization as primary,
or “real,” and others as derivative, or epiphenomenal, were
representative of a more general tendency among develop-
mentalists to split apart the components of the ecology of
human life and to treat the bases of development as residing
in one or another component, for example, nature or nurture
(Overton, 1973, 1998). Indeed, theoretical controversies
and associated empirical activity revolved around whether
nativist concepts or experiences associated with learning
could explain the development of perception, cognition, lan-
guage, intelligence, or personality (Cairns, 1998; Dixon &
Lerner, 1999). This split also is illustrated by the tendency to
reduce human relationships to interactions among members
of dyads, or individual interaction sequences. In addition,
split conceptions of development framed debates about
whether continuity or discontinuity characterized the course
of life; for instance, a key issue was whether early experi-
ence, split off from subsequent periods of life, was integral in
shaping the context of the person’s psychological-behavioral
repertoire across ontogeny (Brim & Kagan, 1980).
LEVELS OF INTEGRATION IN
HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
An old adage says that “standing on the shoulders of giants
we can see forever.” For scholars of human development—
especially contemporary developmentalists who eschew the
split conceptions of the past—many of these giants came
from the ﬁelds of biological-comparative psychology (e.g.,
Gottlieb, 1983, 1997; Gottlieb, Wahlsten, & Lickliter, 1998;
Kuo, 1976; Lehrman, 1953; Maier & Schneirla, 1935;
Novikoff, 1945a, 1945b; Schneirla, 1957; Tobach, 1981; von
Bertalanffy, 1933). Through the cumulative impact of the
theory and research of such scholars, by the early years of
the twenty-ﬁrst century scientists studying human develop-
ment have come to view the reductionist and split concep-
tions that dominated conceptual debates in developmental
psychology during the ﬁrst seven to eight decades of the twen-
tieth century as almost quaint historical artifacts. The few con-
temporary remnants of these split conceptions (e.g., Plomin,
2000; Rushton, 2000; Spelke & Newport, 1998) are regarded
as theoretically atavistic and as conceptually and methodolog-
ically ﬂawed (e.g., see Hirsch, 1997; Lerner, 2002).

2
Introduction: Dimensions of Developmental Psychology
Within the context of the contemporary understanding of
the theoretical ﬂaws of past and, in some cases, present (e.g.,
Plomin, 2000; Rowe, 1994; Rushton, 2000), contemporary
contributions to the literature of human development derive
from ideas that stress that an integrative, reciprocal relation,
fusion, or dynamic interaction of variables from multiple lev-
els of organization provides the core process of development.
These relational ideas—summarized in the concepts associ-
ated with developmental systems models of human develop-
ment (Ford & Lerner, 1992; Sameroff, 1983; Thelen & Smith,
1998)—are found in the theoretical ideas associated with the
work of the comparative psychologists just noted.
To illustrate, the comparative work of Gilbert Gottlieb
(1983, 1997; Gottlieb et al., 1998) has been a central inﬂuence
on contemporary developmental psychology, providing a rig-
orous, compelling theoretical and empirical basis for viewing
human development as involving changes in a person-context
developmental system across the life span. Gottlieb’s scholar-
ship has documented the probabilistic epigenetic character of
developmental changes, that is, alterations that result from
variation in the timing of the integrated or fused relations—or
the coactions—among levels of organization ranging from bi-
ology through the macroecological inﬂuences of culture and
history. Using examples drawn from a variety of species—
and involving, for instance, variation in morphological out-
comes of development in the minute parasitic wasp, the emer-
gence of enameled molar teeth resulting from chick oral
epithelial cells being placed in contact with mouse cell
mesenchyme, dominant frequencies in the vocalizations of
mallard duck embryos and hatchlings, phenotypic variation in
the body builds of human monozygotic twins reared apart,
and secular trends from 1860 to 1970 in the age at menarche
of European and United States females—Gottlieb (1997,
1999) provided evidence of a probabilistic epigenetic view of
bidirectional structure-function development. This view
(Gottlieb, 1997, 1999) may be summarized as
Genetic activity (DNA ← → RNA ← → Protein)
←→Structural Maturation ← → 
Function, Activity, or Experience
Thus, Gottlieb’s (1983) theoretical work is coupled with
rich and convincing empirical documentation that biology-
ecology coactions provide a basis of plasticity—of the
potential for systematic change—across the course of life
(e.g., see Gottlieb, 1997).
Gottlieb’s (1997, 1999; Gottlieb et al., 1998) scholarship
underscores the importance of focusing developmental
analysis on the multilevel, integrated matrix of covariation—
on the dynamic developmental system—that constitutes
human development. Moreover, in forwarding a systems
view of human development, this scholarship necessitates
that developmental psychologists transcend a psychogenic
view of their ﬁeld. This scholarship leads developmentalists
to embrace a perspective that includes contributions from the
multiple—biological, behavioral, and social—sciences that
afford understanding of the several coacting levels of organi-
zation integrated in the developmental system. 
In a similar vein, scholars building on Vygotsky’s (1978)
sociocultural perspective on human development also em-
phasized the need to transcend the boundaries of psychologi-
cal science. Cole (1990, 1996) and Werstch (1985, 1991)
explicated Vygotsky’s description of the genetic method for
the study of human development, stating that a complete
theory of human development for the study of human devel-
opment must be able to explain development at the phyloge-
netic, sociohistorical, ontogenetic, and microgenetic levels.
The assumption is that such an endeavor requires the integra-
tion of perspectives from biology, sociology, anthropology,
history, and psychology.
In short, to understand human development, developmen-
tal psychologists must become developmental scientists.
They must become multidisciplinary collaborators seeking to
describe, explain, and optimize the changing interlevel rela-
tions that constitute the basic process of development within
a developmental systems perspective (Lerner, 1998a, 1998b,
2002).
SCHOLARLY PRODUCTS AND PRODUCERS OF
DEVELOPMENTAL SYSTEMS MODELS
The work of Gottlieb and other comparative psychologists
found a ready audience among many developmentalists
across the last three decades of the twentieth century. This pe-
riod was a teachable moment in the ﬁeld of developmental
psychology because many scholars were struggling to ﬁnd a
theoretically sound means to frame what were anomalous
ﬁndings by the then-current split theoretical models (e.g.,
associated with either nature or nurture, mechanistic concep-
tions or predetermined epigenetic models; see Gottlieb, 1997;
Lerner, 2002; Overton, 1973, 1998; and chapter by Overton
in this volume, for discussion of these split approaches).
For example, these ﬁndings pertained to cohort or time-of-
testing effects on human ontogenetic change, to the role of
later life events in altering (creating discontinuities with)
the trajectories of individual development, and to the pres-
ence of plasticity across life—even in the aged years—
regarding biological, psychological, and social functioning
(e.g., see Baltes, Lindenberger, & Staudinger, 1998; Baltes,

The Contemporary Features of Developmental Science
3
Staudinger, & Lindenberger, 1999; Brim & Kagan, 1980;
Elder, 1998, 1999; Lerner, 2002). These ﬁndings demon-
strated that dynamic relations between individual characteris-
tics and critical contextual events or nonnormative historical
episodes shaped the character of change across the life span.
Several different developmental systems theories were de-
veloped in regard to such ﬁndings (e.g., Brandtstädter, 1998;
Bronfenbrenner & Morris, 1998; Csikszentmihalyi &
Rathunde, 1998; Elder, 1998; Feldman, 2000; Fischer &
Bidell, 1998; Ford & Lerner, 1992; Gottlieb, 1997, 1998,
1999; Lerner, 2002; Magnusson & Stattin, 1998; Overton,
1998; Thelen & Smith, 1998; Wapner & Demick, 1998).
Across these different formulations there is a common em-
phasis on fused person-context relations and on the need to
embed the study of human development within the actual set-
tings of human life.
Such embeddedness may involve tests of theoretically
predicated ideas that appraise whether changes in the
relations within the system result in alterations in develop-
mental trajectories that coincide with model-based predic-
tions. Depending on their target level of organization, these
changes may be construed as policies or programs, and the
evaluation of these actions provides information about both
the efﬁcacy of these interventions in promoting positive
human development and the basic, relational process of
human development emphasized within developmental sys-
tems models.
As such, within contemporary developmental systems
theory, there is a synthesis of basic and applied developmen-
tal science. That is, by studying integrated person-context
relations as embedded in the actual ecology of human devel-
opment, policies and programs represent both features of the
cultural context of this ecology and methodological tools for
understanding how variations in individual-context relations
may impact the trajectory of human life. Thus, the applica-
tion of developmental science (through policy and program
innovations and evaluations) is part of—is synthesized
with—the study of the basic relational processes of human
development.
THE CONTEMPORARY FEATURES OF
DEVELOPMENTAL SCIENCE
As the decade of the 1980s ended, the view of developmental
science that Paul Mussen (1970) had forwarded at the begin-
ning of the 1970s—that the ﬁeld placed its emphasis on
explanations of the process of development—was both vali-
dated and extended. Mussen alerted developmentalists to the
burgeoning interest not in structure, function, or content per
se but to change, to the processes through which change
occurs, and thus to the means through which structures trans-
form and functions evolve over the course of human life. His
vision of and for the ﬁeld presaged what emerged in the
1990s to be at the cutting edge of contemporary developmen-
tal theory: a focus on the process through which the individ-
ual’s engagement with his or her context constitutes the basic
process of human development.
The interest that had emerged by the end of the 1980s in
understanding the dynamic relation between individual and
context was, during the 1990s, brought to a more abstract
level, one concerned with understanding the character of the
integration of the levels of organization comprising the
context, or bioecology, of human development (Lerner,
1998a, 1998b). This concern was represented by reciprocal or
dynamic conceptions of process and by the elaboration of
theoretical models that were not tied necessarily to a particu-
lar content domain but rather were focused on understand-
ing the broader developmental system within which all
dimensions of individual development emerged (e.g.,
Brandtstädter, 1998; Bronfenbrenner, 2001; Bronfenbrenner
& Morris, 1998; Ford & Lerner, 1992; Gottlieb, 1997;
Magnusson, 1999a, 1999b; Sameroff, 1983; Thelen & Smith,
1994, 1998). In other words, although particular empirical is-
sues or substantive foci (e.g., motor development, the self,
psychological complexity, or concept formation) lent them-
selves readily as exemplary sample cases of the processes
depicted in a given theory (Lerner, 1998a), the theoretical
models that were forwarded within the 1990s were superor-
dinately concerned with elucidating the character of the
individual-context (relational, integrative) developmental
systems (Lerner, 1998b).
During the 1980s and 1990s similar concerns with under-
standing the nature of the integration between individual
development and cultural context led to the development of
sociocultural perspectives on human development.As already
noted, some scholars extended Vygotsky’s (1978) socio-
historical theory to emphasize the study of human develop-
ment as it is constituted in sociocultural context (Cole, 1990,
1996;Rogoff,1990;Wertsch,1985,1995).Othersconceptual-
ized culture as the meaning systems, symbols, activities, and
practices through which people interpret experience (Bruner,
1990; Goodnow, Miller, & Kessel, 1995; Greenﬁeld & Cock-
ing, 1994; Markus & Kitayama, 1991; Shweder, 1990).
By the end of the twentieth century, then, the conceptually
split, mechanistic, and atomistic views, which had been in-
volved in so much of the history of concepts and theories of
human development, had been replaced by theoretical mod-
els that stressed relationism and integration across all the
distinct but fused levels of organization involved in human

4
Introduction: Dimensions of Developmental Psychology
life. This dynamic synthesis of multiple levels of analysis is a
perspective having its roots in systems theories of biological
development (Cairns, 1998; Gottlieb, 1992; Kuo, 1976;
Novikoff, 1945a, 1945b; Schneirla, 1957; von Bertalanffy,
1933); in addition, as noted by Cairns (1998), the interest in
understanding person-context relations within an integrative,
or systems, perspective has a rich history within the study of
human development.
For example, James Mark Baldwin (1897) expressed in-
terest in studying development in context, and thus in under-
standing integrated, multilevel, and hence interdisciplinary
scholarship (Cairns, 1998). These interests were shared as
well by Lightner Witmer, the founder in 1896 of the ﬁrst psy-
chological clinic in the United States (Cairns, 1998; Lerner,
1977). Moreover, Cairns describes the conception of devel-
opmental processes—as involving reciprocal interaction,
bidirectionality, plasticity, and biobehavioral organization
(all quite modern emphases)—as integral in the thinking of
the founders of the ﬁeld of human development. For instance,
Wilhelm Stern (1914; see Kreppner, 1994) stressed the
holism that is associated with a developmental systems per-
spective about these features of developmental processes. In
addition, other contributors to the foundations and early
progress of the ﬁeld of human development (e.g., John
Dewey, 1916; Kurt Lewin, 1935, 1954; and even John B.
Watson, 1928) stressed the importance of linking child devel-
opment research with application and child advocacy—a
theme of very contemporary relevance (Lerner, Fisher, &
Weinberg, 2000a, 2000b; Zigler, 1999).
The ﬁeld of human development has in a sense come full
circle in the course of a century. From the beginning of the
last century to the beginning of the present one, the history
of developmental psychology has been marked by an in-
creasing interest in the role of history—of temporal changes
in the familial, social, and cultural contexts of life—in shap-
ing the quality of the trajectories of change that individuals
traverse across their life spans. As a consequence of incorpo-
rating into its causal schemas about ontogenetic change a
nonreductionistic and a synthetic conception about (as com-
pared to a Cartesian split view of) the inﬂuence of context—
of culture and history—the ﬁeld of human development has
altered its essential ontology. The relational view of being
that now predominates in the ﬁeld has required epistemolog-
ical revisions in the ﬁeld as well. Qualitative as well as quan-
titative understanding has been legitimated as scholars have
sought an integrated understanding of the multiple levels of
organization comprising the ecology of human development.
In fact, relational perspectives embracing the developmental
system stress the methodological importance of triangulation
across quantitative and qualitative appraisals of multilevel
developmental phenomena (Lerner, Chaudhuri, & Dowling,
in press).
In essence, then, as we pursue our scholarship about
human development at this early part of a new century, we do
so with an orientation to the human life span that is charac-
terized by (a) integrated, relational models of human life,
perspectives synthesizing biological-through-physical eco-
logical inﬂuences on human development in nonreductionis-
tic manners; (b) a broad array of qualitative and quantitative
methodologies requisite for attaining knowledge about these
fused, biopsychoecological relations; (c) a growing apprecia-
tion of the importance of the cultural and historical inﬂuences
on the quality and trajectory of human development across
the course of life; and (d) a synthesis of basic and applied de-
velopmental science. 
These four deﬁning themes in the study of human devel-
opment are represented in contemporary developmental
systems theories, perspectives that constitute the overarching
conceptual frames of modern scholarship in the study of
human development. We believe as well that across the rest
of this century the ﬁeld will advance through the coordinated
emphasis on a culturally and historically sensitive science
that triangulates quantitative and qualitative appraisals of the
relations among the multiple levels of organization fused
within the developmental system.
In short, there has been a history of visionary scholars in-
terested in exploring the use of ideas associated with devel-
opmental systems theory for understanding the basic process
of human development and for applying this knowledge
within the actual contexts of people to enhance their paths
across life. For instance, scholars building on Vygotsky’s
(1978) sociohistorical perspective have explored promising
conceptual frameworks to explicate the integration between
the individual and cultural context in the process of develop-
ment (Cole, 1996; Wertsch, 1995). Accordingly, the chapters
in this volume reﬂect and extend the diverse theoretical per-
spectives that emphasize understanding dynamic and inte-
grated developmental processes as they are situated in the
varying contexts of people’s lives and circumstances. 
THE PLAN OF THIS VOLUME
Developmental science at the beginning of the twenty-ﬁrst
century is marked by an explicit integration of philosophy,
theory, and method, on the one hand, and a synthetic under-
standing of basic developmental processes and applications
designed to promote positive human development on the other
(Lerner, 2002). Part I of this volume, “Foundations of Devel-
opment Across the Life Span,” presents these integrations in

The Plan of This Volume
5
chapters by Overton and by Wertlieb, respectively. The for-
mer chapter contrasts relational perspectives with models
that were based on philosophically and methodologically
problematic, as well as empirically counterfactual, attempts
to split the components of development, for instance, into
sources related to separate nature or nurture inﬂuences. In
turn, Overton explains the past and contemporary philosoph-
ical and theoretical bases of relational models of human de-
velopment. The integrative vision he provides for theory and
research frames the cutting edge of contemporary basic and
applied scholarship in developmental science.
Wertlieb discusses how relational models associated with
developmental systems theory are used in applications of
developmental science aimed at promoting healthy develop-
ment across life. Drawing on examples from the literatures
of parenting, early care and education, developmental psy-
chopathology, and developmental assets, Wertlieb explains
that developmental science is well poised to enhance the well-
being of children, adolescents, and their families.
The next four parts of the volume provide evidence, within
and across successive portions of the life span, of the rich
scholarship conducted to describe and explain dynamic rela-
tions between developing individuals and their complex
contexts. In Part II of the volume, titled “Infancy,” Cohen and
Cashon review the explosion of research on infant perception
and cognition in the latter half of the twentieth century.The au-
thors’goalistolendcoherencetothesometimes-contradictory
evidence regarding the abilities of infants. They adopt an
information-processing view as an organizational tool in un-
derstanding how infants of different ages and experiences
perceive and understand their worlds.
In the chapter by Thompson, Easterbrooks, and Padilla-
Walker, the authors examine the dynamics of individual and
context in key constructs of early socioemotional develop-
ment: attachment relationships, self-understanding, and emo-
tional regulation. The ways in which these constructs and
developmental processes emerge and take character are ex-
amined from a relational context (primarily that of the infant
and close caregivers).
Gunnar and Davis apply a dynamic systems approach to the
study of the stress and emotion in the early years of life. The
chapter emphasizes the biological roots of developing emo-
tion systems and the scope and limitations of developmental
plasticity. The authors navigate the fundamental tenets of the
psychobiologyofstressandemotion,outliningdevelopmental
integration across infancy. In addition, Gunnar and Davis
place these developmental systems in the context of the rela-
tionships between infants and their caregiving environments.
Issues of caregiving environments are at the center of
the chapter by Fitzgerald, Mann, Cabrera, and Wong. The
authors use a systems approach to understand the role of
child care in the lives of very young children and their fami-
lies. They argue that this ﬁeld of study needs to include key
mediating or moderating factors (temperament, parent-child
relationships, family risk load) in order to understand the way
in which child care impacts family development.
The chapters in Part III, “Childhood,” present current per-
spectives on the dynamic processes of development and mul-
tiple inﬂuences of context in various domains of children’s
development. In the chapter on language acquisition, Hoff fo-
cuses on the current state of the scientiﬁc effort to explain
how children acquire language, presenting the biological, lin-
guistic, social, and domain-general cognitive approaches to
the study of language development. Arguing that no approach
is sufﬁcient, Hoff emphasizes dynamic and interactive nature
of language acquisition.
Similarly, Feldman, in the chapter on cognitive develop-
ment, presents the broad theories of the past 50 years that
have attempted to explain the growth and transformation of
the mind. With a focus on the Piagetian revolution, Feldman
presents a systematic and logically organized discussion of
the emergence, prominence, and subsequent evolution of
Piagetian perspectives, leading to more contemporary theo-
retical frameworks and conceptual issues that are driving cur-
rent research and theory development.
Cummings, Braungart-Rieker, and Du Rocher-Schudlich
take a comprehensive approach in their review of the de-
velopment of emotion and personality. These authors begin
with a focus on individual development of emotion and per-
sonality, leading to a discussion of relational inﬂuences on
development, followed by a review of developmental psy-
chopathology perspectives.
Similarly, McHale, Dariotis, and Kauh provide a compre-
hensive review of social development and social relationships
in middle childhood. Their chapter represents a particularly
broad and culturally inclusive account of social development
because they begin with a focus on the social ecology of
middle childhood, before highlighting individual processes,
thus situating individual processes in a larger socioecological
context.
Finally, in the chapter on culture and child development,
Mistry and Saraswathi describe current understanding of the
interface between culture and child development by integrat-
ing literature from three subﬁelds of psychology—cultural
psychology, cross-cultural psychology, and developmental
psychology. They illustrate the complementary contributions
of the three subﬁelds in unraveling the culture-individual in-
terface by presenting selective overviews of three topic areas
of development: development of self, development of chil-
dren’s narratives, and development of remembering.

6
Introduction: Dimensions of Developmental Psychology
The dynamics of person-context relations, and the inte-
grated inﬂuence of the multiple levels of the developmental
system, frame also the several chapters in Part IV, “Adoles-
cence.” For example, the chapter on puberty, sexuality, and
health, by Susman, Dorn, and Schiefelbein, examines pu-
berty from the perspective of biopsychosocial models of
development. The authors note that the behavioral covariates
of pubertal change are inﬂuenced by the interrelation of hor-
mones, bodily constitution, and social relationships.
Similarly, in their discussion of cognitive development
and achievement during adolescence, Eccles, Wigﬁeld, and
Byrnes use relational ideas pertinent of developmental stage-
environment ﬁt to discuss current patterns of school achieve-
ment and recent changes in both school completion and
differential performance on standardized tests of achieve-
ment. In addition, their relational theoretical frame is used to
understand gender and ethnic group differences in achieve-
ment motivation.
In turn, Galambos and Costigan discuss emotional and
personality development in adolescence through reference to
research areas (e.g., emotion regulation, temperament, and
cultural inﬂuences on emotion and personality) that draw on
integrative understandings of the person and his or her con-
text. The authors stress that their approach to conceptualizing
emotion and personality aids in the design of intervention and
prevention programs that may result in the promotion of
healthy youth development.
Similarly, in their chapter on parental and peer inﬂuences
on development, Kerr, Stattin, Biesecker, and Ferrer-Wreder
emphasize the importance of models of bidirectional rela-
tionship between adolescents and their parents or peers for
understanding the role of these social groups for adolescent
behavior and development. Moreover, the authors emphasize
that adolescents act as active agents in their own develop-
ment and that they integrate their parental and peer contexts
across their development.
Finally, in their discussion of positive behaviors, problem
behaviors, and resiliency, Perkins and Borden emphasize the
interrelation of the behaviors and contents of youth develop-
ment. They stress that to understand the bases of both risk ac-
tualization and resiliency, theory and research must adopt an
integrative systems perspective about the multiple individual
and contextual inﬂuences on adolescent development.
Part V, “Adulthood and Aging,” reﬂects a stress on devel-
opmental systems. For instance, in their discussion of disease,
health, and aging, Siegler, Bosworth, and Poon conceptualize
health as a contextual variable that exists in a bidirectional
relationship with personological processes such as personal-
ity and cognition. They explain how changes in health may
precede changes in individual and social functioning and, as
well, how changes in health status may result from changes in
these functions.
Similarly, in their chapter on cognitive development in
adulthood, Dixon and Cohen explain that cognitive aging in-
volves integrative developmental processes that range from
the neurological, through individual, to social levels of analy-
sis. Cognitive developmental processes are used in different
ways to accomplish different goals throughout adulthood, but
it is always a central component of one’s concept of self and
of one’s adjustment to the challenges of everyday life.
In turn, Bertrand and Lachman emphasize that the key
focus of contemporary personality development research in
adulthood and old age is on assessment of the multidirec-
tional paths of personality and on the impact of individual dif-
ferences throughout the life span. The authors discuss the role
of contextual models, which incorporate person-environment
interactions, in understanding these features of personality
development.
Similarly, Pruchno and Rosenbaum explain that individ-
ual change in adulthood and old age is linked to the people
with whom adults and the aged maintain close relationships.
These social relationships involve spouses, children, siblings,
and friends.
Across the infancy, childhood, adolescence, and adult-
hood and aging sections of this volume, the contributing
scholars make clear that the basic process of human develop-
ment involves dynamic interactions among variables from in-
dividual and contextual levels of organization. These authors
stress that within any focal period of development these inte-
grative relations afford understanding of extant and potential
instances of person-context relations. As such, focus on these
relations is central both for appreciation of basic features of
developmental change and for efforts aimed at enhancing the
character and course of human development. The ﬁnal sec-
tion of the volume, “Applied Developmental Psychology
Across the Life Span,” extends the age speciﬁc discussions of
basic person-context relational processes to multiple portions
of the life span, and does so with a focus on the use of con-
cepts and research associated with developmental systems
thinking in applied efforts aimed at enhancing relational
processes and promoting positive, healthy developmental
trajectories across life. 
The sample cases included in this section involve, ﬁrst,
disabilities and development. Hauser-Cram and Howell em-
phasize the importance of longitudinal and contextually sen-
sitive research in attempting to understand the development
of young children with biologically based developmental
disabilities. They stress the importance of assessing how the

Conclusions
7
strengths of the family system may positively inﬂuence the
development of these children. 
Similar systems effects are discussed by Lerner,Anderson,
Balsano, Dowling, and Bobek in their presentation of the key
emphases on person-context relations associated with the
attempts of applied developmental scientists to promote posi-
tive youth development.The authors discuss how the diversity
of person-context relations may be capitalized on to provide a
frame for policy and program innovations seeking to increase
the probability of such development.
The importance of understanding the links between the
developing child and the features of his or her context are
stressed as well by Lamb, who discusses how knowledge of
such relational developmental processes can assist legal au-
thorities. Lamb illustrates this domain of application by dis-
cussing the importance of developmental scholarship in the
areas of child witness testimony and the resolution of divorce
and child custody cases.
A comparable conceptual frame is used in the chapter by
Connell and Janevic on health and human development. The
authors emphasize the importance of adopting an integrated
understanding of biological, cognitive, and social develop-
mental inﬂuences on health behaviors from infancy through
older adulthood. Connell and Janevic stress the importance of
understanding the interaction between developmental phe-
nomena and extrinsic factors such as socioeconomic status
and culture in studying health across the life span.
Similarly, Freund and Riediger use dynamic, developmen-
tal systems theories to understand the bases of positive,
successful aging. By reference to the model of selection,
optimization, and compensation; the model of assimilative
and accommodative coping; and the model of primary and
secondary control, the authors explain how integrated rela-
tions between aged people and their contexts can result in the
maintenance of high levels of functioning and of well-being.
In sum, the chapters in this volume contribute signiﬁcantly
to extending a quarter century or more of scholarship aimed
at understanding the dynamic relations between individuals
and contexts. The present volume brings this scholarship to
both an empirically richer and a more theoretically nuanced
level, one depicting—for multiple substantive foci of human
development and both within and across the major develop-
mental epochs of life—the nature of the reciprocal or dy-
namic processes of human ontogenetic change, of how struc-
tures function and how functions are structured over time.
The consistency across chapters in the demonstration of
the usefulness of developmental systems thinking for theory,
research, and application indicates that this frame for contem-
porary developmental scholarship is not tied necessarily to a
particular content domain, but rather is useful for understand-
ing the broader developmental system within which all
dimensions of individual development emerge (e.g., Ford &
Lerner, 1992; Gottlieb, 1997; Sameroff, 1983; Thelen &
Smith, 1998). In other words, although particular empirical is-
sues or substantive topics (e.g., perceptual development,
successful aging, cognition and achievement, emotional be-
haviors, or complex social relationships) may lend themselves
readily as emphases of developmental scholarship within or
across developmental periods, the chapters in this volume at-
test to the importance of focusing on relational, integrative
individual-context dynamics to understand the human devel-
opmental system.
CONCLUSIONS
The power of contemporary developmental scholarship lies
in its integrative character—across substantive domains of
individual functioning (e.g., biology, emotional, cognition,
and social behaviors), across developmental periods, across
levels of organization (from biology through culture and his-
tory), and across basic and applied interests in regard to un-
derstanding and enhancing human life. As represented by the
scholarship in this volume, contemporary developmental sci-
ence is not limited by (or, perhaps better, confounded by) an
inextricable association with a unidimensional portrayal of
the developing person (e.g., the person seen from the vantage
point of only cognitions, emotions, or stimulus-response con-
nections). Today, the developing person is neither biologized,
psychologized, nor sociologized. Rather, the individual is
systemized; that is, his or her development is conceptualized
and studied as embedded within an integrated matrix of vari-
ables derived from multiple levels of organization. 
This integrative, systems-oriented approach to develop-
mental science is certainly more complex than its organismic
or mechanistic predecessors (Lerner, 2002; Overton, 1998;
chapter by Overton in this volume). However, a developmen-
tal systems approach is also more nuanced, more ﬂexible,
more balanced, and less susceptible to extravagant, or even ab-
surd, claims (e.g., that nature, split from nurture, can shape the
course of human development). Moreover, as elegantly
demonstrated by the chapters in this volume, developmental
systems offer a productive frame for rigorous and important
scholarship about the process of human development and ap-
plications across the life span. Together, these advances in the
scholarship of knowledge generation and knowledge applica-
tion serve as an invaluable means for advancing science and
service pertinent to people across the breadth of their lives. 

8
Introduction: Dimensions of Developmental Psychology
REFERENCES
Baldwin, J. M. (1897). Mental development in the child and the
race. New York: Macmillan.
Baltes, P. B., Lindenberger, U., & Staudinger, U. M. (1998). Life-
span theory in developmental psychology. In W. Damon (Series
Ed.) & R. M. Lerner (Vol. Ed.), Handbook of child psychology:
Vol. 1. Theoretical models of human development (5th ed.,
pp. 1029–1144). New York: Wiley.
Baltes, P. B., Staudinger, U. M., & Lindenberger, U. (1999). Life
span psychology: Theory and application to intellectual func-
tioning. In J. T. Spence, J. M. Darley, & D. J. Foss (Eds.), Annual
review of psychology: Vol. 50 (pp. 471–507). Palo Alto, CA:
Annual Reviews.
Bijou, S. W., & Baer, D. M. (Eds.). (1961). Child development: A
systematic and empirical theory. New York: Appleton-Century-
Crofts.
Boring, E. G. (1950). A history of experimental psychology
(2nd ed.). New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Brandtstädter, J. (1998). Action perspectives on human develop-
ment. In W. Damon (Series Ed.) & R. M. Lerner (Vol. Ed.),
Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 1. Theoretical models of
human development (5th ed., pp. 807–863). New York: Wiley.
Brim, O. G., Jr., & Kagan, J. (Ed.). (1980). Constancy and change in
human development. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Bronfenbrenner, U. (2001). Human development, bioecological
theory of. In N. J. Smelser & P. B. Baltes (Eds.), International
encyclopedia of the social and behavioral sciences (pp. 6963–
6970). Oxford: Elsevier.
Bronfenbrenner, U., & Morris, P. A. (1998). The ecology of devel-
opmental process. In W. Damon (Series Ed.) & R. M. Lerner
(Vol. Ed.), Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 1. Theoretical
models of human development (5th ed., pp. 993–1028). New
York: Wiley.
Bruner, J. (1990). Culture and human development: A new look.
Human Development, 33, 344–355.
Cairns, R. B. (1998). The making of developmental psychology. In
W. Damon (Series Ed.) & R. M. Lerner (Vol. Ed.), Theoretical
models of human development: Vol. 1. The handbook of child
psychology (5th ed., pp. 25–106). New York: Wiley.
Cole, M. (1990). Cognitive development and formal schooling: The
evidence from cross-cultural research. In L. Moll (Ed.), Vygotsky
and education: Instructional implications and applications of
sociohistorical psychology (pp. 89–110). New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Cole, M. (1996). Cultural psychology: A once and future discipline.
Cambridge, MA: Belknap/Harvard.
Csikszentmihalyi, M., & Rathunde, K. (1998). The development of
the person: An experiential perspective on the ontogenesis of
psychological complexity. In W. Damon (Series Ed.) & R. M.
Lerner (Ed.), Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 1. Theoretical
models of human development (5th ed., pp. 635–684). New York:
Wiley.
Dewey, J. (1916). Democracy and education: An introduction to the
philosophy of education. New York: Macmillan.
Dixon, R. A., & Lerner, R. M. (1999). History and systems in
developmental psychology. In M. Bornstein & M. Lamb (Eds.),
Developmental psychology: An advanced textbook (4th ed.,
pp. 3–45). XXXX: Erlbaum.
Elder, G. H., Jr. (1998). The life course and human development. In
W. Damon (Series Ed.) & R. M. Lerner (Vol. Ed.), Handbook of
child psychology: Vol. 1. Theoretical models of human develop-
ment (5th ed., pp. 939–991). New York: Wiley.
Elder, G. H., Jr. (1999). Children of the Great Depression: Social
change in life experience (25th anniversary ed.). Boulder, CO:
Westview Press.
Feldman, D. H. (2000). Figurative and operative processes in the
development of artistic talent. Human Development, 43, 60–64.
Fischer, K. W., & Bidell, T. (1998). Dynamic development of psy-
chological structures in action and thought. In W. Damon (Series
Ed.) & R. M. Lerner (Vol. Ed.), Handbook of child psychology:
Vol. 1. Theoretical models of human development (5th ed.,
pp. 467–561). New York: Wiley.
Ford, D. L., & Lerner, R. M. (1992). Developmental systems theory:
An integrative approach. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Goodnow, J. J., Miller, P., & Kessel, F. (Eds.). (1995). Cultural prac-
tices as contexts for development. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Gottlieb, G. (1983). The psychobiological approach to developmen-
tal issues. In M. M. Haith & J. Campos (Eds.), Handbook of
child psychology: Vol. 2. Infancy and biological bases (pp. 1–
26). New York: Wiley.
Gottlieb, G. (1992). Individual development and evolution: The
genesis of novel behavior. New York: Oxford University Press.
Gottlieb, G. (1997). Synthesizing nature-nurture: Prenatal roots of
instinctive behavior. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gottlieb, G. (1998). Normally occurring environmental and behav-
ioral inﬂuences on gene activity: From central dogma to proba-
bilistic epigenesis. Psychological Review, 105, 792–802.
Gottlieb, G. (1999). Probabilistic epigenesis and evolution. Heinz
Werner Lecture Series (Vol. 23). Worchester, MA: Clark Univer-
sity Press.
Gottlieb, G., Wahlsten, D., & Lickliter, R. (1998). The signiﬁcance
of biology for human development: A developmental psychobio-
logical systems view. In W. Damon (Series Ed.) & R. M. Lerner
(Vol. Ed.), Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 1. Theoretical
models of human development (5th ed., pp. 233–273). New York:
Wiley.
Greenﬁeld, P. M., & Cocking, R. R. (Eds.) (1994). Cross-cultural
roots of minority child development. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Hirsch, J. (1997). Some history of heredity-vs.-environment,
genetic inferiority at Harvard (?), and The (incredible) Bell
Curve. Genetica, 99, 207–224.

References
9
Homans, G. C. (1961). Social behavior: Its elementary forms. New
York: Harcourt, Brace, & World.
Kreppner, K. (1994). William L. Stern: A neglected founder of
developmental psychology. In R. D. Parke, P. A. Ornstein, J. J.
Rieser, & C. Zahn-Waxler (Eds.), A century of developmental
psychology (pp. 311–331). Washington DC: American Psycho-
logical Association. 
Kuo, Z.-Y. (1976). The dynamics of behavior development: An
epigenetic view. New York: Plenum.
Lehrman, D. S. (1953). A critique of Konrad Lorenz’s theory of in-
stinctive behavior. Quarterly Review of Biology, 28, 337–363.
Lerner, R. M. (1977). [Biographies of DeSanctis, S., Dewey, J.,
Gesell, A., Goodenough, F., Locke, J., Terman, L. M., Werner,
H., and Witmer, L]. In B. B. Wolman (Ed.), International
encyclopedia of neurology, psychiatry, psychoanalysis, and
psychology. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold.
Lerner, R. M. (Ed.). (1998a). Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 1.
Theoretical models of human development (5th ed.). Editor-in-
Chief: William Damon. New York: Wiley.
Lerner, R. M. (1998b). Theories of human development: Contem-
porary perspectives. In R. M. Lerner (Ed.), Handbook of child
psychology: Vol. 1. Theoretical models of human development
(5th ed., pp. 1–24). Editor-in-Chief: William Damon. New
York: Wiley.
Lerner, R. M. (2002). Concepts and theories of human development
(3rd ed.). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Lerner, R. M., Chaudhuri, J., & Dowling, E. (in press). Methods
of contextual assessment and assessing contextual methods: A
developmental contextual perspective. In D. M. Teti (Ed.),
Handbook of research methods in developmental psychology.
Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.
Lerner, R. M., Fisher, C. B., & Weinberg, R. A. (2000a). Toward a
science for and of the people: Promoting civil society through
the application of developmental science. Child Development,
71, 11–20.
Lerner, R. M., Fisher, C. B., & Weinberg, R. A. (2000b). Applying
developmental science in the twenty-ﬁrst century: International
scholarship for our times. International Journal of Behavioral
Development, 24, 24–29.
Lewin, K. (1935). A dynamic theory of personality. New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Lewin, K. (1954). Behavior and development as a function of the
total situation. In L. Carmichael (Ed.), Manual of child psychol-
ogy (2nd ed., pp. 791–844). New York: Wiley.
Magnusson, D., & Stattin, H. (1998). Person-context interaction
theories. In W. Damon (Series Ed.) & R. M. Lerner (Vol. Ed.),
Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 1. Theoretical models of
human development (5th ed., pp. 685–759). New York: Wiley.
Magnusson, D. (1999a). On the individual: A person-oriented ap-
proach to developmental research. European Psychologist, 4,
205–218.
Magnusson, D. (1999b). Holistic interactionism: A perspective for
research on personality development. In L. A. Pervin & O. P.
John (Eds.), Handbook of personality: Theory and research (2nd
ed., pp. 219–247). New York: Guilford Press.
Maier, N. R. F., & Schneirla, T. C. (1935). Principles of animal
behavior. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Markus, H., & Kitayama, S. (1991). Culture and the self: Implica-
tions for cognition, emotion, and motivation. Psychological
Review, 98, 224–253.
Misiak, H., & Sexton, V. S. (1966). History of psychology in
overview. New York: Grune & Stratton.
Mussen, P. H. (Ed.). (1970). Carmichael’s manual of child psychol-
ogy (3rd ed.). New York: Wiley.
Novikoff, A. B. (1945a). The concept of integrative levels of
biology. Science, 62, 209–215.
Novikoff, A. B. (1945b). Continuity and discontinuity in evolution.
Science, 101, 405–406.
Overton, W. F. (1973). On the assumptive base of the nature-nurture
controversy: Additive versus interactive conceptions. Human
Development, 16, 74–89.
Overton, W. F. (1998). Developmental psychology: Philosophy,
concepts, and methodology. In W. Damon (Series Ed.) & R. M.
Lerner (Vol. Ed.), Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 1.
Theoretical models of human development (5th ed., pp. 107–
189). New York: Wiley.
Plomin, R. (2000). Behavioural genetics in the 21st century.
International Journal of Behavioral Development, 24, 30–34.
Rogoff, B. (1990). Apprenticeship in thinking. New York, NY:
Oxford University Press.
Rowe, D. C. (1994). The limits of family inﬂuence: Genes, experi-
ence, and behavior. New York: Guilford Press.
Rushton, J. P. (2000). Race, evolution, and behavior (special
abridged edition). New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction.
Sameroff, A. J. (1983). Developmental systems: Contexts and evo-
lution. In W. Kessen (Ed.), Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 1.
History, theory, and methods (pp. 237–294). New York: Wiley.
Schneirla, T. C. (1957). The concept of development in comparative
psychology. In D. B. Harris (Ed.), The concept of development
(pp. 78–108). Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota.
Shweder, R. A. (1990). Cultural psychology: What is it? In J. W.
Stigler & G. Herdt (Eds.), Cultural psychology: Essays on com-
parative human development (pp. 1–43). Cambridge, MA:
Cambridge University Press.
Spelke,E.S.,&Newport,E.L.(1998).Nativism,empiricism,andthe
development of knowledge. In W. Damon (Series Ed.) & R. M.
Lerner (Vol. Ed.), Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 1. Theoret-
ical models of human development (5th ed., pp. 275–340). New
York: Wiley.
Stern, W. (1914). Psychologie der frühen Kindheit bis zum sechsten
Lebensjahr. Leipzig: Quelle & Meyer.

10
Introduction: Dimensions of Developmental Psychology
Thelen, E., & Smith, L. B. (1994). A dynamic systems approach to
the development of cognition and action. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Thelen, E., & Smith, L. B. (1998). Dynamic systems theories. In W.
Damon (Series Ed.) & R. M. Lerner (Vol. Ed.), Handbook of
child psychology: Vol. 1. Theoretical models of human develop-
ment (5th ed., pp. 563–633). New York: Wiley.
Tobach, E. (1981). Evolutionary aspects of the activity of the
organism and its development. In R. M. Lerner & N. A. Busch-
Rossnagel (Eds.), Individuals as producers of their development:
A life-span perspective (pp. 37–68). New York: Academic Press. 
von Bertalanffy, L. (1933). Modern theories of development.
London: Oxford University Press.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher
psychological processes. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Wapner, S., & Demick, J. (1998). Developmental analysis: A holis-
tic, developmental, systems-oriented perspective. In W. Damon
(Series Ed.) & R. M. Lerner (Vol. Ed.), Handbook of child
psychology: Vol. 1. Theoretical models of human development
(5th ed., pp. 761–805). New York: Wiley.
Watson, J. B. (1928). Psychological care of infant and child. New
York: Norton.
Wertsch, J. V. (1985). Culture, communication, and cognition:
Vygotskian perspectives. New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Wertsch, J. V. (1991). Voices of the mind. Cambridge: Harvard Uni-
versity Press.
Wertsch, J. V. (1995). Introduction. In J. V. Wertsch, P. del Rio, &
A. Alvarez (Eds.), Sociocultural studies of the mind. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Wilson, E. O. (1975). Sociobiology: The new synthesis. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.
Zigler, E. (1999). A place of value for applied and policy studies.
Child Development, 69, 532–542.

PART ONE
FOUNDATIONS OF DEVELOPMENT
ACROSS THE LIFE SPAN


CHAPTER 1
Development Across the Life Span
WILLIS F. OVERTON
13
DEVELOPMENTAL INQUIRY AND
THE METATHEORETICAL
14
The Nature of Developmental Change: Transformations
and Variations
15
What Changes in Development? The Expressive and
the Instrumental
16
A BRIEF HISTORY OF METATHEORETICAL WORLDS AND
THE BIRTH OF DEVELOPMENTAL PSYCHOLOGY
17
The Modern Period
17
The Postmodern Period and the Chaos of
Absolute Relativity
21
RELATIONAL METATHEORY: A SYNTHESIS
OF OPPOSITES
22
Rejecting Splits and Bedrocks
22
The Identity of Opposites
23
The Opposites of Identity
26
Synthesis: The View From the Center
26
A RAPPROCHEMENT: EXPLANATION IN A
RELATIONAL CONTEXT
28
Step 1: Relational Analysis—Synthesis Replaces
Split Reductionism
28
Step 2: Relational Action Pattern—Conditions Explanation
Replaces Split Causes
29
Step 3: Abductive Logic Replaces Split Induction
and Deduction
31
EMBODIED DEVELOPMENT:
A RELATIONAL CONCEPT
32
Person-Centered and Variable Approaches to
Developmental Inquiry
33
The Person-Centered Point of View
34
CONCLUSIONS
38
REFERENCES
38
In this chapter I focus on some ideas that usually rest quietly
in the background when development is explored. Back-
ground ideas are not unlike the foundation of a house. Afoun-
dation grounds, constrains, and sustains the nature and style
of the building that can ultimately be constructed. So, too, do
background ideas ground, constrain, and sustain both theory
and methods of investigation in any area of inquiry. A foun-
dation is usually ignored by those who live and work in the
house; at least until something goes wrong—for example,
when cracks appear in walls or the house begins to sink into
the ground. So, too, are background ideas often ignored by
investigators, at least until something goes wrong with theo-
retical or empirical efforts in the ﬁeld of study. In this chapter
I try to bring these ideas from background to foreground; I
also examine how they form the basis for—and constraints
of—both theory and research in developmental psychology.
In scientiﬁc discussions background ideas are often
termed metatheoretical or metatheories. They transcend (i.e.,
meta-) theories in the sense that they deﬁne the context in
which theoretical concepts are constructed, just as a founda-
tion deﬁnes the context in which a house can be constructed.
Further, metatheory functions not only to ground, constrain,
and sustain theoretical concepts, but also to do the same thing
with respect to methods of investigation. For convenience,
when speciﬁcally discussing background ideas that ground
methods, these will be termed metamethods. Methodology
would also be an appropriate term here if this were under-
stood in its broad sense as a set of principles that guide em-
pirical inquiry (Asendorpf & Valsiner, 1992; Overton, 1998).
The primary function of metatheory—including meta-
method—is to provide a rich source of concepts out of which
theories and methods emerge. Metatheory also provides
guidelines that help to avoid conceptual confusions—and
consequently, help to avoid what may ultimately be unpro-
ductive ideas and unproductive methods.
Theories and methods refer directly to the empirical
world, whereas metatheories and metamethods refer to the
theories and methods themselves. More speciﬁcally, a
metatheory is a set of rules and principles or a story (narra-
tive) that both describes and prescribes what is acceptable
and unacceptable as theory—the means of conceptual explo-
ration of any scientiﬁc domain. A metamethod is also a set of
rules and principles or a story, but this story describes and
prescribes the nature of acceptable methods—the means of

14
Development Across the Life Span
observational exploration—in a scientiﬁc discipline. When
metatheoretical ideas—including metamethod—are tightly
interrelated and form a coherent set of concepts, the set is
often termed a model or paradigm. These coherent sets can
form a hierarchy in terms of increasing generality of applica-
tion. Thus, for example, a model that contains the basic con-
cepts from which a theory of memory will be constructed is a
relatively low-level model because it applies only to memory.
A model such as dynamic systems applies to a number of
domains, including social, cognitive, and emotional domains;
hence, it functions at a higher hierarchical level. The hier-
archical dimension of any given set of metatheoretical ideas
also forms a coherently interrelated system of ideas, and the
model operating at the pinnacle of this hierarchy is termed a
worldview (Overton, 1984). Worldviews are composed of co-
herent sets of epistemological (i.e., issues of knowing) and
ontological (i.e., issues of reality) principles. In this chapter,
most of the discussion concerns ideas that have a very high
range of application.
Metatheories and metamethods are closely interrelated
and intertwined. For example (as we will see shortly), when
considering the very nature of development, a prevailing
metatheory may assert the claim that change of form (trans-
formational change) is a legitimate and important part of
the understanding of developmental change. If a prevail-
ing metatheory asserts the legitimacy of transformational
change, then theories of development will include some type
of stage concept, because stage is the theoretical concept that
is used to describe transformational change. Further, if trans-
formational change and stage are a part of one’s metatheory,
then the related metamethod will prescribe the signiﬁcance of
methods that assess patterns and sequences of patterns that
are appropriate to empirically examining the stage concept in
any given speciﬁc empirical domain. On the other hand, if a
metatheory asserts that transformational change is unimpor-
tant to our understanding of development, then any theoreti-
cal concept of stage will be viewed negatively, and methods
of pattern and sequential assessment will be understood to be
of marginal interest.
Broadly, a metatheory presents a vision of the nature of
the world and the objects of that world (e.g., a metatheory
might present a picture of the child as an active agent con-
structing his/her known world, and another metatheory might
picture the child as a “recording device” that processes infor-
mation). A metamethod presents a vision of the tools that will
be most adequate to explore the world described by the
metatheory.
Any rich understanding of the impact of the metatheoreti-
cal requires an historical appreciation of the emergence of
speciﬁc alternative metatheoretical approaches to knowl-
edge. Developmental psychology was born and spent its
early years in a curious metatheoretical world. This world,
which began in the seventeenth century, has been called the
modern world or modernity. In the past century, the modern
world has undergone major crises; these form the context for
alternative contemporary metatheories. Before describing
this history, a brief examination of the broad ways that
metatheory colors an understanding of the nature of develop-
ment deserves some attention. This discussion will establish
a developmental framework serving as a general context for
the remainder of the chapter.
DEVELOPMENTAL INQUIRY AND
THE METATHEORETICAL
How should we understand the ﬁeld of developmental in-
quiry? Although it is clear that change is central in any deﬁn-
ition of development, the process of identifying the speciﬁc
nature of this change and identifying what it is that changes
in development is shaped by metatheoretical principles. The
most popular current text deﬁnition of development is some
variation of the idea of age changes in observed behavior.
Any reﬂection, however, reveals that serious problems arise
when development is shaped by this deﬁnition. Age has no
unique qualities that differentiate it from time; age is simply
one index of time. There is also nothing unique or novel
about units of age-time, such as years, months, weeks,
minutes, and so on (see Lerner, 2002). Thus, this deﬁnition
merely states that development is about changes that occur in
time. The difﬁculty with this is that all change occurs “in”
time, and—as a consequence—the deﬁnition is an empty
one, merely restating that development is about change. At a
minimum the deﬁnition omits what some would consider to
be critical features of development, including the idea that
developmental change concerns change that has a directional
quality to it, change that is relatively permanent and irre-
versible, and change that entails orderly sequences. However,
making a judgment that direction and sequence are central
concerns—or making the judgment that they are of marginal
interest—is a direct product of the metatheoretical platform
from which the deﬁnition is launched.
Similar problems arise when the deﬁnition of ‘what’ de-
velops is limited to observed behavior. Although observed
behavior is clearly central to empirical investigations—the
dependent variable of psychological research efforts—
whether it is the ultimate goal of inquiry is an issue deﬁned
by metatheory. Except in a metatheoretical world identiﬁed
with behaviorism, observed behavior may be primarily a
jumping-off point—a point of inference—for an exploration
of unseen processes and patterns of processes that identify
mental life. Again, however, making the judgment that

Developmental Inquiry and the Metatheoretical
15
mental events are central to understanding—or the judgment
that mental events are marginal—is a metatheoretically moti-
vated judgment.
The Nature of Developmental Change:
Transformations and Variations
Perhaps the broadest conceptualization of developmental
entails the recognition of two fundamental types of change,
transformational and variational (see Figure 1.1). Transfor-
mational change is change in the form, organization, or struc-
ture of any system. The caterpillar transforms into the butter-
ﬂy, water transforms into ice and gas, the seed transforms
into the plant, cells transform into the organism. All nonlinear
dynamic systems, including the human psyche, undergo
transformation change. Transformational change results in
the emergence of novelty. As forms change, they become
increasingly complex. This increased complexity is a com-
plexity of pattern rather than a linear, additive complexity of
elements. As a consequence, new patterns exhibit novel char-
acteristics that cannot be reduced to (i.e., completely ex-
plained by) or predicted from earlier components (indicated
EMBODIMENT
Person
Person
EMBODIMENT
EMBODIMENT
Person
BIOLOGICAL SYSTEMS
BIO-SYSTEMS
BIO-SYSTEMS
BIO-SYSTEMS
Expressive/Constitutive
Instrumental
Expressive/Constitutive
Instrumental
(PROJECTIVE-TRANSFORMATION-
EXPLORATION) 
Instrumental
TRANSFORMATIONAL CHANGE
Time
(Stages)
PRACTICAL
Intentions, Acts, Goals,
Feelings
ACTION SYSTEMS
(SCHEMES)
(OPERATIONS)
Person
LIVING BODY
EMBODIMENT
3rd ORDER
Representational
Action Systems
REFLECTIVE
SYMBOLIC
PRACTICAL
Thoughts, Wishes, Feelings
2nd ORDER
Representational
Action Systems
SYMBOLIC
PRACTICAL
Thoughts, Wishes, Feelings
REPRESENTATIONAL
Action Systems
TRANS-REFLECTIVE
REFLECTIVE
SYMBOLIC
PRACTICAL
Thoughts, Wishes, Feelings
Expressive/Constitutive
Expressive/Constitutive
Instrumental
(PROJECTIVE/TRANSFORMATIONAL-EXPLORATORY ACTION  CHANGE MECHANISM)
VARIATIONAL
CHANGE
(PROJECTIVE-TRANSFORMATIONAL-EXPLORATORY ACTION) 
(PROJECTIVE-TRANSFORM-
EXPLORATION) 
SOCIOCULTURAL
&
PHYSICAL
WORLD
Figure 1.1
The development of the person: levels of transformational and variational change emerging through embodied action in a sociocultural and
physical world.

16
Development Across the Life Span
by the four “person” cubes on the left side of Figure 1.1).
This emergence of novelty is commonly referred to as quali-
tative change in the sense that it is change that cannot be
represented as purely additive. Similarly, reference to dis-
continuity in development is simply the acknowledgment of
emergent novelty and qualitative change (Overton & Reese,
1981). Recognizing these features of transformational
change is quite important when one considers various notions
of stages or levels of development, as these are theoretical
concepts that refer to transformational change with the asso-
ciated emergent novelty, qualitative change, and disconti-
nuity. The philosopher E. Nagel well captured the nature of
transformational change when he suggested that the concept
of development implies two fundamental features: (a) “the
notion of a system, possessing a deﬁnite structure [i.e., orga-
nization] . . .”; and (b) “the notion of a set of sequential
changes in the system yielding relatively permanent but
novel increments not only in its structures [i.e., organization]
but in its modes of operation as well” (1957, p. 17).
Variational change refers to the degree or extent that a
change varies from a standard, norm, or average (see the ar-
rows on the right side of Figure 1.1). Consider the pecking of
the pigeon; changes in where, when, and how rapidly pecking
occurs are variational changes. The reaching behavior of the
infant, the toddler’s improvements in walking precision, the
growth of vocabulary, and the receipt of better grades in
school are all examples of variational change. From an adap-
tive point of view, developmental variational change is about
a skill or ability’s becoming more precise and more accurate.
This type of change can be represented as linear—completely
additive in nature. As a consequence, this change is under-
stood as quantitative and continuous.
Given these two types of change, there have been three
metatheoretical solutions proposed for the problem of how
they are related in development. The ﬁrst and most prominent
solution—given the history to be described later—has been
to treat variation as the bedrock reality of development. This
solution marginalizes transformational change by claiming
that it is mere description, which itself requires explana-
tion. Essentially this claim embodies the promise that all
“apparent” transformational change will ultimately be
explained—perhaps as our empirical knowledge increases—
as the product of variation and only variation. An important
consequence of this solution is that the associated meta-
method will prescribe methods that can assess linear addi-
tive processes, but will marginalize methods that assess
nonlinear processes. A classic example of this general solu-
tion was the Skinnerian demonstration that given only
variations in pecking and reinforcement, it was possible to
train pigeons to hit ping-pong balls back and forth over a
net. Thus, it was claimed that the “apparent” developmental
novelty of playing ping-pong was in reality nothing but the
continuous additive modiﬁcations in variation. This solution
is also adopted by those who portray cognitive development
as either a simple increase in representational content (see
Scholnick & Cookson, 1994) or as an increase in the efﬁ-
ciency with which this content is processed (Siegler, 1989,
1996; Sternberg, 1984; Valsiner, 1994).
The second metatheoretical solution treats transforma-
tional change as the bedrock reality and marginalizes the
signiﬁcance of variation. Here, variation is seen as rather
irrelevant noise in a transformational system. Although this
solution is seldom actually articulated, some stage theories,
such as Erik Erikson’s (1968) theory of psychosocial devel-
opment, have elevated transformational change to a point that
the importance of the variational seems to disappear below
the horizon.
The third metatheoretical approach does not approach
transformation and variation as competing alternative, but
rather it understands them as fundamentally real, necessary,
and interrelated features of development. This solution
asserts a reality in which each assumes a different functional
role, but each explains and is explained by the other. Trans-
formational systems produce variation, and variation trans-
forms the system (this solution is illustrated in Figure 1.1).
This relational metatheoretical posture is discussed later in
this chapter as a “take on reality” that resolves many of
developmental inquiry’s most controversial problems and
opens new paths of investigation.
In relation to this and to other discussions of systems
and dynamic systems explored in this chapter, it should be
noted that the term systems is ambiguous unless clariﬁed
through articulation of its metatheoretical roots (see Overton,
1975). As pointed out by Ludwig von Bertalanffy (1968a,
1968b), the acknowledged father of general systems theory,
systems has different meanings, depending on the background
assumptions that frame its deﬁnition. Bertalanffy’s own
systems approach—and the one explored in the present
chapter—begins from background assumptions that stress
the central signiﬁcance of irreducible activity and organiza-
tion. Other deﬁnitions, however, emerge from background
assumptions that stress an ultimate absolute foundation of
static uniform objects and a reductionism of any apparent
activity and organization to this foundation. Bertalanffy him-
self referred to these alternative approaches to systems as the
organismic and mechanistic respectively.
What Changes in Development? The Expressive and
the Instrumental
As with development itself, the what of development has
classically entailed two alternatives. Any action, at any level

A Brief History of Metatheoretical Worlds and the Birth of Developmental Psychology
17
from the neuronal to the molar, can be considered from
the perspective of what it expresses or from the perspective
of the instrumental value of the behavior. The expressive-
constitutive function refers to the fact any action may be
considered the reﬂection of some underlying organization or
dynamic system. For example, in human ontogenesis we
speak of cognitive systems, affective systems, and motiva-
tional systems (see the systems described in the cubes on the
left of Figure 1.1). These systems have characteristic forms
of activity that are expressed as actions and patterns of action
in the world (center horizontal lines of Figure 1.1). A verbal-
ization may reﬂect the nature of the child’s system of thought,
a cry in a particular context may reﬂect the status of the
child’s attachment system, and a series of behaviors may re-
ﬂect the child’s intentional system. The expressive function is
constitutive in the sense that it reﬂects the creative function of
human action. It reﬂects the base from which new behaviors,
new intentions, and new meanings are constituted. When in-
quiry is directed toward the assessment or diagnosis of the
nature, status, or change of the underlying psychological sys-
tem, the expressive function is central. It can also be central
when explanations are presented from the perspective of
biological systems. When exploring the expressive function
of an action, the what that changes in development is the
dynamic system that is reﬂected in the action expression.
Dynamic systems become transformed (left cubes of Fig-
ure 1.1) through their action (center horizontal lines of
Figure 1.1). Thus, dynamic systems as a what of change and
transformation as a type of change are closely related.
The instrumental function of an action is understood as a
means of attaining some outcome; it is the pragmatic and
adaptive dimension of action (see center horizontal lines of
Figure 1.1). For example, in human ontogenesis a cognition
or thought may be the means to solve a problem, the emotion
of crying may lead to acquiring a caregiver, or walking
around may be instrumental in acquiring nourishment.
Communicative actions are instrumental actions that extend
into the domain of the intersubjective (relation of the person
cubes at the left and social world at the right of Figure 1.1).
When inquiry is directed toward the adaptive or communica-
tive value of an action, the instrumental function is central.
What changes when the instrumental is focal is the behavior
itself, but the new behavior is some variation of the original.
Thus, instrumental behaviors as a what of change and varia-
tion as a type of change are also closely related.
In a fashion analogous to the earlier discussion of types of
developmental change, solutions to the relation of the expres-
sive and instrumental functions of change emerge from
three different metatheoretical postures. The ﬁrst takes the
instrumental-communicative as bedrock and marginalizes
the expressive. This, for example, is the solution of any
perspective that advocates an exclusively functional ap-
proach to a topic of inquiry (e.g., see the work on the func-
tional theory of emotions, Saarni, Mumme, & Campos,
1998), of any theory that advocates an exclusively adapta-
tionist view of a domain of interest, and of any theory that ex-
plicitly denies or marginalizes the status of mental structures,
mental organization, or biological systems as legitimate—if
partial—explanations of behavior.
The second metatheoretical solution reverses the bedrock-
marginalization process. It establishes the expressive as
bedrock and the instrumental as the marginal. Approaches
that offer biological systems, mental systems, or both as
both necessary and sufﬁcient for the explanation of behavior
represent examples of this solution.
The third metatheoretical solution again—as in the case
of the nature of change itself—presents the expressive and
the instrumental as realities that operate within a relational
matrix. The expressive and the instrumental are accepted not
as dichotomous competing alternatives, but rather as differ-
ent perspectives on the same whole (this solution is illus-
trated in Figure 1.1). Like the famous ambiguous ﬁgure that
appears to be a vase from one line of sight and the faces of
two people from another line of sight, the expressive and
instrumental represent two lines of sight, not independent
processes. System and adaptation, like structure and func-
tion, are separable only as analytic points of view. Focusing
inquiry on the diagnosis of underlying dynamic biological
and psychological systems in no way denies that behaviors
have an adaptive value; focusing on adaptive value in no
way denies that the behaviors originate from some dynamic
system.
With this introduction to the impact of the metatheoretical
on our understanding of the nature of development and our
understanding of the nature of what changes in development,
we can proceed to examine the details of various metatheo-
retical postures as they emerged historically and as they
currently operate.
A BRIEF HISTORY OF METATHEORETICAL
WORLDS AND THE BIRTH OF
DEVELOPMENTAL PSYCHOLOGY
The Modern Period
Modernity was deﬁned both by a quest for absolute certainty
of knowledge (Toulmin, 1990) and by an effort to expand
individual freedom, especially freedom of thought. Building
knowledge on rational and reasoned grounds rather than
on the grounds of authority and dogma was understood as
the key to each of these goals. The early protagonists who

18
Development Across the Life Span
developed the basic tenets of this metatheoretical story line
were Galileo Galilei and his physics of a natural world dis-
connected from mind; René Descartes, whose epistemology
elevated disconnection or splitting to a ﬁrst principle; and
Thomas Hobbes, who saw both mind and nature in a vision of
atomistic materialism. Of the three, Descartes was to have the
greatest and most lasting impact on the text and subtexts of
this particular metatheoretical story.
Descartes’ major contributions entailed the insertion
and articulation of splitting and foundationalism as key
interrelated themes into the story of scientiﬁc knowledge.
Splitting is the formation of a conceptual dichotomy—an
exclusive either-or relationship—and foundationalism is a
claim that one or the other elements of the dichotomy con-
stitutes the ultimate Reality or bedrock of certainty. Nature
and nurture, idealism and materialism (form and matter),
reason and observation, subject and object, constancy and
change, biology and culture, and so on all can be—and
under the inﬂuence of Cartesian epistemology are—
presented as split-off competing alternatives. Choose a
background principle as the “Real”—as the foundation—
and it follows, under a split metatheory, that the other is
mere appearance or epiphenomenal. It must be cautioned
at this point that there is a critical distinction between the
use of the term real in everyday commonsense life and
the Real of foundationalism. No one argues—or has ever
argued—that there is a lack of reality or realness in the
experienced everyday world. This is commonsense realism.
Commonsense realism accepts the material existence of a
real, actual, or manifest world and all metatheoretical per-
spectives treat people, animals, and physical objects as
having such a real existence. The metatheoretical issue of
the Real with a capital R (Putnam, 1987) is a very different
issue. It concerns the current issue of having an absolute
base or foundation from which everything else emerges. In
this limited sense, the Real is deﬁned as that which is not
dependent on something else—that which cannot be re-
duced to something else.
Modernity’s foundationalism is identiﬁed with a ﬁnal
achievement of absolute certainty and the end of doubt. In
this story even probable knowledge is knowledge on its way
to certainty (i.e., 100% probable). This foundation is not
simply a grounding or a vantage point, standpoint, or point of
view, and certainty and doubt are not dialectically related.
Descartes’ foundationalism describes the ﬁnal, ﬁxed, secure
base. It constitutes an absolute, ﬁxed, unchanging bedrock—
a ﬁnal Archimedes point (Descartes, 1969).
Cartesian splitting and foundationalism came to operate as
a permanent background frame for modernity’s scientiﬁc
story. However, the speciﬁcation of the nature of the ultimate
foundation remained at issue. It was left to the empiricist
branch of modernity to locate the Real within a dichotomy of
observation split off from interpretation. Hobbs and later em-
piricists operated within this frame, in which subject became
split from object, mind split from body, ideas split from mat-
ter; they built into it a materialist identiﬁcation of atomistic
matter as the ultimate ontological foundational Real. Further,
the epistemological rhetoric of Locke, Berkeley, and Hume
operated to suppress subjectivity, mind, or ideas, thereby cre-
ating objectivism, or the belief that the ultimate material real-
ity exists as an absolute—independent of mind or knower
(Searle, 1992). This constituted, as Putnam (1990) has said,
the idea of a “God’s eye view” that would be independent of
the mind of the investigator.
Objectivist matter thus came to constitute the ontological
Real to which all of commonsense experience would be re-
duced to arrive at the goal of science: a systematized body of
certain empirical knowledge. Support for the materialist
foundation arose and was further deﬁned by Newton’s contri-
butions. Central among these was the redeﬁnition of the
nature of matter in a way that conceived of all bodies as fun-
damentally inactive. Prior to Newton, matter was understood
as inherently active. Matter had been conceived in terms of
the relation of being (the static, ﬁxed) and becoming (the
active, changing). Newton, however—through his concept
of inertia—split activity and matter and redeﬁned matter as
inactivity (Prosch, 1964).
The redeﬁnition of bodies as inert matter and the assump-
tion of the atomicity of matter (i.e., bodies as ultimately ag-
gregates of elemental matter that is uniform in nature, and in
combination yields the things of the world), were basic for
Newton’s formulation of his laws of motion. However, they
were also ideas that a later generation generalized into a
metaphysical worldview (i.e., a metatheory at the highest
level of generality). This worldview identiﬁed the nature of
the Real as ﬁxed inert matter and only ﬁxed inert matter. This
worldview has been called the “billiard ball” notion of the
universe—“the notion that basically everything . . . was made
up of small, solid particles, in themselves inert, but always in
motion and elasticitly rebounding from each other, . . . and
operating mechanically” (Prosch, 1964, p. 66).
With these metatheoretical themes at hand—splitting,
foundationalism, materialism, empiricism, and objectivism—
it was a short step to the formulation of a completely exclusive
scientiﬁc metamethod termed mechanical explanation that
with relatively minor modiﬁcations has extended to the pre-
sent day as the metamethod of empiricism. This metamethod
has gone under various names, including neopositivism and
later instrumentalism, conventionalism, and functionalism
(Overton, 1998).

A Brief History of Metatheoretical Worlds and the Birth of Developmental Psychology
19
Mechanical Explanation
The mechanical explanation metamethod continues the split-
ting process by dichotomizing science into two airtight com-
partments, description and explanation. There are three steps
to mechanical explanation. The ﬁrst is considered descriptive
and the second two are considered explanatory.
Step 1: Reduction-Description.
The ﬁrst step of me-
chanical explanation entails addressing the commonsense
object of inquiry and reducing it to the absolute material, ob-
jective, ﬁxed, unchanging, foundational elements or atoms.
Terms like reductionism, atomism, elementarism, and ana-
lytic attitude all identify this step. In psychology for many
years the atoms were stimuli and responses. Today they tend
to be neurons and behaviors, or contextual factors and
behaviors—the story line changes but the themes remain the
same within this metatheory. In keeping with the framework
of empiricism and materialism, the broad stricture here is to
reduce all phenomena to the visible.
Brieﬂy consider one impact of this ﬁrst step on devel-
opmental inquiry. Immediately the concepts of transfor-
mational change, stages of development, and the mental
organizations, or dynamic systems that change during devel-
opment become suspect as being somehow derivative be-
cause they are not directly observable. At best under this
story line, transformations, stages, and mental organization
can only function as summary statements for an underlying
more molecular really Real. In fact, the drive throughout this
step is toward the ever more molecular in the belief that
it is in the realm of the molecular that the Real is directly
observed. This is particularly well illustrated in the recent
enthusiasm for a microgenetic method (e.g., D. Kuhn, Garcia-
Mila, Zohar, & Andersen, 1995; Siegler, 1996) as a method
that offers “a direct [italics added] means for studying
cognitive development” (Siegler & Crowley, 1991, p. 606).
In this approach, an intensive trial-by-trial analysis re-
duces the very notion of development to a molecular bedrock
of visible behavioral differences as they appear across
learning trials.
It is important to recognize that the aim of Step 1 is to
drive out interpretations from the commonsense phenomena
under investigation. Under the objectivist theme, common-
sense observation is error laden, and it is only through ever
more careful neutral observation that science can eliminate
this error and ultimately arrive at the elementary bedrock
that constitutes the level of facts or data (i.e., invariable
observations).
Step 2: Causal Explanation.
Step 2 of mechanical
explanation begins to move inquiry into the second
compartment of compartmentalized science—explanation.
Step 2 consists of the instruction to ﬁnd the relation among
the elements described in Step 1. More speciﬁcally, given our
objects of study in developmental psychology—behavior
and behavior change—this step directs inquiry to locate an-
tecedents. These antecedents, when they meet certain criteria
of necessity and sufﬁciency, are termed causes; the discovery
of cause deﬁnes explanation within this metamethod. The an-
tecedents are also often referred to as mechanisms, but the
meaning is identical.
This is another point at which to pause and notice an im-
portant impact of metatheory. Here, because of the particular
metatheoretical principles involved, the word explanation
comes to be deﬁned as an antecedent-consequent relation, or
the efﬁcient-material proximal cause of the object of inquiry.
Further, science itself comes to be deﬁned as the (causal) ex-
planation of natural phenomena. It is critically important to
remember here that Aristotle had earlier produced a very
different metatheoretical story of scientiﬁc explanation.
Aristotle’s schema entailed complementary relations among
four types of explanation, rather than a splitting. Two of
Aristotle’s explanations were causal in nature (i.e., an-
tecedent material and efﬁcient causes). Two, however, were
explanations according to the pattern, organization, or form
of the object of inquiry. Aristotle’s formal (i.e., the momen-
tary form or organization of the object of inquiry) and ﬁnal
(i.e., the end or goal of the object of inquiry) explanations
were explanations that made the object of inquiry intelligible
and gave reasons for the nature and functioning of the object
(Randall, 1960; Taylor, 1995). Today, the structure of the
atom, the structure of DNA, the structure of the solar system,
and the structure of the universe are all familiar examples of
formal pattern principles drawn from the natural sciences.
Kinship structures, mental structures, mental organization,
dynamic systems, attachment behavior system, structures of
language, ego and superego, dynamisms, schemes, opera-
tions, and cognitive structures are familiar examples of for-
mal pattern principles drawn from the human sciences.
Similarly, reference to the sequence and directionality found
in the second law of thermodynamics, self-organizing sys-
tems, the equilibration process or reﬂective abstraction, the
orthogenetic principle, or a probabilistic epigenetic principle
are all examples of ﬁnal pattern principles (Overton, 1994a).
Both formal and ﬁnal pattern principles entail interpreta-
tions that make the phenomena under investigation intelligible.
Both—within the Aristotelian relational scheme— constitute
legitimate explanations. However, within the split story of
mechanical explanation, as guided by reductionism and
objectivism, formal and ﬁnal principles completely lose
any explanatory status; explanation is limited to nothing but

20
Development Across the Life Span
observable efﬁcient (i.e., the force that moves the object) and
material (i.e., the material composition of the object) causes.
At best, within the mechanical story formal and ﬁnal principles
may reappear in the descriptive compartment as mere sum-
mary statements of the underlying molecular descriptive Real
discussed in Step 1. In this way transformational change and
dynamic psychological systems become eliminated or margin-
alized as necessary features of developmental inquiry.
Step 3: Induction of Interpretation-Free Hypotheses,
Theories, and Laws.
Step 3 of mechanical explanation in-
stalls induction as the foundational logic of science. Step 3
instructs the investigator that ultimate explanations in science
must be found in ﬁxed unchanging laws, and these must be
inductively derived as empirical generalizations from the
repeated observation of cause-effect relations found in
Step 2. Weak generalizations from Step 2 regularities consti-
tute interpretation-free hypotheses. Stronger generalizations
constitute interpretation-free theoretical propositions. Theo-
retical propositions joined as logical conjunctions (and
connections) constitute interpretation-free theories. Laws
represent the strongest and ﬁnal inductions.
Deduction later reenters modernity’s story of empirical
science as a split-off heuristic method of moving from induc-
tively derived hypotheses and theoretical propositions to fur-
ther empirical observations. When later editions of the story
introduced a “hypothetico-deductive method” it was simply
more variation on the same theme. The hypothesis of this
method has nothing to do with interpretation, but is simply an
empirical generalization driven by pristine data; the general-
ization then serves as a major premise in a formal deductive
argument. Similarly, when instrumentalism moved away
from the hypothetico-deductive stance to the employment of
models, models themselves functioned merely as the same
type of interpretation-free heuristic devices.
Another important variation—but a variation neverthe-
less—on this same theme was the so-called covering law
model of scientiﬁc explanation. This model was introduced
by Carl Hempel (1942) and became the prototype of all later
explanations formulated within this metatheory. The cover-
ing law model was particularly important for developmental
inquiry because it treated historical events as analogous to
physical events in the sense that earlier events were consid-
ered the causal antecedents of later events (Ricoeur, 1984).
Here, then, is the basic outline of the quest for absolute
certainty according to the empiricist modernity story of
scientiﬁc methodology:
•
Step 1. Reduce to the objective (interpretation-free)
observable foundation.
•
Step 2. Find the causes.
•
Step 3. Induce the law.
As noted, variations appear throughout history. In fact, it
would be misleading not to acknowledge that probability has
replaced certainty as the favored lexical item in the story as it
is told today. Indeed, induction is itself statistical and proba-
bilistic in nature. However, as mentioned earlier, this change
represents much more style than it does substance, because
the aim remains to move toward 100% probability, thereby
arriving at certainty or its closest approximation. This type of
fallibilistic stance continues to pit doubt against certainty as
competing alternatives rather than understand doubt and cer-
tainty as a dialectical relation framed by the concept of plau-
sibility. More generally, all of the variations that have been
introduced since the origin of Newtonian explanation—
including
those
formulated
under
the
methodological
banners of neopositivism, instrumentalism, conventional-
ism, and functionalism—have not at all changed the basic
themes.
There is scarcely any doubt that modernity’s empiricist
metatheory of objective certainty has failed. This failure
is too long a story to retell here. It has been thoroughly
documented in the arena of scientiﬁc knowledge by numer-
ous historians and philosophers of science, including Stephen
Toulmin (1953), N. R. Hanson (1958), Thomas Kuhn
(1962), Imre Lakatos (1978), Larry Laudan (1977), Richard
Bernstein (1983), and—most recently—Bruno Latour
(1993). Despite this discrediting, ghosts of modernity’s
mechanistic worldview continue to haunt the scientiﬁc study
of development. Nature (material cause) and nurture (efﬁ-
cient cause) are still presented as competing alternative ex-
planations. Biology and culture still compete with each other
as fundamental explanations of development (see Lerner,
2002). There are still those who argue that emergence of
genuine novel behavior is not possible and that any apparent
novelty must be completely explained by antecedent causal
mechanisms. Indeed, the claim is still put forth that if a
causal mechanism is not identiﬁed, then there is no real
explanation—only mysticism (Elman et al., 1996) or miracles
(Siegler & Munakata, 1993). This is the same mechanisti-
cally deﬁned argument that claims there can be no disconti-
nuity or transformational change in development. All change,
according to this mechanistic argument, is (i.e., must be)
nothing but additive or continuous in nature; all qualitative
change must be reduced to nothing but quantitative change.
There are also those who still argue that development must
be explained by causal mechanisms and only causal
mechanisms. And—last but not least—there are still those
who argue that all scientiﬁc knowledge about development

A Brief History of Metatheoretical Worlds and the Birth of Developmental Psychology
21
must begin and end in a world of interpretation-free pristine
observations of what “the child actually does,” a world
that exalts the instrumental-communicative and excludes the
expressive.
There are probably several reasons for the failure to
recognize and accept the demise of modernity’s empiricist
metatheory. One of these reasons has to do with socializa-
tion. For psychologists who were reared in the strictures
of mechanical explanation, these strictures are difﬁcult to
abandon, and the values tend to be passed from generation
to generation without deep reﬂection. Indeed, because
this metatheory is virtually inscribed with the motto Don’t
think, ﬁnd out (Cohen, 1931), it is not surprising that ﬂedg-
ling investigators are often discouraged from taking the
very notion of metatheory seriously; hence, they seldom
evaluate the merits and ﬂaws of alternative background
assumptions. Another (perhaps more important) reason,
however, has been the apparent lack of viable empirical
scientiﬁc alternatives—and the seeming abyss of uncer-
tainty that is faced when one abandons a secure rock-solid
base. The rise of postmodern thought did nothing to assuage
this fear.
The Postmodern Period and the Chaos
of Absolute Relativity
Like its predecessor, postmodernism is identiﬁed with the
ideal of achieving individual freedom. However, the propo-
nents of the postmodern agenda have approached this ideal
almost exclusively through attacks directed at modernity’s
rational quest for absolute certainty. This has left in place
the splitting of categories. The effect of this continued split-
ting is that postmodern thought has tended to deﬁne itself
in terms of categories that reﬂect the opposite of those that
deﬁned modernity. Thus, if modernity was rational, the
postmodern celebrates the emotional; if modernity was
objectivist observational, the postmodern celebrates subjec-
tivist interpretation; and if modernity aimed for the univer-
sal, the postmodern argues for the particular. Despite the
fact that advocates of postmodernism explicitly reject foun-
dationalism and explicitly reject the notion of metatheory—
“metanarratives,” as they are termed in the postmodern
vernacular (Overton, 1998)—splitting into oppositional cat-
egories of necessity creates a new (if implicit) foundational-
ism. In this new foundationalism, modernity is turned on its
head. The apparent reality of modernity becomes the real
foundational reality of postmodernism. The foundational el-
evation of interpretation over observation in some versions
of hermeneutics and deconstructivism is illustrative. When
interpretation is valued to the exclusion of observation, the
end result is a complete (i.e., absolute) relativism. If there is
no neutral observational territory to help decide between
your judgment and my judgment, then all knowledge is
purely subjective and (hence) relative. But this situation is
chaotic and precludes any stable general base from which to
operate; this is complete relativity and uncertainty. Given
this chaotic alternative, it is little wonder that the generation
of developmental psychologists that followed the destruc-
tion of neopositivism and instrumentalism tended to cling
for support to the wreckage of modernity’s descending nar-
rative. In their split world, the slow death of fading rele-
vance is less terrifying than the prospect of chaotic
fragmentation.
Although much of postmodern thought has moved to-
wards the chaotic abyss, one variant has attempted to estab-
lish a stable base for knowledge construction by developing a
new scientiﬁc metamethod. This position emerged from the
hermeneutic and phenomenological traditions (Latour, 1999)
and has come to operate parallel to and as a reaction against
neopositivism’s quest for reductionistic causal explanation.
This alternative picture champions understanding (in con-
trast to explanation) as the base of scientiﬁc knowledge—at
least as this scientiﬁc knowledge pertains to the behavioral
and social sciences, including the humanities.
Broadly, hermeneutics is the theory or philosophy of the
interpretation of meaning. Hermeneutics elevates to a heroic
role the very concept that mechanical explanation casts as
demon error—interpretation. For our purposes, we can pass
by the periods of classical, biblical, and romantic hermeneu-
tics, as well as Vico’s historical hermeneutics. Our brief focus
here is on the effort that Dilthey (1972) promoted at the turn
of the present century to construct a metamethod for the
social sciences; this was Verstehen or understanding. Within
this metamethod, understanding operates as an epistemologi-
cal rather than a psychological concept. Furthermore, most
important is that interpretation operates as the procedure that
results in understanding.
As a metamethod of the social and behavioral sciences,
understanding is closely related to action theory. Action the-
ory is a person-centered approach to inquiry into processes
and operations of the meaning-producing, living embodied
agent (Brandtstadter, 1998; Brandtstadter & Lerner, 1999;
Overton, 1997a, 1997b). Action theory stands in contrast to
exclusively variable approaches to human behavior, which
are externalist and event oriented in their focus. Paul Ricoeur
has clearly outlined—in the context of Wittgenstein’s
language games, which are themselves metatheoretical back-
ground principles—the distinction between variable-centered
events and person-centered actions (see also Magnusson &
Stattin, 1998), and in the following outline Ricoeur (1991)

22
Development Across the Life Span
suggested the distinction between mechanical explanation
and hermeneutic understanding:
It is not the same language game that we speak of events [vari-
ables] occurring in nature or of actions performed by people.
For, to speak of events [variables], we enter a language game in-
cluding notions like cause, law, fact, explanation and so on. . . .
It is . . . in another language game and in another conceptual net-
work that we can speak of human action [i.e., a person-centered
frame]. For, if we have begun to speak in terms of action, we
shall continue to speak in terms of projects, intentions, motives,
reasons for acting, agents, [interpretation, understanding] and so
forth. (pp. 132–133)
Unfortunately, the creation of a distinct metamethod for the
social sciences is yet another example of proceeding within a
split background frame. Verstehen is presented as a competing
account of human functioning to that found in the natural sci-
ences. However, the articulation of this dichotomy may also
provide a clue to the possibility of its resolution—the possi-
bility of a rapprochement between the futility of a search for
absolute certainty and the chaos of absolute uncertainty.
Verstehen as a metamethod—and action theory as an ap-
proach to human functioning—are closely related by the
intentional quality of action. Intention is never directly ob-
servable by a third party. To intend is to do something for the
sake of; it involves direction and order. There is a goal toward
which action moves, and a sequence of acts lead to that goal.
To explain (understand) action, it is necessary to make inter-
pretative inferences about patterns of acts that make the
speciﬁc behavioral movements intelligible and give a reason
for the movements. For example, the act we term reaching in
the young infant is only that if the inference is made that the
infant intends a particular goal object. Under another infer-
ence the observed movements might be termed stretching.
Making inferences about action patterns is in fact identical
to Aristotle’s formal and ﬁnal explanations as they were de-
signed to make the object of inquiry intelligible and give
reasons for the nature and functioning of the object. Thus, a
rapprochement between developmental psychology as an
adherent of a so-called natural science perspective might
view it—and as an adherent of an action perspective might
view it—may reside in a metatheoretical perspective that
can integrate the mechanical causal explanation and action
pattern explanation.
RELATIONAL METATHEORY: A SYNTHESIS
OF OPPOSITES
The historian of science Bruno Latour (1993) has sketched
just such a rapprochement in his analysis of the modern
agenda and postmodernism. Latour begins by rejecting both
modernity and postmodernism. He refers to the latter as “a
symptom, not a fresh solution” (p. 46) to the problems of
modernity.
It [postmodernism] senses that something has gone awry in the
modern critique, but it is not able to do anything but prolong that
critique, though without believing in its foundations (Lyotard,
1979). . . .
Postmodernism rejects all empirical work as illusory and de-
ceptively scientistic (Baudrillard, 1992). Disappointed rational-
ists, its adepts indeed sense that modernism is done for, but they
continue to accept its way of dividing up time (p. 46).
Although adversaries, both groups have played on the
ﬁeld of identical background assumptions. Latour’s solution
is to move from this to another much broader ﬁeld of play
where foundations are groundings, not bedrocks of certainty;
and analysis is about creating categories, not about cutting
nature at its joints. Viewed historically, Latour calls this
approach “amodernism” as a denial of both modernity and
postmodernism. Viewed as a metatheoretical background it is
termed “relationism” (p. 114) and its basic identity is deﬁned
by a move away from the extremes of Cartesian splits to the
center or “Middle Kingdom,” where entities and ideas are
represented not as pure forms, but as forms that ﬂow across
fuzzy boundaries.
Rejecting Splits and Bedrocks
A relational metatheory begins by clearing splitting from the
ﬁeld of play. Because splitting and foundationalism go hand
in hand, this also eliminates foundationalism. Splitting in-
volves the belief that there are pure forms, but this belief it-
self springs from the acceptance of the atomistic assumptions
that there is a rock bottom to reality and that this rock bottom
is composed of elements that preserve their identity, regard-
less of context. Thus, acceptance of atomism leads directly to
the belief that the mental (ideas, mind) and the physical (mat-
ter, body) are two absolutely different natural kinds of things.
And if nature is composed of such natural kinds, then it is
possible to cut nature at its joints. A relational metatheory
abandons atomism and replaces it with a more holistic under-
standing, which proposes that the identity of objects derives
from the relational context in which they are embedded.
As a consequence of this form of background idea—as the
philosopher John Searle (1992) has suggested—“the fact
that a feature is mental does not imply that it is not physi-
cal; the fact that a feature is physical does not imply that it is
not mental” (p. 15). Similarly, the fact that a feature is bio-
logical does not suggest that it is not cultural, the fact that a
feature is cultural does not suggest that it is not biological,
and so forth.

Relational Metatheory: A Synthesis of Opposites
23
TABLE 1.1
Fundamental Categories of Analysis
Expressed as Either-Or Dichotomies
Subject
Object
Mind
Body
Biology
Person
Culture
Biology
Person
Culture
Person
Situation
Intrapsychic
Interpersonal
Nature
Nurture
Stability
Change
Expressive
Instrumental
Variation
Transformation
Reason
Emotion
Form
Matter
Universal
Particular
Transcendent
Immanent
Analysis
Synthesis
Unity
Diversity
The rejection of pure forms or essences has broad impli-
cations for developmental psychology. To brieﬂy give but
one example, consider the seemingly never-ending nature-
nurture or biology-culture debate. This debate is framed by
the modern agenda of splitting and foundationalism. In the
debate’s current form, virtually no one actually asserts that
matter-body-brain-genes or society-culture-environment pro-
vides the cause of behavior or development; however, the
background idea of one or the other as the real determinant
remains the silent subtext that continues to shape debate. The
overt contemporary claim is that behavior and development
are the products of the interactions of nature and nurture.
But interaction is still thought of as two split-off pure entities
that function independently in cooperative ways, competitive
ways, or both. As a consequence, the debate simply becomes
displaced to another level of discourse. At this new level, the
contestants agree that behavior and development are deter-
mined by both nature and nurture, but they remain embattled
over the relative merits of each entity’s contribution. Within
the split foundationalist agenda, battles continue over which
of the two is more important for a speciﬁc behavior, which
of the two determines the origin versus the appearance of
a speciﬁc behavior, or how much one or the other contributes
to that behavior. Thus, despite overt conciliatory declara-
tions to the contrary, the classical which one and how
much questions that have long framed the split debate (see
Anastasi, 1958; Schneirla, 1956) continue as potent divisive
frames of inquiry. In fact, it would be impossible to cast ques-
tions of development as issues of nativism and empiricism
(Spelke & Newport, 1998) were it not for the assumption of
pure forms (see Lerner, 2002, for a further elaboration).
The Identity of Opposites
Rejecting atomism eliminates the idea of pure forms and con-
sequently makes any notion of natural foundational splits un-
tenable. This in itself destroys the scientiﬁc legitimacy of
questions such as the which one and how much questions of
nature-nurture. However, the mere rejection of atomism does
not in itself offer a positive approach to resolving the many
fundamental dichotomies that have framed developmental as
well as other ﬁelds of inquiry (see Table 1.1). A general posi-
tive resolution requires a second component; this component
is the generation of a context in which the individual identity
of each formerly dichotomous member is maintained while
simultaneously it is afﬁrmed that each member constitutes
and is constituted by the other. Thus, a general context is
needed in which (for example) both nature and nurture main-
tain their individual identities while simultaneously it is un-
derstood that the fact that a behavior is a product of biology
does not imply that it is not equally a product of culture, and
that the fact that a behavior is a product of culture does not
imply that is not equally a product of biology—that is, it must
be shown that while there are both biology and culture, there
is no biology that is not culture and no culture that is not
biology.
Splitting entails casting categories into an exclusive
either-or form that forces an understanding of the terms as
contradictions in the sense that one category absolutely ex-
cludes the other (i.e., follows the logical law of contradiction
that it is never the case that A  not A). The next step in the
formulation of a relational metatheory involves replacing this
exclusive framework with an inclusive one. The inclusive
framework must accomplish the seemingly paradoxical task
of simultaneously establishing both an identity between the
opposite categories and retaining the opposite quality of the
categories; this is accomplished by considering identity and
differences as two moments of analysis.
Guided by a more holistic contextual background assump-
tion that assumes that parts and wholes deﬁne each other,
the identity among categories is found by recasting the pre-
viously dichotomous elements not as contradictions, but as
differentiated polarities of a uniﬁed matrix—as a relation.
As differentiations, each pole is deﬁned recursively; each
pole deﬁnes and is deﬁned by its opposite. In this identity
moment of analysis the law of contradiction is suspended and
each category contains and in fact is its opposite. Further—
and centrally—as a differentiation this moment pertains to
character, origin, and outcomes. The character of any con-
temporary behavior, for example, is 100% nature because it
is 100% nurture. There is no origin to this behavior that was
some other percentage—regardless of whether we climb
back into the womb, back into the cell, back into the genome,
or back into the DNA—nor can there be a later behavior that
will be a different percentage. Similarly, any action is both

24
Development Across the Life Span
expressive and instrumental, and any developmental change
is both transformational and variational.
In the second or oppositional moment of analysis, the law
of contradiction is allowed to operate and each category again
asserts its individuality. The parts are opposites and they
assert their differences. In this oppositional moment nature
is nature, it is not nurture, and, nurture is nurture, it is not
nature. This moment of analysis pertains to settings or mo-
mentary context. Thus, it is possible to analyze any behavior
from the standpoint of either nature or nurture when this
either-or is considered as an inclusive rather than an exclusive
disjunction. I return to this point in the following section.
Because the idea and implications of suspending the law
of contradiction on the one hand and applying it on the other
hand is not a familiar idea, some clarifying comments are
needed. Here it must be noted that the relational stance owes
much to the notion of the dialectic as this was articulated
by the nineteenth century philosopher G. W. F. Hegel
(1807–1830). For Hegel, historical—and by extension devel-
opmental—change is a dynamic expressive-transformational
process of growth, represented and deﬁned by the dialectic.
The essence of Hegel’s dialectic is that of a process through
which concepts or fundamental features of a dynamic system
differentiate and move toward integration. Any initial con-
cept or any basic feature of a dynamic system—called a the-
sis or an afﬁrmation—contains implicit within itself an
inherent contradiction that, through action of the system, be-
comes differentiated into a second concept or feature—the
antithesis or negation of the thesis. As a consequence, even in
the single unity of thesis there is the implicit contradictory re-
lation of thesis-antithesis, just as in the unity of the single or-
ganic cell there is the implicit differentiation into the unity of
multiple cells. This points to the fundamental relational char-
acter of the dialectic.
As thesis leads to antithesis—thus producing the differen-
tiation of a relational polarity of opposites—a potential space
between them is generated, and this becomes the ground for
the coordination of the two. The coordination that emerges—
again through the mechanism of action of the system—
constitutes a new unity or integration called the synthesis.
The coordinating synthesis is itself a system that exhibits
novel systemic properties while subsuming the original sys-
tems. Thus, a new relational dynamic matrix composed of
three realms—thesis-antithesis-synthesis—is formed. The
integration that emerges from the differentiation, like all inte-
grations, is incomplete. The synthesis represents a new dy-
namic action system—a new thesis—and thus begins a new
growth cycle of differentiation and integration.
In this relational scheme, the polarity of opposites (i.e.,
thesis and antithesis) that emerges from the initial relatively
undifferentiated matrix (i.e., thesis) does not constitute a cut-
off (split) of contradictory categories that absolutely exclude
each other. Having grown from the same soil as it were, the
two, while standing in a contradictory relation of opposites,
also share an identity. Hegel, in fact, referred to this relation
as the “identity of opposites” (Stace, 1924) and illustrated it
in his famous example of the master and slave. In this exam-
ple Hegel demonstrated that it is impossible to deﬁne or un-
derstand the freedom of the master without reference to the
constraints of slavery; and it is consequently impossible to
deﬁne the constraints of slavery without the reference to the
freedom of the master. Freedom thus contains the idea of con-
straint as constraint contains the idea of freedom, and in this
we see the identity of the opposites freedom and constraint.
The justiﬁcation for the claim that a law of logic—for
example, the law of contradiction—can reasonably both be
applied and relaxed depending on the context of inquiry re-
quires a recognition that the laws of logic themselves are not
immune to background ideas. In some background traditions,
the laws of logic are understood as immutable realities given
either by a world cut off from the human mind or by a
prewired mind cut off from the world. However, in the back-
ground tradition currently under discussion, the traditional
laws of logic are themselves ideas that have been constructed
through the reciprocal action of human minds and world. The
laws of logic are simply pictures that have been drawn or sto-
ries that have been told. They may be good pictures or good
stories in the sense of bringing a certain quality of order into
our lives, but nevertheless they are still pictures or stories,
and it is possible that other pictures will serve us even better.
The twentieth century philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein
(1958), whose later works focused on the importance of
background ideas, made this point quite clearly when he dis-
cussed another law of logic—the law of the excluded mid-
dle—as being one possible picture of the world among many
possible pictures.
The law of the excluded middle says here: It must either look
like this, or like that. So it really . . . says nothing at all, but gives
us a picture. . . . And this picture seems to determine what we
have to do and how—but it does not do so. . . . Here saying
‘There is no third possibility’ . . . expresses our inability to turn
our eyes away from this picture: a picture which looks as if it
must already contain both the problem and its solution, while all
the time we feel that it is not so. (1953, para. 352)
The famous ink sketch by M. C. Escher titled Drawing
Hands (Figure 1.2) presents a vivid graphic illustration both
of the identity of opposites that is found when the law of
contradiction is relaxed in this second phase of a relational

Relational Metatheory: A Synthesis of Opposites
25
metatheory, and as well as the opposites of this identity. In
this sketch a left and a right hand assume a relational posture
according to which each is simultaneously drawing and being
drawn by the other. Each hand is identical with the other in
the sense of each drawing and each being drawn. This is the
relaxed moment of the law of contradiction. Yet they are op-
posites and contradict each other in that one is a left hand and
one is a right hand. Identity is achieved in the context of op-
posites that deﬁne and are deﬁned by each other. It is a useful
exercise to write on each hand one term of traditionally split
concepts and to explore the resulting effect. Terms that can be
written in this fashion range from nature and nurture, biology
and culture, transformation and variation, expressive and
instrumental to pairs such as subject-object, intrapsychic-
interpersonal, interpretation-observation, certainty-doubt,
absolute-relative, unity-diversity, stability-change, universal-
particular, reason-emotion, ideas-matter, analysis-synthesis,
and so on. This exercise is more than merely an illustration of
a familiar bidirectionality of effects suggested in many in-
stances by many scientiﬁc investigators. The exercise makes
tangible the central feature of the relational metatheory;
seemingly dichotomous ideas that have often been thought of
as competing alternatives can in fact enter into inquiry as
complementary supportive partners.
This transformation of competing alternatives into com-
plementary partners is illustrated in a recent exchange of
comments concerning research on the topic that social psy-
chology refers to as the fundamental attribution error. In this
exchange, one group (Gilovich & Eibach, 2001) proceeds
from a split position and notes that “human behavior is not
easily parsed into situational and dispositional causes” (p. 23)
and it is difﬁcult to establish “a precise accounting of how
much a given action stems from the impinging stimulus
rather than from the faculty or disposition with which it
makes contact” (p. 24). The reply to this comment, from
a group committed to an identity of opposites (Sabini,
Siepmann, & Stein, 2001), asserts that they reject such a
position because it reﬂects confusion between competing and
Figure 1.2
M. C. Escher’s “Drawing Hands” © Cordon Art B. V.—Baarn—Holland. All rights reserved.
[Image not available in this electronic edition.]

26
Development Across the Life Span
complementary accounts. They argue that the problem with
the question of
How much John’s going out with Sue stems from her beauty
rather than from his love of beautiful women. . . . is not that it is
difﬁcult to answer; it is that it is conceptually incoherent. It is in-
coherent because it construes two classes of accounts that are in
fact complementary as if they were competing. The heart of our
argument is that one must take this point seriously. All behavior
is jointly a product of environmental stimuli and dispositions.
(p. 43)
A similar but subtler example is found in a recently pub-
lished dialogue on spatial development. Uttal begins this
dialogue with the seemingly complementary view that his
claims about spatial development “are based on the assump-
tion that the relation between maps and the development of
spatial cognition is reciprocal in nature” (2000, p. 247). How-
ever, in a commentary on Uttal’s article, Liben (2000) raises
the question of whether Utall is in fact operating within the
context of an identity of opposites, which she proposes as her
own approach.
As I read his thesis, Uttal seems to be suggesting an independent
contribution of maps, positing that exposure to maps can play a
causal role in leading children to develop basic spatial concepts.
My own preference is to propose a more radically interdepen-
dent [italics added] role of organismic and environmental
factors. (p. 272)
The Opposites of Identity
If we think of the identity of opposites as a kind of ﬁgure-
ground problem then, to this point, the ﬁgure has primarily
been the proposition that within a relational metatheory,
ideas—that in other metatheoretical systems act as bedrock
foundational competing alternatives—exhibit an underlying
identity. Equally important, but operating as ground to this
point, is the already alluded-to fact that this identity is one of
opposites. To now make these opposites the ﬁgure, opens the
way to a third component of a relational metatheory: generat-
ing relatively stable platforms from which to launch empiri-
cal inquiry.
Without the opposites of identity there would be only the
identity of identities and this would present little opportunity
for serious empirical work. It has already been noted that a
relational metatheory rejects splits and bedrocks. If this were
the end of the story—as would be the case with an identity
of identities—then we would have eliminated the absolute
objective realism of modernity, but we would still be in
danger of falling into the absolute relativism of post-
modernism. What is needed is some way to introduce a rela-
tive relativism or a relative realism—both would mean the
same—in order to establish a stability sufﬁcient to make em-
pirical inquiry possible and meaningful. This goal is met by
taking the oppositional moment of analysis as ﬁgure and the
identity moment of analysis as ground. When relational terms
are viewed as opposites, each asserts a unique identity that
differentiates it from other identities. These unique differen-
tial qualities are stable within any general system and thus
may form a relatively stable platform for empirical inquiry.
These platforms become standpoints, points of view, or lines
of sight in recognition that they do not reﬂect absolute foun-
dations (Harding, 1986). Again, considering Escher’s sketch,
when left hand as left hand and right as right are the focus of
attention, it then becomes quite clear that—were they large
enough—one could stand on either hand and examine the
structures and functions of that hand. Thus, to return to
the nature-nurture example, while explicitly recognizing that
any behavior is 100% nature and 100% nurture, alternative
points of view permit the scientist to analyze the behavior
from a biological or from a cultural standpoint. Biology and
culture no longer constitute competing alternative explana-
tions; rather, they are two points of view on an object of in-
quiry that has been both created by and will only be fully
understood through multiple viewpoints. To state this more
generally, the unity that constitutes human identity and
human development becomes discovered only in the diver-
sity of multiple interrelated lines of sight.
Synthesis: The View From the Center
Engaging fundamental bipolar concepts as relatively stable
standpoints opens the way and takes an important ﬁrst step
toward establishing a broad stable base for empirical inquiry
within a relational metatheory. However, this solution is in-
complete because it omits a key relational component. The
oppositional quality of the bipolar pairs reminds us that
their contradictory nature still remains and still requires a
resolution. As suggested earlier, the resolution of this tension
between contradictions is not found in the reduction of one
of the system polarities to the other. Rather, moving to the
middle and above the conﬂict—and here discovering a
novel system that coordinates the two conﬂicting systems—
establishes the resolution. This position is a position of syn-
thesis and it constitutes another standpoint.
At this point the Escher sketch fails as a graphic represen-
tation. Although Drawing Hands illustrates the identity of
opposites and shows the middle ground, it does not present a
coordination of the two. In fact, the synthesis for this sketch

Relational Metatheory: A Synthesis of Opposites
27
is the unseen hand that has drawn the drawing hands. The
synthesis of interest for the general metatheory would be a
system that is a coordination of the most universal bipolarity
we can imagine. Undoubtedly there are several candidates for
this level of generality, but the polarity between matter and
society seems sufﬁcient for present purposes. What then rep-
resents the synthesis of matter and society? Arguably it is the
human organism (Latour, 1993). Because our speciﬁc focus
of inquiry is psychology, we can reframe this matter-society
polarity as the polarity of biology and culture. In the context
of psychology, then, as an illustration write “biology” on
one and “culture” on the other Escher hand, and what is
the resulting synthesis?—the human organism, the person
(see Figure 1.3). Persons—as integrated self-organizing
dynamic systems of cognitive, emotional, and motivational
processes—represent a novel level or stage of structure and
functioning that emerges from and constitutes a coordination
of biology and culture (see Magnusson & Stattin, 1998).
At the synthesis, then, there is a standpoint that coordi-
nates and resolves the tension between the other two mem-
bers of the relation. This provides a particularly broad and
stable base for launching empirical inquiry. A person stand-
point opens the way for the empirical investigation of univer-
sal dimensions of psychological structure-function relations
(e.g., processes of perception, thought, emotions, values),
their individual differences, and their development—
(transformational-variational) across the life span. Because
universal and particular are themselves relational concepts,
no question can arise here about whether the focus on univer-
sal processes excludes the particular; it clearly does not, as
we already know from the earlier discussion of polarities.
The fact that a process is viewed from a universal standpoint
in no way suggests that it is not contextualized. The general
theories of Jean Piaget, Heinz Werner, James Mark Baldwin,
William Stern, attachment theory and object relations theo-
ries of John Bowlby, Harry Stack Sullivan, Donald Winnicott
all are exemplars of developmentally oriented relational
person standpoints.
It is important to recognize that one synthesis standpoint is
relative to other synthesis standpoints. Human and society
are coordinated by matter, and thus—within psychological
inquiry—biology represents a standpoint as the synthesis of
person and culture (Figure 1.3). The implication of this is that
a relational biological approach to psychological processes
investigates the biological conditions and settings of psycho-
logical structure-function relations. This exploration is quite
different from split-foundationalist approaches to biological
inquiry that assume an atomistic and reductionistic stance
towards the object of study. The neurobiologist Antonio
Damasio’s (1994, 1999) work on the brain-body basis of a
psychological self and emotions is an excellent illustration of
this biological relational standpoint. And in the context of his
biological investigations, Damasio points out
A task that faces neuroscientists today is to consider the neurobi-
ology supporting adaptive supraregulations [e.g., the psycholog-
ical subjective experience of self] . . . I am not attempting to
reduce social phenomena to biological phenomena, but rather
to discuss the powerful connection between them. (1994,
p. 124). . . . Realizing that there are biological mechanisms be-
hind the most sublime human behavior does not imply a simplis-
tic reduction to the nuts and bolts of neurobiology (1994, p. 125).
A similar illustration comes from the Nobel laureate neurobi-
ologist Gerald Edelman’s (1992; Edelman & Tononi, 2000)
work on the brain-body base of consciousness:
I hope to show that the kind of reductionism that doomed the
thinkers of the Enlightenment is confuted by evidence that has
emerged both from modern neuroscience and from modern
physics. . . . To reduce a theory of an individual’s behavior to a
theory of molecular interactions is simply silly, a point made clear
when one considers how many different levels of physical, bio-
logical, and social interactions must be put into place before
higher order consciousness emerges. (Edelman, 1992, p. 166)
A third synthesis standpoint recognizes that human and
matter are coordinated by society, and again granting that the
inquiry is about psychological processes, culture represents
a standpoint as the synthesis of person and biology (Fig-
ure 1.3). Thus, a relational cultural approach to psychological
(C)
(B)
(A)
Culture
standpoint
Biology
Person
Biology
standpoint
Person
Culture
Person
standpoint
Biology
Culture
Figure 1.3
Relational standpoints in psychological inquiry: person, biology, and culture.

28
Development Across the Life Span
processes explores the cultural conditions and settings of
psychological structure-function relations. From this cultural
standpoint, the focus is upon cultural differences in the con-
text of psychological functions as complementary to the per-
son standpoint’s focus on psychological functions in the
context of cultural differences.
This standpoint is illustrated by cultural psychology, or
developmentally oriented cultural psychology. However, not
all cultural psychologies emerge from standpoint background
ideas. When, for example, a cultural psychology makes the
social constructivist assertion that social discourse is “prior
to and constitutive of the world” (Miller, 1996, p. 99), it be-
comes clear that this form of cultural psychology has been
framed by split-foundationalist background ideas. Similarly,
when sociocultural claims are made about the “primacy of
social forces,” or claims arise suggesting that “mediational
means” (i.e., instrumental-communicative acts) constitute the
necessary focus of psychological interest (e.g., see Wertsch,
1991), the shadows of split-foundationalist metatheoretical
principles are clearly in evidence.
A recent example of a relational developmentally oriented
cultural standpoint emerges from the work of Jaan Valsiner
(1998), which examines the “social nature of human psychol-
ogy.” Focusing on the social nature of the person, Valsiner
stresses the importance of avoiding the temptation of try-
ing to reduce person processes to social processes. To this
end he explicitly distinguishes between the dualisms of
split-foundationalist metatheory and dualities of the rela-
tional stance he advocates. Ernst Boesch (1991) and Lutz
Eckensberger (1990) have also presented an elaboration of
the cultural standpoint. Boesch’s cultural psychology and
Eckensberger’s theoretical and empirical extensions of this
draw from Piaget’s cognitive theory, from Janet’s dynamic
theory, and from Kurt Lewin’s social ﬁeld theory, and argues
that cultural psychology aims at an integration of individual
and cultural change, an integration of individual and collec-
tive meanings, and a bridging of the gap between subject and
object (e.g., see Boesch, 1991).
In a similar vein Damon offers a vision of the cultural
standpoint in his discussion of “two complementary develop-
mental functions, . . . the social and the personality functions
of social development” (1988, p. 3). These are presented by
Damon as an identity of opposites. The social function is an
act of integration serving to “establish and maintain relations
with other, to become an accepted member of society-at-
large, to regulate one’s behavior according to society’s codes
and standards” (p. 3). The personality function, on the other
hand, is the function of individuation, an act of differentiation
serving the formation of the individual’s personal identity
that requires “distinguishing oneself from others, determin-
ing one’s own unique direction in life, and ﬁnding within the
social network a position uniquely tailored to one’s own par-
ticular nature, needs, and aspirations” (p. 3). Although others
could be mentioned as illustrative (e.g., Grotevant, 1998), it
should be noted in conclusion here that Erik Erikson (1968),
was operating out of exactly this type of relational standpoint
when he described identity as “a process ‘located’ in the core
of the individual and yet also in the core of his communal
culture” (p. 22).
As a ﬁnal point concerning syntheses and the view from
the center, it needs to be recognized that a relational metathe-
ory is not limited to three syntheses. For example, discourse
or semiotics may also be taken as a synthesis of person and
culture (Latour, 1993). In this case biology and person are
conﬂated and the biological-person dialectic represents the
opposites of identity that are coordinated by discourse.
As a general summary to this point, the argument has been
made that metatheoretical principles form the ground out of
which grow the theories and methods of any domain of em-
pirical inquiry. This has been illustrated by exploring several
issues that frame the ﬁeld of developmental psychology.
Historically, both the modern and postmodern eras have
articulated broad metatheoretical paradigms that have func-
tioned as competing alternatives in the natural and social sci-
ences. The commonality of these paradigms has been that
each shares the background assumptions of splitting and
foundationalism. A relational paradigm, which begins by
rejecting these assumptions, offers a rapprochement of the
alternatives through an elaboration of the principles of the
identity of opposites, the opposites of identity, and the syn-
thesis of opposites. The question of the speciﬁc nature of this
rapprochement remains.
A RAPPROCHEMENT: EXPLANATION
IN A RELATIONAL CONTEXT
The rapprochement between the natural and social sciences
emerges from transforming the historically traditional dicho-
tomies of observation versus interpretation and theory versus
data into relational bipolar dimensions. Given this movement in
grounding, mechanical explanation and hermeneutic under-
standing become an integrated metamethod in the following
manner.
Step 1: Relational Analysis—Synthesis Replaces
Split Reductionism
Clearly the reduction and atomism of mechanical explanation
are split principles and they need to be replaced. Simply

A Rapprochement: Explanation in a Relational Context
29
anointing holism as the guiding principle is not possible be-
cause holism, at least as often interpreted, is itself a split prin-
ciple. Rather, integration requires that analysis and synthesis
operate as a relational polarity. Analysis must occur in the
context of some integrated whole, and the integrated whole
operates in the context of its analytic parts. Because a rela-
tional metatheory is sometimes incorrectly viewed as less
rigorous than mechanical explanation, a major feature of this
ﬁrst step is the afﬁrmation of the importance of analysis and
the analytic tools of any empirical science. The provisos here
are that it simultaneously be recognized that the analytic mo-
ment always occurs in the context of a moment of synthesis
and that the analysis can neither eliminate nor marginalize
synthesis.
Step 2: Relational Action Pattern—Conditions
Explanation Replaces Split Causes
As noted earlier, the deﬁning marks of mechanical explana-
tion and hermeneutic understanding have been the “nothing
but” reliance on causes and action patterns, respectively. By
entering into a relational context, these forms of explanation
become integrated. In a relational context, causes are trans-
formed from interpretation-free observed objects or events
that produce changes in other objects or event into conditions
that are associated with changes. A cause is interpretation
free only when analysis is split from synthesis; in a relational
model conditions—as an analytic moment of inquiry—are
understood as functioning under some interpretation and
some synthesis (Hanson, 1958). A cause can be a force that
produces, inﬂuences, or affects the status or change of an
object only in a model that splits system and activity; in a re-
lational model, system and activity are joined as a structure-
function relation. In a relational model, conditions are
identiﬁed as necessary, sufﬁcient, or both to the occurrence of
the phenomenon under investigation (von Wright, 1971).
Thus, rather than inquiry into the causes of behavior or de-
velopment, inquiry from a relational perspective examines
conditions that are associated with behavior or development.
For example, if inquiry concerned the development of a
plant, food and water would represent necessary conditions
for the plant to grow, but would not cause the plant’s devel-
opment in the sense of producing that development. Simi-
larly, neither nature factors nor nurture factors can be
considered the cause of human development; they represent
conditions that are associated with that development.
The assertion that causes are best understood as conditions
leaves open the question of what in fact does produce behav-
ior and change. The issue here is that of mechanisms.As is the
case with other key terms, mechanism has several often in-
compatible deﬁnitions. In the present case the meaning is
closer to “a process, physical or mental, by which something
is done or comes into being” than to “the doctrine that all
natural phenomena are explicable by material causes and
mechanical principles” (American Heritage Dictionary of the
English Language, Fourth Edition (2000) online). Hence, for
present purposes, mechanism is deﬁned as an active method
or process rather than a cause or set of causes. These mecha-
nisms are found in the structure-function relations that
identify action patterns. Any active system constitutes a
structure-function relation. The system is not a random aggre-
gate of elements; it has a speciﬁc organization, an architecture
(i.e., a structure). Further, this structure is not randomly
active; it has a characteristic activity (i.e., a function). Even
computers (structure)—when they are turned on—compute
(function). However, computers do not change—at least they
do not change in a transformational manner—and for this
reason they are rather limited as models of the human mind
(Fodor, 2000). The input and output of a computer may
change, and this is the basis for traditional and contemporary
split functionalist approaches to explanation (Overton,
1994a). However, the organization-activity of the computer
itself does not undergo transformational change. Living
organisms, on the other hand, are dynamic systems; they are
organizations (structures) that are inherently active (function)
and exhibit transformational change (dynamic).
When a system is viewed from the standpoint of function,
it is the function itself (i.e., the characteristic action of
the system) that constitutes the mechanism of behavior and
change. Systems change through their characteristic action
on or in the context of external conditions. Thus, the expla-
nation of behavior and change is given by the function of the
system (see Thelen & Smith, 1998). Further, because of the
relation of structure and function, when a system is viewed
from the standpoint of structure, structure then explains
function. Consequently, both structure and function enter
centrally into the explanatory process.
Structure and function are central to explanation, but they
are also fundamentally interpretative in nature; they are not
directly observable. Structure-function relations are patterns
of action, but patterns are never directly observed; they
must be inferred. When examined from the structural stand-
point, the patterns constitute Aristotle’s formal and ﬁnal
explanations. From the structural standpoint, action patterns
make the object of inquiry intelligible and give reasons for
the nature and functioning of the object. From the functional
standpoint, action patterns explain by presenting the mecha-
nism of behavior and development. Action patterns, however,
necessarily operate within the context of material conditions
both internal to the system and external to it. Thus, the

30
Development Across the Life Span
introduction of structure-function relations serves to inte-
grate hermeneutic explanation and natural science conditions
explanation. Both types of explanation are necessary, but
each operates from a different standpoint.
Developmental psychology offers several illustrations
of this explanatory integration. For example, Bowlby’s
(1958) theory of infant-caregiver attachment posits a behav-
ioral attachment system (structure) in relation to actions that
serve the adaptive function of keeping the caregiver in close
proximity. Piaget’s (1952, 1985) theory presents a more gen-
eral example. This theory represents an attempt to make sense
of (i.e., explain) the development of knowing. Like Bowlby’s,
Piaget’s is a relational theory that takes seriously the back-
ground ideas of structure-function and conditions. Because
the theoretical goal is to explain the person and the develop-
ment of the knowing person, Piaget takes a person (and epis-
temic) standpoint rather than a biological or a cultural
standpoint. The theory conceptualizes the person as a dy-
namic self-organizing action system operating in a world
of biological and environmental conditions. Structure and
function constitute thesis and antithesis, and the resulting syn-
thesis is transformational change or stages of new structure-
function relations. Structures are the mental organizations
that are expressed as patterns of action. On the structural side
of the equation, Piaget introduces the theoretical concepts
schemes, coordination of schemes, operations, groupings,
and group. Each explains (i.e., formal explanation)—at
successive novel levels of transformation—the cognitive
equipment that the infant, toddler, child, and adolescent come
to have available for constructing their known worlds.
Theoretical 
concepts 
of 
adaptation, 
assimilation-
accommodation, equilibrium, equilibration, and reﬂective
abstraction, constitute the functional side of the equation.
Schemes, coordinated schemes, operations, and so forth
function; they are active and it is through their action in a
world of conditions that they change. Piaget’s is an action
theory and action is the general mechanism of development.
Through the organized actions of the person in the world, the
person’s mode of knowing the world changes and these
changes are adaptive. Action as the mechanism of develop-
ment becomes more speciﬁc through recognition of its bipha-
sic nature. Assimilation is the phase of action that expresses
the mental organization. This expression gives meaning to
the world; it constitutes the world as known. However, these
meanings—including meanings at a presymbolic, preconcep-
tual stage—have an instrumental function as well as the
expressive function. When the instrumental function of the
action is not completely successful in securing an adaptive
goal, variation occurs in the action. For example, an infant
may intend (assimilate) the side of the breast as a nipple by
sucking it, but when the satisfaction of feeding does not
occur, variations arise in the action and this is exempliﬁed by
the sucking in various new locations. Variations open new
possibilities that both secure a goal and feedback to transform
(differentiations and novel coordinations) the system itself.
This action phase of variation and organizational modiﬁca-
tion is the accommodation phase of any action.
Organization explains in the sense of establishing the form
(structure), and action yields the explanatory mechanism
(function). This relational polarity operates in the context of
conditions, such as parents who do or do not provide appro-
priate opportunities for the adequate exercise of functioning.
It is also the case that at the beginning of any stage of novel
structure-function relations, the capacity for successful adap-
tation is limited. This is theoretically expressed in the idea
that there is more assimilation than accommodation at the be-
ginning of a stage; hence, there is a lack of balance or equi-
librium between assimilation and accommodation. Through
action this imbalance changes and the two phases of action
eventually move into equilibrium within a given stage. Of
course, given the relational nature of the theory, equilibrium
of assimilation and accommodation also means that the un-
derlying structures have reached a stable state (equilibrium)
of differentiation and intercoordination.
The movement toward equilibrium of the action phases of
assimilation and accommodation describes the development
mechanism within a stage. To explain development across
stages, Piaget introduces a principle that also has both a struc-
tural and a functional face. Structurally, this is the equilibra-
tion principle (Piaget, 1985) and it asserts that development
change is directed toward improved states or patterns of the
just-described equilibrium. Improved here is deﬁned in terms
of the adaptive value of one stage of cognitive structures
relative to the adaptive value of other stages of cognitive
structures. For example, the formal operational structures as-
sociated with adolescence represent an improved equilibrium
over sensorimotor structures associated with infancy in that
the formal structures are more stable, more ﬂexible, and
describe a much broader range of potential cognitive experi-
ences than do sensorimotor structures. The equilibration
principle introduces hierarchical organization into the theory
and explains sequence, order, and direction in the emergence
of novel cognitive abilities, just as the second law of thermo-
dynamics explains sequence, order, and direction with
respect to the physical world. It reﬂects Aristotle’s metatheo-
retical ﬁnal explanation, and it is consistent with the struc-
tural ﬁnal explanations offered in other developmental
theories, including Heinz Werner’s (1957, 1958) orthogenetic
principle and Erik Erikson’s (1968) epigenetic principle.
The functional face of the mechanism of development
across stages is termed reﬂective abstraction. Reﬂective
abstraction is action, but it is action that has its own biphasic

A Rapprochement: Explanation in a Relational Context
31
ABDUCTIVE
HYPOTHESIS
BACKGROUND
OBSERVATION
Figure 1.4
The abductive process.
character consisting of reﬂecting in the sense of projecting
something from a lower to a higher level, and reﬂexion, which
is the reorganization of what has been projected. The alterna-
tion of the reﬂecting-reﬂexion phases produces each new
stage of cognitive reorganization. Reﬂection is similar to the
act of generalizing; reﬂexion is acting from the generalized
position to consolidate the gains made through generalizing.
What is abstracted in this process is the coordination of the
differentiated structures of the lower level of organization.
Step 3: Abductive Logic Replaces Split Induction
and Deduction
The third step towards a relational metamethod that integrates
mechanical explanation and hermeneutic understanding ad-
dresses the nature of scientiﬁc logic. Modern mechanical ex-
planation split acts of discovery and acts of justiﬁcation and
identiﬁed the former with a foundational inductive logic and
the latter with a deductive logic. Interpretation-free induction
from interpretation-free data was the vehicle for the discovery
of hypotheses, theories, laws, and interpretation-free deduc-
tion was the vehicle for their justiﬁcation. A relational
metamethod introduces the logic of abduction as the synthesis
of the opposite identities of theory (broadly considered, in-
cluding background ideas) and data. Abduction (also called
retroduction) was originally described by the pragmatist
philosopher Charles Sanders Pierce (1992), and the historian
of science N. R. Hanson (1958) has argued that it has long been
the fundamental—if often invisible—logic of scientiﬁc activ-
ity. In a contemporary version, this logic is termed inference to
the best explanation (Fumerton, 1993; Harman, 1965).
Abduction operates by arranging the observation under
consideration and all background ideas (here, including
speciﬁc theoretical ideas) as two Escherian hands. The possi-
ble coordination of the two is explored by asking the question
of what must necessarily be assumed in order to have that
observation (see Figure 1.4). The inference to—or interpreta-
tion of—what must in the context of background ideas
necessarily be assumed then comes to constitute the explana-
tion of the phenomenon. The abductive process has also been
termed the transcendental argument.
Abductive inference is illustrated in virtually any psycho-
logical work that assumes a centrality of emotional, motiva-
tional, or cognitive mental organization. Russell (1996), for
example, has discussed the signiﬁcance of abduction to the
area of cognition. Chomsky’s work in language and Piaget’s
work in cognitive development are particularly rich in abduc-
tive inference. Consider as an illustration of the process the
following example drawn from Piaget:
1. There is the phenomenal observation (O) that it is the case
that a certain group of people (children around 6–7 years
of age) understands that concepts maintain the same
quantity despite changes in qualitative appearances (i.e.,
conservation).
2. Given the relational background ideas discussed in this
paper, Piaget forms the abductive inference that the expla-
nation of this observation (E) is that a certain type of action
system, having speciﬁed features including reversibility
(i.e., concrete operations), must be available to these peo-
ple. This forms the conditional statement “If (E) concrete
operational structure, then (O) conservation, is expected.”
3. Given (O), the conclusion is, “Therefore, concrete oper-
ational structure explains the understanding of con-
servation.”
This, of course, is not the end of the process, as criteria must
be established that allow choice among alternative Es—the
best E. But this is not a major hurdle, because many of the
criteria for theory-explanation selection that were articulated
within traditional modern science can readily be incorporated
here. These criteria include the explanation’s depth, coher-
ence, logical consistency, extent to which it reduces the pro-
portion of unsolved to solved conceptual and empirical
problems in a domain (Laudan 1977), and last but not least,
scope, empirical support, and empirical fruitfulness.
Scope,empiricalsupport,andfruitfulnessaspartcriteriafor
choice of a best theory-explanation all demand a return to the
observational grounds for empirical assessment. Some of the
statistical and research strategies associated with this return
are described in detail by Rozeboom (1997). Scope is assessed
through testing the abductive explanation in observational
contextsthatgobeyondthecontextthatgeneratedtheexplana-
tion. For example, conservation may be assessed in the
contextsofnumber,weight,number,area,volume,oritmaybe
assessed in relation to other skills that should—in the context
of the explanation—be associated with it. The assessment of
scopealsoservesthefunctionofestablishingthattheabductive
explanation-observation relation is not viciously circular (i.e.,
does not constitute an identity of identities).
The fruitfulness of an explanation is measured in terms of
the extent to which the explanation combines with other

32
Development Across the Life Span
ABDUCTIVE
HYPOTHESIS
BACKGROUND
OBSERVATION
ABDUCTIVE
HYPOTHESIS
BACKGROUND
OBSERVATION
Becomes
ABDUCTIVE
HYPOTHESIS
BACKGROUND
OBSERVATION
Becomes
Figure 1.5
Scientiﬁc progress through abduction.
abductive hypotheses to generate (predict) new observations.
Each new abductive hypothesis in the relational triangle
(Figure 1.4) becomes a part of background (background
ideas-theory) and thus creates a new enlarged background
(see Figure 1.5). The new background generates novel obser-
vations, but these too—because they constitute a back-
ground-observation relation—yield opposite identities that
require further abductive inferences.
Empirical support for an abductive explanation is the out-
come of any assessment of scope. Here, another central fea-
ture of a relational metamethod needs to be differentiated
from the traditional modern split metamethod. Under the
rule of split-off induction and deduction, it was assumed that
scientiﬁc progress moved forward through the deductive
falsiﬁcation of theories (Popper, 1959). The criterion of
falsiﬁcation, however, fell into disrepute through demonstra-
tions by several historians and philosophers of science (e.g.,
Hanson, 1958; T. S. Kuhn, 1962; Lakatos, 1978; Laudan,
1977; Putnam, 1983; Quine, 1953) that although deductive
logic, and hence falsiﬁcation, is applicable to a speciﬁc ex-
perimental hypothesis, falsiﬁcation does not reach to the level
of rich theories (i.e., background is abductive in character, not
inductive nor deductive). Within a relational metatheory,
these demonstrations lead to the principle that falsiﬁed exper-
imental hypotheses are important in that they constitute
failures of empirical support for the broader abductive expla-
nation, but they are not important in the sense of constituting
a refutation of the explanation. T. S. Kuhn, Lakatos, and
Luadan describe these failures as anomalous instances for
the background, and as such they require evaluation; but they
do not in and of themselves require abandonment of the
abductive explanation (see Overton, 1984, 1994a).
To this point a relational metatheory and an integrative
metamethod have been described, and the manner in which
these ground, constrain, and sustain various developmentally
relevantissues,theories,andmethodshasbeenillustrated.The
next section of this paper presents a broad illustration of the
application of relational metatheory to developmental inquiry.
EMBODIED DEVELOPMENT:
A RELATIONAL CONCEPT
This illustration focuses on embodied development. Until re-
cently, the trend of developmental inquiry over the past two
decades had been moving towards ever-increasing fragmenta-
tion of the object of study. Beginning in the early 1980s the ex-
amination of human development aggressively promoted split
and foundational approaches to inquiry, including variable-
centered, discourse, modular, and domain-speciﬁc inquiry.
Each of these potentially alternative foci was advanced with
claims that it presented the bedrock form of explanation. The
result was that inquiry into human development was increas-
ingly split into biologically determined, culturally deter-
mined, and bioculturally determined behavior, innate modules
of mind, situated cognitions, domain-speciﬁc understandings,
and communicative and instrumental functioning. What be-
came lost in the exclusivity of these projects was the person as
a vital integrated embodied center of agency and action. This
is the embodied person—functioning as a self-organizing dy-
namic action system—expressively projecting onto the world,
and instrumentally communicating with self and world,
thoughts, feelings, wishes, beliefs, and desires. This is the em-
bodied person who emerges from and transacts with the rela-
tional biological-cultural world, thereby developmentally
transforming her own expressive and adaptive functioning.
The concept of embodiment was most thoroughly
articulated in psychology by Maurice Merleau-Ponty (1962,
1963) and it represents a relational attempt to mend the
split understanding of body as exclusively physical and mind
as exclusively mental. Embodiment represents the over-
arching synthesis described earlier between each of the

Embodied Development: A Relational Concept
33
PERSON
EMBODIMENT
BIOLOGICAL
EMBODIMENT
CULTURAL
EMBODIMENT
Figure 1.6
Embodiment as synthesis.
biology-person-culture relations (see Figure 1.6); thus, em-
bodiment creates a seamless bridge between the biological,
the psychological, and the sociocultural. It has a double
meaning, referring both to the body as physical structure, and
the body as a form of lived experience, actively engaged with
the world of sociocultural and physical objects. As Merleau-
Ponty (1963) states with respect to embodiment as the form
of life or life form (Lebensform),
One cannot speak of the body and of life in general, but only of
the animal body and animal life, of the human body and of
human life; . . . the body of the normal subject . . . is not distinct
from the psychological. (p. 181)
Embodiment is not the claim that various bodily states have a
causal relation to our perceptions, thoughts, and feelings. It
would simply be trivial to suggest, for example, that when we
close our eyes we perceive differently from when our eyes
are open. Rather, embodiment is the claim that perception,
thinking, feelings, desires—that is, the way we experience
or live the world—is contextualized by being an active agent
with this particular kind of body (Taylor, 1995). In other
words, the kind of body we have is a precondition for the
kind of experiences and meanings that we generate.
Ultimately, embodiment is the afﬁrmation that the lived
body counts in our psychology. Mental processes of motiva-
tion, emotion, and cognition, along with the actions they en-
gender, are not products of a split-off physical and cultural
world, nor are they the products of a split-off world of genes
and a central nervous systems, nor the products of some ad-
ditive combination of biology and culture. Mind and actions
grow from the embodied person constantly engaged in the
world. It is this embodied person that both creates world
meaning and is created by the meaning of the world. Embod-
iment makes our psychological meanings about the world
intelligible and hence explains these meanings. Embodied
processes and action, so conceived, form a bridge between
biological and sociocultural systems.
Person-Centered and Variable Approaches
to Developmental Inquiry
As a bridge concept, embodiment can be examined from a
biological, a cultural, or a person standpoint. Operating
within a relational metatheory, each standpoint on embodi-
ment is complementary to and supports the others (see Fig-
ures 1.6 and 1.7). However, for purposes of exposition it is
only possible to stand at one place at a time. Thus, the present
discussion focuses from a person-centered standpoint and
later brieﬂy describes embodiment from both a biological
standpoint and a cultural standpoint.
A person-centered approach to inquiry maintains a theo-
retical and empirical focus on the psychological processes
and patterns of psychological processes as these explain the
individual’s activities in the world (see Figure 1.7). Perhaps
SOCIOCULTURAL
&
PHYSICAL WORLD
Expressive/Constitutive ACTIONS
Instrumental ACTIONS
LIVING BODY
EMBODIMENT
INQUIRY FOCUS
(Standpoints)
A. PERSON-CENTERED
B. SOCIOCULTURAL-CENTERED
C. BIOLOGY-CENTERED
SUB-PERSON-LEVEL
AGENCY
SELF-ORGANIZING
ACTION SYSTEMS
PERSON
BIOLOGICAL SYSTEMS
PERSON-LEVEL
COGNITION (knowing)
CONATION (wishing)
EMOTION (feeling)
Figure 1.7
Embodied action theory: a relational approach to psychological inquiry.

34
Development Across the Life Span
Figure 1.8
A variable approach to psychological inquiry.
Reflections of
culture and biology.
(conceptualized as
person factors)
SOCIOCULTURAL
&
PHYSICAL WORLD
FACTORS
Instrumental Behavior
INQUIRY FACTORS
BIOLOGICAL
FACTORS
CAUSE
(Correlate)
(Risk factor)
(Predictor)
CAUSE
(Correlate)
(Risk factor)
(Predictor)
this orientation to developmental inquiry is best illustrated by
contrast with what has been termed a variable approach (see
Figure 1.8). In a variable approach, the focus of inquiry is
not on the person, nor on the dynamic action systems that
characterize the person’s functioning. In a variable approach,
the focus is on biological, cultural, and individual variables;
these are understood to operate as predictors, correlates, risk
factors, or antecedent causes of behavior. The distinction
being drawn here is similar to that described some time ago
by Block (1971) and more recently elaborated by Magnusson
(1998; Magnusson & Stattin, 1998). As Magnusson has
suggested, from a variable approach, various individual vari-
ables (e.g., child factors) and contextual variables are under-
stood as the explanatory actors in the processes being
studied. From a person-centered standpoint, self-organizing
dynamic action systems—which identify psychological
mechanisms—operate as the main vehicles of explanation.
Within the context of a relational metatheory a person-
centered theoretical orientation (standpoint or point of view;
Figures 1.6 and 1.7A) is as necessary to an integrated devel-
opmental inquiry as is a relational socioculture-centered
standpoint (Figures 1.6 and 1.7B) or a relationally considered
biological-centered point of view (Figures 1.6 and 1.7C). In
any given inquiry, a focus on the person, or the sociocultural
(interpersonal), or the biological is a necessary focus of
analysis. However, as suggested earlier, these function as
complementary, not alternative competing explanations.
It should also be noted in passing that variable-focused
inquiry can be transformed from a split-off exclusivity to
yet another necessary point of view of relationally integrated
inquiry. Stated brieﬂy, developmental variable-focused
inquiry aims at the prediction of events, states, and move-
ments, whereas developmental person-centered inquiry aims
to explain psychological processes and their transformation.
There is no necessary conﬂict in these aims. They are only in
conﬂict in the reductionistic case, in which one or the other is
asserted as the exclusive foundational aim of inquiry. In a
similar vein, it is important to recognize that the complemen-
tarity here is one of aim and not one suggesting that variable
inquiry is oriented to research methods and person-centered
inquiry is oriented to conceptual context. Both approaches
entail the translation of theory into the empirically assessable
and the translation of the empirically assessable into theory.
The Person-Centered Point of View
Before detailing a person- or child-centered standpoint or
point of view, it is worth noting some of the beneﬁts that ac-
crue to taking this standpoint toward developmental inquiry.
First, a person-centered standpoint rescues developmental
psychology, as a psychology, from becoming a mere adjunct
to biology, to culture, to discourse, to narrative, or to com-
puter science. Psyche initially referenced soul and later mind,
and if psychology is not to again lose its mind—as it did in
the days of behaviorism—keeping the psychological person
as the center of action is a necessary guard against explana-
tory reduction to biology, culture, discourse, and so on.
Second, a person-centered approach highlights the fact
that any act can be proﬁtably understood—again in a com-
plementary bipolar fashion—as both expressive-constitutive
and as instrumental-adaptive. Split or dichotomous
approaches—especially split-off variable approaches—lead
to the illusion that acts exhibit only adaptive-instrumental
functions. A person-centered approach argues that any act
may also be understood as an expression of an underlying
dynamic organization of cognitive, affective, and conative

Embodied Development: A Relational Concept
35
meanings, and this expression operates to constitute the
world as known, felt, and desired. Here, Lois Bloom’s work
(Bloom, 1998; Bloom & Tinker, 2001) on the development
of language provides an excellent illustration of the power
of conceptualizing language acquisition in the context of the
expression of person-centered cognitive, affective, and
conative-motivational meanings, rather than exclusively as
an instrumental tool operating solely for communicative
ends.
A third beneﬁt derived from a person-centered point of
view is that it provides the necessary context for the resolu-
tion of certain important problems related to our general
understanding of psychological meaning. Speciﬁcally, a
person-centered approach is a necessary frame for solving
the so-called symbol-grounding problem. This is the question
of how to explain that representational items (e.g., a symbol,
an image) come to have psychological meaning (Bickhard,
1993; Smythe, 1992). I return to this problem in a more
detailed fashion later in this chapter.
With these examples of some of the beneﬁts of a child- or
person-centered approach to developmental inquiry as back-
ground, it is possible to turn to a speciﬁc description of this
approach. A detailed speciﬁcation of a person-centered ap-
proach to developmental inquiry requires the description of
four critical interwoven concepts: person, agent, action, and
embodiment.
Person-Agent
Person and agent are complementary Escherian levels of
analysis of the same whole (see Figure 1.7). The person
level is constituted by genuine psychological concepts (e.g.,
thoughts, feelings, desires, wishes) that have intentional
qualities, are open to interpretation, and are available to con-
sciousness (Shanon, 1993); or in other words, have psycho-
logical meaning. The agent level—called the subpersonal
level by some (Dennett, 1987; Russell, 1996)—here refers to
action systems or dynamic self-organizing systems. Schemes,
operations, ego, attachment behavioral system, and executive
function are some of the concepts that describe these action
systems.
Taken as a whole, the person-agent forms the nucleus of
a psychological theory of mind. And in this context mind is
deﬁned as a self-organizing dynamic system of cognitive
(knowings, beliefs), emotional (feelings), and conative or
motivational (wishes, desires) meanings or understandings,
along with procedures for maintaining, implementing, and
changing these meanings. It is important to note and under-
line that a person-centered theory of mind is not an encapsu-
lated cognition, but rather a theory that includes emotions,
wishes, and desires, as well as cognition. Further, there is no
question about where mind is located. Mind emerges from a
relational biosociocultural activity matrix. In the present con-
text, mind is a person-centered concept because the approach
being described takes the person standpoint. As a person-
centered concept, mind bridges naturally to both the biologi-
cal and the sociocultural.
Action, Intention, Behavior, and Experience
Person-agency is the source of action. At the agent level,
action is deﬁned as the characteristic functioning of any
dynamic self-organizing system. For example, a plant orients
itself towards the sun. Weather systems form high and low
pressure areas and move from west to east. Human systems
organize and adapt to their biological and sociocultural
worlds. At the person level, action is deﬁned as intentional
activity. Action is often distinguishable from behavior, be-
cause the action of the person-agent implies a transformation
in the intended object of action, whereas behavior often sim-
ply implies movement and states (von Wright, 1971, p. 199).
Thus, when the infant chews (action)—something that from a
sociocultural standpoint is called a basket—the infant, from
a person-centered standpoint, is transforming this part of
his or her known world into a practical action chewable.
Through the intentional act the person projects meaning onto
the world.
Action serves at least three major functions in the devel-
opment of mind (see Figure 1.1). First, action expresses
cognitive-affective-conative meaning. Here, it is important
to recognize that the concept meaning itself has a bipolar
relational status (Overton, 1994b). “I mean” and “it means”
operate in a relational matrix. The former is concerned with
person-centered meanings, the latter with sociocultural
meanings and reference. From a person-centered standpoint,
the focus of analysis is on “I mean” and secondarily on how
“I mean” comes to hook up with “it means.” Considered in its
expressive moment, action entails the projection of person-
centered meanings, thus transforming the objective environ-
mental world (i.e., an object point of view) into an actual
world as known, felt, and desired.
The second function that action serves is the instrumental
function of communicating and adjusting person-centered
meanings. Communication, dialogue, discourse, and problem
solving all call attention to the relational to-and-fro move-
ment between the expression of the self-organizing system
and instrumental adaptive changes. Completely adapted
action (i.e., successful) entails only projection. Partially
adapted (i.e., partially successful) action results in ex-
ploratory action, or variations. Exploratory action that is

36
Development Across the Life Span
adaptive leads to reorganization of the system (transforma-
tional change) and hence leads to new meanings.
This general cycle of projected action and exploratory
variational action as the accommodation to encountered re-
sistances (see Figure 1.1) constitutes the third and most gen-
eral function of action: Action deﬁnes the general mechanism
of all psychological development. From a person-centered
developmental action standpoint, all development is ex-
plained by action. However, action is also identiﬁed with
experience. But caution is necessary here because experi-
ence, like meaning and other basic terms, is itself a bipolar
relational concept. From a person-centered perspective,
experience is the person-agent action of observing, manipu-
lating, and exploring. From a sociocultural and ‘objective’
environmental point of view, experience is often identiﬁed as
an event or stimulus that is independent of the person and im-
poses on or is imposed on the person. For purposes of clarity
it would better to retain the former action deﬁnition as expe-
rience and to redeﬁne the latter as opportunity for experience.
Similarly, it should be pointed out that when experience is
described as a feeling, the reference here is the person-
centered felt meaning of the observational, manipulative, and
explorational action.
In deﬁning experience as the developmental action cycle
of projecting and transforming the known world while
exploring the known world and transforming the system,
experience also becomes the psychological bridge between
biological and sociocultural systems. There is no sense here
of an isolated, cut-off, solitary human psyche. Person-
centered experience emerges from a biosociocultural rela-
tional activity matrix (e.g., see Gallese, 2000a, 2000b), and
this experience both transforms the matrix and is transformed
by the matrix. Person development is neither a split-off na-
tivism, nor a split-off environmentalism, nor a split-off addi-
tive combination of the two. The neonate is a dynamic system
of practical action meanings. These meanings represent the
outcome of 9 months of the interpenetrating action (Tobach
& Greenberg, 1984) of biology-environment, and this inter-
penetration stretches all the way down to DNA (Gottlieb,
1997; Lewontin, 1991, 2000).
Person Development
Psychological development of the person-agent entails the
epigenetic stance that novel forms emerge through the inter-
penetrating actions of the system under investigation and the
resistances the system encounters in the actual environmental
world. It is through interpenetrating actions that the system
changes and hence becomes differentiated. But differentia-
tion of parts implies a novel coordination of parts and this
coordination itself identiﬁes the emergence of novelty. Thus,
for example, the neurological action system becomes differ-
entiated through the interpenetrating actions of neurological-
environmental functioning. This differentiation leads to a
novel coordination or reorganization that constitutes the
adapted level of conscious practical action found in the
neonate. Consciousness is a systemic property of this emer-
gent action system. The initial adapted practical conscious-
ness entails a minimum awareness of the meaning entailed by
an act (Zelazo, 1996). Consciousness cannot be reduced to or
squeezed, so to speak, out of lower stages; it is the result of a
transformation. Similarly, further developmental differentia-
tions and coordinations of actions—described as higher lev-
els of consciousness—emerge through the interpenetrations
of conscious action and the sociocultural and physical worlds
it encounters (Figure 1.1). Symbolic meaning and the sym-
bolic representational level of meanings (Mueller & Overton,
1998a, 1998b) describes forms of consciousness that arise
from the coordination of practical actions; reﬂective and
trans-reﬂective (reﬂective symbolic understandings of reﬂec-
tive symbolic understandings) meanings describe further
developmental advances in the coordination of action
systems.
To summarize, to this point I have described the nucleus
of a relationally informed person-centered developmental
theory of mind, whereby mind is deﬁned as a dynamic self-
organizing system of meanings that through projection
transforms the world as known and through exploration
transforms itself (i.e., develops). However, this remains a
nucleus and only a nucleus, because it lacks the critical
necessary feature of embodiment.
Embodiment
As discussed earlier, embodiment is the claim that our per-
ception, thinking, feelings, desires—that is, the way we
experience or live the world—is contextualized by being an
active agent with this particular kind of body (Taylor, 1995).
In other words, the kind of body we have is a precondition for
the kind of experiences and meanings that we generate.
At the agent level, embodiment speciﬁes the characteris-
tic activity of any living system. At the person level, embod-
iment afﬁrms that—from the beginning—intentionality is a
feature of bodily acts (Margolis, 1987). Intentionality is not
limited to a symbolic, a reﬂective, or a trans-reﬂective system
of psychological meanings. Intentionality also extends to a
system of psychological meanings that characterize practical
embodied actions operating at the most minimum level of
consciousness. Thus, psychological meanings are as charac-
teristic of the neonate as they are of the adult person. This

Embodied Development: A Relational Concept
37
in fact solves the symbol-grounding problem described
earlier—that is, the explanation for how actual world repre-
sentational items (e.g., a symbol, an image) come to have
psychological meaning resides in the fact that psychological
meanings, in the form of practical embodied actions, are pre-
sent from the beginning. As these become transformed and
coordinated, they become available to conventional symbols
provided by the sociocultural world.
Embodiment makes our psychological meanings about the
world intelligible and hence explains our meanings. Embod-
ied action, so conceived, forms a person-agent bridge be-
tween biological and sociocultural systems. Support for the
claim that embodiment is central to the explanation of psy-
chological meaning, central to a person-centered develop-
mental action theory of mind, and central as a relational
bridge between the several points of view is found in empiri-
cal and theoretical work being done from the biological,
the cultural, and the person standpoints. The remainder of
this chapter reviews some of this evidence.
Embodiment and Biology.
If we ﬁrst consider the bio-
logical standpoint of the biology-person-socioculture rela-
tional matrix (see Figure 1.7C), it is apparent that biology is
increasingly taking embodiment seriously. For example,
neurobiologists such as Gerald Edelman (1992), Antonio
Damasio (1994, 1999), and Joseph LeDoux (1996) all argue
that the cognitive-affective-motivational meanings that con-
stitute mind can no longer be thought of as merely a func-
tionalist piece of software or even merely a function of brain
processes, but must be considered in a fully embodied
context (see also Gallese, 2000a, 2000b). As Damasio says,
“mind is probably not conceivable without some sort of
embodiment” (1994, p. 234).
Damasio (1994) comments further on contemporary per-
spectives on mind:
This is Descartes’error: the abyssal separation between body and
mind. . . . The Cartesian idea of a disembodied mind may well
have been the source, by the middle of the twentieth century, for
the metaphor of mind as software program. . . . [and] there may
be some Cartesian disembodiment also behind the thinking of
neuroscientists who insist that the mind can be fully explained in
terms of brain events, leaving by the wayside the rest of the or-
ganism and the surrounding physical and social environment—
and also leaving out the fact that part of the environment is itself
a product of the organism’s preceding actions. (pp. 249–251)
Similarly, Edelman argues that
The mind is embodied. It is necessarily the case that certain dic-
tates of the body must be followed by the mind. . . . Symbols do
not get assigned meanings by formal means; instead it is as-
sumed that symbolic structures are meaningful to begin with.
This is so because categories are determined by bodily structure
and by adaptive use as a result of evolution and behavior.
(p. 239)
Embodiment and the Socioculture Context.
On the
sociocultural side of the biology-person-socioculture rela-
tional matrix (see Figure 1.7B), social constructivists such as
Harre (1995) and Sampson (1996) have increasingly em-
braced embodied action as a relational anchoring to the rela-
tivism of split-off discourse analysis. Sampson, for example,
argues for “embodied discourses” as these “refer to the inher-
ently embodied nature of all human endeavor, including talk,
conversation and discourse itself” (p. 609). Csordas (1999)
approaches culture and embodiment from an anthropological
position. Perhaps the most fully articulated contemporary
employment of embodiment in a developmentally oriented
cultural psychology is found in the work of the German psy-
chologist Ernest E. Boesch (1991). Boesch’s presentation of
“the I and the body” is a discussion of the centrality of em-
bodiment for a cultural psychology. Thus, he states that “the
body, obviously, is more than just an object with anatomical
and physiological properties: it is the medium of our actions
[italics added], it is with our body that we both conceive and
perform actions” (p. 312).
Embodiment and the Person.
From the person-
centered center of the biology-person-socioculture matrix
(see Figure 1.7A), Varela, Thompson, and Rosch (1991)
have sketched a general outline for an embodied theory of
cognition. Sheets-Johnstone (1990) provides an evolutionary
anthropological perspective on human embodiment and
thought, and Santostefano (1995) has detailed the emotional
and cognitive dimensions of practical, symbolic, and reﬂec-
tive embodied meanings. Further, many who have studied
psychopathology, from R. D. Laing (1960) to Donald
Winnicott (1971) and Thomas Ogden (1986), argue that
disruptions in the embodied actions of the person-agent are
central to an understanding of the development of severe
forms of psychopathology.
At the level of practical actions, Bermudez’s (1998) recent
work on the development of self-consciousness is central to
an understanding of the impact of an embodied person con-
ceptualization. Bermudez’s fundamental argument is that
late-emerging forms of meaning found in symbolic and re-
ﬂective consciousness develop from—and are constrained
by—embodied self-organizing action systems available to
the infant. Most important is that these early systems entail
person-level somatic proprioception and exteroception. As

38
Development Across the Life Span
these person-centered processes interpenetrate the physical
and sociocultural worlds, proprioception operates as the
differentiation mechanism for the emergence of a self-
consciousness action system, and exteroception operates as
the differentiation mechanism for the emergence of an
object-consciousness system. Hence, over the ﬁrst several
months of life, a basic practical action associated with me and
other develops, which in turn becomes transformed into the
symbolic me and other of early toddlerhood. Thelen’s (2000)
work on the role of movement generally, and speciﬁcally
“body memory” in infant cognitive functioning is another
closely related area that illustrates the importance of embod-
iment at the level of practical actions.
Langer’s (1994) empirical studies represent important
demonstrations of the intercoordination of embodied action
systems as these intercoordinations move development from
the practical to the symbolic plane of meaning. Earlier work
by Held and his colleagues (e.g., Held & Bossom, 1961; Held
& Hein, 1958), on the other hand, illustrates the signiﬁcance
of voluntary embodied action at all levels of adaptation.
Acredolo’s research (e.g.,Goodwyn & Acredolo, 1993) on
the use of bodily gestures as signs expressing practical mean-
ings in older infants suggests the expressive and instrumental
value of embodied practical gesture. Other work has elabo-
rated on the signiﬁcance of bodily representations at the sym-
bolic and reﬂective levels of meaning. For example, while the
use of ﬁngers for counting is well documented (Gelman &
Williams, 1998), Saxe’s (1981, 1995) research has shown
cross-culturally that other bodily representations enter into
counting systems. Further, earlier research by Overton and
Jackson (1973) and more recently by Kovacs and Overton
(2001) has demonstrated that bodily gestures support emerg-
ing symbolic representations at least until the level of reﬂec-
tive meanings.
At the level of symbolic, reﬂective, and trans-reﬂective
conceptual functioning, the writings of Lakoff and Johnson
(1999; see also Lakoff, 1987) are well known for their
detailed exploration of the signiﬁcance of embodiment. For
Lakoff and Johnson, embodiment provides the fundamental
metaphors that shape meanings at all levels of functioning. In
a parallel but distinct approach, Kainz (1988) has described
how the basic laws of ordinary logic (i.e., the law of identity,
the law of contradictions, and the law of the excluded middle)
can be understood as emerging from the early embodied dif-
ferentiation of self and other. Finally, Liben’s (1999) work on
the development of the child’s symbolic and reﬂective spatial
understanding presents a strong argument for an understand-
ing of this development in the context of an embodied child
rather than in the context of the disembodied eye that tradi-
tionally has framed this domain.
CONCLUSIONS
This chapter has explored background ideas that ground, con-
strain, and sustain theories and methods in psychology
generally and developmental psychology speciﬁcally. An un-
derstanding of these backgrounds presents the investigator
with a rich set of concepts for the construction and assess-
ment of psychological theories. An understanding of back-
ground ideas also helps to prevent conceptual confusions that
may ultimately lead to unproductive theories and unproduc-
tive methods of empirical inquiry. The importance of this
function has recently been forcefully articulated by Robert
Hogan (2001) who in an article entitled “Wittgenstein Was
Right” notes with approval Wittgenstein’s (1958) remark that
“in psychology there are empirical methods and conceptual
confusions” (p. 27), and then goes on to say that
Our training and core practices concern research methods;
the discipline is . . . deeply skeptical of philosophy. We empha-
size methods for the veriﬁcation of hypotheses and minimize the
analysis of the concepts entailed by the hypotheses. [But] all the
empiricism in the world can’t salvage a bad idea. (p. 27)
REFERENCES
Anastasi, A. (1958). Heredity, environment, and the question
“how?” Psychological Review, 65, 197–208.
Asendorpf, J. B., & Valsiner, J. (1992). Editors’ introduction: Three
dimensions of developmental perspectives. In J. B. Asendorpf &
J. Valsiner (Eds.), Stability and change in development: A study
of methodological reasoning (pp. ix–xxii). London: Sage.
Baldwin, J. M. (1895). Mental development in the child and the
race: Methods and process. New York: Macmillan.
Bernstein, R. J. (1983). Beyond objectivism and relativism:
Science, hermeneutics, and praxis. Philadelphia: University of
Pennsylvania Press.
Bertalanffy, L. von. (1968a). General system theory. New York:
George Braziller.
Bertalanffy, L. von. (1968b). Organismic psychology and systems
theory. Barre, MA: Barre.
Bickhard, M. H. (1993). Representational content in humans and
machines. Journal of Experimental and Theoretical Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, 5, 285–333.
Block, J. (1971). Lives through time. Berkeley, CA: Bancroft.
Bloom, L. (1998). Language acquisition in its developmental
context. In W. Damon (Series Ed.), D. Kuhn, & R. Siegler
(Vol. Eds.), Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 2. Cognition, per-
ception, and language (5th ed., pp. 309–370). New York: Wiley.
Bloom, L., & Tinker, E. (2001). The intentionality model and lan-
guage acquisition. Monographs of the Society for Research in
Child Development, 66 (4 Serial No. 267).

References
39
Boesch, E. E. (1991). Symbolic action theory and cultural psychol-
ogy. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Bowlby, J. (1958). The nature of the child’s tie to his mother.
International Journal of Psychoanalysis, 39, 350–373.
Brandtstadter, J. (1998). Action perspectives on human develop-
ment. In W. Damon (Series Ed.) & R. M. Lerner (Vol. Ed.),
Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 1. Theoretical models of
human development (5th ed., pp. 807–864). New York: Wiley.
Brandtstadter, J., & Lerner, R. M. (Eds.). (1999). Action and
self-development: Theory and research through the life span.
London: Sage.
Cohen, M. R. (1931). Reason and nature: An essay on the meaning
of scientiﬁc method. New York: Harcourt, Brace.
Csordas, T. J. (1999). Embodiment and cultural phenomenology. In
G. Weiss & H. F. Haber (Eds.), Perspectives on embodiment
(pp. 143–164). New York: Routledge.
Damasio, A. (1994). Descartes’ error: Emotion, reason, and the
human brain. New York: Avon Books.
Damasio, A. (1999). The feeling of what happens: Body and
emotion in the making of consciousness. New York: Harcourt,
Brace.
Damon, W. (1988). Socialization and individuation. In G. Handel
(Ed.), Childhood socialization (pp. 3–10). Hawthorne, NY:
De Gruyter.
Dennett, D. (1987). The intentional stance. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Dilthey, W. (1972). The rise of hermeneutics (Fredric Jameson,
Trans.). New Literary History, 3, 229–244.
Eckensberger, L. H. (1990). On the necessity of the culture concept
in psychology: A view from cross-cultural psychology. In F. J. R.
van de Vijver & G. J. M. Hutschemaekers (Eds.), The investiga-
tion of culture: Current issues in cultural psychology (pp. 153–
183). Tilburg, Germany: Tilburg University Press.
Edelman, G. M. (1992). Bright air, brilliant ﬁre: On the matter of
the mind. New York: Basic Books.
Edelman, G. M., & Tononi, G. (2000). A universe of consciousness:
How matter becomes imagination. New York: Basic Books.
Elman, J. L., Bates, E. A., Johnson, M. H., Karmiloff-Smith, A.,
Parisi, D., & Plunkett, K. (1996). Rethinking innateness: A con-
nectionist perspective on development. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Erikson, E. H. (1968). Identity youth and crisis. New York:
W. W. Norton.
Fodor, J. (2000). The mind doesn’t work that way: The scope and
limits of computational psychology. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Fumerton, R. (1993). Inference to the best explanation. In J. Dancy
& E. Sosa (Eds.), A companion to epistemology (pp. 207–209).
Cambridge, MA: Basil Blackwell.
Gallese, V. (2000a). The acting subject: Towards the neural basis
of social cognition. In T. Metzinger (Ed.), Neural correlates of
consciousness (pp. 325–334). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gallese, V. (2000b). The “shared manifold hypothesis’’: From
mirror neurons to empathy. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 8,
33–50.
Gelman, R., & Williams, E. M. (1998). Enabling constraints for
cognitive development and learning: Domain speciﬁcity and
epigenesis. In W. Damon (Series Ed.), D. Kuhn, & R. Siegler
(Vol. Eds.), Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 2. Cognition,
perception, and language (5th ed., pp. 575–630). New York:
Wiley.
Gilovich, T., & Eibach, R. (2001). The fundamental attribution error
where it really counts. Psychological Inquiry, 12, 23–26.
Goodwyn, S. W., & Acredolo, L. P. (1993). Symbolic gesture versus
word: Is there a modality advantage for onset of symbol use?
Child Development, 64, 688–701.
Gottlieb, G. (1997). Synthesizing nature-nurture. Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Grotevant, H. D. (1998).Adolescent development in family contexts.
In W. Damon (Series Ed.) & N. Eisenberg (Vol. Ed.), Hand-
book of child psychology: Vol. 3. Social, emotional, and person-
ality development (5th ed., pp. 1097–1149). New York: Wiley.
Hanson, N. R. (1958). Patterns of discovery. London: Cambridge
University Press.
Harding, S. (1986). The science question in feminism. Ithaca, NY:
Cornell University Press.
Harman, G. H. (1965). Inference to the best explanation. Philosoph-
ical Review, 74, 88–95.
Harre, R. (1995). The necessity of personhood as embodied being.
Theory and Psychology, 5, 369–373.
Hegel, G. W. F. (1807). Phenomenology of spirit (A. V. Miller,
Trans.). New York: Oxford University Press.
Hegel, G. W. F. (1830). Hegel’s logic: Being part one of the
encyclopedia of the philosophical sciences (W. Wallace, Trans.).
New York: Oxford University Press.
Held, R., & Bossom, J. (1961). Neonatal deprivation and adult
rearrangement: Complementary techniques for analyzing plastic
sensory-motor coordinations. Journal of Comparative Physio-
logical Psychology, 54, 33–37.
Held, R., & Hein, A. (1958). Adaptation of disarranged hand-eye
coordination contingent upon re-afferent stimulation.Perceptual-
Motor Skills, 8, 87–90.
Hempel, C. G. (1942). The function of general laws in history.
Journal of Philosophy, 39, 35–48.
Hogan, R. (2001). Wittgenstein was right. Psychological Inquiry,
12, 27.
Kainz, H. P. (1988). Paradox, dialectic, and system: A contempo-
rary reconstruction of the Hegelian problematic. University
Park: Pennsylvania State University Press.
Kovacs, S., & Overton, W. F. (2001, June). An embodied action the-
ory of mind approach to the development and transformation of
symbolic representation in preschoolers. Paper presented at the
31st annual meeting of the Jean Piaget Society, Berkeley, CA.

40
Development Across the Life Span
Kuhn, D., Garcia-Mila, M., Zohar, A., & Andersen, C. (1995).
Strategies of knowledge acquisition. Monographs of the Society
for Research in Child Development, 60 (4, Serial No. 245).
Kuhn, T. S. (1962). The structure of scientiﬁc revolutions. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Laing, R. D. (1960). The divided self. New York: Pantheon Books.
Lakatos, I. (1978). The methodology of scientiﬁc research pro-
grammes: Philosophical papers (Vol. 1). New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Lakoff, G. (1987). Women, ﬁre, and dangerous things. What
categories reveal about the mind. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1999). Philosophy in the ﬂesh: The em-
bodied mind and its challenge to western thought. New York:
Basic Books.
Langer, J. (1994). From acting to understanding: The comparative
development of meaning. In W. Overton & D. Palermo (Eds.),
The nature and ontogenesis of meaning (pp. 191–214). Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Latour, B. (1993). We have never been modern. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Latour, B. (1999). Pandora’s hope: Essays on the reality of science
studies. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Laudan, L. (1977). Progress and its problems: Towards a theory of
scientiﬁc growth. Berkeley: University of California Press.
LeDoux, J. (1996). The emotional brain: The mysterious under-
pinnings of emotional life. New York: Touchstone.
Lerner, R. M. (2002). Concepts and theories of human development
(3rd ed.). New York: Random House.
Lewontin, R. C. (1991). Biology as ideology: The doctrine of DNA.
New York: Harper Perennial.
Lewontin, R. C. (2000). The triple helix: Gene, organism and envi-
ronment. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Liben, L. S. (1999). Developing an understanding of external spatial
representations. In I. E. Sigel (Ed.), Development of mental rep-
resentation: Theories and applications (pp. 297–321). Mahwah,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Liben, L. S. (2000). Map use and the development of spatial cog-
nition: Seeing the bigger picture. Developmental Science, 3,
270–273.
Magnusson, D. (1998). The logic and implications of a person-
oriented approach. In R. B. Cairns, L. R. Bergman, & J. Kagan
(Eds.), Methods and models for studying the individual
(pp. 33–63). London: Sage.
Magnusson, D., & Stattin, H. (1998). Person-context interac-
tion theories. In W. Damon (Series Ed.) & R. M. Lerner
(Vol. Ed.), Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 1. Theoretical
models of human development (5th ed., pp. 685–760). New York:
Wiley.
Margolis, J. (1987). Science without unity: Reconciling the human
and natural sciences. New York: Basil Blackwell.
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1962). Phenomenology of perception (Colin
Smith, Trans.). London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1963). The structure of behavior (Alden Fisher,
Trans.). Boston: Beacon Press.
Miller, J. G. (1996). Theoretical issues in cultural psychology. In
J. W. Berry, Y. H. Poortinga, & J. Pandey (Eds.), Handbook of
Cross-Cultural Psychology: Theory and Method (pp. 85–128).
Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
Mueller, U., & Overton, W. F. (1998a). How to grow a baby. A re-
evaluation of image-schema and Piagetian action approaches to
representation. Human Development, 41, 71–111.
Mueller, U., & Overton, W. F. (1998b). Action theory of mind and
representational theory of mind: Is dialogue possible? Human
Development, 41, 127–133.
Nagel, E. (1957). Determinism and development. In D. B. Harris
(Ed.), The concept of development (pp. 15–24). Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press.
Ogden, T. H. (1986). The matrix of the mind: Object relations and
the psychoanalytic dialogue. Northvale, NJ: Jason Aronson.
Overton, W. F. (1975). General system, structure and development.
In K. F. Riegel & G. C. Rosenwald (Eds.), Structure and trans-
formation: Developmental and historical aspects (pp. 61–81).
New York: Wiley-Interscience.
Overton, W. F. (1984). World views and their inﬂuence on psycho-
logical theory and research: Kuhn-Lakatos-Laudan. In H. W.
Reese (Ed.), Advances in child development and behavior
(Vol. 18, pp. 191–226). New York: Academic Press.
Overton, W. F. (1994a). The arrow of time and cycles of time:
Concepts of change, cognition, and embodiment. Psychological
Inquiry, 5, 215–237.
Overton, W. F. (1994b). Contexts of meaning: The computational
and the embodied mind. In W. F. Overton & D. S. Palermo
(Eds.), The nature and ontogenesis of meaning (pp. 1–18).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Overton, W. F. (1997a). Relational-developmental theory: A
psychology perspective. In D. Gorlitz, H. J. Harloff, J. Valsiner,
& G. Mey (Eds.), Children, cities and psychological theories:
Developing relationships (pp. 315–335). Berlin: de Gruyter.
Overton, W. F. (1997b). Beyond dichotomy: An embodied active
agent for cultural psychology. Culture and Psychology, 3,
315–334.
Overton, W. F. (1998). Developmental psychology: Philosophy,
concepts, and methodology. In W. Damon (Series Ed.) & R. M.
Lerner (Vol. Ed.), Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 1. Theo-
retical models of human development (5th ed., pp. 107–188).
New York: Wiley.
Overton, W. F., & Jackson, J. (1973). The representation of imag-
ined objects in action sequences: A developmental study. Child
Development, 44, 309–314.
Overton,W.F.,&Reese,H.W.(1981).Conceptualprerequisitesforan
understanding of stability-change and continuity-discontinuity.
International Journal of Behavioral Development,4,99–123.

References
41
Piaget, J. (1952). The origins of intelligence in children. New York:
W. W. Norton.
Piaget, J. (1985). The equilibration of cognitive structures. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Pierce, C. S. (1992). Reasoning and the logic of things: The
Cambridge conference lectures of 1898. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Popper, K. (1959). The logic of scientiﬁc discovery. London:
Hutchinson.
Prosch, H. (1964). The genesis of twentieth century philosophy.
New York: Doubleday.
Putnam, H. (1983). Realism and reason: Philosophical papers,
(Vol. 3). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Putnam, H. (1987). The many faces of realism. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Putnam, H. (1990). Realism with a human face. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Quine, W. V. (1953). From a logical point of view. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Randall, J. H. (1960). Aristotle. New York: Columbia University
Press.
Ricoeur, P. (1984). Time and narrative (K. McLalughlin & D.
Pellauer, Trans.) (Vol. 1). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Ricoeur, P. (1991). From text to action: Essays in hermeneutics
(K. Blamey & J. B. Thompson, Trans.) (Vol. 2). Evanston, IL:
Northwestern University Press.
Rozeboom, W. W. (1997). Good science is abductive, not
hypothetico-deductive. In L. L. Harlow, S. A. Mulaik, & J. H.
Steiger (Eds.), What if there were no signiﬁcance tests?
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Russell, J. (1996). Agency: Its role in mental development. Mahwah,
NJ: Taylor and Francis.
Saarni, C., Mumme, D. L., & Campos, J. J. (1998). Emotional
development: Action, communication, and understanding. In
W. Damon (Series Ed.) & N. Eisenberg (Vol. Ed.), Handbook
of child psychology: Vol. 3. Social, emotional, and personality
development (5th ed., pp. 237–309). New York: Wiley.
Sabini, J., Siepmann, M. & Stein, J. (2001). Authors’ response to
commentaries. Psychological Inquiries, 12, 41–48.
Santostefano, S. (1995). Embodied meanings, cognition and
emotion: Pondering how three are one. In D. Cicchetti & S. L.
Toth (Eds.), Rochester Symposium on Developmental Psy-
chopathology: Vol. 6. Emotion, cognition and representation
(pp. 59–132). Rochester, NY: University of Rochester Press.
Sampson, E. E. (1996). Establishing embodiment in psychology.
Theory and Psychology, 6(4), 601–624.
Saxe, G. B. (1981). Body parts as numerals. A developmental analy-
sis of numeration among the Oksapmin of New Guinea. Child
Development, 52, 306–316.
Saxe, G. B. (1995, June). Culture, changes in social practices, and
cognitive development. Paper presented to the annual meeting of
the Jean Piaget Society, Berkeley, CA.
Scholnick, E. K., & Cookson, K. (1994). A developmental analysis
of cognitive semantics: What is the role of metaphor in the
construction of knowledge and reasoning? In W. F. Overton &
D. S. Palermo (Eds.), The nature and ontogenesis of meaning
(pp. 109–128). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Schneirla, T. C. (1956). Interrelationships of the innate and the
acquired in instinctive behavior. In P. P. Grasse (Ed.), L’instinct
dans le comportement des animaux et de l’homme (pp. 387–
452). Paris: Mason et Cie.
Searle, J. (1992). The rediscovery of the mind. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Shanon, B. (1993). The representational and the presentational: An
essay on cognition and the study of mind. New York: Harvester
Wheatsheaf.
Sheets-Johnstone, M. (1990). The roots of thinking. Philadelphia:
Temple University Press.
Siegler, R. S. (1989). Mechanisms of cognitive development. An-
nual Review of Psychology, 40, 353–379.
Siegler, R. S. (1996). Emerging minds: The process of change in
children’s thinking. New York: Oxford University Press.
Siegler, R. S., & Crowley, K. (1991). The microgenetic method: A
direct means for studying cognitive development. American
Psychologist, 46, 606–620.
Siegler, R. S., & Munakata, Y. (1993, Winter). Beyond the immacu-
late transition: Advances in the understanding of change. SRCD
Newsletter.
Smythe, W. E. (1992). Conception of interpretation in cognitive
theories of representation. Theory and Psychology, 2, 339–
362.
Spelke, E. S., & Newport, E. L. (1998). Nativism, empiricism, and
the development of knowledge. In W. Damon (Series Ed.) &
R. M. Lerner (Vol. Ed.), Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 1.
Theoretical models of human development (5th ed., pp. 275–
340). New York: Wiley.
Stace, W. T. (1924). The philosophy of Hegel. New York: Dover.
Sternberg, R. J. (Ed.) (1984). Mechanisms of cognitive development.
New York: W. H. Freeman.
Taylor, C. (1995). Philosophical arguments. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Thelen, E. (2000). Grounded in the world: Developmental origins of
the embodied mind. Infancy, 1, 3–28.
Thelen, E., & Smith, (1998). Dynamic systems theories. In
W. Damon (Series Ed.) & R. M. Lerner (Vol. Ed.), Handbook of
child psychology: Vol. 1. Theoretical models of human develop-
ment (5th ed., pp. 563–634). New York: Wiley.
Tobach, E., & Greenberg, G. (1984). The signiﬁcance of T. C.
Schneirla’s contribution to the concept of integration. In
G. Greenberg & E. Tobach (Eds.), Behavioral evolution and
integrative levels (pp. 1–7). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Toulmin, S. (1953). The philosophy of science. New York: Harper
and Row.

42
Development Across the Life Span
Toulmin, S. (1990). Cosmopolis: The hidden agenda of modernity.
Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Uttal, D. H. (2000). Seeing the big picture map use and the develop-
ment of spatial cognition. Developmental Science, 3, 247–264.
Valsiner, J. (1994). Irreversibility of time and the construction
of historical developmental psychology. Mind, Culture, and
Activity, 1, 25–42.
Valsiner, J. (1998). The guided mind: A sociogenetic approach to
personality. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Varela, F. J., Thompson, E., & Rosch, E. (1991). The embodied
mind: Cognitive science and human experience. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
von Wright, G. H. (1971). Explanation and understanding. Ithaca,
NY: Cornell University Press.
Werner, H. (1957). The concept of development from a compara-
tive and organismic point of view. In D. B. Harris (Ed.),
The concept of development: An issue in the study of human
behavior (pp. 125–148). Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
Press.
Werner, H. (1958). Comparative psychology of mental development.
New York: International Universities Press.
Wertsch, J. V. (1991). Voices of the mind: A sociocultural approach
to mediated action. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Winnicott, D. W. (1971). Playing and reality. New York: Basic
Books.
Wittgenstein, L. (1958). Philosophical investigations (G. E. M.
Anscombe, Trans.) (3rd ed.). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice
Hall.
Zelazo, P. D. (1996). Towards a characterization of minimal con-
sciousness. New Ideas in Psychology, 14(1), 63–80.

CHAPTER 2
Applied Developmental Science
DONALD WERTLIEB
43
DEFINING APPLIED DEVELOPMENTAL SCIENCE
43
ELEMENTS OF THE HISTORY OF APPLIED
DEVELOPMENTAL SCIENCE
45
DOMAINS OF INQUIRY AND ACTION IN APPLIED
DEVELOPMENTAL SCIENCE
47
Parenting and Early Child Care and Education
48
Developmental Psychopathology and
Developmental Assets
49
SPECIAL METHODS AND ETHICAL IMPERATIVES OF
APPLIED DEVELOPMENTAL SCIENCE
54
CONCLUSIONS
56
REFERENCES
56
Developmental psychology’s emergent identity as an ap-
plied developmental science (ADS) reflects our discipline’s
rich and complex history and forecasts our discipline’s chal-
lenges and opportunities as we begin our second century of
science and practice. As proponents of a key subdiscipline
of psychology, we continue our commitment to advance
psychology “as a science, as a profession, and as a means
of promoting human welfare” (American Psychological
Association, 2000, p. 1) and to “promote, protect, and
advance the interests of scientifically oriented psychology
in research, application, and the improvement of human
welfare” (American Psychological Society, 2000, p. 1).
Fulfilling this commitment involves heeding the recent call
of a Nobel Foundation symposium for better integrated
models of life-span development and for interdisciplinary
and international frameworks (Cairns, 1998; Magnusson,
1996).
This chapter provides a brief history of the emergence,
or re-emergence, of ADS as a compelling umbrella for
advancing developmental psychology, with a particular
focus on the first two decades of life, namely, child and
adolescent psychology. Consistent with the interdiscipli-
nary and multidisciplinary mandates, consideration of the
kindred disciplines that partner to advance knowledge
follows. Examples of substantive areas of inquiry and
action in ADS are then considered, including articulation
of the special methods of ADS, the special ethical impera-
tives of ADS, and some particular training challenges
for ADS.
DEFINING APPLIED DEVELOPMENTAL SCIENCE
Over the last two decades increasing numbers of develop-
mental psychologists have identiﬁed themselves profession-
ally as applied developmental scientists. Joining them under
this umbrella are colleagues from allied disciplines and spe-
cialties in the biological, social, and behavioral sciences and
the helping professions, all sharing common goals and vi-
sions captured in some of the more formal deﬁnitions of the
ADS ﬁelds. Certainly an early milestone in the staking out of
the ﬁeld’s territory occurred with the founding of the Journal
of Applied Developmental Psychology in 1980, an interna-
tional multidisciplinary life-span journal. The masthead pro-
claimed a “forum for communication between researchers
and practitioners working in life-span human development
ﬁelds, a forum for the presentation of the conceptual,
methodological, policy, and related issues involved in the ap-
plication of behavioral science research in developmental
psychology to social action and social problem solving”
(Sigel & Cocking, 1980, p. i). In welcoming the new journal
in an inaugural editorial, Zigler (1980) narrowed the deﬁni-
tion of the journal’s purview to what he called a “ﬁeld within
a ﬁeld” (i.e., presumably, applied developmental psychology
within developmental psychology) but set high and broad
expectations that “these pages shall attest to the synergistic
relationship between basic and applied research” (p. 1).
Almost 20 years later, Zigler (1998) issued a similar note
of hope, celebration, and welcome in a signiﬁcant essay
called “A Place of Value for Applied and Policy Studies,” this

44
Applied Developmental Science
time in the pages of Child Development, the prestigious
archival journal of the Society for Research in Child Devel-
opment (SRCD). Child Development had been singularly de-
voted to “theory-driven, basic research. Now, after more than
six decades of advancing science as a means to expand our
understanding of human development, SRCD has formally
welcomed into its major journal research that uses this
knowledge on children’s behalf . . . the result of a very
gradual transformation within SRCD from a scientist’s sci-
ence toward a more public science” (Zigler, 1998, p. 532).
The continuing vicissitudes of the gaps and synergies be-
tween applied and basic research will be a theme of the his-
torical sketch offered in the next section (see also Garner,
1972).
In 1991 a National Task Force on Applied Developmental
Science convened representatives from abroad, but not an ex-
haustive range of professional scientiﬁc organizations con-
cerned with the application of the knowledge base of
developmental psychology to societal problems. Organiza-
tions represented included the American Psychological Asso-
ciation, the Gerontological Society of America, the
International Society for Infant Studies, the National Black
Child Development Institute, the National Council on Family
Relations, the Society for Research on Adolescence, and the
Society for Research in Child Development. Goals included
the articulation of the deﬁnition and scope of ADS along with
guidelines for graduate training in this emergent, interdisci-
plinary ﬁeld. A consensus process produced a complex four-
point deﬁnition of ADS, quoted here at length to document
the current parameters of content, process, methods, and
values:
1.1 Applied developmental science involves the programmatic
synthesis of research and applications to describe, explain,
intervene, and provide preventive and enhancing uses of
knowledge about human development. The conceptual base
of ADS reﬂects the view that individual and family func-
tioning is a combined and interactive product of biology and
the physical and social environments that continuously
evolve and change over time. ADS emphasizes the nature of
reciprocal person-environment interactions among people,
across settings, and within a multidisciplinary approach
stressing individual and cultural diversity. This orientation is
deﬁned by three conjoint emphases:
Applied: Direct implications for what individuals, families,
practitioners, and policymakers do.
Developmental: Systematic and successive changes within
human systems that occur across the life span.
Science: Grounded in a range of research methods de-
signed to collect reliable and objective information system-
atically that can be used to test the validity of theory and
application.
1.2 ADS recognizes that valid applications of our knowl-
edge of human development depend upon scientiﬁcally
based understanding of multilevel normative and atypical
processes that continually change and emerge over the life
cycle.
1.3 ADS reﬂects an integration of perspectives from relevant
biological, social, and behavioral sciences disciplines in the
service of promoting development in various populations.
1.4 The nature of work in ADS is reciprocal in that science dri-
ves application and application drives science. ADS empha-
sizes the bidirectional relationship between those who
generate empirically based knowledge about developmental
phenomena and those who pursue professional practices,
services, and policies that affect the well-being of mem-
bers of society. Accordingly, research and theory guide
intervention strategies, and evaluations of outcomes of de-
velopmental interventions provide the basis for the reformu-
lation of theory and for modiﬁcation of future interventions.
(Fisher et al., 1993, pp. 4–5)
By 1997 these parameters deﬁning ADS were adopted as
the editorial scope of a new journal, Applied Developmental
Science, with further explication of a more inclusive range of
methodologies and audiences. The journal publishes
research employing any of a diverse array of methodologies—
multivariate longitudinal studies, demographic analyses, eva-
luation research, intensive measurement studies, ethnographic
analyses, laboratory experiments, analyses of policy and/or
policy-engagement studies, or animal comparative studies—
when they have important implications for the application of
developmental science across the life span. Manuscripts perti-
nent to the diversity of development throughout the life-span—
cross-national and cross-cultural studies; systematic studies of
psychopathology; and studies pertinent to gender, ethnic and
racial diversity–—are particularly welcome. . . . [The audience in-
cludes]developmental,clinical,school,counseling,aging,educa-
tional, and community psychologists; lifecourse, family and
demographic sociologists; health professionals; family and con-
sumerscientists;humanevolutionandecologicalbiologists;[and]
practitioners in child and youth governmental and nongovern-
mental organizations. (Lerner, Fisher, & Weinberg, 1997, p. 1)
This ampliﬁed deﬁnition of ADS postulates a number of hall-
marks of ADS key to the discussion of its history, content,
and special concerns. Among these hallmarks are
1. A historical context and perspective reﬂecting the peren-
nial balancing of related constructs such as basic and ap-
plied research or science and practice or knowledge
generation and utilization. This includes a sensitivity
to historical and sociopolitical contexts captured in the
notion of ADS as

Elements of the History of Applied Developmental Science
45
Scholarship for our times. . . . As we enter the 21st century, there
is growing recognition that traditional and artiﬁcial distinctions
between science and service and between knowledge generation
and knowledge application need to be reconceptualized if soci-
ety is to successfully address the harrowing developmental se-
quelae of the social, economic, and geo-political legacies of the
20th century. Scholars, practitioners and policymakers are in-
creasingly recognizing the role that developmental science can
play in stemming the tide of life-chance destruction caused by
poverty, premature births, school failure, child abuse, crime,
adolescent pregnancy, substance abuse, unemployment, welfare
dependency, discrimination, ethnic conﬂict, and inadequate
health and social resources. (Lerner et al., 1997, p. 2)
2. A broadened and deepened awareness of the ethical chal-
lenges and imperatives involved in implementing the
scope of ADS. This awareness evolves from challenges in
the use of scientiﬁc methods in new ways such that pro-
tection of the autonomy and well-being research of par-
ticipants is increasingly complex. Research participants
become partners in the inquiry process and new, more
complicated collaborations among diverse multidiscipli-
nary professionals and communities become key elements
of deﬁning research questions and problems and seeking
answers and solutions.
More recently, some leaders have broadened the potential
scope of ADS even further, suggesting elements of a blue-
print for promoting civil society and social justice, a provoca-
tive and compelling elaboration of both the substance and the
ethical orientation of the ﬁeld (Lerner, Fisher, & Weinberg,
2000). Others have focused on more traditional academic or
incremental stocktaking for deﬁning ADS with attention to
advancing the numerous knowledge bases and methodolo-
gies (e.g., Schwebel, Plumert, & Pick, 2000; Shonkoff, 2000;
Sigel & Renninger, 1998). ADS is now considered an “estab-
lished discipline” (Fisher, Murray, & Sigel, 1996), deﬁned
with the parameters just outlined. Our survey of this disci-
pline moves now to a more detailed historical analysis, with
attention to earlier roots as well as appreciation for the con-
temporary ferment evident in the deﬁnitional emergence of
the last few years.
ELEMENTS OF THE HISTORY OF APPLIED
DEVELOPMENTAL SCIENCE
From the earliest days of psychology in general and of devel-
opmental psychology in particular, tensions and balances
basic to the emergence of contemporary ADS as just deﬁned
have provided the heat and light for historians of the ﬁeld.
Observers and analysts are prone to calling upon metaphors
such as a swinging pendulum or old wine in new bottles. In-
deed, as argued elsewhere, the newness of the ADS orienta-
tion “ought not be overemphasized—renewal is perhaps a
more accurate frame” (Wertlieb & Feldman, 1996, p. 123).
As the deﬁnition of ADS just noted emerged, Parke’s (1992)
Presidential Address to the American Psychological Associa-
tion Division of Developmental Psychology noted the return
of developmental psychologists to “their forerunners’ con-
cern for applying science to social problems . . . , and their re-
newed interest in interdisciplinary work also resembles early
developmental psychology” (p. 987). Parke noted that “the
applied/nonapplied distinction is an increasingly blurry and
perhaps dubious one, as researchers continue to recognize the
multifaceted value of social experiments such as Headstart”
(p. 987).
Our forerunners were perhaps even bolder in asserting
such views. When discussing the case of a chronic bad speller
referred to his clinic, Witmer (1907), a founder of clinical
psychology, noted that “if psychology was worth anything to
me or to others it should be able to assist the efforts of a
teacher in a retarded case of this kind. The ﬁnal test of the
value of what is called science is its applicability” (cited in
Fagan, 1992, p. 237). Indeed, an elemental challenge in ADS
today is overcoming the historical quagmires of scientism
versus clinicalism (Perry, 1979) and applied versus scientiﬁc
acceptability. As evident at psychology’s inception, Fagan
(1992) reported that “both Hall and Witmer were popular
with teacher and parent constituencies, but not always with
psychologist colleagues, many of whom viewed their work as
less than scientiﬁc” (p. 239).
Several extensive histories of the disciplines of develop-
mental psychology and child development have been pub-
lished, and most include reference to the ebb and ﬂow of
interest and priority for what might be termed the applied,
practical, or societally oriented issues so central to ADS.
Especially relevant are discussions offered by Bronfenbren-
ner, Kessel, Kessen, and White (1986); Cairns (1998);
Davidson and Benjamin (1987); Hetherington (1998);
McCall (1996); McCall and Groark (2000); Parke, Ornstein,
Reiser, and Zahn-Waxler (1994); Sears (1975); and Siegel
and White (1982). Hetherington (1998) framed her analysis
by accenting her use of the term “developmental science . . .
to emphasize both the scientiﬁc and multidisciplinary foun-
dations of the study of development and the recognition that
development is not conﬁned to childhood but extends across
the lifespan” (p. 93)—emphases lost or diluted in using the
too-limiting term child psychology. She interpreted and
extended Sears’s (1975) classic analysis, reafﬁrming that
“unlike many areas in psychology [with their histories

46
Applied Developmental Science
documented by Boring (1950) and Koch & Leary (1985)],
developmental science originated from the need to solve
practical problems and evolved from pressure to improve the
education, health, welfare and legal status of children and
their families” (p. 93).
The chronology of developmental psychology offered by
Cairns (1998) serves as a useful framework in which to spec-
ify some of the distinctive or seminal elements of ADS.
Cairns delimited the emergence of developmental psychol-
ogy (1882–1912), the middle period of institutionalization
and expansion (1913–1946), and the modern era (1947–
1976). His compliance with a convention that 20 years must
elapse before qualifying as “historical” leaves much of the
signiﬁcant milestone material mentioned in our earlier deﬁn-
ition of ADS outside the realm of his presentation, but he did
conclude his account with a clarion call for more integrated
interdisciplinary science, quite consistent with what we
might term the postmodern or contemporary era (1977–pre-
sent). Indeed, it is from this most recent period that we draw
our substantive examples of ADS, after the conclusion of this
historical sketch.
Most accounts, including Cairn’s (1998) emergence anal-
ysis, portray the dialectic at the base of ADS as pioneered by
G. Stanley Hall, the ﬁrst professor of psychology in America
(appointed in 1883 at Johns Hopkins University), the ﬁrst
president of the American Psychological Association (1891),
and founder of the ﬁrst child development research insti-
tute (at Clark University) and of the journal Pedagogical
Seminary.
Hall was a remarkable teacher and catalyst for the ﬁeld. Some of
the most signiﬁcant areas for developmental study—mental test-
ing, child study, early education, adolescence, life-span psychol-
ogy, evolutionary inﬂuences on development—were stimulated
or anticipated by Hall. Because of shortcomings in the methods
he employed and the theory he endorsed, few investigators
stepped forward to claim Hall as a scientiﬁc mentor. His reach
exceeded his grasp in the plan to apply the principles of the new
science to society. Psychology’s principles were too modest,
and society’s problems too large. Perhaps we should use a fresh
accounting to judge Hall’s contributions, one that takes into ac-
count the multiple facets of his inﬂuence on individuals, the dis-
cipline, and society. The audit would reveal that all of us who
aspire to better the lot of children and adolescents can claim him
as a mentor. (Cairns, 1998, p. 43)
White (1992) asserted that
the simple fact is that G. Stanley Hall marched away from exper-
imental psychology toward the study of children because at least
six different constituencies existed inAmerican society, basically
still our constituencies today—scientists, college administrators,
child savers and social workers, mental health workers, teachers,
and parents. These constituencies wanted certain kinds of knowl-
edge about children. Mirabile dictu, without even being develop-
mental psychologists and before we came into existence, they
were all collecting data that look like ours. So if you look at the
social history that surrounds the birth of the Child Study Move-
ment, you gradually come to the conclusion that perhaps we rep-
resent a professionalization of trends of knowledge gathering
and knowledge analysis that existed in our society before our
coming. That doesn’t completely detach us from the mainstream
of the history of psychology, but it certainly throws a very differ-
ent light on the emergence and evolution of the ﬁeld and its basic
issues. (Bronfenbrenner et al., 1986, p. 1221)
Among Hall’s most signiﬁcant contributions, according to
White (1992), were the concern with descriptions of children
in their natural contexts and the need “to arrive at a scientiﬁc
synthesis on the one side and practical recommendations on
the other” (cited in Cairns, 1998, p. 43). Contemporary ADS
continues in its value in the former and aspires to overcome
the too-dichotomous implications of the latter; it emphasizes
the reciprocal and mutual interactions of the scientiﬁc and
practical typical in this earliest era.
The other heroes or giants of history contributing in this
foundational period are, of course, Sigmund Freud, Alfred
Binet, and John Dewey. Freud’s psychoanalytic theories and
methods were key forerunners of one of contemporary ADS’s
most vital arenas, developmental psychopathology. The sep-
arate path taken by psychoanalysis in subsequent years is
only recently reconverging with developmental psychology.
Millennium analyses of the ﬁeld of developmental psy-
chopathology are intriguing sources of elaboration of the
history of ADS, and the reawakened appreciation of psycho-
analytic approaches are of special interest (Cicchetti &
Sroufe, 2000; Fonagy & Target, 2000).
The measurement and testing of intelligence pioneered by
Binet continues to inﬂuence extant theories and methods in
contemporary ADS, although certainly the scientiﬁc revolu-
tions in the ensuing years (e.g., Piagetian psychology), as well
as political sensitivities, establish a much more complex and
sophisticated set of theories about intelligences, their mani-
festation and measurement, and their places in a broad array
of processes, competencies, or outcomes relevant to develop-
mental status or progress. The abiding links to schooling and
education, so basic to the philosophical and scientiﬁc contri-
butions of John Dewey, remain core foci in contemporary
ADS. Notions of constructivism, of the salience of motivation
and everyday experience, and of psychology as a founda-
tional science for applications such as education championed
by Dewey pervade contemporary ADS (Cahan, 1992).

Domains of Inquiry and Action in Applied Developmental Science
47
The second and third periods of Cairn’s (1998) history of
developmental psychology emphasize institutionalization,
especially of scientiﬁc and laboratory-based inquiry, and ex-
pansion into a modern behavioral science. Many of the scien-
tiﬁc and applied seeds planted in the foundational period
grew in the middle of the twentieth century, with what we
might term the rise and fall of the then-grand theories being
an especially salient process. These grand theories included
the elaboration of Freudian psychoanalytic approaches, be-
haviorism as espoused by Skinnerians and Pavlovians, as
well as cognitive theories of Piagetians. Modernism and pos-
itivism yielded to postmodernism with the articulations and
fragmentations captured by labels such as ego-analytic or
neo-Freudian approaches; social-behavioral, social-learning,
and cognitive-behavioral approaches; or neo-Piagetian ap-
proaches, for example. Bronfenbrenner et al. (1986, p. 1219)
described and decried dimensions of this fragmentation
process in the middle of the twentieth century, identifying a
trend of what they term recurring faddism or, worse, recur-
rent scientiﬁc bias.
The contemporary era in which ADS is now emerging
capitalizes on newly grand theoretical formulations. For in-
stance, bioecological theory (Bronfenbrenner & Ceci, 1994),
developmental contextualism (Lerner, 1998), and life-
span developmental psychology (Baltes, Lindenberger, &
Staudinger, 1998) each represent varying degrees of broaden-
ing and integrating (or even reintegrating) consistent with the
scope and challenges of ADS. It is useful to consider a his-
torical process somewhat akin to Werner’s orthogenetic prin-
ciple: “Basic and applied aspects of developmental science
began as a global unit and became increasingly differenti-
ated. Further maturity now allows for a hierarchical integra-
tion of the specialized functions into a synergistic whole”
(Zigler, 1998, pp. 533–534).
Substantive challenges or demands inherent in American
social policy during the “Great Renaissance” of the 1960s
and 1970s (the modern era according to Cairns, 1998)
provided the raison d’être for ADS. The War on Poverty,
Head Start early education intervention, and the community
mental health movements all provided arenas for expecta-
tions and conversations between developmental scientists
and the society in which they functioned. The newly grand
theories were required to guide the generation of research
questions, data, interpretation, and application. ADS is pro-
viding parameters for advancing with simultaneous and in-
creasingly integrated attention to processes of knowledge
generation and knowledge utilization.
As noted earlier, multidisciplinarity and interdisciplinarity
are key hallmarks of ADS. Not surprisingly, parallel histori-
cal evolution in related subdisciplines and disciplines has
been documented such that among the component ﬁelds or
contemporary renditions of ADS are several emergent inte-
grating or synergizing traditions. This trend has been dis-
cussed in kindred subdisciplines of psychology such as
clinical psychology (Fox, 1982; Frank, 1984; Kendall, 1984;
Levy, 1984; Wertlieb, 1985), community psychology
(Marsella, 1998; Masterpasqu, 1981), school psychology
(Fagan, 1992, 2000; Ysseldyke, 1982), educational psychol-
ogy (Bardon, 1983), and pediatric psychology (Brennemann,
1933; Wertlieb, 1999). Other social sciences such as anthro-
pology, policy analysis, social work, home economics/
consumer sciences, and public health share some of these el-
ements of differentiation and recent reintegration in interdis-
ciplinary forms consistent with ADS (e.g., Elder, 1998;
Featherman & Lerner, 1985; Kaplan, 2000; Nickols, 2001;
Schneiderman, Speers, Silva, Tomes, & Gentry, 2001;
Winett, 1995).
Within the ﬁeld of psychology, as well as in the links with
kindred disciplines that form ADS, the integrated identity as
a “scientist-practitioner” evolves as a basic standard or goal.
A similar rubric of reﬂective practice captures the optimal
functioning of a scientist-practitioner (e.g., Schon, 1983).
Cultivation of the scientist-practitioner remains an abiding
challenge (Belar & Perry, 1992). This bridge between science
and practice is requires constant attention, as documented by
Kanfer’s (1990) articulation of the challenges “to foster and
blend the skills, perceptivity and pragmatism of the profes-
sional along with training in methods, and exposure to the
skeptic-empirical attitude of the researcher” (p. 269). Applied
developmental scientists are “translators who a) devote sys-
tematic attention to research and dissemination of practical
implications and methods derived from various domains of
the social sciences and/or b) formulate professional problems
in ‘basic science’ language and collaborate with (or act as)
scientists whose expertise encompasses the domain in which
these researchable questions are phrased” (p. 265). With
deﬁnitions of ADS in hand, along with historically signiﬁcant
elements that continue to shape the ﬁeld, we turn to a selec-
tive overview of contemporary domains of inquiry and action
in ADS.
DOMAINS OF INQUIRY AND ACTION IN APPLIED
DEVELOPMENTAL SCIENCE
At the start of the twenty-ﬁrst century, scores of applied de-
velopmental scientists are actively and productively pursuing
hundreds of signiﬁcant research questions with important im-
plications and applications to the well-being of children,
youth, and families. Table 2.1 lists many of these topics of

48
Applied Developmental Science
TABLE 2.1
Areas of Inquiry and Action in Applied Developmental Science
Topic
Sample Study or Review
Early child care & education
Lamb (1998); Ramey & Ramey (1998); Scarr (1998); Zigler & Finn-Stevenson (1999).
Early childhood education
Elkind (2002).
Education reform & schooling
Adelman & Taylor (2000); Fishman (1999); Renninger (1998); Strauss (1998).
Literacy
Adams, Trieman, & Pressley (1998); Lerner, Wolf, Schliemann, & Mistry (2001).
Parenting & parent education
Collins et al. (2000); Cowan et al. (1998).
Poverty
Black & Krishnakumar (1998); McLoyd (1998).
Developmental assets
Benson (1997); Scales & Leffert (1999); Weissberg & Greenberg (1998).
Successful children & families
Masten & Coatsworth (1998); Wertlieb (2001).
Marital disruption & divorce
Hetherington, Bridges, & Insabella (1998); Wertlieb (1997).
Developmental psychopathology
Cicchetti & Sroufe (2000); Cicchetti & Toth (1998b); Richters (1997); Rutter & Sroufe (2000).
Depression
Cicchetti & Toth (1998a).
Domestic violence & maltreatment
Emery & Laumann-Billings (1998).
Adolescent pregnancy
Coley & Chase-Landsdale (1998).
Aggression & violence
Loeber & Stouthamer-Loeber (1998).
Children’s eyewitness reports
Bruck, Ceci, & Hembrooke (1998).
Pediatric psychology 
Bearison (1998).
Mass media, television, & computers
Huston & Wright (1998); Martland & Rothbaum (1999).
Prevention science
Coie et al. (1993); Kaplan (2000).
inquiry and action to provide a sense of the broad scope of
ADS. Recent textbooks (e.g., Fisher & Lerner, 1994), review
chapters (e.g., Zigler & Finn-Stevenson, 1999), handbooks
(e.g., Lerner, Jacobs & Wertlieb, 2002; Sigel & Renninger,
1998), special issues of journals (e.g., Hetherington, 1998),
and regular sections of journals such as the “Applied Devel-
opmental Theory” section of Infants and Young Children pro-
vide ongoing articulation of ADS inquiry. Journals such as
the Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology, Applied
Developmental Science, and Children’s Services: Social Pol-
icy, Research and Practice are among the central outlets for
new work in ADS. Each of the chapters that follow in the pre-
sent volume on developmental psychology reﬂects, to vary-
ing degrees, some inﬂuence of ADS in establishing the
current state of knowledge, and the ﬁnal section of this vol-
ume includes several chapters speciﬁcally focused on ADS-
related scholarship across the life span. For the purposes of
this chapter’s overview of ADS, just two of the many areas of
inquiry and action have been selected to illustrate some of the
substantive concerns of ADS: (a) parenting and early child
care and education, followed by (b) developmental psy-
chopathology and developmental assets. As will be evident,
each of these complex areas involves foci of theoretical and
methodological concerns, and most link to several of the oth-
ers listed in Table 2.1, consistent with the highly contextual
and interdisciplinary orientation of ADS.
Parenting and Early Child Care and Education
The state of ADS in parenting and early child care education
is well summarized in several reviews (e.g., Bornstein, 1995;
Collins, Maccoby, Steinberg, Hetherington, & Bornstein,
2000; Cowan, Powell, & Cowan, 1998; Harris, 1998, 2000;
Scarr, 1998; Vandell, 2000; Zigler & Finn-Stevenson, 1999)
and covers core questions such as
1. How do parenting behaviors inﬂuence a child’s behavior
and development?
2. How do children inﬂuence parenting behavior?
3. What are the inﬂuences of different forms of child care
and early education on children’s development?
4. How effective are different interventions for parent educa-
tion and early education of young children?
5. How do social policies inﬂuence the qualities of interven-
tions and programs for children and parents?
Political, philosophical, and scientiﬁc controversies per-
meate many discussions of parenting and early child care and
education. In recent years, as challenges to what had become
conventional wisdom about the salience of parents’ attitudes,
beliefs, and behaviors as shapers of their children’s develop-
ment (e.g., Harris, 1998) gained notoriety, applied develop-
mental scientists have acknowledged the shortcomings of
extant socialization research (see chapter by Kerr, Stattin, &
Ferrer-Wreder in this volume). “Early researchers often over-
stated conclusions from correlational ﬁndings; relied exces-
sively on singular, deterministic views of parental inﬂuence;
and failed to attend to the potentially confounding effects of
biological variation” (Collins et al., 2000, p. 218). Now, with
augmented behavior-genetic designs, longitudinal analyses,
animal comparative studies, more sophisticated data collec-
tion, and analyses and grounding in more comprehensive and
contextual biopsychosocial ecological theories, researchers
offer more valid and sophisticated accounts of the important

Domains of Inquiry and Action in Applied Developmental Science
49
inﬂuences of parenting on behavior. These accounts are
highly nuanced with emphasis on interaction and moderator
effects, reciprocal inﬂuences, nonfamilial inﬂuences, and at-
tention to impacts of macrocontexts such as neighborhoods,
policies, and cultures.
As an example, consider the studies of children’s tempera-
ments and parenting reviewed by Collins et al. (2000). Chil-
dren can be characterized in terms of constitutionally based
individual differences or styles of reacting to the environment
and self-regulating. Developmental research had established
modest statistical correlations between “difﬁcult” tempera-
mental proﬁles in young children and later behavior prob-
lems and disorders. 
Bates, Pettit, and Dodge (1995), in a longitudinal study, found
that infants’ characteristics (e.g., hyperactivity, impulsivity, and
difﬁcult temperament) signiﬁcantly predicted externalizing
problems 10 years later. Although this ﬁnding at ﬁrst seems to
support the lasting effects of physiologically based characteris-
tics, Bates et al. (1995) also showed that predictive power in-
creased when they added information about parenting to the
equation. Infants’ early characteristics elicited harsh parenting at
age 4, which in turn predicted externalizing problems when the
children were young adolescents, over and above the prediction
from infant temperament. Similarly, this and other ﬁndings
imply that even though parenting behavior is inﬂuenced by child
behavior, parents’ actions contribute distinctively to the child’s
later behavior. (Collins et al., 2000, p. 222)
Coupled with the increasingly sophisticated literature on the
development and effectiveness of intervention programs that
help parents alter their parenting behavior with infants,
young children, or adolescents (e.g., Cowan et al., 1998;
Webster-Stratton, 1994), this area of scholarship is a proto-
typical domain of inquiry and action for ADS, and one
that provides theoretical, methodological, and practical
contributions.
When care by other than the child’s parents is examined,
similar advances are evident (Lamb, 1998, 2000; National
Institute of Child Health and Human Development Early
Child Care Research Network, 2000; Scarr, 1998; Zigler &
Finn-Stevenson, 1999). Again, these advances are in the con-
text of political, philosophical, and scientiﬁc controversies.
The last quarter century has seen a shift away from research
aimed at documenting how much damage is done to children
who are left in daycare as their mothers enter the work force,
to research discovering and describing varieties and qualities
of day care and early education experiences for children, and
more recently to sophisticated longitudinal studies compar-
ing and contrasting varieties of maternal and nonmaternal
care, including in-home, family-based, and center-based
care. These latter studies increasingly include “not only prox-
imal inﬂuences on the child but distal inﬂuences as well”
(Scarr, 1998, p. 101) and adopt conceptual frameworks re-
quiring attention to individual differences in children, in fam-
ily processes, and contextual issues such as staff training and
support, access to care, and related social policies. Attention
to the special needs of at-risk populations such as children
living in poverty or other disadvantaged conditions shows
similarly increasing sophistication as ADS frameworks are
employed (e.g., Ramey & Ramey, 1998).
Lamb’s (1998) summary of the current state of knowledge
on child care reﬂects the orientation of ADS:
In general, the quality of care received both at home and in alter-
native care facilities appears to be important, whereas the speciﬁc
type of care (exclusive home care, family day care, center day
care) appears to be much less signiﬁcant than was once thought.
Poor quality care may be experienced by many children . . . and
poor quality care can have harmful effects on child development.
Type of care may also have varying effects depending upon the
ages at which children enter out-of-home care settings, with the
planned curricula of day care centers becoming increasingly ad-
vantageous as children get older. Interactions between the type of
care and the age of the child must obviously be considered,
although claims about the formative importance of the amount of
nonparental care and the age of onset have yet to be substantiated
empirically. It also appears likely that different children will be
affected differently by various day care experiences, although we
remain ignorant about most of the factors that modulate these dif-
ferent effects. Child temperament, parental attitudes and values,
preenrollment differences in sociability, curiosity and cognitive
functioning, sex and birth order may all be inﬂuential, but reli-
able evidence is scanty. . . . We know that extended exposure to
nonparental child care indeed has a variety of effects on children,
but when asked about speciﬁc patterns of effects or even whether
such care is good or bad for children we still have to say It
depends. (pp. 116–117)
Such an analysis of the state of our science becomes a start-
ing point for the ADS professional in pursuing the collabora-
tions with researchers from allied disciplines and community
partners to advance knowledge and build and evaluate
programs.
Developmental Psychopathology
and Developmental Assets
In fostering synergy among disciplines concerned with the
understanding and well-being of children, ADS provides a
forum for signiﬁcant scientiﬁc cross-fertilization between
two powerful new traditions of inquiry and action: develop-
mental psychopathology and developmental assets. An early

50
Applied Developmental Science
deﬁnition of the science of developmental psychopathology
called it “the study of the origins and course of individual
patterns of behavioral maladaptation, whatever the age of
onset, whatever the causes, whatever the transformations in
behavioral manifestation, and however complex the course
of the developmental pattern may be” (Sroufe & Rutter,
1984, p. 18). Cicchetti and Toth (1998b) conﬁrmed that 
developmental psychopathologists should investigate function-
ing through the assessment of ontogenetic, genetic, biochemical,
biological, physiological, societal, cultural, environmental, fam-
ily, cognitive, social-cognitive, linguistic, representational, and
socioemotional inﬂuences on behavior. . . . The ﬁeld of devel-
opmental psychopathology transcends traditional disciplinary
boundaries. . . . Rather than competing with existing theories and
facts, the developmental psychopathology perspective provides
a broad integrative perspective within which the contributions of
separate disciplines can be fully realized. . . . The developmental
psychopathology framework may challenge assumptions about
what constitutes health or pathology and may redeﬁne the man-
ner in which the mental health community operationalizes, as-
sesses, classiﬁes, communicates about, and treats the adjustment
problems and functioning impairments of infants, children, ado-
lescents, and adults. . . . Thus, its own potential contribution lies
in the heuristic power it holds for translating facts into knowl-
edge, understanding and practical application. (p. 482)
As society grasps the challenges and the costs of mental
disorder and behavior dysfunction, only a multidisciplinary
vision so broad and so bold, with attendant reliance on the
newly grand theories noted earlier, especially developmental
contextualism and bioecological theory, can sufﬁce. And
even with this breadth and boldness evident in developmen-
tal psychopathology, vulnerability to the critique of its being
illness oriented or deﬁcit oriented limits its scope. Richters’s
(1997) critique of developmental psychopathology identiﬁes
dilemmas and a “distorted lens” (p. 193) that hamper re-
search advances. ADS provides a support for the bridges
needed by developmental psychopathology by linking to the
complementary concepts and methods of the developmental
assets approach. When contemporary clinical psychologists
or clinical-developmental psychologists (Noam, 1998), for
instance, who are increasingly comfortable in claiming their
role as developmental psychopathologists, can collaborate
with community psychologists, for instance, who are increas-
ingly comfortable in cultivating developmental assets, ADS
approaches its promise as a framework for understanding and
addressing the needs of children in our society.
The developmental assets framework (Benson, Leffert,
Scales, & Blyth, 1998; Scales & Leffert, 1999) has some of
its roots and branches in developmental psychopathology but
contributes its own heuristic power to ADS, especially in
grafting its roots and branches in community psychology
and prevention science (e.g., Weissberg & Greenberg, 1998).
Although developmental psychopathology may focus more
often on outcomes reﬂecting health and behavior problems or
mental disorders or illness, the developmental assets frame-
work emphasizes outcomes (or even processes) such as com-
petence or thriving, as captured in the “emerging line of
inquiry and practice commonly called positive youth devel-
opment” (Benson et al., 1998, p. 141; see also Pittman &
Irby, 1996). ADS emphasizes the importance of simultaneous
consideration of both orientations. In addition, whereas de-
velopmental psychopathology is explicitly life-span oriented
as noted in the deﬁnitions stated earlier, the developmental
assets framework, at least to date, is more focused (in deriva-
tion though not implication) on the processes boldest in the
second decade of life. The empirical and theoretical foun-
dations for the framework emphasize “three types of health
outcomes: a) the prevention of high risk behaviors (e.g., sub-
stance use, violence, sexual intercourse, school dropout);
b) the enhancement of thriving outcomes (e.g., school suc-
cess, afﬁrmation of diversity, the proactive approach to nutri-
tion and exercise); and c) resiliency, or the capacity to
rebound in the face of adversity” (p. 143).
Developmental assets theory generates research models
that call upon a system or catalog of 40 developmental assets,
half of them internal (e.g., commitment to learning, positive
values, social competencies, and positive identity) and half of
them external (e.g., support, empowerment, boundaries and
expectations, and constructive use of time). Assessments of
these characteristics and processes in individuals and in com-
munities then provide for problem deﬁnition, intervention
design, and program evaluation. While the developmental
psychopathologist might focus on similar constructs and
word them only in a negative or deﬁcit manner (e.g., a posi-
tive identity is merely the opposite of poor self-esteem),
simultaneous consideration of both the assets and psy-
chopathology orientations reveals that beyond the overlap-
ping or synonymous concept or measure are complementing
and augmenting meanings with important implications for
both research and practice.
Some features of the synergy obtained with the perspec-
tives fostered by developmental psychopathology and devel-
opmental assets orientations are evident in theory and
research conducted in frameworks termed the stress and
coping paradigm (e.g., Wertlieb, Jacobson, & Hauser, 1990),
or
vulnerability/risk 
and 
resiliency/protective 
factors
model (e.g., Ackerman, Schoff, Levinson, Youngstrom, &
Izard, 1999; Hauser, Vieyra, Jacobson, & Wertlieb, 1985; Jes-
sor, Turbin & Costa, 1998; Luthar, Cicchetti, & Becker,
2000; Luthar & Zigler, 1991; Masten & Coatsworth, 1998).

Domains of Inquiry and Action in Applied Developmental Science
51
To illustrate some dimensions of this synergy that are basic to
advancing ADS, we offer an overview of the stress and cop-
ing paradigm.
The Stress and Coping Paradigm
An important step toward the integration of emergent ap-
proaches to developmental psychopathology and extant
stress theories salient to both health and mental health
researchers was taken about 20 years ago at a gathering of
scholars at the Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral
Sciences. Attendants generated what at the time was a com-
prehensive state-of-the-art review and compelling research
agenda published as Stress, Coping, and Development in
Children (Garmezy & Rutter, 1983). At a reunion a decade
later, many of the same scientists and their younger col-
leagues now pursuing the agenda took stock of the research
to produce Stress, Risk, and Resilience in Children and Ado-
lescents (Haggerty, Sherrod, Garmezy, & Rutter, 1994). This
latter volume was especially impressive in its articulation of
important interventions and prevention applications, reﬂect-
ing the historical trend noted earlier to be fueling ADS. A
comparison of the two titles reveals that the coping construct
disappeared—an unfortunate decision in light of present con-
cerns with the promises of coping interventions and develop-
mental assets as elements of overcoming stress, risk, and
poor health outcomes. However, the second title did intro-
duce core biomedical and epidemiological constructs of risk
and resiliency, basic conceptual and methodological tools
consistent with ADS as deﬁned earlier. In any event, these
volumes provide a comprehensive treatment of the stress and
coping ﬁeld as an ADS. Figure 2.1 is a simple schematic that
illustrates some basic features.
The stress and coping paradigm depicted in Figure 2.1
juxtaposes four variable domains capturing the complex and
dynamic stress process (Pearlin, 1989) as a slice in time and
context. The dimensions of time, or developmental progres-
sion, and context are those noted earlier as the bioecological
framework (Bronfenbrenner & Ceci, 1994) and life-course
models (e.g., Clausen, 1995; Elder, 1995); they are the back-
ground and foreground absent from, but implicit in, the
schematic in Figure 2.1. A common critique of stress research
focuses on the circularity of some of its constructs and rea-
soning. For instance, consider a stressful life event such as
the hospitalization of a child and the necessity to consider it
both as a stressor in the life of the child and his family and as
an outcome of a stress process. As ADS evolves with its more
sophisticated longitudinal and nonlinear analytic methodolo-
gies, these critiques will be less compelling. For the moment
and for the sake of this brief description of the paradigm, a
circular form with multiple dual-direction arrows is adopted.
The reciprocity of inﬂuences and the transactional qualities
Figure 2.1
The stress and coping paradigm.
COPING PROCESSES
• appraisal focus
• problem-solving focus
• emotion management
focus
COPING RESOURCES/
      MODERATORS
• social support
• “intelligence”
• “personality”
• socioeconomic status
OUTCOMES
• health
• illness
• adaptation
STRESS
• developmental
• major life event
• hassles
• chronic

52
Applied Developmental Science
of relationships among and across domains are signaled by
both the intersections of the quadrants and the dual-directed
arrows around the circumference. Consideration of each
quadrant should convey the substance and form of this devel-
opmental stress and coping paradigm and the way it calls
upon key variables in developmental psychopathology and
developmental assets orientations.
Beginning with the stress quadrant, reference is made to
the types of stress that are familiar in the literature and have
documented developmental and health consequences. For in-
stance, each child encounters biological, psychological, and
social milestones and transitions. Examples include the tod-
dler’s ﬁrst steps, kindergartners entering school, teenagers
entering puberty, and young people marrying. These are the
developmental stressors, or transitional life events, of devel-
opment.
Traditional psychosomatic medicine as well as contempo-
rary health psychology and behavioral medicine have fo-
cused most heavily on health consequences of major life
events. Among these are normative experiences such as en-
tering high school or starting a new job, nonnormative events
such as the death of a parent during childhood or getting
arrested, and events that do not ﬁt classiﬁcation by normative
life course transitions. Thus, being diagnosed with a serious
chronic illness or undergoing a divorce are examples of non-
normative event changes. The horserace between major life
events such as these and, in turn, what are termed hassles, or
the microstressors of everyday life—efforts to quantify one
type or the other as more strongly related to particular health
outcomes—has been a feature of recent research in develop-
mental psychopathology. This work teaches us the impor-
tance of avoiding overly simple variable-centered strategies
and striving to capture the richness of conceptualizations that
link, for instance, chronic role strain and acute life events, be
they major or quotidian (Eckenrode & Gore, 1994; Pearlin,
1989). Notions of chronic stressors allow for consideration of
a relatively vast child development literature on the adverse
impacts of, for example, poverty (e.g., McLoyd, 1998). The
distinction between chronic and acute stressors also serves
applied developmental scientists when they can differentiate
variables and processes in an acute experience. Thus, for in-
stance, receiving a diagnosis of a chronic illness, such as dia-
betes, may be considered an acutely stressful event, whereas
living with diabetes may be viewed as a chronic stressor
(Wertlieb et al., 1990).
Health consequences associated with these stressors ap-
pear in the outcomes quadrant of Figure 2.1. Highlighted here
are a commitment to multidimensional and multivariate
assessments of health outcomes; an appreciation of both
physical and mental health indexes, acknowledging both
interdependence and unity; an emphasis on a balance among
assets, health, and competence indexes; and a context of
health as a part of a broader biopsychosocial adaptation. In
traditional terms, ADS is concerned with the health and
mental health of individuals. In contemporary terms, the
health of developmental systems and communities must also
be indexed.
For decades, it was these two domains—stressors and
outcomes—that alone constituted the ﬁeld of stress research.
Consistent, reliable, and useful relationships were docu-
mented conﬁrming the stress and illness correlation. Across
scores of studies, statistically consistent relationships on the
order of .30 were obtained and replicated. Thus, we could
consistently account for close to 10% of the variance shared
by stress and health—scientiﬁcally compelling, but hardly
enough given the magnitude of the decisions that health care
providers and policy makers must make. Using the ADS
framework, stress and coping researchers pursue a quest for
the other 90% of the variance. The expansions and differenti-
ations of stressor types exempliﬁed in the stress quadrant of
Figure 2.1 contribute to the cause. In addition, it is the incor-
poration of the other two quadrants—coping processes and
coping resources/moderators—that are the keys to achieving
the goal. As these variables are incorporated into our models,
explanatory and predictive power increases, and the quest for
the other 90% advances.
The present model employs a speciﬁc conceptualization
and assessment methodology for coping processes as ad-
vanced by Lazarus and Folkman (1984) and adapted for chil-
dren by Wertlieb, Weigel, and Feldstein (1987). This model
emphasizes three types or dimensions of coping behavior ex-
hibited by children as well as adults. A focus on the appraisal
process, the problem-solving process, or the emotion-
management process can be distinguished and measured in
the transactions between an individual and the environment
as stress is encountered and as developmental or health con-
sequences unfold. Other researchers have employed similar
or competing coping theories, and many, perhaps most, are
consistent with the broader stress and coping paradigm pre-
sented here (e.g., Aldwin, 1994; Basic Behavioral Science
Task Force of the National Advisory Mental Health Council,
1996; Bonner & Finney, 1996; Compas, 1987; Fiese &
Sameroff, 1989; Luthar & Zigler, 1991; Pellegrini, 1990;
Sorensen, 1993; Stokols, 1992; Wallander & Varni, 1992;
Wills & Filer, 1996).
Similarly, there is a wide range of coping resources/
moderators investigated in the literature, and Figure 2.1 se-
lects a few examples to illustrate the range and demon-
strate the relevance to the developmental psychopathology
and developmental assets domains of ADS. Many of the

Domains of Inquiry and Action in Applied Developmental Science
53
40 elements of the developmental assets framework reﬂect
various dimensions of social support (e.g., family support, a
caring school climate, a religious community, or school en-
gagement). A large and complicated literature documents the
manners in which social support in its diverse forms inﬂu-
ences the relationships between health and illness. Key dis-
criminations of pathways for such inﬂuences in terms of main
effects, interactions, buffering effects, and mediation or mod-
eration are elaborated in these studies (Cohen & Syme, 1985;
Sarason, Sarason, & Pierce, 1990). Similarly complex, and
even controversial, are formulations that call upon constructs
and measures of intelligence or cognitive capacities or styles,
as resources, moderators, or mediators of the stress-health re-
lationship (Garmezy, 1994; Goleman, 1995). Diverse ranges
of personality variables have also been employed in this
work, including biologically oriented notions of tempera-
ment and psychological control orientations (Wertlieb,
Weigel, & Feldstein, 1989).
Socioeconomic status (SES) is depicted in this resource
quadrant, reminding us of the problem of redundancy and cir-
cularity. In the earlier description of types of stress I noted the
manner in which poverty—a level or type of SES—could be
modeled. Here, whether the SES is conceived as a factor that
psychological researchers too often relegate to the status of
background variable in a multivariate model or as a factor
that sociologists might emphasize in a social structural analy-
sis, its elements are crucial pieces of the contemporary con-
text for the stress-health linkage. Again, the general stress
and coping model in Figure 2.1 can accommodate consider-
able diversity in this coping resources/moderators domain;
success in the quest will reﬂect the achievement of simplicity
and parsimony.
A speciﬁc composite case example from our research pro-
gram in pediatric psychology, or child health psychology,
will serve to show the stress and coping paradigm in action.
Again, the ADS framework orients us to signiﬁcant demands
for both knowledge generation and knowledge utilization in
this example of a child’s development, where understanding
as well as application in terms of health care intervention and
social policy are intertwined (Wertlieb, 1999). The example
of Jason Royton involves each of the four domains shown in
Figure 2.1.
Twelve-year-old Jason Royton was rushed to the pediatric
hospital emergency room by his distraught father the morn-
ing after a vociferous battle in their home about whether
Jason will get to see the R-rated movies that he contends all
his friends are allowed to see. Within hours, the pediatrician
emerges with the diagnosis: insulin-dependent diabetes mel-
litus (IDDM). In this scenario, the applied developmental sci-
entist can quickly document multiple interacting dimensions
of stress that potentially impinge on the child: the acute
trauma of the health emergency and diagnosis, the parallel
stress of the separation and autonomy struggle in the
Roytons’ lives, the onset of a chronic stressor of living with a
life-threatening illness, and the initiation of multiple series of
hassles or quotidian stressors associated with the precise reg-
imen of diet, insulin injection, exercise, and medical care.
Also immediate are the coping processes and a mélange of
challenges and responses—shock, grief, denial, anxiety, ap-
praisal (sizing up the nature of the challenges), problem solv-
ing (assessing and marshaling resources to comprehend and
meet these challenges)—and for each individual, as well as
for the family system, managing the feelings, threats, and
disequilibria now introduced into their lives.
Inﬂuences of coping resources/moderators can be recog-
nized as well. Mobilization of social support is part of the
problem-solving process as we see Jason’s grandmother
arriving on the scene once they return home. Caring for the
other two Royton children will be only a minor worry for Mr.
and Mrs. Royton as they get through these initial days of their
new status as a family with IDDM. Less minor and more sur-
prising is the extent to which some of the protection offered
by their comfortable middle-class lifestyle does not turn out
to be what they thought it was. Clarifying their beneﬁts and
expenses in their new managed health care plan conﬁrms that
health insurance is not what it once was. IDDM, too, is not
what it once was. Several decades ago, prior to the 1922 in-
troduction of insulin therapy, the diagnosis was a death sen-
tence. Now, people living with IDDM are part of a large
group enjoying productive lives and pioneering novel chal-
lenges. The hope for ever-greater advances in biomedical sci-
ence and technology is part of that life; a cure for IDDM, or a
prevention, is an active research area.
Jason, meanwhile, is having his various “intelligences”
challenged as his health care team launches him on an educa-
tion for life with IDDM. Processing complex biomedical and
psychosocial information, shifting notions of future threats
and complications in and out of awareness, and anticipating
how to live with this difference, especially when being dif-
ferent, has little cachet in a young adolescent’s social circles.
These stressors are moderated and will unfold as elements of
the multidimensional health outcomes proﬁle that must be
considered in assessing the current or future health of a
youngster with IDDM. Most immediate health outcomes
focus on maintaining healthy blood glucose levels and some
optimal adherence with the medical regimen. Psychological
dimensions of accommodation of psychosocial strivings for
autonomy and consolidation of a positive sense of compe-
tence and self-worth are related developmental processes.
Undoubtedly, this set of experiences for Jason and his family

54
Applied Developmental Science
engages the applied developmental scientist in an array of
conceptual and methodological endeavors guided by frame-
works of developmental psychopathology and develop-
mental assets. (A more detailed consideration of IDDM in a
stress and coping paradigm can be found in Wertlieb et al.,
1990; a comprehensive survey of pediatric psychology is
offered by Bearison, 1998.)
In elaborating the stress and coping paradigm as an exam-
ple of an ADS heuristic, a key point to be made is that al-
though any science can be described by mapping its domains
of inquiry, to describe ADS, one must map domains of in-
quiry and action. The synergy and cross-fertilization between
inquiry and action are core processes in advancing the ADS
ﬁeld. For instance, in the stress and coping paradigm
example, note that each quadrant includes variables that are
amenable to some range of intervention, inﬂuence, or change.
Families, health or social service professionals, communities,
or public policies may be among the instigators or agents of
such changes. Stressors of various types can be reduced,
modiﬁed, or ameliorated by individual actions or shifts in
public policies. Coping processes can be taught or modi-
ﬁed. Resources and moderators can be introduced, altered,
strengthened, or weakened. Outcomes can be changed. The
design and evaluation of such change processes constitutes
key elements of ADS. These foci involve a number of special
methods as well as ethical imperatives.
SPECIAL METHODS AND ETHICAL IMPERATIVES
OF APPLIED DEVELOPMENTAL SCIENCE
Having sketched key historical and deﬁnitional parameters of
ADS and having sampled a few of the many substantive do-
mains of inquiry and action in ADS, this section shifts to con-
sideration of some of the special research methods of and
ethical issues in ADS. As evident in the sampling of inquiry
domains, the ADS parameters are addressed only to a certain
extent by traditional research methods and designs. Ac-
knowledgment of the conceptual complexity imposed by the
relevant developmental contextual and bioecological theo-
ries engages increasingly sophisticated methodological ap-
proaches. Orchestration of a researcher’s perspectives on
a set of problems with a society’s perspectives on the
problems—be they concerns about how to provide a type of
care for children or how to sustain the health and develop-
ment of an ill child, as considered in this sampling—requires
extension and innovation by the applied developmental
scientist. Some of the extension and innovation is relatively
incremental. For example, study of children’s adaptation to
illness becomes the province of interdisciplinary teams of
endocrinologists, pediatric psychologists, nurses, and child
psychiatrists. Bolder innovation advances ADS when fami-
lies and communities are recognized and embraced as legiti-
mate partners in the research enterprise, when the audience or
“consumer” of research is broadened to include service
providers and policy makers, and when traditional institu-
tional structures and functions associated with the ivory
tower of the university are challenged or modiﬁed. A leading
perspective in capturing these extensions and innovations
is termed outreach scholarship (Chibucos & Lerner, 1999;
Lerner & Miller, 1998).
Jensen,Hoagwood,andTrickett(1999)contrastuniversity-
based research traditionally supported by the National
InstituteofHealthinanefﬁcacymodelwithanoutreachmodel
that reﬂects emergent approaches to research consistent with
the parameters of ADS and basic to advancement in the
numerous domains of inquiry and action listed in Table 2.1.
Outreach research or outreach scholarship characterizes the
“engaged university” (Kellogg Commission on the Future of
State and Land-Grant Colleges, 1999) more so than the tradi-
tional ivory tower university (e.g., McCall, Groark, Strauss, &
Johnson, 1995). In outreach scholarship, knowledge advances
as a function of collaborations and partnerships between
universities and communities such that the scientists and the
children, families, and communities that they seek to under-
stand and to help are deﬁning problems, methods, and solu-
tions together. Communities include policy makers as well as
the families and service providers who both implement and
consume interventions and programs. Lerner et al. (2000)
properly noted that this involves a “sea change in the way
scholars conduct their research” (p. 14) and then noted the
principles of outreach scholarship that characterize these
special collaborations and methods in ADS. These principles
include the following:
(1) an enhanced focus on external validity, on the pertinence of
the research to the actual ecology of human development . . . as
opposed to contrived, albeit well-designed, laboratory type stud-
ies; (2) incorporating the values and needs of community collab-
orators within research activities; (3) full conceptualization and
assessment of outcomes, that is, a commitment to understanding
thoroughly both the direct and indirect effects of a research-
based intervention program on youth and their context and to
measuring these outcomes; (4) ﬂexibility to ﬁt local needs and
circumstances, that is, an orientation to adjust the design or pro-
cedures . . . to the vicissitudes of the community within which
the work is enacted; (5) accordingly, a willingness to make mod-
iﬁcations to research methods in order to ﬁt the circumstances of
the local community; and (6) the embracing of long term per-
spectives, that is, the commitment of the university to remain in
the community for a time period sufﬁcient to see the realization

Special Methods and Ethical Imperatives of Applied Developmental Science
55
of community-valued developmental goals for its youth. . . . [In
addition, these principles include] co-learning (between two ex-
pert systems—the community and the university); humility on
the part of the university and its faculty, so that true co-learning
and collaboration among equals can occur; and cultural integra-
tion, so that both the university and the community can appreci-
ate each other’s perspective. (Lerner et al., 2000, p. 14, italics
added)
As articulated in the deﬁnitional parameters of ADS that
opened this chapter and as reﬂected in the speciﬁc examples
of inquiry and action, the extensions and innovations in-
volved in outreach scholarship provide a means to address
the conceptual and methodological challenges inherent in
attending to the synergy and advancement of science and
practice. Along with these tools and potentials comes a series
of ethical imperatives reﬂecting responsibilities of both re-
searchers and practitioners. These complex challenges have
been a central concern to ADS from its earliest contemporary
renditions, and the frameworks offered by Fisher and Tryon
(1990) continue to serve well as an agenda.
Fisher and Tryon (1990) noted that along with the synergy
and integration of research and application basic to the ad-
vance of the ﬁeld, the applied developmental scientist is
bound by the ethics of research, by the ethics of professional
service, and by a complicated admixture that emerges with
the acknowledgement of their interdependence. In addition,
as the notion of outreach scholarship shifts the applied
developmental scientist away from narrow and traditional
notions of research subjects, patients, and clients to more
appropriate notions of partners, consumers, and collabora-
tors, there emerge areas as yet uncharted by the ethical stan-
dards of extant disciplines and professions. Indeed, even the
imperative—that ethical behavior in ADS reﬂects some con-
sensus or amalgam of the applied ethics embraced over time
by diverse disciplines or traditions now teaming up in any of
the areas of inquiry and action noted earlier—invokes chal-
lenge. Distinctive, perhaps even unique, ethical issues arise
when the articulation of basic bioecological and contextual
theories are parlayed into methods, measures, research de-
signs, interventions, programs, and policies. Further, whether
in the traditional disciplines or in emergent ADS, ethical con-
siderations are encumbered and enriched by the mores and
pressures of the historical context. Thus, the particular exi-
gencies of our evolving multicultural and global societies
that are manifested in concerns about diversity and cultural
sensitivity and competence become deep and abiding con-
cerns for the applied developmental scientist as she develops
and tests her theories, designs and evaluates her interven-
tions, provides health or social services, or engages policy
makers around social programs and policies.
As one example of the special ethical challenges that
ADS must master, return to our consideration of the re-
search on early child care and education. As noted then, the
sociohistorical shift involving the entry of more women into
the workforce fueled the interest and concern of both society
and developmental scientists. Hoffman (1990) described the
manner in which bias in the scientiﬁc process characterized
much of the early research on maternal employment.
Knowledge was produced and applied with an emphasis on
documenting defects or deﬁcits in children left in non-
parental day care. As the more sophisticated concepts and
methods of ADS were engaged to address the social concern
of nonparental care, there were more nuanced and accurate
notions of direct and indirect effects of individual differ-
ences and quality variables in home-based and center-based
care settings. In addition, as dire as were some of the ethical
challenges in the conduct of the science aimed at generating
understanding about the impacts of different care arrange-
ments, the risks involved in the communication of ﬁndings
to the public and to policy makers can also be harrowing
and daunting. Hoffman (1990) concluded her account with
the position that whereas “there is a social responsibility to
make ﬁndings available for social policy and individual de-
cision, there is also a responsibility to communicate the re-
sults accurately, and to educate the public about what the
data can and cannot say. The tentative nature of our ﬁndings,
their susceptibility to different interpretations, and the com-
plications of translating them into individual or policy ac-
tions must be communicated to achieve an ethical science”
(p. 268).
A second example to capture some of the particular ethical
challenges facing ADS pertains especially to this particular
historical moment where ADS is gaining recognition as an
established discipline (Fisher et al., 1996). Yet, training pro-
grams to produce the next generation of applied developmen-
tal scientists are only just emerging. Whereas some of the
root or allied disciplines may have sophisticated quality-
control and credentialing procedures in place to increase the
likelihood that ethical standards are met, ADS cannot borrow
completely from these traditions. ADS must generate new
and appropriate standards reﬂecting the exigencies of its spe-
cial methods (e.g., outreach scholarship, university commu-
nity partnerships) and the special expectations and demands
faced by new applied developmental scientists as they pursue
work in many, or any, of the domains of inquiry and action
listed in Table 2.1.
For instance, traditional developmental psychologists can
be trained, and their allegiance to the ethical standards of the
American Psychological Association (1992) can be incul-
cated during their graduate training. Clinical psychologists,

56
Applied Developmental Science
as another example, can be educated and held accountable
both through their graduate training and later professional
career in APA standards and in a variety of state and national
licensing and credentialing conventions. Although applied
developmental scientists now emerging from traditionally
regulated ﬁelds such as clinical, school, or counseling psy-
chology will have a starting point in these traditional ethical
guidelines, neither they nor their colleagues from diverse
disciplinary and multidisciplinary training bases are yet
equipped with explicit ethical principles or credentials
for the practice of ADS. Indeed, Koocher (1990) alerted
the ﬁeld to this challenge a decade ago, and although the
sociopolitical scene has evolved in complex ways since
then, the challenge remains for ADS to attend very seri-
ously to issues of graduate training and ethics commensu-
rate with its appropriately broadened scope and deepened
mission.
CONCLUSIONS
The tributary of history that was developmental psychology
has joined a river that is ADS. This contemporary face of de-
velopmental psychology is not really a new focus, but rather
a contemporary manifestation of some of the ﬁeld’s earliest
roots and priorities. As was originally the case, the under-
standing of children, their development, and their needs is
pursued for the intellectual bounty only in part. It is the use of
this knowledge to enhance the quality of life for children
that launched the discipline of developmental psychology
in the late nineteenth century and that propels ADS in the
early twenty-ﬁrst century.
Recently emerged and sophisticated theoretical frame-
works have evolved and are required to address the para-
meters of ADS. In particular, bioecological theory and
developmental contextual theory are useful in capturing the
complexities of children’s lives over time. As society, includ-
ing families, caregivers, service providers, and policy mak-
ers, as well as youth themselves, convey their awareness of
the needs and potentials of today’s children, applied develop-
mental scientists can collaborate to generate systematic un-
derstandings of how best to meet those needs and achieve
those potentials. A large array of substantive areas of inquiry
and action is likely to be advanced through such collabora-
tion, and only a few examples were discussed in this chapter.
The challenges in many of these areas are considerable—
conceptually, methodologically, and ethically. ADS is aware
of the challenge and is poised to pursue its potential for en-
hancing the well-being of children, adolescents, and families
across the life span.
REFERENCES
Ackerman, B. P., Schoff, K., Levinson, K., Youngstrom, E., & Izard,
C. (1999). The relations between cluster indexes of risk and pro-
motion and the problem behaviors of 6- and 7-year-old children
from economically disadvantaged families. Developmental Psy-
chology, 35, 1355–1366.
Adams, M. J., Treiman, R., & Pressley, M. (1998). Reading, writing,
and literacy. In W. Damon (Series Ed.), I. E. Sigel, & K. A.
Renninger (Vol. Eds.), Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 4.
Child psychology in practice (5th ed., pp. 275–356). New York:
Wiley.
Adelman, H. S., & Taylor, L. (2000). Looking at school health and
school reform policy through the lens of addressing barriers to
learning. Children’s services: Social policy, research, and prac-
tice, 3(2), 117–132.
Aldwin, C. M. (1994). Stress, coping, and development. New York:
Guilford Press.
American Psychological Association. (1992). Ethical principles of
psychologists and code of conduct. American Psychologist,
47(12), 1597–1611.
American Psychological Association. (2000). APA’s mission. Re-
trieved from http://www.apa.org/about/mission.html, December
10, 2000.
American Psychological Society. (2000). Our mission. Retrieved
from http://www.psychologicalscience.org/, December 10,
2000.
Baltes, P. B., Lindenberger, U., & Staudinger, U. M. (1998). Life-
span theory in developmental psychology. In W. Damon (Series
Ed.) & R. M. Lerner (Vol. Ed.), Handbook of child psychology:
Vol. 1. Theoretical models of human development (5th ed.,
pp. 1029–1144). New York: Wiley.
Bardon, J. I. (1983). Psychology applied to education: A specialty in
search of an identity. American Psychologist, 38, 185–196.
Basic Behavioral Science Task Force of the National Advisor
Mental Health Council. (1996). Basic behavioral science re-
search for mental health: Vulnerability and resilience. American
Psychologist, 51(1), 22–28.
Bates, J. E., Pettit, G. S., & Dodge, K. A. (1995). Family and child
factors in stability and change in children’s aggressiveness in
elementary school. In J. McCord (Ed.), Coercion and punish-
ment in long-term perspectives (pp. 124–138). New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Bearison, D. J. (1998). Pediatric psychology and children’s medical
problems. In W. Damon (Series Ed.), I. E. Sigel, & K. A.
Renninger (Vol. Eds.), Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 4.
Child psychology in practice (5th ed., pp. 635–712). New York:
Wiley.
Belar, C. D., & Perry, N. W. (1992). National conference
on scientist-practitioner educational training for the profes-
sional practice of psychology. American Psychologist, 47(1),
71–75.

References
57
Benson, P. L. (1997). All kids are our kids: What communities must
do to raise caring and responsible children and adolescents. San
Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Benson, P. L., Leffert, N., Scales, P. C., & Blyth, D. A. (1998).
Younger and older adults collaborating on retelling everyday sto-
ries. Applied Developmental Science, 2(3), 138–159.
Black, M. M., & Krishnakumar, A. (1998). Children in low income,
urban settings: Interventions to promote mental health and well-
being. American Psychologist, 53, 635–646.
Bonner, M. J., & Finney, J. W. (1996). A psychosocial model of chil-
dren’s health. In T. H. Ollendick & R. J. Prinz (Eds.), Advances
in child psychology (Vol. 18). New York: Plenum Press.
Boring, E. G. (1950). A history of experimental psychology (2nd
ed.). New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Bornstein, M. H. (1995). Introduction to handbook of parenting.
In M. Bornstein (Ed.), Handbook of parenting (Vol. 1, pp. xxiii–
xxiv). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Brennemann, J. (1933). Pediatric psychology and the child guidance
movement. Journal of Pediatrics, 2(1), 1–26.
Bronfenbrenner, U. (1995). Developmental psychology through
space and time: A future perspective. In P. Moen, G. H. Elder, &
K. Luscher (Eds.), Examining lives in context: Perspectives on
the ecology of human development (pp. 619–647). Washington,
DC: American Psychological Association.
Bronfenbrenner, U., & Ceci, S. J. (1994). Nature-nurture reconcep-
tualized in developmental perspective: A biological model. Psy-
chological Review, 101(4), 568–586.
Bronfenbrenner, U., Kessel, F., Kessen, W., & White, S. (1986).
Toward a critical social history of developmental psychology.
American Psychologist, 41(11), 1218–1230.
Bruck, M., Ceci, S. J., & Hembrooke, H. (1998). Reliability and
credibility of young children’s reports: From research to policy
and practice. American Psychologist, 53(2), 136–151.
Cahan, E. D. (1992). John Dewey and human development. Devel-
opmental Psychology, 28(2), 205–214.
Cairns, R. B. (1998). The making of developmental psychology.
In R. M. Lerner (Ed.), Handbook of child psychology (5th ed.,
Vol. 1, pp. 25–105). New York: Wiley.
Chibucos, T., & Lerner, R. M. (1999). Serving children and families
through community-university partnerships: Success stories.
Norwell, MA: Kluwer.
Cicchetti, D., & Sroufe, L. A. (2000). The past as prologue to the
future: The times, they’ve been a-changin’ [Editorial]. Develop-
ment and Psychopathology, 12(3), 255–264.
Cicchetti, D., & Toth, S. L. (1998a). The development of depression
in children and adolescents. American Psychologist, 53(2),
221–243.
Cicchetti, D., & Toth, S. L. (1998b). Perspectives on research
and practice in developmental psychopathology. In W. Damon
(Series Ed.), I. E. Sigel, & K. A. Renninger (Vol. Eds.), Hand-
book of child psychology: Vol. 4. Child psychology in practice
(5th ed., pp. 479–484). New York: Wiley.
Clausen, J. A. (1995). Gender, contexts and turning points in adult’s
lives. In P. Moen, G. H. Elder, & K. Luscher (Eds.), Examining
lives in context: Perspectives on the ecology of human develop-
ment (pp. 365–389). Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association.
Cohen, S., & Syme, S. L. (1985). Social support and health.
Orlando, FL: Academic Press.
Coie, J. D., Watt, N. F., West, S. G., Hawkins, J. D., Asarnow, J. R.,
Markman, H. J., Ramey, S. L., Shure, M. B., & Long, B. (1993).
The science of prevention: A conceptual framework and some
directions for a national research program. American Psycholo-
gist, 48(10), 1013–1022.
Coley, R. L., & Chase-Lansdale, P. L. (1998). Adolescent preg-
nancy and parenthood: Recent evidence and future directions.
American Psychologist, 53(2), 152–166.
Collins, W. A., Maccoby, E. E., Steinberg, L., Hetherington, E. M.,
& Bornstein, M. H. (2000). Contemporary research on parent-
ing: The case for nature and nurture. American Psychologist,
55(2), 218–232.
Compas, B. E. (1987). Coping with stress during childhood and ado-
lescence. Psychological Bulletin, 101(3), 393–403.
Cowan, P. A., Powell, D., & Cowan, C. P. (1998). Parenting inter-
ventions: A family systems perspective. In W. Damon (Series
Ed.), I. E. Sigel, & K. A. Renninger (Vol. Eds.), Handbook of
child psychology: Vol. 4. Child psychology in practice (5th ed.,
pp. 3–72). New York: Wiley.
Davidson, E. S., & Benjamin, L. T., Jr. (1987). A history of the child
study movement in America. In J. A. Glover & Ronning, R. R.
(Eds.),
Historical foundations of educational psychology
(pp. 41–60). New York: Plenum Press.
Elder, G. H. (1995). The life course paradigm: Social change and
individual development. In P. Moen, G. H. Elder, & K. Luscher
(Eds.), Examining lives in context: Perspectives on the ecol-
ogy of human development (pp. 101–139). Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association.
Elder, G. H. (1998). The life course and human development. In W.
Damon (Series Ed.) & R. M. Lerner (Vol. Ed.), Handbook of
child psychology: Vol. 1. Theoretical models of human develop-
ment (5th ed., pp. 939–991). New York: Wiley.
Elkind, D. (in press). Early childhood education. In R. M. Lerner,
F. Jacobs, & D. Wertlieb (Eds.), Promoting positive child, ado-
lescent, and family development. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Manuscript in preparation.
Emery, R. E., & Laumann-Billings, L. (1998). An overview of
the nature, causes, and consequences of abusive family relation-
ships: Toward differentiating maltreatment and violence.
American Psychologist, 53(2), 121–135.
Fagan, T. K. (1992). Compulsory schooling, child study, clinical
psychology, and special education. American Psychologist,
47(2), 236–243.
Fagan, T. K. (2000). Practicing school psychology: A turn-of-the-
century perspective. American Psychologist, 55(7), 754–757.

58
Applied Developmental Science
Featherman, D. L., & Lerner, R. M. (1985). Ontogenesis and
sociogenesis: Problematics for theory about development across
the lifespans. American Sociological Review, 50, 659–676.
Fiese, B. H., & Sameroff, A. J. (1989). Family context in pediatric
psychology: A transactional perspective. Journal of Pediatric
Psychology, 14(2), 293–314.
Fisher, C. B., & Lerner, R. M. (Eds.). (1994). Applied developmen-
tal psychology. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Fisher, C. B., Murray, J. P., Dill, J. R., Hagen, J. W., Hogan, M. J.,
Lerner, R. M., Rebok, G. W., Sigel, I., Sostek, A. M., Spencer,
M. B., & Wilcox, B. (1993). The national conference on gradu-
ate education in the applications of developmental science across
the lifespan. Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology, 14,
1–10.
Fisher, C. B., Murray, J. P., & Sigel, I. E. (Eds.). (1996). Applied
developmental science: Graduate training for diverse disci-
plines and educational settings (Vol. 13) Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Fisher, C. B., & Tryon, W. W. (Eds.). (1990). Ethics in applied
developmental psychology: Emerging issues in an emerging ﬁeld
(Vol. 4). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Fishman, D. B. (1999). The case for pragmatic psychology. New
York: New York University Press.
Fonagy, P., & Target, M. (2000). The place of psychodynamic
theory in developmental psychopathology. Development and
Psychopathology, 12(3), 407–426.
Fox, R. E. (1982). The need for a reorientation of clinical psychol-
ogy. American Psychologist, 37(9), 1051–1057.
Frank, G. (1984). The boulder model: History, rationale, and cri-
tique. Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 15(3),
417–435.
Garmezy, N. (1994). Reﬂections and commentary on risk, re-
silience, and development. In R. J. Haggerty, Sherrod, L.,
Garmezy, N., & Rutter, M. (Eds.), Stress, risk, and resilience in
children and adolescents: Processes, mechanisms, and interven-
tions (pp. 1–18). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Garmezy, N., & Rutter, M. (1983). Stress, coping, and development
in children. New York: McGraw Hill.
Garner, W. R. (1972). The acquisition and application of
knowledge: A symbiotic relation. American Psychologist, 27,
941–946.
Goleman, D. (1995). Emotional intelligence. New York: Bantam
Books.
Gore, S., & Eckenrode, J. (1994). Context and process in research
on risk and resilience. In R. J. Haggerty, L. R. Sherrod, N.
Garmezy, & M. Rutter (Eds.), Stress, risk, and resilience in
children and adolescents: Processes, mechanisms, and inter-
ventions (pp. 19–63). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press.
Haggerty, R. J., Sherrod, L. R., Garmezy, N., & Rutter, M. (Eds.).
(1994). Stress, risk and resilience in children and adolescents:
Processes, mechanisms and interventions. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Harris, J. R. (1998). The nurture assumption: Why children turn out
the way they do. New York: Free Press.
Harris, J. R. (2000). Socialization, personality development, and
the child’s environments: Comment on Vandell. Developmental
Psychology, 36(2), 711–723.
Hauser, S. T., Vieyra, M., Jacobson, A., & Wertlieb, D. (1985). Vul-
nerability and resilience in adolescence: Views from the family.
Journal of Early Adolescence, 5, 81–100.
Hetherington, E. M. (1998). Introduction: Relevant issues in devel-
opmental science [Special issue]. American Psychologist, 53(2),
93–94.
Hetherington, E. M., Bridges, M., & Insabella, G. M. (1998). What
matters? What does not? Five perspectives on the association be-
tween marital transitions and children’s adjustment. American
Psychologist, 53(2), 167–184.
Hoffman, L. W. (1990). Bias and social responsibility in the study of
maternal employment. In C. B. Fisher & W. W. Tyron (Eds.),
Ethics in applied developmental psychology: Emerging issues in
an emerging ﬁeld (Vol. 4, pp. 253–272). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Huston, A. C., & Wright, J. C. (1998). Mass media and children’s
development. In W. Damon (Series Ed.), I. E. Sigel, & K. A.
Renninger (Vol. Eds.), Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 4.
Child psychology in practice (5th ed., pp. 999–1058). New York:
Wiley.
Jensen, P., Hoagwood, K., & Trickett, E. (1999). Ivory towers or
earthen trenches? Community collaborations to foster “real
world” research. Applied Developmental Science, 3(4), 206–
212.
Jessor, R., Turbin, M. S., & Costa, F. M. (1998). Risk and protection
in successful outcomes among disadvantaged adolescents.
Applied Developmental Science, 2(4), 194–208.
Kanfer, F. H. (1990). The scientist-practitioner connection: A bridge
in need of constant attention. Professional Psychology: Research
and Practice, 21(4), 264–270.
Kaplan, R. M. (2000). Two pathways to prevention. American Psy-
chologist, 55(4), 382–396.
Kellogg Commission on the Future of State and Land-Grant
Colleges. (1999). Returning to our roots: The engaged institu-
tion. Washington, DC: National Association of State Universities
and Land-Grant Colleges.
Kendall, P. C. (1984). Social cognition and problem solving: A
developmental and child-clinical interface. In B. Gholson &
T. L. Rosenthal (Eds.), Applications of cognitive developmental
theory (pp. 115–148). Orlando, FL: Academic Press.
Koch, S., & Leary, D. E. (Eds.). (1985). A century of psychology as
science. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Koocher, G. P. (1990). Practicing applied developmental psychol-
ogy: Playing the game you can’t win. In I. E. Sigel (Ed.), Ethics
in applied developmental psychology: Emerging issues in an
emerging ﬁeld (Vol. 4, pp. 215–225). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Lamb, M. E. (1998). Children in poverty: Development, public
policy, and practice. In W. Damon (Series Ed.), I. E. Sigel, &

References
59
K. A. Renninger (Vol. Eds.), Handbook of child psychology:
Vol. 4. Child psychology in practice (5th ed., pp. 73–134).
New York: Wiley.
Lamb, M. E. (2000). The effects of quality of care on child develop-
ment. Applied Developmental Science, 4(3), 112–115.
Lazarus, R. S., & Folkman, S. (1984). Stress, appraisal and coping.
New York: Springer.
Lerner, R. M. (1998). Theories of human development: Contempo-
rary perspectives. In R. M. Lerner (Ed.), Theoretical models of
human development (5th ed., Vol. 1, pp. 1–24). New York: Wiley.
Lerner, R. M., Fisher, C. B., & Weinberg, R. A. (1997). Applied de-
velopmental science: Scholarship for our times. Applied Devel-
opmental Science, 1(1), 2–3.
Lerner, R. M., Fisher, C. B., & Weinberg, R. A. (2000). Toward a
science for and of the people: Promoting civil society through
the application of developmental science. Child Development,
71(1), 11–20.
Lerner, R. M., Jacobs, F, & Wertlieb, D. (Ed.). (2002). Handbook of
applied developmental science: Promoting positive child, ado-
lescent, and family development: A handbook of program and
policy innovations. Manuscript in preparation.
Lerner, R. M., & Miller, J. R. (1998). Developing multidisciplinary
institutes to enhance the lives of individuals and families: Acad-
emic potentials and pitfalls. Journal of Public Service and Out-
reach, 3(1), 64–73.
Lerner, R. M., Wolf, M., Schliemann, A., & Mistry, J. (2001). Child
development and schools. In R. M. Lerner, M. A. Easterbrooks,
& J. Mistry (Eds.), Developmental psychology (Vol. 6). New
York: Wiley.
Levy, L. H. (1984). The metamorphosis of clinical psychology:
Toward a new charter as human services psychology. American
Psychologist, 39(5), 486–494.
Loeber, R., & Stouthamer-Loeber, M. (1998). Development of juve-
nile aggression and violence: Some common misconceptions
and controversies. American Psychologist, 53(2), 242–259.
Luthar, S. S., Cicchetti, D., & Becker, B. (2000). The construct of
resilience: A critical evaluation and guidelines for future re-
search. Child Development, 71, 543–562.
Luthar, S. S., & Zigler, E. (1991). Vulnerability and competence: A
review of research on resilience in childhood. American Journal
of Orthopsychiatry, 61(1), 6–22.
Magnusson, D. (Ed.). (1996). The lifespan development of individu-
als: Behavioral, neurobiological, and psychosocial perspectives.
A synthesis. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Marsella, A. J. (1998). Toward a “global-community psychology”:
Meeting the needs of a changing world. American Psychologist,
53(12), 1282–1291.
Martland, N., & Rothbaum, F. (1999). Cameo feature news: Univer-
sity and community partnership disseminates child development
information. In T. R. Chibucos & R. M. Lerner (Eds.), Serving
children and families through community-university partner-
ships: Success stories (pp. 173–180). Boston: Kluwer.
Masten, A. S., & Coatsworth, J. D. (1998). The development of
competence in favorable and unfavorable environments:
Lessons from research on successful children. American Psy-
chologist, 53(2), 205–220.
Masterpasqua, F. (1981). Toward a synergism of developmental and
community psychology. American Psychology, 36(7), 782–786.
McCall, R. B. (1996). The concept and practice of education, re-
search, and public service in university psychology departments.
American Psychologist, 51(4), 379–388.
McCall, R., & Groark, C. (2000). The future of applied child develop-
ment research and public policy. Child Development, 71, 197–204.
McCall, R. B., Groark, C. J., Strauss, M. S., & Johnson, C. N.
(1995). The University of Pittsburgh Ofﬁce of Child Develop-
ment: An experiment in promoting interdisciplinary applied
human development. Journal of Applied Developmental Psy-
chology, 16, 593–612.
McLoyd, V. C. (1998). Socioeconomic disadvantage and child
development. American Psychologist, 53(2), 185–204.
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development Early
Child Care Research Network. (2000). Characteristics and qual-
ity of child care for toddlers and preschoolers. Applied Develop-
mental Science, 4(3), 116–135.
Nickols, S. Y. (2001). Family and consumer sciences in the United
States. In N. J. Smelser & P. B. Baltes (Eds.), International
encyclopedia of the social and behavioral sciences (Vol. 8,
pp. 5279–5286). Oxford, UK: Elsevier.
Noam, G. G. (1998). Clinical-developmental psychology: Toward
developmentally differentiated interventions. In W. Damon
(Series Ed.), I. E. Sigel, & K. A. Renninger (Vol. Eds.), Hand-
book of child psychology: Vol. 4. Child psychology in practice
(5th ed., pp. 585–634). New York: Wiley.
Parke, R. D. (1992). A ﬁnal word: The passing of the editorial man-
tle and some reﬂections on the ﬁeld. Developmental Psychology,
28(6), 987–989.
Parke, R. D., Ornstein, P. A., Reiser, J. J., & Zahn-Waxler, C. (Eds.).
(1994). A century of developmental psychology. Washington,
DC: American Psychological Association.
Pearlin, L. I. (1989). The sociological study of stress. Journal of
Health and Social Behavior, 30, 241–256.
Pellegrini, D. S. (1990). Psychosocial risk and protective factors in
childhood. Developmental and Behavioral Pediatrics, 11(4),
201–209.
Perry, N. W., Jr. (1979). Why clinical psychology does not need
alternative training models. American Psychologist, 34(7),
603–611.
Pittman, K., & Irby, M. (1996, January). Promoting investment in
life skills for youth: Beyond indicators for survival and problem
prevention. Paper presented at an interactional workshop, “Mon-
itoring and measuring the state of children: Beyond survival,”
Jerusalem, Israel.
Ramey, C. T., & Ramey, S. L. (1998). Early intervention and early
experience. American Psychologist, 53(2), 109–120.

60
Applied Developmental Science
Renninger, K. A. (1998). Developmental psychology and instruc-
tion: Issues from and for practice. In W. Damon (Series Ed.),
I. E. Sigel, & K. A. Renninger (Vol. Eds.), Handbook of child
psychology: Vol. 4. Child psychology in practice (5th ed.,
pp. 211–274). New York: Wiley.
Richters, J. E. (1997). The Hubble hypothesis and the developmen-
talist’s dilemma. Development and Psychopathology, 9, 193–
229.
Rutter, M., & Sroufe, L. A. (2000). Developmental psychopathol-
ogy: Concepts and challenges. Development and Psychopathol-
ogy, 12(3), 265–296.
Sarason, B. R., Sarason, I. G., & Pierce, G. R. (1990). Social
support: An interactional view. New York: Wiley.
Scales, P. C., Benson, P. L., Leffert, N., & Blyth, D. A. (2000). Con-
tribution of developmental assets to the prediction of thriving
among adolescents. Applied Developmental Science, 4(1),
27–46.
Scales, P., & Leffert, N. (1999). Developmental assets: A synthesis of
the scientiﬁc research on adolescent development. Minneapolis,
MN: Search Institute.
Scarr, S. (1998). American child care today. American Psychologist,
53(2), 95–108.
Schneiderman, N., Speers, M., Silva, J. M., Tomes, H., & Gentry,
J. H. (Ed.). (2001). Integrating behavioral and social sciences
with public health. Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association.
Schon, D. (1983). The reﬂective practitioner. New York: Basic
Books.
Schwebel, D. C., Plumert, J. M., & Pick, H. L. (2000). Integrating
basic and applied developmental research: A new model for the
twenty-ﬁrst century. Child Development, 71(1), 222–230.
Sears, R. R. (1975). Your ancients revisited: A history of child
development. In E. M. Hetherington (Ed.), Review of child de-
velopment research (Vol. 5). Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Siegel, A. W., & White, S. H. (1982). The child study movement:
Early growth and development of the symbolized child. In H. W.
Reese (Ed.), Advances in child development and behavior
(Vol. 17, pp. 233–285). New York: Academic Press.
Sigel, I. E., & Cocking, R. R. (1980). Editors’ message. Journal of
Applied Developmental Psychology, 1(1), i–iii.
Sigel, I. E., & Renninger, K. A. (Eds.). (1998). Handbook of child
psychology: Vol. 4. Child psychology in practice (5th ed.). New
York: Wiley.
Sorensen, E. S. (1993). Children’s stress and coping: A family per-
spective. New York: Guilford Press.
Sroufe, L. A., & Rutter, M. (1984). The domain of developmental
psychopathology. Child Development, 55, 17–29.
Stokols, D. (1992). Establishing and maintaining healthy environ-
ments: Toward a social ecology of health promotion. American
Psychologist, 47(1), 6–22.
Strauss, S. (1998). Cognitive development and science education:
Toward a middle level model. In W. Damon (Series Ed.), I. E.
Sigel, & K. A. Renninger (Vol. Eds.), Handbook of child
psychology: Vol. 4. Child psychology in practice (5th ed.,
pp. 357–400). New York: Wiley.
Vandell, D. L. (2000). Parents, peer groups, and other socializing in-
ﬂuences. Developmental Psychology, 36(6), 699–710.
Wallander, J. L., & Varni, J. W. (1992). Social support and adjust-
ment in chronically ill and handicapped children. American
Journal of Community Psychology, 17(2), 185–201.
Webster-Stratton, C. (1994). Advancing videotape parent training:
A comparison study. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psy-
chology, 62(3), 583–593.
Weissberg, R. P., & Greenberg, M. T. (1998). School and commu-
nity competence-enhancement and prevention programs. In W.
Damon (Series Ed.), I. E. Sigel, & K. A. Renninger (Vol. Eds.),
Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 4. Child psychology in prac-
tice (5th ed., pp. 877–954). New York: Wiley.
Wertlieb, D. L. (1985). Clinical child psychology as an applied de-
velopmental psychology: Toward a redeﬁnition of mission and
training. In J. Tuma (Ed.), Proceedings: Conference on training
clinical child psychologists (pp. 64–68). Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association.
Wertlieb, D. L. (1997). Children whose parents divorce: Life trajec-
tories and turning points. In I. Gotlieb & B. Wheaton (Eds.),
Stress and adversity over the life course: Trajectories and turn-
ing points (pp. 179–196). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
Wertlieb, D. L. (1999). Society of pediatric psychology presidential
address, 1997: Calling all collaborators, advancing pediatric
psychology. Journal of Pediatric Psychology, 24(1), 77–83.
Wertlieb, D. L. (2001). Applied developmental science. In R. M.
Lerner, M. A. Easterbrooks, & J. Mistry (Eds.), Developmental
psychology (Vol. 6). New York: Wiley.
Wertlieb, D. L., & Feldman, D. H. (1996). Doctoral education in ap-
plied child development. In C. B. Fisher, J. P. Murray, & I. E.
Sigel (Eds.), Applied developmental science: Graduate train-
ing for diverse disciplines and educational settings (Vol. 13,
pp. 121–141). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Wertlieb, D. L., Jacobson, A., & Hauser, S. (1990). The child with
diabetes: A developmental stress and coping perspective. In P. T.
Costa & G. R. VandenBos (Eds.), Psychological aspects of seri-
ous illness: Chronic conditions, fatal diseases, and clinical
care (pp. 65–101). Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association.
Wertlieb, D. L., Weigel, C., & Feldstein, M. (1987). Measuring chil-
dren’s coping. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 57, 548–
503.
Wertlieb, D. L., Weigel, C., & Feldstein, M. (1989). Stressful expe-
riences, temperament, and social support: Impact on children’s
behavior symptoms. Journal of Applied Developmental Psychol-
ogy, 10, 487–503.

References
61
Wills, T. A., & Filer, M. (1996). Stress-coping model of adolescent
substance use. In T. H. Ollendick & R. J. Prinz (Eds.), Advances
in child psychology (Vol. 18). New York: Plenum Press.
Winett, R. A. (1995). A framework for health promotion and disease
prevention programs. American Psychologist, 50, 341–350.
Ysseldyke, J. E. (1982). The spring hill symposium on the future
of psychology in the schools. American Psychologist, 37(5),
547–552.
Zigler, E. (1980). Welcoming a new journal. Journal of Applied
Developmental Psychology, 1(1), 1–6.
Zigler, E. (1998). A place of value for applied and policy studies.
Child Development, 69(2), 532–542.
Zigler, E. F., & Finn-Stevenson, M. (1999). Applied developmental
psychology. In M. H. Bornstein & M. E. Lamb (Eds.), Develop-
mental psychology: An advanced textbook (4th ed.). Mahwah,
NJ: Erlbaum.


PART TWO
INFANCY


CHAPTER 3
Infant Perception and Cognition
LESLIE B. COHEN AND CARA H. CASHON
65
INFANT PERCEPTION VERSUS INFANT COGNITION
66
HISTORICAL ANTECEDENTS
66
MODERN TECHNIQUES FOR ASSESSING INFANT
PERCEPTION AND COGNITION
66
Infant Visual Preference
66
Novelty Preferences and Habituation
67
Other Techniques
68
THEORETICAL PERSPECTIVES
68
Piagetian Theory
68
Gibson’s Ecological Theory
69
Dynamical Systems
69
Nativism
69
Connectionist Modeling
70
Cognitive Neuroscience
70
Information Processing
70
INFANTS’ PERCEPTION OF PROPERTIES
OF OBJECTS
71
Form Perception
71
Color Perception
72
Perceptual Constancy
73
Constancy as a Relationship Between Features
74
INFANTS’ UNDERSTANDING OF OBJECTS
74
Object Permanence
74
Object Unity
75
Object Individuation
75
Core Knowledge About Objects
76
Face Perception
78
INFANT CATEGORIZATION
79
The Earliest Age at Which Infants Can Categorize
79
The Content of Infants’ Categories
80
Information-Processing Changes in Categorization
80
Current Trends in Infant Categorization Research
80
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES
81
Full-Term Versus Preterm Infants
81
Infants With an Established Risk Condition
82
Predictive Validity of Habituation and Novelty
Preference Measures
83
A Speciﬁc Information-Processing Explanation
83
CONCLUDING COMMENTS
84
REFERENCES
85
Research on infant perception and cognition has grown expo-
nentially over the past four decades. In most respects, this
explosion of research has led to spectacular advances in
knowledge and appreciation of infants and their abilities. How-
ever, this same growth has also led to conﬂicting theoretical
views, contradictory conclusions, and even heated exchanges
between investigators—all of which seem to make a coherent
picture of infant perceptual and cognitive development difﬁ-
cult if not impossible to achieve. One goal of this chapter is to
cut through some of the extravagant claims and rhetorical
arguments to examine in some detail what the evidence really
indicates. We shall approach this task from an information-
processing point of view by continually asking two interrelated
questions: (a) How are infants actually processing the informa-
tion in their environment? and (b) In what way does that
processing change with age and experience? Fortunately, when
one takes this approach, an organized and reasonably con-
sistent picture of infant perception and cognition emerges.
Furthermore, a number of domain-general propositions, such
as those mentioned later in this chapter in the section on in-
formation processing, seem to help to explain both infants’
information processing at a given age and how that processing
develops over time. In this chapter we shall both describe these
information-processing principles and—when possible—use
them as a convenient tool for organizing the many ﬁndings
on numerous topics within the domain of infant perception
and cognition.
Preparation of this chapter was supported in part by NIH grant
HD-23397 to the ﬁrst author from the National Institute of Child
Health and Human Development.

66
Infant Perception and Cognition
INFANT PERCEPTION VERSUS
INFANT COGNITION
Before discussing the ﬁndings in the area of infant perception
and cognition, the ﬁrst step should be at least to make some
crude attempt to deﬁne what we mean by infant perception
and cognition. The reader may have noticed our tendency so
far to treat infant perception and cognition as a single domain
rather than as two distinct entities. Even that issue is unclear
and debatable. Some, such as Mandler (1992, 2000b), overtly
assume that infant perception and cognition are two distinct
domains with little communication between them. Under this
view, infant perception may be seen as including lower-level,
automatic processes such as noticing the features of objects
and responding to those features. Infant cognition, on the
other hand, may be seen as involving higher-level, concep-
tual processes such as making inferences about the functions
or meanings of objects. Others, such as Quinn and Eimas
(2000), argue that both are aspects of a single domain and
that they differ more in degree than in kind.
Our opinion falls closer to Quinn and Eimas’s than to
Mandler’s. We also see the difference between perception
and cognition to be more a matter of degree than of kind.
Whether one is dealing with perceiving size constancy—
perceiving the actual size of an object seen at different
distances—or understanding the meaning of a complex
causal event in which one object pushes another object across
a table, it is the nature of the underlying relationship that
must be perceived or understood. In size constancy, the un-
derlying relationship is the size of one object relative to the
object’s distance or to the size of other objects; in the causal
event, it is the movement of one object in space and time
relative to the movement of the second object. Some rela-
tionships may be perceived automatically and effortlessly;
others require a more active comparison. But from an infor-
mation-processing perspective, they all can be understood in
terms of sets of relationships. Our task is to describe the
nature of these relationships and how they contribute to some
overall organization or information-processing hierarchy.
HISTORICAL ANTECEDENTS
We begin by considering some historical antecedents of
the current popularity of research on infant perception and
cognition. Certainly interest in infants and what they can
perceive and understand has existed for centuries. Classic
debates by philosophers such as Locke versus Rousseau exist
in modiﬁed form to this day. Biologists’ and psychologists’
biographies of their own babies, such as Teidemann, Preyer,
Darwin, and Piaget, provided important insights into their
infants’ reactions, although they often were less than totally
objective accounts (see Kessen, 1965). More objective ex-
periments on infants’responsiveness to stimulation occasion-
ally appeared in the early 1900s. For example, McDougall
(1908) reported ﬁnding differential infant ﬁxation times to
stimuli varying in color. Blanton (1917) was one of the ﬁrst to
ﬁnd that infants will pursue a moving stimulus visually, and
Irwin (1941) found that changes in light intensity produced
modiﬁcations in an infant’s activity.
Somewhat later, in the 1950s and 1960s, studies began to
appear that measured heart rate and sucking measures, as well
as visual ﬁxation. Both auditory (e.g., Bridger, 1961) and
olfactory (Engen, Lipsitt, Lewis, & Kaye, 1963) stimulation
werefoundtoproducechangesinheartrateinnewborninfants.
Furthermore, these studies also showed that repeated presenta-
tions of these stimuli led to habituation of the response.
A group of Russian investigators (Bronshtein, Antonova,
Kamentskaya, Luppova, & Sytova, 1958) presented auditory,
olfactory, and visual stimuli to infants under 1 month of age.
They found suppression of sucking to all three types of stimu-
lation and habituation of the suppression over trials. Often in-
fants were presented with repetitions of a bright light or 90 dB
white noise. Many of these studies examined what Sokolov
(1963) had referred to as the “orienting reﬂex,” a pattern of
physiological and behavioral changes to the presentation of a
novel stimulus. There were several reports that infants exhib-
ited both an orienting response and a decline in that response—
habituation—withrepeatedpresentationsofthesamestimulus.
According to Sokolov, habituation of the orienting reﬂex re-
ﬂected a form of memory, a point that would be picked up in the
1970s when studies of infant memory ﬁrst became popular.
These studies and many similar ones demonstrated that
infants—even very young infants—were sensitive to stimula-
tion from a number of modalities, and perhaps that they even
had some memory of that stimulation. Yet these studies did
very little to address more interesting questions about how that
stimulation was processed or remembered.This may in part be
due to the complexity of the methods involved; in order to con-
duct these experiments, one needed rather elaborate and ex-
pensive recording equipment as well as a team of investigators
to monitor that equipment and the infant.
MODERN TECHNIQUES FOR ASSESSING INFANT
PERCEPTION AND COGNITION
Infant Visual Preference
Two seminal studies, conducted independently on essentially
the same topic, both published in 1958, radically reduced the
potential complexity of the experimental method and led to a

Modern Techniques for Assessing Infant Perception and Cognition
67
dramatic change in the nature of research on infant perception
and cognition. Berlyne (1958) measured the visual ﬁxations of
3- to 9-month-old infants. On each trial, two black and white
checkerboard patterns that differed in brightness or complex-
ity were placed on a display board in front of each infant. An
observer who could not see the patterns called out the direction
of gaze of the infant—a technique that allowed Berlyne to de-
termine to which pattern the infant ﬁrst ﬁxated. One of
Berlyne’s ﬁndings was that infants ﬁrst looked at a complex
pattern, such as a checkerboard with many squares, more than
at a simple pattern, such as a checkerboard with few squares.
At the same time Fantz, known to many as the founder of
modern research on infant perception, began a series of stud-
ies (Fantz, 1958, 1961, 1963; Fantz, Ordy, & Udelf, 1962) on
infants’ visual preferences. Patterns, such as checkerboards
with differing numbers of squares, vertical stripes of different
thicknesses, and drawings of regular versus scrambled faces
were shown to infants two at a time. Fantz’s procedure was a
methodological advance over Berlyne’s in that because of the
placement of the infant in a testing chamber, the experimenter
could actually see a reﬂection of the stimulus on the infants’
cornea. Also, Fantz measured total looking time rather than
just the direction of ﬁrst look. Among Fantz’s ﬁndings were
that infants tend to prefer patterned surfaces to uniform sur-
faces and complex patterns to simple patterns.
Both Berlyne’s and Fantz’s studies represented real ad-
vances over previous research in the ﬁeld. Their innovations
included demonstration of a simple, reliable, inexpensive
technique for measuring infant visual attention, systematic
manipulation of the stimuli presented to infants, and exami-
nation of differences in the pattern of visual attention over
age. Their technique capitalized on what may be considered
infants’ natural preferences for some stimuli over others; it
has come to be called the visual preference paradigm.
The visual preference paradigm is still a very popular
technique. Numerous studies by many investigators over the
past 40 years have used some version of this visual prefer-
ence paradigm to examine topics ranging from infant visual
acuity to pattern perception, preferences for complexity, and
even face perception. Several of these topics are discussed in
greater detail later in this chapter.
Novelty Preferences and Habituation
The visual preference technique works well when infants
have a natural preference for certain stimuli—that is, when
from the outset, infants have the tendency to look at some
stimuli longer than at others. When this occurs, we can infer
not only that infants have a preference for one stimulus over
another, but also that infants can discriminate between those
stimuli. However, many cases exist in which infants do not
display an initial preference, yet investigators need to know
whether the infants can discriminate between the stimuli. In
such cases, investigators often rely on a paradigm that com-
bines the visual preference technique with habituation. Once
again, the ﬁeld is indebted to Fantz for leading the way. In
1964, Fantz reported a study in which infants were shown
two magazine pictures simultaneously, side by side, and the
infants’ looking times to the pictures were recorded. As trials
progressed, the picture on one side remained the same, but
the one on the other side changed from trial to trial. Over the
course of the experiment, infants gradually came to look
more and more at the side with novel pictures.
This preference for novelty has become the underlying
basis of the most widely used research tool for investigating
infant perception and cognition—the infant visual habituation
paradigm. Although many variations of this paradigm exist, a
prototypical example would be to repeatedly present one vi-
sual stimulus until an infant’s looking time habituates to some
criterion level, such as 50% of the infant’s initial looking time.
Novel and familiar test stimuli would then be presented to see
if the infant looks longer at (i.e., recovers to) the novel ones.
Doing so indicates that the infant can differentiate between the
novel and the familiar stimuli, even though initially the infant
may not have had a natural preference for one over the other.
As we shall see later in this chapter, the infant visual
habituation paradigm has been used for over three decades
to investigate basic and esoteric questions related to infant
perception, attention, memory, language acquisition, object
knowledge, categorization, and concept formation. Differ-
ences in habituation and recovery have been reported
between normal and aberrant infants, and both habituation
rates and preferences for novelty appear to be moderately
correlated with later IQ.
As simple and straightforward as infant preferences for
novelty and habituation appear to be, the situation is actually
more complicated. Many people assume that infants always
have a preference for novelty. In reality, several studies have
shown that a preference for familiarity often precedes a pref-
erence for novelty. Furthermore, this early preference for
familiarity seems to be stronger in younger infants. It is also
stronger when the information-processing task is more com-
plex or difﬁcult for the infant.
Hunter and Ames (1988) have summarized these con-
ditions. According to them, the time it takes for an infant
to be familiarized to a stimulus—that is, show a novelty
preference—depends upon both the age of the infant and the
complexity of the stimulus. For example, the familiarity pref-
erences for older infants (e.g., those over 6 months of age)
should be very brief compared to those for younger infants

68
Infant Perception and Cognition
(e.g., those under 6 months of age), and within an age group
the familiarity preferences should vary according to stimulus
complexity. The bottom line is that if younger infants are re-
peatedly shown very simple stimuli—or if older infants are
shown moderately complex stimuli—both groups are likely
to produce the classic monotonically decreasing habituation
curve. On the other hand, if infants at either age are shown
dynamic moving scenes involving multiple objects, they are
likely to prefer familiar scenes prior to preferring novel ones.
Therefore, it becomes important in such studies to habituate
all infants to a relatively stringent criterion and to include
both familiar and novel stimuli at the end to test that the in-
fant indeed prefers novelty. Unfortunately, many infant habit-
uation studies today do not adhere to these procedures.
Other Techniques
Several other techniques have also been used to investigate
questions related to infant perception and cognition. In some,
infants play a more active role, such as crawling, walking, or
reaching. In others, physiological indicators—such as heart
rate or cortical evoked potentials—rather than behavioral
indicators are assessed. Although some of these techniques
are unrelated to visual preference and habituation, others are
more related than one might ﬁrst assume. For example, infant
operant conditioning is often used and has many similarities
to visual habituation (e.g., Bower, 1966a). In these studies,
infants are ﬁrst conditioned to respond to one stimulus and
then tested with novel stimuli that vary in some systematic
way from the conditioned stimulus. The logic is similar to
that in habituation studies. In habituation, responses are arti-
ﬁcially decreased to one stimulus. Discrimination is assessed
by determining whether that decrease generalizes to other
stimuli. In conditioning, responses are artiﬁcially increased
to one stimulus, and discrimination is assessed by determin-
ing whether that increase generalizes to other stimuli.
A variety of conditioning studies have also been used
to investigate infants’ perception of speech (e.g., Eimas,
Siqueland, Jusczyk, & Vigorito, 1971), all of which relate
either to visual preferences, visual habituation, or both. Such
studies have frequently used a high-amplitude sucking proce-
dure in which infants ﬁrst are conditioned to suck in order to
hear a sequence of speech sounds. That procedure continues
until their sucking habituates, at which time the speech
sounds are changed and recovery of sucking is assessed.
Many more recent studies of infant speech perception and
early language ability have turned to visual attention as the
measure (e.g., Jusczyk & Aslin, 1995). For example, infants
may learn to look at a speciﬁc location to hear a particular
sound. Then a new sound is introduced and changes in
looking time are assessed. We ﬁnd it interesting that just as in
the visual perception literature, some disagreement exists as
to whether the infants should look longer or shorter when a
novel stimulus is presented. We cannot list all possible tech-
niques that can be used to assess infant perception and cogni-
tion, but as we have described, many are related either
procedurally or logically to two very important techniques—
infant visual preferences and visual habituation.
THEORETICAL PERSPECTIVES
Several theoretical perspectives have been inﬂuential in
directing research on infant perception and cognition over the
past forty years. It is impossible to adequately represent any
of these viewpoints in just a single chapter. Indeed, some
of them require entire books to explain them adequately.
Certainly Piagetian theory, Gibsonian theory, dynamical
systems, and connectionist modeling fall into this category.
Others are more approaches to studying infant development
than they are complete theories. They make certain assump-
tions and predictions and use certain research techniques to
investigate those predictions, but they probably do not qual-
ify as formal theories. Nativism, cognitive neuroscience,
and information processing tend to fall into this category.
Brief descriptions are provided in the following sections for
each of these theoretical perspectives. It should be under-
stood that each description is merely a cursory overview. Any
real understanding requires reading much more, including
the references provided with each description.
Piagetian Theory
The one researcher who has had the longest—and many would
say the most profound—impact on the ﬁeld of infant cognition
and perception is Piaget. Originally a biologist, Piaget devel-
oped a theory of cognitive development by observing his own
children’s behavior on certain tasks during infancy and child-
hood (e.g., Piaget, 1927, 1936/1952, 1937/1954). For many
years, psychologists in the United States disregarded Piaget’s
theory because his research methods were considered impre-
cise and his ideas about cognition were in conﬂict with the be-
haviorist’s zeitgeist of the day. However, that position began
to change as comprehensive reviews of Piaget’s theory be-
came available in English (e.g., Flavell, 1963; Hunt, 1961).As
the reader will see, the modern infant cognition researcher
often uses Piaget’s theory and observations as a springboard
for further ideas and research.
Piaget’s (1937/1954) view of infant development is that
infants develop an understanding of the world—that is, an
understanding about objects, space, time, and causality—by
interacting with the environment. Borrowing from the ﬁeld of

Theoretical Perspectives
69
biology, Piaget (1936/1952, 1937/1954) believed that infants
develop through the processes of assimilation and accom-
modation. Piaget also believed that development is stagelike
and discontinuous. Furthermore, the infant, according to
Piaget, is as an active learner who is motivated to learn about
the world; but cognitive development, like other aspects of
development, represents an interaction between maturation
and learning.
Piaget speciﬁed four major periods corresponding to
different ages of the developing child. The ﬁrst period of
Piaget’s (1937/1954) theory of cognitive development, the
sensorimotor period, describes infants from birth to around
18–24 months of age, or about the age that language ﬁrst
appears. During this period, infants are thought to go through
six stages, starting from interacting with the world strictly
with innate reﬂexes (Stage 1) to using mental representations
for acting on the world (Stage 6). Topics examined by Piaget
include the development of infants’ understandings of time,
space, causality, and the permanence of objects.
Many modern developmental researchers agree with
Piaget’s view that the child is an active learner, but disagree
with his view that development is discontinuous, or stagelike.
Theoretical positions, such as information processing and the
connectionist view of development, are similar in some ways
to Piaget’s view in that both emphasize the role of learning
and experience to help explain developmental changes and
both can be considered constructivist theories. Like Piaget,
both assume that developmental change is a building-block
process that starts small and gradually becomes more elabo-
rate or sophisticated. Other more nativist views believe that
Piaget was much too conservative about infants’ developing
abilities; they claim he underestimated the ability of the in-
fant. Some modern researchers believe that because Piaget’s
method of research was not truly experimental, his ﬁndings
were not generalizable. His ﬁndings are sometimes criticized
for erroneously focusing too much on the child’s competence
at a very speciﬁc task that may or may not reveal the child’s
true understanding of the world (e.g., Baillargeon, Spelke,
& Wasserman, 1985; Bower, 1974). Nevertheless, Piaget is
revered today by many infant cognition and perception
researchers and is appreciated for his ingenuity and his
insights into the mind of the infant (see Flavell, 1963).
Gibson’s Ecological Theory
Not all theories of development rely so much on the develop-
ing mind of the infant. For example, Gibson’s ecological
approach to the study of infant perceptual development places
emphasis on the environment and infant’s abilities to detect
important information from the world. Her view is based pri-
marily on two key issues: (a) the infant’s ability to discover
new affordances—ways upon which an environment lends it-
self to be acted, and (b) the infant’s ability to differentiate—
parse out invariant information from the world. As infants
act in the world, they differentiate information in their envi-
ronment and discover affordances. With this new understand-
ing of the world around them, their actions in the world
change.
According to Gibson, perception and action are closely
related for the infant, and much Gibsonian research examines
that relationship (Gibson, 1995). For example, it has been
found that an infant may tumble down a slope the ﬁrst couple
of times he or she approaches such a surface. Soon the infant
begins to understand that one affordance of the slope,
compared to other surfaces, is that it may cause tumbling
(Adolph, Eppler, & Gibson, 1993a). Another example is
Gibson and Walk’s (1960) classic work on infants’perception
of depth, known as the “visual cliff” experiment. In this
study, it was found that infants would not crawl across a table
that appeared to have a drop-off, or cliff, in the middle.
Gibson and Walk saw this as evidence that infants of crawl-
ing age had enough experience with depth to know that it
could afford danger. (For a more detailed discussion of this
theory and related research, see the review by Adolph,
Eppler, & Gibson, 1993b).
Dynamical Systems
Another theoretical view that emphasizes the close relation-
ship between perception, cognition, and action is dynamical
systems. In a recent set of books, Smith and Thelen (1993)
and Thelen and Smith (1994) attempt to unify recent ad-
vances in dynamical systems theory with research in devel-
opmental neuroscience and behavioral development. They
argue that development can best be understood in terms of
complex nonlinear systems that are self-organizing. Devel-
opmental changes tend to be described in the language of
physical nonlinear systems—that is, attractor states, phase
transitions, and stability versus ﬂuctuations of the system.
This view, with its emphasis on mechanisms of change, is
clearly opposed to nativist explanations. Although it has been
applied most successfully to issues of motor development, its
advocates are attempting to apply it to perceptual and cogni-
tive development as well. As we shall see, it also has impor-
tant elements in common with connectionist modeling.
Nativism
A persistent theoretical debate throughout the entire history
of developmentalpsychologyhasbeennativismversusempiri-
cism. Nowhere is this debate more apparent than in modern-
day infant perception and cognition. A chief spokesperson for

70
Infant Perception and Cognition
the nativist position is Spelke. According to Spelke (1985),
infants are endowed by nature with capacities to perceive
and understand objects and events in the world. This core
knowledge includes an understanding of partially and fully
occluded objects; the ability to reason about physical proper-
ties of objects, such as continuity and solidity; an under-
standing of number; and knowledge of physical causality.
Spelke and others, most notably Baillargeon, have argued
that human infants are more competent than others (such as
Piaget) had believed. To bolster their claims, they have pro-
vided considerable evidence based upon ingenious variations
of methods involving infant habituation and visual preference.
In some of these variations, infants must not only perceive
events involving one or more objects, but must also make
inferences when a portion of those events is hidden behind an
occluder.
Needless to say, this viewpoint has been controversial.
Many believe the nativist assumptions about the competen-
cies of young infants are unwarranted. In fact, they question
whether such assumptions can even be considered explana-
tions. Recent debates on the pros and cons of nativism have
appeared in the literature between Spelke (1998) versus
Haith (1998) and Baillargeon (1999) versus Smith (1999).
Furthermore, empirical research on some of these topics is
beginning to show that simpler explanations can account
for the apparent cognitive sophistication proposed by the na-
tivists. Some of the research both for and against the nativist
viewpoint is described in later sections of this chapter.
Connectionist Modeling
The connectionist modeling approach stands in sharp
contrast to the nativist approach. The most complete descrip-
tion of the application of connectionism to development has
been published in a recent book entitled Rethinking Innate-
ness (Elman et al., 1996). Whereas nativism assumes infants
come prewired with certain core knowledge, connectionists
reject this form of innateness. They argue that at all levels—
molecular, cellular, and organismic—interactions occur be-
tween organisms and the environment. A more appropriate
meaning of innateness is that the outcome is constrained to
some extent at each of those levels. These constraints operate
on the type of representation, the architecture, and the timing
of the developmental process that is being considered.
Comparisons—sometimes real, sometimes metaphorical—
are made between the structure of the brain and computerized
connectionist networks. So, for example, just as brains in-
clude neuronal synapses and speciﬁc areas, connectionist
models include patterns of connections and types of units or
levels. Connectionist models also include nonlinear learning
rules that may lead to emergent, stagelike properties and thus
are quite compatible with a dynamical systems approach.
Many early models were developed to counter the prevalent
nativism of linguistic theory. Modelers tried to demonstrate
that what some assumed were innate rules of language could
be approximated by connectionist models through experi-
ence. Connectionism has spread to simulations of infant
perception and cognition. New models are appearing on
infant categorization (Mareschal & French, 2000), object
permanence (Munakata, McClelland, Johnson, & Siegler,
1997), speech perception (Schafer & Mareschal, 2001), and
rule learning (Shultz & Bale, 2001). The adequacy of these
models is still being hotly debated (Marcus, 1999a, 1999b)
but there is no doubt that these models are presenting a
challenge to the view that infants possess innate knowledge
structures.
Cognitive Neuroscience
Developmental neuroscience is an area that has grown
substantially over the last 10 to 20 years. Like dynamical sys-
tems and connectionist modeling, its users attempt to make
links between development of the brain and development of
behavior associated with perception and cognition. Whereas
previous approaches to ties with brain development have
been somewhat metaphorical, developmental neuroscientists
attempt to measure brain development directly and then relate
it to cognitive development. However, ﬁnding the answers to
questions about brain development and cognitive develop-
ment in infants is not such a straightforward business. Proce-
dures that may be useful for studying the link between brain
and cognition in older children may not be appropriate for
studying this link in infants. For example, PET (positron-
emission tomography) and fMRI (functional magnetic reso-
nance imaging) methods may work fairly well with children
and adults, but these are considered too intrusive for use with
infants (M. H. Johnson, 1997). The methods most often used
to study the developing brain in infants are EEGs (electroen-
cephalographs), ERPs (event related potentials), and animal
models (for a review of studies on infant perception and at-
tention, see M. H. Johnson, 1996).
Information Processing
The information-processing approach contains elements of
some of the other approaches described previously. Like
Piaget, proponents of the information-processing approach
believe that perceptual and cognitive development is con-
structive. According to one view, at least, the emphasis is on
infants’ learning to process the relationship among properties

Infants’ Perception of Properties of Objects
71
to form the whole (Cohen, 1988, 1991, 1998; Cohen &
Cashon, 2001b). Young infants are able to process simple
perceptual properties of objects, such as color, form, and
shape, before they can process objects as a whole. As in
Piagetian theory, development is also hierarchical. From an
information-processing perspective, what counts as a unique
whole at one age can serve as a property or element of a
larger or more complex whole at an older age. Therefore,
after infants perceive or organize perceptual properties into
unique objects, they can treat objects themselves as proper-
ties of larger wholes and look for relationships between
objects in dynamic events involving multiple objects. One
such relationship is causality; infants can distinguish causal,
direct-launching events from noncausal events. At a later
point in development, even these causal events can become
elements in more elaborate event sequences.
Recently this approach has been summarized by a set of
six propositions (Cohen & Cashon, 2001b):
1. Perceptual-cognitive development follows a set of
domain-general information-processing principles.
2. Information in the environment can be processed at a
number of different levels of organization.
3. Higher (more holistic) levels can be deﬁned in terms of
the types of relationships among lower (parts) levels.
4. Development involves progressing to higher and higher
levels.
5. There is a bias to initiate processing at the highest level
available.
6. If an information overload occurs (such as when move-
ment is added or when the task involves forming a cate-
gory), the optimal strategy is to fall back to a lower level
of processing.
Much like connectionist modeling and dynamical systems
and unlike nativism, the information-processing approach
emphasizes the role of experience, learning, and nonlinear
changes in development. In fact, attempts are currently
underway to produce a connectionist model that follows the
preceding six propositions (Chaput & Cohen, 2001). Along
with other approaches, visual attention and habituation are
frequently used to assess infant information-processing. In
contrast to other approaches, it also emphasizes changes in
attention and memory over age. An information-processing
perspective has often been used in studies of individual dif-
ferences in preterm versus full-term infants or normal versus
aberrant infants as well as long-term predictions of later
intellectual ability (e.g., Bornstein & Sigman, 1986; Fagan,
1984).
INFANTS’ PERCEPTION OF PROPERTIES
OF OBJECTS
We begin by considering three classic topics in perception
that have also been studied extensively in infants—form
perception, color perception, and perceptual constancies. If
space permitted, we could have included many other topics
that have also been investigated in infants, including the
perception of sound, touch, odor, and motion. Although our
selections are not exhaustive, they are representative of the
type of questions being asked about infant perception and its
development. They also serve as a reasonable starting point
for our progression from topics that most would agree are
clear examples of infant perception to topics which fall more
into the category of infant cognition.
Form Perception
Form perception in infants is usually studied with two-
dimensional or three-dimensional static ﬁgures or shapes that
have well-deﬁned contours (Slater, 1995b; Slater & Johnson,
1998). The issue most often investigated in form perception
is whether infants will respond to the component parts of a
shape or to the ﬁgure as a whole (Slater, 1995b; Slater &
Johnson, 1998). However, making this distinction experi-
mentally is not always easy. For example, Slater, Morison,
and Rose (1983) found that newborn infants can discriminate
between the outlines of the shapes of a triangle, a square, and
a cross. Is this form perception? Perhaps not. In fact, in one of
the earliest form perception studies with infants, Salapatek
and Kessen (1966) found that when newborns scanned a
large triangle, they only scanned a small portion near the
apex. To provide clear evidence of form perception, it is
important to show that infants are discriminating between
these shapes based upon more than just a portion of their out-
lines or some other component of the ﬁgure. It also must be
shown that infants process the ﬁgure as a whole.As Banks and
Salapatek (1983) discussed (see also Slater, 1995b), it is very
difﬁcult to obtain unambiguous evidence of form perception
because there are often simpler, perceptual explanations
for results with infants. Thus, even topics as basic as form
perception must deal with issues about part-versus-whole
processing that are central to the information-processing
approach mentioned earlier.
Fortunately, there are ways to examine this experimental
issue. In one such study, Cohen and Younger (1984) investi-
gated developmental differences in the perception of angles
by 14- and 6-week-old infants and were able to get clear
evidence of form perception in the older infants. Cohen and
Younger (1984) tested whether infants would process the

72
Infant Perception and Cognition
parts of the angle—that is, the orientations of the lines—or
whether they would process the whole angle—that is, the
relationship between the lines. After habituating infants to
one angle, they presented variations that either changed the
line orientations but not the angle, or that changed the angle
but not the line orientations. Their results indicated a devel-
opmental shift in the manner in which infants process angles
and perhaps other simple forms. The younger infants seem
only able to process the line orientations, or the independent
parts of the angle, whereas the older infants are able to
process the relationship between the lines and process the
angle as a whole form.
Slater, Mattock, Brown, and Bremner (1991) conducted a
similar set of experiments with newborns. In the ﬁrst experi-
ment, newborns were found to behave similarly to the
younger, 6-week-old infants in the Cohen and Younger
(1984) study. Not surprisingly, the newborns in the Slater
et al. (1991) study responded to a change in line orientation
and not to a change in the angle. In a second experiment,
Slater et al. (1991) investigated whether newborns could
process the angle independently of its orientation. In this ex-
periment, newborns were familiarized either to an acute or an
obtuse angle presented in six different orientations, much like
a category study. Infants were then tested on an acute and an
obtuse angle, one of which was familiar and the other novel,
both in novel orientations. Slater et al. (1991) found that the
newborns showed a novelty preference for the novel angle.
Slater (1995b) suggested that this could be evidence of form
perception in newborns, although he acknowledged that it
may not be unambiguous evidence.
One important alternate interpretation has been referred
to as the “blob theory” (Slater et al., 1991). This interpreta-
tion rests on the notion that at the apex of an angle a low-
frequency “blob” is formed, and the size of the blob varies
depending on the size of the angle. When newborns discrim-
inated between the acute and obtuse angles in the Slater et al.
(1991) test, they may have been responding to the difference
in relative size of the blobs and not actually to the angle it-
self. If this is the case, then the results would be consis-
tent with a developmental progression in the perception of
angles, whereby newborns respond to the size of the apex
(the blob), 6-week-olds respond to the independent lines of
an angle, and 14-week-olds respond to relationship of the
lines of the angle or the form of the angle.
Slater and Morison (as cited in Slater, 1995b) also found
evidence for a developmental progression in form per-
ception. In this experiment, newborns, 3-month-olds and
5-month-olds were tested on whether they could extract
the general shape from a series of ﬁgures that varied only
slightly from one another in design or texture. After being
familiarized to six exemplars of a shape, infants were tested
on a novel exemplar of the familiar shape and a novel shape.
By showing infants slight variations of the same shape, the
experimenters were able to see whether infants could form a
category based on the overall form of the shape. If infants
were in fact able to form this category, then one would expect
infants to show a novelty preference for the novel shape. This
is exactly what the 3- and 5-month-old infants did; however,
the newborns did not show the preference. These results ﬁt
nicely with an information-processing approach and provide
further support that form perception may develop over time.
Color Perception
Our knowledge about infants’ color perception has grown
considerably in the last 25 years (for a review, see Teller &
Bornstein, 1987). Before that time, the results of research
conducted on infant color perception were somewhat
ambiguous. It was never clear in these early experiments
whether infants were discriminating between different hues
or some other aspect of color, such as brightness or intensity.
In 1975, several researchers invented clever tasks to show
that infants younger than 3 months of age can discriminate
between stimuli that vary in hue, not just brightness. For ex-
ample, Peeples and Teller (1975) tested 2-month-old infants
on a hue preference test and found that they could discrimi-
nate a red hue from a white hue, independent of brightness.
More recently, Adams, Courage, and Mercer (1994) tested
infants shortly after birth and found that newborns could
discriminate red from white, but not blue, green, or yellow
from white. As Kellman and Arterberry (1998) concluded,
however, by about 2 to 3 months of age, infants seem to have
color vision very similar to that of to adults and can discrim-
inate between many colors.
So, within the ﬁrst 2 to 3 months of life, infants appear to
be sensitive to the same spectrum of color as adults. But do
infants view the boundaries between colors in the same way
as adults? Adults group a range of colors into blue and
another range into green, and so on. In other words, do
infants (like adults) organize colors into distinct categories?
Bornstein, Kessen, and Weiskopf (1976) tested this question
with 4-month-old infants. They habituated infants to a stimu-
lus of a certain hue, or wavelength. Then the infants were
tested with the same stimulus, a stimulus of a different wave-
length but from the same color category, and a stimulus of a
different wavelength that was considered by adults to be in a
different category. If infants dishabituated to both novel stim-
uli, one would conclude that they must have responded to the
wavelength and not the color categories. However, Bornstein
et al. (1976) found that infants dishabituated only to the

Infants’ Perception of Properties of Objects
73
stimulus that adults considered to be in a different color cate-
gory. Thus, infants not only perceive colors at an early age,
they also seem to organize them into roughly the same color
categories as adults.
From an information-processing viewpoint, it is interest-
ing that like form perception, even infants’ color perception
appears to go through a developmental pattern whereby in-
fants begin by processing information at a lower level, and
then later they integrate that information and process it at a
higher level. In the case of color perception, infants ﬁrst
gain the ability to discriminate between colors (around 2–3
months of age) and then later, building upon that ability, are
able categorize colors (around 4 months of age). In the next
section, we examine something that looks very much like
categorization with infants’ perception of shape and size
constancy.
Perceptual Constancy
Artists are taught to be conscious of the way they see the
world and to create visual illusions such as size, perspective,
and distance on the canvas. For example, to create the illu-
sion that an object is farther away, an artist simply draws the
object higher and smaller on the page than he or she would
draw an object that is meant to be up close. Similarly, adults
have little difﬁculty making sense of the environment and un-
derstanding the illusions created on our retina. For example,
you would have no trouble recognizing this book as the same
book whether you saw it inside on your desk under ﬂuores-
cent lighting or outside in the bright daylight. You would not
be fooled by the different perceptual characteristics of the
book due to the different illuminations and would effortlessly
understand that it is the same book. Furthermore, you would
perceive the book as the same despite its change in location
or orientation. This ability to identify an object as the same
despite a perceptual transformation is known as perceptual
constancy.
One question that researchers have asked is whether
young infants see real objects as adults do or retinal images
of objects? For example, how would an infant make sense of
seeing a teddy bear from across the room and then seeing
the same teddy bear up close? Would the infant respond to the
objective characteristics of the teddy bear and recognize the
two images as the same teddy bear, or would the infant
respond to the different-sized images on the retina and
perceive the bears as two distinct objects, one much larger
than the other? If infants perceived the two images as the
same, as adults would, we would say that infants have size
constancy—that is, despite the fact that the retinal image of
the close teddy bear may be twice as large as the retinal
image of the distant teddy bear, the objective size is still
preserved.
The notion of constancy can also refer to shape constancy,
which is the ability to perceive an object as being the same
despite changes to its orientation or slant. For example, if an
infant saw a rectangular block from the frontal view and then
saw it at a 45° angle, would the infant know that it was the
same block? In other words, would the infant (like an adult)
understand that despite the change in slant, both objects are
the same rectangular block? Or would the infant perceive
only the retinal image of these two objects and treat these two
as different shapes, one as a rectangle and one as a trapezoid?
Size Constancy
Piaget and Inhelder (1969) adhered to the position that
infants ﬁrst respond to the retinal images of objects and
believed that infants did not get size constancy until 5 or
6 months of age. They based this belief on the ﬁnding that if
one taught infants to reach for a large box, the infant would
continue to reach for that box even though it projected a
smaller image on the retina than did a box that was closer and
smaller in real size.
Bower, however, challenged the traditional view of size
constancy and was one of the ﬁrst researchers to test its
claims empirically. In several experiments (e.g., Bower,
1966b), he used an operant conditioning paradigm to investi-
gate whether young infants based their responses to an object
on that object’s real size, retinal size, or distance. Bower
(1966b) found that infants generalized their response based
upon both the objective size and the object’s distance, but not
retinal size. Thus, he had evidence that infants younger than
2 months of age do not rely on the retinal size of objects and
can respond on the basis of an object’s real size and distance.
Day and McKenzie (1981) continued the work on infant
size constancy using a habituation paradigm, a completely
different technique from Bower’s operant conditioning
experiments. They also found evidence for size constancy in
infants as young as 18 weeks of age. Subsequently, two inde-
pendent research laboratories tested newborns in a habitua-
tion paradigm, and both found evidence of size constancy
(Granrud, 1987; Slater, Mattock, & Brown, 1990).
Shape Constancy
In addition to studying size constancy in infants, Bower also
used his operant conditioning technique to study shape
constancy. In one experiment with 50- to 60-day-olds, he
trained infants on a rectangle that was slanted at a 45° angle,
which created a retinal image that looked like a trapezoid.

74
Infant Perception and Cognition
He then looked for a generalized response to (a) a rectangle at
a frontal view (new retinal image, same objective shape, new
slant); (b) a trapezoid at a frontal view (same retinal image,
new objective shape, new slant); and (c) a trapezoid slanted at
a 45° angle (new retinal image, new objective shape, same
slant). Bower found that infants generalized their responses to
the rectangle presented at a frontal view. This result indicates
that the infants responded to the objective shape of objects and
not the shape of the retinal image or the slant of the objects.
Caron, Caron, and Carlson (1979) also addressed the issue
of shape constancy in young infants, but did so in several
studies using a habituation paradigm. Their results supported
Bower’s ﬁnding that young infants perceive the objective
shape of objects and do not rely solely on the retinal image of
those objects. In fact, in a more recent habituation study,
Slater and Morison (1985) also found evidence of shape
constancy in newborns.
Constancy as a Relationship Between Features
In sum, the evidence suggests that young infants do not rely
solely on the retinal image of objects and are capable from
birth (or shortly thereafter) of understanding size and shape
constancy. How is it that infants are able to understand these
constancies and respond to more than the retinal image of
objects at birth? The key may be that all constancies require
an understanding or appreciation of relational information.
To return to the examples in the beginning of this section, the
reason this book outdoors is not perceived as brighter is
that relative to other objects, it is not brighter. Furthermore,
the reason that an infant would perceive the teddy bear up
close and far away as the same bear is that the size is constant
relative to the distance of the object. The up close bear may
appear two times as large, but it is also two times as close as
the distant bear. Thus, the relationship between size and
distance has remained the same. It is these constant relation-
ships to which the infants must be sensitive.
Being sensitive to the relationships among things in the
world is a necessary requirement for understanding the world
around us. From our information-processing perspective,
understanding relationships is the central principle around
which infant perceptual and cognitive development proceeds.
Throughout this chapter, we demonstrate that as infants get
older, the types of relationships they process, understand, and
remember become more complex and abstract. In that sense,
the abilities to understand size, shape, and other constancies
become building blocks from which infants learn about ﬁrst
objects and later events in the world about them.
Even some types of constancies may be more cognitively
demanding or require more conscious attention to relation-
ships than do others. One of these constancies may be object
constancy, which is an understanding that despite a signiﬁ-
cant physical transformation of an object in space, time,
or both, it is the same object. An example would be under-
standing that the bottle now on its side but seen previously
standing up is the same bottle—or recognizing the back of
mother’s head is the same person who is normally seen from
the front. One could go a step further. What if the object or
person were not visible at all? For example, consider an
infant who hears her mother’s voice in the other room and is
able to identify the voice as that of his or her mother—or an
infant who recognizes that the toy under the table is the same
toy he or she had in hand before dropping it and losing sight
of it. This extension of object constancy has been examined
in great detail in the infant cognition literature by Piaget and
many other investigators under the heading of object perma-
nence. Because the development of an understanding about
objects has played such a prominent role in investigations of
infant cognition, we shall devote considerable space to it in
the next section of this chapter.
INFANTS’ UNDERSTANDING OF OBJECTS
Object Permanence
When people think about what infants know about objects,
the concept of object permanence, or understanding that
an object continues to exist in the world even though it is hid-
den or cannot be seen, often comes to mind. There is the
general misconception that infants acquire this concept at 8
or 9 months of age. The misconception arises in part because
most people think of object permanence as a unitary concept
that infants have or do not have at a particular age.
Because one of the most dramatic developments in object
permanence, reaching for and obtaining an object that is
totally hidden, occurs around 8 or 9 months of age, this is when
many assume infants acquire object permanence. However,
for Piaget, obtaining a hidden object is only one intermediate
step in a long sequence of accomplishments that infants must
master during their ﬁrst 2 years of life (Piaget, 1936/1952,
1937/1954). Obtaining a completely hidden object is charac-
teristic of the onset of Piaget’s Stage 4 (9 to 12 months). How-
ever, infants at Stage 3 (1 and one half to 4 or 5 months),
although not yet able to retrieve a completely hidden object,
are able to retrieve an object that is only partially hidden. And
even though infants in Stage 4 can retrieve a completely hid-
den object, if an experimenter subsequently hides the object
under a second cloth, infants at this stage will commit what is
known as the A not B error. They will mistakenly go to the ﬁrst
cloth to retrieve the object (for more discussion on theAnot B
error, see Diamond, 1991; and Haith & Benson, 1998).

Infants’ Understanding of Objects
75
Infants at Stage 5 (12–18 months) no longer make this
error and will correctly retrieve the hidden object from the
correct cloth. However, according to Piaget (1937/1954),
Stage 5 infants still do not completely have the concept of
object permanence because they are fooled by invisible
displacements. If an experimenter shows an infant an object
and then places the object in a small box before hiding it
under a cloth on the table, the Stage 5 infant will not look for
the hidden object at its ﬁnal destination. An infant who does
successfully retrieve an object under this circumstance is
considered by Piaget to be in Stage 6 (18–24 months) and to
have completely mastered the object concept. (For more
discussion on the development of the object concept, see
Diamond, 1991; and Haith & Benson, 1998)
Object Unity
More recent research has extended the work of Piaget and
considered other questions about infants’ understanding of
objects. Kellman and Spelke (1983), for example, investi-
gated the role of coordinated movement of an object parts in
infants’ perception of objectness, or the perception of object
unity. In this classic study, they habituated 4-month-old
infants to a display in which a partially occluded rod moved
back and forth behind an occluder. They were then tested on
two displays without the occluder. In one test, infants saw a
complete rod that moved back and forth, and in the other they
saw just the two rod parts that resembled portions visible
during habituation. The infants dishabituated to the two rod
parts but not to the solid rod, indicating to Kellman and
Spelke (1983) that the parts were novel, and thus that they
must have perceived the two moving parts during habituation
as a single complete rod. This result, according to Kellman
and Spelke, indicates that the infants perceived object unity
even under conditions of partial occlusion. It is interesting to
note that the perception or inference of an object under
conditions of partial occlusion at 4 months of age would be
consistent with Piaget’s Stage 3 behavior. It therefore would
be of interest to test younger infants to see whether this
ability to perceive or infer a uniﬁed object develops during
the ﬁrst few months of life.
Several researchers have in fact attempted to replicate this
object unity study with younger infants. Slater et al. (1990)
conducted a similar study with newborns and found a very
different set of results from those reported by Kellman and
Spelke (1983). Slater et al. found that instead of dishabituat-
ing to the two rod parts, newborn infants dishabituated to the
complete rod, suggesting that they were perceiving the rod
parts as separate items rather than as the top and bottom of a
single uniﬁed object. More recently, researchers have rep-
licated Kellman and Spelke’s ﬁndings with 2-month-olds and
have found that they dishabituate to the rod parts display in
the test if the occluder is rather narrow (S. P. Johnson &
Nañez, 1995). Collectively, research on object unity shows
that infants are not born with the ability to perceive two parts
of a moving, partially occluded object as one object, but that
this ability develops over at least the ﬁrst 4 months of age.
In fact, such a conclusion ﬁts within an information-
processing framework by showing once again a developmen-
tal change from processing parts to processing wholes. It
seems clear from research on object unity and other related
topics that well before 7 months of age, infants are capable of
perceiving objectness—that is, of perceiving those character-
istics that indicate a single uniﬁed object exists. From our
earlier discussions on form, color, and constancy, it is equally
clear that also well before 7 months of age infants perceive
many characteristic features of an object. However, as re-
search described in the next section indicates, young infants
still lack the ability to distinguish one object from another.
This ability has been called object individuation or object
segregation and estimates about when it develops range
widely from 4 or 5 months of age to 12 months of age.
Object Individuation
The ability to distinguish two objects as distinct entities is
what researchers refer to as object individuation or object seg-
regation. Depending on the procedure used, there are reports
that infants can individuate objects at 12 but not 10 months of
age (Xu & Carey, 1996), or in some cases as young as 5 months
of age (Needham, 2001; Wilcox, 1999). Xu and Carey (1996)
employed an “event-mapping” procedure, as it is referred to
by Wilcox and Baillargeon (1998), in which infants were
shown an event and then tested on two events—one that was
considered consistent and another that was considered incon-
sistent with the ﬁrst event. Speciﬁcally, infants initially saw
one object move behind an occluder from the left, then a dif-
ferent object emerge from behind the occluder and move to the
right.The authors reasoned that if infants understood that there
were two objects in the original event, then they should look
longer at the inconsistent event—that is, the display with
one object. They found that the 12-month-olds but not the
10-month-olds, looked longer at the one-object display. Based
upon these ﬁndings, Xu and Carey concluded that these older
infants understood that there were two objects present in the
event and had successfully individuated the objects.
However, studies with younger infants suggest that they
also—under certain circumstances—can individuate objects.
In a very recent set of studies, Needham (2001) gave infants
exposure to an object prior to presenting two test events that
involved an object similar to the prior-experience–object but
varying on some feature such as texture (Experiments 1 and 2),

76
Infant Perception and Cognition
orientation (Experiment 3), and color (Experiments 4, 5, and
6). One test event can be described as two objects move to-
gether. In this event, the two objects that are touching
and move together could be perceived as either one or two sep-
arate objects. The second test event can be described as one
object moves. In this event, the object remains stationary, so it
should be obvious that there are two distinct objects. Needham
reasoned that if infants attended to the featural characteristics
of the prior-experience–object and its equivalent in the test
was similar enough, then infants should still show signs of in-
dividuating the objects in the move-together test event. If,
however, infants did not view the two objects as similar, then
presumably that prior experience with the ﬁrst object would
not help the infants to individuate the objects in the test dis-
play. In this case, infants would not be expected to show a dif-
ference in response to the two test events. Needham (2001)
found that 4.5-month-olds could use texture and orientation
but not color cues to help them individuate the objects in the
test displays.
In addition to these ﬁndings a study by Wilcox (1999)
showed a developmental progression in what featural infor-
mation can be used to help infants individuate objects. She
found that at 4.5 months of age infants can use shape and size,
at 7.5 months of age they can use pattern, and at 11.5 months
of age they can use color to individuate objects. From our ear-
lier discussions on form and color perception, it is clear that
infants in the ﬁrst 3 months can perceive these characteristics
about objects. Furthermore, as the discussion on object unity
shows, infants are also capable of perceiving objectness
(i.e., that something is a separate object) by 2 months of age.
Given this information, one may ask why infants cannot
consistently individuate objects until possibly 5 or even 10 to
12 months of age; we believe the answer may lie in an
information-processing perspective. The ability to individu-
ate objects requires attention to and integration of both feat-
ural information and objectness. Thus, object individuation
represents another example of a developmental progression
from processing the independent features of objects to inte-
grating or relating those features and processing the object as
a whole.
Core Knowledge About Objects
Some theorists believe that infants have sophisticated knowl-
edge about objects and object permanence much earlier than
others such as Piaget had assumed. In fact, in many of their
studies investigating infants’ understanding of objects, an
understanding of object permanence is a prerequisite for the
infants. For example, in one experiment on young infants’
understanding of object solidity—that is, that one solid
object cannot pass through another solid object—Spelke,
Breinlinger, Macomber, and Jacobson (1992, Experiment 3)
showed 2.5-month-olds’events in which a ball rolled from the
left end of the stage to behind an occluder. After about 2 s, the
occluder was raised to reveal the ball resting against a wall. In
the habituation phase, when the occluder was raised, the ball
was shown resting on the left side of a wall on the right end of
the stage. In the test phase, lifting the occluder revealed two
walls, one in the center of the stage and one on the right. In
one test event, the ball was found resting against the center
wall, which was considered a consistent outcome because the
wall would have obstructed the ball’s path. In the other test
event, the ball rested against the right wall, which was con-
sidered an inconsistent outcome because the ball would have
had to go through the center wall to reach the right wall.
Spelke et al. (1992) found that infants looked longer at the
inconsistent outcome and interpreted this result to mean that
infants as young as 2.5 months of age understand that a ball
cannot travel through a solid center wall to get to the right
wall. However, given the fact that the action of the ball took
place behind an occluder, to make the interpretation that
these very young infants understand object solidity, one also
has to assume that these infants understand the ball continues
to exist when behind an occluder—in other words, one must
assume that they are operating at least at Stage 4 of object
permanence.
Recent evidence with 8-month-old infants and animated
events, however, suggests a simpler explanation for this ap-
parent sophisticated cognitive ability of infants. It is possible
the infants were simply responding to changes in the per-
ceptual cues of the events, such as the duration of movement
or the presence of a wall to the left of the ball (Bradley &
Cohen, 1994). In another, similar set of experiments on in-
fants’ understanding of solidity, Cohen, Gilbert, and Brown
(1996) tested 4-, 8-, and 10-month-old infants. They found
that infants had to be at least 10 months of age before they
really understood that one solid object cannot pass through
another solid object.
If this conclusion is accurate, once again it ﬁts within the
information-processing framework. As we have mentioned,
there is evidence that infants ﬁrst learn about the independent
features of objects by about 4 months and then integrate these
features into a whole object by about 7 months. The next
developmental step would be for infants to understand the
relationship between objects—in this case, to understand that
one solid object cannot pass through another solid object. It
makes sense to us that the ability to understand object solid-
ity may not develop until approximately 10 months of age,
given that infants would ﬁrst have to be able to individuate
and segregate individual objects.

Infants’ Understanding of Objects
77
Another type of relationship between objects would be a
causal relationship, the simplest version of which would
occur in what has been called a direct launching event. In this
type of event, one moving object hits a second moving
object, causing the second object to move. Several studies
have now been reported on infants’perception or understand-
ing of causality in these types of events. Once again, as pre-
dicted by an information-processing view, when realistic
objects are being used, infants do not perceive the causality
until approximately 10 months of age. See Cohen, Amsel,
Redford, and Casasola (1998) for a review of this literature.
In addition to Spelke and her colleagues, Baillargeon has
also reported a large body of research suggesting that infants
are precocious (for reviews, see Baillargeon, 1995, 1999). In
one of her most well-known set of studies, she reported that
infants as young as 3.5 months old understand that an object
continues to exist when it is out of sight (Baillargeon, 1987;
Baillargeon et al., 1985). Her procedure was very different
from the traditional Piagetian object permanence task. In-
stead of relying on an infants’ ability to reach for a hidden
object, she (like Spelke) relied on infants’ looking times at
possible and impossible events.
The procedure involved familiarizing infants with a
screen that rotated 180° back and forth, from a position of
lying ﬂat on the front part of a stage to lying ﬂat on the back
part of the stage. Infants were then tested on a possible and an
impossible event, both of which involved the presence of an
object such as a yellow box placed in the path of the rotating
screen. In the possible event, infants saw the box resting on
the stage before the start of the ﬁrst rotation. The screen then
rotated back and forth, as it did in the familiarization event.
Each time it rotated back, it hid the object from the infant.
Furthermore, the screen stopped rotating at 112° when it
appeared to make contact with the object and then rotated
back toward the infant, once again reexposing the object. The
impossible event was similar to the possible event, except
that the screen rotated a full 180°, appearing to go magically
through the space that should have been occupied by the box.
(There was actually an experimenter behind the stage who
removed the box so that the screen could complete its rota-
tion. As the screen rotated toward the infant again, the exper-
imenter replaced the box on the stage in time for the infant to
see the box once again resting in the screen’s path.)
Baillargeon (1987) found that 4.5- and some 3.5-month-
old infants looked longer at the impossible event. She in-
terpreted this ﬁnding to mean that the infants “understood that
(a) the object behind the screen continued to exist after the
screen rotated upward and occluded it and (b) the screen could
not move through the space occupied by the object” (p. 662).
She based these interpretations on several assumptions:
(a) Infants normally have a novelty preference during the test
phase, (b) infants would perceive the impossible event as
familiar because the amount of rotation in this event is the
same as the amount of rotation in the familiarization event,
(c) infants would perceive the possible event as novel because
the amount of rotation is novel, and (d) if infants looked
longer at the impossible event, which should be perceived as
familiar, it must be for reasons other than novelty; it must be
because they understood object permanence and object solid-
ity and were observing a violation of both concepts.
However, as with Spelke et al. (1992), recent evidence
suggests a simpler, perceptual explanation of Baillargeon’s
so-called drawbridge results (Baillargeon, 1987; Baillargeon
et al., 1985). We have already mentioned the problem of a
familiarity effect in habituation-familiarization studies.Along
those lines, one alternative interpretation is that the infants in
Baillargeon’s studies were not fully habituated and thus did
not have a novelty preference during the test phase, as she as-
sumed. The results of these more recent studies, which varied
familiarization time or used more stringent habituation crite-
ria, support the interpretation that infants looked longer at the
impossible event because it was familiar, not because it was
impossible (Bogartz, Shinskey, & Schilling, 2000; Cashon &
Cohen, 2000; Schilling, 2000; see also Bogartz, Cashon,
Cohen, Schilling, & Shinskey, 2000).
The ﬁndings that 3.5- to 4.5-month-olds understand object
permanence (Baillargeon, 1987) and that infants as young as
2.5 months old understand object solidity (Spelke et al., 1992)
stand in stark contrast to Piaget’s reported ages and stages.
Thus, if one assumes that explanations like Baillargeon’s
(1987) and Spelke et al.’s (1992) are correct regarding in-
fants’ early understanding of object permanence, that expla-
nation has to be reconciled with the fact that under standard
object permanence techniques, infants do not show evidence
that they understand an object exists when completely hidden
until at least 8 or 9 months of age.
The prevailing explanation for this discrepancy is that
younger infants understand that hidden objects continue to
exist, but they fail to reach for those objects in a standard
Piagetian task because they have difﬁculty with means-end
actions (Baillargeon, 1987; Baillargeon et al., 1985; Bower,
1974; Diamond, 1991). In other words, infants may have
trouble coordinating two actions to obtain a goal—in this
case, removing the cloth and then reaching for the object.
Once again, however, recent evidence suggests that infants
do not have a means-end deﬁcit. A couple of recent studies,
for example, have shown that infants do not have the same
reaching problem when the object is behind a transparent
obstacle versus an opaque obstacle (Munakata et al., 1997;
Shinskey, Bogartz, & Poirer, 2000). Taken together, these

78
Infant Perception and Cognition
more recent results uphold previous ﬁndings that infants
younger than 8 or 9 months of age fail to search for hidden
objects not because they lack a means-end skill, but because
they have yet to understand that objects continue to exist
when they are hidden.
Face Perception
A considerable amount of research has been conducted on
infants’ perception of faces over the past 40 or so years
(see Maurer, 1985, for review). There is no question that faces
are important stimuli for infants. Infants see faces often and
use them to help identify others, interact with others, and learn
about the world. It may seem odd to some that we have
included a section of face perception within a section devoted
to objects. However, one issue that arises in the study of
infants’ perception of faces is whether infants view faces as
something special or whether they perceive faces in the same
way they perceive other complex objects (see Kleiner, 1993,
for discussion). Nativists often argue that faces are a unique
class of objects and that the way in which newborns process a
face is quite different from the way in which newborns process
nonface stimuli (e.g., Fantz, 1961; Morton & Johnson, 1991).
Empiricists, however, regard face perception quite differ-
ently. They argue that the way in which we process a face is
brought about through experience; at least in the begin-
ning, faces are no different from other objects (e.g., Banks &
Ginsburg, 1985). In this section, we review some of the
literature regarding the issue of infants’ preference for face-
like over nonfacelike stimuli, followed by a discussion of how
infants process faces and how that processing may change
with age.
Research on infants’ perception of faces has produced
conﬂicting results with respect to the question of whether
faces are special to infants. Whether newborns have an in-
nate preference to look at faces over other stimuli is still
unresolved (for discussions, see Easterbrooks, Kisilevsky,
Hains, & Muir, 1999; Maurer, 1985). Visual tracking studies
with newborns have shown that neonates will follow (with
their eyes) a facelike pattern farther than they will follow a
nonfacelike pattern (Goren, Sarty, & Wu, 1975; M. H.
Johnson, Dziurawiec, Ellis, & Morton, 1991; Maurer &
Young, 1983). However, preferential looking paradigm stud-
ies have provided a different picture. Fantz and Nevis (1967)
found that in general, newborns preferred to look at patterned
stimuli, such as a bull’s-eye and a schematic face, to plain
stimuli, and preferred a schematic face to a bull’s-eye;
however, they did not ﬁnd a preference for a schematic face
over a scrambled face. In another preferential looking study,
Maurer and Barrera (1981) found a preference for a facelike
pattern over scrambled faces at 2 months of age, but not at
1 month of age. M. H. Johnson et al. (1991, Experiment 2)
replicated Maurer and Barrera’s ﬁndings with 5- and 10-
week-old infants in a preferential looking paradigm and
Goren et al.’s (1975) with newborns in a visual tracking task.
It may seem odd that the evidence suggests that newborns
have a preference for faces but that this preference disappears
by 2 months of age. One possible explanation for the discrep-
ancy, posited by Morton and Johnson (1991) and Johnson
and Morton (1991), is that two different testing methods were
used that may tap into two different processes of face recog-
nition in place at different ages. The ﬁrst mechanism they
describe is CONSPEC, a subcortical device in the brain of the
newborn that contains the information about the structure of
a face. CONSPEC is believed to attract infants’ attention to
stimuli with the same structural information as faces, which
would account for newborns’ preferential tracking of faces.
The second mechanism, CONLERN, is thought to take over
by the second month. It is assumed to be a cortical structure
that is involved in learning about conspeciﬁcs of a face. This
mechanism is believed to help in the recognition of individ-
ual faces.
If Morton and Johnson are correct that infants have an
innate representation of the structure of faces, then we could
certainly conclude that faces are special. However, evidence
from other studies raised doubts about this conclusion. The
results of studies on infants’ visual scanning patterns of faces
and nonface stimuli have revealed similar scanning patterns
and developmental trends for faces and nonface stimuli alike,
which suggests that faces may not be special to infants
(see Salapatek, 1975, for discussion). Several researchers
have reported ﬁnding that infants tend to scan mostly the
external contour of a face in the ﬁrst month of life, whereas
in the second month, infants tend to scan the internal fea-
tures (Bergman, Haith, & Mann, 1971, as cited in Salapatek,
1975; Maurer & Salapatek, 1976; Salapatek, 1975). This de-
velopmental shift in the scanning pattern of faces has also
been found in infants’ scanning pattern of nonface stimuli
(Salapatek, 1975).
A number of investigators have examined the develop-
ment of infants’ face processing over the ﬁrst year of life and
whether that processing is similar to or different from the
development of object processing. Previous ﬁndings with
4- and 7-month-olds have shown that the younger infants
process the independent features of line-drawn animals, but
that the older infants are sensitive to the correlations among
features (Younger & Cohen, 1986). More recently, we have
been investigating whether this developmental shift from
parts to whole processing would also be true in 4- and 7-
month-old infants’ processing of faces as well. It has been

Infant Categorization
79
found that adults process upright faces as a whole but
inverted faces in a piecemeal manner. Therefore, we also
examined the effect of orientation. Half of the infants saw all
upright faces and the other half saw inverted faces.
Some of the results were expected; others were surpris-
ing. The 7-month-olds behaved as expected—that is, they
responded to upright faces as a whole but inverted faces in a
piecemeal fashion (Cohen & Cashon, 2001a). The 4-month-
olds, however, behaved in a totally unexpected manner. In
one sense, they appeared to be more advanced than the 7-
month-olds—or even adults. Not only did these younger
infants process a face as a whole when it was presented
upright, but they also processed it as a whole when it was pre-
sented in an inverted orientation (Cashon & Cohen, 2001)!
One possible explanation for this ﬁnding currently under
investigation is that an upright facial orientation may not be
as important to infants at 4 months of age. They undoubtedly
receive a considerable amount of exposure to faces in a vari-
ety of orientations, perhaps much more so than at 7 months
when they are stronger and tend to view the world from an
upright position.
INFANT CATEGORIZATION
Categorization is a fundamental cognitive ability. It allows us
to group together objects and events in the world and to
respond equivalently to items that may be perceptually quite
different. Infants as well as adults must be able to categorize
to some degree. Consider what life would be like for infants
if they could not: No two experiences would be identical,
learning would be nonexistent, and anticipating the regulari-
ties in the world would be impossible. As Madole and Oakes
(in press) have stated a bit more conservatively,
The ability to categorize may be especially important in infancy
when an enormous amount of new information is encountered
every day. By forming groups of similar objects, infants can
effectively reduce the amount of information they must process,
learn and remember . . . (p. 1)
But how can one determine whether infants—in particu-
lar, young, preverbal infants—are able to categorize? Fortu-
nately that problem was at least partially solved in the late
1970s by a modiﬁcation of the standard habituation para-
digm. Instead of habituating infants to repeated presentations
of a single item, infants could be habituated to a series of
perceptually distinct items that all were members of the same
category. If in a subsequent test, infants remained habituated
to a novel example from that habituated category, but not to a
novel noncategory item, they would be demonstrating the
ability to categorize. In other words, they would be respond-
ing equivalently to items that were perceptually distinct.
Cohen and Caputo (1978) were among the ﬁrst to use this
procedure. They tested three groups of 7-month-old infants.
One group was habituated to a single, repeated presentation
of a photograph of a toy stuffed animal. A second group was
habituated to pictures of different stuffed animals, and a third
group was habituated to pictures of unrelated objects. All
three groups were then tested with a picture of a new stuffed
animal and a multicolored arrangement of ﬂowers. The ﬁrst
group dishabituated to both test items. They had not formed a
category. The third group did not even habituate. But the
second group—the one that had seen different members of
the stuffed animal category—dishabituated to the ﬂowers but
remained habituated to the new stuffed animal. They demon-
strated that they were responding on the basis of the stuffed
animal category.
Early demonstrations, such as the previously described
stuffed animal example, have been followed by other
attempts to assess categorization in infants, using a variety
of techniques—including habituation and novelty prefer-
ence, sequential touching, operant conditioning, and even im-
itation—with infants over 1 year of age. In fact, an explosion
of research on categorization in infants has occurred in the
past two decades, and several reviews of this literature are -
available. (e.g., Cohen & Younger, 1983; Hayne, 1996;
Madole & Oakes, 1999; Quinn & Eimas 1996; Younger &
Cohen, 1985). In reviewing this literature, we shall consider
three signiﬁcant questions regarding categorization in infants:
At what age can infants categorize; what is the content of in-
fants’ categories; and ﬁnally, what information-processing
changes underlie infant categorization?
The Earliest Age at Which Infants Can Categorize
Considerable evidence is now available that infants can cate-
gorize during the second half of the ﬁrst year of life. In addi-
tion to the previously mentioned study with pictures of
stuffed animals, several studies report infant categorization of
faces (e.g., Cohen & Strauss, 1979; Strauss, 1979) of three-
dimensional as well as two-dimensional representations of
animals (Younger & Fearing, 1998) and even adult gender
categories (Leinbach & Fagot, 1993). Other studies have re-
ported that as early as 3 or 4 months of age, infants can distin-
guish cats from dogs (Quinn, Eimas, & Rosenkrantz, 1993)
and animals from furniture (Behl-Chadha, 1996). In addition,
if one assumes that perceptual constancies may actually be a
form of categorization, then there is evidence that newborns
can categorize.

80
Infant Perception and Cognition
Consider size constancy as an example. In a newborn size
constancy experiment, infants are habituated to the same
object at different distances and then are tested with that
same object at a new distance versus a different-sized object
at an old distance. Assuming that the infant can discriminate
among these distances, then the procedure amounts to a typi-
cal categorization experiment. The infants have been habitu-
ated to multiple examples of discriminably different stimuli
(in this case, the same object at different distances) and then
do not dishabituate to a new example (the object at a new
distance) but do dishabituate to a nonexample (a new object).
Of course, as adults we assume a big difference between an
instance of perceptual constancy, which we interpret as
different views of one item, and categorization, which we
interpret as a grouping of similar but different items. It is a
totally unexplored question whether infants make that same
distinction and if so at what age they do it.
The Content of Infants’ Categories
Although many investigators agree that even newborns may
be able to categorize, they also agree that the content of those
categories changes over age. It is one thing to group together
different views of the same object and quite another to group
together very different animals into the category of mammal
or tables and chairs into the category of furniture. An
important issue in this regard is the level at which infants ﬁrst
categorize objects. The traditional view has been that infants
and young children form basic-level categories (such as dog
or chair) and only later form higher-order superordinate cat-
egories (such as animal or furniture; Mervis & Rosch, 1981).
Recent evidence with infants (see Quinn & Eimas, 1996,
for a review) provides some support for this view. On the
other hand, Mandler (2000a) has argued just the opposite.
She has reported studies in which infants ﬁrst appear to re-
spond in terms of global categories (e.g., Mandler, Bauer, &
McDonough, 1991). Quinn and others have also reported that
infants respond more readily to global categories than to
basic categories (Quinn & Eimas, 1998; Quinn & Johnson,
2000; Younger & Fearing, 2000).
To complicate matters further, one might assume Mandler
would be pleased to ﬁnd additional evidence supporting a
priority of global categories over basic categories. How-
ever, she makes an additional distinction, also in dispute,
between perceptually and conceptually based representa-
tions (Mandler, 2000b). She believes the evidence cited
previously—which is based primarily upon habituation and
novelty preference techniques—taps perceptual categories,
whereas her studies—which use manipulation and imitation
techniques—tap something independent: conceptual cate-
gories. Quinn and Eimas (1996), on the other hand, argue that
there is a continuum between the two, with perceptual cate-
gories gradually developing into more abstract conceptual
categories.
Information-Processing Changes in Categorization
One of the difﬁculties in deciding between global versus
basic levels or perceptual versus conceptual processing is that
these distinctions are based upon the presumed content of the
categories from the experimenter’s point of view. Evidence
that infants distinguish between animals and vehicles, for ex-
ample, does not necessarily mean that the infants are operat-
ing at a global or superordinate level. In fact, Rakison and
Butterworth (1998) have shown that in the case of toy animals
versus toy vehicles, 14- and 18-month-old infants are actually
responding to legs versus wheels. Much younger infants can
distinguish cats from dogs, but the distinction is based pri-
marily on features located in the face region (Quinn & Eimas,
1996). Consistent with an information-processing viewpoint,
there appears to be a developmental progression from pro-
cessing these features independently to processing the corre-
lation among the features (Younger & Cohen, 1986). In fact,
by 10 months of age, attention to correlations among features
becomes a major factor both in the formation of categories
and in the differentiation of one category versus another
(Younger, 1985).
The number and variety of features to which infants attend
also increases with age (Madole & Oakes, in press). One
nonobvious type of feature that appears to become salient,
particularly in the second year of life, is an object’s function.
For example, Madole, Cohen, and Bradley (1994) found
that 14-month-olds but not 10-month-olds used functional
information (what an object does) in their formation of cate-
gories. Madole, Oakes, and Cohen (1993) also reported a
developmental shift from processing form and function infor-
mation independently at 14 months to processing the rela-
tionship between form and function at 18 months, once again
a developmental shift that is consistent with an information-
processing view of infant perception and cognition. The in-
creased salience of nonobvious features of objects during the
second year of life, such as their function or their animacy
(Rakison & Poulin-Dubois, 2001), may account at least in
part for what appears to be a shift from perceptual to concep-
tual categorization.
Current Trends in Infant Categorization Research
Research on infant categorization is continuing at a rapid
pace. Among the most exciting developments are the ties
developing to other related areas of developmental and
cognitive psychology. One of these ties is the relationship

Individual Differences
81
between infant categorization and infant language develop-
ment. Lalonde and Werker (1995), for example, have shown
the close tie between the use of correlated attributes in
categorization and the development of speech perception.
Waxman (1999) has also reported the importance of language
labels in infant categorization. Close ties are also develop-
ing between infant categorization and connectionist model-
ing. Several attempts recently have been reported to
simulate infant categorization (e.g., Mareschal & French,
2000; Quinn & Johnson, 2000). The most popular approach
has been the use of simple auto-encoder models, although
other more complex models are on the drawing board. These
early attempts to model infant behavior in a categorization
task have been remarkably successful. Future, more extensive
models are likely to lead to interesting predictions as well.
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES
The vast majority of research on infant perception and cogni-
tion has been concerned with discovering the abilities of
normal infants along with changes in those abilities over age
and development. Both theoretical predictions and experi-
mental designs generally have been based upon differences
between groups, with the goal of describing and explaining
how infants in one condition differ from those in another con-
dition, or how one age group differs from another age group.
The average performance of these groups is not even the em-
phasis. It is the optimal performance of infants at a certain
age, so that often the behavior of 25% or more of the infants
in a study is discarded for some reason. Perhaps it is because
the infants were too irritable, or they were too sleepy, or they
did not attend sufﬁciently, or they did not habituate. In such
studies, individual differences traditionally are treated as
error variance. They are considered primarily as an indication
of the degree of experimental control or the statistical power
of the experiment.
This overwhelming emphasis on group differences among
normal infants does not mean that investigators of infant
perception and cognition have been totally unconcerned
about the value of assessing individual differences in normal
populations or in discovering what differences exist between
normal and aberrant infants. In fact, a frequent argument
often made in signiﬁcance sections of grant proposals is
that one must ﬁrst collect data on normal infants before
one can determine the most important ways in which aberrant
infants deviate from normal ones. Fagan, a basic researcher
of infant attention and memory in the 1970s, has gone con-
siderably further than that. He has developed a clinical
screening device—based upon his measure of infant novelty
preferences—that he argues should be used to differentiate
those infants truly at risk for some long-term deﬁcit from
those who may seem to be at risk, but really are not (Fagan,
1984).
To be accurate, individual differences in infants’ function-
ing have been of interest to some investigators of infant
perception and cognition since the 1970s. That research has
come primarily from those focused on differences in infant
attention, memory, and information processing. As Rose and
Feldman (1990) noted, this research on individual differences
can be subdivided into two broad categories: differences
between normal versus risk groups and measures of predic-
tive validity, primarily in normal infants.
Full-Term Versus Preterm Infants
The term at risk usually refers to infants who are born with
some difﬁculty that may or may not lead to a long-term
deﬁcit. The most common group of at-risk infants are those
who are born prematurely with or without additional symp-
toms. Much of the early research on individual differences in
infant perception and cognition compared full-term versus
preterm infants. One of the ﬁrst such studies was reported by
Fagan, Fantz, and Miranda (1971). They tested normal and
preterm infants on a novelty preference task from approxi-
mately 6 to 20 weeks of age. Their infants were familiar-
ized to one complex black and white pattern and then tested
with that pattern versus a novel pattern. A clear difference be-
tween the groups was obtained with normal-term infants ﬁrst
showing a novelty preference at 10 weeks of age, but preterm
infants not showing a novelty preference until 16 weeks of
age. Of more importance from a developmental perspective
was that when the two groups were equated for conceptional
age (gestational age plus age since birth) the group difference
disappeared. Both groups ﬁrst showed a strong novelty pref-
erence at about 52 weeks of conceptional age. Thus, at least
on this one task, maturation seemed to play a more important
role than that of the total amount or type of external stimula-
tion the infants had received.
Others, however, have found differences between preterm
and full-term infants even when conceptional age is equated.
Sigman and Parmelee (1974), for example, found that at
59 weeks of conceptional age, full-term infants preferred
faces to nonfaces, whereas preterm infants did not. Unlike
the results in the Fagan et al. (1971) study, full-term but
not preterm infants also displayed a novelty preference. Of
course, there are many reasons that preterm infants may be
delayed compared to full-term infants. Preterm infants
usually have more serious medical complications, they are
more isolated from their parents, they stay in the hospital
longer, they tend to be disproportionately male and lower
class, the parents tend to have received less prenatal care and

82
Infant Perception and Cognition
poorer nutrition, and so on. Any number of these factors in
isolation or combination could be responsible for delays in
perceptual or cognitive development.
In another study (Cohen, 1981) three groups of infants
were compared at 60 weeks conceptional age. The severe
group had a number of complications, including prematurity
and hyaline membrane disease; several had seizures, one had
severe hypocalcemia, and one had congenital heart disease.
In general these infants had suffered considerable prenatal
or perinatal trauma but had survived relatively intact. They
all also came from lower-class family backgrounds. A sec-
ond group included only full-term, healthy infants, also from
lower social class backgrounds. Finally, a third group in-
cluded only full-term infants from middle-class backgrounds.
In this study, low and middle SES (socioeconomic status)
groups differed in number of two-parent families, years of
education, racial background, and place of residence. All
three groups were habituated to a picture of a face and then
tested with two different novel faces. The middle-class group
dishabituated to the novel faces (i.e., showed a novelty pref-
erence), but neither of the lower-class groups did so. It ap-
peared that factors associated with class status were more
signiﬁcant than those associated with prematurity or risk
status in this particular study.
We ﬁnd it interesting that Rose, Gottfried, and Bridger
(1978) reported a similar ﬁnding with one-year-old infants
and a cross-modal task. Middle-class full-term infants,
lower-class full-term infants, and preterm infants were
allowed oral and tactile familiarization with a three-
dimensional block. When shown that object and a novel
object, only the middle-class infants looked longer at the
novel object. In a subsequent study, however, using a visual
task with simple geometric shapes presented at 6 months of
age, lower-class full-term infants displayed a novelty prefer-
ence but lower-class preterms did not (Rose et al., 1978).
Thus the evidence is mixed with respect to preterm versus
full-term differences. Systematic differences between these
groups are frequently reported, but the bases for those differ-
ences are not always clear. In some cases, the difference
appears to be based upon conceptional age or social class. In
other cases, risk status seems to be implicated more directly.
The differences discussed so far between full-term and
preterm infants have been rather global; full-term infants
dishabituate or show a novelty preference, whereas preterm
infants do not. But at least one study has gone further to
investigate how the two groups differ in their information
processing. Caron, Caron, and Glass (1983) tested preterm
and full-term infants on a variety of problems that involved
processing the relations among the parts of complex facelike
drawings and other stimuli that they presented. They then
tested to see whether the infants had processed the stimuli on
a conﬁgural basis (e.g., the overall conﬁguration of a face)
and a component basis (e.g., the type of eyes and nose that
made up the faces). They found clear evidence that the full-
term infants were processing conﬁgurations, whereas the
preterm infants were processing components.
Infants With an Established Risk Condition
Adistinction is sometimes drawn between infants who are “at
risk” for later disability and infants who have an “established
risk condition,” such as Down’s syndrome, cerebral palsy, and
spina biﬁda (Tjossem, 1976). Several studies have established
that Down’s syndrome infants, for example, are delayed rela-
tive to normal infants in habituation and novelty preference
(e.g., Fantz, Fagan, & Miranda, 1975; Miranda, 1976).
One of the more interesting comparative studies was re-
ported by McDonough (1988). She tested normal 12-month-
old infants as well as 12-month-old infants with spina biﬁda,
cerebral palsy, or Down’s syndrome. The infants were given
a category task similar to the one reported earlier by Cohen
and Caputo (1978). Infants were habituated to a series of pic-
tures of stuffed animals and then tested with a novel stuffed
animal versus an item that was not a stuffed animal (a chair).
The normal infants and the infants with spina biﬁda or cere-
bral palsy habituated, but the infants with Down’s syndrome
did not. Apparently the presentation of multiple distinct ob-
jects was too difﬁcult for them to process. However, in the
test, only the normal infants and the infants with spina biﬁda
showed evidence of categorization by looking longer at the
noncategory item than at the new category member; even
though the infants with cerebral palsy habituated, they
showed no evidence of forming the category.
These and other studies that have compared normal with
at-risk infants provide compelling evidence that the at-risk
infants perform more poorly on certain tests of habituation
and novelty preference. Additional evidence on these differ-
ences is available in edited volumes by Friedman and Sigman
(1981) and Vietze and Vaughan (1988). An important ques-
tion is what these differences mean. Most would assume that
habituation, and novelty preference tests are assessing certain
aspects of information processing, such as attention, memory,
or perceptual organization. But even if some at-risk infants
perform more poorly during the ﬁrst year of life, does this
performance predict any long-term deﬁciency in one or more
of these processes? Even if some long-term prediction is
possible, does that prediction only apply to group differences,
such as those between normal and at-risk or established-risk
infants? Or can one also use habituation and novelty prefer-
ence measures to make long-term predictions of individual
differences even among normal infants? This question is
addressed in the next section.

Individual Differences
83
Predictive Validity of Habituation and Novelty
Preference Measures
An examination of the predictive value of traditional
standardized tests of infant development, such as the Bayley
or the Gesell scales, has led to the unfortunate but deﬁnite
conclusion that these tests have dubious long-term predictive
validity for normal populations (e.g., McCall, 1979; McCall,
Hogarty, & Hurlburt, 1972), as well as for populations that
include infants at risk (Kopp & McCall, 1982). This lack of
predictive validity of traditional tests was at ﬁrst considered
not to be a failure in the tests themselves but simply a reﬂec-
tion of the discontinuity and qualitative nature of change over
age in intellectual development from infancy to childhood
(McCall, 1981; McCall, Appelbaum, & Hogarty, 1973).
That view became somewhat suspect in the 1980s as
studies appeared demonstrating sizable correlations between
infant habituation or novelty preference usually assessed
sometime between 3 and 8 months of age and later IQ—
usually assessed between 3 and 8 years of age (e.g., Caron
et al., 1983; Fagan & McGrath, 1981; Rose & Wallace, 1985).
Both Bornstein and Sigman (1986) and McCall and Carriger
(1993) provide excellent reviews and analyses of this litera-
ture. McCall and Carriger, for example, report that across
these studies the median correlation between information-
processing measures assessed via habituation or novelty
preference tasks and childhood intelligence is approximately
.47, whereas it is approximately .09 between standardized
infant tests and later intelligence. Furthermore these high
correlations between information processing and later IQ tend
to occur even in small samples and with normal populations.
Although many speciﬁc measures of infant information
processing have been tried, three classes of them appear to be
the best predictors of later intelligence (Slater, 1995a). One is
preference for visual novelty. Following brief exposure to a
visual pattern (usually 5–20 s), the familiar and a novel pat-
tern are presented side by side and the percent responding to
the novel pattern is recorded. This percent novelty tends to be
positively correlated with later IQ. A second is some measure
of habituation rate. Various measures of habituation, such as
the total looking time until some habituation criterion is
reached or the total number of habituation trials prior to
criterion are sometimes found to be correlated with later
intelligence. In general, those who habituate more rapidly
tend to have higher IQs. The third is some measure of ﬁxation
duration independent of habituation. The measure may be
the duration of a look at the outset of the habituation trials, or
the duration of the longest look during habituation, or the
average duration of a look during habituation. In general, the
shorter the look by the infant, the higher the IQ found later in
life. Some have even found systematic individual differences
between short and long lookers. For example, it has been
found that younger infants tend to look longer at most pictures
that they can see clearly than do older infants (Colombo &
Mitchell, 1990).
Although most investigators agree that these measures
tap some aspect of information processing, it is less clear what
the underlying mechanism or mechanisms may be. Most
explanations of differences in infants’ performances have
something to do with differences in encoding or processing
speed or the ability to remember old information and compare
it to new information. Perhaps the most popular explanation is
based upon processing speed. Why speed of processing visual
pattern information in infancy should be related to later IQ in
childhood is still an open question, although Rose and Feld-
man (1995) have recently reported that these infancy measures
correlate with perceptual speed at 11 years of age, even when
IQ was controlled.
Whatever the mechanism, correlations in the .4, .5, or
even .6 range between measures of infant attention at around
6 months and later measures of IQ at around 6 years are quite
impressive, particularly in light of the failure of standardized
IQ tests to predict. But the results are not without contro-
versy; not everyone obtains such high correlations. Both
Lecuyer (1989) and Slater (1995a), for example, point out
that the so-called 0.05 syndrome makes it difﬁcult to publish
a paper if the correlations are not statistically signiﬁcant.
Many studies have probably not found a relationship between
infant attention and IQ, but they are not counted in sum-
maries or meta-analyses because no one knows about them.
In their meta-analysis of this literature, McCall and Carriger
(1993) evaluate three other criticisms that have been raised
about the importance of these correlations. First, habitua-
tion and novelty preference measures may not reﬂect any in-
teresting cognitive process. Second, the infancy measures
have only moderate test-retest reliabilities. Third, the small
sample sizes used may lead to a prediction artifact—that is,
the inclusion of a few extreme scores, perhaps by infants who
have known disabilities, can inﬂate correlations when the
sample N is small. McCall and Carriger conclude that
although these criticisms have some merit, in the end they do
not negate the fact that even with normal populations, the
ability to make long-term predictions is impressive.
A Speciﬁc Information-Processing Explanation
Before leaving this section, it might be worthwhile to try to
understand these individual differences by referring to the
speciﬁc set of information-processing propositions men-
tioned previously in this chapter (Cohen & Cashon, 2001b).
First, it seems a bit odd that previous explanations have
assumed that somehow habituation and novelty preferences

84
Infant Perception and Cognition
are tapping infant information processing, but they do not
emphasize how infants are actually processing the informa-
tion or how that processing changes with age. It is not a
coincidence that the best predictions seem to result when
infants are between about 4 and 7 months of age and they are
shown complex, abstract patterns or pictures of faces. That is
just the age period when infants should be making a transi-
tion from processing those pictures in a piecemeal fashion to
processing them holistically. If one makes the additional
assumption that processing and remembering something
holistically takes less time and fewer resources than process-
ing it one piece at a time, then the following set of results—
all of which have been reported—would be predicted.
•
Younger infants should look longer at complex patterns
than do older infants because the younger ones, who are
processing the individual features, in effect have more to
process.
•
At 4 or 5 months of age, infants with short looking times
should be more advanced than are infants with long look-
ing times because the short lookers have made the transi-
tion to holistic processing, whereas the long lookers are
still processing the stimuli piece by piece.
•
Optimal predictions should occur in a novelty preference
procedure when familiarization times are short. Obviously
if familiarization times are long enough, even piecemeal
processors will have sufﬁcient time to process and re-
member all or most of the pieces.
•
Both measures of infant ﬁxation duration in habituation
tasks and measures of percent novelty in novelty prefer-
ence tasks should work equally well; both are essentially
testing the same thing in different ways. Short ﬁxation du-
rations imply holistic processing. Therefore, short lookers
should be more advanced than long lookers. Novelty pref-
erence tasks work when familiarization times are short—
in other words, at the end of familiarization the holistic
processor will have had time to process and remember the
pattern presented, but for the piecemeal processor much
about the pattern will still be novel. Therefore, when
tested with the familiar versus a novel pattern, the holistic
processor should show a greater novelty preference.
Thus, according to this version of the information-processing
approach, the correlations with later intelligence occur
because the infant tasks are tapping into an important devel-
opmental transition in information processing at exactly the
right age and with exactly the right stimuli to assess that
transition. Those who develop more rapidly as infants will
tend to continue that rapid development and become the
children with higher IQs. Whether the developmental
progression that is being assessed in infancy is speciﬁc to
infant perception and cognition or whether it is much more
general really has yet to be determined.
Two ﬁnal points can be derived from this approach. First,
it is clear that the piecemeal to holistic transition is hierarchi-
cal. It occurs at several different levels at different ages.
Therefore, one would predict that if simpler stimuli were
presented with younger ages or more complex stimuli such
as categories or events involving multiple objects were pre-
sented at older ages, one might achieve the same level of
prediction that one now ﬁnds with complex two-dimensional
patterns in the 4- to 7-month age period. At the very least this
viewpoint predicts that the most appropriate stimuli for the
infants to process will change systematically with age.
The other point is that the information-processing tasks
given to infants might be tapping processing or perceptual
speed as some assume, but only in an indirect way. More
advanced infants may appear to process the items more
rapidly because they effectively have fewer items to process
in the same stimulus—not because they are processing each
item more rapidly. After the manner in which infants process
information at a particular age is understood, one can design
experiments that equate the effective amount of information at
different ages to see whether older and more advanced infants
really do process and remember information more rapidly.
CONCLUDING COMMENTS
As we were contemplating topics to include in this chapter, it
became obvious that it would be impossible to review all or
even most of the research on infant perception and cognition
in the space allotted. Instead we decided to concentrate on
several areas that not only have been very productive over the
years, but also tend to relate to each other in one way or
another. The purpose was to provide some overall organiza-
tion to the ﬁeld. Admittedly, that organization is based upon
an information-processing perspective, the perspective we
believe most adequately encompasses most of the ﬁndings,
both basic and applied. However, we also included other the-
oretical perspectives and attempted to show how these per-
spectives are similar or different from one another. It should
be obvious that we relied almost exclusively on issues and
evidence from infant visual perception and cognition and on
techniques designed to address those issues. One could argue
that that is where most of the action is these days.
We fully recognize, however—and want the reader to
appreciate—that many other topics are equally important and
exciting. These topics include but are not limited to auditory

References
85
and speech perception, the relationship between perception
and action, cross-modal perception, the perception of num-
ber, the understanding of causality and animacy, the expecta-
tion and anticipation of future events, and an understanding
of the organization of complex sequences of events. We
believe many of the issues addressed in this chapter apply to
these topics as well. For example, some of these areas are
clearly in the domain of perception and others are much more
in cognition; still others fall somewhere in between. Again,
the nature versus nurture debate rears its head with respect to
these topics as well as to the ones described in more detail
in the chapter. Furthermore, traditional theoretical perspec-
tives have been applied to these topics and to the ones cov-
ered in this chapter. Like those topics covered in this chapter,
we believe more recent theoretical approaches such as con-
nectionist modeling, dynamical systems, and information
processing may lead to advances in these topics as well.
One thing is certain. The area of infant perception and
cognition is alive and well and making continued progress.
Spectacular results and unwarranted assumptions are being
replaced by solid evidence. The ﬁeld is expanding. Topics
investigated under the rubric of infant perception and cog-
nitionarebecomingmoreandmoreadvanced,andthesubjects
of previous studies are getting older and older. At the same
time, investigators of cognitive processes in children are going
younger and younger to ﬁnd the origins of those processes. In
some cases—such as in theory of mind research—the two
ﬁelds have met, and fruitful collaborations are taking place.
Collaborations are also beginning between investigators in in-
fant perception and cognition and those in other apparently
quite disparate areas such as sensory psychophysics, cognitive
neuroscience, language acquisition, and even artiﬁcial intelli-
gence and robotics. It is an exciting and dynamic time. Over
the past 25 years we have seen exponential growth in research
on infant perception and cognition. Given current attempts to
apply approaches broad enough to relate basic and applied re-
search—and excursions into collaborations that will add new
dimensions to our understanding—continued rapid progress
in research on infant perception and cognition is not only
likely, it is inevitable.
REFERENCES
Adams, R. J., Courage, M. L., & Mercer, M. E. (1994). Systematic
measurement of human neonatal color vision. Vision Research,
34, 1691–1701.
Adolph, K. E., Eppler, M. A., & Gibson, E. J. (1993a). Crawling
versus walking infants’perception of affordances for locomotion
over sloping surfaces. Child Development, 64, 1158–1174.
Adolph, K. E., Eppler, M. A., & Gibson, E. J. (1993b). Development
of perception of affordances. In C. Rovee-Collier & L. P. Lipsitt
(Eds.), Advances in infancy research (Vol. 8, pp. 51–98).
Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Baillargeon, R. (1987). Object permanence in 3.5- and 4.5-month-
old infants. Developmental Psychology, 23, 655–664.
Baillargeon, R. (1995). A model of physical reasoning in infancy. In
C. Rovee-Collier & L. P. Lipsitt (Eds.), Advances in infancy
research (Vol. 9, pp. 305–371). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Baillargeon, R. (1999). Young infants’ expectations about hidden
objects: A reply to three challenges. Developmental Science, 2,
115–132.
Baillargeon, R., Spelke, E. S., & Wasserman, S. (1985). Object
permanence in ﬁve-month-old infants. Cognition, 20, 191–208.
Banks, M. S., & Ginsburg, A. P. (1985). Early visual preferences:
A review and new theoretical treatment. In H. W. Resse (Ed.),
Advances in child development and behavior (Vol. 19). New
York: Academic Press.
Banks, M. S., & Salapatek, P. (1983). Infant visual perception.
In P. H. Mussen (Ed.), Handbook of child psychology (pp. 435–
571). New York: Wiley.
Behl-Chadha, G. (1996). Basic-level and superordinate-like
categorical representations early in infancy. Cognition, 60, 343–
364.
Berlyne, D. E. (1958). The inﬂuence of the albedo and complexity
of stimuli on visual ﬁxation in the human infant. British Journal
of Psychology, 49, 315–318.
Blanton, M. G. (1917). The behavior of the human infant during the
ﬁrst thirty days of life. Psychological Review, 24, 456–483.
Bogartz, R. S., Cashon, C. H., Cohen, L. B., Schilling, T. H., &
Shinskey, J. L. (2000). Reply to Baillargeon, Aslin, and
Munakata. Infancy, 1, 479–490.
Bogartz, R. S., Shinskey, J. L., & Schilling, T. H. (2000). Object
permanence in 5.5-month-old infants. Infancy, 1, 403–428.
Bornstein, M. H., Kessen, W., & Weiskopf, S. (1976). Color vision
and hue categorization in young infants. Journal of Experi-
mental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 2,
115–129.
Bornstein, M. H., & Sigman, M. D. (1986). Continuity in mental
development from infancy. Child Development, 57, 251–274.
Bower, T. G. R. (1966a). Slant perception and shape constancy in
infants. Science, 151, 832–834.
Bower, T. G. R. (1966b). The visual world of infants. Scientiﬁc
American, 215, 80–92.
Bower, T. G. R. (1974). Development in infancy. San Francisco:
W. H. Freeman.
Bradley, K. L., & Cohen, L. B. (1994, May). The understanding of
solidity in 8-month-old infants. Poster presented at the Midwest-
ern Psychological Association meeting, Chicago.
Bridger, W. H. (1961). Sensory habituation and discrimination in the
human neonate. American Journal of Psychiatry, 117, 991–996.

86
Infant Perception and Cognition
Bronshtein, A. I., Antonova, T. G., Kamenetskaya, A. G., Luppova,
N. N., & Sytova, V. H. (1958). On the development of the
functions of analyzers in infants and some animals at the early
stage of ontogenesis. In Problems of evolution of physiological
functions (PTS Report No. 60-61066). Moscow: Academy of
Science.
Caron, A. J., Caron, R. F., & Carlson, V. R. (1979). Infant perception
of the invariant shape of objects in slant. Child Development, 50,
716–721.
Caron, A. J., Caron, R. F., & Glass, P. (1983). Responsiveness to
relational information as a measure of cognitive functioning in
non-suspect infants. In T. Field & A. Sostek (Eds.), Infants born
at risk: Physiological, perceptual, and cognitive processes
(pp. 181–209). New York: Grune and Stratton.
Cashon, C. H., & Cohen, L. B. (2000). Eight-month-old infants’
perception of possible and impossible events. Infancy, 1, 429–
446.
Cashon, C. H., & Cohen, L. B. (2001, April). Developmental
changes in infants’ processing of faces. Symposium paper pre-
sented at the Society for Research in Child Development
Meeting, Minneapolis.
Chaput, H. H., & Cohen, L. B. (2001). A model of infant causal
perception and its development. J. D. Moore & K. Stenning
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 23rd Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 182–187). Mahwah: Erlbaum.
Cohen, L. B. (1981). Examination of habituation as a measure of
aberrant infant development. In S. Friedman & S. Sigman (Eds.),
Preterm birth and psychological development (pp. 241–258).
New York: Academic Press.
Cohen, L. B. (1988). An information processing view of infant cog-
nitive development. In L. Weiscrantz (Ed.), Thought without
language (pp. 211–228). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Cohen, L. B. (1991). Infant attention: An information processing
approach. In M. J. Weiss & P. R. Zalazo (Eds.), Newborn
attention: Biological constraints and the inﬂuence of experience
(pp. 1–21). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Cohen, L. B. (1998). An information-processing approach to infant
perception and cognition. In F. Simion & G. Butterworth (Eds.),
The development of sensory, motor, and cognitive capacities in
early infancy (pp. 277–300). Hove, UK: Psychology Press.
Cohen, L. B., Amsel, G., Redford, M. A., & Casasola, M. (1998).
The development of infant causal perception. In A. Slater (Ed.),
Perceptual development: Visual, auditory, and speech perception
in infancy (pp. 167–209). East Sussex, UK: Psychology Press.
Cohen, L. B., & Caputo, N. F. (1978, May). Instructing infants to
respond to perceptual categories. Presented at the Midwestern
Psychological Association Meeting, Chicago.
Cohen, L. B., & Cashon, C. H. (2001a). Do 7-month-old infants
process independent features or facial conﬁgurations? Infant and
Child Development, 10, 83–92.
Cohen, L. B., & Cashon, C. H. (2001b). Infant object segregation
implies information integration. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 78, 75–83.
Cohen, L. B., Gilbert, K. M., & Brown, P. S. (1996, April). Infants’
understanding of solidity: Replicating a failure to replicate.
Poster session presented at the International Conference on
Infant Studies, Providence, RI.
Cohen, L. B., & Strauss, M. S. (1979). Concept acquisition in the
human. Child Development, 50, 419–424.
Cohen, L. B., & Younger, B. A. (1983). Perceptual categorization in
the infant. In E. Scholnick (Ed.), New trends in conceptual
representation (pp. 197–220). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Cohen, L. B., & Younger, B. A. (1984). Infant perception of angular
relations. Infant Behavior and Development, 7, 37–47.
Colombo, J., & Mitchell, D. W. (1990). Individual differences in
early visual attention: Fixation time and information processing.
In J. Colombo & J. Fagen (Eds.), Individual differences in
infancy (pp. 193–227). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Day, R. H., & McKenzie, B. E. (1981). Infant perception of the
invariant size of approaching and receding objects. Developmen-
tal Psychology, 17, 181–309.
Diamond, A. (1991). Neuropsychological insights into the meaning
of object concept development. In S. Carey & R. Gelman (Eds.),
The epigenesis of mind: Essays of biology and cognition
(pp. 67–110). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Easterbrooks, M. A., Kisilevsky, B. S., Hains, S. M. J., & Muir,
D. W. (1999). Faceness or complexity: Evidence from newborn
visual tracking of facelike stimuli. Infant Behavior and Develop-
ment, 22, 17–35.
Eimas, P. D., Siqueland, E. R., Jusczyk, P. W., & Vigorito, J. (1971).
Speech perception in infants. Science, 171, 303–306.
Elman, J., Bates, E., Karmiloff-Smith, A., Johnson, M., Parisi, D., &
Plunkett, K. (1996). Rethinking Innateness: A connectionist
perspective on development. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Engen, T., Lipsitt, L. P., Lewis, P., & Kaye, H. (1963). Olfactory
responses and adaptation in the human neonate. Journal of
Comparative and Physiological Psychology, 56, 73–77.
Fagan, J. F. (1984). The relationship of novelty preferences during
infancy to later intelligence and recognition memory. Intelli-
gence, 8, 339–346.
Fagan, J. F, Fantz, R. L., & Miranda, S. B. (1971, April). Infants’
attention to normal stimuli as a function of postnatal and con-
ceptional age. Paper presented at a meeting of the Society for
Research in Child Development, Minneapolis, MN.
Fagan, J. F., & McGrath S. K. (1981). Infant recognition memory
and later intelligence. Intelligence, 5, 121–130.
Fantz, R. L. (1958). Pattern vision in young infants. Psychological
Record, 8, 43–47.
Fantz, R. L. (1961). The origin of form perception. Scientiﬁc
American, 204(5), 66–72.
Fantz, R. L. (1963). Pattern vision in newborn infants. Science, 140,
296–297.
Fantz, R. L. (1964). Visual experience in infants: Decreased
attention to familiar patterns relative to novel ones. Science, 146,
668–670.

References
87
Fantz, R. L., Fagan, J. F., & Miranda, S. B. (1975). Early visual
selectivity as a function of pattern variables, previous exposure,
age from birth and conception, and expected cognitive deﬁcit.
In L. B. Cohen & P. Salapatek (Eds.), Infant perception: From
sensation to cognition: Vol. 1. Basic visual processes (pp. 249–
346). New York: Academic Press.
Fantz, R. L., & Nevis, S. (1967). Perceptual preferences and
perceptual-cognitive development in early infancy. Merrill-
Palmer Quarterly, 13, 77–108.
Fantz, R. L., Ordy, J. M., & Udelf, M. S. (1962). Maturation of
pattern vision in infants during the ﬁrst six months. Journal of
Comparative and Physiological Psychology, 55, 907–917.
Flavell, J. H. (1963). The developmental psychology of Jean Piaget.
New York: Van Nostrand.
Friedman, S. L., & Sigman, M. (Eds.). (1981). Preterm birth and
psychological development. New York: Academic Press.
Gibson, E. J. (1995). Exploratory behavior in the development of
perceiving, acting, and the acquiring of knowledge. In L. P.
Lipsitt & C. Rovee-Collier (Eds.), Advances in infancy (Vol. 9,
pp. xxi–lxi). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Gibson, E. J., & Walk, R. D. (1960). The “visual cliff.” Scientiﬁc
American, 202, 64–71.
Goren, C. C., Sarty, M., & Wu, P. Y. K. (1975). Visual following and
pattern discrimination of face-like stimuli by newborn infants.
Pediatrics, 56, 544–549.
Granrud, C. E. (1987). Size constancy in newborn human in-
fants. Investigative Ophthalmology and Visual Science, 28(5,
Supplement).
Haith, M. M. (1998). Who put the cog in infant cognition? Is rich
interpretation too costly? Infant Behavior and Development, 21,
167–179.
Haith, M. M., & Benson, J. B. (1998). Infant cognition. In W.
Damon (Series Ed.), D. Kuhn, & R. S. Siegler (Vol. Eds.),
Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 2. Cognition, perception and
language (5th ed., pp. 199–254). New York: Wiley.
Hayne, H. (1996). Categorization in infancy. In C. Rovee-Collier &
L. P. Lipsitt (Eds.), Advances in infancy (Vol. 10, pp. 79–120).
Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Hunt, J. M. (1961). Intelligence and experience. New York: Ronald.
Hunter, M. A., & Ames, E. W. (1988). A multifactor model of infant
preferences for novel and familiar stimuli. In C. Rovee-Collier &
L. P. Lipsitt (Eds.), Advances in infancy research (Vol. 5,
pp. 69–95). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Irwin, O. C. (1941). Effect of strong light on the body activity
of newborns. Journal of Comparative and Physiological
Psychology, 32, 233–236.
Johnson, M. H. (1996). From cortex to cognition: Cognitive
neuroscience studies of infant attention and perception. In
C. Rovee-Collier & L. P. Lipsitt (Eds.), Advances in infancy
research (Vol. 10, pp. 161–217). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Johnson, M. H. (1997). Developmental cognitive neuroscience.
Oxford, UK: Blackwell.
Johnson, M. H., Dziurawiec, S., Ellis, H. D., & Morton, J. (1991).
Newborns’ preferential tracking of face-like stimuli and its
subsequent decline. Cognition, 40, 1–19.
Johnson, M. H., & Morton, J. (1991). Biology and cognitive devel-
opment: The case of face recognition. Oxford, UK: Blackwell.
Johnson, S. P., & Nañez, J. E. (1995). Young infants’ perception of
object unity in two-dimensional displays. Infant Behavior and
Development, 18, 133–143.
Jusczyk, P. W., & Aslin, R. N. (1995). Infants’ detection of sound
patterns of words in ﬂuent speech. Cognitive Psychology, 29,
1–23.
Kellman, P. J., & Arterberry, M. E. (1998). The cradle of knowledge:
Development of perception in infancy. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Kellman, P. J., & Spelke, E. S. (1983). Perception of partly occluded
objects in infancy. Cognitive Psychology, 15, 483–524.
Kessen, W. (1965). The child. New York: Wiley.
Kleiner, K. A. (1993). Speciﬁc vs. non-speciﬁc face recognition
device. In B. de Boysson-Bardies, S. de Schonen, P. Jusczyk,
P. McNeilage, & J. Morton (Eds.), Developmental neurocogni-
tion: Speech and face processing in the ﬁrst year of life
(pp. 103–108). Boston: Kluwer.
Kopp, C. B., & McCall, R. B. (1982). Predicting later mental
performance for normal, at risk, and handicapped infants. In
P. B. Baltes & O. G. Brim, Jr. (Eds.), Life-span development and
behavior (Vol. 4, pp. 33–61). New York: Academic Press.
Lalonde, C. E., & Werker, J. F. (1995). Cognitive inﬂuences on
cross-language speech perception in infancy. Infant Behavior
and Development, 18, 459–475.
Lecuyer, R. (1989). Habituation and attention, novelty and cogni-
tion:Where is the continuity? Human Development, 32, 148–157.
Leinbach, M. D., & Fagot, B. I. (1993). Categorical habituation to
male and female faces: Gender schematic processing in infancy.
Infant Behavior and Development, 16, 317–332.
Madole, K. L., Cohen, L. B., & Bradley, K. (1994, June). Ten-month-
old infants categorize from but not function. Presented at the
Ninth International Conference on Infant Studies, Paris, France.
Madole, K. L., & Oakes, L. M. (1999). Making sense of infant
categorization: Stable processes and changing representations.
Developmental Review, 19, 263–296.
Madole, K. L., & Oakes, L. M. (in press). Principles of develop-
mental change in infants’ category formation. In D. Rakison &
L. Oakes (Eds.), Categories and concepts in early development.
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Madole, K. L., Oakes, L. M., & Cohen, L. B. (1993). Developmen-
tal changes in infants’ attention to function and form-function
correlations. Cognitive Development, 8, 189–209.
Mandler, J. M. (1992). How to build a baby II: Conceptual primi-
tives. Psychological Review, 99, 587–604.
Mandler, J. M. (2000a). What-global-before-basic trend. Commen-
tary on perceptually based approaches to early categorization.
Infancy, 1, 99–110.

88
Infant Perception and Cognition
Mandler, J. M. (2000b). Perceptual and conceptual processes in
infancy. Journal of Cognition and Development, 1, 3–36.
Mandler, J. M., Bauer, P. J., & McDonough, L. (1991). Separating
the sheep from the goats: Differentiating global categories.
Cognitive Psychology, 23, 263–298.
Marcus, G. (1999a). Do infants learn grammar with algebra or
statistics? Science, 284, 433.
Marcus, G. (1999b). Response: Rule learning by seven-month-old
infants and neural networks. Science, 284, 875.
Mareschal, D., & French, R. (2000). Mechanisms of categorization
in infancy. Infancy, 1, 59–76.
Maurer, D. (1985). Infants’ perception of facedess. In T. M. Field &
N. A. Fox (Eds.), Social perception in infants (pp. 73–100).
Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Maurer, D., & Barrera, M. (1981). Infants’ perception of natural and
distorted arrangements of a schematic face. Child Development,
52, 196–202.
Maurer, D., & Salapatek, P. (1976). Developmental changes in the
scanning of faces by young infants. Child Development, 47,
523–527.
Maurer, D., & Young, R. (1983). Newborns’ following of natural
and distorted arrangements of facial features. Infant Behavior
and Development, 6, 127–131.
McCall, R. B. (1979). Qualitative transitions in behavioral develop-
ment in the ﬁrst two years of life. In M. Bornstein & W. Kessen
(Eds.), Psychological development from infancy (pp. 183–224).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
McCall, R. B. (1981). Toward an epigenetic conception of mental
development in the ﬁrst year of life. In M. Lewis (Ed.), Origins
of intelligence (pp. 97–122). New York: Plenum Press.
McCall, R. B., Appelbaum, M., & Hogarty, P. (1973). Developmen-
tal changes in mental performance. Monographs of the Society of
Research in Child Development, 38(3, Serial No. 150).
McCall, R. B., & Carriger, M. (1993). A meta-analysis of infant
habituation and recognition memory performance as predictors
of later IQ. Child Development, 64, 57–79.
McCall, R. B., Hogarty, P., & Hurlburt, N. (1972). Transitions in
infant sensorimotor development and the prediction of child-
hood IQ. American Psychologist, 27, 728–748.
McDonough, S. C. (1988). Early information processing in aberrant
infants. In P. M. Vietze & H. G. Vaughan, Jr. (Eds.), Early
identiﬁcation of infants with developmental disabilities (pp. 318–
329). Philadelphia: Grune and Stratton.
McDougall, W. (1908). An investigation of the colour sense of two
infants. British Journal of Psychology, 2, 338–352.
Mervis, C. B., & Rosch, E. (1981). Categorization of natural
objects. Annual Review of Psychology, 32, 89–115.
Miranda, S. B. (1976). Visual attention in defective and high-risk
infants. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 22, 201–227.
Morton, J., & Johnson, M. H. (1991). CONSPEC and CONLERN:
A two-process theory of infant face recognition. Psychological
Review, 98, 164–181.
Munakata, Y., McClelland, J. L., Johnson, M. H., & Siegler, R. S.
(1997). Rethinking infant knowledge: Toward an adaptive
process account of successes and failures in object permanence
tasks. Psychological Review, 104, 686–713.
Needham, A. (2001). Object recognition and object segregation in
4.5-month-old infants. Journal of Experimental Child Psychol-
ogy, 78, 3–24.
Peeples, D. R., & Teller, D. Y. (1975). Color vision and brightness
discrimination in human infants. Science, 189, 1102–1103.
Piaget, J. (1927). The child’s conception of physical causality
(M. Gabain, Trans.). Atlantic Highland, NJ: Humanities Press.
Piaget, J. (1952). The origins of intelligence in children (M. Cook,
Trans.). New York: Basic Books. (Original work published 1936)
Piaget, J. (1954). The construction of reality in the child (M. Cook,
Trans.). New York: Basic Books. (Original work published 1937)
Piaget, J. & Inhelder, B. (1969). The psychology of the child. New
York: Basic Books.
Quinn, P. C., & Eimas, P. D. (1996). Perceptual organization and
categorization in young infants. In C. Rovee-Collier & L. P.
Lipsitt (Eds.), Advances in infancy research (Vol. 10, pp. 1–36).
Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Quinn, P. C., & Eimas, P. D. (1998). Evidence for a global categori-
cal representation for humans by young infants. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 69, 151–174.
Quinn, P. C., & Eimas, P. D. (2000). The emergence of category
representations during infancy: Are separate perceptual and
conceptual processes required? Journal of Cognition and Devel-
opment, 1, 55-61.
Quinn, P. C., Eimas, P. D., & Rosenkrantz, S. L. (1993). Evidence
for representations of perceptually similar natural categories by
3-month-old and 4-month-old infants. Perception, 22, 463–475.
Quinn, P. C., & Johnson, M. H. (2000). Global before basic object
categorization. Infancy, 1, 31–46.
Rakison, D. H., & Butterworth, G. E. (1998). Infants’ use of object
parts in early categorization. Developmental Psychology, 34,
49–62.
Rakison, D. H., & Poulin-Dubois, D. (2001). Developmental origin
of the animate-inanimate distinction. Psychological Bulletin,
127, 209–228.
Rose, S. A., & Feldman, J. F. (1990). Infant cognition: Individual
differences and developmental continuities. In J. Colombo & J. F.
Fagan (Eds.), Individual differences in infancy (pp. 247–270).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Rose, S. A., & Feldman, J. F. (1995). Prediction of IQ and speciﬁc
cognitive abilities at 11 years from infancy measures. Develop-
mental Psychology, 31, 685–696.
Rose, S. A., Gottfried, A. W., & Bridger W. H. (1978). Cross-model
transfer in infants: Relationship to prematurity and socio-
economic background. Developmental Psychology, 14, 643–652.
Rose, S. A., & Wallace, I. F. (1985). Visual recognition memory: A
predictor of later cognitive functioning in preterms. Child
Development, 56, 843–852.

References
89
Salapatek, P. (1975). Pattern perception in early infancy. In L. Cohen
& P. Salapatek (Eds.), Infant perception: From sensation to cog-
nition: Vol. 1. Basic visual processes (pp. 133–248). New York:
Academic Press.
Salapatek, P., & Kessen, W. (1966). Visual scanning of triangles by
the human newborn. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology,
3, 155–167.
Schafer, G., & Mareschal, D. (2001). Modeling infant speech sound
discrimination using simple associative networks. Infancy, 2,
7–28.
Schilling, T. H. (2000). Infants’ looking at possible and impossible
screen rotations: The role of familiarization. Infancy, 1, 389–402.
Shinskey, J. L., Bogartz, R. S., & Poirer, C. R. (2000). The effects of
graded occlusion on manual search and visual attention in 5- to
8-month-old infants. Infancy, 1, 323–346.
Shultz, T. R., & Bale, A. C. (2001). Neural network simulation of in-
fant familiarization to artiﬁcial sentences: Rule-like behavior
without explicit rules and variables. Infancy, 2, 501–536.
Sigman, M., & Parmelee, A. H. (1974). Visual preferences for four-
month-old premature and full-term infants. Child Development,
45, 959–965.
Slater, A. M. (1995a). Individual differences in infancy and later IQ.
Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 36, 69–112.
Slater, A. M. (1995b). Visual perception and memory at birth. In
C. Rovee-Collier & L. P. Lipsitt (Eds.), Advances in infancy
research (Vol. 9, pp. 107–162). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Slater, A. M., & Johnson, S. P. (1998). Visual sensory and perceptual
abilities of the newborn: Beyond the blooming, buzzing con-
fusion. In F. Simion & G. Butterworth (Eds.), The development
of sensory, motor and cognitive capacities in early infancy
(pp. 121–141). Hove, UK: Psychology Press.
Slater, A. M., Mattock, A., & Brown, E. (1990). Size constancy at
birth: Newborn infants’ responses to retinal and real size. Jour-
nal of Experimental Child Psychology, 49, 314–322.
Slater, A. M., Mattock, A., Brown, E., & Bremner, J. G. (1991).
Form perception at birth: Cohen and Younger revisited. Journal
of Experimental Child Psychology, 51, 395–405.
Slater, A. M., & Morison, V. (1985). Shape constancy and slant
perception at birth. Perception, 14, 337–344.
Slater, A. M., Morison, V., & Rose, D., (1983). Perception of shape
by the new-born baby. British Journal of Developmental Psy-
chology, 1, 135–142.
Slater, A. M., Morison, V., Somers, M., Mattock, A., Brown, E., &
Taylor, D. (1990). Newborn and older infants’ perception of
partly occluded objects. Infant Behavior and Development, 13,
33–49.
Smith, L. B. (1999). Do infants possess innate knowledge
structures? The con side. Developmental Science, 2, 133–144.
Smith, L. B., & Thelen, E. (1993). A dynamical systems approach to
development: Applications. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Sokolov, E. N. (1963). Perception and the conditioned reﬂex.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Spelke, E. S. (1985). Preferential-looking methods as tools for the
study of cognition in infancy. In G. Gottlieb & N. Krasnegor
(Eds.), Measurement of audition and vision in the ﬁrst year of
postnatal life (pp. 323–363). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Spelke, E. S. (1998). Nativism, empiricism, and the origins
of knowledge. Infant Behavior and Development, 21, 181–
200.
Spelke, E. S., Breinlinger, K., Macomber, J., & Jacobson, K.
(1992). Origins of knowledge. Psychological Review, 99, 605–
632.
Strauss, M. S. (1979). Abstraction of prototypical information in
adults and 10-month-old infants. Journal of Experimental Psy-
chology: Human Learning and Memory, 5, 618–632.
Teller, D. Y., & Bornstein, M. H. (1987). Infant color vision and
color perception: In P. Salapatek & L. Cohen (Eds.), Handbook
of infant perception: Vol. 1. From sensation to perception
(pp. 185–236). Orlando, FL: Academic Press.
Thelen, E., & Smith, L. B. (1994). A dynamical systems approach to
the development of cognition and action. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Tjossem, T. D. (1976). Early intervention: Issues and approaches.
In T. D. Tjossem (Ed.), Intervention strategies for high risk in-
fants and young children (pp. 3–33). Baltimore: University
Park.
Vietze, P. M., & Vaughan, H. G. (Eds.), (1988). Early identiﬁcation
of infants with developmental disabilities. Philadelphia: Grune
and Stratton.
Waxman, S. R. (1999). Specifying the scope of 13-month-olds’
expectations for novel words. Cognition, 70, B35–B50.
Wilcox, T. (1999). Object individuation: Infants’ use of shape, size,
pattern, and color. Cognition, 72, 125–166.
Wilcox, T., & Baillargeon, R. (1998). Object individuation in
infancy: The use of featural information in reasoning about
occlusion events. Cognitive Psychology, 37, 97–155.
Xu, F., & Carey, S. (1996). Infants’ metaphysics: The case of
numerical identity. Cognitive Psychology, 30, 111–153.
Younger, B. A. (1985). The segregation of items into categories by
10-month-old infants. Child Development, 56, 1574–1583.
Younger, B. A., & Cohen, L. B. (1985). How infants form cate-
gories. In G. Bower (Ed.), The psychology of learning and moti-
vation: Advances in research and theory (Vol. 19, pp. 211–247).
New York: Academic Press.
Younger, B. A., & Cohen, L. B. (1986). Developmental change in
infants’ perception of correlations among attributes. Child
Development, 57, 803–815.
Younger, B. A., & Fearing, D. (1998). Detecting correlations among
form attributes: An object-examining test with infants. Infant
Behavior and Development, 21, 289–297.
Younger, B. A., & Fearing, D. (2000). A global to basic trend in
early categorization: Evidence from a dual-category habituation
task. Infancy, 1, 47–58.


91
CHAPTER 4
Social and Emotional Development in Infancy
ROSS A. THOMPSON, M. ANN EASTERBROOKS, AND LAURA M. PADILLA-WALKER
SOCIOEMOTIONAL DEVELOPMENT IN CONTEXT
92
Psychobiological Context
92
Relational Context
94
Cultural Context
95
Summary
97
DEVELOPING EMOTIONS AND SOCIABILITY
97
Development of Emotional Expression and Sensitivity
97
The Growth of Meaning, Reciprocity, and Competence in
Emotional Development
98
Summary
100
RELATIONSHIPS: THE DEVELOPMENT
OF ATTACHMENTS
100
Developmental Aspects of Attachments
100
Individual Differences in Attachments
101
Multiple Attachment Relationships
101
Issues of Stability and Continuity in Attachments
102
Summary
103
RELATIONSHIPS AND REPRESENTATION
103
The Transitions of Toddlerhood
103
Developments in Self and Social Understanding
104
Summary
105
CONCLUSIONS: APPLICATIONS TO POLICY AND
PRACTICE AND IMPERATIVES FOR A
RESEARCH AGENDA
105
REFERENCES
106
Infancy is a period of origins. It is when a child’s capabilities,
individuality, and ﬁrst relationships begin to develop. Early
social and emotional development is concerned with devel-
oping capacities for emotional expression, sociability, self-
understanding, social awareness, self-management, and other
facets of socioemotional growth. Research in this ﬁeld is im-
portant for understanding these central features of early
development and for applying this knowledge to understand-
ing why some young children become anxiously insecure in
their attachments, easily dysregulated in their behavior when
stressed, or preoccupied with sad affect early in life. By
studying the dimensions and contexts of healthy or maladap-
tive growth, developmental scientists can contribute to pre-
ventive and therapeutic interventions and public policies
designed to ensure that infancy is a period of growing com-
petence, connection, happiness, and self-conﬁdence.
Because infancy is a period of origins, the study of so-
cioemotional development also addresses some of the most
signiﬁcant questions of contemporary developmental psy-
chology. How are nature and nurture processes fused in shap-
ing developmental pathways (cf. chapter by Overton in this
volume)? How may early experiences have an enduring
effect on social and emotional growth (“as the twig is bent, so
grows the tree”), and under what conditions are their inﬂu-
ences subsumed by subsequent developmental processes? In
what ways are early relationships of signiﬁcance for the
growth of social dispositions, self-understanding, and per-
sonality? Under what conditions does early temperament
provide a foundation for mature personality?
These enduring questions cast the study of early social and
emotional development within the broader context of life-
span development, and they focus on the early years as a pe-
riod of potentially formative inﬂuences. Although not all
developmental scholars concur that infancy may be a founda-
tion for later development (see Kagan, 1984; Lewis, 1997;
Scarr, 1992), belief in the enduring effects of early experi-
ences is deeply rooted in Western and Eastern cultures as well
as in developmental science. This belief contributes to the
concerns of parents, practitioners, and policy makers that
young children are afforded a good start in infancy because
of the difﬁculties in later correcting developmental pathways
that begin awry. The National Academy of Sciences Commit-
tee on Integrating the Science of Early Childhood Develop-
ment recently highlighted the “fundamental paradox” that
“development in the early years is both highly robust and
highly vulnerable . . . because it sets either a sturdy or fragile
state” for later development (Shonkoff & Phillips, 2000, pp. 4,
5). Although an overemphasis on infancy as a period of

92
Social and Emotional Development in Infancy
formative inﬂuences can lead people to perceive the early
years primarily as they foreshadow later development—rather
than as a developmental period that is signiﬁcant in itself—
this view also highlights the practical and scientiﬁc value of
understanding social and emotional growth in infancy.
Research on early socioemotional development is impor-
tant, therefore, because it affords understanding of the growth
of emotions, relationships, and self in infancy; provides
knowledge enabling parents and practitioners to promote
healthy early psychosocial growth; and offers unique oppor-
tunities to explore central questions of early development,
especially those related to the signiﬁcance of the early years.
Each of these perspectives on early socioemotional develop-
ment provides a guiding orientation to this chapter.
We begin by placing infancy in context. We consider the
psychobiological context of temperamental individuality and
neurobiological growth that shape early emotions, individu-
ality, and patterns of relating to others. We also consider the
contexts of culture and family that shape, and are shaped by,
early experiences. In doing so, the dynamic interplay of
nature and nurture is proﬁled at the outset of the chapter (see,
too, chapter by Overton in this volume).
Early emotional development and the growth of sociabil-
ity are proﬁled next, with special attention to the importance
of emotion to early social interaction and social relationships.
This intertwining illustrates the integration of developmental
functions, structures, and processes in infancy. In the section
that follows, we focus on attachment relationships between
infants and their caregivers, a topic of signiﬁcant research in-
terest during the past 30 years. Two central questions are
highlighted: (a) how infants develop different patterns of at-
tachment behavior in these relationships and (b) the contro-
versial question of potentially enduring consequences of
variations in attachments during infancy. The importance
of relationships for self-awareness, emotional understanding,
empathy, and conscience is subsequently discussed with re-
spect to the early representations that are inﬂuenced by rela-
tional experience. Our focus on the representational features
of early relationships constitutes a bridge between infancy
and psychosocial development in early childhood, when rep-
resentations of self, others, and relationships truly ﬂourish.
Finally, in a concluding note we consider the implications of
research and theory in this ﬁeld for policy and practice.
SOCIOEMOTIONAL DEVELOPMENT IN CONTEXT
Because the young of the human species cannot thrive out-
side of a relational context (Tobach & Schnierla, 1968), in
order to understand infant socioemotional development, one
must understand also the broader caregiving context. This
sentiment, illustrated by Winnicott’s celebrated statement
that “there is no such thing as an infant” (Winnicott, 1965),
sets the framework for this chapter. By its very deﬁnition
socioemotional development invokes relationships. The
mother-infant relationship is central to popular and scientiﬁc
images of social and emotional development in infancy.
This emphasis occurs because of cultural and theoretical
traditions emphasizing that the sensitivity, warmth, and
responsiveness of this ﬁrst and primary relationship shapes a
baby’s initial, and in some conceptualizations continuing,
social dispositions and expectations for others. Later in this
chapter we examine research concerning this relationship,
especially within the context of attachment theory. It is
important ﬁrst, however, to establish a broader framework for
our discussion of early socioemotional development by
considering how social and emotional responding and the
very relationships that develop transactionally (Sameroff &
Chandler, 1975) are shaped by the psychobiological context
of neurological development and temperament, as well as by
the broader social contexts of culture and family.
Psychobiological Context
Neurobiological Underpinnings
Infancy is a period of rapid physical and neurological growth,
second only to the prenatal months in the scope and
pace of development. This has signiﬁcant implications for
the changes that occur in emotional and social responding
(see chapter by Gunnar & Davis in this volume). Emotional
development is predicated on the growth of richly intercon-
nected brain structures and hormonal inﬂuences that organize
the arousal-activation and regulatory-recovery interplay of
emotional behavior (LeDoux, 1996; Schore, 1994). Because
emotions are biologically essential features of human func-
tioning in that they are critical to the very survival of the in-
fant from the earliest postnatal days, they are based on
regions of the human nervous system that develop very early,
including structures of the limbic system and the brain stem.
The capacity of a newborn to exhibit distress, excitement,
and rage reﬂects the early emergence of these deeply biolog-
ically rooted emotional brain systems.
Major advances in emotional responding occur during the
initial years of life as a result of developmental changes
in central neurobiological systems, including maturation in
adrenocortical activation and parasympathetic regulation
systems, and the slow growth of frontal regions of the neo-
cortex that exert regulatory control over limbic activation
(Gunnar, 1986; Porges, Doussard-Roosevelt, & Maiti, 1994;

Socioemotional Development in Context
93
Thompson, 1994). This development helps to account for the
ontogeny of the newborn, whose unpredictable swings of
arousal can be disconcerting to neonate and caregivers alike,
into the emotionally more nuanced and well-regulated tod-
dler, who is capable of responding emotionally to a wide
range of events and whose emotional reactions can be man-
aged by self and others. There are, of course, signiﬁcant ad-
vances in emotional development yet to occur in childhood
and adolescence with further growth in these and other brain
processes.
For decades we have recognized that caregivers play a
role in the infant’s psychobiological organization. Sander
(1964), for example, proposed that the ﬁrst role of the care-
giver was to aid the infant in achieving physiological regula-
tion. There is intriguing recent evidence that individual
differences in the quality of caregiving can inﬂuence the
development of these neurobiological systems when early
experiences are highly stressful (Gunnar, 2000; chapter by
Gunnar & Davis in this volume) or when mothers are
seriously or chronically depressed (Dawson & Ashman,
2000). This research suggests that development of the physi-
ological systems managing emotion and coping is impaired
by experiences of chronic stress when the caregiver is either
the source of stress or fails to buffer it.
Although the topic of early brain development and its role
in shaping cognitive and emotional development has enjoyed
both scientiﬁc and popular currency during the last decade, it
is important to understand the extent to which ﬁndings repre-
senting acute or chronic severe deprivation or stressors apply
more broadly. At present there is little evidence that more
typical variations in early care have a signiﬁcant impact
on individual differences in brain development. Nor is there
strong evidence that time-limited critical periods or
“windows of opportunity” exist for early socioemotional
development during which essential experiential catalysts are
required for the young brain to develop normally—this
despite widely publicized claims to the contrary (Thompson,
2002; Thompson & Nelson, 2001). In other words, much of
early brain development is experience expectant rather than
experience dependent. In most cases, the typical circum-
stances of early care afford many opportunities for healthy
social and emotional development to occur; caregivers who
are not abusive or neglectful typically provide these opportu-
nities in the course of their everyday social interactions with
the infants in their care (Shonkoff & Phillips, 2000). For
development to proceed otherwise would indicate a very
fragile system indeed.
Because of these developmental changes in the neurobio-
logical systems governing early social and emotional respond-
ing, it is not surprising that temperamental individuality also
emerges and ﬂourishes during infancy. The construct of tem-
perament has eluded ﬁrm deﬁnition. Scientists enumerating
the dimensions that comprise the domain of temperament
have reported from three to nine dimensions (Chess &
Thomas, 1986; Rothbart & Bates, 1998). Some of the most
distinctive temperamental attributes that characterize infants
at birth are based on emotional response tendencies, whether
they concern the baby’s dominant mood, adaptability, sootha-
bility, or reactions to novelty. In general, most theorists agree
that aspects of temperament involve biologically based, heri-
table, response tendencies that involve emotionality, activity,
and attention (see chapter by Cummings, Braungart-Rieker, &
Rocher-Schudlich in this volume; Rothbart & Bates, 1998)
and that are somewhat stable across time and context.
Temperamental individuality describes not only emotional
response tendencies but also self-regulatory qualities
(Goldsmith et al., 1987; Kagan, 1998; Rothbart & Bates,
1998); each of these has implications for social interactions
and relationships. Young children who are behaviorally shy
in response to new people or situations, for example, are
displaying a temperamental attribute that is both emotional in
quality (i.e., fearful) and self-regulatory (i.e., inhibited), with
profound implications for the child’s social functioning
(Kagan, 1998). Both reactive and self-regulatory aspects of
temperament are based on early-emerging biological individ-
uality founded on differences in neuroendocrine functioning,
the reactivity of subcortical or sympathetic nervous system
structures, variability in parasympathetic regulation, or other
nervous system processes (Rothbart & Bates, 1998).
The Construct of Temperament
Because infant socioemotional development is embedded in a
relational context, understanding the construct of tempera-
ment is key. Because social relationships are inﬂuenced by
temperament, they also have an effect on the expression of
temperamental individuality. A young child’s temperamental
proﬁle signiﬁcantly inﬂuences how the child interacts with
people in at least two ways. Temperamental qualities tend to
evoke certain reactions from others (e.g., a temperamentally
positive infant naturally elicits smiles and interest from others,
paving the way for the development of mutually satisfying
relationships) as well as shape a child’s preferences for certain
partners, settings, and activities (e.g., a temperamentally shy
child tends to withdraw from unfamiliar social situations;
Scarr & McCartney, 1983). Thus, temperamental qualities
shape social and emotional growth because they channel the
young child’s early experiences in particular ways.
This interactional stance implies that early socioemotional
growth can be signiﬁcantly affected by how well a young

94
Social and Emotional Development in Infancy
child’s temperamental proﬁle accords with the requirements
of his or her social settings, a concept known as goodness of
ﬁt (e.g., Chess & Thomas, 1986; see also chapters by Eccles,
Wigﬁeld, & Byrnes and by Lerner, Anderson, Balsano,
Dowling, & Bobek in this volume). A temperamentally shy
child is likely to be happier and become less withdrawn, for
example, when parents are tolerant and accommodating to
the child’s need for greater support and time with new part-
ners. These parents may want to invite a potential sitter into
their home on several occasions while they remain at home,
before they leave their infant alone with the new caregiver.
By contrast, even a temperamentally easy-going child will
have difﬁculty in settings where social demands are exces-
sive and developmentally inappropriate. Because of this,
social experiences can considerably modify the behavioral
manifestations of temperamental qualities a baby exhibits at
birth. The interactions, or transactions, between the child’s
constitutional makeup and the social “surround” acknowl-
edge a more dynamic view of temperament than previously
recognized (e.g., Lerner, 2002).
In light of this, and in view of the remarkable psychobio-
logical advances of the early years, it is perhaps unsurprising
that temperamental characteristics in infancy are only mod-
estly predictive of later temperament, or of other behavior in
the years that follow (Rothbart & Bates, 1998). Stronger evi-
dence for enduring associations between temperament and
later behavior begins to appear in children after the second
birthday (Caspi, 1998; Sanson, Prior, Oberklaid, & Smart,
1998; see also chapter by Cummings, Braungart-Rieker, &
Rocher-Schudlich in this volume), perhaps because many of
the biological foundations of temperament have consolidated
after infancy (although some continue to mature throughout
childhood). An additional factor may be measurement
artifact, with greater difﬁculty measuring appropriate mani-
festations of temperament in the early years. Stronger
continuity after infancy also may be advanced by the fact that
the 2-year-old is a more self-aware child whose developing
self-understanding is likely to incorporate temperamental
qualities that cause the child to perceive herself, and to
respond to situations, in temperament-consistent ways. Thus,
temperamental qualities in infancy may not foreshadow the
personality of the adult, although they are signiﬁcant for
shaping the quality of a baby’s social interactions with others.
There are, however, notable exceptions to this conclusion,
namely the work on temperamental shyness or behavioral
inhibition and work involving the construct of temperamental
difﬁculty. Behavioral inhibition, associated with a unique
physiological pattern including high and stable heart rate,
elevated baseline cortisol, right frontal electroencephalo-
graph (EEG) activation, and negative emotional and motor
reactivity to the unfamiliar (e.g., Calkins, Fox, & Marshall,
1996; Kagan, Reznick, & Snidman, 1987; Schmidt,
Shahinfar, & Fox, 1996), has been identiﬁed early in infancy
(Fox, Henderson, Rubin, Calkins, & Schmidt, 2001; Kagan
& Snidman, 1991). Some work shows that the extremes of in-
hibition and the opposite end of the continuum, exuberance
or uninhibited behavior, demonstrate considerable continuity
from early infancy into toddlerhood and childhood (Fox
et al., 2001; Kagan et al., 1987; Kagan & Snidman, 1991;
Kagan, Snidman, & Arcus, 1998). Despite the stability, there
also is lawful discontinuity in the behavioral manifestations
of this pattern, with more early-inhibited children later show-
ing decreased inhibition than early low-reactive or uninhib-
ited children demonstrating later behavioral inhibition.
Multiple factors may be implicated by this pattern of ﬁnd-
ings. Societal norms of desired behavior (e.g., positive affect,
independence, sociability) may push for control of negative
affect and manifestations of inhibition. Environmental fac-
tors may play an additional role. Fox et al. (2001) reported
that infants who became less inhibited had signiﬁcant out-of-
home care experiences during the ﬁrst two years. Whether
these experiences with multiple caregivers, peers, and envi-
ronments contributed to decreases in behavioral inhibition or
whether differences among the groups in parent personality
or child temperament affected families’ decisions to place
children in out-of-home care is a question that remains
unanswered.
In addition to the intriguing work on behavioral inhibition,
temperament research that demonstrates some measure of
continuity from infancy into childhood utilizes the construct
of temperamental difﬁculty (Chess & Thomas, 1986). Tem-
peramental difﬁculty is a constellation of qualities that
includes negative mood, frequent and intense negative emo-
tional behavior, irregularity, poor adaptability, and demand-
ingness. As was suggested by the research on temperamental
inhibition, the interaction, or transaction, of temperamental
characteristics and environmental characteristics aids predic-
tion of long-term continuity or consequences. Difﬁcult
temperament in infancy is signiﬁcantly more prognostic of
later psychosocial difﬁculties because this constellation
of characteristics is likely to create and maintain problems in
early interactions with others and to color many aspects of
early experience compared to other temperamental conﬁgu-
rations (Bates, 1987; Rothbart & Bates, 1998).
Relational Context
Contrary to traditional maturationist views (e.g., Gesell,
1940), therefore, the infant is psychobiologically constituted
by early experiences as well as heredity. This is one reason

Socioemotional Development in Context
95
for interest in early caregiving relationships that sensitively
accommodate to the infant’s temperamental qualities and
offer support for the unfolding of positive emotional and
social dispositions. The research evidence reviewed earlier
suggesting that neurobiological systems governing emotion
and coping with stress can be affected by abusive or neglect-
ful care, by the caregiver’s serious depression, and possibly
by other chronic experiences not yet studied contributes
further to an appreciation of the importance of these relation-
ships for healthy psychobiological growth.
But the social context of infancy extends far beyond rela-
tionships with primary caregivers to include other family
members, including fathers and siblings. Although early rela-
tionships with these partners have been studied much less, in-
fants develop qualitatively distinct modes of interaction with
their fathers and older siblings that arise from the unique
social experiences that they have with each (Dunn, 1993;
Lamb, 1997). Infant-father interactions are characterized by
exuberant, emotionally animated physical play, for example,
that helps to account for a baby’s excitement in the father’s
presence (Lamb, 1997; Parke & Tinsley, 1987). These char-
acteristics of many father-infant play interactions may in part
account for the importance of the father-child relationship to
emotional regulation and control (Gottman, Katz, & Hooven,
1997). Although style of paternal involvement (warmth,
sensitivity) is linked to positive outcomes for children,
amount of involvement is not (Easterbrooks & Goldberg,
1985; Elder, Van Nguyen, & Caspi, 1985; Lamb, 1997).
Siblings also are unique sources of social and emotional
understanding as young children carefully observe, interpret,
and inquire about their behavior directly with the sibling or
with others in the family (Dunn, 1998). In fact, sibling rela-
tionships may play a very important role in the emotional and
social development of infants, given the special nature of the
relationships. Sibling relationships, notable for their emo-
tional intensity, provide ample opportunities for observing,
experiencing, and interpreting both positive and negative
emotions. Although sibling rivalry may be accompanied by
intense competition and negative emotions, parents also state
that siblings often can most easily induce positive mood in
infants. These observations, combined with the role structure
of sibling relationships, may serve as a catalyst for develop-
mental growth in infants’ social and emotional repertoire. In
part, this may be due to the fact that the demands of sibling
relationships may encourage infants to stretch emotionally in
ways that relationships with parents or other adult caregivers
do not.
Whereas the direct interactions between infants and their
family members are recognized as important, far less attention
has been devoted to the indirect effect of other relationships,
in terms of both their inﬂuence on infant development and the
ways in which they are inﬂuenced by a developing infant. Pos-
itive marital relationships are more likely to be associated
with sensitive parent-infant interactions because marital har-
mony is thought to provide support for the sometimes-difﬁcult
tasks of parenting (Gottman et al., 1997; Goldberg &
Easterbrooks, 1984). Conversely, marital conﬂict is associ-
ated with less optimal parent-infant interaction and infant ad-
justment (e.g., attachment, emotion regulation; Cummings &
Davies, 1994). In similar fashion, the extent to which fathers
become actively involved in caregiving responsibilities sig-
niﬁcantly affects the extent to which mothers feel stressed or
supported in their caregiving role.
The social ecology of infancy extends signiﬁcantly beyond
the family, of course, to include relationships with adults and
peers in out-of-home care (see chapter by Fitzgerald, Mann,
Cabrera, & Wong in this volume). This means that early social
and emotional development is shaped not only by the quality
of the relationship with the primary caregiver but also by rela-
tionships with a range of partners of varying developmental
status and different characteristics who are encountered in
widely varying social contexts (Howes, 1999). Zimmerman
and McDonald (1995) reported, for example, that infant emo-
tional availability was distinct with mothers and other adult
caregivers (e.g., fathers, day care providers).
Research in the 1970s and 1980s established that infant peer
relationships develop as early as the ﬁrst year of life and help to
deﬁne the structure and content of these interactions (Adamson
& Bakeman, 1985; Howes, 1988; Mueller & Vandell, 1979).
Although infant peer relationships involve both positive and
negative emotions (Adamson & Bakeman, 1985; Hay, Nash, &
Pedersen, 1983), positive affect predominates.
Familial and nonfamilial relationships may have overlap-
ping or independent inﬂuences on early psychosocial growth.
Recognizing these patterns undermines any assumption that,
within this broad social ecology, a baby’s social and emotional
dispositions arise from social encounters with the mother
alone. In fact, several studies suggest that relationships with
nonparental caregivers are more predictive of later social
skills than are relationships with parents (Oppenheim, Sagi, &
Lamb, 1988). Indeed, understanding how different social part-
ners have unique and overlapping inﬂuences on early socioe-
motional growth is one of the signiﬁcant research challenges
in this ﬁeld.
Cultural Context
Uniting these diverse social inﬂuences are the values of the
culture. Cultural values deﬁne the needs and characteristics
of infants, the roles and responsibilities of caregivers, and the

96
Social and Emotional Development in Infancy
goals of child development that are based on the mature at-
tributes that are consensually valued (see chapter by
Saraswathi & Mistry in this volume). Cultural beliefs and
values guide the behavior of caregivers, family members, and
others in the community with an interest in young children
and, in doing so, shape the ecology of infant care (New,
2001). For example, among the Efe, a foraging community in
the forests of Zaire, infants receive care from birth by many
adults besides the mother, and this intense social contact
leads to strong connections with many people in the commu-
nity (Morelli & Tronick, 1991; Tronick, Morelli, & Winn,
1987). This cultural pattern of infant care not only ensures
that young children are protected by accommodating to the
wide-ranging foraging activities of men and women, but also
incorporates diverse community members into infant care
and socializes infants into the intrinsically interactive, coop-
erative features of community life.
Culture is not synonymous with nationality. Within the
United States and other heterogeneous nations, multiple cul-
tural communities exist with distinct values related to young
children and their care. General cultural attitudes are related
to speciﬁc parental child-rearing beliefs, or ethnotheories,
and practices (Small, 1998). One of the most important val-
ues related to child care that transcends speciﬁc national
norms is the emphasis placed on the independence or interde-
pendence of infants with their caregivers (based on Triandis’s
1995 distinction between individualist and collectivist cul-
tures). Belief in the importance of infant-caregiver indepen-
dence or interdependence affects many features of infant care
and is inﬂuential even before a baby’s birth. Korean mothers,
for example, are explicitly instructed to view each prenatal
event as an experience shared with the fetus, and they are
encouraged to avoid unpleasant experiences that might affect
the child or the mother-infant relationship (Yu, 1984). The
interdependence fostered by cultural beliefs such as these
signiﬁcantly inﬂuences subsequent patterns of infant care in
Korea and in other cultures.
The extent to which cultural values emphasize the inde-
pendence or interdependence of infant and caregiver affects
early socioemotional growth through its impact on infant care
practices. In most families in the United States, for example,
infants sleep in their own beds independently of their parents
within the ﬁrst few months after birth, and their parents are
extremely concerned about the establishment of reliable
sleeping patterns and report a large number of sleeping prob-
lems in their offspring (Morelli, Rogoff, Oppenheim, &
Goldsmith, 1992). By contrast, Japanese,African, and Mayan
infants sleep with their mothers until toddlerhood, and their
sleeping patterns are determined by the sleeping rhythms of
those around them and are less of a family disturbance
(Small, 1998). Infants who awaken are more easily and
quickly comforted, fed, and returned to sleep (Harkness,
1980; Morelli et al., 1992). Likewise, not only does the
constant carrying of infants by mothers of the !Kung hunter-
gatherers of the Kalahari desert permit reliable contact and
regular feeding, but also the baby’s fusses receive an imme-
diate response before they escalate, and soothing can occur
more quickly (Barr, Bakeman, Konner, & Adamson, 1987;
Hunziker & Barr, 1986). By contrast, the cries of infants in
the United States often escalate because soothing is delayed
by the physical distance between infant and mother or by
other demands in a child-care setting. The close physical con-
tact of sleeping and carrying reﬂects cultural values con-
cerning infant-mother interdependence that reduces the
incentives for infants to acquire skills for managing their dis-
tress independently (Pomerleau, Malcuit, & Sabatier, 1991).
A cultural emphasis on independence or interdependence
also inﬂuences other aspects of mother-infant interaction,
including feeding practices, verbal stimulation, and provision
of play materials. In one observational study, Puerto Rican
mothers were found to be more likely to restrain their infants,
physically position them, and issue direct commands to them,
each of which was consistent with a maternal emphasis on
interdependence and the infant’s need for guidance. By con-
trast, American mothers offered more suggestions to their
offspring and praised infant behavior much more than Puerto
Rican mothers did (Harwood, Scholmerich, & Schulze,
2000). In another study, Japanese mothers were observed to
respond in a more animated fashion when the infant’s atten-
tion was directed toward them, whereas mothers in the
United States were more responsive when infants were look-
ing at objects rather than at them (Bornstein, Tal, & Tamis-
LeMonda, 1991; Bornstein, Toda, Azuma, Tamis-LeMonda,
& Ogino, 1990). This difference is consistent with the close
intimacy fostered by Japanese mothers with their offspring,
in contrast to the greater emphasis on individualism and inde-
pendence of mothers in the United States.
Cultural differences in normative patterns of social inter-
action are important not only because of how they affect
early social and emotional responding, but also because they
compel developmental scientists’ attention to the appropriate
assessment of early social interaction and social relation-
ships. Researchers cannot assume that caregiving practices
and infant behavior that are normative for middle-class
families in the United States are standard worldwide, nor
even within different cultural communities inside the United
States. Thus, early socioemotional development must be
viewed within the context of the speciﬁc cultural values and
goals that guide child-rearing practices. However, many
aspects of early socioemotional growth, such as forming

Developing Emotions and Sociability
97
close attachments to caregivers, are broadly observed in dif-
ferent cultural contexts and appear to be universal features of
psychosocial development based on human evolutionary
adaptation (van IJzendoorn & Sagi, 1999). An important
challenge to students of socioemotional development, there-
fore, is how to study broadly generalizable processes of
social and emotional growth while respecting cultural
differences in how these processes are realized (see, e.g.,
Rothbaum, Weisz, Pott, Miyake, & Morelli, 2000).
Summary
Taken together, the psychobiological context of infant devel-
opment and the contexts of culture and family offer
reminders that early socioemotional development occurs
within a broader network of inﬂuences than is commonly
portrayed. Although the majority of the research reviewed in
this chapter focuses on developmental inﬂuences in the con-
text of close relationships—most commonly mother-infant
relationships—these relationships are inﬂuenced by the inte-
gration of the infant’s rapid neurobiological maturation and
the values and beliefs of family and cultural members.
DEVELOPING EMOTIONS AND SOCIABILITY
It is difﬁcult to conceive of early social development apart
from the emotions that color social interactions in infancy.
Emotions have been called the language of infancy, and
infants as “emotion detectors” (Tronick, 2001). Infants sig-
nal their emerging social discriminations and preferences
according to which partners can most readily evoke smiles
and cooing, and adults become engaged in social play with
babies because of the animated, exuberant responses that
they receive. Caregivers attune to the preemptory sound of
the infant cry and the hunger, pain, or startled fear it reﬂects,
and the baby’s developing sensitivity to the emotional
expressions of others reﬂects achievements in an emerging
understanding of people. In short, the study of “socioemo-
tional” development reﬂects how interwoven are the
processes of early social and emotional growth, each of
which provides a window into psychological development.
Although it is common to view emotions as disorganizing,
unregulated inﬂuences on infant behavior, it is more appro-
priate to regard their inﬂuence as both organizing and
disorganizing (similar to how emotions affect adults). The
image of a 3-month-old in a raging, uncontrollable tantrum
must be joined to the image of the same child who has been
motivated to learn how to make a crib mobile spin because of
the interest and pleasure it evokes. Even a toddler’s angry
conﬂict with a parent can motivate and organize new under-
standing of another’s thoughts, feelings, or motives.
Development of Emotional Expression and Sensitivity
Most conceptualizations of early socioemotional develop-
ment place the social nature of emotions as a centerpiece of
early development. Emotional availability, a relational con-
struct, is considered central to healthy socioemotional devel-
opment (Easterbrooks & Biringen, 2000). According to
Emde (1980), emotional availability refers to responsiveness
and attunement to another’s signals, goals, and needs. Stern
(1985) called it a “dance”—those captivating images of par-
ent and infant immersed in interaction, oblivious to the out-
side world. Such pictures highlight the extent to which
emotions are part of the fabric of complex relationships, not
simply sensations to be regulated. Emotions, in fact, “are apt
to be a sensitive barometer of early developmental function-
ing in the child-parent system” (Emde & Easterbrooks,
1985, p. 80).
Face-to-Face Social Interaction
An important early social context in which the organizing in-
ﬂuence of emotions is apparent is face-to-face social interac-
tion with an adult partner. This activity becomes prominent
by the time infants are 2 to 3 months of age, when they are
capable of sustained alertness and display preferential
responses to familiar people, and it continues until about 6 or
7 months, after which more active kinds of infant-parent
interactions ensue with the baby’s developing locomotor
skills (Tronick, 1989). Face-to-face play involves short but
intense episodes of focused interaction between an infant and
an adult (typically the mother) in which each partner enter-
tains the other with smiling, vocalizing, animated facial
expressions, and other social initiatives and responses. The
goal of this activity is the establishment and maintenance of
well-coordinated exchanges that elicit mutual pleasure,
although these synchronous exchanges occur only about
30% or less of the time that mothers and infants interact with
each other (Tronick, 1989; Tronick & Cohn, 1989). These
sequences of affective synchrony and mismatches offer
opportunities for infants to learn important lessons about
the possibilities of reparation of dyssynchronous states
(Kohut, 1977; Lyons-Ruth, Bronfman, & Parson, 1999;
Tronick, 2001). For example, rules of communication
within and across interactions, preferred interactive tempo
and intensity, and ways to convert negative affect into neutral
or pleasurable states can be learned. As a consequence,
other developmental skills, such as learning to self-regulate

98
Social and Emotional Development in Infancy
(including managing emotional arousal) and to repair dys-
synchronous interaction, are also fostered by these intensive
social exchanges (Gianino & Tronick, 1988).
Although adults take the lead in face-to-face interaction
by sensitively scaffolding their initiatives to accord with the
infant’s readiness to respond (Kaye, 1982), infants also
participate actively through their animated emotional expres-
sions, approach and withdrawal, and patterns of gazing that
signal their interest in social play. In this respect, emotions
organize early social interaction by structuring the ebb and
ﬂow of social activity and by providing signals by which
each partner can respond in a coordinated fashion to the
other. Moreover, changes in infant behavior during play over
the early months also indicate changes in the emerging social
expectations that guide the baby’s behavior. Infants begin to
expect, for example, that others will spontaneously interact
with them, and when their mothers are instructed to be
impassive and expressionless, their offspring respond with
social elicitations (e.g., brief smiles, increased vocalizing
and reaching) followed, eventually, by withdrawal (Cohn,
Campbell, & Ross, 1991; Cohn & Tronick, 1983). Even
more, infants begin to expect to receive responses from their
partners that are contingent on their own behavior: They re-
spond with positive animation to responsive partners but turn
away from partners who are comparably active but not re-
sponsive to the infant’s initiatives (Murray & Trevarthen,
1985; Symons & Moran, 1987). Taken together, these behav-
iors suggest that within the ﬁrst 6 months, the infant is learn-
ing about the rules of social interaction and is developing a
rudimentary awareness of her or his own efﬁcacy in evoking
responses from other people.
Later in the ﬁrst year, infants respond differently also to
the appearance of their mothers and fathers in social play,
reﬂecting the development of discriminative expectations
for speciﬁc familiar partners (Lamb, 1981). According to
Tronick (2001), two qualities regulate the uniqueness of
relationships that infants have with different social partners:
implicit relational knowing (e.g., “how we interact together”)
and thickness. Implicit relational knowing derives from re-
peated patterns of affect in interaction with a partner; thick-
ness refers to the number of different time-activity contexts
of interactions (e.g., play, feeding, bathing, putting to bed).
As infants develop, then, much of implicit relational knowing
is increasingly unique to speciﬁc relationships, which be-
come more differentiated.
The Role of Distress-Relief Sequences
Face-to-face play is not the only context in which social
expectations develop. From repeated experiences of distress
and its subsequent relief from a caregiver’s nurturant re-
sponse, infants begin to expect to be soothed after the adult
arrives. This is revealed in the baby’s anticipatory quieting,
after fussing occurs, to the sound of the caregiver’s footsteps
(Gekoski, Rovee-Collier, & Carulli-Rabinowitz, 1983;
Lamb & Malkin, 1986). By the latter part of the ﬁrst year,
therefore, infants have begun to learn about the behavioral
propensities of others, as well as the self’s efﬁcacy in pro-
voking these behaviors, and this makes the baby a more com-
petent and self-aware social partner. These early social
expectations also shape emotional responding because an
awareness of the contingency between one’s actions and
another’s response is a highly reliable elicitor of smiling and
laughter and can contribute to the alleviation of distress
(Watson, 1972, 1979). Consequently, an infant’s early experi-
ences of face-to-face play and the relief of distress contribute
signiﬁcantly to the social expectations and positive emotional
responses to caregivers that set the stage for the development
of attachment relationships.
The Growth of Meaning, Reciprocity, and Competence
in Emotional Development
Throughout the ﬁrst year, infants develop a more acute sensi-
tivity to the emotions of others as they are expressed in vocal
intonation, facial expression, and other behavior. Because
these various modes of emotional expression typically
covary, infants have many opportunities to learn about the
behavioral propensities of someone with, say, an angry vocal
tone, or the facial expressions that accompany the sound of
laughter. By the second half of the ﬁrst year, the emotions
of others have become affectively meaningful to the baby
through processes of conditioning, emotion contagion, or of
empathy (Saarni et al., 1998). That is, the emotions of others
become meaningful to the baby because of the actions with
which they are associated and the resonant emotional
responses that they evoke in the infant. Equally important, an
awareness of the emotions of others in circumstances that
evoke emotion in the infant herself contributes to a growing
realization that other people, like oneself, are subjective
human entities.
Later in the ﬁrst year, the growth of crawling, creeping,
and walking introduces new challenges to parent-infant inter-
action and socioemotional growth (Bertenthal & Campos,
1990; Biringen, Emde, Campos, & Appelbaum, 1995;
Campos et al., 2000; Campos, Kermoian, & Zumbahlen,
1992). On one hand, self-produced locomotion changes the
child, who, with the capacity to move independently, becomes
more capable of goal attainment, as well as of wandering
away from the parent, acting in a dangerous or disapproved

Developing Emotions and Sociability
99
manner, and experiencing the varieties of emotion and feel-
ings of self-efﬁcacy that these activities inspire. Parents
commonly report that this developmental transition is accom-
panied by their child’s increased expressions of affection but
also of anger and frustration, and offspring also become more
adept at monitoring the parents’ whereabouts (Campos et al.,
1992; Campos et al., 2000). On the other hand, self-produced
locomotion changes the parent, who must now more actively
monitor the child’s activity by using prohibitions and sanc-
tions and expecting compliance from offspring. The testing
of wills that ensues from self-produced locomotion not only
is a challenge to the emotional quality of the parent-child
relationship, but also provides a catalyst to the infant’s early
grasp of mental states in others that are different from the
child’s own.
This development is important because by 9 to 10 months
of age infants begin to show other indications of a dawning
awareness of mental states in others. For example, they strive
to achieve joint visual attention with those with whom they
are communicating, and their protocommunicative acts (e.g.,
gestures, vocal appeals) and imitative activity each increase
in sophistication. Taken together, infants are beginning to un-
derstand that others are intentional agents with potentially
shared subjective orientations toward objects and events that
are worth understanding. This dawning psychological under-
standing changes how they interact with others and their in-
terpretations of why people act as they do (Bretherton,
McNew, & Beeghly-Smith, 1981; Carpenter, Nagell, &
Tomasello, 1998; Tomasello, Kruger, & Ratner, 1993).
Social Referencing
Another reﬂection of the infant’s growing realization that
others have mental states is the emergence of social referenc-
ing, in which infants respond to events (particularly novel or
ambiguous events) based on the emotional expressions that
they detect in other people (Campos & Stenberg, 1981;
Feinman, 1992; Saarni, Mumme, & Campos, 1998). In a
manner similar to how adults take their cues from others
nearby when responding to unexpected or uncertain situa-
tions, the sight of an adult’s reassuring smile or terriﬁed gaze
(especially if it is accompanied by the appropriate vocaliza-
tions and other behavior) can signiﬁcantly inﬂuence whether
a young child approaches or withdraws from an unfamiliar
person or novel object. Social referencing is commonly
believed to arise from the infant’s active search for clarifying
information from another’s emotional reactions, although it
may also be derived less deliberately when the child shares a
new experience or seeks reassurance from a caregiver
(Baldwin & Moses, 1996). In either case, social referencing
is important for socioemotional development because it indi-
cates that infants are competent at obtaining and enlisting
emotional information from others into their own responses
to events, and it reﬂects the infant’s growing awareness of
accessible subjective states in others.
Although its direct effects on an infant’s behavior can be
modest and transient, social referencing in the ﬁrst year is the
vanguard of the variety of more sophisticated referencing
activities that enable young children to acquire social under-
standing from the experiences that they share with adults.
During the second year, for example, social referencing
permits toddlers to compare their own evaluation of events
with those of others, enabling them to begin to understand
conﬂicting as well as shared mental states. Somewhat later,
social referencing becomes an important avenue to con-
science development as behavioral standards are conveyed
through the parent’s nonverbal affective reaction to approved
or disapproved activity, which may be referenced by a young
child even prior to acting in a disapproved way (such as the
toddler who watches the parent’s face carefully while reach-
ing sticky ﬁngers into the VCR; Emde & Buchsbaum, 1990;
Emde, Johnson, & Easterbrooks, 1987). Social referencing
can also be a source of pride and self-conﬁdence as children
consult their parents’ approving expressions after succeeding
at a difﬁcult task (Stipek, 1995). In these ways, the infant’s
dawning awareness of subjectivity in others, as well as inter-
est in understanding these mental states, transforms the
development of social understanding and self-awareness.
As social and emotional capabilities develop in concert,
they are mutually inﬂuential. Emotional connections to
familiar people provide a foundation for developing attach-
ments and social understanding, and early social experiences
cause the generalized emotional systems of early infancy to
become more discretely and functionally organized (Saarni
et al., 1998).
Emotion Regulation
Social development and emotional development are interwo-
ven also in how emotions become enlisted into social compe-
tence. One way this occurs is through the growth of skills of
emotion regulation (Thompson, 1994). In infancy, of course,
parents assume the prominent role in managing the emotions
of offspring. They do so by directly intervening to soothe or
pacify the child, as well as by regulating the emotional
demands of familiar settings like home or child care (e.g., by
creating predictable routines), altering how the young child
construes an emotionally arousing experience (e.g., by
smiling reassuringly when a friendly but unfamiliar adult
approaches the child), and later by actively coaching young

100
Social and Emotional Development in Infancy
children on the expectations or strategies of emotion man-
agement. Moreover, young children’s emotions are managed
because of the security or conﬁdence that they derive from
their relationships with caregivers, such as in a baby’s antici-
patory soothing to the sound of the parent’s arrival. Infants
and toddlers who can anticipate reassurance from the arrival
of their caregivers are aided by the belief that, with the adult’s
assistance, emotions are neither uncontrollable nor unman-
ageable (Cassidy, 1994; Nachmias, Gunnar, Mangelsdorf,
Parritz, & Buss, 1996).
In the early years, however, young children are also devel-
oping rudimentary means of managing their own emotions.
This can be observed initially in the comfort seeking of a
distressed infant or toddler, but young children quickly
appreciatethatemotionscanalsobemanagedbymakingactive
efforts to avoid or ignore emotionally arousing situations,
through reassuring self-talk, by obtaining further information
about the situation, and in other simple ways (Braungart
& Stifter, 1991; Calkins & Johnson, 1998; Grolnick,
Bridges, & Connell, 1996). Developing skills of emotion
regulation are built on slowly maturing brain regions that also
contribute to the young child’s capacities to inhibit impulsivity
and that enable rule-governed behavior (Diamond, Werker, &
Lalonde, 1994; Rothbart, Posner, & Boylan, 1990). Moreover,
individual differences in temperamental “inhibitory control”
emerge early and are related to conscience development
(Kochanska, Murray, & Coy, 1997). Not surprisingly, there-
fore, the growth of emotion regulation is part of a constellation
of developing capabilities that are related to social competence
andbehavioralself-control,andsuccessfulemotionregulation,
within a cultural framework, is seen as a central developmental
task of early childhood.
Summary
Caregivers assume a signiﬁcant role in supporting the devel-
opment of these features of socioemotional competence that
enable young children to enlist their emotions constructively
to accomplish social goals (Saarni, 1999). Unfortunately, for
some children temperamental vulnerability combined with
poor caregiver support can contribute to the growth of
emotion-related difﬁculties in the early years, including prob-
lems related to sad, depressed affect (Cicchetti & Schneider-
Rosen, 1986), anxious fear (Thompson, 2002), and angry
behavioral problems (Shaw, Keenan, & Vondra, 1994).
Often, these are conceptualized as relationship problems
rather than difﬁculties of the individual (Zeanah & Boris,
2000; Zeanah, Boris, Heller, Hinshaw-Fuselier, Larrieu,
Lewis, Palomino, Rovaris, & Valliere, 1997), reminiscent of
Winnicott’s maxim about infants existing within a social
system. The presence of clear disturbances in emotion regu-
lation during infancy and toddler years is a reminder of
the importance of establishing the social and emotional com-
petencies that are a foundation for psychosocial health in the
years that follow.
RELATIONSHIPS: THE DEVELOPMENT
OF ATTACHMENTS
Freud (1940/1963) described the infant-mother relationship
as “unique, without parallel, established unalterably for a
whole lifetime as the ﬁrst and strongest love-object and as
the prototype of all later love-relations.” (p. 45) Although the
typical conditions of early care in Western cultures have
changed signiﬁcantly since Freud’s day (i.e., fathers, child-
care providers, babysitters, and extended family members
now share infant care with mothers), Freud’s famous asser-
tion draws attention to the importance of the initial attach-
ments a baby develops to caregivers and to their potentially
enduring signiﬁcance. An attachment can be described as an
enduring affectional bond that unites two or more people
across time and context, and the development of attachment
relationships between infants and their caregivers is one of
the hallmarks of early socioemotional growth (Ainsworth,
Blehar, Waters, & Wall, 1978; Bowlby, 1969/1982; Cassidy
& Shaver, 1999).
Developmental Aspects of Attachments
Except in highly unusual conditions of neglect or abuse,
virtually all infants develop close emotional ties to those who
care for them. These initial attachments are as biologically
basic as learning to crawl and talk because they have been
crucial to the protection, nurturance, and development of
infants throughout human evolution (Gould, 1977; Tobach &
Schnierla, 1968). Bowlby (1969/1982) placed special em-
phasis on the role of distress-relief sequences as key interac-
tions for the development of attachments, with attachment
behaviors eliciting caregiver proximity and care for a vulner-
able, dependent infant.
Attachment theorists believe that these infant-caregiver
relationships address two fundamental needs of the infant
(see Ainsworth et al., 1978; Cassidy & Shaver, 1999). First,
a caregiver’s support reduces a young child’s fear, distress,
or anxiety in novel or challenging situations and enables the
child to explore with conﬁdence and to manage negative
emotions (Ainsworth, 1967; Emde & Easterbrooks, 1985).
This is commonly reﬂected in secure base behavior, by
which an infant maintains reassuring psychological contact

Relationships: The Development of Attachments
101
with the caregiver (through looks and smiles from a distance
and occasionally returning to the adult for affection) while
exploring and playing. Second, the caregiver’s sensitive and
prompt responding to the baby’s needs and signals strength-
ens the child’s sense of competence and efﬁcacy, especially
for obtaining assistance from others. Attachment relation-
ships begin to develop very early on and become consoli-
dated between 6 and 12 months of age as infants become
gradually aware of the psychological qualities of other
people, acquire expectations for their behavior, and develop
trust in certain caregivers upon whom they rely for this kind
of assistance and support (Ainsworth et al., 1978; Colin,
1996).
Individual Differences in Attachments
Although virtually all infants become attached to their care-
givers, not all attachments exhibit characteristics that attach-
ment theorists deﬁne as secure (Ainsworth et al., 1978).
Whereas the markers of a secure attachment are the child’s
conﬁdent exploration and secure base behavior in the care-
giver’s company, as well as ready soothing of distress when
the child is upset, infants sometimes develop attachments to
caregivers that reﬂect uncertainty or distrust in the respon-
siveness of the parent, child-care provider, or other caregiver.
Infants with insecure attachments are not so easily soothed by
the caregiver, and their exploratory play may be better char-
acterized either by independence or by anxious dependency
on the adult (Ainsworth et al., 1978; Colin, 1996; Thompson,
1998). An insecure attachment is not, however, equivalent to
no attachment at all. Even a young child who is uncertain
about the caregiver’s nurturance derives important emotional
support from the caregiver’s presence that would not be de-
rived from the company of someone to whom the child had
no attachment at all. Even so, as we shall see, attachment
relationships characterized by insecurity provide young
children with a weaker psychological foundation for the
growth of sociability, emotion management, and self-
understanding than do secure attachments. Insecure attach-
ments do not presage or accompany the development of
psychopathology. There is, however, some evidence of an as-
sociation between one kind of insecure attachment—insecure
disorganized attachment—and psychopathology in child-
hood and adulthood, particularly in the context of high psy-
chosocial risk environments (Dozier, Stovall, & Albus, 1999;
Greenberg, 1999; Lyons-Ruth & Jacobvitz, 1999; Sroufe,
1997). Although some of these data are cross-sectional,
others are drawn from a handful of longitudinal studies
following the development of infants into the childhood or
adolescent—and now early adult—years.
Given the importance of secure attachment, what character-
istics of care contribute to its creation?Although a child’s tem-
perament is inﬂuential, the most important determinant of
whether an infant develops a secure or insecure attachment is
the caregiver’s sensitivity to the child’s needs and inten-
tions (de Wolf & van IJzendoorn, 1997; Thompson, 1998).
Sensitivity can be described as responding promptly and
appropriately to the child and being available to help when
needed, especially when the child is distressed. The word
“appropriately” is key here because the quickest response is
not necessarily the most sensitive, particularly beyond early
infancy. Appropriate timing of sensitive responsiveness
allows older infants opportunities to develop competent self-
regulation of emotions and coping strategies. Sensitive
responding thus addresses the two fundamental needs of the in-
fant described earlier: It helps to manage the child’s distress to
permit conﬁdent exploration, and it consolidates a young
child’s sense of efﬁcacy, both in the self and in soliciting the
support of others and the expectation of an effective response.
Sensitive care—and its opposite, whether conceptualized as
unresponsiveness, uninvolvement, rejection, or psychological
unavailability—is inﬂuenced by many features of a caregiver’s
life experiences (Berlin & Cassidy, 1999; George & Solomon,
1999; Isabella, 1995). The amount and nature of social stress
and support that an adult experiences; the caregiver’s personal-
ity and childhood history, including his or her own attachment
relationships; competing demands, beliefs, and values; and
many other factors can inﬂuence the sensitivity shown to a
young child at any moment (Bornstein, 1995; Easterbrooks &
Graham, 1999; Fonagy, Steele, & Steele, 1991; Holden, 1995).
Sensitivity also is undermined by more severe circumstances,
such as parental depression or other forms of mental illness
(Seifer & Dickstein, 1993).Ababy’s temperamental difﬁculty,
developmental delay, or other needs inﬂuence how sensitivity
is expressed in the relationship with the caregiver (e.g.,
Brazelton, Koslowski, & Main, 1974) and can also affect
the
child’s
perceptions
of
the
adult’s
responsiveness
(Easterbrooks, 1989; Seifer, Schiller, Sameroff, Resnick, &
Riordan, 1996; van den Boom, 1989). Thus, the sensitive care
leading to secure attachment is affected by the psychobio-
logical and familial contexts of infant development discussed
earlier, reﬂecting the view that attachment relationships are the
product of an integrated developmental system.
Multiple Attachment Relationships
In typical conditions of contemporary care, infants develop
attachments to many caregivers, including mothers and
fathers at home, child-care providers, preschool teachers, and
sometimes also grandparents and other adults (Berlin &

102
Social and Emotional Development in Infancy
Cassidy, 1999; Howes, 1999). Infants’attachments with these
caregivers can be secure or insecure based on their experi-
ence with each person, largely independent of the security of
their relationships with the other people who care for them.
This means that a child can be insecurely attached to the
mother but securely attached to the father or a child-care
provider, or the reverse may be true. This has important im-
plications for early socioemotional development because it
means that young children are affected by relationships with
a variety of caregivers, each of whom provides opportunities
to develop the social skills, emotional understanding, and
self-conﬁdence that are offered by a secure attachment.
Secure relationships with each are optimal, but a secure at-
tachment to one may support healthy psychosocial growth
even if relationships with others are insecure. Early socio-
emotional development is, in short, affected by a variety of
relationships, not just the mother-infant bond, although the
mother-infant relationship remains most signiﬁcant for most
children (Easterbrooks & Goldberg, 1990; Main, Kaplan, &
Cassidy, 1985; Suess, Grossman, & Sroufe, 1992; NICHD
Early Child Care Research Network, 1997).
Issues of Stability and Continuity in Attachments
Relationships are not static. They change and grow in concert
with the developing child and the changing social contexts in
which the child lives. Parents and the quality of care that they
provide also change over time (Holden & Miller, 1999). This
means that the security of attachment can change in the early
years when changes occur in the caregiver’s sensitivity,
in family circumstances, or for other reasons (Thompson,
1998). Longitudinal studies have found, for example,
that changes in attachment security occur because of
common changes in family circumstances such as alterations
in child-care arrangements, the birth of a new sibling, or
family stress (like marital discord) that causes a reorganiza-
tion of familiar patterns of interaction with caregivers
(Belsky, Campbell, Cohn, & Moore, 1996; Cummings &
Davies, 1994; Teti, Sakin, Kucera, Corns, & Das Eiden,
1996; Vaughn, Egeland, Sroufe, & Waters, 1979). A child
with an insecure attachment in infancy, therefore, may later
have opportunities to develop greater conﬁdence in the same
caregiver, and a child who begins with a secure attachment is
not safeguarded against the possibility of later insecurity if
the caregiving context and quality should change toward in-
sensitivity. There is no guarantee that the inﬂuence of early
attachment security will endure, unless that environmental
caregiving support and ensuing security are maintained in the
years that follow through the continuing sensitivity of
parental care and a supportive developmental context.
Therefore, one of the most important long-term conse-
quences of a secure attachment in infancy is that it inaugu-
rates a positive relationship with a caregiver that heightens
the child’s receptiveness to the adult and that supports, but
does not ensure, continuing parental sensitivity (Kochanska
& Thompson, 1997; Waters, Kondo-Ikemura, Posada, &
Richters, 1991; Thompson, 1999). If this positive relation-
ship is maintained over time, it contributes to the develop-
ment of mutual trust and responsiveness between parent
and child in which young children are motivated to accept
and adopt the parent’s instruction, guidance, and values.
Such a relationship provides not only a secure base for conﬁ-
dent exploration in infancy but also support, in early child-
hood, for a young child’s emerging conscience and sense of
moral responsibility, emotional understanding, positive sense
of self, and motivation to achieve (Kochanska & Thompson,
1997; Laible & Thompson, 1998, 2000; Thompson, 2000a;
Waters et al., 1991). A secure attachment in infancy is impor-
tant, in short, because it reﬂects a positive parent-child
relationship and inaugurates processes of mutual positive
regard that can support healthy socioemotional growth in the
years that follow.
A secure attachment in infancy also supports other
socioemotional competencies (see Thompson, 1998, 1999,
for reviews). Longitudinal studies report that children with
secure attachments to parents (typically mothers) develop
more positive, supportive relationships with teachers,
friends, camp counselors, and others whom they come to
know well. Their positive social skills and friendly approach
to those with whom they develop new relationships seem to
evoke closer friendships with others. There is also evidence
that securely attached infants have stronger social skills in
their initial encounters with unfamiliar adults, perhaps
because they generalize the positive sociability that they
acquire in their relationships with caregivers.
Attachment relationships are important also because of
how they inﬂuence young children’s emergent understand-
ings of who they are and of what other people are like. Secure
or insecure attachments are associated with a child’s devel-
oping conceptions of self, others, and relationships that
constitute some of their earliest representations (or, in the
parlance of attachment theory, internal working models)
of the social world (Bretherton & Munholland, 1999;
Thompson, 2000a). Securely attached infants have been
found, for example, to have a more complex and sophisti-
cated understanding of themselves and their mothers com-
pared to insecurely attached infants (Pipp, Easterbrooks, &
Brown, 1993; Pipp, Easterbrooks, & Harmon, 1992; Pipp-
Siegel, Easterbrooks, Brown, & Harmon, 1995; Schneider-
Rosen & Cicchetti, 1984).

Relationships and Representation
103
In early childhood, when representations of self and the
social world begin to develop more fully, the inﬂuence of se-
cure attachments on the “self” becomes more apparent
(Thompson, 2000a). Securely attached young children have
been found to have positive views of the self (Cassidy, 1988;
Verschueren&Marcoen,1999),amoreeasily-accessedorbal-
anced self-concept (Cassidy, 1988; Easterbrooks & Abeles,
2000), a more sophisticated grasp of emotion (Laible &
Thompson, 1998), more positive understandings of friendship
(Cassidy, Kirsh, Scolton, & Parke, 1996; Kerns, 1996), and
more advanced conscience development (Kochanska &
Thompson, 1997; Laible & Thompson, 2000) compared with
insecurely attached young children (see review by Thompson,
1999). Attachment theorists argue that this arises not only
because of the continuing inﬂuences of sensitive parental care,
but also because attachment security provides important
lessons about what people, including the self, are like in close
relationships, including how rewarding or painful they might
be.Positivenotionslendconﬁdenceintheselfandguideyoung
children’s understanding and expectations in their encounters
with new relational partners (Sroufe & Fleeson, 1986).
Summary
The body of research just summarized adds credence to tradi-
tional views, expressed in Freud’s famous maxim, that the
mother-infant relationship has enduring effects on early
psychosocial development. Especially when the sensitivity
that initially led to a secure attachment is maintained into
early childhood, attachment security contributes to the
growth of a positive orientation toward others, emotional and
moral awareness, and self-understanding that are crucial
aspects of healthy psychological development. However, the
dynamic changes that can occur in the quality of caregiving,
and thus attachment security, remind us also that the effects
of early attachment are provisional, that is, contingent on
the enduring quality of these relationships in the years to
come. Moreover, early attachment does not solely determine
the course of later socioemotional growth and is only one of
the complex inﬂuences on early psychological development
(Sroufe, Carlson, Levy, & Egeland, 1999; Sroufe, Egeland, &
Kreutzer, 1990).
This means that in understanding the course of early
development, it is important to take a developmental
contextualist view (Lerner, 2002; Lerner & Kaufmann, 1985)
and to consider, along with the security of attachment, the
inﬂuences of a child’s temperamental attributes, biological
characteristics, intellectual capabilities, the parent’s stresses
and supports, the marital relationship, the demands or oppor-
tunities associated with socioeconomic status, and other
inﬂuences on early socioemotional growth (Belsky, 1981;
Easterbrooks, Davidson, & Chazan, 1993; Lyons-Ruth,
Easterbrooks, & Cibelli, 1997). Security of attachment is
important for its direct inﬂuences on early socioemotional de-
velopment, but it is also important as it buffers (or heightens)
the impact of risk factors that can undermine healthy psy-
chosocial growth, and enhances (or undercuts) the beneﬁts of
other supports that exist in the child’s world.
RELATIONSHIPS AND REPRESENTATION
The Transitions of Toddlerhood
As attachment theorists have shown, and as developmental
scientists concerned with cognitive development also have
recognized, early relationships are important for the growth
of social representation. From their experiences in close
attachment relationships and interactions with others, infants
acquire a sense of who they are, what people are like, and the
qualities of close relationships in the form of internal work-
ing models that encompass provisional understandings of the
self and social world. These rudimentary representations are
continuously revised in the years after infancy with advances
in conceptual understanding and experience in new and
different relationships. As infancy evolves into toddlerhood
and early childhood, a young child’s working models of self
and relationships change signiﬁcantly as parent-child rela-
tionships become forums of mutual understanding and
disagreement and as the child develops more complex forms
of psychological self- and other-awareness.
The Role of Conﬂict in Relationships
Although the emphasis of attachment theory is on the devel-
opment of warm, nurturant relationships with parents and
other caregivers, we have already noted that conﬂict and its
resolution are also part of these early relationships. In fact,
even securely attached dyads experience affective errors or
mismatches in emotional communication (Lyons-Ruth et al.,
1999); the repair of these missed communications is key to
successful emotion regulation and secure attachments. From
the dyssynchrony experienced in early face-to-face play to
the testing of wills evoked by the toddler’s independent
locomotion, parent-child differences in behavior, goals, inten-
tions, and expectations provide some of the most important
early catalysts to the young child’s growing awareness of the
subjectivity inherent in interpersonal relationships. Nothing
focuses a young child’s attention on what others are thinking,
feeling, and expecting better than the realization that

104
Social and Emotional Development in Infancy
disagreement with that person must be resolved. As a conse-
quence, conﬂict as well as security in early relationships
helps to shape emergent representations of self, others, and
relationships. Conﬂict, then, may be development enhancing
(Turiel, 1978, 1997).
The second and third years of life are marked by signiﬁ-
cant changes in parent-child relationships. Young children
are developing the cognitive skills to understand parental
expectations and apply them to their own behavior, and they
are becoming increasingly capable of regulating their own
actions according to internalized standards of conduct
(Kopp, 1982; Kopp & Wyer, 1994). At the same time, par-
ents “up the ante” in their expectations for the behavior of
offspring to incorporate consideration for others, basic skills
at self-care, safety concerns, and compliance with family
routines and manners (Campos et al., 2000; Erikson, 1950;
Gralinski & Kopp, 1993). The strategies used by parents to
elicit compliance also change to build on the young child’s
maturing capacities for self-control, and they begin to make
greater use of explanations, bargaining, indirect guidance,
and other nonassertive strategies (Belsky, Woodworth, &
Crnic, 1996; Crockenberg & Litman, 1990; Kuczynski,
Kochanska, Radke-Yarrow, & Girnius-Brown, 1987). In re-
sponse, young offspring cooperate but also assert their own
independent judgment by refusing before they comply and
by negotiating, compromising, and displaying other indica-
tors of self-assertion (Kuczynski & Kochanska, 1990;
Kuczynski et al., 1987; Vaughn, Kopp, & Krakow, 1984).
As a consequence, parent-child interaction in the toddler pe-
riod is a psychologically more complex process of mutual
understanding than it was in early infancy. This affords
young children frequent opportunities to expand and elabo-
rate their understandings of self and social relationships be-
cause
of
their
experience
of
shared
and
conﬂicting
intentions, feelings, and beliefs in their interactions with
caregivers.
Developments in Self and Social Understanding
These changes in parent-child interaction arise because of
the growth of psychological self-awareness in the second
and third years. Self-understanding grows rapidly in infancy
and early childhood (Stern, 1985, 1995). Early in infancy, a
rudimentary subjective self-awareness emerges from the
infant’s experience of the self as a causal agent in social
interaction and a volitional agent in play, especially when
accompanied by the strong emotions that are often experi-
enced in these situations. Somewhat later in the ﬁrst year, as
noted earlier, a new form of self-awareness arises as infants
become aware of subjective states in others that can be
accessed and altered, contributing to the realization that
differences exist between another’s feelings and intentions
and one’s own.
By the middle of the second year, another form of self-
awareness develops with the growth of physical self-
recognition. Toddlers who catch sight of their mirror images
after a spot of rouge has been surreptitiously applied to their
noses begin to respond with self-referential behavior (e.g.,
touching their noses) and other self-conscious acts (e.g., smil-
ing, looking away) that indicate that they recognize the mirror
image to be themselves (Lewis, 1993). By the end of the
second year and during the third year, young children become
more psychologically self-aware. They begin to use their
names and personal pronouns more frequently, describe them-
selves and their experiences to others, and assert their compe-
tence, independence, and responsibility as autonomous agents
by insisting on “doing it myself” (Bullock & Lutkenhaus,
1990; Heckhausen, 1988; Stipek, Gralinski, & Kopp, 1990).
This emergent psychological self-awareness also contributes
to the deﬁance and obstinacy that can occur with parents (lead-
ing to the charming description of this period as the “terrible
twos”); but beneath a young child’s assertion of self-will is a
newly discovered self-conscious sense inspiring reﬂection
and requiring expression and respect from others.
Because of these changes in the parent-child relationship
and the child’s psychological self-awareness, the end of in-
fancy and the beginning of early childhood also witness rapid
advances in social awareness. The initial, provisional work-
ing models of infancy change considerably as the young child
acquires growing insight into the feelings, intentions, and
(at a somewhat later age) thoughts of other people and into
the nature of human relationships. The child’s developing
sensitivity to the violation of behavioral standards and
emerging capacities for self-control, for example, together
with the incentives to cooperate with the parent that arise
from a secure attachment relationship, provide the founda-
tions for conscience development in early childhood as
young children adopt and comply with the expectations of
parents (Dunn, 1987; Emde et al., 1987; Kochanska &
Thompson, 1997). The emotional repertoire of infancy
expands considerably to include self-referential emotions
like pride, guilt, shame, and embarrassment that reﬂect the
young child’s growing awareness of and sensitivity to the
evaluations of others (Lewis, 1993; Tangney & Fischer,
1995). And with a developing understanding of the mental
states of others, young children begin to enlist this under-
standing in more competent social interaction, whether this
consists of negotiating with parents, teasing a sibling, or
achieving personally meaningful goals (e.g., having dessert
after dinner).

Conclusions: Applications To Policy and Practice and Imperatives For A Research Agenda
105
Summary
The close of infancy and the beginning of early childhood
brings, therefore, remarkable advances in psychological
growth that arise, in part, from the ﬂourishing representa-
tional capacities of the second and third years of life. As a
consequence, young children perceive themselves and regard
others much differently and become capable of understand-
ing relationships and interacting with others in ways that take
into account the perspectives, emotions, and intentions of
other people. Throughout this period, a young child’s close
relationships with caregivers remain central to the growth of
these representational working models through the warmth
and sensitivity of adult care. When caregivers focus a young
child’s attention on the human consequences of misbehavior,
exuberantly applaud a child’s accomplishments, help a young
child understand a sibling’s actions, or talk about the child’s
own emotions, they contribute to the growth and reﬁnement
of a young child’s early representations of who they are,
what other people like, and how relationships are negotiated.
These relational catalysts to social and emotional understand-
ing begin to be inﬂuential at the same time that children’s
representational abilities unfold (Thompson, 1998, 2000a),
providing a reminder that although caregiving relationships
change signiﬁcantly from infancy to early childhood, the
sensitivity of care—expressed in age-appropriate ways—
remains important throughout.
CONCLUSIONS: APPLICATIONS TO POLICY
AND PRACTICE AND IMPERATIVES FOR A
RESEARCH AGENDA
During the past decade or so, we have witnessed an explosion
of interest in infancy, within the scientiﬁc and popular milieu.
Technological advances in understanding the development
and functioning of the infant brain have gone hand in hand
with public engagement campaigns highlighting the impor-
tance of the early years of life for social and emotional, as well
as cognitive, development. Very early child development has
enjoyed currency in major media outlets and among politi-
cians and entertainers. The market is ﬁlled with infant prod-
ucts (T-shirts, toys, videos, music) extolling the amazing skills
of infants and is aimed at making babies “more stimulated,”
“smarter,” or “better attached.” Researchers and academics
now must ask the “so what?” question (Brady, Jacobs, &
Lerner, 2002) and consider how best to translate advances in
the scientiﬁc knowledge base about early social and emotional
development into policies and practices that promote positive
development (e.g., secure attachments, curiosity, self-conﬁ-
dence, cooperation, conﬂict resolution).
Although most researchers do not operate acontextually,
it is important to bring these issues of dissemination, policy,
and practice to the forefront, rather than the recesses, of
scientiﬁc investigation (Brady et al., 2002; Shonkoff &
Phillips, 2000). Thus far, the potential beneﬁts of develop-
mental science have yet to be realized. The reasons are com-
plex, including (a) traditional academic or university
structures that do not facilitate dissemination of applied
work, (b) the natural tendency of academe toward scientiﬁc
conservatism based on standards of scientiﬁc rigor, and
(c) the occasional suspicion of academe by some policy
makers and practitioners (Lerner, Fisher, & Weinberg,
2000). Efforts to bridge the divide between research and ap-
plication may be enhanced by embracing broader deﬁnitions
of the scientiﬁc enterprise, scientiﬁc rigor, and the surround-
ing context of scholarly and public policy endeavors (East-
erbrooks, Jacobs, Brady, & Mistry, 2001; Thompson &
Nelson, 2001).
The publication of From Neurons to Neighborhoods: The
Science of Early Childhood Development (Shonkoff &
Phillips, 2000) by the Committee on Integrating the Science
of Early Childhood Development presents a compelling man-
date for policy-makers, employers, and individuals to con-
sider what we know to be the fundamental needs of infants
and whether our social policies and practices facilitate posi-
tive infant social and emotional development for all infants.
Several key questions accompany this directive, including
those of the roles of culture and individual differences in bio-
logical predispositions and environmental context in shaping
individual development.
The bulk of our scientiﬁc knowledge in infant social and
emotional development is drawn from Western samples
(primarily North American) that are not representative of
diversity in race or ethnicity, family structure, or economic
context. In fact, some have assumed that all infants are the
same, echoing a bias that “babies are just babies,” not really
conscious beings until the onset of language.Although all cul-
tures have traditions that promote competence, in a heteroge-
neous society it is sometimes difﬁcult to distinguish individual
differences in typical social and emotional development from
deviations requiring concern and intervention. How does an
early intervention home visitor, for example, distinguish cul-
ture-bound caution and shy behavior from potentially prob-
lematic emotional inhibition? In addition, to what extent can
particular individual, relational, or contextual strengths com-
pensate for particular vulnerabilities or risks, particularly in
the frequent context of double jeopardy (Parker, Greer, &
Zuckerman, 1988) or multiple risks? The fact that we do not
have immediate answers to many of the most pressing ques-
tions in early social and emotional development does not

106
Social and Emotional Development in Infancy
mitigate the responsibility to use the extant knowledge to
ensure the best start for all infants.
The application of scientiﬁc research in infant social and
emotional development spans disciplinary boundaries (e.g.,
interdisciplinary or transdisciplinary team approaches to
early intervention). Earlier in this chapter we discussed recent
signiﬁcant developments in the knowledge base about infant
socioemotional functioning that have emerged from neuro-
science. This work in neuroscience crosses traditional notions
of disciplinarity but is easily embedded in a developmental
framework that includes social relationships. This research
calls into question both the limits of developmental plasticity
as well as deterministic views of early brain development. Fu-
ture work needs to map this knowledge of early development
onto the actual social ecology of infancy that considers not
only the primary caregiving relationship but also the broader
social networks and contexts in which infants develop.
Our understanding of the growth of social and emotional
capacities in infancy highlights that although infancy is a
period of origins, developmental processes early in life are
complex and multifaceted. Nature and nurture are in dynamic
interplay throughout infancy as caregivers respond to the
psychobiological individuality of offspring but also alter
temperamental qualities through the quality of care. Early
inﬂuences can have an enduring effect on young children, but
change is also evident. Continuity in early adaptation is
apparent primarily when the developmental context is main-
tained as the child grows so that early inﬂuences are actually
continuing ones that impact on psychosocial growth. The
dispositions, understanding, and relationships of the ﬁrst two
years are important not because they may inaugurate
unchanging developmental pathways, but because they
provide a foundation for the emergence of new representa-
tional capacities and relational capacities in the years that
follow. These underpinnings ideally set the stage for the tran-
sitions of early childhood to be approached with security,
curiosity, and conﬁdence in the self and in relationships.
REFERENCES
Ainsworth, M. D. S. (1967). Infancy in Uganda: Infant care and the
growth of love. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Ainsworth, M. D. S., Blehar, M. C., Waters, E., & Wall, S. (1978).
Patterns of attachment. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Baldwin, D. A., & Moses, L. J. (1996). The ontogeny of social
information-processing. Child Development, 67, 1915–1939.
Barr, R. G., Bakeman, M., Konner, M., & Adamson, L. (1987).
Crying in !Kung infants: Distress signals in a responsive context.
American Journal of Diseases of Children, 141, 486.
Bates, J. E. (1987). Temperament in infancy. In J. D. Osofsky (Ed.),
Handbook of infant development (2nd ed., pp. 1101–1149). New
York: Wiley.
Belsky, J. (1981). Early human experience: A family perspective.
Developmental Psychology, 17, 3–19.
Belsky, J., Campbell, S. B., Cohn, J. F., & Moore, G. (1996). Insta-
bility of infant-parent attachment security. Developmental Psy-
chology, 32, 921–924.
Belsky, J., Woodworth, S., & Crnic, K. (1996). Trouble in the sec-
ond year: Three questions about family interaction. Child Devel-
opment, 67, 556–578.
Berlin, L., & Cassidy, J. (1999). Relations among relationships:
Contributions from attachment theory and research. In J. Cassidy
& P. R. Shaver (Eds.), Handbook of attachment (pp. 688–712).
New York: Guilford Press.
Bertenthal, B., & Campos, J. J. (1990). A systems approach to the
organizing effects of self-produced locomotion during infancy.
In C. Rovee-Collier & L. Lipsitt (Eds.), Advances in infancy
research (Vol. 6, pp. 1–60). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Biringen, Z., Emde, R. N., Campos, J. J., & Appelbaum, M. I.
(1995). Affective reorganization in the infant, the mother, and
the dyad: The role of upright locomotion and its timing. Child
Development, 66, 499–514.
Bornstein, M. H. (1995). Parenting infants. In M. H. Bornstein
(Ed.), Handbook of parenting: Vol. 1. Children and parenting
(pp. 3–39). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Bornstein, M. H., Tal, J., & Tamis-LeMonda, C. S. (1991). Parent-
ing in crosscultural perspective: The United States, France, and
Japan. In M. H. Bornstein (Ed.), Cultural approaches to parent-
ing (pp. 69–90). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Bornstein, M. H., Toda, S., Azuma, H., Tamis-LeMonda, C. S., &
Ogino, M. (1990). Mother and infant activity and interaction in
Japan and in the United States: Pt. II. A comparative microanaly-
sis of naturalistic exchanges focused on the organization of in-
fant attention. International Journal of Behavioral Development,
13, 289–308.
Bowlby, J. (1982). Attachment and loss:, Vol. 1. Attachment.
(2nd ed.). New York: Basic Books. (Original work published
1969)
Brady, A. E., Jacobs, F. H., & Lerner, R. M. (2002). Social policy
and the enhancement of infant development. In M. Lewis &
A. Slater (Eds.), Introduction to infant development (pp. 284–
299). New York: Oxford University Press.
Braungart, J. M., & Stifter, C. A. (1991). Regulation of negative re-
activity during the Strange Situation: Temperament and attach-
ment in 12-month-old infants. Infant Behavior and Development,
14, 349–364.
Brazelton, T. B., Koslowski, B., & Main, M. (1974). The origins of
reciprocity: The early mother-infant interaction. In M. Lewis &
L. Rosenblum (Eds.), The effect of the infant on its caregiver
(pp. 49–76). New York: Wiley.

References
107
Bretherton, I., McNew, S., & Beeghly-Smith, M. (1981). Early per-
son knowledge as expressed in gestural and verbal communica-
tion: When do infants acquire a “theory of mind”? In M. Lamb &
L. Sherrod (Eds.), Infant social cognition (pp. 333–373).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Bretherton, I., & Munholland, K. A. (1999). Internal working
models in attachment relationships: A construct revisited. In
J. Cassidy & P. R. Shaver (Eds.), Handbook of attachment
(pp. 89–111). New York: Guilford Press.
Bullock, M., & Lutkenhaus, P. (1990).Who am I? Self-understanding
in toddlers. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 36, 217–238.
Calkins, S. D., Fox, N. A., & Marshall, T. R. (1996). Behavioral and
physiological antecedents of inhibition in infancy. Child Devel-
opment, 67, 523–540.
Calkins, S. D., & Johnson, M. C. (1998). Toddler regulation of dis-
tress to frustrating events: Temperamental and maternal corre-
lates. Infant Behavior and Development, 21, 379–395.
Campos, J. J., Anderson, D. I., Barbu-Roth, M. A., Hubbard, E. M.,
Hertenstein, M. J., & Witherington, D. (2000). Travel broadens
the mind. Infancy, 1, 149–219.
Campos, J. J., Kermoian, R., & Zumbahlen, M. R. (1992). Socio-
emotional transformations in the family system following infant
crawling onset. In N. Eisenberg & R. A. Fabes (Eds.), Emotion
and its regulation in early development (pp. 35–40). San
Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Campos, J. J., & Stenberg, C. R. (1981). Perception, appraisal, and
emotion: The onset of social referencing. In M. E. Lamb & L. R.
Sherrod (Eds.), Infant social cognition (pp. 273–314). Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Carpenter, M., Nagell, K., & Tomasello, M. (1998). Social cogni-
tion, joint attention, and communicative competence from 9 to
15 months of age. Monographs of the Society for Research in
Child Development, 63(4, Serial No. 255), 1–176.
Caspi, A. (1998). Personality development across the life course. In
W. Damon (Series Ed.) & N. Eisenberg (Vol. Ed.), Handbook of
child psychology: Vol. 3. Social, emotional, and personality
development (5th ed., pp. 311–388). New York: Wiley.
Cassidy, J. (1988). Child-mother attachment and the self in six-year-
olds. Child Development, 59, 121–134.
Cassidy, J. (1994). Emotion regulation: Inﬂuences of attachment
relationships. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child
Development, 59(2–3, Serial No. 240), 228–249.
Cassidy, J., Kirsh, S., Scolton, K. L., & Parke, R. D. (1996). Attach-
ment and representations of peer relationships. Developmental
Psychology, 32, 892–904.
Cassidy, J., & Shaver, P. R. (Eds.). (1999). Handbook of attachment:
Theory, research, and clinical applications. New York: Guilford
Press.
Chess, S., & Thomas, A. (1986). Temperament in clinical practice.
New York: Guilford Press.
Cicchetti, D., & Schneider-Rosen, K. (1986). An organizational ap-
proach to childhood depression. In M. Rutter, C. Izard, & P. Read
(Eds.), Depression in young people: Clinical and developmental
perspectives (pp. 71–134). New York: Guilford Press.
Cohn, J. F., Campbell, S. B., & Ross, S. (1991). Infant response in
the still-face paradigm at 6 months predicts avoidant and secure
attachment at 12 months. Child Development, 54, 367–376.
Cohn, J. F., & Tronick, E. Z. (1983). Three-month-old infants’ reac-
tion to simulated maternal depression. Child Development, 54,
185–193.
Colin, V. L. (1996). Human attachment. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Crockenberg, S., & Litman, C. (1990). Autonomy as competence in
2-year-olds: Maternal correlates of child deﬁance, compliance,
and self-assertion. Developmental Psychology, 26, 961–971.
Cummings, E. M., & Davies, P. (1994). Children and marital con-
ﬂict. New York: Guilford Press.
Dawson, G., & Ashman, S. B. (2000). On the origins of a vulnera-
bility to depression: The inﬂuence of the early social environ-
ment on the development of psychobiological systems related to
risk for affective disorder. In C. A. Nelson (Ed.), The Minnesota
Symposia on Child Psychology:, Vol. 31. The effects of early ad-
versity on neurobehavioral development (pp. 245–279). Mah-
wah, NJ: Erlbaum.
de Wolf, M. S., & van IJzendoorn, M. H. (1997). Sensitivity and
attachment: A meta-analysis on parental antecedents of infant
attachment. Child Development, 68, 571–591.
Diamond, A., Werker, J. F., & Lalonde, C. (1994). Toward under-
standing commonalities in the development of object search,
detour navigation, categorization, and speech perception. In
G. Dawson & K. W. Fischer (Eds.), Human behavior and the de-
veloping brain (pp. 380–426). New York: Guilford Press.
Dozier, M., Stovall, K. C., & Albus, K. E. (1999). Attachment and
psychopathology in adulthood. In J. Cassidy & P. R. Shaver
(Eds.), Handbook of attachment (pp. 497–519). New York:
Guilford Press.
Dunn, J. (1987). The beginnings of social understanding.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Dunn, J. (1993). Young children’s close relationships: Beyond
attachment. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Dunn, J. (1998). Siblings, emotion, and the development of under-
standing. In S. Braten (Ed.), Intersubjective communication and
emotion in early ontogeny: Studies in emotion and social inter-
action (pp. 158–168). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Easterbrooks, M. A. (1989). Quality of attachment to mother and to
father: Effects of perinatal risk status. Child Development, 60,
825–830.
Easterbrooks, M. A., & Abeles, R. (2000). Windows to the self
in eight-year-olds: Bridges to attachment representation and
behavioral adjustment. Attachment and Human Development, 2,
85–106.

108
Social and Emotional Development in Infancy
Easterbrooks, M. A., & Biringen, Z. (2000). Mapping the terrain of
emotional availability and attachment. Attachment and Human
Development, 2, 123–129.
Easterbrooks, M. A., Davidson, C. E., & Chazan, R. (1993). Psy-
chosocial risk, attachment, and behavior problems among
school-aged children. Development and Psychopathology, 5,
389–402.
Easterbrooks, M. A., & Goldberg, W. A. (1985). Effects of early
maternal employment on toddlers, mothers, and fathers. Devel-
opmental Psychology, 21, 774–783.
Easterbrooks, M. A., & Goldberg, W. A. (1990). Security of toddler-
parent attachment: Relation to children’s sociopersonality func-
tioning during kindergarten. In M. T. Greenberg, D. Cicchetti, &
E. M. Cummings (Eds.), Attachment in the preschool years
(pp. 221–244). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Easterbrooks, M. A., & Graham, C. A. (1999). Security of attach-
ment and parenting: Homeless and low-income housed mothers
and infants. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 69, 337–346.
Easterbrooks, M. A., Jacobs, F. H., Brady, A. E., & Mistry, J. (2001).
Assimilation and accommodation in applied research: The
Massachusetts Healthy Families Evaluation. Manuscript sub-
mitted for publication.
Emde, R. N. (1980). Emotional availability: A reciprocal reward
system for infants and parents with implications for prevention
of psychosocial disorders. In P. M. Taylor (Ed.), Parent-infant
relationships (pp. 87–115). Orlando, FL: Grune and Stratton.
Emde, R. N., & Buchsbaum, H. K. (1990). “Didn’t you hear my
Mommy?”: Autonomy with Iconnectedness in moral self emer-
gence. In D. Cicchetti & M. Beeghly (Eds.), The self in transi-
tion: Infancy to childhood (pp. 35–60). Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Emde, R. N., & Easterbrooks, M. A. (1985). Assessing emotional
availability in early development. In W. K. Frankenburg, R. N.
Emde, & J. W. Sullivan (Eds.), Early identiﬁcation of children at
risk: An international perspective (pp. 79–101). New York:
Plenum Press.
Emde, R. N., Johnson, W. F., & Easterbrooks, M. A. (1987). The
do’s and don’ts of early moral development: Psychoanalytic tra-
dition and current research. In J. Kagan & S. Lamb (Eds.), The
emergence of morality in young children (pp. 245–276).
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Erikson, E. (1950). Childhood and society. New York: W. W.
Norton.
Feinman, S. (Ed.). (1992). Social referencing and the social con-
struction of reality in infancy. New York: Plenum Press.
Fonagy, P., Steele, H., & Steele, M. (1991). Maternal representa-
tions of attachment during pregnancy predict the organization of
infant-mother attachment. Child Development, 62, 891–905.
Freud, S. (1963). An outline of psychoanalysis (J. Strachey, Trans.).
New York: W. W. Norton. (Original work published 1940)
Gekoski, M. J., Rovee-Collier, C. K., & Carulli-Rabinowitz, V.
(1983). A longitudinal analysis of inhibition of infant distress:
The origins of social expectations? Infant Behavior and Devel-
opment, 6, 339–351.
George, C., & Soloman, J. (1999). Attachment and caregiving: The
caregiving behavioral system. In J. Cassidy & P. R. Shaver
(Eds.), Handbook of attachment (pp. 649–670). New York:
Guilford Press.
Gesell, A. (1940). The ﬁrst ﬁve years of life: A guide to the study of
the preschool child. New York: Harper.
Gianino, A., & Tronick, E. Z. (1988). The mutual regulation model:
the infant’s self and interactive regulation and coping and defen-
sive capacities. In T. Field, P. McCabe, & N. Schneiderman
(Eds.), Stress and coping (Vol. 2, pp. 47–68). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Goldberg, W. A., & Easterbrooks, M. A. (1984). The role of marital
quality in toddler development. Developmental Psychology, 20,
504–514.
Goldsmith, H. H., Buss, A. H., Plomin, R., Rothbart, M. K.,
Thomas, A., Chess, S., Hinde, R. A., & McCall, R. B. (1987).
Roundtable: What is temperament? Four approaches. Child
Development, 58, 505–529.
Gottman, J. M., Katz, L. F., & Hooven, C. (1997). Meta-emotion:
How families communicate emotionally. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gould, S. J. (1977). Ontongeny and phylogeny. Cambridge, MA:
Belknap Press.
Gralinski, J. H., & Kopp, C. B. (1993). Everyday rules for behavior:
Mothers’ requests to young children. Developmental Psychol-
ogy, 29, 573–584.
Greenberg, M. T. (1999). Attachment and psychopathology in child-
hood. In J. Cassidy & P. R. Shaver (Eds.), Handbook of attach-
ment (pp. 469–496). New York: Guilford Press.
Grolnick, W. S., Bridges, L. J., & Connell, J. P. (1996). Emotion reg-
ulation in two-year-olds: Strategies and emotional expression in
four contexts. Child Development, 67, 928–941.
Gunnar, M. R. (1986). Human developmental psychoneuroen-
docrinology: A review of research on neuroendocrine responses
to challenge and threat in infancy and childhood. In M. E.
Lamb, A. Brown, & B. Rogoff (Eds.), Advances in develop-
mental
psychology
(Vol.
4,
pp.
51–103).
Hillsdale,
NJ:
Erlbaum.
Gunnar, M. R. (2000). Early adversity and the development of stress
reactivity and regulation. In C. A. Nelson (Ed.), Minnesota
Symposia on Child Psychology: Vol. 31. The effects of early
adversity on neurobehavioral development (pp. 163–200).
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Harkness, S. (1980). The cultural context of child development. In
C. M. Super & S. Harkness (Eds.), Anthropological perspectives
on child development (pp. 7–14). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Harwood, R. L., Scholmerich, A., & Schulze, P. A. (2000). Homo-
geneity and heterogeneity in cultural belief systems. In S.
Harkness, C. Raeff, & C. M. Super (Eds.), Variability in the
social construction of the child (pp. 41–58). San Francisco:
Jossey-Bass.

References
109
Hay, D. F., Nash, A., & Pedersen, J. (1983). Interaction between six-
month-old peers. Child Development, 54, 557–612.
Heckhausen, J. (1988). Becoming aware of one’s competence in the
second year: Developmental progression within the mother-
child dyad. International Journal of Behavioral Development,
11, 305–326.
Holden, G. W. (1995). Parental attitudes toward childrearing. In
M. H. Bornstein (Ed.), Handbook of parenting: Vol. 3. Status and
social conditions of parenting (pp. 359–392). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Holden, G. W., & Miller, P. C. (1999). Enduring and different: A
meta-analysis of the similarity in parents’ child rearing. Psycho-
logical Bulletin, 125, 223–254.
Howes, C. (1988). Peer interaction in young children. Monographs
of the Society for Research in Child Development, 53(1, Serial
No. 217), 1–94.
Howes, C. (1999). Attachment relationships in the context of multi-
ple caregivers. In J. Cassidy & P. R. Shaver (Eds.), Handbook of
attachment (pp. 671–687). New York: Guilford Press.
Hunziker, U. A., & Barr, R. G. (1986). Increased carrying reduces
infant crying: A randomized controlled trial. Pediatrics, 77,
641–648.
Isabella, R. A. (1995). The origins of infant-mother attachment:
Maternal behavior and infant development. In R. Vasta (Ed.),
Annals of child development (Vol. 10, pp. 57–82). London:
Jessica Kingsley.
Kagan, J. (1984). The nature of the child. New York: Basic Books.
Kagan, J. (1998). Biology and the child. In W. Damon (Series Ed.)
& N. Eisenberg (Vol. Ed.), Handbook of child psychology:
Vol. 3. Social, emotional, and personality development (5th ed.,
pp. 177–235). New York: Wiley.
Kagan, J., Reznick, J. S., & Snidman, N. (1987). The physiology
and psychology of behavioral inhibition in children. Child De-
velopment, 58, 1459–1473.
Kagan, J., & Snidman, N. (1991). Infant predictors of inhibited and
uninhibited proﬁles. Psychological Science, 2, 40–44.
Kagan, J., Snidman, N., & Arcus, D. (1998). Childhood derivatives
of high and low reactivity in infancy. Child Development, 69,
1483–1493.
Kaye, K. (1982). The mental and social life of babies. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Kerns, K. A. (1996). Individual differences in friendship quality and
their links to child-mother attachment. In W. W. Bukowski, A. F.
Newcomb, & W. W. Hartup (Eds.), The company they keep
(pp. 137–157). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Kochanska, G., Murray, K., & Coy, K. C. (1997). Inhibitory control
as a contributor to conscience in childhood: From toddler to
early school age. Child Development, 68, 263–277.
Kochanska, G., & Thompson, R. A. (1997). The emergence and de-
velopment of conscience in toddlerhood and early childhood. In
J. E. Grusec & L. Kuczynski (Eds.), Parenting strategies and
children’s internalization of values (pp. 53–77). New York:
Wiley.
Kohut, H. (1977). The restoration of the self. New York: Interna-
tional Universities Press.
Kopp, C. B. (1982). Antecedents of self-regulation: A developmen-
tal view. Developmental Psychology, 18, 199–214.
Kopp, C. B., & Wyer, N. (1994). Self-regulation in normal and atyp-
ical development. In D. Cicchetti & S. L. Toth (Eds.), Rochester
Symposium on Developmental Psychopathology: Vol. 5. Disor-
ders and dysfunctions of the self. (pp. 31–56). Rochester, NY:
University of Rochester Press.
Kuczynski, L., & Kochanska, G. (1990). Development of children’s
noncompliance strategies from toddlerhood to age 5. Develop-
mental Psychology, 26, 398–408.
Kuczynski, L., Kochanska, G., Radke-Yarrow, M., & Girnius-
Brown, O. (1987). A developmental interpretation of young
children’s noncompliance. Developmental Psychology, 23,
799–806.
Laible, D. J., & Thompson, R. A. (1998). Attachment and emotional
understanding in preschool children. Developmental Psychol-
ogy, 34, 1038–1045.
Laible, D. J., & Thompson, R. A. (2000). Mother-child discourse,
attachment security, shared positive affect, and early conscience
development. Child Development, 71, 1424–1440.
Lamb, M. E. (1981). The development of social expectations in the
ﬁrst year of life. In M. E. Lamb & L. R. Sherrod (Eds.), Infant so-
cial cognition (pp. 155–175). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Lamb, M. E. (1997). The development of father-infant relationships.
In M. E. Lamb (Ed.), The role of the father in child development
(3rd ed., pp. 104–120). New York: Wiley.
Lamb, M. E., & Malkin, C. M. (1986). The development of social
expectations in distress-relief sequences: A longitudinal study.
International Journal of Behavioral Development, 9, 235–249.
LeDoux, J. (1996). The emotional brain. New York: Touchstone.
Lerner, R. M. (2002). Concepts and theories of human development
(3rd ed.). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Lerner, R. M., & Kaufmann, M. B. (1985). The concept of develop-
ment in contextualism. Developmental Review, 5, 309–333.
Lerner, R. M., Fisher, C. B., & Weinberg, R. A. (2000). Toward a
science for and of the people: Promoting civil society through
the application of developmental science. Child Development,
71, 11–20.
Lewis, M. (1993). Self-conscious emotions: Embarrassment, pride,
shame, and guilt. In M. Lewis & J. M. Haviland (Eds.), Hand-
book of emotions (pp. 563–573). New York: Guilford Press.
Lewis, M. (1997). Altering fate: Why the past does not predict the
future. New York: Guilford Press.
Lyons-Ruth, K., Bronfman, E., & Parsons, E. (1999). Maternal atyp-
ical responsiveness and disorganized infant attachment patterns.
Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development,
64(3, Serial No. 258), 67–96.

110
Social and Emotional Development in Infancy
Lyons-Ruth, K., Easterbrooks, M. A., & Cibelli, C. D. (1997).
Infant attachment strategies, infant mental lag, and maternal
depressive symptoms: Predictors of internalizing and externaliz-
ing problems at age 7. Developmental Psychology, 33, 681–692.
Lyons-Ruth, K., & Jacobvitz, D. (1999). Attachment disorganiza-
tion: Unresolved loss, relational violence, and lapses in behav-
ioral and attentional strategies. In J. Cassidy & P. R. Shaver
(Eds.), Handbook of attachment (pp. 520–554). New York:
Guilford Press.
Main, M., Kaplan, N., & Cassidy, J. (1985). Security in infancy,
childhood, and adulthood: A move to the level of representation.
Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development,
50(1-2, Serial No. 209), 66–104.
Morelli, G. A., Rogoff, B., Oppenheim, D., & Goldsmith, D. (1992).
Cultural variation in infants’ sleeping arrangements: Questions
of independence. Developmental Psychology, 28, 604–613.
Morelli, G. A., & Tronick, E. Z. (1991). Efe multiple caretaking and
attachment. In J. L. Gewirtz & W. M. Kurtines (Eds.), Intersec-
tions with attachment (pp. 41–54). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Mueller, E., & Vandell, D.B. (1979). Infant-infant interaction. In
J.
D. Osofsky (Ed.). Handbook of infant development
(pp. 591–622). New York: Wiley.
Murray, L., & Trevarthen, C. (1985). Emotional regulation of inter-
actions between two-month-olds and their mothers. In T. M. Field
& N. A. Fox (Eds.), Social perception in infants (pp. 177–197).
Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Nachmias, M., Gunnar, M., Mangelsdorf, S., Parritz. R. H., & Buss,
K. (1996). Behavioral inhibition and stress reactivity: The mod-
erating role of attachment security. Child Development, 67,
508–522.
New, R. (2001). Quando c’e’ ﬁgli: Observations on Italian early
childhood. In L. Gandini & C. Edwards (Eds.), Infant-toddler
centers in Italy: The quality of experience (pp. 167–194). New
York: Teachers College Press.
NICHD Early Child Care Research Network (1997). The effects of
infant child care on infant-mother attachment security: Results
of the NICHD Study of Early Child Care. Child Development,
68, 860–879.
Oppenheim, D., Sagi, A., & Lamb, M. E. (1988). Infant-adult at-
tachments on the kibbutz and their relation to socio-emotional
development four years later. Developmental Psychology, 27,
727–733.
Parke, R. D., & Tinsley, B. J. (1987). Family interaction in infancy.
In J. D. Osofsky (Ed.), Handbook of infant development
(pp. 579–641). New York: Wiley.
Parker S., Greer, S., & Zuckerman, B. (1988). Double jeopardy: The
impact of poverty on early childhood. The Pediatric Clinics of
North America, 35(6), 1227–1240.
Pipp, S., Easterbrooks, M. A., & Brown, S. R. (1993). Attachment
status and complexity of infants’self- and other-knowledge when
tested with mother and father. Social Development, 2, 1–14.
Pipp, S., Easterbrooks, M. A., & Harmon, R. J. (1992). The
relation between attachment and knowledge of self and
mother in one- to three-year-old infants. Child Development,
63, 738–750.
Pipp-Siegel, S., Easterbrooks, M. A., Brown, S. R., & Harmon, R. J.
(1995). The relation between infants’self/mother knowledge and
three attachment categories. Infant Mental Health Journal, 16,
221–232.
Pomerleau, A., Malcuit, G., & Sabatier, C. (1991). Child-rearing
practices and parental beliefs in three cultural groups of Mon-
treal: Quebecois, Vietnamese, Haitian. In M. H. Bornstein (Ed.),
Cultural approaches to parenting (pp. 45–68). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Porges, S. W., Doussard-Roosevelt, J. A., & Maiti, A. K. (1994).
Vagal tone and the physiological regulation of emotion.
Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development,
59(2–3, Serial No. 240), 167–196.
Rothbart, M. K., & Bates, J. E. (1998). Temperament. In W. Damon
(Series Ed.) & N. Eisenberg (Vol. Ed.), Handbook of child psy-
chology: Vol. 3. Social, emotional, and personality development
(5th ed., pp. 105–176). New York: Wiley.
Rothbart, M. K., Posner, M. I., & Boylan, A. (1990). Regulatory
mechanisms in infant development. In J. T. Enns (Ed.), The
development of attention (pp. 47–66). Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Rothbaum, F., Weisz, J., Pott, M., Miyake, K., & Morelli, G. (2000).
Attachment and culture: Security in the United States and Japan.
American Psychologist, 55, 1093–1104.
Saarni, C. (1999). The development of emotional competence. New
York: Guilford Press.
Saarni, C., Mumme, D. L., & Campos, J. J. (1998). Emotional
development: Action, communication, and understanding. In
W. Damon (Series Ed.) & N. Eisenberg (Vol. Ed.), Handbook of
child psychology: Vol. 3. Social, emotional, and personality
development (5th ed., pp. 237–309). New York: Wiley.
Sameroff, A. J., & Chandler, M. J. (1975). Reproductive risk and the
continuum of caretaking casualty. In F. D. Horowitz, M.
Hetherington, S. Scarr-Salapatek, & G. Siegel, (Eds.), Review of
child development research (Vol. 4, pp. 187–244). Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Sander, L. W. (1964). Adaptive relationships in early mother-child
interaction. Journal of the American Academy of Child Psychia-
try, 3, 231–264.
Sanson, A., Prior, M., Oberklaid, F., & Smart, D. (1998). Tempera-
mental inﬂuences on psychosocial adjustment: From infancy to
adolescence. Australian Educational and Developmental Psy-
chologist, 15, 7–38.
Scarr, S. (1992). Developmental theories for the 1990s: Develop-
ment and individual differences. Child Development, 63, 1–19.
Scarr, S., & McCartney, K. (1983). How people make their own en-
vironments: A theory of genotype-environment effects. Child
Development, 54, 424–435.

References
111
Schmidt, L. A., Shahinfar, A., & Fox, N. A. (1996). Frontal EEG
correlates of dysregulated social behavior in children [Abstract].
Psychophysiology, 33, S8.
Schneider-Rosen, K., & Cichetti, D. (1984). The relationship
between affect and cognition in maltreated infants: Quality of
attachment and the development of self-recognition. Child
Development, 55, 648–658.
Schore, A. N. (1994). Affect regulation and the origin of the self:
The neurobiology of emotional development. Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Seifer, R., & Dickstein, S. (1993). Parental mental illness and infant
development. In C. H. Zeanah, Jr. (Ed.), Handbook of infant
mental health (pp. 120–142). New York: Guilford Press.
Seifer, R., Schiller, M., Sameroff, A. J., Resnick, S., & Riordan, K.
(1996). Attachment, maternal sensitivity, and temperament
during the ﬁrst year of life. Developmental Psychology, 32,
12–25.
Shaw, D. S., Keenan, K., & Vondra, J. I. (1994). Developmental pre-
cursors of externalizing behavior: Ages 1 to 3. Developmental
Psychology, 30, 355–364.
Shonkoff, J., & Phillips, D. (Eds.). (2000). From neurons to neigh-
borhoods:
The science of early childhood development.
Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Siegel, D. J. (1998). The developing mind: Toward a neurobiology
of interpersonal experience. The Signal, 6, 1–10.
Small, M. (1988). Our babies, ourselves: How biology and culture
shape the way we parent. New York: Doubleday.
Sroufe, L. A. (1997). Psychopathology as outcome of development.
Development and Psychopathology, 9, 251–268.
Sroufe, L. A., Carlson, E. A., Levy, A. K., & Egeland, B. (1999).
Implications of attachment theory for developmental psy-
chopathology. Development and Psychopathology, 11, 1–13.
Sroufe, L. A., Egeland, B., & Kreutzer, T. (1990). The fate of early
experience following developmental change: Longitudinal
approaches to individual adaptation in childhood. Child Devel-
opment, 61, 1363–1373.
Sroufe, L. A., & Fleeson, J. (1986). Attachment and the construc-
tion of relationships. In W. W. Hartup & Z. Rubin (Eds.),
Relationships and development (pp. 51–71). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Stern, D. (1985). The interpersonal world of the infant. New York:
Basic Books.
Stern, D. (1995). The motherhood constellation. New York: Basic
Books.
Stipek, D. (1995). The development of pride and shame in toddlers.
In J. P. Tangney & K. W. Fischer (Eds.), Self-conscious emotions
(pp. 237–252). New York: Guilford Press.
Stipek, D. J., Gralinski, J. H., & Kopp, C. B. (1990). Self-concept
development in the toddler years. Developmental Psychology,
26, 972–977.
Symons, D. K., & Moran, G. (1987). The behavioral dynamics of
mutual responsiveness in early face-to-face mother-infant
interaction. Child Development, 58, 1488–1495.
Tangney, J. P., & Fischer, K. W. (Eds.). (1995). Self-conscious emo-
tions. New York: Guilford Press.
Teti, D. M., Sakin, J., Kucera, E., Corns, K. M., & Das Eiden, R.
(1996). And baby makes four: Predictors of attachment security
among preschool-aged ﬁrstborns during the transition to sibling-
hood. Child Development, 67, 579–596.
Thompson, R. A. (1994). Emotion regulation: A theme in search of
deﬁnition. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child De-
velopment, 59(2–3, Serial No. 240), 25–52.
Thompson, R. A. (1998). Early sociopersonality development. In
W. Damon (Series Ed.) & N. Eisenberg (Vol. Ed.), Handbook of
child psychology: Vol. 3. Social, emotional, and personality
development (5th ed., pp. 25–104). New York: Wiley.
Thompson, R. A. (1999). Early attachment and later development.
In J. Cassidy & P. R. Shaver (Eds.), Handbook of attachment
(pp. 265–286). New York: Guilford Press.
Thompson, R. A. (2000a). The legacy of early attachments. Child
Development, 71, 145–152.
Thompson, R. A. (2000b). Childhood anxiety disorders from the
perspective of emotion regulation and attachment. In M. W.
Vasey & M. R. Dadds (Eds.), The developmental psychopathol-
ogy of anxiety (pp. 160–182). Oxford, UK: Oxford University
Press.
Thompson, R. A. (2002). Early brain development, the media, and
public policy. Book in preparation.
Thompson, R. A., & Nelson, C. E. (2001). Developmental science
and the media: Early brain development. American Psycholo-
gist, 56, 5–15.
Tobach, E., & Schnierla, T. C. (1968). The biopsychology of social
behavior of animals. In R. E. Cooke & S. Levin (Eds.), Biologic
basis of pediatric practice (pp. 68–82). New York: McGraw-
Hill.
Tomasello, M., Kruger, A. C., & Ratner, H. H. (1993). Cultural
learning. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 16, 495–511.
Triandis, H. C. (1995). Individualism and collectivism. Boulder,
CO: Westview.
Tronick, E. Z. (1989). Emotions and emotional communication in
infants. American Psychologist, 44, 112–119.
Tronick, E. Z. (2001, November). The process of connecting and
disconnecting: Implications for attachment theory. Paper pre-
sented at the meeting of the Boston Institute for the Development
of Infants and Parents, Chestnut Hill, MA.
Tronick, E. Z., & Cohn, J. F. (1989). Infant-mother face-to-face
interaction: Age and gender differences in coordination and the
occurrence of miscoordination. Child Development, 60, 85–92.
Tronick, E. Z., Morelli, G. A., & Winn, S. (1987). Multiple
caregiving of Efe (Pygmy) infants. American Anthropologist, 89,
96–106.

112
Social and Emotional Development in Infancy
Turiel, E. (1978). Social regulations and domains of social concepts.
In W. Damon (Ed.), New directions for child developmentI:
Vol. 1. Social cognition. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Turiel, E. (1997). The development of morality. In N. Eisenberg
(Ed.),
Handbook of child psychology
(5th ed., Vol. 3,
pp. 863–932). New York: Wiley.
van den Boom, D. C. (1989). Neonatal irritability and the develop-
ment of attachment. In G. A. Kohnstamm, J. E. Bates, & M. K.
Rothbart (Eds.), Temperament in childhood (pp. 299–318). New
York: Wiley.
van IJzendoorn, M. H., & Sagi, A. (1999). Cross-cultural patterns of
attachment: Universal and contextual dimensions. In J. Cassidy
& P. R. Shaver (Eds.), Handbook of attachment (pp. 713–735).
New York: Guilford Press.
Vaughn, B. E., Egeland, B., Sroufe, L. A., & Waters, E. (1979).
Individual differences in infant-mother attachment at twelve and
eighteen months: Stability and change in families under stress.
Child Development, 50, 971–975.
Vaughn, B. E., Kopp, C. B., & Krakow, J. B. (1984). The emergence
and consolidation of self-control from eighteen to thirty months
of age: Normative trends and individual differences. Child
Development, 55, 990–1004.
Verschueren, K., & Marcoen, A. (1999). Representation of self and
socioemotional competence in kindergartners: Differentials and
combined effects of attachment to mother and to father. Child
Development, 70, 183–201.
Waters, E., Kondo-Ikemura, K., Posada, G., & Richters, J. E. (1991).
Learning to love: Mechanisms and milestones. In M. R. Gunnar
& L.A. Sroufe (Eds.), Minnesota Symposia on Child Psychology,
Vol. 23. Self processes and development. (pp. 217–255). Hills-
dale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Watson, J. S. (1972). Smiling, cooing, and “the game.” Merrill-
Palmer Quarterly, 18, 323–339.
Watson, J. S. (1979). Perception of contingency as a determinant of
social responsiveness. In E. B. Thoman (Ed.), Origins of the
infant’s social responsiveness (pp. 33–64). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Yu, A. C. (1984). The child rearing practices in the traditional
Korean society. Seoul, Korea: Jung-Min-Sa.
Zimmerman, L., & McDonald, L. (1995). Emotional availability in
infants’ relationships with multiple caregivers. American Jour-
nal of Orthopsychiatry, 65, 147–152.

CHAPTER 5
Stress and Emotion in Early Childhood
MEGAN R. GUNNAR AND ELYSIA POGGI DAVIS
113
THE PSYCHOBIOLOGY OF STRESS
114
The Limbic-Hypothalamic-Pituitary-
Adrenocortical System
115
Autonomic Regulation
116
Limbic Regulation
117
Frontal Regulation
118
Summary
119
PSYCHOBIOLOGICAL STUDIES OF STRESS AND
EMOTION IN CHILDREN
119
Developmental Periods of Stress Reactivity
and Regulation
120
Individual Differences
125
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
128
REFERENCES
129
Stress is a fact of life. Even before birth, successful adapta-
tion requires responding to stressors and regulating stress
reactions. What causes us to react and how we regulate
stress change during development and differ among indi-
viduals. These differences affect our physical and emo-
tional health and determine whether we experience events
as threats or challenges. In this chapter we adopt a devel-
opmental psychobiological approach to the study of stress
in early development. Further, we explore the intimate, but
not isomorphic, relations among emotions, temperament,
and stress.
Developmental psychobiologists approach the study of
stress from a systems perspective (e.g., Gottlieb, Whalsten, &
Lickliter, 1998). (Note that to reduce the overall length of the
chapter, the number of citations had be limited. Whenever
possible we have cited review papers rather than original
studies. We hope that the interested reader is able to use these
reviews to ﬁnd the original studies supporting the points
made in this chapter.) This perspective, with its roots in epi-
genetic approaches to comparative psychology (e.g., Kuo,
1976), is shared by many developmental frameworks (e.g.,
Lerner, 1986; Sameroff, 1983). Accordingly, the stress sys-
tem is viewed as hierarchically organized into reciprocally
inﬂuencing systems and subsystems. Whereas understanding
organization on one level requires understanding the roles
played by systems at lower levels of organization, reduction-
istic explanations are viewed as misleading. Plasticity is seen
as an inherent characteristic of living systems; nonetheless,
with development, plasticity is expected to narrow. Under-
standing the boundaries of plasticity and recognizing the
processes involved in narrowing the range of likely adapta-
tions as development proceeds are central to research on the
developmental psychobiology of stress.
The developmental systems perspective is overwhelm-
ingly complex. Coherence of a sort is achieved by reference
to several critical propositions. First, development proceeds
through activity-dependent processes. At all levels of the or-
ganism, the critical question is how that activity shapes future
responses to, creation of, and selection of experiences. Sec-
ond, activity involves not only responses, but also regulation
of responses; thus, no reaction of the organism can be under-
stood without an equal focus on how the reaction is regulated.
Finally, the systems that regulate development do not stop at
the skin, but extend into the social contexts that are essential
for the survival of the developing young.
Work on this manuscript was supported by a National Institute of
Mental Health Research Scientist Award (MH00946) to the ﬁrst au-
thor. The authors wish to thank the members of the NIMH-funded,
Early Experience and Glucocorticoid Network (MH60766) for in-
sightful discussions of many of the issues contained in this review.
Particular thanks are due to Delia Vazquez, Paul Plotsky, and Mar
Sanchez of the Network for comments on earlier drafts. In addition,
we wish to thank Jonathan Gewirtz, Monica Luciana, and Jay
Schulkin for their comments on sections of the manuscript.

114
Stress and Emotion in Early Childhood
The developmental psychobiology of stress is eclectic.
Because the neural systems underlying emotions and emo-
tionality inﬂuence the activation and regulation of behavioral
and physiological responses to stressors, developmental
psychobiological research on stress is intimately related to
neuroscience research on emotions and temperament. Theory
and research in these domains, however, are not always con-
sistent with a developmental systems approach. Tempera-
ment theorists, for example, often adopt main effect rather
than transactional models in studies of the development
of temperament (Kagan, 1994), whereas neuroscience re-
search is often overly reductionist (see discussion by West &
King, 2001). Nevertheless, the emphasis on neural plasticity
in neuroscience (e.g., Hann, Huffman, Lederhendler, &
Meinecke, 1998) and psychobiological models of tempera-
ment (Rothbart, Derryberry, & Posner, 1994) provides
bridges from these research domains to developmental psy-
chobiological research on stress.
In this chapter we review what is known about the
development of activity and regulation of the two arms
of the stress system, the limbic-hypothalamic-pituitary-
adrenocortical (L-HPA) and brain-stem norepinephrine/
sympathetic-adrenomedullary (NE-SAM) systems. We begin
with an overview of the neurobiology of the L-HPA system
and the autonomic nervous system, emphasizing the SAM
system. Next we describe limbic and cortical circuits in-
volved in the ability to anticipate threat and engage in
preparatory responses and the way these circuits modulate
and may be modulated by the L-HPA and SAM systems. This
is followed by a discussion of what is known about the on-
togeny of these systems and of the way individual differences
in the development of reactivity and regulation of these sys-
tems may be related to temperament and caregiving. We con-
clude with some thoughts about the need for basic research
examining the development of stress systems in order to bet-
ter our understanding of the origins of individual differences
in stress reactivity and regulation. We begin, however, with a
general discussion of the concept of stress as it is used in the
psychobiological literature.
THE PSYCHOBIOLOGY OF STRESS
Stress is difﬁcult to deﬁne. Like the terms motivation and
emotion, periodically there are calls to strike stress from the
scientiﬁc lexicon (e.g., Engle, 1985). Stress variously refers
to objective events (stressors), subjective psychological
states (being stressed), and physiological responses (e.g.,
increases in cortisol). Following Selye (1975), in this chapter
we refer to the events that precipitate stress reactions as
stressors and the responses to those events as stress reactions.
Events that have the potential to stimulate stress responses
are not stressors for all individuals or at all ages. Intra-
individual processes mediate the effect of the event on the re-
sponse (e.g., Frankenhaeuser, 1979). Stress results when the
demands of internal or external events exceed immediately
available resources. These demands may be physiological,
including being overheated, chilled, and so on. They may
also be psychological, including perceived threat, failure of
expectation, and social rejection. Such conditions threaten
well-being and require a shifting of metabolic resources to
fuel the processes needed for self-protection. This shift in
metabolic resources favors systems involved in immediate
survival and threat-related learning processes. When intense
or prolonged, this metabolic shift limits activity in systems
performing functions that are future oriented, including func-
tions directed at growth and repair. Shifting resources to
maintain organism viability is termed allostasis or stability
through change (McEwen, 1998). The capacity to respond
to stress through allostatic adjustments is necessary for
survival. Increasing evidence suggests that when stress re-
sponses are limited or acute, they tend to enhance function-
ing. However, these adjustments have costs that, if frequent
or prolonged, may undermine health and development. Thus,
as important as activation is in understanding the psychobiol-
ogy of stress, an understanding of the processes that regulate
stress reactions is critical.
Two systems orchestrate stress responses in mammals: the
L-HPA and the NE-SAM systems (Johnson, Kamilaris,
Chrousos, & Gold, 1992). These systems interact in complex
ways at all levels of their organization. In the early 1900s
Cannon (1936) argued that the SAM system was responsible
for coordinating the physiological and behavioral responses
necessary to meet external challenges to the constancy of the
internal milieu. Building on Bernard’s theory that organisms
have evolved complex adaptive mechanisms to stabilize their
internal states, Cannon proposed the concept of ﬁght/ﬂight
to describe the behavioral functions of the SAM system.
Later, when Selye (e.g., 1975) presented his theory of the
general adaptation syndrome, attention shifted from the SAM
to the L-HPA system. Both Cannon and Selye recognized that
thoughts and emotions could produce increases in sym-
pathetic and adrenocortical activity even when there were no
physical threats to homeostasis. However, it was not until re-
searchers understood that activity of the pituitary gland was
under the regulation of hypothalamic releasing and inhibiting
factors that the outlines of our current understanding of stress
and its relations to the neurobiology of emotion and cognition
began to be discerned. It is now well recognized that the
SAM and L-HPA system are regulated in part by forebrain

The Psychobiology of Stress
115
structures and pathways, including regions in the prefrontal
cortex (Johnson et al., 1992). As in all areas of neuroscience,
most of what we know is based on animal research and, when
conducted in humans, generally involves adults. Thus, cau-
tion is necessary in extrapolating the information presented
here to human infants and children.
Contemporary formulations of stress describe a loosely
integrated system consisting of neuroanatomical and func-
tional subsystems. Below the neck, stress biology centers
on the regulation of glucocorticoids or CORT (cortisol in
primates, corticosterone in rodents) and catecholamines, pri-
marily norepinephrine and epinephrine (NE and EPI) (e.g.,
Johnson et al., 1992). In the periphery, CORT and cate-
cholamines operate to increase the energy available for action
through inhibiting glucose uptake into storage sites and liber-
ating energy from fat and protein stores. Concurrently, they
stimulate increases in cardiovascular and pulmonary function
to support the increased motor activity needed in times
of challenge. Finally, in concert with central components of
the stress system, they function to modulate the biology of
growth and repair, including digestion, physical growth, im-
mune function, and reproduction. In the brain, the stress sys-
tem is orchestrated through reciprocal interactions among NE
and hypothalamic and extra-hypothalamic corticotropin-
releasing hormone (CRH).
Levels of the stress system mature and become organized
over the course of development. In humans, the hypothalamic-
brain-stem level develops largely during the prenatal period.
Development and integration of limbic and hypothalamic-
brain-stem circuits likely occur over the course of infancy
(Vazquez, 1998).The frontal cortex is also involved in the reg-
ulation of limbic and hypothalamic nuclei. The long period of
development of the frontal cortex that extends into adoles-
cence (Huttenlocher, 1994) likely means that a protracted
period of development of stress reactivity and regulation in
humans exists. A prolonged period of postnatal development
of the stress system also suggests that postnatal experience
may play critical and multiple roles in emerging individual
differences in stress reactivity and regulation (e.g., Heim,
Owen, Plotsky, & Nemeroff, 1997). Next we describe each
level of the stress system in more detail.
The Limbic-Hypothalamic-Pituitary-Adrenocortical
System
The L-HPA system orchestrates mammalian stress biology
through the activity of CRH (e.g., Nemeroff, 1996). CRH is a
neuroactive peptide produced in the hypothalamus and in
extra-hypothalamic sites. In the hypothalamus its production
begins the cascade of events that culminates in increased
production of CORT by the adrenal glands. Along with sev-
eral other secretagogues, CRH regulates the production of
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) by the anterior
pituitary (for review, see Palkovits, 1987). Released into gen-
eral circulation, ACTH binds to receptors on adrenocortical
cells in the cortex of the adrenal glands and stimulates the
biosynthesis and release of CORT into general circulation.
Negative feedback regulates L-HPA activation and CORT
production. Current evidence suggests that negative feedback
is a widely distributed system involving CORT receptors in,
but not limited to, the prefrontal cortex, hypothalamus, hip-
pocampus, and the anterior pituitary gland (e.g., de Kloet,
Vreugdenhil, Oitzl, & Joels, 1998; Sanchez, Young, Plotsky,
& Insel, 2000).
CRH-producing cells in the hypothalamus receive input
from other limbic, hypothalamic, and brain-stem nuclei. As
discussed later, NE is a major stimulus of CRH activity in
response to psychological stressors. However, multiple neuro-
transmitter and neuropeptide systems, beyond the NE system,
are involved in regulating CRH (Palkovits, 1987). Further-
more, hypothalamic CRH-producing cells also receive input
from other nuclei in the hypothalamus, particularly those
involved in daily energy ﬂow (Dallman et al., 1993). The
net result is that the production of cortisol is not a direct
reﬂection of the individual’s emotional state. Rather, it reﬂects
the extent to which signals impinging on the hypothalamus
from all sources indicate that extraordinary resources can
and must be expended in order to meet the demands of the
moment.
Balancing internal and external demands is reﬂected not
only in CRH activity at the level of the hypothalamus, but
also in CRH activity at extra-hypothalamic sites (Nemeroff,
1996). CRH is produced in many brain structures that are in-
volved in associating fear and anxiety with activation of the
stress system, including the amygdala and prefrontal cortex.
In addition, one subtype of the CRH receptor, CRH1, appears
speciﬁcally to mediate fear-related functions, whereas in-
creasing evidence suggests that CRH2 receptors are more in-
volved in anxiety states (Steckler & Holsboer, 1999). The
neuroanatomy of the CRH system has lead to the (likely
overly simplistic) view of CRH as the central orchestrator of
the stress system, both in terms of endocrine and behavioral
responses.
CORT has ﬁgured prominently in research on the health
consequences of chronic stress. One common fallacy about
the L-HPA system is that CORT is necessarily bad for one’s
health and development. In fact, the relationship between
CORT and healthy adaptation is an inverted-U function.
Although it appears that chronic or frequent high CORT can
be detrimental, it is equally apparent that insufﬁcient CORT

116
Stress and Emotion in Early Childhood
has negative consequences (McEwen, 1998). One hypothesis
is that the basis for this inverted-U function lies in the two
receptors for CORT, termed mineralocorticoid receptors
(MR) and glucocorticoid receptors (GR), and the different
functions they mediate (de Kloet et al., 1998). According to
this hypothesis, MRs primarily mediate processes that sus-
tain and promote mental and physical health, whereas GRs
mediate effects that shunt metabolic resources from growth
and repair to catabolic activities needed to manage immedi-
ate threats. MRs tend to be occupied when CORT levels are
in the basal range. GRs become occupied as CORT levels rise
in response to stressors. As GRs become occupied, CRH
activity in the hypothalamus is restrained and the stress
response is terminated. Activation of this system and activa-
tion of GRs is normal and probably has beneﬁcial effects.
However, when GRs are occupied chronically, GR-mediated
biochemical events can threaten neuronal viability and down-
regulate or reduce the GRs available to terminate the stress
response, leading to an increase in CORT production. Thus,
frequent or prolonged elevations in CORT have been postu-
lated to be one cause of subsequent heightened and prolonged
CORT elevations following trauma or chronic adversity. Im-
portantly, early experiences in rodents shape the MR and GR
receptor systems (e.g., Caldji et al., 1998; Levine, 1994).
Conditions associated with adequate maternal care result in
increased MR/GR ratios that allow better containment of the
stress response and promotive effects associated with MR
occupation to be produced across a wider range of CORT
production. Histories of inadequate nurturance result in the
opposite pattern of decreased MR/GR ratios.
Autonomic Regulation
Although the L-HPA system now ﬁgures prominently in re-
search on stress, the older focus on the SAM system has not
been lost (see review by Johnson et al., 1992). Consider the
catecholamines EPI and NE. EPI is produced by the adrenal
medulla and then released into general circulation. EPI acts
as a stress hormone, whereas NE produced at synapses is a
neurotransmitter. Both EPI and NE act to energize and mobi-
lize the organism for action. Neurons of the hypothalamus
and other cell groups within the brain stem are the central
coordinators of the sympathetic nervous system (SNS). In
the brain, NE-producing neurons originating in the locus
coeruleus (LC) project widely throughout the cortex.
Although the LC has often been considered a component of
central autonomic control, there is little evidence to support
this view. LC projections seem to be involved in arousal
(Saper, 1995). In addition, LC neurons project to the CRH-
producing cells in the hypothalamus, serving as a primary
stimulus of increased CRH production and sensitization in
response to emotional stressors. In a parallel but independent
system, CRH-producing neurons in the amygdala project to
the LC, bringing activity of the LC under the regulation of
extra-hypothalamic CRH. The central nucleus of the amyg-
dala also stimulates activity of the SAM system via projec-
tions to the lateral hypothalamus and brain-stem autonomic
nuclei. Although the SAM system has long been associated
with stress, its activity is not speciﬁc to threatening or aver-
sive events. Instead, because of the role of the sympathetic
system in supporting rapid energy mobilization, its activity
tends to track conditions requiring effort and information
processing more generally, rather than those involving dis-
tress and uncertainty about outcomes more speciﬁcally (e.g.,
Frankenhaeuser, 1979). Despite this, frequent mobilization of
the sympathetic system, particularly in the presence of ele-
vated CORT, can threaten physical health.
The SAM system forms one arm of the autonomic nervous
system (ANS). The other arm of this system is the parasym-
pathetic nervous system (PNS). Unlike the SAM system,
which is sometimes referred to as a diffuse or mass-discharge
system, the PNS tends to be more ﬁne-tuned, having discrete
effects on the organ systems that it innervates (Hugdahl,
1995). Similar to the health-promotive effects of MRs for the
L-HPA system, the PNS primarily promotes anabolic activi-
ties concerned with the conservation and restoration of en-
ergy (Porges, 1995a, 1995b). The presence of PNS terminals
on most organs and tissues innervated by the SAM system
allows the PNS to serve as a major regulator of sympathetic
effects. Furthermore, although both the PNS and SAM sys-
tems have been viewed as efferent systems that carry out
work dictated by the brain, both systems also have afferent
projections to the brain. These afferent projections not only
inform the brain about the status of organs and tissues in the
periphery but also allow autonomic regulation of the central
nervous system.
Parasympathetic neuronal projections leave the brain
through several cranial nerves including the 10th cranial, or
vagus nerve, which has been the focus of most of the psy-
chophysiological research relating activity of the PNS to
stress and emotion (Porges, 1995a, 1995b). In the following
description we draw heavily from Porges’s work, which has
stimulated much of the developmental work on emotion and
stress (see also the review by Beauchaine, in press). The pri-
mary ﬁbers of the vagus nerve originate in two nuclei in the
medulla: the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus (DMNX),
which
regulates
visceral
functions,
and
the
nucleus
ambiguus (NA), which regulates functions associated with
communication and emotion. In addition, a third medullary
nucleus, the nucleus tractus solitarius (NTS) receives many

The Psychobiology of Stress
117
of the afferent projections traveling through the vagus from
peripheral organs. In his polyvagal theory, Porges (1995a)
argued that this trinity of nuclei forms the central regulatory
component of the vagal system. Efferent projections from
the NA, the smart vagus (Vna), are the principal vagal com-
ponent in vagal cardiac and bronchomotor regulation. The
intimate associations between Vna and facial and vocal ex-
pressions of emotion, in combination with afferent projec-
tions through the NTS, provide pathways through which
emotion regulation may contribute to stress regulation, and
vice versa. Though still speculative, this polyvagal theory
offers a number of insights into the potential role of the PNS
in regulating stress biology (Porges, 1995b). Speciﬁcally,
high-baseline Vna should increase the individual’s ability to
cope effectively with stress by permitting the lifting of what
Porges termed the vagal break, allowing rapid increases in
sympathetic activity to shift metabolic resources quickly
in response to challenge. In addition, feedback to the NTS
via afferent projections of the vagal system should stimu-
late CNS containment of both the L-HPA and SAM system
reactivity.
Limbic Regulation
The physiology of stress can be activated and regulated with
little or no input from limbic or cortical centers. Limbic-
cortical involvement provides the opportunity to anticipate
threats to homeostasis before they are actualized, allowing
for preparatory, defensive responses. Integration of corticol-
imbic with hypothalamic-brain-stem stress systems also
means that feedback and afferent projections of the L-HPA,
NE-SAM, and vagal systems inﬂuence cognitive-emotional
behavior. All attempts to describe the neurobiology of
emotion and stress trace their history to work by Papez
as elaborated by MacLean (1952). Accordingly, emotions
involve the integration of neural structures that include
hypothalamic and brain-stem nuclei, along with structures
such as the amygdala, hippocampus, cingulate gyrus, and or-
bitofrontal cortex (see Figure 5.1).
The amygdala has long been known to mediate adreno-
cortical responses to psychosocial stressors (Palkovits,
1987). Its role in negative emotion and conditioned fear is
also now well established (for review, see Rosen & Schulkin,
1998). The amygdala and the bed nucleus of the stria termi-
nalis (BNST) form the core structures in current views of the
neurobiology of fear, anxiety, and emotional activation of the
stress system. The amygdala is comprised of multiple nuclei
that are richly interconnected with other parts of the brain.
The central nucleus of the amygdala (CEA) has widespread
inﬂuence over the L-HPA, NE-SAM, and vagal systems via
amygdalofugal and stria terminalis pathways. Lesions of the
amygdala and surrounding cortex in adult animals prevent
elevations in stress hormones to psychological stressors such
as physical restraint but do not prevent elevations to physical
stressors such as illness or surgery. Such lesions also affect
negative emotionality and impair fear conditioning. Although
some have speculated that the CEA is involved in anxiety
(e.g., with regard to behavioral inhibition, see Kagan, 1994),
the role of the CEA in anxiety has recently been questioned.
Indeed, Davis has argued that the BNST is more centrally in-
volved in regulating anxious affectivity (for discussion, see
Rosen & Schulkin, 1998). Nonetheless, although controversy
exists regarding the roles of the CEA and BNST in the regu-
lation of fear versus anxiety, both structures and their circuits
are involved in the regulation of L-HPA and SAM system
responses to events that elicit negative emotionality.
Figure 5.1

118
Stress and Emotion in Early Childhood
Current views hold that the threshold for activating the
CEA and BNST is regulated by extra-hypothalamic CRH.
Similar to stimulation of the CEA, microinfusions of CRH
into the CEA produce fear behaviors in primates (reviewed
by Rosen & Schulkin, 1998). The fear-inducing effects of
CRH are mediated by CRH1 receptors, and experiences that
increase fearful reactions to events also tend to increase
CRH1 receptors in these regions (for review, see Steckler &
Holsboer, 1999). There is also increasing evidence that CRF2
receptors may be involved in regulating anxiety and related
states. These facts would seem to argue for a close coupling
between fear/anxiety and elevations in CORT. As reﬂected in
syndromes such as posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD),
however, this is not always the case. Whereas elevated NE
and EPI have been described in PTSD, remarkably, basal
cortisol levels are normal or even suppressed and the L-HPA
response to stressors is often dampened although levels of
CRH are increased (see review by Yehuda, 1998). Never-
theless, emotion-modulated startle responses, which are be-
lieved to reﬂect responsivity of the CEA and BNST, are
increased in animal models of PTSD and are further en-
hanced by infusions of CRH especially in the presence of
high CORT (see review by Rosen & Schulkin, 1998). Odd as
it may seem, the limbic CRH and hypothalamic CRH sys-
tems appear only loosely coupled. It is not uncommon to ﬁnd
dissociations between these levels of the CRH system and,
consequently, between activity of the L-HPA and NE-SAM
systems. There is some suggestion that these dissociations
may be the result of prolonged elevations in CORT (e.g.,
Rosen & Schulkin, 1998). In animal models, prolonged
CORT elevations produce increased activity of CRH-
producing cells in the CEA but decreased activity of similar
cells in the hypothalamus. Adrenalectomy (i.e., eliminating
CORT) has the opposite effect. Dissociations of this sort
may contribute to the development of anxiety disorders (see
also Cameron & Nesse, 1988).
Frontal Regulation
Frontal regulation of the limbic, hypothalamic, and brain-stem
circuits involved in stress and emotion is a comparatively new
frontier in stress research. Although it has long been recog-
nized that the orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) and anterior cingu-
late cortex (ACC) play critical roles in regulating emotional
behavior (e.g., MacLean, 1952), their roles in regulating ac-
tivity of the L-HPA and autonomic systems are increasingly
appreciated. Indeed, the degree and breadth of interconnectiv-
ity between the amygdala and frontal cortex in primates have
been one of the surprising ﬁndings of the last two decades
(Emery & Amaral, 2000). Perhaps especially in primates, the
frontal cortex appears to play a central role in stress reactivity
and regulation. In this section we brieﬂy describe OFC and
ACC regulation of the stress system. Then we broaden the
discussion to current views of the roles played by analytic
reasoning and positive affectivity.
The OFC and medial cortex have numerous reciprocal
connections to the amygdala and other limbic regions (Price,
1999). These connections support the integration of sensory
and affective signals, allowing the organization of behavior
in relation to reward and punishment. They are also critically
important in organizing and modulating behavior so that it is
appropriate to the social context. It has been hypothesized
that the OFC and its connections to the amygdala and other
limbic regions help to mediate attachment effects on stress
reactivity and regulation (Schore, 1996). This argument is
supported by evidence that the OFC and medial prefrontal
regions have connections with hypothalamic and brain-stem
regions that regulate behavioral, neuroendocrine, and auto-
nomic stress responses. Thus, activity in this region may be
important in modulating autonomic and neuroendocrine
stress responses.
Technically, the ACC is part of the limbic system. How-
ever, it has both cortical and limbic functions and serves, in
many ways, to balance activity in the prefrontal regions of the
brain with activity in the limbic-hypothalamic areas. The
ACC long has been associated with emotion. Most critical to
this review, dysregulation of autonomic and neuroendocrine
stress reactions are produced by lesions of the ACC (e.g.,
Diorio, Viau, & Meaney, 1993). The ACC also subserves
cognition. It has been hypothesized that the cognitive and
emotion functions of the ACC involve two subdivisions, a
dorsal cognitive and rostral-ventral affective division (Bush,
Luu, & Posner, 2000). According to this perspective, the cog-
nitive division is considered part of the anterior attention net-
work, a distributed attentional network that contributes to
executive functioning. The emotional division, on the other
hand, is connected to the OFC and medial prefrontal cortex,
to the amygdala, and to hypothalamic and brain-stem regions
involved in the regulation of stress physiology (e.g., Price,
1999).
Posner and Rothbart (2000) argued that the anterior atten-
tion network forms the basis of the effortful control di-
mension of temperament. Effortful control is believed to
contribute importantly to the regulation of social and emo-
tional behavior, particularly when effortful inhibition of
actions and emotion are required. Recent evidence that the
cognitive and emotional subdivisions of the ACC recipro-
cally regulate each other may provide one mechanism
whereby effortful control exerts inhibitory effects on nega-
tive affect and stress physiology (Drevets & Raichle, 1998).

Psychobiological Studies of Stress and Emotion in Children
119
Increases in the size and functional connectivity of the ACC
with development may also help explain children’s increas-
ing ability to use cognitive coping strategies to regulate emo-
tion, behavior, and stress (e.g., Rothbart, Derryberry, et al.,
1994; Wilson & Gottman, 1996).
In addition, affect inﬂuences activity of the cognitive and
affective subdivisions of the ACC. Positive emotion has been
shown to support the cognitive ACC and enhance executive
functioning (Ashby, Isen, & Turken, 1999), whereas nega-
tive emotion has been shown to decrease activity in the cog-
nitive division (Bush et al., 2000). Thus, conditions that
produce anger, fear, and other strong negative affects, if in-
tense, may disrupt children’s effortful regulation of their be-
havior and make it difﬁcult for them to engage in tasks
requiring executive function. This ability to dampen negative
affects and/or reassert more positive affective states may
be critical in regulating stress. Some individuals seem to be
able to do this better than others. As discussed in the next sec-
tion, individual differences may partly reﬂect asymmetry in
neural activity in the prefrontal cortex.
Emotional activity in the prefrontal cortex appears to be
lateralized, with activity (for review, see Davidson, 1994;
Davidson & Slagter, 2000) in the right prefrontal cortex sup-
porting negative affectivity, while activity in the left supports
positive affectivity. It is interesting to note that baseline
asymmetry predicts susceptibility to negative and positive
emotion-eliciting stimuli and may index the extent of
prefrontal-cortex inhibition of limbic-hypothalamic stress
circuits. Speciﬁcally, greater activity in the right prefrontal
cortex may result in disinhibition of the stress system,
whereas greater activity in the left prefrontal cortex may help
contain and terminate stress reactions. It is not yet clear how
this laterality is related to the functioning of speciﬁc frontal
structures involved in the regulation of the stress response.
Nonetheless, the focus on right-frontal asymmetry is consis-
tent with evidence that there is a right bias in the reactive
components of the stress system. In rodents there is evidence
that the right, not the left, medial frontal cortex mediates
neuroendocrine and autonomic responsivity to stressors
(Sullivan & Grafton, 1999). Similarly, both sympathetic
(Kagan, 1994) and parasympathetic regulation of the heart
show a right bias (Porges, 1995a). Hyperactivity in the right
frontal regions, then, may reﬂect a bias not only to negative
emotions but also to hyperactivation of the stress system.
Although most of the attention has been on negative emo-
tionality, recently there has been increased attention on posi-
tive emotions in stress regulation. Positive affectivity has
been associated with problem-focused coping (Folkman &
Moskowitz, 2000), perhaps because it supports the engage-
ment of the cognitiveACC and executive functions. Similarly,
positive affectivity as reﬂected in greater left than right frontal
activity has been associated with self-reported preferences
for approach-oriented coping strategies (Davidson & Irwin,
1999). This is consistent with Davidson’s argument that later-
alization of emotion in the frontal lobes reﬂects differential
motor biases, with negative emotions organized to support
withdrawal and freezing and positive emotions organized to
support approach. Greater left than right frontal activity has
also been associated with more rapid termination of CEA-
generated fear reactions. Davidson and colleagues have sug-
gested that a left-sided bias in the emotion system may allow
individuals to experience negative emotions and produce
stress reactions to threat, but then to dampen these responses
rapidly once the threat has been removed.
Summary
The physiology of stress and emotions is complex. While we
are beginning to develop a much richer understanding of the
neurobiological bases of both emotions and stress, most of
the work has yet to be conducted with humans. Furthermore,
we know the least about infants and young children. Infor-
mation about neurobiology, however, can serve as a guide in
our attempts to construct a psychobiological account of the
development of stress and emotion in early childhood. In
addition, the information we are accumulating on young
children—when inconsistent with models based on adults or
animals—can challenge researchers in neuroscience to pro-
vide explanations that are more congruent with the human
developmental data. We turn now to what we know about
stress and emotions in early human development.
PSYCHOBIOLOGICAL STUDIES OF STRESS AND
EMOTION IN CHILDREN
Psychobiological studies of stress in human infants and
children are relatively new. Until the early 1980s, researchers
in human development were largely limited to examining
heart rate–behavior associations. Only a handful of child
studies assessing CORT and catecholamines existed (see
review by Gunnar, 1986). After 1980, research on the psy-
chobiology of stress in children burgeoned as the result of the
availability of salivary assays for cortisol and theoretical ad-
vances in psychophysiology (e.g., Berntson, Cacioppo, &
Quigley, 1993; Davidson, 1994; Kirschbaum & Hellhammer,
1989; Porges, 1995a). These technical and theoretical ad-
vances corresponded to a heightened interest in the physio-
logical basis of temperament (e.g., Kagan, 1994, 2001). We
cover the temperament research later when we discuss

120
Stress and Emotion in Early Childhood
individual differences. First we describe what is known at
this point about the ontogeny of stress reactivity and regula-
tion in infancy and early childhood.
Developmental Periods of Stress Reactivity
and Regulation
Prenatal Origins
The ontogeny of human stress reactivity and regulation be-
gins well before birth. By 18 to 20 weeks gestation, increases
in NE and CORT are observed to invasive surgical proce-
dures (e.g., Giannakoulpoulous, Teixeira, Fisk, & Glover,
1999; Giannakoulpoulous, Sepulveda, Kourtis, Glover, &
Fisk, 1994). With increased gestational age, basal levels of
cortisol and ACTH rise (Economides, Nicolaides, Linton,
Perry, & Chard, 1988; Murphy, 1982), and heart rate de-
creases but becomes more variable and coupled with fetal
movement (e.g., DiPietro, Costigan, Shupe, Pressman, &
Johnson, 1999). By the latter part of gestation individual dif-
ferences in fetal movement and heart rate show modest sta-
bility and predict maternal reports of infant temperament
during the early postnatal months (e.g., DiPietro, Hodgson,
Costigan, Hilton, & Johnson, 1996). In general, active fetuses
and those with higher heart rates associated with fetal motor
movement are described as more difﬁcult, less predictable,
and more physically active in early infancy.
Experience begins to shape the infant’s stress system
before birth. In animal models where maternal stress can be
manipulated experimentally, a wide range of environmental
(e.g., loud noises) and psychosocial (e.g., entry into new
social groups) stressors during pregnancy result in offspring
that are more behaviorally and physiologically stress reactive
(e.g., Weinstock, 1997). Activity of the maternal L-HPA axis
appears to be a mediating factor because controlling maternal
CORT levels during these stressors reduces the inﬂuence of
maternal stress during pregnancy on the offspring’s develop-
ment (e.g., Barbazanges, Piazza, Moal, & Maccari, 1996).
One pathway through which maternal CORT may inﬂuence
the fetus’s developing stress system is via effects on placen-
tal CRH production (Wadhwa, Garite, & Sandman, 2001).
During gestation, the placenta produces a large number of
hormones and peptides, including CRH, that maintain the in-
tegrity of the fetal-maternal placental unit. As the placenta
enlarges during pregnancy, CRH levels increase. Placental
CRH binding protein, a molecule that traps CRH, and the an-
ticortisol effects of rising estrogen levels protect both the
mother and fetus from activation by stress hormones. CRH
binding protein during early pregnancy and the latter part of
the third trimester stimulates fetal L-HPA maturation and
contributes to the initiation of labor and delivery. Nonethe-
less, whereas the CRH molecule is necessary for healthy de-
velopment of the fetus, it also may provide a mechanism
through which maternal stress can inﬂuence the development
of the infant’s stress system.
Proving that maternal stress inﬂuences fetal development
in humans is hampered by our inability to perform controlled
experiments. Nevertheless, evidence now exists that maternal
perceptions of high stress and low social support during preg-
nancy are correlated with higher maternal ACTH and CORT
levels, higher maternal CRH levels (which are of placental
origin), fetuses with higher and less variable heart rates, and
newborns delivered earlier with lower birth weights (e.g.,
Huizink, de Medina, Mulder, Visser, & Buitelaar, 2000;
DiPietro et al., 1996; Wadhwa et al., 2001). Lower versus
higher socioeconomic status is also associated with many of
these same effects (e.g., DiPietro et al., 1999).
As yet, there are very few prospective studies in humans
of the relations between maternal stress during pregnancy
and postnatal measures of infant behavior and stress system
activity. However, in contrast to one early study that failed
to ﬁnd any association between maternal L-HPA activity
and infant temperament (Vaughn, Bradley, Joffe, Seifer, &
Barglow, 1987), several recent studies have yielded positive
ﬁndings (Huizink et al., 2000; Wadhwa et al., 2001). In these
latter studies, controlling for a variety of obstetric and psy-
chosocial risk factors, higher maternal CORT and ACTH lev-
els during pregnancy were associated with maternal reports
and observational measures of infant negative emotional re-
activity and nonadaptability.
Although still preliminary, these studies suggest a transac-
tional view of the fetal origins of infant stress reactivity and
regulation. The placenta, which is of fetal origin, expresses
genes that both inﬂuence and are inﬂuenced by maternal hor-
mone levels. Maternal stress hormone levels, in turn, are in-
ﬂuenced by obstetric factors and by the mother’s reactions to
the challenges of her daily life. Impinging on the fetus, these
inﬂuences may affect the activity of the developing stress
system and contribute to the organization of postnatal tem-
perament. Undoubtedly, this is a vast oversimpliﬁcation of
the complex interweaving of organismic and environmental
processes that shape the developing stress system prior to
birth. Furthermore, birth is not the endpoint of these shaping
processes.
Early Postnatal Development
Although it was once thought that the neonatal L-HPA axis
was hyporesponsive at birth, this is not the case (for review,
see Gunnar, 1992). The newborn displays graded behavioral,

Psychobiological Studies of Stress and Emotion in Children
121
endocrine, and autonomic responses to aversive medical pro-
cedures. Furthermore, the healthy newborn is remarkably
capable of regulating stress. Stressors such as heel-stick
blood draws, circumcision, and physical exams produce in-
creases in heart rate, decreases in vagal tone, and elevations
in CORT; however, following such stressors the parameters
of these systems return rapidly to baseline (e.g., Gunnar,
Porter, Wolf, & Rigatuso, 1995).
The healthy neonate has powerful biobehavioral regula-
tory mechanisms at its disposal. Sleep is one of these mecha-
nisms. Sleep is critical to stress regulation throughout life
(Dahl, 1996). Newborns spend the majority of their time
asleep, and in the young infant sleep periods are dominated
by active or REM sleep as compared to slow-wave or quiet
sleep (Anders, 1975). Quiet sleep appears to serve restorative
functions in the newborn similar to the restorative functions
it serves at later stages of the life cycle. This has been equated
with the concept of a stimulus barrier in early infancy that
protects the newborn from overwhelming stimulation (e.g.,
Tennes, Emde, Kisley, & Metcalf, 1972). Indeed, stressors
alter sleep in the newborn, increasing the ratio of quiet to
active sleep (for discussion, see Gunnar, 1992). In animal
models the shift into sleep following stress has been shown to
be facilitated by the rise in CORT and other stress biochemi-
cals that increase in response to noxious stimulation (e.g.,
Born, de Kloet, Wenz, Kern, & Fehm, 1991). Thus it may be
that stressors stimulate elevations in stress biochemicals that,
in turn, facilitate the shift to quiet sleep supporting a return to
homeostasis.
In addition to sleep, feeding and tactile stimulation appear
to serve stress regulatory functions for the newborn. Blass
(e.g., 1996) has recently shown that several components of
nursing operate to calm the neonate through opioid- and
nonopioid-mediated pathways. Sucking produces calming
through nonopioid pathways in both human infants and rat
pups. Sucking and swallowing are complex motor acts that
engage and are regulated by the vagal system (e.g., Porges,
1995a). Thus, the vagal system may be partially responsible
for the behavioral calming produced by nonnutritive sucking.
In contrast, the calming and analgesic effects of sweet tastes
appear to be opioid mediated. Thus, rat pups given a sucrose-
ﬂavored liquid are slower to remove their paws from a hot
plate, and this effect is blocked if the pups are ﬁrst pretreated
with an opioid antagonist. Similar calming effects of sucrose
have been demonstrated in human newborns. In addition to
activating opioid-mediated analgesic pathways, sweet tastes
also produce facial expressions of positive affect and increase
left-sided anterior EEG activity (Fox & Davidson, 1986).
Although it is unlikely that this EEG activity reﬂects frontal
lobe generators in the neonate, it may reﬂect activity of
deeper structures such as the amygdala that also show
asymmetric organization and are rich in opioid receptors
(Pitkanen, Savander, & LeDoux, 1997).
Attention and alerting also may be components of the
calming effects of sucrose. For example, Barr, Young,
Wright, and Hendricks (1997) noted that quinine, an aversive
taste, calms crying newborns. They have shown that in re-
sponse to either sucrose or quinine newborns do not quiet and
fall asleep; rather, they enter a sustained calm, alert state.
Soothing practices that engage the vestibular and propriocep-
tive systems (i.e., picking the infant up, rocking) also appear
to be most effective when they produce a calm, alert state
(e.g., Brackbill, 1975). One interpretation is that these prac-
tices disrupt crying by engaging the infant’s orienting and at-
tentional mechanisms (Rothbart, Posner, & Rosicky, 1994).
As discussed later, attentional mechanisms play a central role
in stress regulation.
The regulatory roles for feeding and nonnutritive sucking
led Blass (1996) to argue that the mother serves as a shield to
buffer the infant from pain and facilitate the restoration of
growth processes following periods of stress system activa-
tion. Although the concept of mother as shield is attractive,
she may not shield all stress-sensitive systems equally (see
also Hofer, 1987). Being held, fed, and allowed to suckle ap-
pear to have their largest effects on behavioral distress, are
less clearly capable of buffering heart rate responses to
painful stimulation, and have no apparent impact on CORT
responses to either painful or nonpainful stressors (e.g.,
Gunnar, 1992). Thus, the layers of stress regulation appear to
be loosely coupled in the newborn. This is to be expected
given the wide range of cultural variation in patterns of hold-
ing, carrying, and feeding, and given beliefs about whether
and how quickly to respond to infant crying (e.g., Barr,
1990). If soothing practices were tightly coupled to stress
regulation, it would seem unlikely that such variations would
exist.
Variations in how much the infant is held when not dis-
tressed, however, do appear to affect the duration of crying
bouts (e.g., Barr, 1990). In addition, breast feeding versus
bottle feeding also appears to affect infant irritability and be-
havioral responsivity to stressors (e.g., Hughes, Townsend, &
Branum, 1988). We do not know whether caregiving
variations shape differentially responsive stress systems in
humans, although in rodent models variations surrounding
feeding and contact (licking and grooming) have such effects
(e.g., Caldji et al., 1998). Also, there is evidence that activity
of the L-HPA system is affected by experience in early life. In
newborns, repeated exposure to the same handling stressor
results in habituation of the CORT response, although with
two exposures at a 24-hour interval, behavioral responses do

122
Stress and Emotion in Early Childhood
not habituate (e.g., Gunnar, 1992). Pain, in contrast, may sen-
sitize behavioral and physiological components of the stress
system (e.g., Taddio, Katz, Ilarslch, & Koren, 1997).
The First Two Years
It has been suggested that there are two periods of marked
change in biobehavioral organization during the ﬁrst year of
life (Emde, Gaensbauer, & Harmon, 1976). The ﬁrst, be-
tween two and four months of age, has been described as the
three-month revolution when almost every facet of infant
functioning exhibits reorganization. The second is during the
later half of the ﬁrst year, when the emergence of independent
locomotion appears to produce dramatic neurobehavioral
reorganization (e.g., Campos, Kermoian, & Witherington,
1996; Fox & Bell, 1993). This latter period is also associated
with the emergence and organization of secure base behavior
(e.g., Bowlby, 1969) and inhibition of approach to novel or
strange events and people (e.g., Bronson, 1978). Both of
these periods are associated with marked changes in stress
reactivity and regulation.
Two to Four Months.
Several research groups have
used well-baby examinations and childhood immunizations
as stressors in developmental studies of stress in infancy (e.g.,
Gunnar, Brodersen, Krueger, & Rigatuso, 1996; Lewis &
Ramsay, 1995). As in the newborn period, CORT increases
markedly to exam inoculations at 2 months of age. Heart-rate
and vagal-tone changes to inoculations have not been studied,
but physical exams elicit signiﬁcant increases in heart rate
and decreases in vagal tone in the 2-month-old infant (White,
Gunnar, Larson, Donzella, & Barr, 2000). Both physical
exams and inoculations elicit fussing and crying at this age
(Gunnar et al., 1996; Lewis & Ramsay, 1995). When facial
expressions are coded based on discrete muscle groups, ex-
pressions during inoculations at this age reﬂect generalized
distress, rather than more speciﬁc negative emotions such as
fear or anger, as will be the case by the second year of life
(Izard, Hembree, Dougherty, & Spizzirri, 1983). Probing the
reasons for the change in CORT response to a physical exam,
results showed that it was not because the exam produced less
behavioral distress in 12-week-old and older infants (as re-
viewed in Gunnar, 2000). Nor did the change appear to be due
to the greater organization of the circadian rhythm in cortisol
that emerges around three months. The decreased CORT re-
sponse to handling around three months could reﬂect as-yet-
unexamined maturation of negative feedback controls of the
L-HPA axis. Indeed, feedback regulation of the L-HPA axis
changes during early postnatal development in the rodent
(Vazquez, 1998).
The L-HPA system is not the only stress-sensitive system
to exhibit changes in regulation between 2 and 4 months.
Developmental changes in fussing and crying have been well
documented (as reviewed in Barr, 1990). The amount of time
spent fussing and crying increases from birth to around 6 to
8 weeks and then declines. This developmental pattern in
fussing and crying has been described in several cultures with
markedly different early child-care practices, suggesting that
it may be a universal phenomenon (see Barr, 1990). The basis
for this developmental increase and subsequent decline is un-
known; however, it raises the question of whether at around
2 months of age the infant might be particularly vulnerable to
stress. Certainly, this is the period when some infants develop
colic (e.g., Gormally & Barr, 1997), which by deﬁnition re-
ﬂects dysregulation of the behavioral component of the stress
system.
If this period of heightened irritability constitutes a stress-
vulnerable period, we might expect that infants with colic
would be especially vulnerable to hyperresponsivity of the
L-HPA and SAM systems. This possibility was recently ex-
amined by subjecting 2-month-olds with and without colic to
the physical exam stressor paradigm (White, et al., 2000).
Remarkably, although the physical exam produced incon-
solable crying in many of the infants with colic, changes in
CORT, heart rate, and vagal tone were signiﬁcant but did not
differ between groups. These data add to the body of litera-
ture indicating that fussing and crying, the primary behav-
ioral measures used to index stress in early infancy, are not
always indicative of individual differences in the activity of
stress-sensitive physiological systems. Again, the layers of
the stress system appear to be only loosely coupled.
Several other systems that are relevant for stress research
also undergo developmental shifts during these early months
of life. These include sleep, attention, and the parasympa-
thetic nervous system. Changes in sleep emerge gradually, but
for most a more mature day-night sleep organization is char-
acteristic of the infant by 3 to 4 months of age (e.g., Coons,
1987). Unfortunately, although sleep and the regulation of
the L-HPA and autonomic nervous systems are interrelated
(Follenius, Brandenberger, Bandesapt, Libert, & Ehrhart,
1992; Porges, Doussard-Roosevelt, Stifter, McClenny, &
Riniolo, 1999), little is known about the relations between
stress regulation and the ontogeny of sleep in human infants
and children.
Recently, there has been increasing interest in attention
and emotion regulation. Early in the ﬁrst year, between
roughly 3 and 4 months, the development of the posterior at-
tention system, which is thought to be involved in the ability
to orient attention, may allow increased regulation of infant
distress (e.g., Rothbart, Posner,  et al., 1994). Development of

Psychobiological Studies of Stress and Emotion in Children
123
the posterior attention system also may play a role in the reg-
ulation of stress physiology. With the development of this
system, gaze aversion and distraction appear to become
coping strategies for the infant that are used in increasingly
coordinated and sophisticated ways to regulate behavioral
arousal and distress over the course of the ﬁrst year (e.g.,
Field, 1981).
Attention regulation has been related to ascending inﬂu-
ences of the vagal system, particularly the component regu-
lated by the nucleus ambiguus (Vna). Porges (1995a) argued
that basal Vna tone may index the capacity to modulate
cardiac-CNS activity to sustain attention to the environment.
Maturational increases in basal Vna tone can be seen (Porges
& Fox, 1986), presumably reﬂecting myelination of the
neural systems underlying vagal regulation. With maturation
of the Vna system, the infant’s capacity to regulate arousal
through regulating attention and vice versa is expected to in-
crease. Recently, research on vagal tone has shifted from an
exclusive focus on basal tone to an interest in the dynamics of
the vagal responses to stimulation. According to Porges’s
(1995a) polyvagal theory, suppression of Vna activity allows
increases in sympathetic activity, whereas increases allow the
infant to engage in social approach and remain calm. Modu-
lating Vna activity thus is viewed as a necessary support for
social and attentional regulatory strategies. Huffman et al.
(1998) recently argued that not until close to 3 months of age
would infants evince the capacity to regulate the Vna system
to support orienting and soothing. They demonstrated that
among 12-week-olds, high basal Vna was associated with less
irritability, whereas delta Vna during testing was related to
duration of attention. Both measures were related to mea-
sures of soothability.
In sum, the systems inﬂuencing stress reactivity and regu-
lation undergo rapid maturation during the early months of
life. Three months of age has been described as a qualitative
turning point in early infancy from which the infant emerges
prepared to engage and sustain a broader range of interac-
tions with the environment. By 3 months the elevations in
CORT that have characterized neonatal responses are no
longer observed, on average, to handling stressors. Fussing
and crying become increasingly dissociated from activity of
the HPA system. Vagal tone increases, and some infants show
increased competence in using vagal regulation to sustain
attention and engagement during challenging stimulation. In
addition, more clearly established day-night rhythms may
facilitate the regulation of behavioral and physiological
responses to potentially stressful stimulation. Unfortunately,
we need to know much more about the integration of these
various components of the stress system through this devel-
opmental period.
Later Infancy.
Responsivity of the L-HPA system to
stressors appears to undergo another change in the latter part
of the ﬁrst year of life (points below are reviewed in Gunnar,
2000). Elevations in CORT to inoculation procedures are
roughly comparable at 4 and 6 months of age; however, by
the second year of life (i.e., 12, 15, or 18 months), on aver-
age, infants do not exhibit elevations in CORT to these pro-
cedures. Similarly, maternal separation, stranger approach,
unfamiliar and arousing events, and frustrating tasks do not
readily provoke increases in cortisol in children older than
12 months. Whether this decrease in CORT responsivity
emerges gradually or abruptly has not been determined, nor
have the processes accounting for this change been identiﬁed.
What has been shown is that there are individual differences
in whether the infant exhibits an inhibition of the CORT re-
sponse to stressors by the end of the ﬁrst year. Examination of
CORT increases at 6 and 15 months using the inoculation
paradigm revealed that while most infants failed to elevate
CORT at 15 months, some showed increases that were as
large or larger than those typically observed at 6 months.
These high CORT reactive infants tended to be the ones with
an insecure attachment relationship to the parent who accom-
panied them during the exam-inoculation procedure. The role
of relationships in the development of individual differences
in stress reactivity and regulation will be discussed more
fully below. Here we only note that these data suggest that
the organization of secure-base behavior in the latter part of
the ﬁrst year may play a role in the developmental changes in
CORT responsivity observed during this age period.
The latter part of the ﬁrst year is a period of emotional re-
organization. In addition to changes in secure-base behavior
and distress responses to separation from attachment ﬁgures,
other developmental changes in negative emotionality are
also observed. Given the emphasis on fear-stress relations
in neuroscience, the fact that this period is associated with
increased behavioral inhibition is of particular interest. In
rodents, developmental changes in behavioral inhibition are
related to increased CORT responses near the end of the pe-
riod of relative CORT hyporesponsivity in early development
(Takahashi & Rubin, 1993). Administering CORT to the
young rat pup speeds up the emergence of behavioral inhibi-
tion. This has been taken as evidence that CORT facilitates
maturation of fear circuits in the rat brain. There have been
too few studies of adrenocortical activity and the develop-
ment of behavioral inhibition in humans to conclude that a
similar pattern does not exist in late infancy. However, the
correspondence in humans of increased fearfulness and
decreased CORT responsivity over the last part of the ﬁrst
year suggests that the developmental psychobiology of fear
and stress may be very different in human infancy.

124
Stress and Emotion in Early Childhood
One reason for the apparent difference may be that fear
is rarely the emotion expressed in infant research. More typi-
cal is wariness or inhibition of approach combined with in-
creased proximity to caregivers, followed by interest and
afﬁliation/exploration (Sroufe, Waters, & Matas, 1974). It is
not clear whether wariness is less intense fear or a response
that reﬂects conﬂict between approach and avoidance
(Bronson, 1978). However, wariness in the face of unknown
people, objects, and events emerges gradually over the latter
part of the ﬁrst year and is tempered by experience, context,
and the controllability of stimulation (e.g., Bronson, 1978;
Gunnar, 1980; Sroufe et al., 1974). Many of these same fac-
tors are well known to temper physiological responses to
threatening stimuli in studies of adults and animals (e.g.,
Lefcourt, 1973; Maier, Ryan, Barksdale, & Kalin, 1986).
It is important to note that wariness or behavioral inhibi-
tion emerges around the same period when infants are in-
creasingly able to control proximity to both safe havens and
exciting, new stimulation. Functionalist approaches to emo-
tion argue that in most instances emotions serve to organize,
not disorganize, behavior (Campos et al., 1996; Panksepp,
1996). Accordingly, wary responses to the unknown may
serve to check the infant’s tendency to approach things that
are new, foster increased proximity to attachment ﬁgures in
new situations, and thus provide a window of opportunity for
caregivers to warn infants away from situations that are dan-
gerous (Waters, Matas, & Sroufe, 1975). Social referencing,
or the infant’s tendency near the end of the ﬁrst year to look
to caregivers for their appraisals of unfamiliar or strange
events, provides another avenue through which caregivers
can curb infant curiosity at a time when infant mobility is
increasing (Campos & Stenberg, 1981). Campos et al. (1996)
argued that an epigenetic-constructionist perspective on
emotional development is helpful in understanding the
reorganization of emotions near the end of the ﬁrst year. This
perspective, which is consistent with the developmental
psychobiological approach, may also help us understand
the organization of fear/wariness and stress in infants near the
end of the ﬁrst year of life.
According to an epigenetic-constructionist perspective,
developmental changes in one system can generate expe-
riences that set the stage for widespread biobehavioral
changes. In addition, changes in the person bring about bidi-
rectional changes in person-environment relations that set the
stage for further development. During the latter part of the
ﬁrst year, learning to crawl and then to walk dramatically
alters the infant’s relations with the environment. Indepen-
dent locomotion changes the events and obstacles that the
infant encounters daily and requires the development of
strategies for managing the environment that are markedly
different from those that serve the prelocomotor infant (e.g.,
Campos et al., 1996). Self-produced locomotion appears to
be critical in organizing fear reactions to one particular situa-
tion: heights. Infants placed on the deep side of a visual cliff
where depth cues indicate they should fall fail to show in-
creases in heart rate prior to the onset of crawling, but they do
show such increases after a few weeks of crawling experi-
ence. From this epigenetic-constructionist perspective, the
critical emotion-organizing feature of motor acquisitions is
the increase in agency and intentionality that they allow the
infant. Increased experiences of agency and intentionality, in
turn, may affect the extent to which the infant appraises
events based on his or her certainty of being able to control
them (Gunnar, 1980).
Infants are responsive to the contingency of stimulation
early in infancy (Watson & Ramey, 1972). Within a few
months of birth, infants exhibit positive affect to events that
are contingent on their actions, as well as anger or sadness
when a previously contingent event begins to occur noncon-
tingently. However, it is not until close to a year of age that
the infant’s control over producing stimulation determines
whether a potentially distressing event produces crying and
avoidance or positive affect and approach (for a review, see
Gunnar, 1980). Over the course of the second year of life, in-
creases are observed in children’s attempts to control directly
or alter situations that produce inhibition of approach (e.g.,
Parritz, 1996). Furthermore, by 12 months of age, approach
versus avoidance of strangers reﬂects the responsiveness of
the stranger to the infant’s actions, and thus the stranger’s
controllability (e.g., Mangelsdorf, 1992). Thus, by the ﬁrst
birthday, and increasingly over the second year of life, stress
reactivity and regulation may be inﬂuenced by the infant’s
sense of agency or perceived control.
Another approach to understanding changes in emotional-
ity during the latter part of infancy has focused on the devel-
opment of the frontal lobes (e.g., Bell & Fox, 1992). Many of
the social and cognitive accomplishments emerging during
the latter part of the ﬁrst year and throughout the second year
depend on the development of the prefrontal cortex and its
connections with brain systems involved in motor develop-
ment and emotion (e.g., Dawson, Panagiotides, Klinger, &
Hill, 1992; Diamond, 2000). Maturation of frontal function-
ing, like other aspects of brain development, is expected
to reﬂect genetically-programmed, activity-dependent neural
processes that are supported by the child’s interactions with
the environment. It is important to note that using 8-month-
old infants, Bell and Fox (1997) showed that one to four
weeks of independent locomotion was associated with the
degree of mass neuronal excitability in the frontal cortex,
greater activity over left than right frontal leads, and the

Psychobiological Studies of Stress and Emotion in Children
125
ability to tolerate longer delays on a classic frontal lobe task
(i.e., the A not B task). These data suggest that as the infant
approaches the second year, motor acquisitions that dramati-
cally alter the infant’s control over approaching and avoiding
stimulation co-occur with maturational changes in anterior
regions of the brain. These changes likely underlie the devel-
opmental changes in the organization of emotional and phys-
iological responses to stressors that are observed around the
ﬁrst birthday and increasingly over the second year of life
(e.g., Campos et al., 1996). Unfortunately, there are no stud-
ies as of yet examining the relations between the develop-
mental changes just described and the responsivity of the
autonomic or neuroendocrine system to stressors.
The Toddler and Preschool Period
Development of frontal regions of the brain should allow in-
creasing control over emotional behavior and physiological
stress responses (Dawson et al., 1992). Indeed, marked in-
creases in self-control of negative emotionality develop be-
tween 1 and 3 years (e.g., Kopp, 1989). Studies focusing on
individual differences have shown correlations between ex-
pressive language development and regulation of negative
emotions and social engagement and between both of these
domains and cardiac vagal tone (e.g., Bornstein & Suess,
2000). The study of emotion regulation has dominated re-
search on emotional development in the last decade, despite
problems in deﬁnition and operationalization (Thompson,
1994). The research and theorizing of Posner and Rothbart
(e.g., 2000) provided much needed focus in this area. They ar-
gued that maturation of the anterior attentional network per-
mits effortful regulation of behavior, including emotional
behavior. In line with these predictions, Kochanska, Murray,
and Harlan (2000) have shown that children who perform bet-
ter on tasks designed to assess effortful control also are better
at suppressing both positive and negative emotional expres-
sions. Stroop tasks that require inhibition of response to a pre-
potent stimulus activate the frontal attentional network in
imaging studies of adults (Posner & Petersen, 1990). A ver-
sion of the Stroop that was designed for 2- and 3-year-olds has
revealed increases in accuracy over this age period (Gerardi-
Caulton, in press). In addition, at 30 months, when some but
not all children were able to perform the task, more competent
performance was negatively correlated with parent reports of
child negative emotionality. Effortful regulation of behavior,
nonetheless, undoubtedly involves multiple neural systems;
thus, these studies provide only the ﬁrst insights into the
neural bases of self-regulation and its development.
Presumably, as the child develops increasing ability to reg-
ulate emotions, she should also become increasingly capable
of regulating physiological stress reactions (Stansbury &
Gunnar, 1994).This assumption is speculatively based on sev-
eral arguments. First, with the development of the anterior at-
tentional network, the child should be able to engage the
cognitive component of the anterior cingulate cortex, thus
suppressing activity of the emotional component (Bush et al.,
2000). This should help inhibit and constrain the reactivity of
limbic components of the stress system. Second, to the extent
that emotion regulation also involves increased activity in the
left prefrontal cortical regions, the child should become in-
creasingly capable of using positive affect and approach-
oriented behavioral strategies for managing potentially
stressful situations (Davidson & Irwin, 1999; Dawson et al.,
1992). Third, the ability to regulate negative emotions should
foster social competence and better social relationships with
peers and adults (e.g., Eisenberg et al., 1993). This ability, in
turn, should enhance the child’s opportunities to use positive
and supportive social relationships to cope with stressful situ-
ations. Social competence should also reduce the likelihood
that the child’s behavior will create stressful interactions with
others (for review, Gunnar, 2000). Thus far, no studies exam-
ining developmental changes in the presumed neural substrate
of emotion regulation and changes in stress reactivity or regu-
lation have been reported. There have been studies of individ-
ual differences in effortful control, emotion regulation, and
physiology, as reviewed in the next section.
Individual Differences
Questions about the origins of individual differences form the
core of developmental research on stress. Most of this re-
search deals with temperament and the argument that some
children are biologically predisposed to be more stress reac-
tive than are others. Some research, however, focuses on the
importance of early experiences in the shaping of stress reac-
tivity. These research foci come together in arguments about
the relations between temperament and attachment and in
studies of experience and the continuity of behavioral disposi-
tions.As in other areas of developmental research, main effect
arguments based on either nature or nurture explanations are
giving way to transactional models that are more consistent
with the developmental psychobiological perspective.
Stress and Temperament
Most studies of stress and temperament deal with behavioral
inhibition. In this section we draw heavily on several excellent
recent summaries of this research (see Fox, Henderson, Rubin,
Calkins, & Schmidt, 2001; Kagan, in press; Stevenson-Hinde &
Shouldice, 1996). As conceptualized by Kagan (2001), about

126
Stress and Emotion in Early Childhood
10% of children are extremely anxious and inhibited in their re-
actions to unfamiliar events. Consistent with the neurobiology
linking fear and stress, a lower threshold for activation of fear-
anxiety circuits in the CEA (or perhaps the BNST) is believed
to form the basis of extreme inhibition to the unknown. Kagan
argued that extremely negative reactions to stimulation at 4
months of age reﬂect activity of the CEA and thus predict fear-
ful, anxious reactions to the unknown in later infancy and child-
hood. With development, behavioral inhibition may be more
readily seen to social than to nonsocial stimuli, leading some to
talk of social reticence rather than behavioral inhibition when
discussing this temperamental disposition in preschoolers and
older children. Fox and colleagues (e.g., Schmidt & Fox, 1999)
argued that at least two forms of social reticence may have dif-
ferent neurobiological substrates. These forms differ in the ex-
tent to which a reticent or shy child is also motivated to be
social. Although both patterns reﬂect a diathesis to be stressed
in social situations, children who are both sociable and shy may
experience the most conﬂict between response tendencies and
thus may ﬁnd new social situations to be the most stressful or
challenging.
Continuity in extreme inhibition has been examined
in several longitudinal studies. Generally speaking, shyness
shows modest continuity across childhood, although children
selected to be extremely shy often become less so with age
(e.g., Kagan, in press; Stevenson-Hinde & Shouldice, 1996).
Less continuity has been noted for children selected for high
reactivity early in infancy (Fox et al., 2001). Most infants
who show extreme negative reactivity at 4 months do not
remain behaviorally inhibited into childhood; nevertheless, a
small subset does remain so. As discussed later, there is some
evidence that consistently inhibited children may be more
extreme in their physiological markers of inhibition.
Studies of heart rate and heart rate variability or vagal tone
constitute the largest body of literature on physiological dif-
ferences between extremely inhibited and uninhibited chil-
dren. In several cohorts, children identiﬁed as extremely
inhibited during infancy have been shown to have higher and
more stable baseline heart rates and lower vagal tone (for a
review, see Kagan, in press). Higher and more stable baseline
heart rates continue to distinguish behaviorally inhibited chil-
dren throughout the preschool years. However, with con-
tinued development these baseline differences in heart rate
become more difﬁcult to ﬁnd. Thus, several studies of chil-
dren 7 years and older have failed to obtain differences be-
tween shy, inhibited children and uninhibited children using
baseline cardiac measures, although heart rate changes in
response to social stressors differentiate these groups (e.g.,
Marshall & Stevenson-Hinde, 1998; Schmidt, Fox, Schulkin,
& Gold, 1999). In studies of CORT activity there is also
evidence that between 3 and 7 years of age children become
increasingly capable of maintaining the normal diurnal de-
crease in CORT under normative conditions of social chal-
lenge (i.e., a day at daycare; Dettling, Gunnar, & Donzella,
1999). Furthermore, positive correlations between vagal tone
and age have been reported over this age period (e.g.,
Donzella, Gunnar, Krueger, & Alwin, 2000). It may be that
by about 7 years of age maturation of these systems allows
children, including those who are more fearful or inhibited, to
maintain basal functioning even in less protected contexts.
Recently, in attempts to understand the underlying neuro-
biological differences between extremely inhibited and unin-
hibited children, researchers have examined more direct
indexes of the forebrain systems presumably involved in
fearfulness and negative emotionality. To this end, startle
amplitude, a measure presumably mediated by the CEA, has
been employed in several studies. At 9 months, infants se-
lected at four months for extreme negative reactivity have
been shown to exhibit larger startle reactions during stranger
approach. Tested again at 4 years, however, larger startle am-
plitudes were not found for these children, although at this
older age only baseline startle was examined, and this might
not reﬂect the same underlying neural circuits (see Schmidt
et al., 1997).
Right frontal EEG asymmetry has also been examined in
relation to behavioral inhibition. Schmidt and Fox (1999)
recently reviewed their studies of EEG asymmetry on
81 children selected at 4 months because they were either
high negative, high positive, or low reactive in their behav-
ioral responses to stimulation. At 9 and 24 months, but not at
14 months, high negative infants exhibited greater right
frontal activity. At 48 months, the 4-month groupings no
longer predicted differences in frontal EEG asymmetry; how-
ever, asymmetry scores at 48 months were signiﬁcantly cor-
related with concurrent measures of social reticence. When
children who were continuously extreme in inhibition were
examined separately from those who became less inhibited
with age, the continuously inhibited children exhibited
greater right frontal asymmetry at 9, 14, and 48 months (Fox
et al., 2001).
Consistent with the relative lack of baseline physiological
difference between inhibited and uninhibited school-aged
children, Schmidt et al. (1999) recently failed to ﬁnd base-
line asymmetry differences in 7-year-olds selected to be
extremely shy. However, they did ﬁnd that these children
showed a greater increase in right frontal EEG asymmetry as
the social stressor became more intense. Thus, right frontal
EEG asymmetry does seem to be associated with behavioral
inhibition, although as with other physiological measures,
differences are not always obtained, even when extreme

Psychobiological Studies of Stress and Emotion in Children
127
groups are chosen. As with other stress-sensitive physiologi-
cal systems, the capacity to detect baseline differences re-
lated to behavioral inhibition may decrease with age.
Dissociations between behavioral and physiological
indexes of fear and stress are often noted (e.g., Quas, Hong,
Alkon, & Boyce, 2000). Some of these dissociations may
reﬂect the lack of speciﬁcity of the physiological measures.
Thus, for example, low vagal tone may reﬂect low emotional
expressivity and not just high fearful inhibition (e.g., Cole,
Zahn-Waxler, Fox, Usher, & Welsh, 1996; Porges, 1995a).
More speciﬁc measures of sympathetic activity may help
clarify cardiac associations with extremely inhibited behav-
ior (e.g., pre-ejection period; Berntson et al., 1993). Selecting
children based on physiological extremes, and not merely be-
havioral extremes, may also be useful (see Fox, 1989). How-
ever, even when all of these analytic choices are made, it is
likely that the associations between physiology and behavior
will remain elusive. We suggest that this is because context
and the resources children need to cope with challenge mod-
erate relations between temperament and the activity of these
stress-sensitive physiological systems.
Studies of CORT and temperament make this last point
most clearly. While higher CORT levels for shy, inhibited
children have been noted in several studies (for review, see
Gunnar, 2000), particularly in new social situations, it is
often the extroverted children who exhibit greater CORT
responsivity (e.g., Davis, Donzella, Krueger, & Gunnar,
1999). At ﬁrst glance this seems incongruous. Why would
extroverted children be stressed by meeting other children,
an activity that they seem to enjoy? However, activation of
the stress system should help children mobilize the resources
they need to facilitate adaptation to new situations. Perhaps
extroverted children are better at mobilizing to meet social
challenge. If so, the critical question may be not whether
children react initially, but how rapidly they dampen their
reactivity. Indeed, there is evidence that as social situations
become familiar, socially competent, outgoing children show
reduced CORT activity and associations between high CORT
activity and negative, emotional temperament become more
likely (see Gunnar, 1994). However, even when young chil-
dren are familiar with the social situation, higher stress sys-
tem activity is less often associated with shyness and more
often associated with behaviors such as low frustration toler-
ance and aggression—behaviors that cause preschoolers to
be disliked by their peers. In fact, peer rejection appears to be
an important predictor of high CORT levels in preschool
classrooms (Gunnar, Tout, de Hann, Pierce, & Stansbury,
1997). Combined, these ﬁndings strongly suggest that behav-
ioral inhibition is not the only temperamental disposition
associated with greater stress reactivity in young children.
Furthermore, they point to the importance of context and re-
lationships in determining how temperamental differences
among children impact the activity of stress-sensitive physi-
ological systems. In the following section we deal with
caregiver-child interaction. However, it is important to note
that the psychobiology of stress in early childhood includes
peer- as well as adult-child relations.
Stress and Caregiving Relationships
In work with animals it is well documented that maternal
behavior shapes the reactivity of stress-sensitive systems
(e.g. Caldji et al., 1998; Levine, 1994). In rats, dams that
spend the most time licking and grooming their pups and ex-
hibit well-organized nursing behavior have pups that grow up
to be less fearful of novelty, compared to the offspring of
mothers low in these behaviors. A number of neurobiological
changes accompany these differences in fear reactions, in-
cluding more rapid containment of the HPA stress response,
less evidence of CRH activity in the CEA, BNST, and LC,
and decreased NE in response to psychosocial stressors
(Caldji et al., 1998). In primates, there is strong evidence that
contact with the mother buffers the stress response (e.g.,
Levine & Weiner, 1988). As long as the infant monkey can
gain access to the mother, elevations in CORT to a variety of
stressors are reduced, even though the infant may still show
agitated, distressed behavior.
In human adults, supportive social relationships moderate
the impact of stressful life circumstances on emotional and
physical health (Berkman, 1995). In young children, studies
of the quality of mother-infant attachment have yielded evi-
dence that secure attachment relationships function to regu-
late the activity of stress-sensitive systems (see review by
Gunnar, 2000). This has been demonstrated during the
strange situation task used to assess attachment security, as
well as when attachment security is examined as a moderator
of temperament-physiology associations in response to other
stressful stimuli. Under both kinds of testing situations, both
insecure avoidant (A) and insecure resistant (C) infants
exhibit larger and more prolonged CORT and heart rate
increases (see also Spangler & Grossmann, 1993; Sroufe &
Waters, 1979). Furthermore, behavioral indexes of distress or
inhibition appear to be associated with heightened CORT
responses only when infants and toddlers are tested in the
presence of a parent with whom they have an insecure at-
tachment relationship (e.g., Spangler & Schieche, 1998).
Similar results have been obtained for preschool-aged chil-
dren. Thus, among 4.5-year-olds, highly inhibited children
who were insecurely attached had the highest heart rates
during mild social challenges, whereas highly inhibited

128
Stress and Emotion in Early Childhood
children who were securely attached had the lowest heart
rates (Stevenson-Hinde & Marshall, 1999). Thus, although
there is an ongoing debate between attachment and tempera-
ment theorists over whether these attachment classiﬁcations
reﬂect behavioral inhibition rather than relationship quality
(e.g., Belsky & Rovine, 1987), the preponderance of the
evidence indicates that differences in stress reactivity be-
tween children in secure and insecure relationships are not a
reﬂection of temperament. Rather, they reﬂect the role of at-
tachment security in moderating relations between tempera-
mental fearfulness and stress system activity.
Attachment theorists argue that infants form secure rela-
tionships with caregivers who are sensitive and responsive to
their signals. A number of researchers have questioned the
strength of these associations (e.g., Goldsmith & Alansky,
1987); however, evidence suggests that these qualities in a
caregiver are associated with reduced stress system activity.
Infants interacting with an insensitive, unresponsive mother
or those randomly assigned to an unresponsive babysitter
have been shown to produce increasing levels of CORT dur-
ing play bouts (e.g., Gunnar, 2000; Spangler, Schieche, Ilg,
Maier, & Ackermann, 1994). Furthermore, mothers suffer-
ing from clinical depression, who often have trouble being
sensitive and responsive, have infants who tend to show
right frontal EEG asymmetry and higher CORT levels (e.g.,
Dawson & Ashman, 2000). Controlling for numerous other
factors, it appears that the depressed mothers’ unresponsive,
intrusive behavior shapes higher CORT and greater right
frontal EEG activity (see Dawson & Ashman, 2000). In addi-
tion, the timing of maternal periods of clinical depression ap-
pears to matter. Periods of depression during the infant’s ﬁrst
year have been shown to predict higher CORT levels at age 3,
whereas periods of depression during the second and third
year predict greater right frontal EEG patterns at three years.
Dawson and colleagues speculate that their ﬁndings may re-
ﬂect sensitive periods for the organization of different aspects
of the stress system; however, they also note that these data
are preliminary and need replication.
Although the results just described strongly suggest that
sensitive, responsive parenting regulates the young child’s
stress system, there is some evidence that overly responsive,
overly solicitous parenting may do the opposite. Thomasgard
and Metz (1993) argued that from the best of intentions par-
ents may feel that they need to step in to protect their anxious
child from upsetting experiences and may intrude into their
ongoing activities in ways that are overly protective and
overly solicitous. Overly solicitous, intrusive caregiving dur-
ing threat is associated with larger CORT increases among
toddlers and predicts insecure attachment classiﬁcation
(Nachmias, Gunnar, Mangelsdorf, Parritz, & Buss, 1996).
Similarly, parents who are extremely affectionate with and
solicitous of infants selected for high negative reactivity at 4
months are more likely to have infants who become ex-
tremely inhibited in their second year than are less affection-
ate and solicitous parents (Arcus, Gardner, & Anderson,
1992). Such parenting might increase fearfulness and stress
reactivity because it is insensitive, is organized more around
the parent’s anxiety about the child than the child’s actual
needs, and reduces the child’s experiences of self-regulation.
Regardless, these data suggest that we need more studies of
caregiving in stressful circumstances to understand how what
the caregiver does during periods of high challenge inﬂu-
ences both the parent-child relationship and the child’s
developing stress system.
Animal studies document that not only normal variations
in caregiving but also early maltreatment inﬂuence the devel-
oping stress system. There are too few studies of early mal-
treating rearing environments in humans to know whether
early experiences shape the stress system in our species (for
review, see Gunnar, 2000). In several studies of children who
were severely maltreated during their ﬁrst years of life, eleva-
tions in baseline CORT and catecholamine production have
been noted several years after removal from their maltreating
contexts. Similarly, in a recent study of women who were
sexually abused during childhood, heightened ACTH re-
sponses to a social stressor were found both for those who
were and those who were not clinically depressed. However,
the situations that result in maltreatment in humans are
complex. Any of a number of factors beyond caregiver-infant
interaction, including lack of adequate stimulation, malnutri-
tion, and inadequate medical care might be involved in
producing alterations in the development of the stress system.
As in other domains of early human experience, proving that
maltreatment at the hands of caregivers early in development
has permanent effects on the developing stress system will be
difﬁcult.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
The last several decades have seen tremendous advances in
our understanding of the neurobiology of the human stress
system. Research on the development of stress reactivity
and regulation in infants and children has burgeoned in re-
cent years due largely to the development of noninvasive
measurement techniques. However, we are still far from un-
derstanding the processes through which individual differ-
ences in stress become organized. Repeatedly throughout this
review we have noted where basic information is lacking.
Much of this information involves normative data on the

References
129
organization of stress reactivity and regulation at different
points during early development. As in the study of emo-
tional development more generally, we have much more in-
formation about individual differences in stress reactivity
than we do about normative patterns of development and
change. However, unless we develop this latter body of
knowledge, it will be difﬁcult to explicate the origins of
individual differences in stress reactivity and regulation.
Research on temperament, especially extremely inhibited
temperament, has motivated much of the research on early
stress reactivity and regulation. Although this work has been
aimed at documenting the stability of temperamental differ-
ences among children, the evidence strongly suggests that
most children do not remain extremely fearful or inhibited
throughout infancy and early childhood. Change is as likely,
or even more likely, than stability. Studies of caregiver-child
interactions indicate that qualities of care, including sensitiv-
ity and responsiveness, are related to reactivity and regula-
tion of the stress system in infants and young children. It
seems likely that transactional processes shape the develop-
ment of the stress system in humans as they appear to in other
mammals. These processes, including the child’s role in in-
ﬂuencing the nature of his or her experiences, remain largely
unexplored. We argue that an adequate understanding of the
development of stress and emotion in early childhood will
require attention both to the transactional nature of the inﬂu-
ences that shape differences in stress responsivity among in-
dividuals and to the ways these transactions emerge and
change during the early years of life.
REFERENCES
Anders, T. (Ed.). (1975). Maturation of sleep patterns in the new-
born infant. New York: Spectrum.
Arcus, D., Gardner, S., & Anderson, C. (1992). Infant reactivity, ma-
ternal style, and the development of inhibited and uninhibited
behavioral proﬁles. Paper presented at the International Society
for Infant Studies, Miami, FL.
Ashby, F. G., Isen, A. M., & Turken, A. U. (1999). A neuropsycho-
logical theory of positive affect and its inﬂuence on cognition.
Psychological Review, 106(3), 529–550.
Barbazanges, A., Piazza, P. V., Moal, M. L., & Maccari, S. (1996).
Maternal glucocorticoid secretion mediates long-term effects of
prenatal stress. Journal of Neuroscience, 16(12), 3943–3949.
Barr, R. G. (1990). The early crying paradox: A modest proposal.
Human Nature, 1(4), 355–389.
Barr, R. G., Young, S. N., Wright, J. H., & Hendricks, L. A. (1997).
Differential response to intraoral sucrose, quinine, and corn oil
in crying human newborns. Physiology and Behavior, 62(2),
317–325.
Beauchaine, T. (in press). Vagal tone, development, and Gray’s
motivational theory: Toward an integrative model of autonomic
nervous system functioning in psychopathology. Development
and Psychopathology.
Bell, M. A., & Fox, N. A. (1992). The relations between frontal
brain electrical activity and cognitive development during
infancy. Child Development, 63, 1142–1163.
Bell, M. A., & Fox, N. A. (1997). Individual differences in object
permanence performance at 8 months: Locomotor experience
and brain electrical activity. Developmental Psychobiology,
31(4), 287–297.
Belsky, J., & Rovine, M. (1987). Temperament and attachment
security in the strange situation: An empirical rapproachement.
Child Development, 58(3), 787–795.
Berkman, L. F. (1995). The role of social relations in health promo-
tion. Psychosomatic Medicine, 57, 245–254.
Berntson, G. G., Cacioppo, J. T., & Quigley, K. S. (1993). Cardiac
psychophysiology and autonomic space in humans: Empirical
perspectives and conceptual implications. Psychological Bul-
letin, 114(2), 296–322.
Blass, E. M. (1996). Mothers and their infants: Peptide-mediated
physiological, behavioral and affective changes during suckling.
Regulatory Peptides, 66(1–2), 109–112.
Born, J., de Kloet, E. R., Wenz, H., Kern, W., & Fehm, H. L. (1991).
Gluco- and antimineralocorticoid effects on human sleep: A role
of central corticosteroid receptors. American Physiological
Society, E183–E188.
Bornstein, M. H., & Suess, P. E. (2000). Physiological self-
regulation and information processing in infancy: Cardiac vagal
tone and habituation. Child Development, 71(2), 273–287.
Bowlby, J. (1969). Attachment and Loss: Attachment (Vol. 1). New
York: Basic Books.
Brackbill, Y. (1975). Continuous stimulation and arousal level in
infancy: Effects of stimulus intensity and stress. Child Develop-
ment, 46, 364–369.
Bronson, G. (1978). Aversive reactions to strangers: A dual process
interpretation. Child Development, 49, 495–499.
Bush, G., Luu, P., & Posner, M. I. (2000). Cognitive and emotional
inﬂuences in anterior cingulate cortex. Trends in Neuroscience,
4, 215–222.
Caldji, C., Tannenbaum, B., Sharma, S., Francis, D., Plotsky,
P. M., & Meaney, M. J. (1998). Maternal care during infancy reg-
ulates the development of neural systems mediating the expres-
sion of fearfulness in the rat. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, USA, 95(9), 5335–5340.
Cameron, O. G., & Nesse, R. M. (1988). Systematic hormonal and
physiological abnormalities in anxiety disorders. Psychoneu-
roendocrinology, 13(2), 287–307.
Campos, J., Kermoian, R., & Witherington, D. (1996).An epigenetic
perspective on emotional development. In R. D. Kavanaugh,
B. Zimmerberg, & S. Feinman (Eds.), Emotion: Interdisciplinary
perspectives (pp. 119–138). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

130
Stress and Emotion in Early Childhood
Campos, J., & Stenberg, C. (1981). Perception, appraisal and emo-
tion: The onset of social referencing. In M. Lamb & L. Sherrod
(Eds.), Infant social cognition: Empirical and theoretical con-
siderations (pp. 273–314). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Cannon, W. B. (1936). Bodily changes in pain, hunger, fear and
rage. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Cole, P., Zahn-Waxler, C., Fox, N. A., Usher, B. A., & Welsh, J. D.
(1996). Individual differences in emotion regulation and behav-
ior problems in preschool children. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 105, 518–529.
Coons, S. (1987). Development of sleep and wakefulness during the
ﬁrst six months of life. In C. Guilleminault (Ed.), Sleep and its
disorders in children (pp. 17–27). New York: Raven Press.
Dahl, R. E. (1996). The regulation of sleep and arousal: Develop-
ment and psychopathology. Development and Psychopathology,
8, 3–27.
Dallman, M. F., Strack, A. M., Akana, S. F., Bradbury, M. J.,
Hanson, E. S., Scribner, K. A., & Smith, M. (1993). Feast and
famine: Critical role of glucocorticoids with insulin in daily
energy ﬂow. Frontiers in Neuroendocrinology, 14, 303–347.
Davidson, R. J. (1994). Asymmetric brain function, affective style,
and psychopathology: The role of early experience and plastic-
ity. Development and Psychopathology, 6, 741–758.
Davidson, R. J., & Irwin, W. (1999). The functional neuroanatomy
of emotion and affective style. Trends in Neuroscience, 3, 11–21.
Davidson, R. J., & Slagter, H. A. (2000). Probing emotion in the
developing brain: Functional neuroimaging in the assessment of
the neural substrates of emotion in normal and disordered chil-
dren and adolescents. Mental Retardation and Developmental
Disabilities Research Reviews, 6(3), 166–170.
Davis, E. P., Donzella, B., Krueger, W. K., & Gunnar, M. R. (1999).
The start of a new school year: Individual differences in salivary
CORT response in relation to child temperament. Developmental
Psychobiology, 35(3), 188–196.
Dawson, G., & Ashman, S. (2000). On the origins of a vulnerability
to depression: The inﬂuence of early social environment on the
development of psychobiological systems related to risk for
affective disorder. In C. A. Nelson (Ed.), Minnesota Symposia on
Child Psychology: Vol. 31. The effects of adversity on neurobe-
havioral development (pp. 245–280). New York: Erlbaum.
Dawson, G., Panagiotides, H., Klinger, L. G., & Hill, D. (1992). The
role of frontal lobe functioning in the development of infant self-
regulatory behavior. Brain and Cognition, 20, 152–175.
de Kloet, R., Vreugdenhil, E., Oitzl, M. S., & Joels, A. (1998). Brain
corticosteroid receptor balance in health and disease. Endocrine
Reviews, 19(3), 269–301.
Dettling, A., Gunnar, M. R., & Donzella, B. (1999). CORT levels of
young children in full-day childcare centers: Relations with age
and temperament. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 24(5), 505–518.
Diamond, A. (2000). Close interrelation of motor development
and cognitive development and of the cerebellum and prefrontal
cortex. Child Development, 71(1), 44–56.
Diorio, D., Viau, V., & Meaney, M. J. (1993). The role of the me-
dial prefrontal cortex (cingulate gyrus) in the regulation of
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal responses to stress. Journal of
Neuroscience, 13, 3839–3847.
DiPietro, J. A., Costigan, K. A., Shupe, A. K., Pressman, E. K., &
Johnson, T. R. (1999). Fetal neurobehavioral development asso-
ciated with social class and fetal sex. Developmental Psychobi-
ology, 33, 79–81.
DiPietro, J. A., Hodgson, D. M., Costigan, K. A., Hilton, S. C., &
Johnson, T. R. (1996). Fetal neurobehavioral development. Child
Development, 67, 2553–2567.
Donzella, B., Gunnar, M. R., Krueger, W. K., & Alwin, A. (2000).
CORT and vagal tone responses to competitive challenge in
preschoolers: Associations with temperament. Developmental
Psychobiology, 37(4), 209–220.
Drevets, W. C., & Raichle, M. E. (1998). Reciprocal suppression of
regional cerebral blood ﬂow during emotional versus higher cog-
nitive processes: Implications for interactions between emotion
and cognition. Cognition and Emotion, 12, 353–385.
Economides, D. L., Nicolaides, K. H., Linton, E. A., Perry, L. A., &
Chard, T. (1988). Plasma CORT and adrenocorticotropin in
appropriate and small for gestational age fetuses. Fetal Therapy,
3, 158–164.
Eisenberg, N., Fabes, R. A., Bernzweig, H., Karbon, M., Poulin, R.,
& Hanish, L. (1993). The relations of emotionality and regula-
tion to preschoolers’ social skills and sociometric status. Child
Development, 64, 1418–1438.
Emde, R. M., Gaensbauer, T. J., & Harmon, R. J. (1976). Emotional
expressions in infancy: A biobehavioral study. New York: Inter-
national University Press.
Emery, N. J., & Amaral, D. G. (2000). The role of the amygdala
in primate social cognition. In R. D. Lane & L. Nadel (Eds.),
Cognitive neuroscience of emotion (pp. 156–191). New York:
Oxford University Press.
Engle, B. T. (1985). Stress is a noun! No, a verb! No, an adjective.
In T. Field, P. McCabe, & N. Sneiderman (Eds.), Stress and cop-
ing (Vol. 1, pp. 3–12). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Field, T. (1981). Infant gaze aversion and heart rate during face-to-
face interactions. Infant Behavior and Development, 4, 307–316.
Folkman, S., & Moskowitz, J. T. (2000). Stress, positive emotion,
and coping. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 9,
115–118.
Follenius, M., Brandenberger, G., Bandesapt, J. J., Libert, J. P., &
Ehrhart, J. (1992). Nocturnal CORT release in relation to sleep
structure. Sleep, 15(1), 21–27.
Fox, N. A. (1989). Psychophysiological correlates of emotional
reactivity during the ﬁrst year of life. Developmental Psychol-
ogy, 25(3), 364–372.
Fox, N. A., & Bell, M. A. (1993). Frontal function in cognitive and
emotional behaviors during infancy: Effects of maturation and
experience. In B. de Boysson-Bardies & S. de Schonen (Eds.),
NATO ASI Series D: Behavioural and Social Sciences: Vol. 69.

References
131
Developmental Neurocognition: Speech and Face Processing in
the First Year of Life (pp. 199–210). Dordrecht, Netherlands:
Kluwer.
Fox, N.A., & Davidson, R. J. (1986). Taste-elicited changes in facial
signs of emotion and the asymmetry of brain electrical activity in
human newborns. Neuropsychologia, 24, 417–422.
Fox, N. A., Henderson, H. A., Rubin, K. H., Calkins, S., &
Schmidt,
L. A.
(2001).
Continuity
and
discontinuity
of
behavioral inhibition and exuberance: Psychophysiological and
behavioral inﬂuences across the ﬁrst four years of life. Child
Development, 72, 1–21.
Frankenhaeuser, M. (1979). Psychobiological aspects of life stress.
In S. Levine & H. Ursin (Eds.), Coping and health (pp. 203–
224). New York: Plenum Press.
Gerardi-Caulton, G. (in press). Sensitivity to spatial conﬂict and the
development of self-regulation in children 24–36 months of age.
Developmental Science.
Giannakoulpoulous, X., Sepulveda, W., Kourtis, P., Glover, V., &
Fisk, N. M. (1994). Fetal plasma and beta-endorphin response to
intrauterine needling. The Lancet, 344, 77–81.
Giannakoulpoulous, X., Teixeira, J., Fisk, N. M., & Glover, V.
(1999). Human fetal and maternal noradrenaline responses to
invasive procedures. Pediatric Research, 45, 494–499.
Goldsmith, H. H., & Alansky, J. A. (1987). Maternal and infant tem-
peramental predictors of attachment: A meta-analytic review.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 55(6), 805–816.
Gormally, S. M., & Barr, R. G. (1997). Of clinical pies and clinical
clues: Proposal for a clinical approach to complaints of early
crying and colic. Good Practice Guide, 3, 137–153.
Gottlieb, G., Wahlsten, D., & Lickliter, R. (1998). A developmental
psychobiological systems view. In R. Lerner (Ed.), Handbook of
child psychology: Vol. 1. Theoretical model of human develop-
ment (5th ed., pp. 233–274). New York: Wiley.
Gunnar, M. R. (1980). Contingent stimulation: A review of its role
in early development. In S. Levine & H. Ursin (Eds.), Coping
and health (pp. 101–120). New York: Plenum Press.
Gunnar, M. R. (1986). Human developmental psychoendocrinol-
ogy: A review of research on neuroendocrine responses to
challenge and threat in infancy and childhood. In M. Lamb, A.
Brown, & B. Rogoff (Eds.), Advances in developmental psychol-
ogy (Vol. 4, pp. 51–103). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gunnar, M. R. (1992). Reactivity of the hypothalamic-pituitary-
adrenocortical system to stressors in normal infants and children.
Pediatrics, 80(3), 491–497.
Gunnar, M. R. (1994). Psychoendocrine studies of temperament and
stress in early childhood: Expanding current models. In J.
Bates & T. Wachs (Eds.), Temperament: Individual differences at
the interface of biology and behavior (pp. 175–198). New York:
American Psychological Association Press.
Gunnar, M. R. (2000). Early adversity and the development of stress
reactivity and regulation. In C. A. Nelson (Ed.), The Minnesota
Symposia on Child Psychology: Vol. 31. The effects of adversity
on neurobehavioral development (pp. 163–200). Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Gunnar, M. R., Brodersen, L., Krueger, K., & Rigatuso, J. (1996).
Dampening of adrenocortical responses during infancy: Norma-
tive changes and individual differences. Child Development,
67(3), 877–889.
Gunnar, M. R., Porter, F., Wolf, C., & Rigatuso, J. (1995). Neonatal
stress reactivity: Predictions to later emotional temperament.
Child Development, 66, 1–14.
Gunnar, M. R., Tout, K., de Haan, M., Pierce, S., & Stansbury, K.
(1997). Temperament, social competence, and adrenocortical
activity in preschoolers. Developmental Psychobiology, 31(1),
65–85.
Hann, D. M., Huffman, L. C., Lederhendler, I. I., & Meinecke, D.
(Eds.). (1998). Advancing research on developmental plasticity:
Integrating the behavioral science and neuroscience of mental
health (Vol. 98). Washington, DC: National Institute of Health.
Heim, C., Owen, M. J., Plotsky, P. M., & Nemeroff, C. B. (1997).
The role of early adverse life events in the etiology of depression
and posttraumatic stress disorder: Focus on corticotropin-
releasing factor. Annals of the New York Academy of Science,
821, 194–207.
Hofer, M. (1987). Shaping forces within early social relationships.
In N. A. Krasnegar (Ed.), Perinatal development: A psychobio-
logical perspective (pp. 251–274). Orlando, FL: Academic
Press.
Huffman, L., Bryan, Y. E., del Carmen, R., Pedersen, F. A.,
Doussard-Roosevelt, J., & Porges, S. W. (1998). Infant tempera-
ment and cardiac vagal tone: Assessments at twelve weeks of
age. Child Development, 69, 624–635.
Hugdahl, K. (1995). Psychophysiology: The mind-body perspective.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Hughes, R. B., Townsend, P. A., & Branum, Q. K. (1988). Relation-
ship between neonatal behavioral responses and lactation out-
comes. Issues in Comprehensive Pediatric Nursing, 11(5–6),
271–281.
Huizink, A. C., de Medina, P. G. R., Mulder, E. J. H., Visser, G. H.
A., & Buitelaar, J. K. (2000). Prenatal psychosocial and en-
docrinologic predictors of infant temperament. In A. C. Huizink
(Ed.), Prenatal stress and its effects on infant development
(pp. 171–200). Hoorn, Netherlands: Drukkerij van Vliet.
Huttenlocher, P. R. (1994). Synaptogenesis, synapse elimination,
and neural plasticity in human cerebral cortex. In C. A. Nelson
(Ed.), Threats to optimal development: Integrating biological,
psychological, and social risk factors (Vol. 27, pp. 35–54).
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Izard, C. E., Hembree, E. A., Dougherty, L. M., & Spizzirri, C. C.
(1983). Changes in facial expressions of 2- to 19-month-old
infants following acute pain. Developmental Psychology, 19(3),
418–426.
Johnson, E. O., Kamilaris, T. C., Chrousos, G. P., & Gold, P. W.
(1992). Mechanisms of stress: A dynamic overview of hormonal

132
Stress and Emotion in Early Childhood
and behavioral homeostasis. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral
Reviews, 16, 115–130.
Kagan, J. (1994). Galen’s prophecy. New York: Basic Books.
Kagan, J. (2001). Temperamental contributions to affective and be-
havioral proﬁles in childhood. In S. G. Hofmann & P. Di Bartolo
(Eds.), Social phobia and social anxiety: An integration. Boston:
Allyn and Bacon.
Kirschbaum, C., & Hellhammer, D. H. (1989). Salivary cortisol in
psychobiological research: An overview. Neuropsychobiology,
22, 150–169.
Kochanska, G., Murray, K. T., & Harlan, E. T. (2000). Effortful
control in early childhood: Continuity and change, antecedents,
and implications for social development. Developmental Psy-
chology, 36(2), 220–232.
Kopp, C. B. (1989). Regulation of distress and negative emotions:
A developmental view. Developmental Psychology, 25(3), 343–
355.
Kuo, Z. Y. (1976). The dynamics of behavior development. New
York: Plenum Press.
Lefcourt, H. M. (1973). The functions of the illusions of control and
freedom. American Psychologist, 28, 417–425.
Lerner, R. M. (1986). Concepts and theories of human development
(2nd ed.). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Levine, S. (1994). The ontogeny of the hypothalamic-pituitary-
adrenal axis: The inﬂuence of maternal factors. Annals of the
New York Academy of Sciences, 746, 275–288.
Levine, S., & Wiener, S. G. (1988). Psychoendocrine aspects
of mother-infant relationships in nonhuman primates. Psy-
choneuoendocrinology, 13, 143–154.
Lewis, M., & Ramsay, D. S. (1995). Developmental change in
infants’ responses to stress. Child Development, 66(3), 657–670.
MacLean, P. D. (1952). Some psychiatric implications of physio-
logical studies on frontotemporal portions of limbic system
(visceral brain). Electroencephalography and Clinical Neuro-
physiology, 4, 407–418.
Maier, S. F., Ryan, S. M., Barksdale, C. M., & Kalin, N. H. (1986).
Stressor controllability and the pituitary-adrenal system. Behav-
ioral Neuroscience, 100(5), 669–674.
Mangelsdorf, S. C. (1992). Developmental changes in infant-
stranger interaction. Infant Behavior and Development, 15,
191–208.
Marshall, P. J., & Stevenson-Hinde, J. (1998). Behavioral inhibition,
heart period, and respiratory sinus arrhythmia in young children.
Developmental Psychobiology, 33, 283–292.
McEwen, B. (1998). Stress, adaptation, and disease: Allostasis and
allostatic load. Annals of the New York Academy of Science, 840,
33–44.
Murphy, B. P. (1982). Human fetal serum cortisol levels related
to gestational age: Evidence of a midgestational fall and a steep
late gestational rise, independent of sex or mode of delivery.
American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 144, 276–282.
Nachmias, M., Gunnar, M. R., Mangelsdorf, S., Parritz, R., & Buss,
K. (1996). Behavioral inhibition and stress reactivity: Moderat-
ing role of attachment security. Child Development, 67(2),
508–522.
Nemeroff, C. B. (1996). The corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF)
hypothesis of depression: New ﬁndings and new directions. Mol-
ecular Psychiatry, 1(4), 336–342.
Palkovits, M. (1987). Organization of the stress response at the
anatomical level. In E. R. de Kloet, V. M. Wiegant, & D. de
Wied (Eds.), Progress in brain research (Vol. 72, pp. 47–55).
Amsterdam: Elsevier Science.
Panksepp, J. (1996). Affective neuroscience: A paradigm to study
the animate circuits for human emotions. In R. D. Kavanaugh,
B. Zimmerberg, & S. Fein (Eds.), Emotion: Interdisciplinary
perspectives (pp. 29–60). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Parritz, R. H. (1996). A descriptive analysis of toddler coping in
challenging circumstances. Infant Behavior and Development,
19, 171–180.
Pitkanen, A., Savander, V., & LeDoux, J. E. (1997). Organization of
intraamygdaloid circuitries in the rat: An emerging framework
for understanding function of the amygdala. In J. Smith &
G. Schoenwolf (Eds.), Neurulation (pp. 517–523). New York:
Elsevier Science.
Porges, S. W. (1995a). Orienting in a defensive world: Mammalian
modiﬁcations of our evolutionary heritage. A poly-vagal theory.
Psychophysiology, 32(4), 301–318.
Porges, S. W. (1995b). Cardiac vagal tone: A physiological index
of stress. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 19(2),
225–233.
Porges, S. W., Doussard-Roosevelt, J. A., Stifter, C. A., McClenny,
B. D., & Riniolo, T. C. (1999). Sleep state and vagal regulation
of heart period patterns in the human newborn: An extension of
the polyvagal theory. Psychophysiology, 36(1), 14–21.
Porges, S. W., & Fox, N. A. (1986). Developmental psychophysiol-
ogy. In M. G. H. Coles, E. Donchin, & S. W. Porges (Eds.),
Psychophysiology (pp. 611–625). New York: Guilford Press.
Posner, M. I., & Petersen, S. E. (1990). The attention system of the
human brain. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 13, 25–42.
Posner, M. I., & Rothbart, M. (2000). Developing mechanisms
of self-regulation. Development and Psychopathology, 12(3),
427–442.
Price, J. L. (1999). Prefrontal cortical networks related to visceral
function and mood. Annals of the New York Academy of
Sciences, 877, 383–396.
Quas, J. A., Hong, M., Alkon, A., & Boyce, W. T. (2000). Dissocia-
tions between psychobiologic reactivity and emotional expres-
sion in children. Developmental Psychobiology, 37, 153–175.
Rosen, J. B., & Schulkin, J. (1998). From normal fear to pathologi-
cal anxiety. Psychological Review, 105(2), 325–350.
Rothbart, M. K., Derryberry, D., & Posner, M. I. (1994). A psy-
chobiological approach to the development of temperament. In J.
Bates & T. Wachs (Eds.), Temperament: Individual differences at

References
133
the interface of biology and behavior (pp. 83–116). Washington,
DC: American Psychological Association.
Rothbart, M. K., Posner, M. I., & Rosicky, J. (1994). Orienting
in normal and pathological development. Development and Psy-
chopathology, 6, 635–652.
Sameroff, A. (1983). Developmental systems: Contexts and evolu-
tion. In W. Kessen (Ed.), Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 1.
History, theory, and methods (4th ed., pp. 237–294). New York:
Wiley.
Sanchez, M. M., Young, L. J., Plotsky, P. M., & Insel, T. R. (2000).
Distribution of corticosteroid receptors in the rhesus brain:
Relative absence of glucocorticoid receptors in the hippocampal
formation. Journal of Neuroscience, 20(12), 4657–4668.
Saper, C. B. (1995). Central autonomic system. In G. Paxinos (Ed.),
The Rat Nervous System (pp. 107–135). New York: Academic
Press.
Schmidt, L. A., & Fox, N. A. (1999). Conceptual, biological, and
behavioral distinctions among different categories of shy children.
In L. A. Schmidt & J. Schulkin (Eds.), Extreme fear, shyness, and
social phobia: Origins, biological mechanisms, and clinical out-
comes (pp. 47–66). New York: Oxford University Press.
Schmidt, L. A., Fox, N. A., Rubin, K. H., Sternberg, E. M., Gold,
P. W., Smith, C. C., & Schulkin, J. (1997). Behavioral and neu-
roendocrine responses in shy children. Developmental Psychobi-
ology, 30(2), 127–140.
Schmidt, L. A., Fox, N. A., Schulkin, J., & Gold, P. W. (1999). Be-
havioral and psychophysiological correlates of self-presentation
in temperamentally shy children. Developmental Psychobiology,
35(2), 119–135.
Schore, A. N. (1996). The experience-dependent maturation of a
regulatory system in the orbital prefrontal cortex and the origin
of developmental psychopathology. Development and Psy-
chopathology, 8, 59–87.
Selye, H. (1975). Confusion and controversy in the stress ﬁeld.
Journal of Human Stress, 1(2), 37–44.
Spangler, G., & Grossmann, K. E. (1993). Biobehavioral organiza-
tion in securely and insecurely attached infants. Child Develop-
ment, 64, 1439–1450.
Spangler, G., & Schieche, M. (1998). Emotional and adrenocortical
responses of infants to the strange situation: The differential
function of emotional expression. International Journal of
Behavioral Development, 22(4), 681–706.
Spangler, G., Schieche, M., Ilg, U., Maier, U., & Ackermann, C.
(1994). Maternal sensitivity as an external organizer for biobe-
havioral regulation in infancy. Developmental Psychobiology,
27(7), 425–437.
Sroufe, L. A., & Waters, E. (1979). Heart rate as a convergent mea-
sure in clinical and developmental research. Merrill-Palmer
Quarterly, 23(1), 3–27.
Sroufe, L. A., Waters, E., & Matas, L. (1974). Contextual determi-
nants of infant affective response. In M. Lewis & L. Rosenblum
(Eds.), The origins of fear (pp. 49–72). New York: Wiley.
Stansbury, K., & Gunnar, M. R. (1994). Adrenocortical activity and
emotion regulation. Monographs of the Society for Research in
Child Development, 59(2–3), 250–283.
Steckler, T., & Holsboer, F. (1999). Corticotropin-releasing hor-
mone receptor subtypes and emotion. Biological Psychiatry, 46,
1480–1508.
Stevenson-Hinde, J., & Marshall, P. J. (1999). Behavioral inhibition,
heart period, and respiratory sinus arrhythmia: An attachment
perspective. Child Development, 70, 805–816.
Stevenson-Hinde, J., & Shouldice, A. (1996). Fearfulness: Develop-
mental consistency. In A. J. Sameroff & M. M. Haith (Eds.), The
ﬁve to seven year shift: The age of reason and responsibility
(pp. 237–252). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Sullivan, R. M., & Grafton, A. (1999). Lateralized effects of medial
frontal lesions on neuroendocrine and autonomic stress re-
sponses in rats. Journal of Neuroscience, 19, 2834–2840.
Taddio, A., Katz, J., Ilarslch, A. L., & Koren, G. (1997). Effects
of neonatal circumcision on pain response during subsequent
routine vaccination. The Lancet, 340, 599–603.
Takahashi, L. K., & Rubin, W. W. (1993). Corticosteroid induction
of threat-induced behavior inhibition in preweanling rats. Behav-
ioral Neuroscience, 107(5), 860–866.
Tennes, K., Emde, R., Kisley, A., & Metcalf, D. (1972). The stimu-
lus barrier in early infancy: An exploration of some formulations
of John Benjamin. In R. R. Holt & E. Peterfreund (Eds.), Psy-
choanalysis and contemporary science: An annual of integrative
and interdisciplinary studies (Vol. 1, pp. 206–234). New York:
MacMillan.
Thomasgard, M., & Metz, W. P. (1993). Parental overprotection
revisited. Child Psychiatry and Human Development, 24, 67–80.
Thompson, R. A. (1994). Emotion regulation: A theme in search of
deﬁnition. In N. A. Fox (Ed.), The development of emotion regu-
lation: Biological and behavioral considerations (pp. 25–52).
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Vaughn, B. E., Bradley, C. F., Joffe, L. S., Seifer, R., & Barglow, P.
(1987). Maternal characteristics measured prenatally are pre-
dictive ratings of temperamental “difﬁculty” on the Carey
Infant Temperamental Questionnaire. Developmental Psychol-
ogy, 23(1), 152–161.
Vazquez, D. M. (1998). Stress and the developing limbic-
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis. Psychoneuroendocrinol-
ogy, 23, 663–700.
Wadhwa, P. D., Sandman, C. A., & Garite, T. J. (2001). The
neurobiology of stress in human pregnancy: Implications for
prematurity and development of the fetal central nervous system.
Progress in Brain Research, 133, 131–142.
Waters, E., Matas, L., & Sroufe, A. (1975). Infants’ reactions to an
approaching stranger: Description, validation, and functional
signiﬁcance of wariness. Child Development, 46, 348–356.
Watson, J., & Ramey, C. (1972). Reactions to response-contingent
stimulation in early infancy. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 13,
219–288.

134
Stress and Emotion in Early Childhood
Weinstock, M. (1997). Does prenatal stress impair coping and regu-
lation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis? Biobehavioral
Review, 21, 1–10.
West, M. J., & King, A. P. (2001). Science lies its way to the
truth . . . really. In E. Blass (Ed.), Handbook of behavioral neu-
robiology, Vol. 13: Developmental psychobiology, developmen-
tal neurobiology, and behavioral ecology: Mechanisms and
early principles. New York: Plenum.
White, B. P., Gunnar, M. R., Larson, M. C., Donzella, B., & Barr,
R. G. (2000). Behavioral and physiological responsivity, and
patterns of sleep and daily salivary cortisol in infants with and
without colic. Child Development, 71(4), 862–877.
Wilson, B. J., & Gottman, J. M. (1996). Attention-The shuttle be-
tween emotion and cognition: Risk, resiliency, and physiological
bases. In E. M. Hetherington & E. A. Blechman (Eds.), Stress,
coping, and resiliency in children and families (pp. 189–238).
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Yehuda R. (1998). Psychoneuroendocrinology of post-traumatic
stress disorder. Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 21(2),
359–379.

CHAPTER 6
Diversity in Caregiving Contexts
HIRAM E. FITZGERALD, TAMMY MANN, NATASHA CABRERA, AND MARIA M. WONG
135
NONPARENTAL CHILD CARE OF INFANTS
AND TODDLERS
136
SYSTEMS THEORY: AN ORGANIZING FRAMEWORK FOR
THE STUDY OF NONPARENTAL CHILD CARE
137
EARLY CHILD CARE AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT
139
NICHD Study of Early Child Care
139
ACYF Study of Early Head Start
141
Carolina Abecedarian Project
146
Parent-Child Development Centers
146
Goteborg Child Care Study
147
Summary: Early Child Care and Child Development
147
FACTORS INFLUENCING OUTCOMES IN EARLY CHILD
CARE RESEARCH
147
Temperament
148
Caregiver-Child Social-Emotional Relationships
149
Fathers and Nonparental Child Care
152
Summary: Factors Inﬂuencing Outcomes in Early
Child Care Research
154
NONPARENTAL CHILD CARE: COST, QUALITY,
AND ASSURANCE
155
Cost and Quality
155
Benchmarking Quality
155
Assurance: Regulatory Policies and Nonparental
Child Care
157
Summary: Nonparental Child Care
160
ENTERING THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY
160
REFERENCES
161
Day nurseries and creches have come in for particularly heavy
criticism . . . and the World Health Organization actually as-
serted that their use inevitably caused permanent psychological
damage. There is no evidence in support of this view. Of course,
day nurseries vary greatly in quality and some are quite poor.
Bad child care whether in day nurseries or at home is to be
deplored but there is no reason to suppose that day nurseries, as
such, have a deleterious inﬂuence. (Rutter, 1976, p. 160)
A generation ago, infants and toddlers were being described
as the new school-age children, in response to what then was
an unprecedented demand in the United States for infant and
toddler child care (Fitzgerald, Strommen, & McKinney,
1977). In 1940 only 10% of children had mothers in the labor
force. By 1970 that percentage had risen to 36%, and today
nearly 70% of all children under 5 years of age have mothers
who work outside the home (Hernandez, 1997). Impetus for
the accelerated demand for child care of very young children
that occurred from 1940 to 1970 was fueled by many factors,
not the least of which was Franklin Delano Roosevelt’s
authorization of the Works Progress Administration toward
the end of the Depression, which established the ﬁrst U.S.
government-funded child care programs for families in need.
In 1944 Congress passed the LanhamAct, thereby authorizing
use of federal funds to support child care for all children,
beginning at 2 years of age. By 1945 there were slightly more
than 1.5 million children enrolled in full day care centers or
nursery schools.
Reviews of the child care literature have described his-
torical trends in the study of nonmaternal child care (Scarr &
Eisenberg, 1993; Clarke-Stewart, Allhusen, & Clements,
1995), cross-cultural perspectives on siblings as caregivers
(Zukow-Goldring, 1995), kinship care (Wilson & Chipaungu,
1996), contextual setting events and cross-cultural variations
in child care (Lamb, 1998), and criteria for selecting child
care (Honig, 1995). The extant literature on infant and
toddler child care supports the broad conclusion that supple-
mental nonmaternal child care is not harmful to infants and
toddlers—and in fact can be beneﬁcial both to child devel-
opment and to the quality of the parent-child relationship.
Nevertheless, there are many issues that remain unresolved
about supplemental child care during the birth-to-three years.
There is consensus that quality is the key to success of child
care, regardless of where that care takes place. However, the
deﬁning features of quality have not been fully articulated—
either for parental child rearing or for nonparental child
care. There is increasing recognition that fathers play an im-
portant role in early child development, but there is not much

136
Diversity in Caregiving Contexts
speciﬁcity as to what that role actually is. We know far more
about characteristics of children that are correlated with
father absence, but we know little about the effects of father
presence on child development. Although there is consider-
able research assessing the impact of nonparental child care
on child development, no theoretical or conceptual model
currently provides an overarching framework to guide sys-
tematic research in this area. Attention is directed to issues re-
lated to the physical settings within which nonparental child
care takes place, with a distinct focus on health and safety is-
sues, child-to-adult ratios, and training of care providers. In
contrast, less attention is given to issues related to the quality
of the care provider-child relationship. If the quality of the
adult-infant relationship comprises the core of human social-
emotional development as attachment theorists would have
it, then one would expect that the relationships that infants
and toddlers have with their child care providers would con-
tribute to emotion regulation during early childhood.
In this chapter we examine selected aspects of the child
care literature to identify streams of research that may best
inform efforts to establish benchmarks for quality care of
infants and toddlers, particularly in nonparental child care
settings. We propose that the study of the impact of early
child care would be facilitated by adopting ecological
approaches—such as that embodied in systems theory—in
order to provide organizational structure to the ﬁeld. We
brieﬂy review several national and local studies of the impact
of early child care that have in common use of randomized
designs and research designs that provided tracking of chil-
dren over time. Then we draw attention to four focal issues—
infant temperament, caregiver-child relationships, father
involvement, family risk load—and suggest that each should
be a targeted domain in the overall assessment of the impact
of nonparental child care on infant and toddler development.
Finally, we close with a discussion of evidence that may be
used to establish benchmarks of quality for nonparental care
of infants and toddlers.
NONPARENTAL CHILD CARE OF
INFANTS AND TODDLERS
Today’s demand for supplemental child care for infants and
toddlers makes yesterday’s reference to new school-age chil-
dren a gross understatement. According to data from the
National Household Survey (1999), 61% of all children
4 years of age or under participated in some form of regularly
scheduled child care; this includes 44% of infants younger
than 1 year of age, 53% of 1-year-olds, and 57% of 2-year-
olds. Today, approximately 12 million children younger than
4 years of age receive some form of partial or full-time non-
maternal child care involving as many as 40 or more hours in
nonparental care.
Throughout human history, the care of children rarely has
been the mother’s exclusive responsibility. However, power-
ful theories of human development emerged during the twen-
tieth century that focused attention to mother as the primary
caregiver for infants and toddlers. Early in that century,
Freud’s (1946) psychoanalytic theory and Piaget’s (1952)
theory of genetic epistemology drew attention to the ﬁrst 3
years of life as uniquely important for personality develop-
ment and cognitive development, respectively. Bowlby
(1969) drew heavily from psychoanalytic theory to articulate
an extraordinarily inﬂuential theory of early personality de-
velopment as emergent from the quality of the mother-infant
relationship. Prior to Bowlby’s work, Spitz (1965) focused
attention on the impact of maternal and sensory deprivation
on infant development. Ainsworth subsequently developed a
research procedure, the Strange Situation, that has had a pro-
found impact on the study of the quality of the mother-infant
social-emotional relationship (Ainsworth, Bleher, Waters, &
Wall, 1978). Although attachment theory and research meth-
ods have markedly advanced knowledge of early personality
development, affect regulation, and interpersonal relation-
ships, they also created an atmosphere highly suspicious of
nonmaternal child care, especially during the ﬁrst year of life.
In addition, they directed such strong attention to the mother-
child relationship that the father nearly became a forgotten
parent with respect to his parenting role during early child-
hood development (Coley, 2001). Although few developmen-
tal theorists continue to hold onto the view that the events of
infancy rigidly determine subsequent outcomes (Rutter,
1995), contemporary brain research asserts that the impact of
environmental events on neurobehavioral systems in the
early years of development need to be carefully considered
(Shonkoff & Phillips, 2001).
There is a tendency in the literature to discuss care of
children by individuals other than a parent as nonmaternal
child care. Although many authors have drawn attention to
the fact that throughout human history, “the exclusive care of
infants by their mother is an exception rather than a rule”
(Werner, 1988, p. 105), supplemental caregivers tend to be
other women more often than to be men. Even in cultures that
have ofﬁcial policies granting parental leave to men, rela-
tively few men participate equally in the routine care of their
infants and toddlers (Mackey, 1996; Salmi, 1994). For exam-
ple, Finland has one of the highest percentages of women in
the workforce of any country of in the world (80%). Parents
receive 11 months of parental leave, the ﬁrst 105 days of
which are reserved for mothers. Thereafter, mothers and

Systems Theory: An Organizing Framework for the Study of Nonparental Child Care
137
fathers can choose among a variety of options for allocating
the remaining months of parental leave to one or the other
parent. However, in relatively few families (4%) do fathers
choose to take advantage of the parental leave policy (Salmi,
1994). After 11 postnatal months, families may enroll their
toddlers in municipal day care (government-supported child
care centers), private day care, or at-home day care. Families
choosing options other than municipal child care receive
government subsidies to help offset the costs. In Finland (as
elsewhere) parental leave policies are associated with lower
demand for nonparental infant child care (Kamerman &
Kahn, 1995).
The options for nonparental child care in Finland are
essentially those found everywhere. Nonparental child care
basically takes place in one of two basic settings: in a center
or in someone’s home. Centers can be located practi-
cally anywhere—schools, workplaces, religious institutions,
universities, shopping centers, apartment buildings, or inde-
pendent private buildings. Although center-based care his-
torically involved preschool-aged children, the number of
infants and toddlers in such care is increasing. Home-based
child care varies, with some infants and toddlers cared for in
their own homes (at-home day care) and others cared for in
someone else’s home, often referred to as family day care or
kinship care (Wilson & Chipungu, 1996). Child care that is
provided in the child’s own home is convenient, but it is also
the most expensive type of child care when it is provided by
a nonrelative. Kinship care that takes place in the child’s
own home generally is provided by grandparents, older sib-
lings, or others with the likelihood that services are free or
of minimal cost (Wilson & Chipungu, 1996). On the other
hand, kinship care often involves low-income families and
chosen because it is the only affordable option available to
families. When kinship care takes place in the home of a rel-
ative, the ﬁnancial arrangements vary greatly. The issue of
ﬁnancial support to enhance the quality of kinship care is a
matter of current policy debate (Hornby, Zeller, & Karraker,
1996). Because kinship care and family care take place in
the child care provider’s home, it often means that the num-
ber of children being cared for is relatively small. When sev-
eral children are involved, their ages may vary substantially.
Multiple age groupings retain a sense of family structure,
with older children available as models and teachers for
younger children.
Traditional caregiving provided by nonparental persons to
infants and toddlers while their parents work is referred to as
child care. Nonparental caregivers are referred to as child
caregivers, child care providers or workers, domestic care-
givers, educators (those providing both education and care),
or teachers. Although some may also be called day care
workers, the term day care is used less often as more parents
work nontraditional hours, thus requiring child care services
evenings, overnight, and on weekends. The term child care
provider is rapidly becoming the generic descriptor for all
child caregiving services provided to infants and toddlers in
the absence of their parents. Regardless of the descriptor used
to depict nonparental care providers and regardless of where
such care takes place, there is a need for some overarching
organizational structure to guide the systematic study of the
impact of nonparental care on infant and toddler develop-
ment in all of its cultural complexity and diversity (Cochran,
1993; Kontos, Howes, Shinn, & Galinsky, 1995; Morelli &
Verhoef, 1999). For example, studies of the impact of non-
parental child care on child development does not yet take
into account the full impact of such ecological variables as
geographic region, family structure, and maternal character-
istics (Singer, Fuller, Keiley, & Wolf, 1998). Singer et al.
demonstrated that the type of child care parents choose is
inﬂuenced by such variables as parental race and ethnicity,
geographic location of residence, maternal employment,
child age, maternal education, and number of children in the
family. We believe that ecological models of human develop-
ment—especially those that embrace some variant of systems
theory—provide the best hope for organizing and directing
the systematic study of such diverse sources of impact (see
Table 6.1).
SYSTEMS THEORY: AN ORGANIZING
FRAMEWORK FOR THE STUDY OF
NONPARENTAL CHILD CARE
In the 1930s Ludwig von Bertalanffy, dissatisﬁed with both
mechanistic and vitalist attempts to explain the organization
of living things, articulated an alternative organismic posi-
tion which he subsequently named general systems theory
(von Bertalanffy, 1950, 1968). Since then a number of inves-
tigators have expanded and reﬁned systems theory into a
powerful conceptual framework for organizing the study of
adaptive behavior and adaptive functioning applicable across
the life span. Systems theorists view the organization of all
systems as emergent, epigenetic, constructive, hierarchically
integrated (Bronfenbrenner, 1979; Ford & Lerner, 1992;
Gottlieb, 1991; Miller, 1978; Sameroff, 2000) and potentially
chaotic (Thelen & Smith, 1994). Moreover, systems theorists
believe that the ecological context within which systems de-
velop plays a key role in the organizational process. Because
the components of any system are interdependent, it follows
that attempts to understand adaptive functioning at one
level require that we understand how that level is embedded

138
Diversity in Caregiving Contexts
TABLE 6.1
Variables Affecting Family Choice of Child Care
within the broader system of which it is a part. Moreover, be-
cause systems theory posits that all components of a system
are interdependent, the parts derive their meaning only in the
context of intersystem and intrasystem relationships.
Assessing the impact of any kind of child care on child
development requires longitudinal research approaches. One
can easily assess proximal impacts with cross-sectional de-
signs, but only through longitudinal designs can one assess
changes that occur in relation to events that occur over the life
course. From a systems perspective, identifying causal factors
related to child care outcomes must take into account intra-in-
dividual (within the individual), interindividual (between in-
dividuals), contextual (social-historical-temporal events or
situations), and organism-environment transaction (ecologi-
cal, bidirectional) sources of variance. Relying on main effect
or direct effect models is unlikely to reveal much about the
dynamic changes that occur during the birth-to-three years.
Within this multilevel approach, we focus on four aspects
of the child care system: primary system characteristics
(characteristics of individual units—child, family, neighbor-
hood—of a system), intrasystem relationships (parent-child,
spousal, sibling, kinship interrelationships), adjunctive sys-
tem inﬂuences (ecological contexts that impact the primary
system), and intersystem relationships (boundaries, barriers,
transitions; Fitzgerald, Zucker, & Yang, 1995). Recent ac-
counts of the impact of neighborhood poverty on child devel-
opment illustrate the nesting of risk factors in communities
(Duncan & Brooks-Gunn, 1997) and support the hypothe-
sis that risky neighborhoods envelop individuals and families
within maintenance structures that sustain risk (Zucker et al.,
2000). For example, very young children reared in antisocial
alcoholic families are more likely to be exposed to parents
who themselves had childhood behavior problems, illegal
behavior, frequent arrests, chronic lying, relationship distur-
bances, depression and family violence, neuroticism, poor
achievement and cognitive functioning, and low socioeco-
nomic status (SES; Fitzgerald, Puttler, Mun, & Zucker 2000).
There is also evidence of assortative mating in such families.
This suggests that the nesting environment within which
children with a high family history for alcohol are reared also
carries a substantially higher risk load (Zucker et al, 2000).
Thus, antisocial alcoholic parents provide a high-risk rearing
environment that is very likely to be embedded within a high-
risk neighborhood (cf. Osofsky & Fenichel, 1994).
All development takes place in a complex environment
that consists of the primary system, the transactions that occur
within the primary system (Sameroff, 2000), and the transac-
tions that take place between the primary system and all of its
adjunctive systems (Carlson & Cassell, 1984; Fitzgerald
et al., 1995). Contemporary prevention programs designed to
enhance child development during the early years reﬂect this
thinking. They address issues related to child development,
parent involvement, consistency of care, and networking to
the broader community of human service agencies and to the
schools. To the extent that the primary system is embedded in
risk, adjunctive child care systems may be the child’s best
hope for being exposed to individuals and environments that
will stretch the boundaries that encapsulate the primary sys-
tem and will thereby generate resilience structures. The ques-
tion of speciﬁc interest for the current chapter is whether
nonparental child care generates resilience, enhances risk, or
at the least does no harm. With the exception of large feder-
ally funded studies of the impact of child care programs for
primarily low-income families, answers to this question will
require use of large-representative-sample, multifactorial,
interdisciplinary, prospective longitudinal research designs
more extensive than has typically characterized research
[Table not available in this electronic edition.]

Early Child Care and Child Development
139
attempting to determine the impact of nonparental child care
for infants and toddlers.
EARLY CHILD CARE AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT
During the last third of the twentieth century, many studies of
child care programs appeared in the scientiﬁc and profes-
sional literatures. Often these studies described programs that
were narrowly focused—guided by a particular theoretical
model. Rarely did studies involve random assignment of par-
ticipants, use sophisticated quasi-experimental designs, or
collect outcome data over time. Moreover, they seldom in-
volved sample sizes sufﬁcient to generate reasonable statisti-
cal power. Near the end of the century, however, signiﬁcant
funding from several government agencies established large-
scale, longitudinal evaluations of the impact of early child
care programs. Nearly all of these studies emphasized child
development, parent involvement, and community network-
ing; some utilized random assignment evaluation designs,
some were center based, some were home based, and many
combined home- and center-based models. Although richly
diverse, modestly successful, and collectively limited, when
combined with the extant literature these studies provide sup-
port for the positive effects of quality supplemental care on
early child development, family functioning, and community
networking.
During the last decade of the twentieth century, agencies of
the United States government provided funding for signiﬁcant
evaluations of the effectiveness of child care programs that in-
volved random assignment, large sample sizes, and repeated
assessments over time. For illustrative purposes we describe
the National Institute of Child Health and Human Develop-
ment (NICHD) Study of Early Child Care, theAdministration
for Children, Youth, and Families national evaluation of Early
Head Start, and the Parent-Child Development Centers
(which actually were established as long ago as 1969–1970).
In addition, we brieﬂy review outcomes from the Carolina
Abecedarian Project, for which there are substantive longitu-
dinal ﬁndings. For our ﬁnal example, we describe outcomes
from the Goteborg (Sweden) Child Care Study.
NICHD Study of Early Child Care
The NICHD Study of Early Child Care was designed to
assess the impact of nonparental caregivers on a broad range
of child outcomes, including social-emotional development
(interpersonal relationships, self-regulation), cognitive de-
velopment (reasoning and problem solving), linguistic devel-
opment (receptive and productive language), achievement
performance (literacy, numeracy, school readiness), physical
development (height and weight), and health (immuniza-
tions, chronic illness, illnesses of childhood). Nonparental
caregivers included relatives (kinship care) and nonrelatives.
The context for caregiving varied from in-home, in the
provider’s home, and at child care centers. The NICHD
study was guided by ecological (Bronfenbrenner, 1979;
Bronfenbrenner & Morris, 1998) and developmental life-
course theoretical perspectives. Thus, the study was designed
at the outset to examine the impact of contextual inﬂuences
as well as the interaction between context and age-related ex-
perience. Some experiences are normative in that they occur
at narrowly circumscribed ages for most people (e.g., school
entry). Other experiences are nonnormative in the sense that
they are not linked to speciﬁc ages (e.g., parental divorce,
change in child care arrangement, family relocation). When
combined, the ecological and life course perspectives pro-
vide a framework for conceptualizing the relations of both
normative and individual contextual inﬂuences to develop-
mental pathways.
Because the NICHD study is longitudinal, it offers the
possibility of tracking the effectiveness of different models
(i.e., cumulation, endurance, sleeper, fade) proposed to ac-
count for the way in which early care experiences inﬂuence
later child behavior. The cumulation model suggests that
child care contributions aggregate over time such that chil-
dren in child care should show progressively stronger effects
over the course of their exposure. The endurance model pro-
poses that the effects of child care consolidate and persist
over time regardless of changes in the child’s educational
context. The sleeper model predicts that child care effects are
least likely to be evident during the time that infants and tod-
dlers are enrolled in child care, but emerge upstream at later
points in developmental time. The fade model suggests that
the effects of child care are transient and so will disappear
over time as more proximal events come to exert their inﬂu-
ences on child behavior. The NICHD not only provided an
opportunity to assess these models, but also allowed investi-
gators to examine the relations between child care experi-
ences and concurrent psychological and health outcomes, the
effects of the home environment on child outcomes, and the
linkages between demographic and family characteristics and
child development (NICHD Early Child Care Research
Network, 1994, 1996, 1997, 2000).
Participants in the study were recruited from 24 desig-
nated hospitals at 10 data collection sites across the United
States. Factors such as location, availability, previous work-
ing relations with the site investigators, and the nature of the
patient load contributed to the selection of hospitals within
sites. A total of 1,364 newborn infants (and their families)

140
Diversity in Caregiving Contexts
were enrolled in the study, with the sample distributed ap-
proximately equally over the 10 sites. The enrolled families
included mothers who planned to work full time (53%), part
time (23%), and not at all (24%) during the child’s ﬁrst year.
The enrolled families came from a wide range of socioe-
conomic and sociocultural backgrounds, as well as from di-
verse family arrangements (24% ethnic minority children,
11% mothers who did not complete high school, 14% single
mothers; these percentages are not mutually exclusive).
On a weekly basis, each site was expected to screen a mini-
mum of 20 newborn infant-mother dyads in the participating
hospitals for potential enrollment to the study. The exclusion
criteria for the hospital screening included (a) maternal age
(18 years), (b) language proﬁciency (non-English speakers),
(c) family mobility (family planned a move with 12 months),
(d) infant medical status (medical complications or maternal
substance abuse), (e) maternal illness, (f) adoption placement,
(g) lack of maternal cooperation in data collection, (h) family
involvement in other research, (i) residence in an neighbor-
hood posing excessive danger for data collectors, (j) maternal
failure to complete the hospital interview, and (k) other
factors. In addition, researchers collected information about
the child’s gender, gestational age and weight, the mother’s
ethnic and racial identiﬁcation, age, education, employment
status, and her partner’s residential status and education. Of
the original 1,364 families, 1,100 were still participating in
the study when most of the children were entering the third
grade, yielding an 80.6% retention across the 8 years of study
involvement.
Supplemental funding provided by the U. S. Department
of Health and Human Services enabled investigators to add
direct measures of fathers’ attitudes and perceptions in 6 of
the 10 sites (Arkansas, California, Kansas, North Carolina,
Pittsburgh, and Wisconsin). The fathers’ component enabled
investigators to examine not only fathers’ direct impact on
their children, but also the impact of fathers on the quality of
the marital relationship and the impact of maternal employ-
ment. Experience during early development was assessed
through a diverse array of measures designed to capture
the child’s experience in the context of home and family,
in child care, and eventually in school. Measures of social-
emotional, cognitive, linguistic, and academic development
and physical growth and health were used to assess chil-
dren’s developmental status. Selection of measures was
based on (a) the child’s developmental level, (b) the psycho-
metric properties of the measure, (c) the applicability of
measures to children and families varying in ethnicity and
socioeconomic status, (d) the amount of time needed to com-
plete the measure, (e) the relations among the different mea-
sures planned for each visit, and (f) the results of pilot
testing. Two criteria were considered in selecting speciﬁc
child outcomes to be assessed: (a) that the developmental
importance of the outcome construct was well documented
in previous research and theory, and (b) that there was reason
to hypothesize that children’s development in a particular
domain would be affected by environments of early child
rearing.
What have investigators found to date? Reports from the
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development
(NICHD) Early Child Care Research Network (2000) sug-
gest that during the children’s ﬁrst year of life, there was high
reliance on infant care, very rapid entry into care postbirth,
and substantial instability in care. By 12 months of age, 84%
of the infants in the study had entered some form of non-
parental child care, with the majority starting care before the
age of 4 months. When they ﬁrst entered care, 25% of the in-
fants were cared for by their father or their mother’s partner,
23% were cared for by other relatives, and only 12% were en-
rolled in child care centers. Over the ﬁrst year of life, the ma-
jority of children in nonparental care experienced more than
two different child care arrangements, and more than one
third experienced three or more arrangements.
Economic factors were most consistently associated with
the amount and nature of nonmaternal care infants received.
For example, mothers with higher incomes and families that
were more dependent on the mother’s income placed their in-
fants in child care at earlier ages. Maternal personality and
beliefs about maternal employment also contributed. For ex-
ample, mothers who believed that maternal employment has
positive effects on children put their children in nonmaternal
care for more hours. Poor families were less likely than were
afﬂuent families to use child care, but poor children who
were in care averaged as many hours as did children from
other income groups.
Observations of the quality of care at 6 months indicated
that more positive caregiving occurred when children were in
smaller groups, child-adult ratios were lower, caregivers held
less authoritarian beliefs about child rearing, and physical en-
vironments were safe, clean, and stimulating. Observed qual-
ity of care for poor children was generally lower than that for
nonpoor children when they were cared for by an unrelated
caregiver. The single exception was that poor children in
centers received better-quality care than near-poor children,
perhaps because they were more likely to be in subsidized
(and therefore perhaps more regulated) settings. Evaluation
of child care centers in relation to guidelines recommended
by professional organizations for child-staff ratios, group
sizes, teacher training, and teacher education indicated that
most classes observed in the study did not meet all four of
these guidelines.

Early Child Care and Child Development
141
Analyses of the effects of family and child care on child
outcomes indicated that in general, family characteristics and
the quality of the mother’s relationship with her child were
stronger predictors of child outcomes than were child care
factors. Family factors predicted child outcomes even for
children who spent many hours in child care, and statistically
signiﬁcant child care effects were relatively small in size.
Maternal depressive symptoms comprised one family predic-
tor of child outcomes (in addition to income level, education,
attitudes, and behavior). Children whose mothers reported
feeling depressed performed more poorly on measures of
cognitive-linguistic functioning at 36 months and were rated
as less cooperative and more problematic. However, depres-
sion effects on expressive language and ratings of coopera-
tion were moderated by maternal sensitivity, with sensitivity
predicting better outcomes more strongly among children of
depressed mothers.
Analyses controlling for nonrandom use of child care by
families of different socioeconomic backgrounds revealed
that among the aspects of child care studied, a relatively con-
sistent predictor of child outcomes was the observed quality
of care. When observed quality of caregivers’ behavior was
high, children had better cognitive and linguistic abilities,
showed more cooperative behavior with mothers during play,
and had fewer behavior problems. For children in center care
at 36 months, children had fewer behavior problems and
higher scores on language comprehension and school readi-
ness when classes met more of the guidelines recommended
by experts for ratios, group sizes, and teacher training and ed-
ucation. Higher-quality child care was also associated with
higher-quality mother-child interaction among the families
that used nonparental care. Additionally, poor-quality child
care was related to an increased incidence of infant insecure
attachment to mothers at 15 months, but only when the mother
was also relatively low in sensitivity and responsiveness.
Overall, type of child care by itself appeared to have rela-
tively limited impacts on child outcomes. At age 3, greater
cumulative experience in center care and early experience in
child care homes were both associated with better perfor-
mance on cognitive and language measures than were other
forms of care, assuming comparable quality of caregiving
environment. Experience with group care (settings with at
least three other children, not counting siblings), whether in
centers or child care homes, made some difference in several
social-emotional outcomes at ages 2 and 3. Children with
more cumulative experience in group care showed more co-
operation with their mothers in the laboratory at age 2, less
negative laboratory interaction with their mothers at age 3,
and fewer caregiver-reported behavior problems at both
ages. However, higher amounts of group experience before
12 months were associated with more mother-reported be-
havior problems at age 3, suggesting that beneﬁts from group
care may begin in the second year of life.
The quantity of nonparental care was also a statistically
signiﬁcant predictor of some child outcomes. When children
spent more hours in child care, mothers were less sensitive in
their interactions with their children (at 6, 15, 24, and 36
months) and children were less positively engaged with their
mother (at 15, 24, and 36 months, the ages at which child
engagement was assessed). In addition, analyses of attach-
ment at 15 months show that children who spent more hours
in child care and had mothers who were relatively insensitive
and unresponsive were at heightened risk for insecure
mother-infant attachments.
ACYF Study of Early Head Start
In 1994, the United States Congress reauthorized the Head
Start Act and stipulated that 4% of the appropriation was to
be used to establish Early Head Start. The percentage of
funding for Head Start diverted to Early Head Start has in-
creased steadily since 1994, and in 2002 reaches its ﬁnal
authorized level of 10% of the Head Start budget (Raikes &
Love, 2002). Designated primarily as a child care program
for low-income families, Early Head Start is designed to en-
hance developmental outcomes for infants and toddlers and
to enhance family functioning (Jerald, 2000). The 1994 reau-
thorization of Head Start stipulated that procedures be estab-
lished to provide for continuous quality improvement of
programs and to monitor the ﬁt between programs and com-
munity needs. The reauthorization bill of 1998 afﬁrmed both
the continuous quality improvement policy as well as the
need to evaluate the extent to which Head Start and Early
Head Start were achieving their objectives (Raikes & Love,
2002). In order to monitor program quality, performance
standards were adopted in 1996. The standards deﬁne the ser-
vices that must be provided to children and families, although
they do not specify how such services must be delivered. The
lack of speciﬁcity for service delivery allows for greater di-
versity in programming across communities; it also gives
programs greater ﬂexibility to develop community partner-
ships that are unique to family needs for high-quality child
care (Fenichel & Mann, 2001).
The Secretary of the Department of Health and Human
Services appointed an Advisory Committee on Services for
Families With Infants and Toddlers (1994), which identiﬁed
four key cornerstones of program quality that must be ad-
dressed by every Head Start and Early Head Start program:
child development, family development, community de-
velopment, and staff development (see Administration on

142
Diversity in Caregiving Contexts
Children, Youth, and Families, 2001; Fenichel & Mann,
2001). Of the four cornerstones, issues related to child de-
velopment were clearly identiﬁed as ﬁrst among equals
(Fenichel & Mann, 2001). Moreover, the performance stan-
dards clearly specify that programs must acknowledge the
importance of relationships for infant and toddler develop-
ment, and this includes relationships with all caregivers, in-
cluding parents. Because parents are considered to be integral
to the delivery of quality child care, Early Head Start pro-
grams must address issues related to parenting skills, parent-
child relationships, and father involvement. In addition, all
children must be screened for developmental disabilities
within 45 days of enrollment. Ten percent of all openings in
EHS must be available for infants and toddlers with deﬁned
disabilities. The number of infants and toddlers with estab-
lished conditions, environmental risks, or combinations of
these is substantial, and current EHS funding is insufﬁcient to
provide child care programs for all eligible infants and tod-
dlers because of special needs. To achieve the ﬂexibility nec-
essary to ﬁt programming with community needs (Raikes,
Kisker, Paulsell, & Love, 2000), Early Head Start child care
program services are offered in formats that are designated as
(a) home-based, (b) center-based, (c) home-based, center-
based combinations, or (d) locally designated options.
Currently, there are 635 Early Head Start programs nation-
wide, serving 45,000 infants and toddlers.
Evaluation of Early Head Start
The Administration for Children, Youth, and Families
(ACYF) evaluation of Early Head Start (EHS) involves a
partnership among ACYF, Mathematical Policy Research,
Columbia University Center for Children and Families
at Teachers College, 15 universities, and program staff at
17 sites across the United States. Sixteen sites partnered with
university research teams and one site was directly afﬁliated
with Mathematical Policy Research, which also served as the
evaluation consultant for the full national study. Each site
was also independently funded to conduct local studies.
Thus, the evaluation of the impact of Early Head Start con-
sists of analyses of the integrated data from 17 regionally dis-
tributed programs (Commissioner’s Ofﬁce of Research and
Evaluation, 1999a, 1999b), as well as the independent ﬁnd-
ings from each of the program sites. In addition, separate
studies were conducted to assess the impact of EHS on
fathers, child care, health and disabilities, and welfare re-
form, and a longitudinal follow-up study is currently assess-
ing children as they make the transition from preschool to
kindergarten. A similar longitudinal follow-up to track chil-
dren’s transitions to elementary school is being planned.
The EHS research sites were selected to represent geo-
graphical and ethnic diversity within the constraints of the
income requirements for eligibility. Across the 17 sites,
3,001 families were randomly assigned to either an EHS pro-
gram or some other child care program that was available
in the local community. Randomization resulted in ﬁnal
samples of 1,513 EHS eligible families enrolled in EHS pro-
grams and 1,488 EHS eligible families assigned to the con-
trol condition. Federal poverty guidelines were used to
determine income eligibility for Early Head Start. Families in
the control group were able to secure any kind of child care
available in their community with the exception of Early
Head Start. They were notiﬁed that they would have access to
Head Start if they continued to be eligible for the program
when their child was 4 years old. Originally, seven of the
EHS sites were home-based programs, four were center-
based programs, and six were mixed programs. In the na-
tional evaluation, all programs that were not exclusively
home-based or center-based were classiﬁed as mixed pro-
grams. Center-based programs provided all services to fami-
lies through the center (which also included a small number
of home visits). Home-based programs provided EHS ser-
vices through home visits, although families were able to use
other kinds of child care options as they wished. Mixed pro-
grams provided services to some families through centers,
home visiting, or some combination of these in addition
to local options (Commissioner’s Ofﬁce for Research and
Evaluation, 1999a). Initially (1995, 1996), there were ﬁve
home-based, ﬁve center-based, and seven mixed programs.
Slightly more than 1 year later, eight programs were home-
based, four were center-based, and ﬁve were mixed; and by
1999, there were 2 home-based, 4 center-based, and 11 mixed
programs (Commissioner’s Ofﬁce for Research and Evalua-
tion, 2001a). As parental needs for nonparental child care in-
creased, EHS programs responded by providing a greater mix
of options for parents. Obviously, the evaluation of program
effectiveness will have to take into account changes in the
type of child care options available to families over the
course of the longitudinal evaluation. Regardless of program
type, all programs were required to provide child develop-
ment services, to build family and community partnerships,
and to enlist support staff to provide high-quality services for
infants, toddlers, and their families. Thus, all EHS programs
are conceptualized as seamless systems, with responsibilities
for comprehensive child development, family functioning,
relationships with program staff, and connections to commu-
nity resources.
Evaluation data were collected at enrollment (baseline)
and at 5, 15, and 26 months after enrollment (parent services
interviews) and when children were 14, 24, and 36 months

Early Child Care and Child Development
143
old (parent interviews, child assessments, and videotaped
parent-infant interactions). Only summary data from several
aspects of the 6–24 month assessment periods has been com-
pleted (Commissioner’s Ofﬁce of Research and Evaluation,
2001a, 2001b). Although the ﬁndings are only preliminary,
they suggest that EHS programs have modest positive inﬂu-
ences on child development, particularly with respect to en-
hancement of cognitive and language skills and reduction of
aggression and other behavior problems. No differences were
found for toddlers’ task-related emotion regulation or their
general interactions with mothers during a videotaped free-
play interaction. EHS parents were more knowledgeable
about infant-toddler development; engaged in more cogni-
tive, language, and literacy activities at home; were generally
more positively engaged with their children during free-play
interactions; were less likely to have spanked their child
(in the past week); and reported less marital conﬂict than did
mothers in the control group (Commissioner’s Ofﬁce of
Research and Evaluation, 2001c). Some of the signiﬁcant dif-
ferences between EHS and control groups at the 24-month
assessment are summarized in Table 6.2.
Center-based programs had their greatest impact on indi-
cators of child development and some parenting behaviors.
Home-based programs had their greatest impact on parenting
behaviors, child language, and parent participation in educa-
tion and job training. The mixed-approach programs were
most similar to the center-based programs, but also inﬂu-
enced children’s social and language development. EHS
participation also seemed to have an energizing effect on par-
ticipating families because they were more than twice as
likely as control families to participate in parent education,
parent-child, or parent support group activities, and they
were more likely to beneﬁt from key services available in
their communities. It will be several years before the national
evaluation of EHS reveals the full impact of EHS, but the
preliminary analyses of the 24-month data are extremely
encouraging. EHS appears to be having a positive impact
both on child development and parental competence and self-
sufﬁciency (Robinson & Fitzgerald, 2002).
Early Head Start and Home Visiting
The NICHD and EHS child care and child development pro-
grams each involved center-based and home-based compo-
nents, reﬂecting the fact that exclusive center-based care
during the early years—especially during infancy—is more
TABLE 6.2
National Evaluation of Early Head Start: Selected Global Impacts on Toddlers and Parents
at 24 Months
EHS Group
Control Group
Effect Size
Outcome
Mean
Mean
Percent
Bayley Mental Development Index
90.1
88.1
14.9a
Percentage with MDI below 85
33.6
40.2
13.5a
Percentage combining words
81.0
77.9
7.4
Vocabulary production score (CDI)
56.3
53.9
10.8a
Sentence complexity score (CDI)
8.6
7.7
11.4a
Aggressive behavior problems
9.9
10.5
10.2a
Child negativity toward parent
1.7
1.8
8.0
Child engagement of parent during structured play
4.3
4.2
7.6
Parent supportiveness in structured play
4.1
3.9
13.5a
Parent detachment in structured play
1.4
1.5
10.4a
Percentage of parents who read to child daily
57.9
52.3
11.3a
Percentage of parents who read to child at bedtime
29.4
22.6
16.0a
Knowledge of Infant Development Inventory
3.4
3.3
12.3a
Parent-child activities
4.6
4.5
11.7a
Percentage of parents who spanked child in
47.4
52.1
9.4a
previous week
PSI parental distress
25.0
25.9
10.2a
Percentage of parents who ever participated in
48.4
43.7
10.7a
an education or job-training program in ﬁrst
15 months
Items were selected from a list of 41 impacts to illustrate the kinds of statistically signiﬁcant impacts obtained at the
24 month assessment period.
aCommissioner’s Ofﬁce of Research and Evaluation and the Head Start Bureau, Administration on Children, Youth, and
Families, Department of Health and Human Services (December–January, 2001). Building their futures: How Early
Head Start programs are enhancing the lives of infants and toddlers in low-income families: Summary report (pp. 17–18).
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

144
Diversity in Caregiving Contexts
the exception than the rule. For example, approximately 85%
of infants receiving nonparental child care do so in their own
homes, in the home of a care provider, or the home of a rela-
tive. In large measure, our knowledge of the effectiveness of
early child care is generated from a database that is not repre-
sentative of the population (an oversampling of low-income
families), or of the contexts within which early child
care takes place (an oversampling of center-based child care
settings). Although there is great controversy in the litera-
ture about the effectiveness of home-visiting programs, the
weight of that evidence is slowly shifting to questions of
for whom and under what circumstances rather than whether
home visiting is or is not effective in enhancing child devel-
opment (Tableman, 2001). Moreover, as exempliﬁed by two
of the successful national demonstrations of child care for
infants and toddlers that spanned low- to middle-class sam-
ples (EHS and NICHD), programs that combine some form
of home visiting with other types of child care have generated
some of the best benchmark guidelines for quality care
to date.
However, there is an interesting paradox with respect to
home visiting. Most home-visiting programs are designed
to have a direct impact on parents and an indirect impact
on the child. Of course, in many EHS programs involving
home-based–center-based combinations or mixed models,
there are both direct and indirect pathways leading to desired
outcomes. In any of these cases, the home-based component
is designed to enhance parenting skills and knowledge of
child development, as well as the parent-infant relationship.
Because home visitors work with parents to develop their
parenting skills, the quality of their family relationships, and
their ability to access human services within their communi-
ties, their immersion in child care can be as extensive as that
of relatives or nonrelatives if one excludes the direct provi-
sion of care. Seldom have such programs been offered to care
providers in nonparental child care settings even though
infants and toddlers in such settings can have nonparental
caregiving for as much as 40–50 hours per week (Smith,
2000). The concept of home visitor is implicit in the Head
Start/Early Head Start training and technical assistance sys-
tem designed to provide broad based support for all HS and
EHS programs, regardless of the speciﬁc mix used by any
speciﬁc program to deliver high-quality child care. Training
and technical assistance staff visit program sites, assist with
evaluating needs of program staff, and develop training
opportunities related to identiﬁed needs (Mann, 2002).
Training and technical-assistance on-site visits to programs
during the implementation phase of EHS indicated that the
time required to establish programs and to coordinate all of
the necessary support components to assure quality care was
underestimated. As a result, many programs needed to reor-
ganize their approaches even while they were implementing
new child care services (Mann, 2002). Because child care
home-visitors help families to develop service delivery plans
that are unique to family needs (parental age, parent-child
interaction patterns, family resources, family composition)
and that are extensions of the child care program, disruptions
in the base child care program can have a negative impact on
the home-visiting part of the child care service. For example,
Gill, Greenberg, and Vazquez (2002) found that changes
in program structure negatively affected home-visitor job
satisfaction, work motivation, and staff turnover during the
transitional period of program reorganization. Because adult-
child relationships comprise a critical component of infant-
toddler child care regardless of setting, studies of stability of
care providers in child care centers reveal essentially the
same ﬁndings as those found for home visitors (Raikes, 1993;
Rubenstein, Pedersen, & Yarrow, 1977). Stability enhances
the quality of the care-provider–child relationship and the
social-emotional development of the child. Oppenheim, Sagi,
and Lamb (1988) found that attachment security was related
to personality characteristics of Israeli kindergarten children,
but it did not predict speciﬁc characteristics such as ego-
control, empathy, achievement orientation, or independence.
When changes in care provider do occur, infants and toddlers
seem more likely to be negatively affected if change occurs
during the second year of life (13–18 months) or if changes
are frequent (Howes & Hamilton, 1993).
Examples of home visiting programs appear in Table 6.3.
Although EHS programs are most likely to use infant mental
health services or parents as teachers home visitor models, the
Prenatal Early Infancy Project (PEIP) is one of the best-known
home visitor intervention models because of the strong impact
it obtained with a high-risk sample. The PEIP was developed
to determine whether a home-visiting program could prevent
poor developmental outcomes for infants of high-risk mothers
(Olds 1988; Olds, Henderson, Chamberlin, & Tatelbaum,
1986; Olds, Henderson, Tatelbaum, & Chamberlin, 1986,
1988). Mothers were low-income, single, or teenage. Like the
NICHD and EHS child care evaluations, PEIP families were
randomly assigned to a treatment or comparison group. Fami-
lies in the treatment group received home visits every 2 weeks
during pregnancy and every 1–6 weeks for 2 years after birth.
During the home visits, nurses provided parent education,
helped mothers to develop informal support systems, and
connected families with community services. The interven-
tion was related to increased birth weight and gestation length
of infants born to teen mothers and to smoking mothers.
Throughout the ﬁrst two postnatal years, mothers in the treat-
ment group were signiﬁcantly less likely to have veriﬁed child

Early Child Care and Child Development
145
TABLE 6.3
Examples of Home-Visiting Models for Enhancing Developmental Outcomes for Infants and Toddlers
Focus
Purpose
Population Served
Contact
Relationship-based
Infant mental
Promote positive parent-
Parent-infant dyads at risk for or exhibiting disrupted
Deborah Weatherson, Ph.D.
health services.
infant interaction, healthy
relationships, disorders of infancy, and/or delayed
Merrill-Palmer Institute
infant development, and
development of the child.
Wayne State University
parental competencies.
Detroit, MI
aa2233@wayne.edu
Steps toward effective
Promote healthy parent-
Poor, primarily, single, young ﬁrst-time mothers;
Martha Erickson, Ph.D.
enjoyable parenting.
child relationships and
most reporting a history of abuse in childhood 
University of Minnesota
prevent social-emotional
and/or recent relationships. No more than
problems among children.
a high school education.
Family
Improve child’s
First-time mothers, poor, lacking support, plus
Christoph Heinike, Ph.D.
development
development and parent’s
other risk factors.
University of California,
project.
functioning and relationships.
Los Angeles
Department of Psychiatry and
Biobehavioral Sciences 
760 Westwood Plaza,
Los Angeles, CA 90042
Information-based
Healthy Families
Promote positive parenting
Families with risk factors related to lack of support;
Prevent Child Abuse America
America.
and prevent child abuse
low income; less than high school education;
200 South Michigan Ave
and neglect.
history of substance abuse, mental illness,
17th Floor
abortions, marital or family problems.
Chicago, IL 60604
www.preventchildabuse.org
Parents as Teachers.
Educate and empower
Infants no older than 6 months up to age 4.
Parents as Teachers National Center
parents to become active
Intended for any parent.
10176 Corporate Square Drive
participants in their child’s
Suite 230 St. Louis, MO 63132
education.
www.patnc.org
Building Strong
Provide parents and
Parents with limited resources, parents who may
Jodi Spiccer,
Families.
caregivers the knowledge
or may not have limited literacy, and children age
MSU-E
and skills needed to help
birth to 3 years.
103 Human Ecology Building
their children reach their
Michigan State University
potential.
East Lansing, MI 48824
www.msue.msu.edu/msue/
cyffamily/bsfone/html
Behavior-based
Brief intervention
Promote secure attachment
Normal ﬁrstborn infants—from well-functioning
D. C. van den Boom
with irritable
by enhancing the mother’s
low-income families—who were irritable and
The Netherlands
infants.
sense of efﬁcacy in relating
therefore difﬁcult to care for; at risk of insecure
with her child.
attachment because of irritability and low level of
maternal responsiveness characteristic of
low-income families.
Interaction
Promote infant’s well-
Difﬁcult-to-engage families: resistant to
Susan C. McDonough, Ph.D.
guidance.
being through positive
other forms of psychotherapy; young,
University of Michigan
change in parent-infant
inexperienced, cognitively limited, and
interaction.
infants with failure to thrive, regulation
disorders, and organic problems.
Adjunct to health care
Montreal Home
Promote child’s health and
Working-class women between 18 and 35 years, 
C. Larson
Visitation Study.
development.
no more than high school education, ﬁrstborn
full-term infants.
Healthy Steps for 
Young Children
Program
Note. All programs have been evaluated using random assignment or comparison group designs with positive results. Material in this table was adapted from
B. Tableman (2000). Summaries of home visiting models for very young children (Best Practice Briefs No. 18). East Lansing: Michigan State University,
University Outreach Partnerships. Adapted with permission.

146
Diversity in Caregiving Contexts
abuse than were mothers in the comparison group; they pun-
ished their children less, made fewer trips to the emergency
room, and provided them with more appropriate toys (Olds,
1988). Mothers in the treatment group had greater increases in
their knowledge of community services, use of social sup-
ports, and dietary improvements; they also attended more
childbirth classes (Olds et al., 1986a, b) and returned to school
sooner (Olds et al., 1988) than did mothers in the comparison
group. One contributor to the success of PEIP was the rela-
tively low turnover in home-visitor staff.
Carolina Abecedarian Project
The Carolina Abecedarian Project was designed to strengthen
the intellectual competence and academic achievement of
children from low-income families (Ramey & Campbell,
1984). For this project, 111 infants with single black mothers
were randomly assigned either to an intervention group (57)
or to a control group (54). Infants in the intervention group
attended an educational child care program and the infants in
the control group did not. All infants received infant formula,
pediatric care, and supportive social services regardless of
their assigned group. The preschool intervention provided
early childhood education, pediatric care, and family support
services beginning in infancy and lasting until the children
entered kindergarten. The Abecedarian Project involved
families with multiple risks (Ramey & Ramey, 1998), includ-
ing poor maternal formal education, single-parent families,
adolescent mothers, and authoritarian approaches to child
rearing (Ramey, 2000; Ramey & Campbell, 1984, 1987;
Ramey & Ramey, 1998.
The Abecedarian Project shared common characteristics
with other early child care intervention programs, including
programming that was connected to other local services
for high-risk families, low child-to-teacher ratios, weekday
programming available 10 hours per day (7:30–5:30), use of
developmentally appropriate practices involving social-
emotional and cognitive-language skills, and family support
programs including pediatric care and nutritional supplemen-
tation. Because children in the control group also received
health care assistance, social services, and nutritional supple-
ments, any differences between groups can more readily be
attributed to differences in the quality of early child care the
children experienced (Ramey, 2000).
At 18, 24, 36, and 48 months of age, children in the inter-
vention group scored higher on measures of cognitive func-
tioning. By 4 years of age, children in the control group were
six times more likely to score in the mild mental retardation
range of the Stanford-Binet IQ test. When the infants
reached preschool age, another randomization took place and
children in the original intervention and control groups were
assigned to new intervention and control groups. Follow-up
studies conducted when the children were 12 indicated that
intervention children did signiﬁcantly better on measures of
overall and Verbal IQ, but not Performance IQ. Children
in the control group, however, were more likely to have
IQ scores in the borderline range for mild mental retarda-
tion (F. A. Campbell & Ramey, 1990). Another follow-up
performed when the children were 15 indicated that children
in the preschool intervention group scored higher on mea-
sures of reading and mathematics than did children in the
control group. Moreover, more children from the control
groups were retained at grade level than were children from
the intervention group (F. A. Campbell & Ramey, 1994). By
21 years of age, individuals in the treatment group were more
likely to be in school (40% vs. 20%), and three times as many
young adults from the treatment group (than from the control
group) had either graduated from college or were still pursu-
ing their degrees (35% vs. 12 %). Moreover, only 12% of the
children in the treatment group received special education
versus 48% of the control group.
Parent-Child Development Centers
The parent-child development centers (PCDCs), ﬁrst estab-
lished in 1969–1970, were designed to provide low-income
families with support for child development as well as parent
education. Mothers were the main targets for educational
services, including information on child development, health,
nutrition, parenting skills, and how to access community ser-
vices and build social networks. Sites varied across many di-
mensions, but most notably in service delivery, ethnic group,
program intensity, and home-based versus center-based con-
texts. A pre- and posttest evaluation strategy was used to
evaluate program outcomes. At two of the sites, program par-
ticipants scored higher than did controls on measures of pos-
itive maternal behavior. Dokecki, Hargrove, and Sandler
(1983) reported differences in 36-month IQ scores between
children in the program groups and those in control groups,
with program children scoring signiﬁcantly higher. PCDCs
received negative evaluations for the quality of their facili-
ties, lack of space, high child-staff ratios, low language inter-
actions between parent and child, high dropout rates, and
limited health services. Program strengths included positive
affective environments, high-quality home-based services,
high use of educational services, and organized support for
the program. Initial program effects were positive but de-
clined at kindergarten age. Despite these strengths, no differ-
ences were found later in IQ or school achievement as a
function of the early preschool curriculum.

Factors Inﬂuencing Outcomes in Early Child Care Research
147
One of the Parent-Child Development Centers (PCDCs),
the Houston Parent-Child Development Center, targeted pri-
marily Mexican-American parents and their 12-month-old
children (Johnson, 1988; Johnson & Breckenridge, 1982;
Johnson & Walker, 1987, 1991). Emphasis was given to en-
hancing the positive affective relationships between mothers
and their children. During the ﬁrst year, families received
home visits from trained neighborhood peer-educators.
Weekend family workshops focused on issues of communi-
cation and support. When the children were 24 months of
age, they attended a nursery school program while their
mothers participated in classes on home management, per-
sonal development, and child development. After the 2-year
intervention, PCDC mothers had more supportive interac-
tions with the children than did comparison mothers. PCDC
children scored better on the Stanford-Binet Intelligence
Scale than did the comparison children. Follow-up studies
were conducted when children were between 4 and 7 years of
age and when they were 8–11 years of age. At the ﬁrst follow-
up, mothers of children in the comparison group reported
higher levels of behavior problems—especially for boys—
than did mothers of children in the PCDC group. At the sec-
ond follow-up, teachers rated children in the comparison
group—especially boys—as having more behavior problems
than did children in the PCDC group.
Goteborg Child Care Study
The Goteborg study involved 140 Swedish 12- to 24-month-
old toddlers who were divided into three groups (center-
based, family day care, and home cared). Fifty-two of the
original sample were followed prospectively through 15 years
of age (J. J. Campbell, Lamb, & Hwang, 2000). Over the
course of the study, 43 children remained enrolled in family
day care (13) or center day care (30), and 9 others changed
from family day care to center day care. Data were collected
on the quality of the home environment, parent demograph-
ics, quality of the supplemental child care setting, and target
child peer interactions. Follow-up assessments were made
1 and 2 years after the initial data collection. Social com-
petence was also assessed when the children were 6.5 and
8.5 years old. Final data collection occurred when the children
were 15 years old.
Investigators found strong evidence of stability in child
behavior over the span of 3–15 years of age as measured by
indicators of social competence with peers during early de-
velopment. However, at both 8.5- and 15-year assessments,
neither the quality of home care nor the quality of supplemen-
tal child care was associated with social competence. There
are striking parallels between stability of social competence
in the Goteborg sample and stability of aggression in
Dunedin, New Zealand children over a 20-year span (Caspi,
Mofﬁt, Newman, & Silva, 1996) and for externalizing behav-
ior problems over a slightly shorter span for children in
Michigan (Wong, Zucker, Puttler, & Fitzgerald, 1999).
Summary: Early Child Care and Child Development
Arich body of evidence has emerged that speaks to the positive
effects of quality supplemental care on early child develop-
ment. These research studies emphasize child development,
parent involvement, and community networking. Some use
random assignment evaluation designs and focus on different
types of nonparental care—center-based, home based, and a
combination of the two. Others use designs that allow for com-
parison of the effects of type of care on development.The most
illustrative examples of this work include the NICHD Study of
Early Child Care, the Administration for Children, Youth, and
Families national evaluation of Early Head Start; the Parent-
Child Development Centers, the Carolina Abecedarian
Project, and the Goteborg (Sweden) Child Care Study. Collec-
tively, these studies provide information about the type of non-
parental care children receive, the quality of that care, and the
impact of nonparental care on child outcomes. Additionally,
these studies shed light on the effect of comprehensive inter-
vention on child outcomes over time. In general, the majority
of infants start some type of nonparental care by the age of
4 months, experience multiple arrangements over the ﬁrst year
of life, and have working parents. More positive caregiving
occurs when children are in smaller groups; child-to-adult
ratios are lower; caregivers hold less authoritarian beliefs
about child rearing; and physical environments are safe, clean,
and stimulating. Poor children experience poor-quality family
care but good-quality center care. Some studies report that
center care has a modest positive effect on cognitive and lan-
guage skills and reduction of aggression and other behavior
problems. Moreover, family characteristics and the quality of
mother-child relationships are stronger predictors of child
outcomes than are child care factors; hence, interventions—
including education and knowledge of child development—
that have an effect on parent behaviors are critical in having a
positive effect on children.
FACTORS INFLUENCING OUTCOMES IN EARLY
CHILD CARE RESEARCH
Regardless of whether supplemental infant care is delivered
via home visiting, child care centers, or some mixed model,
evaluation of early child care programs must take into account

148
Diversity in Caregiving Contexts
factors beyond those associated only with program compo-
nents. Recall the conclusion reached by members of the
National Research Council and Institute of Medicine (2000)
that the question is not whether early preventive-intervention
programs work, but for whom and under what circumstances.
This clearly was recognized in the national evaluations of the
NICHD Child Care Study and EHS, in which considerable
effort was devoted to assessing characteristics of children and
parents, parent-child interactions, and the ecological contexts
within which development takes place. The list of such
variables includes community characteristics (violence, com-
munity resources), family characteristics (poverty, single par-
enthood), parent characteristics (education level, substance
abuse, depression or other psychopathology, employment),
and child characteristics (disabilities, temperament). We be-
lieve that there are several critical areas in need of substantive
research with respect to their implications for nonparental
child care, regardless of whether that care is delivered in cen-
ters (including family child care), through home-based pro-
grams, or in mixed models. These areas involve child
temperament and its impact on the caregiver-child relation-
ship, mother-child social-emotional relationships, and father
involvement in child and family development.
Temperament
Temperament refers to individual differences in emotional,
motor, and attentional reactivity, as well as differences in self-
regulation (see also chapters by Gunnar & Davis and Thomp-
son, Easterbrooks, & Padilla-Walker in this volume). The
dominant view expressed in the literature is that such individ-
ual differences are biologically based, relatively stable over
time and situations, and evident fairly early in infancy (Strelau,
1998). References to variation in temperament date back to the
earliest writings of Greek physicians.AlthoughAllport (1937)
was among the ﬁrst to contribute a formal deﬁnition of tem-
perament, it was the work of Thomas and Chess (1977) that
sparked contemporary research on the role that infant tem-
perament may play in the development of parent-infant rela-
tionships. Instead of treating temperament as a characteristic
anchored exclusively in biology or personality, Thomas and
Chess conceptualized the impact of temperament within the
framework of parent-infant interactions, and considered good-
ness of ﬁt between the child’s temperament and the child’s
parenting environment to be a major inﬂuence on the develop-
ment of normative and atypical behavior (Chess & Thomas,
1986, 1991; Thomas, Chess, & Birch, 1968).
Thomas and Chess began to use the term temperament—
originally referred to as individual reaction patterns—to de-
scribe individual differences in behavioral styles in relation
to children’s interactions with their environments, particu-
larly their caregiving environments. The impact of tempera-
ment resides in the goodness of ﬁt between the child’s
(perceived) temperament and the demands and expectations
of the rearing environment. A good match is more likely to
result in minimal conﬂict and stress between the child and
signiﬁcant adults in the caregiving environment, and a poor
match is likely to exacerbate conﬂict and tension between the
child and caregiver (Chess & Thomas, 1991). The bulk of the
research has investigated the implications of temperament for
mother-child interactions and relationships; little is known
about temperament in relation to father or child care provider
relationships.
The lack of knowledge about the impact of care-provider–
infant goodness of ﬁt is disconcerting when one considers
that many infants and toddlers in center-based care spend as
many as 50 hours each week in out-of-home settings. This
may be especially troublesome for infants who are character-
ized as having difﬁcult temperaments.
Thomas and Chess (1986) conceptualized difﬁcult tem-
perament as consisting of ﬁve components: irregularity,
withdrawal from novelty, slow or no adaptation to change,
negative mood, and intense emotional reactivity. Since their
initial characterization, many investigators have deﬁned difﬁ-
cult temperament differently, using a few as one trait and as
many as 10 (Windle, 1991). The search for a ﬁnite set of op-
erational components of difﬁcult temperament is constrained
by the social and perceptual qualities of temperament. Thus,
what may be perceived to be difﬁcult by one observer may be
perceived to be positive by another. The care provider may
be bothered by an assertive or somewhat uninhibited child,
whereas the child’s father may perceive these traits as posi-
tive and in fact reward them. It is possible, however, that
children with difﬁcult temperaments actually display more
stability across situations. For example, difﬁcult tempera-
ment has been linked etiologically to behavioral undercon-
trol, especially in the context of high family dysfunction
(Maziade, Caron, Cote, Boutin, & Thivierge, 1990); alco-
holism and substance abuse (Mun, Fitzgerald, Puttler,
Zucker, & von Eye, 2001); and poor academic functioning
(Martin, 1989). Scarr and McCartney (1983) proposed a
Patterson-type coercive model in which infant difﬁcult tem-
perament elicits negative parental responses, which in turn
exacerbates the infant’s negative behaviors. Speciﬁcally,
difﬁcult temperament contributed to parental role dissatisfac-
tion, insensitive caregiving, and an insecure infant-caregiver
attachment relationship. Studying inner-city, low-income
African American mothers and their infants, Ispa, Fine, and
Thornberg (in press) found that infant difﬁcult temperament
and mother stress reaction were independently and inversely

Factors Inﬂuencing Outcomes in Early Child Care Research
149
related to attachment security: high difﬁcult temperament
was related to low attachment security. Galinsky, Howes,
Kontos, and Shinn (1994) found that more than 50 percent of
the infants in family day care settings had insecure attach-
ment relationships with their care providers, although this
ﬁnding is not speciﬁcally linked to difﬁcult temperament.
Degree of difﬁculty is not the only aspect of temperament
that may affect the quality of the care-provider–infant rela-
tionship. Fein (1995) reported that infants who were happy
and socially detached received less attention from care
providers, suggesting that such infants may fail to provide
the normative cues necessary to elicit appropriate caregiver
behavior.
Caregiver-Child Social-Emotional Relationships
No issue related to nonparental child care attracts more debate
and heated discussion than does attachment (see the chapter
by Thompson, Easterbrooks, & Padilla-Walker in this vol-
ume). Attachment refers to the social-emotional relationship
constructed by infants and their primary caregivers during the
ﬁrst year of life that functions to facilitate protection, survival,
and reproductive ﬁtness (Berlin & Cassidy, 2000). According
to Bowlby (1969), the functional signiﬁcance of attachment is
expressed in proximity seeking (protection, care), avoidance
of danger (fear, wariness), connectedness (social and interper-
sonal behavior), and novelty seeking (exploratory behavior).
Attachment relationships during infancy are focused on rela-
tively few individuals, with most infants showing a preference
hierarchy when multiple caregivers are available. Typically,
the relationship between mothering and the mother-infant
attachment relationship is stronger than is the relationship
between fathering and the father-infant attachment relation-
ship (van Ijzendoorn & De Wolff, 1997). The set goal of the
attachment system is to induce a sense of security and comfort
in the infant that will eventually be internalized and expressed
as a working model or internal mental representation of self
and others (Berlin & Cassidy, 2000).
Because relationships are dynamic and transactional, in-
fants and caregivers are constantly challenged to adjust their
behavior as they seek to achieve a secure attachment relation-
ship. Bowlby referred to this as a goal correcting process.
Everyday observations of infants and toddlers in interaction
with their parents, older siblings, and kin readily conﬁrm that
they form attachment relationships with many adults. How-
ever, as previously indicated, not all attachments are equal!
Although infants generally have a preference for mother over
father in situations that evoke attachment behaviors, they pre-
fer father over a stranger when mother is not present (Cohen &
Campos, 1974). Regardless of who the attachment object is,
infants and adults either successfully negotiate a secure at-
tachment relationship or they fall into one of three variants of
insecure attachment: avoidant, ambivalent, or disorganized.
Because attachment theory predicts caregiver speciﬁcity with
respect to attachment relationships, several questions become
paramount: Does nonparental child care interfere with the de-
velopment of secure attachments between mother and infant?
Do infants develop attachment relationships with their non-
parental caregivers? If so, do nonparental attachments com-
pensate for insecure mother-infant attachment relationships?
Research by Howes and her colleagues clearly illustrates
that infants establish attachment relationships with their care
providers (Howes & Hamilton, 1992a, 1992b; Howes &
Smith, 1995; Howes, Rodning, Galluzzo, & Myers, 1988;
Phillips, Howes, & Whitebook, 1992). Moreover, low teacher
turnover enhances stability of the attachment relationship
(Howes & Hamilton, 1992b). However, the ease of establish-
ing a positive and secure care-provider–infant relationship
may depend in part on the degree of preparation care
providers have for teaching infants and toddlers. For exam-
ple, Galinsky, Howes, and Kontos (1995) found that attach-
ment security increased when family day care providers
participated in a training program designed to enhance their
caregiving skills.
The largest and most comprehensive longitudinal research
ﬁndings on attachment in relation to child care effects are
from the NICHD child care study noted earlier. At 6, 15, 24,
and 36 months, 1,364 socially and racially diverse children
were assessed after birth and followed to age 6. Positive child
caregiving and language stimulation contributed mean-
ingfully to early cognitive and language development. The
higher the quality of provider-child interaction, the more pos-
itive were the mother-child interactions, and the more sensi-
tive and involved were the mothers over the ﬁrst 3 years
(National Institute of Child Health and Human Development
Early Child Care Research Network [NICHD], 1994, 1996,
1997, 2000).
The longer the time that infants and toddlers spent in
group care, the fewer positive interactions they had with their
mothers at 6 and 15 months of age, and the less affection they
showed with their mothers at 2 and 3 years. Family income,
mother’s vocabulary, home environment, and parental cogni-
tive stimulation were more important than was child care
quality in predicting cognitive and language advancements.
Children in center care made larger gains than did those in
family child care homes. Children from ethnic minority
groups were more likely to be cared for in settings that of-
fered fewer opportunities for messy play, reading books, and
active explorations than were children from other groups.
Children reared in economically disadvantaged homes were

150
Diversity in Caregiving Contexts
more likely to be insecurely attached to their mothers. When
mothers strongly endorsed statements supporting the possi-
ble beneﬁts of maternal employment for children’s develop-
ment, their infants were more likely to be insecurely attached,
and these mothers were also observed to be less sensitive and
responsive. Their children were in poorer-quality care at
earlier ages and for more hours per week.
Infant child care per se (observed quality of care, amount
of care, age of entry, and frequency of care starts) did not
appear to be a risk factor for insecure attachment. Maternal
sensitivity however, was: Mothers who were least sensitive
and responsive had more infants classiﬁed insecure avoidant;
(16–19%) and fewer secure (53–56%) compared with the
most sensitive mothers (9–11% insecure avoidant, 12–14%
disorganized, 60–65% secure babies). The lowest proportion
of secure attachment was noted when maternal sensitivity
and child care quality were both low. For children with less
sensitive mothers, attachment security proportions were
higher if the children were in high-quality care than if they
were in low-quality child care.
Effects of Separation
Separation from parents is a daily event for children of all age
levels during early childhood. Putting baby down for a nap or
going to the grocery store, to work, for dinner, or to a party
are all events that separate parents from children. With the
exception of parental employment, the effects of everyday
separations on the child’s behavior have not been extensively
studied. However, everyday separations probably have an
overall beneﬁcial inﬂuence on the young child, encouraging
autonomy, independence, and the development of social
competence. This is not to say that toddlers and preschoolers
will always accept their parents’ departure. In fact, as parents
are about to leave, it is quite common for toddlers to protest
and to try to stay with parents.
There are separations that can have profoundly disruptive
inﬂuences on the young child’s development. These include
the prolonged separations associated with death, divorce,
desertion by one parent, or the loss of both parents—as in
institutionalization or prolonged absences due to illness or to
work. Until recently, the study of the effects of prolonged
separation on the child’s development has focused on mater-
nal separation involving the institutionalization of illegiti-
mate children. This research raised the basic question of
What are the consequences of prolonged maternal depriva-
tion on the child’s development? To some extent, the hesi-
tancy of American parents to rush into massive group child
care for infants and toddlers can be traced to the belief that
group care is detrimental to normal growth and development.
This belief is rooted in studies of institutionally reared infants
that pointed out the dangers of poor institutional care and
deprivation from meaningful relationships with signiﬁcant
caregivers (Goldfarb, 1945; Skeels, 1936; Spitz, 1965).
Prolonged exposure to poor institutional care is associated
with apathy, despair, and a pronounced deﬁcit in social
responsiveness—what Spitz referred to as hospitalism.
Moreover, the effects of institutionalization are strongest if the
infant is institutionalized during the period when attachment to
signiﬁcant caregivers normally occurs (Spitz, 1965). Rutter
(1979) argues that it is not separation per se that causes devel-
opment of affectionless pathology in children, but rather it is
the failure to develop a secure attachment or emotional bond
with primary caregivers in the ﬁrst place that interferes with
social competence and personality development.
Institutionalization represents the extreme form of separa-
tion from primary caregivers and because it is a rare event in
the Western world, relative to the care settings in which most
of the world’s infants and toddlers are reared, the results of
institutionalization may translate poorly to other contexts.
The fact is that most infants and toddlers experience frequent
separations from their primary caregivers and we know pre-
cious little about how infants and their families negotiate
these separations. For example, Tronick, Winn, and Morelli
(1985) report that by the third week after birth, Efe infants
of Zaire are cared for by an average of 3.6 nonmaternal
individuals per hour, occupying 39% of daylight hours. By
18 weeks of age, Efe infants experience an average of 4.6 in-
dividuals per hour, which occupies 58% of daylight hours.
Although when infants are fussy they are more likely to be
passed to their mother for comforting, this in fact happens
less than half of the time. Among the Loogoli of East Africa,
mother’s caregiving responsibilities are inﬂuenced by such
factors as household density. In large households, mothers
are less likely to be their infants’ caregiver (Munroe &
Munroe, 1971). Group size, therefore, may be an important
factor for establishing secure infant-caregiver relationships.
Infant-caregiver ratio is a standard aspect of all deﬁnitions of
quality. Presumably, the lower the ratio, the better the care
provider-infant relationship should be.
In the United States, Suwalsky, Klein, Zaslow, Rabinovich,
and Gist (1987) conducted one of the few studies of naturally
occurring mother-infant separations. They tracked mothers of
ﬁrstborn infants over the course of the ﬁrst year of life, focus-
ing on six types of separation—three during daytime (nonre-
current separation for nonreimbursed activities; recurrent
separations for employment; recurrent separations for nonre-
imbursed activities) and three overnight (maternal vacation,
maternal employment, maternal illness/hospitalization). The
range of separations across the 144 participating families was

Factors Inﬂuencing Outcomes in Early Child Care Research
151
extraordinary. For example, the number of recurrent separa-
tions for employment ranged from 1 to 749; the number of
nonrecurrent separations for nonreimbursed activities ranged
from 2 to 545. Reasons for separations included work, shop-
ping, education, religious activities, and leisure activities.
Excluded are all the instances when infants and caregivers are
separated within the household because it is nap time, dinner
preparation time, time to work in the yard, or time to clean the
house. Suwalsky et al. found that the most frequent location
for supplemental care during employment-related separations
was the home of the care provider (family child care, neigh-
bor, relative). Fathers and relatives provided 31% of the
infant’s care. One of the questions of interest to the investiga-
tors concerned the effect of changes in maternal employment
on everyday separations. We ﬁnd it interesting that when
mothers’ employment hours decreased, the likelihood of an-
other type of separation increased because mothers spent
more time in nonreimbursed activities outside the home.
Maternal Employment
Some researchers report a slight increase in insecure attach-
ments, aggression, and noncompliance in infants whose
mothers were employed full-time during the infant’s ﬁrst
year of life (Barglow, Vaughn, & Molitor, 1987; Belsky &
Eggebeen, 1991; Belsky & Steinberg, 1978). Others report
no relationship between maternal work status and the quality
of infants’ attachment to their mothers. Lerner and Castellino
(2001) suggest that the effects of maternal employment on
infant and toddler development are unclear because few in-
vestigators adequately account for a wide range of confound-
ing variables, such as the quality and amount of nonparental
care, the age at which infants or toddlers enter into non-
parental care, the stress load of work and family responsibil-
ities, the degree to which mother receives parenting and
housework assistance from other adults in the home, and a
variety of characteristics of the infant. Clinical evidence con-
cerning the effects of prolonged maternal deprivation on
early development has existed for at least 50 years (Spitz &
Wolf, 1946). Moreover, sufﬁcient contemporary evidence
exists to support the contention that toddlers’ interpersonal
competencies ﬂow from their initial relationships with their
caregivers and other signiﬁcant adults (Berlin & Cassidy,
2000). If the quality of the infant’s attachment relationship
to signiﬁcant caregivers is damaged, then one would predict
difﬁculties in intrapersonal (self-concept) and interpersonal
(self-other) relationships. Therefore, it is reasonable to ques-
tion whether maternal separations associated with going
to work are in any way causally related to negative child
outcomes.
Working mothers do seem to provide role models for their
children that are different from those provided by working
mothers (Lerner & Castellino, 2001). For example, the daugh-
ters of working mothers tend to be more independent and
more achievement-oriented than do the daughters of non-
working mothers. Both the sons and the daughters of working
mothers tend to assume greater responsibility for household
chores and to develop more positive attitudes toward maternal
employment than do the children of nonworking mothers. In
addition, the husbands of working wives tend to become more
involved with routine household tasks and with caregiving
than do husbands whose wives do not work.
One key determinant of the effects of maternal employ-
ment on her children’s behavior is the degree to which the
mother is satisﬁed with her work and with the alternative
child care arrangements available for her children. In fact,
there is some indication that mothers who are satisﬁed with
their personal and work life are more competent mothers than
are mothers who either do not work or are not satisﬁed with
their way of life (see Hoffman, 1974; Lerner & Castellino,
2002). Unfortunately, the effects of maternal employment on
infant and toddler behavior have not received the research at-
tention they deserve, especially in cultures in which women
comprise a substantive portion of the labor force. For exam-
ple, in the United States and Sweden, substantial numbers of
infants and toddlers of working mothers spend 20 to more
than 35 hours per week in paid child care (see Table 6.4).
Although working mothers with children under 2 years of
age comprise the smallest proportion of working mothers
with children under 5 years of age, the numbers are increas-
ing. Not only are more women earning college degrees, but
more low-income women are entering the workforce because
of welfare-to-work requirements. In the former case, more
highly educated women are more likely to be able to afford
high-quality child care, whereas more poorly educated
women are more dependent upon other family members for
child care assistance.
Grandparents have a special role in child care in low-
income families (Casper, 1994), and they provide about 30%
of the care for all children under 5 years when mothers are at
work. Fathers provide about 18% of the care for all children
under 5 (Smith, 2000), and low-income fathers are more than
twice as likely as nonpoor fathers to be primary caregivers
when mothers are at work (Casper, 1997). Nevertheless, in
1995 there were 9,342,000 children under 5 years of age in
the United States who received nonparental and nonrelative
care (14.8% in day care centers, 13.5% in nursery or
preschool, 3.0% in Head Start, and 12.6% in family day
care). The average hours in nonparental, nonrelative care
ranged from 18.4 to 32.6 hours per week (Smith, 2000).

152
Diversity in Caregiving Contexts
Honig and Park (1993) found that the longer children experi-
enced out-of-home care, the more likely their teachers were
to rate them as instrumentally more aggressive. Moore
(1990) reported a link between the number of hours of infant-
toddler out-of-home care and teacher reports of behavior
problems in school. The relationships pertained to boys but
not to girls. Speciﬁcally, spending more than 15 hours per
week in out-of-home care when the child was between 18 and
21 months of age was associated with more teacher-reported
behavior problems in school.
Infant-toddler development is inﬂuenced by forces ema-
nating from a broad set of familial and social-cultural sources
and is far from being solely an outcome of the mother-infant
relationship (Brooks-Gunn, Duncan, & Aber, 1997; Brooks-
Gunn, Leventhal, & Duncan, 2000). Historical and cultural
factors must be considered with respect to their inﬂuence on
family life and gender role if the boundaries that bind infants
and toddlers to their cultural contexts are to be fully under-
stood (Jordon, 1997). It is culture that in large measure de-
ﬁnes the characteristics of family life and deﬁnes the nature
of gender role—including the role of the father.
Fathers and Nonparental Child Care
Although knowledge of the father’s impact on child devel-
opment lags far behind knowledge of the mother’s impact,
there is sufﬁcient literature to support a number of working
hypotheses related to fathers and their young children
(Fitzgerald & Montañez, 2000, 2001). The literature sup-
porting such generalizations disproportionately involves data
obtained from white, middle-class fathers. Data from a
much more ethnically diverse and economically depressed
sample of fathers whose children are participating in the
national evaluation of EHS show some interesting parallels
(Fitzgerald, Berlin, et al., 2000). The EHS study provided an
opportunity to contrast responses from three types of fathers:
Residential biological, nonresidential biological, and social
fathers (nonbiologically related men who are identiﬁed by
the mother as having a father role in the life of the child). Pre-
liminary analyses suggest that all fathers in the EHS study
were emotionally invested in their children, although the de-
gree of investment was less for social fathers than for biolog-
ical fathers (see Table 6.5).
Whether such demonstrative signs of investment and in-
volvement reﬂect deep emotional commitment or are expres-
sions of transitory engrossment (Greenberg & Morris, 1974)
remains to be determined.
Thirty Years of Research
The research of the past three decades consistently has
demonstrated that fathers’ lack of participation in routine
TABLE 6.4
Rates of Employment Among Mothers of Young Children by the Age of the Youngest Child
[Table not available in this electronic edition.]

Factors Inﬂuencing Outcomes in Early Child Care Research
153
TABLE 6.5
General Findings From National and International
Studies of Fathers and Their Impact on Child Development
Men are motivated to have children for psychological reasons, not for
social or economic reasons (Mackey, 1996). In short, men like children!
Fathers are not particularly involved with infants, but they become more
involved as their children reach the 2–6 age range (Belsky, Rovine, & Fish,
1989).
Fathers can and do perform routine caregiving tasks with their infants
(Parke et al., 1979), but when in the presence of mother, fathers yield
caregiving management to her (Mackey, 1996).
Across a wide range of cultures, when fathers have access to their children,
they take advantage of it (Mackey, 1996).
Physical distance between fathers and their children decreases father
involvement (Lerman & Sorensen, 1996).
When father’s role as breadwinner is compromised, he is less likely to be
involved with his children, and more likely to have mothers limit his access
if he is nonresidential (Lerman & Sorensen, 1996; Mackey, 1996).
As mother’s economic independence increases, fathers are less likely to be
involved with their children (Lerman & Sorensen, 1996).
Source. Adapted from Fitzgerald & Montañez (2000).
caregiving of infants is more a matter of performance than
of competence (Parke & Sawin, 1976; Parke, Power, &
Gottman, 1979). In the United States the number of fathers
who are primary care providers for their children is higher
than ever before, and cross-culturally, fathers in dual-parent
families are spending more time in routine child care than
their fathers did (Burghes, Clarke, & Cronin, 1997; Horn,
2000). However, it is also the case cross-culturally that when
fathers are in the presence of mothers and their infants, they
tend to yield authority of child care to mothers (Mackey,
1996).
Fathers are invested in their infants and they establish
attachment relationships with them. Demonstrating that
father-infant attachments occur or that fathers seem to be
invested in their children no longer seem to be critical ques-
tions. The more important questions and the questions of
greater signiﬁcance concern the circumstances that affect the
degree of investment and the quality of the father-infant rela-
tionship. Nearly every theory of development assumes that
fathers play a key role in the sex role identiﬁcation of their
children. Research attention has been given to fathers’ play
interactions with infants and toddlers, with the conclusion
that fathers are more actively involved in gender role social-
ization than are mothers, particularly with respect to their
playful interactions with their sons and daughters (Fitzgerald,
1977; Power, 1981). Others report that fathers are less likely
to differentially interact with their sons and daughters during
infancy, but that by the toddler years they have a clear prefer-
ence for rough-and-tumble play with their sons rather than
with their daughters (Yogman, 1982). At least by 20 months
of age, toddlers also respond differently to the play of their
mothers and fathers. They are more likely to expect fathers
than mothers to initiate play interactions, and by 30 months
of age toddlers are more cooperative, involved, excited, and
interested in play with their fathers than in play with their
mothers (Clarke-Stewart, 1977). Fathers take a more direct
role in regulating toddler compliance than mothers do and are
particularly directive with demanding compliance from boys
(Power, McGrath, Hughes, & Manire, 1994). Finally, fathers
are also more likely than are mothers to encourage their chil-
dren to be competitive, to be independent, and to take risks
(Hewlett, 1992).
The most accurate summary statement that can be made at
present regarding the effects of paternal deprivation on in-
fants and toddlers is that we have a good sense of what out-
comes are correlated with father absence, but that we are a
long way from isolating the causal variables that explain the
correlations. Cabrera, Tamis-LeMonda, Bradley, Hofferth,
and Lamb (2000, p. 128) identiﬁed ﬁve ways in which father
absence may have an impact on child development: (a) with-
out a father there is no coparent, (b) economic loss frequently
accompanies single motherhood, (c) social isolation and so-
cial disapproval of single or divorced mothers and children
may lead to emotional distress and less adaptive functioning,
(d) abandonment may cause psychological distress in chil-
dren, and (e) conﬂict between parents may negatively inﬂu-
ence children’s social-emotional development.
What do these ﬁndings suggest for infants and toddlers
who receive supplemental child care? It may mean that many
infants and toddlers spend considerable portions of the non-
parental child care day in the presence of women but not in the
presence of men. The number of males versus the number of
women actively involved in infant and toddler child care
is minuscule. Cabrera et al. (2000) note that little is known
about how men learn to be fathers. Having been reared in a
father-present family seems to be important. Investigators
have found that men whose fathers were involved in raising
them are more positively involved with their own children
(Hofferth, 1999). Regardless of marital status or father pres-
ence or absence, it is clear that children reared in dysfunc-
tional family systems or in families characterized by high
parental risk loads are more likely to have problems them-
selves. These risk loads include the presence of intergen-
erational aggression and antisociality (Shears, Robinson, &
Emde, in press). Men who reported high antisocial behavior
during their youth had low assessments of themselves as
fathers. Conversely, men who reported having positive rela-
tionships with their own fathers viewed themselves as good
fathers. Some investigators have suggested that sociocultural
factors create barriers for male involvement in early child care

154
Diversity in Caregiving Contexts
settings such as Early Head Start (Fitzgerald & Montañez,
2000). Families headed by low-income single mothers might
especially beneﬁt by having greater opportunities for men to
be actively involved in child care and development. If young
children in child care settings rarely interact with men, they
may be denied social learning experiences that may be impor-
tant for learning how to be a father (Cabrera et al., 2000).
Fathers and Family Risk Load
Infant mental health focuses on issues related to emotional
development and within that context, the literature suggests
that fathers may play a crucial role in helping children learn
how to control their emotionality. There is no question that
men like children and that fathers are both invested in and in-
volved with their children (Mackey, 1996). Investment and
involvement increase dramatically around the toddler years
as children’s motor and language skills push them into more
active, physical, and arousing play interactions, especially
with their father or father ﬁgure. Outcomes of such activity
include enhanced emotional regulation, compliance to rules
and authority, and the internalization of rule structures.
Both father absence and father antisocial behavior are
linked to behavioral dysregulation in children, especially boys.
Antisocial fathers model aggression and provide the context
for children to internalize aggressive scripts or schemas as
action plans that are linked to speciﬁc contexts. This puts chil-
dren at high risk for poor school performance, poor peer rela-
tionships, substance abuse, poor cognitive functioning, and the
intergenerational transmission of dysfunctional interpersonal
relationships (Carmichel Olsen, O’Connor, & Fitzgerald,
2001; Caspi, Henry, McGee, Mofﬁtt, & Silva, 1995; Dobkin,
Tremblay, & Sacchitelle, 1997; Fitzgerald, Puttler et al., 2000;
Loukas, Fitzgerald, Zucker, & von Eye, 2001). Evidence sug-
gests that father acceptance-rejection predicts child develop-
ment outcomes better than does mother acceptance-rejection
(Rohner, 1998). The negative effects of father absence or
dysfunction are exacerbated by risky rearing environments,
including risky neighborhoods (Zucker et al., 2000).
Large-scale child care programs such as Early Head Start
that actively promote father involvement appear to be on the
right course. Summers et al. (1999) used multiple ethno-
graphic approaches to obtain qualitative responses from low-
income fathers of EHS children about their roles as fathers.
Fathers identiﬁed providing ﬁnancial support, just being
there, caregiving, play, teaching, disciplining, providing love,
and protection as key roles. Some evidence suggests that the
new perception of fatherhood is one of father as equal copar-
ent (Pleck & Pleck, 1997), and this theme was evident in
many of the father interviews. It remains to be determined
whether involvement in EHS programs will be sufﬁcient to
offset the gradual distancing that occurs between nonresiden-
tial fathers and their children during the time of youth and
adolescence (Nord & Zill, 1996). Nevertheless, fathers seem
to contribute disproportionately to family risk load, and pro-
grams that may help to induce a greater sense of responsi-
bility for fatherhood are likely to assist in the reduction of
that load.
Summary: Factors Inﬂuencing Outcomes
in Early Child Care Research
Several factors inﬂuence the outcomes in early child care
research. The ﬁrst factor concerns child temperament and its
impact on the caregiver-child relationship. Temperament
refers to individual differences in emotional, motor, and
attentional reactivity, as well as differences in self-regulation.
The impact of temperament resides in the goodness of ﬁt be-
tween the child’s (perceived) temperament and the demands
and expectations of the rearing environment. A good match is
likely to result in minimal conﬂict and stress between the
child and signiﬁcant adults, and a poor match is likely to ex-
acerbate conﬂict and tension. Much is known about maternal
perception of infant temperament and its impact on mother-
infant relationships. However, relatively less is known about
how perceptions of the father and nonparental caregivers
may affect their interactions with infants.
The second factor involves mother-child social-emotional
relationships. Attachment refers to the social-emotional rela-
tionship constructed by infants and their primary caregivers.
Research clearly shows that infants establish attachment rela-
tionships with their care providers. The ease of establishing a
relationship depends in part on the degree of preparation care
providers have for teaching infants and toddlers. In both the
United States and other cultures, most infants and toddlers ex-
perience frequent separations from their primary caregivers.
Yet very little is known about how these separations affect the
development of the child. For instance, the effects of maternal
employment on child development are still unclear because
few investigators control for important confounding variables
such as the quality and amount of nonparental care or the age
at which children enter into nonparental care.
The third factor concerns father involvement in child and
family development. Fathers are more actively involved in
gender role socialization than are mothers. They take a more
direct role in regulating toddler compliance than mothers do
and are more likely than mothers are to encourage their chil-
dren to be competitive, to be independent, and to take risks.
Father absence may have a profound impact on child devel-
opment. If young children in child care settings rarely interact

Nonparental Child Care: Cost, Quality, and Assurance
155
with men, they may be denied social learning experiences that
are important for learning how to be a father. Literature on
infant mental health suggests that father absence and father
antisocial behavior are linked to adverse outcomes in chil-
dren, such as behavioral dysregulation, poor school perfor-
mance, poor peer relationships, poor cognitive functioning,
and substance abuse. Fathers seem to contribute dispropor-
tionately to family risk load. Programs that induce a greater
sense of responsibility for fatherhood are likely to assist in the
reduction of that load.
NONPARENTAL CHILD CARE: COST, QUALITY,
AND ASSURANCE
Cost and Quality
Cost is a primary concern when choosing child care. Based
on the Children’s Defense Fund 2000 Yearbook, full-time
child care costs may range from $4,000 to $10,000 per year
per child. In one modest-sized midwestern city, family child
care ranges from about $3,000 to $7,000 per year per child.
Data from the sites involved with the national evaluation of
EHS indicate that $9,646 per year is necessary to provide
high-quality care to infants and toddlers in full-year child
care. Clearly, nonparental child care is expensive. For some
families, approximately one fourth of their income can
be consumed by child care. When one considers that half of
the families in the United States with young children earn
less than $35,000 annually and that families with two full-
time working parents, each earning minimum wages, earn
less than $22,000 combined, it is clear that access to non-
parental child care depends upon the availability of govern-
ment subsidies. Data from the 1990 National Child Care
Survey (Hofferth, 1995) suggest that parental income does
not affect the availability of child care. However, the same
survey indicated that few programs accept subsidized chil-
dren. In the ﬁnal analysis, working poor and working-class
families end up paying a greater proportion of their income
for child care than do middle-class families. As a result, they
often have to depend on kinship care or on informal, low-
quality child care.
The pay for child care providers is limited by the income
of the families served and is often less than what is considered
to be an acceptable wage. The average yearly salary of a child
care worker is less than $15,000. There are limited federal
subsidies available to assist parents with the costs of licensed
child care, but only 1 in 10 eligible children receive the ﬁnan-
cial support needed. The availability of quality child care is
limited by lack of funding subsidies for child care workers
and working parents. Making less than a livable wage greatly
reduces the number of trained child care providers, the num-
ber of available child care slots, and the ability of parents to
work, while it simultaneously increases staff turnover.
Benchmarking Quality
In the United States, child care tends to be viewed as a per-
sonal issue to be solved at the family level. The minority
view is that child care availability and quality are issues of
national concern that require extensive government support.
According to the Children’s Defense Fund 2000 Yearbook,
approximately 76% of children age birth to 5 years are placed
in child care, and 60% of the children are infants. This sug-
gests that quality child care is both a private and public issue;
adequate spaces for child care enable working parents to have
a placement for their children. Meeting quality standards
assures that their children will thrive as well as—or perhaps
better than—they might in home care (Phillips, 1992;
Phillips, Howes, & Whitebook, 1992; Philips, Lande, &
Goldberg, 1990; Phillips & Adams, 2001).
Theoretically, quality child care should be associated with
children who are cognitively, linguistically, and socially pre-
pared for preschool and kindergarten—children who are
ready to learn. Because of their interactions with peers, they
should be as socially skilled as are children who are reared at
home with siblings. Initial studies of the effects of infant day
care reported that infants reared in day care scored higher on
measures of cognitive, linguistic, and social competence than
did home-reared infants (Robinson & Robinson, 1971;
Fowler, 1972; Lally, 1973; Honig & Brill, 1970; Keister,
1970). Nearly all studies from this era reported that infants in
child care formed their strongest attachments to their mother
(Caldwell, Wright, Honig, & Tannenbaum, 1970; Ragozin,
1980), thus allaying concerns of critiques that group day care
would lead to emotional damage. Some investigators re-
ported that toddlers reared in child care were less attentive to
peers than were home-reared toddlers (Kagan, Kearsley, &
Zelazo, 1975). Others found no differences between day care
and home-reared children with respect to peer relationships.
Rubenstein and Howes (1979) note that peers play an impor-
tant role in child care by serving as models for one another.
For example, in their study, infants’ positive affect and com-
petence at toy play were higher when they were interacting
with peers than when interacting with adults.
The 1970s was also a time when investigators focused
on so-called natural experiments in infant-toddler child care
that were provided by many countries in the Soviet Union
and Western Europe. Child care programs in Hungary, East
Germany, Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia, and the Soviet

156
Diversity in Caregiving Contexts
Union were described in great detail (Brackbill, 1962;
Bronfenbrenner, 1962; Meers & Marans, 1968; Wagner &
Wagner, 1971). One lesson learned from these reports was
that infant-toddler child care settings and curricula will re-
ﬂect broader social-cultural values, and therefore might not
generalize easily to other cultures.
Because many of these early studies assessed the impact
on infants and toddlers enrolled in university demonstration
day care centers or in formal state-supported centers, the ex-
tent to which ﬁndings generalized to the everyday context
was compromised. Thus, the basic questions concerning the
impact of nonparental child care continue to be raised. Does
early nonparental child care have detrimental effects on chil-
dren’s social-emotional and cognitive development? Is there
an optimal group size for facilitating the development of
competence? Are same-age peer groups more effective than
multiple-age peer groups? Are the relationships among chil-
dren different in day care than in home care, regardless of the
nature of the peer group composition? The questions tend to
be especially pointed at the group care of infants and tod-
dlers, but they apply equally well to the broad range of care-
giving contexts within which very young children are reared
by nonparental caregivers.
Some investigators report that infants who experience non-
parental center-based child care have poorer social-emotional
development and social behavior skills as preschoolers
(Belsky, 1986, 1988) and are more likely to score higher
on measures of behavioral control than are home-reared
children. Other investigators ﬁnd that consistency in child
care may be an important mediator of such outcomes. For
example, Ketterlinus, Henderson, and Lamb (1992) found no
differences between infants and toddlers reared in nonparental
day care and home-reared comparison children. Stability of
placement seemed to be a critical component of the lack of dif-
ferences in outcome; infants or toddlers in the Ketterlinus
et al. study experienced two sustained years in stable day care
settings. In a retrospective study of maternal reports of their
children’s behavior, Burchinal, Ramey, Reid, and Jaccard
(1995) did not ﬁnd evidence to support heightened levels of
externalizing or internalizing behavior problems in infants
reared in day care. Anderson’s (1989) study of Swedish
8-year-old children who experienced nonparental child care
as infants found similar results from teacher ratings. In fact,
teachers rated the children who had experienced day care as
more persistent, more independent, less anxious, and more
verbal than children who did not have prior day care experi-
ence. Of course, one critical variable in studies tracing the
effects of infant day care on later developmental outcomes
concerns the quality of the child care they experienced. Howes
(1990) found that low-quality infant child care predicted poor
peer relationships as kindergartners, whereas high-quality
care did not. For example, infants who developed secure rela-
tionships with their teachers were gregarious and less aggres-
sive in peer play as 4-year-olds, whereas those who were
dependent and socially withdrawn were more aggressive in
their play interactions (see also Pianta & Nimetz, 1991).
Publication of optimal standards for high-quality
child care occurs frequently, ﬁlling newsletters of national
child development associations, parenting magazines, state
and national agency bulletins, newspaper “living today” sec-
tions, and countless web pages. Criteria for high-quality child
care include a staff well-trained in child development; a staff
that promotes warm, sensitive, and responsive interactions
with infants and toddlers; low staff-child ratios and small
classroom groups; stability of caregivers over time (Howes &
Hamilton, 1992a, 1993); good nutrition and health practices;
developmentally appropriate curriculum practices; good
provider-parent relationships; and stimulating and safe
environments.
Despite almost consensus agreement on these criteria for
quality, there have been few systematic efforts to determine
whether such factors as group size, child-staff ratios (Belsky,
1990; Hayes, Palmer & Zaslow, 1990), or provider training
(Arnett, 1989) actually do deﬁne quality care that in turn has
positive impacts on child development. Blau (1996) analyzed
data from 1,309 teachers from 227 day care centers that par-
ticipated in the National Child Care Stafﬁng Study. Blau
found that in the best-ﬁtting models, conventional bench-
marks such as group size, child-staff ratios, and staff training
had nearly negligible impacts on quality of child care.
Staff training and education had some positive but low-order
effects on quality. Child care quality was deﬁned by the
Early Childhood Environment Rating Scale (ECERS) for
preschool classrooms and the Infant-Toddler Environment
Rating Scale (ITERS) for infant-toddler programs (Harms &
Clifford, 1980, 1986). Factor analysis of the items in the
ECERS and ITERS revealed two aggregate scales, which
Blau deﬁned as CARE (Appropriate Caregiving: adult-child
interaction, supervision, discipline), and ACTIVITY (Appro-
priate Activity: materials, schedule, activities as a proxy
measure of classroom environment). The Arnett Caregiver
Interaction Scale, used to rate teacher’s interactions with
children, generated three indexes (SENSITIVE, HARSH,
DETACHED), which were combined with the ACTIVITY
and CARE scales to assess quality of child care. We present
this level of detail (a) to specify what Blau deﬁned as quality
care and (b) to indicate that none of the variables assessed
were linked to child outcome data. Whereas Blau has made
an important ﬁrst step toward a systematic analysis of qual-
ity care, the next steps must involve child development

Nonparental Child Care: Cost, Quality, and Assurance
157
outcomes because they represent the ultimate product of in-
terest in the child care system.
Standards for high-quality child care almost always in-
clude reference to relationships between parents and care
providers. Indeed, in national child care initiatives such as
EHS, parents must be an integral component of the operating
organization structure. Seldom, however, are parents involved
in any systematic way in the evaluation of child care quality.
A retrospective study of parents whose infants were enrolled
in an infant-toddler child care program attempted to deter-
mine whether parent’s perceptions of their child’s proximal
behavior were in any way linked to their attitudes about their
child’s early child care experience (Ledesma, Fitzgerald, &
McGreal, 1980). Parents of all infants who had been enrolled
in the child care center over a 9-year period were mailed
questionnaires designed to elicit their opinions about their
children’s past child care experience and their current devel-
opmental status.
Nearly all parents reported feeling guilty when ﬁrst en-
rolling their infants in the center; most often, this involved
parents’ concerns about their attachment relationship with
their child. We ﬁnd it interesting that parents reported that
they did develop strong attachment relationships with their
infants and that their current relationships were also strong.
They noted that their infants shared attachments with other
caregivers but not to the detriment of the parent-infant rela-
tionship. They especially noted that enrollment of their in-
fants in day care resulted in less stress on the family during a
time when supplemental care was essential. Ledesma et al.
(1980) note that some parents reported that they had to deal
with public bias against having their infant in day care:
. . . and I did feel guilty. Our daughter was only six months old
when I went back to school and we had to continuously reassure
ourselves that we were doing the right thing. I must have called
the center ﬁve times a day during her ﬁrst few months there. Rel-
atives didn’t make it any easier. My mother-in-law (as well as
one of my professors) kept referring to “mothers who abandon
their babies” whenever she could work it into a conversation.
(pp. 47–48)
Other concerns frequently expressed involved the degree
of parental involvement in center activities, caregiver-infant
ratios, maintenance of physical health, and amount of physi-
cal space available in the center for play areas. An over-
whelming number of parents reported that it was the quality
of the center staff that surfaced as the most important factor
contributing to parents’ perceptions of quality child care.
The competent, caring, and knowledgeable senior caregivers
(both registered nurses with considerable personal and
professional experience with infants and toddlers) seemed to
allay any concerns that parents had about physical space,
health maintenance, and child development.
We seem to “know” the deﬁning characteristics of child
care quality; yet this knowledge faces many contradictions.
We know that highly trained staff are essential to quality, yet
relatively few states regulate training or have minimal stan-
dards for staff competency. We know what quality child care
is, yet we continue to conduct research in order to identify the
components of optimal child care. In some respects re-
searchers seem to be intent on identifying the just-adequate
environment that will do no harm, rather than focusing on the
speciﬁc individual, familial, and systemic variables that may
predict child outcomes independent of or in interaction with
particular child care settings.
Although the deﬁning features of high quality nonparental
child care have been identiﬁed, these features are program and
personnel speciﬁc—that is to say, child characteristics, family
characteristics, and neighborhood characteristics are not
typically part of the quality formula. We are a long way from
fully understanding how intra-individual and familial vari-
ables interact with the child care setting to inﬂuence child
outcomes, although we have clear pathways marked to guide
such research (Anderson, 1989; Howes, 1988; Howes &
Hamilton, 1992a, 1992b, 1993; Howes, Hamilton, &
Matheson, 1994; Ketterlinus et al., 1992; Lucas, 2001; Pianta
& Nimetz, 1991; Raikes, 1993; Ramey, 2000; Ramey &
Ramey,1998;Rubinsteinetal.,1977).Doinfantswithdifﬁcult
temperaments score higher on measures of aggressive
behavior regardless of their child care experiences? Does
high-quality child care provide protective factors for chil-
dren who are reared in low-quality home environments? Does
the quality of the teacher-child relationship promote effective
social interaction skills? Is high-quality early child care
sufﬁcient to facilitate resilience factors and coping skills
amongchildrenrearedinhigh-riskfamilyorneighborhooden-
vironments? One of the strongest conclusions Yoshikawa
(1994, 1995) reached in his analysis of the effects of child care
was that poor quality is associated with poor outcomes and
that high quality is associated with positive outcomes—
cooperation with adults, the ability to imitate and sustain posi-
tive interactions with adults, and early competence in reading
and math.
Assurance: Regulatory Policies and Nonparental 
Child Care
IntheUnitedStates,childcarecentersarerapidlyadoptingcur-
ricula that ﬂow from the principles and practices that constitute
developmentally appropriate practices for early childhood

158
Diversity in Caregiving Contexts
education (Bredekamp, 1987a, 1987b; see Table 6.6, which
outlines an approach to early child development that optimizes
individualized instruction.
The developmentally appropriate child-centered approach
to early childhood education is not universal (Boocock,
1995). The Maori of New Zealand and residents of many
Asian countries view early childhood education as a direct,
downward extension of formal schooling. Low child-adult ra-
tios valued in the United States apparently are less meaningful
in France and Japan with respect to attainment of high-quality
care or positive child development outcomes. Children who
attend preschool in developing countries have better cognitive
skills and overall school performance when compared with
children in the same countries who do not attend preschool
(Boocock, 1995). We ﬁnd it interesting that countries that re-
port positive outcomes for early childhood education tend to
have national policies that support universal preschool and
high-quality programs. The United States spends heavily to
support a wide variety of prevention programs (EHS, Head
Start, Healthy Start, Even Start, Early Start, Success by Six,
Early Intervention for Infants and Toddlers) that target chil-
dren in families whose incomes ﬁt the federal deﬁnition of
poverty or who for other reasons are at high risk. Currently, 31
states also fund programs that speciﬁcally target families with
very young children. Only recently have efforts emerged to try
to link existing programs into more integrated systems for
children of low-income families. For example, performance
standards for EHS require programs to build community
TABLE 6.6
Developmentally Appropriate and Inappropriate Practices (Items From One
Research Checklist) from Perspectives of Kindergarten Teachers
Appropriate
Inappropriate
View of growth and development
Work is individualized.
Work is evaluated against a group norm.
Children move at their own pace.
Everyone is expected to acquire the same narrowly 
deﬁned skills.
Organization of the curriculum
Activities center on topics in such areas as
Teacher-directed reading groups.
science and social studies.
Lecturing to the whole group.
Topic activities include story writing and
Paper-and-pencil exercises, workbooks, 
storytelling, drawing, discussing, listening
and worksheets.
to stories and informational books,
Projects, learning centers, and play are
and taking part in cooperative activities.
offered if time permits or as
rewards for completing work.
Skills are taught as they are needed to
complete a task.
Teacher preparation and organization of instruction
Learning centers provide opportunities
There is little time for enrichment activities.
for writing, reading, math and language
Interest centers are available for children who ﬁnish their
games, and dramatic play.
seatwork early.
Children are encouraged to critique their
Centers are set up so that children must complete a
own work.
prescribed sequence of teacher-directed activities
within an allotted period of time.
Prosocial behavior, perseverance, and industry
Stimulating, motivating activities that
Children are lectured about the importance of
promote student involvement.
appropriate social behavior.
Individual choices are encouraged.
Children who become bored and restless with seatwork 
and whisper, talk, or wander around are punished.
Enough time is allowed to complete work.
Children who dawdle and do not ﬁnish work in 
the allotted time are punished.
Time with friends or teachers is provided.
There is no time for private conversation. 
Only the most able children ﬁnish their work in 
time to visit interest centers or to interact with 
other students.
Source. Charleswork, R., Hart, C., Burts, D., et al. (1993).  Measuring the developmental appropriateness
of kindergarten teachers’ beliefs and practices.  Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 8, 255–376.

Nonparental Child Care: Cost, Quality, and Assurance
159
networks among service providers to facilitate easy access to
available services for EHS families.
States with higher levels of child care quality are more
likely to report higher economies, safer neighborhoods, and
better schools than are states with lower ratings. Young,
Marsland, and Zigler (1997) analyzed the regulatory stan-
dards for center-based child care in the United States. Noting
that a 1980 review reported that no state met federal stan-
dards of quality for group composition, staff training, and
program of care, Young et al. sought to determine how much
change has occurred during the 1980s. Data in Table 6.7 indi-
cate that relatively little progress was made over a 10-year
period. With the exception of the number of programs scoring
in the good category, the majority of states were rated poor to
very poor (or unregulated) on group composition and care-
giver qualiﬁcations. Indeed, only Minnesota was rated
as high as minimally acceptable with respect to caregiver
qualiﬁcations. A more recent analysis of state regulations
(Table 6.8) indicates that the major of states do not have train-
ing requirements for either family child care providers or for
teachers in child care centers.
Perhaps policies adopted by the United States Department
of Defense (DOD) for child care programs available to
families in the military should serve as benchmarks for qual-
ity assurance (N. D. Campbell, Applebaum, Martinson, &
Martin, 2000; N. D. Campbell, 2000; Lucas, 2001). The
DOD provides military families with options of full-day care,
part-day care, hourly care, occasional care, and long-term
care, depending on need. One half of all children in military
child care programs are in infant-toddler programs, which
provide child care beginning as early as the sixth postnatal
week in center programs and the fourth postnatal week in
family programs. Regardless of the type of care needed, pro-
vision of care and related services is organized in a seamless
system with one point of entry for each family. Monitoring
for quality assurance requires annual certiﬁcation of health
TABLE 6.7
Ratings of 1990 State Infant and Toddler Center-Based Child Care Regulation by Domain and Category 
Minimally
Very Poor or
Domain
Optimal 
Good
Acceptable
Poor 
Unregulated
Overall
(Score  81) 
(Range  65–80) 
(Range  49–64)
(Range  33–48)
(Range  17–32)
No States
No States
AL, CT, HI, IL,
AK, AZ, AR, CA,
ID, MS, SC, WY
KS, ME, MD, MA,
CO, DE, DC, FL, 
MN, MO, ND, OK,
GA, IN, IA, KY, 
OR, RI, UT, VT, 
LA, MI, MT, NE,
WI
NV, NH, NJ, NM, 
NY, NC, OH, PA,
SD, TN, TX, VA, 
WA, WV
Grouping
(Score  27) 
(Range  21–26)
(Range  16–20)
(Range  11–15) 
(Range  5–10)
No States
CT, DC, MD, MA, 
AL, CA, HI, KS,
CO, IL, IN, IA,
AK, AZ, AR, DE,
OR,VT
MN, MO, WI, UT
ME, MI, MT, NE,
FL, GA, ID, KY, 
NH, NY, ND, OH, 
LA, MS, NV, NJ, 
OK, PA, SD, TN, 
NM, NC, RI, SC, 
WA, WV
TX, VA, WY
Caregiver
(Score  81)
(Range  21–26) 
(Range  16–20) 
(Range  11–15) 
(Range  5–10)
Qualiﬁcations
No States
No States 
MN
AK, AZ, AR, CA, 
AL, CO, CT, DC,
DE, IL, IN, ME, 
FL, GA, HI, ID, IA, 
MA, MO, NJ, NM, 
KS, KY, LA, MD,
NY, NC, ND, OH,
MI, MS, MT, NE,
PA, RI, SD, TN,
NV, NH, OK, OR,
TX, UT, VA, WV, 
SC, VT, WA, WY
WI
Program 
(Score  27)
(Range  22–26)
(Range  17–21)
(Range  12–16) 
(Range  7–11)
AK
AL, AZ, DE, HI,
AR, CA, CT, FL, 
CO, DC, IN, MS 
ID, WY
IL, ME, MD, MA,
GA, IA, KS, KY, 
MO, MT, NH, NJ,
LA, MI, MN, NE, 
NM, NY, NC, ND,
NV, PA, SC, SD, 
OH, OK, OR, RI,
TN
TX, UT, VT, VA,
WA, WV, WI
Source. Reprinted with permission from Young, K. T., Marsland, K. W., & Zigler, E. (1997). The regulatory status of center-based infant and toddler child care.
American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 67, p. 539.

160
Diversity in Caregiving Contexts
TABLE 6.8
Training Requirements for Child Care Personnel (1998)
for the States and the District of Columbia
No
Yes
States with Requirements
Training required for 
41
10
CO, DE, FL, KT, ME, MD,
family child care 
MN, NE, NV, UT, WI
providers prior to
serving children.
Training required for 
33
18
CA, DE, DC, FL, GA, HI, 
teachers in child care 
IL, MD, MA, MN, MT, NV, NH,
center prior to
NJ, RI, TX, VT, WI
serving children.
and safety regulations, developmental programming, child
abuse prevention efforts, and staff training. Four unan-
nounced inspections occur annually, one of which involves a
multidisciplinary team (Lucas, 2001)! Clearly, the DOD
takes seriously its commitment to provide high-quality child
care to families serving in the military.
Summary: Nonparental Child Care
Although there continues to be national ambivalence regard-
ing the use of nonparental child care for very young children,
it is likely that current employment trends for women of
childbearing age are not likely to reverse anytime soon. The
simple fact is that many parents—even if they desire to stay
at home with their very young children—may not be able to
do so for economic reasons. Why should these parents be
penalized for making choices that directly affect their ability
to contribute to taking care of themselves and their families?
More policy options are needed that provide support for fam-
ilies needing to access such care options.
It seems that we have come to recognize this reality as we
examine the system established to support those enlisted in
the armed forces. The beneﬁts of such a system have been
considerable—not only for children who participate in care
regulated by the DOD, but also for families and for the gov-
ernment. When parents feel comfortable about the quality and
safety of care, it likely has a positive impact on productivity.
We need to carefully consider how all aspects of the military
child care system (cost, quality, and assurance) can provide a
model for what should also be in place in the private sector.
Although it is certainly true that federal-, state-, and even
foundation-funded efforts have been established, much of
this work seems inadequate to sufﬁciently address the need
that presently exists for nonparental child care.
Researchers have an important role to play in this process.
As we consider the fact that many families will continue to
rely upon nonparental care, we need a generation of research
that goes beyond the question of whether child care inﬂuences
development; more studies are needed that seek to understand
the pathways through which these settings exert their inﬂu-
ence and how providers can in turn improve their settings as a
result of such research.
ENTERING THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY
The so-called new school-age child is now around 40 years
old, and the realities of the workforce, equality for women,
and changing roles for men suggest that the number of infants
and toddlers living in supplemental care settings during some
signiﬁcant portion of their lives will continue to increase
through the ﬁrst decade of the twenty-ﬁrst century. Although
it may no longer be meaningful to ask where preventive inter-
vention programs work (e.g, National Research Council and
Institute of Medicine, 2000), considerable ﬁne detail needs
speciﬁcation if we are to achieve the quality of child care that
will facilitate optimal development of infants and young chil-
dren. Failure to determine the boundaries of quality and to de-
mand that all nonparental child care experiences fall within
those boundaries could have serious neurobiological, psycho-
logical, and social consequences for infants and toddlers.
We have suggested several focal domains relevant to spec-
ifying the consequences of nonparental child care. The ﬁrst
domain focuses on characteristics of the infant and on the
ecological context within which they organize. We suggest
that dominant theories of the importance of mother-child
relationships fail to adequately address the ecological context
within which most parenting takes place, contrasting studies
of separation experiences in the laboratory with studies of
separations that take place through the normal course of
everyday life. Moreover, we suggest that questions raised
about the importance of mother-child relationships also be
examined with respect to care-provider–infant relationships.
The second domain examines the impact of fathers on infant
and toddler development. Theory and research on fathers
needs to move beyond simple imitation of the vast literature
concerning maternal inﬂuences on child development. Al-
though many theoretical concepts may prove to apply equally
to mothers and fathers, the level of our current knowledge of
the impact of fathers on child development will beneﬁt from
openness and creativity among developmental researchers.
The third domain addresses issues of risk. The dominant
questions in child care research have focused as much on a
political agenda contrasting at-home rearing with out-of-
home rearing as they have on the impact of child care on
mother-infant relationships.
Developmentalists need to move beyond these issues and
examine the impact of nonparental care on infants who are
at biological risk, familial risk, community risk, or any

References
161
combination. Part of this agenda requires intensive study of
the impact of cultural diversity in parenting and child-rearing
beliefs, attitudes, and practices as they play out against the
realities of needed placements in nonparental care settings
(Garcia Coll, 1990).Although research on infants and families
deﬁned as ethnic minorities in the United States is increasing,
our knowledge of variability in developmental pathways for
infants of color is woefully inadequate (Fitzgerald et al.,
1999). Finally, we suggested that exemplary models for high-
quality care provide a base for setting standards that re-
searchers can use to assess the impact of the child care context
on infant and toddler development. Finally, to paraphrase
Michael Rutter’s observation in 1976, perhaps it is time to
consider that the standards that society applies to the conse-
quences of nonparental child care should also be applied to the
consequences of parental child care.
REFERENCES
Ainsworth, M. D. S., Blehar, M. C., Waters, E., & Wall, S. (1978).
Patterns of attachment. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Allport, G. W. (1937). Personality: A psychological interpretation.
New York: Holt.
Anderson, B.-E. (1989). Effects of public day care: A longitudinal
study. Child Development, 60, 857–866.
Arnett, J. (1989). Caregivers in day care centers: Does training
matter? Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology, 10,
541–552.
Barglow, P., Vaughn, B. E., & Molitor, N. (1987). Effects of mater-
nal absence due to employment on the quality of infant-mother
attachment in a low-risk sample. Child Development, 53, 53–61.
Belsky, J. (1986). Infant day care: A cause for concern? Zero to
Three, 6, 1–9.
Belsky, J. (1988). The effects of infant day care reconsidered. Early
Childhood Research Quarterly, 3, 235–272.
Belsky, J. (1990). Parental and nonparental child care and children’s
socioemotional development: A decade in review. Journal of
Marriage and the Family, 52, 885–903.
Belsky, J., & Eggebeen, D. (1991). Early and extensive maternal
employment and young children’s socioemotional development:
Children of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth. Journal
of Marriage and the Family, 53, 1083–1098.
Belsky, J., & Steinberg, L. D. (1978). The effects of daycare: A
critical review. Child Development, 49, 929–949.
Berlin, L. J., & Cassidy, J. (2000). Understanding parenting: Contri-
butions of attachment theory and research. In J. D. Osofsky &
H. E. Fitzgerald (Eds.), WAIMH handbook of infant mental
health (pp. 131–170). New York: Wiley.
Bertalanffy, L. von (1950). An outline of General Systems Theory.
British Journal of Philosophy and Science, 1, 139–164.
Bertalanffy, L. von (1968). General systems theory. New York:
Braziller.
Blau, D. M. (1996). The production of quality in child care centers.
The Journal of Human Resources, 32, 334–387.
Boocock, S. S. (1995). Early childhood programs in other nations:
Goals and outcomes. The Future of Children, 5, 94–114.
Bowlby, J. (1969). Attachment. New York: Basic Books.
Brackbill, Y. (1962). Research and clinical work with children. In
R. A. Bauer (Ed.), Some views on Soviet psychology (pp. 99–
164). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Bredekamp, S. (Ed.). (1987a). Accreditation criteria and proce-
dures of the National Academy of Early Childhood Programs.
Washington, DC: National Association for the Education of
Young Children.
Bredekamp, S. (1987b). Developmentally appropriate practice in
early childhood programs serving children from birth through
age 8. Washington, DC: National Association for the Education
of Young Children.
Bronfenbrenner, U. (1962). Soviet methods of character education:
some implications for research. American Psychologist, 17,
550–564.
Bronfenbrenner, U. (1979). The ecology of human development:
Experiments by nature and design. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Bronfenbrenner, U., & Morris, P. (1998). The ecology of develop-
mental processes. In W. Damon (Series Ed.) and R. M. Lerner
(Vol. Ed.), Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 5. Theoretical
models of human development (5th ed., pp. 993–1028). New
York: Wiley.
Brooks-Gunn, J., Duncan, G. J., & Aber, J. L. (1997). Neighborhood
poverty (Vol. 1). New York: Russell Sage.
Brooks-Gunn, J., Leventhal, T., & Duncan, G. J. (2000). Why
poverty matters for young children: Implications for policy. In
J. D. Osofsky & H. E. Fitzgerald (Eds). WAIMH handbook of
infant mental health: Vol. 3. Parenting and child care (pp. 89–
132). New York: Wiley.
Burghes, L., Clarke, L., & Cronin, N. (1997). Fathers and father-
hood in Britain. London: Family Policy Studies Centre.
Burchinal, M. R., Ramey, S. L., Reid, M. K., & Jaccard, J. (1995).
Early child care experiences and their association with family
and child characteristics during middle childhood. Early Child-
hood Research Quarterly, 10, 33–61.
Cabrera, N. J., Tamis-LeMonda, C. S., Bradley, R. H., Hofferth, S.,
& Lamb, M. E. (2000). Fatherhood in the twenty-ﬁrst century.
Child Development, 71, 127–136.
Caldwell, B. M., Wright, C. M., Honig, A. S., & Tannenbam, J.
(1970). Infant day care and attachment. American Journal of
Orthopsychiatry, 40, 397–412.
Campbell, F. A., & Ramey, C. T. (1990). The relationship be-
tween Piagetian cognitive development, mental test perfor-
mance, and academic achievement in high-risk students with and
without early educational experience. Intelligence, 14, 293–308.

162
Diversity in Caregiving Contexts
Campbell, F. A., & Ramey, C. T. (1994). Effects of early interven-
tion on intellectual and academic achievement: A follow-up
study of children from low-income families. Child Development,
65, 684–698.
Campbell, J. J., Lamb, M. E., & Hwang, C. P. (2000). Early child-care
experiences and children’s social competence between 12 and 15
years of age. Applied Developmental Science, 4, 166–175.
Campbell, N. D. (2000, May). Military provides model for child care
reforms. Department of Defense News Brieﬁng. Washington,
DC: U.S. Department of Defense.
Campbell, N. D., Applebaum, J. C., Martinson, K., & Martin, E.
(2000, April). Be all that we can be: Lessons from the military
for improving our nation’s child care system. Washington, DC:
National Women’s Law Center.
Carlson, N. A., & Cassell, T. Z. (1984). A socio-ecological model of
adaptive behavior and functioning. In H. E. Fitzgerald, B. M.
Lester, & M. W. Yogman (Eds.). Theory and research in behav-
ior pediatrics (Vol. 2, pp. 31–66). New York: Plenum Press.
Carmichael Olson, H., O’Connor, M. J., & Fitzgerald, H. E. (2001).
Lessons learned from study of the developmental impact of
parental alcoholism. Infant Mental Health Journal, 22, 271–290.
Casper, L. M. (1994). Who’s minding our preschoolers? Fall 1994
update. Current Population Reports. Washington, DC: U.S.
Department of Commerce.
Casper, L. M. (1997). My daddy takes care of me! Fathers as care
providers. Current Population Reports. Washington, DC: U.S.
Department of Commerce.
Caspi, A., Henry, B., McGee, R. O., Mofﬁtt, T. E., & Silva, P. A.
(1995). Temperamental origins of child and adolescent behavior
problems: From age three to age ﬁfteen. Child Development, 66,
55–68.
Caspi, A., Mofﬁtt, T. E., Newman, D. L., & Silva, P. A. (1996).
Behavioral observations at age 3 years predict adult psychiatric
disorders. Archives of General Psychiatry, 53, 1034–1039.
Chess, S., & Thomas, A. (1986). Temperament in clinical practice.
New York: Guilford Press.
Chess, S., & Thomas, A. (1991). Temperament and the concept of
goodness of ﬁt. In J. Strelau & A. Angleitner (Eds.). Explo-
rations in temperament: International perspectives on theory
and measurement (pp. 15–28). New York: Plenum Press.
Clarke-Stewart, K. A. (1977). Child care in the family: A review of
research and some propositions for policy. New York: Academic
Press.
Clarke-Stewart, K. A., Allhusen, V. D., & Clemens, D. C. (1995).
Nonparental caregiving. In M. H. Bornstein (Ed.), Handbook of
parenting: Vol. 3. Status and social conditions of parenting
(pp. 151–176). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Cochran, M. (Ed.). (1993). International handbook of child care
policies and programs. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
Cohen, L. J., & Campos, J. J. (1974). Father, mother, and stranger as
elicitors of attachment behaviors in infancy. Developmental Psy-
chology, 10, 146–154.
Coley, R. L. (2001). Emerging research on low-income, unmarried,
and minority fathers. American Psychologist, 56, 743–753.
Commissioner’s Ofﬁce of Research and Evaluation, Head Start
Bureau, Administration on Children, Youth, and Families, &
Department of Health and Human Services (1999a, December).
Leading the way: Characteristics and early experiences of
selected Early Head Start Programs: Vol. 1. Cross-site perspec-
tives. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services.
Commissioner’s Ofﬁce of Research and Evaluation, Head Start
Bureau, Administration on Children, Youth, and Families, &
Department of Health and Human Services (1999b, December).
Leading the way: Characteristics and early experiences of
selected Early Head Start Programs: Vol. 2. Program proﬁles.
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services.
Commissioner’s Ofﬁce of Research and Evaluation, Head Start
Bureau, Administration on Children, Youth, and Families, &
Department of Health and Human Services (2001a, December–
June). Building their futures: How Early Head Start programs
are enhancing the lives of infants and toddlers in low-income
families: Vol. 1. Technical report. Washington, DC: U.S. Depart-
ment of Health and Human Services.
Commissioner’s Ofﬁce of Research and Evaluation, Head Start
Bureau, Administration on Children, Youth, and Families, &
Department of Health and Human Services (2001b, December–
June). Building their futures: How Early Head Start programs
are enhancing the lives of infants and toddlers in low-income
families: Vol. 2. Technical report appendices. Washington, DC:
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
Commissioner’s Ofﬁce of Research and Evaluation, Head Start
Bureau, Administration on Children, Youth, and Families, &
Department of Health and Human Services (2001c, December–
January). Building their futures: How Early Head Start
programs are enhancing the lives of infants and toddlers in low-
income families: Summary report. Washington, DC: U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.
Dobkin, P. L., Tremblay, R. E., & Sacchitelle, C. (1997). Predicting
boys’ early-onset substance abuse from father’s alcoholism,
son’s disruptiveness, and mother’s parenting behavior. Journal
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 65, 86–92.
Dokecki, P. R., Hargrove, E. C., & Sandler, H. M. (1983). An
overview of the Parent Child Development Center social experi-
ment. In R. Haskins & D. Adams (Eds.), Parent education and
public policy. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Duncan, G. J., & Brooks-Gunn, J. (Eds.). (1997). Consequences of
growing up poor. New York: Russell Sage.
Fein, G. G. (1995). Infants in group care: Patterns of despair and
detachment. Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 10, 261–275.
Fenichel, E., & Mann, T. L. (2001). Early Head Start for low-
income families with infants and toddlers. The Future of Chil-
dren, 11, 135–141.

References
163
Fitzgerald, H. E. (1977). Infants and caregivers: Sex differences as
determinants of socialization. In E. Donelson & J. Gullahorn
(Eds.), Women: A psychological perspective. New York: Wiley.
Fitzgerald, H. E., Berlin, L., Cabrara, N., Coker, D., Pan, B.,
Raikes, H., Roggman, L., Spellman, M., Tamis-LeMonda, C., &
Tarrullo, L. (2000, July). Twenty-four months of fatherhood:
Low-income men and their toddlers. Factors affecting paternal
involvement in infant and toddler development: insights from
early head start. In symposium (L. Roggman and K. Boller,
chairs), 24 months of fatherhood: Low income men and their
toddlers. Presented at the biennial meeting of the International
Conference on Infant Studies, Brighton, UK.
Fitzgerald, H. E., Johnson, R. B., Van Eqeren, L. A., Castellino,
D. R., Johnson, C. B., & Judge-hawton, M. (1999). Infancy and
culture: An international review and source book. New York:
Falmer Press.
Fitzgerald, H. E., & Montañez, M. (2000, October). Infant mental
health and Early Head Start: Building capacity for father
engagement.
Paper presented at the Head Start Infant
Mental Health Forum, “Addressing mental health needs of
infants, parents, and families in Early Head Start and
Migrant Head Start: Lessons from the scientiﬁc community,”
Washington, DC.
Fitzgerald, H. E., & Montañez, M. (2001). Fathers as facilitators of
infant mental health: Implications for Early Head Start. Zero to
Three, 22, 25–28.
Fitzgerald, H. E., Puttler, L. I., Mun, E.-Y., & Zucker, R. A. (2000).
Prenatal and postnatal exposure to parental alcohol use and
abuse. In J. D. Osofsky & H. E. Fitzgerald (Eds.), WAIMH hand-
book of infant mental health: Vol. 4. Infant mental health in
groups at high risk (pp. 124–159). New York: Wiley.
Fitzgerald, H. E., Strommen, E. A., & McKinney, J. P. (1977). The
infant and young child. Homewood, IL: Dorsey Press.
Fitzgerald, H. E., Zucker, R. A., & Yang, H.-Y. (1995). Develop-
mental systems theory and alcoholism: Analyzing patterns of
variation in high risk families. Psychology of Addictive Behav-
iors, 11, 49–58.
Ford, D. H., & Lerner, R. M. (1992). Developmental systems theory:
An integrative approach. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Fowler, W. (1972). A developmental learning approach to infant
care in a group setting. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 18, 145–175.
Freud, S. (1946 ). Collected papers (J. Strachey, Trans.) (Vols. 1, 2, &
3). London: Hogarth Press.
Galinsky, E., Howes, C., & Kontos, S. (1995). The family child-care
training study: Highlights of ﬁndings. New York: Families and
Work Institute.
Galinsky, E., Howes, C., Kontos, S., & Shinn, M. (1994). The study
of children in family child care and relative care. New York:
Families and Work Institute.
Gill, S., Greenberg, M. T., & Vazquez,A. (2002). Changes in the ser-
vice delivery model and home visitors’job satisfaction in an Early
Head Start. Infant Mental Health Journal, 23, 182–196.
Goldfarb, W. (1945). Effects of psychological privation in infancy
and subsequent development. American Journal of Psychiatry,
102, 18–33.
Gottlieb, G. (1991). Experiential canalization of behavioral devel-
opment: Theory. Developmental Psychology, 27, 4–13.
Greenberg, M., & Morris, N. (1974). Engrossment: The newborn’s
impact upon the father. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry,
44, 520–531.
Harms, T., & Clifford, R. (1980). Early Childhood Environment
Rating Scale. New York: Teachers College Press.
Harms, T., & Clifford, R. (1986). Infant-Toddler Environment
Rating Scale. Chapel Hill: Frank Porter Graham Center.
Hayes, C. D., Palmer, J. L., & Zaslow, M. J. (Eds.). (1990). Who
cares for America’s children? Child care policy for the 1990s.
Washington DC: National Academy Press.
Hernandez, D. (1997, June). Findings about the changing face of
childhood: family, economics, and ethnicity. Paper presented
at the Science Writers Workshop, NIH Ofﬁce of Behavioral
and Social Sciences. Washington, DC: American Sociological
Association.
Hewlett, B. S. (1992). Husband-wife reciprocity and the father-
infant relationship among AKA pygmies. In B. S. Hewlett
(Ed.), Father-child relations: Cultural and biosocial contexts
(pp. 153–176). New York: de Gruyter.
Hofferth, S. L. (1995). Caring for children at the poverty line. Chil-
dren and Youth Services Review, 17, 61–90.
Hoffereth, S. L. (1999). Race/ethnic differences in father involve-
ment with young children: A conceptual framework and empiri-
cal test in two-parent families. Paper presented at the Urban
Seminar on Fatherhood, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA.
Hoffman, J. M. (1994). The ﬁsh is in the water and the water is in the
ﬁsh. The Signal, 2, 5–6.
Hoffman, L. W. (1974). Effects of maternal employment on the
child: A review of research. Developmental Psychology, 10,
204–228.
Honig, A. S. (1995). Choosing child care for young children. In M.
H. Bornstein (Ed.), Handbook of parenting: Vol. 4. Applied and
practical parenting (pp. 411–436). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Honig, A. S., & Brill, S. A. (1970, September). A comparative
analysis of the Piagetian development of twelve-year-old disad-
vantaged infants in an enrichment center with others not in such
a center. Paper presented at the meeting of the American
Psychological Association, Miami, FL.
Honig, A. S., & Park, K. (1993). Effects of day care on preschool
sex-role development. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 63,
481–486.
Horn, W. F. (2000). Fathering infants. In J. D. Osofsky & H. E.
Fitzgerald (Eds.), WAIMH handbook of infant mental health:
Vol. 3. Parenting and child care (pp. 269–298). NewYork: Wiley.
Hornby, H., Zeller, D., & Karraker, D. (1996). Kinship care in
America: What outcomes should policy seek? Child Welfare,
LXXV, 397–418.

164
Diversity in Caregiving Contexts
Howes, C. (1988). The peer interactions of young children. Mono-
graphs of the Society for Research in Child Development,
53(1, Serial No. 217).
Howes, C. (1990). Can the age of entry and the quality of infant
child care predict adjustment in Kindergarten? Development
Psychology, 26, 252–303.
Howes, C., & Hamilton, C. E. (1992a). Children’s relationships with
caregivers: Mothers and child care teachers. Child Development,
63, 859–866.
Howes, C., & Hamilton, C. E. (1992b). Children’s relationships
with child care teachers: Stability and concordance with parental
attachments. Child Development, 63, 867–878.
Howes, C., & Hamilton, C. E. (1993). The changing experience of
child care: Changes in teachers and in teacher-child relationships
and children’s social competence with peers. Early Childhood
Research Quarterly, 8, 15–32.
Howes, C., Hamilton, C. E., & Matheson, C. C. (1994). Children’s
relationships with peers: Differential associations with aspects
of the teacher-child relationship. Child Development, 65, 253–
263.
Howes, C., Rodning, C., Galluzzo, D. C., & Myers, L. (1988).
Attachment and child care: Relationships with mother and
caregiver. Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 3, 403–416.
Howes, C., & Smith, E. W. (1995). Children and their child care care-
givers: Proﬁles of relationships. Social Development, 4, 44–61.
Ispa, J. M., Fine, M. A., & Thornberg, K. R. (2002). Maternal
personality as a moderator of relations between difﬁcult infant
temperament and attachment security in low-income families.
Infant Mental Health Journal, 23, 130–144.
Jerald, J. (2000). Early Head Start. National Head Start Bulletin, 69,
1–3.
Johnson, D. J. (1988). Parental racial socialization strategies of
Black parents in three private schools. In D. T. Slaughter & D. J.
Johnson (Eds.). Visible now: Blacks in private schools (pp. 251–
267). Westport, CT: Greenwood.
Johnson, D. L., & Breckenridge, J. N. (1982). The Houston Parent-
child Development Center and the primary prevention of behav-
ior problems in young children. American Journal of Community
Psychology, 10, 305–316.
Johnson, D. L., & Walker, T. (1987). Primary prevention of behav-
ior problems in Mexican-American children. American Journal
of Community Psychology, 15, 375–385.
Johnson, D. L., & Walker, T. (1991). A follow-up evaluation of the
Houston Parent-Child Development Center: School perfor-
mance. Journal of Early Intervention, 15, 226–236.
Jordan, B. (1997). Gender, politics and infant mental health. The
Signal, 3, 12–13.
Kagan, J., Kearsley, R. B., & Zelazo, P. R. (1975). The emergence
of initial apprehension to unfamiliar peers. In M. Lewis &
L. Rosenblum (Eds.), Friendship and peer relations (pp. 187–
206). New York: Wiley.
Kamerman, S. B., & Kahn, A. J. (1995). Innovations in toddler day
care and family support services: An international overview.
Child Welfare, LXXIV, 1281–1300.
Keister, M. E. (1970). A demonstration project: Group care of
infants and toddlers. Final report submitted to the Children’s
Bureau, Ofﬁce of Child Development. Washington, DC: U.S.
Department of Health, Education, and Welfare.
Ketterlinus, R. D., Henderson, S. H., & Lamb, M. E. (1992). Les ef-
fets du type de garde de l‘emploi maternel et del’estime de soi
sur le comportement des enfants [The effect of type of child care
and maternal employment on children’s behavioral adjustment
and self-esteem]. In B. Pierrrehumbert (Ed.), L’accueil du jeune
enfant: Politiques et recherches dans les differents pays [Child
care in infancy: Policy and research issues in different countries]
(pp. 150–163). Paris: Les Editions Sociales.
Lally, R. J. (1973). The family development research program: A
program for prenatal, infant, and early childhood enrichment.
College for Human Development. Syracuse University,
Syracuse, NY.
Lamb, M. E. (1998). Nonparental child care: Context, quality, cor-
relates, and consequences. In I. E. Sigel & K. A. Renninger
(Eds.), Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 4. Child psychology
in practice (pp. 73–133). New York: Wiley.
Ledesma, S., Fitzgerald, H. E., & McGreal, C. E. (1980). Parent’s
perceptions of the infant’s day care experience. Infant Mental
Health Journal, 1, 42–55.
Lerner, J. V., & Castellino, D. R. (2002). Daycare and maternal
employment in the 21st century: Conﬂicts and consequences for
infant development. In H. E. Fitzgerald, K. Karraker, & T. Luster
(Eds.), Infant development: Ecological perspectives (pp. 143–
164). New York: Routledge.
Loukas, A., Fitzgerald, H. E., Zucker, R. A., & von Eye, A. (2001).
Parental alcoholism and co-occurring antisocial behavior:
Prospective relationships to externalizing behavior problems
in their young sons. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 29,
91–106.
Lucas, M.-A. (2001). The military child care connection. The Future
of Children, 11, 129–133.
Mackey, W. C. (1996). The American father: Biocultural and devel-
opmental aspects. New York: Plenum Press.
Mann, T. L. (2002). Training and technical assistance for Early
Head Start. Infant Mental Health Journal, 23, 36–47.
Martin, R. P. (1989). Activity level, distractibility and persistence:
Critical characteristics in early schooling. In G. A. Kohnstamm,
J. E. Bates, & M. K. Rothbart (Eds.), Temperament in childhood
(pp. 451–461). Chichester, UK: Wiley.
Maziade, M., Caron, C., Cote, R., Boutin, P., & Thivierge, J. (1990).
Extreme temperament and diagnosis. Archives of General Psy-
chiatry, 47, 447–484.
Meers, D. R., & Marans, A. E. (1968). Group care of infants in other
countries. In L. L. Dittmann (Ed.), Early child care (pp. 237–
282). New York: Atherton Press.

References
165
Miller, J. G. (1978). Living systems. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Morelli, G. A., & Verhoef, H. (1999). Who should raise my child? A
cultural approach to understanding nonmaternal child care deci-
sions. In L. Balter & C. S. Tamis-LeMonda (Eds.), Child psy-
chology: A handbook of contemporary issues (pp. 491–509).
New York: Taylor and Francis.
Mun, E-Y., Fitzgerald, H. E., Puttler, L. I., Zucker, R. A., & von Eye,
A. (2001). Temperamental characteristics as predictors of exter-
nalizing and internalizing child behavior problems in the con-
texts of high and low parental psychopathology. Infant Mental
Health Journal, 22, 393–415.
Munroe, R. H., & Munroe, R. L. (1971). Household density and
infant care in an East African society. Journal of Social Psychol-
ogy, 83, 3–13.
National Research Council and Institute of Medicine (2000). From
Neurons to neighborhoods: The science of early childhood de-
velopment (J. P. Shonkoff & D. A. Phillips, Eds.). Washington,
DC: Board on Children, Youth, and Families, Commission on
Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education.
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development Early
Child Care Research Network. (1994). Child care and child
development: The NICHD study of early child care. In S. L.
Friedman & H. C. Haywood (Eds.), Developmental follow-up:
Concepts, domains and methods (pp. 377–396). New York:
Academic Press.
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development Early
Child Care Research Network. (1996). Characteristics of infant
child care: Factors contributing to positive caregiving. Early
Childhood Research Quarterly, 11, 269–306.
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development Early
Child Care Research Network. (1997). Familial factors associ-
ated with the characteristics of nonmaternal care of infants. Jour-
nal of Marriage and the Family, 59, 389–408.
NICHD Early Child Care Research Network. (2000). Characteris-
tics and quality of child care for toddlers and preschoolers. Ap-
plied Developmental Science, 4, 116–135.
Nord, C. W., & Zill, N. (1996). Non-custodial parents’participation
in their children’s lives: Evidence from the Survey of Income and
Program Participation (2 vols.). Final report prepared for the
ofﬁce of the Assistant Secretary of Planning and Evaluation.
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services.
Olds, D. L. (1988). The prenatal/early infancy project. In R. H. Price
(Ed.), Fourteen ounces of prevention (pp. 9–23). Washington,
DC: American Psychological Association.
Olds, D. L., Henderson, C. R., Chamberlin, R., & Tatelbaum, R.
(1986a). Preventing a child abuse and neglect: A randomized
trial of nurse home visitation. Pediatrics, 78, 65–78.
Olds, D. L., Henderson, C. R., Tatelbaum, R., & Chamberlin, R.
(1986b). Improving the delivery of prenatal care and outcomes
of pregnancy: A randomized trial of nurse home visitation.
Pediatrics, 77, 16–28.
Olds, D. L., Henderson, C. R., Tatelbaum, R., & Chamberlin, R.
(1988). Improving the life-course development of socially disad-
vantaged mothers: A randomized trial of nurse home visitation.
American Journal of Public Health, 78, 1436–1444.
Oppenheim, D., Sagi, A., & Lamb, M. E. (1988). Infant-adult
attachments on the kibbutz and their relation to socioemotional
development four years later. Developmental Psychology, 24,
427–433.
Osofsky, J. D., & Fenichel, E. (Eds.). (1994). Caring for infants and
toddlers in violent environments. Arlington, VA: Zero to
Three/National Center for Clinical Infant Programs.
Parke, R. D., Power, T. G., & Gottman, J. M. (1979). Conceptual-
ization and quantifying inﬂuence patterns in the family triad. In
M. E. Lamb, S. J. Suomi, & G. R. Stephenson (Eds.), Social
interaction analysis: Methodological issues (pp. 231–253).
Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
Parke, R. D., & Sawin, D. B. (1976). The father’s role in infancy: A
reevaluation. The Family Coordinator, 25, 365–371.
Phillips, D. A. (1992). Child care and parental well-being: Bringing
quality of care into the picture. In A. Booth (Ed.), Child care in
the 1990s: Trends and consequences (pp. 172–180). Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Phillips, D. A., & Adams, G. (2001). Child care and our youngest
children. The Future of Children, 11, 35–52.
Phillips, D. A., Howes, C., & Whitebook, M. (1992). Child care as
an adult work environment. Journal of Social Issues, 47, 49–70.
Phillips, D. A., Lande, J., & Goldberg, M. (1990). The state of child
care regulations: A comparative analysis. Early Child-hood
Research Quarterly, 5, 151–179.
Piaget, J. (1952). The origins of intelligence in children. New York:
International Universities Press.
Pianta, P. C., & Nimetz, S. L. (1991). Relationship between children
and teachers: Associations with classroom and home behavior.
Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology, 12, 379–393.
Pleck, E. H., & Pleck, J. H. (1997). Fatherhood ideals in the United
Sates: Historical dimensions. In M. E. Lamb (Ed.). The role of
the father in child development (3rd ed., pp. 33–48). New York:
Wiley.
Power, T. G. (1981). Sex typing in infancy: The role of the father.
Infant Mental Health Journal, 2, 226–240.
Power, T. G., McGrath, M. P., Hughes, S. O., & Manire, S. H. (1994).
Compliance and self-assertion: Young children’s responses to
mothers versus fathers. Developmental Psychology, 30, 980–989.
Ragozin, A. Z. (1980). Attachment behavior of day-care children:
Naturalistic and laboratory observations. Child Development,
511, 409–415.
Raikes, H. (1993). Relationship duration in infant care: Time with a
high ability teacher and infant-teacher attachment. Early Child-
hood Research Quarterly, 8, 309–325.
Raikes, H., Kisker, E., Paulsell, D., & Love, J. (2000). Early Head
Start National Research and Evaluation project: Meeting the child
care needs of families. National Head Start Bulletin, 69, 7–10.

166
Diversity in Caregiving Contexts
Raikes, H. H., & Love, J. M. (2002). History and purpose of Early
Head Start. Infant Mental Health Journal, 23, 1–13.
Ramey, C. T. (2000). Michigan Family Impact Seminars: Child care
and education. Michigan State University, East Lansing: Insti-
tute for Children, Youth and Families.
Ramey, C. T., & Campbell, F. A. (1984). Preventive education for
high-risk children: Cognitive consequences of the Carolina
Abecedarian Project. American Journal of Mental Deﬁciency,
88, 515–523.
Ramey, C. T., & Campbell, F. A. (1987). The Carolina Abecedarian
Project: An educational experiment concerning human mal-
leability. In S. S. Gallagher & C. T. Ramey (Eds.), The mal-
leability of children (pp. 127–139): Baltimore, Brooks.
Ramey, C. T., & Ramey, S. L. (1998). Early intervention and early
experience. American Psychologist, 58, 109–120.
Rohner, R. P. (1998, October). Father love and child development:
History and current evidence. Current Directions in Psychologi-
cal Science, 157–161.
Robinson, H. B., & Robinson, N. M. (1971). Longitudinal devel-
opment of very young children in a comprehensive day care
program:The ﬁrst two years. Child Development, 42, 1673–1684.
Robinson, J. L., & Fitzgerald, H. E. (2002). Early Head Start:
Contemporary perspectives and promise. Infant Mental Health
Journal, 23, 250–257.
Rubenstein, J. L., & Howes, C. (1979). Caregiving and infant be-
havior in day care an in homes. Developmental Psychology, 15,
1–24.
Rubenstein, J. L., Pedersen, F. A., & Yarrow, L. J. (1977). What
happens when mothers are away: A comparison of mothers and
substitute caregivers. Developmental Psychology, 13, 529–530.
Rutter, M. (1976). Parent-child separation: Psychological effects on
the children. In A. M. Clarke & A. D. B. Clarke (Eds.), Early
experience: Myth and evidence (pp. 153–186). New York: Free
Press.
Rutter, M. (1979). Maternal deprivation, 1972–1978: New ﬁndings,
new concepts, new approaches. Child Development, 50, 283–305.
Rutter, M. (1995). Maternal deprivation. In M. H. Bornstein (Ed.),
Handbook of parenting: Vol. 4. Applied and practical parenting
(pp. 3–31). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Salmi, M. (1994). The parental leave and day care systems in
Finland. Helsinki, Finland: National Research and Development
Centre for Welfare and Health.
Sameroff, A. J. (2000). Ecological perspectives on developmental
risk. In J. D. Osofsky & H. E. Fitzgerald (Eds.), WAIMH hand-
book of infant mental health: Vol. 4. Infant mental health in
groups at high risk (pp. 1–34). New York: Wiley.
Scarr, S., & Eisenberg, M. (1993). Child care research: Issues,
perspectives, and results. Annual Review of Psychology, 44,
613–644.
Scarr, S., & McCartney, K. (1983). How people make their own
environments: A theory of genotype-environment effects. Child
Development, 54, 424–435.
Shears, J., Robinson, J. L., & Emde, R. N. (2002). Fathering rela-
tionships and their associations with juvenile delinquency. Infant
Mental Health Journal, 23, 79–87.
Singer, J. D., Fuller, B., Keiley, M. K., & Wolf, A. (1998). Early
child-care selection: variation by geographic location, maternal
characteristics, and family structure. Developmental Psychology,
34, 1129–1144.
Skeels, H. M. (1936). Mental development of children in foster
homes. Journal of Genetic Psychology, 49, 91–106.
Smith, K. (2000). Who’s minding the kids? Child care arrangements:
Fall 1995 (Current Population Reports, P 70-70). Washington,
DC: U.S. Census Bureau.
Spitz, R. (1965). The ﬁrst year of life. New York: International
Universities Press.
Spitz, R. & Wolf, K. M. (1946). Anaclitic depression: An inquiry
into the genesis of psychiatric conditions in early childhood:
Vol. 2. The psychoanalytic study of the child (pp. 313–342).
New York: International Universities Press.
Strelau, J. (1998). Temperament: A psychological perspective. New
York: Plenum Press.
Summers, J. A., Raikes, H., Butler, J., Spicer, P., Pan, B., Shaw, S.,
Langager, M., McAllister, C., & Johnson, M. K. (1999). Low-
income fathers’ and mother’s perceptions of the father role: A
qualitative study in four Early Head Start communities. Infant
Mental Health Journal, 20, 291–304.
Suwalsky, J. T. D., Klein, R. P., Zaslow, M. J., Rabinovich, B. A., &
Gist, N. F. (1987). Dimensions of naturally occurring mother-
infant separations during the ﬁrst year of life. Infant Mental
Health Journal, 8, 3–18.
Tableman, B. (2001). Effective home visiting for very young chil-
dren (Best Practice Brief No. 17). East Lansing: Michigan State
University, University Outreach Partnerships.
Thelen, E., & Smith, L. B. (1994). A dynamic systems approach to the
development of cognition and action. Cambridge, MA: MITPress.
Thomas, A., & Chess, S. (1977). Temperament and development.
New York: Brunner/Mazel.
Thomas, A., & Chess, S. (1986). The New York Longitudinal Study:
from infancy to early adult life. In R. Plomin & J. Dunn (Eds.),
The study of temperament: Changes, continuities, and chal-
lenges (pp. 39–52). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Thomas, A., Chess, S., & Birch, H. G. (1968). Temperament and
behavior disorders in children. New York: New York University
Press.
Tronick, E. Z, Winn, S., & Morelli, G. A. (1985). Multiple caretak-
ing in the context of human evolution: Why don’t the Efe know
the Western prescription for child care. In M. Reite & T. Field
(Eds.), Psychobiology of attachment (pp. 293–322). New York:
Academic Press.
van Ijzendoorn, M. H., & De Wolff M. (1997). In search of the
absent father: Meta-analysis of infant-father attachment. A
rejoinder to our discussants. Child Development, 68, 604–609.

References
167
Wagner, M. G., & Wagner, M. M. (1971). Day care programs in
Denmark and Czechoslovakia. In E. H. Grotberg (Ed.), Day
care: Resources for decisions (pp. 28–37). Washington DC:
United States Public Health Service, Ofﬁce of Economic Oppor-
tunity.
Werner, E. E. (1988). A cross-cultural perspective on infancy. Jour-
nal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 19, 96–113.
Wilson, D. B., & Chipaungu, S. S. (Eds.). (1996) Kinship care.
Child Welfare, LSSV, 387–662.
Windle, M. (1991). The difﬁcult temperament in adolescence:
Associations with substance use, family support, and problem
behaviors. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 47, 310–315.
Wong, M. M., Zucker, R. A., Puttler, L. I., & Fitzgerald, H. E.
(1999). Heterogeneity of risk aggregation for alcohol problems
between early and middle childhood. Development and Psy-
chopathology, 11, 727–744.
Young, K. R., Marsland, K. W., & Zigler, E. (1997). The regulatory
status of center-based infant and toddler child care. American
Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 67, 535–544.
Yoshikawa, H. (1994). Prevention as cumulative protection: Effects
of early family support and education on chronic delinquency
and its risks. Psychological Bulletin, 115, 28–54.
Yoshikawa, H. (1995). Long term effects of early childhood
programs on social outcomes and delinquency. The Future of
Children, 5, 51–75.
Yogman, M. W. (1982). Development of the father-infant relation-
ship. In H. E. Fitzgerald, B. M. Lester, & M. W. Yogman (Eds.),
Theory and research in behavioral pediatrics (pp. 221–279).
New York: Garland Press.
Zucker, R. A., Fitzgerald, H. E., Reﬁor, S. K., Puttler, L. I., Pallas,
D. M., & Ellis, D. A. (2000). The clinical and social ecology of
children of alcoholics: Description of a study and implications
for a differentiated social policy. In H. E. Fitzgerald, B. M. Lester,
& B. S. Zuckerman (Eds.), Children of addiction: Research,
health and policy issues (pp. 109–141). New York: Garland Press.
Zukow-Goldring, P. (1995). Sibling caregiving. In. M. H. Bornstein
(Ed.), Handbook of parenting: Vol. 3. Status and social condi-
tions of parenting (pp. 177–208). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.


PART THREE
CHILDHOOD


CHAPTER 7
Language Development in Childhood
ERIKA HOFF
171
The Question to Which Research on Language
Development Is Addressed
172
Theoretical Approaches to Discovering How
Language Is Acquired
172
LANGUAGE DEVELOPMENT AS A
BIOLOGICAL PROCESS
173
The Species Universality and Species Speciﬁcity
of Language
173
The Invariance and Robustness of
Language Development
174
The Heritability of Language
175
The Neurological Underpinnings of Language and
Language Development
175
The Critical Period Hypothesis
176
Language as an Evolved Adaptation
177
Summary and Conclusions
177
LANGUAGE DEVELOPMENT AS A
LINGUISTIC PROCESS
178
Universal Grammar
178
Innate Lexical Constraints
180
Summary and Conclusions
181
LANGUAGE DEVELOPMENT AS A SOCIAL PROCESS
181
A Social-Pragmatic Account of 
Grammatical Development
182
Social-Pragmatic Approach to Lexical Development
183
Acquiring the Social Uses of Language
184
Summary and Conclusions
184
LANGUAGE DEVELOPMENT AS 
DOMAIN-GENERAL LEARNING
185
The Nature of Infants’ Learning Mechanisms
185
Connectionism as a Domain-General Challenge
to Nativism
186
A Problem-Solving Model of 
Phonological Development
186
Domain-General Processes in 
Morphosyntactic Development
187
Domain-General Processes in Lexical Development
187
Summary and Conclusions
188
CONCLUSION
189
REFERENCES
189
Somehow in the span of just a few years, newborn infants
who neither speak nor understand any language become
young children who comment, question, and express their
ideas in the language of their community. The transition
from the stage of the prelinguistic infant to the linguistically
competent 4-year-old follows a predictable developmental
course. First, newborns’ cries give way to coos and babbles.
Then, infants who coo and babble start to show signs of
comprehension such as turning when they hear their name.
Infants then become toddlers who say bye-bye and all gone
and start to label the people and objects in their environment.
As their vocabularies continue to grow, children start to
combine words. Children’s ﬁrst word combinations, such as
all gone juice and read me, are short and lack parts found in
adults’ sentences. Gradually, children’s immature sentences
are replaced by longer and more adult-like sentences. As
children master language, they also become masters at using
language to serve their needs. One-year-olds, who can only
point and fuss to request something, become 2-year-olds who
say please; later they become 4-year-olds capable of the lin-
guistic and communicative sophistication of the child who
excused himself from a boring experiment by saying, “My
mother says I have to go home now” (Keller-Cohen, January
1978, personal communication).
This course that language development follows is the re-
sult of concurrent processes of development in the several
domains that together constitute adult knowledge of lan-
guage. In acquiring language, children master a system for
combining sounds into units of meaning (phonology) and a
system for combining units of meaning into well-formed
The author is grateful to the editors and to Iris Berent for comments
on earlier versions of this chapter.

172
Language Development in Childhood
words and sentences (morphology and syntax). Together
these systems constitute the grammar of language. In addi-
tion to grammar, a speaker-hearer of a language has acquired
a lexicon—a repository of words with their meanings and
grammatical categories. Normally, speaker-hearers of a lan-
guage use that language to communicate. Thus, adult-like
language competence includes pragmatic or communicative
competence as well as knowledge of a grammar and lexicon.
The goal of this chapter is to describe the current state of the
scientiﬁc effort to explain how these changes take place and
how children end up knowing a language. The content of this
chapter is not a description of language development; those
are readily available elsewhere (e.g., Hoff, 2001). Rather, this
chapter provides a description of the ﬁeld that takes language
development as its topic of study.
This description focuses on research that seeks to describe
the nature of the mental capacity that underlies the human
ability to acquire language. The fact that language acquisition
occurs in a range of social and cultural environments is rele-
vant to constructing such a description, and research aimed at
identifying the necessary social conditions for language ac-
quisition to occur is reviewed. A more complete considera-
tion of how culture inﬂuences language development falls
under the heading of language socialization, that is, the
process by which children come to use language in the man-
ner of their social or cultural group. That topic is touched on
only brieﬂy in this chapter; in-depth treatments can be found
in Ochs and Schieffelin (1979), Schieffelin and Ochs (1986),
and Slobin, Gerhardt, Kyratzis, and Guo (1996).
The Question to Which Research on Language
Development Is Addressed
The study of language development is marked by serious dis-
agreement with respect to both what the correct explanation
of language development will look like and how best to dis-
cover that explanation. There is, however, an abstract level at
which all researchers in the ﬁeld are trying to answer the
same question: What is the nature of the human capacity to
acquire language? This question can be conceptualized in the
following manner: The human capacity for language is a de-
vice residing in the human brain that takes as its input certain
information from the environment and produces as its output
the ability to speak and understand a language. Everything
that is part of adults’ knowledge of language (i.e., the output
of the device) must either be in the input, be in the internal
device, or somehow result from the way the device operates
on the input it receives (see Figure 7.1).
Noam Chomsky (1965) termed this capacity the Language
Acquisition Device (LAD), and this particular way of posing
the question still tends to be made explicit only by those tak-
ing a generative grammar approach to the study of language
acquisition. However, this conceptualization makes clear two
criteria that must apply to all candidate explanations of how
children learn to talk. To wit, any proposed account of the
language acquisition process must be consistent with two sets
of facts: (a) the input that children receive and (b) the compe-
tence that they acquire. It is obvious that language acquisition
makes use of input because children quite reliably acquire the
particular language to which they are exposed. Yet it is not at
all clear—and a matter of great dispute—whether input pro-
vides sufﬁcient information to explain how children end up
knowing what all adult speakers know. It is also clear that
what children acquire is knowledge of a productive system
because adults can and do understand and produce sentences
that they have never heard before. Just how best to character-
ize that system is also a topic of dispute. As we review the
current work in the study of language development, we will
see the sometimes stark differences in the views of input and
ultimate competence that guide research in this area. These
differing views crucially affect the nature of the debate re-
garding how language is acquired because the problem of ex-
plaining acquisition is different depending on the nature of
the input and the nature of what is acquired.
Theoretical Approaches to Discovering How
Language Is Acquired
Current research on language development can be usefully
organized as being motivated by four different premises re-
garding the nature of the LAD and the language development
it produces. One such premise is that the human capacity for
language is best understood as a biological phenomenon and
language development as a biological process. This leads to
research investigating the degree to which language and
language development share the hallmark features of other
biological processes, such as universality and heritability, and
to the study of the anatomical structures and physiological
processes that underlie language development. A second
premise, which guides other research in the ﬁeld, is that lan-
guage acquisition is best understood and studied as a linguistic
Figure 7.1
A model for studying the nature of the human capacity to
acquire language.

Language Development as a Biological Process
173
phenomenon. On this view, the LAD is essentially a linguistic
device. This approach starts with a description of the linguis-
tic competence of adults and seeks an account of the acquisi-
tion process that is adequate to explain how that end point is
reached. This approach is often referred to as the learnability
approach because its focus is on explaining how it is that lan-
guage is learnable. The biological and linguistic approaches
share the view that language is innate. For the biological
approach, innateness is part of the package—something that is
part of human biology is, by deﬁnition, innate. For the linguis-
tic approach, innateness is a quickly reached conclusion
from the following line of reasoning: The complex, abstract
system that is adult linguistic competence simply could not be
arrived at by any general learning mechanism operating over
the input that children receive. The solution to this problem,
known as the logical problem of language acquisition (C. L.
Baker & McCarthy, 1981), is to propose that substantial
language-speciﬁc knowledge and language-speciﬁc learning
mechanisms are part of the equipment that children bring to
the language-learning task. The charge for research is to de-
scribe that innate knowledge (Crain, 1991).
There are alternative approaches that resist attributing
innate linguistic knowledge to the child and that seek a de-
scription of how children could learn language from experi-
ence using learning mechanisms that are not speciﬁc to
language. The chasm between the learnability approach and
the developmental approach is such that even labeling the
ﬁeld carries implications of allegiance to one view or the
other. The term “language acquistion” is most associated
with the learnability approach; the terms “language develop-
ment” and “child language” are most associated with the de-
velopmental approach. Research within this developmental
approach, as it is termed, begins not with the end point of de-
velopment, but rather with the starting point—the child’s
demonstrated competencies. Such work seeks to explain not
the fact that language is acquired but the developmental
course that language learning follows. Within the develop-
mental approach, two different lines of argument and re-
search exist. One starts from the premise that language is
essentially a social phenomenon and that language develop-
ment is a social process. Such research focuses on social as-
pects of interaction as the experience relevant to language
acquisition and on the social-cognitive abilities of the child as
the relevant learning capacities. The other starts from the
premise that language acquisition is essentially an asocial
learning problem that children solve in the same way they
solve other learning problems. Research in this vein seeks an
account of how language might be learned by the child’s ap-
plication of domain-general cognitive processes to informa-
tion available in input.
The goal of this chapter is to present each of these four
approaches: the biological, the linguistic, the social, and the
domain-general cognitive. None of these presentations is
comprehensive. Rather, for each approach the aim is to illus-
trate the nature of the research and theoretical argument it
generates and to evaluate its contribution to explaining how
children learn to talk.
LANGUAGE DEVELOPMENT AS 
A BIOLOGICAL PROCESS
If we begin with the premise that the LAD is a biological entity
and its operation a biological process, we are led to investigate
the degree to which language acquisition shares hallmark
features of other biological processes and to investigate how
the anatomical structures and physiological processes that
accomplish language acquisition actually do their work. The
hallmark features of biologically based characteristics include
species universality and species speciﬁcity, an invariant
course of development that is robust over varying environ-
mental circumstances, a critical period for development, heri-
tability, and an adaptive function that explains its evolution as
a characteristic of the species. To the extent that human lan-
guage and language acquisition meet these criteria, language
and the capacity for language acquisition would seem to be
part of human biology. That is to say, language would appear
to be innate.
The Species Universality and Species Speciﬁcity
of Language
All humans have language, and no other species has a com-
munication system that shares all the features of human lan-
guage. In addition, in the absence of a language to learn,
humans will create one. For example, it has been widely ob-
served that deaf children in hearing families invent systems
of signs with which to communicate. These systems have the
equivalent of syntax and morphology and a lexicon in which
different words belong to different grammatical categories,
and the system as a whole is used for the same sort of  pur-
poses as are established languages, thus demonstrating the
basic features of all human languages. Because children in-
vented rather than learned these home sign systems, it is ar-
gued that these features reﬂect components of language that
are built into the human mind (Goldin-Meadow, 1997).
Other evidence similarly suggests that the necessary
and sufﬁcient ingredients for language creation are the op-
portunity for communication with others and a human
mind—particularly a child’s mind. Although socially isolated

174
Language Development in Childhood
children do not invent languages (Shatz, 1994), whenever
people come together, language emerges. Pidgins are lan-
guages that emerge when circumstance puts together people
who share no common language. Pidgins tend to be morpho-
logically simple languages, lacking markers of subject-verb
agreement, tense, and so on. With time, and with the birth of
children who acquire these pidgins as their native language,
the pidgins evolve into creoles, which have more elaborate
grammatical morphology. It has been argued—although not
universally accepted (e.g., Jourdan, 1991)—that children play
a crucial role in the process of creolization and that the struc-
tural similarities among creole languages with independent
origins suggest the work of the human capacity that is nor-
mally put to language acquisition, but which in the absence of
a full-blown language to learn, reveals itself as the human ca-
pacity for language creation (Bickerton, 1984, 1988).
More recent evidence for the human capacity—and partic-
ularly the human child’s capacity—to create language comes
from the study of Nicaraguan Sign Language (NSL). This
language has emerged in just the last 25 years, following the
opening of the ﬁrst public schools for the deaf in Nicaragua
in 1978. When they entered the school, the deaf children typ-
ically had only their own idiosyncratic home sign systems
and no shared language, but in the school setting a new sign
language began to develop. Studies of changes in this lan-
guage over time reveal that the language has moved from a
structurally simpler language to a structurally more complex
language (Senghas, 1995, 2000). It also appears that the dif-
ferences in structural complexity show primarily in the sign-
ing of those who begin to learn the language at an early age.
For example, the early form of NSL contained few verb in-
ﬂections; the more recent form has such devices for marking
subject-verb agreement. It is particularly those individuals
who were exposed to the language at an early age that pro-
duce the verb inﬂections that distinguish the newer from the
older form. Older learners of the newer form of the language
do not master the verb inﬂections. Such results suggest that
the changes that have occurred in NSL over time depend on
young children acquiring the language. In sum, not only is
language universal in the species, but the nature of the human
mind ensures that wherever there are humans, there will be
language. Children seem to play a unique role in creating
languages with the complex grammatical systems that char-
acterize fully developed languages. We return to this poten-
tially special role of children when we discuss the critical
period hypothesis.
The other side of the species-universality coin is species
speciﬁcity. The literature on species speciﬁcity is large and
messy, and there is not the space to adequately review it here.
Sufﬁce it to say that neither examination of the naturally oc-
curring communicative systems of other species nor the sev-
eral attempts to teach a language to another species have
found human-like language capacities outside the human
mind. The criterion on which most other systems and the
most nearly successful training efforts clearly fail is syntax
(Kako, 1999; Tomasello, 1994). It has also been suggested
that other animals, speciﬁcally chimpanzees, lack the social
interest in other members of their species that a human-like
communication system requires for both invention and
acquisition (Premack, 1986; Tomasello, Call, Nagell, Olguin,
& Carpenter, 1994).
The Invariance and Robustness of
Language Development
All normal children in anything remotely like a normal envi-
ronment learn to talk. Furthermore, the course of language
development is, in broad outline, constant across varying en-
vironments. These basic facts suggest to many a maturational
process, the course and timing of which is determined by the
unfolding of a genetic blueprint (Gilger, 1996; Gleitman,
1981). On the other hand, it could be that the universal acqui-
sition of language is the result of universal features of human
environments. A review of the literatures that describe the
varied social environments in which children learn to talk
suggests that all environments provide two sources of sup-
port for language acquisition: They show children that lan-
guage is used to communicate with other people, and they
deliver to children, through speech, data that the children use
to ﬁgure out the underlying linguistic system (Lieven, 1994).
Furthermore, there are differences in the rate and course of
language development associated with differences in how
children’s environments provide these two sources of support
and in how much speech children hear. For example, in some
environments children are talked to directly from birth; in
others children observe and overhear conversations among
others but are not engaged participants from an early age.
This difference has consequences for language development.
Children who are not directly talked to appear particularly
precocious in the development of skills for joining the ongo-
ing conversations of others (Bernicot & Roux, 1998; Dunn &
Shatz, 1989; Hoff-Ginsberg, 1998). Children whose data is in
the form of speech among others appear to begin talking by
producing rote-learned chunks of speech, and they only later
analyze these chunks into their structural and lexical compo-
nents. Children who hear more speech addressed directly to
them rely less on memorized but unanalyzed wholes (Lieven,
1994). These are effects on the style or course of language de-
velopment. There are also effects on rate. Although it appears
to matter more for lexical development than for grammatical
development, children who hear more data develop language
more rapidly than do children exposed to fewer data (Hart &

Language Development as a Biological Process
175
Risley, 1995; Hoff & Naigles, 2002; Huttenlocher, Haight,
Bryk, Seltzer, & Lyons, 1991). These demonstrated effects
of the nature and amount of environmental support for
language acquisition make it clear that the process of lan-
guage acquisition is not solely a maturational process and,
therefore, that linguistic innateness by itself is not sufﬁcient
as an explanation.
The Heritability of Language
Among children who acquire language normally, there are in-
dividual differences in the rate of language acquisition, and
some children acquire language quite slowly and with difﬁ-
culty. Although some of these individual differences can be
attributed to differences in experience, there is also evidence
that both normal individual differences and some cases of
language impairment have a genetic basis. Twin studies that
have looked at children past the age of 3 years using stan-
dardized tests of children’s verbal IQ, vocabulary, and read-
ing ability ﬁnd that about 50% of the variance among children
on these measures can be attributed to genetics (Stromswold,
2001). Receptive and expressive language skills up to
24 months of age show lower heritability—between 1% and
38% of the variance, depending on the measure (Reznick,
Corley, & Robinson, 1997). Ganger, Pinker, Chawla, and
Baker (2002) used the twin study method to assess the
heritability of individual differences in the timing of the
achievement of two milestones of language development:
the achievement of a 25-word productive vocabulary and the
production of ﬁrst word combinations. They found, as did
earlier studies, that the heritability of vocabulary was low. In
this study, 11% of the variance was attributable to genetics.
In stark contrast, they found that the timing of syntactic de-
velopment was highly heritable—82% of the variance was
attributable to genetics. A larger scale twin study also found
that the heritability of grammatical development was higher
than the heritability of lexical development, although that
study found lower heritability of grammatical development
(39%) and higher heritability of lexical development (25%;
Dale, Dionne, Eley, & Plomin, 2000).
Evidence of environmental effects on language de-
velopment provides converging evidence for the greater
heritability of grammatical than of lexical development.
Hoff-Ginsberg (1998) found grammar to be minimally sus-
ceptible to environmental inﬂuence and vocabulary develop-
ment more so. The method of studying the inﬂuence of the
environment was, in this case, to investigate the effects of
family socioeconomic status (SES) and birth order on lan-
guage development. It is well established that children in
high-SES families hear more speech than do children in
middle-SES families (Hoff, Laursen, & Tardif, 2002), and it
is reasonable to assume that ﬁrstborn children have more op-
portunity for one-to-one speech than later born children.
Thus, these two variables serve as proxies for language expe-
rience. Vocabulary development was strongly affected by
both birth order and family SES, with ﬁrstborn children and
children from high-SES families showing larger vocabu-
laries; grammatical development was affected only by birth
order, again with ﬁrstborns showing more advanced language
(Hoff-Ginsberg, 1998). It appears that grammatical develop-
ment, more than lexical development, may be the result of the
unfolding of a genetic blueprint; vocabulary development is
more paced by environmental factors.
Evidence that impairment of the normal ability to ac-
quire language has a genetic basis includes ﬁndings that lan-
guage impairment runs in families, that monozygotic twins
are more likely to be concordant for language disorders than
are dizygotic twins, and that adopted children with language-
impaired biological relatives are more likely to be language
impaired than are adopted children with no language impair-
ment among their biological relatives (Eley et al., 1999;
Stromswold, 1998). In one well-studied family, 16 out of 30
family members were seriously language impaired, and the
inheritance patterns suggest that a single dominant gene is
responsible (Gopnik & Crago, 1991).
In sum, although it is clear that differences in the environ-
ments that children experience contribute to the observed in-
dividual differences in language development, work on the
genetics of language development makes a strong case for a
genetic contribution as well—both within the normal range
of variation and, even more so, in cases of atypical develop-
ment. Syntax seems to ﬁt the biological model of language
better than other aspects of language development do.
Although this work establishes that there is something genet-
ically based that determines the pace of syntactic develop-
ment, it does not clearly reveal what that something is—nor
how domain speciﬁc it is. We know the LAD is a biological
entity, but we still do not know how it works.
The Neurological Underpinnings of Language 
and Language Development
In making the argument that language is innate, Chomsky has
referred to a language organ in the brain. If there is such a
thing, it would seem to be located in the left cerebral hemi-
sphere. It has been known since the nineteenth century that
damage to the left side of the brain disturbs language func-
tions, whereas damage to the right side typically does not.
This is true even for deaf signers. Although the right hemi-
sphere is primarily responsible for processing visual-spatial
information, if that information is linguistic information, it is
handled predominantly by the left hemisphere. A wealth of

176
Language Development in Childhood
other sources of data also suggests that language is predomi-
nantly a left-hemisphere function. Patients with a split corpus
callosum can label objects put in their right hand or presented
to their right visual ﬁeld, but they cannot label objects in their
left hand or left visual ﬁeld (e.g., Gazzaniga, 1983). Dichotic
listening tests with normal, intact adults show a consistent
right-ear advantage for speech stimuli (Springer & Deutsch,
1981). Research that uses scalp electrodes to measure event-
related potentials or brain imaging techniques to measure
cortical activity also has found greater left-hemisphere activ-
ity associated with language processing (e.g., Mazziotta &
Metter, 1988). There are, however, some problems with
drawing the conclusion that the language organ resides in
the left cerebral hemisphere. Other parts of the brain also
contribute to language processing. Patients with right-
hemisphere damage have difﬁculty understanding jokes, sar-
casm, ﬁgurative language, and indirect requests (Weylman,
Brownell, & Gardner, 1988). They have difﬁculty under-
standing linguistic units that have more than one meaning,
and they fail to use broad contextual information in the inter-
pretation of connected discourse (Chiarello, 1991).
The literature provides a couple of suggestions for de-
scribing the contributions of the right and left hemispheres to
language. Studies of event-related potentials in intact patients
show that the right hemisphere is activated by semantic pro-
cessing, whereas the left is activated primarily by syntax
processing (Neville, Nicol, Barss, Forster, & Garrett, 1991).
Studies of the language abilities of patients who have had
their left hemispheres entirely removed (because of severe
pathology) similarly suggest that the right hemisphere can
support many language functions but that the left hemisphere
is necessary for normal syntax. Together, the ﬁndings suggest
that for adults the right hemisphere is involved in semantics
and pragmatics but that syntax is the province of the left
hemisphere. The story becomes a little more complicated if
we look at children. The right hemisphere seems to be more
important for language acquisition than for language process-
ing once language is acquired. If brain damage is suffered in
infancy, prior to language acquisition, right-hemisphere dam-
age is more detrimental to future language acquisition than
is left-hemisphere damage (Stiles, Bates, Thal, Trauner, &
Reilly, 1998). Another difﬁculty with concluding that the
left hemisphere is the language organ is that although the left
hemisphere is primarily responsible for language, it is not
necessarily dedicated speciﬁcally to language. It has been
suggested that the left hemisphere is specialized for execut-
ing well-practiced routines (see Mills, Coffey-Corina, &
Neville, 1997). The ﬁnding that experienced musicians show
a right-ear (i.e., left hemisphere) advantage for music stimuli,
whereas naive listeners show a left-ear (i.e., right hemi-
sphere) advantage for music stimuli (Bever & Chiarello,
1974) is consistent with this hypothesis. There is additional
evidence that the relation between brain localization and
language has to do with practice in the ﬁndings from children
and adults that the neural representation of a bilingual’s two
languages differ as a function of language proﬁciency (Con-
boy & Mills, 2001; Perani et al., 1998).
The Critical Period Hypothesis
Many examples of species-speciﬁc, biologically based
learnings have the characteristic that the learning must occur
during a biologically determined window if the learning is to
be successful. Thus, regarding language development as a
biological phenomenon suggests the hypothesis that there is
a critical period for language acquisition. Seemingly, sup-
portive evidence is obvious and widely available. When
families immigrate to a new language community, it is com-
monly and reliably observed that the young children in the
family acquire the new language well and eventually are in-
distinguishable from native speakers. Older children and
adults acquire the language less well, and they typically
never achieve native-like proﬁciency. Young children re-
cover from aphasia following brain damage more rapidly
and more nearly completely than do older children and
adults. There is also the case of “Genie,” a child who was
kept isolated and thus deprived of language until the age of
13 (Curtiss, 1977). Despite both exposure and training after
her discovery, Genie never achieved normal language. Fi-
nally, there appear to be differences in how and where the
brain processes language depending on the age at which the
language is acquired (Kim, Relkin, Lee, & Hirsch, 1997;
Weber-Fox & Neville, 1996), although differences in proﬁ-
ciency may be an alternative explanation. If such phenom-
ena have a biological explanation, it should be found in
some biological event. Puberty is often proposed as that
event: The hypothesis is that the onset of puberty closes the
window on the period during which the brain is best able to
acquire language.
Not all the data ﬁt that hypothesis. First, the advantage of
being young is seen only in the level of ultimate language
achievement. Older learners actually make more rapid
progress than do younger learners during the ﬁrst year in a
new language community—provided that the opportunities
are roughly equal (Snow & Hoefnagel-Hohle, 1978). Second,
the advantage of younger second-language learners over
older second-language learners in ultimately achieving
native-like competence does not abruptly end at puberty but
continues past age 20 (Birdsong, 1999). Finally, that advan-
tage may not be so much a function of differences between

Language Development as a Biological Process
177
younger and older brains as much as it is a function of differ-
ences between the experiences of younger and older arrivals
in the new language community. Children attend school in
the new language, whereas adults must do work that their
limited language skills allow, thus limiting their exposure to
the new language. Additionally, older children and adults
have stronger ﬁrst-language skills and are more likely to con-
tinue to read material in their ﬁrst language than are young
children. A study of Chinese immigrants to New York City
found that younger children were more exposed to English
than were older children during their ﬁrst year in the United
States, and by the end of the year Chinese was no longer pre-
ferred over and dominant relative to English for those
younger children. The older children, in contrast, were ex-
posed to English less, and at the end of their ﬁrst year their
preferred and dominant language was still Chinese (Jia &
Aaronson, 1999). This provides an alternative explanation
for why the younger children’s English proﬁciency was
greater than that of the older children.
Although the data on second-language acquisition seem
to provide less conclusive support for the critical period
hypothesis on close examination than they do at ﬁrst blush,
other evidence remains. Recovery from aphasia is better at
younger ages, and children have made unique contributions
to the process of grammatical expansion in NSL. As long as
these data hold, it does seem to be the case that maturation
affects the way the brain acquires language. However, the
strongest sort of critical period hypothesis—that the window
of opportunity for language acquisition is shut by a single bio-
logical event—is not supported. This is not necessarily telling
evidence against the claim that language is biologically based.
First, puberty is not a single, well-deﬁned biological event.
Second, there is evidence that even in the animal world, biol-
ogy alone does not determine when biologically prepared
learning can occur. In songbirds, for example, access to social
interaction, as opposed to mere exposure to mature song, ex-
tends the sensitive period for song learning (Nelson, 1997).
Language as an Evolved Adaptation
Consonant with the hypothesis that the capacity for language
is domain speciﬁc and modular, it has been proposed that this
capacity was selected for in the course of human evolution to
serve its particular function. According to this view, humans
have language because having language gave some of our
hominid ancestors an advantage in survival and reproduction
over those who did not have language (Bloom, 1998;
Pinker & Bloom, 1990). This view puts language in the same
category as upright posture and bipedal locomotion as evolu-
tionary achievements writ into the human DNA. Further
arguments have been made for why language would have
been useful and why language evolved to have the particular
structure that it does. With respect to the value of language, it
has been argued that language is useful to humans because of
humans’ unique social characteristics. Language is useful
only to a species whose members are interested in communi-
cating with each other, and a system as complex as human lan-
guage is more useful than calls and hoots only if the
interacting members of the species are interested in exchanges
of information more complex than food locations and preda-
tor warnings. With respect to why language has its particular
structure, it has been argued that this level of complexity is
necessary for exchanges of the sort of information that is im-
portant for human survival. For example, a mechanism for
embedding one clause in another is necessary to communicate
the distinction between a region that has animals you can eat
and a region that has animals that can eat you (Pinker, 1994).
There are also arguments for how the anatomical changes that
accompanied upright posture, namely the lowering of the lar-
ynx in the throat, gave rise to some of the structural features of
human language (Carstairs-McCarthy, 1999).
There is no contrary argument that the human capacity for
language is not part of human nature, acquired in the course
of human evolution. Rather, the argument has to do with
domain speciﬁcity. One contrary argument is that language
evolved as a result of quantitative changes in several preex-
isting mental abilities (Bates, Thal, & Marchman, 1991;
Lieberman, 1975). That is, the human capacity for language
is a “new machine built out of old parts” (Bates et al., 1991,
p. 35). Another contrary argument is that language is a by-
product of general increases in the computational power of
the brain—language is just one more thing that humans do
with their great intelligence (Chomsky, 1982; Gould &
Lewontin, 1979).
Summary and Conclusions
If we ask to what degree language development demonstrates
hallmark features of a biological process, we are led to con-
clude that language is an intrinsic part of human nature. Just
what makes language so, however, is unclear. Language is
certainly universal in the species and is species speciﬁc, but
the rate and course of language acquisition are paced and
shaped to a signiﬁcant degree by environmental inﬂuence.
Among the several components of language, grammar seems
most robust—the rate of development is most heritable, and
environmental effects are correspondingly weaker. Vocabu-
lary development appears to be very inﬂuenced by access to
input. Additional support for the notion that grammar is
what is really biologically based about language comes from

178
Language Development in Childhood
neurolinguistic research. When we look for a dedicated lan-
guage organ, we ﬁnd the left hemisphere carrying out the
grammatical functions of language. Meaning and use appear
to be less isolable functions. Most of the data that address the
critical period hypothesis are inconclusive. If there is a criti-
cal period, its boundaries are fuzzy and the mechanism un-
clear. Yet there does seem to be an advantage to having a left
hemisphere available to take on language functions, and the
availability of the left hemisphere may decline with age.
Furthermore, even accepting the conclusion that grammar is
a biologically based human capacity that resides in the left
cerebral hemisphere does not quite answer the question about
the nature of that capacity. It is possible that the capacity is
dedicated speciﬁcally to language. The data also ﬁt an ac-
count in which the left hemisphere is particularly good at the
kind of processing that grammar requires. Finally, the biolog-
ically based characteristics of humans on which the human
capacity for language depends seem also to include the social
nature of humans—although social inﬂuences are not typi-
cally included in biological models. Language is created or
acquired only when there is the opportunity for interaction
with other humans. This is not to say that language is entirely
a social process—that issue will be taken up in later
sections—but that the social nature of humans is a necessary
ingredient.
LANGUAGE DEVELOPMENT AS A
LINGUISTIC PROCESS
If one starts from the premises that (a) all adults have knowl-
edge of a complex, abstract, formal system that is what
allows them to be competent speaker-hearers of a language
and that (b) the information available in input and the learn-
ing mechanisms available to children are inadequate for
achieving that system from an initial state of no linguistic
knowledge, one is led to the inescapable conclusion that
linguistic knowledge must be innate. This is basically the
worldview of the generative grammar approach to language
acquisition.
The task for research, then, is to describe just what is in-
nate. This enterprise is led by linguistic analysis of the end
state of language acquisition. The resultant description of lin-
guistic knowledge, that is, Universal Grammar (UG), is then
attributed wholesale to the child. Two explanatory problems
remain, however. One is that children acquire different lan-
guages, depending on the language they hear, and accommo-
dating that fact requires some mechanism that allows
children to acquire the particular language to which they are
exposed. The other is that young children do not demonstrate
the competence that they are posited to possess, requiring
some explanation for apparent developmental change.
Universal Grammar
To handle the ﬁrst problem, UG allows options. It consists of
a set of principles that are true for all languages and a set of
parameters on which languages vary. For example, in some
languages, such as English, sentence subjects must be ex-
pressed, whereas in other languages, such as Spanish, they
need not be. In Spanish, one can say the equivalent of Goes to
school whereas in English it would be necessary to say He
goes to school. Languages that allow pro-drop, as it is called,
also allow sentences that are the equivalent of Raining
whereas in English one would need to say It’s raining. Be-
cause some languages allow pro-drop and others do not, this
is a parameter in UG that children must set on the basis of
their language experience. The argument is that children
learning English must hear sentences such as It’s raining, and
then use that input to set the pro-drop parameter. Less work
has been done in applying a universal phonological theory to
acquisition, but the structure of the problem is the same:
There exists a set of universal rules (in the standard theory)
or constraints (in the more recent optimality theory; see
Bernhardt & Stemberger, 1998). The function of these rules
or constraints is to mediate between the underlying represen-
tations of words and the surface form of words, just as syntax
mediates between the underlying representation of sentences
and the surface form of sentences. As it does for syntax, the
linguistic approach assumes that rules or constraints can-
not be learned from input. Language variation is handled
by positing that a universal set of rules or constraints is pro-
vided innately, and children use input to learn which rules
apply or to set the rankings of the constraints (Bernhardt &
Stemberger, 1998).
This approach has encountered both theoretical and em-
pirical problems. As linguistic theories both Principles and
Parameter Theory and Optimality Theory are still in develop-
ment. As a theory of acquisition, Optimality Theory has been
too little tested to judge, as work in this area has only just
begun (e.g., Dinnesen & O’Connor, 2001). Work applying
Principles and Parameters Theory to explaining the acquisi-
tion of syntax has longer tradition, and, thus far, the proposal
that children use input to set parameters has not found empir-
ical support in data on language acquisition (Maratsos,
1998). Although future work in linguistic theory may prove
more successful at describing language in terms of paramet-
ric variation and ranked constraints, Maratsos (1998) pointed
out that there is a problem, in principle, with the atten-
dant acquisition theory. The notion that a single instance of

Language Development as a Linguistic Process
179
input would serve as a trigger for parameter setting requires
that input be error free, and it certainly is not. Furthermore, a
parameter-setting approach in which the role of input is
merely that of a trigger predicts that the amount of input
should not matter a great deal to the acquisition of any para-
meterized aspect of language. Contrary to this prediction,
there is evidence that a component of grammatical knowl-
edge that is held to be part of UG, that-trace phenomena, is
acquired earlier by children with more language experience
and later by children with less (Gathercole, 2002). There
may also be a solution to this problem if parameter setting is
not accomplished on the basis of a single instance of input,
but requires an accumulation of evidence. This, however,
would be a very different sort of model than the current Prin-
ciples and Parameters theory.
Turning to the problem of apparent developmental
change, we ﬁnd that two solutions have been proposed. One
begins with the Continuity Hypothesis (Pinker, 1984), ac-
cording to which all of UG is in the child’s grammar from the
beginning. This requires explaining differences between chil-
dren’s and adults’ grammatical performance in terms of fac-
tors other than knowledge of the grammar. Lack of lexical or
pragmatic knowledge or processing limitations that interfere
with performance are often invoked. The other proposed so-
lution is the Maturation Hypothesis, according to which some
elements of UG become available only later in development.
Like permanent teeth and secondary sexual characteristics,
these elements of grammar are provided innately, but they are
not manifest until their developmental time arrives (Wexler,
1999).
This manner of reasoning and the research it generates can
be illustrated with respect to one of the principles of UG.
Among the principles of UG is a set of principles called bind-
ing principles, which deal with the relations between elements
in a sentence. Binding Principle B pertains to how pronouns
are related to nouns. Stated formally, Principle B says that per-
sonal pronouns must not be coindexed with a c-commanding
noun phrase (NP) in the local domain. C-commanding within
the local domain refers to a particular structural relationship
between parts of a sentence. What Principle B means is that
pronouns such as he and her cannot refer to a noun that is in
the same part of the sentence structure as the pronoun. In the
sentence Grover is patting him, him cannot mean Grover.
(This is in contrast to Principle A, which applies to reﬂexives,
with the consequence that in Grover is patting himself, himself
must refer to Grover.)
The reason that Principle B has generated so much
research is that children disobey this principle up to a very
advanced age—even at 8 years—and well after they demon-
strate knowledge of Principle A (Thorton & Wexler, 1999).
This late adherence to a basic principle of UG contradicts both
the basic premise of the UG approach, that universal princi-
ples are provided innately, and the Continuity Hypothesis, that
all of UG is available from the beginning. In fact, many possi-
ble explanations of children’s seeming ignorance of Principle
B are problematic for the UG view. For example, one expla-
nation is to say that Principle B is not innate after all but must
be learned from experience and that the learning process takes
time. The UG view rejects this explanation and in general re-
jects learning sorts of accounts of developmental change on
the grounds that there is no way for input to give children the
information they need to arrive at Principle B. That is because
Principle B, like the other principles of UG, makes reference
to notions like binding and c-command, and there is no way
for children to get such abstract notions from input (Chien &
Wexler, 1990). This is an example of how the formal de-
scription of grammatical knowledge deﬁnes the acquisition
problem differently than another sort of description of gram-
matical knowledge might.
Another possible explanation of children’s late adherence
to Principle B is to reject the Continuity Hypothesis but
save UG and assert that Principle B simply matures late. The
problem with this is that the whole theory requires that Princi-
ple B be on line early in order to play a necessary role in guid-
ing other learning (Chien & Wexler, 1990). There have also
been a variety of proposals regarding other factors that might
interfere with children’s demonstrating knowledge of Princi-
ple B. It could be that the processing demands of the task
make it difﬁcult for children to apply their grammatical
knowledge or mislead the children in some way so that chil-
dren’s poor performance is a function of the task, not a lack of
knowledge (Grimshaw & Rosen, 1990; Grodzinsky & Rein-
hart, 1993). Alternatively, it could be that children lack the
pragmatic knowledge to recognize when Principle B applies.
The argument that children do know Principle B but violate
it for extragrammatical reasons comes from studies in which
children demonstrate that they do adhere to Principle B under
some circumstances, but not others. For example, if the chil-
dren interpret a sentence such as The cow is scratching her to
mean the cow is scratching herself because of ignorance of
Principle B, then they also should interpret Every cow is
scratching her to mean many cows are all scratching them-
selves. Children do not do that, however. This suggests that the
interpretation of the ﬁrst sentence is not the result of ignorance
of Principle B, but the result of some other lack of understand-
ing. There are circumstances in which Principle B does not
apply. In the sentence, She’s wearing Alissa’s clothes, Princi-
ple B requires that she not be Alissa. However, if the circum-
stance is that someone who looks a great deal like Alissa but
who has a different haircut walks by and the identity of this

180
Language Development in Childhood
person is the topic of conversation, it is possible that she does
mean Alissa in the second sentence in the following sequence:
She must be Alissa; she’s wearing Alissa’s clothes. One argu-
ment for why relatively old children disobey Principle B is
that they have experienced exceptions such as this and they do
not know that it is an exception allowed only in certain prag-
matic contexts. By this account it is a lack of pragmatic under-
standing, not a lack of grammatical knowledge, that leads to
Principle B violations.
At present there are several proposals for how best to ex-
plain the seeming late mastery of Principle B. Resolving the
issue is not crucial for the present purpose because the aim of
the foregoing summary of work on Principle B was not to ex-
plain why 6-year-olds sometimes interpret Grover is patting
him to mean that Grover is patting himself. Rather, the pur-
pose was to illustrate the kind of research and argument that
the UG view of language acquisition generates. Although
there is disagreement within the UG approach as to how to
explain apparent developmental change, there is consistent
agreement with the basic premise that UG must be innate.
The work on Principle B is an example of research within
the UG approach that makes very little contact with other ap-
proaches to language development. Although a great deal of
UG work is of this sort, there are some questions that have been
tackled by both UG and other approaches to the study of chil-
dren’s language. Several studies have found that before the age
of 3 years children do not use the verbs they know in all their
possible syntactic and morphological environments (Bloom,
Lifter, & Haﬁtz, 1980; Tomasello, 1992; Valian, 1991). It is a
challenge to the claims of the UG approach that children, who
are asserted to have complete knowledge of the grammar, pro-
duce only a subset of the constructions the grammar allows.
The UG explanation is that performance factors impede the
expression of the underlying competence. For example,Valian
(1991) (Study 5) found that early in development children pro-
duce few verbs with direct objects but that the proportion of
verbs used with a direct object increases from 11/2 to 3 years.
Valian (1991) interpreted the effect of age as evidence of the
role of capacity limitations. Her argument was that the syntac-
tic knowledge underlying the production of direct objects is
there from the beginning, but for very young children it is too
cognitively demanding for children to actually produce such
sentences. As processing capacity increases with age, such
performance constraints lessen. We consider an alternative
account of these data in the next section.
Innate Lexical Constraints
There is also a learnability approach to lexical development.
It begins, like the argument for innate grammar, with an
assertion of the impossibility of learning. This assertion
was famously made by the philosopher Quine (1960) and
is known as the Gavagai problem. Imagine that you are a lin-
guist studying a newly discovered tribe. A rabbit runs across
the ﬁeld, and a tribesman shouts Gavagai. How do you de-
cide what Gavagai means? It could mean “running thing,”
“whiteness,” “furriness,” “dinner if we’re lucky,” “animal,”
“mammal,” or even “rabbit.” The point is that in principle,
the possible meanings are inﬁnite. Despite this problem, chil-
dren are good at learning words. By the time children are
6 years old they have vocabularies of up to 14,000 words.
Assuming that word learning begins at about 12 months, that
works out to a word learning pace of nearly eight words per
day. Furthermore, experimental work has demonstrated that
very few exposures to a novel term are sufﬁcient for children
to form at least a partial entry in their mental lexicons
(Dolloghan, 1985; Woodward, Markman, & Fitzsimmons,
1994). Thus, somehow, the inﬁnite possible meanings of a
new word in context that bothered Quine do not bother
young, language-learning children.
To solve the problem of how children arrive at meanings
readily, when the environment does not clearly indicate those
meanings, it has been proposed that children come to the
word learning task with innate constraints on the kinds of
hypotheses they consider. A great deal of research has been
aimed at discovering just what those constraints are. One
constraint or principle that appears to guide children’s infer-
ences about the meanings of newly encountered words is the
whole-object principle. This leads children to assume that
words refer to whole objects rather than to a part or property
of an object. This eliminates “whiteness” and “furriness” as
possible meanings of Gavagai. The existence of such an as-
sumption is supported both by evidence from word-learning
experiments (Markman & Wachtel, 1988; Taylor & Gelman,
1988; Waxman & Markow, 1995) and by errors that young
children make. For example, it is not uncommon for very
young children to think that hot is the label for stove, given
the common experience of hearing, Don’t touch it; it’s hot in
reference to the stove.
Another proposed word-learning principle is the taxo-
nomic principle, according to which words refer to things
that are of the same kind. This assumption—it is proposed—
helps the child ﬁgure out what else, other than the particular
whole object being labeled, is included in the meaning of the
new word. When the child hears the word dog in the presence
of a dog (and assumes that the whole dog is being referred to
because of the whole-object principle), the taxonomic princi-
ple leads the child to think that dog will also refer to other
dogs, but not to things that are thematically related to dogs,
such as collars, leashes, or bones. Again, the evidence for this

Language Development as a Social Process
181
assumption comes from both the fact that in natural lan-
guage use children tend correctly to extend the meanings of
the words they learn and experimental demonstrations that
despite a tendency to form thematically related categories,
when children are presented with a new word, sud with a pic-
ture (e.g., a picture of a dog) and asked to ﬁnd another one
that is the same as this sud, children pick another picture of
a dog. When simply asked to ﬁnd another one that is the
same—without a new word being introduced—preschool
children are more inclined to pick the picture of dog food
(Markman & Hutchinson, 1984). Another principle, the mu-
tual exclusivity principle, is the principle that different words
refer to different kinds of things. So, for example, members
of the category labeled dog do not overlap with members of
the category labeled cow. In word-learning experiments,
when presented a novel word and an array of objects that in-
cludes several objects for which they have labels and one for
which they do not, children will take the new word to mean
the object for which they have no label. That is, they appear
to assume that the new word cannot be a synonym for any
of the words that they already know (Markman & Wachtel,
1988; Mervis & Bertrand, 1994).
These principles work in concert, so that the mutual ex-
clusivity assumption provides a basis for overriding the
whole object principle, which children must do in order to
learn terms for parts and properties of objects. A child who
knows the word rabbit and hears the word furry will not take
furry to be a synonym for rabbit but will look for something
else to be the referent of the new term. The alternatives to
the proposal that word learning is constrained by innate,
linguistic principles are (a) that these principles operate in
word learning but are themselves learned (Nelson, 1988) and
(b) that the assumptions that guide word learning are not
speciﬁcally linguistic but have a social-pragmatic basis
(Clark, 1997). It has also been argued that the process of word
learning involves more than mapping sounds onto referents
and that multiple learning procedures are brought to bear on
the task of building a lexicon (Hoff & Naigles, 2002).
Summary and Conclusions
It is difﬁcult to evaluate the contribution to the general un-
derstanding of language development made by the UG ap-
proach to grammatical development. The reason for this
difﬁculty is that this work is so isolated from the rest of the
ﬁeld that one must either buy the UG account or reject it as a
whole package. This isolation is not a scientiﬁc necessity, but
rather a sociological fact. There is very little discussion
between linguists and nonlinguists because researchers from
the two disciplines do not ask the same questions or even use
the same vocabulary. There are, of course, exceptions. The
work reviewed on the issue of whether children have the cat-
egory V is an exception, and there is an interesting and em-
pirically informed debate on this topic. Similarly, in the
domain of lexical development, the source of and necessity
for constraints on the hypotheses children generate has
motivated a great deal of research, and that research has
advanced understanding of the process of word learning. For
example, mixed accounts of lexical development incorporate
some innate principles along with other bases for word
learning (Golinkoff, Mervis, & Hirsh-Pasek, 1994; Hollich,
Hirsh-Pasek, & Golinkoff, 2000).
Even without such integration, however, the linguistic ap-
proach makes a contribution to the overall enterprise of un-
derstanding language development by forcefully making two
points: (a) Grammar is complex, and it is not so easy to show
how some of the more abstract aspects of grammar could be
derived from input; and (b) children may have more gram-
matical knowledge than they demonstrate in their speech, be-
cause producing speech requires adjunct competencies such
as memory and pragmatic understandings, which may be
limited in children.
LANGUAGE DEVELOPMENT AS A
SOCIAL PROCESS
The approach that considers language as a social phenome-
non and language development as a social process begins
with very different assumptions than does the previously dis-
cussed generative grammar approach. Whereas the genera-
tive grammar position asserts that the output of the LAD is a
complex, abstract system whose properties are unrelated to
the communicative function of language and are not apparent
in the surface form of sentences, the social approach, also
termed the social-pragmatic view, asserts that language is
much simpler (Tomasello, 1992, 2000). The social-pragmatic
approach relies on Cognitive-Functional linguistic theory, ac-
cording to which grammatical devices are not hidden things
like c-command and binding but are things like word order
and case marking endings on words. Not only are these gram-
matical devices directly observable, but their functions are
related directly to meaning. That is, word order and case
markings indicate notions such as agent of action and object
of action that are part of everybody’s cognitive understand-
ings of events.
Second, in the social-pragmatic view, the input is richer
than in the generative grammar view. According to the social-
pragmatic view, it is crucially important to the process of lan-
guage development that language is learned in the context of

182
Language Development in Childhood
interaction with others, in routines such as feeding and dress-
ing and, in some cultures, interactive games, book reading,
and more. The signiﬁcance of these repeated routines is that
they create a shared referential context within which the lan-
guage of the adult makes sense to the prelinguistic child
(Carpenter, Nagell, & Tomasello, 1998). Third, the child’s
learning mechanisms include the all-important capacity for
what Tomasello has termed cultural learning (Tomasello,
2000; Tomasello, Kruger, & Ratner, 1993). Cultural learning
involves imitating others, but it is not uncomprehending
mimicry. Rather, cultural learning consists of learning to
reproduce the behavior of others for the purpose of achiev-
ing the same goal or performing the same function that the
learner understands to have been the goal or intended func-
tion when that behavior was produced by another. Cultural
learning is possible only after around 9 months of age, when
children develop the capacity for secondary intersubjectivity,
which allows them to coordinate their attention with both
the person who is talking to them and the objects or events
that are being talked about. This is prerequisite to cultural
learning because only with this capacity can children share
another’s perspective on the world, thereby gaining nonlin-
guistic access to the communicative intentions of others.
Learning language, on this view, is learning to express one’s
communicative intentions with sequences of sounds that one
has previously heard uttered by others to express those same
communicative intentions.
In sum, compared to the generative linguistics approach,
the social-pragmatic approach assumes that the infant who
acquires language is smarter and that the language system
that is acquired is simpler. Viewed this way, language is
learnable without recourse to stipulation of innate knowl-
edge. In the next sections we consider what this view has to
say more speciﬁcally with respect to the acquisition of gram-
mar and the lexicon, and we consider some of the arguments
that have been made against those proposals.
A Social-Pragmatic Account of
Grammatical Development
The gist of the social pragmatic approach to explaining gram-
matical development is to redescribe both the nature of the
child’s syntactic competence and the adult syntactic compe-
tence eventually achieved so that they are states of knowl-
edge that can be achieved using information available in
social interaction and domain-general mechanisms of learn-
ing. (There is no social-pragmatic account of phonological
development.) The redescription of children’s competence is
done through analysis of children’s spontaneous speech and
performance in experimental tasks. The redescription of adult
competence is made by referring to cognitive-functional
linguistics.
The crucial point in the redescription of child competence
is the claim that children do not have a fully productive sys-
tem. It is that productivity, or generativity, that motivates the
abstract system that is generative grammar. Children, it is
argued, have only a repertoire of constructions that they have
memorized as a result of hearing them in input. Central to this
argument is the claim that children do not have the grammat-
ical category V, because sentences are built around verbs.
Without the category children cannot have fully productive
rules for sentence generation. Instead, children have verb-
speciﬁc frames that they use to construct sentences. Children
do have a noun-like category, and thus they achieve some
limited productivity in their speech by substituting nouns in
their memorized, verb-based frames.
Recall from the previous section, the observation that chil-
dren initially do not use the verbs that they know in the full
range of environments that the grammar allows. Rather than
explaining this as a reﬂection of performance limitations, as
the UG approach does, the social-pragmatic approach argues
that children have limited knowledge about how individual
verbs can be used. In essence, children know only what they
have heard. In support of this view, there is evidence that chil-
dren use the same frames with each verb as their mothers use
(Theakston, Lieven, Pine, & Rowland, 2001). Additionally,
there are ﬁndings from several experiments in which children
are taught new verbs and then asked questions designed to
elicit use of those verbs in different sentence structures. The
consistently obtained result is that children under 3 years tend
not to use their new verbs in utterances that go beyond the
way they have heard those verbs used by adults. This con-
trasts with the ﬁnding for novel nouns, which children do use
in new combinatorial structures (Tomasello, 2000).
Eventually, of course, children do use verbs productively,
and the social-pragmatic theory must account for that. Part of
the social-pragmatic solution is the proposal that children
move to a system of more general, productive constructions
from an item-based set of constructions by noticing patterns
among the item-based constructions and combining them.
Consistent with this sort of mechanism is that some mea-
sures of productivity increase gradually from 2 years to
8 years (Tomasello, 2000). The social-pragmatic account
never gives itself the task of explaining how children achieve
the autonomous, abstract grammar of the generative linguis-
tic approach. This is where the redescription of adult compe-
tence comes into play. Adult linguistic competence, in this
view, is also just an inventory of constructions—the differ-
ence is that some of them are quite general and productive.
The adult grammar can end up with some of the structural

Language Development as a Social Process
183
apparatus of standard grammars, provided that those struc-
tures relate to speciﬁc communicative functions. So, for ex-
ample, syntactic constituents such as noun phrases can be
arrived at from input because noun phrases refer to identiﬁ-
able referents. To paraphrase an example from Tomasello
(2000), your papers is a coherent constituent because it
serves a single referential function. The importance to acqui-
sition of children’s understanding of speakers’ communica-
tive intentions is made clear by this analysis. All the units of
language structure correspond to communicative functions.
Thus, understanding the communicative functions of utter-
ances leads inevitably to understanding structure. In this
view, no other route to grammar is necessary.
The counterarguments to the social-pragmatic view of the
acquisition of grammar are essentially three: (a) Whereas the
social understandings that are argued to be the basis of lan-
guage development are important and perhaps even necessary
for some aspects of development, they are not sufﬁcient to
account for acquisition; (b) the social-pragmatic position
and Cognitive-Functional linguistics underestimate the com-
plexity and functionally independent nature of morphosyntax
(Maratsos, 1998; Shatz, 1992); and (c) the data do not
quite support the straightforward input-dependent, limited-
productivity account offered by the social-pragmatic view. To
elaborate the last point, diary data on the ﬁrst uses of 34 com-
mon verbs by eight different children show that many verbs
do in fact appear in multiple structures within children’s ﬁrst
10 uses of those verbs, suggesting some early productivity
(Vear, Naigles, Hoff, & Ramos, 2001). In addition, although
children do tend to use main verbs in the particular syntactic
structures in which they have heard those verbs used
(deVilliers, 1985; Theakston et al., 2001), this is not the case
for auxiliary verbs. One of the most robust input-acquisition
relations in the literature is that the frequency in input of
questions that prepose auxiliaries (e.g., Can you eat your
breakfast now?) is related to children’s acquisition of
auxiliaries, but when the children use auxiliaries it is ﬁrst in
declarative forms (e.g., I can do it; Newport, Gleitman, &
Gleitman, 1977; Shatz, Hoff-Ginsberg, & MacIver, 1989).
This particular datum and the complexity of what children
acquire more generally argue that internal mental processes
operate over input and transform it into syntactic knowledge
that is used in creating novel productions. The social-
pragmatic approach to the acquisition of grammar is mute
with respect to what those internal mental processes might be.
Social-Pragmatic Approach to Lexical Development
The gist of the social-pragmatic explanation of lexical devel-
opment is the assertion that children can ﬁgure out what
newly encountered words mean because they know what the
other speakers’communicative intentions are. Early formula-
tions of the social-pragmatic proposal argued that the recur-
rent social interactions between mother and child establish
each participant’s intentions through a given routinized activ-
ity, allowing the child to predict “where the adult’s attention
is currently focused and where it is likely to be focused next.
Therefore, any language the adult may use in such a context
is likely to be immediately meaningful to the child”
(Tomasello & Todd, 1983, p. 199). Additionally, if in nonrou-
tinized interaction, mothers talk about the aspects of the ac-
tivity that the child is focused on, then the meanings the child
is harboring should be consistently expressed. Thus, the
social-pragmatic argument is that by virtue of either rou-
tinization or maternal attentiveness children know what their
mothers are saying without understanding the language, and
they can use that nonlinguistically acquired knowledge to
ﬁgure out the meaning of the language they hear.
More recently, the social-pragmatic proposal has focused
on the social cognitive abilities and inclinations of children
(Akhtar & Tomasello, 2000; Baldwin, 2000). Children are not
at the mercy of adults, following their attentional focus in order
for word meaning to be made transparent. Rather, children
have the ability to discern their mothers’communicative inten-
tions. According to this view, word learning begins once chil-
dren understand others as intentional agents, assume some
communicative intention behind the vocalizations others
make, and successfully ﬁgure out what those communicative
intentions are. Although the earlier and later formulations dif-
fer in whether the mother or the child contributes the requisite
social-pragmatic skill, in both formulations mutual engage-
ment or joint attention is prerequisite to word learning.
The sort of empirical ﬁndings cited in support of this
view include ﬁndings that maternal responsiveness is
positively associated with child vocabulary development
(Tamis-LeMonda, Bornstein, Kahana-Kalman, Baumwell, &
Cyphers, 1998), that mothers who follow their child’s lead
have children with larger vocabularies (Akhtar, Dunham, &
Dunham, 1991; Harris, Jones, Brookes, & Grant, 1986;
Tomasello & Farrar, 1986), and that the proportion of time
mothers and children spend in joint engagement predicts vo-
cabulary growth (Carpenter et al., 1998; Tomasello & Todd,
1983). Another important piece of this argument is evidence
that children have the ability to use nonverbal cues such as
eye gaze to determine a speaker’s focus of attention and that
they infer that speakers are talking about their own focus of
attention, even when it differs from the child’s (Baldwin,
1993).
The foregoing arguments address how children can
correctly map a newly encountered word onto its intended

184
Language Development in Childhood
referent. There is also a pragmatically based argument for
how children learn multiple terms for the same referent
(Clark, 1997). That is, the same creature can be the dog, our
pet, or Rover, depending on the purpose for which one is la-
beling him. Children are disinclined to take these different
labels to be exact synonyms because they have the principle
of contrast, that is, the pragmatic understanding that if a
speaker chooses a different word, it indicates a different
meaning. The innate constraints approach explains the same
behavior with reference to the mutual exclusivity principle.
There is evidence consistent with both views. Absent any
pragmatic information, children are reluctant to accept new
labels for an already-labeled referent (Merriman & Bowman,
1989); however, very young children can learn multiple
labels for the same referent if they understand the multiple
communicative purposes or perspectives that lead to different
word choices (Clark, 1997). Adults also provide help to the
would-be word learner through pragmatic directions. To il-
lustrate, Clark offers a hypothetical example in which some
birds are ﬂying overhead and the adult speaker ﬁrst says look
at the birds and then points to one bird followed by another,
saying This one is a sparrow; this one here is a crow. By ﬁrst
not individuating and later individuating the referents, the
speaker indicates to the child the perspective shift that ac-
companies the shift in the hierarchical level of the label pro-
vided. Although the foregoing example is hypothetical, there
are data to the effect that mothers indicate when they are talk-
ing about a group labeled by a superordinate category and
that simple labeling tends to be used with basic-level or sub-
ordinate categories (Callanan, 1985). There are also sponta-
neous speech data from very young children attesting to their
use of multiple labels for the same item (e.g., food and cereal,
animal and tiger; Clark, 1997).
The quarrel some have with the social-pragmatic ap-
proach to lexical development is similar to the exception
taken with respect to social-pragmatic accounts of grammat-
ical development. The problem is one of sufﬁciency. Al-
though children may well use their social skills to infer
speaker intent in episodes of mutual engagement, analysis of
published studies of mother-child interaction suggests that
only about 20% of the time mothers and children spend in
conversation is characterized by the mutual understandings
upon which the social-pragmatic view of acquisition depends
(Hoff & Naigles, 2002). Furthermore, there is more to build-
ing a lexicon than mapping newly encountered words onto
referents. Before that initial mapping words must be identi-
ﬁed as such in the speech stream, and after the initial map-
ping there is still more for children to ﬁgure out to complete
the lexical entry. The sort of information that would con-
tribute to those other parts of the word-learning task and the
sort of learning abilities that would use that information are
ignored in the social-pragmatic account.
Acquiring the Social Uses of Language
Thus far we have been discussing socially based accounts of
the acquisition of what are considered the core aspects of lan-
guage: grammar and the lexicon. The extent to which social
processes can explain those developments is very much at
issue. In contrast, there are other aspects of language devel-
opment for which a socially based explanation is the most
obvious choice. Language development includes language
socialization—learning to use language as do adult members
of one’s social group. This refers to everything from learning
to be polite to learning to tell a coherent story. These learn-
ings must depend on the social context in which language is
acquired because what constitutes both politeness and a
coherent story vary depending on culture (Clancy, 1986;
Minami & McCabe, 1995). More direct evidence for the role
of social context in these aspects of language development
are ﬁndings that within a culture, differences in the environ-
mental support provided by other speakers are related to the
rate of development of the ability to produce narratives
(Fivush, 1991; McCabe & Peterson, 1991; Reese & Fivush,
1993).
Socially based accounts of development have little com-
petition with respect to explaining the acquisition of commu-
nicative competence. While there are requisite and perhaps
biologically based cognitive developments, it is clear that
acquiring communicative competence depends on social ex-
perience. A large body of work describes children’s develop-
ment of communicative competence and seeks explanation in
terms of social development, cognitive development, and
experience in language interaction (see, e.g., Ninio & Snow,
1999). From a distance, however, this sort of research seems
not to be the main-stage event in the search for an explana-
tion of how children learn to talk. The main stage is occupied
by the study of grammar and the lexicon.
Summary and Conclusions
There is no quarrel from any quarter that language is used to
communicate or that it is acquired in the context of commu-
nicative interaction. Thus, there is most certainly a social
basis to language development (Shatz, 1992). At issue is the
explanatory power of this social basis. The claim made by ad-
vocates of the social-pragmatic view—that learning language
is merely a matter of learning to produce the sounds to ex-
press one’s intentions that one has heard others produce to
express those intentions—is not particularly revolutionary.

Language Development as Domain-General Learning
185
If intentions are meanings, and it seems that they must be,
then this statement is simply a paraphrase of a statement in
every linguistics textbook: Language is a system for relating
sound to meaning. The question is, What is the nature of that
system and what does it take to learn it? According to the
social-pragmatic approach, the system is fairly simple and
based in the communicative functions of language. Thus,
learning the system is a natural consequence of children’s
social-cognitive abilities to understand others’ intentions,
their desire to communicate their own intentions, and their
ability to imitate the means of communicating intentions that
they see modeled by others. To the extent that language is
complex and has structural properties not grounded in the
communicative functions of language, it will require more to
be learned than social understandings and a capacity to imi-
tate the goal-directed behavior of others.
LANGUAGE DEVELOPMENT AS
DOMAIN-GENERAL LEARNING
It is possible, in principle, that substantial aspects of linguis-
tic knowledge are neither innate nor achieved in the manner
described by the social-pragmatic approach. Linguistic
knowledge could be learned via the application of asocial and
domain-general learning procedures to language input. The
work in this vein does not come from a single theoretical
orientation but rather comprises a variety of approaches that
have in common a rejection of the assumptions that language
is too complex, the input too impoverished, and the child’s
learning mechanisms too weak to account for language ac-
quisition without stipulating innate linguistic knowledge.
Some, but not all, domain-general proposals also entail a de-
scription of the adult linguistic knowledge that differs from
the generative linguistics account. The domain-general learn-
ing approach differs also from the social-pragmatic approach
in locating the information used by language learners in the
speech stream itself and in the nonlinguistic context accom-
panying speech rather than in socially achieved understand-
ings. Information about utterance or word meaning that
children derive through their understandings of other speak-
ers’ intentions may be useful, but it has no special status that
is different from other sources of information. Furthermore,
the mechanisms for learning are more than the mechanisms
of cultural learning referred to by the social-pragmatic ap-
proach. The argument for a domain-general approach to lan-
guage development is made primarily with three sources of
evidence: (a) studies of infants showing that language learn-
ers do indeed have powerful learning mechanisms available
to them, (b) computer implementations of connectionist
models of language acquisition demonstrating the sufﬁciency
of some aspects of input for at least some aspects of language
development, and (c) developmental data suggesting that
children do apply general learning procedures to input in the
process of acquiring language.
The Nature of Infants’ Learning Mechanisms
Recent attention to infant learning mechanisms began with a
study demonstrating that 8-month-old babies can learn the
statistical regularities in a stream of sounds presented for
only 2 min (Saffran, Aslin, & Newport, 1996). The babies lis-
tened to a tape-recording that presented four different three-
syllable “words” (e.g., tupiro, golabu) combined in random
order in an uninterrupted stream. After 2 min of exposure, the
babies were tested with stimuli that either recombined the
same words in a different order or recombined the same syl-
lables in a different order, violating the integrity of the former
“words.” Eight-month-old babies could tell the difference.
They appeared to have learned the distributional regularities
in the ﬁrst sequence, that is ro always follows pi which al-
ways follow tu, whereas tu can follow any of three different
word ﬁnal syllables. Although this ﬁnding demonstrated that
babies were more powerful learners than had previously been
thought, there remains substantial disagreement over how
much of the burden of explaining language acquisition even
this kind of learning can carry. Some have hailed this ﬁnding
as evidence that babies can learn language (Bates & Elman,
1996), whereas others, including the original authors, have
been quick to point out that there is more to learning a lan-
guage than identifying words in the steam of speech (Pinker,
1996).
There is other evidence that babies are capable of even
more sophisticated learning. That is, babies seem able not
only to learn the distributional regularities among the partic-
ular sounds they hear but also to abstract a pattern that can
be applied to other dissimilar sounds (Marcus, Vijayan,
Bandi Rao, & Vishton, 1999). Marcus et al. (1999) presented
7-month-olds with 2-min sequences that followed an ABA
pattern (e.g., ga ti ga, li na li) or an ABB pattern (e.g., ga ti ti,
li na na). Subsequently, the babies were able to distinguish
between the pattern that they had heard and the other pattern,
even when those patterns were presented using entirely dif-
ferent syllables. According to Marcus et al. (1999), these
babies learned algebraic rules, not just statistical regularities,
but there are dissenters from this view (McClelland & Plaut,
1999). The assertion that infants can learn rules has broad im-
plications. Rules capture patterns among abstract variables,
and variables can refer to any stimuli, old or new, regardless
of their similarity to the stimuli that produced the learning.

186
Language Development in Childhood
Thus, a rule is highly generalizable knowledge. In contrast,
statistical learning consists of memorizing the co-occurrence
patterns among stimuli actually experienced. These patterns
can be generalized, but there must be some physical similar-
ity between the stimuli that produced the learning and the
new stimuli to which the learning is applied. The scope of
generalization for statistical learning is much narrower than
for rule learning, and rule learning is therefore a much more
powerful learning mechanism (Marcus, 2001).
The signiﬁcance of the evidence that babies can learn rules
is tied up with one of the central topics of dispute between
some domain-general approaches to language acquisition and
the generative linguistic approach: Is knowing language
knowing a system of rules?According to traditional accounts,
it is. The rules are rules for word formation (in phonology and
morphology) and sentence formation (in syntax) that operate
over symbols.The symbols are variables that stand for abstract
categories such as Noun and Verb; the rules apply to anything
that is an instance of those categories. This is what allows
language to be productive. According to some connectionist
accounts, linguistic knowledge is not knowledge of a rule
system that operates on variables. Rather, language is a func-
tion of the strength of connections among less abstract units—
in some models the units are actually sound sequences.
Connectionism as a Domain-General
Challenge to Nativism
Connectionism is the main domain-general challenge to lin-
guistic nativism, and there have been computer implementa-
tions of connectionist models of aspects of the development
of phonology (e.g., Plaut & Kello, 1999), of morphology
(e.g., Daugherty & Seidenberg, 1994), of syntax (e.g., Elman,
1993), and of lexical development (e.g., Siskind, 1996;
see Brent, 1997; Plunkett, 1998, for comprehensive treat-
ments). The basic learning mechanism is that of establishing
connections among units and adjusting the strength of those
connections. The strength of the connection between two
units increases each time the stimuli that activate those two
units are presented together. Thus, like old-fashioned associ-
ationism, connectionist learning is a function of the contigu-
ity of stimuli in experience. Unlike older models, however,
connectionist models contain a complex internal structure
that mediates between experience and learning with the re-
sult, it is claimed, that what is learned is greater than the sum
of the learner’s experiences. The strongest claim of connec-
tionism is that it offers an alternative to the tradeoff between
ﬁnding the structure of language in the input or building the
structure into the acquisition mechanism. Instead, structure
emerges from the effect of input on the connectionist network
(Plunkett, 1998; see also MacWhinney, 1999, for a more
complete treatment of the notion of emergence). Another at-
traction of connectionist models is that they seem closer to
biology than symbolic models do because we know that the
brain is a set of interconnected neurons. If cognitive process-
ing could be modeled in a system that is closer to the
“wetware” of the brain, the hope is that the problem of deter-
mining how the brain represents symbols and rules could be
eliminated.
Although connectionism has generated a great deal of
excitement as a potential new way to explain both how
language is learned and how the brain accomplishes this feat,
there are also naysayers. The success of many connectionist
implementations is disputed, as is their relevance to what
children actually do. Also, connectionism is not an alterna-
tive to a system of symbols and rules if it is merely an imple-
mentation of symbols and rules. According to Marcus (1998),
many connectionist models—particularly those that success-
fully mimic some aspect of language acquisition—actually
contain within them nodes that stand for variables. If the con-
nectionist model merely implements a symbolic processor,
then the problem of explaining symbolic processing and the
attendant problems of explaining the acquisition of symbols
and rules are not solved. Furthermore, the analogy between
connectionist models and the brain has been criticized as illu-
sory. Not only are nodes not neurons, but also no one knows
how the neurons in the human brain represent what humans
know. For that reason, connectionism does not bring us closer
to knowing how the brain represents or acquires linguistic
knowledge (Fodor, 1997).
Even if connectionism does not provide an account of how
children learn language using domain-general learning pro-
cedures, there are other arguments that language develop-
ment depends on some sort of general learning—that neither
innate linguistic knowledge nor solely social processes can
be the entire story. We turn now to more speciﬁc proposals
within the domains of phonological, morphosyntactic, and
lexical development and to arguments that have been made
on the basis of developmental data.
A Problem-Solving Model of Phonological Development
In contrast to the view of linguistic nativism—that all the uni-
versally possible rules or constraints of phonology are pro-
vided innately and selected or ranked by input, there is a
widely held view that phonological development is the result
of the child’s problem-solving activity (Ferguson & Farwell,
1975; Macken & Ferguson, 1983). The problem that requires
solution by the child is how to match the target language
given the child’s articulatory constraints. According to the

Language Development as Domain-General Learning
187
problem-solving model, children ﬁgure out how to use their
limited articulatory abilities to approximate the target lan-
guage using their general capacities for perception, produc-
tion, and problem solving. Initially children do this on a
word-by-word basis, with the attested result that sounds may
be produced in different ways across words. Later children
arrive at a system for mapping individual sounds in the target
language onto a set of sounds that they can produce. This
results in consistency, but occasionally in regression for
sounds that were produced accurately in only some words.
Because different children hit upon different solutions to the
problem, there will be individual differences among children
in the phonological systems achieved. Applications of na-
tivist models in contrast tend to focus on universals of phono-
logical development rather than individual differences, and
part of the argument among different approaches concerns
how much individual variation exists.
Domain-General Processes in
Morphosyntactic Development
The argument that the development of morphology and
syntax are the result of general cognitive processes has been
made on the basis of analysis of the task itself (Maratsos,
1998) and on the basis of evidence that children make use of
information in input in acquiring syntax (Hoff-Ginsberg,
1986; Shatz et al., 1989). The task analysis consists of de-
scribing the complexity of morphological systems that are
speciﬁc to particular languages and thus could not be pro-
vided innately. (In fact, the UG position makes no claim in
this regard.) The question is how could children acquiring
Turkish, to pick an example, learn that a particular sufﬁx, -u,
indicates patienthood of the noun to which it is attached (and,
according to Maratsos, 1998, this is a simpliﬁed example of
the problem of learning Turkish morphology). Children will
hear sentences in which a noun has -u as a sufﬁx, but they
need to ﬁgure out from the universe of possibilities what that
sufﬁx indicates. Maratsos argued that there must be some in-
nate constraints on the possibilities considered, but languages
vary enough in what meanings get grammaticized that even
an innately constrained list of possibilities would be quite
long. The child would need many examples of the -u sufﬁx in
order to ﬁgure out what meaning reliably co-occurs with -u.
This process of ﬁguring out is a process of sifting through
data, and it requires a great deal of data. Thus, although some
innate constraints on the problem may be involved, the
process is not like the learning process in UG models in
which input functions as a trigger. The process is also unlike
that proposed by the social-pragmatic view because neither
the hypothesizing of candidate meanings nor the sifting
through data has anything to do with social processes. Other
speakers do not point out which of the many meanings that
co-occur with a particular instance of -u is being encoded by
that sufﬁx, and the process of grinding through the data to
ﬁnd the right one is entirely internal to the child. Learning
depends on asocial input and internal data-analytic processes
operating over that input.
Add to Maratsos’s argument for data sifting the facts that
languages are not perfectly regular and that speech is not
completely error free. This leads to the inevitable conclusion
that the internal data-sifting mechanism must be able to
detect probabilistic patterns in the environment. In fact,
Newport and Aslin (2000) documented children’s abilities to
detect the regularities in less-than-perfect input, and they
argued that this importantly enables language acquisition.
The ability to exploit probabilistic information is useful to
most species in many domains because, as Kelly and Martin
(1994) put it, “the structure of the environment itself is often
probabilistic” (p. 105). Thus, we are led to the conclusion that
the acquisition of morphology depends on massive language
data that feed data-analytic abilities that are domain-general.
The notions that input provides information that requires
an internal data-sifting mechanism, that children use that
information in learning language, and that the value of that
input is independent of its communicative function are also
supported by evidence from the study of the relation between
properties of mothers’ child-directed speech and their chil-
dren’s syntactic development. The frequency with which
mothers ask questions with preposed auxiliaries, produce
partial expansions of child speech, and produce partial self-
repetitions and expansions have all been found to predict the
rate at which children develop some aspects of grammar
(N. D. Baker & Nelson, 1984; Hoff-Ginsberg, 1985, 1986;
Newport et al., 1977). Hoff-Ginsberg (1985) argued that
these features of input are useful because they make the
phrase structure of language salient to a distributional learn-
ing mechanism. Finally, the properties of input that provide
this sort of information are unrelated to the functions to
which the speech is put. Although the use of question forms
is of course related to the expression of questioning as a com-
municative intent, it is not clear what the functional basis
would be of a particular beneﬁt of questions that involve pre-
posed auxiliaries. Mothers’ use of partial self-repetitions and
expansions has been found to be unrelated to the functions of
maternal speech (Hoff-Ginsberg, 1986, 1990, 1999).
Domain-General Processes in Lexical Development
The proposal that domain-general learning processes con-
tribute to lexical development also begins with an analysis of

188
Language Development in Childhood
the task itself. Current research and theory suggest that the
process of word learning consists of at least the following
three, ordered, components: (a) word segmentation, (b) an
initial fast mapping of the new word onto a referent, and (c) a
longer, extended process of completing the lexical entry.
Both the innate constraints view and the social-pragmatic
view address only the process of mapping words onto refer-
ents. They have nothing to say about word segmentation or
the internal data-sifting processes that must be involved in
completing a lexical entry. In contrast, there is substantial
evidence that the amount and nature of input contribute to the
child’s lexical development. With respect to word segmenta-
tion, there is evidence that stress patterns, prosody, and repe-
tition of words in combination with a variety of different
words all contribute (see references in Aslin, Saffran, &
Newport, 1999; Morgan & Demuth, 1996). With respect to
the word-to-world mapping that the innate constraints and
social-pragmatic views address, there is evidence for the
potential usefulness and actual use of other information in the
content and structure of the utterance in which a new word
appears. Computer simulations (Siskind, 1996) have demon-
strated that the use of partial linguistic knowledge to con-
strain hypotheses, combined with the ability to extract
commonalities across different situations of use, can result in
lexical acquisition by a system that has no access to speaker
intentions. To illustrate, knowledge of what the word ball
means, combined with knowledge about what kinds of enti-
ties do what kinds of things, indicates to the learning device
that if the word ball is in the utterance, then an unknown
word in that utterance is more likely to mean “roll” than
“eat.” Evidence that humans can similarly make inferences
about word meaning from information in the utterance
containing a novel word comes from Gillette, Gleitman,
Gleitman, and Lederer’s (1999) simulation of word learning
with human (adult) participants. The learners in this case
were shown a series of silent video clips of real mother-child
interactions during which a speciﬁc verb had been spoken by
the mother. The participants were provided with various
clues to the identity of the verb, including (a) just the video
clips, (b) the video clips plus the nouns in the mother’s utter-
ance, (c) just the nouns in the utterance, (d) just the sentence
frames in which the verb was placed, (e) the sentence frames
plus the nouns, or (f) the video clips, the sentence frames, and
the nouns. With only the video clip information, the partici-
pants made correct identiﬁcations of the target verbs only
7.7% of the time. Each additional bit of information raised
this level of accuracy signiﬁcantly, until those with complete
information (i.e., Condition f) reached 90.4% correct.
These foregoing studies involve simulations by computer
or adult learner. There is also substantial evidence from
studies of children’s performance in experiments and from
studies of input correlates of lexical development that young
children ﬁnd sources of information in the speech they hear
and in the nonlinguistic context of that speech. Those ﬁndings
suggest that neither the innate constraints view nor the social-
pragmatic view provides a complete account of the process of
word learning. Experimental studies of young children show
that they can make use of structural information in ﬁgur-
ing out what a newly encountered word means (Goodman,
McDonough, & Brown, 1998; Prasada & Choy, 1998;
Waxman, 1999; see Woodward & Markman, 1998, for a sum-
mary). For example, Naigles (1990) found that given a scene
in which multiple interpretations of a novel verb are possible,
2-year-olds make systematically different conjectures de-
pending on whether they hear The duck is gorping the rabbit
or The duck and the rabbit are gorping (see also Naigles,
1996, 1998). Children’s ability to use cross-situational infor-
mation to converge on meaning has also been demonstrated
(Akhtar & Montague, 1999), again suggesting an internal
process of data sifting.
Evidence that children actually use syntax as a source of
information in lexical development comes from studies of
correlations between properties of input and measures of lex-
ical development that ﬁnd, for example, that the diversity of
syntactic frames in which a verb appears predicts its order of
acquisition (Naigles & Hoff-Ginsberg, 1998) and, more gen-
erally, that the syntactic complexity of maternal speech (in-
dexed by mean length of utterance) is positively related to
children’s vocabulary development (Bornstein, Haynes, &
Painter, 1998; Hoff & Naigles, 2002). Evidence that the
process of lexical development requires a great deal of data to
sift through comes from multiple ﬁndings that the amount of
input addressed to children is a positive predictor of their vo-
cabulary development. Huttenlocher et al. (1991) found that
the amount of speech mothers produced was a signiﬁcant,
positive predictor of their children’s rates of vocabulary
growth over the course of 10 to 12 months. Studying the vo-
cabulary of bilingual children, Pearson, Fernandez, Lewedeg,
and Oller (1997) found that the relative sizes of 1- to 2-year-
old children’s vocabularies in each of the languages they
were acquiring was related to the relative amount of input in
each language.
Summary and Conclusions
The evidence reviewed in this section argues that Chomsky
may have overstated the case when he said that input was too
impoverished and children’s learning mechanisms too weak
for language to be learnable. The evidence suggests that chil-
dren’s language development is to a nontrivial degree the

References
189
result of children’s general capacities for learning the regu-
larities in their environment applied to information in lan-
guage input. As was the case for the social-pragmatic
approach, the problem of sufﬁciency remains. None of the
demonstrations that input is useful and used in the process
of language acquisition constitutes proof that linguistic na-
tivism is unnecessary.
CONCLUSION
In this chapter we reviewed the theoretical and empirical ar-
guments that address the nature of the capacity that underlies
language development. We organized those arguments under
four headings that refer to four different premises regarding
the nature of that capacity: the biological, the linguistic, the
social, and the domain-general cognitive approaches to the
study of language development. No approach seems sufﬁ-
cient alone, and each approach makes some contribution to
the current understanding of how children learn to talk. The
implication is that nature has equipped children with innate
constraints, social inclinations and abilities, and asocial com-
putational processes, all of which contribute to children’s
language development. If this is true, then an important goal
for researchers in the ﬁeld of language development must be
to specify not only the nature of each source’s contribution
but also how these factors interact in the course of language
development.
REFERENCES
Akhtar, N., Dunham, F., & Dunham, P. J. (1991). Directive interac-
tions and early vocabulary development: the role of joint atten-
tional focus. Journal of Child Language, 18, 41–50.
Akhtar, N., & Montague, L. (1999). Early lexical acquisition: The
role of cross-situational learning. First Language, 19, 347–358.
Akhtar, N., & Tomasello, M. (2000). The social nature of words and
word learning. In R. M. Gollinkoff, K. Hirsh-Pasek, L. Bloom,
L. B. Smith, A. L. Woodward, N. Akhtar, M. Tomasello, &
G. Hollich (Eds.), Becoming a word learner: A debate on lexical
acquisition (pp. 115–135). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Aslin, R. N., Saffran, J. R., & Newport, E. L. (1999). Statistical
learning in linguistic and nonlinguistic domains. In B.
MacWhinney (Ed.), The emergence of language (pp. 359–380).
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Baker, C. L., & McCarthy, J. J. (Eds.). (1981). The logical problem
of language acquisition. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Baker, N. D., & Nelson, K. E. (1984). Recasting and related conver-
sational techniques for triggering syntactic advances by young
children. First Language, 5, 3–21.
Baldwin, D. (1993). Infants’ ability to consult the speaker for clues
to word reference. Journal of Child Language, 20, 395–419.
Baldwin, D. (2000). Interpersonal understanding fuels knowledge
acquisition. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 9, 40–
45.
Bates, E., & Elman, J. (1996). Learning rediscovered. Science, 247,
1849–1850.
Bates, E., Thal, D., & Marchman, V. (1991). Symbols and syntax:
A Darwinian approach to language development. In N. A.
Krasnegor, D. M. Rumbaugh, R. L. Schiefelbusch, & M.
Studdert-Kennedy (Eds.), Biological and behavioral determi-
nants of language development (pp. 29–66). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Bernhardt, B. H., & Stemberger, J. P. (1998). Handbook of phono-
logical development from the perspective of constraint-based
nonlinear phonology. San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Bernicot, J., & Roux, M. (1998). La structure et l’usage des
enonces: Comparison d’enfants uniques et d’enfants second nes
[The structure and use of expressions: Comparing only children
and second born children]. In J. Bernicot, H. Marcos, C. Day, M.
Guidetti, J. Rabain-Jamin, V. Laval, & G. Babelot (Eds.), De
l’usage des gestes et des mots chez les enfants [Children’s use of
gestures and words] (pp. 157–178). Paris: Armand Colin.
Bever, T. G., & Chiarello, R. J. (1974). Cerebral dominance in mu-
sicians and nonmusicians. Science, 185, 537–539.
Bickerton, D. (1984). The language bioprogram hypothesis. Behav-
ioral and Brain Sciences, 7, 173–221.
Bickerton, D. (1988). Creole languages and the bioprogram. In 
F. J. Newmeyer (Ed.), Linguistics: The Cambridge survey
(Vol. II, pp. 268–284). Cambridge, England: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
Birdsong, D. (1999). Introduction: Whys and why nots of the
critical period hypothesis for second language acquisition. In
D. Birdsong (Ed.), Second language acquisition and the critical
period hypothesis (pp. 1–22). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Bloom, L. (1998). Language acquisition in its developmental
context. In D. Kuhn & R. S. Siegler (Eds.), Handbook of child
psychology: Vol. 2. Cognition, perception, and language (5th ed.,
pp. 309–370). New York: Wiley.
Bloom, L., Lifter, K., & Haﬁtz, J. (1980). Semantics of verbs and
the development of verb inﬂection in child language. Language,
56, 386–412.
Bornstein, M. H., Haynes, M. O., & Painter, K. M. (1998). Sources
of child vocabulary competence: A multivariate model. Journal
of Child Language, 25, 367–393.
Callanan, M. A. (1985). How parents label objects for young chil-
dren: The role of input in the acquisition of category hierarchies.
Child Development, 56, 508–523.
Carpenter, M., Nagell, K., & Tomasello, M. (1998). Social cogni-
tion, joint attention, and communicative competence from 9 to
15 months of age. Monographs of the Society for Research in
Child Development, 63(4, Serial No. 255).

190
Language Development in Childhood
Carstairs-McCarthy, A. (1999). The origins of complex language:
An inquiry into the evolutionary beginnings of sentences, sylla-
bles, and truth. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Chiarello, C. (1991). Interpretation of word meanings by the cere-
bral hemispheres: One is not enough. In P. J. Schwanenﬂugel
(Ed.), The psychology of word meanings (pp. 251–278).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Chien, Y.-C. & Wexler, K. (1990). Children’s knowledge of locality
conditions in binding as evidence for the modularity of syntax
and pragmatics. Language Acquisition, 1, 225–295.
Chomsky, N. (1965). Aspects of the theory of syntax. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Chomsky, N. (1982). Discussion of Putnam’s comments. In M.
Piattelli-Palamarini (Ed.), Language and learning: The debate
between Jean Piaget and Noam Chomsky (pp. 310–324).
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Clark, E. V. (1997). Conceptual perspective and lexical choice in
acquisition. Cognition, 64, 1–37.
Conboy, B. T., & Mills, D. (2001, April 19–22). Two languages, one
developing brain: Effects of vocabulary size on bilingual tod-
dlers’ event-related potentials to auditory words. Poster pre-
sented at the meetings of the Society for Research in Child
Development, Minneapolis, MN.
Crain, S. (1991). Language acquisition in the absence of experience.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 14, 597–650.
Curtiss, S. (1977). Genie: A psycholinguistic study of a modern day
“wild child.” New York: Academic Press.
Dale, P. S., Dionne, G., Eley, T. C., & Plomin, R. (2000). Lexical
and grammatical development: a behavioral genetic perspective.
Journal of Child Language, 27, 619–642.
deVilliers, J. (1985). Learning how to use verbs: lexical coding and
the inﬂuence of the input. Journal of Child Language, 12,
587–595.
Dinnsen, D. A., & O’Connor, K. M. (2000). Typological predictions
in developmental phonology. Journal of Child Language, 28,
597–628.
Dollaghan, C. (1985). Child mets word: “Fast mapping” in
preschool children. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research,
28, 449–454.
Dunn, J., & Shatz, M. (1989). Becoming a conversationalist despite
(or because of) having an older sibling. Child Development, 60,
399–410.
Eley, T. C., Bishop, D. V. M., Dale, P. S., Oliver, B., Petrill, S. A.,
Price, T. S., Purcell, S., Saudino, K. J., Simonoff, E., Stevenson,
J., & Plomin, R. (1999). Genetic and environmental origins
of verbal and performance components of cognitive delay in
2-year-olds. Developmental Psychology, 35, 1122–1131.
Elman, J. L. (1993). Learning and development in neural networks:
The importance of starting small. Cognition, 48, 71–99.
Ferguson, C. A., & Farwell, C. B. (1975). Words and sounds in early
language acquisition. Language, 51, 439–491.
Fodor, J. (1997, May 16). Do we have it in us? Times Literary
Supplement, 3–4.
Fivush, R. (1991). The social construction of personal narratives.
Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 37, 59–81.
Ganger, J., Pinker, S., Chawla, S., & Baker, A. (2002). Heritability
of early milestones of vocabulary and grammar: A twin study.
Unpublished manuscript.
Gathercole, V. C. M. (2002). Monolingual and bilingual acquisition:
Learning different treatments of that-trace phenomena in
English and Spanish. In D. K. Oller & R. E. Eilers (Eds.),
Language and literacy in bilingual children  (pp. 220–254).
Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters.
Gazzaniga, M. S. (1983). Right hemisphere language following
brain bisection: A twenty-year perspective. American Psycholo-
gist, 38, 525–537.
Gilger, J. W. (1996). How can behavioral genetic research help
us understand language development and disorders? In Mabel
L. Rice (Ed.), Toward a genetics of language (pp. 77–110).
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gillette, J., Gleitman, H., Gleitman, L., & Lederer,A. (1999). Human
simulations of vocabulary learning. Cognition, 73, 135–176.
Gleitman, L. R. (1981). Maturational determinants of language
growth. Cognition, 10, 103–114.
Goldin-Meadow, S. (1997). The resilience of language in humans.
In C. Snowdon & M. Hausberger (Eds.), Social inﬂuences on
vocal development (pp. 293–311). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Golinkoff, R. M., Mervis, C. B., & Hirsh-Pasek, K. (1994). Early
object labels: The case for a developmental lexical principles
framework. Journal of Child Language, 21, 125–156.
Goodman, J., McDonough, L., & Brown, N. (1998). The role of
semantic context and memory in the acquisition of novel nouns.
Child Development, 69, 1330–1344.
Gopnik, M., & Crago, M. B. (1991). Familial aggregation of a
developmental language disorder. Cognition, 39, 1–50.
Gould, S. J., & Lewontin, R. C. (1979). The spandrels of San Marco
and the Panglossian paradigm: A critique of the adaptationist
programme. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, 205,
581–598.
Grimshaw, J., & Rosen, S. (1990). Knowledge and obedience: The
developmental status of the binding theory. Linguistic Inquiry,
21, 189–222.
Grodzinsky, Y., & Reinhart, T. (1993). The innateness of binding
and development of coreference: A reply to Grimshaw and
Rosen. Linguistic Inquiry, 24, 69–103.
Harris, M., Jones, D., Brookes, S., & Grant, J. (1986). Relations
between the non-verbal context of maternal speech and rate of
language development. British Journal of Developmental
Psychology, 4, 261–268.
Hart, B., & Risley, T. (1995). Meaningful differences in the every-
day experience of young American children. Baltimore: Brookes.

References
191
Hoff, E. (2001). Language Development. Wadsworth: Thompson
Learning. California.
Hoff, E., Laursen, B., & Tardif, T. (2002). Socioeconomic status
and parenting. In M. H. Bornstein (Ed.), Handbook of parenting
(2nd ed., pp. 231–252). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Hoff, E., & Naigles, L. (2002). How children use input to acquire a
lexicon. Child Development, 73, 418–433.
Hoff-Ginsberg, E. (1985). Some contributions of mothers’speech to
their children’s syntactic growth. Journal of Child Language, 12,
367–385.
Hoff-Ginsberg, E. (1986). Function and structure in maternal
speech: Their relation to the child’s development of syntax.
Developmental Psychology, 22, 155–163.
Hoff-Ginsberg, E. (1990). Maternal speech and the child’s develop-
ment of syntax: A further look. Journal of Child Language, 17,
85–99.
Hoff-Ginsberg, E. (1994). Inﬂuences of mother and child on mater-
nal talkativeness. Discourse Processes, 18, 105–117.
Hoff-Ginsberg, E. (1998). The relation of birth order and socioeco-
nomic status to children’s language experience and language
development. Applied Psycholinguistics, 19, 603–630.
Hoff-Ginsberg, E. (1999). Formalism or functionalism? Evidence
from the study of language development. In M. Darnell,
E. Moravscik, M. Noonan, F. Newmeyer, & K. Wheatley (Eds.),
Functionalism and formalism in linguistics (pp. 317–340).
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Hollich, G. J., Hirsh-Pasek, K., & Golinkoff, R. M. (2000). Break-
ing the language barrier: An emergentist coalitition model for
the origins of word learning. Monographs of the Society for
Research in Child Development, 65 (3, Serial No. 262).
Huttenlocher, J., Haight, W., Bryk, A., Seltzer, M., & Lyons, T.
(1991). Early vocabulary growth: Relation to language input and
gender. Developmental Psychology, 27, 236–248.
Jia, G., & Aaronson, D. (1999). Age differences in second language
acquisition: The dominant language switch and maintenance
hypothesis. In A. Greenhill, H. Littleﬁeld, & C. Tano (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 23rd Annual Boston University Conference
on Language Development (pp. 301–312). Somerville, MA:
Cascadilla Press.
Jourdan, C. (1991). Pidgins and creoles: The blurring of categories.
Annual Review of Anthropology, 20, 187–209.
Jusczyk, P. W. (1997). The discovery of spoken language.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kako, E. (1999). Elements of syntax in the systems of three
language-trained animals. Animal Learning and Behavior, 27,
1–14.
Kelly, M. H., & Martin, S. (1994). Domain-general abilities applied
to domain-speciﬁc tasks: Sensitivity to probabilities in percep-
tion, cognition, and language. In L. Gleitman & B. Landau
(Eds.), The acquisition of the lexicon (pp. 105–140). Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Kim, K. H. S., Relkin, N. R., Lee, K.-M., & Hirsch, J. (1997).
Distinct cortical areas associated with native and second
languages. Nature, 388, 171–174.
Lieberman, P. (1975). On the origins of language: An introduction
to the evolution of human speech. New York: Macmillan.
Lieven, E. V. M. (1994). Crosslinguistic and crosscultural aspects of
language addressed to children. In C. Gallaway & B. J. Richards
(Eds.), Input and interaction in language acquisition (pp. 56–
73). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Macken, M. A., & Ferguson, C. (1983). Cognitive aspects of
phonological development: Model, evidence, and issues. In
K. E. Nelson (Ed.), Children’s language (Vol. 4, pp. 256–282).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
MacWhinney, B. (1999). The emergence of language. Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Maratsos, M. (1998). The acquisition of grammar. In D. Kuhn &
R. S. Siegler (Eds.), Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 2.
Cognition, perception, and language (5th ed., pp. 421–466).
New York: Wiley.
Marcus, G. F. (1998). Rethinking eliminative connectionism.
Cognitive Psychology, 37, 243–282.
Marcus, G. F. (2001). The algebraic mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Marcus, G. F., Vijayan, S., Bandi Rao, S., & Vishton, P. M. (1999).
Rule learning by seven-month-old infants. Science, 283, 77–80.
Markman, E. M., & Hutchinson, J. E. (1984). Children’s sensitivity
to constraints on word meaning: Taxonomic vs. thematic rela-
tions. Cognitive Psychology, 16, 1–27.
Markman, E. M., & Wachtel, G. A. (1988). Children’s use of mutual
exclusivity to constrain the meanings of words. Cognitive Psy-
chology, 20, 121–157.
Mazziotta, J. C., & Metter, E. J. (1988). Brain cerebral metabolic
mapping of normal and abnormal language and its acquisition
during development. In F. Plum (Ed.), Language, communica-
tion, and the brain (pp. 245–266). New York: Raven Press.
McCabe, A., & Peterson, C. (1991). Getting the story: A longitudi-
nal study of parental styles in eliciting narratives and developing
narrative skill. In A. McCabe & C. Peterson (Eds.), Developing
narrative structure (pp. 217–253). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
McClelland, J. L., & Plaut, D. C. (1999). Does generalization in
infant learning implicate abstract algebra-like rules? Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 3, 166–168.
Merriman, W. E., & Bowman, L. L. (1989). The mutual exclusivity
bias in children’s word learning. Monographs of the Society for
Research in Child Development, 54 (3–4, No. 220).
Mervis, C., & Bertrand, J. (1994). Acquisition of the novel name-
nameless category principle. Child Development, 65, 1646–
1662.
Mills, D. L., Coffey-Corina, S., & Neville, H. (1997). Language
comprehension and cerebral specialization from 13 to 20
months. Developmental Neuropsychology, 13, 395–445.

192
Language Development in Childhood
Minami, M., & McCabe, A. (1995). Rice balls and bear hunts:
Japanese and North American family narrative patterns. Journal
of Child Language, 22, 423–446.
Morgan, J., & Demuth, K. (1996). Signal to syntax: Bootstrapping
from speech to grammar in early acquisition. Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Naigles, L. (1990). Children use syntax to learn verb meanings.
Journal of Child Language, 17, 357–374.
Naigles, L. (1996). The use of multiple frames in verb learning via
syntactic bootstrapping. Cognition, 58, 221–251.
Naigles, L. (1998). Developmental changes in the use of structure in
verb learning. In C. Rovee-Collier, L. Lipsitt, & H. Haynes
(Eds.), Advances in infancy research (Vol. 12, pp. 298–318).
London: Ablex.
Naigles, L. R., & Hoff-Ginsberg, E. (1998). Why are some verbs
learned before other verbs? Effects of input frequency and struc-
ture on children’s early verb use. Journal of Child Language, 25,
95–120.
Nelson, D. A. (1997). Social interaction and sensitive phases for
song learning: A critical review. In C. T. Snowdon & M.
Hausberger (Eds.), Social inﬂuences on vocal development
(pp. 7–23). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Nelson, K. (1988). Constraints on word learning? Cognitive Devel-
opment, 3, 221–246.
Neville, H. J., Nicol, J. L., Barss, A., Forster, K. I., & Garrett, M.
(1991). Syntactically based sentence processing classes: Evi-
dence from event-related brain potentials. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 3, 151–165.
Newport, E. L., & Aslin, R. N. (2000). Innately constrained learn-
ing: Blending old and new approaches to language acquisition.
In S. C. Howell, S. A. Fish, & T. Keith-Lucas (Eds.), Proceed-
ings of the 24th Boston University Conference on Language
Development (pp. 1–21). Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press.
Newport, E. L., Gleitman, H., & Gleitman, L. R. (1977). Mother, I’d
rather do it myself: Some effects and non-effects of maternal
speech style. In C. E. Snow & C. A. Ferguson (Eds.), Talking
to children: Language input and acquisition (pp. 109–150).
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Ninio, A., & Snow, C. E. (1999). The development of pragmat-
ics: Learning to use language appropriately. In W. C. Ritchie &
T. K. Bhatia (Eds.), Handbook of child language acquisition
(pp. 347–386). New York: Academic Press.
Ochs, E., & Schieffelin, B. B. (1979). Developmental pragmatics.
New York: Academic Press.
Pearson, B. Z., Fernandez, S. C., Lewedeg, V., & Oller, D. K.
(1997). The relation of input factors to lexical learning by bilin-
gual infants. Applied Psycholinguistics, 18, 41–58.
Perani, D., Paulesu, E., Galles, N. S., Dupous, E., Dehaene, S.,
Bettinardi, V., Cappa, S. F., Fazio, F., & Mehler, J. (1998). The
bilingual brain: Proﬁciency and age of acquisition of the second
language. Brain, 121, 1841–1852.
Pinker, S. (1984). Language learnability and language develop-
ment. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Pinker, S. (1994). The language instinct: How the mind creates
language. New York: Morrow.
Pinker, S. (1999). Words and rules. New York: Basic Books.
Pinker, S., & Bloom, P. (1990). Natural language and natural
selection. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 13, 707–784.
Plaut, D., & Kello, C. (1999). The emergence of phonology from the
interplay of speech comprehension and production: A distributed
connectionist approach. In B. MacWhinney (Ed.), The emer-
gence of language (pp. 381–416). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Plunkett, K. (Ed.). (1998). Language acquisition and connection-
ism. East Sussex, UK: Psychology Press.
Prasada, S., & Choy, J. (1998, November). The role of syntactic
structure in the interpretation of proper nouns. Paper presented
at the 23rd Annual Boston University Conference on Language
Development, Boston.
Premack, D. (1986). Gavagai! Or the future history of the animal
language controversy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Reese, E., & Fivush, R. (1993). Parental styles of talking about the
past. Developmental Psychology, 29, 596–606.
Reznick, J. S., Corley, R., & Robinson, J. (1997). A longitudinal
twin study of intelligence in the second year. Monographs of
the Society for Research in Child Development, 62 (1, Serial
No. 249).
Saffran, J. R., Aslin, R. N., & Newport, E. L. (1996). Statistical
learning by 8-month-old infants. Science, 274, 1926–1928.
Schieffelin, B. B., & Ochs, E. (Eds.). (1986). Language socializa-
tion across cultures. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press.
Senghas, A. (1995). The development of Nicaraguan Sign Language
via the language acquisition process. In D. MacLaughlin & S.
McEwen (Eds.), Proceedings of the 19th Boston University Con-
ference on Language Development (pp. 543–552). Somerville,
MA: Cascadilla Press.
Senghas,A. (2000). The development of early spatial morphology in
Nicaraguan Sign Language. In S. C. Howe, S.A. Fish, & T. Keith-
Lucas (Eds.), Proceedings of the 24th Boston University Confer-
ence on Language Development (pp. 696–707). Somerville, MA:
Cascadilla Press.
Shatz, M. (1992). A forward or backward step in the search for
an adequate theory of language acquisition? Social Develop-
ment, 1, 2.
Shatz, M. (1994). A toddler’s life: Becoming a person. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Shatz, M., Hoff-Ginsberg, E., & MacIver, D. (1989). Induction and
the acquisition of English auxiliaries: the effects of differentially
enriched input. Journal of Child Language, 16, 121–140.
Siskind, J. M. (1996). A computational study of cross-situational
techniques for learning word-to-meaning mappings. In M. R.

References
193
Brent (Ed.), Computational approaches to language acquisition
(pp. 39–91). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Slobin, D. I., Gerhardt, J., Kyratzis, & Guo, J. (Eds.). (1996). Social
interaction, social context, and language: Essays in honor of
Susan Ervin-Tripp. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Snow, C. E., & Hoefnagel-Hohle, M. (1978). The critical period for
language acquisition: Evidence from second language learning.
Child Development, 49, 1114–1128.
Springer, A., & Deutsch, G. (1981). Left brain, right brain. San
Francisco: W. H. Freeman.
Stiles, J., Bates, E. A., Thal, D., Trauner, D., & Reilly, J. (1998).
Linguistic, cognitive, and affective development in children
with pre- and perinatal focal brain injury: A ten-year overview
from the San Diego longitudinal project. In C. Rovee-Collier,
L. Lipsitt, & H. Hayne (Eds.), Advances in Infancy Research
(Vol. 12, pp. 131–164). Stamford, CT: Ablex.
Stromswold, K. (1998). The genetics of spoken language disorders.
Human Biology, 70, 297–324.
Stromswold, K. (2001). The heritability of language: A review and
metaanalysis of twin, adoption and linkage studies. Language,
77, 647–723.
Tamis-LeMonda, C. S., Bornstein, M. H., Kahan-Kalman, R.,
Baumwell, L., & Cyphers, L. (1998). Predicting variation in
the timing of linguistic milestones in the second year: An events-
history approach. Journal of Child Language, 25, 675–700.
Theakston, A., Lieven, E., Pine, J., & Rowland, C. (2001). The role
of performance limitations in the acquisition of verb-argument
structure: an alternative account. Journal of Child Language, 28,
127–152.
Tomasello, M. (1992). First verbs: A case study of early grammati-
cal development. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Tomasello, M. (1992). The social bases of language acquisition.
Social Development, 1, 67–87.
Tomasello, M. (1994). Can an ape understand a sentence? A review
of Language comprehension in ape and child by E. S. Savage-
Rumbaugh et al. Language & Communication, 14, 377–390.
Tomasello, M. (2000). Do young children have adult syntactic
competence? Cognition, 74, 209–253.
Tomasello, M., Call, J., Nagell, K., Olguin, R., & Carpenter, M.
(1994). The learning and use of gestural signals by young chim-
panzees: A trans-generational study. Primates, 35, 137–154.
Tomasello, M., & Farrar, M. J. (1986). Joint attention and early
language. Child Development, 57, 1454–1463.
Tomasello, M., Kruger, A., & Ratner, H. (1993). Cultural learning.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 16, 495–552.
Tomasello, M., & Todd, J. (1983). Joint attention and lexical acqui-
sition style. First Language, 4, 197–212.
Valian, V. (1991). Syntactic subjects in the early speech of American
and Italian children. Cognition, 40, 21–81.
Vear, D., Naigles, L., Hoff, E., & Ramos, E. (2001, December, 5–8).
An investigation of the syntactic ﬂexibility within young chil-
dren’s early verb development: Evidence from a cross-sectional
diary study. Paper presented to the Early Lexicon Acquisition
Conference, Lyon, France.
Weber-Fox, C. M., & Neville, H. J. (1996). Maturational constraints
on functional specializations for language processing: ERP and
behavioral evidence in bilingual speakers. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 8, 231–256.
Wexler, K. (1999). Maturation and growth of grammar. In W. C.
Ritchie & T. K. Bhatia (Eds.), Handbook of child language
acquisition (pp. 55–111). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Weylman, S. T., Brownell, H. H., & Gardner, H. (1988). “It’s what
you mean, not what you say”: Pragmatic language use in brain-
damaged patients. In F. Plum (Ed.), Language, communication,
and the brain (pp. 229–244). New York: Raven Press.
Woodward, A. L., & Markman, E. M. (1998). Early word learning.
In D. Kuhn & R. S. Siegler (Eds.), Handbook of child psychol-
ogy: Vol. 2. Cognition, perception, and language (5th ed.,
pp. 371–420). New York: Wiley.
Woodward, A. L., Markman, E. M., & Fitzsimmons, C. M. (1994).
Rapid word learning in 13- and 18-month-olds. Developmental
Psychology, 30, 553–556.


CHAPTER 8
Cognitive Development in Childhood
DAVID HENRY FELDMAN
195
THREE REVOLUTIONS
195
The Cognitive Revolution
196
The Revolution in Language Acquisition
196
Intelligence and Artiﬁcial Intelligence
197
The Piagetian Revolution
197
MAIN FEATURES OF THE PIAGETIAN SYSTEM
198
Universals
199
Invariant Sequence
199
Transitions
199
Logical Structures
200
Constructivism
200
PROBLEMS WITH PIAGET’S THEORY AND EFFORTS 
TO RESPOND TO THEM
201
Neo-Piagetian Contributions
202
Vygotsky and Sociocultural Theories
203
CONTEMPORARY TRENDS
204
The Universal Versus Individual
Cognitive Development
204
Efforts at Integration
205
FUTURE DIRECTIONS IN COGNITIVE DEVELOPMENTAL
THEORY AND RESEARCH
206
REFERENCES
207
As a distinct subﬁeld of developmental psychology, cognitive
development has about a 50-year history. Prior to the 1950s,
the ﬁeld had few specialists in cognitive development. A re-
lated area, the study of learning in children, goes back to the
beginnings of the ﬁeld (e.g. see Thorndike, 1914; Watson,
1913), but the theoretical frameworks within which the study
of learning was carried out differ sharply from those that
came to prominence after about the middle of the twentieth
century. Learning was conceptualized primarily in terms of
behavioral principles and association processes, whereas cog-
nitive development emerged from the cognitive revolution,
the revolution in psycholinguistics, and especially Piaget’s
work on children’s reasoning about a myriad of subjects like
space, time, causality, morality, and necessity (Kessen, 1965;
Piaget, 1967, 1970). Therefore, although superﬁcially similar,
research and theory on learning versus research and theory on
cognitive development represent very different histories and
very different perspectives.
The present chapter deals mainly with broader theories
that have been devised to try to explain how the mind grows
and transforms. Its time frame extends from about the middle
of the twentieth century to the present time. It does not deal
directly with related topics in cognitive psychology such
as learning, perception, attention, motivation, and memory;
these are seen as more properly belonging to the larger ﬁeld
of cognition, of which cognitive development represents a
part of the overall story (Flavell, 1977). The chapter also does
not address the topic of language development, found in a
separate chapter in this Handbook (see the chapter by Hoff in
this volume). Language development has emerged as a sub-
stantial research topic in its own right, and although closely
related to more general issues in cognitive development, it is
now a specialty area large enough to merit separate treatment.
Its roots are separate as well, springing from the debates
between behaviorism and nativism as explanations for lan-
guage acquisition. Indeed, there are specialists in cognitive
development who may not know a great deal about language
development, and (although less likely) vice versa.
THREE REVOLUTIONS
The ﬁeld of cognitive development became a separate area
of developmental psychology largely as a consequence of
three sets of related events that all occurred around the
middle of the last century: the cognitive revolution (Bruner,
1986; Gardner, 1985; Miller, 1983), the language revolution
(Chomsky, 1957), and the Piagetian revolution (Flavell, 1963;
Piaget, 1970). All three of these revolutions had the quality in
common that they opened up the black box, so to speak, of the

196
Cognitive Development in Childhood
mind and set as a goal the exploration of the mental processes
and mental structures that control thought—particularly
humanthought.Priortotheserevolutions,psychology(atleast
on the North American continent) was largely dominated by
behavioristic and positivistic perspectives that eschewed what
they viewed as speculation about the inner workings of the
mind (Boring, 1950; Gardner, Kornhaber, & Wake, 1996). As
the combined effects of the three new approaches accumu-
lated, the study of mental processes, how they work, and how
and why they develop became central to the ﬁeld of develop-
mental psychology. Thus emerged the new specialty of cogni-
tive development.
Each of the three revolutions had important inﬂuences on
the form that the ﬁeld of cognitive development would take.
Although there were other inﬂuences to be sure, it is fair to
say that the end of the 1960s largely set the shape and contour
of cognitive development as a ﬁeld of study. Although any
one of the three might have been sufﬁcient to inspire a
new specialty in cognitive development, it is the synergistic
impact of the three that gives the ﬁeld its distinctive form.
Because of its central role in the ﬁeld and because of its
continuing inﬂuence on all areas of cognitive development,
this chapter focuses on Piaget and the Genevan tradition,
summarizing its main contributions and the main lines of
criticism that have been mounted in recent decades. Although
three revolutions gave rise to the ﬁeld of cognitive develop-
ment, one of them (the Piagetian revolution) has been so far
the most inﬂuential and most enduring.
Prior to 1960, few scholars labeled themselves as cogni-
tive developmentalists. From 1960 through the end of the
century, hundreds of scholars were trained in and pursued
research careers in cognitive development, largely because of
the excitement and challenge of the work done in Geneva.
After brieﬂy reviewing some of the main features of the
other two primary sources of inspiration for the ﬁeld of cog-
nitive development, a more detailed review of the Piagetian
system and its features are presented.
The Cognitive Revolution
From the newly emerging ﬁeld of cognition, the assumption
that there are important mediating processes that internally
organize and direct behavior was integrated into the study of
cognitive development from the start. The study of cognition
focused on control of motor processes, perception, attention,
association, and memory—processes too ﬁne-grained for
most cognitive developmentalists. But topics like problem
solving strategies, hypothesis formation, skill acquisition,
skill sequences, classiﬁcation, and hierarchical organization
processes have been of great interest to researchers and
theorists in the ﬁeld (e.g., Brainerd, 1978; Case, 1972;
Fischer, 1980; Flavell, 1977; Klahr, 1984; Siegler, 1981,
1996). The ﬁeld rapidly broadened its reach to embrace some
more socially and culturally weighted topics like social cog-
nition and moral reasoning (e.g., Ainsworth, 1973; Kohlberg,
1973; Miller, 1983). The hallmark of virtually all research
inspired by the study of cognition has been its emphasis on
identifying, describing, and explaining the inner workings of
thought, the ways in which thought evolves, and how knowl-
edge and understandings are achieved. These more general
issues are prominent in most research and theory in cognitive
development.
The Revolution in Language Acquisition
The inﬂuence of the revolution in language was essentially
twofold: It showed that mentalistic approaches to speech
were necessary; also, it proposed that linguistic structures
were innate and required no special environmental circum-
stances for them to appear. With Chomsky’s publication of
Syntactical Structures (1957), the identiﬁcation of a set of
mental rules that guide the production of an inﬁnity of speech
forms helped transform the study of language from a behav-
iorally oriented to a mentally oriented enterprise. Chomsky’s
debates with Skinner and others (e.g., Chomsky, 1972)
cracked the hold that behavioral analysis held on the ﬁeld
of research on language and successfully questioned the
adequacy of association rules to account for the diversity of
speech forms that exist.
The second major inﬂuence of cognitive linguistics was
less immediate in its impact but no less important. A central
assumption of the approach of Chomsky and his followers
was that linguistic rules are native and natural to human
beings. It assumed that human beings come into the world
equipped with a language acquisition device or language
module that contains all the information necessary for each
individual to become a user of human speech (barring
organic deﬁcit, of course; Bruner, 1986; Chomsky, 1957;
Piattelli-Palmerini, 1980).
With the nativist assumption as its inspiration, the seeds
were planted for two important strains of work to germinate.
One attempted to specify the nature of innate modules for
various forms of human thought beyond speech (e.g., face
recognition, space, music, dance, time, quantity) and the
rules that underlie each module (Carey, 1985; Fodor, 1980,
1983; Gardner, 1983; Keil, 1984, 1989). Another strain set
out to establish the existence of abilities and skills, including
theories and ontological distinctions present even in the ear-
liest months of life (e.g. Gelman, 1998; Gopnik & Meltzoff
1997; Spelke & Newport, 1998). Thus, along with a set of

Three Revolutions
197
core domains and privileged content areas, the ﬁeld began to
seek a set of core cognitive capabilities, some of which are
quite sophisticated, that are natural to human minds from the
outset (Bates, Thal, & Meacham, 1991; Gelman, 1998;
Greenﬁeld, 2001; Spelke, 2001). These lines of work in turn
were challenging to the Piagetian tradition and led to reac-
tion and response from both sides (see Piattelli-Palmerini,
1980).
Intelligence and Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Although not quite as inﬂuential, two other areas of
research—one that predates the ﬁeld of cognitive develop-
ment and the other appearing at about the same time—need
to be mentioned to complete the picture of the main ingredi-
ents of the ﬁeld during its 50-year history. The study of intel-
ligence (usually expressed in IQ or G terms) dates from at
least the beginning of the twentieth century and has provided
a foil against which other approaches to cognitive develop-
ment have railed. The effort to simulate cognitive processes
using computer programming techniques has in turn pro-
vided a demanding criterion against which claims for the
adequacy of accounts of cognitive development have often
been evaluated.
The ﬁeld of artiﬁcial intelligence has added a degree of
rigor and precision to many of the efforts to study particular
instances of problem solving or skill acquisition (e.g.,
Siegler, 1981, 1984). Essentially, if a team of researchers is
successful in getting a computer to behave in ways that sup-
port their claims for a learning process of a particular kind,
their claims are supported by the accomplishment. More re-
cently, the study of simulated neural networks has provided a
challenge that is (in certain respects) even more demanding
than efforts to explain transformation and change in cognitive
structures through computer simulation (Elman et al., 1996;
J. A. Feldman, 1981; Plunkett & Sinha, 1992).
The Piagetian Revolution
As John Flavell (1998) has written of Piaget (quoting another
source), estimating the inﬂuence of Piaget on develop-
mental psychology is like trying to estimate the inﬂuence of
Shakespeare on English literature. In other words, Piaget’s
impact was (and in many respects still is) incalculable. For
the study of cognitive development, three inﬂuences have
been particularly important for the direction in which the
ﬁeld has gone; these inﬂuences are the emphasis on the de-
velopment of universal cognitive structures, the claim that all
cognitive structures are constructed by the individual child
(neither taught by others nor innate), and the necessity of
explaining novel structures through processes that account
for transitions from earlier and less powerful to later and
more powerful forms of reasoning (Beilin, 1985; Piaget,
1963, 1970, 1971b).
Other important inﬂuences of Piaget and the Genevan re-
search enterprise include the increasing emphasis on explain-
ing changes in logical reasoning as the central goal of the
work, the tendency to study scientiﬁc reasoning (space, time,
causality, necessity) over other possible topics (e.g., learning
school subjects, artistic areas, physical development), and a
tendency to de-emphasize the importance of language and
thus separate mainstream cognitive development work from
work on language acquisition.
When Piaget began his work in the early 1920s, he worked
as an assistant in the laboratory of T. H. Simon, the French re-
searcher who was the co-inventor of the standardized intelli-
gence test (Bringuier, 1980; Gardner et al., 1996). Piaget
found the psychometric approach to intelligence deeply prob-
lematic and quite intentionally set out to deﬁne intelligence in
a very different way.
Rather than ﬁnding out whether children know the right
answers to standard questions, Piaget believed that children’s
reasoning and the ideas that they generated were of greater
interest than was the correctness of their responses. And he
found the set format of psychometric procedure to be conﬁn-
ing and constraining in what could be discovered about the
child’s mind and how it deals with the challenges of the
world (Gardner et al., 1996).
Piaget’s efforts to redeﬁne intelligence as the development
of cognitive structures of a certain sort has not been com-
pletely successful; most people—professional and nonpro-
fessional alike—would still say that intelligence is the quality
estimated by IQ tests (Neisser et al., 1996).
Cognitive Development as a Separate Field
The ﬁeld of cognitive development split off from the ﬁeld of
psychometric intelligence virtually from its beginnings in
Geneva. Each approach to intelligence was pursued largely
without regard to the other. By the late 1960s or early 1970s,
most people in the ﬁeld of cognitive development would not
have considered psychometric studies of intelligence as part
of their ﬁeld of study—and vice versa for those whose work
was primarily psychometric; they would have identiﬁed
themselves as belonging to the ﬁeld of individual differences
or differential psychology. Only during the most recent
decades have there been serious efforts to bring the two ap-
proaches to intellectual development into a productive rela-
tionship (e.g., Elkind, 1976; Fischer & Pipp, 1984; Gardner,
1983, 1993).

198
Cognitive Development in Childhood
Piaget’s work and the work of his many colleagues and
collaborators was well known before the 1950s. Piaget’s ﬁrst
ﬁve books, written during the 1920s and 1930s, were widely
read and often quoted. It was not until the publication of John
Flavell’s inﬂuential text on Piaget appeared in 1963, how-
ever, that a major shift in orientation occurred. Prior to the
Piagetian breakthrough, the ﬁeld of learning was dominated
by behaviorally oriented learning paradigms such as those
proposed by Pavlov, Thorndike, Watson, and Skinner. Psy-
chometrics was inﬂuential in the applied areas of education,
business, the military and civil service, but—as mentioned
previously—was largely seen as a separate ﬁeld from the
study of learning and problem solving. Although there were
no doubt other inﬂuences, Flavell’s book on Piaget seemed to
catalyze a dramatic shift from behavioral theory to cognitive
constructivism as the consensus paradigm for the emerging
ﬁeld (Flavell, 1963).
In arguing that Piaget’s work deserves the most serious
study, Flavell (1963) warned against dismissing the theory
too hastily:
Piaget’s system is susceptible to a malignant kind of premature
foreclosure. You read his writings, your eye is drawn at once
to its surface shortcomings, and the inclination can be very
strong to proceed no further, to dwell on these. . . . A case could
be made that Piaget’s system has suffered precisely such a fate
for a long time, and that only recently has there been any sus-
tained effort to resist the siren of criticism in favor of trying to
extract underlying contributions. (p. 405)
Partly through efforts like those of Flavell and partly because
of the joint inﬂuence of the other shifts in ﬁelds like linguis-
tics and cognition, the ﬁeld of child development rushed
toward Piaget and the Genevan school with great energy, both
positive (e.g., Ginsburg & Opper, 1988; Green, Ford, &
Flamer, 1971; Murray, 1972; Tanner & Inhelder, 1971) and
negative (e.g., Bereiter, 1970; Brainerd, 1978; Gelman, 1969;
Trabasso, Rollins, & Shaughnessy, 1971). The 1960s and
1970s saw a veritable torrent of studies, reviews, books, and
articles replicating, extending, challenging, and attempting to
apply Piagetian theory and research. In the 1970 edition of
Carmichael’s Manual of Child Psychology (Mussen, 1970),
Piaget had his own chapter, the only instance in which a con-
temporary ﬁgure wrote about his or her own work (Piaget,
1970). Piaget was cited 96 times in the index of the volume,
with a number of the citations being several pages long—a far
greater representation than that for any other single ﬁgure;
Freud was cited 20 times, all single-page citations, and Erik
Erikson was cited twice. Jerome Bruner, who helped establish
the inﬂuence of Piaget with his own brand of constructivist
cognitive development, was cited 60 times in the Manual.
By the next edition of the Handbook of Child Psychology
(Mussen, 1983), an entire volume was devoted to cognitive
development (with John Flavell as one of its editors), and
Piaget’s citations had increased to 113, with the word passim
added 22 times (compared with none in 1970). Clearly,
Piaget’s importance in the ﬁeld of cognitive development
was very evident in how the ﬁeld responded to his work. Six
of the 13 chapters in the 1983 Manual were directly based on
work done in or inspired by Genevan research and theory. A
separate ﬁeld within child development had been established
largely based on Piaget’s work.
In the most recent edition of the Handbook of Child
Psychology (Damon, 1998), the number of citations of
Piaget is still high, but there are fewer than in the previous
edition; this may be for several reasons, but it is fair to say
that the place of Piaget’s work at the center of the ﬁeld was
shaken from its place until recently. More generally, the ﬁeld
of cognitive development itself has shown some signs of di-
minished visibility. In the current decade cognitive develop-
ment has had a tendency to show signs of waning as a major
subﬁeld of developmental psychology, perhaps because
more specialized areas like brain development, neonativist
frameworks, language development, artiﬁcial intelligence,
and dynamic systems approaches have moved to center
stage.
Piaget’s enormous inﬂuence began to lessen after his
death in 1980, when Vygotsky’s more sociocultural approach
to development began to eclipse Piaget’s as the century
moved toward its ﬁnal decade (Bruner, 1986). Although still
arguably a cognitive developmentalist, Vygotsky’s frame-
work could be equally plausibly thought of as social, cultural,
historical, or educational as easily as it could be called cogni-
tive (Glick, 1983; Vygotsky, 1978).
More recently, Genevan work has been gaining attention
again in the ﬁeld as efforts to explain, extend, elaborate
and—where necessary—modify Piaget’s theory have shown
increasing momentum (e.g., Beilin, 1985; Case, 1991; D. H.
Feldman, 2000; Fischer, 1980; Flavell, 1998; Gelman, 1979).
Examining how the theory has waxed and waned is a produc-
tive way to follow the movements of the ﬁeld of cognitive
development.
MAIN FEATURES OF THE PIAGETIAN SYSTEM
The features of Piaget’s system that found their way to wide
acceptance in the study of cognitive development are too
numerous to mention, but ﬁve seem particularly important.
These are (a) an emphasis on universals in the development
of cognitive structures; (b) an assumption that there are

Main Features of the Piagetian System
199
invariant sequences of stages and substages in cognitive
development; (c) transitions between stages and substages
must be explained, particularly given the assumption that
there are a number of broad, qualitative advances in reason-
ing structures; (d) the main goal of cognitive development is
to acquire a set of logical structures that underlie reasoning in
all domains, including space, time, causality, number, and
even moral judgment; and (e) that all new structures are con-
structed by the individual child, who seeks to understand the
world in which she or he lives, rather than imposed from the
outside by the environment or expressed as a direct biologi-
cal function of growth.
Universals
The study of child development has tended to focus on nor-
mative and general qualities of children as they grow up, but
that tendency did not extend to intellectual development until
Piaget’s work became prominent. Partly to develop an anti-
dote to what he considered to be an unhealthy emphasis on
differences between and among individual children, Piaget
wanted to build a theory of cognitive development that would
show the common patterns of intellectual development
that are shared—regardless of gender, ethnicity, culture, or
history.
By choosing to study universals, Piaget and his group
showed that every human being is naturally curious and a
naturally active learner, sufﬁciently well equipped to con-
struct all of the essential cognitive structures that characterize
the most powerful mind known. In other words, Piaget sacri-
ﬁced the ability to shed light on differences between and
among individuals (see Bringuier, 1980) in order to shine a
beam on those qualities that are distinctive to the growing
human mind generally. In Piaget’s world, all children
are equally blessed with the necessary equipment to build a
set of cognitive structures that are the equal of any ever
constructed.
Invariant Sequence
The assumption of invariant sequence gives direction and
order to cognitive development. The idea that a child must
begin with the ﬁrst set of challenges in a given area and then
move in order through to the last step was a powerful claim
that generated a great deal of reaction. There are those within
the Genevan inner circle who began to back away from the
strong form of the claim, especially when data from studies
around the world cast doubt on the accuracy of the claim
that all children go through a sequence of four large stages
from sensorimotor (ages 0–18 months), to preoperational
(2–6 years), to concrete operations (6–12 years), to formal
operations (about 12 years onward).
Less controversial—but still very important to the
theory—are a number of sequences that describe progress of
certain more limited concepts such as the object concept,
seriation, and many others (Bringuier, 1980; Ginsburg &
Opper, 1988; Piaget, 1977).Although some Genevans backed
away from the stronger claims of the sequence of stages of
the theory (see Cellerier, 1987; Karmiloff-Smith & Inhelder,
1975; Sinclair, 1987), it appears that Piaget never relaxed his
claim that all normal children go through the four large-scale
stages, reaching the ﬁnal stage sometime during adolescence
(D. H. Feldman, 2000). In a ﬁlm made a few years before he
died, Piaget mentioned stages and sequences more than a
dozen times (Piaget, 1977).
Transitions
Perhaps the most controversial feature of Piagetian theory is
its mechanism for trying to account for movement from one
stage to another (at whatever level of generality the stage is
proposed). For this purpose, Piaget borrowed and adapted
ideas primarily from the ﬁelds of biology and physics. His
main goal in proposing the so-called equilibration model was
to offer a plausible account of qualitative change in the struc-
tures underlying the child’s reasoning that were neither em-
pirical nor innate in origin (e.g., see Piattelli-Palmarini,
1980).
For Piaget, the only kind of transition process that made
sense was one that put an active, curious, goal-oriented child
at the center of the knowledge-seeking enterprise—a child
that would make sustained efforts to build representations
and interpretations that became ever more veridical and
adaptive of the objects in the world (Bringuier, 1980).
Piaget assumed that a child seeks to build accurate represen-
tations of the objects important to her or him and to build
powerful systems of interpretation to better understand these
objects and their relationships to one another and to the child
him- or herself.
The notions of equilibrium and systems dynamics from
physics were integrated with notions of adaptation and orga-
nization from biology to form a mechanism for accepting rel-
evant information (accommodating) and interpreting it using
available categories, rules, hierarchies, and conceptual prop-
erties available at the time (assimilating). Change in the
available instruments for knowing the world come about
when existing ways to interpret things are perceived to be in-
adequate and an apprehension that better ones must be con-
structed provides needed motivation. The readiness of a
growing cognitive system to undergo change is assumed to

200
Cognitive Development in Childhood
include some maturational readiness to enable the system to
transform, along with sustained efforts on the part of the child
to bring about changes perceived to be essential to additional
understanding of the world.
Piaget’s theory assumed that the equilibration process is a
lifelong effort representing more or less stable outcomes of
the functional invariants of organization and adaptation that
are the inherent goals of all efforts to build cognitive struc-
tures. The effort is never complete; rather, moves through a
sequence of four systemwide transformations, resulting in a
set of formal organizational structures that provide the most
powerful means of understanding the world available to
human minds.
It should be noted that Piaget was never fully satisﬁed
with his efforts to account for transitions (e.g., see
Bringuier, 1980; Piaget, 1975). One of the last projects he
took on was his revision of the equilibration model, an indi-
cation of just how vital he felt this aspect of the theory was
to its success.
Logical Structures
For Piaget, the ability to use the rules and principles of
logical reasoning was the hallmark and the highest goal of
human cognitive development. He did not necessarily mean
by logical reasoning the set of formal algorithms and tech-
niques of the professional logician. Closer to his meaning
would be to describe the goal of cognitive development to be
a mind that functions like a well-trained natural scientist—
with widespread use of systematic, hypothetico-deductive
reasoning: hypothesis testing, experimental design, appropri-
ate methods for gathering information, and rigorous stan-
dards of proof. It is not too great a distortion of Piaget’s
intent to describe the end of his cognitive developmental
model as the mind of a biologist, mathematician, chemist, or
physicist.
Later in his career, Piaget began to believe that he had
perhaps overly emphasized formal logic as an appropriate ref-
erence for the kinds of cognitive structures his last stage rep-
resented (see Beilin, 1985; Ginsburg & Opper, 1988). He
explored a number of alternative processes and frameworks
that might better capture his image of what the formal opera-
tions stage is about (e.g., Ginsburg & Opper, 1988; Inhelder,
de Caprona, & Cornu-Wells, 1987; Piaget, 1972). Thus the
term logical for the ﬁnal stage in Piaget’s system may be less
adequate than originally thought, but what seems clear is that
Piaget never abandoned his belief that all children achieve a
version of formal operations. He thought this in spite of the
fact that many scholars—including some within his own
inner circle—began to doubt this claim (e.g., see Beilin, 1985;
Commons, Richards, & Ammons, 1984; D. H. Feldman,
2000; Inhelder et al., 1987).
Constructivism
If there has been a triumph of the Genevan school, it is no
doubt its emphasis on constructivist explanations of cogni-
tive development. Prior to Piaget, most approaches to mind
were either empiricist or rationalist in nature. That is to say,
either it was assumed that the child’s mind was a function of
the speciﬁc history of experiences that formed it, including
systematic events in the environment (e.g., sunrise and sun-
set), purposeful efforts to shape the mind (e.g., teaching,
discipline, etc.), or chance events (e.g., accidents, earth-
quakes, war, etc.); or it was assumed that the mind was
formed through some process, such as genetic endowment,
supernatural intervention, reincarnation, and so on, beyond
the control of the individual.
Piaget rejected both of these long-standing sources of
explanation, and instead he proposed that mind is constructed
as an interaction between a mind seeking to know and a
world with certain inherent affordances (Gibson, 1969) that
give rise to certain kinds of knowledge. The idea of interac-
tion is intended to go beyond a vacuous invocation that both
nature and nurture are involved in development and to try to
propose a rigorous set of processes that explain the construc-
tion of cognitive structures (see the previous section of this
chapter entitled “Transitions”) through logical-mathematical
and physical-empirical experience (often labeled operative
and ﬁgurative in Piagetian theory; see Milbrath, 1998).
Although Piaget’s version of constructivism is not uni-
versally accepted, there are few major streams of current
cognitive developmental research and theory that do not
have constructivist assumptions of one sort or another.
Piaget’s then-revolutionary assumptions of a curious, active,
knowledge-seeking child, a child who wants to know and
understand the world around her or him, is a feature of virtually
all major frameworks in the ﬁeld of cognitive development
(e.g., see Damon, Kuhn, & Siegler, 1998; Liben, 1981).
Taken together, the ﬁve features of Piagetian theory just
described have transformed the landscape of the study of
cognitive development. In addition to these features, many
other contributions have had major impact. Two of the more
important of these are brieﬂy summarized in the following
discussion.
In addition to the major strands of the framework, several
other features of Piaget’s approach to cognitive development
have made their way into the ﬁeld. Methodologically, Piaget
tended to favor small, informal, exploratory forays into new
areas. For these purposes Piaget and his colleagues developed

Problems With Piaget’s Theory and Efforts to Respond to Them
201
what is now called the clinical method, based as it is on the
one-on-one interviews that are common in clinical psychol-
ogy. Over time, the clinical method of the Geneva school
evolved into a highly subtle and carefully articulated set of
ﬂexible techniques for guiding a dialogue between an inquir-
ing researcher and a participating child (Ginsburg & Opper,
1988). Although not without its own limitations, the clinical
method has gained considerable credibility within cognitive
developmental research. Many studies use a version of the
interview method often complemented with other more tradi-
tional methods such as experiments, correlational and cross-
sectional studies, and longitudinal research. Piaget tended
to be skeptical of statistics and large-scale sampling (see
Bringuier, 1980), favoring the more interpretive and analytic
approach to research.
As part of the effort to reduce the clinical method’s de-
pendence on speech and language abilities, the Genevans
invented many ingenious activities and tasks designed to
reveal the structures being acquired and the processes used to
respond to the challenges posed to children without depend-
ing upon the child’s verbal response. Several of these activi-
ties (e.g., the balance beam task) have become almost
domains of their own, with dozens and dozens of studies
done with them both inside and outside the Genevan frame-
work (e.g., Siegler, 1981, 1996). A task requiring children
to take different perspectives on a geographical landscape
(the three mountains task; is another example of a clever
activity that has been used for many different purposes. As is
often the case when an approach to research has great inﬂu-
ence, its methodological proclivities and its techniques for
gathering special information prove to be as (or more!) im-
portant than its broad theoretical or empirical claims.
There are many other inﬂuences that emanated from the
Genevan school. Some of these have become so well inte-
grated into the ﬁeld that speciﬁc citations for Piaget have
lessened. This has been particularly true in the study of infant
cognitive development, a specialty area that has exploded
since Piaget ﬁrst showed that babies were active, curious, and
surprisingly competent (Gopnik, Meltzoff, & Kuhl, 1999;
Piaget, 1967). For someone currently just entering the ﬁeld, it
would be difﬁcult if not impossible to trace the Genevan
origin of many of the research topics and techniques.
In spite of the pervasive inﬂuence that Piaget and his
many followers around the world had from the 1960s to the
1980s, as the century moved into its ﬁnal decades it appeared
that Piaget’s central place in the ﬁeld was waning—perhaps
partly because le patron himself died in 1980, or perhaps
because the ﬁeld needed to move forward in different direc-
tions. Works that criticized Piaget’s theory and that ques-
tioned the empirical ﬁndings of the Genevan school had been
part of the literature for decades, to be sure, but the weight of
the criticism seemed heavier after about 1980.
Jerome Bruner, one of the founders of the cognitive revo-
lution, one of the ﬁrst cognitive developmentalists, and an
admirer of Piaget, wrote about the rising inﬂuence of the
Russian Vygotsky:
So, while the major developmental thinker of capitalist Western
Europe, Jean Piaget, set forth an image of human development as
a lone venture for the child, in which others could not help unless
the child had already ﬁgured things out on his own and in which
not even language could provide useful hints about the concep-
tual matters to be mastered, the major developmentalist of
socialist Eastern Europe set forth a view in which growth was a
collective responsibility and language one of the major tools of
that collectivity. Now, all these years later, Vygotsky’s star is
rising in the Western sky as Piaget’s declines. (in Rogoff &
Wertsch, 1984, p. 96).
There are several themes in this quote that we discuss in more
detail later in the chapter, but at this point it is sufﬁcient to
note that one of the great leaders in the ﬁeld of cognitive de-
velopment was announcing the end of one era (Piaget’s) and
the beginning of another (Vygotsky’s). This view was widely
accepted at the time.
PROBLEMS WITH PIAGET’S THEORY AND
EFFORTS TO RESPOND TO THEM
Criticisms of various aspects of Piaget’s theory and research
program ranged from outright dismissal (e.g., Atkinson,
1983; Brainerd, 1978) to general acceptance but with a need
for modiﬁcation (e.g., Case, 1984; D. H. Feldman, 1980;
Fischer, 1980; Fischer & Pipp, 1984). There were also vig-
orous defenses of Genevan positions (e.g., Elkind, 1976;
Inhelder & Chipman, 1976; Inhelder et al., 1987).
The main problems with the theory can be summarized as
follows:
1.
The theory claimed that cognitive development was
universal but would not specify the role that maturation
plays in the process.
2.
The theory proposed that each stage of cognitive devel-
opment was a complete system—a structured whole
available to the growing child as she or he moved into
that stage. Yet empirical results indicated again and
again that children were unable to carry out many of the
tasks characteristic of a given stage, leading to charges
that the theory invoked an “immaculate transition”

202
Cognitive Development in Childhood
that happened but could not be seen (see Siegler &
Munakata, 1993).
3.
Related to the previous point is that other than proposing
a six-phase substage sequence for sensorimotor behav-
ior, the subsequent three large-scale stages of the theory
had little internal order. This problem gets worse with
each stage because each stage increases in the number of
years it encompasses—from 2, to 4, to 6, to at least 8 (see
D. H. Feldman, 2002).
4.
Formal operations, the ﬁnal stage according to the the-
ory, seemed not to be achieved by many adults (see
Commons et al., 1984; Piaget, 1972).
5.
A number of researchers claimed that stages beyond
formal operations exist and needed to be added to the
theory (e.g., Commons et al., 1984; Fischer, 1980).
6.
There was widespread dissatisfaction with the equilibra-
tion process as an explanation for qualitative shifts from
stage to stage (e.g., Brainerd, 1978; Case, 1984; Damon,
1980; D. H. Feldman, 1980, 1994; Fischer & Pipp, 1984;
Keil, 1984, 1989; Piattelli-Palmarini, 1980; Snyder &
Feldman, 1977, 1984).
7.
The theory seemed to depend too much on logic as both
a framework for describing cognitive structures and
as an ideal toward which development was supposed to
be aimed (e.g., Atkinson, 1983; Ennis, 1975; Gardner,
1979; Gardner et al., 1996). Areas of development that
were not centrally logical (art, music, drama, poetry,
spirituality, etc.) seemed to be largely beyond the
theory’s compass.
8.
The methods that the Genevan school favored, although
appropriate for exploratory research, lacked the rigor
and systematic techniques of traditional experimental
science (e.g., see Bringuier, 1980; Gelman, 1969;
Ginsburg & Opper, 1988; Klahr, 1984). Its claims were
made at such a broad and general level that it was often
difﬁcult to put them to rigorous test (Brainerd, 1978,
1980; Case, 1999; Klahr, 1984; Siegler, 1984).
9.
The theory did not deal with emotions in any systematic
way (Bringuier, 1980; Cowan, 1978 text; Langer, 1969;
Loevinger, 1976).
10. The theory did not deal with individual differences, indi-
viduality, or variability (Bringuier, 1980; Case, 1984,
1991; Fischer, 1980; Fischer & Pipp, 1984; Siegler,
1996; Turiel, 1966).
11. The theory implied that progress was a natural and
inevitable reality of cognitive development, an assump-
tion that seemed to be more and more a relic from the
nineteenth century (Kessen, 1984).
12. The theory gave little role to cultural, social, technologi-
cal, and historical forces as major inﬂuences on cogni-
tive development (e.g., Bruner, 1972; Bruner, Olver, &
Greenﬁeld, 1966; Cole & Scribner, 1981; Rogoff, 1990;
Shweder & LeVine, 1984; Smith, 1995). In particular, it
seemed to paradoxically both inspire educational reform
and at the same time offer no important role for educa-
tors (D. H. Feldman, 1980, 1994).
13. As a theory that aims to be suitable for formal analysis,
Piaget’s framework was found to have serious ﬂaws
conceptually, logically, and philosophically (Atkinson,
1983; Bereiter, 1970; Ennis, 1975; Fodor, 1980, 1983;
Lerner, 1986; Oyama, 1985, 1999; Piaget, 1970, 1971b;
Piattelli-Palmarini, 1980).
These and other criticisms of Piaget’s great ediﬁce eventually
weakened its hold on the ﬁeld and allowed other perspectives
to emerge or reemerge. As Case (1999) suggested, Piaget’s
theory was so powerful that for several decades it seemed to
overwhelm everything else. The empiricist-learning tradition
that preceded it in inﬂuence was all but swept aside, while the
cultural-historical-social tradition inspired by the writings
of Marx and Engel was unable to gain a foothold in North
American scholarly discourse. As the century drew to a close,
however, the ﬁeld began to apply (or in the case of empiri-
cism, reengage) topics raised in these other approaches to the
growing young mind.
Neo-Piagetian Contributions
The dilemma facing the ﬁeld in the post-Piaget period, as
Case (1999) pointed out, was to somehow transcend the
major weakness of the theory while preserving its consider-
able strengths. A number of divergent paths were taken to try
to achieve these ends, of which the so-called neo-Piagetians
were the earliest and closest to the original Genevan ap-
proach. The two most prominent neo-Piagetian theories were
those of Robbie Case (1984, 1991, 1999) and Kurt Fischer
(1980; Fischer & Kennedy, 1997; Fischer & Pipp, 1984).
These theories had much in common but also certain distinct
features.
Both Case and Fischer tried to preserve a version of
Piaget’s stages, but added features that made them less prob-
lematic. In both theories there is a systematic role for biolog-
ical maturational processes—processes that prepare the brain
and central nervous system for the kinds of changes in struc-
ture that the theories propose. Here they were trying to reduce
the miraculousness of the stage transition process by invok-
ing a physical enabling change to occur in the central nervous

Problems With Piaget’s Theory and Efforts to Respond to Them
203
Universal
Cultural
Discipline-
based
Idiosyncratic
Unique
Figure 8.1
Developmental regions from universal to unique.
system as part of the transition process. Both theories also
dropped the structures as a whole requirement for stages,
making movement from stage to stage both a more gradual
and more variable process. The shift from stage to stage
could take place in a number of different content domains
and in a variety of molecular sequences.
Finally, both Case’s and Fischer’s theories installed a
recursive within-stage sequence to help deal with the disor-
der that was found within Piaget’s stages, particularly those
beyond Sensorimotor behavior (see Figure 8.1 for an illustra-
tion of how Case’s and Fischer’s theories used recursive sub-
stage sequences in the stage architecture).
Although different in detail, both theories proposed a re-
curring four-phase sequence in each of the major stages (four
major stages in Case’s theory and three in Fischer’s). The
ﬁnal phase of each large-scale stage overlaps with the ﬁrst
phase of its more advanced neighbor, becoming integrated
into a new kind of organization as the system proceeds for-
ward. This feature helps make transitions less abrupt by
showing how elements from a former stage become integral
to a more advanced succeeding stage. Thus two problems in
the Piagetian formulation are addressed using recursiveness
in phases: the lack of order within the large-scale stages and
the lack of plausibility of the explanation of how a child
moves from large-scale stage to another large-scale stage
(Case, 1984, 1991, 1998, 1999; D. H. Feldman, 2000;
Fischer, 1980; Fischer & Bidell, 1998).
In these ways (and others) neo-Piagetian theories demon-
strated that some of the most intractable problems of Piaget’s
formulation could be transcended while still preserving most
of the major features of the theory. In order to accomplish
these goals, however, both theories focused on more speciﬁc
contents and narrower sets of processes, losing some of the
grandeur and overall sweep of the original. Case’s theory
dealt primarily with solving ever more complex and chal-
lenging problems through a natural ability to process more
kinds of information and construct more complex rules for
doing so. Fischer’s theory prescribed a sequence of more and
more complex skills that when acquired would allow the
child (or young adult) to deal with more and more challeng-
ing situations.
As Case (1999) noted, both his and Fischer’s theories
explicitly attempted to integrate the broader approach of
Piaget with some of the features of the empirical-learning tra-
dition that had been so inﬂuential up until the 1960s in North
America, with the result that a more variegated, ﬁne-grained
pattern could describe each child’s movement through the
sequence of broad stages that the theories proposed. Both
theories also allowed for greater impact from forces in the
child’s environment, thus restoring a major role in cognitive
development for parents, caregivers, teachers, and technolo-
gies that seemed to have been largely lost in Piaget’s frame-
work (D. H. Feldman, 1976, 1981).
Vygotsky and Sociocultural Theories
While neo-Piagetians and others identiﬁed with the rationalist-
structuralist tradition attempted to work from within the
Piagetian ediﬁce, others were sufﬁciently disillusioned with
the limitations of Genevan theory that they looked elsewhere
for inspiration. Partly in response to broader historical and cul-
tural changes (e.g., the end of the Cold War, the civil rights
movement, feminism, reactions to excessive greed in the
1980s, etc.), the works of the great Russian developmentalist
Lev Vygotsky began to make their way into the mainstream of
the ﬁeld of cognitive development following the translation
and publication of his seminal book Thought and Language
(sometimes translated as Thinking and Speech; Vygotsky,
1962).
Jerome Bruner (1962) wrote a warm and appreciative fore-
word to Thought and Language, and Piaget himself (1962)
also wrote a set of comments about the work, a rare tribute
from Geneva. Michael Cole, Sylvia Scribner, and other
scholars (e.g., Cole, Gay, Glick, & Sharp, 1971; Scribner &
Cole, 1973) began to promote the work of Vygotsky and other
Russian work as having importance for cross-cultural re-
search on intelligence and other topics. The importance of
guided assistance from others and the greater role of the so-
cial context in promoting or impeding cognitive development
were themes of these works that resonated with greater and
greater force in the ﬁeld.
The combination of increasing impatience with some of
the limitations and constraints of Piagetian theory along with
the refreshing insights into learning based on the wider circle
of inﬂuence in the Russian work started a groundswell of in-
terest in that work and also inspired new approaches based on
Soviet research and theory. Connections heretofore not easily
made began to form across disciplines such as anthropology,
comparative linguistics, history of science, and cognitive de-
velopment (e.g., Cole & Means, 1981; Rogoff & Lave, 1984;
Shweder & LeVine, 1984). Everyday activities like counting
and tailoring that would have seemed irrelevant were sud-
denly of intense interest to cognitive developmentalists (e.g.,
Carraher, Carraher, & Schliemann, 1985; Saxe, Guberman, &
Gearhart, 1987). A major new area of research and theory had

204
Cognitive Development in Childhood
been launched and would threaten to eclipse the Piagetian
hegemony.
The main features of the Vygotskiian-Russian revolution
are an emphasis on shared participation in culturally valued
activities, recognition that cultures vary in what kinds of
skills and abilities are valued, the importance of culturally
constructed and preserved tools and technologies as key
to cognitive development, and—in striking contrast to
Piaget—the absolutely central role in human cognitive
development of language (Cole & Means, 1981; Rogoff &
Lave, 1984; Shweder & LeVine, 1984; Vygotsky, 1962,
1978).
This last feature of the sociocultural revolution—the
placement of language in the theoretical center of the study of
cognitive development—helped make yet another connec-
tion that had been waiting to happen since the earliest days
of the cognitive revolution. Chomsky (1957, 1972) had
claimed that speech was an innate ability, whereas Piaget had
claimed that language was no more important than any other
symbolic system to be used in constructing cognitive struc-
tures (Bringuier, 1980; Piaget, 1970). According to Piaget,
speech structures were constructed using the same principles
and processes as other symbol systems and were based on the
same general procedures created during the ﬁrst eighteen
months of life.
These two powerful claims were apparently sufﬁcient to
keep the study of language development largely separate
from the rest of the ﬁeld of cognitive development during
most of 50-year period that it has been systematically stud-
ied (Brown, 1973; Tomasello, 1992). It was one of Piaget’s
strongest convictions that the general procedures for con-
structing cognitive structures were applied to the challenge
of speech as they were applied to the challenge of number,
causation, space, time, and many other topics (see Bringuier,
1980). This claim helped support Piaget’s view that human
cognitive development shared many of its principles and
processes of change with those of other creatures, placing
human cognitive development as one among many exam-
ples of biological adaptation, neither superior to nor funda-
mentally different from other examples (Piaget, 1971a,
1971b).
Although this view acknowledged that human cognitive
development is distinctive in certain respects (including fea-
tures like the acquisition of speech and logical reasoning),
these features did not set our species above the rest of the
organic world. The particular forms that adaptation took in
human evolution and individual development represent spe-
ciﬁc examples of general processes: birdsong and echoloca-
tion would be other instances found in other species
(Bringuier, 1980; Carey & Gelman, 1991; Piaget, 1971a,
1971b).
CONTEMPORARY TRENDS
As a new century begins, there seems to be less need in the
ﬁeld to insist that humans and other species represent
fundamentally similar forms of adaptation to the challenges
of survival. Neo-Piagetian theories have proposed systematic
biological contributions to the processes of cognitive devel-
opment without compromising the constructivist core of their
frameworks (Case, 1999; Fischer, 1980; Gelman, 1998).
There is less of an either-or quality to the discussion about the
role of nature versus nurture in development (Gottlieb, 1992;
Overton, 1998; Sternberg & Grigorenko, 1997). It is also
more widely accepted that biological aspects must be under-
stood as vital to the process of cognitive development
(Gardner, 1983). At the same time, the Piagetian assumption
is ever more widely accepted that humans construct their own
systems for representing and understanding the world and
their experience of it (Carey & Gelman, 1991; Gelman,
1998). There are increasing numbers of examples of healthy
cross-fertilization between the ﬁelds of cognitive develop-
ment and language development (although they still are
covered in different chapters in this Handbook).
The acquisition of speech is now understood to be a
remarkable human adaptation, the investigation of which is
central to understanding human cognitive development. It is
also understood that language, with its powerful evolutionary
and natural underpinnings, is constructed through a complex
set of processes that are individual, social, cultural, and
contextual (Cole & Cole, 1993). Contemporary researchers in
language development such as Elizabeth Bates (Bates et al.,
1991), Michael Tomasello (1992) and Susan Goldin-Meadow
(2000) reﬂect this trend to draw upon several traditions
(Piagetian,Vygotskiian, evolutionary, nativist, computational)
to
build
their
frameworks
for
interpreting
language
development (see also the chapter by Hoff in this volume).
The Universal Versus Individual Cognitive Development
The ﬁeld of cognitive development for most of its history has
been concerned with those sequences of changes that are
likely to occur in all children during the course of the ﬁrst
decade or two of life (D. H. Feldman, 1980, 1994; Gelman,
1998; Strauss, 1987). A consequence of this preoccupation
with universals is that the variations caused by group or
individual differences have tended to be of less interest to the

Contemporary Trends
205
ﬁeld (Thelen & Smith, 1998). Piaget reﬂects this view in his
response when asked about the individual:
Generally speaking—and I’m ashamed to say it—I’m not really
interested in individuals, in the individual. I’m interested in the
development of intelligence and knowledge. (Bringuier, 1980,
p. 86)
Efforts at Integration
Two recent theories have tried to integrate the general se-
quences of large-scale changes in cognitive development
with modular approaches to mind. The late Robbie Case
(1998, 1999; Case & Okamoto, 1996) proposed that general
stagelike structures of the Piagetian sort were part but not all
of the story of cognitive development. Playing off these uni-
versal structures were a set of more content-speciﬁc modules
of mind, each of which is particularly sensitive to and built to
process speciﬁc contents. Following from Chomsky’s work
in language (1957), a number of modular theories were pro-
posed, usually with several speciﬁc kinds of content domains
proposed (e.g., Fodor, 1980, 1983; Gardner, 1983, 1993;
Karmiloff-Smith, 1992; Keil, 1984, 1989). Examples of pro-
posed modules other than speech that appear in one or more
modular theories are music, space, gesture, number, face
recognition, and self-other understanding.
In Case’s version of an integrated framework, domain-
speciﬁc knowledge (as it is often labeled) interacts with sys-
temwide principles and constraints to form what are labeled
central conceptual structures. The content-speciﬁc nature of
the structures in designed to help explain how broad sys-
temwide structures can be formed without resorting to a rad-
ical nativist interpretation (Case & Okamoto, 1996). Rather
than formed as a consequence of the interaction of a child’s
general structures with the objects of the world, central con-
ceptual structures are formed as a consequence of the child’s
concern with certain content areas like narrative, number,
and space, each of which has distinct constraints and distinct
opportunities for learning. Because of the many ways in
which the central conceptual structures may be assembled,
Case and his colleagues argued that their theory includes
room for variation and individuality in the actual course of
development (Case & Okamoto, 1996).
A second version of an integrated theory is that of
Karmiloff-Smith (1992). In Karmiloff-Smith’s theory, gen-
eral, systemwide structures are abandoned altogether in favor
of a set of content modules that are universal: language;
the physical world and how it works; quantity; thought and
emotion; and symbolic representation. What remains constant
across modules, however, is a set of processes of representing
and rerepresenting that give the child the ability to bootstrap
from level to level, transcending constraints that each module
poses to the developing child.
Using concepts from connectionist modeling in artiﬁcial
intelligence and dynamic systems approaches (e.g., see
Thelen & Smith, 1998), Karmiloff-Smith (1992) has pro-
posed a theory that has both general processes for change and
speciﬁc-content domains within which such changes take
place. Her assumptions are that there are natural, content-
speciﬁc constraints on development, but that children con-
struct their understanding of the world through progressive
efforts to represent and reinterpret their representations of the
knowledge in each domain:
One can attribute various innate predispositions to the human
neonate without negating the roles of the physical and sociocul-
tural environments and without jeopardizing the deep-seated
conviction that we are special . . . (p. 5).
A third approach concerns itself with the range and variety
of content domains that have been established by human
effort without taking a stand one way or another on the issue
of modularity (D. H. Feldman, 1980, 1994, 1995). This ap-
proach attempts to specify the distinctive markers for cate-
gories of domains ranging from universal to unique (see
Figure 8.1). The main goal of the effort to specify the quali-
ties that mark domains in each region of the universal to
unique continuum of domains is to show that there is vast
developmental territory that is not universal, but which is
nonetheless developmental in an important sense (i.e., impor-
tant to individuals, groups, societies, and cultures; D. H.
Feldman, 1994).
Nonuniversal theory (as Feldman’s theory is called) aims
to provide a framework for knowledge and knowing that en-
compasses Piaget’s universalist framework and places it into
a context of other less universal developmental domains. By
describing the levels of various domains in each of the regions
of the universal to unique continuum, some of the commonal-
ity across domains and some of the distinctiveness of each
region and each domain are revealed (van Geert, 1997).
A more recent effort at integration is to be found in the
work of Patricia Greenﬁeld (2001). In this framework, the
kind of cognitive developmental theory that best explains how
children learn and develop is a function of the cultural context
within which the processes and activities of learning and
development take place. Based on studies in several distinct
cultural settings in the United States, Mexico, and Central
America, Greenﬁeld and her colleagues have proposed that a

206
Cognitive Development in Childhood
more Piagetian framework is most appropriate in cultural con-
text in which economic constraints on learning are minimal,
whereas a Vygotskyan framework better captures learning
and development when there is pressure to acquire particular
skills and techniques to ensure economic well-being.
For Greenﬁeld and her colleagues, there is not a single
theory that is a best ﬁt to every cultural context. Rather,
different theories will capture the experience of learning and
development depending upon the kinds of constraints imposed
by the social and cultural contexts that surround them.
The theories just described have in common that they
attempt to preserve some of the useful features of approaches
like Piaget’s that emphasize universals in cognitive develop-
ment, while at the same time trying to build into their archi-
tecture important variations within and across individuals,
groups, societies, and cultures. Case’s approach focuses on
how individuals use modules of speciﬁed content to construct
universal conceptual structures, with the primary aim to bet-
ter account for general, systemwide change than do previous
frameworks. Karmiloff-Smith abandons general, systemwide
change in favor of more domain-speciﬁc development, but
with sequences of processes of change that can be found
across domains. Thus, her theory also aims primarily to ac-
count for universals in development, but to do so in ways that
reconcile nativist and constructivist perspectives.
Nonuniversal theory is primarily intended to illustrate the
diversity in developmental domains that may engage the ener-
gies of individuals. While recognizing that there are some
domains that are universal or nearly so, as Piaget proposed, the
theory proposes that many other domains of knowledge and
skill can be conceptualized as developmental in the sense that
they are built in sequences of developmental levels and are
achieved through change processes that include qualitative
shifts in organization and functioning. By drawing attention to
common as well as distinct features of various domains, some
of which are universally achieved and others of which may be
achieved only by members of a species, a culture, a discipline,
an avocation, or even an individual, the range of topics of
concern to developmentalists is greatly expanded.
Greenﬁeld’s approach is intended less to integrate various
theoretical frameworks into a single one, but rather to add a
set of broader social and cultural considerations to the dis-
cussion of learning and development that help guide the se-
lection of one or another existing theoretical explanation. In
this respect, theories are less competing explanations for a
single truth, but rather exist as possible sources of truth, un-
derstanding, enrichment, and guidance, depending upon the
context within which they are used (Greenﬁeld, 2001).
Theories like Piaget’s and Vygotsky’s—in the context
of the universal-to-unique continuum of developmental
domains—can be better understood as dealing with different
kinds of domains: Piaget’s theory is about universals, and
Vygotsky’s is about pancultural and cultural domains (D. H.
Feldman & Fowler, 1997). Therefore, trying to determine
which theory is right and which is wrong misses the essential
point that they are about different aspects of developmental
change.
Nonuniversal theory is therefore useful in helping make
conceptual and theoretical distinctions between and among
various theories of cognitive development, but does not focus
as much on how qualitative change occurs as do Case’s and
Karmiloff-Smith’s theories (van Geert, 1997).
FUTURE DIRECTIONS IN COGNITIVE
DEVELOPMENTAL THEORY AND RESEARCH
With more than half a century of productive work behind it,
the ﬁeld of cognitive development seems well established as
a specialty area within developmental psychology. Although
dominated by the Genevan approach for much of its history,
the ﬁeld has recently reengaged some of its traditional
areas of emphasis, such as experimental learning studies and
sociocultural-historical research (Case, 1999). It has also
spawned some cross-disciplinary efforts to better deal with
the challenges of explaining systematic, qualitative change,
which is the heart of the matter for cognitive developmental-
ists. Drawing on work done in systems theory or connection-
ism from artiﬁcial intelligence, a number of contemporary
researchers have tried to build frameworks that are complex
enough to allow for many levels of description to interact
with each other to produce major change (Fischer & Bidell,
1998; Thelen & Smith, 1998; van Geert, 1991, 1997). Efforts
to model qualitative change using dynamic systems (Lewis,
2000; Thelen & Smith, 1998; van Geert, 1991) and chaos the-
ory (van der Maas & Molenaar, 1992) have shown promise as
sources of explanation for stagelike shifts. By working at a
ﬁne grain of detail, dynamic systems and other approaches
take a further step toward trying to integrate general and spe-
ciﬁc, universal and unique, commonality and variation, and
description and explanation (Lerner, 1998).
Similarly, research and theory from newly emerging dis-
ciplines like evolutionary robotics and artiﬁcial life simula-
tions have become important sources of ideas for research
and theory in cognitive development (D. H. Feldman,
2002; Norman, 1993; Varela, Thompson, & Rosch, 1993;
Wilensky & Resnick, 1999). Starting with simple sensorimo-
tor processes, detailed histories of interactions between and
among levels of activity provide rich sources of information
about change, including large-scale changes that can occur

References
207
without changing the simple processes that gave rise to the
emergent layers of activity in the system and that sustain it
(Bedeau, 1997; Thompson & Fine, 1999).
There have also been great strides made in the technologies
that permit brain imaging and of studies of the neural basis of
brain development and functioning, both of which will no
doubt have impact on the ﬁeld of cognitive development, and
perhaps vice versa (Johnson, 1998). The thrust of work in
these areas is fully consistent with the direction of other cur-
rent approaches in being interdisciplinary, systems oriented,
interactive, and constructivist (Lerner, 1998). The interactive
relations between brain and behavior—each inﬂuencing the
development of the other within the context of other systems
emerging and changing—reﬂects the growing consensus
within the ﬁeld that all levels of description, from the molec-
ular to the whole organism in context, will be necessary as-
pects of our efforts to explain cognitive development.
Finally, we may wish to conclude this brief summary of
the ﬁeld of cognitive development by noting that the bound-
aries and borders between and among aspects of human de-
velopment have become more permeable (Lerner, 1998). It
is increasingly recognized that important inﬂuences on cog-
nitive development may come from emotions, motivations,
challenges, and environmental events (Bearison & Zimiles,
1986; D. H. Feldman, 1994). Although it seems likely that a
ﬁeld called cognitive development is likely to continue to
exist within developmental psychology, the range of topics,
the variety of phenomena encompassed, and the degree of
interaction with other specialties are all likely to increase in
the decades to come. There are without doubt sufﬁcient
challenges in the study of cognitive development to keep
a cadre of researchers and theorists busy for many decades
to come.
REFERENCES
Ainsworth, M. D. (1973). The development of infant-mother attach-
ment. In B. M. Caldwell & H. N. Ricciuti (Eds.), Review of child
development research (Vol. 3, pp. 1–94). Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Atkinson, C. (1983), Making sense of Piaget: The philosophical
roots. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Bates, E., Thal, D., & Marchman, B. (1991). Symbols and syntax: A
Darwinian approach to language development. In N. Krasnegor,
D. Rumbaugh, R. Schiefelbusch, & M. Studdert-Kennedy
(Eds.), Biological and behavioral determinants of language
development (pp. 29–65). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Bearison, D., & Zimiles, H. (Eds.). (1986). Thought and emotion:
Developmental perspectives. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Bedeau, M. A. (1997). Weak emergence: Philosophical perspec-
tives. Mind, Causation, and World, 11, 374–399.
Beilin, H. (1985). Dispensable and nondispensable elements in
Piaget’s theory. In J. Montangero (Ed.), Genetic epistemology:
Yesterday and today (pp. 107–125). New York: City University
of New York, The Graduate School and University Center.
Bereiter, C. (1970). Educational implications of Kohlberg’s
cognitive-developmental view. Interchange, 1, 25–32.
Boring, E. (1950). A history of experimental psychology. New York:
Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Brainerd, C. (1978). The stage question in cognitive-developmental
theory. The Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 1, 173–182.
Bringuier, J.-C. (1980). Conversations with Jean Piaget. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Brown, R. (1973). A ﬁrst language. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Bruner, J. (1962). Introduction. In L. Vygotsky, Thought and
language (pp. v–x). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Bruner, J. (1972). The nature and uses of immaturity. American
Psychologist, 27, 1–22.
Bruner, J. (1986). Actual minds, possible worlds. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Bruner, J., Olver, R., & Greenﬁeld, P. (1966). Studies in cognitive
growth. New York: Wiley.
Carraher, T. N., Carraher, D. W., & Schliemann, A. D. (1985).
Mathematics in the streets and schools. British Journal of
Developmental Psychology, 3, 21–29.
Carey, S. (1985). Conceptual change in childhood. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Carey, S., & Gelman, R. (Eds.). (1991). The epigenesis of mind:
Essays on biology and cognition. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Case, R. (1972). Learning and development: A neo-Piagetian inter-
pretation. Human Development, 15, 339–358.
Case, R. (1984). The process of stage transition: A neo-Piagetian
view. In R. Sternberg (Ed.), Mechanisms of cognitive develop-
ment (pp. 19–44). San Francisco: W. H. Freeman.
Case, R. (1985). Intellectual development: Birth to adulthood. New
York: Academic Press.
Case, R. (1991). The mind’s staircase: Exploring the conceptual
underpinnings of children’s thought and knowledge. Mahwah,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Case, R. (1998). The development of conceptual structures. In
D. Kuhn & R. Siegler (Eds.), Handbook of child psychology:
Vol. 2. Perception, cognition, and language (5th ed., pp. 745–
800). New York: Wiley.
Case, R. (1999). Conceptual development in the child and the ﬁeld:
A personal view of the Piagetian legacy. In E. Scholnick, K.
Nelson, S. Gelman, & P. Miller (Eds.), Conceptual development:
Piaget’s legacy (pp. 23–51). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Case, R., & Okamoto, Y. (1996). The role of central conceptual
structures in the development of children’s thought. Monographs

208
Cognitive Development in Childhood
of the Society for Research in Child development, 61 (1–2, Serial
No. 246).
Cellerier, G. (1987). Structures and functions. In B. Inhelder, D.
de Caprona, & A. Cornu-Wells (Eds.), Piaget today (pp. 15–36).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Chomsky, N. (1957). Syntactic structures. The Hague, The
Netherlands: Mouton.
Chomsky, N. (1972). Psychology and ideology. Cognition, 1,
11–46.
Cole, M., & Cole, S. (1993). The development of children (2nd ed.).
New York: Scientiﬁc American Books.
Cole, M., Gay, J., Glick, J., & Sharp, D. (1971). The cultural context
of learning and thinking. New York: Basic Books.
Cole, M., & Means, B. (1981). Comparative studies of how people
think: An introduction. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Cole, M., & Scribner, S. (1981). Culture and thought: A psycholog-
ical introduction. New York: Wiley.
Commons, M., Richards, F., & Ammons, C. (Eds.). (1984). Beyond
formal operations: Late adolescent and adult development. New
York: Praeger.
Cowan, P. (1978). Piaget: With feeling. New York: Holt, Rinehart, &
Winston.
Damon, W. (1980). Patterns of change in children’s social reason-
ing. Child Development, 51, 101–107.
Damon, W. (1998). Preface. In W. Damon & R. Lerner (Eds.),
Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 1. Theoretical models of
human development (5th ed.). New York: Wiley.
Damon, W., Kuhn, D., & Siegler, R. (Eds.). (1998). Handbook of
child psychology: Vol. 2. Cognition, perception, and language
(5th ed.). New York: Wiley.
Elkind, D. (1976). Child development and education: A Piagetian
perspective. New York: Oxford University Press.
Elman, J., Bates, E., Johnson, J., Karmiloff-Smith, A., Parisi, D., &
Plunkett, K. (1996). Rethinking innateness: A connectionist per-
spective on development. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Ennis, R. (1975). Children’s ability to handle Piaget’s propositional
logic: A conceptual critique. Review of Educational Research,
45, 1–41.
Feldman, D. H. (1976). The child as craftsman. Phi Delta Kappan,
58, 143–149.
Feldman, D. H. (1980). Beyond universals in cognitive develop-
ment. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Feldman, D. H. (1994). Beyond universals in cognitive development
(2nd ed.). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Feldman, D. H. (1995). Learning and development in nonuniversal
theory. Human Development, 38, 315–321.
Feldman, D. H. (2002, June). Piaget’s stages revisited (and some-
what revised). Presented at the Annual Meeting of the Jean
Piaget Society, Philadelphia, PA.
Feldman, D. H., & Fowler, C. (1997). The nature(s) of developmen-
tal change: Piaget, Vygotsky and the transition process. New
Ideas in Psychology, 15, 195–210.
Feldman, J. A. (1981). A connectionist model of visual memory. In
G. Hinton & J. Anderson (Eds.), Parallel models of associative
memory. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Fischer, K. W. (1980). A theory of cognitive development: The
control and construction of hierarchies of skills. Psychological
Review, 87, 477–531.
Fischer, K. W., & Bidell, T. (1998). Dynamic development of
psychological structures in action and thought. In W. Damon &
R. Lerner (Eds.), Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 1. Theoret-
ical models of human development (5th ed., pp. 467–561). New
York: Wiley.
Fischer, K. W., & Kennedy, B. (1997). Tools for analyzing the many
shapes of development: The case of self-in-relationships in
Korea. In K. A. Renninger & E. Amsel (Eds.), Change and de-
velopment: Issues of theory, method, application (pp. 117–152).
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Fischer, K. W., & Pipp, S. (1984). Processes of cognitive develop-
ment: Optimal level and skill acquisition. In R. Sternberg
(Ed.), Mechanisms of cognitive development (pp. 45–80). San
Francisco: W. H. Freeman.
Flavell, J. (1963). The developmental psychology of Jean Piaget.
New York: Van Nostrand.
Flavell, J. (1977). Cognitive development. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice Hall.
Flavell, J. (1998). Piaget’s legacy. In A. Woolfolk (Ed.), Readings
in educational psychology (pp. 31–35). Boston: Allyn and
Bacon.
Fodor, J. (1980). On the impossibility of acquiring “more powerful”
structures. In M. Piattelli-Palmerini (Ed.), Language and learn-
ing: The debate between Jean Piaget and Noam Chomsky
(pp. 142–149). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Fodor, J. (1983). The modularity of mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Gardner, H. (1979). Developmental psychology after Piaget: An
approach in terms of symbolization. Human Development, 22,
73–88.
Gardner, H. (1983). Frames of mind. New York: Basic Books.
Gardner, H. (1985). The mind’s new science: A history of the cogni-
tive revolution. New York: Basic Books.
Gardner, H., Kornhaber, M., & Wake, W. (1996). Intelligence: Mul-
tiple perspectives. Fort Worth, TX: Harcourt Brace.
Gelman, R. (1969). Conservation acquisition: A problem of learning
to attend to relevant attributes. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 7, 167–187.
Gelman, R. (1979). Why we will continue to read Piaget. The
Genetic Epistemologist, 8, 1–3.
Gelman, R. (1998). Domain speciﬁcity in cognitive development:
Universals and nonuniversals. In M. Sabourin, F. Craik, &
M. Robert (Eds.), Advances in psychological science: Vol. 2.

References
209
Biological and cognitive aspects (pp. 557–579). East Sussex,
UK: Psychology Press.
Gibson, E. J. (1969). Principles of perceptual learning and develop-
ment. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Ginsburg, H., & Opper, S. (1988). Piaget’s theory of intellectual
development (3rd ed.). New York: Prentice-Hall.
Glick, J. (1983). Piaget, Vygotsky, and Werner. In S. Wapner & B.
Kaplan (Eds.), Toward a holistic developmental psychology
(pp. 51–62). New York: Hudson Hills Press.
Goldin-Meadow, S. (2000). Beyond words: The importance of
gestures to researchers and learners. Child Development, 71,
231–239.
Gopnik, A., & Meltzoff, A. N. (1997). Words, thoughts, and theo-
ries. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gopnik, A., Meltzoff, A., & Kuhl, P. (1999). The scientist in the crib.
New York: HarperCollins.
Gottlieb, G. (1992). Individual development and evolution: The
genesis of novel behavior. New York: Oxford University Press.
Green, D., Ford, M., & Flamer, G. (Eds.). (1971). Measurement and
Piaget. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Greenﬁeld, P. (2001). Culture and universals: Integrating social and
cognitive development. In L. Nucci, G. Saxe, & E. Turiel (Eds.),
Culture, thought, and development (pp. 231–277). Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Inhelder, B., & Chipman, H. (Eds.). (1976). Piaget and his school.
New York: Springer-Verlag.
Inhelder, B., de Caprona, D., & Cornu-Wells, A. (Eds.). (1987).
Piaget today. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Johnson, M. (1998). The neural basis of cognitive development. In
W. Damon (Series Ed.), D. Kuhn, & R. Siegler (Vol. Eds.),
Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 2. Cognition, perception,
and language (5th ed., pp. 1–49). New York: Wiley.
Karmiloff-Smith, A., & Inhelder, B. (1975). If you want to get
ahead, get a theory. Cognition, 3, 195–212.
Keil, F. (1984). Mechanisms in cognitive development and the struc-
tures of knowledge. In R. Sternberg, (Ed.), Mechanisms of cog-
nitive development (pp. 81–100). San Francisco: W. H. Freeman.
Keil, F. (1989). Concepts, kinds, and cognitive development.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kessen, W. (1965). The child. New York: Wiley.
Kessen, W. (1984). Introduction: The end of the age of develop-
ment. In R. Sternberg (Ed.), Mechanisms of cognitive develop-
ment (pp. 1–18). San Francisco: W. H. Freeman.
Klahr, D. (1984). Transition processes in quantitative development.
In R. Sternberg (Ed.), Mechanisms of cognitive development
(pp. 101–139). San Francisco: W. H. Freeman.
Kohlberg, L. (1973). The claim to moral adequacy of the highest
stage of moral development. Journal of Philosophy, 70,
630–646.
Langer, J. (1969). Theories of development. New York: Holt,
Rinehart, & Winston.
Lerner, R. (1986). Concepts and theories of human development
(2nd ed.). New York: Random House.
Lerner, R. (1998). Theories of human development: Contemporary
perspectives. In W. Damon & R. Lerner (Eds.), Handbook of
child psychology: Vol. 1. Theoretical models of human develop-
ment (5th ed., pp. 1–24). New York: Wiley.
Lewis, M. (2000). The promise of dynamic systems approaches for
an integrated account of human development. Child Develop-
ment, 71, 36–43.
Liben, L. (1981). Individuals’ contributions to their own de-
velopment during childhood: A Piagetian perspective. In R. M.
Lerner & N. Busch-Rossnagel (Eds.), Individuals as producers
of their development (pp. 117–153). New York: Academic Press.
Loevinger, J. (1976). Measuring ego development. New York:
Jossey-Bass.
Milbrath, C. (1998). Patterns of artistic development in children.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Miller, P. H. (1983). Theories of developmental psychology. San
Francisco: W. H. Freeman.
Murray, F. (1972). The acquisition of conservation through social
interaction. Developmental Psychology, 6, 1–6.
Mussen, P. (Ed.). (1970). Carmichael’s manual of child psychology.
New York: Wiley.
Mussen, P. (Ed.). (1983). Handbook of child psychology (4th ed.,
Vol. IV). New York: Wiley.
Neisser, U., Boodoo, G., Bouchard, T., Boykin, A., Brody, N., Ceci,
S., Halpern, D., Loehlin, J., Perloff, R., Sternberg, R., & Urbina,
S. (1996). Intelligence: Knowns and unknowns. American Psy-
chologist, 51, 77–101.
Norman, D. A. (1993). Cognition in the head and the world: An
introduction to the special issue on situated action. Cognitive
Science News, 17, 1–6.
Overton, W. (1998). Developmental psychology: Philosophy, con-
cepts, and methodology. In W. Damon & R. Lerner (Eds.), Hand-
book of child psychology: Vol. 1. Theoretical models of human
development (pp. 107–188). New York: John Wiley.
Oyama, S. (1985). The ontogeny of information: Developmental sys-
tems and evolution. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Oyama, S. (1999). Locating development: Locating developmental
systems. In E. Scholnick, K. Nelson, S. Gelman, & P. Miller
(Eds.), Conceptual development: Piaget’s legacy (pp. 185–208).
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Piaget, J. (1962). Comments on Vygotsky’s critical remarks.
Preface. In L. Vygotsky, Thought and language (pp. 1–14).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Piaget, J. (1963). The origins of intelligence in children. New York:
W. W. Norton.
Piaget, J. (1967). Six psychological studies. New York: Random
House.
Piaget, J. (1970). Piaget’s theory. In P. Mussen (Ed.), Carmiachael’s
manual of child psychology (pp. 703–732). New York: Wiley.

210
Cognitive Development in Childhood
Piaget, J. (1971a). Biology and knowledge. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Piaget, J. (1971b). The theory of stages in cognitive development. In
D. Green, M. Ford, & G. Flamer (Eds.), Measurement and
Piaget (pp. 1–11). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Piaget, J. (1972). Intellectual evolution from adolescence to adult-
hood. Human Development, 15, 1–12.
Piaget, J. (1975). The development of thought: Equilibration of cog-
nitive structures. New York: Viking Penguin.
Piaget, J. (1977). Piaget on Piaget [Motion picture]. New Haven,
CT: Yale University Press. (Distributed by Yale University
Media Design Studio, New Haven, CT, 06520).
Piattelli-Palmarini, M. (Ed.). (1980). Language and learning: The
debate between Jean Piaget and Noam Chomsky. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Plunkett, K., & Sinha, C. (1992). Connectionism and developmental
theory. British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 10, 209–254.
Rogoff, B. (1990). Apprenticeship in learning. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Rogoff, B., & Lave, J. (Eds.). (1984). Everyday cognition.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Rogoff, B., & Wertsch, J. (Eds.). (1984). Children’s thinking in the
zone of proximal development. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Saxe, G., Guberman, S., & Gearhart, M. (1987). Social processes
in early number development. Monographs of the Society
for Research in Child Development, 52 (2, Serial No. 216).
Scribner, S., & Cole, M. (1973). Cognitive consequences of formal
and informal instruction. Science, 182 (35), 553–559.
Shweder, R., & LeVine, R. (Eds.). (1984). Culture theory: Essays on
mind, self, and emotion. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Siegler, R. S. (1981). Developmental sequences within and between
concepts. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child
Development, 46 (2, Serial No. 189).
Siegler, R. S. (1984). Mechanisms of cognitive growth: Variation
and selection. In R. Sternberg (Ed.), Mechanisms of cognitive
development (pp. 141–162). New York: W. H. Freeman.
Siegler, R. S. (1996). Emerging minds: The process of change in
children’s thinking. New York: Oxford University Press.
Siegler, R. S., & Munakata,Y. (1993,Winter). Beyond the immaculate
transition:Advances in the understanding of change. Newsletter of
the Society for Research in Child Development, 3, 10–13.
Sinclair, H. (1987). Conﬂict and congruence in development and
learning. In L. Liben (Ed.), Development and learning: Conﬂict
or congruence (pp. 1–17). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Smith, L. (Ed.). (1995). Sociological studies. London: Routledge.
Snyder, S. S., & Feldman, D. H. (1977). Internal and external inﬂu-
ences on cognitive developmental change. Child Development,
48, 937–943.
Snyder, S. S., & Feldman, D. H. (1984). Phases of transition in cog-
nitive development: Evidence from the domain of spatial repre-
sentation. Child Development, 55, 981–989.
Spelke, E. (2001). Core knowledge. American Psychologist, 55,
1233–1243.
Spelke, E., & Newport, E. (1998). Nativism, empiricism, and the
development of knowledge. In W. Damon & R. Lerner (Eds.),
Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 1. Theoretical models of
human development (5th ed., pp. 181–200). New York: Wiley.
Sternberg, R., & Grigorenko, W. (Eds.). (1997). Intelligence, hered-
ity, and environment. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Strauss, S. (1987). Educational-developmental psychology and
school learning. In L. Liben (Ed.), Development and learning:
Conﬂict or congruence (pp. 133–157). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Tanner, J., & Inhelder, B. (Eds.). (1971). Discussions on child
development. New York: International Universities Press.
Thelen, E., & Smith, L. (1998). Dynamic systems theories. In
W. Damon & R. Lerner (Eds.), Handbook of child psychology:
Vol. 1: Theoretical models of human development (5th ed.,
pp. 563–634). New York: Wiley.
Thompson, L., & Fine, G. (1999). Socially shared cognition, affect
and behavior. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 3,
278–302.
Thorndike, E. L. (1914). The psychology of learning. New York:
Teachers College Press.
Tomasello, M. (1992). The social bases of language development.
Social Development, 1, 159–162.
Trabasso, T., Rollins, H., & Shaughnessy, E. (1971). Storage and
veriﬁcation stages in processing concepts. Cognitive Psychol-
ogy, 2, 239–289.
Turiel, E. (1966). An experimental test of the sequentiality of devel-
opmental stages in the child’s moral judgments. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 3, 611–618.
van der Maas, H., & Molenaar, P. (1992). Stagewise cognitive
development: An application of catastrophe theory. Psychologi-
cal Review, 99, 395–417.
van Geert, P. (1991). Adynamic systems model of cognitive and lan-
guage growth. Psychological Review, 98, 3–53.
van Geert, P. (1997). The draughtman’s contract. New Ideas in Psy-
chology, 15, 227–234.
Varela, F., Thompson, E., & Rosch, R. (1993). The embodied mind:
Cognitive science and human experience. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Vygotsky, L. (1962). Thought and language. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Vygotsky, L. (1978). Mind in society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Watson, J. B. (1913). Psychologist as a behaviorist views it. Psy-
chological Review, 20, 158–177.
Wilensky, U., & Resnick, M. (1999). Thinking in levels: A dynamic
systems approach to making the world. Journal of Science Edu-
cation and Technology, 8, 1–39.

CHAPTER 9
Emotion and Personality Development in Childhood
E. MARK CUMMINGS, JULIA M. BRAUNGART-RIEKER, AND TINA DU ROCHER-SCHUDLICH
211
Individual Development of Emotions and Personality
in Children
212
Relational Inﬂuences on Emotional and Personality
Development in Children
212
Normal and Abnormal Emotional and Personality
Development: A Developmental
Psychopathology Perspective
213
INDIVIDUAL DEVELOPMENT OF EMOTION
AND PERSONALITY
213
Emotions: Expression, Understanding,
and Regulation
213
Emotional Expressions: The Emergence
of Self-Conscious Emotions
213
Emotional Understanding
214
Emotion Regulation and Coping
With Stressful Situations
215
Temperament and Personality
216
RELATIONAL INFLUENCES ON EMOTION
AND PERSONALITY DEVELOPMENT
221
Parent-Child Relationships
221
A Functionalist Perspective on Emotion Regulation,
Attachment, and Personality Development
224
Marital Relationships
225
Familywide Perspective
226
Cultural Contexts
228
NORMAL AND ABNORMAL EMOTIONAL AND
PERSONALITY DEVELOPMENT: A DEVELOPMENTAL
PSYCHOPATHOLOGY PERSPECTIVE
229
Conceptualizing Personality Disorders as Processes,
Not Outcomes
230
Children of Depressed Parents
231
Resilience
231
Future Directions
233
CONCLUSION
233
REFERENCES
233
A dramatic change in views about the roles of emotions in
socioemotional development—including the relations be-
tween emotion and personality—has taken place in recent
years. The traditional perspective was that emotions were
experiential, intrapsychic events that occurred more or less
secondarily, as by-products of more signiﬁcant causal pro-
cesses and phenomena. Thus, emotions were characterized as
feelings or affects primarily limited to intrapersonal experi-
ence. Given that emotions were difﬁcult to observe, deﬁne,
and assess, little impetus therefore existed to include ac-
counts of emotions in explanations of children’s social and
personality development, and—for some scientiﬁc disciplines
(e.g., behaviorism)—the study of emotions was even regarded
as anathema to a science of behavior (Eisenberg & Fabes,
1998).
The past two decades of research and theory have
advanced different perspectives on the role and signiﬁcance
of emotions to child development. Although a consensus on
the deﬁnition and functions of emotions is not yet apparent—
reﬂecting the fact that these phenomena remain elusive and
difﬁcult to capture—various current directions in the study of
emotions place much greater emphasis on the signiﬁcance
and role of emotions in social functioning and personality
development.
Support is increasing for the view that emotions play an
important role in the appraisal and evaluation of children’s
experiences and their readiness for action in response to
contextual changes and events (Eisenberg, 1998; Oatley &
Jenkins, 1996). Emotional expressions and emotional under-
standing are elements of social communication, and appro-
priate emotional regulation may be pertinent to children’s
adaptive versus maladaptive functioning. Emotional expres-
sion and regulation are also fundamental to individual dif-
ferences between children in temperament and personality.
Moreover, according to a functionalist perspective on
emotions, emotions constitute more than what might be

212
Emotion and Personality Development in Childhood
measured as self-reported feelings. Instead, emotions are
seen as reﬂecting processes and conﬁgurations of responding
pertinent to children’s evaluation of the meaning of experien-
tial contexts in relation to their goals (Campos, Campos, &
Barrett, 1989; Jenkins, Oatlery, & Stein, 1998; Saarni,
Mumme, & Campos, 1998). Emotions are understood as part
of the child’s immediate reactions to person-environment con-
texts and of the extent to which their goals are met by ongo-
ing events (Lazarus & Folkman, 1984; Stein, Trabasso, &
Liwag, 1994). Thus, emotional functioning contributes to
processes underlying the individual’s dynamic processes of
adaptation or—alternatively—risk for the development of
psychopathology.
The present chapter aims to provide state-of-the-art cover-
age of various themes pertaining to the increasing under-
standing of the role of emotions in children’s development,
examining what is known, what is currently being done, and
in what directions future conceptualizations and research are
likely to take. Speciﬁcally, the organization of the chapter is
divided into three parts, reﬂecting a progression from (a) an
examination of individual development of emotion and
personality in children, to (b) a discussion of relational
inﬂuences, and then to (c) a consideration of emotions and
children’s adjustment.
Individual Development of Emotions and Personality
in Children
Even if one is not yet prepared to accept the assumptions of
the functionalist perspective regarding the role of emotions,
emerging directions serve to call greater attention to the role
of emotions in children’s individual development. At the
least, children’s emotional expressions and regulation are un-
derstood to inﬂuence—and be inﬂuenced by—their social in-
teractions, relationships, and contexts. Moreover, it follows
that children’s expression and regulation of emotions are rec-
iprocally related to the responses of others to their social
functioning.
Emotions and emotionality are also increasingly seen as
related to important individual differences between children
in social functioning, temperament, and personality. For
example, the conceptualization of self is related to emotional
processes (Harter, 1998), including the self-conscious emo-
tions of shame, guilt, and embarrassment (Lewis, Sullivan,
Stranger, & Weiss, 1989; Denham, 2000). Moreover,
emotions are related to fundamental differences between
individuals in personal characteristics and styles of social
functioning. Thus, attention has been called to the signiﬁ-
cance of reactivity and self-regulation—each with implica-
tions for emotional functioning—as basic dispositions of
temperament (Rothbart & Bates, 1998). Moreover, tempera-
mental differences in infancy have been linked to individual
differences in personality as individuals get older (Caspi,
1998; Caspi, Elder, & Bem, 1987).
Relational Inﬂuences on Emotional and Personality
Development in Children
Increasing emphasis is also being placed on relational inﬂu-
ences on emotional and personality development in child-
hood. A functionalist perspective on emotions is particularly
pertinent to emotional processes in social contexts viewed
from a relational perspective. Emotional expression and
functioning are closely tied to the individual’s responses to
social contexts, especially the contexts deﬁned by signiﬁcant
categories of social relationships. For example, children’s re-
lationships with parents serve as an important foundation for
emotional functioning in social situations. Thus, security of
attachment pertains to children’s emotional regulation in
stressful situations (Cassidy, 1994; Thompson & Calkins,
1994). At the same time, the quality of emotional expressions
and communications is related to the development of attach-
ments between children and parents. For example, hostile
emotional expressions and lack of emotional availability are
related to insecure attachment. The quality of emotional rela-
tionships has been related to dimensions of parenting perti-
nent to children’s socialization and personality development
(Cummings, Davies, & Campbell, 2000). Furthermore, re-
ﬂecting the signiﬁcance of emotion to relations between par-
ents and children, attachments are fundamentally deﬁned as
emotional bonds that endure over space and time (Colin,
1996).
Relational inﬂuences on children’s emotional and person-
ality development are also documented in the effects of mar-
ital functioning on children’s functioning and development
(Cummings & Davies, 1994). In particular, marital conﬂict—
including negative emotional expressions of anger and
hostility—may induce signiﬁcant emotional and behavioral
dysregulation in the children. Moreover, consistent with a
functionalist perspective on emotions, current theory sug-
gests that children’s emotions serve an appraisal function
with regard to children’s responses to marital conﬂict and
serve to organize, guide, and direct children’s reactions
(Davies & Cummings, 1994). For example, children who ap-
praise marital conﬂict as distressing are motivated to inter-
vene, whereas children who make the appraisal that parents
will be able to work out conﬂict have little motivation to me-
diate in parental disputes (Emery, 1989).
Ultimately, these various relational inﬂuences on chil-
dren’s emotional functioning do not act in isolation, but are

Individual Development of Emotion and Personality
213
likely to have cumulative effects on children’s reactions and
behaviors. For example, there is evidence that children’s
emotional security—which has implications for children’s
emotional regulation capacities and dispositions in the face
of stress—is a function of the inﬂuence of multiple family
systems, including parent-child relations and the marital sys-
tem (Cummings & Davies, 1996). Thus, in order to more
fully understand effects on personality development, under-
standing relational inﬂuences must ultimately move to the
level of including multiple sources of family and extrafamil-
ial inﬂuence. With regard to the latter, there is increasing em-
phasis on the role of culture and diversity as potentially
signiﬁcant sources of differences in responding to emotional
events in the family and in children’s dispositions towards
emotional functioning (Parke & Buriel, 1998).
Normal and Abnormal Emotional and
Personality Development: A Developmental
Psychopathology Perspective
Finally, although the study of emotional processes as norma-
tive inﬂuences on development is a relatively recent focus for
mainstream developmental research, concern about the im-
plications of disturbances in emotional and personality devel-
opment can be traced back to Freud and early psychoanalytic
theory. In recent years a convergence of emerging themes for
process-oriented perspectives on both normal and abnormal
development has found articulate expression in research and
theory from a developmental psychopathology perspective
(Cicchetti & Cohen, 1995). The study of new directions to-
ward advanced understanding of abnormal emotional and
personality development adds to the richness and breadth of
normative models for child development emerging from the
investigation of emotional and personality development.
INDIVIDUAL DEVELOPMENT OF EMOTION
AND PERSONALITY
Emotions: Expression, Understanding, and Regulation
This section presents information regarding the development
of and individual differences in the emotional system. Topics
include emotional expressions and regulation or coping of
emotions. In particular, age is examined as a factor in indi-
vidual differences in emotional functioning. As children’s
cognitive and language capacities develop, so too does
their emotional system. As is shown in the following discus-
sion, changes occur in children’s emotional expressions and
in their awareness of their own and others’ expressions
(Denham, 1998; Mascolo & Fischer, 1995); they are also
better able to describe the causes and consequences of vari-
ous emotions (Stein & Levine, 1999). In addition, children
become increasingly savvy about how and when to strategi-
cally use emotions (e.g., maximizing or minimizing them) in
relevant social situations (Saarni, 1998). They are also better
able to regulate their emotions and cope with negative feel-
ings associated with social interactions. Even within age pe-
riods, however, substantial individual differences between
children in their emotional abilities are apparent.
Emotional Expressions: The Emergence
of Self-Conscious Emotions
As children leave the toddler phase and enter into the
preschool and school-aged periods, a number of changes in
their emotional expressions can be observed. For example, the
expression of basic emotions (e.g., anger, sadness, happiness),
which are well documented to emerge in infancy (Zahn-
Waxler, Cummings, & Cooperman, 1984), starts to become
more context-dependent. In peer settings, for example, anger
and happiness are expressed more frequently than are sadness
or pain and distress (Denham, 1986). In addition, the fre-
quency with which negativity in general is expressed declines
with age (Cole, Mischel, & Teti, 1994). Emotional expres-
sions also show more complexity over time. Children’s ex-
pressions may show blends of various basic emotions. For
example, children engaging in rough-and-tumble play show
facial expressions of both anger and happiness (Cole, 1985).
However, perhaps the most signiﬁcant changes in emo-
tional expressivity emerging during early childhood follow-
ing the infancy and toddler periods are the development of
self-conscious emotions. As children’s sense of self develops,
particularly in the second and third years of life, they show
emerging emotional reactions of pride, shame, embarrass-
ment, and guilt (e.g., Lewis, Sullivan, Stanger, & Weiss,
1989; Mascolo, & Fischer, 1995). Self-conscious emotions
are important to understand, given that such emotions affect
intrapersonal and interpersonal dynamics and functioning
(Barrett, 1998). Furthermore, deﬁcits in self-conscious emo-
tions (e.g., inability to experience guilt or excessive feelings
of shame) have clinical implications across the entire life
span.
According to differential emotions theory (DET), self-
conscious emotions involve an interplay between affective
and cognitive processes (Ackerman, Abe, & Izard, 1998)—
that is, self-conscious emotions cannot operate without the
sense of self, the ability to discriminate the self and other, the
ability to sense the self and other as causal agents, and cogni-
tive evaluations or appraisal processes that enable the ability

214
Emotion and Personality Development in Childhood
to form comparisons. DET also argues that self-conscious
emotions do not have consistent signatures in expressive
behaviors over the life span. In a study comparing younger
versus older children during a situation in which they fail a
task, children younger than 42 months of age were more
likely to look away from the experimenter after failing—
perhaps indicating their concern with social evaluation from
the experimenter. In contrast, older children were twice as
likely to pout or frown (Stipek et al., 1992). Stipek and col-
leagues suspect that in both cases, younger and older children
were experiencing shame, but that shame moves from being
more externally to more internally based over time.
From a functionalist’s perspective, although self-
conscious emotions such as guilt, shame, and embarrassment
reﬂect a more general “feeling-bad-about-performance” cate-
gory, unique functions characterize each of the negative self-
conscious emotions (Barrett, 1998; Denham, 1998). For
example, when experiencing guilt, one wishes that one had
behaved differently, and one will often seek reparation. When
feeling ashamed, on the other hand, the ramiﬁcations extend
well beyond those of guilt; an offensive self—as well as of-
fensive behavior—is perceived (Denham, 1998). Moreover,
feelings of embarrassment result from processes or events
different from those involved in the feelings of shame or
guilt. Children aged 5 to 8 reported that they would be un-
likely to feel embarrassment in the presence of a passive
audience, but would feel embarrassment in the presence of a
ridiculing audience (Bennett, 1989). Thus, embarrassment—
at least during early childhood—appears to result as a func-
tion of negative evaluations from others as opposed to the
self (Denham, 1998).
Individual differences in the experience and expression of
self-conscious emotions as a function of context are also evi-
dent. In a study examining 2-year-olds’ responses to playing
with an experimenter’s “favorite doll” that breaks during
play, some children showed amending responses by trying to
resolve the situation, whereas others showed avoidance by
averting their gaze (Barrett, Zahn-Waxler, & Cole, 1993).
Barrett et al. (1993) concluded that amenders were experi-
encing feelings of guilt as evidenced by their approaching
and attempts for reparation, whereas avoiders were experi-
encing shame, given that they were withdrawing from the sit-
uation. It would be interesting to examine why some children
experience guilt and others experience shame even within the
same context.
In a study examining gender differences, Stipek et al.
(1992) found that girls show more shame and pride compared
to boys. This gender difference is interesting, given that girls
are more at risk for internalizing disorders, in which feelings
of shame and self-loathing are evident. Another interesting
gender difference is that shame and guilt are positively
correlated for girls but are distinct emotions in boys (Lewis
et al., 1992). Whether such gender differences in self-
conscious emotions are a result of socialization or of biolog-
ical differences remains to be found.
Some evidence suggests that temperament in addition to
gender is related to self-conscious emotions. In a study of
school-aged children (6–7 years), children rated higher in
internalizing components of negative affectivity were higher
on prosocial characteristics such as the tendency to experi-
ence guilt or shame. In addition, children rated higher in ef-
fortful control (e.g., impulse control) were found to be more
empathic and higher in guilt and shame (Rothbart et al.,
1994). Such ﬁndings have implications for the ease with
which a child can be socialized, as well as the development of
the conscience (Kochanska, 1993), given that emotions such
as guilt or shame remind individuals to think about rules and
standards. Research related to the association between tem-
perament and conscience is described later.
Emotional Understanding
In addition to undergoing changes between infancy and early
childhood in emotional experiences and expressions, children
become more sophisticated in their understanding of emo-
tions. Young children not only show increasing awareness of
their own emotional states, but they also become more adept at
evaluating and appropriately responding to others’ feelings
and expressions. They become able to describe the causes and
consequences of various emotions (Stein & Levine, 1999). In
addition, children become increasingly knowledgeable about
display rules—the social customs for when and to whom cer-
tain emotions are appropriate to express.
Much of what we know about children’s understanding of
emotions has stemmed from naturalistic research. Dunn and
colleagues have frequently reported on observations of chil-
dren in the family context (e.g., Dunn & Brown, 1994;
Youngblade & Dunn, 1995) or peer context (Hughes &
Dunn, 1997, 1998) because the “daily lives of young children
are full of emotional drama” (p. 230; Dunn, 1999). By age 3,
children evidence signiﬁcant increases in the frequency with
which they ask questions about others’ feeling states (Dunn,
1988). Children also appear to learn about emotions in
situations in which emotions are being experienced. For ex-
ample, Dunn and Brown (1994) reported that mothers were
more than twice as likely to talk about feelings with their
children when the children were expressing distress or anger
than when they were expressing happy or neutral states.
Moreover, children were more likely to have causal discus-
sion of feelings when they were mildly upset. In addition,

Individual Development of Emotion and Personality
215
Dunn and Brown (1993) found that those children who en-
gaged more frequently in such causal conversations were
more advanced in later tests of emotional understanding. In
particular, individual differences in children’s understanding
of emotions are important to understand because children
who have difﬁculty in identifying emotional expressions
and talking about the causes and consequences of emo-
tions have been reported to be less accepted by their peers
(Cassidy, Parke, Butkovsky, & Braungart, 1992). It is impor-
tant to keep in mind that research on children’s understand-
ing of emotions has generally been conducted on children
living in cultures in which emotional expression and discus-
sion are accepted and encouraged. Cultural display rules may
vary across cultures; thus, ﬁndings in this regard may be
moderated by culture contexts.
In addition to gaining a better understanding of emotions,
children become more aware of cultural display rules as they
move from early to later childhood. In a classic study of chil-
dren’s responses after they received an undesirable gift
(e.g., babyish toy), 6-year-olds (especially boys) were openly
negative in their expressions, and 8- to 9-year-olds (and
younger girls) showed transitional behavior in which
their arousal level was apparent (e.g., lip biting), but their
negativity was not as openly expressed (Saarni, 1984). Chil-
dren aged 10–11 (especially girls), however, were most likely
to exhibit positive behavior. Thus, older children become
better able to mask their true feelings when they understand
how their expressions might affect others. Individual differ-
ences in display rule use may be pertinent to social compe-
tence. Recently, McDowell, O’Neil, and Parke (2000)
reported that fourth-grade children—especially girls—who
used more appropriate display rules during a disappointment
task were rated as more socially competent by both teachers
and peers.
Emotion Regulation and Coping With
Stressful Situations
As Thompson (1994) has pointed out in a monograph devoted
to the topic of emotion regulation, there is surprising diversity
in the ways in which different researchers conceptualize emo-
tion regulation. Despite such diversity, most deﬁnitions of
emotion regulation include aspects surrounding a person’s
ability to modulate, control, or reduce the intensive and tem-
poral features of an emotion (Saarni & Crowly, 1990; Saarni &
Mumme, 1998; Thompson, 1994; Thompson, 1998). In addi-
tion, regulation can occur at the neurophysiological, hor-
monal, attentional, and behavioral levels (Calkins, 1994; Fox,
1994; Rothbart & Derryberry, 1981; Stansbury & Gunnar,
1994; Thompson, 1994).
The term coping has sometimes been used interchangeably
with emotion regulation (Brenner & Salovey, 1997), espe-
cially to the extent that effective coping is inseparable from
effective emotion regulation and vice versa (Saarni, 1999). In
addition, the term self-regulation has sometimes been used to
mean emotion regulation. Self-regulation, however, may be a
broader term that includes the ability to manage not only one’s
emotions but also one’s thoughts and actions in adaptive and
ﬂexible ways (Kopp, 1982).As Saarni (1999) recently pointed
out, however, self- and emotion regulation seem to be highly
related, especially in Western cultures. It is not as clear
whether self- and emotion regulation would be intertwined in
non-Western societies.
Several researchers have recently attempted to examine
the ways in which children attempt to regulate their emotions
and cope with stressful situations. Saarni (1997) interviewed
children aged 6–8 and 10–12 about the types of strategies
that children would use during various stressful situations.
The strategies that emerged, with the most adaptive strategy
listed ﬁrst and the least adaptive listed last, were problem
solving (attempting to change the situation), support seeking
from caregivers or peers (either for seeking solace or help),
distancing-avoidance, internalizing, and antisocial behaviors
(i.e., externalizing).
Rossman (1992) developed a questionnaire to assess the
coping strategies of 6- to 12-year-old children from a diverse
sample (children from a university subject pool, those from a
battered women’s shelter, and those experiencing incest).
Children were asked to describe what they did when attempt-
ing to feel better and the degree to which they felt that a partic-
ular strategy enabled them to effectively reduce negative
feelings. Similar to Saarni’s (1997) ﬁndings, the following
factors emerged: use of caregivers, solitary distraction-
avoidance, seeking out peers, self-calming behaviors (e.g.,
taking lots of deep breaths), and distressed-externalizing be-
haviors (e.g., “it helps to get in a ﬁght or hit someone”). Inter-
esting age and gender effects also emerged from this study:
girls were more likely than boys to rely on others (caregivers
and peers), and younger children were more likely to rely
on caregivers, distraction, and self-calming strategies than
were older children. Somewhat surprisingly, age-by-gender
effects also indicated that boys were more likely to report
using distressed-externalizing techniques than were girls at
younger ages, but this pattern reversed for the older ages.
Rossman (1992) also examined the degree to which the
various coping strategies predicted children’s perceptions of
self-worth. After controlling for age and gender, Rossman
found that seeking help from caregivers and self-calming
strategies were positively associated with self-worth, whereas
distress-externalizing techniques were negatively related to

216
Emotion and Personality Development in Childhood
self-worth. Thus, similar to Saarni’s (1997) rank ordering,
strategies involving either the self-reliance or seeking help
from others were more adaptive than were those involving an-
tisocial behaviors. Such externalizing behaviors may actually
reﬂect the lack of managing one’s emotions.
Whether certain styles of coping are more adaptive than
others may also depend on other factors. In a sample of
preschool-aged children, Eisenberg et al. (1993) found that
gender was a salient moderator of the effect of coping strat-
egy and social competence. More speciﬁcally, greater social
competence of boys (but not that of girls) could be predicted
by their display of adaptive strategies such as problem solv-
ing. Somewhat differently, greater social competence of girls
could be predicted from their use of avoidant coping strate-
gies. For both boys and girls, however, high emotional inten-
sity was associated with lower levels of constructive coping
and attentional control. In turn, children who showed exces-
sive negative emotionality were regarded by adults as less
mature and by their peers as less attractive as playmates.
Thus, even by the preschool period, children who are able to
manage their negativity in a more adaptive manner seem
to fare better socially.
According to Kopp (1989), caregivers play a crucial role
in serving as an external support system for the regulation of
emotions—particularly when children are very young (i.e.,
during infancy). As children’s cognitive development be-
comes more sophisticated, changes in the emotion regulation
system can be observed. During the second year of life, tod-
dlers begin to develop a more sophisticated sense of the self,
as well as the ability to understand causes of distress (Kopp,
1989). Such changes suggest that toddlers become aware of
their own distress and begin to realize that their own behav-
ior can help alleviate negative feelings. In a study involving
several emotionally laden situations, Grolnick, Bridges, and
Connell (1996) found that 2-year-olds most frequently dealt
with their distress by using active engagement with substitute
objects, regardless of the context of the situation (delay of
gratiﬁcation vs. maternal separations). In addition, toddlers
who used more active engagement were less distressed than
were those who used other types of strategies (e.g., focusing
on the forbidden toy). Thus, focusing ones’ attention away
from a task appears to help minimize negativity. Further-
more, classic studies by Mischel (e.g., 1974) have demon-
strated that children who orient their attention away from
a forbidden object are better able to delay their gratiﬁcation,
thus facilitating behavioral control as well as emotion
regulation.
However, as Saarni (1999) recently pointed out, we do not
have a systematic empirical literature that tells us what cop-
ing strategies tend to emerge at what age, especially given
that studies differ substantially on sample and contextual
characteristics. Two general patterns have emerged, how-
ever: (a) As children get older, they can generate more coping
alternatives; and (b) older children are better able to make use
of cognitively oriented coping strategies for situations in
which they have no control (e.g., Compas, Malcarne, &
Fondacaro, 1988).
Although age is one factor related to children’s differences
in emotion regulation and coping, other factors appear to
be important as well. Explaining individual differences in
emotion regulation is an important challenge to undertake
because older children who appear to have difﬁculties in
managing emotions (e.g., anger) are at risk for develop-
ing behavioral disorders (Cole, Michel, & Teti, 1994;
Dodge & Garber, 1991). Although psychopathological out-
comes may represent extreme deﬁcits in emotion regulation,
less than optimal outcomes may also occur for children who
struggle with regulating emotions. For example, Calkins
(1994) has speculated that children who have trouble manag-
ing anger may have difﬁculties in establishing positive peer
relationships.
It has been suggested that parenting contributes a great
deal to children’s ability to regulate their emotions
(Eisenberg et al., 1998). For example, in a study of 9- to
10-year-olds’ coping strategies for everyday stressful situa-
tions, Hardy, Power, and Jaedicke (1993) found that mothers
who were more supportive in moderately low-structured
homes had children who generated more coping strategies
across situations. In addition, supportive mothers also had
children who used fewer aggressive coping strategies and
more avoidant coping strategies when children perceive the
stressor as uncontrollable. Thus, parenting appears to affect
both the breadth and manner in which coping is exhibited.
Temperament and Personality 
In this section, we provide deﬁnitions of temperament and
personality and review recent work related to the structure of
each, as well as associations between temperament and per-
sonality. In addition, we examine recent research related to
biological foundations of temperament and personality, as
well as its links with social outcomes.
Deﬁnition
Much of the early work on temperament during childhood
stemmed from Thomas, Chess, and colleagues’ (1963; 1977)
seminal studies involving the New York Longitudinal Study
(NYLS). At that time, researchers and clinicians were ac-
knowledging the importance of infants’ and children’s own

Individual Development of Emotion and Personality
217
contributions to their development and the possibility that
socialization effects were bidirectional rather than stemming
solely from parents to children (Bell, 1968). Current theory
proposes that temperament is a component of the more gen-
eral domain of personality and involves individual differ-
ences in basic psychological processes such as emotionality,
activity, and attention that are relatively stable over situations
and time (Goldsmith et al., 1987; Rothbart & Bates, 1998;
Thompson, 1999). Although not all temperament researchers
have agreed on the speciﬁc dimensions that comprise tem-
perament, there is a general consensus that temperament
arises at least in part from hereditary differences—and that
temperament inﬂuences and is inﬂuenced by experience
(Rothbart, Ahadi, & Evans, 2000).
By contrast, current work proposes that personality en-
compasses much more than temperament does—and that it
includes skills, habits, values, perceptions of the self, and the
relation of the self to others and events (Rothbart & Bates,
1998). Those signiﬁcant others who provide physical and
emotional support, care, and security are believed to help
shape personality (Ainsworth, Blehar, Waters, & Wall, 1978).
Furthermore, personality is inﬂuenced by broader social ex-
periences involving neighborhood, school, and community
contexts (Eccles & Roeser, 1999), as well as children’s
emerging morality, conscience, and gender identity (Turiel,
1998). Likewise, personality inﬂuences how experiences are
construed and interpreted and the choices that a person might
make (Thompson, 1999). Thus, similar to temperament, per-
sonality is inﬂuenced by and inﬂuences experiences over
time. Moreover, some investigators have proposed that tem-
perament might be viewed as early-appearing personality
characteristics. Thus, the conceptual borders between tem-
perament and personality as individual difference constructs
are to some extent blurred. Despite the conceptual overlap
between temperament and personality, however, empirical
investigations involving both domains are quite sparse (see
Caspi, 1998, for a recent review).
Structure
Compared to the structure of temperament during infancy, it
seems that temperament during childhood involves fewer
dimensions (Rothbart & Bates, 1998), especially if one
considers temperament and personality to be organized
hierarchically with broad traits (e.g., extroversion) represent-
ing the most general dimensions and lower levels including
the more speciﬁc traits (e.g., energetic). Based on factor
analyses of maternal report data on items from the NYLS for
3- to 8-year-olds, three higher-order factors were found:
Negative Emotionality, Self-Regulation, and Sociability
(Sanson, Smart, Prior, Oberklaid, & Pedlow, 1994). Simi-
larly, Rothbart’s Childhood Behavior Questionnaire (which
was developed in relation to infant and toddler versions),
which is used for children aged 3–8, consistently yields three
broad temperament factors (Rothbart, Ahadi, & Hershey,
1994). The ﬁrst factor is Surgency, which includes approach,
high-intensity pleasure, activity level, and shyness (re-
versed). The second factor, Negative Affectivity, consists of
discomfort, fear, anger-frustration, sadness, and soothability
(reversed). The third factor has been labeled Effortful Con-
trol, and includes scales related to inhibitory control, atten-
tional focusing, low-intensity pleasure, and perceptual
sensitivity. Interestingly, the three dimensions from both San-
son et al.’s (1994) and Rothbart et al.’s (1994) research re-
semble adult personality structures such as the Big Three
(Tellegen, 1985)—Extroversion (Sociability and Surgency),
Neuroticism (Negative Emotionality and Negative Affectiv-
ity), and Constraint (Self-Regulation and Effortful Control).
Other child temperament-personality researchers have gener-
ally found support for ﬁve factors that are equivalent to the
adult Big Five (see Halverson, Kohnstamm, & Martin’s 1994
book for an extensive review). Thus, in addition to Extrover-
sion, Neuroticism, and Conscientiousness (similar to Con-
straint), there is also Agreeableness and Openness. Such a
structure has been found in child personality research despite
differences in sampling and methodology (Caspi, 1998).
Although most theorists have conceptualized and mea-
sured temperament or personality on quantitative dimensions,
some have argued for a categorical approach. By placing
children into categories or typologies, one is able to take an
ipsative, or a person-centered approach to understanding
the child (Caspi & Silva, 1995). More typically, however,
temperament and personality researchers have used a vari-
able-centered approach, which involves the examination of
multiple factors or dimensions, but each dimension is exam-
ined separately. In the end, both approaches may be useful.
Categories or typologies are helpful because they suggest that
a particular constellation of dimensions are greater than the
sum of their parts, so to speak. Indeed, Thomas and Chess’s
(1977) original approach to temperament included both
dimensional ratings (e.g., approach-withdrawal) and categor-
ical aspects (e.g., difﬁcult child).
As pointed out by Aksan et al. (1999), however, one
difﬁculty with using grouping techniques is deciding what to do
about cases that are ambiguous. If children are forced into a
classiﬁcation, within-group heterogeneity can be high (even if
between-group differences are high).Thus, using the restriction
that heterogeneity is minimal, Aksan et al. (1999) found that
two typologies emerged for preschool-aged children: con-
trolled-nonexpressive and noncontrolled expressive. Although

218
Emotion and Personality Development in Childhood
these two types show overlap with previous typology work,
only 15% of the children satisﬁed both between-category dis-
tinctiveness and within-category homogeneity criteria. Thus,
categorical approaches may be helpful in capturing children’s
general dispositional styles, but also may be limited if within
categories, children show wide variability.
Links Between Early Temperament and Later Personality
Despite the limitations of dimensional or categorical ap-
proaches, there has been some evidence that temperament
and personality are related. However, it is also important to
note that the amount of research to date that has examined the
stability between temperament over time or between early
temperament and later personality is still quite sparse (Caspi,
1998). Challenging questions pertaining to major develop-
mental issues may prevent a simple examination of the sta-
bility between early and later dispositional styles. As pointed
out by Thompson (1999), for example, can the same tem-
peramental attribute be measured at different ages using age-
appropriate measures? Just because we assign the same
label to a dimension (e.g., Activity) at two ages, do we neces-
sarily examine the same behaviors at both times or do we
expect that there are qualitative changes in how a “trait” is
expressed? In the following discussion, we highlight several
studies that have examined stability in early temperament
and later temperament or stability in early temperament
and later personality. See also Caspi (1998), Rothbart and
Bates (1998), and Thompson (1999) for more extensive
reviews.
Using categorical approaches, Kagan, Resnick, and
Gibbons (1989) found that toddlers who were selected at 14
and 20 months because they were highly inhibited were
found to be more cautious and fearful at age 4. In a long-term
longitudinal study, Caspi and Silva (1995) found signiﬁcant
associations between 3-year temperament groups and 15- to
18-year personality: Young children who were temperamen-
tally undercontrolled were more likely to show higher levels
of aggression, danger seeking, and impulsivity during adoles-
cence. Inhibited children at age 3, on the other hand, were
more likely to be rated as cautious and restrained during
adolescence.
Studies relying on quantitative dimensions have found
modest levels of stability over time. For example, Rothbart,
Derryberry, and Hershey (2000) found modest stability be-
tween infant temperament and 7-year temperament for
certain dimensions and a lack of stability for others. In brief,
frustration-anger, fear, and approach showed signiﬁcant sta-
bility over time, but activity and smiling-laughter did not.
Rothbart et al. (2000) makes an interesting conclusion that
those dimensions showing signiﬁcant stability are considered
to reﬂect the more psychobiologically rooted dimensions.
Recently, Goldsmith, Lemery, Aksan, and Buss (2000)
used both dimensional and categorical approaches in the
study of stability of childhood temperament from age 4 to 7.
They found evidence for moderate stability (and some
change), regardless of how temperament was measured. Chil-
dren rated by their mothers as higher in fearfulness, anger,
positive affect, and emotion regulation at age 4 were rated
higher relative to their peers at age 7 on these dimensions
(rs ranged from .55 to .77; Goldsmith et al., 2000). Based on
behaviors in the lab, children rated as Bold, Intermediate, or
Shy at age 4 generally were found to show consistent group
classiﬁcation at age 7. One interesting result, however, was
that greater stability in classiﬁcation was found for the Bold
group, suggesting that the Intermediate and Shy groups were
more susceptible to change (Goldsmith et al., 2000).
Psychobiological Links With Temperament
and Personality
Recent research involving childhood temperament has been
examining the extent to which biological indexes map onto
temperament characteristics. Studies that apply a psychobio-
logical approach to temperament basically ﬁnd converging
evidence that temperamental attributes are rooted at least in
part in biological bases. This convergence occurs despite the
wide variety of methods applied and markers examined as
potential indicators (Goldsmith et al., 2000). Behavioral
genetics is a methodology that examines the extent to
which temperament and personality attributes show heritabil-
ity. Other research has relied more on direct physiological
markers. The most common indexes that are used include
heart rate and heart rate variability, cortisol, and brain activ-
ity as measured by an electroencephalogram (EEG). Several
studies of child emotionality have also examined skin
conductance.
Behavioral Genetics.
Behavioral genetic approaches
seek to determine the degree to which individual differences
in temperamental or personality characteristics are related to
both heritability and environmentality (see Caspi, 1998, and
Goldsmith, Buss, & Lemery, 1997, for the most recent re-
views of behavioral genetic research on temperament and
personality during childhood). In short, behavioral genetic
methods compare the degree to which family members’
characteristics show resemblance and whether the amount
of similarity varies as a function of genetic relatedness.

Individual Development of Emotion and Personality
219
In general, most temperamental characteristics show some
degree of heritability (e.g., around 40%), as well as non-
shared environmental effects (e.g., those experiences that
make family members different; Daniels & Plomin, 1985), in
spite of whether samples involved twins or adoptive siblings,
or whether the temperament measure was based on parent
ratings or lab observations. We ﬁnd it interesting, however,
that several studies have found an exception to this general
pattern. Factors involving positive affect and approach
(Plomin et al., 1993)—as well as effortful control (Goldsmith
et al., 1997)—have signiﬁcant effects due to the shared fam-
ily environment. Such ﬁndings suggest that future research
should examine what speciﬁc types of shared family experi-
ences promote (or impede) the development of positive affect
and effortful control. Behavioral genetic ﬁndings on heri-
tability also indicate that future research should examine the
speciﬁc physiological mechanisms that link genotype with
phenotype—that is, for traits showing substantial heritability,
how do gene systems eventually become manifested in be-
havior? And what are the environmental conditions that
might moderate such biological inﬂuences?
Cortisol.
Cortisol is the primary product of the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenocortical 
system 
(HPA)—a
major stress-sensitive system (Palkovitz, 1987). Under con-
ditions of stress, basal regulation of the HPA system is over-
ridden, causing elevated levels of cortisol. At one time, it was
predicted that elevated cortisol levels would be higher for in-
hibited children compared with uninhibited children (Kagan,
Reznick, & Snidman, 1987). However, elevated cortisol lev-
els have not been consistently found among behaviorally
inhibited children (Tennes & Kreye, 1985). For example,
Nachmias et al. (1996) found elevated cortisol levels during
novel situations if toddlers were behaviorally inhibited and in
an insecure parent-child attachment relationship. It is possi-
ble that securely attached inhibited children are better able to
rely on their attachment ﬁgure, have effective emotional-
regulatory skills, or both—any of which could then buffer the
stress response. Moreover, Gunnar (1994) has argued that
behavioral inhibition may actually reduce the likelihood of
an HPA stress response in certain novel situations—that is,
behavioral inhibition may serve as a coping response that
reduces the child’s engagement with overly arousing and
unpredictable events. Indeed, a recent study by deHaan,
Gunnar, Tout, Hart, and Stansbury (1998) seems to suggest
that although cortisol levels were elevated for children show-
ing shy, anxious, and internalizing behavior in the home set-
ting, higher cortisol responses in a new preschool context
were associated with aggressive, angry, and assertive styles
of behavior. Thus, HPA responses are complex and may re-
ﬂect not only certain temperamental attributes, but also the
context within which the child is examined.
Heart Rate and Heart Rate Variability.
Studies exam-
ining relations between heart rate and temperament have
been fairly consistent; there has been some disagreement,
however, about the interpretation of ﬁndings. In a study by
Kagan et al. (1987) in which inhibited children showed
higher resting heart rates, as well as less variable heart rate
patterns, Kagan concluded that such patterns reﬂected the
activation of the sympathetic nervous system. Porges (1992)
has argued, however, that cardiac activity in response to
novel situations reﬂects activity in the parasympathetic
nervous system (PNS). He has suggested that the increased
and less variable heart rate patterns of inhibited children
might reﬂect PNS withdrawal—and thus low vagal tone.
Studies examining vagal tone (e.g., as indexed by respiratory
sinus arrhythmia; RSA) have shown that increased baseline
RSA and greater suppression of RSA following a stressor is
generally associated with more positive temperamental char-
acteristics (see Porges & Doussard-Roosevelt, 1997, for a
review).
Electroencephalogram (EEG).
Fox 
and 
Davidson
(1984) proposed that the left and right hemispheres were
specialized: Activation in the left hemisphere would be asso-
ciated with positive affect and approach, whereas activation
in the right hemisphere would be related to negative affect
and avoidance. Some empirical support has been found—
particularly with infants, but also with children. For exam-
ple, Fox, Calkins, and Bell (1994) showed that infants
9–24 months of age with stable right frontal EEG asymme-
try exhibited more fearfulness and inhibition to labora-
tory situations. Similarly, at age 4, children showing right
frontal asymmetry also expressed more reticence and social
withdrawal.
Skin Conductance.
In a study of children in kindergar-
ten and the second grade, Fabes et al. (1994) found a positive
correlation at both ages between facial distress (when watch-
ing ﬁlms of children being hurt in an accident) and skin con-
ductance. In addition, skin conductance was inversely related
to prosocial behaviors, suggesting that high skin conductance
was reﬂective of a dysregulated state. In a similar study of
somewhat older children (third- and sixth-graders), skin con-
ductance was positively related to facial distress and nega-
tively related to mothers’ reports of general helpfulness (but
only for girls; Fabes et al., 1993).

220
Emotion and Personality Development in Childhood
Early Temperament and Personality and Later
Social Outcomes
Much of the work focusing on outcomes of temperament
has concentrated on children’s adjustment—such as internal-
izing and externalizing problems and conduct disorders—
and other areas of developmental psychopathology (see
Rothbart & Bates, 1998, for a review). In this section, we
provide a brief overview of the research on long-term predic-
tions of temperament and later adjustment. In addition, other,
less widely studied areas—but nonetheless exciting research
topics—are covered. More speciﬁcally, new research exam-
ining temperament’s prediction to the development of the
conscience, as well as its prediction to peer status, will be
covered.
Behavioral Adjustment
Rothbart, Posner, and Hershey (1995) have discussed several
ways in which temperament would relate to later adjustment:
directly, indirectly, or by moderated linkages (e.g., tempera-
ment X environment interactions). Much of the work on tem-
perament and behavioral adjustment has focused on direct
linkages, in which a particular trait is associated with the
development of an adjustment pattern (Rothbart & Bates,
1998). For example, in the Bloomington Longitudinal Study,
infants and toddlers rated high on difﬁcultness (high in fre-
quency and intensity of negative affect) had more externaliz-
ing and internalizing problems in the preschool through
middle-childhood periods (Bates & Bayles, 1988; Bates
et al., 1991).
Temperament might also affect the development of later
adjustment in an indirect manner. A child’s temperament
might elicit certain parenting behaviors, which in turn af-
fect the child’s development; in this case, a child’s tempera-
ment is evoking certain responses from the environment
(Scarr & McCartney, 1983). Alternatively, a child’s tempera-
ment might predispose him or her to seek out certain experi-
ences. In this case, a child is playing a more active role in
creating (or niche-picking) his or her environment (Scarr &
McCartney, 1983). There is some empirical support for indi-
rect effects of temperament, although it should be noted that
relatively few studies have examined indirect effects. In ad-
dition, several studies have found that models testing for di-
rect effects ﬁt better than do those including indirect effects
(e.g., McClowry et al., 1992). One recent study, however, ex-
amining complex relations among concurrent temperament,
externalizing problems, social factors, and drug use in sixth-
graders, found signiﬁcant mediation (Wills, Windle, &
Cleary, 1998)—that is, higher activity level and negative
emotionality predicted more drug use. Furthermore, external-
izing adjustment problems mediated the link between tem-
perament and drug use. Finally, associations between
externalizing problems and drug use were mediated by nega-
tive life events and by having friends who used drugs.
Temperament might also interact with environmental
characteristics. For example, goodness-of-ﬁt models suggest
that it is not the child’s temperament that will determine
later behavioral problems; rather, how that child’s tempera-
ment ﬁts with his or her environment will affect the devel-
opment of behavioral outcomes (Thomas & Chess, 1981).
Again, however, relatively few studies test these ideas
empirically. Moreover, many of the studies examining
temperament-environment interactions have not controlled
for main effects (Rothbart & Bates, 1998). One study that
did examine main effects in conjunction with interaction ef-
fects, however, found modest support for temperament X
environment effects. Hagekull and Bohlin (1995) found that
toddlers who were rated as temperamentally easy and who
were in higher-quality child care were less aggressive at age
4 than were easy children in lower-quality care. In contrast,
difﬁcult children’s aggressiveness was not inﬂuenced by
quality of care.
Conscience
Kochanska (1993) proposed two temperamental factors likely
to be associated with the development of conscience:
the child’s proneness to distress and inhibitory control. Chil-
dren prone to distress—particularly fear—may be afraid
to commit a wrongful act. In addition, children with high
inhibitory control may have an easier time preventing
or “putting the brakes on” a behavior that violates rules.
In addition, children with low fear, inhibitory control, or
both may be harder to socialize. Kochanska found that for
highly fearful children, maternal compliance strategies that
de-emphasize power are correlated with child compliance—
not only concurrently at 3.5 years, but also a year later
(Kochanska, 1997).
In a study involving 2.5-year-olds, children rated by their
mothers as higher in temperamental negative reactivity were
more likely to show noncompliant behavior in the lab (refus-
ing to clean up toys and touching a prohibited objected).
Moreover, mothers of more negatively reactive children used
more power-assertive methods as a means of controlling their
children (Braungart-Rieker, Garwood, & Stifter, 1997). Thus,
negative reactivity appears to affect parent behavior as well
as children’s internalized control abilities.

Relational Inﬂuences on Emotion and Personality Development
221
Peer Status
There are numerous reasons to expect that temperament
would predict peer status, especially given that temperament
is related to behavioral adjustment (e.g., Bates et al., 1985);
in turn, antisocial and prosocial behaviors are related to
peer acceptance (e.g., Coie, Dodge, & Kupersmidt, 1990).
Surprisingly, however, there is relatively little research
examining the extent to which temperament directly or indi-
rectly relates to peer relationships (Maszk, Eisenberg, &
Guthrie, 1999). There is some evidence, for example, that the
ability to regulate emotions or manage anger contributes to
peer sociometric status (Hubbard & Coie, 1994). Children
who can regulate their arousal engage in fewer aggressive in-
teractions with peers (Gottman, Katz, & Hooven, 1996). In a
recent short-term longitudinal study that controlled for earlier
peer status, Maszk et al. found that children aged 4 to 6 years
of age who were higher in emotional intensity and lower in
regulation (as reported by teachers) were rated as more
popular by their peers. An interesting result was that earlier
levels of social status did not predict later emotionality or
regulation (Maszk et al., 1999).
In summary, research and theory supports the importance
to children’s socioemotional development of individual dif-
ferences between children in emotional expression and
regulation and the role of emotional processes in broader
organizations of temperament and personality. The construct
of emotion regulation offers particularly exciting promise for
future advances, especially as understood in relation to tem-
perament and personality development. However, more work
is needed to further clarify the deﬁnitions of these constructs,
their interrelations with each other over time and context, and
the biological, experiential, and psychological processes that
underlie the signiﬁcance of these constructs to the individ-
ual’s development in childhood. Moreover, these dimensions
of functioning do not operate in isolation from children’s so-
cial contexts; it is to the matter of the role of social context
that we next turn.
RELATIONAL INFLUENCES ON EMOTION
AND PERSONALITY DEVELOPMENT
The family is clearly the most important relational inﬂu-
ence on children’s emotionality and emotional development
(Cummings, Davies, & Campbell, 2000). Accordingly, this
section focuses on family as a source of relational inﬂuences.
Traditional research has emphasized the importance of the
parent-child subsystem for children’s emotional functioning,
often to the exclusion of the study of possible effects of other
family subsystems. The parent-child subsystem is certainly
the most signiﬁcant single category of family inﬂuence on
child development. However, the emotional qualities of the
marital subsystem in particular may also have pervasive im-
plications for the emotional quality of children’s lives, as well
as overall emotionality of family functioning (Cowan &
Cowan, 2002; Cummings, 1998). In order to more fully
account for relational inﬂuences on children’s emotional and
personality development, a familywide perspective is needed
that goes beyond considering only the parent-child subsystem.
Moreover, one cannot assume that relations found in one cul-
tural context (e.g., race, ethnicity) will necessarily be found
for others (Parke & Buriel, 1998)—that is, culture may mod-
erate relations between children’s emotional expressions, ex-
periences, and personality development. Accordingly, the
importance of appreciating and examining contextual inﬂu-
ences on emotionality as a function of culture is indicated.
Accordingly, this chapter examines a variety of relational
inﬂuences within the family on children’s emotional and per-
sonality development, including factors associated with the
parent-child relationship, the marital relationship, family-
wide functioning, and cultural contexts. Given their im-
portance to a consideration of family inﬂuences, cultural
inﬂuences as elements of relational inﬂuences are also exam-
ined. Although other factors (e.g., peers, schools; Crick &
Dodge, 1994) also undoubtedly affect children’s early emo-
tional and personality development, a consideration of these
additional inﬂuences is beyond what can be attempted in this
relatively brief treatment.
Parent-Child Relationships
This section is concerned with parental emotional inﬂuences
on children’s development. Children have some of their ﬁrst
experiences with internal affective states, including anger,
fear, anxiety, and happiness, in the context of their relation-
ships with their parents. Moreover, the quality and intensity
of children’s emotional experiences are affected by the qual-
ity of their relationships with their parents. Parents may be
highly inﬂuential—especially for young children—in chil-
dren’s regulation of their affect (Kopp, 1982; 1989). Chronic
experience with enduring and intense negative emotions can
be excessively challenging to the capacities of young chil-
dren to regulate their emotions, and children with less-than-
secure relationships with parents may have more frequent
and difﬁcult experiences with ﬂuctuating and unpredictable
affective states.
Emotionality is also a signiﬁcant dimension of parent-
child interactions and relationships, including parenting as

222
Emotion and Personality Development in Childhood
acceptance, emotional availability, sensitivity, and parent-
child emotional bond or attachment (i.e., emotional relation-
ship; Barber, 1997; Cummings & Davies, 1995). Dimensions
of parent-child relations pertaining to the emotionality of
parenting, parenting styles, and the quality of the parent-
child emotional relationship have been found to have sub-
stantial implications for children’s emotional and personality
development.
Emotional Dimensions of Parenting: Parental Acceptance
and Emotional Availability
The terms acceptance and emotional availability have been
used to describe a relatively diverse set of behaviors pertain-
ing to the emotional quality of relations between parents and
children (e.g., parental support, expressions of warmth or
positive emotional tone, sensitivity to children’s psychologi-
cal states) that nonetheless share common ground—relations
with demonstrated implications for children’s emotional and
personality development. Parental acceptance and respon-
siveness have been shown to predict positive child develop-
ment outcomes, including greater sociability, self-regulation,
prosocial behavior, self-esteem, and constructive play. In
contrast, parental behaviors indicative of a lack of responsiv-
ity or availability have been prospectively linked with a
variety of maladaptive outcomes, including social with-
drawal, aggression, and attention deﬁcit disorder (Darling &
Steinberg, 1993; Maccoby & Martin, 1983).
Emotional mediators within the child are implicated in the
effects of parental emotionality on children’s functioning.
Observing interactional bouts between parents and children
provides one method for understanding the processes that
parenting practices induce in children. For example, parental
withdrawal and unresponsiveness have been shown to elicit
infant protest, distress, and wariness, and children commonly
react to parental intrusiveness and hostility by withdrawing
and disengaging (Cohn & Tronick, 1989).
As another example of the role of children’s emotionality
in responding to emotional qualities of parenting, Parke,
Cassidy, Burks, Carson, and Boyum (1992) have proposed
that various affect management skills of the child mediate re-
lations between parenting style and children’s developmental
functioning. Speciﬁcally, styles of parenting (e.g., stimula-
tion, responsiveness) are seen to inﬂuence children’s
emotion regulation, interpersonal information processing
(e.g., encoding, decoding) in social-emotional contexts, and
understanding of emotion (e.g., ability to recognize and pro-
duce emotional expressions, understanding of the causes and
meaning of emotion, understanding one’s own history of emo-
tional experiences and others’emotional displays)—which in
turn affects children’s ability to function competently in other
interpersonal contexts (e.g., with peers, in friendship groups).
Thus, to elaborate on one pathway, emotionally negative
parenting may foster children’s negative attribution styles
about parent-child relations, with subsequent effects on
children’s processing of peer events and relationships. Pro-
clivities toward hostile evaluations and response tendencies
in turn may increase children’s susceptibility to poor peer
relationships, aggression, social isolation, and depression
(Crick & Dodge, 1994). On the other hand, parental avail-
ability may promote children’s capacities for interpersonal
connectedness, fostering a general view of the social world as
a safe, secure place, and equipping children with the social
skills necessary to advance the quality of their relationships
with others (Barber, 1997).
Notably, as other examples of relations between parenting
and children’s emotionality, parental responses to children’s
emotional expressions may affect children’s emotional and
social functioning. Fabes, Eisenberg, and Murphy (1996)
have hypothesized that children display the most constructive
ways of regulating and expressing negative emotion when
parents show moderate (rather than high or low) encourage-
ment of emotional expression. However, parental encourage-
ment of emotional expression is only one of the ways in
which parents respond to their children’s emotions that inﬂu-
ence children’s functioning. Additional dimensions, such as
parental distress, dismissing children’s emotions, comfort-
ing, and encouraging and helping children to solve distress-
ing problems may also have implications for children’s
emotional and personality development (Eisenberg, 1996;
Eisenberg & Fabes, 1994).
Emotional Dimensions of Parenting and Parenting Styles
Another level of conceptualization of parenting that has had
implications in children’s emotional and personality develop-
ment are parenting styles. Baumrind (1967, 1971) proposed
that the effectiveness of parenting styles for children’s per-
sonality development reﬂects both the quality of the parent-
child emotional relationships (e.g., responsiveness, warmth,
availability) and parental control (e.g., demandingness, mon-
itoring, consistent discipline). Working from these assump-
tions, Baumrind distinguished between three qualitatively
different types of parenting styles (authoritative, authoritar-
ian, and permissive parenting styles), each with emotional el-
ements and with implications for children’s emotional and
personality development.
Authoritative parents utilize ﬁrm, consistent control, cen-
tered around integrating the child into the family and society
and insisting that the child meet increasing standards of

Relational Inﬂuences on Emotion and Personality Development
223
maturity as he or she gets older. Communication styles with
children are characterized by warmth, clarity, reciprocality,
and verbal give and take between parent and child. Children
of authoritative parents are most likely to exhibit a healthy
balance between high levels of agency (i.e., achievement-
oriented, high self-esteem, independent) and communion
(i.e., sociable, interpersonally cooperative, friendly).
Authoritarian parents are also ﬁrm in their control prac-
tices. However, their control strategies differ qualitatively
from those of authoritative parents. Strict, unquestioned obe-
dience to parental authority is expected, with any assertion
of individuality by the child met with swift and severe
punishment. Furthermore, authoritarian parents evidence de-
tachment and lack of warmth. These children are at greater
risk for internalizing symptoms, self-devaluation, social sub-
missiveness, low self-efﬁcacy, and diminished autonomy
(Baumrind, 1967, 1971, 1991).
Permissive parents evidence high acceptance, associated
with frequent expressions of warmth and affection by parents;
there is also low enforcement of rules and authority. This lax-
ness in monitoring and discipline means that children are left
to regulate their own behavior and make decisions con-
cerning their own actions (e.g., bedtime, meals; Maccoby &
Martin, 1983). Accordingly, children of permissive parents
exhibit high levels of self-worth and self-esteem, but exhibit
impairments in maturity, impulse control, social responsibil-
ity, and achievement.
Extending Baumrind’s work, Maccoby and Martin (1983)
proposed that parenting styles can be deﬁned in terms of two
parenting characteristics ordered along linear continuums:
(a) demandingness and (b) responsiveness. Four parenting
styles (authoritative, authoritarian, indulgent, indifferent-
uninvolved) emerged from the crossing of these two dimen-
sions, with the ﬁrst three similar to Baumrind’s authoritative,
authoritarian, indulgent. The last style was characterized by
emotional uninvolvement with the child. For this parenting
style, interactions with the children are considered an incon-
venience and are dealt with in the way that most quickly and
effortlessly terminates the interaction. This style predicts the
most maladaptive outcomes of the various parenting styles,
including low levels of social and academic competence—
and also delinquency, alcohol problems, and drug use
(Baumrind, 1991; Patterson, DeBaryshe, & Ramsey, 1989).
Parent-Child Attachment: Emotional Bonds Between
Parents and Children
The effects of parental behavior on children’s adjustment
are more than a matter of the behaviors that parents direct
towards their children or even the emotional intensity of
interactions or parenting behavior; rather, they reﬂect the
underlying emotional quality of the relationship between
parents and children—that is, interactions between parents
and children are inﬂuenced by the emotional bond or attach-
ment that has formed between the parent and child. Thus,
in deciding how to behave, children not only respond simply
to the behaviors directed at them by parents, but also re-
spond as a function of the their emotional relationships with
parents.
John Bowlby and Mary Ainsworth’s attachment theory
provides the most inﬂuential conceptualization of the nature
of the emotional bonds between parents and children
(Bowlby, 1969; Ainsworth, Blehar, Waters, & Wall, 1978).
Moreover, the attachment theory tradition provides consider-
able empirical support for the signiﬁcance of attachments
to children’s (and adults’) adjustment (Cassidy & Shaver,
1999), although variability in the stability of attachment over
time—and in the prediction of later behavior based upon
earlier attachment—is evident in the literature (Belsky,
Campbell, Cohn, & Moore, 1996; Thompson, 2000).
Parent-Child Attachment Patterns: Secure Versus
Insecure Emotional Relationships
Attachment as parenting is neither deﬁned as simply a set of
behaviors that are observable at a microscopic level of analy-
sis, nor is it deﬁned as a global trait. Rather, attachment is an
organizational construct—that is, goals or plans that serve
to organize and motivate behavior that emerges from the
functioning of the attachment behavioral system. Moreover,
this system functions in a manner that is highly sensitive to
context, including the past history of the relationship (e.g.,
the perceived availability and sensitive responsiveness of the
parent) and the circumstances of the immediate situation
(e.g., the appraisal of threat).
Attachment is a life-span construct, and a variety of meth-
odologies have been derived to assess attachment security
across the life span (Cassidy & Shaver, 1999). At all ages,
however, security of attachment is held to have implications
for the individual’s emotional regulation and emotional
functioning, with corresponding implications for personality
development.
In infancy and early childhood, individual differences in
patterns of attachment security are assessed based on the
Strange Situation (Ainsworth et al., 1978), which consists of
a sequence of brief contexts for observing the children’s
functioning—most notably, functioning in relation to the
parent’s presence, absence, and return. Children’s attachment
securities are classiﬁed to distinguish parent-child relation-
ships in terms of the infant’s relative effectiveness in deriving

224
Emotion and Personality Development in Childhood
security from the parent in these various contexts and the
parent’s effectiveness in providing security.
The organization of children with secure attachments
reﬂects optimal use of the attachment ﬁgure as a secure base
and as support in the context of the attachment relationship.
The child thus demonstrates a coherent strategy for using the
parent as a source of security. For example, upon the return of
the parent after separation, the recovery from an overly
aroused or distressed state due to separation from the parent
is smooth and readily carried to completion—that is, after
making connection with the parent, the child rather quickly
returns to a nondistressed state and to exploration or play.
This pattern is associated with greater responsivity and
warmth by the parents towards the children in the home.
The behavioral pattern exhibited by children with avoid-
ant attachments indicates less-than-optimal secure base use
and secure base support in the context of the attachment rela-
tionship. Thus, upon reunion the child conspicuously avoids
proximity or contact with the parent. Avoidant infants are not
responsive to parental attempts at interaction, may quite
demonstratively turn away or look away from the parent and
fail to proactively initiate interaction with the parents. These
children are more fussy and readily distressed by separation
in the home, and may have more difﬁculty with arousal con-
trol at a physiological level in the Strange Situation. Parents
of avoidant children are more rejecting, tense, irritable, and
avoidant of close bodily contact towards the children in day-
to-day interaction in the home; they may also be more intru-
sive and overstimulating (Belsky, Rovine, & Taylor, 1984),
thereby fostering less conﬁdence in the child about the par-
ents as a reliable source of security.
The organization of anxious, resistant attachment also re-
ﬂects relatively ineffective use of the parent as a source of se-
curity in times of stress—and reﬂects the particular strategy
of extreme dependence. Prior to separation, these infants are
often clingy and uninterested in toys. Upon reunion, resistant
children may mix angry behavior (e.g., struggling when held,
stiffness, hitting or pushing away) with excessive contact and
proximity seeking. Children are not readily reassured by the
parents’ presence or comforting (e.g., continued fussing and
crying), and have considerable difﬁculty settling and return-
ing to well-regulated emotional functioning. These attach-
ment patterns are also associated with problematic histories
of parent-child interaction in the home, including parenting
that is relatively inept or inconsistent.
Emotional Dimensions of Parenting and
Attachment Security
Attachment research provides evidence for the role of
emotional dimensions of parenting practices, in particular, in
the formation of attachment relationships. Bowlby’s theory
(Bowlby, 1969, 1973) proposed the importance of the par-
ent’s emotional availability and responsiveness for the devel-
opment of secure attachments. The work of Ainsworth et al.
(1978) provided empirical support for the pertinence of
sensitivity, accessibility, acceptance, and cooperation as par-
enting behaviors relevant to the development of security of
attachments to the parents.
A core prediction of attachment theory from its initial for-
mulation thus was that the child’s sense of emotional security
would derive from the responsiveness, warmth, and emo-
tional availability of the parent. Maternal sensitivity was
particularly emphasized and deﬁned by Ainsworth as the
parent’s ability to accurately perceive the child’s signals and
to respond appropriately and promptly. Although the size of
the relations reported in Ainsworth’s pioneering Baltimore
study were particularly strong, dozens of published studies
have reported that constructs reﬂecting maternal sensitivity
and emotional availability or related constructs signiﬁ-
cantly predicted the quality of attachment. A meta-analysis
suggests that the support for this relation is much more than
convincing from a statistical perspective (De Wolff & van
IJzendoorn, 1997). Attachment security is also predicted
from parent’s emotional availability as seen from a relational
perspective (i.e., maternal structuring, maternal sensitivity,
child responsiveness, child involvement; Easterbrooks,
Biesecker, & Lyons-Ruth, 2000).
A Functionalist Perspective on Emotion Regulation,
Attachment, and Personality Development
The attachment behavioral system has been hypothesized as
organized and directed by children’s appraisals of their felt
security in speciﬁc social situations and contexts (Sroufe &
Waters, 1977). Thus, children’s emotions are viewed as an
aspect of their appraisals of their emotional well-being or
felt security in speciﬁc contexts, also serving to guide and
direct their behavioral responding—for example, their
decisions about whether to seek proximity of contact with
parents.
Bowlby emphasized the role of self-regulatory processes
in the impact of parenting on children’s emotional and per-
sonality development, including children’s emotional and
cognitive appraisals of situational and contextual challenges
and threats as inﬂuencing children’s emotional and behav-
ioral responding. In particular, emotional reactions reﬂecting
children’s evaluations of events were conceptualized as play-
ing a role in children’s organization and motivation of their
responses to these events, a point made by Bowlby and sub-
sequently expanded by later theorists (Carlson & Sroufe,
1995; Sroufe & Waters, 1977). Over time, these emotionally

Relational Inﬂuences on Emotion and Personality Development
225
based self-regulatory patterns, which reﬂected the relative
security or insecurity afforded by their experiential histories
with parents in multiple situations, were seen as characteriz-
ing their functioning in response to current experiences.
Thus, such responses were one class of processes derived
from day-to-day experiences with the parents; over time,
these responses served to mediate relations between experi-
ential history and child outcomes—that is, these processes
reﬂected internal self-regulatory structures derived from ex-
perience that served to guide current responding. Carlson and
Sroufe (1995) articulate this idea:
From a developmental perspective, these self-regulatory struc-
tures and mechanisms are viewed as characteristic modes of af-
fect regulation and associated expectations, attitudes, and beliefs
internalized from patterns of dyadic interaction. . . . These
processes, or internalized ‘models’ (Bowlby, 1980), serve not as
static traits, but as guides to ongoing social interaction, support-
ing the maintenance of existing patterns of adaptation. . . . Such
processes are of great theoretical and practical importance, not
only because they may explain continuity in individual develop-
ment but also because they may lead to an understanding of
pathogenesis itself. (p. 594)
This direction in attachment research and theory is consis-
tent with other research and theory that demonstrate that
self-regulatory processes may mediate relations between
children’s emotional experiences with the parents and devel-
opmental outcomes (e.g., Campos, Campos, & Barrett, 1989;
Cole, Michel, & Teti, 1994). For example, Eisenberg and
her colleagues have stressed the role of children’s regulatory
capacities in accounting for relations between familial expe-
riences (e.g., parents’ positive or negative emotional expres-
sivity towards the child), children’s temperament, and
children’s social competence and risk for adjustment prob-
lems (Eisenberg, Spinrad, & Cumberland, 1998; see also
Thompson & Calkins, 1996). Increasing evidence also sug-
gests that children’s emotional and other self-regulatory ca-
pacities are inﬂuenced by their relationships with parents
(Kochanska, Murray, & Coy, 1997).
Marital Relationships
Marital conﬂict has proven to be a particularly signiﬁcant cat-
egory of emotional event in the family with regard to child,
marital, and family functioning (Cummings & Davies, 1994).
Family systems researchers (e.g., Easterbrooks & Emde, 1988;
Easterbrooks & Goldberg, 1990) have stressed the signiﬁ-
cance of the marital dyad to parenting and family functioning.
When this relationship is distressed, family responsibilities
and coping skills suffer (Gilbert, Christensen, & Margolin,
1984). Moreover, links between marital conﬂict and children’s
adjustment problems have long been indicated, including ex-
ternalizing disorders (e.g., aggression), internalizing difﬁcul-
ties (e.g., anxiety, withdrawal), and academic problems
(Cummings & Davies, 1994; Emery, 1989; Grych & Fincham,
1990).
Direct Effects of Exposure to Marital Relations
on Children’s Emotionality
Emotionality in the marital subsystem—especially during
interparental conﬂict—has direct effects on children’s emo-
tions and behaviors (e.g., Cummings, 1987) and indirect
effects by inﬂuencing the quality of emotional communica-
tions in the parent-child subsystem (e.g., Jouriles & Farris,
1992). Furthermore, researchers using a number of different
analogue paradigms have isolated the emotional qualities of
interparental communications as inﬂuential in terms of
children’s emotions and behaviors (e.g., Shifﬂett-Simpson &
Cummings, 1996).
Observational studies of children’s emotional reactions to
parents’conﬂicts are especially informative with regard to the
direct effects of interadult emotions on children’s emotional
functioning. Examinations of children’s reactions to natu-
rally occurring marital anger and affection expressions and
simulated emotion expressions indicate that marital conﬂict
induced distress and anger in 10- to 20-month-old infants—a
reaction that was markedly different from their reaction
to marital harmony (Cummings, Zahn-Waxler, & Radke-
Yarrow, 1981). In a follow-up study, Cummings, Zahn-
Waxler, & Radke-Yarrow (1984) found that children’s
reactions to expressions of anger and affection in the home
changed over time. Children who were 6–7 years old overtly
expressed their emotions (e.g., cry, yell, laugh) during inter-
parental anger situations signiﬁcantly less often than they did
as toddlers; they were also much more likely to intervene in
marital conﬂict situations, as evidenced by the signiﬁcantly
higher rate of mediation attempts. O’Hearn, Margolin, and
John (1997) also reported on children’s reactions to marital
conﬂict based on parents’ completions of daily reports of
marital conﬂicts that occurred in front of their child. Children
from homes with physical marital conﬂict were more likely to
evidence negative emotions (appear sad or frightened), be-
come hostile (misbehave or appear angry), or attempt to con-
trol exposure to marital conﬂict (leave the room) than were
children from nonphysical-conﬂict or low-conﬂict families. In
addition, children from high-conﬂict families (physical or
nonphysical) were more likely to take sides during marital
conﬂict episodes than were children from the low-conﬂict
homes.
The emotionally stressful effects of exposure to adults’
conﬂicts have been documented in children as young as

226
Emotion and Personality Development in Childhood
6monthsofage.Literallydozensofstudies—withtheﬁndings
converging on the same conclusions even when based upon
multiple and different types of home- and laboratory-based
methodologies—have consistently shown that children react
with emotional distress as bystanders to conﬂict (Cummings
& Davies, 1994). Distress responses shown by children in-
clude motor inhibition and freezing; self-reported anger, dis-
tress, concern, self-blame, and fear; behavioral responses of
anger, distress, and hostile aggression; physiological indica-
tions of stress reactions (e.g., blood pressure, heart rate eleva-
tion, galvanic skin response); and children’s concerned
mediation in the parents’disputes. Children’s reports of nega-
tive representations and expectations about interparental rela-
tions indicative of emotional distress are also associated with
exposure to marital conﬂict (e.g., Davies & Cummings, 1998;
Grych, 1998; Shamir, Du Rocher-Schudlich, & Cummings,
2002). It is notable that children’s distressed reactions to mar-
ital conﬂict increase as a function of negative marital conﬂict
histories, and such reactions to marital conﬂict are associated
with adjustment problems (Cummings & Davies, 1994).
Indirect Effects of Marital Relations on Children’s
Emotionality via Inﬂuence on Parenting
A substantial literature supports relations between marital
conﬂict and negative changes in parenting. Relationships
marked by the presence of violence or a high frequency of
overt conﬂict have been linked to inconsistent child rear-
ing (Holden & Ritchie, 1991) and disciplinary problems
(Stoneman, Brody, & Burke, 1989). Marital conﬂict has also
been associated with increased parental negativity and intru-
sive control (Belsky, Youngblade, Rovine, & Volling, 1991)
and with low levels of parental warmth and responsiveness
(Cox, Owen, Lewis, & Henderson, 1989). Conﬂict between
parents may drain them of the necessary emotional resources
to operate effectively (Goldberg & Easterbrooks, 1984), or
anger between parents may translate directly into angry inter-
actions with children (Kerig, Cowan, & Cowan, 1993).
Marital relations are also predictive of the quality of the
emotional bond or attachment that forms between parents
and children. Increases in marital conﬂict during the ﬁrst
9 months (Isabella & Belsky, 1985)—or even prenatally
(Cox & Owen, 1993)—are linked to insecure attachment at
12 months of age. Another study found that high marital con-
ﬂict when children were 1 year of age predicted insecure at-
tachment at age 3 (Howes & Markman, 1989). Finally,
children’s relationships with their parents may also change
because of the negative effects on their sense of trust or high
regard for parents due to watching them behave in mean or
hostile ways toward each other (Owen & Cox, 1997).
To synthesize the information from studies of marital rela-
tions and parent-child relations, Erel and Burman (1995)
performed a meta-analysis of 68 pertinent studies. The results
indicated a moderately large relationship between marital
conﬂict and parenting. Furthermore, signiﬁcant relations
were found between marital conﬂict and multiple forms
of problems in parenting. Based on this extensive meta-
analysis, the authors concluded that “these ﬁndings suggest
that, regardless of causality, positive parent-child relations
are less likely to exist when the marital relationship is trou-
bled” (pp. 128–129).
More recent observational studies of the emotional func-
tioning of triadic family contexts of marital conﬂict and chil-
dren’s functioning add to the case for the effects of marital
conﬂict on children’s emotional functioning in triadic con-
texts (i.e., the mother, father, and child are present). In one
such study, Easterbrooks, Cummings, and Emde (1994)
reported that toddlers showed more positive emotional be-
haviors than distressed behaviors when their parents demon-
strated harmonious or positive expressions during a marital
problem-solving task. On the other hand, expressions of dis-
tress between the parents were signiﬁcantly related to chil-
dren’s distress. In another recent study, Kitzman (2000)
reported that family emotional processes involving mothers,
fathers, and their 6- to 8-year-old sons become disrupted after
conﬂictual marital interactions but not after pleasant marital
interactions. Lower levels of family cohesion as well as
higher levels of unbalanced alliances were found following
marital disagreements. In addition, fathers demonstrated sig-
niﬁcantly less support and engagement toward their sons fol-
lowing the conﬂictual discussion compared to the pleasant
discussion. Finally, Davis, Hops, Alpert, and Sheeber (1998),
using a sequential analysis procedure, found that conﬂict-
ual mother-father interactions led to children’s subsequent
hostile aggressiveness during triadic family interactions.
Moreover, adolescents’ aggressive and dysphoric responses
to interparental aggression sequences contributed to the pre-
diction of their overall aggressive and depressive functioning
when general marital satisfaction was included as a control
variable.
Familywide Perspective
Families are appropriately viewed as relational environments
with systems qualities (Cox & Paley, 1997). At this level of
analysis, familial inﬂuences can be seen to reﬂect the multi-
ple and mutually inﬂuential effects of multiple systems,
including interparental, parent-child, sibling, and whole fam-
ily systems; thus, a systems theory perspective may be use-
fully applied to outlining the complex patterns of mutual

Relational Inﬂuences on Emotion and Personality Development
227
inﬂuence of emotional expression and behavior that charac-
terize family functioning. Accordingly, such a perspective in
part emphasizes viewing families as organized wholes, with
the wholes having inﬂuences above and beyond those of its
parts. For example, overall family emotional expressiveness
may constitute a context for children’s reaction to family
emotion—beyond effects due to the emotional qualities of
speciﬁc family subsystems (Cassidy, Parke, Butkovsky, &
Braungart, 1992).
At the same time, it also follows from systems theory that
the family is appropriately seen as composed of multiple dis-
tinct subsystems, with each exercising inﬂuence on the others
and on the whole. Accordingly, the actions and emotions of
family members are necessarily interdependent, having a rec-
iprocal and continuous inﬂuence on other family members,
with each individual or dyadic unit inextricably embedded
within the larger family system. Thus, a family systems
model advocates against simple linear models of causality or
the assumption that one can adequately understand family
inﬂuences by focusing exclusively on certain individual
subsystems (Emery, Fincham, & Cummings, 1992). Applied
to a familywide model of emotions, systems theory pre-
dicts that the emotions and behaviors of each subsystem are
related to the emotions and behaviors of other subsystems. It
is notable that the emotional and social functioning of the sib-
ling subsystem is also affected by marital conﬂict (Stocker &
Youngblade, 1999).
Children and Family Emotionality in the Home
Research based on parental diary reports of emotional
expressions in the context of marital interactions indicate
pervasive interconnections between emotions and behaviors
among family members during everyday interactions. Given
that the meaning rather than the speciﬁc content of family
communications is particularly important in the considera-
tion of effects on both parents and children (Fincham, 1998),
the perspective afforded by parental reports of their own
emotions and their perceptions of the partners’ and children’s
emotions may be particularly telling about emotionality and
family functioning.
Taking the examination of relational inﬂuences on family
emotionality a step further than in previous research (e.g.,
Cummings et al., 1981), Cummings, Goeke-Morey, and Papp
(in press) examined the interdependence between emotions
and behaviors within the marital subsystem and the effects on
the emotionality of the marital subsystem on the emotional
functioning of children—that is, progress toward a family-
wide model was achieved to the extent that effects pertaining
to the responses of mothers, fathers, and children were
examined, especially in the context of interparental and tri-
adic systems (mother, father, child). Consistent with a fami-
lywide perspective on the role of emotions in families, it was
expected that the emotions experienced or expressed by one
member of the family would be related to emotions experi-
enced or expressed by other members of the family, including
mothers, fathers, and children. Moreover, consistent with a
functionalist perspective on emotions, it was expected that
the apparent meaning of parental emotions—as evidenced
by the negativity versus positivity of emotions—would pre-
dict the other parent’s and children’s emotional and behav-
ioral responses.
With regard to interparental communications, substantial
reciprocity was found between wives’ and husbands’ emo-
tional expressions, both for positive and for negative emotional
expressions—that is, the emotions of one spouse had a sub-
stantial and predictable relation to emotions of the other
spouse. Speciﬁcally, parents reported that when one partner
(either wife or husband) expressed more anger, sadness, fear,
or negative emotionality (negativity, i.e., the sum of anger, sad-
ness, and fear), the other partner engaged in more destructive
behaviors (such as physical aggression, threats, yelling, giving
dirty looks, withdrawing). Moreover, when one partner ex-
pressed anger, the other expressed more negative emotionality
and engaged in less productive (such as calmly discussing,
problem solving, reaching a partial resolution) and less
constructive (such as humorous, affectionate, supportive,
apologetic, compromising) behaviors. Conversely, when one
partner expressed more positive emotionality, the other ex-
pressed more positive emotionality and engaged in less de-
structive behaviors and in more productive and constructive
behaviors.
Moreover, Cummings, Goeke-Morey, and Papp (in press)
also reported that emotions and behaviors between the par-
ents were linked to children’s emotional and behavioral reac-
tions in a manner consistent with a functionalist perspective
on the role of emotion in family functioning—that is, chil-
dren’s responses were consistent with the apparent meaning
of the parent’s emotionality as indicated by the valence of the
parent’s emotions. Thus, when parents expressed more anger,
sadness, fear, and negative emotionality in marital conﬂict,
children were more concerned. Moreover, children generally
expressed more negative emotion and less positive emotion
when their parents expressed negative emotions during mar-
tial conﬂict. Parents also reported that their and their part-
ners’ positive emotionality was related to their children’s
positive emotionality.
Furthermore, parents reported that children engaged in
insecure behaviors (crying, freezing, misbehaving, yelling
at parents, being aggressive) when parents were angry or

228
Emotion and Personality Development in Childhood
evidenced negative emotionality. Moreover, children’s nega-
tive emotional appraisals appeared to activate, organize, and
motivate behavioral responding to marital conﬂicts, shown
either by their overt avoidance of exposure to marital conﬂict
or by active efforts to ameliorate the parent’s marital prob-
lems (i.e., children acting as mediators). Parents further re-
ported that children’s efforts to act as mediators (involvement
in the parents’ conﬂict through such acts as comforting, help-
ing out, taking sides) were related to the parents’ expressions
of negative emotionality, fear, anger, and sadness. Parents
also reported that their negative emotionality, anger, and sad-
ness was related to children’s avoidance and that parents’
positivity was inversely related to children’s avoidance. Sim-
ilar ﬁndings were reported for children’s responses to the
mothers’ and fathers’ expressions of emotions during marital
conﬂict, and mothers’ and fathers’ diary records yielded re-
markably similar patterns of ﬁndings.
In summary, these data illustrate the intriguing patterns of
mutual inﬂuence of emotions between and among family
members in the everyday context of the home. Moreover, the
evidence indicated that individuals’ emotions were more
closely linked with their own behaviors and the responses of
others to these behaviors than were other categories of social
expression and behavior (Cummings, Goeke-Morey, & Papp,
in press). Thus, although by no means a formal or direct test
of the strong assumptions of the functionalist perspective on
the role of emotions in family functioning, these results are
sufﬁciently suggestive to support—even encourage—further
exploration of the hypotheses of a functionalist perspective.
A Functionalist Perspective on Emotionality, Family
Functioning, and Personality Development
Cummings and Davies have proposed a theoretical model for
a functionalist perspective on the role of emotions in organiz-
ing, regulating, and directing children’s responses to marital
conﬂict (Davies & Cummings, 1994) and family functioning
(Cummings & Davies, 1996). This theory, called the emo-
tional security hypothesis, speciﬁcally places considerable
emphasis on emotional regulation and reactivity as signiﬁ-
cant elements of children’s appraisals and responses to
family events. Moreover, when events are appraised as
threatening, emotional reactions are seen as serving to orga-
nize and motivate children’s responses (e.g., children serving
as mediators in marital conﬂicts) to threatening events (e.g.,
hostile marital conﬂict; see also Emery, 1989).
Thetheoryisproposedasanextensionofattachmenttheory
to a familywide model of processes that account for children’s
responses to family events, with these response processes—in
particular, emotional regulation and reactivity—seen as hav-
ing implications for children’s personality development over
time. Some tentative evidence to support the model has
emerged. Recent empirical tests of the role of emotional regu-
lation as a mediator of children’s functioning due to marital
conﬂict histories have been conducted. For example, using a
latent variable path analysis, Davies and Cummings (1998)
examined whether links between marital relations and chil-
dren’s adjustment were mediated by response processes in-
dicative of emotional security.Analyses supported theoretical
pathways whereby emotional reactivity (e.g., vigilance, dis-
tress) mediated relations between marital conﬂict and both
externalizing and internalizing symptoms.
More recently, basing their conclusions on tests formu-
lated in terms of structural equation modeling, Harold and
Shelton (2000) reported that children’s emotional reactivity
in response to marital conﬂict—as well as attachment
security—mediated relations between family functioning and
child adjustment.
Cultural Contexts
Consistent with the propositions of Bronfenbrenner’s (1979)
ecological perspective, childhood development is best under-
stood as embedded in a variety of social and other ecological
contexts, including community, cultural, and ethnic contexts
of child development. Neighborhood and community, socio-
economic status (SES), and ethnicity (including generation
and acculturation) are among the contextual-ecological
inﬂuences that may affect children’s emotional and social
functioning, including the relative efﬁcacy of different social-
ization practices (Parke & Buriel, 1998). Each of these factors
may exercise inﬂuence and may change the relative impact of
family events and processes on child development. Thus, it is
critical that attention be paid to whether the socialization mod-
els developed on middle-class Caucasian samples are appro-
priate to other, often-neglected samples (Cowan, Powell, &
Cowan, 1998).
Research directions that examine inﬂuences of culture and
ethnicity are essential to understand the full range of variation
in family functioning and child development, including
the determination of whether family practices and their effects
are culture-speciﬁc or culture-universal (Bornstein, 1991).
There is an emerging consensus that innovative approaches
are needed to advance substantially the cross-cultural study of
psychological processes (van de Vijver & Leung, 2000). For
example, in cross-cultural psychology, culture typically is
treated as an independent variable. New directions in the
study of culture conceptualize culture as process (Keller &
Greenﬁeld, 2000), with the effects of culture seen in terms of
dynamic response processes occurring in individuals due to
transactions between the individual and environment over
time (Cummings, Davies, & Campbell, 2000).

Normal and Abnormal Emotional and Personality Development: A Developmental Psychopathology Perspective
229
For example, in contrast to much of the research in
development psychology, an impressive body of attachment
research has been conducted across cultures. In fact, an inter-
est in cross-cultural perspectives has characterized attach-
ment research from the beginning (Bowlby, 1969, 1973).
Moreover, observational study of attachment security in nat-
uralistic contexts and initial exploration of the tripartite clas-
siﬁcation of attachment (i.e., secure, avoidant, resistant)
began with Ainsworth’s work among the Ganda in Africa
(van IJzendoorn & Sagi, 1999). In addition to the extensive
research based on European samples, a substantial body of
work has been based on cultures from other parts of the
world, including Japan, Israel, China, Columbia, Chile, and
several African cultures. This cross-cultural database is an
admirable contribution, although the number of cultures that
have been studied must be regarded as relatively modest in
relation to the worldwide domain of different cultures (van
IJzendoorn & Sagi, 1999).
Furthermore, cross-cultural research can be seen as gener-
ally supporting the validity of the basic propositions of
attachment theory. Attachment phenomena—for example,
the child’s use of the parents as a secure base—are readily
observed across cultures. Moreover, the different patterns of
attachment found in Western cultures are generally found
elsewhere and appear to describe the domain of attachments
as adequately in non-Western cultures as they do in Western
cultures. It would also appear that secure attachments are not
just a Western ideal, but are normative and preferred across
cultures.
However, cross-cultural research can also been interpreted
as raising challenges for attachment theory. For example, the
distributions of insecure attachments (i.e., avoidant, resis-
tant) in particular have been reported to vary across cultures.
We wish to note, however, that the more signiﬁcant question
for attachment theory is whether variations in attachment
patterns follow from variations in parenting, especially emo-
tional dimensions of parenting (e.g., parental sensitivity,
emotional availability, and responsiveness), consistent with
the predictions of attachment theory. This question exempli-
ﬁes the process-oriented level of analysis that is a needed
next step in the study of cultural inﬂuences on attachment.
This level of analysis has been explored only in a limited
number of cultures, especially with regard to the predic-
tion of different patterns of attachment following from varia-
tions in the emotional dimensions of parenting (Waters &
Cummings, 2000). On the other hand, although the evi-
dence to date is relatively scant, emotional dimensions of
parent-child relationships—especially parental sensitivity—
have been linked with secure attachment in virtually all cul-
tures in which statistically signiﬁcant results are found (van
IJzendoorn & Sagi, 1999).
Consider another example: As we have seen, a substantial
body of evidence indicates that marital conﬂict and discord
has negative effects on children’s functioning and adjustment
(Grych & Fincham, 1990). However, understanding of the
pervasiveness of these relations is limited because most
research has been based upon children and families from
American or other Western cultures (e.g., British samples;
Rutter & Quinton, 1984). Put another way, the study of fam-
ilies in other cultures or non-White ethnic groups has rarely
considered marital functioning as an inﬂuence on children’s
functioning (Parke & Buriel, 1998).
To address this gap, Cummings, Wilson, and Shamir
(2000) recently reported that children’s exposure to marital
hostility and other indexes of marital discord were related to
adjustment among Chilean children, with effects at least as
evident as those found among American children. Moreover,
reﬂecting a process-oriented level of analysis, the qualities of
marital conﬂict behavior were found to be related to chil-
dren’s processes of emotional responding to marital conﬂict
across cultures, with Chilean children making distinctions in
emotional responding between unresolved and resolved
conﬂict similar to (or even greater than) those of American
children.
In summary, research and theory are emerging to support
a familywide perspective on emotions from a systems
perspective; moreover, speciﬁc process models are being
developed that emphasize the function of emotions in orga-
nizing and directing children’s reactions to family interac-
tions. Consistent with the move to process-level explanation
of relations between emotions and personality, research has
begun also to articulate cultural contexts as inﬂuences on
relations between emotional functioning and relationships,
family contexts, and children’s personality development.
However, more research is needed to further explore interre-
lations between family, especially the signiﬁcance of sibling
relationships and the effects of extended family members
(e.g., grandparents), culture, and children’s emotions and
behaviors, with ongoing prospective longitudinal studies
especially signiﬁcant for further understanding the causal
role of children’s emotional functioning in their personality
development across cultural contexts.
NORMALAND ABNORMAL EMOTIONAL
AND PERSONALITY DEVELOPMENT:
A DEVELOPMENTAL PSYCHOPATHOLOGY
PERSPECTIVE
The study of emotional and personality disorders in child-
hood has a long history in psychology. However, increas-
ing emphasis is being placed on moving beyond simply

230
Emotion and Personality Development in Childhood
documenting correlations between childhood factors and
later development to advanced understanding of the
processes underlying children’s emotional and personality
development. In particular, the developmental psychopathol-
ogy perspective has underscored the importance of under-
standing the processes that underlie normal and abnormal
development (Cicchetti & Cohen, 1995; Cummings, Davies,
& Campbell, 2000). The purpose of this last section is to
brieﬂy review the themes that characterize these emerging
directions for conceptualizing emotional and personality
development.
Conceptualizing Personality Disorders as Processes,
Not Outcomes
Childhood psychopathology was long viewed from the per-
spective of a static model of development (e.g., something
that a person “has”)—that is, disorders were treated as dis-
crete, enduring, and having linear trajectories in terms of
causes and outcomes (Sroufe, 1997), with the focus on symp-
tom description and the classiﬁcation of disorders rather than
on etiological processes (Sroufe & Rutter, 1984). Precursors
to disorders were expected to be single pathogens (e.g., bio-
logically based pathogens) or early forms of the disorder, and
psychopathology was assumed to be qualitatively different
from normality (Rutter, 1986).
In addition, the focus was on decidedly on abnormality
and risk vulnerability. For example, marital conﬂict was
assumed to be a homogeneous stimulus with uniformly negative
and distressing effects on children. Recent work—consistent
with a developmental psychopathology perspective—has
shown that distinctions can be made between constructive and
destructive marital conﬂict behaviors from the perspective of
effects on children; with some forms actually beneﬁcial for chil-
dren to witness and with possibly protective effects (Cummings,
1998; Cummings & Davies, 1994).
Moreover, the developmental psychopathology approach
calls attention to the importance of understanding the multi-
plicity of individual, biological, social, familial, and other
processes that underlie the development of childhood prob-
lems. For example, multiple emotional, cognitive, and physi-
ological processes have been implicated as mediators
of relations between marital conﬂict and children’s adjust-
ment and social competence (Cummings & Davies, 2002).
Additionally, a focus is on an in-depth understanding of
the developmental processes and pathways that precede and
account for the development of clinical disorders. A develop-
mental psychopathology approach also advocates simultane-
ously examining both abnormal and normal and risk and
resiliency to provide a more accurate, appropriately complex,
and complete picture of the processes that account for the risk
for—and emergence of—psychopathology in children.
Accordingly, developmental psychopathology can best
be deﬁned in terms of its primary goal: achieving a science
that can unravel the dynamic-process relations underlying
pathways of normal development and the development of
psychopathology (Cummings, Davies, & Campbell, 2000).
Given the process-oriented focus, it follows that children’s
adjustment and functioning ultimately must be assessed
using a multidisciplinary, multidomain, multicontextual, and
multimethod strategies (Cicchetti & Cohen, 1995). It is no-
table that the developmental psychopathology perspective
assumes a contextualistic worldview, in which development
is viewed as emerging from ongoing interactions involving
an active, changing organism in a dynamic, changing context
(Cummings, Davies, & Campbell, 2000). A transactional
model of developmental process is adopted, whereby recip-
rocal interactions occur between children’s intraorganismic
characteristics, their adaptational history, and the current
context (Sroufe, 1997). Thus, psychopathology is not due to
a single pathogen’s acting on the child, but rather is the end
result of complex interactions between risk and protective
factors over time.
The aim is to uncover dynamic-process relations, includ-
ing moderators and mediators of childhood outcomes.
Psychopathology is viewed as reﬂecting deviations from nor-
mative patterns over time (Sroufe, 1997). Inherent in this
concept are the notions of multiﬁnality, in which the
same pathways lead to different outcomes, and equiﬁnality, in
which more than one pathway leads to the same outcome.
The development of disorder is understood from a proba-
bilistic perspective (i.e., change is possible at any point in
time), although change is constrained by prior adaptation.
Furthermore, emphasis is placed on the signiﬁcance of con-
text for interpreting developmental patterns: What may be
dysfunctional or harmful in one context may be adaptive in
another.
Although the focus of developmental psychopathology
is not on describing and identifying speciﬁc disorders in
children, this perspective advocates for fuller conceptualiza-
tion by emphasizing the importance of taking into account
both the context and the developmental level of the child in
nosological systems. For example, this approach to deﬁning
disorders is pertinent to understanding the comorbidity of dis-
orders. Note that children often have behaviors that ﬁt into two
or more diagnostic categories. Although some approaches
may attempt to assign only one or the other diagnosis or may
assume that multiple disorders are present, the developmental
psychopathology perspective considers the possibility that
underlying processes do not necessarily ﬁt into standard

Normal and Abnormal Emotional and Personality Development: A Developmental Psychopathology Perspective
231
nosological classiﬁcations (Sroufe, 1997)—that is, the con-
cept of static diagnostic categories may be not be an optimal
heuristic for capturing the dynamic patterns of processes
of psychological functioning, nor for capturing the current
and historical contexts that underlie children’s functioning.
For example, diagnoses of attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity dis-
order and oppositional deﬁance disorder often go hand in
hand, but children ﬁtting both classiﬁcations may have family
histories, developmental courses, and prognoses different
from those of children with one or the other problem
(Cummings, Davies, & Campbell, 2000). For example, chil-
dren ﬁtting both classiﬁcations are more likely than are other
groups to have dysfunctional families with high rates of psy-
chopathology; they are also more likely to have poorer
outcomes in adolescence (Layhey et al., 1988) and adulthood
(Weiss & Hechtman, 1993). In sum, focusing on the child,
familial, social, and developmental factors occurring and
changing over time provides avenues for greater understand-
ing of how and why maladjustment occurred and how to best
treat it.
As can be seen, the dynamic process-oriented approach of
developmental psychopathology provides a powerful theoreti-
cal framework for charting new directions for studying and
understanding child adjustment problems. This approach en-
courages directions towards determining more precisely which
factors pose risks for children’s development over time and
which are protective or compensatory in nature. The goal of
process-oriented research is to “describe the speciﬁc responses
and patterns in the context of speciﬁc histories or developmen-
tal periods that account over time for normal versus clinically
signiﬁcant outcomes” (Cummings, Davies, & Campbell,
2000). In other words, the goal is to be able to characterize how
and why the psychological, physiological, and other factors
function over time as dynamic processes.
Children of Depressed Parents
Children of depressed parents provide an example of the
pertinence of such an approach toward examining processes
underlying adjustment. Children of depressed parents are
at heightened risk for a full range of adjustment problems—
including emotional and personality problems—and are at
speciﬁc risk for clinical depression (Downey & Coyne,
1990). Biological and cognitive models are important in
accounting for the relationship between parental depression
and child adjustment problems, but they only partially ac-
count for this relationship. Many children with depressed
parents do not develop adjustment problems, and not all
children develop problems at the same point in their develop-
ment—evidence that other environmental factors must be
considered. The heterogeneity of outcomes in children de-
mands further explication of the processes that account for
and modify children’s adjustment (Cummings & Davies,
1994).
Children may be affected by parental depression through
direct exposure, altered patterns of parent-child interactions
and attachment, and associated increases in conﬂict and
discord within the family (Cummings, DeArth-Pendley, Du
Rocher Schudlich, & Smith, 2000). The importance of exam-
ining several contexts is further exempliﬁed by ﬁndings that
marital conﬂict is an even better predictor than is depression
of adjustment problems in children when there is parental de-
pression. Thus, Downey and Coyne (1990) comment that
“marital discord is a viable alternative explanation for the
general adjustment difﬁculties of children with a depressed
parent” (p. 68).
This example makes evident the need for a complex, ﬂex-
ible theoretical model that can incorporate these diverse ﬁnd-
ings and yield a viable explanation of the multiple potential
pathways of development. Thus, it is not as simple as just a
genetic predisposition’s causing maladjustment in children of
depressed parents, and it is not just the presence or absence of
certain factors that can lead to adjustment or maladjustment;
rather, it is the way in which these factors transpire that helps
account for children’s adjustment at any given time.
Resilience
The fact that children from adverse circumstances may evi-
dence nonadverse personality outcomes has been character-
ized in terms of the concept of resilience. The treatment
of resilience in the developmental psychopathology ap-
proach provides an example of how the developmental
psychopathology approach treats relatively complex person-
ality outcomes that may sometimes be oversimpliﬁed.
Deﬁning and operationalizing the terms resilience and ad-
versity have varied greatly across theorists and researchers.
Although diverse empirical methodology is essential to ex-
pand understanding of the resilience construct, it can lead to
a host of unrelated ﬁndings, questions as to whether it is even
the same entity being studied, and varying estimates of rates
of resilience among similar risk groups (Luthar, Cicchetti, &
Becker, 2000). In contemporary research on children,
resilience has typically been used to refer to the ability of
children to function well in the face of adversity.
Resilience is currently conceptualized in two ways that re-
ﬂect different usages of the construct. The ﬁrst conceptual-
ization of it refers to resilience as a positive psychological
outcome in the face of adversity. This notion reﬂects the
extent to which diagnostic outcomes of greater competence

232
Emotion and Personality Development in Childhood
and fewer adjustment problems (e.g., internalizing or exter-
nalizing disorders) are found despite exposure to negative in-
ﬂuences (e.g., parental mental illness, poverty; Cummings,
Davies, & Campbell, 2000). This is a static notion under
protective factors foster resilient outcomes, which is not con-
sistent with the cutting-edge conceptualizations of develop-
mental psychopathology. The second way of conceptualizing
resilience refers to the dynamic processes of psychological
functioning that foster greater positive and diminished nega-
tive outcomes in the face of adversity, both at the present time
and in the future (Cummings, Davies, & Campbell, 2000). In
this sense, resilience refers to the various protective factors
that foster processes of resilience that promote adaptation
rather than just resilient outcomes. This conceptualization as-
sumes that processes of resilience operate in opposition to the
processes of vulnerability to adversity.
More speciﬁcally, “resilience refers to the process of,
capacity for, or outcome of successful adaptation despite
challenging or threatening circumstances” (Masten, Best, &
Garmezy, 1990, p. 425). Two conditions are inherent within
this deﬁnition: exposure to threat or adversity and positive
adaptation despite these threats or adverse conditions. From a
process model, maladaptive and adaptive trajectories result
from dynamic, bidirectional relations between experiential
and organismic factors; accordingly, notions of risk, re-
silience, and protective factors must be considered in such
terms (Cummings, Davies, & Campbell, 2000).
A key tenet of the developmental psychopathology per-
spective is the study of risk and resilience, taking into ac-
count prior adaptation and its relation to current risk—and
deﬁning and ﬁnding relations between those developmental
pathways leading to psychopathology and those leading
away (Sroufe, 1997). Accordingly, risk and resiliency or
stress and coping are mutually deﬁning and informing in
charting processes affecting children’s development. For ex-
ample, examining how and why protective factors serve as
buffers of risk for resilient children from high-conﬂict homes
is just as informative as looking at risk factors leading to psy-
chopathology (Cummings, 1998).
Until recently, researchers assumed resilience was homo-
genous and was either present or not present. In fact, risk and
resilience are not all-or-none phenomena and are heteroge-
neous. Resilience can be present in certain contexts and do-
mains but not in others, just as certain behaviors can
be adaptive in some contexts but not in others (Luthar,
Doernberger, & Zigler, 1993). For example, studies of chil-
dren of depressed parents reveal that although some children
seem to be coping relatively well (e.g., in academics), even
these well-coping children showed considerable vulnerabil-
ity for developing depression (Radke-Yarrow & Sherman,
1990). Other studies on at-risk inner-city children found that
high-stress children who demonstrated considerable behav-
ioral competence were highly vulnerable to emotional dis-
tress over time (Luthar, Doernberger, & Zigler, 1993).
Research in the area of marital conﬂict and children’s ad-
justment also highlights the importance of examining differ-
ent types of children’s competence. For example, children’s
intervening behaviors during their parents’ disagreements
may lead one to think that such children are unusually well-
behaved, well-adjusted, and mature. However, examining
other responses of the children (physiological responses and
self-reported emotions) and their adjustment outside of their
family context would yield completely different interpreta-
tions. This more complex analysis would suggest that the
children are quite distressed and have an increased risk for
dysfunction later on as a result of their taking on too much
responsibility for their parents’ relationship (Cummings &
Davies, 1994).
These ﬁndings indicate a considerable lack of consistency
in the difﬁculties children experience across domains of com-
petence; they also point to the importance of examining
different types of children’s functioning (physiological, emo-
tional, and behavioral) in different domains (e.g., academic,
emotional, social). Given the multiple outcomes and the
particular risks some children may face, some outcomes may
need to be accorded more importance than others as the most
critical indicators of resilience (Luthar, Cicchetti, & Becker,
2000). For example, in children at risk for a mood disorder,
their emotional functioning logically would appear to be
more critical than their academic functioning would.
Masten and Coatsworth (1998) reviewed research on
resilience over the past 25 years to understand the development
of competence in children who are faced with unfavorable or
highly adverse situations such as living with severely mentally
illparents,familyviolence,poverty,naturaldisasters,andother
high-risk situations. Results of the studies were remarkably
consistent in pointing to qualities of child and context that are
associated with better psychological functioning following ad-
versity. Child characteristics associated with resilience were
good intellectual functioning; appealing, sociable, easygoing
disposition; self-efﬁcacy, self-conﬁdence, high self-esteem;
talents; and faith. Characteristics of the family that were asso-
ciated with resilience were having a close relationship to a car-
ing parent ﬁgure, authoritative parenting (e.g., warmth,
structure, high expectations), socioeconomic advantages, and
connections to extended supportive family networks. Finally,
characteristics of the extrafamilial context associated with re-
silience were having bonds to prosocial adults outside the fam-
ily, having connections to prosocial organizations, and
attending effective schools.

References
233
Just as resilience is purported not to be an all-or-none
phenomenon, it is also is posited to not be static (Luthar,
Cicchetti, & Becker, 2000). In other words, it is unstable; a
child who is not resilient at one point in time can later de-
velop resilience, and one who has been resilient can later fal-
ter and subsequently deteriorate. Additionally, the meaning
of competency and resilience may change across contexts
and people. For these reasons it is important to focus on
the how and why questions (i.e., mediators) of risk and re-
silience—as well as on the who and when questions (i.e.,
moderators)—after the what questions have been answered.
In other words, the next step is to delineate the protective fac-
tors and processes that account for children’s adaptation
under adverse circumstances.
Similarly, inconsistency is evident in the ﬁeld regarding
what constitutes a protective factor. One commonality across
many researchers, however, has been a focus on inherently
positive characteristics. Protective factors, however, are not
restricted to pleasant, positive, desirable things; in fact, they
can often be quite adverse and stressful. Challenge models
posit that small amounts of adversity have so-called steeling
effects—much like those produced by immunizations—that
serve to enhance coping, facilitate adjustment, and inoculate
children against future psychological trauma. For example,
Cummings and Davies (1994b) suggest that children of
depressed parents may learn particularly adaptive interper-
sonal skills—such as sensitivity and empathy—as a result of
their exposure to their parents’ depression and to moderate
negative affect in the home.
Thus, just as it is important to examine the underlying
processes of child maladjustment, it is equally important to
examine the underlying processes of resilience that account
for their effects rather than simply identify a factor associated
with positive outcome. The processes by which protective
factors may lead to resilient outcomes include (a) mitigating
the riskiness of the stressor or adverse situation, (b) decreas-
ing exposure to the stressor, (c) breaking adverse cycles or
chains of bad luck brought about by a stressor, (d) fostering
positive self-esteem and conﬁdence, (e) increasing the range
of positive opportunities and options, and (f) facilitating
emotion regulation and coping skills (Cummings, Davies, &
Campbell, 2000).
Future Directions
Many promising directions for future research toward better
understanding of emotional and personality development
from this perspective can be identiﬁed. However, it is chal-
lenging to adequately measure children’s psychological
functioning at the level of dynamic processes and to integrate
such microscopic levels of analysis into more macroscopic
models that convey the big picture, so to speak, with regard
to children’s patterns of adaptation and maladaptation over
time in context. Additionally, it is challenging to conduct
multimethod research and still make good sense of the results
of patterns of information that may diverge on the picture
provided (Cummings, Davies, & Campbell, 2000). Finally, it
remains a future goal to more fully incorporate context and
developmental history into a diagnostic system, such that a
nosology or heuristic integrates the different types of infor-
mation pertinent to the appraisal of the child’s level of ad-
justment (Cummings, Davies, & Campbell, 2000).
CONCLUSION
This chapter thus documents the widely ranging research di-
rections concerned with emotional and personality develop-
ment that have emerged in recent years and promise to
continue to develop in the future. As we have shown, the in-
creased emphasis placed on the complexity of emotional
processes, the role of emotions in characterizing individual
differences between children, and the dynamic effects of
emotions in children’s functioning and development over
time are among the most signiﬁcant emerging directions in
research. It will be exciting in the future to determine the
extent to which a functionalist perspective on the role of emo-
tions in children’s socioemotional development can be further
articulated. Relatedly, emerging perspectives—notably as
advanced in the emerging work from a developmental
psychopathology perspective—call attention to the promise
for future conceptual and clinical advances of investigating
emotional and personality development from a process-
oriented perspective. Moreover, this work has served to
call further attention to the signiﬁcance of emotional
processes to normal development and the development of psy-
chopathology. Thus, an exciting prospect is that the next two
decades will see advances as substantial as those found in the
past two decades in our understanding of these vital processes
underlying socioemotional development and adjustment in
children.
REFERENCES
Ackerman, B. P., Abe, J. A., & Izard, C. E. (1998). Differential
emotions theory and emotional development: Mindful and mod-
ularity. In M. F. Mascolo & S. Grifﬁn (Eds.), What develops in
emotional development? (pp. 85–108). New York: Plenum Press.
Ainsworth, M. D. S., Blehar, M., Waters, E., & Wall, S. (1978).
Patterns of attachment. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

234
Emotion and Personality Development in Childhood
Aksan, N., Goldsmith, H. H., Smider, N. A., Essex, M. J., Clark, R.,
Hyde, J. S., Klein, M. H., & Vandell, D. L. (1999). Derivation
and prediction of temperamental types among preschoolers.
Developmental Psychology, 35, 958–971.
Barber, B. K. (1997). Introduction: Adolescent socialization in con-
text: The role of connection, regulation, and autonomy in the
family. Journal of Adolescent Research, 12, 5–11.
Barrett, K. C. (1998). A functionalist perspective to the development
of emotions. In M. F. Mascolo & S. Grifﬁn (Eds.), What de-
velops in emotional development? (pp. 109–134). New York:
Plenum Press.
Barrett, K. C., Zahn-Waxler, C., & Cole, P. M. (1993). Avoiders
versus amenders-Implications for the investigation of guilt and
shame during toddlerhood? Cognition and Emotion, 7, 481–505.
Bates, J. E., & Bayles, K. (1988). The role of attachment in the de-
velopment of behavior problems. In J. Belsky & T. Nezworski
(Eds.), Clinical implications of attachment (pp. 253–299).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Bates, J. E., Bayles, K., Bennett, D. S., Ridge, B., & Brown, M. M.
(1991). Origins of externalizing behavior problems at eight years
of age. In D. Pepler & K. Rubin (Eds.), Development and
treatment of childhood aggression (pp. 93–120). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Bates, J. E., Maslin, C. A., & Frankel, K. A. (1985). Attachment
security, mother-child interaction, and temperament as predic-
tors of behavior problem ratings at age three years. Society
for Research in Child Development Monographs, 50 (1/2, Serial
No. 209), 167–193.
Baumrind, D. (1967). Child care practices anteceding three patterns
of preschool behavior. Genetic Psychology Monographs, 75,
43–88.
Baumrind, D. (1971). Current patterns of parental authority. Devel-
opmental Psychology Monograph, 41 (1, Pt. 2), 101–103.
Baumrind, D. (1991). The inﬂuence of parenting style on adolescent
competence and substance use. Journal of Early Adolescence,
11, 56–95.
Bell, R. Q. (1968). A reinterpretation of the direction of effects in
studies of socialization. Psychological Review, 75, 81–95.
Belsky, J., Campbell, S. B., Cohn, J. F., & Moore, G. (1996).
Instability of infant-parent attachment security. Developmental
Psychology, 32, 921–924.
Belsky, J., & Isabella, R. A. (1985). Marital and parent-child rela-
tionships in family of origin and marital change following the
birth of a baby: A retrospective analysis. Child Development, 56,
342–349.
Belsky, J., Rovine, M., & Taylor, D. G. (1984). The Pennsylvania
Infant and Family Development Project: Pt. 3. The origins of
individual differences in infant-mother attachment: Maternal
and infant contributions. Child Development, 55, 718–728.
Belsky, J., Youngblade, L., Rovine, M., & Volling, B. (1991).
Patterns of marital change and parent-child interaction. Journal
of Marriage and the Family, 53, 487–498.
Bennett, M. (1989). Children’s self-attributions of embarrassment.
British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 7, 207–217.
Bornstein, M. C. (1991). Approaches to parenting in culture. In
M. C. Bornstein (Ed.), Cultural approaches to parenting
(pp. 3–22). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Bowlby, J. (1969). Attachment and loss: Vol. 1. Attachment. New
York: Basic Books.
Bowlby, J. (1980). Attachment and loss: Vol. 3. Loss: Sadness and
depression. New York: Basic Books.
Braungart-Rieker, J. M., Garwood, M. M., & Stifter, C. S. (1997).
Compliance and noncompliance: The roles of maternal control
and child temperament. Journal of Applied Developmental
Psychology, 18, 411–428.
Brenner, E., & Salovey, P. (1997). Emotion regulation during
childhood: Developmental, interpersonal, and individual con-
siderations. In P. Salovey & D. Sluyter (Eds.), Emotional literacy
and emotional development (pp. 168–192). New York: Basic
Books.
Brofenbrenner, U. (1979). The ecology of human development:
Experiments by nature and design. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Calkins, S. D. (1994). Origins and outcomes of individual
differences in emotion regulation. Monographs for the Society
of Research in Child Development, 59 (1–2, Serial No. 240),
53–72.
Campbell, S. B. (1990). Behavior problems in preschool children:
Clinical and developmental issues. New York: Guilford Press.
Campos, J. J., Campos, R. G., & Barrett, K. C. (1989). Emergent
themes in the study of emotional development and emotion reg-
ulation. Developmental Psychology, 25, 394–402.
Carlson, E. A., & Sroufe, L. A. (1995). Contribution of attachment
theory to developmental psychopathology. In D. Cicchetti & D.
Cohen (Eds.), Developmental psychopathology: Theory and
methods (Vol. 1, pp. 581–617). New York: Wiley.
Caspi, A. (1998). Personality development across the life course. In
W. Damon (Series Ed.) & N. Eisenberg (Vol. Ed.) Handbook of
Child Psychology: Vol. 3. Social, emotional, and personality
development (5th ed., pp. 311–388). New York: Wiley.
Caspi, A., & Silva, P. A. (1995). Temperamental qualities at age 3
predict personality traits in adulthood: Longitudinal evidence
from a birth cohort. Child Development, 66, 486–498.
Cassidy, J., Parke, R. D., Butkovsky, L., & Braungart, J. M. (1992).
Family-peer connections: The roles of emotional expressiveness
within the family and children’s understanding of emotions.
Child Development, 63, 603–618.
Cassidy, J., & Shaver, P. R. (Eds.). (1999). Handbook of attachment:
Theory, research, and clinical applications. New York: Guilford
Press.
Cicchetti, D., & Cohen, D. J. (1995). Perspectives of developmen-
tal psychopathology. In D. Cicchetti & D. J. Coehn (Eds.),
Developmental psychopathology: Vol. 1. Theory and methods
(pp. 3–20). New York: Wiley.

References
235
Cohn, J. F., & Tronick, E. Z. (1989). Speciﬁcity of infants’ response
to mothers’affective behavior. Journal of the American Academy
of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 28, 242–248.
Coie, J. D., Dodge, K., & Kupersmidt, J. B. (1990). Peer group
behavior and social status. In S. R. Asher & J. D. Coie (Eds.),
Peer rejection in childhood. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Cole, P. M. (1985). Display rules and the socialization of affective
displays. In G. Zivin (Ed.), The development of expressive
behavior (pp. 269–290). New York: Academic Press.
Cole, P. M., Michel, M. K., & Teti, L. O. (1994). The development
of emotion regulation and dysregulation: A clinical perspective.
Monographs for the Society of Research in Child Development,
59 (1–2, Serial No. 240), 73–100.
Compas, B., Malcarne, V., & Fondacaro, K. I. (1988). Coping with
stressful events in older children and young adolescents. Journal
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 56, 405–411.
Cowan, P. A., & Cowan, C. P. (2002). What an intervention design
reveals about how parents affect their children’s academic
achievement and behavior problems. In J. G. Borkowski, M. M.
Bristol-Power, & S. L. Ramey (Eds.), Parenting and the child’s
world: Inﬂuences on academic, intellectual, and social emo-
tional development (pp. 75–97). Hillside, NJ: Erlbaum.
Cowan, P. A., Powell, D., & Cowan, C. P. (1998). Parenting inter-
ventions: A family systems perspective. In W. Damon (Series
Ed.), I. E. Sigel, & K. A. Renninger (Vol. Eds.), Handbook of
child psychology: Vol. 4. Child psychology in practice (5th ed.,
pp. 3–72). New York: Wiley.
Cox, M. J., & Owen, M. T. (1993, March). Marital conﬂict and
conﬂict negotiation: Effects on infant-mother and infant-father
relationships. In M. Cox & J. Brooks-Gunn (Chairs), Conﬂict in
families: Causes and consequences. Symposium conducted at
the meeting of the Society for Research in Child Development,
New Orleans, LA.
Cox, M. J., Owen, M. T., Lewis, J. M., & Henderson, V. K. (1989).
Marriage, adult adjustment, and early parenting. Child Develop-
ment, 60, 1015–1024.
Cox, M. J., & Paley, B. (1997). Families as systems. Annual Review
of Psychology, 48, 243–267.
Crick, N. R., & Dodge, K. A. (1994). A review and reformulation of
social information-processing mechanisms in children’s social
adjustment. Psychological Bulletin, 155, 74–101.
Cummings, E. M. (1987). Coping with background anger in early
childhood. Child Development, 58, 976–984.
Cummings, E. M. (1995). The usefulness of experiments for the
study of the family. Journal of Family Psychology, 9, 175–185.
Cummings, E. M. (1997). Marital conﬂict, abuse, and adversity in
the family and child adjustment: A developmental psychopathol-
ogy perspective. In D. Wolfe (Ed.), Child abuse: New directions
in prevention and treatment across the lifespan (pp. 3–26).
Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Cummings, E. M. (1998a). Children exposed to marital conﬂict
and violence: Conceptual and theoretical directions. In G.
Holdern, B. Geffner, & E. Jouriles (Eds.), Children exposed to
marital violence: Theory, research, and applied issues (pp. 55–
94). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Cummings, E. M., & Davies, P. T. (1994a). Children and marital
conﬂict: The impact of family dispute and resolution. New York:
Guilford Press.
Cummings, E. M., & Davies, P. T. (1994b). Maternal depression and
child development. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry,
35, 73–112.
Cummings, E. M., & Davies, P. T. (1995). The impact of parents on
their: An emotional security hypothesis. Annals of Child Devel-
opment, 10, 167–208.
Cummings, E. M., & Davies, P. T. (1996). Emotional security as a
regulatory process in normal development and the development
of psychopathology. Development and Psychopathology, 8,
123–139.
Cummings, E. M., & Davies, P. T. (2002). Effects of marital conﬂict
on children: Recent advances and emerging themes in process-
oriented research. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry,
43, 31–63.
Cummings, E. M., Davies, P. T., & Campbell, S. B. (2000).
Developmental psychopathology and family processes: Theory,
research, and clinical implications. New York: Guilford Press.
Cummings, E. M., DeArth-Pendley, G., Du Rocher Schudlich, T., &
Smith, D. A. (2000). Parental depression and family function-
ing: Towards a process-oriented model of children’s adjustment.
In S. Beach (Ed.), Marital and family processes in depression
(pp.
89–110). Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association.
Cummings, E. M., Goeke-Morey, M. C., & Papp, L. M. (in press). A
family-wide model for the role of emotion in family functioning.
Marriage and Family Review.
Cummings, E. M., Wilson, J., & Shamir, H. (2001). Reactions of
Chilean and American children to marital conﬂict and marital
conﬂict resolution. Manuscript submitted for publication.
Cummings, E. M., Zahn-Waxler, C., & Radke-Yarrow, M. (1981).
Young children’s responses to expressions of anger and affection
by others in the family. Child Development, 52, 1274–1282.
Cummings, E. M., Zahn-Waxler, C., & Radke-Yarrow, M. (1984).
Developmental changes in children’s reactions to anger in the
home. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 25, 63–75.
Daniels, D., & Plomin, R. (1985). Differential experience of siblings
in the same family. Developmental Psychology, 21, 747–760.
Darling, N., & Steinberg, L. (1993). Parenting style as context: An
integrative model. Psychological Bulletin, 113, 487–496.
Davies, P. T., & Cummings, E. M. (1998). Exploring children’s
emotional security as a mediator of the link between marital
relations and child adjustment. Child Development, 69, 124–139.
Davis, B. T., Hops, H. Alpert, A., & Sheeber, L. (1998). Child
responses to parental conﬂict and their effect on adjustment:

236
Emotion and Personality Development in Childhood
A study of triadic relations. Journal of Family Psychology, 12,
163–177.
DeHaan, M., Gunnar, M. R., Tout, K., Hart, J., & Stansbury, K.
(1998). Familiar and novel contexts yield different associations
between cortisol and behavior among 2-year-old children.
Developmental Psychobiology, 33, 93–101.
Denham, S. A. (1986). Social cognition, social behavior, and emo-
tion in pre-schoolers: Contextual validation. Child Development,
57, 194–201.
Denham, S. A. (1998). Emotional development in young children.
New York: Guilford Press.
De Wolff, M., & van Ijzendoorn, M. H. (1997). Sensitivity and
attachment: A meta-analysis on parental antecedents of infant
attachment. Child Development, 68, 571–591.
Dodge, K. A., & Garber, J. (1991). Domains of emotion regulation.
In J. Garber & K. A. Dodge (Eds.), The development of emotion
regulation and dysregulation (pp. 159–181). Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Downey, G., & Coyne, J. C. (1990). Children of depressed parents:
An integrative review. Psychological Bulletin, 108, 50–76.
Dunn, J. (1988). The beginnings of social understanding.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Dunn, J. (1999). Making sense of the social world: Mindreading,
emotion, and relationships. In P. D. Zelazo, J. W. Astington, &
D. R. Olson (Eds.), Developing theories of intention: Social
understanding and self-control (pp. 229–242). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Dunn, J., & Brown, J. (1993). Early conversations about causality:
Content, pragmatics, and developmental change. British Journal
of Developmental Psychology, 11, 107–123.
Dunn, J., & Brown, J. (1994). Affect expression in the family, chil-
dren’s understanding of emotions, and their interactions with
others. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 40, 120–137.
Easterbrooks, M. A., Biesecker, G., & Lyons-Ruth, K. (2000).
Infancy predictors of emotional availability in middle child-
hood: The role of attachment security & maternal depressive
symptomatology. Attachment and Human Development, 2,
170–187.
Easterbrooks, M. A., Cummings, E. M., & Emde, R. N. (1994).
Young children’s responses to constructive marital disputes.
Journal of Family Psychology, 8, 160–169.
Easterbrooks, M. A., & Emde, R. N. (1988). Marital and parent-
child relationships: The role of affect in the family system. In
R. A. Hinde & J. Stevenson-Hinde (Eds.), Relationships within
families: Mutual inﬂuences (pp. 83–103). London: Oxford
University Press.
Easterbrooks, M. A., & Goldberg, W. A. (1990). Security of toddler-
parent attachment: Relation to children’s sociopersonality func-
tioning during kindergarten. In M. T. Greenberg & D. Cicchetti
(Eds.), Attachment in the preschool years: Theory, research, and
intervention (pp. 221–244). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Eccles, J. S., & Roeser, R. W. (1999). School and community
inﬂuences on human development. In M. H. Bornstein & M. E.
Lamb (Eds.), Developmental psychology: An advanced textbook
(4th ed., pp. 503–554). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Eisenberg, N. (1996). Meta-emotion and socialization of emotion in
the family: A topic whose time has come: Comment on Gottman
et al. (1996). Journal of Family Psychology, 10, 269–276.
Eisenberg, N., & Fabes, R. A. (1994). Mothers’ reactions to chil-
dren’s negative outcomes: Relations to children’s temperament
and anger behavior. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 40, 138–156.
Eisenberg, N., Spinrad, T. L., & Cumberland, A. (1998). Parental
socialization of emotion. Psychological Inquiry, 9, 241–273.
Eisenberg, N., Fabes, R., Bernzweig, J., Karbon, M., Poulin, R., &
Hanish, L. (1993). The relations of emotionality and regulation
to preschoolers: Social skills and sociometric status. Child
Development, 64, 1418–1438.
Emery, R. E. (1989). Family violence. American Psychologist, 44,
321–328.
Emery, R. E., Fincham, F. D., & Cummings, E. M. (1992). Parent-
ing in context: Systemic thinking about parental conﬂict and its
inﬂuence on children. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 60, 909–912.
Erel, O., & Burman, B. (1995). Interrelations of marital relations
and parent-child relations: A meta-analytic review. Psychologi-
cal Bulletin, 188, 108–132.
Fabes, R. A., Eisenberg, N., & Eisenbud, L. (1993). Behavioral and
physiological correlates of children’s reactions to others in
distress. Developmental Psychology, 29, 655–663.
Fabes, R. A., Eisenberg, N., Karbon, M., & Troyer, D. (1994). The
relations of children’s emotion regulation to their vicarious
emotional responses and comforting behaviors. Child Develop-
ment, 65, 1678–1693.
Fabes, R. A., Eisenberg, N., Smith, M. C., & Murphy, B. C. (1996).
Getting angry at peers: Associations with liking of the provoca-
teur. Child Development, 67, 942–956.
Fincham, F. D. (1998). Child development and marital relations.
Child Development, 69, 543–574.
Fox, N. A. (1994). Dynamic cerebral processes underlying emotion
regulation. Monographs for the Society of Research in Child
Development, 59 (1–2, Serial No. 240), 152–166.
Fox, N. A., Calkins, S. D., & Bell, M. A. (1994). Neural plasticity
and development in the ﬁrst two years of life: Evidence from
cognitive and socioemotional domains of research. Development
and Psychopathology, 6, 677–696.
Fox, N. A., & Davidson, R. J. (1984). Hemispheric substrates of
affect: A developmental model. In N. A. Fox & R. J. Davidson
(Ed.), The psychology of affective development (pp. 353–382).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gilbert, R., Christensen, A., & Margolin, G. (1984). Patterns of
alliances in non-distressed and multiproblem families. Family
Processes, 23, 75–87.

References
237
Goldberg, W. A., & Easterbrooks, M. A. (1984). The role of marital
quality in toddler development. Developmental Psychology, 20,
504–514.
Goldsmith, H. H., Buss, K. A., & Lemery, K. S. (1997). Toddler
and childhood temperament: Expanded content, stronger genetic
evidence, new evidence for the importance of environment.
Developmental Psychology, 33, 891–905.
Goldsmith, H. H., Buss, A. H., Plomin, R., Rothbart, M. K.,
Thomas, A., Chess, S., Hinde, R. A., & McCall, R. B. (1987).
Roundtable: What is temperament? Four approaches. Child
Development, 59, 505–529.
Goldsmith, H. H., Lemery, K. S., Aksan, N., & Buss, K. A. (2000).
Temperamental substrates of personality development. In V. J.
Molfese&D.L.Molfese(Eds.),Temperamentandpersonalityde-
velopment across the lifespan (pp. 1–32). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gottman, J. M., Katz, L. F., & Hooven, C. (1996). Meta-emotion
and socialization of emotion in the family? A topic whose time
has come: Comment on Gottman et al. (1996). Family Psychol-
ogy, 10, 269–276.
Grolnick, W. W., Bridges, L. J., & Connell, J. P. (1996). Emotion
regulation in two-year-olds: Strategies and emotional expression
in four contexts. Child Development, 67, 928–941.
Grych, J. H. (1998). Children’s appraisals of interparental conﬂict:
situational and contextual inﬂuences. Journal of Family
Psychology, 12, 437–453.
Grych, J. H., & Fincham, F. (1990). Marital conﬂict and children’s
adjustment: A cognitive-contextual framework. Psychological
Bulletin, 108, 267–290.
Gunnar, M. R. (1994). Psychoendocrine studies of temperament and
stress in early childhood: Expanding current models. In J. E.
Bates & T. D. Wachs (Ed.), Temperament: Individual differences
at the interface of biology and behavior (pp. 175–198).
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Hagekull, B., & Bohlin, G. (1995). Day care quality, family and
child characteristics, and socioemotional development. Early
Childhood Research Quarterly, 10, 505–526.
Halverson, C. F., Jr., Kohnstamm, G. A., & Martin, R. P. (1994). The
developing structure of temperament and personality from in-
fancy to adulthood. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Hardy, D., Power, T., & Jaedicke, S. (1993). Examining the relation
of parenting to children’s coping with everyday stress. Child
Development, 64, 1829–1841.
Harold, G. T., & Shelton, K. (2000, April). Testing the emotional se-
curity hypothesis: An analysis across, time, gender and culture.
In G. T. Harold (Chair), Marital conﬂict, emotional security and
adolescent adjustment: A cross-site investigation. Symposium
conducted at the Eighth Biennial Meeting of the Society for
Research on Adolescence, Chicago, IL.
Holden, G. W., & Ritchie, K. L. (1991). Linking extreme marital
discord, child rearing, and child behavior problems: Evidence
from battered women. Child Development, 62, 311–327.
Howes, P., & Markman, H. J. (1989). Marital quality and child func-
tioning: A longitudinal investigation. Child Development, 60,
1044–1051.
Hubbard, J. A., & Coie, J. D. (1994). Emotional correlates of social
competence in children’s peer relationships. Merrill-Palmer
Quarterly, 40, 1–20.
Hughes, C., & Dunn, J. (1995). Understanding mind and emotion:
Longitudinal associations with mental-state talk between young
friends. Developmental Psychology, 34, 1026–1037.
Hughes, C., & Dunn, J. (1997). “Pretend you don’t know”:
Preschoolers’ talk about mental states in pretend play. Cognitive
Development, 12, 381–403.
Jensen, P. S., & Hoagwood, K. (1997). The book of names: DSM-IV
in context. Development and Psychopathology, 9, 231–250.
Jouriles, E. N., & Farris, A. M. (1992). Effects of marital conﬂict
on subsequent parent-son interactions. Behavior Therapy, 23,
355–374.
Kagan, J., Reznick, J. S., & Gibbons, J. (1989). Inhibited and unin-
hibited types of children. Child Development, 60, 838–845.
Kagan, J., Reznick, J. S., & Snidman, N. (1987). The physiology
and psychology of behavioral inhibition. Child Development, 58,
1459–1473.
Keller, H., & Greenﬁeld, P. M. (2000). History & future of develop-
ment in cross-cultural psychology. Journal of Cross-Cultural
Psychology, 31, 52–62.
Kerig, P. K., Cowan, P. A., & Cowan, C. P. (1993). Marital quality
and gender differences in parent-child interaction. Developmen-
tal Psychology, 29, 931–939.
Kitzman, K. M. (2000). Effect of marital conﬂict on subsequent
triadic family interactions and parenting. Developmental Psy-
chology, 36, 3–13.
Kochanaksa, G. (1993). Towards a synthesis of parental socializa-
tion and child temperament in the development of guilt and con-
science. Child Development, 64, 325–347.
Kochanska, G. (1997). Multiple pathways to conscience for chil-
dren with different temperaments: From toddlerhood to age 5.
Developmental Psychology, 3, 228–240.
Kochanska, G., Murray, K., & Coy, K. C. (1997). Inhibitory control
as a contributor to conscience in childhood: From toddler to
early school age. Child Development, 68, 263–277.
Kopp, C. B. (1982). Antecedents of self-regulation: A developmen-
tal perspective. Developmental Psychology, 18, 199–214.
Kopp, C. B. (1989). Regulation of distress and negative emotions:
A developmental view. Developmental Psychology, 25, 343–
354.
Layhey, B. B., Pelham, W. E., Stein, M. A., Loney, J., Trapani,
C., Nugent, K., Kipp, H., Schmidt, E., Lee, S., Cale, M., Gold,
E., Hartung, C. M., Willcutt, E., & Bauman, B. (1998). Validity
of DSM-IV attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder for younger
children. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adoles-
cent Psychiatry, 37, 695–702.

238
Emotion and Personality Development in Childhood
Lewis, M., Alessandri, S. M., & Sullivan, M. (1992). Differences
in shame and pride as a function of children’s gender and task
difﬁculty. Child Development, 63, 630–638.
Lewis, M., Sullivan, M., Stanger, C., & Weiss, M. (1989). Self-
development and self-conscious emotions. Child Development,
60, 146–156.
Luthar, S. S., Cicchetti, D., & Becker, B. (2000). The construct of
resilience: A critical evaluation and guidelines for future work.
Child Development, 71, 543–562.
Luthar, S. S., Doernberger, C. H., & Zigler, E. (1993). Resilience is
not a unidimensional construct: Insights from a prospective
study of inner-city adolescence. Development and Psycho-
pathology, 5, 703–717.
Maccoby, E., & Martin, J. (1983). Socialization in contexts of the
family: Parent-child interaction. In E. M. Hetherington (Ed.),
Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 4. Socialization, personality,
and social development (4th ed., pp. 1–101). New York: Wiley.
Mascolo, M., & Fischer, K. (1995). Developmental transformations
in appraisals for pride, shame, and guilt. In J. Tangney & K.
Fischer (Eds.), Self-conscious emotions: The psychology of
shame, guilt, embarrassment and pride (pp. 64–113). New York:
Guilford Press.
Masten, A. S., Best, K., & Garmezy, N. (1990). Resilience and
development: Contributions from the study of children who
overcame adversity. Development and Psychopathology, 2,
425–444.
Masten, A. S., & Coatsworth, J. D. (1998). The development of
competence in favorable and unfavorable environments:
Lessons from research on successful children. American Psy-
chologist, 53, 205–220.
Maszk, P., Eisenberg, N., & Guthrie, I. K. (1999). Relations of
children’s social status to their emotionality and regulation: A
short-term longitudinal study. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 45,
468–492.
McClowry, S. G., Giangrande, S. K., Tommasini, N. R., Clinton, W.,
Foreman, N. S., Lynch, K., & Ferketich, S. L. (1994). The effects
of child temperament, maternal characteristic, and family cir-
cumstances on the maladjustment of school-age children. Re-
search in Nursing and Health, 17, 25–35.
McDowell, D. J., O’Neil, R., & Parke, R. D. (2000). Display rule
application in a disappointing situation and children’s emotional
reactivity: Relations with social competence. Merrill-Palmer
Quarterly, 46, 306–324.
Mischel, W. (1974). Processes in delay of gratiﬁcation. In L.
Berkowitz (Ed.), Progress in experimental personality research
(Vol. 3, pp. 249–292). New York: Academic Press.
Nachmias, M., Gunnar, M., Mangelsdorf, S., Parritz, R. H., &
Buss, K. (1996). Behavioral inhibition and stress reactivity: The
moderating role of attachment security. Child Development, 67,
508–522.
O’Hearn, H. G., Margolin, G., & John, R. S. (1997). Mothers’ and
fathers’reports of children’s reactions to naturalistic marital con-
ﬂict. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry, 36, 1366–1373.
Owen, M. T., & Cox, M. J. (1997). Marital conﬂict and the develop-
ment of infant-parent attachment relationships. Journal of Fam-
ily Psychology, 11, 152–164.
Palkovitz, M. (1987). Organization of the stress response at the
anatomical level. Progress in Brain Research, 72, 47–55.
Parke, R. D., & Buriel, R. (1998). Socialization in the family: Ethnic
and ecological perspectives. In W. Damon (Series Ed.) &
N. Eisenberg (Vol. Ed.), Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 3.
Social, emotional, and personality development (pp. 463–552).
New York: Wiley.
Parke, R. D., Cassidy, J., Burks, V. M., Carson, J. L., & Boyum, L.
(1992). Familial contribution to peer competence among young
children: The role of interactive and affective processes. In R. D.
Parke & G. W. Ladd (Eds.), Family-peer relationships: Model of
linkage (pp. 107–134). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Patterson, G. R., DeBaryshe, B., & Ramsey, E. (1989). A develop-
mental perspective on antisocial behavior. American Psycholo-
gist, 44, 329–335.
Radke-Yarrow, M., & Sherman, T. (1990). Hard growing: children
who survive. In J. Rolf, A. S. Masten, D. Cicchetti, K. H.
Nuechterlein, & S. Weintraub (Eds.), Risk and protective factors
in the development of psychopathology (pp. 97–119). New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Ramey, C. T., & Ramey, S. L. (1998). Early intervention and expe-
rience. American Psychologist, 53, 109–120.
Rutter, M. (1986). The developmental psychopathology of depres-
sion: Issues and perspectives. In M. Rutter, C. E. Izard, & P. B.
Read (Eds.), Depression in young people: Developmental and
clinical perspectives (pp. 3–30). New York: Guilford Press.
Rutter, M., & Quinton, D. (1984). Parental psychiatric disorder:
Effects on children. Psychological Medicine, 14, 853–880.
Shamir, H., Du Rocher-Schudlich, T., & Cummings, E. M. (2002).
Marital conﬂict, parenting styles, and children’s representations
of family relationships. Parenting: Science and Practice, 1–2,
123–151.
Shifﬂett-Simpson, K., & Cummings, E, M. (1996). Mixed message
resolution and children’s responses to interadult conﬂict. Child
Development, 67, 437–448.
Sroufe, L. A. (1997). Psychopathology as an outcome of develop-
ment. Development and Psychopathology, 9, 251–268.
Sroufe, L. A., & Rutter, M. (1984). The domain of developmental
psychopathology. Child Development, 55, 17–29.
Sroufe, L. A., & Waters, E. (1977). Attachment as an organizational
construct. Child Development, 48, 1184–1199.
Stocker, C. M., & Youngblade, L. (1999). Marital conﬂict and
parental hostility: Links with children’s sibling and peer rela-
tionships. Journal of Family Psychology, 13, 598–609.
Stoneman, Z., Brody, G. H., & Burke, M. (1989). Marital quality,
depression, and inconsistent parenting: Relationship with

References
239
observed mother-child conﬂict. American Journal of Orthopsy-
chiatry, 59, 105–117.
Thompson, R. A. (2000). Legacy of early attachment. Child Devel-
opment, 59 (2–3, Serial No. 240), 25–52.
Thompson, R. A., & Calkins, S. D. (1996). The double-edged
sword: Emotional regulation for children at risk. Development
and Psychopathology, 8, 163–182.
van de Vijver, F. J. R., & Leung, K. (2000). Methodological issues
on psychological research on culture. Journal of Cross-Cultural
Psychology, 31, 33–51.
van Ijzendoorn, M. H., & Sagi, A. (1999). Cross-cultural patters of
attachment: Universal and contextual dimensions. In J. Cassidy &
P. R. Shaver (Eds.), Handbook of attachment: Theory, research,
and clinical applications (pp. 713–734). New York: Guilford
Press.
Wakeﬁeld, J. C. (1997). When in development disordered? Devel-
opmental psychopathology and the harmful dysfunction analysis
of mental disorder. Development and Psychopathology, 9,
269–290.
Waters, E., & Cummings, E. M. (2000). A secure based from which
to explore close relationships. Child Development, 49, 164–172.
Weiss, G., & Hechtman, L. T. (1993). Hyperactive children grown
up: ADHD in children, adolescents, and adults (2nd ed.). New
York: Guilford Press.
Willett, J. B., Singer, J. D., & Martin, N. C. (1998). The design
and analysis of longitudinal studies of development and
psychopathology in context: Statistical models and methodolog-
ical recommendations. Development and Psychopathology, 10,
395–426.


241
CHAPTER 10
Social Development and Social Relationships
in Middle Childhood
SUSAN M. MCHALE, JACINDA K. DARIOTIS, AND TINA J. KAUH
THE SOCIAL ECOLOGY OF MIDDLE CHILDHOOD
243
Models of the Social Ecology of Childhood
243
Children’s Daily Activities
244
SOCIAL DEVELOPMENTAL PROCESSES IN
MIDDLE CHILDHOOD
246
Social Cognition and Social Competence During
Middle Childhood
246
Emotional and Social Development: Self-Regulation and
Self-Control in Middle Childhood
249
Summary
251
SOCIAL RELATIONSHIPS AND DEVELOPMENT IN
MIDDLE CHILDHOOD
252
Children and Their Parents
252
Children and Their Peers
255
Children and Their Siblings
257
Summary
259
CONCLUSIONS
260
REFERENCES
260
Middle childhood is a time of considerable change in chil-
dren’s social competencies and interpersonal relationships.
Descriptions of the salient features of this developmental
period highlight an expansion of the social world as children
spend increasing amounts of time outside their homes, away
from their families, at school, with peers, and in extracurric-
ular activities (Collins, 1984; Eccles, 1999). Learning to
interact effectively in these new and diverse social settings
is at the core of social development in middle childhood.
Building on conceptual models that emphasize adaptation
to interpersonal and setting demands as fundamental to social
behavior and social competence (Cairns & Cairns, 1994;
Ogbu, 1995; Rose-Krasnor, 1997), in this chapter we de-
scribe the nature of and inﬂuences on social development
between ages 6 and 12 years.
Although middle childhood is often viewed as a period of
consolidation between two periods of striking change (i.e.,
infancy and early childhood on the one hand and adolescence
on the other), both theoretical accounts and empirical evi-
dence highlight the unique developmental tasks that children
confront during the school-age years. From the realm of ego
psychology, the writings of Erik Erikson (1963) and Harry
Stack Sullivan (1953) stress the signiﬁcance of experiences
in middle childhood for later healthful development. Erikson
portrayed this period as one focused on the development of a
sense of industry as children become competent at a range of
activities valued by the societies in which they live. Middle
childhood is a time when children become immersed in work:
schoolwork in the case of children living in industrialized
countries and paid labor in the case of children in developing
countries. In the context of new work roles, social behaviors
emerge, are practiced, and change, and their emerging social
competencies are an important component of children’s suc-
cessful task performance.
Sullivan (1953) described the importance of what he
termed the juvenile era (the early part of middle childhood) as
“the actual time for becoming social” (p. 227). Key to making
the transition into this developmental period are declines in
egocentrism and increasing awareness of others’perspectives
brought about through association with age-mates. The social
developmental process continues in the preadolescent era
through the development of an intimate and egalitarian
relationship with a particular same-sex age-mate, or chum.
According to Sullivan, the chum relationship is central to
both the development of self-understanding and the individ-
ual’s later involvement in mature, close relationships. From

242
Social Development and Social Relationships in Middle Childhood
Sullivan’s perspective, adaptations children make in the con-
text of their social interactions with a best friend deﬁne social
development in middle childhood.
A second perspective on development in middle child-
hood targets changes in children’s cognitive abilities. Jean
Piaget’s theory (Piaget, 1932) highlights advances in logical
reasoning, problem solving, and the ability to think about
abstract representations. Metacognitive skills—which allow
children to step back and think about their thoughts, plans,
and activities—also develop at this time (Flavell, 1976).
Piaget, like Sullivan, highlighted the accommodations chil-
dren make in the course of social exchanges with peers as an
important impetus for cognitive growth. Later in this chapter
we consider how children’s emerging understandings of self,
other, and the social world have implications for their social
behavior and relationships.
In contemporary research, the work of Robert Cairns and
colleagues (Cairns, 1991; Cairns & Cairns, 1994; Cairns,
Gariepy, & Hood, 1990) has contributed conceptually and
empirically to our understanding of social behavior and de-
velopment. Basing their ideas on a series of human and com-
parative studies, Cairns and colleagues argue that adaptations
in social behavior arise out of a tension between forces for
continuity and forces that promote novelty and change
(Cairns et al., 1990). With respect to the experiences of the
individual in the context of interpersonal interactions, for ex-
ample, Cairns (1991) explains that “a special feature of social
behavior is the ability to adapt to changing circumstances
while simultaneously maintaining internal coherence and
dyadic organization in action. Social behaviors are jointly
determined from within and without, yet there is both intra-
personal synchrony and interpersonal integration. Despite
having to serve two masters simultaneously—or because of
it—the system is kept reasonably stable as well as reasonably
plastic” (p. 25). One reason that the study of social behavior
is important is that external inﬂuences on individual develop-
ment can be directly observed in the behavioral accommoda-
tions that appear during the course of social exchange.
Stepping back to consider the larger picture of development
and change, Cairns et al. (1990) highlight a second set of
tensions that control the emergence of novelties in the devel-
opment of the individual and in the evolution of the species.
Although evolution and development are conservative
processes, these authors argue that “. . . there must be avenues
for rapid change both in ontogeny and in microevolution if be-
havioralsystemsaretobefunctionalintimeandspace”(p.62).
From this perspective, the study of social behavior also is im-
portant because its inherently accommodating function makes
social behavior the leading edge of the adaptations that consti-
tute individual development and microevolution.
These ideas—core to a psychobiological approach to the
study of development—imply several challenges for an
analysis of social development in middle childhood. The psy-
chobiological concept of development not only directs atten-
tion to understanding continuities in development, but also
emphasizes the search for novelty and change. We therefore
ask the following question: In the face of the consolidation of
earlier skills and abilities that characterizes middle child-
hood, what are the emergent features of social development
that also deﬁne this developmental period? A psychobiologi-
cal framework also highlights the web of coacting inﬂuences
that guide the course of social development—inﬂuences
ranging from the biological to the contextual and including
the active, mediating role of children’s own constructions of
their social worlds and their social experiences (Cairns &
Cairns, 1994; Lerner, 1982). In this chapter we review factors
that inﬂuence developmental and individual differences in
children’s social behavior and social experiences; in the face
of models that highlight coacting inﬂuences on children’s
social functioning, documenting the workings of these
processes is a complex effort whose goal remains elusive.
Eisenberg (1998) recently provided an insightful analysis
of emerging themes in research within the broad domain of so-
cial, emotional and personality development. First, Eisenberg
noted the attention paid in recent research to external inﬂu-
ences on children’s social development, particularly in studies
of the ways in which features of the larger social context
inﬂuence children’s social experiences. Reﬂecting the ﬁeld’s
increasing appreciation of the network of inﬂuences on chil-
dren’s social development, Eisenberg also highlighted a focus
on within-individual processes, including biological, emo-
tional, and cognitive factors in children’s social behavior and
development. With respect to these within-individual devel-
opmental processes, another research emphasis noted by
Eisenberg pertains to self-regulation processes—speciﬁcally,
developmental changes in the integration of external and self-
control across the course of childhood. Studies of regulatory
processes provide a window on changes during middle child-
hood in the nature and signiﬁcance of children’s active role in
their own experiences and development. Yet another impor-
tant theme in recent literature is the importance of the role of
interpersonal relationships in children’s social development.
Finally, Eisenberg stressed the importance of questions of
process—that is, the delineation of mechanisms through
which internal and external inﬂuences operate together to
produce individual differences and developmental changes
in children.
A discussion of the complete range of social developmen-
tal phenomena is beyond the scope of this chapter; readers are
directed to the recent review chapters on topics ranging from

The Social Ecology of Middle Childhood
243
emotion and prosocial development (Eisenburg & Fabes,
1998; Saarni, Mumme, & Campos, 1998), to peer relation-
ships (Rubin, Bukowski, & Parker, 1998) and family inﬂu-
ences (Bugental & Goodnow, 1998; Parke & Buriel, 1998)
in the Handbook on Child Psychology for in-depth analyses
of issues in children’s social development. In reviewing re-
search on social development here, we have chosen topics
relevant to many of the themes of contemporary research on
social development highlighted in Eisenberg’s analysis of the
ﬁeld. We begin broadly with a picture of the social ecology of
middle childhood; one goal of this discussion is to direct at-
tention to the diversity of settings in which children spend
their lives. Speciﬁcally, we consider models for conceptualiz-
ing and measuring children’s social ecologies, and we review
research on children’s everyday activities as one instantiation
of an ecological perspective on children’s social develop-
ment. We then turn our attention to studies of individual
developmental processes that constitute the bulk of extant
research on social development, focusing on two domains—
social cognitive development and emotion regulation—as
examples of such developmental processes. Our review high-
lights how these processes unfold during middle childhood,
what factors inﬂuence individual differences in these do-
mains, and how these processes are tied to children’s social
experiences and competencies. Our survey of ecological
and individual factors in social development provides a
grounding for a discussion of children’s interpersonal
relationships—speciﬁcally, their parent-child, peer, and sib-
ling relationships—in the ﬁnal section of this chapter.Afocus
on children’s social development implies an analysis of the
emerging social competencies and behaviors of the individ-
ual child, but the study of social relationships also demands a
dyadic level of conceptualization and analysis (Hinde, 1979).
As we note, studying children’s individual development
in the context of their interpersonal relationships is not
the same as studying the development of children’s interper-
sonal relationships. Furthermore, as our review reveals,
we know somewhat more about the former than about the
latter.
THE SOCIAL ECOLOGY OF MIDDLE CHILDHOOD
The contexts of children’s social development are as diverse
as they are dynamic. For example, in the space of a generation
or two, the family setting for European-American middle-
class children (the focus of most extant research on social
development) has changed dramatically in at least two impor-
tant ways: the involvement of their mothers in the labor force
and the likelihood that youth will spend at least some of their
childhood in a single-parent or stepfamily. For U.S. children
as a whole, between 1940 and the mid-1990s the rate of
maternal employment went from less than 10% to greater than
70% (L. W. Hoffman & Youngblade, 1999). Furthermore,
whereas fewer than 10% of children were living in a single-
parent family in 1960, by the mid-1990s that ﬁgure reached
almost 35% (Hernandez, 1997). Changing family demo-
graphics make for changes in the socialization agents and in-
stitutions of childhood: stepparents and siblings, after-school
child care programs, and caregivers ﬁgure in the social expe-
riences of greater numbers of U.S. children, thereby increas-
ing the diversity and complexity of their social ecologies.
Possibly even more signiﬁcant are analyses that have
alerted researchers to large populations of children in the
United States who traditionally have been neglected in child
development research—including children living in poverty,
who constitute more than 20% of children in the United
States, and children of ethnic minority status, who constitute
almost 45% of children in the United States (Hernandez,
1997). In the face of recent efforts directed at their study, we
still know very little about the social ecologies of these chil-
dren’s lives. When one considers that children in developed
countries—where most child development research has been
conducted—constitute less than a ﬁfth of the world’s popula-
tion of children, it becomes evident that our ﬁeld faces an im-
portant challenge as researchers seek to document the range
of social development experiences that characterize middle
childhood.
Models of the Social Ecology of Childhood
In his 1979 volume, The Ecology of Human Development,
Urie Bronfenbrenner laid out his inﬂuential model of contex-
tual inﬂuences on the developing child, a model that high-
lighted contexts ranging from the everyday settings in which
children spend their time—such as the family, peer group, or
school—to larger cultural-societal systems that exert their
impact by virtue of the structure, expectations, and meanings
they impose on children’s everyday settings and experiences.
From the ﬁeld of cultural anthropology come theoretical con-
structs such as the ecological niche (Weisner, 1984), which
provide a framework for operationalizing and measuring the
ecologies of middle childhood. According to Weisner, the
ecological niche refers to the social and cultural environment
within which a child and his or her family are embedded. The
term niche highlights the dynamic and adaptive nature of
the social-cultural environment. The evolution of the niche
comes about as a function of subsistence demands that oper-
ate within a given physical, political, and social setting; chil-
dren and their families adapt to the demands of the setting but

244
Social Development and Social Relationships in Middle Childhood
also act on their settings to effect change. Furthermore, the
ecological niche includes not only the physical environment,
but also the goals, motivations, and scripts of the individuals
within that setting.
Weisner (1984) deﬁned ﬁve categories or clusters of niche
characteristics that provide challenges to and supports
for children’s development; the everyday behavioral adapta-
tions children make to these setting demands are at the heart
of their social development. The ﬁrst includes factors related
to the health and mortality of the child’s social group. Fea-
tures of the context, ranging from health care availability to
dangers in the community—in forms ranging from predators,
to warfare, to trafﬁc laws, to the availability of bicycle
helmets—fall into this category; learning the social rules and
scripts a society has developed to negotiate these setting fea-
tures is an important component of social development in
middle childhood. The second category has to do with the
provision of food and shelter. What kinds of work parents do
and when they do it, parents’ expectations for their children’s
future roles as workers, and—as we shortly consider later in
some detail—children’s own role in the family economy are
context characteristics with implications for children’s social
experiences and development. A third set of niche character-
istics highlights the “personnel” involved in children’s every-
day activities and the kinds of caregiving activities those
individuals undertake. The extent to which children spend
time with adults, other children, or both, in relative isolation
or in groups are some of the ways in which niches can be
distinguished. Such a focus highlights the different social op-
portunities of children in different ecologies. Related to the
issue of personnel present is the role of women in the com-
munity and the extent to which distinctions are made in the
opportunities and expectations for males versus females in a
society; such patterns will be central to children’s everyday
social experiences, as well as to their images of their future
roles in adulthood. A ﬁnal category has to do with the avail-
ability of alternative cultural models—that is, the extent to
which variations in the characteristics previously outlined
exist within a community or are evident from without;
children’s experiences vis à vis alternative models affect the
way they interpret the social demands of their own settings,
as well as their ideas about their own developing roles and
competencies.
The elements of children’s social ecologies outlined by
Weisner deﬁne a broader range of life circumstances for chil-
dren than is common in most accounts by developmental
scholars who study children’s social development. Efforts
to capture variation in children’s life circumstances often
have relied on global indexes such as social class or ethnic
background—what Bronfenbrenner and Crouter (1983) refer
to as “social address variables.” As Weisner (1984) argued,
measuring features of the ecological niche directly allows the
researcher to “decompose global descriptors like socioeco-
nomic level into much more complex set of measures. In
addition, measures derived from ecocultural niche domains
are more likely to reveal the mechanisms by which class or
education produce their effects on children.” This is because
elements of the ecological niche have direct implications for
children’s everyday experiences including (a) the activities
and tasks in which children spend their time each day,
(b) children’s companions in their everyday activities, and
(c) the cultural scripts that provide the meaning and motiva-
tion for children’s everyday experiences.
Children’s Daily Activities
In research on cross-cultural differences in children’s time
use, we see how features of the ecocultural niche shape chil-
dren’s everyday activities in ways that are likely both to
reﬂect and to have important implications for children’s so-
cial development (Bronfenbrenner, 1979; Larson & Verma,
1999). Reviewing the literature on how children and adoles-
cents spend their time, Larson and Verma highlight as fore-
most in importance differences in the relative amounts of
time children spend on work and leisure that distinguish chil-
dren and youth from industrial, preindustrial, and transitional
societies. Cross-cultural analysis of the nature of and balance
between children’s work and leisure shows how these areas
change between early childhood and adolescence and how
they are tied to the subsistence demands and associated mate-
rial conditions of families and communities. Societies also
differ markedly in the extent to which children’s work and
leisure—and the balance between the time spent in each—are
sex-typed.
Within the sphere of work, children’s activities can be
divided into work activities that contribute to economy of
their families, including unpaid domestic work (household
chores, sibling caregiving), wage-earning activities (which
usually take place outside the home), and “work” activities
that are designed to promote children’s individual develop-
ment and skills such as schoolwork (Larson & Verma, 1999).
In industrialized societies, where making a living requires
specialized skills, children’s work comes predominantly in
the form of schoolwork. Data from a range of cultures reveal
that children in nonindustrial societies—girls in particular—
may spend half their waking hours doing housework; how-
ever, among children in industrial societies who attend
school, the average child spends less than half an hour a day
on household chores (Goodnow, 1988; Larson & Verma,
1999; Medrich, Roizen, Rubin, & Buckley, 1982). These
differences in time use have implications in such areas as the
kinds of social rules and scripts children learn, their everyday

The Social Ecology of Middle Childhood
245
social partners, their family roles as economic contributors
versus “ornaments” (Zelizer, 1985), and their expectations
regarding their future roles as adults. In turn, their social
competencies will be an important element in children’s
success in their everyday work activities. Sex differences in
children’s work are striking: Whereas girls tend to spend
more time than boys do in housework, boys tend to be more
involved than girls are in wage-earning jobs. In the United
States, common paid jobs during middle childhood are paper
routes and babysitting (Medrich et al., 1982), but elsewhere
around the world, middle childhood is the time when children
begin working for pay in factories, in agriculture, and on the
street (Larson & Verma, 1999). Despite variations in the form
work takes, across diverse settings, middle childhood is the
time at which children’s work responsibilities begin to com-
prise a signiﬁcant portion of their waking hours: By this met-
ric, middle childhood can indeed be described as a period of
industry (Erikson, 1963).
On the other hand, the meanings attributed to children’s
work—both their schoolwork and their labor—vary con-
siderably within and across cultures. Moreover, it is in the
meaning of children’s work that cultural values—particularly
those of individualism versus collectivism—inhere. Recently
researchers have given more attention to the meanings
and motivations for work—both household work and
schoolwork—undertaken by children in Western societies.
The results of this research suggest that the developmental
implications of children’s work vary considerably as a func-
tion of whether work is seen as directed at fulﬁlling personal
versus family needs and goals. When differences emerge, it
appears that a collectivist (as opposed to an individualistic)
orientation promotes developmental advantages in the form
of prosocial development and individual well-being and
achievement (Goodnow, 1988; Weisner, 1984).
The amount of free time available for children to spend in
play and leisure activities also varies considerably around the
world. Larson and Verma (1999) suggest that among some
nonindustrialized societies, availability of free time is sex-
typed, with boys having up to twice as much free time as
girls. Subsistence opportunities and demands are probably
the most important factor in explaining children’s free time in
nonindustrialized societies; when employment and economi-
cally productive opportunities for children’s relatively un-
skilled labor are available, children have less time for play
and leisure. Children in the United States are notable for the
sizable quantity of their free time—up to 50% of their waking
hours (Larson & Verma, 1999). Across middle childhood, the
nature of children’s leisure changes in potentially important
ways, from more time spent in relatively unstructured play
(e.g., sociodramatic play, play with toys) to more time spent
in organized activities away from home, for example, in the
form of clubs or team sports (Medrich et al., 1982; Newson &
Newson, 1976; Posner & Vandell, 1999; Timmer, Eccles, &
O’Brien, 1985). Despite its signiﬁcance in the ecology of
everyday life, however, we know little about the implications
of free time use during middle childhood for children’s social
development. Free time may be a source of stress to the
extent that children are hurried by frenetic schedules of ex-
tracurricular activities (Elkind, 1981)—a missed opportunity
for cognitive development to the extent that it takes children
away from schoolwork (Stevenson & Lee, 1990), or free time
may present an opportunity to develop social competencies
and interpersonal ties (Larson & Verma, 1999; Werner,
1993).
Along with changes in what children do with their free
time and where they spend it come changes in the social con-
texts of children’s leisure activities. As children move toward
adolescence, an increasing amount of their time is spent with
peers, outside the direct supervision of parents (Collins,
Harris, & Susman, 1995; Parke & Buriel, 1998). Conse-
quently, parenting from a distance by acquiring information
about children’s activities and companions and helping to
organize children’s involvement in social activities outside
the home becomes an increasingly important component of
child-rearing activities for parents during middle childhood.
Children who spend their free time in sports and organized
activities are likely to do so in the company of nonparental
adults who can play an important role as mentors and sources
of support; these social opportunities may be particularly
important for children in troubled family circumstances
(Werner, 1993). One of the most dramatic features of middle
childhood—and one that distinguishes this period from early
childhood on the one hand and adolescence on the other—
is the extent to which peer experiences are sex-segregated
(Maccoby, 1990). As we note in our discussion of peer rela-
tionships later in this chapter, sex segregation in the peer
group during middle childhood is a phenomenon that has
been observed in cultures around the world. The social con-
texts of children’s everyday activities both reﬂect and have
implications for an important domain of social-psychological
functioning—children’s gender role development (Maccoby,
1998).
In sum, in contrast to what we have learned in recent
decades about normative (within-individual) social develop-
mental processes, we know much less about the everyday
lives of children—including what they do, where they go,
and with whom they spend their time. Furthermore, even less
is understood about the social developmental implications
of children’s everyday activities (see McHale, Crouter, &
Tucker, 2001; Posner & Vandell, 1999, for some exceptions).
An important direction for future research will be to describe
how the ecologically grounded meanings and motives for

246
Social Development and Social Relationships in Middle Childhood
children’s activities mediate the links between children’s
time use and their social functioning and adjustment. Also
needed is research on how patterns of everyday activities
develop in different ecological niches.
Children’s everyday activities, including their task and in-
terpersonal demands are a forum within which children’s so-
cial behavior emerges, is practiced, and changes. Within the
individual, however, developmental processes also shape and
set constraints on social behavior and relationship experi-
ences, and these processes provide a foundation for the de-
velopment of social competence. Indeed, as we have noted,
most of the research on children’s social development high-
lights this latter focus on within-individual processes. It is to
these developmental processes—speciﬁcally children’s so-
cial cognitive development, their emotion regulation abili-
ties, and these abilities’ role in the development of social
competence—to which we now turn.
SOCIAL DEVELOPMENTAL PROCESSES
IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD
Social Cognition and Social Competence
During Middle Childhood
Middle childhood is a period during which children become
better able to reason and think logically, no longer relying on
superﬁcial qualities or characteristics as the basis for their
problem solving (Piaget, 1932). The emergence of logical
reasoning abilities coincides with a decline in egocentrism
and with the development of social perspective-taking abili-
ties (Grusec & Lytton, 1988); these changes have implica-
tions for children’s self-awareness, self-understanding, and
self-evaluation abilities (Harter, 1999). Children’s social
understanding—in combination with their emerging sense
of self—undergird the social comparison skills that also
develop during middle childhood. Indeed, one skill that coa-
lesces in middle childhood is children’s ability to use infor-
mation from social comparisons in self-evaluations (Harter,
1999; Ruble, 1983). The array of social cognitive abilities
that emerges in middle childhood is both cause and conse-
quence of children’s involvement in an expanding and
increasingly complex social world.
Research on how cognitive developmental changes are
linked to children’s social understanding is one area in which
researchers have focused almost exclusively on European-
American children; except in the domain of moral develop-
ment, we know little about how the nature of or the demands
on children’s social understanding vary across age in di-
verse cultural settings. Furthermore, although Piagetian ideas
served as a basis for early empirical studies of social cognitive
development in middle childhood, contemporary researchers
have moved away from such broad developmental models in
order to examine developmental processes within speciﬁc
areas of functioning (e.g., perspective taking, moral develop-
ment). In addition, researchers have incorporated new frame-
works of cognitive development—speciﬁcally, information
processing models—into their conceptualization and study
of social cognitive development. In the following discussion
we consider three areas of study highlighted in work on
children’s social cognitive development: the development of
children’s perspective-taking abilities, their prosocial disposi-
tions, and their social information-processing skills.
Development of Perspective-Taking Skills
Selman (1980) described social development in terms of
qualitative changes in children’s ability to understand the
perspectives of others. Speciﬁcally, he argued that children’s
social understanding progresses through an invariant se-
quence of stages marked by distinct and universal patterns of
thinking. In contrast to cognitive developmental changes as
outlined by Piaget, however, Selman emphasized that “social
perspective taking involves a developing understanding of
the intrinsic psychological characteristics and capacities of
individuals, not just the complex coordination of decentered
cognitive operations, that is, it has an intrinsically social
component . . . the social or psychological content is inex-
tricable and equally as important as the logical or operational
structure which may in turn be its basis” (Selman, 1980,
p. 22). Likewise, according to Selman, shifts in perspective-
taking abilities result as a function of the interaction between
children’s cognitive development and their interactions in
their social environments. By middle childhood—through
the role-playing of familiar social roles, for example, in
play—children gain skills that allow them to realize that two
individuals can have different interpretations of the same
event. By around age 10, when children tend to be immersed
in more coordinated and organized activities such as games,
clubs, or sports, they are able to understand others’ perspec-
tives as well as their own. By the end of middle childhood,
Selman argues, children have the ability to simultaneously
consider multiple social perspectives and abstract societal
norms.
Changes in perspective-taking ability have implications
across multiple domains, including the development of the
self system and experiences in close friendships, peer-group
relations, and parent-child relations (see Selman, 1980, for a
detailed discussion of these domains). For instance, Selman
suggests that shifts in perspective-taking ability during

Social Developmental Processes in Middle Childhood
247
middle childhood allow for more elaborated understanding
of the internal and external selves; such understanding has
important implications for self-consciousness, including
notions of an imaginary audience and personal fable that
emerge in adolescence (Vartanian & Powlishta, 1996). As
with other research on children’s social cognitive develop-
ment, however, research on perspective taking generally has
been limited to a focus on White, middle-class children in
the United States. Moreover, although a number of studies
have provided empirical support for Selman’s model of pro-
gressive sophistication in perspective-taking ability (e.g.,
Gurucharri, Phelps, & Selman, 1984), some recent research
suggests that perspective-taking abilities may emerge in
particular domains (e.g., visual or spatial) earlier than Selman
had originally suggested (Miller, Holmes, Gitten, & Danbury,
1998; Taylor, 1988), and that child-speciﬁc characteristics
may play an important role in the development of these abil-
ities (e.g., Miletic, 1996). Furthermore, intervention-oriented
studies suggest that training and practice can improve
perspective-taking abilities (Chalmers & Townsend, 1990;
Lane-Garon, 1998). Researchers have begun to examine the
implications of perspective-taking ability for ethnic identity
development as a way to enhance exploration opportunities
that minority children need for identity achievement later in
adolescence (Markstrom-Adams & Spencer, 1994; Quintana,
Castaneda-English, & Ybarra, 1999).
Development of Prosocial Cognition and Behavior
Children can use their social cognitive abilities in more or
less positive ways; they may direct their abilities to achieve
self-, other, or mutual goals. The study of children’s prosocial
dispositions—which deﬁne the goals and motivations for
children’s social behavior—encompasses research on the
development of moral judgment and moral behavior in
children. Although they are conceptually related, research in
these two areas has been conducted within two distinct
traditions.
The study of moral development has focused on children’s
moral judgments and cognitive developmentally based
changes in children’s understanding of right and wrong.
Based on his early studies, Piaget (1932) argued that middle
childhood marks shifts from an heteronomous stage, in which
children’s moral values develop out of a unilateral respect
for authority, to an autonomous stage, in which conceptions
of reciprocity and equality emerge. Consequently, during
middle childhood, rules previously perceived as ﬁxed are
now seen as more ﬂuid and based on internalized standards.
These changes are associated with children’s cooperation and
perspective-taking skills and are brought about by increased
peer interaction in an expanding social world (Piaget, 1932).
Kohlberg (1976) built on Piaget’s ideas, proposing a three-
level model of the development of moral judgment directed
toward the achievement of a postconventional moral orienta-
tion, in which individual, self-chosen principles prevail. In
outlining his developmental model, Kohlberg claimed that
members of all cultures follow the same universal, invariant
sequence of stages moving toward the same universal ethical
principles. Kohlberg and Kramer (1969) also suggested that
females were less likely than were males to reach the highest
level of moral development, although few studies have found
substantial sex differences.
Reviewing research that has tested Kohlberg’s model,
Snarey (1985) found evidence substantiating Kohlberg’s
model across diverse cultures ranging from tribal villages to
industrialized cities. Snarey found, however, that cultural
groups that value collective solidarity rather than individual
rights and justice were signiﬁcantly less likely to achieve
Kohlberg’s postconventional moral level. Similarly, Gilligan
(1982) argued that Kohlberg inadequately described female
moral development, which—in contrast to Kohlberg’s focus
on moral justice—follows an alternate path focusing on the
morality of care and responsibility for others. Gilligan sug-
gested that these differential paths emerge as a result of the
greater concern females give to relationships, caregiving, and
intimacy. Eisenberg et al. (1987) found evidence supporting
Gilligan’s assertions in a longitudinal study following chil-
dren from middle childhood into adolescence.
Gilligan’s work was one impetus for a reinterpretation of
moral development among some theorists who view moral
values as consisting of distinct domains that research has
often mistakenly lumped together (Turiel, 1994). In some
cultures, for instance, the moral domain consists of justice-
related issues involving individuals’ rights or welfare,
whereas the societal domain consists of rules dictating social
conventions or norms, such as gender roles. Research sug-
gests, however, that welfare and the law may not be culturally
universal principles for basing evaluations in the moral
domain (Nisan, 1987). In the United States, Smetana and
Braeges (1990) found that children can distinguish between
these two domains by early childhood, but their distinctions
become more consistent across criteria with increasing age.
Arsenio and Ford (1985) suggest further that children come
to distinguish between these two domains via the greater
affect related to moral transgressions relative to that associ-
ated with social norm violations.
Studies of empathy move analyses from a focus on chil-
dren’s prosocial cognitions to the study of their prosocial
feelings and behavior, which Eisenberg et al. (1999) suggest
may reﬂect personality dispositions formed during childhood

248
Social Development and Social Relationships in Middle Childhood
that remain relatively stable into adulthood. Empathy repre-
sents an individual’s emotional response to another’s emo-
tional state and has been the focal point of studies examining
prosocial behavior during childhood (Bengtsson & Johnson,
1992; Eisenberg et al., 1999; Litvack-Miller, McDougall, &
Romney, 1997). Some studies suggest that empathy tends to
be stronger in girls than in boys (Zahn-Waxler, Friedman, &
Cummings, 1983), and this work shows that empathic re-
sponses include multiple reactions, such as personal distress
and sympathy (Eisenberg et al., 1999). M. L. Hoffman (1982)
proposed that social cognitive development and emotion
processes interact to explain empathic reactions; emotional
and social perspective-taking skills—which more fully de-
velop during middle childhood—mediate affective arousal
and thus inﬂuence the intensity of the empathic response.
Therefore, children who are better able to see others’ points
of view experience greater empathy and are more likely to
help others out of sympathy rather than as an attempt to alle-
viate personal distress (Eisenberg et al., 1999). Numerous
studies have documented links between perspective-taking
skills, empathy, and prosocial behavior among school-
aged children across cultures and socioeconomic levels
(Bengtsson & Johnson, 1992; Carlo, Knight, Eisenberg, &
Rotenberg, 1991; Garner, 1996; Litvack-Miller et al., 1997).
Although the relationship between empathy and prosocial
behaviors becomes stronger with age (e.g., Eisenberg et al.,
1999), Blasi (1980) argued that a variety of situation-
speciﬁc factors—such as the genuineness and urgency of
the other’s needs—mediate the relationship between moral
judgment and moral behavior and become increasingly
important with age. Blasi (1980) also suggested that devel-
opmental changes in middle childhood have signiﬁcant im-
plications for the extent to which children enact their moral
cognitions and feelings. For instance, children who lack
perspective-taking abilities will be less likely to behave
prosocially when self-needs compete with others’ needs.
Grusec (1983) proposed that children’s socializing agents
can play an important role by establishing social scripts or
schemas of prosocial behavior and by encouraging chil-
dren’s use of those scripts during social interactions. It is
important that children learn to adapt their social scripts to
the needs and expectations of their social partners and to the
demands of their immediate settings within a larger system
of social values and beliefs.
Development of Social Information-Processing Skills
An information-processing approach to explaining children’s
social development differs from a cognitive developmental
approach in several important ways. Researchers in this
tradition begin with a precise analysis of particular social
tasks facing a child; these investigators’ primary goal is to
learn how children use the information available to them in re-
sponding to task demands. Changes in children’s behavior—
due to intervention efforts or to everyday experiences—are
thought to be a function of changes in children’s content
knowledge about a task and their strategies for using task-
related information.
Several social information-processing (SIP) models of
social cognitive development have been proposed to explain
the links between the ways in which children interpret or
understand social behaviors and cues, children’s resulting so-
cial behaviors, and—in turn—their social adjustment. Crick
and Dodge (1994), for example, outlined one SIP model that
suggests that children, whose abilities at any given age are lim-
ited by biologically based constraints, enter social situations
with a database of past experiences, including memories, rules,
social schemas, and social knowledge. During social interac-
tions, children go through a series of steps including encoding
and interpreting social cues, clarifying their goals for social in-
teraction, accessing possible behavioral responses, choosing a
response from their pool of choices, and then enacting their
chosen response. When children search their database for pre-
viously applied responses, the database conversely stores in-
formation regarding the current situation for future use.
SIP models such as the one just described have been used
extensively in the study of socially maladjusted children, par-
ticularly those who are highly aggressive. The results from a
series of studies of U.S. children suggest that those with poor
social adjustment and skills may suffer from distortions or
deﬁcits in their information-processing skills at one or more
of the steps of information processing (Crick & Dodge,
1994). For instance, researchers have identiﬁed attributional
biases in rejected and/or aggressive children who exhibit a
greater tendency to see hostile intentions as the cause of
others’ behaviors toward them (Dodge, 1980; Quiggle,
Garber, Panak, & Dodge, 1992). Other evidence suggests that
these kinds of inaccurate attributions may be speciﬁc to chil-
dren who display reactive or retaliatory aggression (Crick &
Dodge, 1996). Here, children’s strategies for interpreting
social cues are perceived to be faulty, and thus intervention
efforts should be directed at changing the way children
understand others’ behaviors.
In contrast to the idea that deﬁcits in social cognitive abil-
ities give rise to social adjustment problems, recent research
suggests that some aggressive children might actually be
manipulative experts in social situations. Sutton, Smith, and
Swettenham (1999), for example, found that 7- to 10-year-old
“ringleader bullies” scored higher on tests of perspective-
taking than did “follower bullies” (bully-supporters), victims,

Social Developmental Processes in Middle Childhood
249
or even children who defended victims. These ringleaders
were essentially best at understanding the mental states, be-
liefs, and emotions of others, suggesting that this particular
group of aggressive children may be advanced in some
elements of their social knowledge. Thus, whereas social in-
formation processing models provide an account of how chil-
dren’s social understanding may be linked to their ability to
negotiate social interactions effectively, other kinds of mod-
els are needed to explain individual differences in children’s
motivations and goals for their social interactions and rela-
tionships. Furthermore, although information processing
models make assumptions that cognitive abilities and skills
are maturationally constrained and improve across develop-
ment, explanation of the sources of such developmental
changes awaits further study. An important direction for SIP
research is to examine the applicability of these kinds of mod-
els across a range of cultural and subcultural contexts.
Emotional and Social Development: Self-Regulation and
Self-Control in Middle Childhood
Emotion is commonly conceived as a motivational force
underlying social behaviors, and expression of emotion is a
central component of social interaction (Eisenberg, 1998;
Saarni et al., 1998). According to Sarni et al., emotion is
“the person’s attempt or readiness to establish, maintain, or
change the relation between the person and the environment
on matters of signiﬁcance to that person” (p. 238). Emotion
regulation in turn involves a dynamic process of matching
intrinsic reactive tendencies and coping strategies with envi-
ronmental stressors and coping resources on the one hand,
and norms about appropriate emotional expression on the
other (Eisenberg, 1998; Saarni et al., 1998). A body of studies
on the development of emotion regulation documents that
children who effectively regulate their emotions and
their emotion-related behaviors via a diverse and ﬂexible
repertoire of responses—tailored to contextually grounded
demands and motives—are more socially competent
(Eisenberg, 1998; Parke, Burks, Carson, Neville, & Boyum,
1994; Saarni et al., 1998).
Changing patterns of everyday activities during middle
childhood—including spending more time outside the home
and away from direct parental supervision—mean that
children must learn to manage their own emotions. In child-
hood, effective emotion regulation is reﬂected in children’s
control over when and how they express their emotions, as
well as in children’s expanding opportunities and abilities to
pick niches—including particular activities or speciﬁc social
settings—whose demands fall within the range of their cop-
ing and self-control abilities (Eisenberg, 1998; Skinner &
Wellborn, 1994). A larger social world also means that chil-
dren confront increasingly varied behavioral repertoires in
their social partners and encounter new requirements for
emotion expression and regulation. As children move into
new and more varied settings, they learn that they must adapt
their emotion expression to contextual demands.
In the following pages we describe factors that inﬂuence
emotion regulation during middle childhood; we also high-
light the implications of emotion regulation processes for
children’s social competence and adjustment. Characteristics
of the individual that have implications for emotion regulation
include developing cognitive abilities, which, for example,
allow children to recognize emotions in themselves and others
or anticipate reactions by others (Dodge, 1989; Parke et al.,
1994; Saarni et al., 1998). Individual differences in tempera-
ment also play a role, for example, in the intensity of a child’s
reactions to social experiences or the degree to which children
attend to and learn from socialization efforts (Skinner &
Wellborn, 1994). Factors from without or extrinsic factors
range from the emotional climate, to the demands of proxi-
mate environments, to the availability of role models of ap-
propriate emotional expression (Dunsmore & Halberstadt,
1997; Sarni et al., 1998). Such factors also include the behav-
ior of the social partners who elicit emotional reactions from
children, children’s experience of stressful life events, and cir-
cumstances that may place extra demands on children’s regu-
lation capacities (Skinner & Wellborn, 1994). These personal
and interpersonal processes in turn take place within contexts
(family, peer group, school) that deﬁne speciﬁc but potentially
very different ranges of appropriate emotional expression.
This area of study is a broad and burgeoning one with a heavy
emphasis on the study of infants and young children (detailed
analyses of development in this domain can be found in re-
views by Eisenberg 1998; Fox, 1994; Saarni et al., 1998;
Thompson, 1991).
Intrinsic Factors in Emotion Development
Intrinsic factors that underlie emotion and emotion regulation
help to establish children’s social interaction styles and
thresholds for social stressors. Some of these factors have
documented biological substrates and include genetic factors
undergirding individual differences in temperament, sex
differences in boys’versus girls’emotion behavior, and matu-
rational factors that govern cognitive developmental changes
in self-understanding, -regulation and -control.
Temperament can be deﬁned as differences in reactivity,
including children’s disposition toward impulsivity or inhibi-
tion; temperamental characteristics contribute to individual
differences in self-regulatory behaviors, such as arousal

250
Social Development and Social Relationships in Middle Childhood
threshold and reaction duration and intensity (Eisenberg,
1998; Saarni et al., 1998). Children with high emotional in-
tensity may be inclined toward less effective coping strate-
gies and less attention control, and those who are easily
distracted or prone to arousal may be less successful at at-
tending to and processing signals from others (Eisenberg,
1998). Of signiﬁcance is that individual differences in chil-
dren’s dispositions toward emotional expression—grounded
in temperament—mean that the effects of socialization
efforts or contextual demands will vary considerably across
children. The goodness of ﬁt between a child’s temperament
and environmental demands (e.g., expectations, stressors)
determines how much tailoring a child must do to accommo-
date successfully to a given social context (e.g., Lerner,
1982).
Sex differences in children’s emotion-related social cogni-
tive abilities are not widely apparent; girls and boys are
equally capable of encoding and decoding emotion and of
developing emotion-coping repertoires. Nonetheless, girls
and boys may evoke contrasting gender socialization efforts
regarding their emotionality and emotion expression. With
respect to their strategies for coping with stress, girls are
more likely to use emotion-focused coping strategies,
whereas boys are more likely to use problem-solving strate-
gies (Saarni et al., 1998). Sex differences in adjustment that
have emotion-related components are also widely evident
and become more pronounced toward the end of middle
childhood, with girls more inclined to exhibit internalizing
problems such as low self-esteem or depression, and boys
more inclined to exhibit externalizing problems such as phys-
ical aggression or thrill-seeking behavior.
Cognitive developmental processes constitute an additional
set of intrinsic factors that undergird emotional regulation. For
example, during early childhood cognitive advances allow
children to recognize their emotional states; perspective-
taking skills, consolidated in middle childhood, mean that chil-
dren become better able to anticipate and understand the
expectations, reactions, and behaviors of others. Cognitive ad-
vances also provide for more sophisticated social cue recogni-
tion and interpretation and greater sensitivity to both person
and situation signals. Children also become better able to
anticipate others’ emotional reactions and the consequences
for their own emotional displays and to understand the causes
of their own and others’ emotions (Eisenberg, 1998; Saarni
et al., 1998; Selman, 1980). Drawing upon their developing
meta-understanding of emotion, children expand their reper-
toires of coping strategies to include introspection (e.g., rein-
terpreting negative situations more positively), redirecting
attention, and arousal avoidance (Saarni et al., 1998; Skinner &
Wellborn, 1994). Children also recognize that their own and
others’overt reactions are not always consistent with felt emo-
tions. As a result of knowing that emotions and reactions
are sometimes disassociated, children learn to change their
reactions—despite feeling the same emotion—to conform to
situational demands and experience social approval. For ex-
ample, children bullied at school may exhibit courage, while
experiencing fear; in the face of failure and disappointment,
children learn to keep smiles on their faces.
Extrinsic Factors in Emotion Development
Between early and middle childhood, adult regulation of
children’s emotions and emotional expression transforms
into adult-child coregulation, and ultimately to children’s
self-regulation of their emotion experiences (Collins, 1984).
Some researchers have targeted the family—in particular,
parent-child interactions—as the root of emotion and emo-
tion regulation (Dunsmore & Halberstadt, 1997; Eisenberg,
1998; Thompson, 1991). For example, children’s expecta-
tions regarding their own and others’ emotional displays and
reactions may be inﬂuenced by their exposure to models of
emotional expressiveness within the family. In the family
context, children learn values and norms about appropriate
emotional displays and about their own responsibility for
their emotional expression (Dunsmore & Halberstadt, 1997;
Saarni et al., 1998). Some work suggests that when parents
are overly restrictive of their children’s emotional displays,
children’s social competence may be impaired (e.g.,
Gottman, Katz, & Hooven, 1997). In addition, family inter-
actions provide children with practice at controlling and ex-
pressing their emotions and at reading the emotions of others
(Dunsmore & Halberstadt, 1997; Gottman et al., 1997; Parke
et al., 1994; Saarni et al., 1998). Finally, parents can help
children learn to avoid uncontrollable stressors by orchestrat-
ing their involvement in everyday activities and social con-
texts outside the home (Parke et al., 1994; Saarni et al.,
1998).
Whereas infants and young children require sensitive
adults to read and respond to their cues, by middle childhood
children can play a more active role in directing their every-
day experiences, such as by choosing activities, contexts, and
social partners that better support their emotional styles and
needs (Saarni et al., 1998). The expanding social world of
middle childhood, however, means that children must learn
and apply norms of emotion expression that vary across con-
text: What is permissible in the context of the family may dif-
fer markedly from what is appropriate in the peer group or at
school. Increasing autonomy and time spent outside of direct

Social Developmental Processes in Middle Childhood
251
parental supervision also means that greater self-control is
required from children. The school setting is marked by
pressure for children to conform to behavioral expectations,
serving as a major motivation for self-regulation and con-
structive coping of emotion during the middle childhood
years (Saarni et al., 1998). The peer group is also an important
context for emotional development, and a number of studies
have documented that appropriate emotion regulation in the
peer group is linked to greater social competence and more
positive peer relationships (Rubin et al., 1998; Parker & Seal,
1996). An important consideration is that differences across
settings in what constitutes appropriate emotional expression
may be more pronounced for some children than for others;
likewise, the demands for self-control and constraints on
emotion expression in particular settings may or may not be
compatible with a child’s dispositions. For instance, children
reared by depressed parents or those who experience coercive
parent-child relationships may develop emotion expression
dispositions that involve withdrawal in the former case or es-
calation of negative emotion in the latter (Saarni et al., 1998;
Thompson, 1991). These types of emotion regulation, how-
ever, do not translate well to the school environment or to the
peer group and may result in social rejection or isolation. In
turn, rejected and isolated children miss opportunities to learn
different and adaptive social-emotional interaction styles
(Dunsmore & Halberstadt, 1994; Saarni et al., 1998).
Personal Characteristics, Socialization Inﬂuences, and
Contextual Demands: Interacting Inﬂuences on
Emotion Regulation
Developmental models highlight interactive processes in-
volving individual characteristics, learning and experience,
and the demands of the immediate setting in explaining social
behavior (Cairns, 1991). Because it is a period marked by in-
creased opportunities for independence and involvement in
new social settings, middle childhood may present a chal-
lenge for children’s emotion regulation in the form of poten-
tial inconsistencies between personal dispositions and past
learning on the one hand and the demands of new and imme-
diate settings on the other. Dunsmore and Halberstadt (1997)
propose that the match between familial emotional style of
expression, child predispositions, and extrafamilial contex-
tual demands will be an important determinant of effective
emotion regulation in children. Although Collins (1984)
suggests that a certain degree of inconsistency may enable
children to develop a more differentiated understanding of
the social world, children who experience less consistency
may have more difﬁculty regulating their emotions and may
require more resources—in the forms of social support or
coping strategies—to do so. Extant research provides scant
evidence about how to support children in their response to
the diverse and sometimes inconsistent demands for emotion
expression and regulation in their everyday experiences.
Such information would enhance our understanding of indi-
vidual differences in emotional regulation and provide
insights about potential avenues for intervention.
Summary
Research on children’s everyday social experiences and
social competencies during middle childhood highlights
the
challenges children face as—with ever-increasing
autonomy—they navigate a more diverse and complex social
world. Maturing cognitive and physical abilities allow chil-
dren to undertake new and different kinds of activities in their
work and in their play; novel activity settings in turn place
demands on children’s social competencies; and it is in the
behavioral accommodations children make in adapting to
new settings that social development is manifested (Cairns,
1991). As such, an agenda for researchers studying social
development is to explore just how the demands of their
activity settings ﬁrst elicit and then support adaptations in
children’s social behavior.
Recent theoretical efforts directed at deﬁning social com-
petence highlight the importance of understanding children’s
social behavior in its larger context. Rose-Krasnor (1997),
for example, argues that social competence should be deﬁned
as effectiveness in social interaction; competence can not
be evaluated independent of the social context because (a) the
context-dependent nature of social competence means that
behaviors that are effective in one context may not be so in
another; (b) children’s everyday social behaviors are inﬂu-
enced in part by factors such as emotional arousal or moti-
vation level, which are affected by setting conditions;
(c) children’s social behaviors are goal directed, and their
goals are tied to the demands and constraints of their social
settings; and (d) children’s social behaviors emerge in their
interactions with particular social partners and therefore must
be evaluated in terms of the responses of others. Rose-
Krasnor’s focus on effectiveness as fundamental to social
competence is congruent with John Ogbu’s (1995) argument,
framed within a broader, cultural-ecological perspective, that
human competencies must be understood in terms of the
adaptation requirements of a given ecology. For children
this means that socialization experiences will be directed at
developing different kinds of social knowledge and self-
regulation abilities in different social and cultural settings.

252
Social Development and Social Relationships in Middle Childhood
A challenge for social development researchers is to expand
the scope of their studies to examine the array of settings
around the world in where children spend their time in which
they develop and practice novel social behaviors.
SOCIAL RELATIONSHIPS AND DEVELOPMENT
IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD
Children’s interpersonal relationships provide a context for
their social development. Social behaviors emerge, are
practiced, and change in the context of interactions with sig-
niﬁcant others, casual acquaintances, and strangers. The
“personnel present” is one important component of children’s
activity settings (Weisner, 1984); the everyday lives of chil-
dren in different cultures and in different historical eras can
be distinguished by whom they spend their time with and
also by the nature of the relationships they form with their
companions.
Children develop as individuals in the context of their
relationships, and their relationships also undergo develop-
ment and change. Changes in dyadic relationships are a func-
tion of the development of both partners as individuals as well
as the history of the relationship partners’ shared experiences
(Hinde, 1979). As should become evident, research on how
children’s individual development is affected by their rela-
tionship experiences represents the bulk of the literature in
this domain; focusing on change at the level of the dyad adds
an element of complexity to the study of social development
but is an important focus for researchers interested in chil-
dren’s social development. In this section we consider three
kinds of relationships that are central in the lives of children:
relationships with parents, with peers, and with siblings. We
begin each section with an overview of how these relation-
ships change during middle childhood, and then we discuss
research on how their relationship experiences have implica-
tions for children’s individual growth and competencies.
Children and Their Parents
During middle childhood, parent-child relationships evolve
in the direction of greater mutuality, with adult regulation
increasingly supplanted by coregulation and reciprocal
exchange between parent and child (Collins et al., 1995;
Collins & Russell, 1991). The nature of parents’ involve-
ment with their children also changes. Time spent during in-
fancy and early childhood in shared activities focused on
caregiving and play is supplanted by parenting from a dis-
tance, as when parents observe or supervise their children’s
activities or learn about their children’s experiences second-
hand. Finally, children’s emerging social cognitive skills
mean that they are developing a more differentiated perspec-
tive on their parents: all-knowing and powerful parental ﬁg-
ures may be increasingly perceived as individuals with
needs and interests that go beyond their parenting roles, and
this recognition may alter children’s and parents’ behaviors
and emotions in their shared relationship. Despite these
many changes, however, relatively few studies have studied
parent-child relationships during middle childhood; instead,
much of the focus on developmental changes in parent-child
relationship focuses on adolescence (see Collins & Russell,
1991; Russell & Saebel, 1997, for reviews of research on
parent-child relationships).
What is evident in the literature on children’s relationships
with their parents are the important differences between their
experiences with their mothers versus their fathers. A thor-
ough review of issues of gender and parent-child relation-
ships is beyond the scope of this chapter; at the most general
level, this literature suggests that children’s relationships
with their mothers and fathers generally take distinct forms,
with mothers being more involved overall and children feel-
ing closer to their mothers; fathers’ involvement, in contrast,
tends to center on play and leisure activities, with conversa-
tions focusing on instrumental topics. In addition, probably
because of their more extensive contact and closeness, chil-
dren’s relationships with their mothers involve more conﬂict,
whereas in their relationships with their fathers, children are
more deferential (see Collins & Russell, 1991; Maccoby,
1998; Russell & Saebel, 1997, for reviews).
As we have suggested, the majority of research on parents
and children has been devoted to studying how the quality
of parenting is linked to children’s social development and
well-being. In the face of increasingly diverse and changing
family forms (Hernandez, 1997), however researchers are
becoming more focused on the family contexts of children’s
experiences with their parents. Families are not limited to
maritally intact, biological mothers and fathers with children;
in fact, this traditional family form is becoming increasingly
rare in Western societies. An ecological perspective high-
lights that parent-child relationship dynamics—as well as
the effects of parent-child relationships on children’s social
development—are likely to vary as a function of family
structure and as a function of the larger cultural context in
which the family is embedded. A discussion of the range of
parent socialization and parent-child relationship experiences
in diverse family settings is beyond the scope of this chapter
(interested readers are directed to overviews by Parke &
Buriel, 1998, on differences in parenting across ethnic
groups, Arendell, 1997, on parenting in divorced and re-
married families, Allen, 1997, on lesbian and gay parents).

Social Relationships and Development in Middle Childhood
253
We limit our discussion to an overview of models of parental
inﬂuence, highlighting what may be the special features of
family experiences that are connected to social development
during middle childhood.
Most of the research on parental inﬂuences on children’s
social development focuses on parents’ role as interaction
partners with their children (Parke & Buriel, 1998). By virtue
of their level of warmth and responsiveness and by the ways
in which they attempt to control their children’s behavior,
parents provide children with social interactional experiences
that shape children’s expectations about, understandings of,
and behaviors in other interpersonal relationships. Research
that focuses on children’s emotional attachments to their
parents (e.g., Ainsworth, Blehar, Waters, & Wall, 1978) and
research that examines the links between parental style
and children’s social functioning (e.g., Baumrind, 1971,
1991) fall within this tradition.
Recent analyses of parents’ role in the socialization
process have noted limitations of these early, more determin-
istic models, directing attention, for example, to contextual
moderators of parent socialization inﬂuences, to the impact
of children’s characteristics and behaviors on parental
activities, and to the cognitive and affective processes that
underlie observed parenting practices (e.g., Bugental &
Goodnow, 1998; Collins, Maccoby, Steinberg, Hetherington,
& Bornstein, 2000). These accounts highlight the complexi-
ties of parental socialization processes and suggest new di-
rections for research. As one example of an expanded model
of parental socialization, the tripartite model of parenting
proposed by Parke and colleagues (Parke et al., 1994) focuses
on parents’ activities as “direct instructors” and “providers of
opportunities” along with their role as interaction partners.
Whereas the inﬂuence of parent-child interactions on chil-
dren’s social development is indirect (as when children de-
velop expectations for experiences in close relationships that
are generalized to new social partners), parents may directly
inﬂuence their children’s social development by giving their
children advice about negotiating new social experiences and
inculcating values about appropriate ways of relating toward
relatives, friends, or strangers (i.e., direct instruction) or by
engineering social opportunities for their children such as
by picking the community where their children will reside or
providing funds for and transportation to school and ex-
tracurricular activities. Relative to research on parents’ indi-
rect role in children’s social development, we know much
less about parents’direct role in children’s social experiences.
Yet when one considers the broad range of circumstances in
which children’s lives unfold and the corresponding goals for
social competence that parents hold (Ogbu, 1995), parents’
directive activities are clearly a central component of parental
roles. In the following pages we review the limited research
on parents’ direct inﬂuence and highlight key areas of study
focused on parents’ indirect inﬂuences on children’s social
development.
Parents’ Role in Children’s Social Development:
Direct Inﬂuences
Within the context of the parent-child relationship, parents
directly inﬂuence their children’s social development in a
variety of ways. Of fundamental signiﬁcance is the parents’
choice of the environments in which their children are reared
(Parke et al., 1994; Super & Harkness, 1986). Aspects of the
environment include the social and physical characteristics
of the child’s immediate setting, such as the home, neighbor-
hood, and school; but as Weisner (1984) suggested, elements
of the broader social setting—including its political, eco-
nomic, and cultural components—also have important impli-
cations for children’s development. The range of choices
available to parents is necessarily limited, but within this
range children may develop ideas about their parents as pow-
erful and competent adults and about their own signiﬁcance
in their parents’ lives based on parents’ ability and willing-
ness to make choices that are advantageous to children’s
well-being.
Parents also are responsible for transmitting values and
attitudes—both their own and those of the larger community
in which they live—to their children. Parents serve as role
models and educators for children, they construct their home
environments in ways that convey parental values, and they
engineer children’s out-of-home activities in ways that will
promote their goals for their children’s development. For in-
stance, parents who value education may make it a priority in
children’s lives by limiting the amount of television viewing
or by encouraging children to read (Stevenson & Lee, 1992).
Parents also create and maintain a home environment that
teaches children about acceptable interaction styles. For
example, parents demonstrate their values about appropriate
social behavior by how they behave toward other family
members; a body of studies has established links between
parents’ experiences in other dyadic relationships in the
family (such as with their spouse or with a child’s siblings)
and children’s social development and well-being (Davies &
Cummings, 1994; Gottman et al., 1997; Perlman & Ross,
1997). Additionally, parents teach children values by the
kinds of activities they assign or support. Gender socializa-
tion may be fostered, for example, by how parents allocate
household tasks to their daughters and sons or by the kinds of
extracurricular activities they encourage (McHale, Crouter,
& Tucker, 1999). Finally, explicitly through instruction or

254
Social Development and Social Relationships in Middle Childhood
implicitly through their own reactions and behaviors, parents
teach children how to decode the meaning of others’ social
behavior and how to respond in kind (Parke et al., 1994).
Another important element of parents’ directive role in-
volves their efforts to scaffold their children’s development
(Rogoff, 1990). The process of scaffolding includes sensitiv-
ity to children’s current ability level coupled with stepwise
advising and training to foster new skill acquisition. Parents
usher children on to their next level of social functioning by
choosing new developmentally appropriate social activities
that challenge but do not overwhelm, by practicing new
scripts (e.g., riding the bus on the ﬁrst day of school) before
they actually are needed, or by intervention in an ongoing in-
teraction when a child appears to be ﬂoundering (Palacios,
Gonzalez, & Moreno, 1992).
Parenting from a distance becomes increasingly promi-
nent in middle childhood with children’s burgeoning auton-
omy and involvement in a new array of social settings.
Parents actively select children’s activities, set rules concern-
ing children’s whereabouts and companions, and monitor
their children’s behavior from afar. This places a new burden
on the children, who must adjust to new routines and social
scripts and to parental expectations for conduct and disclo-
sure. A body of work on parental monitoring and knowledge
of their children’s activities highlights the importance of this
domain of parenting activities for children’s well-being
(Crouter & Head, 2002).
Although research on parents’ directive role focuses on
parents as socialization agents, the active role of the child
should not be dismissed. Within their family and community
contexts, children evoke reactions from others by virtue
of their personal characteristics, and they seek increasing
opportunities to select their own niches (Scarr & McCartney,
1983). Furthermore, the success of parents’ directive social-
ization efforts is dependent in part on children’s willingness
to be socialized. Darling and Steinberg (1993) argue that
warmth and closeness in the parent-child relationship, de-
veloped through parent-child interaction experiences, is an
important determinant of whether parents’socialization prac-
tices will be effective.
Parents’ Role in Children’s Social Development:
Indirect Inﬂuences
The bulk of research on the role of parent-child relationships
in children’s development highlights how interactions within
the parent-child relationship have broader implications for
children’s social development and well-being. Such indirect
inﬂuences of parent-child relationships have been studied by
researchers focused on parent- (particularly mother-) child
attachment and by those focused on parental style. Although
these perspectives traditionally de-emphasized the active role
of the child in the socialization process, the theoretical orien-
tation to socialization has shifted in past decades from a
parent-to-child model to a greater appreciation for the recip-
rocal nature of inﬂuences between parents and children.
Characteristics such as children’s sex, temperament, and
cognitive sophistication are important factors in determining
the kinds of parenting strategies parents employ as well as the
effectiveness of those strategies (Collins et al., 1995; Deater-
Deckard & Dodge, 1997; McGillicuddy-DeLisi, 1992).
Research on parent-infant attachment links sensitive re-
sponsiveness by caregivers early in children’s lives to later
social and relationship competence. The importance of early
experience derives from children’s sense of security that their
needs will be met within the context of their ﬁrst social rela-
tionships (which usually are with parents). As a result of
interpreting and internalizing their early parent-child rela-
tionship experiences, children are thought to develop internal
working models or expectations about future relationships
with others. Sroufe and Fleeson (1986) argue further that
these early parent-child relationship experiences underlie
personality development, where personality is deﬁned as the
“organization of attitudes, feelings, expectations, and behav-
iors of the individual across contexts” (p. 52). From this
perspective, continuity in personality organization should be
evident across age, although the manifestations of individual
differences will change with development. In middle child-
hood, attachment researchers have documented links be-
tween early parent-infant attachment and children’s social
competence with peers (Rubin et al., 1998; Sroufe, 1979).
A second line of study has examined the signiﬁcance of
parental style for children’s social development and well-
being. Baumrind (1973) proposed one of the most inﬂuen-
tial models in this regard, documenting the signiﬁcance of
authoritative parenting, a style characterized by high
warmth, democratic discipline, and developmentally appro-
priate limit-setting, for the development of social competence
from early childhood through adolescence. Expanding on
Baumrind’s typology, Maccoby and Martin (1983) identiﬁed
four patterns of parenting that vary along two dimensions: the
extent of parent control and the degree to which parents are
responsive and child centered. As in Baumrind’s typology, in
addition to the authoritative style (appropriate control and
high in responsiveness) Maccoby and Martin identiﬁed a
group labeled authoritarian, which refers to a parental style
characterized by high levels of restrictiveness in combination
with low levels of responsiveness and warmth. Baumrind
(1991) found that this style was associated with especially
poor outcomes for boys. In contrast, indulgent or permissive

Social Relationships and Development in Middle Childhood
255
parents are high in responsiveness but low in control and tend
to have children who have poor impulse control. Finally,
neglectful or uninvolved parents are low in both warmth and
control and are focused more on their own needs than on
those of their children.
Parental style is connected to the broader circumstances of
family life. McLoyd and others (McLoyd, 1990; McLoyd &
Wilson, 1990), for example, describe how the stresses that
accompany poverty may give rise to emotional distress and
decreased responsiveness and involvement on the parts of
parents. Stressors such as marital separation and divorce also
negatively affect parenting style (Hetherington, 1989), with
implications for children’s social competence and adjust-
ment. Equally important inﬂuences on parental style are
parents’ child-rearing goals and values. For example, Kohn
(1977) argued that the more authoritarian style of working-
class fathers in the United States arises out of men’s belief
that obedience and conformity are important attributes for
success in the workplace and that a harsher and more restric-
tive discipline style best promotes such qualities. Other writ-
ers suggest that context characteristics ranging from the level
of violence and danger in the neighborhood to cultural norms
within the wider ecology that highlight collectivist versus in-
dividualistic values will have implications for parents’choice
of child-rearing style as well as for how a particular style is
associated with social competence and adjustment in children
(Ogbu, 1995; Parke & Buriel, 1998). Finally, a burgeoning
literature stresses that parents’ beliefs about how children
develop and their attributions about the causes of child
behaviors highlight some of the processes through which
the larger social ecology may exert an impact on parental be-
havior (Bugental & Goodnow, 1998; McGuillicuddy-DeLisi,
1992). These kinds of analyses highlight that parent-child
relationships and their implications for children’s develop-
ment are best understood when they are examined within
their larger social ecology.
Children and Their Peers
Middle childhood is a developmental period when children
turn from parents to peers for companionship in their every-
day activities; this change is part of a pattern of children’s
increasingly active role in choosing where and with whom
they spend their time. Research suggests that children’s inter-
est in their peers, together with their increasingly sophisti-
cated social cognitive and emotion regulation abilities, are
tied to newly emerging characteristics of children’s peer ex-
periences. These emerging characteristics involve quantita-
tive changes in peer group size and qualitative changes in the
bases of friendships.Abody of work examines how children’s
experiences with their friends and in their peer social net-
works have implications for their current and future social
competence and adjustment. Our discussion in the following
pages provides an overview of the predominant areas of re-
search on peer relationships in middle childhood.
The Development of Peer Relationships
in Middle Childhood
Several important changes characterize peer experiences and
friendships during middle childhood; like other elements of
children’s social development, these changes reﬂect both
children’s developing cognitive abilities and their expanding
social worlds. With respect to peer experiences more gener-
ally, increased exposure to a world outside of the family con-
text means that children spend their time with a more diverse
set of same-age peers. Children also begin to spend their time
with peers outside the direct supervision of parents or other
adults. A striking element of peer interaction during middle
childhood is its sex-segregated quality, which has been docu-
mented in cultures around the world (Cairns & Cairns, 1994;
Fagot, 1994; Maccoby, 1994). In early childhood, mixed-sex
peer groups play together. Later in adolescence, boys and
girls develop dyadic romantic relationships, and larger social
groups may include both sexes. In middle childhood, how-
ever, cross-sex friendships and activities are quite rare within
the visible peer group, such as on the school playground
(Adler, Kless, & Adler, 1992; Maccoby, 1998), although
some ﬁndings show that same-sex friendships occur in more
private settings (e.g., Gottman, 1994). Maccoby (1990) sug-
gests that gender segregation may be based in boys’and girls’
distinct and sometimes incompatible interaction and play
styles; sex segregation in peer and friendship groups in turn
exacerbates sex differences in social interaction styles. Other
investigators (e.g., Fagot, 1994; Leaper, 1994) concur that
the tendency for sex segregation in the peer group may both
reﬂect and have important implications for gender role so-
cialization. Fagot (1977), for example, found that girls who
attempt to join male peer groups and who participate in cross-
sex behaviors are ignored whereas boys’ feminine activities
and behaviors instigate negative feedback from both male
and female peers.
Groups or cliques—which consist of stable, voluntary
friendships, typically of three to nine same-sex, same-race
children—also form for the ﬁrst time during middle child-
hood. These social groups provide a reference point for social
comparisons and self-evaluations; only later in development
will adolescents begin to use absolute and personal standards
(Harter, 1999). The emergence of cliques also leads to the
organization of popularity hierarchies. In middle childhood,

256
Social Development and Social Relationships in Middle Childhood
boys’ place in the social hierarchy tends to be based on social
dominance, athletic ability, coolness, and toughness (Adler
et al., 1992; Hartup, 1992). In contrast, girls’ social status de-
pends on family background and socioeconomic status (SES)
and physical appearance (Adler et al., 1992; Thorne, 1994).
For both boys and girls, social skillfulness is an important
factor in social dominance.
Children’s awareness of and concern for their popularity
status greatly increases during middle childhood and may be
related in part to their social cognitive development, which
provides for an increasing appreciation of the perspectives of
others. Consistent with such changes is the increasing promi-
nence of gossiping (Parker & Gottman, 1989). Gossip is one
basis for a child’s social reputation with peers (Hartup, 1992;
Hymel, Wagner, & Butler, 1990) and can serve other social
functions, including the communication of social norms and
expectations to group members; such communications often
take place through negative evaluations of others (Eder &
Enke, 1991; Gottman & Mettetal, 1986). Because direct con-
frontation is inappropriate within their peer culture, gossip
constitutes an important form of communication among girls,
in particular (Corsaro & Eder, 1990).
Children’s increased autonomy during middle childhood
coincides with their greater control over the types of acti-
vities in which they participate. Rough-and-tumble play is
replaced by games with or without formal rules, and peer in-
teractions become increasingly coordinated (Corsaro & Eder,
1990). Although the activity settings of children’s peer inter-
actions during middle childhood have not been well de-
scribed, Zarbatany, Hartmann, and Rankin (1990) found that
peer involvement most often occurred during conversation
(both in person and over the telephone), while children were
“hanging out,” and when they were playing sports. The only
sex difference in peer interactions that emerged in this study
of peer activities was that girls interacted with their peers
more through telephone conversations than did boys.
In addition to developmental changes in orientations to-
ward the peer group, middle childhood also is a time of
change in friendships. Among the U.S. children who have
been the primary focus of study, friendships in middle child-
hood tend to be age- and sex-homogeneous (Hartup, 1992;
Rubin et al., 1998). In a biracial southern community, Shrum,
Cheek, and Hunter (1988) found that during middle child-
hood, gender homophily peaks and then begins to fall in ado-
lescence, whereas race homophily ﬁrst appears and then
begins to increase during middle childhood, plateauing in
adolescence—a pattern that may reﬂect children’s initial
awareness of racial identity. Children’s friendships in middle
childhood are also characterized by greater reciprocity, com-
mitment, and affectional bonds compared to those at younger
ages. As mentioned earlier, Sullivan (1953) suggested that
the development of friends, or chumships, is predicated on
decreasing egocentrism and increasing perspective-taking
ability; these changes provide the potential for greater reci-
procity in peer interactions (Selman, 1980). In addition to
sharing the view that middle childhood coincides with loss of
egocentrism, Piaget (1932) suggested that middle childhood
brings about the ability for greater abstract thinking. Conse-
quently, the basis of friendships evolves from participation in
common activities and the satisfaction of instrumental needs
(e.g., for a play partner) at the start of middle childhood to the
satisfaction of more abstract relational needs and goals, such
as trust, honesty, and loyalty, in adolescence and beyond
(Cairns & Cairns, 1994). Parker and Asher (1993) found
that validation, help, and companionship are associated with
greater satisfaction with friendships during childhood,
whereas conﬂict is related to decreased satisfaction. They
also noted that boys characterized their friendships as having
less intimacy, validation, and help than did girls. Similarly,
Cairns and Cairns (1994) reported that honesty and loyalty
were more important to girls than to boys possibly, as self-
protection against the relational aggression that is mani-
fested, in gossip and social manipulation (Crick & Grotpeter,
1995). In contrast to the greater prevalence of verbal or phys-
ical aggression in boys’ interactions relative to those of girls,
Crick and Grotpeter (1995) found that such relational aggres-
sion strategies were more common among third- through
sixth-grade girls than boys.
Children’s friendships have been characterized as having
stability—that is, as showing continuity over time, distance,
and events, but empirical data on this issue are equivocal
(Rubin et al., 1998). For example, although relationship sta-
bility was greater for children in middle childhood than for
those at earlier ages, based on their longitudinal study, Cairns
and Cairns (1994) reported a high degree of long-term
volatility in children’s friendships. During middle childhood,
relationship change was at least partially attributed to limited
opportunities for maintaining friendships—for example,
when children moved to another community or were as-
signed to a different classroom at school. Although middle
childhood marks a time of development in which children
gain greater autonomy and greater control over their activi-
ties, their lives are still constrained. In the face of forces
toward instability, however, behavioral characteristics of
children do make a difference in children’s tendencies to es-
tablish and maintain friendships and in their social status, an
issue we further consider in the next section.
Peer Inﬂuences on Children’s Social Development
A body of work examines the connections between children’s
experiences with peers and their social competencies and

Social Relationships and Development in Middle Childhood
257
adjustment; as with studies of friendship, most of this work
focuses on U.S. children. One set of studies focuses on
children’s sociometric status, examining children’s social
skills and adjustment as both cause and consequence of their
popularity with peers. Using peer nominations, researchers
in this tradition classify children into one of several cate-
gories: (a) Children who receive a high number of positive
nominations (i.e., expressions of liking) and few negative
nominations (i.e., expressions of disliking) are labeled popu-
lar; (b) those with many negative nominations and few posi-
tive nominations are labeled rejected; (c) children are labeled
neglected if they receive few negative and few positive nom-
inations; (d) they are labeled average when they receive an
average number of both negative and positive nominations;
and (e) children are considered controversial if they are given
a high number of both negative and positive nominations. Al-
though popular and rejected statuses seem relatively stable
over time (Hymel, Rubin, Rowden, & LeMare, 1990; Roff,
Sells, & Golden, 1972) neglected, average, and controversial
statuses are less so (Ladd, 1999; Rubin et al., 1998).
A number of studies have shown that socially competent
behaviors—including the ability to enter groups, initiate re-
lationships, and maintain those relationships over time—
are linked to sociometric status (Putallaz & Wasserman,
1990) as are children’s abilities to regulate their emotions
(Eisenberg et al., 1987). Indeed, consistent manifestation of
either positive or negative social behaviors is predictive of
acceptance or rejection by the peer group (Coie, Dodge, &
Kupersmidt, 1990; Dodge, Coie, Pettit, & Price, 1990;
Harrist, Zaia, Bates, Dodge, & Pettit, 1997; Parker & Seal,
1996).
Moving away from a focus on social skill deﬁcits of
the rejected or neglected child, Hymel, Wagner et al. (1990)
focused on the ways in which the social structure within the
child’s environment can negatively inﬂuence a child’s peer
acceptance. They suggest that—due to biases formed by pre-
viously established reputations—members of the peer group
may be more likely to shun rejected children’s attempts to
enter groups or initiate interactions.
In turn, substantial evidence links problematic childhood
peer relationships to both current and future adjustment. Much
of this work is premised on one of two models (Parker &
Asher, 1987). The causal model suggests that low-accepted
children are limited in their normal peer interactions and are
thus excluded from normal socialization experiences and so-
cial support networks; such low involvement further perpetu-
ates unacceptable patterns of social cognition, emotion, and
behavior. In contrast to the assumption that problematic peer
relationships cause maladjustment, the incidental model sug-
gests that early forms of a disorder, which will later develop
into maladjustment, inhibit positive peer relationships during
childhood (see Parker & Asher, 1987, for limitations of these
models).
Most research on the implications of social status for so-
cial adjustment has focused on popular and rejected statuses.
As noted, popular children tend to be socially competent at
entering new situations and are viewed as cooperative,
friendly, sociable, and sensitive by peers, teachers, and ob-
servers (Dodge, Coie, & Brakke, 1982; Dodge, McClaskey, &
Feldman, 1985; Putallaz, 1983; Newcomb, Bukowski, &
Pattee, 1993). Although neglected- and average-statuses
during childhood are not closely tied to later well-being
outcomes, peer group rejection is associated with adjust-
ment problems such as depression, aggression, poor grade
retention, and poor academic competence over time (Coie,
Lochman, Terry, & Hyman, 1992; Panak & Garber, 1992).
Most sociometric research has focused on short-term correla-
tional studies linking children’s peer acceptance to their con-
current or future adjustment, but some longitudinal analyses
have documented the predictive power of peer acceptance
(e.g., Hymel, Rubin et al., 1990; Kupersmidt & Coie, 1990).
Based on their review of risk research, Parker and Asher
(1987) concluded that low acceptance and aggressiveness
predicted later maladjustment (criminality and early school
dropout), but that there was insufﬁcient evidence linking shy-
ness and social withdrawal to poor outcomes. This may be in
part because current research highlights overtly negative be-
haviors and externalizing problems rather than the mental
health and relationship problems that may be more common
in the development of children who are socially withdrawn
and neglected by their peers.
In sum, an array of empirical evidence supports the propo-
sition that peer acceptance has signiﬁcant implications for
children’s social development. Future research in this area
should move beyond a focus on the number of children’s
friends to examine the qualities of children’s relationships
and the characteristics of the peer group (Hartup, 1996). Re-
search on “deviancy training” (Dishion, Andrews, & Crosby,
1995) suggests, for example, that a child may have many
friends, but that if all are antisocial, children’s well-being
may be at risk. How children’s peer experiences are linked to
the values and expectations of the larger social ecology is
another topic for future study.
Children and Their Siblings
Like peer relationships, sibling relationships are an important
part of life in middle childhood. These relationships have
received less empirical scrutiny than have parent-child and
peer relationships, but a body of work documents the unique
role that siblings play in one another’s development (Dunn,
1998; Dunn & Plomin, 1990; Brody & Stoneman, 1995).

258
Social Development and Social Relationships in Middle Childhood
Through their everyday interactions, siblings can affect one
another when they serve as models, teachers, and social part-
ners. Siblings also inﬂuence one another indirectly by virtue
of their impact on roles and relationship dynamics in
the larger family system. In this ﬁnal section, we describe the
special properties of sibling relationships, highlighting the
experiences of children in middle childhood. We then review
research that exempliﬁes the mechanisms through which sib-
lings may inﬂuence one another’s social development.
The Development of Sibling Relationships
in Middle Childhood
Most children grow up in households that include one or
more siblings. In the United States, demographic changes in
fertility rates and divorce-remarriage mean that the size and
structure of sibships have been undergoing striking change
(Eggebeen, 1992). For example, U.S. census data show that
among White families in 1950, over half of children of
preschool age were living in households with more than two
siblings; by 1980 this ﬁgure had declined to 30%. Among
African Americans, the percent of young children with more
than two siblings declined from almost 80% in 1950 to about
40% in 1980 (Eggebeen, 1992). More recent census data in-
dicate that family size among all segments of the U.S. popu-
lation continues to fall (Hernandez, 1997).
In the face of such statistics, cross-cultural analyses high-
light the ubiquity of siblings in children’s everyday lives as
companions and caregivers; from these analyses comes the
observation that what varies across cultures is who else be-
sides siblings will be an important part of the child’s social
world (Weisner, 1989). Documenting the centrality of sib-
lings in the everyday lives of working- and middle-class
White children in the United States, daily diary reports show
that during middle childhood, siblings are children’s most
common out-of-school companions (McHale & Crouter,
1996). The companionship that siblings experience in child-
hood provides a foundation for what is one of the few lifelong
relationships that most individuals will experience.
In addition to their centrality in children’s everyday lives,
another important feature of sibling relationships in middle
childhood is emotional intensity (Dunn, 1998). In fact, the
emotional intensity of the sibling relationship may be what
gives this relationship its developmental signiﬁcance (Dunn,
1998). The sibling relationship has been described as a love-
hate relationship to reﬂect a common observation that playful
companions can turn very quickly into bitter enemies; in-
deed, conﬂict between siblings is one of the most common
child-rearing problems reported by parents (Perlman & Ross,
1997). The nature and level of negativity between siblings are
likely to be quite different from what occurs between chil-
dren and their friends; because friendships are a voluntary
relationship, children are likely to be more invested in main-
taining harmony (Updegraff, McHale, & Crouter, 2001).
Theories of the origins of sibling conﬂict that highlight the
signiﬁcance of sibling rivalry (e.g., for parents’ attention and
family resources) underscore that the origins of sibling con-
ﬂict also are different from the sources of conﬂict within
other social dyads (Ansbacher & Ansbacher, 1956).
A third feature that distinguishes sibling relationships
from other kinds of dyadic relationships pertains to the nature
of sibling roles. Parent-child and peer relationships in child-
hood are distinguished by their degree of role asymmetry,
with the former characterized by complementarity and the
latter by more equalitarian or reciprocal exchanges. In con-
trast, sibling relationships involve both kinds of roles (Dunn,
1998). Although in some ways sibling relationships are peer-
like, age and birth order differences mean that older siblings
may assume the role of caregiver, teacher, or model. Indeed,
in middle childhood and adolescence, as children spend in-
creasing amounts of time outside the family, older siblings
are often looked to as sources of information and advice (e.g.,
on peer experiences, school) in areas in which parents are
seen as having less expertise (Tucker, McHale, & Crouter,
in press).
Sibling Inﬂuences on Children’s Social Development
Siblings’role in children’s social development is both direct—
siblings have an impact on one another in the course of their
everyday interactions—and indirect, to the extent that siblings
affect the daily activities, roles, and relationships in the
broader family system. Early work on sibling inﬂuences high-
lighted sibling interaction experiences as a source of social de-
velopment. Based on a series of studies in which interactions
of young siblings were observed, Dunn (1998) argued that the
emotional intensity of the sibling relationship motivates chil-
dren’s development and use of increasingly sophisticated so-
cial skills and problem-solving strategies; in their efforts to
prevail in the context of sibling exchanges, young siblings are
likely to display more sophisticated social abilities than they
might need in the context of interactions with either parents or
peers. These ideas are based largely on studies of children
during early childhood, however, and we know less about the
kinds of social competencies children learn and practice with
their siblings in middle childhood and beyond.
Cross-cultural work on siblings’ role as caregivers has
likewise highlighted the importance of sibling experiences
for positive social development. Describing the organization
of agricultural and pastoral societies, Weisner (1989), for

Social Relationships and Development in Middle Childhood
259
example, points out that older siblings—girls in particular—
have a larger role in direct caregiving of children than do
mothers. In such societies, mothers are likely to spend their
time in subsistence activities (e.g., work close to home in the
ﬁelds) while groups of young children, including neighbors
and kin, are in the direct care of older girls, usually girls of
middle childhood age. The organization of such societies,
Weisner (1984) argues, promotes “attachment to community,
early expectations of prosocial, mature behaviors, strong
compliance and deference expectations, work and responsi-
bility expectations . . .” (p. 346). These sibling caregiving ex-
periences in turn are linked to social empathy, a focus on
afﬁliation and cooperation (as opposed to competition), and a
focus on age-mates—rather than adults—as a source of help
and guidance (Weisner, 1984).
Not all of what children learn from their experiences with
siblings promotes positive development. Work by Patterson
(1986), for example, highlights sibling exchanges as a breed-
ing ground for aggression. Studying sibling interactions
within a social learning framework, Patterson found evidence
of conﬂict escalation in sibling exchanges; these coercive cy-
cles of escalating conﬂict practiced in the context of the sib-
ling relationship can be generalized to parent-child and peer
interactions. Such ﬁndings are echoed in research showing
the sometimes deleterious impact of older, adolescent-age
siblings on their younger sisters and brothers (e.g., Rowe,
Rodgers, & Meseck-Bushey, 1992). Adolescent-age siblings
may introduce their younger sisters and brothers to older
peers and invite their involvement in risky behaviors such as
substance use or early sexual activity. Some work suggests
that younger sisters of older adolescent-age brothers are
particularly vulnerable to these kinds of negative inﬂuences
(Bank, Patterson, & Reid, 1996).
Another line of investigation—one of the earliest areas of
research on sibling inﬂuences on social development—
examined siblings’ role in gender socialization. Operating
within a social learning framework that emphasized the sig-
niﬁcance of older siblings as role models, early investigators
tested the hypothesis that sisters and brothers would model
and reinforce their own qualities in their siblings, and thus
that girls with brothers would develop more masculine
qualities and boys with sisters more feminine ones (e.g.,
Koch, 1956; Sutton-Smith & Rosenberg, 1970). Although
some support was found for this social learning hypothesis,
results overall were equivocal, and the early studies suffered
from a number of methodological shortcomings. More re-
cently, researchers have attempted to study some of the
dyadic and family processes through which siblings may
affect one another’s gender development. Observational
research on school-age children with opposite-sex siblings,
for example, revealed that boys and girls with older brothers
engaged in relatively more stereotypically masculine play
activities and girls with older sisters engaged in relatively
more feminine ones (Stoneman, Brody, & MacKinnon,
1986). More generally, the sex constellation of sibships has
important implications for family patterns of activities, roles,
and relationships (McHale et al., 1999).
What children learn from making comparisons between
their own versus their siblings’ family experiences is an im-
portant means through which siblings indirectly inﬂuence one
another’s social development. Following on the writings of
Alfred Adler, who highlighted the role of sibling rivalry in
personality development (Ansbacher &Ansbacher, 1956), re-
searchers have devoted substantial attention to the role of par-
ents’ differential treatment—speciﬁcally, favoritism directed
at one child. A body of research links differential treatment to
children’s social emotional well-being (e.g., Dunn, Stocker, &
Plomin, 1990). Recently, investigators have suggested that
the links between differential treatment and child functioning
are not direct. Rather, the meanings children attribute to their
parents’ differential treatment—including children’s under-
standing of their parents’ reasons for treating their offspring
differently and children’s perceptions of the legitimacy of
their parents’ differential treatment—are important moderat-
ing factors (Kowal & Kramer, 1997; McHale & Pawletko,
1992). More generally, the study of siblings’differential treat-
ment exempliﬁes what can be learned about children’s devel-
opment from studying the family system of relationships; the
signiﬁcance of parents’ differential treatment for children’s
individual adjustment highlights the ways in which dyadic
family relationships may be mutually inﬂuential.
Summary
Research on children’s interpersonal relationships suggests
that as children move through middle childhood, their devel-
oping social-emotional and cognitive abilities give rise to
changes in their relationships with important people in their
lives. Children’s relationships in turn are a forum within
which new social competencies emerge, are practiced, and
change. Substantial effort has been directed at studying chil-
dren’s social competencies in the context of their relation-
ships, particularly their peer relationships (Eisenberg, 1998),
and important new lines of study involve examination of the
connections between children’s experiences in different so-
cial relationships and explorations of how children’s relation-
ships operate within larger social systems such as the family
(e.g., Easterbrooks & Emde, 1988; Parke & Buriel, 1998;
Parke & Ladd, 1992). A direction for future work is to learn
more about how children’s relationships change over time.

260
Social Development and Social Relationships in Middle Childhood
Also important are studies of how the social roles children as-
sume in their relationships—as well as the scripts they em-
ploy and the behaviors they exhibit—are tied to the values
and expectations of the larger social ecology.
CONCLUSIONS
Our goal in this chapter was to provide an overview of social
development and social relationships in middle childhood.
Middle childhood has been described as a period of skill con-
solidation between two periods of striking developmental
change; our review underscores that important social compe-
tencies, including social cognitive skills and emotion regula-
tion strategies, are practiced and reﬁned during this period
and have implications for children’s relationships with signif-
icant others in their lives. As we have suggested, an important
limitation of work on developmental processes is its heavy
focus on European American samples of children. Given the
inherently adaptive nature of social behavior, it will be
important to examine how social developmental processes
unfold across a wider range of settings.
Stepping back from a focus on within-individual develop-
mental processes to consider the larger context of children’s
everyday lives, we see that middle childhood is also a time of
new demands and expectations for social competencies as chil-
dren enter new social settings and spend their time in a diverse
array of social contexts. Task demands are one important new
component of the activity settings of middle childhood in cul-
tures around the world; this developmental period is a time
when children ﬁrst become seriously involved in work and
when children must learn to adapt their social behaviors to in-
strumental demands (Erikson, 1963). The activities of middle
childhood—at school, in the context of paid labor, and even
during free time—are ones in which children can succeed or
fail, and children’s social competencies are central to their
ability to succeed in many of their endeavors.
Middle childhood also is notable for the extent to which
children spend time with other children—both siblings and
friends—outside of the direct supervision and involvement of
adults. Children’s self-regulation and social problem-solving
skills are essential in the absence of parents or other authority
ﬁgures; sanctions for inept or inappropriate social behavior
may be absolute and harsh in the context of the peer group.
On the other hand, shared experiences with peers that take
place outside the company of adults may give rise to the
feelings of intimacy and mutual understanding that ﬁrst
emerge in middle childhood and that are hallmarks of close
friendships and group solidarity (Sullivan, 1952; Weisner;
1989).
Finally, middle childhood marks an expansion in chil-
dren’s social worlds: Children spend their time in an increas-
ingly diverse array of social contexts where they assume
different roles, adapt to the expectations of different social
partners, and conform to different setting demands—often
without adults to scaffold their behavior. The expansion of
the social world requires an ability to read and respond ﬂexi-
bly to setting demands and is linked in a reciprocal fashion to
the metacognitive skills (i.e., children’s ability to think about
their own social behavior and its implications) that ﬁrst
emerge in middle childhood. The kinds of behavioral adapta-
tions that children make as they enter the novel roles, rela-
tionships, and activities of middle childhood are social
developmental phenomena worthy of continued study.
REFERENCES
Adler, P. A., Kless, S. J., & Adler, P. (1992). Socialization to gender
roles: Popularity among elementary school boys and girls. Soci-
ology of Education, 65(3), 169–187.
Ainsworth, M., Blehar, M., Waters, E., & Wall, S. (1978). Patterns
of attachment. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Allen, K. R. (1997). Lesbian and gay families. In T. Arendell (Ed.),
Contemporary parenting (pp. 154–195). Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage.
Ansbacher, H. L., & Ansbacher, R. R. (1956). The individual psy-
chology of Alfred Adler. New York: Basic Books.
Arsenio, W. F., & Ford, M. E. (1985). The role of affective informa-
tion in social-cognitive development: Children’s differentiation
of moral and conventional events. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly,
31, 1–17.
Bank, L., Patterson, G. R., & Reid, J. B. (1996). Negative sibling
interaction patterns as predictors of later adjustment problems in
adolescent and young adult males. In G. H. Broad (Ed.), Sibling
relationships: Their causes and consequences (pp. 197–229).
Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Baumrind, D. (1971). Current patterns of parental authority. Devel-
opmental Psychology Monograph, 1971, 4(1, Pt 2).
Baumrind, D. (1991). Parenting styles and adolescent development.
In J. Brooks-Gunn, R. Lerner, & A. C. Peterson (Eds.), The
encyclopedia of adolescence (pp. 746–758). New York: Garland
Press.
Bengtsson, H., & Johnson, L. (1992). Perspective taking, empathy,
and prosocial behavior in late childhood. Child Study Journal,
22(1), 11–22.
Blasi, A. (1980). Bridging moral cognition and moral action: A crit-
ical review of the literature. Psychology Bulletin, 88, 1–45.
Brody, G., & Stoneman, Z. (1995). Sibling relationships in middle
childhood. In R. Vasta (Ed.), Annals of child development
(Vol. 11, pp. 73–93). London: Jessica Kingsley.

References
261
Bronfenbrenner, U. (1979). The ecology of human development.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Bronfenbrenner, U., & Crouter, A. C. (1983). The evolution of envi-
ronmental models in developmental research. In P. Musen (Ed.),
The handbook of child psychology (Vol. 1, pp. 358–414). New
York: Wiley.
Bugental, D. B., & Goodnow, J. J. (1998). Socialization processes.
In W. Damon (Series Ed.) & N. Eisenberg (Vol. Ed.), Handbook
of child psychology: Vol. 3. Social emotional and personality
development (pp. 389–462). New York: Wiley.
Cairns, R. B. (1991). Multiple metaphors for a singular idea. Devel-
opment Psychology, 27, 23–26.
Cairns, R. B., & Cairns, B. D. (1994). Lifelines and risks: Pathways
of youth in our time. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Cairns, R. B., Gariepy, J. L., & Hood, K. E. (1990). Development,
microevolution, and social behavior. Psychological Review, 97,
49–65.
Carlo, G., Knight, G. P., Eisenberg, N., & Rotenberg, K. J. (1991).
Cognitive processes and prosocial behaviors among children:
The role of affective attributions and reconciliations. Develop-
mental Psychology, 27(3), 456–461.
Chalmers, J. B., & Townsend, M. A. (1990). The effects of training
in social perspective taking on socially maladjusted girls. Child
Development, 61, 178–190.
Coie, J. D., Dodge, K., & Kupersmidt, J. B. (1990). Peer group
behavior and social status. In S. R. Asher & J. D. Coie (Eds.),
Peer rejection in childhood (pp. 17–59). New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Coie, J. D., Lochman, J. E., Terry, R., & Hyman, C. (1992). Predict-
ing early adolescent disorder from childhood aggression. Jour-
nal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 60, 783–792.
Collins, W. A. (1984). Conclusion: The status of basic research on
middle childhood. In W. A. Collins (Ed.), Development during
middle childhood: The years from six to twelve (pp. 398–421).
Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Collins, W. A., Harris, M., & Susman, A. (1995). Parenting during
middle childhood. In M. Bornstein (Ed.), Handbook of
parenting: Vol. 1. Children and parenting (pp. 65–89). Mahwah,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Collins, W.A., Maccoby, E. E., Steinberg, L., Hetherington, E. M., &
Bornstein, M. H. (2000). Contemporary research on parenting:
The case for nature and nurture. American Psychologist, 55,
218–232.
Collins, W. A., & Russell, G. (1991). Mother-child and father-child
relationships in middle childhood and adolescence: A develop-
mental analysis. Developmental Review, 11, 99–136.
Corsaro, W. A., & Eder, D. (1990). Children’s peer cultures. Annual
Review of Sociology, 16, 197–220.
Crick, N. R., & Dodge, K. A. (1994). A review and reformulation of
social information processing mechanisms in children’s social
adjustment. Psychological Bulletin, 115, 74–101.
Crick, N. R., & Dodge, K. A. (1996). Social information-processing
mechanisms in reactive and proactive aggression. Child Devel-
opment, 67, 993–1002.
Crick, N. R., & Grotpeter, J. K. (1995). Relational aggression, gen-
der, and social-psychological adjustment. Child Development,
66, 710–722.
Crouter, A. C., & Head, M. R. (2002). Parental monitoring: What
are we really measuring and what does it mean? In M. H.
Bornstein (Ed.), The handbook on parenting (pp. 461–484).
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Darling, N., & Steinberg, L. (1993). Parenting style as context: An
integrative model. Psychological Bulletin, 113, 487–496.
Davies, P., & Cummings, M. (1994). Marital conﬂict and child
adjustment: An emotion security hypothesis. Psychological
Bulletin, 116, 387–411.
Deater-Deckard, K., & Dodge, K. (1997). Externalizing behavior
problems and discipline revisited: Nonlinear effects and varia-
tion by culture, context, and gender. Psychological Inquiry, 8,
161–175.
Dishion, T. J., Andrews, D. W., & Crosby, L. (1995). Antisocial boys
and their friends in early adolescence: Relationship characteris-
tics, quality, and interactional process. Child Development, 66,
139–151.
Dodge, K. A. (1980). Social cognition and children’s aggressive
behavior. Child Development, 51(1), 162–170.
Dodge, K. A. (1989). Coordinating responses to aversive stimuli:
Introduction to a special section on the development of emotion
regulation. Developmental Psychology, 25, 339–342.
Dodge, K. A., Coie, J. D., & Brakke, N. P. (1982). Behavior patterns
of socially rejected and neglected preadolescents: The role of
social approach and aggression. Journal of Abnormal Child Psy-
chology, 10, 389–410.
Dodge, K. A., Coie, J. D., Pettit, G. S., & Price, J. M. (1990). Peer
status and aggression in boys’ groups: Developmental and con-
textual analyses. Child Development, 61, 1289–1309.
Dodge, K. A., McClaskey, C. L., & Feldman, E. (1985). A situa-
tional approach to the assessment of social competence in
children. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 53,
344–353.
Dunn, J. (1998). Siblings, emotion, and development of understand-
ing. In S. Braten (Ed.), Intersubjective communication and emo-
tion in early ontogeny: Studies in emotion and social interaction
(pp. 158–168). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Dunn, J., & Plomin, R. (1990). Separate lives: Why siblings are so
different. New York: Basic Books.
Dunn, J., Stocker, C., & Plomin, R. (1990). Non-shared experiences
within the family: Correlates of behavioral problems in middle
childhood. Development and Psychopathology, 2, 113–126.
Dunsmore, J. C., & Halberstadt, A. G. (1997). How does family
emotional expressiveness affect children’s schemas? New Direc-
tions for Child Development, 77, 45–68.

262
Social Development and Social Relationships in Middle Childhood
Easterbrooks, M. A., & Emde, R. N. (1988). Marital and parent-
child relationships: The role of affect in the family system. In
R. Hinde & J. Stevenson-Hinde (Eds.), Relationships within
families (pp. 83–103). Oxford, UK: Clarendon Press.
Eccles, J. S. (1999). The development of children ages 6 to 14.
Future of Children, 9, 30–44.
Eder, D., & Enke, J. L. (1991). The structure of gossip: Opportuni-
ties and constraints on collective expression among adolescents.
American Sociological Review, 56(4), 494–508.
Eggebeen, D. J. (1992). Changes in sibling conﬁgurations in
American preschool children. Social Biology, 39, 27–44.
Eisenberg, N. (1998). Introduction. In W. Damon (Series Ed.) &
N. Eisenberg (Vol. Ed.), Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 3.
Social, emotional, and personality development (pp. 1–24). New
York: Wiley.
Eisenberg, N., & Fabes, R. (1998). Prosocial development. In
W. Damon (Series Ed.) & N. Eisenberg (Vol. Ed.), Handbook of
child psychology: Vol. 3. Social, emotional, and personality
development (pp. 701–778). New York: Wiley.
Eisenberg, N., Guthrie, I. K., Murphy, B. C., Shepard, S. A.,
Cumberland, A., & Carlo, G. (1999). Consistency and develop-
ment of prosocial dispositions: A longitudinal study. Child
Development, 70(6), 1360–1372.
Eisenberg, N., Shell, R., Pasternack, J., Beller, R., Lennon, R., &
Mathy, R. M. (1987). Prosocial development in middle child-
hood: A longitudinal study. Developmental Psychology, 23(5),
712–718.
Elkind, D. (1981). The hurried child. Reading, MA: Addison-
Wesley.
Erikson, E. H. (1963). Childhood and society (2nd ed.). New York:
W. W. Norton.
Fagot, B. (1977). Consequences of moderate cross-gender behavior
in preschool children. Child Development, 4, 902–907.
Fagot, B. I. (1994). Peer relations and the development of compe-
tence in boys and girls. New Directions for Child Development,
65, 53–66.
Flavell, J. H. (1976). Metacognitive aspects of problem solving. In
L. B. Resnick (Ed.), The nature of intelligence (pp. 231–235).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Fox, N. (1994). The development of emotion regulation: Biological
and behavioral considerations. Monographs of the Society
for Research in Child Development, 58(2/3, Serial No. 240),
152–166.
Garner, P. W. (1996). The relations of emotional role taking
affective/moral attributions, and emotional display rule knowl-
edge to low-income school-age children’s social competence.
Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology, 17, 19–36.
Gilligan, C. (1982). In a different voice: Psychological theory and
women’s development. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Goodnow, J. (1988). Children’s housework: Its nature and func-
tions. Psychological Bulletin, 103, 5–26.
Gottman, J. M. (1994). Why can’t men and women get along? In
D. Canary & L. Stafford (Eds.), Communication and relational
maintenance (pp. 203–229). San Diego, CA: Academic Press. 
Gottman, J. M., Katz, L. F., & Hooven, C. (1997). Meta-emotion:
How families communicate. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gottman, J. M., & Mettetal, G. (1986). Speculations about social
and affective development: Friendship and acquaintanceship
through adolescence. In J. Gottman & J. Parker (Eds.), Conver-
sations of friends: Speculations on affective development
(pp. 192–237). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Grusec, J. E. (1983). The internalization of altruistic dispositions:
A cognitive analysis. In E. T. Higgins, D. N. Ruble, & W. W.
Hartup (Eds.), Social cognitive and social development: A socio-
cultural perspective (pp. 275–293). New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Grusec, J. E., & Lytton, H. (1988). Social development: History,
theory, and research. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Gurucharri, C., Phelps, R., & Selman, R. (1984). Development of
interpersonal understanding: A longitudinal and comparative
study of normal and disturbed youths. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 52(1), 26–36.
Harrist, A. W., Zaia, A. F., Bates, J. E., Dodge, K. A., & Pettit, G. S.
(1997). Subtypes of social-withdrawal in early childhood: Socio-
metric status and social-cognitive differences across four years.
Child Development, 68, 278–294.
Harter, S. (1999). The construction of the self: A developmental per-
spective. New York: Guilford Press.
Hartup, W. W. (1992). Peer relations in early and middle childhood.
In V. B. Van Hasselt & M. Hersen (Eds.), Handbook of social
development: A lifespan perspective (pp. 257–281). New York:
Plenum Press.
Hartup, W. W. (1996). The company they keep: Friendships and
their developmental signiﬁcance. Child Development, 67, 1–13.
Hernandez, D. J. (1997). Child development and the social demog-
raphy of childhood. Child Development, 68, 149–169.
Hetherington, E. M. (1989). Coping with family transitions:
Winners, losers and survivors. Child Development, 60, 1–14.
Hinde, R. (1979). Toward understanding relationships. New York:
Academic Press.
Hoffman, L. W., & Youngblade, L. M. (1999). Mothers at work:
Effects on children’s
well-being.
Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Hoffman, M. L. (1982). The contribution of empathy to justice and
moral judgment. In N. Eisenberg & J. Strayer (Eds.), Empathy
and its development: Cambridge studies in social and emotional
development (pp. 47–80). New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Hymel, S., Rubin, K. H., Rowden, L., & LeMare, L. (1990). Chil-
dren’s peer relationships: Longitudinal prediction of internaliz-
ing and externalizing problems from middle to later childhood.
Child Development, 61, 2004–2021.

References
263
Hymel, S., Wagner, E., & Butler, L. (1990). Reputational bias: View
from the peer group. In S. R. Asher & J. Coie (Eds.), Peer rejec-
tion in childhood (pp. 156–186). New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Koch, H. L. (1956). Sissiness and tomboyishness in relation to
sibling characteristics. Journal of Genetic Psychology, 88,
231–244.
Kohlberg, L. (1976). Moral stages and moralization. In T. Lickona
(Ed.), Moral development and behavior: Theory, research and
social issues (pp. 31–53). New York: Holt, Rinehart, & Winston.
Kohlberg, L., & Kramer, R. (1969). Continuities and discontinuities
in childhood moral development. Human Development, 12,
93–120.
Kohn, M. (1977). Class and conformity: A study of values (2nd ed.).
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Kowal, A., & Kramer, L. (1997). Children’s understanding of
parental differential treatment. Child Development, 68, 113–126.
Kupersmidt, J. B., & Coie, J. D. (1990). Preadolescent peer status,
aggression, and school adjustment as predictors of externalizing
problems in adolescence. Child Development, 61.
Ladd, G. W. (1999). Peer relationships and social competence dur-
ing early and middle childhood. Annual Review of Psychology,
50, 333–359.
Lane-Garon, P. S. (1998). Developmental considerations: Encour-
aging perspective taking in student mediators. Mediation
Quarterly, 16(2), 201–217.
Larson, R., & Verma, S. (1999). How children and adolescents
spend time across the world: Work, play and developmental
opportunities. Psychological Bulletin, 126, 701–735.
Leaper, C. (1994). Exploring the consequences of gender segrega-
tion on social relationships. New Directions for Child Develop-
ment, 65, 67–86.
Lerner, R. M. (1982). Children and adolescents as producers of their
own development. Developmental Review, 2, 342–370.
Litvack-Miller, W., McDougall, D., & Romney, D. M. (1997). The
structure of empathy during middle childhood and its relation-
ship to prosocial behavior. Genetic, Social, and General Psy-
chology Monographs, 123(3), 303–324.
Maccoby, E. E. (1990). Gender and relationships: A developmental
account. American Psychologist, 45, 513–520.
Maccoby, E. E. (1994). Commentary: Gender segregation in child-
hood. New Directions for Child Development, 65, 87–98.
Maccoby, E. E. (1998). The two sexes: Growing up apart, coming
together. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Maccoby, E. E., & Martin, J. A. (1983). Socialization in the context
of the family: Parent-child interaction. In P. H. Mussen (Series
Ed.) & E. M. Hetherington (Vol. Ed.), Handbook of child psy-
chology: Vol. 4. Socialization, personality and social develop-
ment (pp. 1–101), New York: Wiley.
Markstrom-Adams, C. M., & Spencer, M. B. (1994).Amodel for iden-
tity intervention with minority adolescents. In S. L. Archer (Ed.),
Interventions for adolescents (pp. 84–102). Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage.
McGillicuddy-DeLisi, A. V. (1992). Parents’ beliefs and children’s
personal social development. In A. V. McGillicuddy-DeLisi &
J. J. Goodnow (Eds.), Parental belief systems: The psychological
consequences for children (pp. 115–142), Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
McHale, S. M., & Crouter, A. C. (1996). The family contexts of sib-
ling relationships. In G. Brody (Ed.), Sibling relationships: Their
causes and consequences (pp. 173–196). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
McHale, S. M., Crouter, A. C., & Tucker, C. J. (1999). Family con-
text and gender role socialization in middle childhood: Compar-
ing girls to boys and sisters to brothers. Child Development, 70,
990–1004.
McHale, S. M., Crouter, A. C., & Tucker, C. J. (2001). Free time
activities in middle childhood: Links with adjustment in early
adolescence. Child Development, 72, 1764–1778.
McHale, S. M., & Pawletko, T. (1992). Differential treatment of
siblings in two family contexts. Child Development, 63, 68–81.
McLoyd, V. (1990). The impact of economic hardship on Black
families and children: Psychological distress, parenting, and so-
cioemotional development. Child Development, 61, 311–346.
McLoyd, V. C., & Wilson, L. (1990). Maternal behavior, social sup-
port, and economic conditions as predictors of distress in chil-
dren. New Directions for Child Development, 46, 49–69.
Medrich, E. A., Roizen, J. A., Rubin, V., & Buckley, S. (1982). The
serious business of growing up: A study of children’s lives
outside school. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Miletic, G. (1996). Perspective taking: Knowledge of level 1 and
level 2 rules by congenitally blind, low vision, and sighted chil-
dren. Journal of Visual Impairment and Blindness, 89(6),
513–523.
Miller, S. A., Holmes, H. A., Gitten, J., & Danbury, J. (1998). Chil-
dren’s understanding of false beliefs that result from develop-
mental misconceptions. Cognitive Development, 12(1), 21–51.
Newcomb, A. F., Bukowski, W. M., & Pattee, L. (1993). Children’s
peer relations: A meta analytic review of popular, rejected, ne-
glected, controversial and average sociometric status. Psycho-
logical Bulletin, 113, 99–128.
Newson, J., & Newson, E. (1976). Seven years old in the home
environment. New York: Wiley.
Nisan, M. (1987). Moral norms and social conventions: A
cross-cultural comparison. Developmental Psychology, 23(5),
719–725.
Ogbu, J. U. (1995). Origins of human competence: A cultural-
ecological perspective. In N. R. Goldberger & J. B. Veroff
(Eds.), The culture and psychology reader (pp. 245–275). New
York: New York University Press.
Palacios, J., Gonzalez, M., & Moreno, M. (1992). Stimulating the
child in the zone of proximal development: The role of parents’
ideas. In I. E. Sigel, A. V. McGillicuddy-DeLisi, & J. J.
Goodnow (Eds.), Parental belief systems: The psychological
consequences for children (pp. 71–94). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

264
Social Development and Social Relationships in Middle Childhood
Panak, W. F., & Garber, J. (1992). Role of aggression, rejection, and
attributions in the prediction of aggression in children. Develop-
mental Psychopathology, 4, 145–165.
Parke, R. D., & Buriel, R. (1998). Socialization in the family: Ethnic
and ecological perspectives. In W. Damon (Series Ed.) &
N. Eisenberg (Vol. Ed.), Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 3.
Social, emotional, and personality development (pp. 463–552).
New York: Wiley.
Parke, R. D., Burks, V., Carson, J., Neville, B., & Boyum, L. (1994).
Family-peer relationships: A tripartite model. In R. D. Parke &
S. Kellam (Eds.), Advances in family research: Vol. 4. Family
relationships with other social systems (pp. 115–145). Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Parke, R. D., & Ladd, G. W. (1992). Family-peer relationships:
Modes of linkage. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Parker, J. G., & Asher, S. R. (1987). Peer relations and later personal
adjustment: Are low-accepted children at risk? Psychological
Bulletin, 102, 357–389.
Parker, J. G., & Asher, S. R. (1993). Friendship and friendship qual-
ity in middle childhood: Links with peer group acceptance and
feelings of loneliness and social dissatisfaction. Developmental
Psychology, 29, 611–621.
Parker, J. G., & Gottman, J. M. (1989). Social and emotional devel-
opment in a relational context: Friendship interaction from early
childhood to adolescence. In T. J. Berndt & G. W. Ladd (Eds.),
Peer relations in child development (pp. 95–131). New York:
Wiley.
Parker, J. G., & Seal, J. (1996). Forming, losing, renewing, and
replacing friendships: Applying temporal parameters to the as-
sessment of children’s friendship experiences. Child Develop-
ment, 67, 2248–2268.
Patterson, G. (1986). The contribution of siblings to training for
ﬁghting: A microsocial analysis. In D. Olweus, J. Block, &
M. Radke-Yarrow (Eds.), Development of antisocial and proso-
cial behavior: Research, theories, and issues (pp. 235–261).
New York: Academic Press.
Perlman, M., & Ross, H. (1997). The beneﬁts of parent intervention
in children’s disputes: An examination of concurrent changes in
children’s ﬁghting styles. Child Development, 64, 690–700.
Piaget, J. (1932). The moral judgment of the child. New York:
Harcourt, Brace, and World.
Posner, J. K., & Vandell, D. L. (1999). After school activities and
the development of low-income children: A longitudinal study.
Developmental Psychology, 35, 868–879.
Putallaz, M. (1983). Predicting children’s sociometric status from
their behavior. Child Development, 54, 1417–1426.
Putallaz, M., & Wasserman, A. (1990). Children’s entry behaviors.
In S. R. Asher & J. Coie (Eds.), Peer rejection in childhood
(pp. 60–89). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Quiggle, N. L., Garber, J., Panak, W. F., & Dodge, K. A. (1992).
Social information processing in aggressive and depressed chil-
dren. Child Development, 63(6), 1305–1320.
Quintana, S. M., Castaneda-English, P., & Ybarra, V. C. (1999).
Role of perspective-taking abilities and ethnic socialization in
development of adolescent ethnic identity. Journal of Research
on Adolescence, 9(2), 161–184.
Roff, M., Sells, B. B., & Golden, M. M. (1972). Social adjust-
ment and personality development. Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press.
Rogoff, B. (1990). Apprenticeship in thinking: Cognitive develop-
ment in a social context. New York: Oxford University Press.
Rose-Krasnor, L. (1997). The nature of social competence: A theo-
retical review. Social Development, 6, 111–135.
Rowe, D. C., Rodgers, J. L., & Meseck-Bushey, S. (1992). Sibling
delinquency and the family environment: Shared and unshared
inﬂuences. Child Development, 63, 59–67.
Rubin, K. H., Bukowski, W., & Parker, J. G. (1998). Peer interac-
tions, relationships, and groups. In W. Damon (Series Ed.) &
N. Eisenberg (Vol. Ed.), Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 3.
Social emotional and personality development (pp. 619–700).
New York: Wiley.
Ruble, D. N. (1983). The development of social-comparison
processes 
and 
their 
role 
in 
achievement-related 
self-
socialization. In E. T. Higgins, D. N. Ruble, & W. W. Hartup
(Eds.), Social cognition and social development: A sociocultural
perspective (pp. 134–157). New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Russell, A., & Saebel, J. (1997). Mother-son, mother-daughter,
father-son, and father-daughter: Are they distinct relationships?
Developmental Review, 17, 111–147.
Saarni, C., Mumme, D. L., & Campos, J. J. (1998). Emotional
development: Action, communication and understanding. In
W. Damon (Series Ed.) & N. Eisenberg (Vol. Ed.), Handbook of
child psychology: Vol. 3. Social, emotional, and personality
development (pp. 238–295). New York: Wiley.
Scarr, S., & McCartney, K. (1983). How people make their own
environments: A theory of genotype-environment effects. Child
Development, 54, 424–435.
Selman, R. L. (1980). The growth of interpersonal understanding:
Developmental and clinical analyses. New York: Academic
Press.
Shrum, W., Cheek, N. H., & Hunter, S. M. (1988). Friendship in
school: Gender and racial homophily. Sociology of Education,
61(4), 227–239.
Skinner, E., & Wellborn, J. (1994). Coping during childhood and
adolescence: A motivational perspective. In R. Lerner (Ed.),
Lifespan development and behavior (pp. 91–133). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Smetana, J. G., & Braeges, J. L. (1990). The development of
toddlers’ moral and conventional judgments. Merrill-Palmer
Quarterly, 36, 329–346.
Snarey, J. R. (1985). Cross-cultural universality of social-moral
development: A critical review of Kohlbergian research. Psycho-
logical Bulletin, 97(2), 202–232.

References
265
Sroufe, L. A. (1979). The coherence of individual development:
Early care attachment and subsequent developmental issues.
American Psychologist, 34, 834–841.
Sroufe, L. A., & Fleeson, J. (1986). Attachment and the construction
of relationships. In W. W. Hartup & Z. Rubin (Eds.), Relation-
ships and development (pp. 52–71). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Stevenson, H. W., & Lee, S. (1990). Contexts of achievement.
Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development,
55(1–2, Serial No. 221).
Stoneman, Z., Brody, G., & MacKinnon, C. (1986). Same-sex and
cross-sex siblings: Activity choices, roles, behavior, and gender
stereotypes. Sex Roles, 15, 495–510.
Sullivan, H. S. (1953). The interpersonal theory of psychiatry.
New York: W. W. Norton.
Super, C. M., & Harkness, S. (1986). The developmental niche: A
conceptualization at the interface of child and culture. Interna-
tional Journal of Behavior Development, 9, 1–25.
Sutton, J., Smith, P. K., & Swettenham, J. (1999). Social cognition
and bullying: Social inadequacy or skilled manipulation? British
Journal of Developmental Psychology, 17, 435–450.
Sutton-Smith, B., & Rosenberg, B. G. (1970). The sibling.
New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston.
Taylor, M. (1988). Conceptual perspective taking: Children’s ability
to distinguish what they know from what they see. Child Devel-
opment, 59(3), 703–718.
Thompson, R. A. (1991). Emotional regulation and emotional
development. Educational Psychology Review, 3, 269–307.
Thorne, B. (1994). Gender play: Girls and boys in school.
New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
Timmer, S. G., Eccles, J., & O’Brien, K. (1985). How children use
time. In F. T. Juster & F. P. Stafford (Eds.), Time, goods, and
well-being (pp. 353–382). Ann Arbor, MI: Institute for Social
Research.
Tucker, C. J., McHale, S. M., & Crouter, A. C. (in press). Conditions
of sibling support in adolescence. Journal of Family Psychology.
Turiel, E. (1994). The development of social-conventional and
moral concepts. In B. Puka (Ed.), Fundamental research in
moral development (Vol. 2, pp. 255–293). New York: Garland.
Updegraff, K. A., McHale, S. M. & Crouter, A. C. (2001).
Adolescents’ sex-typed experiences: Does having a sister versus
a brother matter? Child Development, 71, 1597–1610.
Vartanian, L. R., & Powlishta, K. K. (1996). A longitudinal exami-
nation of the social-cognitive foundations of adolescent egocen-
trism. Journal of Early Adolescence, 16(2), 157–178.
Weisner, T. S. (1984). Ecocultural niches of middle childhood: A
cross-cultural perspective. In W. A. Collins (Ed.), Development
during middle childhood: The years from six to twelve.
Washington, DC: National Academy of Sciences.
Weisner, T. S. (1989). Comparing sibling relationships across
cultures. In P. Goldring Zukow (Ed.), Sibling interaction across
cultures (pp. 11–25). New York: Springer-Verlag.
Werner, E. E. (1993). Risk, resilience and recovery: Perspectives
from the Kawaii Longitudinal Study. Development and Psy-
chopathology, 5, 503–515.
Zahn-Waxler, C., Friedman, S. L., & Cummings, E. M. (1983).
Children’s emotions and behaviors in response to infants’ cries.
Child Development, 54, 1522–1528.
Zarbatany, L., Hartman, D. P., & Rankin, D. B. (1990). The psycho-
logical functions of preadolescent peer activities. Child Develop-
ment, 61, 1067–1080.
Zelizer, V. A. (1985). Pricing the priceless child. New York: Basic
Books.


CHAPTER 11
The Cultural Context of Child Development
JAYANTHI MISTRY AND T. S. SARASWATHI
267
MAJOR APPROACHES TO THE STUDY OF CULTURE AND
CHILD DEVELOPMENT
268
Cross-Cultural Psychology
268
Cultural Psychology
269
Developmental Psychology
271
Emerging Convergence Between the
Major Approaches
272
Continuing Issues and Debates
272
INTERFACE BETWEEN THE STUDY OF CULTURE AND
THE STUDY OF CHILD DEVELOPMENT
274
Integrative Conceptual Framework
275
DEVELOPMENT OF SELF
276
Developmental Trends: Contributions From
Developmental Psychology
276
Alternate Deﬁnitions of Self: Contributions from 
Cross-Cultural and Cultural Psychology
276
Integrated Perspectives: Multiple Developmental Models
and Pathways
277
DEVELOPMENT OF CHILDREN’S NARRATIVES
279
Developmental Trends: Contributions From
Developmental Psychology
280
Cultural Variations in Narratives: Contributions From
Cross-Cultural and Cultural Psychology
280
Integrative Perspectives: Toward Multiple Models of
Narrative Development
280
DEVELOPMENT OF REMEMBERING
282
Developmental Trends: Contributions From
Developmental Psychology
282
Variability in Remembering: Lessons From
Cross-Cultural Research
283
Integrated Perspectives: Multiple Dimensions
of Remembering
283
CONCLUDING COMMENTS
285
REFERENCES
286
In the ﬁeld of developmental psychology the stage is set for a
gradual yet profound change in the conceptualization of
children’s development. Culture and context are becoming
increasingly signiﬁcant constructs in the study of child de-
velopment for several reasons. Forces from outside the ﬁeld,
such as trends toward globalization (economic, political, and
social) with concomitant increase in the interface between
the diverse communities of the world, bring to the fore the
multiple realities of humanity. The Western world can no
longer ignore the multiple realities of the human condition
within its own countries and those countries that Kagitçibasi
(1996b) claimed constitute the “majority world” (p. 3). In
addition, change in the conceptualization of development is
being wrought also from within the ﬁeld. Be it “rumble or
revolution” (Kessen, 1993, p. 272), calls for putting culture at
the core of developmental psychology (Cole, 1996; Hatano,
1999) and for paradigm shifts abound in the recent literature
(Garcia-Coll & Magnuson, 1999; Saraswathi & Dasen,
1997).
The changes in conceptualization that are being demanded
are not minor. They may well require a shaking of the foun-
dations and a need to look outside the ﬁeld for theoretical
insights. Emphasizing the need for a global-community psy-
chology, Marsella (1998) suggested that emerging social,
cultural, political, and environmental problems around the
world are placing increasing demands on the ﬁeld. “Psychol-
ogy can assist in addressing and resolving these problems,
especially if it is willing to reconsider some of its fundamen-
tal premises, methods, and practices that are rooted within
Western cultural traditions and to expand its appreciation and
use of other psychologies” (Marsella, 1998, p. 1282). In a
similar vein, Kessen (1993) claimed that “it is imperative that
developmental psychology loosen its tie to the dream of the
one best system, be it theoretical or methodological” (p. 272).
Toward these ends of broadening the vision and charge of
developmental psychology, we undertake the task of integrat-
ing perspectives from within and without the ﬁeld.
Acknowledgments: We appreciate comments made by Ranjana
Dulta, Barbara Rogoff, and Pierre R. Dasen on a previous version of
this chapter.

268
The Cultural Context of Child Development
Our primary goal in this chapter is to represent current un-
derstanding of the interface between culture and child devel-
opment by drawing on three subﬁelds of psychology: cultural
psychology, cross-cultural psychology, and developmental
psychology. In the ﬁrst half of the chapter we provide a brief
overview of these three subﬁelds of psychology, highlighting
how the interface between culture and development is ex-
plained in each. We end this part of the chapter emphasizing
the increasing convergence and parallels between the three
subﬁelds while delineating the differences and debates that
persist.
In the second half of the chapter we present an integrative
framework that synthesizes the complementary foci of the
various approaches to the study of culture and child develop-
ment and then use this framework to organize an integrative
overview of three selected topics in child development. Our
exemplars include development of self, development of
children’s narratives, and the development of remembering.
Because a comprehensive review of all potential domains of
development is beyond the scope of this chapter, we have
selected only three exemplars to illustrate the possibility of
integrating literature from cultural, cross-cultural, and devel-
opmental psychology. We have selected these three exem-
plars from domains of development within which we believe
sufﬁcient inroads have been made to develop theories that
are culturally based and broad enough to encompass the
database of mainstream developmental patterns and cultural
variations in a coherent manner.
MAJOR APPROACHES TO THE STUDY OF
CULTURE AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT
In the discipline of psychology three subﬁelds have made sig-
niﬁcant contributions to our current knowledge about the cul-
tural context of child development. We highlight major
approaches to the study of culture and development from
each subﬁeld, focusing on the core assumptions or deﬁning
elements of each stream of knowledge. We do not provide an
overview of each subﬁeld, as there are handbooks or full-
length books devoted to that task in each ﬁeld (Berry et al.,
1997; Damon, 1998; J. G. Miller, 1997; Shweder et al., 1998;
Triandis, 1980).
Cross-Cultural Psychology
Although culture has been the focus of study in anthropology
since E. B. Tylor wrote Primitive Culture in 1871 (Tylor,
1871/1958), the interest in culture is much more recent in the
discipline of psychology. Tracing the origins of culture-
related psychology, several historical overviews of the ﬁeld
of cross-cultural psychology emphasize its relatively recent
institutionalization as a subdiscipline of psychology during
the 1960s (Jahoda, 1990; Segall, Dasen, Berry, & Poortinga,
1999; Jahoda & Krewer, 1997). As these reviews highlight,
several publication outlets and organizations devoted to
cross-cultural and cross-national research were established at
this time.
Understanding the origins of this ﬁeld is important
because the essential deﬁning characteristics of cross-cultural
psychology as a ﬁeld are rooted in the reasons for its emer-
gence. It is critical to remember that cross-cultural psychol-
ogy emerged as a subdiscipline of psychology in reaction to
the tendency in psychology to ignore cultural variations and
to consider them nuisance variables or error (Kagitçibasi &
Poortinga, 2000). Thus, cross-cultural psychology is often
deﬁned primarily by its method of comparative cross-cultural
research aimed at exploring similarities and differences of
human psychological functioning (Berry, 1980; Berry,
Poortinga, Segall, & Dasen, 1992; Brislin, 1983; Jahoda,
1992; Jahoda & Krewer, 1997). It has functioned as a partic-
ular methodological strategy of mainstream psychology
rather than as a subﬁeld with a speciﬁc epistemological,
theoretical, or content-related emphasis (Brislin, 1983).
The centrality of the culture-comparative approach is
clearly reﬂected in statements of the overall goals of the
ﬁeld from early deliberations of the emerging area of re-
search (Berry & Dasen, 1974) to more recent discussions of
cross-cultural psychology as a scholarly discipline (Segall,
Lonner, & Berry, 1998; Segall et al., 1999). The three pri-
mary goals of cross-cultural psychology have remained the
following: (a) to test or extend the generalizability of existing
theories and ﬁndings in psychology; (b) to use naturalistic
variations provided by various cultures to test or discover
range of variation in behaviors; and (c) to integrate ﬁndings
to generate a more universal psychology applicable to a
wider range of cultural settings.
In addition to its characteristic methodological approach,
the culture-comparative approach of cross-cultural psychol-
ogy is rooted also in assumptions about the universality of
psychic functioning (J. G. Miller, 1997; Poortinga, 1997). As
suggested by the goals just delineated, cross-cultural research
is designed to test emerging theories in a broader range of
cultural contexts and lead to the identiﬁcation of psychologi-
cal universals. Whereas the ﬁrst goal speciﬁcally focuses on
the search for psychological universals, the second empha-
sizes the documentation of diversity. However, both goals
are always complementary and ultimately aimed at generat-
ing a more universal psychology (Segall, Dasen, Berry, &
Poortinga, 1999). The centrality of assumptions of universal-
ity of psychic functioning in culture-comparative approaches

Major Approaches to the Study of Culture and Child Development
269
is particularly well highlighted by Kagitçibasi and Poortinga
(2000). They argued that assumptions of cultural relativism or
universalism have important implications for methodology:
“In so far as there is non-identity of psychological processes
cross-culturally, there is non-comparability of data. Insistence
on the uniqueness of phenomena deﬁes comparison and
makes the use of common methods and instruments inappro-
priate. Thus, the entire enterprise of culture comparative re-
search collapses if the assumption of psychic unity of human
kind is rejected” (p. 131).
Much of the cross-cultural research undertaken during the
ﬁrst half of the twentieth century reﬂected the goals of estab-
lishing universal laws of human behavior and examining how
psychological processes are affected by different aspects of
cultural context. For example, more than half of the studies
carried out in the African continent during the early 1900s
were concerned with IQ testing—reﬂecting the primary goal
of testing existing theories and constructs in psychology
(Jahoda & Krewer, 1997). This focus on testing existing
theories (essentially those developed in the West) led to a
large body of cross-cultural research that was primarily
replicative in nature. Much of this work was fraught with
indiscriminate use of tests and procedures developed in
Western settings and used without concern for their ecologi-
cal validity in very different settings.
Fortunately, the rapid growth of comparative cross-national
research following the institutionalization of cross-cultural
psychology in the 1960s generated far more promising trends.
Concerns about the validity of constructs, instruments, and
procedures developed by mainstream psychology became
highlighted by signiﬁcant lines of cross-cultural research in the
two decades following the 1960s (Cole, Gay, Glick, & Sharp,
1971; Dasen, 1974; Dasen & Heron, 1984; Laboratory of
Comparative Human Cognition [LCHC], 1983; Lancy, 1978;
Serpell, 1977). These researchers went beyond documenting
differences between Western and non-Western groups. Their
research reﬂected deep insights about the particular non-
Western groups and communities being studied, primarily
gained through extended periods of residence and work
within the communities and culturally sensitive and systematic
attemptstoreviseprocedures,instruments,andevenconstructs
to understand better the phenomenon being studied from an
insider’s perspective.
During this period of rapid growth in cross-cultural re-
search, there was also a shift toward a more substantive and
theory-building approach. This was a particularly signiﬁcant
trend for a ﬁeld primarily characterized by its methodological
approach. For example, Segall, Campbell, and Herskovits’s
(1966) study of cross-cultural differences in illusion suscep-
tibility Berry’s (1966) study of cross-cultural differences in
psychological differentiation, and Whiting and Whiting’s
(1975) study of child-rearing in six cultures not only stimu-
lated signiﬁcant bodies of research but also generated sub-
stantive theorizing about the links between ecological
contexts, modes of subsistence, socialization processes, and
individual psychological functioning.
Another promising trend resulted from the efforts of psy-
chologists working in developing countries who began to
question the validity of theories developed in the Western
world. Rather than accepting existing psychological theories
as objective, value-free, and universal, indigenous psycholo-
gists claimed that these were deeply enmeshed with Euro-
American values that champion liberal, individualistic ideals
(Kim & Berry, 1993; Kim, Park, & Park, 2000). Psycholo-
gists in East and Southeast Asia have been particularly vocal
since the late 1970s in advocating the need to develop psy-
chological constructs and frameworks rooted in local cultural
and philosophical traditions, rather than relying on imported
ones (Enriques, 1977; Ho, 1988, 1993; D. Sinha, 1986,
1997). For example, in Confucian heritage cultures, con-
structs that depict the fundamental relatedness between indi-
viduals played a particularly important role in promoting the
role of indigenous psychological frameworks (Ho, 1976,
1988; Kim & Choi, 1994; Lebra, 1976). In modern Indian
psychology, context-sensitivity, multidimensionality, and
adult-child continuity (Kakar, 1978; Kumar, 1993; Marriott,
1989; A. K. Ramanujam, 1989) are examples of indigenously
derived psychological concepts that are rooted in assump-
tions and orientations that are fundamentally different from
Western approaches to knowledge about psychological func-
tioning (Kao & Sinha, 1997; Mishra, 1997; D. Sinha, 1997).
Thus, whereas the subﬁeld of cross-cultural psychology
may initially have been deﬁned primarily in terms of its com-
parative approach, the past 30 years of cross-cultural research
in psychology have led to a critical discussion of the initial
approach and a rediscovery of a more socioculturally ori-
ented tradition in psychology (Jahoda & Krewer, 1997;
Poortinga, 1997; Segall et al., 1999). Although the compara-
tive approach and the search for a culturally inclusive yet uni-
versal psychology remain hallmarks of cross-cultural
psychology, recent trends indicate promising areas of conver-
gence with other subﬁelds of psychology that also examine
the interface of culture with human development.
Cultural Psychology
Although cross-cultural psychology as just presented pro-
ceeds from the perspective of the search for universals in psy-
chological functioning, cultural psychology has often been
viewed as representing the perspective of cultural relativism.

270
The Cultural Context of Child Development
However, we suggest that to portray cultural psychology as
primarily representing a cultural-relativist stance is inaccu-
rate and glosses over more signiﬁcant deﬁning features of
this approach to the study of culture and human development.
We highlight three core features of cultural psychology in
this section.
In recent discussions of the cultural psychology approach
to the study of human development (Harwood, Miller, &
Irizarry, 1995; J. G. Miller, 1997; Shweder et al., 1998),
numerous approaches have been categorized under this
overarching label. The most common examples include
extensions of Vygotsky’s (1978) sociohistorical theory,
which emphasizes the study of human development as it is
constituted in sociocultural context (Cole, 1990, 1996; Ro-
goff, 1990; Wertsch, 1985, 1991), and theories that empha-
size culture as the meaning systems, symbols, and practices
through which people interpret experience (Bruner, 1990;
Goodnow, Miller, & Kessel, 1995; Greenﬁeld & Cocking,
1994; Markus & Kitayama, 1991; Shweder, 1990). Models
that incorporate ecological constructs with those from the
culture and personality school of thought (D’Andrade, 1984;
LeVine, 1973; LeVine et al., 1994; Super & Harkness, 1986;
Whiting & Whiting, 1975) and models based on activity the-
ory (Eckensberger, 1996) are also included under the um-
brella of cultural psychology.
Although cultural psychology does not have a unifying
deﬁnition or theoretical perspective, all these approaches
share a common focus on understanding culturally consti-
tuted meaning systems. Thus, the ﬁrst core feature of all
these approaches is the common assumption that human
beings construct meaning through the cultural symbol sys-
tems available to them in the context of social interactions.
Thus, cultural psychologists view human psychological
functioning as an emergent property that results from sym-
bolically mediated experiences with the behavioral prac-
tices and historically accumulated ideas and understandings
(meanings) of particular cultural communities (Shweder
et al., 1998).
Along with the emphasis on the cultural meanings, a sec-
ond unifying theme across various cultural psychology ap-
proaches is the assumption that culture and individual
psychological functioning are mutually constitutive. It is as-
sumed that culture and individual behavior cannot be under-
stood in isolation, yet they are also not reducible to each other
(Cole, 1996; J. G. Miller, 1997; Rogoff, 1990). In such a view,
culture and individual development are not separated into in-
dependent and dependent variables. In addition, the assump-
tion that culture and individual functioning are mutually
constitutive goes beyond an emphasis on the bidirectionality
of inﬂuence. Cultural psychologists argue that to deﬁne the
relation between culture and individual development as
mutually constitutive requires a fundamental reconceptualiza-
tion of the nature of the relationship between culture and indi-
vidual development (Cole, 1996; J. G. Miller, 1997; Shweder
et al., 1998). Sociocultural perspectives offer such a reconc-
eptualization of the relation between mind and culture in the
central assumption that human development—conceptualized
as particular modes of thinking, speaking, behaving—is
assumed to arise from and remain integrally tied to concrete
forms of social practice (Cole, 1990; Vygotsky, 1978;
Wertsch, 1985): “Mind, cognition, memory, and so forth are
understood not as attributes or properties of the individual, but
as functions that may be carried out intermentally or intra-
mentally” (Wertsch & Tulviste, 1992, p. 549). Thus, instead of
conceptualizing individuals as “having abilities and skills,”
the focus is on the “person-acting-with-mediation-means” as
the appropriate unit of analysis (Wertsch, 1991, p. 119). In
other words, individual “ability” or “tendency” is not sepa-
rated from the contexts in which they are used. The argument
is that when the focus is on human actions, we are immediately
forced to account for the context of the actions and therefore
cannot separate context from human functioning.
A third unifying theme in approaches to cultural psychol-
ogy lies in the interpretive methodology preferred by these
various approaches. Because the basic assumption is that cul-
ture and behavior are essentially inseparable, psychological
functioning tends to be described in terms of the understand-
ing of behavior and experience by the members of a cultural
group themselves. Hence, the focus is on representing the
meaning that behavior has for the behaving person. The
roots of this preferred methodology have been traced to
hermeneutics, or the theory of interpretation derived from the
Greeks. W. Dilthey is credited with translating hermeneutic
tradition to a historic methodology in which general validity
is established through seeking objectiﬁed meanings within a
coherence of contexts (Harwood et al., 1995; Jahoda, 1992;
Jahoda & Krewer, 1997; Shweder et al., 1998).
Although cultural psychology is not a dominant perspec-
tive in mainstream psychology, it has stimulated attempts to
develop more culturally inclusive theories of human develop-
ment in the ﬁeld of cross-cultural psychology (Dasen, 1993;
Jahoda & Krewer, 1997) and in the ﬁeld of developmental
psychology (Cole, 1995, 1996; LCHC, 1983; Rogoff, 1990;
Rogoff & Chavajay, 1995; Valsiner, 1989). Such cross-
disciplinary contributions are the focus of a later section, so
we now turn our attention to major approaches to the study of
culture and human development within the ﬁeld of develop-
mental psychology.

Major Approaches to the Study of Culture and Child Development
271
Developmental Psychology
The primary focus in the ﬁeld of developmental psychology
has been to describe and explain development and develop-
mental processes in all domains of human physical and psy-
chological functioning. In the study of human development,
deﬁned as “changes in physical, psychological, and social be-
havior as experienced by individuals across the lifespan from
conception to death” (Gardiner et al., 1998, p. 3), develop-
mental change necessarily becomes the focus of inquiry. Dur-
ing the twentieth century much of the theoretical and
empirical focus on the bases of developmental change cen-
tered on establishing the signiﬁcance of nature versus nur-
ture. However, contemporary developmental psychologists,
going beyond prior debates between the proponents of nature
versus nurture, stress that the dynamic relations between in-
dividual and context represent the basic processes of human
development (Lerner, 1991, 1998, 2002; Sameroff, 1983;
Thelen & Smith, 1998).
Historically, concerns about following the traditions of
established science and assumptions about universality as a
deﬁning characteristic of human development have discour-
aged attention to the diversity and inﬂuence of varied devel-
opmental contexts. Recently, however, there has been
increasing focus on the contexts of psychological function-
ing. This attention to the contexts of development has been
prompted by several intersecting trends in the past couple
decades. Theoretical models and perspectives that have been
developed from within the ﬁeld, particularly the ecological
model (Bronfenbrenner, 1979, 1986), developmental contex-
tualism (Lerner, 1991, 1996), and the life-span approaches
(Baltes, Lindenberger, & Staudinger, 1998; Baltes, Reese, &
Lipsitt, 1980), have been particularly inﬂuential in focusing
attention on the contexts of individual development. In most
of the ecologically based theories (with origins in the ecolog-
ical sciences that examine the interrelationships between or-
ganisms and their environments), context is viewed as one of
the major environmental variables that facilitate or constrain
individual development. Similarly, life-span psychologists
also emphasize social context, based on the central assump-
tion that changes in the individual’s social context across the
life span interact with the individual’s unique history of
experiences, roles, and biology to produce an individualized
developmental pathway. More recently, theorizing on the dy-
namic relation between individual and context has been
brought to a more abstract and complex level through the
concepts associated with developmental-systems models of
human development (Dixon & Lerner, 1999; Lerner, 2002).
In such models, integrative, reciprocal, and dynamic relations
and interactions among variables from multiple levels of or-
ganization constitute the core processes of developmental
change (Ford & Lerner, 1992; Gottlieb, 1997; Lerner, 1998;
Thelen & Smith, 1998).
It is not surprising that the models and perspectives just
listed have been credited for the increasing amounts of re-
search on the diversity of social contexts and life experi-
ences. In summarizing state-of-the-art reviews of conceptual
and empirical work on social, emotional, and personality de-
velopment, Eisenberg (1998) identiﬁed increasing focus on
contextual and environmental inputs to development as a key
theme: “Burgeoning interest in context in developmental
psychology is reﬂected in the study of many levels of inﬂu-
ence, including diversity in culture and subculture, race and
ethnicity, sex and gender, and types of families and groups”
(p. 20). Similarly, Eisenberg noted that conceptual frame-
works are becoming more conditional, multifaceted, and
complex and that there is an increasing tendency to view de-
velopment as a consequence of “social interactions that are
shaped by contextual factors and characteristics of all partic-
ipants in the interaction” (p. 20). Thus, investigation of the
diversity of contexts of individual development has become a
major research agenda in most domains of psychological
functioning (Damon, 1998; Eisenberg, 1998; Maasten, 1999;
Wozniak & Fischer, 1993).
Applied and problem-oriented research has also con-
tributed to the increasing relevance of context in human devel-
opment. Context has been the speciﬁc focus of research aimed
at understanding the particular circumstances of children
growing up in poverty or adverse socioeconomic conditions
(McLloyd, 1990, 1998). Similarly, research that examines
children’s environments to enable the design of intervention
programs to improve their welfare have focused speciﬁ-
cally on context variables (Kagitçibasi, 1996b) because it is
assumed that these mediating contextual factors can be ad-
dressed by programs.
Despite the increasingly more sophisticated conceptual-
izations of developmental processes and contexts of chil-
dren’s development just noted, there appears to be a common
underlying tendency to treat culture and context as synony-
mous in developmental psychology. Culture is operational-
ized as context variables and treated as an independent
variable. Even when investigated as a transactional or interac-
tional relationship, it is treated as separate from the individual
developmental outcomes with which it interacts. This focus
on culture as context may reﬂect the ﬁeld’s continued reliance
on the methods of experimental psychology and the concern
with establishing universal relationships between context and
behavior. Having highlighted essential dimensions of each

272
The Cultural Context of Child Development
ﬁeld’s approach to the study of culture, we now turn our
attention to the convergence between major approaches
followed by an emphasis on the continuing differences and
debates.
Emerging Convergence Between the
Major Approaches
Recent calls for paradigm shifts to enable the integrated study
of culture and human development are emerging from within
all three ﬁelds—cross-cultural psychology, cultural psychol-
ogy, and developmental psychology. Within cross-cultural
psychology there is a current shift toward more sociocultur-
ally oriented theorizing and empirical work, representing the
inroads made by cultural psychology approaches. Further,
there are increasing attempts to integrate knowledge gener-
ated by indigenous psychologies (Kim et al., 2000). Taking a
stance similar to that of cultural psychology, indigenous psy-
chologists advocate a paradigm shift in which constructs and
theories are developed inductively from within the culture
and culture is not treated as an independent variable. Al-
though theory development within indigenous psychology is
not far advanced, it appears to hold promise for integrating
the concerns of cultural psychology and cross-cultural psy-
chology (Saraswathi & Dasen, 1997).
Cultural psychology approaches also have had signiﬁcant
inﬂuence within developmental psychology, more so in some
areas than in others, for example, in infancy research, adoles-
cence, and cognitive development (Kagitçibasi & Poortinga,
2000). For example, Rogoff and Chavajay (1995) described
the transformation of research on culture and cognitive de-
velopment. They described the shift from the cross-cultural
comparisons approach of the 1960s and 1970s to the more
substantive, socioculturally based theorizing and research
that became a signiﬁcant tradition of research in cognitive
development within mainstream developmental psychology
by the beginning of the 1990s. Interestingly, Rogoff and
Chavajay documented this transformation by following the
trajectories of a number of researchers and scholars whose
initial research began within the traditions of cross-cultural
psychology, became increasingly sociocultural in orientation,
and eventually became an integral part of developmental psy-
chology (e.g., Cole, 1996; Miller, 1997; Rogoff, 1998).
Convergence between cross-cultural psychology and
developmental psychology has been evident primarily in the
use of culture-comparative approaches to test developmental
theories and constructs. Examples of such research include
studies that tested the universality of Piagetian stages
(Dasen, 1972; Dasen & Heron, 1981) and the cross-cultural
applicability of developmental differences in cognitive
competencies (Cole et al., 1971; LCHC, 1983) and that exam-
ined the universality of secure patterns of attachment (Sagi,
1990; Thompson, 1998; Van Ijzendoorn & Kroonenberg,
1988).
However, developmental psychology has had much less
inﬂuence on the ﬁeld of cross-cultural psychology. The vol-
ume of culture-comparative research on developmental issues
published in cross-cultural publications is small (Keller &
Greenﬁeld, 2000). One reason for this within the domain of
cross-cultural psychology is intellectual: Developmentalists
are interested in documenting the developmental trajectory in
different domains of development, and in the socialization and
enculturation processes, that is, the processes by which chil-
dren are taught and acquire competencies as they grow up
(Kagitiçibasi & Poortinga, 2000). Cross-cultural psycholo-
gists, however, are interested primarily in examining cultural
variability and establishing universally applicable lawful rela-
tions between cultural and ecological contexts and individual
behavior. Much of cross-cultural psychology focuses on cul-
tural variability of adult behavior, and therefore intersects
more with social psychology than developmental psychology.
Although this has been useful for developmental psycholo-
gists because the culturally constructed behavior of adults can
be viewed as an endpoint along a developmental pathway,
lack of comparative research on ontogenetic development
suggests that questions of central importance to developmen-
tal psychologists have not inﬂuenced the agenda of cross-
cultural psychologists. However, recent shifts indicating more
convergence between the aims of cross-cultural, cultural,
and developmental psychology suggest a promising future
for integrative approaches. Increasing culture-comparative
research in international journals of behavioral development
reﬂect such convergence. Keller and Greenﬁeld (2000) out-
lined their vision for the future of cross-cultural psychology,
in which “developmental issues and methods will be the-
oretically, methodologically, and empirically integrated into
cross-cultural psychology, thus enabling our ﬁeld to make
signiﬁcant advance in research and theory” (p. 60).
Continuing Issues and Debates
Despite the cross-disciplinary convergences and contribu-
tions just highlighted, critical differences and debates be-
tween the major approaches persist. Although there has been
increasing agreement in the ﬁeld of developmental psychol-
ogy on the need to situate psychological phenomena in cul-
tural context, answering the question of how to integrate
culture into developmental or psychological analysis has
been difﬁcult (Kagitçibasi, 1996b). Issues in addressing this
question are both conceptual and methodological. These are

Major Approaches to the Study of Culture and Child Development
273
perhaps best exempliﬁed in the debates that have been ongo-
ing between cultural and cross-cultural psychologists and are
now also being debated within the ﬁeld of developmental
psychology—between those inﬂuenced by ecological and
contextualist approaches to development and those inﬂu-
enced by cultural and sociohistorical perspectives. Often, the
difference is oversimpliﬁed by assuming that cross-cultural
psychology proceeds from the perspective of the search for
universals, while cultural psychology proceeds from the per-
spective of cultural relativism. Arguing that this distinction is
misleading, we summarize recent discussions of the differ-
ences between cultural and cross-cultural psychology that
delve into the issues in more depth (Harwood et al., 1995;
Kagitçibasi, 1996; Poortinga, 1997; Saraswathi & Dasen,
1997; Shweder et al., 1998). We highlight some of the more
important issues because these continue to be debated in the
ﬁeld of developmental psychology and need to be resolved if
we are serious in our goal to generate more culturally inclu-
sive theories of human development.
Debates on conceptual issues often focus on the question
of how culture or cultural context should be conceptualized
and operationalized in psychological research. Most of the
research examining cross-cultural differences can be criti-
cized for not clarifying the conceptual frameworks or the
explicit theoretical models of culture within which cross-
cultural ﬁndings are examined and understood (Harwood
et al., 1995). In recent debates between cross-cultural psy-
chologists and cultural psychologists on this issue of how to
conceptualize culture, some cross-cultural psychologists sug-
gested that culture can be operationalized as a set of condi-
tions (Poortinga, 1992, 1997; Segall, 1984). In such a view,
cultural variables are conceptualized as independent and an-
tecedent variables inﬂuencing human behavior. In this en-
deavor “there is a tendency to take cultural context, including
ecological as well as sociocultural variables, as a set of an-
tecedent conditions, while behavior phenomena, including
attitudes and meanings as well as observed behaviors, are
seen as the outcomes or consequents of these antecedent in-
ﬂuences” (Poortinga, 1997, p. 350).
Similarly, in the ecological model (Bronfenbrenner, 1979,
1986) or the developmental contextualist (Lerner, 1991,
1996) approaches that have been particularly inﬂuential in
development psychology research, cultural context is opera-
tionalized in terms of various levels of children’s ecological
context, and research in this area attempts to document the
interplay between historical, cultural, biological, and psycho-
logical inﬂuences on behavior in a systems approach to
understanding inﬂuences on development.
In contrast, cultural psychologists maintain that in study-
ing culture, the focus should be on understanding culturally
constituted meaning systems. Thus, the study of the individ-
ual behavior must involve an examination of culturally con-
stituted psychological processes, including culturally shared
cognitive models and meaning systems (Harwood et al.,
1995). Contrary to the ecological or contextualist perspec-
tives, in cultural psychological approaches cultural context is
not conceptualized as an independent variable or inﬂuence on
behavior (LCHC, 1983; Rogoff, 1990; Rogoff & Mistry,
1985). As Shweder et al. (1998) claimed, “This insistence in
cultural psychology that contexts and meanings are to be the-
oretically represented as part and parcel of the psychological
system and not simply as inﬂuences, factors, or conditions
external to the psychological system distinguishes cultural
psychology from other forms of psychology which also think
of themselves as contextual (or situated)” (p. 871).
Arelated conceptual issue that distinguishes cross-cultural
and cultural psychology relates to the primary goals of each
approach. A primary goal of cross-cultural psychology is to
test the generalizability of psychological theories and estab-
lish universalities and differences in human functioning. In
cultural psychology the attention shifts from ﬁnding lawful
relationships between environmental variables (as culture
and context are often operationalized) and behavioral out-
comes to understanding the directive force of shared meaning
systems in the lives of individuals and how these meanings
are constructed in given contexts (D’Andrade & Strauss,
1992; Harkness & Super, 1992). Whereas cultural psycholo-
gists recognize that children grow up within the multiple con-
texts represented in ecological models, they also argue that
contexts cannot be merely conceptualized as environmental
inﬂuences. Understanding context must include understand-
ing the tacit social and interactional norms of the individuals
who exist within those settings, and whose behaviors and ex-
pectations both shape and are shaped by the institutional
structures of which they are a part (Harwood et al., 1995).
This focus on understanding the rule-governed understand-
ings, interpretations, and behaviors in particular contexts,
and the processes whereby individuals coconstruct and ap-
propriate these understandings and interpretations through
participation in various contexts, is the primary goal of cul-
tural psychologists (Harwood et al., 1995).
The methodological debate between cross-cultural psy-
chology centers on how to study culture. Cross-cultural psy-
chologists emphasize a comparative approach with a focus on
using common constructs and common measures across cul-
tural communities, whereas cultural psychologists prefer an
emphasis on the uniqueness of constructs in each cultural con-
text because they derive their meanings from these contexts
(Kagitçibasi, 1996b). Thus, the debates about the preferred
research orientation have been cast in terms of the emic-etic

274
The Cultural Context of Child Development
distinction (Berry, 1969; Poortinga, 1997), or the indige-
nous versus universalist orientation to study phenomenon
(D. Sinha, 1997). Behavior is emic—or culture speciﬁc—to
the extent that it can only be understood within the cultural
context in which it occurs; it is etic or universal in as much as
it is common to human beings independent of their culture
(Kagitçibasi, 1996b; Poortinga, 1997). Thus, the debate cen-
ters on the issue of whether a comparative or decontextualiz-
ing methodology is preferred or a holistic, contextualized
methodology is to be used. Proponents of each view criticize
the methodology preferred by the other. The interpretive
methodologies that are particularly appropriate to study cul-
turally unique phenomena from an emic perspective are often
not acceptable to psychologists using conventional empirical
standards of methodological rigor. Similarly, culture-compar-
ative methodologies that utilize etic constructs to establish
lawful relationships between cultural variables and psycho-
logical phenomenon have been criticized (Greenﬁeld, 1997)
as insensitive to cultural context.
Although some discussions of these contrasts between
cultural psychology and cross-cultural psychology have
taken oppositional stances, more recent discussions have at-
tempted to ﬁnd areas of convergence in the search for more
culturally inclusive theories that can encompass cultural uni-
versals as well as differences and uniqueness. Convincing ar-
guments made by cross-cultural psychologists (Poortinga,
1997) and by ecological and developmental contextual mod-
els in developmental psychology (Bronfenbrenner, 1986;
Lerner, 1991, 1996) emphasize the need to establish lawful
relations obtained between cultural, environmental, and be-
havioral variables. In general agreement with the need to
establish lawful relations, cultural psychologists however
emphasize that psychological structures and processes can
vary fundamentally in different cultural contexts (Miller,
1997) and that there may be multiple, diverse psychologies
rather than a single psychology (Shweder et al., 1998).
Arguing that the search for a science of human nature must
be concerned with meanings as well as lawful behavior and
that no approach can fully explain or account for all behavior
(Poortinga, 1997), we suggest that each approach has some-
thing unique and complementary to contribute to a compre-
hensive understanding of human development. Similarly,
the contrasting methodological approaches to the study of
culture should also be seen as complementary—“a compara-
tive approach does not preclude a contextualist orientation”
(Kagitiçibasi, 1996b, p. 12). For example, Rogoff, Mistry,
Göncü, and Mosier (1993) speciﬁcally use a derived-etic
approach in which contextualized constructs are used
for comparative analyses. In fact, conceptualizing the
context-dependency of psychological phenomena can focus
investigations to uncover causal relations in different contexts
that could actually lead to better generalizability. Our next
section, and the rest of the chapter, is directed toward this goal
of drawing on complementary approaches to build a more
comprehensive understanding of human development.
INTERFACE BETWEEN THE STUDY
OF CULTURE AND THE STUDY OF
CHILD DEVELOPMENT
In this section we focus on the issue of integrating knowledge
gained from the literature in cultural psychology and cross-
cultural psychology with the rest of developmental psychol-
ogy. Toward this end we delineate a broad integrative
framework that draws on the lessons learned from each of the
three subﬁelds and integrates the complementary foci and
constructs of various approaches to create culturally based
conceptual frameworks that can encompass cultural varia-
tions in a coherent manner. Then we utilize this integrative
framework to present a selective review of speciﬁc topics in
child development as exemplars to document how it is
possible to integrate the cultural, cross-cultural, and develop-
mental literature. Three topical areas of child development—
development of self, children’s narrative development, and
development of remembering—serve as exemplars for the
construction of a culture-sensitive and culture-inclusive de-
velopmental psychology.
As discussed earlier, a central conceptual debate (between
cultural and cross-cultural psychologists, and between con-
textualist approaches and sociocultural approaches) focuses
on the question of how culture or cultural context should be
conceptualized and operationalized in psychological re-
search. Should culture be conceptualized as context and as an
independent inﬂuence (e.g., set of antecedent conditions) on
behavior or development, or should it be conceptualized as
culturally constituted meaning systems? Should the focus be
on ﬁnding lawful relationships between environmental vari-
ables (as cultural context is often operationalized) and behav-
ioral outcomes, or should our focus be on understanding how
culturally constituted meaning systems are constructed in
given contexts?
Perhaps the more important question is this: Should not
our focus be on understanding both contexts and the cultur-
ally constituted meaning systems embedded in various con-
texts? When the focus is solely on culturally constituted
meaning systems, there is the danger of relying on cultural
explanations for variations that often tend to preclude
more substantial analyses (Kagitçibasi & Poortinga, 2000).
Understanding important social-structural factors such as

Interface Between the Study of Culture and the Study of Child Development
275
social-class standing, poverty, and low educational levels is
then easily overlooked. On the other hand, focusing on con-
text as social address variables (Bronfenbrenner, 1986) can
reinforce past assumptions that causes of development are
similar across groups but that variations between groups are
caused by differential exposure to causal agents or conditions
and biological predispositions. In the following discussion
we suggest how each perspective can be viewed as comple-
mentary and can be integrated.
Integrative Conceptual Framework
Here we develop a broad integrative framework that we
use to synthesize the cultural, cross-cultural, and develop-
mental literature on each of our selected topics. This frame-
work integrates constructs from contextualist approaches
(Bronfenbrenner, 1986; Lerner, 1991, 1996), sociocultural
theory, and cross-cultural psychology’s contribution of
promising substantive constructs that are pan-cultural as well
as those that are more unique within a culture (Segall et al.,
1999; Triandis, 1994).
Ecological context theories (e.g., Bronfenbrenner, 1986;
Lerner, 1991, 1996) provide the labels and operationalization
for layers of context—for example, macro system as cultural
level shared ideology; exo system as the societal level insti-
tutions; meso and micro system settings as the closest layer
of context for children’s development. Sociocultural perspec-
tives (Cole, 1996; Rogoff, 1990; Wertsch, 1991; Vygotsky,
1978) and Super and Harkness’s (1986) construct of develop-
mental niche provide the mediating constructs through which
broad cultural (macro) level contexts and ideology get in-
stantiated or reﬂected in the contexts of daily life (e.g., micro
and meso systems). Thus, each setting of a child’s micro or
meso system (e.g., home, school, peer group, neighborhood,
religious setting) can be conceptualized as consisting of
physical and social activities, practices, and psychology of
caregivers (i.e., the constructs that constitute the develop-
mental niche). These then are the more proximal level inﬂu-
ences within which individual development is embedded and
constituted, and through which broad cultural level contexts
and ideology get instantiated in the day-to-day life of indi-
viduals in their micro and meso system settings.
Similarly, constructs from sociocultural theory can also
complement those from ecological context models, particu-
larly to operationalize context and understand the mecha-
nisms or processes of developmental change. Concepts such
as context, activity (Leont’ev, 1981; Wertsch, 1985), cultural
practices (P. J. Miller & Goodnow, 1995), and situated prac-
tice (Lave, 1990) have been discussed as various means of
operationalizing cultural context. Cole (1996) offered a
particularly comprehensive discussion of these concepts as
attempts to deﬁne a supraindividual sociocultural entity that is
the cultural medium within which individual growth and
development take place. Cole drew on both the sociohistori-
cal school of thought (represented in the writings of Vygotsky,
Lucia, and Leont’ev) and on anthropological theory to offer a
conceptualization of such an entity, deﬁning “culture as a
medium constituted of artifacts” (p. 31).
Artifacts refer to the tools and objects used in a cultural
community that are developed by prior generations and that
get institutionalized and privileged in the institutions, prac-
tices, and valued activities of that cultural community.
Books, calculators, and computers are common examples of
physical artifacts or tools of our present-day literate and tech-
nological society that mediate how we interact with our
social and physical world (and thus are examples of media-
tion means). Written language, the alphabet, numeral sys-
tems, the decimal system (as a way of organizing numbers),
and the calendar (organizing time into years, months, days)
are examples of conceptual artifacts (or mediation tools)
that also regulate human functioning and behavior.
This notion of culture as a medium constituted of histori-
cally developed artifacts that are organized to accomplish
human growth highlights the study of culture as central to
understanding the processes or mechanisms of human devel-
opment (Cole, 1995). But this begs the next question: What is
the appropriate unit of analysis that will enable us to focus on
both individual functioning and the supraindividual context
within which it is situated? From a sociocultural perspective
the appropriate mode of research is to analyze the way in
which human thinking occurs within culturally organized
forms of activity. Based on the assumption that human
functioning cannot be separated from the context of activities
through which development takes place, it follows that rather
than focusing on individuals as entities, the aim should be to
examine individuals as participants in culturally valued
activities.
In fact, sociocultural theory posits that the integration of
individual, social, and cultural-sociohistorical levels takes
place within the analytic unit of activity (Cole, 1985, 1995;
Leont’ev, 1981; Tharp & Gallimore, 1988; Wertsch, 1985,
1991). Thus, the assumption is that activities mediate the im-
pact of the broader sociocultural system on the lives of indi-
viduals and groups (Gallimore & Goldenburg, 1993). Using
activity as the unit of analysis contrasts with the independent-
dependent variable approach that separates individual re-
sponses from environmental stimuli as the units of analysis.
Rather, activity as the unit of analysis consists of individuals
(as active agents) engaged in goal-directed behavior, carrying
out actions and using culturally valued tools and mediation

276
The Cultural Context of Child Development
means within a framework of shared cultural assumptions
and expectations (Cole, 1985; Leont’ev, 1981; Tharp &
Gallimore, 1988; Wertsch, 1985).
In the rest of the chapter we use this integrative framework
to organize a selective review of three topics in child devel-
opment, including key publications from cultural and cross-
cultural psychology and developmental psychology. We hope
to document the inroads that have been made in unraveling
the culture-individual interface, ranging from delineating the
larger context, institutional mechanisms, and speciﬁc situa-
tion contexts and their embedded meaning that result in the
individual’s construction and acquisition of culture, as well
as a precipitation of social-cultural change. We emphasize
how the complementary contributions from three subﬁelds
of psychology enable a rich understanding of the interface
between culture and individual development.
Within each topic area we begin with contributions from
developmental psychology that often focus on descriptions of
“normative” development as well as cultural variations on the
“normal” outcomes of development.Then we highlight contri-
butions from cross-cultural psychology that identify cultural
or societal variations that have emerged from the culture-
comparative approach. Finally, we utilize the integrative
approach just delineated to integrate or link together societal-
level cultural variations and individual development. We
highlight the possibility of multiple normal developmental
pathways that exist in varying cultural contexts.
DEVELOPMENT OF SELF
We include the development of self as an exemplar to docu-
ment the interface between culture and development because
there has been much research generated on this topic within
all three subﬁelds (developmental, cross-cultural, and cul-
tural psychology). Studies on the development of self
(Greenﬁeld, 1994; Kagitçibasi, 1996a; Markus & Kitayama,
1991, 1994; Shweder, 1991) provide a rich source of infor-
mation regarding the signiﬁcance of culture as a context for
development. From the moment of birth, or even before,
every individual is immersed in a complex cultural context
that provides the settings, meanings, and expectations that
enable the growing child to become an acceptable member of
a given culture. Whether viewed from the perspective of so-
cial construction (J. G. Miller, 1997; Shweder & Bourne,
1991), which implies that both culture and individuals con-
stitute each other, or from the perspective of culture as an in-
dependent variable (Triandis, 1989; Kagitçibasi, 1996b), the
total immersion of the individual child in culture is clearly
recognized: “Theorists, psychologists, anthropologists, and
sociologists alike generally acknowledge that the self is a
social phenomenon” (Markus, Mullally & Kitayama, 1997,
p. 14).
Developmental Trends: Contributions From
Developmental Psychology
In the developmental psychology literature, theories and
empirical work on the development of self have concentrated
on documenting developmental differences and the chronol-
ogy of the development of self-representations from infancy
through adolescence, as well as on determining the factors
that inﬂuence individual differences in self-evaluations
(Harter, 1998). Harter noted that the integration of research in
cognitive, affective, and social domains in the past 15 years
has contributed to a more comprehensive understanding of the
basis and development of self-awareness, self-representation,
and self-evaluations through normative developmental shifts
and transitions. Although the developmental progression is
primarily descriptive at this point, Harter underscores increas-
ing theoretical emphasis on the role of interactions with care-
givers and socialization agents in inﬂuencing normative
progression, not just in creating individual differences.
Developmental researchers also have focused on numerous
issues—such as discrepancies between real and ideal self-
concepts, multidimensional selves versus the uniﬁed self, the
relation to self-esteem, stability of self-representations—
leading to better understanding of the complexities of devel-
opmental processes and how individual differences emerge.
Most of the theorizing and research in developmental
psychology has been based on a Western view of the self that
emphasizes separateness, autonomy, individualism, and dis-
tinctness. In contrast, the cross-cultural literature provides a
much richer and in-depth analysis of alternate constructions
of the self that exist among different cultural communities
and are considered appropriate and mature within these com-
munities. Our discussion now turns to this literature.
Alternate Deﬁnitions of Self: Contributions from
Cross-Cultural and Cultural Psychology
Review of the rich culture-comparative literature indicates a
general consensus regarding predominance of two major
alternate views of the self. These two alternate frameworks
have been variously referred to as independence versus inter-
dependence (Greenﬁeld, 1994; Markus & Kitayama, 1994),
individualist versus collectivist orientations (Kim & Choi,
1994; Triandis, 1989), autonomous versus relational self
(Kagitçibasi, 1996a), and cultural themes promoting the
referential versus indexical selves (Landrine, 1992).

Development of Self
277
Based on the ideology of individualism, the Western
deﬁnitions of the self emphasize it as an independent, self-
contained entity. The self is viewed as comprising of a unique
conﬁguration of internal attributes (including traits, emo-
tions, motives, values, and rights) and behaving primarily to
meet the demands of these attributes (Markus & Kitayama,
1994). The self in this perspective is seen as “bounded,
unique, singular, encapsulated, noncorporeal” (Landrine,
1992, p. 747). The autonomous self is seen as an active agent
that promotes selective abstraction of information from the
environment (Triandis, 1989), as stable over time and across
contexts, and as using environmental resources and all rela-
tionships instrumentally in the service of the self. The nor-
mal, healthy, independent self is expected to be assertive,
conﬁdent, and goal oriented toward self-fulﬁllment, enhance-
ment, and actualization (Landrine, 1992).
In contrast to the autonomous self, the interdependent or
indexical self is not discrete, bounded, separate, or unique
and is constituted (created and recreated) through social in-
teractions, contexts, and relationships (Landrine, 1992). The
self is viewed as embedded in relationships and the social
context and has no existence independent of the same
(Markus & Kitayama, 1994). In fact, “experiencing interde-
pendence entails seeing oneself as part of an encompassing
social relationship and recognizing that one’s behavior is de-
termined by, contingent on, and to a large extent, organized
by what the actor perceives to be the thoughts, feelings, and
actions of others in the relationships” (Markus et al., 1997,
p. 26). Further, the boundaries of the individual self are
permeable with fusion between self and others, self and so-
cial roles, and in some cultures such as the NSO of Cameroon
in Africa (Nsamenang & Lamb, 1994) and Hindu India
(Marriott, 1989; Shweder & Bourne, 1991) include the
supernatural and ancestral spirits.
Cross-cultural literature has also emphasized the culture-
bounded nature of what is considered the appropriate goal or
endpoint of development. Contrasting the Western worldview
of the place of the individual self in society with the socially
and contextually embedded Indian self, Marriott (1989) com-
mented that in the former worldview, “individuals are seen as
indivisible, integrated, self-developing units, not normally
subject to disjunction or reconstitution” (p. 17). These same
characteristics that denote positive features when viewed from
the independence-autonomy dimension may be perceived as
immodest, arrogant, and aggressive when viewed from the
perspective of the interdependent or indexical self: “To mem-
bers of socio-centric organic cultures the concept of the au-
tonomous individual, free to choose and mind his or her own
business, must feel alien, a bizarre idea cutting the self off
from the interdependent whole, dooming it to a life of isolation
and loneliness” (Kakar, 1978, p. 86). Parallel to the constrast-
ing perceptions of desirable self-ways (discussed later) of the
referential self, the indexical or interdependent self is viewed
as passive, weak, and unstable from the cultural framework
that fosters autonomy, even while it is viewed as socially
sensitive, harmonious, and unselﬁsh from the sociocentric
perspective (Landrine, 1992; B. K. Ramanujam, 1979).
Integrated Perspectives: Multiple Developmental
Models and Pathways
Several researchers have emphasized the coexistence of al-
ternative deﬁnitions of self within a culture, as well as within
individuals across developmental stages and across contexts.
Markus, Mullally, and Kitayama (1997), in introducing their
comprehensive review of literature from contrasting cultural
contexts, suggested that “taken together, this work reveals
that there are multiple ways to construct interdependence and
independence and that constructions of both can be found
in all cultural contexts” (p. 13). The coexistence of the pri-
vate and public self (Triandis, 1989), the integration of au-
tonomy and relational orientations (Kagitçibasi, 1996b), and
the variations in expressions of independence and interde-
pendence (Kim & Choi, 1994) have received focused atten-
tion in the cross-cultural literature. Similarly, developmental
psychologists criticize the sharp dichotomy between auton-
omy and connectedness. Harter (1998) argued that the recent
trend toward incorporating both concepts of autonomy and
connectedness in theories of self, rather than treating them as
competing orientations, is leading to promising lines of
research within developmental psychology.
Although cross-cultural research that documents the exis-
tence of alternate conceptualizations of self has been a signif-
icant contribution, it is not enough for a comprehensive theory
of self. Such a theory must be able to explain the process of
social construction whereby these alternate conceptualiza-
tions of self are appropriated by individuals, describe the mul-
tiple developmental pathways for the appropriation of these
different concepts of self, document the source of individual
variations in developmental pathways, and explain how indi-
viduals collectively bring about macro- or societal-level
changes. The conceptual framework we delineated earlier that
integrates cultural psychology perspectives and ecological-
contextual models of development is utilized here to synthe-
size the contributions of cross-cultural and developmental
research in such an endeavor.
Role of Social and Cultural Institutions
We suggest that sociocultural perspectives enable us to un-
derstand the role of cultural and social institutions of the

278
The Cultural Context of Child Development
macro system and exo system in institutionalizing culturally
idealized notions of self and society, as well as the processes
whereby individuals collectively bring about change in insti-
tutions and in cultural values or macro-level ideology. Soci-
etal institutions and macro-level ideology may create the
conditions and contexts for the social construction of self at
the individual level, but they themselves are constructed and
institutionalized by collective individual actions. Individuals
confronted by conﬂicting demands arising from changes
within a society or brought about by interacting societal con-
texts can also become the impetus for creating and institu-
tionalizing new cultural patterns of behavior. For example,
Kumar (1993) drew attention to the contradictory forces that
impinge on the urban middle-class child in India today. On
the one hand, the competitive settings of institutions such as
the school and the aggressive commercial media call for indi-
viduation, but the continued emotional hold of the family on
the child’s decision making necessitates developing socio-
centricism. The resulting tendency on the part of individuals
to respond to both needs and appropriate a model of self
that integrates individuation and sociocentricism eventually
becomes the culturally valued norm.
Similarly, Kagitçibasi (1996b) suggested that increasing
urbanization and nucleation of families in traditional soci-
eties, along with the introduction of the institutions of infor-
mation technology and the market economy, have created a
context in which individuals have constructed valued notions
of self in which both independence and dependence are inte-
grated. Families have responded to the shift from agrarian
economies to market economies by weakening intergenera-
tional material interdependencies while maintaining the emo-
tional interdependency, thus creating new cultural patterns
and norms.
Individual Social Construction and Development
of Self in Context
When the focus of attention shifts to the individual level as
we address questions of developmental pathways and
processes, it is essential to reiterate a basic assumption about
the social construction of the self. Although cultural psychol-
ogists have always viewed the self as a social construction
and its development as a social coconstructive process, there
appears to be increasing agreement among developmental
psychologists about the critical role of social interactive
processes. However, this is often conceptualized as the vari-
able of caregiver’s role or style (Harter, 1998; Neisser &
Jopling, 1997). In highlighting notable advances in research
on the development of self-representation, Harter (1998)
commented that while in earlier research “care giving styles
were related to individual differences in child self-related
behaviors, recent conceptualizations and supporting evi-
dence point to the major role that caregiver-infant interac-
tions play in inﬂuencing the normative progression of
self-development” (p. 566).
While there remains much to be done, recent attempts in
the literature to describe different developmental pathways
for the appropriation of alternate conceptualizations of self
and for accounting for individual differences are also emerg-
ing (Neisser & Jopling, 1997). Markus, Mullally, and
Kitayama (1997) used the term self-ways to include broader
cultural connotations than that of the individual self. They
deﬁne self-ways as including “key cultural ideas and values,
including understandings of what a person is, as well as
senses of how to be a ‘good,’ ‘appropriate,’ or ‘moral’
person” (p. 16). This connotation assumes special signiﬁ-
cance because it provides for distinction between the modal
cultural pattern and individual differences within a culture
that may be shaped by a complex set of cultural dimensions
including social class, gender, and age.
Recent theorizing to consider the developmental implica-
tions of alternate conceptualizations of the self has led to the
generation of hypotheses and some empirical support about
alternate developmental pathways related to distinctions
between individualistic and sociocentric concepts of self.
Development of self-consistency and stability of self-concepts
and emphasis on uniqueness are important developmental
milestones representing increasing maturity when the individ-
ualistic self is the culturally valued goal of development
(Harter, 1998; Neisser & Jopling, 1997).
However, contrasting the Western worldview of indi-
vidualism and autonomy with the Hindu world view of
sociocentricism, Marriott (1989) commented that in Hindu
postulations “persons are in various degrees nonreﬂexive (not
necessarily consistent) in their relations” (p. 16). Interpersonal
relations are viewed as irregular and ﬂuid. It follows that such
a self would exhibit little stability across contexts and time,
and the individual self’s attributes, values, and needs emerge
from or reﬂect the needs of the relationships and contexts
(Greenﬁeld, 1994; Kim & Choi, 1994; Shweder & Bourne,
1991). Thus, in cultures like India, context sensitivity is the
preferred formulation (J. G. Shweder & Miller, 1991; A. K.
Ramanujam, 1990; Shweder & Bourne, 1991) and, one might
extrapolate, the preferred indicator of increasing maturity.
There is some evidence to support the notion of different
developmental pathways. When asked to describe them-
selves in 20 statements, Japanese youths’ responses indicated
a predominance of contextualized responses, in contrast to
American youths’ responses emphasizing personal attrib-
utes. In a similar vein, Shweder and Miller (1991) presented

Development of Children’s Narratives
279
developmental data documenting increasing context sensitiv-
ity with age among Indian children and adolescents, com-
pared to the increasing proportion with age of statements
about general dispositions of the agent among American chil-
dren. Similarly, Hart and Fegley (1995) documented African
American children’s relatively more sophisticated self-
descriptions compared to children tested in Iceland and ex-
plained the difference in terms of the cultural heterogeneity
of life experiences, suggesting that children who encounter a
variety of perspectives are better able to articulate their vary-
ing self-concepts.
We conclude this section with a speciﬁc example of the
social construction of self in Hindu India, a culture in which
one of us (Saraswathi) is deeply embedded. We use this spe-
ciﬁc example to highlight the different developmental out-
comes and trajectories that are possible for the development
of self. The development of self in the Indian context can
make a case study by itself for several reasons. First, India
has a sociohistorical context with a philosophical tradition
that is thousands of years old and rooted in the belief of har-
mony, multiplicity (e.g., many deities, one God), and context
sensitivity. Second, India has a prescriptive religious philos-
ophy deeply embedded in the psyche of the average Hindu
(see Kakar, 1978; Marriott, 1989; D. Sinha & Tripathi, 1994)
that details the acceptable code of conduct for each stage of
life and includes the engagement and disengagement of the
self in relationships and social bonds. Third, India has a fast-
paced rate of social change due to urbanization, industrializa-
tion, and a market economy that coexists with a rural India
still deeply rooted in tradition.
A. K. Ramanujam (1989) illustrated this coexistence of
contradictions in Indians who learn, quite expertly, modern
science, business, or technology. However, this “scientiﬁc
temper” and the new ways of thought and behavior do not
replace older religious ways but live among them.
Ramanujam’s own father, who was a well-known mathemati-
cian and astronomer, also specialized in astrology and hosted
with ease both astronomers and astrologers, never ﬁnding it
paradoxical. In a similar vein J. B. P. Sinha (1980) presented
the idea of the nurturant task leader, who is authoritarian but
effective as a benevolent patriarch in an Indian organizational
setting that competes in modern global trade.
The Hindu ashramadharma theory describes the code of
conduct for each life stage (Kakar, 1978). In the context of the
development of self, what is noteworthy is that whereas mar-
riage and procreation and the fulﬁllment of the duties of the
householder are considered imperative for personhood from
emerging adulthood to late adulthood, the process of disen-
gagement from social bonds is expected to be initiated from
early old age (vanavas), leading to complete renunciation
(sanyas) in late old age. In fact the ritualistic ceremonies of
the completion of the 60th and 80th birthdays provide formal
recognition to the expected (idealized) shift. This shift is from
the sociocentric self embedded in worldly relationships and
duties to a individualized self leading to the path of inward
search and self actualization to ultimate salvation or Nirvana.
Thus, both the sociocentric and individualistic self are val-
ued, but at different stages of life. Here lies the challenge for
developmental theory “to devise organizing frameworks that
can account for developmental change, cultural diversity, and
contextual variation in a model that presents development as
multi-determined” (Cocking, 1994, p. 394) and, we would
add, multidimensional.
DEVELOPMENT OF CHILDREN’S NARRATIVES
We select a topic in language and communication as our sec-
ond exemplar because this is another domain of development
in which the integration between developmental and cross-
cultural research has been promising, if not achieved. When
language is viewed primarily as code acquisition, the ten-
dency is to focus on the underlying universal processes and
theories of language acquisition (chapter by Hoff in this vol-
ume). However, in cross-cultural psychology there has been a
shift away from attempts to validate linguistic models and
toward the notion of language and communication as socially
embedded cultural phenomenon (Mohanty & Perregaux,
1997; Schieffelin & Ochs, 1986). The bulk of cross-cultural
research on language development consists of cross-linguistic
studies that focus on the formal structure and rules of differ-
ent languages and document that different grammatical
structures create different types of problems for a child’s
acquisition of language (Slobin, 1992). However, there is also
increasing interest in language socialization and the various
socially embedded cultural devices used to socialize children
in the pragmatics of language use (Mohanty & Perregaux,
1997).
The interface between individual development and culture
becomes particularly critical when language is viewed as in-
volving social action and the creation of meaning, rather than
as merely code acquisition. In light of this, we select the topic
of narratives from the broad domain of language develop-
ment because development of narrative skills involves mean-
ing making and communication that are culturally embedded
and not merely the acquisition of linguistic codes. In addi-
tion, signiﬁcant inroads have been made in unraveling the in-
terface between individual development and culture in this
body of literature.

280
The Cultural Context of Child Development
Developmental Trends: Contributions From
Developmental Psychology
Research from a developmental psychology perspective has
focused on documenting developmental trends in the nature
of children’s narratives and the acquisition of narrative
skills, including the social-interactive processes whereby
children learn to produce narratives. Much of the research
examining the development of children’s narratives has used
deﬁnitions of narratives based on the types of narratives val-
ued in formal school settings. Skills and knowledge that
allow for the understanding and production of narratives
have been delineated based on deﬁnitions and characteriza-
tions of what constitutes such school-based narrative styles
(Feagans, 1982). These include knowledge of such infor-
mation as introductions, setting, character descriptions,
themes, event sequences, reactive events, and conclusions
(Rumelhart, 1975; Stein, 1988), as well as knowledge of
how to sequence information to form a coherent and cohe-
sive narrative.
Age-related progression in the production of narratives
has also been documented, beginning with the rudimentary
narratives produced between the ages of 2 to 3 years of age
(Sachs, 1983; Snow & Goldﬁeld, 1982), to the personal nar-
ratives produced by 6- to 9-year-olds that include most of the
basic elements that are typical in the narratives told by adults
in the community, such as orienting information and eva-
luations and resolutions of climactic events (Peterson &
McCabe, 1983). The social-interactive processes through
which children learn to tell the type of narratives valued by
adults have also been the focus of research on children’s
narratives. Some examples of the social-interactive activities
that were common in early research on the development
of narratives are joint book reading activities (Snow &
Goldﬁeld, 1982), dialogues with adults around storybooks
(Cazden, 1988), talking about personal experiences and
stories (Heath, 1982), school tasks and activities related to
comprehension, and processing of information from written
narratives and texts (Stein, 1988).
Cultural Variations in Narratives: Contributions
From Cross-Cultural and Cultural Psychology
The main contribution of culture comparative research has
been to emphasize that conceptions of normative narratives are
themselves culturally constructed and culture bound. The
modelsofstorystructure,suchasthestorygrammarmodelsde-
rived from research in the United States (Mandler & Johnson,
1977; Stein, 1988), cannot always be applied to narratives from
other cultures. Based on an analysis of 150 Japanese folktales,
Matsuyama (1983) concluded that story grammar models were
difﬁcult to apply to the folktales because these often did not
have the goal structure (a goal for the main character to
achieve) that is common in Western folktales.
Similarly, Heath’s (1983) landmark research on different
cultural communities in the United States described how
three communities differed in their deﬁnition of stories—
even though telling stories was a valued activity in all the
communities. In one community (a White mill community of
Appalachian origin), culturally valued stories were factual
and chronological, included a lesson to be learned, and were
used to reinforce behavioral norms. In contrast, in another
community (an African American mill community of rural
origin), stories were highly creative and ﬁctionalized and
were used to entertain and assert individual strengths.
Distinctive structural patterns also have been delineated for
narratives generated by HispanicAmerican and Japanese chil-
dren (Minami & McCabe, 1991; Rodino, Gimbert, Perez, &
McCabe, 1991), in African-American children’s narratives
(Gee, 1989; Michaels, 1991; Nichols, 1989), and in Hawaiian
children’s narratives (Watson, 1975). In fact, the difﬁculty in
applying story grammar structures to narratives from various
cultures led to the development of other types of structural
analysis, such as verse analysis and stanza analysis (Gee,
1986; Hymes, 1974).
Integrative Perspectives: Toward Multiple Models
of Narrative Development
Whereas developmental research attempts to delineate nor-
mative trends in the development of children’s narratives,
cross-cultural research emphasizes variations in the structure
and form of culturally valued narratives. However, merely
documenting variations is not enough to explain the process
whereby these differences in what is culturally valued are
generated and maintained by becoming institutionalized in
cultural institutions and ideology. Similarly, delineating
developmental differences, or the factors that lead to individ-
ual differences, is not enough to understand how individuals
appropriate the narrative forms and styles valued in their
cultural communities and in turn collectively create, institu-
tionalize, and privilege particular forms of narratives in their
communities.
We argue that it is essential to integrate research from all
three subﬁelds (cross-cultural, developmental, and cultural
psychology) to beneﬁt from their complementary foci and
develop a more comprehensive understanding of the inter-
face between culture and narrative development. An example
of such integration of various bodies of literature is offered
by Mistry (1993) and is brieﬂy summarized here.

Development of Children’s Narratives
281
Using the sociocultural perspective to facilitate the inte-
gration of empirical work on the development of children’s
narratives, Mistry (1993) organized her literature review to
document how sociocultural context is an integral part of
children’s narrative development at both an institutional and
an interpersonal level. At the institutional level, cultural his-
tory creates and establishes institutions (e.g., schools, literary
organizations) that value, foster, and reward (through tools
such as grades, awards, and other means of formal or infor-
mal recognition) particular types of narratives and narrative
practices. At the interpersonal level, the cultural basis of
narrative practices is manifested in the nature of the task that
the narrator and listener seek to accomplish, the values in-
volved in determining the appropriate goals and means, the
intellectual tools available (e.g., language system and
conventions), and the institutional structures within which
interactions take place (e.g., schools, social organizations,
economic systems).
Role of Social and Cultural Institutions
To understand development in any domain, it is ﬁrst essential
to identify goals of development or culturally accepted end-
points of development within that domain. At the broadest
level, cultural institutions serve to establish these norms and
goals of development. In a literate and technologically ori-
ented society, social and cultural institutions privilege partic-
ular forms of narratives and narrative practices, which then
become the desired norms that determine what is considered
normal progression toward mature and developmentally
sophisticated forms. Sociolinguists have pointed to the exis-
tence of a literate bias in contemporary approaches to narra-
tives (Gee, 1991; Michaels, 1991). Similarly, cross-cultural
literature has emphasized that the unidirectional focus and
value placed on academic and literate contexts of develop-
ment must be questioned, as the goals of literacy and
academic discourse are not universal. To understand the deve-
lopment of children in the context of their own communities
requires study of the local goals and means of approaching
life (Rogoff, Mistry, Göncü, & Mosier, 1993). Each commu-
nity’s valued skills, institutionalized in cultural ideology and
institutions (the macro and exo systems), constitute the local
goals of development.
In addition to privileging particular forms of narratives and
narrative practices, cultural institutions also provide the con-
text and structure the situations and activities of the micro
and meso systems within which children hear narratives and
gain practice in producing them. For example, in European
American middle-class communities, the dominant interac-
tional contexts within which narrative activities take place
are related to the institutions of formal schooling and the
socioeconomic systems that call for literate means of
communication (Mistry, 1993). Hence, young children’s nar-
rative skills develop within the interactional contexts of
school-like learning activities. The occurrence of school-like
narrative activities, such as story reading and recounting
of events during parent-child conversations (Feitelson &
Goldstein, 1986; Fivush, 1991; Haight, 1991; Heath, 1989;
Snow, 1989) have been well documented in the developmen-
tal psychology literature on European American middle-class
children. Parallels and continuity in the patterns of narrative
discourse between home and school in middle-class, school-
oriented communities occur because the cultural and social in-
stitutions that serve as a dominant context for development
are similar in each case.
The consistency between children’s narrative patterns and
those apparent in the discourse patterns of adults participat-
ing in several institutional contexts of community life, such
as the church, has been documented by Heath (1983) for an
African American mill town community: “Thoughout the
sermons, prayers, and raised hymns of the church, there ap-
pears a familiar pattern which marks many other features of
Trackton life: the learning of language, telling of stories, and
composing of hand-clap and jump-rope songs” (p. 211).
Patterns of language use that were apparent in children’s and
adult’s storytelling were also evident in other institutional
contexts in the community, such as in parts of the church ser-
vice (sermons, hymns, personal testimonials), in the music,
in community events, and in children’s games and play.
Links between children’s narrative patterns and cultur-
ally institutionalized discourse patterns are also evident in
Minami and McCabe’s (1991) research on Japanese chil-
dren’s narratives. They link the short length of Japanese
children’s conversational narratives to culturally valued liter-
ary forms in which the emphasis is on brevity, such as haiku
(a literary form that combines narrative and poetry and has
strict length limitations) and karuta (a game that displays
three lines of written discourse). Thus, within any cultural
community there is continuity in the patterns of narrative dis-
course used at home and the discourse patterns utilized and
privileged by the cultural institutions controlled by people in
the communities (Mistry, 1993). However, the fact that the
narrative patterns and the cultural institutions that support
them can be very different across cultural communities un-
derscores the importance of recognizing multiple goals and
pathways of development. Having emphasized the role of
cultural institutions in privileging particular forms of narra-
tives and structuring the settings and activities in which chil-
dren appropriate these forms, we now turn our attention to the
role of individual social construction.

282
The Cultural Context of Child Development
Individual Social Construction and Development 
of Narratives
As we pointed out earlier, much of the research examining
children’s development of narrative skills delineates the ma-
ture skills of storytelling based on deﬁnitions of narratives
valued in schools and other institutions in a literate society.
Developmental trends in how children acquire and appropri-
ate school-based narrative styles and conventions through
their dialogues and joint activity with adults in school-like
learning activities and conversations have been well
documented in the developmental psychology literature
(Cochran-Smith, 1983; Snow, 1989). However, less is known
about the social-interactional contexts and processes through
which narrative practices valued in other cultural communi-
ties are acquired and appropriated.
Some cultural differences in aspects of joint conversa-
tional or narrative activity have been documented through
culture-comparative approaches. Blum-Kulka and Snow
(1992) found variation in the amount of assistance and the
degree of independence given children during dinner-time
conversations in working-class, middle-class American and
middle-class Israeli homes. Similarly, Minami and McCabe
(1991) reported differences in the length of time children
are given the ﬂoor during mother-child conversations in
Canadian and Japanese homes. Canadian mothers encour-
aged lengthy turns by asking many extending questions,
whereas Japanese mothers regularly capped the length of
their children’s turns at three utterances.
To summarize our integration of the literature on the de-
velopment of children’s narrative from developmental, cross-
cultural, and cultural psychology perspectives, we emphasize
the contributions from each subﬁeld of psychology in build-
ing a more comprehensive and culturally inclusive theo-
retical and empirical knowledge base. Research within
developmental psychology has delineated normative trends
in the development of children’s narratives in communities in
which the institutions of schooling and literacy are dominant
contexts for this development. By documenting variations in
the structure and form of culturally valued narratives, cross-
cultural research has enabled us to recognize the culture-
bounded nature of what might be construed as normative
developmental trends and acknowledge these as situated in
particular communities, speciﬁcally those dominated by the
institutions of schooling and literacy. Finally, sociocultural
perspectives have elucidated the processes whereby differ-
ences in what is culturally valued are generated and main-
tained by becoming institutionalized in cultural institutions
and ideology. Such perspectives also offer theoretical con-
ceptualizations of how individuals appropriate the narrative
forms and styles valued in their cultural communities, and in
turn collectively create, institutionalize, and privilege partic-
ular forms of narratives in their communities.
DEVELOPMENT OF REMEMBERING
In the cross-cultural psychology literature, cognitive develop-
ment has been identiﬁed as by far the most frequently studied
topic of cultural-comparative research. Whereas cross-cultural
researchers in the ﬁrst half of the twentieth century focused on
testing the applicability of the IQ construct (Jahoda & Krewer,
1997), after the 1960s researchers concentrated on studying
cognitive processes such as memory, mathematical thinking,
and categorization (Cole et al., 1971; Dasen, 1972; Dasen &
Heron, 1981; Wagner, 1981). Since the 1970s several scholars
have provided detailed accounts of cross-cultural research on
cognition (Altaribba, 1993; Berry & Dasen, 1974; Mishra,
1997; Rogoff, 1981; Segall, Dasen, Berry, & Poortinga, 1999;
Wagner, 1981). Research carried out during the last half of
the twentieth century has also led to signiﬁcant shifts in un-
derstanding the interface between culture and human develop-
ment. Therefore, we considered it important to include a topic
in cognitive development as an exemplar of the integration of
research from various subﬁelds of psychology. However, to
delimit our task, we have chosen to focus on the topic of
remembering.
Developmental Trends: Contributions From
Developmental Psychology
Although research on the development of memory has a long
history, there has been a shift in emphasis from describing
developmental differences in memory performance to identi-
fying the underlying mechanisms of developmental change.
This shift may have been a result of the increasing promi-
nence of information processing and neuroscience ap-
proaches in the 1960s (Schneider & Bjorklund, 1998).
Although developmental differences on working memory
capacity was a signiﬁcant line of research, developmental
differences in the use of mnemonic strategies became a par-
ticularly important area of research in this attempt to explain
developmental differences.
Several reviews of research (Paris, Newman, & Jacobs,
1985; Perlmutter, 1988; Schneider & Pressley, 1989;
Weinert & Perlmutter, 1988) documented early attempts to
explain memory development as the development of increas-
ingly ﬂexible and more general memory strategies between
5 and 11 years of age. Age-related changes in operative
knowledge (knowing how to use mnemonic strategies),

Development of Remembering
283
epistemic (content) knowledge, and metacognitive knowl-
edge were assumed to contribute to age-related improve-
ments in memory performance (Perlmutter, 1988). However,
research within developmental psychology itself, such as ev-
idence of strategic remembering among young children in fa-
miliar contexts (Wellman, 1988) and the role of prior
knowledge in facilitating better recall (Chi, 1978), high-
lighted the problems with decontextualized generalizations
about memory development.
In a recent review Schneider and Bjorklund (1998) under-
scored the heterogeneity and variability in different aspects
of memory and the expectation that different types of
memory abilities will have different developmental functions
and trajectories. Some dimensions of memory are assumed to
develop slowly over childhood and to be inﬂuenced by
environmental context, whereas others are viewed as devel-
opmentally invariant and relatively impervious to environ-
mental factors (Schneider & Bjorklund, 1998). Noting the
shift away from research on conscious and strategic remem-
bering to a focus on basic-level unconscious and nondeliber-
ate micro processes, Schneider and Bjorklund placed
particular emphasis on the need to study memory at multiple
levels and from multiple perspectives, including perspectives
that focus on the social construction of remembering.
Variability in Remembering: Lessons From 
Cross-Cultural Research
Reviews of cross-cultural research on remembering (Mistry,
1997; Rogoff & Mistry, 1985) characterize much of this re-
search as based on a model in which culture and memory
were conceived of as separate variables. The inﬂuence of
culture on individual performance or development was typi-
cally studied by comparing the memory performance of indi-
viduals from two or more cultures. Evidence from such
research in the 1960s and 1970s indicated that individuals
from non-Western cultures did not use the type of mnemonic
strategies that were assumed to facilitate better recall among
individuals from Western cultures and to be responsible for
developmental differences (Cole & Scribner, 1977; Rogoff,
1981; Rogoff & Mistry, 1985; Wagner, 1981).
Despite the predominance of research focused on testing
psychological theories using constructs and procedures de-
veloped in the West, important lessons were learned from
such culture-comparative research (Mistry, 1997). Cross-
cultural studies conducted by Cole and his colleagues in
the 1970s (Cole et al., 1971; Cole & Scribner, 1977; Sharp,
Cole, & Lave, 1979) were particularly notable for their in-
sightful use of ethnographic methods. These researchers
combined ethnographic methods to gain a deep understand-
ing of cultural context with experimental procedures to elab-
orate features of the memory tasks and materials that
mediated cultural differences in performance on remember-
ing tasks. Along with evidence from descriptions of non-
Western people’s memory in their everyday life (Bartlett,
1932; Lord, 1965), such research emphasized the variability
of remembering as a function of familiarity and practice with
speciﬁc materials, tasks, mediational means, and the modal-
ity of remembering (Mistry, 1997).
Cross-cultural research also highlighted another important
lesson for research on memory in general. It enabled re-
searchers to separate variables that vary simultaneously in
the United States but are separable in other cultures. For
example, in many nontechnological societies, formal school-
ing is not yet universal, so the relative independence of age
and amount of schooling provides investigators with a nat-
ural laboratory for investigating effects of age and schooling
separately. Cross-cultural comparisons of memory perfor-
mance by individuals varying in schooling experience
allowed consideration of whether developmental changes in
remembering were due to experience with school rather than
maturation (Rogoff, 1981, 1990; Sharp, Cole, & Lave, 1979).
Western children enter school at about age 5, and there is
high correlation between age and grade in school thereafter.
Thus, cross-cultural research facilitated awareness of the fact
that “cognitive-developmental research has been measuring
years of schooling, using age as its proxy variable” (LCHC,
1979, p. 830). This evidence from cross-cultural studies,
along with recent research on the impact of training on use of
mnemonic strategies, has led developmental psychologists to
recognize the social construction of memory (Schneider &
Bjorklund, 1998).
Integrated Perspectives: Multiple Dimensions
of Remembering
Although the variability of memory has been well docu-
mented in cross-cultural research, it is essential to go beyond
merely documenting differences to developing a theory or
conceptual framework that describes and explains the multi-
dimensional complexity of the development of remembering
in diverse contexts. If the notion of culture is to be integral to
a theory of memory development, it must take into account
contemporary ideas and ﬁndings in the ﬁeld (Wertsch &
Tulviste, 1992). Therefore, we emphasize the need for an in-
tegrative perspective that will enable us to interpret research
at many levels, examining the larger social context to institu-
tional mechanisms and the speciﬁc situation contexts and the

284
The Cultural Context of Child Development
embedded meaning that results in the individual’s construc-
tion and acquisition of remembering.
Role of Social and Cultural Institutions
Although much of the cross-cultural research in the study of
memory has not been conducted from a sociocultural or
cultural-psychology perspective, this body of research is re-
viewed to examine how it elucidates a theory of memory
development in which the interface between culture and indi-
vidual development is integral.
Early cross-cultural research focused on testing constructs
and procedures for assessing memory performance among
people from different cultural communities. On classic mem-
ory tasks developed by developmental psychologists (e.g.,
free or serial recall of lists of words or series of pictures),
people in non-Western communities were widely observed to
perform poorly (see reviews by Cole & Scribner, 1977;
Rogoff, 1981; Rogoff & Mistry, 1985; Wagner, 1981). Fur-
thermore, following the prevalent approach in cross-cultural
psychology, researchers typically examined characteristics
that commonly varied between cultures (e.g., the amount of
formal schooling, degree of modernity, urban vs. rural resi-
dence) as an explanation for these differences in remember-
ing. However, the research that documented differences in
remembering as a function of these variables did not elabo-
rate the cultural context of remembering because it did not
unpackage (Whiting, 1976) speciﬁc aspects of the environ-
mental or experiential context that differentiated the groups.
Toward the goal of elaborating the cultural context of
remembering, we draw on sociocultural perspectives to facil-
itate the development of a conceptual framework of remem-
bering in which culture is integral. In such a conceptual
framework, it is essential to consider how remembering is
coconstructed in the context of speciﬁc institutions that
privilege particular goals for remembering, particular forms
of remembering, and particular modalities and particular
mnemonic strategies (or mediational tools) for remembering.
From this perspective, differences in recall performance be-
tween schooled and nonschooled people can be interpreted as
reﬂecting the signiﬁcant role of schools as a social institution
in privileging particular goals and mediational means for
remembering.
Research has documented that people with schooling tend
to use organizational strategies (e.g., mediational means) that
enhance their recall, whereas people not exposed to Western
schooling tend not to use such mnemonic strategies. Dis-
cussing these ﬁndings from a cultural perspective, Rogoff
and Mistry (1985; Mistry, 1997) pointed out that school is
one of the few places in which a person has to remember
information deliberately, as a goal in itself, and make initially
meaningless, unrelated pieces of information ﬁt together
sensibly. Many of the organizational strategies that facilitate
recall of classic laboratory memory tasks (which impose
some organization on meaningless material) are valued and
therefore learned in school because they serve a valued pur-
pose in school learning.
Similarly, research documenting different outcomes for
learning and memory for varied forms of schooling or other in-
stitutions for literacy (Mishra, 1997; Serpell & Hatano, 1997)
emphasize the signiﬁcance of the institution of schooling,
albeit different forms of schooling. The rote memory–based
learning valued in Koranic schools, which is well suited to re-
membering long Koranic verses, has been linked to the supe-
rior performance of Muslim children in Morocco schooled in
these schools compared to nonschooled children (Wagner,
1993). In their classic work to examine how institutions of lit-
eracy structure and organize the way individuals remember,
Scribner and Cole (1981) compared the performance of Vai
people who varied in the use of several types of literacy:
Arabic literacy gained through the study of religious script in
traditional Koranic schools, literacy in the indigenous Vai
script learned through informal means for practical correspon-
dence in trade, and literacy in English learned inWestern-style
schools. The Arabic literates had a great advantage over the
other groups on recall of words when the preservation of word
order was required, consistent with the incremental method of
learning the Koran (adding a new word to a series at each at-
tempt). Thus, each form of literacy training, each embedded in
different institutions of learning, privileged and facilitated
particular ways of remembering.
Cross-cultural ﬁndings of outstanding memory perfor-
mance by non-Western people can also be interpreted and
understood as instances of how cultural, social, and eco-
nomic institutions and their valued goals facilitate particular
ways of remembering. The extraordinary skills in memory,
inference, and calculation for navigation among Micronesian
sailors (Gladwin, 1970) and the exceptional ability to recall
genealogy and family history among oral historians of clans
in Africa who serve a critical function in resolving disputes
(D’Azevedo, 1982) are just a few examples among many that
have been discussed elsewhere (Mistry, 1997; Mistry &
Rogoff, 1994; Rogoff & Mistry, 1985).
Individual Social Construction of Remembering
As evident from the discussion thus far, once research on re-
membering is contextualized by situating it in particular
institutional and sociocultural contexts, cross-cultural differ-
ences are better understood and can be integrated into a more

Concluding Comments
285
comprehensive theoretical perspective that provides a coher-
ent explanation for such differences. For example, much of
the research on remembering represented in the ﬁeld of de-
velopmental psychology occurs in situations in schools,
homes, and laboratories that are structured and inﬂuenced by
institutions such as schooling and literacy, which are domi-
nant in Western society. Remembering in these contexts will
naturally be different from remembering in cultural contexts
in which institutions other than schooling are dominant.
Although explanations of such differences at the cultural
level are now better understood, an integrated perspective on
remembering must also be able to interpret individual differ-
ences and the social-interactional and individual processes
whereby remembering is socially constructed in culturally
speciﬁc situation contexts with their embedded meaning.
At the level of individual processes, cross-disciplinary
contributions can also be particularly valuable. Cross-
cultural research that situates variability in remembering as a
function of different aspects of the activity in which remem-
bering takes place, such as differential familiarity with mate-
rials, mediational means, modalities, and motivations for
remembering, can be useful to developmental psychologists
in their attempt to understand individual differences in re-
membering. On the other hand, research from developmental
psychology that delineates how children learn to use
mnemonic tools or approach memory problems more skill-
fully through supportive interaction with more skilled part-
ners can serve as models for culture comparative research.
Several studies of remembering in U.S. contexts have
speciﬁcally focused on the question of whether and how
social interaction supports memory development. Build-
ing on Vygotsky’s (1978) emphasis on the role of joint
interaction, some have suggested that adults may serve as
children’s auxiliary metamemory (Wertsch, 1978). Studies
have documented such parental roles and the conse-
quences for remembering. For example, McNamee (1987)
suggested that memory for connected text develops between
adults and children as they converse; DeLoache (1984) noted
the supportive role of mothers’ memory questions in picture
book reading; and Fivush (1991) documented the social con-
struction of narratives by young children. Similarly, guided
participation in remembering with adults has been docu-
mented to facilitate children’s performance on categorization
and remembering tasks (Ellis & Rogoff, 1982; Rogoff &
Gardner, 1984; Rogoff & Mistry, 1990).
However, culture-comparative studies of the individual
construction and appropriation of culturally valued means
for remembering are lacking in the cross-cultural literature.
This gap in the cross-cultural literature must be addressed if
we are to build a theoretically and empirically integrated
knowledge base on the development of remembering. For the
development of such a knowledge base, we reiterate the need
for an integrative perspective that will enable us to interpret
research at many levels, examining the larger social context
to institutional mechanisms and the speciﬁc situation con-
texts and their embedded meaning that results in the individ-
ual’s construction and acquisition of remembering.
CONCLUDING COMMENTS
As a ﬁnal thought, we underscore the importance of drawing
on multiple streams of knowledge to build more comprehen-
sive and culturally inclusive theories and empirical databases
on children’s development. Despite the fact that cross-
cultural, cultural, and developmental psychology approach
the study of culture and human development from different
perspectives, we document how it is possible to integrate
literature from all three subﬁelds to build more culturally in-
clusive understandings of any domain of development.
Building on Kessen’s (1993) commentary that the elevation
of context in developmental psychology represents a shaking
of its foundations, we reiterate that in the reconstruction of
the ﬁeld, we must be willing to incorporate perspectives from
cultural and cross-cultural psychology as well.
In focusing on the interface between culture and human
development, developmental psychology has not been at the
forefront in looking outside its discipline for theoretical
insights or research. As Kessen (1993) suggested, this may be
due to the tensions between the emerging intentions of devel-
opmental psychologists and the traditions of experimental
science. However, there are promising signs of changes being
wrought from within the ﬁeld. The work of developmental
psychologists who are able to blend the methodologies val-
ued in developmental psychology with the concerns voiced
by cultural psychologists on the need to incorporate a focus
on cultural meaning systems represent the most promising
approaches to bringing about the reconstruction that Kessen
suggests is now underway.
Studies of children’s cognition and learning as situated
in the contexts of activities and interactional processes
(Wozniak & Fischer, 1993) are examples of changes in con-
ceptualization being wrought from within the ﬁeld. Attempts
to unpackage culture in ways that go beyond treating it as a
social address variable, and instead to operationalize it in
concrete variables constructed from emic perspectives, are
all examples of promising research that bridges the concerns
of both developmental and cultural psychology (Garcia-
Coll & Magnuson, 1999; Rogoff et al., 1993; Harwood et al.,
1995). To continue the process of bringing about change from

286
The Cultural Context of Child Development
within and meeting the challenge of developing theories and
empirical databases that can account for developmental
change and cultural and contextual variation, it is essential
for developmental psychology to push the boundaries of the
ﬁeld.
REFERENCES
Altaribba, J. (Ed.). (1993). Cognition and culture: A cross-cultural
approach to cognitive psychology.Amsterdam, The Netherlands:
Elsevier Press.
Baltes, P. B., Lindenberger, U., & Staudinger, U. M. (1998). Life-
span theory in developmental psychology. In R. L. Lerner (Ed.),
Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 1. Theoretical models of
human development (pp. 1029–1144). New York: Wiley.
Baltes, P. B., Reese, H. W., & Lipsitt, L. P. (1980). Life-span
developmental psychology. Annual Review of Psychology, 31,
65–110.
Bartlett, F. C. (1932). Remembering. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Berry, J. W. (1966). Temne and Eskimo perceptual skills. Interna-
tional Journal of Psychology, 1, 207–229.
Berry, J. W. (1969). On cross-cultural comparability. International
Journal of Psychology, 4, 119–128.
Berry, J. W. (1980). Introduction to methodology. In H. C. Triandis
& J. W. Berry (Eds.), Handbook of cross-cultural psychology:
Vol. 2. Methodology (pp. 1–28). Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
Berry, J. W., & Dasen, P. R. (1974). Culture and cognition: Read-
ings in cross-cultural psychology. London: Methuen.
Berry, J. W., Poortinga, Y. H., Pandey, J., Dasen, P. R., Saraswathi,
T. S., Segall, M. H., & Kagitçibasi, C. (Eds.). (1997). Handbook
of cross-cultural psychology (2nd ed., Vols. 1–3). Needham
Heights, MA: Allyn and Bacon.
Berry, J. W., Poortinga, Y. H., Segall, M., & Dasen, P. R. (1992).
Cross-cultural 
psychology: 
Research 
and 
applications.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Blum-Kulka, S., & Snow, C. E. (1992). Developing autonomy for
tellers, tales, and telling in family narrative events. Journal of
Narrative and Life History, 2, 187–217.
Brislin, R. W. (1983). Cross-cultural research psychology. Annual
Review of Psychology, 3, 363–400.
Bronfenbrenner, U. (1979). The ecology of human development.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Bronfenbrenner, U. (1986). Ecology of the family as a context
for human development. Developmental Psychology, 22(6),
723–742.
Bruner, J. (1990). Culture and human development: A new look.
Human Development, 33, 344–355.
Cazden, C. (1988). Classroom discourse: The language of teaching
and learning. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.
Chi, M. (1978). Knowledge structure and memory development.
In R. S. Siegler (Ed.), Children’s thinking: What develops?
(pp. 73–96). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Cochran-Smith, M. (1983). Reading stories to children: A review
critique. In B. Hutson (Ed.), Advances in reading/language
research (pp. 197–229). Greenwich, CT: Jai Press.
Cocking, R. R. (1994). Ecologically valid frameworks of develop-
ment: Accounting for continuities and discontinuities across
contexts. In P. M. Greenﬁeld & R. R.Cocking (Eds.), Cross-
cultural roots of minority child development (pp. 393–409).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Cole, M. (1985). The zone of proximal development: Where culture
and cognition create each other. In J. W. Werstch (Ed.), Culture,
communication, and cognition (pp. 146–162). Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Cole, M. (1990). Cognitive development and formal schooling. In
L. Moll (Ed.), Vygotsky and education (pp. 89–110). New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Cole, M. (1995). Culture and cognition development: From cross-
cultural research to creating systems of cultural mediation.
Culture and Psychology, 1(1), 25–54.
Cole, M. (1996). Cultural psychology: A once and future discipline.
Cambridge, MA: Belknap/Harvard.
Cole, M., Gay, J., Glick, J., & Sharp, D. W. (1971). The cultural
context of learning and thinking. New York: Basic Books.
Cole, M., & Scribner, S. (1977). Cross-cultural studies of memory
and cognition. In R. V. Kail & J. W. Hagen (Eds.), Perspectives
on the development of memory and cognition (pp. 239–271).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Damon, W. (Series Ed.). (1998). Handbook of child psychology
(Vols. 1–4). New York: Wiley.
D’Andrade, R. G. (1984). Cultural meaning systems. In R. A.
Shweder & R. A. LeVine (Eds.), Culture theory: Essays on
mind, self, and emotion (pp. 88–119). New York: Cambridge
University Press.
D’Andrade, R. G., & Strauss, C. (1992). Cultural models and human
motives. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Dasen, P. R. (1972). Cross-cultural Piagetian research: A summary.
Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 7, 75–85.
Dasen, P. R. (1974). The inﬂuence of ecology, culture and European
contact on cognitive development in Australian aboriginies. In
J. W. Berry & P. R. Dasen (Eds.), Culture and cognition
(pp. 381–408). London, UK: Methuen.
Dasen, P. R. (1984). The cross-cultural study of intelligence: Piaget
and the Baole. In P. S. Fry (Ed.), Changing conceptions of intel-
ligence & intelligence functioning: Current theory and research
(pp. 107–134). Amsterdam, North-Holland.
Dasen, P. R. (1993). What’s in a name? Cross-cultural Psychology
Bulletin, 27(2), 1–2.
Dasen, P. R., & Heron, A. (1981). Cross-cultural tests of Piaget’s
theory. In H. C. Triandis & A. Heron (Eds.), Handbook of

References
287
cross-cultural psychology: Vol. 4. Developmental Psychology
(pp. 295–341). Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
D’Azevedo, W. A. (1982). Tribal history in Liberia. In U. Neisser
(Ed.), Memory observed: Remembering in natural contexts
(pp. 274–292). San Francisco: Freeman.
DeLoache, J. (1984). What’s this? Maternal questions in joint
picture book reading with toddlers. Quarterly Newsletter of the
Laboratory for Comparative Human Cognition, 6, 87–95.
Dixon, R. A., & Lerner, R. M. (1999). History and systems in de-
velopmental psychology. In M. Bornstein & M. Lamb (Eds.),
Developmental psychology: An advanced textbook (4th ed.,
pp. 3–45). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Eckensberger, L. H. (1996). Agency, action and culture: Three basic
concepts for cross-cultural psychology. In J. Pandey & D. Sinha
(Eds.),
Asian contributions to cross-cultural psychology
(pp. 72–102). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Eisenberg, N. (1998). Introduction. In W. Damon (Series Ed.) &
N. Eisenberg (Vol. Ed.), Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 1.
Theoretical models of human development (5th ed., pp. 1–24).
New York: Wiley.
Ellis, S., & Rogoff, B. (1982). The strategies and efﬁcacy of child
versus adult teachers. Child Development, 53, 730–735.
Enriques, V. G. (1977). Filipino psychology in the Third World.
Phillipine Journal of Pyschology, 10, 3–18.
Feagans, L. (1982). The development and importance of narrative
for school adaptation. In L. Feagans & D. C. Farran (Eds.), The
language of children reared in poverty (pp. 25–36). New York:
Academic Press.
Feitelson, D., & Goldstein, Z. (1986). Patterns of book ownership
and reading to young children in Israeli school-oriented and non-
school-oriented families. Reading Teacher, 39, 924–930.
Fivush, R. (1991). The social construction of personal narratives.
Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 37, 59–82.
Ford, D. L., & Lerner, R. M. (1992). Developmental systems theory:
An integrative approach. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Gallimore, R., & Goldenburg, C. (1993). Activity settings of early
literacy: Home and school factors in children’s emergent liter-
acy. In E. A. Forman, N. Minick, & C. A. Stone (Eds.), Contexts
for learning: Sociocultural dynamics in children’s development
(pp. 313–335). New York: Oxford University Press.
Garcia-Coll, C., & Magnuson, G. (1999). Cultural inﬂuences on
child development: Are we ready for a paradigm shift? In A.
Masten (Ed.), Cultural processes in child development: The
Minnesota symposia on child psychology (Vol. 29, pp. 1–24).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gardiner, H. W., Mutter, J. D., & Kosmitzki, C. (1998). Lives across
cultures: Cross-cultural human development. Boston: Allyn and
Bacon.
Gee, J. P. (1986). Units in the production of narrative discourse.
Discourse Processes, 9, 391–422.
Gee, J. P. (1989). Commonalities and differences in narrative
construction. Discourse Processes, 12, 287–307.
Gee, J. P. (1991). Memory and myth: A perspective on narrative. In
A. McCabe & C. Peterson (Eds.), Developing narrative structure
(pp. 83–98). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gladwin, T. (1970). East is a big bird. Cambridge, MA: Belknap.
Goodnow, J. J., Miller, P., & Kessel, F. (Eds.). (1995). Cultural prac-
tices as contexts for development. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Gottlieb, G. (1997). Synthesizing nature-nurture: Prenatal roots of
instinctive behavior. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Greenﬁeld, P. M. (1994). Independence and interdependence as
developmental scripts: Implications for theory, research, and
practice. In P. M. Greenﬁeld & R. R. Cocking (Eds.), Cross-
cultural roots of minority child development
(pp. 1–40).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Greenﬁeld, P. M. (1997). Culture as process: Empirical methods for
cultural psychology. In J. W. Berry, Y. H. Poortinga, J. Pandey,
P. R. Dasen, T. S. Saraswathi, M. H. Segall, & C. Kagitçibasi
(Series Eds.) & J. W. Berry, Y. H. Poortinga, & J. Pandey
(Vol. Eds.), Handbook of cross-cultural psychology: Vol. 1.
Theory and method (2nd ed., pp. 301–346). Needham Heights,
MA: Allyn and Bacon.
Greenﬁeld, P. M., & Cocking, R. R. (Eds.). (1994). Cross-cultural
roots of minority child development. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Haight, W. (1991). Parents’ ideas about pretend play. Paper pre-
sented at the meetings of the Society for Research in Child
Development, Seattle, WA.
Harkness, S., & Super, C. M. (1992). Parental ethnotheories inac-
tion. In I. E. Sigel, A. V. McGillicuddy-DeLisi, & J. J. Goodnow
(Eds.), Parental belief systems (pp. 373–391). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Hart, D., & Fegley, S. (1995). Prosocial behavior and caring in ado-
lescence: Relations to self-understanding and social judgment.
Child Development, 66, 1346–1359.
Harter, S. (1998). The development of self-representations. In
W. Damon (Series Ed.) & N. Eisenberg (Vol. Ed.), Handbook of
child psychology: Vol. 1. Theoretical models of human develop-
ment (5th ed., pp. 553–617). New York: Wiley.
Harwood, R. L., Miller, J. G., & Irizarry, N. L. (1995). Culture and
attachment: Perceptions of the child in context. New York: The
Guildford Press.
Hatano, G. (1999). Is cultural psychology on the middle ground or
farther? Human Development, 42(2), 83–86.
Heath, S. B. (1982). What no bedtime story means: Narrative skills
at home and school. Language in Society, 11(1), 49–76.
Heath, S. B. (1983). Ways with words: Language, life, and work in
communities and classrooms. New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Heath, S. B. (1989). The learner as cultural member. In M. L. Rice
& R. L. Schiefelbusch (Eds.), The teachability of language
(pp. 333–350). Baltimore: Paul H. Brookes.
Ho, D. Y. F. (1976). On the concept of face. American Journal of
Sociology, 81, 867–884.

288
The Cultural Context of Child Development
Ho, D. Y. F. (1988). Asian psychology: A dialogue on indigenization
and beyond. In A. C. Paranjpe, D. Y. F. Ho, & R. W. Reiber
(Eds.), Asian contributions to psychology (pp. 53–77). New
York: Praeger.
Ho, D. Y. F. (1993). Relational orientation in Asian social psychol-
ogy. In U. Kim & J. W. Berry (Eds.), Indigenous psychologies:
Research and experience in cultural context (pp. 240–259).
Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Hymes, D. (1974). Foundations in sociolinguistics: An ethno-
graphic approach. Philadelphia, Pennsylvania: University of
Pennsylvania Press.
Jahoda, G. (1990). Our forgotten ancestors. In J. Berman (Ed.),
Cross-cultural perspectives (pp. 1–40). Nebraska Symposium on
Motivation, 1989. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
Jahoda, G. (1992). Crossroads between culture and mind. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Jahoda, G., & Krewer, B. (1997). History of cross-cultural and
cultural psychology. In J. W. Berry, Y. H. Poortinga, J. Pandey, P.
R. Dasen, T. S. Saraswathi, M. H. Segall, & C. Kagitçibasi
(Series Eds.) & J. W. Berry, Y. H. Poortinga, & J. Pandey (Vol.
Eds.), Handbook of cross-cultural psychology: Vol. 1. Theory
and method (2nd ed., pp. 1–42). Needham Heights, MA: Allyn
and Bacon.
Kagitçibasi, C. (1996a). The autonomous-relational self: A new
synthesis. European Psychologist, 1(3), 180–186.
Kagitçibasi, C. (1996b). Family and human development across cul-
tures: A view from the other side. Mahwah, NJ: LEA.
Kagitçibasi, C., & Poortinga, Y. (2000). Cross-cultural psychology:
Issues and overarching themes. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psy-
chology, 31(1), 129–147.
Kakar, S. (1978). The inner world: A psycho-analytic study of child-
hood and society in India. London: Oxford University Press.
Kao, H. S. R., & Sinha, D. (Eds.). (1997). Asian perspectives on
psychology. New Delhi, India: Sage.
Keller, H., & Greenﬁeld, P. M. (2000). History and future of devel-
opment in cross-cultural psychology. Journal of Cross Cultural
Psychology, 31(1), 52–62.
Kessen, W. (1993). Rumble or revolution: A commentary. In R. H.
Wozniak & F. W. Fischer (Eds.), Development in context: Acting
and thinking in speciﬁc environments (pp. 269–279). Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Kim, U., & Berry, J. W. (Eds.). (1993). Indigenous psychologies:
Research and experience in cultural context. Newbury Park, CA:
Sage.
Kim, U., & Choi, S. H. (1994). Individualism, collectivism, and
child development: A Korean perspective. In P. M. Greenﬁeld &
R. R. Cocking (Eds.), Cross-cultural roots of minority child de-
velopment (pp. 227–256). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Kim, U., Park, Y. S., & Park, D. (2000). The challenge of cross-
cultural psychology: The role of the indigenous psychologies.
Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 31(1), 63–75.
Kumar, K. (1993). Study of childhood and family. In T. S. Saraswathi
(Ed.), Human development and family studies in India:An agenda
for research and policy (pp. 67–76). New Delhi, India: Sage.
Laboratory of Comparative Human Cognition. (1979). What’s
cultural about cross-cultural psychology? Annual Review of
Psychology, 30, 145–172.
Laboratory of Comparative Human Cognition. (1983). Culture and
cognitive development. In W. Kessen (Vol. Ed.), Handbook of
child psychology: Vol. 1. History, theory, and methods (4th ed.,
pp. 295–356). New York: Wiley.
Lancy, D. (1978). The indigenous mathematics project [Special
issue]. Journal of Education, 14.
Landrine, H. (1992). Clinical implications of cultural differences:
The referential versus the indexical self. Clinical Psychology
Review, 12, 401–415.
Lave, J. (1990). The culture of acquisition and the practice of
understanding. In J. W. Stigler, R. A. Shweder, G. Herdt (Eds.),
Cultural psychology (pp. 309–327). New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Lebra, T. S. (1976). Japanese patterns of behavior. Honolulu, HI:
University of Hawaii Press.
Leont’ev, A. N. (1981). The problem of activity in psychology. In
J. V. Wertsch (Ed.), The concept of activity in Soviet psychology
(pp. 37–71). Armonk: Sharpe.
Lerner, R. M. (1991). Changing organism-context relation as the
basic process of development: A developmental-contextual per-
spective. Developmental Psychology, 27, 27–32.
Lerner, R. M. (1996). Relative plasticity, integration, temporality,
and diversity in human development: A developmental contex-
tual perspective about theory, process, and method. Develop-
mental Psychology, 32, 781–786.
Lerner, R. M. (1998). Theories of human development: Contempo-
rary perspectives. In R. M. Lerner (Ed.), The handbook of child
psychology: Vol. 1. Theoretical models of human development
(5th ed., pp. 1–24). New York: Wiley.
Lerner, R. M. (2002). Concepts and theories of human development
(3rd ed.). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
LeVine, R. A. (1973). Culture, behavior, and personality. Chicago:
Aldine.
LeVine, R. A., Dixon, S., LeVine, S., Richman, A., Leiderman,
P. H., Keefer, C., & Brazelton, T. B. (1994). Child care and
culture: Lessons from Africa. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Lord, A. B. (1965). Singer of tales. New York: Methuen.
Maasten, A. (Ed.). (1999). Cultural processes in child development:
The Minnesota symposia on child psychology: Vol. 29. Mahwah,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Mandler, J., & Johnson, N. (1977). Remembrance of things parsed:
Story structure and recall. Cognitive Psychology, 9, 111–151.
Markus, H. R., & Kitayama, S. (1991). Culture and the self: Impli-
cations for cognition, emotion, and motivation. Psychological
Review, 98, 224–253.

References
289
Markus, H. R., & Kitayama, S. (1994). The cultural construction of
self and emotion: Implications for social behavior. In S.
Kitayama & H. R. Markus (Eds.), Emotion and culture: Empiri-
cal studies of mutual inﬂuence (pp. 89–130). Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association.
Markus, H. R., Mullally, P. R., & Kitayama, S. (1997). Self ways:
Diversity in modes of cultural participation. In U. Neisser & D.A.
Jopling (Eds.), The conceptual self in context: Culture, experi-
ence, self-understanding (pp. 13–61). Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Marriott, M. (1989). Constructing an Indian ethnosociology. In M.
Marriott (Ed.), India through Hindu categories (pp. 1–39). New
Delhi, India: Sage.
Marsella, A. J. (1998). Toward a “global-community psychology”:
Meeting the needs of a changing world. American Psychologist,
53(2), 1282–1291.
Matsuyama, U. K. (1983). Can story grammar speak Japanese? The
Reading Teacher, 36, 666–669.
McLloyd, V. C. (1990). Minority children: Introduction to the spe-
cial issue. Child Development, 61(2), 263–266.
McLloyd, V. C. (1998). Children in poverty: Development, public
policy, and practice. In W. Damon (Series Ed.) & I. E. Sigel &
K. A. Renninger (Vol. Eds.), Handbook of child psychology:
Vol. 4. Child psychology in practice (pp. 135–210). New York,
NY: Wiley.
McNamee, G. (1987). The social origins of narrative skills. In M.
Hickman (Ed.), Social and functional approaches to language
and thought (pp. 287–304). San Diego: Academic Press.
Michaels, S. (1991). The dismantling of narrative. In A. McCabe &
C. Peterson’s (Eds.), Developing narrative structure (pp. 303–
351). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Miller, J. G. (1997). Theoretical issues in cultural psychology. In
J. W. Berry, Y. H. Poortinga, J. Pandey, P. R. Dasen, T. S.
Saraswathi, M. H. Segall, & C. Kagitçibasi, (Series Eds.) & J. W.
Berry, Y. H. Poortinga, & J. Pandey (Vol. Eds.), Handbook of
cross-cultural psychology: Vol. 1. Theory and method (2nd ed.,
pp. 85–128). Needham Heights, MA: Allyn and Bacon.
Miller, P. J., & Goodnow, J. J. (1995). Cultural practices: Toward an
integration of culture and development. In J. J. Goodnow, P. J.
Miller, & F. Kessel (Eds.), Cultural practices as contexts for
development (pp. 5–16). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Minami, M., & McCabe, A. (1991). Haiku as a discourse regulation
device: A stanza analysis of Japanese children’s personal narra-
tives. Language in Society, 20, 577–599.
Mishra, R. C. (1997). Cognition and cognitive development. In J. W.
Berry, Y. H. Poortinga, J. Pandey, P. R. Dasen, T. S. Saraswathi,
M. H. Segall, & C. Kagitçibasi (Series Eds.) & J. W. Berry, P. R.
Dasen, &T. S. Saraswathi (Vol. Eds.),Handbook of cross-cultural
psychology: Vol. 2. Basic processes and human development (2nd
ed., pp. 143–175). Needham Heights, MA:Allyn and Bacon.
Mistry, J. (1993). Cultural context in the development of
children’s narratives. In J. Altaribba (Ed.), Cognition and
culture: A cross-cultural approach to cognitive psychology
(pp. 207–228). Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Elsevier Press.
Mistry, J. (1997). The development of remembering in cultural con-
text. In N. Cowan (Ed.), The development of memory in children
(pp. 343–368). Sussex, UK: Pyschology Press.
Mistry, J., & Rogoff, B. (1994). Remembering in cultural context.
In W. Lonner & R. Malpass (Eds.), Psychology and culture
(pp. 139–144). Needham Heights, MA: Allyn and Bacon.
Mohanty, A. K., & Perregaux, C. (1997). Language acquisition and
bilingualism. In J. W. Berry, Y. H. Poortinga, J. Pandey, P. R.
Dasen, T. S. Saraswathi, M. H. Segall, & C. Kagitçibasi (Series
Eds.) & J. W. Berry, P. R. Dasen, & T. S. Saraswathi (Vol. Eds.),
Handbook of cross-cultural psychology: Vol. 2. Basic processes
and human development (2nd ed., pp. 217–253). Needham
Heights, MA: Allyn and Bacon.
Neisser, U., & Jopling, D. A. (Eds.). (1997). The conceptual self in
context: Culture, experience, self-understanding (pp. 13–61).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Nichols, P. C. (1989). Storytelling in Carolina: Continuities and
contrasts. Anthropology and Education Quarterly, 20, 232–245.
Nsamenang, B. A., & Lamb, M. E. (1994). Socialization of Nso chil-
dren in the Bamenda grassﬁelds of northwest Cameroon. In P. M.
Greenﬁeld & R. R. Cocking (Eds.), Cross-cultural roots of minor-
ity child development (pp. 133–146). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Paris, S. G., Newman, D. R., & Jacobs, J. E. (1985). Social contexts
and functions of children’s remembering. In C. J. Brainerd &
M. Pressley (Eds.), Cognitive learning and memory in children
(pp. 81–115). New York: Springer-Verlag.
Perlmutter, M. (1988). Research on memory and its development:
Past, present and future. In F. E. Weinert & M. Perlmutter (Eds.),
Memory development: Universal changes and individual differ-
ences (pp. 353–380). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Peterson, C., & McCabe, A. (1983). Developmental psycholinguis-
tics: Three ways of looking at a child’s narrative. New York:
Plenum.
Poortinga, Y. H. (1992). Towards a conceptualization of culture for
psychology. Cross-Cultural Psychology Bulletin, 24(3), 2–10.
Poortinga, Y. H. (1997). Towards convergence. In J. W. Berry, Y. H.
Poortinga, J. Pandey, P. R. Dasen, T. S. Saraswathi, M. H. Segall,
& C. Kagitçibasi (Series Eds.) & J. W. Berry, Y. H. Poortinga,
J. Pandey (Vol. Eds.), Handbook of cross-cultural psychology:
Vol. 1. Theory and method (2nd ed., pp. 347–387). Needham
Heights, MA: Allyn and Bacon.
Ramanujam, A. K. (1989). Is there an Indian way of thinking? An
informal essay. In M. Marriott (Ed.), India through Hindu cate-
gories (pp. 41–58). New Delhi, India: Sage Publications.
Ramanujam, B. K. (1979). Toward maturity: Problems of identity
seen in the Indian clinical setting. In S. Kakar (Ed.), Identity and
adulthood (pp. 37–55). Delhi, India: Oxford University Press.
Rodino, A., Gimbert, C., Perez, C., & McCabe, A. (1991). Getting
your point across: Contrastive sequencing in low-income African-
American and Latino children’s personal narratives. Paper

290
The Cultural Context of Child Development
presented at the Boston University Conference on Language
Development, Boston, MA.
Rogoff, B. (1981). Schooling and the development of cognitive
skills. In H. C. Triandis & A. Heron (Eds.), Handbook of cross-
cultural psychology: Vol. 4: Developmental Psychology. (pp. 233–
294). Rockleigh, NJ: Allyn and Bacon.
Rogoff, B. (1990). Apprenticeship in thinking. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Rogoff, B. (1998). Cognition as a collaborative process. In
W. Damon (Series Ed.) & D. Kuhn & R. S. Siegler (Vol. Eds.),
Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 2. Cognition, perception,
and language (pp. 679–744). New York: Wiley.
Rogoff, B., & Chavajay, P. (1995). What’s become of research on
the cultural basis of cognitive development? American Psychol-
ogist, 50 (10), 859–877.
Rogoff, B., & Gardner, W. P. (1984). Adult guidance of cognitive
development. In B. Rogoff & J. Lave (Eds.), Everyday cogni-
tion: Its development in social context (pp. 95–116). Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Rogoff, B., & Mistry, J. (1985). Memory development in cultural
context. In M. Pressley & C. Brainerd (Eds.), Cognitive learning
and memory in children (pp. 117–142). New York: Springer-
Verlag.
Rogoff, B., & Mistry, J. (1990). The social and functional context of
children’s memory skills. In R. Fivush, J. Hudson, & U. Neisser
(Eds.), Knowing and remembering in young children (pp. 197–
222). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Rogoff, B., Mistry, J., Göncü, A., & Mosier, C. (1993). Guided
participation in cultural activity by toddlers and caregivers.
Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development,
58 (8, Serial No. 236).
Rumelhart, D. E. (1975). Notes on a schema for stories. In D. G.
Bobrow & A. Collins (Eds.), Representation and understanding:
Studies in cognitive science (pp. 211–237). New York: Academic
Press.
Sachs, J. (1983). Talking about the there and then: The emergence of
displaced reference in parent-child discourse. In K. Nelson (Ed.),
Children’s language: Vol. 4 (pp. 1–28). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Sagi, A. (1990). Attachment theory and research from a cross-
cultural perspective. Human Development, 33, 10–22.
Sameroff, A. J. (1983). Developmental systems: Contexts and evo-
lution. In W. Kessen (Ed.), Handbook of child psychology:
Vol. 1. History, theory, and methods (pp. 237–294). New York:
Wiley.
Saraswathi, T. S., & Dasen, P. R. (1997). Introduction. In J. W. Berry,
Y. H. Poortinga, J. Panday, P. R. Dasen, & T. S. Saraswathi, M.
Segall, & C. Kagitçibasi (Series Eds.) & J. W. Berry, P. R. Dasen,
& T. S. Saraswathi (Vol. Eds.), Handbook of cross-cultural
psychology: Vol. 2. Basic processes and human development
(pp. 1–28). Needham Heights, MA: Allyn and Bacon.
Schieffelin, B. B., & Ochs, E. (Eds.). (1986). Language socialization
across cultures. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Schneider, W., & Bjorklund, D. F. (1998). Memory. In W. Damon
(Series Ed.) & D. Kuhn & R.S. Siegler (Vol. Eds.), Handbook of
child psychology: Vol. 2. Cognition, perception, and language
(5th ed., pp. 467–). New York: Wiley.
Schneider, W., & Pressley, M. (1989). Memory development be-
tween 2 and 20. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Scribner, S., & Cole, M. (1981). The psychology of literacy.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Segall, M. H. (1984). More than we need to know about culture, but
are afraid to ask. Journal of Cross-cultural Psychology, 15 (2),
153–162.
Segall, M. H., Campbell, D. T., & Herskovits, M. J. (1966). The in-
ﬂuence of culture on visual perception. Indianapolis, IN: Bobbs-
Merrill.
Segall, M. H., Dasen, P. R., Berry, J. W., & Poortinga, Y. H. (1999).
Human behavior in global perspective. New York: Elmsford.
Segall, M. H., Lonner, W. J., & Berry, J. W. (1998). Cross-cultural
psychology as a scholarly discipline: On the ﬂowering of cul-
ture in behavioral research. American Psychologist, 53 (10),
1101–1110.
Serpell, R. (1977). Strategies for investigating intelligence in its cul-
tural context. The Quarterly Newsletter of the Laboratory for
Comparative Human Development, 1, 11–15.
Serpell, R., & Hatano, G. (1997). Education, schooling, and literacy.
In J. W. Berry, Y. H. Poortinga, J. Panday, P. R. Dasen, T. S.
Saraswathi, M. Segall, & C. Kagitçibasi (Series Eds.) & J. W.
Berry, P. R. Dasen, & T. S. Saraswathi (Vol. Eds.), Handbook of
cross-cultural psychology: Vol. 2. Basic processes and human
development (pp. 339–376). Needham Heights, MA: Allyn and
Bacon.
Sharp, D., Cole, M., & Lave, J. (1979). Education and cognitive
development: The evidence from experimental research.
Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development,
44 (1–2, Serial No. 178).
Shweder, R. A. (1990). Cultural psychology: What is it? In J. W.
Stigler & G. Herdt (Eds.), Cultural psychology: Essays on com-
parative human development (pp. 1–43). Cambridge, MA:
Cambridge University Press.
Shweder, R. A. (1991). Thinking through cultures: Expeditions in
cultural psychology. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Shweder, R. A., & Bourne, E. J. (1991). Does the concept of the
person vary cross-culturally? In R. A. Shweder (Ed.), Thinking
through cultures: Expeditions in cultural psychology (pp. 113–
155). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Shweder, R. A., Goodnow, J., Hatano, G., LeVine, R. A., Markus,
H., & Miller, P. (1998). The cultural psychology of development:
One mind, many mentalities. In R. L. Lerner (Ed.), Handbook of
child psychology: Vol. 1. Theoretical models of human develop-
ment (pp. 865–938). New York: Wiley.
Shweder, R. A., & Miller, J. G. (1991). The social construction of
the person: How is it possible? In R. A. Shweder (Ed.), Thinking

References
291
through cultures: Expeditions in cultural psychology (pp. 156–
185). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Sinha, D. (1986). Psychology in a third world country: The Indian
experience. New Delhi, India: Sage.
Sinha, D. (1997). Indigenizing psychology. In J. W. Berry, Y. H.
Poortinga, J. Panday, P. R. Dasen, T. S. Saraswathi, M. Segall, &
C. Kagitçibasi (Series Eds.) & J. W. Berry, Y. H. Poortinga, &
J. Pandey (Vol. Eds.), Handbook of cross-cultural psychology:
Vol. 1. Theory and method (2nd ed., pp. 129–170.) Needham
Heights, MA: Allyn and Bacon.
Sinha, D., & Tripathi, R. C. (1994). Individualism in a collectivist
culture: A case of coexistence of opposites. In U. Kim, H. C.
Triandis, C. Kagitçibasi, S. C. Choi, & G. Yoon (Eds.), Individu-
alism and collectivism: Theory, method and applications
(pp. 123–136). London: Sage.
Sinha, J. B. P. (1980). The nurturant task leader. New Delhi, India:
Concept Publishing House.
Slobin, D. I. (Ed.). (1992). The cross-linguistic study of language
acquisition. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Snow, C. E. (1989). Understanding social interaction and language
acquisition; sentences are not enough. In M. H. Bornstein & J. S.
Bruner (Eds.), Interaction in human development (pp. 83–103).
New Jersey: LEA.
Snow, C. E., & Goldﬁeld, B. A. (1983). Turn the page please:
Situation-speciﬁc language acquisition. Journal of child
language, 10(3), 551–569.
Stein, N. L. (1988). The development of children’s storytelling skill.
In M. B. Franklin & S. S. Barten (Eds.), Child language: A
reader (pp. 282–297). New York: Oxford University Press.
Super, C., & Harkness, S. (1986). Developmental niche: A concep-
tualization at the interface of child and culture. International
Journal of Behavioral Development, 9, 545–569.
Tharp, R., & Gallimore, R. (1988). Rousing minds to life: Teaching,
learning, and schooling in social context. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Thelen, E., & Smith, L. B. (1998). Dynamic systems theories. In
W. Damon (Series Ed.) & R. M. Lerner (Vol. Ed.), Handbook of
child psychology: Vol. 1. Theoretical models of human develop-
ment (5th ed., pp. 563–633). New York: Wiley.
Thompson, R. (1998). Early sociopersonality development. In
W. Damon (Series Ed.) & N. Eisenberg (Vol. Ed.), Handbook of
child psychology: Vol. 3. Social, emotional, and personality
development (5th ed., pp. 25–104). New York: Wiley.
Triandis, H. C. (1980). Introduction to handbook of cross-cultural
psychology. In H. C. Triandis & W. W. Lambert (Eds.), Hand-
book of cross-cultural psychology: Vol. 1. Perspectives (pp. 1–14).
Boston, MA: Allyn and Bacon. 
Triandis, H. C. (1989). The self and social behavior in differing
cultural contexts. Psychological Review, 96(3), 506–520.
Triandis, H. C. (1994). Culture and social behavior. In W. J. Lonner
& R. Malpass (Eds.), Psychology and culture (pp. 169–174).
Needham Heights, MA: Allyn and Bacon.
Tylor, E. B. (1958). The origins of culture. New York: Harper and
Row. (Original work published 1871)
Valsiner, J. (1989). Human development and culture. Toronto:
Lexington Books.
Van Ijzendoorn, M. H., & Kroonenberg, P. M. (1988). Cross-cultural
patterns of attachment: A meta-analysis of the Strange Situation.
Child Development, 59, 147–156.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher
psychological processes. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Wagner, D. (1981). Culture and memory development. In H. C.
Triandis & A. Heron (Eds.), Handbook of cross-cultural
psychology: Vol. 4. Developmental Psychology (pp. 187–232).
Boston, MA: Allyn and Bacon.
Wagner, D. (1993). Literacy, culture, and development: Becoming
literate in Morocco. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Watson, K. (1975). Transferable communicative routines: Strategies
and group identity in two speech events. Language in Society,
4(1), 53–72.
Weinert, F. E., & Perlmutter, M. (Eds.). (1988). Memory develop-
ment: Universal changes and individual differences. Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Wellman, H. M. (1988). The early development of memory strate-
gies. In F. E. Weinert & M. Perlmutter (Eds.), Memory develop-
ment: Universal changes and individual differences (pp. 3–30).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Wertsch, J. V. (1978). Adult-child interaction and the roots of
metacognition. Quarterly Newsletter of the Institute for Compar-
ative Human Development, 2, 15–18.
Wertsch, J. V. (1985). Culture, communication, and cognition:
Vygotskian perspectives. NewYork: Cambridge University Press.
Wertsch, J. V. (1991). Voices of the mind. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Wertsch, J.V. (1995).The need for action in sociocultural research. In
J. V. Werstch, P. del Rio, &A. Alvarez (Eds.), Sociocultural stud-
ies of the mind (pp. 56–74). New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Wertsch, J. V., & Tulviste, P. (1992). L. S. Vygotsky and contempo-
rary developmental psychology. Developmental Psychology,
28(4), 548–557.
Whiting, B. B. (1976). The problem of the packaged variable. In
K. F. Riegel & J. A. Meacham (Eds.), The developing individual
in a changing world. Chicago, IL: Aldine.
Whiting, B. B., & Whiting, J. W. (1975). Children of six cultures: A
psycho-cultural analysis. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Wozniak, R. H., & Fischer, K. W. (1993). Development in context:
Acting and thinking in speciﬁc environments. Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.


PART FOUR
ADOLESCENCE


295
CHAPTER 12
Puberty, Sexuality, and Health
ELIZABETH J. SUSMAN, LORAH D. DORN, AND VIRGINIA L. SCHIEFELBEIN
THEORIES AND MODELS OF PUBERTY
AND ADJUSTMENT
295
Developmental Contextualism
296
Holistic Interactionism
297
WHAT IS PUBERTY?
298
Phases of Puberty: Adrenarche and Gonadarche
298
Mechanisms Controlling the Onset of Puberty
298
Growth at Puberty
300
PUBERTY AND CHANGES IN EMOTIONS
AND BEHAVIOR
301
Testosterone and Behavior
301
Estrogen and Behavior
303
Adrenal Androgens
304
TIMING OF PUBERTY AND PSYCHOSOCIAL
DEVELOPMENT
305
Early and Late Pubertal Timing
305
Theoretical and Methodological Issues
306
PUBERTY AND ADOLESCENT HEALTH: CULTURAL
SIGNIFICANCE AND SECULAR CHANGE
307
Secular Changes in Timing of Puberty
307
Puberty and Adolescent Health
308
Puberty and Adult Health
309
Timing of Puberty and Stress
310
Puberty and Sexuality
312
IMPLICATIONS FOR RESEARCH AND
SOCIAL POLICY
314
Content of Programs on Puberty
314
Timing of Puberty and Prevention
315
Research and Theory Development
315
REFERENCES
316
Puberty, the passage from childhood to adulthood, fascinates
scientists, parents, and adolescents alike. This fascination
originates from its complexity, rapid and pervasive physical
growth, profound psychological changes, and sexual awak-
ening. Puberty is perceived to contribute to the turbulence
and stress experienced by some adolescents.
Fortunately, over the last few decades, the conception of
adolescence as a period of storm and stress (Blos, 1962; Hall,
1904) is being replaced by a more balanced view of adoles-
cence as a period when biological, cognitive, emotional, and
social functioning becomes reorganized. The majority of
adolescents are viewed as experiencing neither maladjust-
ment nor grossly undesirable behaviors.
Along with the reconceptualization of adolescence great
strides have been made in developing interdisciplinary mod-
els of puberty that realistically portray the diversity of path-
ways through which adolescents progress from childhood to
adulthood. Because of the myriad biological and psychologi-
cal changes that characterize it, puberty engenders scientiﬁc
interests that span the social, behavioral, medical and life
sciences. Research foci include the biological and social
mechanisms that initiate puberty, the timing of puberty, and
the interactive inﬂuences among hormones, physical growth
changes, emotions, problem behavior, cognition, and sexual
activity. This chapter presents a summary of two predomi-
nant models of development at puberty as well as current per-
spectives on the biological processes of puberty, timing of
puberty and psychological development, secular trends in
timing of puberty, puberty and sexuality, and implications for
theory, research, and social policy.
THEORIES AND MODELS OF PUBERTY
AND ADJUSTMENT
The biological processes of puberty historically were inte-
grated with the psychological processes at a conceptual level.
In fact, in the early twentieth century perspectives on adoles-
cent development featured the centrality of biological
processes in psychological development. In contrast, at an
empirical level, research tended to focus either on biological
and health issues or on social, emotional, and contextual

296
Puberty, Sexuality, and Health
processes in adolescent development but seldom on the inter-
actions between biological, psychological, and contextual
processes. Contextualism, behaviorism, and learning theory
supplanted theories of development and evolution that domi-
nated the early twentieth century (S. T. Parker, 2000). The
empirical research reﬂected the predominant interest in con-
textual inﬂuences on development.
A turning point in the integration of puberty with biologi-
cal, psychological, and contextual processes was the publica-
tion of Girls at Puberty (Brooks-Gunn & Petersen, 1983),
followed shortly thereafter by models that incorporated the
reciprocal interactions among biological, psychological, and
contextual processes that contribute to the experience of
puberty (Lerner & Foch, 1987; D. Magnusson, 1981;
D. Magnusson, Stattin, & Allen, 1985). Subsequent to the ar-
ticulation of these theories, empirical studies linking puberty-
related hormones and psychological development began to
appear in the literature. These studies addressed issues of ag-
gressive behavior (Susman et al., 1985, 1987), adjustment
(Nottelmann et al., 1987), depressed mood (Brooks-Gunn &
Warren, 1989), and sexuality (Udry, Billy, & Morris, 1986;
Udry, Billy, Morris, Groff, & Raj, 1985; Udry & Talbert,
1988). These studies integrated rather than compartmental-
ized psychological, biological, and contextual inﬂuences on
development.
An early example of this integration was the recognition
of the interdependence of family interactions and the adoles-
cent’s stage of pubertal development (e.g., Steinberg, 1988;
Steinberg & Hill, 1978). In later theoretical perspectives
integrating biological and psychological processes, no single
level of functioning is viewed as primary or as the ultimate
causal inﬂuence on development. Rather, development is
characterized by reciprocal interaction, bidirectionality, plas-
ticity, and organization (Cairns, 1997; Cairns & Rodkin,
1998; Lerner, 1998; D. Magnusson & Stattin, 1998). Systems
or conﬁgural views of development are considered para-
mount with processes from different levels viewed as equal
forces in development (Ford & Lerner, 1992; Susman, 1998).
Within this perspective, the physical maturational, hormonal,
and psychological processes of puberty interact to create the
diversity of changes at adolescence.
Two compatible and overlapping theoretical perspectives
exemplify the integration of biological, psychological, and
contextual inﬂuences on adolescent development: develop-
mental contextualism and holistic interactionism.
Developmental Contextualism
The developmental contextualism model of adolescence,
proposed by Lerner (1998), parallels modern life-span
developmental theories. The life-span perspective is a set of
ideas about the nature of human development and change
from birth to death. This perspective is concerned with issues
of the embeddedness of evolution and ontogeny, of consis-
tency and change, of human plasticity, and of the role the de-
veloping person plays in his or her own development (Lerner,
1987). Within the developmental contextual perspective, in-
dividuals are viewed as producers of their own development
(Brandtstaedter & Lerner, 1999): The theory embodies the
notion of the dynamic interactions between individuals and
the multiple contexts within which they live. With reference
to adolescence, the biological changes of puberty both inﬂu-
ence and reciprocally are inﬂuenced by psychological, be-
havioral, and social inﬂuences (Lerner, 1987; Lerner & Foch,
1987). Key concepts of the developmental contextualism
perspective relevant to puberty are embeddedness, dynamic
interactionism, and plasticity.
Embeddedness encompasses the notion that the phe-
nomena of human life exist at multiple levels of being:
inner-biological, individual-psychological, social network,
community, societal, cultural, and the larger physical ecology
and historical contexts. The biological, psychological, and
social aspects of change are embedded in the contexts of de-
velopment. Contexts of development include family, peers,
and the multiple social institutions that surround the develop-
ing individual. The levels are not interdependent; rather, the
processes at one level inﬂuence and are inﬂuenced by the
processes at the other levels.
Dynamic interactionism refers to the dynamic interaction
among the levels of analysis. This concept is especially
central to integrating the biological and social contextual
aspects of pubertal development. In contrast to a previous
view that biological processes are deterministic or causal,
dynamic interaction concepts embody the notion that biolog-
ical processes and substances are dynamic and simultane-
ously inﬂuence and are inﬂuenced by the psychological and
social contextual levels of analysis. For instance, genes no
longer are considered purely deterministic inﬂuences on de-
velopment. Instead, they are viewed as requiring a speciﬁc
environment to be expressed. Furthermore, genetic inﬂu-
ences are not static but shift with development (Rowe, 1999).
Genes responsible for pubertal development, such as genes
related to gonadotropin releasing hormone (GnRH), begin to
express mRNA in late childhood, leading to a cascade of hor-
monal growth and psychological changes. Genes, the indi-
vidual, and the environment consistently are in a state of
dynamic interaction.
Plasticity evolves from the notion that the potential for
change exists across the life span in the multiple levels of or-
ganization that characterize the developing human (Lerner,

Theories and Models of Puberty and Adjustment
297
1998). Contemporary theorists emphasize relative plasticity
throughout the life span (Lerner, 1998). Relative plasticity im-
plies that across the lifetime, intra-individual development is
constrained.All developmental modiﬁcations are not possible,
and all possible variations are not desirable (Brandtstaedter,
1998). Development and systematic change have constraints
imposed both from endogenous (e.g., genetic) and exogenous
(e.g., legal sanctions) constraints.
With regard to puberty, social and nutritional circum-
stances affect the timing of puberty, yet the normal age
range for the onset of puberty is constrained by genetic in-
ﬂuences. The normative current age range varies from 9 to
15 years for girls and 10 to 16 for boys, although this range
may be broadening (see the section titled “Phases of
Puberty: Adrenarche and Gonadarche”). Beyond this age
range, plasticity in the timing of puberty becomes replaced
by an abnormal or pathophysiological condition that re-
quires evaluation and intervention. In brief, only a subset of
variations in puberty is compatible with the natural laws of
development.
Plasticity is inﬂuenced by the individual’s experiential
history in interaction with the multiple contexts of develop-
ment. Behaviors, social contexts, and nutrition are hypothe-
sized to affect the relative plasticity of timing of puberty.
For instance, boys with a history of aggressive, disruptive
behavior with peers and family were later in their pubertal
development and were lower on testosterone than were
their nondisruptive peers (Schaal, Tremblay, Soussignan, &
Susman, 1996). Overall, the study of plasticity involves
scrutiny of the history of dynamic organism-context interac-
tions or the fusion of nature and nurture (Lerner, 1998).
Plasticity is a feature neither of nature nor of nurture but
rather the fusion of the dynamic interactions between nature
and nurture.
Viewed from the developmental contextualism perspec-
tive, development at puberty is the product of the dynamic in-
teractions among psychological, biological, and contextual
processes. These processes reciprocally and bidirectionally
inﬂuence each other (Lerner & Foch, 1987). Processes at dif-
ferent levels of functioning are not independent but are
merged throughout puberty. The physical and hormonal man-
ifestations of puberty are a product of a species genotype. Yet
the experiential history of adolescents and the contexts for
social interactions can interact with genes to change the tim-
ing and tempo of puberty. Puberty is, then, a process of
change and the product of a complex interaction among
genotype, brain-behavior, and context. No one research pro-
ject can test these multiple reciprocal inﬂuences on adoles-
cent development. Rather, the developmental contextual
model acts as a guide for selecting constructs and measures to
be considered in the conceptual framework and design of a
speciﬁc study.
Holistic Interactionism
A basic proposition of holistic interactionism’s theoretical
framework is that the individual is an active, intentional part
of an integrated complex, dynamic, and adaptive person-
environment system who develops in that context from the
fetal period until death (D. Magnusson, 1999). The holistic in-
teractionism model of development can be summarized in a
set of fundamental principles (D. Magnusson & Cairns,
1996): An individual (a) develops as an integrated organism
(b) in a dynamic, continuous, and reciprocal process of inter-
action with the environment. This functioning (c) depends on
and inﬂuences the reciprocal interaction among subsystems
within the individual (perceptual, cognitive, emotional, phys-
iological, morphological, and neurobiological). (d) Novel pat-
terns of functioning arise during ontogeny, and (e) differences
in the rates of development, such as differences in timing of
puberty, may produce differences in the organization and con-
ﬁguration of psychological functions that are (f) extremely
sensitive to the environmental circumstances in which they
are formed, particularly the environment as it is perceived and
interpreted by the individual. It follows that an individual is
viewed as an active, intentional part of an integrated complex,
dynamic, and adaptive person-environment system.
Furthermore, within this person-environment system, the
individual functions and develops as an integrated organism
in which biological, psychological, and behavioral factors
operate in reciprocal interaction and dependency within inte-
grated multidetermined, dynamic, and adaptive processes
(Magnusson, 1999). Each aspect of the structures and
processes that are operating in the individual (perceptions,
plans, values, goals, motives, biological factors, and con-
duct), as well as each aspect of the environment, takes on
meaning from its role in the total functioning of the individ-
ual. A speciﬁc element derives its signiﬁcance not from its
structure or function per se, but from its role in the system of
which it forms a part. From a holistic interactionism perspec-
tive, development at puberty takes on meaning not from
physical change per se but from its meaning to the adolescent
in relation to psychological attributes, experiences, the tim-
ing of the change relative to peers, and its role as a social sig-
nal. Physical development is a signal that a child is becoming
an adolescent, and this new status implies new social roles
and responsibilities in the societal and cultural system in
which the individual develops.
The holistic nature of the functioning of the integrated or-
ganism is that normally a psychological-biological process

298
Puberty, Sexuality, and Health
cannot be determined by a single factor. As a consequence of
the holistic nature of humans, the processes cannot be subdi-
vided into independent parts in the analysis of the integrated
organism’s way of functioning. To understand and explain
the role of a speciﬁc element in the functioning and devel-
opment of an individual, it has to be analyzed in the context
of the relevant system to which it belongs. Applied to the
current instance, psychological and behavioral processes
at puberty (e.g., aggressive behavior) cannot be under-
stood without an awareness of the biological and contex-
tual processes that simultaneously inﬂuence the adolescent.
These processes range from the molecular and cellular levels
to the level of the individual as an active, intentional part of
an integrated sociocultural person-environment system.
Within a holistic interactionist view, developmental pro-
cesses are accessible to systematic, scientiﬁc inquiry because
they occur in a speciﬁc way within organized structures and
are guided by speciﬁc principles. The claim for a holistic
view on individual development implies that any theoretical
or empirical analysis of developmental processes has to be
performed with reference to a complex set of phenomena.
This view does not imply that all aspects of puberty need to
be considered simultaneously. Rather, the interpretation of
ﬁndings at one level of functioning should be made by inte-
grating the ﬁndings to levels above and below the level of
empirical veriﬁcation. An investigation of hormones at the
physiological level and emotions at the psychological level
can more meaningfully be interpreted by simultaneously con-
sidering the social (peer or family) levels of analysis.
WHAT IS PUBERTY?
Puberty encompasses a wide variety of phenomena, as re-
ﬂected in the following deﬁnition: “Puberty is a transitional
period between childhood and adulthood, during which a
growth spurt occurs, secondary sexual characteristics appear,
fertility is achieved, and profound psychological changes
take place” (National Research Council, 1999, p. 1).
Phases of Puberty: Adrenarche and Gonadarche
Historically, puberty refers to the stage of development char-
acterized by maturation of the reproductive system. Puberty
now is considered to have two components, adrenarche and
gonadarche, which are thought to be independent events
controlled by separate mechanisms (Counts et al., 1987),
although the mechanisms separating these periods remain
controversial.
The ﬁrst component of puberty, adrenarche (awakening
of the adrenal glands), begins between the ages of 6 and
9 years. At adrenarche, the adrenal androgen concentra-
tions begin to rise (Forest, 1989; Grumbach & Styne, 1992),
but hormones of the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal (HPG)
axis, testosterone and estrogen, are initially quiescent.
The adrenal androgens continue to increase throughout
gonadarche and include dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA),
dehydroepiandrosterone sulphate (DHEAS) and androstene-
dione (∆4-A). The initial hormonal increases in adrenal
androgen secretion occur prior to external physical changes,
such as pubic hair development. The exact mechanism
responsible for the onset of adrenarche is controversial,
although recent evidence suggests that adrenocorticotropic
hormone (ACTH; Weber, Clark, Perry, Honour, & Savage,
1997) or 3-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase plays a signiﬁcant
role in the regulation of adrenarche (Gell et al., 1998).
Adrenarche is severely understudied in relation to emotions
and behavior change, an unfortunate happenstance given
ﬁndings linking adrenarche and behavior (Brooks-Gunn &
Warren, 1989; Susman et al., 1987). In addition, a recent
study showed that premature-adrenarche children have sig-
niﬁcantly more behavior problems and psychopathology than
do age-matched peers (Dorn, Hitt, & Rotenstein, 1999).
(Findings relating adrenal androgens to behavior are dis-
cussed later.)
The second component of puberty, gonadarche, is the reac-
tivation of the hypothalamic-pituitary gonadotropin-gonadal
system, which initially had been activated during fetal and
early infant development. Gonadarche begins at approxi-
mately age 9 to 10 years in White girls and at 8 to 9 years
in African American girls (Herman-Giddens et al., 1997)
and at 10 to 11 years in boys (Grumbach & Styne, 1992).
Gonadarche is what most individuals refer to as “puberty” and
entails sexual maturation and reproductive maturity. At go-
nadarche, HPG-axis activation and physical maturation result
in the development of the primary sexual characteristics
(testes and ovaries) and secondary sexual characteristics
(pubic hair, body hair, and genital and breast growth). The
culmination of gonadarche and reproductive function is
menarche for girls and spermarche for boys.
Mechanisms Controlling the Onset of Puberty
Neural Control of Puberty
In the last two decades major advances have been made in
explaining the physiology of puberty from the molecular
level to the whole-organism level. Given that puberty
(gonadarche) marks the development of reproductive capa-
bility, the physiology of puberty becomes synonymous with
that of reproductive maturation. Gonadarche occurs when the

What is Puberty?
299
GnRH pulse generator (neurons in the medial basal hypo-
thalamus) is reactivated or reaugmented (Knobil, 1988;
Medhamurthy, Gay, & Plant, 1990; Tersawa, Bridson, Nass,
Noonan, & Dierschke, 1984) and gonadal sex steroid hor-
mone secretion increases. The mechanism for understanding
the control system that deﬁnes timing of puberty and the neu-
robiological basis of this reaugmentation of the GnRH pulse
generator continues to be speculative (Plant, 1995; Suter,
Pohl, & Plant, 1998). Much of what we do know about pu-
berty is based on a nonhuman primate model. In humans, re-
search on the onset of puberty is much more difﬁcult to carry
out because frequent serial sampling of blood at night in pre-
pubertal children is required as gonadotropin pulsatile secre-
tion ﬁrst occurs at night. In addition, very sensitive assays are
required for detection of low concentrations of gonadotropins
and gonadal steroids. Thus, few human studies are available
on the onset of puberty, and in those that do exist, the sample
size is small and not likely to be representative of the general
population.
Hormone and growth changes at puberty are the conse-
quence of complicated neuroendocrine processes. In the
early days of research on the endocrine component of pu-
berty, the emphasis was on speciﬁc releasing hormones or
speciﬁc hormones such as testosterone and estrogen. The em-
phasis now is on the neural (Plant, 1998) and genetic control
of puberty. Speciﬁcally, the identiﬁcation of speciﬁc genes
and the expression of genes responsible for the onset and pro-
gression of puberty now are the focus of study. Given these
advances, the most widely accepted explanation of the onset
of puberty is the expression of genes controlling the GnRH
pulse generator and the reactivation of the HPG axis. In addi-
tion, the cortex, limbic system, and neurotransmitter systems
modulate hypothalamic function (Brooks-Gunn & Reiter,
1990) and thus puberty.
Weight, Body Fat, and the Onset of Puberty
Various theories posit additional factors contributing to the
onset of puberty in combination with programmed genetic in-
ﬂuences. One earlier theory posits that critical body mass
must be attained before puberty (speciﬁcally, menarche as an
index of puberty) will occur (Frisch, 1984). The ﬁndings in-
dicated that menarche is dependent on the maintenance of a
minimum weight for height, likely representing a critical fat
storage level (Frisch & McArthur, 1974). Undernutrition also
delays puberty in boys. Fat may inﬂuence reproductive abil-
ity in girls through two mechanisms: (a) Fat converts andro-
gens to estrogens that are critical to regular menstrual cycles
and the maintenance of pregnancy, and (b) relative fatness
inﬂuences the direction of estrogen metabolism from its least
to most potent form (Frisch, 1984). It was hypothesized that
absolute and relative amounts of fat are important because
the individual must be large enough to reproduce success-
fully. This theory largely fell from wide acceptance. Somatic
growth and maturation at puberty are now considered to be
inﬂuenced by several additional factors that act interdepen-
dently to inﬂuence the onset of puberty.
Leptin and Puberty
Discovery of the hormone leptin led to the theory that it may
be a signal allowing for the initiation of and progression to-
ward puberty (Mantzoros, Flier, & Rogol, 1997). An alterna-
tive perspective is that leptin is implicated in the onset of
puberty but may not be the cause of the onset. Leptin is a
16-kDa adipocyte-secreted protein, a product of the obesity
gene. Serum leptin levels reﬂect mainly the amount of energy
stores but are also inﬂuenced by short-term energy imbalance
as well as several cytokines (indexes of immune system func-
tion) and hormones (Mantzoros, 2000). Leptin is implicated
in the initiation of puberty, energy expenditure, normal men-
strual cycles, fertility, maintenance of pregnancy, and nutri-
tion. Speciﬁcally, leptin may well be one of the messenger
molecules signaling the adequacy of the fat stores for repro-
duction and maintenance of pregnancy at puberty (Kiess
et al., 1999). The possible mechanism involves leptin as a
hormone that serves to signal the brain with information on
the critical amount of fat stores that are necessary for
luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH) secretion
and activation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA)
axis. Moreover, circadian and ultradian variations of leptin
levels are also associated with minute-to-minute variations of
LH and estradiol in normal women (Mantzoros, 2000). The
mechanisms whereby leptin regulates body weight, adiposity,
and the hormones that increase at puberty (e.g., testosterone
and estrogen) are not yet known.
Controlling for adiposity, leptin is higher in girls than in
boys (Blum et al., 1997). At the initiation of puberty, circu-
lating leptin concentrations diverge in boys and girls. In boys
leptin concentrations increase and then markedly decrease
to prepubertal concentration levels in late puberty. In con-
trast, in girls there are increasing concentrations at puberty
(Roemmich & Rogol, 1999). The increase in leptin is be-
lieved to result from alterations in the regional distribution of
body fat in boys and girls at puberty. Overall, sex differences
in leptin concentrations are accountable to differences in the
amounts of subcutaneous fat in girls and greater androgen
concentrations in boys (Roemmich et al., 1998).
The biological effects of leptin in adult humans are still
to be determined, but reports show that congenital leptin

300
Puberty, Sexuality, and Health
deﬁciency leads to hyperphagia and excessive weight gain
from early infancy onward as well as failure of pubertal onset
in adolescence (Ong, Ahmed, & Dunger, 1999). Leptin con-
centrations also are higher in girls with premature adrenarche
than in girls with on-time adrenarche (Cizza et al., 2001).
Leptin concentrations have not yet been examined in rela-
tion to behavior changes at puberty, but leptin provides a
promising biological probe for understanding physiological
pubertal processes and issues of body image, self-esteem,
and behavior at puberty.
Growth at Puberty
It is well known that pubertal growth includes a signiﬁcant
increase in height, or linear growth, as well as changes in
body size and proportions. Puberty brings on the most rapid
rate of linear growth since infancy (Rogol, Roemmich, &
Clark, 1998). Rate of linear growth slows throughout child-
hood and reaches a low point just before the growth spurt
(Tanner, 1989). The growth spurt refers to a rapid increase in
linear growth at puberty. The timing and magnitude of the
growth spurt is different for girls and boys. Girls grow an av-
erage of 25 cm with a peak rate of 9 cm per year at about age
12 (Marshall & Tanner, 1969). Boys grow more than girls,
but their growth occurs later than in girls because they grow
at an average of 28 cm with a peak rate of 10.3 cm per year at
about age 14 (Marshall & Tanner, 1970). Tanner (1989) de-
scribed much of what is known about growth and changes in
physical proportions. The rapid increase in height in boys is
largely due to faster growth in trunk length than in leg length,
particularly since leg length peaks about 6 to 9 months before
trunk length does (Tanner, 1989). However, the legs and
trunk are not the only parts of the body that are growing.
Adolescents show some increase in head diameter, an aspect
of growth that has otherwise been basically dormant since the
ﬁrst few years of age. The skull bones also demonstrate an
increase in thickness of about 15% (Tanner, 1989). Growth
arrest occurs as a result of epiphyseal fusion (Cohen &
Rosenfeld, 1996) or ossiﬁcation (hardening) of the ends of
long bones.
The main regulator of growth is growth hormone (GH), a
hormone produced in the anterior pituitary. GH is secreted at
puberty, ﬁrst at night, followed by surges during the day in
later stages of puberty. The hypothalamic hormones, growth
hormone releasing hormone (GHRH) and somatostatin,
stimulate and inhibit GH secretion, respectively (Cohen &
Rosenfeld, 1996). The increase in GH at puberty parallels the
growth spurt. Other endocrine factors inﬂuence growth, such
as thyroid hormone and glucocorticoids. Sex steroids, pri-
marily testosterone and estrogen, also facilitate growth at
puberty. Many nonendocrine growth factors are implicated in
growth, the largest of which are genetic inﬂuences that
control the growth rate, age of puberty, and adult height
(Cohen & Rosenfeld, 1996). Growth also can be affected by
nutrition, physical activity, and stressors.
In addition to height and other linear measurements, body
weight increases dramatically during puberty. Fifty percent
of adult body weight is gained during adolescence (Rogol
et al., 1998). As with height, girls reach their peak growth in
weight earlier than boys, but boys show a greater increase in
weight than girls. Girls’ average rate of weight gain peaks at
8.3 kg per year at about 12.5 years of age and about 6 months
after their peak height increase (Barnes, 1975; Tanner, 1965).
Boys’ peak weight gain of 9 kg per year occurs at about the
same time (14 years) as their peak increase in height (Barnes,
1975; Tanner, 1965).
Along with the increase in body weight, body composition
also changes at puberty. The changes in body composition are
quite different for boys and girls. Girls reach the fat-free mass
of a young woman by about 15 to 16 years of age (Rogol
et al., 1998). Fat mass also increases by about 1.14 kg per
year, and it increases to a greater extent than the fat-free
mass, meaning that girls have a net increase in percentage of
body fat (Rogol et al., 1998). Girls’ body fat is redistributed
during puberty in a female-speciﬁc pattern. The deposition
rate of subcutaneous fat on girls’ limbs decreases (Tanner,
1989), while estrogens promote fat deposition at the breasts,
thighs, and buttocks (Sherwood, 1993). Another source of the
body mass increase in girls is a deposition of skeletal miner-
als. Girls accumulate almost one third of their total bone min-
eral within 3 to 4 years after beginning puberty (Bonjour,
Theintz, Buchs, Slosman, & Rizzoli, 1991; Slemeda et al.,
1994). The importance of emphasizing good nutrition and ex-
ercise in fostering bone accretion during puberty has not been
public health policy. Therefore, an important opportunity to
prevent osteoporosis later in development may have been
missed by many women.
Body composition in boys follows a very different pattern.
Boys’fat-free mass increases faster and for a longer period of
time than in girls, and boys reach the fat-free mass of a young
man at about 19 to 20 years of age (Rogol et al., 1998). Dur-
ing this time of increase in fat-free mass, boys maintain a
fairly constant fat mass, so they show a net decrease in per-
centage of body fat (Rogol et al., 1998). The skeletal mineral
accumulation in boys also differs from that of girls. Boys ac-
cumulate bone mineral content for a longer period of time
after the pubertal growth spurt, and they have substantial in-
creases in mineralization between 15 and 18 years of age
(Rogol et al., 1998), which may explain the lower incidence
of osteoporosis in men than in women.
The sex differences in growth and especially in body-
composition changes during puberty result in the typical

Puberty and Changes in Emotions and Behavior
301
female and male body types (Rogol et al., 1998). There are
other sex differences in how body and facial structure change
during puberty in addition to the previously discussed differ-
ences in height, weight, fat-free mass, body fat and its dis-
tribution, and skeletal mineralization. Adolescent girls
experience a large spurt in hip width, a spurt that is quantita-
tively as great as boys’ growth even though girls’ growth is
less in almost all other dimensions (Tanner, 1989). Boys
demonstrate a large increase in shoulder width (Tanner,
1989). The differences in these body proportions are due to
the responsiveness of cartilage cells in the hip to estrogens
and of the shoulder cartilage cells to androgens, particularly
testosterone (Tanner, 1989). Another sex difference is that the
later growth spurt of boys results in the greater leg length typ-
ical of males (Tanner, 1989): boys’ legs grow for a longer
period of time than do girls’. Finally, facial features change
over the course of puberty, with the forehead becoming more
prominent, the jaws growing forward, and facial muscles de-
veloping, although these changes tend to be much more pro-
nounced in boys than in girls (Tanner, 1989). Facial structure
in girls is rounder and softer than it is angular.
Secondary Sexual Characteristics
Secondary sexual characteristics refer to breast and pubic
hair development in girls and genital and pubic hair develop-
ment in boys. These changes have been carefully described
and fall into ﬁve stages (Marshall & Tanner, 1969, 1970; pic-
tures of these ﬁve stages appear in these references; see also
Brooks-Gunn & Reiter, 1990). However, the description of
stages of puberty has been done only for White adolescents;
therefore, little information exists regarding pubertal changes
in populations throughout the world. Adolescent, parent, or
health-professional ratings of the ﬁve stages are frequently
used in research assessing the relationship between pubertal
development and psychological development, although the
most well-accepted rating is that of a trained health care pro-
fessional. Important to note is that there is wide variability in
the timing and rate of pubertal development. This variability
is normal yet may be distressful from the perspective of indi-
vidual adolescents as their early or late maturation renders
them different from same-age peers.
PUBERTY AND CHANGES IN EMOTIONS
AND BEHAVIOR
Puberty long has been considered a progenitor of changes in
moods and behavior. Until the last two decades, studies of
behavior change at puberty considered only physical mor-
phological characteristics in assessing biological change.
These physical changes were considered in relation to
psychological processes and the various ecological contexts
of development that included family, peers, neighborhood,
and socioeconomic factors. This perspective now has been
enriched by studies that include actual biological substances,
such as hormones, that are essential for establishing the direct
effects of biological changes at puberty, as well as physical
characteristics and contextual factors in development. Over-
all, hormones have a stronger relationship to emotions and
behavior than does pubertal stage.
Contemporary biopsychosocial theories reﬂect the theo-
retical perspectives discussed earlier: developmental contex-
tualism and holistic interactionism. “A biobehavioral science
recognizes that behaviors are simultaneously determined by
processes within the individual, in the social ecology, and in
interactions between the two. A focus on either social or bio-
logical factors can yield only part of the story of aggressive
and violent behaviors: integrative investigations are essential
to complete the picture” (Cairns & Stoff, 1996, p. 338). In the
last decade the empirical research on hormones and behavior
during adolescence reﬂects this integrated perspective.
Adolescent increases in depression, aggressive and delin-
quent behavior, and sexual activity have been attributed to
changes in hormones and physical morphological changes,
brain changes (Giedd et al., 1999; Lange, Giedd, Castellanos,
Vaituzis, & Rapoport, 1997; Zijdenbos et al., 1999), altered
reactivity to stressors (e.g., life events), and cognitive
changes (Bebbington et al., 1998; Nolen-Hoeksema &
Girgus, 1994). The links between the biological changes at
puberty and changes in affective qualities and aggressive be-
havior have been extensively reviewed (Brain, 1994; Brain &
Susman, 1997; Petersen, 1988; Susman & Finkelstein, 2001;
Susman & Petersen, 1992). Given these comprehensive
reviews, a brief summary of changes in behavior and affec-
tive qualities will be considered in relation to the two groups
of hormones most often examined at puberty: sex steroids
(testosterone and estrogen) and adrenal androgens (4-A,
DHEA, and DHEAS).
Testosterone and Behavior
Products of the endocrine system, principally the steroid hor-
mone testosterone, are implicated in physical aggression in
animals and antisocial behavior in adolescents and adults, but
the ﬁndings are not entirely consistent across human model
studies (see Archer, 1991; Brain, 1994, for extensive reviews
of both animal and human model studies). The effects of
steroid hormones like testosterone on antisocial behavior are
hypothesized to derive from the regulatory functions of
hormones on brain development that occur during pre- and
postnatal periods (organizational inﬂuences) as well as in
later development (activational inﬂuences). Because males

302
Puberty, Sexuality, and Health
are exposed to higher concentrations of androgens than
females during pre- and postnatal development and because
males tend to express greater physical aggression, androgens
are implicated in the higher incidence of physical aggression
and dominance in boys than in girls. Because testosterone
rises at puberty and antisocial behavior also rises at puberty,
testosterone is assumed to affect antisocial behavior at
puberty.
Evidence for the relationship between testosterone and
aggressive behavior is derived from both correlational and
experimental studies. Olweus, Mattson, Schalling, and Low
(1988) examined the causal role of testosterone in older ado-
lescents on provoked and unprovoked aggression. Based on
path analysis, the ﬁndings showed that at Grade 9 testos-
terone exerts a direct causal inﬂuence on provoked ag-
gressive behavior. Testosterone appeared to lower the boys’
frustration tolerance at Grade 9. Ahigher level of testosterone
appears to lead to an increased readiness to respond with
vigor and assertion to provocation and threat. For unpro-
voked aggressive behavior (starting ﬁghts and verbal aggres-
sion) at Grade 9, the ﬁndings were somewhat different.
Testosterone had no direct effects on unprovoked aggressive
behavior. There was an indirect effect of testosterone with
low frustration tolerance as the mediating variable. The au-
thors conclude that higher levels of testosterone made the
boys more impatient and irritable, in turn increasing readi-
ness to engage in unprovoked aggressive behavior. The ﬁnd-
ings of the Olweus et al. studies are consistent with a study of
midadolescent boys. Adolescents higher in testosterone lev-
els did exhibit behaviors that are distinguishable from be-
havior in boys with lower concentrations of testosterone.
Adolescent boys’ perceptions of peer dominance were re-
ﬂected in testosterone concentrations (Schaal et al., 1996;
Tremblay et al., 1997). Testosterone was signiﬁcantly higher
in perceived leaders than in nonleaders.
A negative relationship between testosterone and behavior
problems was reported in healthy young boys (Susman et al.,
1987). In contrast, there was no relationship between di-
agnoses of conduct disorder problems and testosterone
(Constantino et al., 1993). The low concentration of testos-
terone in 4- to 10-year-old children in combination with the
older relatively insensitive assays made the measurement of
testosterone difﬁcult in young boys.
In girls, testosterone was not related to aggressive behav-
ior in two studies (Brooks-Gunn & Warren, 1989; Susman
et al., 1987). Furthermore, testosterone was not related to
dominance behaviors when young adolescent boys and girls
interacted with their parents (Inoff-Germain et al., 1988). It
is noteworthy that the associations between antisocial be-
havior and testosterone are less apparent in girls and in male
children and younger adolescents (Brooks-Gunn & Warren,
1989; Constantino et al., 1993; Nottelmann et al., 1987) than
in the associations in older adolescents (Olweus, 1986;
Olweus et al., 1988) and adults (see review by Archer, 1991).
These inconsistencies should be expected given the different
constructs and measures used in the studies. Questionnaires
that assess aggressive behavior may not have adequate sen-
sitivity for capturing subtle differences in the behavior of
adolescents that covary with testosterone levels. The devel-
opmental differences in ﬁndings between children, adoles-
cents, and adults indicate that elevated testosterone and
antisocial behavior may be a consequence as opposed to a
cause of aggressive behavior during adulthood (Constantino
et al., 1993; Susman, Worrall, Murowchick, Frobose, &
Schwab, 1996). Boys who consistently displayed disruptive
behavior problems across 6 years were signiﬁcantly lower on
testosterone than were boys who were not disruptive and who
were later in pubertal maturation (Schaal et al., 1996). The
effect of antisocial behavior on suppression of gonadal
steroids may result from higher concentrations of stress-
related products of the HPA axis (corticotropin releasing hor-
mone [CRH], ACTH, and cortisol; Susman, Nottelmann,
Dorn, Gold & Chrousos, 1989).
Given the dynamic interactive process models discussed
earlier, it is likely that biological characteristics, ongoing be-
haviors, and characteristics of the environment interact to
predispose an individual toward certain levels of sex steroids.
In an animal model, Sapolsky (1991) showed that the dy-
namic interactions between one’s place in the dominance hi-
erarchy affected both cortisol and testosterone. As dominance
increased, testosterone rose and cortisol decreased. In con-
trast, as dominance decreased, testosterone fell and cortisol
increased, suggesting the importance of social interactions as
inﬂuences on testosterone. High dominance was related to
higher concentrations of testosterone, but this relationship
was not stable over time. In an extensive review of the litera-
ture on testosterone and dominance, Mazur and Booth (1998)
concluded that dominance is more closely linked to testos-
terone than is physical aggression. Dominance sometimes
does entail physical aggression with the intent of inﬂicting
harm on another person, but dominance also can be ex-
pressed nonaggressively such as in rebellion, competitive-
ness, and illegal behavior.
Testosterone is related to depression as well as to aggres-
sive behavior at puberty. Earlier research assessed the indi-
rect effect of hormone change on depression as reﬂected in
the relationship between depression and pubertal stage.
Transition to Tanner stage III was associated with a sharp
increase in rates of unipolar depression (deﬁned by the Diag-
nostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders–Fourth
Edition) in girls, but neither the timing of puberty nor menar-
che had any effect on depression (Angold & Worthman,

Puberty and Changes in Emotions and Behavior
303
1993). Tanner stage had a bigger effect on depression than
did age, suggesting that biological change rather than merely
a period in development had an effect on depression. A later
study found an effect of Tanner stage on depression but a
larger effect for testosterone (Angold, Costello, Erkanli, &
Worthman, 1999). When Tanner stage and hormones were
entered simultaneously, the effect for Tanner stage became
nonsigniﬁcant, but the effect for testosterone and estradiol
remained unchanged.
Experimental studies are the preferred method for estab-
lishing the cause-effect relationship between hormones and
behavior at puberty. A unique experiment was carried out to
examine this cause-effect relationship. Testosterone or es-
trogen was administered to boys and girls in a placebo-
controlled, randomized, double-blind, cross-over design
study. The boys and girls had delayed puberty and were being
treated with physiological doses of testosterone (boys) or
conjugated estrogens (girls; Finkelstein et al., 1997; Kulin
et al., 1997; Susman et al., 1998). Each 3-month treatment
period was preceded and followed by a 3-month placebo
period. The doses of gonadal steroids were calculated to sim-
ulate the concentrations of gonadal steroids in blood in nor-
mal early (low dose), middle (middle dose), and late (high
dose) pubertal adolescents. Aggressive behaviors, problem
behavior, and sexual activity were measured by self-reports.
In boys who were treated with testosterone, aggressive
behaviors were measured by self-reports about physical and
verbal aggression against peers and adults, aggressive im-
pulses, and aggressive inhibitory behaviors. Signiﬁcant
increases in aggressive impulses and physical aggression
against peers and adults were seen in boys but only at the
middle dose. (Findings for estrogen are discussed later.)
There were no effects for testosterone treatment on behavior
problems (Susman et al., 1998). Administering midpubertal
levels of testosterone to hypogonadal boys resulted in signif-
icantly increased self-reports of nocturnal emissions, touch-
ing girls, and being touched by girls (Finkelstein et al., 1998).
(See also the section titled “Puberty and Sexual Activity.”) In
brief, testosterone levels are related to aggressive behavior,
but the results are not consistent across studies.
Estrogen and Behavior
The effects of estrogen, the other major sex steroid that
increases rapidly at puberty, are less frequently examined in
relation to behavior than is testosterone. In the few studies that
have examined estrogens in relation to emotions and
antisocial behavior, the relationship between estrogen and
moods and behavior at puberty in girls may be as strong, or
stronger in some instances, than the relationship between
testosterone and moods and behavior in boys. The lack of
progression of research on estrogen and behavior reﬂects two
issues. First, only males are included in the majority of studies
on hormones and antisocial behavior as physical aggression
and violence occur more frequently in men and violence in
women rarely comes to the attention of the judicial system or
the media. Second, testosterone was considered the major hor-
mone associated with antisocial behavior until recently.
The relationship between estrogen and behavior in girls
may parallel that of testosterone in boys. In adolescents, cor-
relational studies and a recent clinical trial study show a con-
nection between estrogen and self-reports of aggressive
tendencies. Of note is that in 9- to 14-year-olds, girls with
higher concentrations of estradiol were more dominant while
interacting with their parents than were girls with lower levels
of estradiol (Inoff-Germain et al., 1988). In the same study,
estrogen was not related to aggressive or delinquent behavior
problems (Susman et al., 1987). In both sets of ﬁndings, pu-
bertal stage did not contribute to the ﬁndings. In a parallel
study girls were grouped by pubertal breast stages and four
stages of estradiol secretion (Brooks-Gunn & Warren, 1985;
Warren & Brooks-Gunn, 1989). No signiﬁcant mood or be-
havior changes were reported as a function of pubertal stages.
The hormonal stages revealed a signiﬁcant curvilinear trend
for depressive affect (increase, then decrease), impulse con-
trol (decrease, then increase), and psychopathology (increase,
then decrease; Warren & Brooks-Gunn, 1989), indicating sig-
niﬁcant differences in these indexes during times of rapid in-
creases in hormone levels.
In the placebo-controlled, randomized, double-blind,
cross-over design study just described, girls with delayed
puberty were treated with physiological doses of estrogen.
Signiﬁcant increases in self-reported aggressive impulses
and in physical aggression against both peers and adults were
seen in girls at the low and middle doses but not at the high
dose (Finkelstein et al., 1997). In contrast, in boys, signiﬁcant
increases in aggressive impulses and physical aggression
against peers and adults were seen but only at the middle
dose of testosterone. Problem behaviors also were assessed
using the Child Behavior Checklist (CBCL; Achenbach,
1991). In girls, only withdrawn behavior increased with es-
trogen treatment and only after the low dose (Susman et al.,
1998). Unfortunately, there were no objective measures of
reports (arrests, school or police reports) of dangerous behav-
iors in these adolescents.
In a recent study, the relationship between depression and
estradiol was linear, with depression increasing with increases
in estrogen (Angold et al., 1999) as opposed to the nonlinear
relationship in the Warren and Brooks-Gunn study. Slight dif-
ferences in the manner in which estradiol was categorized
may have led to the different ﬁndings in these two studies.
Collectively, these results demonstrate a clear relationship

304
Puberty, Sexuality, and Health
between estrogen and depression. Given the lack of relation-
ships between physical maturation based on pubertal stage
and emotions or behavior, hormonal changes appear to be
more important than the physical changes as correlates of
mood and behavior patterns at puberty.
Even though physical maturational changes at puberty
were not directly related to depression, underlying hormone
changes appear to have indirect effects on behavior, princi-
pally in girls. Stattin and Magnusson (1989) showed that
morphological estrogen-related changes apparent in physical
development, such as breast development, have life-long im-
plications for development. Early maturation in girls was re-
lated to engaging in interactions with older peers and norm
violation in midadolescence. In adulthood, the earlier matur-
ers were likely to bear children earlier, have more children
and more abortions, hold lower position employment, and
have fewer years of education than were later maturers. In
brief, the timing of physical maturational inﬂuences at
puberty were potent predictors of later social development.
In summary, there is a signiﬁcant relationship among sex
roles, steroid hormones and depression symptoms, aggres-
sive behavior, and mood in adolescents. Physical matura-
tional status is related to emotions and aggressive behavior as
well as to hormones. Adding hormones to a statistical model
tends to account for variance above and beyond physical
maturational status or to eliminate the relationship between
physical maturation and behavior and emotions. Nonethe-
less, the relationships between physical maturation and ado-
lescent behavior may be latent until adulthood, as evidenced
by the outcome of early maturers (Stattin & Magnusson,
1989). When considering maturational inﬂuences, attention
must be given to the contextual processes that may moderate
or mediate maturation and emotions and behavior. Family
and peer interactions are likely candidates as moderators
of maturational effects as evidenced by the associations
between high problem behavior and lack of parental monitor-
ing and adolescent associations with deviant peers (Ary et al.,
1999). In keeping with the developmental contextualism
(Lerner, 1998) and holistic interaction (D. Magnusson, 1999)
models described earlier, simultaneous consideration of emo-
tions and individual behavior, biological inﬂuences, and the
social context of development are essential for explaining
individual development.
Adrenal Androgens
The adrenal androgens traditionally receive little attention in
relation to behavior. The adrenal androgens are considered
weak bonding androgens relative to testosterone (Bondy,
1985). Nonetheless, adrenal androgens are associated with
aggressive behavior, affect, psychiatric disorder symptoms,
and sexual behavior (Brooks-Gunn & Warren, 1989; Susman
et al., 1987; Udry et al., 1985; Udry & Talbert, 1988). Higher
levels of DHEA also predicted the onset of the ﬁrst episode of
major depression (Goodyer, Herbert, Tamplin, & Altham,
2000). Adrenal androgen actions may parallel those of testos-
terone and behavior because one of the adrenal androgens,
∆4-A, is a precursor of both testosterone and estrogens. The
rationale for examining the connections between behavior and
adrenal androgens stems from ﬁndings from both animal and
human model studies. In the female spotted hyena, the adrenal
androgen ∆4-A is present in high concentrations, and the fe-
males of the species are highly aggressive and highly anatom-
ically masculinized (Glickman, Frank, Davidson, Smith, &
Siiteri, 1987). High ∆4-A concentrations during pregnancy
may organize or activate sex-reversed traits in female spotted
hyenas (Yalcinkaya et al., 1993). The roles of ∆4-A and other
adrenal androgens (DHEA, DHEAS) in humans are not as
clear as in hyenas beyond their roles in the development of
pubic hair, body odor, and acne during puberty.
In the last decade several studies of adolescents report rela-
tionships between adrenal androgens and antisocial behavior
in adolescents. In healthy puberty-age girls (Brooks-Gunn &
Warren, 1989), higher DHEAS correlated negatively with ag-
gressive affect. The interaction between negative life events
and DHEAS and aggressive affect also was signiﬁcant. Girls
with lower concentrations of DHEAS who experienced nega-
tive life events had more aggressive affect than did girls with
fewer negative life events. The second study included 9- to
14-year-old healthy boys and girls. Reports from this study
show a relatively consistent pattern of high adrenal androgens
and low gonadal steroids associated with problem behaviors
and negative affect (Nottelmann et al., 1987; Nottelmann,
Inoff-Germain, Susman, & Chrousos, 1990; Susman et al.,
1987; Susman, Dorn, & Chrousos, 1991). Adrenal androgens
also correlate with dominance in interactions with parents
(Inoff-Germain et al., 1988). This interaction supports the per-
spective of Raine, Brennan, and Farrington (1997) that bio-
logical factors interact with social factors to predispose an
individual to antisocial behavior.
The third study demonstrates the contribution of adrenal
androgens to sexual behavior and activities (Udry et al., 1985;
Udry & Talbert, 1988).Afourth study with boys with conduct
disorder reported signiﬁcantly higher levels of DHEA and
DHEAS and the intensity of aggression and delinquency
(van Goozen, Matthys, Cohen-Kettenis, Thijssen, & van
Engeland, 1998). Finally, DHEAS levels interact with timing
of puberty and depression in girls. Girls with high levels of
DHEAS and early maturation had the highest emotional
arousal and depressive affect scores (Graber, Brooks-Gunn, &

Timing of Puberty and Psychosocial Development
305
Warren, in press). In brief, although adrenal androgens have a
lower (weaker) binding afﬁnity compared to testosterone, the
relationship between adrenal androgens and antisocial behav-
ior parallels the relationships between testosterone and anti-
social behavior in adults.
TIMING OF PUBERTY AND
PSYCHOSOCIAL DEVELOPMENT
Wide variation exists among individuals in the timing of the
onset of activation of the HPG axis and pubertal growth spurt;
therefore, there is a wide range of physiologic variations in
sexual reproduction capability and normal growth at pu-
berty. Thesevariationsarearesultofgeneticinﬂuencesandnu-
tritional status, resulting from self-induced restriction of
energy intake and heavy exercise training (Rogol, Clark, &
Roemmich, 2000). The variation in timing of puberty and psy-
chological development constitutes one of the most often ex-
amined topics in the entire ﬁeld of adolescent development.
Early and Late Pubertal Timing
The classic studies of the effects of timing of puberty were
ﬁrst reported in the 1930s (H. E. Jones, 1938; M. C. Jones,
1958; M. C. Jones & Bayley, 1950). Psychological conse-
quences of timing of puberty continue to be of sustained
interest. In general, for boys in the early studies, early matu-
ration tended to be advantageous, particularly with respect to
social development. In contrast, early maturation for girls
often tended to be disadvantageous (Faust, 1969; Jones,
Bayley, & Jones, 1948; Stolz & Stolz, 1944), although the
results were not always consistent across studies.
With the rise of interest in biobehavioral research, begin-
ning in the 1980s, two predominant hypotheses were formu-
lated to explain the inﬂuence of physical maturation on
primarily negative psychological outcomes. First, the matu-
rational deviance hypothesis (e.g., Brooks-Gunn, Petersen, &
Eichorn, 1985; Caspi, Henry, McGee, Mofﬁtt, & Silva, 1995;
Caspi & Mofﬁtt, 1991; Petersen & Taylor, 1980; Tschann
et al., 1994; Williams & Dunlop, 1999) suggested that
adolescents who are off time (earlier or later) in their pubertal
development, with respect to peers, experience more stress
than on-time adolescents. Being an off-time maturer may
result in an adolescent’s lacking the usual coping re-
sources and social support that characterize being on time
in pubertal development. The added stress and lack of re-
sources may increase vulnerability to adjustment prob-
lems. In brief, a maturational-deviance hypothesis predicts
that early-maturing girls and late-maturing boys experience
heightened emotional distress, which inﬂuences the initiation
of antisocial behavior including use of illegal substances,
sexual activity, and delinquent behavior.
The second hypothesis, the early-maturational or early
timing hypothesis (e.g., Brooks-Gunn et al., 1985; Caspi &
Mofﬁt, 1991; Petersen & Taylor, 1980; Tschann et al., 1994)
posited that being an early developer is especially disadvan-
tageous for girls (Stattin & Magnusson, 1990). The disadvan-
tage may result from the missed opportunity for completion
of normal psychosocial developmental tasks of middle child-
hood (Brooks-Gunn et al., 1985). Early maturers may face
greater social pressure to conform to adult norms and, impor-
tantly, to engage in adult behaviors. Earlier maturing adoles-
cents look more physically mature than their chronological
age, and hence society may view them as older and more so-
cially, emotionally, and cognitively advanced (Brooks-Gunn
et al., 1985; Caspi & Mofﬁtt, 1991). However, the cognitive
and social development of early maturers may lag far behind
their seemingly adult status. With this mismatch, expecta-
tions are high for more adult-like behaviors and actions,
yet the physically early maturing girls may not be ready for
adult behaviors and roles. Thus, an early-maturation hypoth-
esis predicts that early-maturing girls engage in more acting-
out behavior or negative emotions than all other groups,
independent of emotional distress.
Although not always consistent, the results from the early
timing of maturation studies report that early maturation for
boys appears to be positive, particularly with respect to social
development, whereas for girls early maturation is related to
more negative moods and behaviors (Faust, 1969; Ge,
Conger, & Elder, 2001a; Jones & Bayley, 1938; Stolz &
Stolz, 1944). For instance, early-maturing girls experienced
signiﬁcantly higher levels of psychological distress and were
more vulnerable to prior psychological problems, deviant
peer pressures, and fathers’ hostile feelings when compared
to on-time and late-maturing peers (Ge, Conger, & Elder,
1996). However, early-maturing boys also report more hos-
tile feelings and internalizing behavior problems than do
their later maturing peers (Ge, Conger, & Elder, 2001b).
Other studies show that early timing is negative for both boys
and girls. This ﬁnding was supported in studies of African
American children as well (Ge, Brody, Conger, & Simons, in
press). Tschann et al. (1994) reported that boys and girls who
are earlier maturers reported more substance abuse compared
to later maturers.
Earlier maturing boys and girls were more sexually active
and participated in more antisocial behavior (Flannery, Row, &
Gulley, 1993), and early-timing boys reported more antisocial
behavior than on-time boys (Williams & Dunlop, 1999) com-
pared to late maturers. Early-maturing boys also engaged in

306
Puberty, Sexuality, and Health
more health risk behaviors (Orr & Ingersoll, 1995). In other
studies, early-maturing girls were least satisﬁed with their
height and weight, had poorer body image, or were less happy
(Blyth, Simmons, & Zakin, 1985; Brooks-Gunn et al., 1985;
Brooks-Gunn & Warren, 1989; Duncan, Ritter, Dornbusch,
Gross, & Carlsmith, 1985; Petersen & Crockett, 1985) and had
more internalizing problems (Hayward et al., 1997), more be-
havioral and emotional problems (Caspi & Mofﬁtt, 1991), and
more interactions with peers who were deviant (Silbereisen,
Petersen,Albrecht, & Kracke, 1989).
Timing of puberty is related to a variety of health and risk
behaviors. Eating problems were reported by 9th-, 10th-, and
11th-grade girls who perceived their pubertal timing to be
earlier than that of peers (Swarr & Richards, 1996). More-
over, they report that interactions between pubertal timing
and various experiences or perceptions of parents are related
to eating problems. Similarly, early-maturing girls engaged
in risk behaviors such as drinking, smoking, and sexual ac-
tivity at an earlier age (D. Magnusson et al., 1985). In another
study, girls with earlier puberty had their ﬁrst alcohol experi-
ence and drank moderate amounts of alcohol sooner than
those with later pubertal timing did (Wilson et al., 1994).
Finally, the perception of earlier pubertal timing was a statis-
tical predictor for future suicide attempts in Norwegian ado-
lescents, and this relationship was stronger in girls than in
boys (Wichstrom, 2000).
Other studies show that early timing in girls and late tim-
ing in boys are related to affective and behavior problems.
For example, early timing of puberty in girls and late timing
in boys were related to a higher incidence of psychopathol-
ogy and depressed mood (Graber, Lewisohn, Seeley, &
Brooks-Gunn, 1997), and poor body image was evident
in boys (Siegel, Yancey, Aneshensel, & Schuler, 1999).
Similarly, Andersson and Magnusson (1990) reported that
both early- and late-maturing boys may be more likely to be
alcohol users. Using hormone concentrations standardized
for age as an index of timing of puberty, earlier maturing ado-
lescents, based on adrenal androgen levels, tended to have
poor adjustment; however, the ﬁndings varied depending on
the hormone under consideration (Susman et al., 1985). Later
maturing adolescents, based on sex steroids, tended to have
poorer adjustment. The ﬁndings were more pronounced for
boys than for girls.
Later maturation is not as consistently related to negative
emotions and behavior problems as is earlier maturation.
Later maturation in boys was related to lower achievement
(Dubas, Graber, & Petersen, 1991), lower self-esteem or con-
ﬁdence, and less happiness (Crockett & Petersen, 1987;
Simmons, Blyth, Van Cleave, & Bush, 1979). Other studies
showed no effects of pubertal timing, either earlier or later, in
relation to mood and behavioral outcomes. For example,
Brooks-Gunn and Warren (1989) reported no relationship
between pubertal timing and negative emotions in girls, and
Angold, Costello, and Worthman (1998) reported no relation-
ship between pubertal timing and the rates of depression in
boys and girls.
In summary, there is support for both the maturational de-
viance hypothesis and the early-maturational hypothesis.
Adolescents who are off time in pubertal timing generally re-
port more adjustment problems, supporting the maturational
deviance hypothesis. Early timing of puberty does appear to
be more disadvantageous for girls than for boys (the early-
maturational hypothesis), but boys are negatively affected by
early timing as well. Nonetheless, there also is evidence that
timing of puberty has no effect on adjustment and that earlier
puberty is neither consistently disadvantageous for girls nor
advantageous for boys. The effects of timing of puberty on
adjustment and deviant behavior are made even more difﬁ-
cult to unravel by imprecise deﬁnitions and measurement of
puberty and the inclusion of a wide age group of adolescents.
Theoretical and Methodological Issues
The studies just reviewed show both consistencies and major
inconsistencies regarding the relationship among timing of
puberty and behavior, adjustment, and psychopathology.
Nonetheless, it is legitimate to conclude that both earlier and
later timing of puberty has a major impact on multiple dimen-
sions of psychological functioning in boys and girls. Of note
is that timing of puberty has long-term implications. Later in
adolescence or adulthood, early-maturing girls reported more
psychopathology (Graber et al., 1997) and less educational
achievement and career success than did later maturing girls
(Stattin & Magnusson, 1990). The inconsistencies across
studies of earlier and later puberty emerge from conceptual
and methodological differences. The major theoretical inter-
est appears to be on earlier timing of puberty given societal
concerns regarding potential consequences of early matura-
tion: precocious sexuality, substance use, and deviance. With
some exceptions, few studies examine the longer term effects
associated with earlier maturation. Earlier or later maturation
has been theorized to be a stable characteristic of individuals
rather than a dynamic concept that changes with changing age
and contextual factors. The behaviors that are related to tim-
ing of puberty during adolescence, such as risky sexual be-
havior and other forms of externalizing problems, may
disappear in late adolescence and adulthood. Nonetheless, the
longer term implications of timing of puberty will emerge as
transformed manifestations of these early behaviors as de-
scribed by Stattin and Magnusson (1990). Speciﬁcally, early

Puberty and Adolescent Health: Cultural Signiﬁcance and Secular Change
307
maturers may become afﬁliated with older and deviant peers
for a limited time period and engage in deviant behaviors that
cease in late adolescence. The expense of engaging in these
behaviors is reduced achievement and educational and occu-
pational success.
Although the ﬁndings regarding early and late puberty
seem inconsistent, there is consistency across studies. The
consistency of ﬁndings showing earlier maturation and prob-
lems in adjustment suggests that adolescents are exquisitely
sensitive to their early pubertal status. Such is not the case for
later maturers. The fewer ﬁndings relating later maturation and
psychological functioning indicate the ability of adolescents to
adapt to differences between themselves and same-age peers
as puberty progresses. Less theorizing has taken place regard-
ing developmental implications of later maturation.
Methodological differences also contribute to the inconsis-
tencies in ﬁndings. The chronological age when adoles-
cents are assessed for effects of timing, the measure of timing
(age of menarche, pubertal stage, or other measure) and the
construct assessed (antisocial behavior, depression, parent-
adolescent interactions) all may contribute to the discrepan-
cies in how timing of puberty and psychological functioning
co-occur. The method used to assess timing of puberty likely
plays a major role in the discrepancies across studies. To a
large degree, timing of puberty has been assessed utilizing a
self-report measure of puberty (e.g., pubertal stage, age at
menarche, appearance of body hair). Other studies use objec-
tive measures of physical development such as pubertal stage
by physical examination (Tanner criteria; Marshall & Tanner,
1969, 1970) or hormone concentrations.The lack of reliability
in self-reports of pubertal status (Dorn, Susman, Nottelmann,
Inoff-Germain, & Chrousos, 1990) and age of menarche
(Dorn et al., 1999) is likely a major source of error variance in
assessing the multiple connections between timing of puberty
and psychological functioning.
PUBERTY AND ADOLESCENT HEALTH:
CULTURAL SIGNIFICANCE AND
SECULAR CHANGE
Secular Changes in Timing of Puberty
Timing of puberty currently captures the interest of the public
as well as the scientiﬁc community. Time (October 2000)
magazine’s front cover and accompanying article featured
the problem of early timing of puberty in girls. There has
been a decrease in age of menarche over the last century
(Blythe & Rosenthal, 2000; Gerver, De Bruin, & Drayer,
1994; Grumbach & Styne, 1992; Tanner & O’Keeffe, 1962;
Wyshak & Frisch, 1982). The secular (generational) trend in
age at menarche has been evident from at least the mid 1800s
to currently when a decrease in the age of menarche was
noted from 15 years to 12.7 years (Garn, 1992).Age at menar-
che decreased by approximately 1 year for those women born
from 1900 to 1950. A decrease in the age of menarche also is
evident in international studies.
In a nationwide growth study in the Netherlands, age of
menarche was assessed in two cohorts. The ﬁrst cohort was en-
rolled in 1952–1956, and the most recent cohort was enrolled
in 1996–1997. Age at menarche decreased to 13.15 years,
which was a 6-month decline over four decades (Fredriks et al.,
2000). Similarly, in two cohorts of American girls 14 years
apart, age at menarche was found to decrease (Wattigney,
Srinivasan, Chen, Greenlund, & Berenson, 1999). Cohort 1 in-
cluded 1,190 girls (64% White) who were examined in
1978–1979. The second cohort was examined in 1992–1994
and included 1,164 girls (57% White). In Cohort 2 more than
twice as many girls reached menarche before age 12 years than
did in Cohort 1. Menarche occurred earlier in Cohort 2 for
both Black and White girls. Furthermore, in both cohorts all of
the obesity measures used in the study were correlated with age
at menarche.The decrease in timing of menarche has generally
been attributed to cultural factors, speciﬁcally, improved nutri-
tion and socioeconomic conditions evident in the United States
and numerous developing countries.
In 1997 a large-scale study of pubertal development in
American girls received widespread attention in the media as
well as in the health care and research arenas. Herman-Giddens
et al. (1997) studied over 17,000 pre- and peripubertal-age
girls (90.4% White) to determine age at onset of pubertal
changes. They reported that African American girls began pu-
bertyonaveragebetweenage8and9whereasWhitegirlsbegan
puberty by age 10. For example, at age 9, 62.6% of African
American girls had breast development at stage 2 or higher (in-
dicative of puberty) compared to 32.1% of White girls. Simi-
larly, age at menarche was 12.16 years for African American
girls and 12.88 years for White girls (Herman-Giddens et al.,
1997). In a follow-up article (Kaplowitz, Oberﬁeld, & the Drug
and Therapeutics and Executive Committees, 1999), based on
the Herman-Giddens study, the suggestion was that breast or
pubic hair development is not precocious unless under age 7 in
White girls and 6 in African American girls. Thus, girls begin-
ningpubertyabovethatrangeneednomedicalfollow-up.How-
ever,theyfurtherstressthatnofollow-upisneededonlyifother
factors are not present (e.g., bone age >2 years ahead of
chronological age and predicted height of 2 SD or more below
target height or < 59 inches, underlying neurological ﬁnding,
etc.; Kaplowitz et al., 1999). It appears prudent to seek medical
advice in all instances of suspected early puberty.

308
Puberty, Sexuality, and Health
Although, the Herman-Giddens et al. (1997) study is
unique and important in that it includes a large number of
girls, a number of important methodological considerations
may have affected the ﬁndings and interpretations of secular
trends in timing of puberty. These methodological considera-
tions include the method of conducting the physical exami-
nation. Breast stage was determined by visual inspection and
not palpation. Even with palpation conducted by an experi-
enced clinician, it is difﬁcult to distinguish between breasts
and adipose tissue. Thus, some girls could have been classi-
ﬁed as pubertal at Stage 2 when the actual cause of apparent
breast development was obesity. Statistically controlling for
body mass could have partially addressed the problem of
overestimating the extent of breast development although the
problem would not have been eliminated. Additionally, char-
acteristics of the sample may have contributed to ratings of
early puberty. Some of the girls in the sample likely were
brought to their primary care provider for the evaluation of
early pubertal development. In addition, nearly 7% of the
sample had a chronic disease, and 3% were on medication.
These percentages were higher in the African American sam-
ple. Finally, not all of the girls in the study had reached
menarche (Emans & Biro, 1998), thereby possibly decreas-
ing the average age of menarche. The authors are to be com-
mended on the study, but the mean age of menarche reported
may not truly be representative of the general population of
adolescent girls. In spite of the earlier age of onset of puberty,
there was little change in age at menarche noted in the
Herman-Giddens et al. report compared to reports in the pre-
vious 25 years.
The report by Herman-Giddens et al. (1997) continues to
remain controversial. In the fall of 2000, Rosenﬁeld et al.
(2000) emphasized that it is premature to state that puberty is
occurring earlier in girls based on one study. Rosenﬁeld et al.
cited similar criticisms to those expressed earlier (e.g., stage
of puberty was based on visual inspection versus palpation)
but particularly emphasized the “fatal ﬂaw” (p. 622) of utiliz-
ing a nonrandom sample. The authors concluded that regard-
less of race, when breast development or pubic hair appear
before age 8 or 9 years, a diagnostic evaluation should be
conducted for bone age and height prediction. Based on these
results as well as the physical examination, decisions for fur-
ther follow-up should then be made.
The exact decrease in the true onset of timing of puberty
as opposed to the timing of menarche is difﬁcult to assess as
the timing of puberty is often indexed in girls by “age at
menarche.” Age at menarche is a relatively easy marker to
obtain by self-report or parental report but is not an accurate
index of timing of onset of puberty. Variability in accuracy of
reports of onset of menarche (Dorn et al., 1999) contributes
to the difﬁculty of estimating secular trends in the onset of
puberty. Unfortunately, the data on secular trends in onset of
puberty in boys are much less complete than for girls. Theo-
retically, the ﬁrst nocturnal emission or spermarche is a com-
parable timing measure for boys; however, information on
spermarche is difﬁcult to obtain. Sanders and Soares (1986)
reported that many adult men either had difﬁculty recalling
their ﬁrst nocturnal emission or were hesitant to reveal the in-
formation. Few psychosocial studies include the concept of
spermarche as an index of timing of puberty (for exceptions,
see Downs & Fuller, 1991; Gaddis & Brooks-Gunn, 1985;
Kim & Smith, 1998; Kim, Smith, & Palermiti, 1997). Infor-
mation regarding secular trends in timing of puberty is not
easily gleaned from these studies because they include a wide
age range of subjects (up to age 62) or small sample sizes.
None provided normative data regarding average age of sper-
marche or reliability of the measurement of spermarche. In
an earlier study, Kulin, Fronera, Demers, Barthlomew, and
Lloyd (1989) reported the average age of spermarche to be
age 14, and at that age gonadotropins were at adult concen-
trations. To our knowledge, this is the only study that simul-
taneously assessed self-reported age at spermarche and
gonadotropin levels. Given the lack of information regarding
onset of puberty in boys, there is no valid method of estimat-
ing secular trends in the onset of puberty in boys. A study of
boys that parallels the Herman-Giddens et al. (1997) study of
girls in a randomly selected representative sample could
make a signiﬁcant contribution to the literature.
Puberty and Adolescent Health
Puberty implies that an adolescent is becoming an adult. Con-
temporary culture is ambivalent about the desirability of this
transition. On the one hand, puberty implies independence
and adult roles and the emergence of a physical morphology
and reproductive capability characteristic of adults. On the
other hand, for girls the thin prepubertal physique is valued,
whereas fat deposition at puberty is viewed as a less desirable
characteristic of female adults. These changes in physical
size and proportions have deﬁnite negative social signaling
value. As boys and girls progress in physical development
there are societal expectations for moodiness and disruptive
behavior and opportunities for risky sexual behavior. With
the engagement in sexual activities, there is added risk for
sexually transmitted diseases (STDs; e.g., HIV transmission)
and teen pregnancy (Udry, 1979; Udry & Cliquet, 1982). Pu-
berty, then, is a period of development ripe for the emergence
of major health risk behaviors and health problems. Public
health policies tend to focus on preventing the occurrence of
the health problems (substance use, risky sex, and accidents)

Puberty and Adolescent Health: Cultural Signiﬁcance and Secular Change
309
but at the same time ignore the role of puberty as a major fac-
tor affecting the onset and trajectory of risky health behav-
iors. The effects of timing of puberty on adult health are only
now beginning to be identiﬁed.
Puberty and Adult Health
Health policies to reduce the risk of long-term implications of
early timing of puberty are just beginning to be considered.
This emphasis, based primarily on observational studies,
regards the relationship between reported age of puberty and
later health problems. Timing of puberty and later health
have been understudied in males, so disorders linked with
timing of puberty in males are yet to be identiﬁed. The lack of
attention to long-term implications of pubertal processes
(particularly, timing of puberty) represents a missed opportu-
nity for possible public health prevention efforts.
Research on puberty and later health has focused primarily
on cancer, obesity, and reproductive disorders. An increased
risk of breast cancer is associated with early puberty based on
age at menarche (Kampert, Whittemore, & Paffenbarger,
1988; C. M. Magnusson et al., 1999; Rockhill, Moorman, &
Newman, 1998; Vihko & Apter, 1986; for a review, see Key,
1999). The increased risk of cancer in early maturers is attrib-
uted to the longer duration of exposure to circulating estro-
gens across the life span. Women who experience earlier
menarche have higher levels of circulating free estrogen into
at least the third decade of life compared to later maturers
(Apter, Reinila, & Vikho, 1989). An additional indirect mea-
sure of estrogen, the timing of the pubertal growth spurt, is
also associated with breast cancer risk. Women who attain
their adult height at a later age have a lower risk of breast can-
cer, possibly due to their having lower levels of growth hor-
mone (GH) and insulin-like growth factor (IGF1) during
breast development (Li, Malone, White, & Daling, 1997).
However, it is important to note that other studies do not show
an increased risk of breast cancer with earlier menarche (e.g.,
R. G. Parker, Rees, Leung, & Legorreta, 1999) and that the
cause of breast cancer is no doubt multifactorial.
Early maturing girls are at greater risk for obesity (Lovejoy,
1998; Ness, Laskarzewski, & Price, 1991). Obese girls also
have an earlier timing of puberty, so the direction of the rela-
tionship between obesity and timing of puberty is unknown.
Obesity in adolescence is related to major risk factors for car-
diovascular disease (Morrison, Barton, Biro, Daniels, &
Sprecher, 1999). In Black andWhite 10- to 15-year-olds, over-
weight status was related to lower high-density lipids and
higher low-density lipids, a risk-proﬁle for cardiovascular dis-
ease. Obesity is also linked to the high incidence of Type II
diabetes mellitus in adolescents.
Reproductive disorders related to timing of puberty are
evident primarily in ovarian pathophysiology. Polycystic
ovarian syndrome (PCOS) is a disorder in adulthood reported
to be related to early puberty. PCOS is a heterogenous disor-
der characterized by oligo/amenorrhea (few or no menstrual
periods), insulin resistance or high insulin, and hyperandro-
genism, which is associated with an increased risk of devel-
oping impaired glucose tolerance and Type II diabetes
(Ibáñez et al., 1993). PCOS is reported in 5% to 10% of
women of reproductive age. PCOS can begin to express itself
during puberty and continue into the adult reproductive years
with ensuing infertility.
One possible mechanism linking PCOS and early puberty
is premature adrenarche. During adrenarche the adrenal an-
drogens, DHEA and DHEAS, and ∆-4A begin to rise. When
adrenarche occurs prior to age 8 in girls and 9.5 in boys, it is
considered premature (Siegel, Finegold, Urban, McVie, &
Lee, 1992; Siegel & Lee, 1992; see Reiter & Saenger, 1997,
for review). Premature adrenarche is characterized by high
adrenal androgen concentrations and pubic hair development
with no evidence of breast development. Off-time activation
of the adrenal glands is presumed to be the cause of prema-
ture adrenarche. Premature adrenarche has been considered a
benign condition (Kaplowitz, Cockerell, & Young, 1985)
representing a variation of puberty; therefore, treatment was
deemed unnecessary (Reiter & Saenger, 1997). Recent
research suggests that children with premature adrenarche
may have long-term sequelae such as PCOS, anovulation in
late adolescence (and potentially infertility), and insulin
resistance (Ibáñez, de Zegher, & Potau, 1999; Ibáñez et al.,
1993; Ibáñez, Potau, Zampolli, Street, & Carrascosa, 1997;
Oppenheimer, Linder, Saenger, & DiMartino-Nardi, 1995;
Richards et al., 1985). In adulthood, women with PCOS have
an increased risk for cardiovascular problems (Birdsall,
Farquhar, & White, 1997; Talbott et al., 1995) and complica-
tions from diabetes mellitus (Dunaif, 1997, 1999; Dunaif,
Futterweit, Segal, & Dobrijansky, 1989). Thus, women with
early adrenarche may be at risk for PCOS, resulting in signif-
icant physical morbidity. It is unknown if there is continuity
of adjustment problems observed in premature adrenarche
(Dorn et al., 1999) and severe psychopathology observed in
adult women with PCOS.
The timing of puberty is considered to have implication
for brain development. Saugstad (1989b) pointed out that the
“onset of puberty coincides with the last major step in brain
development: the elimination of some 40% of the neuronal
synapses” (p. 157) and postulated that synaptic loss may have
implications for the development of manic-depressive psy-
chosis and schizophrenia. Secular, social class, and geo-
graphic trends in body build and mental disorders suggest

310
Puberty, Sexuality, and Health
that early maturers may be more susceptible to manic-
depressive psychosis and that late maturers may be more sus-
ceptible to schizophrenia (Saugstad, 1989a, 1989b). These
hypotheses remain speculative until longitudinal studies pro-
vide more deﬁnitive ﬁndings.
Timing of Puberty and Stress
One of the most controversial issues regarding timing of pu-
berty is whether stressors accelerate or delay the timing of
puberty. Consistent with the theoretical perspectives dis-
cussed earlier, timing of puberty and behavior and experi-
ences are considered dynamic and bidirectional processes
(Susman, 1997). Experiences as well as genetic factors are
speculative inﬂuences on the tremendous variations in the
timing of puberty. Experiential-based sources of variation in-
clude disruptive behavior disorders (Schaal et al., 1996),
family relationships (Steinberg, 1987, 1988), participation in
intensive physical exercise such as ballet dancing (Warren
et al., 1991), negative emotional states (Nottelmann et al.,
1990; Susman et al., 1989), and family adversity (Belsky,
Steinberg, & Draper, 1991). Interest in the mechanism for
explaining the relationship between experience and timing of
puberty began to emerge in the last decade.
The concept of stress is hypothesized to play a major role
in timing of puberty. There are two opposing views on the re-
lationship between stress and timing of puberty. The ﬁrst per-
spective, advocated by Belsky et al. (1991), is based on an
evolutionary model of psychosocial inﬂuences on the timing
of puberty. The premise is that early on children develop an
understanding of the availability of resources, the duration
of close relationships, and the trustworthiness of adults.
Exposure to these different types of resources and caretaking
adults in the child’s environment are hypothesized to in-
ﬂuence the child’s reproductive strategies. Environments
characterized by stress are hypothesized to contribute to early
reproductive development (Belsky et al., 1991). Three possi-
ble avenues are proposed whereby early stress accelerates
reproductive development and subsequently earlier child-
bearing: (a) the stress of living in a conﬂicted family, (b) the
stress of being reared in a single family home, especially with
a single mother, and (c) exposure to the parental paramours if
in a single parent home. Belsky et al. proposed that these
early stressful experiences act by changing the child’s view
of the world in general and the child’s view of relationships,
in particular, as uncertain, unpredictable, and unstable. The
uncertainty of living in a stressful environment has both psy-
chological and physiological consequences. Early stress acts
on psychological development via the individual’s having
adopted a view of the world as being uncertain. If individuals
view the world as uncertain, reproducing early, while they
still can, is an adaptive strategy to counteract the uncertainty
of the difﬁcult family environment. Uncertainty also leads
these individuals to not count on their partners for re-
sources, thereby creating unstable pair bonds. Early stress is
proposed to act on physiological systems to accelerate puber-
tal development, although the exact mechanisms involved in
acceleration of puberty are not addressed.
The hypothesis has received mixed support. Conﬂict in
the family at age 7 predicted earlier menarche (Mofﬁtt,
Caspi, Belsky, & Silva, 1992). Divorce as a stressor and as a
context for girls being raised in father-absent versus father-
present homes also has been linked to timing of puberty. Girls
in father-absent homes tend to reach puberty earlier than girls
reared in father-present homes (Jones, Leeton, McLeod, &
Wood, 1972; Mofﬁtt et al., 1992; Surbey, 1990; Wierson,
Long, & Forehand, 1993). The stress of living in a conﬂicted
family has been extended to include having a father who is an
alcoholic (Malo & Tremblay, 1997). Other studies show that
greater marital and family conﬂict, as well as less marital and
family harmony, are associated with pubertal timing in girls
(Ellis & Garber, 2000; Ellis, McFadyen-Ketchum, Dodge,
Pettit, & Bates, 1999; Graber, Brooks-Gunn, & Warren,
1995; Mofﬁtt et al., 1992; Steinberg, 1988). Absence of posi-
tive parent-child relationships, rather than negative relation-
ships, predicted early pubertal timing (Ellis et al., 1999).
Positive interactions included greater supportiveness in the
parental dyad and more father-daughter and mother-daughter
affection.
Absence of positive parent-child relationships, rather than
negative relationships, predicted early pubertal timing (Ellis
et al., 1999). Positive relationships included greater sup-
portiveness in the parental dyad and more father-daughter
and mother-daughter affection. The quality of fathers’
investments in the family emerged as the most important fea-
ture of the proximal family environment. Presence of fathers
in the home, more time spent by fathers in child care, greater
supportiveness in the parental dyad, more father-daughter
affection, and more mother-daughter affection, as assessed
prior to kindergarten, each predicted later pubertal timing by
daughters in seventh grade. The positive dimension of family
relationships, rather than the negative dimension, accounted
for these relations (Ellis et al., 1999). The interpretation was
that the ﬁndings are consistent with the Belsky model be-
cause positive dimensions were related to later timing of pu-
berty. The ﬁndings could also be interpreted as inconsistent
with the Belsky model because it predicts that negative as-
pects of the family will predict earlier timing of puberty.
The mechanisms linking earlier onset of puberty and
family stress are not articulated in the existing research. In

Puberty and Adolescent Health: Cultural Signiﬁcance and Secular Change
311
contrast, the effect of father absence as a precipitant of earlier
puberty is hypothesized to be mediated by endocrine mecha-
nisms. Biological father absence frequently is replaced by a
stepfather or mother’s boyfriend. Exposure to pheromones of
unrelated males is hypothesized to lead to earlier onset of pu-
berty. Exposure to chemosignals and pheromonal systems in
a variety of species, including humans, leads to changes in
menstrual cycles (McClintock, 1998; Stern & McClintock,
1998) and timing of puberty (Sanders & Reinisch, 1990).
Pheromonal systems and chemosignals may function as mod-
ulators or signaling substances that precipitate the onset of
puberty.
The relationship between family stress and timing of pu-
berty, as well as the psychobiological perspective, in particu-
lar, has generated controversy regarding the validity of
theoretical perspectives and the imprecision of deﬁning and
assessing family stress. A primary criticism of the stress and
early timing hypothesis focuses on the logic of the argument
that stress is responsible for early onset of puberty. The phys-
iology of the stress system is such that stress should attenuate
timing and progression of puberty. This perspective is based
on the physiological principle of adaptation to stressors.
Adaptation is accomplished at both the physiological and be-
havioral levels. At the neuroendocrine and peripheral levels
CRH is secreted by the hypothalamus, ACTH by the pitu-
itary, and cortisol from the adrenal glands (Chrousos & Gold,
1992; Stratakis & Chrousos, 1997). These components of the
HPA stress system down-regulate the reproductive HPG axis
at the level of the hypothalamus, pituitary, and gonads. For
instance, cortisol exerts inhibitory effects at the levels of the
LHRH neuron, the pituitary gonadotroph (responsible for
secreting luteinizing hormone and follicle stimulating hor-
mone), and the gonad itself, thereby suppressing sex steroids
(testosterone and estrogen) and maturation of reproductive
function. Down-regulation or attenuation of secretion of
HPG-axis hormones is accomplished either directly or via
endorphin. CRH suppresses the LHRH neuron in the hypo-
thalamus. Adaptation at a behavioral level involves a delay or
cessation of sexual reproduction activities to conserve vital
metabolic resources (Chrousos, 1998). Based on these physi-
ological and behavioral processes, the onset of reproductive
capability will be attenuated in children reared in stressful
environments (Nottelman et al., 1990; Susman et al., 1989).
Conditions that are physically stressful, such as malnutrition
and physical stressors (e.g., intense exercise), also suppress
reproduction.
In young adolescents stress reﬂected in behavior problems
and self-image problems was related to later maturation
based on hormone levels and stage of pubertal development
(Tanner criteria, Marshall & Tanner, 1969, 1970; Nottelmann
et al., 1987; Susman et al., 1987). Family stressors related to
paternal alcoholism led to a delay of male pubertal onset,
supporting the hypothesis that stress activates the HPA axis
and inhibits the HPG axis (Malo & Tremblay, 1997). Addi-
tional longitudinal studies that include actual indexes of
stress hormones, as well as adolescent and family stressors,
are needed to explain further the links between stress and
timing of puberty.
A set of papers (Hinde, 1991; Maccoby, 1991) that
accompanied the publication of Belsky et al. (1991) raised
additional criticisms regarding the family stress and evolu-
tionary theory of socialization. Maccoby (1991) evoked
the concepts of quality and quantity to argue against the
Belsky et al. perspective. The quantity argument based on the
Belsky et al. perspective is that unstable rearing environments
will lead to early maturation and sexual activity, and presum-
ably earlier and more frequent childbearing. Maccoby pro-
posed that if males invest less, females must invest more in
rearing the young and that if the male is not available, she re-
cruits investment from her mother and sisters. Her basic strat-
egy should be to select a mate who has the resources and the
motivation to be a quality parent rather than a quantity parent.
Maccoby further suggested that it does not seem plausible
that evolution would have shaped psychological and physio-
logical maternal characteristics such that she would have
more children in the absence of a supportive family environ-
ment as each additional child increases the difﬁculty of rais-
ing each child. Thus, skepticism is warranted regarding the
claim that females have evolved so as to take up a quantity
reproductive strategy in the face of instability in childhood
relationships. Finally, Maccoby suggested that evolutionary
concepts are not essential for explaining contemporaneous
functioning. Social learning could explain the effects of fam-
ily functioning on early sexual activity. Girls from disorga-
nized families likely have less surveillance, are more aware of
sexual activity (especially if the mother has multiple sexual
partners), or have relationships with older men who are
viewed as avenues for escaping dysfunctional homes.
The evolutionary approach to timing of maturation brings
together rich perspectives on puberty from animal and human
models of adaptation and change. Nonetheless, this perspec-
tive is at odds with the two predominant theories articulated
at the beginning of the chapter, developmental contextualism
and holistic interactionism. Both perspectives acknowledge
the importance of evolutionary and genetic contributions to
development but include the contemporaneous dynamic in-
teraction between psychological, biological, and contextual
processes. Family context provides an arena within which
parent-adolescent interactions evolve as a result of their past
history together as well as current self-organizing properties.

312
Puberty, Sexuality, and Health
Early maturation at puberty within these frameworks is a
product of contextual factors (e.g., nutritional consumption
and related obesity) and parent-adolescent interactions char-
acterized by detachment or warmth. The relationship
between timing of puberty and family processes is further
clouded by the limited research on direction of relationships.
Lewontin and Levins (2000) concurred with the contextual-
ism and holistic interactionism developmental models in
emphasizing that when considering systems of any complex-
ity there are positive and negative feedback systems. Biolog-
ical and psychological feedback loops at any time in
development. Clear evidence based on models linking se-
quential and dynamic inﬂuences between family stability and
instability and timing of puberty is essential to allow for an
escape from current controversies regarding timing of pu-
berty and family processes.
Puberty and Sexuality
One of the things that can be stated assuredly is that adoles-
cence “is when most individuals ﬁrst experience sexual
intercourse” (Meschke, Zweig, Barger, & Eccles, 2000,
p. 316). The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC; 1999) reported that in 1999 over 47% of the girls and
52% of the boys surveyed in grades 9 through 12 had had in-
tercourse, and over one third of the sample had been sexually
active in the previous three months; 4.4% of girls and 12.2%
of boys reported experiencing intercourse before age 13.
Trends in sexual activity vary by historical time. Singh and
Darroch (1999) examined trends in sexual activity of Ameri-
can women across a 13-year period in three surveys. In the
1980s there was an increase in the proportion of adolescents
who had ever had sexual intercourse, but by the mid-1980s
and on into the 1990s this increased trajectory stabilized. On
average, approximately 40% of adolescents in the 15- to
19-year-old age group had had sexual intercourse in the last
three months. These percentages were equal across the three
surveys. Kaufmann et al. (1998) reported similar trends.
There is some variation between subpopulations of ado-
lescents. For example, Finkelstein et al. (1998) reported that
delayed-puberty boys tended to engage in more advanced
sexual behavior than did delayed girls of similar age.
Halpern, Udry, and Suchindran (1997) found differences in
the self-reported sexual behaviors of Black and White girls,
with White girls more likely to report masturbation and Black
girls more likely to report petting and coitus.
The inﬂuences on adolescent sexuality arise in many
spheres: biological, psychological, social, and the media.
Biologically, hormones are known to bring about sexual de-
velopment at puberty and are also considered inﬂuences on
adolescent sexual behavior. Hormones are thought to have
both direct and indirect (e.g., via pubertal physical develop-
ment) effects on sexuality (Halpern, Udry, & Suchindran,
1998). Androgens, in particular, are considered potent inﬂu-
ences on sexuality in both boys and girls. The pubertal in-
crease in male testosterone levels “is thought to provide a
biological foundation for the increases in sexual interest and
activity that occur during adolescence” (Halpern et al.,
1998, p. 446). Studies have examined the relationship be-
tween testosterone and sexual activity using both random-
ized clinical trials and correlational and group difference
designs. In a randomized clinical trial of sex hormone re-
placement therapy, intramuscular administration of mid-
pubertal levels of testosterone to hypogonadal boys resulted
in signiﬁcantly increased self-reports of nocturnal emis-
sions, touching girls, and being touched by girls (Finkelstein
et al., 1998). Similarly, Halpern et al. (1998) found that ado-
lescent boys with higher levels of salivary testosterone were
more likely to initiate coitus and to participate in other part-
nered sexual behaviors. Within individuals, salivary testos-
terone increases were also associated with a greater
likelihood of partnered sexual activity. Additionally, the
study illustrated the importance of physical developmental
inﬂuences on sexual activity. When the analysis of testos-
terone and partnered activity controlled for pubertal de-
velopment, neither testosterone nor pubertal development
reached statistical signiﬁcance. These ﬁndings suggest that
evaluations of the propensity to engage in sexual activity
should consider multiple levels of inﬂuence by psychologi-
cal, biological, and social functioning.
Testosterone and other androgens also have striking ef-
fects on sexuality in adolescent girls. Halpern et al. (1997)
reviewed several lines of evidence for androgenic effects on
female adolescent sexuality, including hormone replacement
studies, female behavioral responsiveness to testosterone,
and connections between testosterone levels and sexual ac-
tivity during puberty (see also Hutchinson, 1995). Udry et al.
(1986) reported that adolescent girls’ androgen levels,
namely testosterone and the adrenal androgens DHEA,
DHEAS, and ∆-4A, predicted the girls’ anticipation of future
sex. Halpern et al. examined within-individual changes as
well as differences between girls and found that higher
plasma testosterone levels were associated with a higher
incidence of transition to coitus in both Black and White
girls. Frequency of attendance at religious services operated
as a social control factor among White females. Testosterone
was concluded to be a causal factor in female sexual activity,
but biological effects were moderated by relevant social vari-
ables. Processes at both the social and biological levels ap-
pear to interact to inﬂuence sexual activity.

Puberty and Adolescent Health: Cultural Signiﬁcance and Secular Change
313
Less research has examined the role of estrogens in ado-
lescent sexuality, but there is some evidence for estrogenic
effects on female adolescent sexual behavior. Finkelstein
et al. (1998) found that administering oral conjugated estro-
gen to hypogonadal female adolescents resulted in signiﬁ-
cantly increased self-reports of necking behavior, but only at
the highest dose used (intended to simulate the late stages of
puberty). Of note is that when testosterone or estrogen is
measured in blood or saliva and related to sexual activity,
moods, or behavior, it is not known which of the hormones
activates or is permissive of the expression of sexual behav-
ior as testosterone can be converted to estrogen.
A plethora of nonhormonal factors also inﬂuences adoles-
cent sexuality, but an additional factor is of note: body fat.
Halpern, Udry, Campbell, and Suchindran (1999) examined
the dating frequency and sexual behaviors of seventh- and
eighth-grade girls in relation to measured body fat. Compar-
ing girls with mean body fat levels to those 1 SD above or
below showed that the lower body fat was associated with a
greater chance of dating. This pattern was true for both Black
and White girls, although the relationship was stronger for
White girls. Additionally, this difference in dating frequency
explained the relationship between higher body fat and lower
incidence of coitus and petting. Halpern et al. warned, how-
ever, that these results must be taken in context because syn-
chronous transitions (e.g., when dating begins at the same
time as menarche and the transition to middle school) may
exert unique pressures (as in Smolak, Levine, & Gralen,
1993). Other factors also inﬂuence dating such as late matu-
ration in girls, with later maturers being less likely to date de-
spite their lower levels of body fat.
Peer sexual activity is considered a potent inﬂuence on
sexual activity. Udry et al. (1986) found that the strongest
predictor of sexual behavior in pubertal girls was whether
their close friends were sexually active. Meschke et al.
(2000) supported these ﬁndings in a report showing that tim-
ing of ﬁrst intercourse was associated with peer achievement
levels and popularity for boys, along with “dating alone” and
pubertal timing for girls. Siblings also inﬂuence sexual activ-
ity. Based on a social modeling theory, East and Shi (1997)
proposed a sibling interaction hypothesis to explain sexual
activity in pregnant or parenting teens and their younger sis-
ters. Negative sibling relationship qualities, such as rivalry,
competition, and conﬂict, were more closely related to
younger sisters engaging in problem behavior and sexual
behavior than were positive relationship qualities, such as
warmth and closeness. Additionally, a shared friendship net-
work with the older sister was found to be associated with ex-
tensive younger sister problem behavior and sexual behavior.
Compared with the younger siblings of never-pregnant
teenagers, the younger sisters of pregnant teenagers viewed
school and career as less important, were more accepting of
adolescent childbearing, perceived younger ages as appropri-
ate for ﬁrst intercourse, marriage, and childbearing, and en-
gaged in more problem behavior (East, 1996). These attitudes
are conducive to increasing the probability of early sexual ac-
tivity and early childbearing. Collectively, these studies aptly
demonstrate that a biopsychosocial model had greater statis-
tical power for both boys and girls than do models that take
fewer factors into account. In summary, hormones and pu-
bertal development appear to impact strongly adolescents’
sexual development, but sexuality occurs within the context
of the adolescent’s social development that incorporates
peers and siblings.
Sexual Risk Taking
Sexual activity beginning sometime during puberty might be
considered normative given the high number of adolescents
engaging in early sexual activity. The danger inherent in
considering sexual activity normative is that risky sexual be-
haviors are linked to high rates of morbidity and even mor-
tality in adolescents. In a national survey of 10,645 youth,
engaging in multiple health risk behaviors (including sexual
behavior) increased across age in youth (Brener & Collins,
1998). For those in the 12–13 year age group, 1 in 12 engaged
in two or more sexual behaviors, whereas one third of 14- to
17-year-olds and 50% of the 18- to 21-year-olds engaged in
multiple sexual behaviors. There was a greater likelihood for
males to engage in multiple health-risk behaviors. The pre-
dictive stability of early sexual behavior with regard to later
mental and physical health problems is not well known.
In one of the few longitudinal studies addressing this issue,
women’s reproductive experiences during adolescence had
repercussions in adult life with regard to sexuality, self-
image, and state of gynecological health (C. M. Magnusson
et al., 1999). Women who had gynecological problems dur-
ing adolescence experienced their adolescent sexual experi-
ences as generally negative. In early adulthood these women
had more recurrent and varied gynecological illnesses than
did their comparison-group counterparts. Women’s early
sexual experience was also linked to an increase in norm-
breaking behavior, lower educational attainment, and a
younger age of adult responsibilities compared with the con-
trol women. These ﬁndings are unique in that they document
long-term consequences of early sexual activity in diverse
domains: health, adjustment, achievement, and socially sanc-
tioned behavior. The lack of longitudinal information does
not allow for sorting out whether early sexual activity is re-
ﬂective of a constellation of behavior problems that persist

314
Puberty, Sexuality, and Health
over time or whether sexual activity, per se, leads to unique
mental health and gynecological problems that persist into
adulthood.
Limitations of self-report of sexual debut are acknowl-
edged and likely result in an overestimate in the age of onset
as well as the frequency of sexual activity during adoles-
cence. In the National Youth Survey (Lauritsen & Swicegood,
1997) there were inconsistencies in age at ﬁrst intercourse
from reports as an adolescent to reports as an adult by 28% to
32% of subjects. Those most likely to have consistent report-
ing across time were females (70%), whereas only 27% of
Black males were consistent in reporting. Given the serious-
ness of risky sexual behavior it seem prudent to continue to
press for programs to reduce risky sexual behavior even in the
absence of quality statistics on onset and progression of sex-
ual activity during adolescence.
IMPLICATIONS FOR RESEARCH
AND SOCIAL POLICY
The rapid increase in research ﬁndings in the last two decades
relating puberty to various domains of functioning provides
an exceptionally strong platform for planning interven-
tions to improve the well-being of adolescents and to prevent
problems. Findings from basic and applied research have
implications for the content of prevention and intervention
programs, the timing and type of interventions, and the
modalities for delivering the program message. In addition,
in the past several decades the importance of adolescence has
been the focus of attention of various organized groups,
which have, in turn, directed programs or policy issues to-
ward that age group. For example, the American Academy of
Pediatrics (www.aap.org) has a section on adolescent health,
founded in 1978. Additionally, the Society of Adolescent
Medicine offers specialized health services to adolescents
(www.adolescenthealth.org). These services include not only
the assessment of normal growth and physical health prob-
lems of adolescents but also psychosocial issues, health pro-
motion, disease prevention, and anticipatory guidance.
Unfortunately, the problem of maldistribution of health pro-
fessionals specializing in adolescent health is signiﬁcant.
Many practitioners of adolescent health are in academic med-
ical centers located in urban areas. Rural areas of the country
continue to lack support services for adolescents. A parallel
scenario is noted for psychiatrists specializing in adolescent
development.
Policy-related goals for adolescent health and devel-
opment also have been articulated. In 1998 Brindis et al. re-
viewed 36 national documents that emerged over the last
decade and focused on or pertained to the health of adoles-
cents. Through the synthesis of these documents, the com-
mittee determined the following six policy-related goals for
the health of adolescents: (a) improve access to health care
for adolescents, (b) improve the adolescent environment,
(c) increase the role of schools in improving adolescent
health, (d) promote positive adolescent health, (e) improve
adolescent transitions to adulthood, and (f) improve collabo-
rative relationships. In addition to the six policies, the com-
mittee also provided several cross-cutting themes that
emerged from their recommendations. Most germane to this
chapter is the theme that a “greater programmatic focus on
primary prevention and early intervention, which is substan-
tiated and shaped by rigorous research, is needed” (p. 183).
Currently, adolescent health care focuses on secondary rather
than primary prevention, and there is a dearth of research that
characterizes the effect of providing counseling or anticipa-
tory guidance services in the health care visits of youth or the
effect of content and quality of primary care visits.
Content of Programs on Puberty
Public health policy lags behind the sophisticated knowledge
that is accumulating regarding puberty, especially with
regard to the notion that puberty signals the onset of repro-
ductive competence, sexual activity, and risky sexual behav-
ior. The majority of citizens in the United States are unaware
of the recent advances in understanding the physiological
aspects of puberty as well as the positive dimensions of
psychological development during puberty. The sexual re-
productive aspects of puberty receive disproportional at-
tention compared to the normative and positive aspects of
development during adolescence. The result is that normative
health and developmental concerns receive little attention
from major social institutions: health care, education, and
family. A public health focus on puberty might proﬁtably be
based on the following questions: What do parents, educa-
tors, and the public need to know about puberty? What do
adolescents want to know? Research initiatives and preven-
tion programs arise almost exclusively from adults with
virtually no consultation from adolescents. Therefore, a wide
gap may exist between what information is presented to ado-
lescents and what they want to know. In a rare study on what
adolescents want to know, a majority of the questions re-
ﬂected biological topics (88%), such as genital physiology
(26%) and sexuality and reproduction (26%). Only 6% ad-
dressed psychosocial questions (Ryan, Millstein, & Irwin,
1996). Both females and Asians (compared with other ethnic
or racial groups) expressed greater interest in the differences
between male and female development. Prepubertal males

Implications for Research and Social Policy
315
were more concerned about general puberty than were boys
in later Tanner stages.
In North America the study of puberty and reproduction is
confused with sexual activity and the breaking of religious
and social norms. Puberty and emerging sexuality take on
negative societal connotations and thereby become shunned
by the family and educational institutions. Adolescent sexu-
ality is rarely viewed in the broader perspective as involving
a social and cultural component. The interactions between
boys and girls do not necessarily lead to sexual activity.
Rather, these interactions reﬂect an arena whereby the social-
and culture-based roles of males and females are learned and
practiced.
Those entrusted with the care of adolescents should be
cognizant of the broad range of emotional, behavioral, and
even sexual activities that characterize the pubertal transi-
tion. Along with this awareness, those same persons should
recognize that the diversity of acceptance or rejection of such
functioning is often dictated by gender, ethnicity, age, and
life history. Those involved in the health care system are in a
prime position to educate the public and adolescents them-
selves about the range of new emotions and behaviors that
will emerge by late puberty.
In addition to innovative content, positive attitudes about
adolescents are critical elements of an effective program.
Health care providers must recognize the speciﬁc challenges
and rewards of providing services for adolescents. Quality
care begins with the establishment of trust, respect, and con-
ﬁdentiality between the caregiver and the adolescent. Espe-
cially when providing care for the younger teen, caregivers
must focus on involving a member of the family or another
signiﬁcant adult to provide needed support and guidance.
Anticipatory guidance for parents should focus on assess-
ing their parenting styles and promoting supervision and
monitoring. Although parents should strive to maintain open
communication with their adolescents, they may estimate
neither the depression and anxiety of their adolescents nor the
sexual activity and the sexual risk experienced by their
teenage children accurately. Most adolescents want to dis-
cuss sexual-related issues with health care providers and oth-
ers and will welcome direct questions about sexual behaviors
and possible risks when posed in a conﬁdential and non-
moralistic manner. Discussion of the physical, emotional,
familial, and social changes related to adolescence will en-
courage healthy sexual development.
Timing of Puberty and Prevention
A goal of prevention is to ﬁnd a point in development when
prevention efforts have some hope of success (Coie et al.,
1993). With regard to puberty, the goal is to initiate interven-
tions before or simultaneously with the biological changes.
Puberty may be occurring at earlier ages than anticipated in
girls (Herman-Giddens et al., 1997), which has important
health care, educational, and social policy implications. Pro-
grams to improve adolescent mental and physical health
problems should correspondingly begin earlier in ontogeny
than in the past. All individuals responsible for any aspect of
the well-being of adolescents—parents, teachers, and health
system personnel—should be aware that puberty may be oc-
curring earlier in American girls than it did a few decades
ago. In earlier maturing adolescents, the effects of hormone
changes can occur two to three years before they are antici-
pated by parents and teachers. Important to note is that much
less is known about boys than girls and timing of puberty.
Given that boys and girls ﬁnd themselves together in multiple
contexts, programs to prevent mental and physical health
problems should be introduced simultaneously for boys and
girls.
Prevention efforts to reduce early risky sexual behaviors
and mental health problems, like depression, are likely to
have a higher probability of success if initiated at a younger
age than in the past, given the earlier age of puberty. Social
policy with regard to the cognitive abilities of adolescents,
parent training, and school health and sex education and
guidance programs will need to be modiﬁed to take into
account the early onset of puberty (Reider & Coupey, 1999).
Body self-awareness and emotion recognition programs are
especially important to implement early in gonadarche;
otherwise, adolescents will be confused by body changes that
accompany puberty. Similarly, parental monitoring in sexual
possibility situations, as well as in other situations (e.g., when
alcohol or drugs may be present), will need to occur earlier
than in the past. In all cases, programs to prevent early sexual
activity will present a challenge to program planners given
the cognitive developmental status of the adolescents and the
complexities of presenting information about the physiology
and psychology of sexuality.
Research and Theory Development
Scholars of adolescent development have accepted the
importance of the integration of biological, psychological,
and contextual processes long before it was fashionable in
other areas of developmental science. The theoretical frame-
works discussed earlier (developmental contextualism and
holistic interactionism) are hallmarks for the acknowledg-
ment of the importance of integrated biological, psycho-
logical, and social perspectives on development. These
theoretical perspectives are consistent with the emerging

316
Puberty, Sexuality, and Health
perspective that processes of development can only be under-
stood by considering the multiple systems that function at
multiple levels of development, from the genetic, molecular,
and cellular levels to the societal level (Susman, 1998).
Given these complexities, the following principles might
guide research in the future.
First, models that consider multiple biological, psycholog-
ical, and contextual levels of functioning will be inter-
disciplinary, bringing together the expertise of multiple
professionals. An example of such interdisciplinary research
in the future is that offered by the Human Genome Project,
which offers a myriad of possibilities for linking individual
genes or patterns of genes to speciﬁc behaviors in speciﬁc con-
texts. Given that experiences affect the timing of puberty and
that genes are responsible for the initiation of puberty, future
interdisciplinary studies have the potential of identifying
genes that link experience and the onset of puberty.
Second, the complexity of integrating multiple levels of
analysis necessarily implies that the scale and scope of in-
vestigations will be larger than in the past. Nonetheless,
hypothesis-driven, small-scale studies at speciﬁc levels of
analysis are critically important to continue as well. If studies
focus on one level of analysis, such as the biological level, it
is critical to acknowledge the contribution of mediators and
moderators at other levels as well.
Third, methodological innovations and the integration of
biology and behavior are possible given the advances in
statistical models in the last decade. In addition, theoretical
innovations act in concert with methodological innovations.
This premise is nowhere more apparent than in the new
methodologies for considering the dynamic interplay
between hormones and behavior. The dynamic and changing
nature of physical maturation, hormones, and psychological
characteristics at puberty now can be captured in longitudinal
statistical models using estimates of how changes in one
domain (hormones) can lead to changes in another domain
(behavior). Additionally, perspectives like the holistic inter-
action model proposed by D. Magnusson (1999) capture dy-
namic holistic processes through related methodological
strategies (e.g., longitudinal cluster analysis) developed by
Bergman and Magnusson (1997). These methodological
strategies look for patterns or conﬁgurations in developmen-
tal processes.
REFERENCES
Achenbach, T. M. (1991). Manual for Child Behavior Checklist/
4-18 and 1991 Proﬁle. Burlington: University of Vermont.
Andersson, T., & Magnusson, D. (1990). Biological maturation in
adolescence and the development of drinking habits and alcohol
abuse among young males: A prospective longitudinal study.
Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 19, 33–42.
Angold, A., Costello, E. J., Erkanli, A., & Worthman, C. (1999).
Pubertal changes in hormone levels and depression in girls.
Psychological Medicine, 29, 1043–1053.
Angold, A., Costello, E. J., & Worthman, C. M. (1998). Puberty and
depression: The roles of age, pubertal status and pubertal timing.
Psychological Medicine, 28, 51–61.
Angold, A., & Worthman, C. (1993). Puberty onset of gender differ-
ences in rates of depression: A developmental, epidemiologic
and neuroendocrine perspective. Journal of Affective Disorders,
29, 145–158.
Apter, D., Reinila, M., & Vikho, R. (1989). Some endocrine charac-
teristics of early menarche, a risk factor for breast cancer, are
preserved into adulthood. International Journal of Cancer, 44,
783–787.
Archer, J. (1991). The inﬂuence of testosterone on human aggres-
sion. British Journal of Psychology, 82, 1–28.
Ary, D. V., Duncan, T. E., Biglan, A., Metzler, C. W., Noell, J. W., &
Smolkowski, K. (1999). Development of adolescent problem
behavior. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 27, 141–150.
Barnes, H. V. (1975). Physical growth and development during
puberty. Medical Clinics of North America, 59, 1305–1317.
Bebbington, P. E., Dunn, G., Jenkins, R., Lewis, G., Brugha, T.,
Farrell, M., & Meltzer, H. (1998). The inﬂuence of age and sex
on the prevalence of depressive conditions: Report from the
National Survey of Psychiatric Morbidity. Psychological Medi-
cine, 28, 9–19.
Belsky, J., Steinberg, L., & Draper, P. (1991). Childhood experi-
ence, interpersonal development, and reproductive strategy: An
evolutionary theory of socialization. Child Development, 62,
647–670.
Bergman, L. R., & Magnusson, D. (1997). A person-oriented
approach in research on developmental psychopathology.
Development and Psychopathology, 9, 291–319.
Birdsall, M. A., Farquhar, C. M., & White, H. D. (1997). Associa-
tion between polycystic ovaries and extent of coronary artery
disease in women having cardiac catheterization. Annals of
Internal Medicine, 126, 32–35.
Blos, P. (1962). On adolescence: A psychoanalytical interpretation.
New York: Free Press.
Blum, W. F., Englaro, P., Hanitsch, S., Juul, A., Hertel, N. T., Muller,
J., Skakkebaek, M. L., Heinman, M., Birkett, A. M., Attanasio,
W., Kiess, W., & Rascher, W. (1997). Plasma leptin levels in
healthy children and adolescents: Dependence on body mass
index, body fat mass, gender, pubertal stage, and testosterone.
Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism, 82, 2904–
2910.
Blyth, D. A., Simmons, R. G., & Zakin, D. F. (1985). Satisfaction
with body image for early adolescent females: The impact of
pubertal timing within different school environments. Journal
of Youth and Adolescence, 14, 207–225.

References
317
Blythe, M. J., & Rosenthal, S. L. (2000). Female adolescent sexual-
ity. Promoting healthy sexual development. Obstetrics and
Gynecology in Clinics of North America, 27, 125–141.
Bondy, P. K. (1985). Disorders of the adrenal cortex. In J. D. Wilson
& D. W. Foster (Eds.), Williams textbook of endocrinology
(pp. 816–890). Philadelphia: Saunders.
Bonjour, J., Theintz, G., Buchs, B., Slosman, D., & Rizzoli,
R. (1991). Critical years and stages of puberty for spinal and
femoral bone mass accumulation during adolescence. Journal of
Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism, 73, 555–563.
Brain, P. F. (1994). Hormonal aspects of aggression and violence.
In A. J. Reiss Jr., K. A. Miczek, & J. I. Roth (Eds.), Understand-
ing and preventing violence: Vol. 2. Biobehavioral inﬂuences
(pp. 173–244). Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Brain, P. F., & Susman, E. J. (1997). Hormonal aspects of antisocial
behavior and violence. In D. M. Stoff, J. Breiling, & J. Maser
(Eds.), Handbook of antisocial behavior (pp. 314–323). New
York: Wiley.
Brandtstaedter, J. (1998). Action perspectives on human develop-
ment. In W. Damon (Series Ed.) & R. M. Lerner (Vol. Ed.),
Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 1. Theoretical models of
human development (pp. 807–863). New York: Wiley.
Brandstaedter, J., & Lerner, R. M. (1999). Action and self-
development: Theory and research through the life span. Thou-
sand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Brener, N. D., & Collins, J. L. (1998). Co-occurrence of health-risk
behaviors among adolescents in the United States. Journal of
Adolescent Health, 22, 209–213.
Brindis, C. D., Ozer, E. M., Handley, M., Knopf, D. K., Millstein,
S. G., & Irwin, C. E. (1998). Improving adolescent health: An
analysis and synthesis of health policy recommendations, full
report. San Francisco: University of California, San Francisco.
Brooks-Gunn, J., & Petersen, A. C. (1983). Girls at puberty:
Biological and psychosocial perspectives. New York : Plenum
Press.
Brooks-Gunn, J., Petersen, A. C., & Eichorn, D. (1985). The study
of maturational timing effects in adolescence [Special issue].
Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 14, 149–161.
Brooks-Gunn, J., & Reiter, E. O. (1990). The role of pubertal
processes. In S. S. Feldman & G. R. Elliott (Eds.), At the thresh-
old: The developing adolescent (pp. 16–53). Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Brooks-Gunn, J., & Warren, M. P. (1985). Measuring physical status
and timing in early adolescence: A developmental perspective.
Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 14, 163–189.
Brooks-Gunn, J., & Warren, M. P. (1989). Biological and social
contributions to negative affect in young adolescent girls. Child
Development, 60, 40–55.
Cairns, R. B. (1997). Socialization and sociogenesis. In D.
Magnusson (Ed.), The lifespan development of individuals:
Behavioral, neurobiological and psychosocial perspectives: A
synthesis (pp. 277–295). NewYork: Cambridge University Press.
Cairns, R. B., & Rodkin, P. C. (1998). Phenomena regained: From
conﬁgurations to pathways. In R. B. Cairns & L. R. Bergman
(Eds.), Methods and models for studying the individual (pp. 245–
265). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Cairns, R. B., & Stoff, D. M. (1996). Conclusion: A synthesis of
studies on the biology of aggression and violence. In D. M.
Stoff & R. B. Cairns (Eds.), Aggression and violence: Genetic,
neurobiological and biosocial perspectives. Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Caspi, A., Henry, B., McGee, R. O., Mofﬁtt, T. E., & Silva, P. A.
(1995). Temperamental origins of child and adolescent behavior
problems: From age three to ﬁfteen. Child Development, 66,
55–68.
Caspi, A., & Mofﬁtt, T. E. (1991). Individual differences are accen-
tuated during periods of social change: Sample case of girls at
puberty. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 61,
157–168.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (1999). Youth Risk
Behavior Survey [On-line]. Available at www.cdc.gov/epo/
mmwr/preview/mmwr.html/ss4905a1.htm.
Chrousos, G. P. (1998). Stressors, stress, and neuroendocrine inte-
gration of the adaptive response. Stress of Life: From Molecules
to Man, Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 851,
311–335.
Chrousos, G. P., & Gold, P. W. (1992). The concepts of stress and
stress system disorders. Journal of the American Medical Asso-
ciation, 267, 244–1252.
Cizza, G., Dorn, L. D., Lotsikas, A., Sereika, S., Rotenstein, D., &
Chrousos, G. P. (2001). Circulating plasma leptin and IGF-1
levels in girls with premature adrenarche: Potential implications
of preliminary study. Hormone and Metabolic Research, 33,
138–143.
Cohen, R., & Rosenfeld, R. G. (1996). Growth regulation. In J. E.
Grifﬁn & S. R. Agate (Eds.), Textbook of endocrine physiology
(pp. 244–259), New York: Oxford University Press.
Coie, J. D., Watt, N. F., West, S. G., Hawkins, J. D., Asarnow, J. R.,
Marksman, H. J., Ramee, S. L., Shure, M. D., & Long, B. (1993).
The science of prevention: A conceptual framework and some
directions for a national research program. American Psycholo-
gist, 48, 1013–1022.
Constantino, J. N., Grosz, D., Saenger, P., Chandler, D. W., Nardi,
R., & Earls, F. J. (1993). Testosterone and aggression in children.
Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry, 32, 1217–1222.
Counts, D. R., Pescovitz, O. H., Barnes, K. M., Hench, K. D.,
Chrousos, G. P., Sherins, R. J., Comite, F., Loriaux, D. L., &
Cutler, G. B., Jr. (1987). Dissociation of adrenarche and
gonadarche in precocious puberty and in isolated hypogo-
nadotropic hypogonadism. Journal of Clinical Endocrinology
and Metabolism, 64, 1174–1178.
Crockett, L. J., & Petersen, A. C. (1987). Pubertal status and psy-
chosocial development: Findings from the Early Adolescence

318
Puberty, Sexuality, and Health
Study. In R. M. Lerner & T. T. Foch (Eds.), Biological-
psychosocial interactions in early adolescence: Child psychol-
ogy (pp. 173–188). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Dorn, L. D., Hitt, S., & Rotenstein, D. (1999). Psychological and
cognitive differences in children with premature vs. on-time
adrenarche. Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine,
153, 137–145.
Dorn, L. D., Susman, E. J., Nottelmann, E. D., Inoff-Germain, G., &
Chrousos, G. P. (1990). Perceptions of puberty: Adolescent, par-
ent, and health care personnel ratings of pubertal stage. Develop-
mental Psychology, 28, 322–329.
Downs, A., & Fuller, M. J. (1991). Recollections of spermarche: An
exploratory investigation. Current Psychology: Research and
Reviews, 10, 93–102.
Dubas, J. S., Graber, J. A., & Petersen, A. C. (1991). The effects of
pubertal development on achievement during adolescence.
American Journal of Education, 99, 444–460.
Dunaif, A. (1997). Insulin resistance and the polycystic ovary
syndrome: Mechanism and implications for pathogenesis.
Endocrine Review, 18, 774–800.
Dunaif, A. (1999). Insulin action in the polycystic ovary syndrome.
Endocrinology and Metabolism Clinics of North America, 28,
341–359.
Dunaif, A., Futterweit, W., Segal, K. R., & Dobrijansky, A. (1989).
Profound peripheral insulin resistance independent of obesity in
the polycystic ovary syndrome. Diabetes, 38, 1165–1174.
Duncan, P. D., Ritter, P. L., Dornbusch, S. M., Gross, R. T., &
Carlsmith, J. M. (1985). The effects of pubertal timing on body
image, school behavior, and deviance. Journal of Youth and
Adolescence, 14, 227–235.
East, P. L. (1996). The younger sisters of childbearing adolescents:
Their attitudes, expectations, and behaviors. Child Development,
67, 267–282.
East, P. L., & Shi, C. R. (1997). Pregnant and parenting adolescents
and their younger sisters: The inﬂuence of relationship qualities
for younger sister outcomes. Journal of Development and
Behavioral Pediatrics, 18, 84–90.
Ellis, B. J., & Garber, J. (2000). Psychosocial antecedents of varia-
tion in girls’ pubertal timing: Maternal depression, stepfather
presence, and marital and family stress. Child Development, 71,
485–501.
Ellis, B. J., McFadyen-Ketchum, S., Dodge, K. A., Pettit, G. S., &
Bates, J. E. (1999). Quality of early family relationships and in-
dividual differences in the timing of pubertal maturation in girls:
A longitudinal test of an evolutionary model. Journal of Person-
ality and Social Psychology, 77, 387–401.
Emans, S. J., & Biro, F. (1998). Secondary sexual characteristics
and menses in young girls (Letter to the editor). Pediatrics, 101,
949–950.
Faust, M. S. (1969). Developmental maturity as a determinant
of prestige in adolescent girls. Child Development, 38, 1025–
1034.
Finkelstein, J. W., Susman, E. J., Chinchilli, V., Kunselman, S. J.,
D’Arcangelo, M. R., Schwab, J., Demers, L. M., Liben, L.,
Lookingbill, M. S., & Kulin, H. E. (1997). Estrogen or testos-
terone increases self-reported aggressive behavior in hypogo-
nadal adolescents. Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and
Metabolism, 82, 2433–2438.
Finkelstein, J. W., Susman, E. J., Chinchilli, V. M., D’Arcangelo, M.
R., Kunselman, S. J., Schwab, J., Demers, L. M., Liben, L. S., &
Kulin, H. E. (1998). Effects of estrogen or testosterone on self-
reported sexual responses and behaviors in hypogonadal adoles-
cents. Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism, 83,
2281–2285.
Flannery, D. J., Rowe, D. C., & Gulley, B. L. (1993). Impact of pu-
bertal status, timing and age on adolescent sexual experience and
delinquency. Journal of Adolescent Research, 8, 21–40.
Ford, D. H., & Lerner, R. M. (1992). Developmental systems theory:
An integrative approach. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Forest, M. G. (1989). Physiological changes in circulating andro-
gens. In M. G. Forest (Ed.), Androgens in childhood
(pp. 104–129). Basel: Karger.
Fredriks, A. M., Van Buuren, S., Burgmeijer, R. J. F., Muelmeester,
J. F., Roelien, J., Brugman, E., Roede, M. J., Verloove-
Vanhorick, S. P., & Wit, J. M. (2000). Continuing positive secu-
lar growth change in the Netherlands 1955–1997. Pediatric
Research, 47, 316–323.
Frisch, R. E. (1984). Body fat, puberty and fertility. Biological
Reviews of the Cambridge Philosophical Society, 59, 161–188.
Frisch, R. E., & MacArthur, J. (1974). Menstrual cycles: Fatness as
a determinant of minimum weight for height necessary for their
maintenance or onset. Science, 185, 949–951.
Gaddis, A., & Brooks-Gunn, J. (1985). The male experience of
pubertal change. Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 14, 61–69.
Garn, S. M. (1992). Physical growth and development. In S. B.
Friedman, M. Fisher, & SK Schonberg (Eds.), Comprehensive
adolescent health care (pp. 18–23). St. Louis, MO: Quality
Medical.
Ge, X., Brody, G. H., Conger, R. D., & Simons, R. L. (in press). Pu-
bertal transition and African American children’s internalizing
and externalizing symptoms. Journal of Youth and Adolescence.
Ge, X., Conger, R. D., & Elder, G. H. (2001a). Pubertal transition,
stressful life events, and the emergence of gender differences in
adolescent depressive symptoms. Developmental Psychology,
37, 404–417.
Ge, X., Conger, R. D., & Elder, G. H. (2001b). The relationship
between pubertal status and psychological distress in adolescent
boys. Journal of Research on Adolescence, 11, 49–70.
Ge, X., Conger, R. D., & Elder, G. H., Jr. (1996). Coming of age too
early: Pubertal inﬂuences on girls’vulnerability to psychological
distress. Child Development, 67, 3386–3400.
Gell, J. S., Carr, B. R., Sasano, I. I., Atkins, B., Margarf, L., Mason,
J. I., & Rainey, W. E. (1998). Adrenarche results from devel-
opment of a 3-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase-deﬁcient

References
319
adrenal reticularis. Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and
Metabolism, 83, 3695–3701.
Gerver, W. J., De Bruin, R., & Drayer, N. M. (1994). A persisting
secular trend for body measurements in Dutch children: The
Oosterwolde II Study. Acta Paediatrica, 83, 812–814.
Giedd, J. N., Blumenthal, J., Jeffries, N. O., Rajapakse, J. C.,
Vaituzis, A. C., Liu, H., Berry, Y. C., Tobin, M., Nelson, J., &
Castellanos, F. X. (1999). Development of the human corpus
callosum during childhood and adolescence: A longitudinal MRI
study. Progress in Neuro-psychopharmacology and Biological
Psychiatry, 21, 1185–1201.
Glickman, S. E., Frank, L. G., Davidson, J. M., Smith, E. R., &
Siiteri, P. K. (1987). Androstenedione may organize or activate
sex-reversed traits in female spotted hyenas. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Science, 84, 3444–3447.
Goodyer, I. M., Herbert, J., Tamplin, A., & Altham, P. M. (2000).
First-episode major depression in adolescents: Affective, cogni-
tive and endocrine characteristics of risk status and predictors of
onset. British Journal of Psychiatry, 176, 142–149.
Graber, J. A., Brooks-Gunn, J., & Warren, M. P. (1995). The
antecedents of menarcheal age: Heredity, family environment,
and stressful life events. Child Development, 66, 346–359.
Graber, J. A., Brooks-Gunn, J., & Warren, M. P. (in press). Pubertal
effects on adjustment in girls: Moving from demonstrating effects
to identifying pathways. Journal of Youth and Adolescence.
Graber, J. A., Lewisohn, P. M., Seeley, J. R., & Brooks-Gunn, J.
(1997). Is psychopathology associated with the timing of puber-
tal development? Journal of the American Academy of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry, 36, 1768–1776.
Grumbach, M. M., & Styne, D. M. (1992). Puberty: Ontogeny, neu-
roendocrinology, physiology, and disorders. In J. D. Wilson &
P. W. Foster (Eds.), Williams textbook of endocrinology
(pp. 1139–1231). Philadelphia: Saunders.
Hall, G. S. (1904). Adolescence. New York: Appleton.
Halpern, C. T., Udry, J. R., & Suchindran, C. (1998). Monthly mea-
sures of salivary testosterone predict sexual activity in adoles-
cent males. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 27, 445–465.
Halpern, C. T., Udry, J. R., & Suchindran, C. (1997). Testosterone
predicts initiation of coitus in adolescent females. Psychoso-
matic Medicine, 59, 161–171.
Halpern, C. T., Udry, J. R., Campbell, B., & Suchindran, C. (1999).
Effects of body fat on weight concerns, dating, and sexual activ-
ity: A longitudinal analysis of Black and White adolescent girls.
Developmental Psychology, 35, 721–736.
Hayward, C., Killen, J. D., Wilson, D. M., Hammer, L. D., Litt, I.
F., Kraemer, H. C., Haydel, F., Varaday, A., & Taylor, C. B.
(1997). Psychiatric risk associated with early puberty in adoles-
cent girls. Journal of the American Academy of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry, 36, 255–262.
Herman-Giddens, M. E., Slora, E. J., Wasserman, R. C., Bourdony,
C. J., Bhapkar, M. V., Koch, G. G., & Hasemeier, C. (1997). Sec-
ondary sexual characteristics and menses in young girls seen in
ofﬁce practice: A study from the Pediatric Research in Ofﬁce
Settings Network. Pediatrics, 99, 505–512.
Hinde, R. A. (1991). When is an evolutionary approach useful?
Child Development, 62, 671–675.
Hutchinson, K. A. (1995). Androgens and sexuality. The American
Journal of Medicine, 98, 111S–115S.
Ibáñez, L., de Zegher, F., & Potau, N. (1999). Anovulation after pre-
cocious pubarche: Early markers and time course in adoles-
cence. Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism, 84,
2691–2695.
Ibáñez, L., Potau, N., Virdis, R., Zampolli, M., Terzi, C., Gussinye,
M., Carrascosa, A., & Vicens-Calvet, E. (1993). Postpubertal
outcomes in girls diagnosed of premature pubarche during child-
hood: Increased frequency of functional ovarian hyperandro-
genism. Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism, 76,
1599–1603.
Ibáñez, L., Potau, N., Zampolli, M., Street, M. E., & Carrascosa, A.
(1997). Girls diagnosed with premature pubarche show an exag-
gerated ovarian androgen synthesis from the early stages of
puberty: Evidence from gonadotropin-releasing hormone antag-
onist testing. Fertility and Sterility, 67, 849–855.
Inoff-Germain, G., Arnold, G. S., Nottelmann, E. D., Susman, E. J.,
Cutler, G. B., Jr., & Chrousos, G. P. (1988). Relations between
hormone levels and observational measures of aggressive behav-
ior of early adolescents in family interactions. Developmental
Psychology, 24, 129–139.
Jones, B., Leeton, J., McLeod, I., & Wood, C. (1972). Factors inﬂu-
encing the age of menarche in a lower socio-economic group in
Melbourne. Medical Journal of Australia, 2, 533–535.
Jones, H. E. (1938). The California adolescent growth study. Jour-
nal of Educational Research, 31, 561–567.
Jones, M. C. (1958). A study of socialization patterns at the high
school level. Journal of Genetic Psychology, 92, 87–111.
Jones, M. C., & Bayley, N. (1950). Physical maturing among boys
as related to behavior. Journal of Educational Psychology, 41,
129–148.
Jones, M. C., Bayley, N., & Jones, H. E. (1948). Physical maturing
among boys as related to behavior. American Psychologist, 3,
264.
Kampert, J. B., Whittemore, A. S., & Paffenbarger, R. S., Jr. (1988).
Combined effect of childbearing, menstrual events, and body
size on age-speciﬁc breast cancer risk. American Journal of
Epidemiology, 128, 962–979.
Kaplowitz, P. B., Cockerell, J. L., & Young, R. B. (1985). Premature
adrenarche. Clinical Pediatrics, 25, 28–34.
Kaplowitz, P. B., Oberﬁeld, S. E., and the Drug and Therapeutics
and Executive Committees of the Lawson Wilkins Pediatric
Endocrine Society. (1999). Reexamination of the age limit for
deﬁning when puberty is precocious in girls in the United States:
Implications for evaluation and treatment. Pediatrics, 104,
936–941.

320
Puberty, Sexuality, and Health
Kaufmann, R. B., Spitz, A. M., Strauss, L. T., Morris, L., Santelli, J.
S., Koonin, L. M., & Marks, J. S. (1998). The decline in US teen
pregnancy rates, 1990–1995. Pediatrics, 102, 1141–1147.
Key, T. J. (1999). Serum oestradiol and breast cancer risk.
Endocrine-Related Cancer, 6, 175–180.
Kiess, W., Reich, A., Meyer, K., Glasow, A., Deutscher, J., Klammt,
J., Yang, Y., Muller, G., & Kratzsch, J. (1999). A role for leptin in
sexual maturation and puberty? Hormone Research, 51, 55–63.
Kim, K., & Smith, P. K. (1998). Retrospective survey of parental
marital relations and child reproductive development. Interna-
tional Journal of Behavioral Development, 22, 729–751.
Kim, K., Smith, P. K., & Palermiti, A.-L. (1997). Conﬂict in child-
hood and reproductive development. Evolution and Human
Behavior, 18, 109–142.
Knobil, E. (1988). The hypothalamic gonadotrophic hormone re-
leasing hormone (GnRH) pulse generator in the rhesus monkey
and its neuroendocrine control. Human Reproduction, 3, 29–31.
Kulin, H. E., Frontera, M. A., Demers, L. M., Barthlomew, M. J., &
Lloyd, T. A. (1989). The onset of sperm production in pubertal
boys: Relationship to gonadotropin excretion. American Journal
of Diseases of Children, 143, 190–193.
Kulin, H. E., Finkelstein, J. W., D’Arcangelo, R., Susman, E. J.,
Chinchilli, V., Kunselman, S., Schwab, J., Demers, L.,
Lookingbill, G. (1997). Diversity of pubertal testosterone
changes in boys with constitutional delay in growth and/or
adolescence. Journal of Child Clinical Endocrinology, 10, 1–6.
Lange, N., Giedd, J. N., Castellanos, F. X., Vaituzis, A. C., &
Rapoport, J. L. (1997). Variability of human brain structure size:
Ages 4–20. Psychiatry Research, 74, 1–12.
Lauritsen, J. L., & Swicegood, C. G. (1997). The consistency of
self-reported initiation of sexual activity. Family Planning
Perspectives, 29, 215–221.
Lerner, R. M. (1987). A life-span perspective for early adolescence.
In R. M. Lerner & T. T. Foch (Eds.), Biological-psychological
interactions in early adolescence (pp. 1–34). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Lerner, R. M. (1998). Theories of human development: Contempo-
rary perspectives. In W. Damon (Series Ed.) & R. M. Lerner
(Vol. Ed.), Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 1. Theoretical
models of human development (pp. 1–24). New York: Wiley.
Lerner, R. M., & Foch, T. T. (Eds.). (1987). Biological-psychological
interactions in early adolescence. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Lewontin, R., & Levins, R. (2000). Let the numbers speak. Interna-
tional Journal of Health Services, 30, 873–877.
Li, C. I., Malone, K. E., White, E., & Daling, J. R. (1997). Age when
maximum height is reached as a risk factor for breast cancer
among U.S. women. Epidemiology, 8, 559–565.
Lovejoy, J. C. (1998). The inﬂuence of sex hormones on obesity
across the female life span. Journal of Women’s Health, 7,
1247–1256.
Maccoby, E. E. (1991). Different reproductive strategies in males
and females. Child Development, 62, 676–681.
Magnusson, C. M., Persson, I. R., Baron, J. A., Ekbom, A.,
Bergstrom, R., & Adami, H. O. (1999). The role of reproductive
factors and use of oral contraceptives in the aetiology of breast
cancer in women aged 50 to 74 years. International Journal of
Cancer, 80, 231–236.
Magnusson, D. (1981). Toward a psychology of situations: An inter-
actional perspective. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Magnusson, D. (1999). Holistic interactionism: A perspective for
research on personality development. In L. A. Pervin & O. P.
John (Eds.), Handbook of personality: Theory and research
(2nd ed., pp. 219–247). New York: Guilford Press.
Magnusson, D., & Cairns, R. B. (1996). Developmental science:
Toward a uniﬁed framework. In R. B. Cairns, G. Elder, & J.
Costello (Eds.), Developmental science (pp. 7–30). New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Magnusson, D., & Stattin, H. (1998). Person-context interaction
theories. In W. Damon (Series Ed.) & R. M. Lerner (Vol. Ed.),
Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 1. Theoretical models of
human development (pp. 685–759). New York: Wiley.
Magnusson, D., Stattin, H., & Allen, V. (1985). Biological matura-
tion and social development: A longitudinal study of some ad-
justment processes from mid-adolescence to adulthood. Journal
of Youth and Adolescence, 14, 267–283.
Malo, J., & Tremblay, R. E. (1997). The impact of paternal alco-
holism and maternal social position on boys’ school adjustment,
pubertal maturation and sexual behavior: A test of two compet-
ing hypotheses. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry and
Allied Disciplines, 38, 187–197.
Mantzoros, C. S. (2000). Role of leptin in reproduction. Annals of
the New York Academy of Sciences, 900, 174–183.
Mantzoros, C. S., Flier, J. S., & Rogol, A. D. (1997). A longitudinal
assessment of hormonal and physical alterations during normal
puberty in boys: V. Rising leptin levels may signal the onset of
puberty. Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism, 82,
1066–1070.
Marshall, W. A., & Tanner, J. M. (1969). Variations in patterns of
pubertal change in girls. Archives of Disease in Childhood, 44,
291–303.
Marshall, W. A., & Tanner, J. M. (1970). Variations in patterns of
pubertal changes in boys. Archives of Disease in Childhood, 45,
15–23.
Mazur, A., & Booth, A. (1998). Testosterone and dominance in men.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 21, 353–397.
McClintock, M. K. (1998). Whither menstrual synchrony? Annual
Review of Sex Research, 9, 77–95.
Medhamurthy, R., Gay, V. L., & Plant, T. M. (1990). The prepuber-
tal hiatus in gonadotropin secretion in the male rhesus monkey
(Macaca mulatta) does not appear to involve endogenous opioid
peptide restraint of hypothalamic gonadotropin-releasing hor-
mone release. Endocrinology, 126, 1036–1042.
Meschke, L. L., Zweig, J. M., Barger, B. L., & Eccles, J. S. (2000).
Demographic, biological, psychological, and social predictors of

References
321
the timing of ﬁrst intercourse. Journal of Research on Adoles-
cence, 10, 315–338.
Mofﬁtt, T. E., Caspi, A., Belsky, J., & Silva, P. A. (1992). Childhood
experience and the onset of menarche: A test of a sociobiological
model. Child Development, 63, 47–58.
Morrison, J. A., Barton, B. A., Biro, F. M., Daniels, S. R., &
Sprecher, D. L. (1999). Overweight, fat patterning, and cardio-
vascular disease risk factors in black and white boys. Journal of
Pediatrics, 135, 451–457.
National Research Council, Board on Children, Youth, and Fami-
lies. (1999). Adolescent development and the biology of puberty.
Washington: National Academy Press.
Ness, R., Laskarzewski, P., & Price, R. A. (1991). Inheritance of ex-
treme overweight in black families. Human Biology, 63, 39–52.
Nolen-Hoeksema, S., & Girgus, J. S. (1994). The emergence of gen-
der differences in depression during adolescence. Psychological
Bulletin, 115, 424–443.
Nottelmann, E. D., Inoff-Germain, G., Susman, E. J., & Chrousos,
G. P. (1990). Hormones and behavior at puberty. In J. Bancroft &
J. M. Reinisch (Eds.), Adolescence and puberty (pp. 88–123),
New York: Oxford University Press.
Nottelmann, E. D., Susman, E. J., Inoff-Germain, G. E., Cutler,
G. B., Jr., Loriaux, D. L., & Chrousos, G. P. (1987). Develop-
mental processes in American early adolescence: Relations be-
tween adolescent adjustment problems and chronologic age,
pubertal stage and puberty-related serum hormone levels. Jour-
nal of Pediatrics, 110, 473–480.
Olweus, D. (1986). Aggression and hormones: Behavioral relation-
ships with testosterone and adrenaline. In D. Olweus, J. Block, &
M. Radke-Yarrow (Eds.), Developmental of antisocial and
prosocial behavior: Research, theories, and issues (pp. 51–72).
Orlando, FL: Academic Press.
Olweus, D., Mattson, A., Schalling, D., & Low, H. (1988). Circulat-
ing testosterone levels and aggression in adolescent males: A
causal analysis. Psychosomatic Medicine, 50, 261–272.
Ong, K. K., Ahmed, M. L., & Dunger, D. B. (1999). The role of
leptin in human growth and puberty. Acta Paediatr Supplement,
88, 95–98.
Oppenheimer, E., Linder, B., Saenger, P., & DiMartino-Nardi, J.
(1995). Decreased insulin sensitivity in prepubertal girls with
premature adrenarche and acanthosis nigricans. Journal of
Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism, 80, 614–618.
Orr, D. P., & Ingersoll, G. M. (1995). The contribution of level of
cognitive complexity and pubertal timing to behavioral risk in
young adolescents. Pediatrics, 95, 528–533.
Parker, R. G., Rees, K., Leung, K. M., & Legorreta, A. P. (1999).
Expression of risk factors for breast cancer in women younger
than 49. American Journal of Clinical Oncology, 22, 178–179.
Parker, S. T. (2000). Comparative developmental evolutionary
biology, anthropology, and psychology. In S. T. Parker, J.
Langer, & L. M. McKinney (Eds.), Biology, brain, and behavior
(pp. 1–24). Sante Fe, NM: Sar Press.
Petersen, A. C. (1988). Adolescent development. Annual Review of
Psychology, 39, 583–607.
Petersen, A. C., & Crockett, L. (1985). Pubertal timing and grade
effects on adjustment. Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 14,
191–206.
Petersen, A. C., & Taylor, B. (1980). The biological approach to
adolescence. In J. Adelson (Ed.), Handbook of adolescent
psychology (pp. 117–155). New York: Wiley.
Plant, T. M. (1995). Concluding remarks: Fourth international con-
ference on the control of the onset of puberty. In T. M. Plant &
P. A. Lee (Eds.), The neurobiology of puberty (pp. 337–342).
Bristol: The Journal of Endocrinology Limited.
Plant, T. M. (1998). The neurophysiology of puberty. Paper pre-
sented at Physical Development, Health Futures of Youth II:
Pathways to Adolescent, Maternal, and Child Health Bureau,
Annapolis, MD.
Raine, A., Brennan, P. J., & Farrington, D. P. (1997). Biosocial bases
of violence: Conceptual and theoretical issues. In A. Raine, D.
Farrington, P. Brennan, & S. A. Mednick (Eds.), Unlocking
crime: The biosocial key (pp. 1–20). New York: Plenum.
Reider, J., & Coupey, S. M. (1999). Update on pubertal development.
Current Opinion in Obstetrics and Gynecology, 11, 457–462.
Reiter, E. O., & Saenger, P. (1997). Premature adrenarche. The
Endocrinologist, 7, 85–88.
Richards, G. E., Cavallo, A., Meyer, W. J., III, Prince, M. J., Peters,
E. J., Stuart, C. A., & Smith, E. R. (1985). Obesity, acanthosis
nigricans, insulin resistance, and hyperandrogenism: Pediatric
perspective and natural history. Journal of Pediatrics, 107,
893–897.
Rockhill, B., Moorman, P. G., & Newman, B. (1998). Age at
menarche, time to regular cycling, and breast cancer. Cancer
Causes and Control, 9, 447–453.
Roemmich, J. N., Clark, P. A., Berr, S. S., Mai, V., Mantzoros, C. S.,
Flier, J. S., Weltman, A., & Rogol, A. D. (1998). Gender differ-
ences in leptin levels during puberty are related to the sub-
cutaneous fat depot and sex steroids. American Journal of
Physiology, 275, E543–E551.
Roemmich, J. N., & Rogol, A. D. (1999). Role of leptin during
childhood growth and development. Endocrinology and Metab-
olism Clinics of North America, 28, 749–764.
Rogol, A. D., Clark, P. A., & Roemmich, J. N. (2000). Growth and
pubertal development in children and adolescents: Effects of diet
and physical activity. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition,
72, 521S–528S.
Rogol, A. D., Roemmich, J. N., & Clark, P. A. (1998, September).
Growth at puberty. Paper presented at a workshop, Physical De-
velopment, Health Futures of Youth II: Pathways to Adolescent
health, Maternal and Child Health Bureau, Annapolis, MD.
Rosenﬁeld, R. L., Bachrach, L. K., Chernausek, S. D., Gertner,
J. M., Gottschalk, M., Hardin, D. S., Pescovitz, O. H., &
Saenger, P. (2000). Current age of onset of puberty (Letter to the
editor). Pediatrics, 106, 622.

322
Puberty, Sexuality, and Health
Rowe, D. (1999). Introduction to the special section on behavioural
genetics. International Journal of Behavioral Development, 23,
289–292.
Ryan, S. A., Millstein, S. G., & Irwin, C. E., Jr. (1996). Policy
section: Puberty questions asked by early adolescents: What do
they want to know? Adolescent Health, 19, 145–152.
Sanders, S. A., & Reinisch, J. M. (1990). Biological and social in-
ﬂuences on the endocrinology of puberty: Some additional con-
siderations. In J. Bancroft & J. M. Reinisch (Eds.), Adolescence
and puberty (pp. 50–62). New York: Oxford University Press.
Sanders, B., & Soares, M. P. (1986). Sexual maturation and spatial
ability in college students. Developmental Psychology, 22,
199–203.
Sapolsky, R. M. (1991). Testicular function, social rank, and per-
sonality among wild baboons. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 16,
281–293.
Saugstad, L. F. (1989a). Age at puberty and mental illness: Towards
a neurodevelopmental aetiology of Kraepelin’s endogenous
psychoses. British Journal of psychiatry, 155, 536–544.
Saugstad, L. F. (1989b). Mental illness and cognition in relation to
age at puberty: A hypothesis. Clinical Genetics, 36, 156–167.
Schaal, B., Tremblay, R., Soussignan, B., & Susman, E. J. (1996).
Male pubertal testosterone linked to high social dominance but
low physical aggression: A 7 year longitudinal study. Journal of
the American Academy of Child Psychiatry, 35, 1322–1330.
Sherwood, L. (1993). Human physiology: From cells to systems.
St. Paul, MN: West.
Siegel, S. F., Finegold, D. N., Urban, M. D., McVie, R., Lee, P. A.
(1992). Premature pubarche: Etiological heterogeneity. Journal
of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism, 74, 239–247.
Siegel, S., & Lee, P. (1992). Adrenal cortex and medulla. In
W. Hung (Ed.), Clinical pediatric endocrinology (pp. 200–201).
St. Louis, MO: Mosby.
Siegel, J. M., Yancey, A. K., Aneshensel, C. S., & Schuler, R.
(1999). Body image, perceived pubertal timing, and adolescent
mental health. Journal of Adolescent Health, 25, 155–165.
Silbereisen, R. K., Petersen, A. C., Albrecht, H. T., & Kracke, B.
(1989). Maturational timing and the development of problem be-
havior: Longitudinal studies in adolescence. Journal of Early
Adolescence, 9, 247–268.
Simmons, R., Blyth, A., Van Cleave, E., & Bush, D. (1979). Entry
into early adolescence: The impact of school structure, puberty,
and early dating on self-esteem. American Sociological Review,
44, 948–967.
Singh, S., & Darroch, J. E. (1999). Trends in sexual activity among
adolescent American women: 1982–1995. Family Planning
Perspectives, 31, 212–219.
Slemeda, C. W., Reister, T. K., Hui, S. L., Miller, J. Z., Christian, J.
C., & Johnston, C. C. (1994). Inﬂuence on skeletal mineraliza-
tion in children and adolescents: Evidence for varying effects of
sexual maturation and physical activity. Journal of Pediatrics,
125, 201–207.
Smolak, L., Levine, M. P., & Gralen, S. (1993). The impact of
puberty and dating on eating problems among middle school
girls. Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 22, 355–368.
Stattin, H., & Magnusson, D. (1989). The role of early aggressive
behavior in the frequency, seriousness, and types of later crime.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 57, 710–718.
Stattin, H., & Magnusson, D. (1990). Pubertal maturation in female
development. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Steinberg, L. D. (1987). Single parents, stepparents, and the suscep-
tibility of adolescents to antisocial peer pressure. Child Develop-
ment, 58, 269–275.
Steinberg, L. D. (1988). Reciprocal relations between parent-child
distance and pubertal maturation. Developmental Psychology,
24, 122–128.
Steinberg, L. D., & Hill, J. P. (1978). Patterns of family interaction
as a function of age, the onset of puberty, and formal thinking.
Developmental Psychology, 14, 683–684.
Stern, K., & McClintock, M. K. (1998). Regulation of ovulation by
human pheromones. Nature, 392, 177–179.
Stolz, H. R., & Stolz, L. M. (1944). Adolescent problems related to
somatic variations. Yearbook of the National Society for the
Study of Education, 43, 80–99.
Stratakis, C. A., & Chrousos, G. P. (1997). Neuroendocrinology and
pathophysiology of the stress system. In G. P. Chrousos, R.
McCarty, K. Pacák, G. Cizza, E. Sternberg, P. W. Gold, & R.
Kvetn´ansky´ (Eds.), Stress: Basic mechanisms and clinical
implications. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 771,
1–18.
Surbey, M. K. (1990). Family composition, stress, and the timing of
human menarche. In T. E. Ziegler & F. B. Bercovitch (Eds.),
Socioendocrinology of primate reproduction (pp. 11–32). New
York: Wiley-Liss.
Susman, E. J. (1997). Modeling developmental complexity in ado-
lescence: Hormones and behavior in context. Journal of Re-
search on Adolescence, 7, 283–306.
Susman, E. J. (1998). Biobehavioural development: An integrative
perspective. International Journal of Behavioral Development,
22, 671–679.
Susman, E. J., Dorn, L. D., & Chrousos, G. P. (1991). Negative af-
fect and hormone levels in young adolescents: Concurrent and
longitudinal perspectives. Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 20,
167–190.
Susman, E. J., & Finkelstein, J. W. (2001). Biology, development
and dangerousness. In L. Pagani & G. F. Pinard (Eds.), Contrib-
utors of clinical assessment of dangerousness: Empirical contri-
butions (pp. 23–46). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Susman, E. J., Finkelstein, J. W., Chinchilli, V. M., Schwab, J.,
Liben, L. S., D’Arcangelo, M. R., Meinke, J., Demers, L. M.,
Lookingbill, G., & Kulin, H. E. (1998). The effect of sex hor-
mone replacement therapy on behavior problems and moods in
adolescents with delayed puberty. Journal of Pediatrics, 133(4),
521–525.

References
323
Susman, E. J., Inoff-Germain, G., Nottelmann, E. D., Cutler, G. B.,
Loriaux, D. L., & Chrousos, G. P. (1987). Hormones, emotional
dispositions, and aggressive attributes in early adolescents.
Child Development, 58, 1114–1134.
Susman, E. J., Nottelmann, E. D., Dorn, L. D., Gold, P. W., &
Chrousos, G. P. (1989). The physiology of stress and behavioral
development. In David S. Palermo (Ed.), Coping with uncer-
tainty: Behavioral and developmental perspectives (pp. 17–37).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Susman, E. J., Nottelmann, E. D., Inoff, G. E., Dorn, L. D., Cutler,
G. B., Loriaux, D. L., & Chrousos, G. P. (1985). The relation of
relative hormonal levels and social-emotional behavior in young
adolescents. Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 14, 245–252.
Susman, E. J., & Petersen, A. C. (1992). Hormones and behavior in
adolescence. In E. R. McAnarney, R. E. Kreipe, D. P. Orr, &
G. D. Comerci (Eds.), Textbook of adolescent medicine
(pp. 125–130). New York: Saunders.
Susman, E. J., Worrall, B., Murowchick, E., Frobose, C., & Schwab,
J. (1996). Experience and neuroendocrine parameters of devel-
opment: Aggressive behaviors and competencies. In D. Stoff &
R. Cairns (Eds.), Neurobiological approaches to clinical aggres-
sion research (pp. 267–289). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Suter, K. J., Pohl, C. R., & Plant, T. M. (1998). The pattern and
tempo of the pubertal reaugmentation of open-loop pulsatile
gonadotropin-releasing hormone release assessed indirectly in
the male rhesus monkey (Macaca mulattta). Endocrinology, 139,
2447–2483.
Swarr, A. E., & Richards, M. H. (1996). Longitudinal effects of ado-
lescent girls’ pubertal development, perceptions of pubertal tim-
ing, and parental relations on eating problems. Developmental
Psychology, 32, 636–646.
Talbott, E., Guzick, D., Clerici,A., Berga, S., Detre, K.,Weimer, K., &
Kuller, L. (1995). Coronary heart disease risk factors in women
with polycystic ovary syndrome. Arteriosclerosis, Thrombosis,
and Vascular Biology, 15, 821–826.
Tanner, J. M. (1965). The relationship of puberty to other maturity
indicators and body composition in man. Symposia of the Society
for the Study of Human Biology, 6, 211.
Tanner, J. M. (1989). Foetus into man: Physical growth from con-
ception to maturity. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Tanner, J. M., & O’Keeffe, B. (1962). Age at menarche in Nigerian
school girls, with a note on their heights and weights from age 12
to 19. Human Biology, 34(3), 187–196.
Tersawa, E., Bridson, W. E., Nass, T. E., Noonan, J. J., & Dierschke,
D. J. (1984). Developmental changes in the luteinizing hormone
secretory pattern in peripubertal female rhesus monkeys: Com-
parison between gonadally intact and ovariectomized animals.
Endocrinology, 115, 2233–2240.
Tremblay, R. E, Schaal, B., Boulerice, B.,Arseneault, L., Soussignan,
R., & Perusse, D. (1997). Male physical aggression, social domi-
nance, and testosterone levels at puberty: A developmental per-
spective. InA. Raine, D. Farrington, P. Brennan, & S.A. Mednick
(Eds.), Biosocial bases of violence (pp. 271–291). New York:
Plenum Press.
Tschann, J. M., Adler, N. E., Irwin, C. E., Jr., Millstein, S. G.,
Turner, R. A., & Kegeles, S. M. (1994). Initiation of substance
use in early adolescence: The roles of pubertal timing and emo-
tional distress. Health Psychology, 13, 326–333.
Udry, J. R. (1979). Age at menarche, at ﬁrst intercourse, and at ﬁrst
pregnancy. Journal of Biosocial Science, 11(4), 433–441.
Udry, J. R., Billy, J. O. G., & Morris, N. M. (1986). Biosocial foun-
dation for adolescent female sexuality. Demography, 23, 217–
227.
Udry, R. J., Billy, J. O. G., Morris, N. M., Groff, T. R., & Raj, M. H.
(1985). Serum androgenic hormones motivate sexual behavior in
adolescent boys. Fertility and Sterility, 43, 90–94.
Udry, R., & Cliquet, R. L. (1982). A cross-cultural examination of
the relationship between ages at menarche, marriage and ﬁrst
birth. Demography, 19, 53–63.
Udry, R. J., & Talbert, L. M. (1988). Sex hormone effects on per-
sonality at puberty. Journal of Personality and Social Psychol-
ogy, 54, 291–295.
Van Goozen, S. H. M., Matthys, W., Cohen-Kettenis, P. T., Thijssen,
J. H. H., & van Engeland, H. (1998). Adrenal androgens and ag-
gression in conduct disorder prepubertal boys and normal con-
trols. Biological Psychiatry, 43, 156–158.
Vihko, R. K., & Apter, D. L. (1986). The epidemiology and en-
docrinology of the menarche in relation to breast cancer. Cancer
Surveys, 5, 561–571.
Warren, M. P., & Brooks-Gunn, J. J. (1989). Mood and behavior at
adolescence: evidence for hormonal factors. Journal of Clinical
Endocrinology and Metabolism, 69, 77–83.
Warren, M. P., Brooks-Gunn, J., Fox, R. P., Lancelot, C., Newman,
D., & Hamilton, W. G. (1991). Lack of bone accretion and amen-
orrhea: Evidence for a relative osteopenia in weight-bearing
bones. Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism, 72,
847–853.
Wattigney, W. A., Srinivasan, S. R., Chen, W., Greenlund, K. J., &
Berenson, G. S. (1999). Secular trend of earlier onset of menar-
che with increasing obesity in black and white girls: The
Bogalusa Heart Study. Ethnicity and Disease, 9, 181–189.
Weber, A., Clark, A. J. L., Perry, L. A., Honour, J. W., & Savage,
M. O. (1997). Diminished adrenal androgen secretion in familial
glucocorticoid deﬁciency implicates a signiﬁcant role for ACTH
in the induction of Adrenarche. Clinical Endocrinology, 46,
431–437.
Wichstrom, L. (2000). Psychological and behavioral factors unpre-
dictive of disordered eating: a prospective study of the general
adolescent population in Norway. International Journal of
Eating Disorders, 28, 33–42.
Wierson, M., Long, P. J., & Forehand, R. L. (1993). Toward a new
understanding of early menarche: The role of environmental
stress in pubertal timing. Adolescence, 28, 913–924.

324
Puberty, Sexuality, and Health
Williams, J. M., & Dunlop, L. C. (1999). Pubertal timing and
self-reported delinquency among male adolescents. Journal of
Adolescence, 22, 157–171.
Wilson, D. M., Killen, J. D., Hayward, C., Robinson, T. N.,
Hammer, L. D., Kraemer, H. C., Varady, A., & Taylor, C. B.
(1994). Timing and rate of sexual maturation and the onset of
cigarette and alcohol use among teenage girls. Archives of Pedi-
atrics and Adolescent Medicine, 148, 789–795.
Wyshak, G., & Frisch, R. E. (1982). Evidence for a secular trend
in age of menarche. New England Journal of Medicine, 306,
1033–1035.
Yalcinkaya, T. M., Siiteri, P. K., Vigne, J. L., Licht, P., Pavgi, S.,
Frank, L. G., & Glickman, S. E. (1993). A mechanism for viril-
ization of female spotted hyenas in utero. Science, 260,
1929–1931.
Zijdenbos, P. T., Worsley, A., Collins, K., Blumenthal, J., Giedd,
J. N., Rapoport, J. L., & Evans, A. C. (1999). Structural matura-
tion of neural pathways in children and adolescents. Science,
283, 1908–1911.

325
CHAPTER 13
Cognitive Development in Adolescence
JACQUELYNNE S. ECCLES, ALLAN WIGFIELD, AND JAMES BYRNES
COGNITIVE DEVELOPMENT
325
Age Changes in Structural and Functional Aspects
326
Gender and Ethnic Differences in Cognition
329
ACHIEVEMENT AND ACHIEVEMENT-RELATED
BELIEFS
329
The Junior High School Transition
330
The High School Transition
334
GENDER AND ACHIEVEMENT
334
Gender and Academic Achievement
335
Eccles’ Expectancy-Value Model of Achievement-Related
Choices and Performance
336
Gender and Self-Esteem
342
RACIAL AND ETHNIC GROUP DIFFERENCES
IN ACHIEVEMENT MOTIVATION
343
Ethnic Group Differences in Children’s Competence,
Control, and Attribution Beliefs
343
Ethnic Group Differences in Achievement
Values and Goals
344
Ethnicity and Motivation at the Interface Between
Expectancies and Values
344
SUMMARY
345
REFERENCES
345
In this chapter, we focus on two major aspects of adolescent
development: cognitive development and both achievement
and achievement motivation. First we discuss cognitive de-
velopment, pointing out the relevance of recent work for both
learning and decision making. Most of the chapter focuses on
achievement and achievement motivation. We summarize
current patterns of school achievement and recent changes in
both school completion and differential performance on stan-
dardized tests of achievement. Then we summarize both the
positive and negative age-related changes in school motiva-
tion and discuss how experiences in school might explain
these developmental patterns. Finally, we discuss both gen-
der and ethnic group differences in achievement motivation
and link these differences to gender and ethnic group dif-
ferences in academic achievement and longer-term career
aspirations.
COGNITIVE DEVELOPMENT
In this section, we review work related to cognitive develop-
ment. At a general level, the most important cognitive
changes during this period of life relate to the increasing abil-
ity of youth to think abstractly, consider the hypothetical
as well as the real, engage in more sophisticated and elabo-
rate information-processing strategies, consider multiple
dimensions of a problem at once, and reﬂect on oneself and on
complicated problems (see Keating, 1990). Indeed, such ab-
stract and hypothetical thinking is the hallmark of Piaget’s
formal operations stage assumed to begin during adolescence
and to continue through young adulthood (e.g., Piaget &
Inhelder, 1973; see the chapter by Feldman in this volume).
Although there is still considerable debate about when exactly
these kinds of cognitive processes emerge and whether their
emergence reﬂects global stagelike changes in cognitive skills
as described by Piaget, most theorists do agree that these
kinds of thought processes are more characteristic of youth’s
cognition than of younger children’s cognition.
At a more speciﬁc level, along with their implications for
learning and problem solving, these kinds of cognitive
changes affect individuals’ self-concepts, thoughts about
their future, and understanding of others. Theorists from
Erikson (1968) to Harter (1990), Eccles (Eccles & Barber,
1999), and Youniss (Youniss, McLellan, & Yates, 1997) have
suggested that the adolescent and emerging adulthood years
are a time of change in youth’s self-concepts, as they consider
what possibilities are available to them and try to come to
a deeper understanding of themselves. These sorts of self-
reﬂections require the kinds of higher-order cognitive
processes just discussed.
Finally, during adolescence individuals also become more
interested in understanding others’ internal psychological

326
Cognitive Development in Adolescence
characteristics, and friendships become based more on per-
ceived similarity in these characteristics (see Selman, 1980).
Again, these sorts of changes in person perception reﬂect the
broader changes in cognition that occur during adolescence.
We turn now to a more detailed discussion of cognitive
development during the adolescent years.
Are there age changes in the structural and functional
aspects of cognition, and do these age-related trajectories in
cognitive skills differ across gender and ethnic groups? In
this section we summarize the research relevant to these
questions. A fuller treatment can be found in sources such as
Byrnes (2001a, 2001b), Bjorklund (1999), and Feldman
(this volume).
Age Changes in Structural and Functional Aspects
Changes in Structural Aspects
Structural aspects of cognition include the knowledge pos-
sessed by an individual as well as the information-processing
capacity of that individual. Structuralist researchers often
focus on the following two questions: (a) What changes
occur in children’s knowledge as they progress through
the adolescent period? and (b) What changes occur in the
information-processing capacities of adolescents?
Knowledge Changes.
The term knowledge refers to
three kinds of information structures that are stored in long
term memory: declarative knowledge, procedural knowl-
edge, and conceptual knowledge (Byrnes, 2001a, 2001b).
Declarative knowledge or “knowing that” is a compilation
of all of the facts an adolescent knows (e.g., knowing
that 2 + 2  = 4; knowing that Harrisburg is the capital of
Pennsylvania). Procedural knowledge or “knowing how to”
is a compilation of all of the skills an adolescent knows (e.g.,
knowing how to add numbers; knowing how to drive a car).
The third kind of knowledge, conceptual knowledge, is the
representation of adolescents’ understanding of their declara-
tive and procedural knowledge. Conceptual knowledge is
“knowing why” (e.g., knowing why one should use the least
common denominator method to add fractions).
Various sources in the literature suggest that these forms
of knowledge increase with age (Byrnes, 2001). The clearest
evidence of such changes can be found in the National
Assessments of Educational Progress (NAEPs) conducted by
the U.S. Department of Education every few years. The
NAEP tests measure the declarative, procedural, and concep-
tual knowledge of fourth, eighth, and 12th graders (N’s >
17,000) in seven domains: reading, writing, math, science,
history, geography, and civics. In math, for example, NAEP
results show that children progress from knowing arithmetic
facts and being able to solve simple word problems in
Grade 4 to being able to perform algebraic manipulations,
create tables, and reason about geometric shapes by Grade 12
(Reese, Miller, Mazzeo, & Dossey, 1997). Although similar
gains are evident for each of the domains (Beatty, Reese,
Perksy, & Carr, 1996), in no case can it be said that a major-
ity of 12th graders demonstrate a deep conceptual under-
standing in any of the domains assessed (Byrnes, 2001a,
2001b). One reason for the low level of conceptual knowl-
edge in 12th graders is the abstract, multidimensional, and
counterintuitive nature of the most advanced questions in
each domain. Even in the best of circumstances, concepts
such as scarcity, civil rights, diffusion, limit, and conserva-
tion of energy are difﬁcult to grasp and illustrate. Moreover,
the scientiﬁc deﬁnitions of such concepts are often counter to
students’ preexisting ideas. As a result, there are numerous
studies showing misconceptions and faulty information
possessed by adolescents and adults (see Byrnes 2001a,
2001b; see also the chapter by Feldman in this volume).
In sum, then, one can summarize the results on knowledge
as follows:
•
In most school-related subject areas, there are modest,
monotonic increases in declarative, procedural, and con-
ceptual knowledge between the fourth grade and college
years.
•
Misconceptions abound in most school subjects and are
evident even in 12th graders and college students.
•
The most appropriate answer to the question “Does
knowledge increase during adolescence?” is the follow-
ing: It depends on the domain (e.g., math vs. interpersonal
relationships) and type of knowledge (e.g., declarative vs.
conceptual).
•
Although there is little evidence of dramatic and across-
domain increases in understanding, there is consistent
evidence of incremental increases in within-domain under-
standing as children move into and through adolescence.
Do these kinds of changes in knowledge inﬂuence behav-
ior? For example, do older adolescents make better life deci-
sions because they know more? Are they better employees?
Parents? College students? Lifelong learners? At some level,
the answer to these questions has to be yes. Certainly
expanded domain-speciﬁc knowledge makes it easier to
solve problems and perform complex tasks in activities very
closely linked to the same knowledge domain (Byrnes,
2001a, 2001b; Ericcson, 1996). But does expanded knowl-
edge on its own increase the wisdom of more general life
decisions? The answer to this question is less clear because

Cognitive Development
327
such decisions depend on many other aspects of cognitive as
well as motivational and emotional processes that inﬂuence
the likelihood of accessing and effectively using one’s stored
knowledge. For example, younger adolescents may have the
knowledge needed to make decisions or solve problems (on
achievement tests or in social situations) but may lack the
processing space needed to consider and combine multiple
pieces of information. We turn to these other aspects of cog-
nition now.
Capacity Changes.
Are there age-related increases in
cognitive processing capacity? Processing space is analogous
to random-access memory (RAM) on a computer. A very
good software package may not be able to work properly if
the RAM on a PC is too small. One key index of processing
capacity in humans is working memory—the ability to tem-
porarily hold something in memory (e.g., a phone number). It
used to be assumed that working memory capacity changes
very little after childhood. In fact, however, until quite
recently this assumption had not been adequately tested.
Several recent studies suggest that working memory does
increase during adolescence. For example, Zald and Iacono
(1998) charted the development of spatial working memory
in 14- and 20-year-olds by assessing their memory for the
location of objects that were no longer visible. They found
that the introduction of delays and various forms of cognitive
interference produced drops in performance that were
sharper in the younger than in the older participants. Simi-
larly, Swanson (1999) found monotonic increases in both
verbal and spatial working memory between the ages of 6
and 35 in a large normative sample. Such increases should
make it easier for older adolescents and adults to consider
multiple pieces of information simultaneously in making
important decisions. This hypothesis needs more extensive
study.
Changes in Functional Aspects of Cognition
Functionalist aspects of cognition include any mental
processes that alter, operate on, or extend incoming or exist-
ing information. Examples include learning (getting new
information into memory), retrieval (getting information out
of memory), reasoning (drawing inferences from single or
multiple items of information), and decision making (gener-
ating, evaluating, and selecting courses of action). As noted
earlier, both structural and functional aspects of cognition are
critical to all aspects of learning, decision-making, and cog-
nitive activities. For example, experts in a particular domain
learn new, domain-relevant items of information better than
novices do. Also, people are more likely to make appropriate
inferences and make good decisions when they have relevant
knowledge than when they do not have relevant knowledge
(Byrnes, 1998; Ericsson, 1996). With this connection in
mind, we can consider the ﬁndings sampled from several
areas of research (i.e., deductive reasoning, decision making,
other forms of reasoning) to get a sense of age changes in
functional aspects.
Deductive Reasoning.
People engage in deductive rea-
soning whenever they combine premises and derive a logi-
cally sound conclusion from these premises (S. L. Ward &
Overton, 1990). For example, given the premises (a) Either
the butler or the maid killed the duke and (b) The butler could
not have killed the duke, one can conclude The maid must
have killed the duke. Adolescents are likely to engage in de-
ductive reasoning as they try to make sense of what is going
on in a context and what they are allowed to do in that con-
text. Moreover, deductive reasoning is used when they write
argumentative essays, test hypotheses, set up algebra and
geometry proofs, and engage in debates and other intellectual
discussions. It is also critical to decision making and problem
solving of all kinds.
Although the issue of age differences in deduction skills
is somewhat controversial, most researchers believe that
there are identiﬁable developmental increases in deductive
reasoning skills between childhood and early adulthood.
Competence is ﬁrst manifested around age 5 or 6 in the abil-
ity to draw some types of conclusions from “if-then” (condi-
tional) premises, especially when these premises refer to
fantasy or make-believe content (e.g., Dias & Harris, 1988).
Several years later, children begin to understand the differ-
ence between conclusions that follow from conditional
premises and conclusions that do not (Byrnes & Overton,
1986; Girotto, Gilly, Blaye, & Light, 1989; Haars & Mason,
1986; Janveau-Brennan & Markovits, 1999), especially
when the premises refer to familiar content about taxonomic
or causal relations. Next, there are monotonic increases dur-
ing adolescence in the ability to draw appropriate conclu-
sions, explain one’s reasoning, and test hypotheses, even
when premises refer to unfamiliar, abstract, or contrary-to-
fact propositions (Klaczynski, 1993; Markovits & Vachon,
1990; Moshman & Franks, 1986; S. L. Ward & Overton,
1990). Again, however, performance is maximized on famil-
iar content about legal or causal relations (Klaczynski &
Narasimham, 1998). However, when the experimental con-
tent runs contrary to what is true (e.g., All elephants are
small animals. This is an elephant. Is it small?) or has no
meaningful referent (e.g., If there is a D on one side of a
card, there is a 7 on the other), less than half of older ado-
lescents or adults do well.

328
Cognitive Development in Adolescence
Performance on the latter tasks can, however, be improved
in older participants if the abstract problems are presented
after exposure to similar but more meaningful problems or if
the logic of the task is adequately explained (Klaczynski,
1993; Markovits & Vachon, 1990; S. L. Ward, Byrnes, &
Overton, 1990). Even so, such interventions generally have
only a weak effect. These ﬁndings imply that most of the de-
velopment after age 10 in deductive reasoning competence is
in the ability to suspend one’s own beliefs and think objec-
tively about the structure of an argument (e.g., “Let’s assume
for the moment that this implausible argument is true . . .”;
Moshman, 1998). Little evidence exists for an abstract,
domain-general ability that is spontaneously applied to new
and different content.
Decision Making.
When people make decisions, they
set a goal (e.g., get something to eat), compile options for
attaining that goal (e.g., go out, ﬁnd something in the refrig-
erator, etc.), evaluate these options (e.g., eating at home is
cheaper and healthier than eating out), and ﬁnally implement
the best option. Alternatively, they must decide whether to
engage in a particular behavior that is made available to them
in a speciﬁc situation (e.g., they decide whether to have
sexual intercourse in an intimate encounter or to accept an
offered alcoholic drink or illicit drug). Competent decision
making entails the ability to identify the risks and beneﬁts of
particular behaviors as well as the ability to identify options
likely to lead to positive, health-promoting outcomes (e.g.,
stable relationships, good jobs, physical health, emotional
health, etc.) or promote one’s short- and long-term goals.
Clearly, good decision-making skills are among the most
important cognitive skills adolescents need to acquire.
Given the centrality of decision making, it is surprising that
so few developmental studies have been conducted (Byrnes,
1998; Klaczynski, Byrnes, & Jacobs, 2001). Considered to-
gether, the widely scattered (and sometimes unreplicated)
ﬁndings suggest that older adolescents and adults seem to be
more likely than are younger adolescents or children to (a) un-
derstand the difference between options likely to satisfy mul-
tiple goals and options likely to satisfy only a single goal
(Byrnes & McClenny, 1994; Byrnes, Miller, & Reynolds,
1999), (b) anticipate a wider range of consequences of their
actions (Lewis, 1981; Halpern-Felsher & Cauffman, 2001),
and (c) learn from their decision-making successes and fail-
ures with age (Byrnes & McClenny, 1994; Byrnes, Miller, &
Reynolds, 1999). There is also some suggestion that adoles-
cents are more likely to make good decisions when they have
metacognitive insight into the factors that affect the quality of
decision making (D. C. Miller & Byrnes, 2001; Ormond,
Luszcz, Mann, & Beswick, 1991). However, most of the
studies that support these conclusions involved laboratory
tasks, hypothetical scenarios, or self-reports. In real-world
contexts, other emotional and motivational factors are likely
to seriously affect the quality of adolescents’ decisions. For
example, adolescents may think they will ﬁnd a particular out-
come enjoyable, only to learn later that it was not, either be-
cause they had inadequate self-knowledge or because they
failed to use the self-knowledge that they had. High states of
emotional arousal or intoxication can also reduce an adoles-
cent’s ability and motivation to generate, evaluate, and imple-
ment success-producing options and to adequately assess the
risks associated with various behavioral options. Hence, ado-
lescents and adults who look good in the lab may nevertheless
make poor decisions in the real world if they lack appropriate
self-regulatory strategies for dealing with such possibilities
(e.g., self-calming techniques, coping with peer pressure to
drink, etc.). Additional studies are clearly needed to examine
such issues. The recent work by Baltes and his colleagues on
the selection-optimization-compensation (SOC) models of
adaptive behavior provides one useful approach for such re-
search (see Baltes, Lindenberger, & Staudinger, 1998).
In contrast to the dearth of studies on decision making in
adolescents, there are quite a number of developmental stud-
ies in a related area of research: risk taking (Byrnes, 1998). If
a decision involves options that could lead to negative or
harmful consequences (i.e., anything ranging from mild
embarrassment to serious injury or death), adolescents who
pursue such options are said to have engaged in risk-taking
(Byrnes, Miller, & Schaefer, 1999). Although all kinds of risk
taking are of interest from scientiﬁc standpoint, most studies
have focused on age changes in physically harmful behaviors
such as smoking, drinking, and unprotected sex. Regrettably,
these studies reveal the opposite of what one would expect if
decision-making skills improve during adolescence; instead,
these studies show that older adolescents are more likely than
younger adolescents or preadolescents to engage in these
behaviors (DiClemente, Hansen, & Ponton, 1995). Repeat-
edly, studies have shown that those who take such risks do
not differ in their knowledge of possible negative conse-
quences. Given that risk-takers and risk-avoiders do not
differ in their knowledge of options and consequences, it is
likely that the difference lies in other aspects of competent
decision making (e.g., self-regulatory strategies, ability to
coordinate health-promoting and social goals, etc.). This
hypothesis remains to be tested.
Other Functional Aspects.
In addition to ﬁnding age-
related increases in deductive reasoning and decision-making
skills, researchers have also found increases in mathematical
reasoning ability, certain kinds of memory-related processes,

Achievement and Achievement-Related Beliefs
329
the ability to perform spatial reasoning tasks quickly, and
certain aspects of scientiﬁc reasoning (Byrnes, 2001a). The
variables that seem to affect the size of these increases include
(a) whether students have to learn information during the ex-
periment or retrieve something known already, and (b) the
length of the delay between stimulus presentation and being
asked to retrieve information. In the case of scientiﬁc reason-
ing, the ability to consciously construct one’s own hypotheses
across a wide range of contents, test these hypotheses in con-
trolled experiments, and draw appropriate inferences also in-
creases (Byrnes, 2001a, 2001b; Klaczynski & Narasimham,
1998; Kuhn, Garcia-Mila, Zohar, & Andersen, 1995).
Summary
The literature suggests that there are changes in the intellec-
tual competencies of youth as they progress through the
adolescent period. However, there are many ways in which
the thinking of young adolescents is similar to that of older
adolescents and adults. Thus, before one can predict whether
an age difference will manifest itself on any particular mea-
sure of intellectual competence, one needs to ask questions
such as “Does exposure to the content of the task continue
through adolescence?”, “Do many issues have to be held in
mind and considered simultaneously?, “Are the ideas consis-
tent with naive conceptions?”, and “Does success on the task
require one to suspend one’s beliefs?” If the answers to these
questions are all “no,” then younger adolescents, older
adolescents, and adults should perform about the same. How-
ever, if one or more “yes” answer is given, then one would
expect older adolescents and adults to demonstrate more
intellectual competence than younger adolescents.
Gender and Ethnic Differences in Cognition
It is not possible to provide a comprehensive summary of the
vast literature on gender and ethnic differences in a single
chapter or portion of a chapter. One can, however, provide an
overview of some of the essential ﬁndings (see Byrnes,
2001a, 2001b, for a more complete summary). With respect
to gender differences, male and female adolescents perform
comparably on measures of math, science, and social studies
knowledge (e.g., NAEPs) and also obtain nearly identical
scores on measures of intelligence, deductive reasoning,
decision making, and working memory. Two areas in which
gender differences have appeared are risk taking and
Scholastic Achievement Test (SAT) math performance. With
regard to risk taking, the pattern is quite mixed: Males are
more likely than females to take such risks as driving reck-
lessly or taking intellectual risks; in contrast, females are
more likely than males to take such health risks as smoking.
The size of such gender differences, however, varies by age
(Byrnes, Miller, & Schaefer, 1999). These ﬁndings seem to
reﬂect differences in males’ and females’ expectations,
values, and self-regulatory tendencies.
With regard to gender differences on SAT-math scores,
male’s scores are routinely slightly higher than are
female’s scores (De Lisi & McGillicuddy-De Lisi, 2002). It
is still not clear why this difference obtains, given the fact
that there are no gender differences in math knowledge or
gender differences in other kinds of reasoning. Researchers
have shown, however, that part of this difference reﬂects gen-
der differences in test-taking strategies, conﬁdence in one’s
math ability, ability and motivation to use unconventional
problem-solving strategies, mental rotation skills, and anxi-
ety about one’s math ability, particularly when one’s gender
is made salient (see De Lisi & McGillicuddy-De Lisi, 2002,
for review).
With respect to ethnic differences, European American
and Asian American students perform substantially better
than do African American, Hispanic and Native American
students on standardized achievement tests, the SAT, and
most of the NAEP tests. In contrast, no ethnic differences are
found in studies of deductive reasoning, decision-making, or
working memory. Moreover, ethnic differences on tests such
as the SAT and NAEP are substantially reduced after vari-
ables such as parent education and prior course work are con-
trolled (Byrnes, 2001). We know even less about the origins
of these ethnic group differences than we know about the
origins of gender differences in cognitive performance.
ACHIEVEMENT AND
ACHIEVEMENT-RELATED BELIEFS
The picture of achievement for adolescents in the United
States is mixed. More youth than ever are graduating from
high school, and a large number are enrolled in some form of
higher education (National Center for Educational Statistics,
1999; Ofﬁce of Educational Research and Improvement,
1988). High school dropout rates, although still unacceptably
large in some population subgroups, are at all-time lows
(National Center for Educational Statistics, 1999; Ofﬁce of
Educational Research and Improvement, 1988). Comparable
improvements in educational attainment over the last century
characterize all Western industrialized countries as well as
many developing countries.
In contrast to these quite positive trends in academic
achievement, a substantial minority of America’s adolescents
are not doing very well in terms of academic achievement

330
Cognitive Development in Adolescence
and school-related achievement motivation: First and fore-
most, America’s adolescents on average perform much worse
on academic achievement tests than do adolescents from
many other countries (National Center for Educational Statis-
tics, 1995). Between 15 and 30% of America’s adolescents
drop out of school before completing high school; and many
others are disenchanted with school and education (Kazdin,
1993; Ofﬁce of Educational Research and Improvement,
1988). Both the rates of dropping out and disengagement are
particularly marked among poor youth and both Hispanic and
Native American youth.
There are also mean level declines in such motivational
constructs as grades (Simmons & Blyth, 1987), interest in
school (Epstein & McPartland, 1976), intrinsic motivation
(Harter, 1981), and self-concepts (Eccles et al., 1989;
Wigﬁeld, Eccles, Mac Iver, & Reuman, 1991; Simmons &
Blyth, 1987) in conjunction with the junior high school tran-
sition. For example, Simmons and Blyth (1987) found a
marked decline in some young adolescents’ school grades as
they moved into junior high school—the magnitude of which
predicted subsequent school failure and dropout (see also
Roderick, 1993). Several investigators have also found drops
in self-esteem as adolescents make the junior and senior high
school transitions—particularly (but not always only) among
European American girls (Eccles et al., 1989; Simmons &
Blyth, 1987; Wigﬁeld et al., 1991). Finally, there is evidence
of similarly timed increases in such negative motivational
and behavioral characteristics as focus on self-evaluation
rather than task mastery (e.g., Maehr & Anderman, 1993),
test anxiety (Hill & Sarason, 1966), and both truancy and
school dropout (Rosenbaum, 1976; see Eccles, Wigﬁeld, &
Schiefele, 1998, for full review).
Few studies have gathered information on ethnic and
social class differences in these declines. However, academic
failure and dropout are especially problematic among African
American and Hispanic youth and among youth from low-
SES (socioeconomic status) communities and families (Finn,
1989). It is probable then that these groups are particularly
likely to show these declines in academic motivation and
self-perceptions as they move into and through the years of
secondary school. We discuss this possibility more later in
this chapter.
Although these changes are not extreme for most adoles-
cents, there is sufﬁcient evidence of gradual declines in vari-
ous indicators to make one wonder what is happening
(see Eccles & Midgley, 1989). A variety of explanations have
been offered. Some scholars attribute these declines to the
intrapsychic upheaval assumed to be associated with early
pubertal development (see Arnett, 1999). Others have
suggested that they result from the coincidence of multiple
life changes. For example, drawing upon cumulative stress
theory, Simmons and her colleagues suggest that declines in
motivation result from the fact that adolescents making the
transition to junior high school at the end of Grade 6 must
cope with two major transitions: pubertal change and school
change (see Simmons & Blyth, 1987). Because coping with
multiple transitions is more difﬁcult than coping with only
one, these adolescents are at greater risk of negative out-
comes than are adolescents who have to cope with only
pubertal change during this developmental period. To test
this hypothesis, Simmons and her colleagues compared the
pattern of changes on the school-related outcomes of young
adolescents who moved from sixth to seventh grade in a K–8,
9–12 system with the pattern of changes for those who made
the same grade transition in a K–6, 7–9, 10–12 school
system. They found clear evidence, especially among girls,
of greater negative changes for those adolescents making the
junior high school transition than for those remaining in
the same school setting (i.e., those in K–8, 9–12 schools).
The fact that the junior high school transition effects were es-
pecially marked for girls was interpreted as providing addi-
tional support for the cumulative stress theory, because at this
age girls are more likely than boys are to be undergoing both
a school transition and pubertal change. Further evidence in
support of the role of the cumulative stress came from
Simmons and Blyth’s (1987) analyses comparing adolescents
who experienced varying numbers of other life changes in
conjunction with the junior high school transition. The nega-
tive consequences of the junior high school transition
increased in direct proportion to the number of other life
changes an adolescent also experienced as he or she made the
school transition.
The Junior High School Transition
Eccles and her colleagues have focused on the school transi-
tion itself as a possible cause of academic-motivational
declines.As noted previously, many of these declines coincide
with school transitions. The strongest such evidence comes
from work focused on the junior high school transition—for
example, the work just discussed by Simmons and Blyth.
Eccles and her colleagues have obtained similar results using
the data from the National Educational Longitudinal Study.
They compared eighth graders in K–8 school systems with
eighth graders in either K–6, 7–9 systems or K–5, 6–8 sys-
tems. The eighth-grade students in the K–8 systems looked
better on such motivational indicators as self-esteem, pre-
paredness, and attendance than did the students in either of the
other two types of school systems (Eccles, Lord, & Buchanan,
1996).Inaddition,theeighth-gradeteachersintheK–8system

Achievement and Achievement-Related Beliefs
331
reported fewer student problems, less truancy, and more stu-
dent engagement than did the teachers in either of the other
two types of school systems. Clearly, both the young adoles-
cents and their teachers fared better in K–8 school systems
than did those in the more prevalent junior high school and
middle school systems. Why?
Several investigators have suggested that the changing
nature of the educational environments experienced by many
young adolescents helps explain these types of school system
differences as well as the mean level declines in the school-
related measures associated with the junior high school
transition (e.g., Eccles, Midgley, Buchanan, Wigﬁeld,
Reuman & Mac Iver, 1993; Eccles & Midgley, 1989; Lipsitz,
1984; Simmons & Blyth, 1987). Drawing upon person-
environment ﬁt theory (see Hunt, 1979), Eccles and Midgley
(1989) proposed that these motivational and behavioral de-
clines could result from the fact that junior high schools are
not providing appropriate educational environments for
many young adolescents. According to person-environment
theory, behavior, motivation, and mental health are inﬂu-
enced by the ﬁt between the characteristics individuals bring
to their social environments and the characteristics of these
social environments (Hunt, 1979; see also the chapter by
Lerner, Easterbrooks, and Mistry in this volume). Individuals
are not likely to do very well or be very motivated if they are
in social environments that do not ﬁt their psychological
needs. If the social environments in the typical junior high
school do not ﬁt very well with the psychological needs of
adolescents, then person-environment ﬁt theory predicts a
decline in adolescents’motivation, interest, performance, and
behavior as they move into this environment. Furthermore,
Eccles and Midgley (1989) argued that this effect should be
even more marked if the young adolescents experience a fun-
damental change in their school environments when they
move into a junior high school or middle school—that is, if
the school environment of the junior high school or middle
school ﬁts less well with their psychological needs than did
the school environment of the elementary school.
This analysis suggests several questions. First, what are
the developmental needs of the early adolescent? Second,
what kinds of educational environment are developmentally
appropriate for meeting these needs and stimulating further
development? Third, what are the most common school envi-
ronmental changes before and after the transition to middle or
junior high school? Fourth—and most important—are these
changes compatible with the physiological, cognitive, and
psychological changes early adolescents are experiencing?
Or is there a developmental mismatch between maturing
early adolescents and the classroom environments they expe-
rience before and after the transition to middle or junior high
school that results in a deterioration in academic motivation
and performance for some children?
Eccles and Midgley (1989) argued that there are develop-
mentally inappropriate changes at the junior high or middle
school in a cluster of classroom organizational, instructional,
and climate variables, including task structure, task complex-
ity, grouping practices, evaluation techniques, motivational
strategies, locus of responsibility for learning, and quality
of teacher-student and student-student relationships. They
hypothesized that these changes contribute to the negative
change in early adolescents’ motivation and achievement-
related beliefs.
Is there any evidence that such a negative change in the
school environment occurs with the transition to junior high
school? Most relevant descriptions have focused on school-
level characteristics such as school size, degree of depart-
mentalization, and extent of bureaucratization. For example,
Simmons and Blyth (1987) point out that most junior high
schools are substantially larger (by several orders of magni-
tude) than elementary schools, and instruction is more likely
to be organized departmentally. As a result, junior high
school teachers typically teach several different groups of
students, making it very difﬁcult for students to form a close
relationship with any school-afﬁliated adult at precisely the
point in development when there is a great need for guid-
ance and support from nonfamilial adults. Such changes in
student-teacher relationships are also likely to undermine the
sense of community and trust between students and teachers,
leading to a lowered sense of efﬁcacy among the teachers, an
increased reliance on authoritarian control practices by the
teachers, and an increased sense of alienation among the stu-
dents. Finally, such changes are likely to decrease the proba-
bility that any particular student’s’ difﬁculties will be noticed
early enough to get the student the help he or she needs, thus
increasing the likelihood that students on the edge will be al-
lowed to slip onto negative motivational and performance
trajectories leading to increased school failure and dropout.
Recent work by Elder and his colleagues (Elder & Conger,
2000) and classic work on the disadvantages of large schools
by Barker and Gump (1964) provide strong support for these
suggestions.
These structural changes are also likely to affect class-
room dynamics, teacher beliefs and practices, and student
alienation and motivation in the ways proposed by Eccles
and Midgley (1989). Some support for these predictions is
emerging, along with evidence of other motivationally rele-
vant systematic changes (e.g., Maehr & Midgley, 1996; B. A.
Ward et al., 1982).
First, despite the increasing maturity of students, junior
high school classrooms—as compared to elementary school

332
Cognitive Development in Adolescence
classrooms—are characterized by a greater emphasis on
teacher control and discipline and fewer opportunities for
student decision making, choice, and self-management (e.g.,
Midgley & Feldlaufer, 1987; Moos, 1979). For example,
junior high school teachers spend more time maintaining
order and less time actually teaching than do elementary
school teachers (Brophy & Evertson, 1976).
Similar differences emerge on indicators of student
opportunity to participate in decision making regarding their
own learning. For example, Midgley and Feldlaufer (1987)
reported that both seventh graders and their teachers in the
ﬁrst year of junior high school indicated less opportunity for
students to participate in classroom decision making than did
these same students and their sixth-grade elementary school
teachers 1 year earlier.
Such declines in the opportunity for participation in
decision making and self-control are likely to be particularly
detrimental at early adolescence. This is a time in develop-
ment when youth begin to think of themselves as young
adults. It is also a time when they increase their exploration
of possible identities. They believe they are becoming more
responsible and consequently deserving of greater adult
respect. Presumably, the adults responsible for their social-
ization would also like to encourage them to become more
responsible for themselves as they move towards adulthood;
in fact, this is what typically happens across the elementary
school grades (see Eccles & Midgley, 1989). Unfortunately,
the evidence suggests this developmentally appropriate
progression is disrupted with the transition to junior high
school.
In their stage-environment ﬁt theory, Eccles and Midgley
(1989) hypothesize that the mismatch between young adoles-
cents’ desires for autonomy and control and their perceptions
of the opportunities in their learning environments will result
in a decline in the adolescents’ intrinsic motivation and inter-
est in school. Mac Iver and Reuman (1988) provided some
support for this prediction. They compared the changes in
intrinsic interest in mathematics for adolescents reporting
different patterns of change in their opportunities for partici-
pation in classroom decision-making items across the junior
high school transition. Those adolescents who perceived their
seventh-grade math classrooms as providing fewer opportu-
nities for decision making that had been available in their
sixth-grade math classrooms reported the largest declines in
their intrinsic interest in math as they moved from the sixth
grade into the seventh grade.
Second, junior high school classrooms (as compared to
elementary school classrooms) are characterized by less per-
sonal and positive teacher-student relationships (Feldlaufer,
Midgley, & Eccles, 1988). Furthermore, the transition into a
less supportive classroom impacts negatively on early
adolescents’ interest in the subject matter being taught in
that classroom, particularly among low-achieving students
(Midgley, Feldlaufer, & Eccles, 1989b).
Such a shift in the quality of student-teacher relationships
is likely to be especially detrimental at early adolescence. As
adolescents explore their own identities, they are prone to
question the values and expectations of their parents. In more
stable social groups, young adolescents often have the oppor-
tunity to do this questioning with supportive nonparental
adults such as religious counselors, neighbors, and relatives.
In our highly mobile, culturally diverse society, such oppor-
tunities are not as readily available. Teachers are the one
stable source of nonparental adults left for many American
youth. Unfortunately, the sheer size and bureaucratic nature
of most junior high schools—coupled with the stereotypes
many adults hold regarding the negative characteristics of
adolescents—can lead teachers to distrust their students and
to withdraw from them emotionally (see Eccles et al., 1993;
C. L. Miller et al., 1990). Consequently, these youth have
little choice but to turn to peers as nonparental guides in their
exploration of alternative identities. Evidence from a variety
of sources suggests that this can be a very risky venture.
The reduced opportunity for close relationships between
students and junior high school teachers has another unfortu-
nate consequence for young adolescents: It decreases the
likelihood that teachers will be able to identify students on
the verge of getting into serious trouble and then to get these
students the help they need. In this way, the holes in the
safety net may become too big to prevent unnecessary
“failures.” Successful passage through this period of experi-
mentation requires a tight safety net carefully monitored by
caring adults—adults who provide opportunities for experi-
mentation without letting the youth seriously mortgage their
futures in the process. Clearly, the large, bureaucratic struc-
ture of the typical junior high and middle school is ill suited
to such a task.
Third, junior high school teachers (again compared to
elementary school teachers) feel less effective as teachers,
especially for low-ability students. For example, the seventh-
grade junior high teachers studied by Midgley, Feldlaufer,
and Eccles (1988) expressed much less conﬁdence in their
teaching efﬁcacy than did sixth-grade elementary school
teachers in the same school districts. In addition, those
students who experienced a decline in their teachers’sense of
efﬁcacy as they made the junior high school transition low-
ered their estimates of their math abilities more than did other
students (Midgley, Feldlaufer, & Eccles, 1989a). This decline

Achievement and Achievement-Related Beliefs
333
in teachers’ sense of efﬁcacy for teaching less competent
students could help explain why it is precisely these students
who give up on themselves following the junior high school
transition.
Fourth, junior high school teachers are much more likely
than elementary school teachers are to use such teaching
practices as whole-class task organization, public forms of
evaluation, and between-classroom ability grouping (see
Eccles & Midgley, 1989). Such practices are likely to
increase social comparison, concerns about evaluation, and
competitiveness (see Rosenholtz & Simpson, 1984), which in
turn are likely to undermine many young adolescents’ self-
perceptions and motivation. These teaching practices also
make aptitude differences more salient to both teachers and
students, likely leading to increased teacher expectancy
effects and both decreased feelings of efﬁcacy and increased
entity rather than incremental views of ability among
teachers (Dweck & Elliott, 1983). These predictions need to
be tested.
Fifth, junior high school teachers appear to use a more
competitive standard in judging students’ competence and in
grading their performance than do elementary school teach-
ers (see Eccles & Midgley, 1989). There is no predictor of
students’ self-conﬁdence and sense of personal efﬁcacy for
schoolwork stronger than the grades they receive. If grades
change, then we would expect to see a concomitant shift in
the adolescents’ self-perceptions and academic motivation;
this is in fact what happens. For example, Simmons and
Blyth (1987) found a greater drop in grades between sixth
and seventh grade for adolescents making the junior high
school transition at this point than for adolescents enrolled in
K–8 schools. Furthermore, this decline in grades was not
matched by a decline in the adolescents’ scores on standard-
ized achievement tests, supporting the conclusion that the
decline reﬂects a change in grading practices rather than a
change in the rate of the students’ learning (Kavrell &
Petersen, 1984). Imagine what this decline in grades could do
to young adolescents’ self-conﬁdence, especially in light of
the fact that the material they are being tested on is not likely
to be more intellectually challenging.
Finally, several of the changes noted previously are linked
together in goal theory. According to goal theory, individuals
have different goal orientations when they engage in achieve-
ment tasks, and these orientations inﬂuence performance, per-
sistence, and response to difﬁculty. For example, Nicholls and
his colleagues (e.g., Nicholls, 1979b; Nicholls, 1989) deﬁned
two major kinds of goal orientations: ego-involved goals
and task-involved goals. Individuals with ego-involved goals
seek to maximize favorable evaluations of their competence
and minimize negative evaluations of competence. Questions
like “Will I look smart?” and “Can I outperform others?” re-
ﬂect ego-involved goals. In contrast, with task-involved
goals, individuals focus on mastering tasks and increasing
one’s competence. Questions such as “How can I do this
task?” and “What will I learn?” reﬂect task-involved goals.
Dweck and her colleagues suggested two similar orientations:
performance goals (like ego-involved goals), and learning
goals (like task-involved goals; e.g., Dweck & Elliott, 1983).
Similarly,Ames (1992), Maehr and Midgley (1996), and their
students (e.g., Midgley, Anderman, & Hicks, 1995) distin-
guish between performance goals (like ego-involved goals)
and mastery goals (like task-focused goals). With ego-
involved (or performance) goals, students try to outperform
others and are more likely to do tasks they know they can do.
Task-involved (or mastery-oriented) students choose chal-
lenging tasks and are more concerned with their own progress
than with outperforming others. All of these researchers
argue—and have provided some support—that students learn
more, persist longer, and select more challenging tasks when
they are mastery-oriented and have task-involved goals (see
Eccles et al., 1998, for review).
Classroom practices related to grading practices, support
for autonomy, and instructional organization affect the
relative salience of mastery versus performance goals that
students adopt as they engage in the learning tasks at school.
The types of changes associated with the middle grades
school transition should precipitate greater focus on perfor-
mance goals. In support of this, in Midgley et al. (1995), both
teachers and students reported that performance-focused
goals were more prevalent and task-focused goals less preva-
lent in middle school classrooms than in elementary school
classrooms. In addition, the elementary school teachers
reported using task-focused instructional strategies more
frequently than did the middle school teachers. Finally, at
both grade levels the extent to which teachers were task-
focused predicted the students’ and the teachers’ sense of
personal efﬁcacy. Not surprisingly, personal efﬁcacy was
lower among the middle school participants than among the
elementary school participants.
In summary, changes such as those noted in the preceding
discussion are likely to have a negative effect on many
students’ school-related motivation at any grade level. But
Eccles and Midgley (1989) argued that these types of changes
are particularly harmful during early adolescence, given what
is known about psychological development during this stage
of life—namely, that early adolescent development is charac-
terized by increases in desire for autonomy, peer orientation,
self-focus and self-consciousness, salience of identity issues,

334
Cognitive Development in Adolescence
concern over heterosexual relationships, and capacity for
abstract cognitive activity (see Simmons & Blyth, 1987).
Simmons and Blyth (1987) have argued that adolescents need
a reasonably safe, as well as an intellectually challenging,
environment to adapt to these shifts—an environment that
provides a “zone of comfort” as well as challenging new op-
portunities for growth (see Call & Mortimer, 2001, for ex-
panded discussion of the importance of arenas of comfort
during adolescence). In light of these needs, the environmen-
tal changes often associated with the transition to junior high
school seem especially harmful in that they disrupt the possi-
bility for close personal relationships between youth and non-
familial adults at a time when youth have increased need for
precisely this type of social support; they emphasize compe-
tition, social comparison, and ability self-assessment at a
time of heightened self-focus; they decrease decision-making
and choice at a time when the desire for self-control and adult
respect is growing; and they disrupt peer social networks at a
time when adolescents are especially concerned with peer
relationships and social acceptance. We believe the nature of
these environmental changes—coupled with the normal
course of development—is likely to result in a developmental
mismatch because the “ﬁt” between the early adolescents’
needs and the opportunities provided in the classroom is par-
ticularly poor, increasing the risk of negative motivational
outcomes, especially for those adolescents who are already
having academic difﬁculties.
Based on these general issues and on the research under-
lying these conclusions, the Carnegie Foundation funded and
helped to coordinate several school reform efforts aimed at
making middle schools and junior high schools more devel-
opmentally appropriate learning environments. By and large,
when well implemented, these reforms were effective at both
increasing learning and facilitating engagement and positive
motivation (Jackson & Davis, 2000).
Long-Term Consequences of the Junior
High School Transition
The work reviewed in the previous section documents the
immediate importance of school transitions during the early
years of adolescence. Do these effects last? Are there long-
term consequences of either a positive or negative experience
during this early school transition? There have been very few
studies that can answer this question. Some of the work
reviewed earlier indicated that a decline in school grades at this
point is predictive of subsequent high school dropout. Eccles
and her colleagues have gone one step further towards answer-
ing this question. First they linked self-esteem change over the
junior high school transition to changes in other aspects of
mental health and well-being during the transitional period.
Second, they linked changes in self esteem over this transition
to indicators of mental health, academic performance, and
alcohol and drug use in Grades 10 and 12 (Eccles, Lord,
Roeser, Barber, & Jozefowicz, 1997). In both sets of analyses,
there was a strong association between self-esteem change and
other indicators of well-being.
In their ﬁrst set of analyses, Eccles et al. (1997) found that
those students who showed a decline in their self esteem as
they made the junior high school transition also reported
higher levels of depression, social self-consciousness, school
disengagement, worries about being victimized, and sub-
stance abuse at the end of their seventh-grade school year.
These same students also showed lower self-esteem and
more depression during their 10th- and 12th-grade school
years and were slightly less likely to be target for graduating
from high school on time.
The High School Transition
Although less work has been performed on the transition to
high school, the existing work is suggestive of similar prob-
lems (Jencks & Brown, 1975). For example, high schools are
typically even larger and more bureaucratic than are junior
high schools and middle schools. Bryk, Lee, and Smith
(1989) provided numerous examples of how the sense of
community among teachers and students is undermined by
the size and bureaucratic structure of most high schools.
There is little opportunity for students and teachers to get to
know each other, and—probably as a consequence—there is
distrust between them and little attachment to a common set
of goals and values. There is also little opportunity for the
students to form mentor-like relationships with a nonfamilial
adult, and little effort is made to make instruction relevant to
the students. Such environments are likely to further under-
mine the motivation and involvement of many students,
especially those not doing particularly well academically,
those not enrolled in the favored classes, and those who are
alienated from the values of the adults in the high school.
These hypotheses need to be tested.
Recent international comparative work by Hamilton (1990)
also points to the importance of strong apprenticeship pro-
grams that provide good mentoring and solid links to
post–high-school labor markets for maintaining motivation
to do well in school for non–college-bound adolescents. By
comparingtheapprenticeshipprogramsinGermanywiththose
in the United States, Hamilton has documented how the voca-
tional educational programs in the United States often do not
serve non–college-bound youth very well, either while they are
in high school or after they graduate and try to ﬁnd jobs.

Gender and Achievement
335
Most large public high schools also organize instruction
around curricular tracks that sort students into different
groups. As a result, there is even greater diversity in the
educational experiences of high school students than of
middle grades students; unfortunately, this diversity is often
associated more with the students’ social class and ethnic
group than with differences in the students’ talents and inter-
ests (Lee & Bryk, 1989). As a result, curricular tracking has
served to reinforce social stratiﬁcation rather than foster
optimal education for all students, particularly in large
schools (Dornbusch, 1994; Lee & Bryk, 1989). Lee and Bryk
(1989) documented that average school achievement levels
do not beneﬁt from this curricular tracking. Quite the
contrary—evidence comparing Catholic high schools with
public high schools suggests that average school achieve-
ment levels are increased when all students are required
to take the same challenging curriculum. This conclusion is
true even after one has controlled for student selectivity
factors. A more thorough examination of how the organiza-
tion and structure of our high schools inﬂuences cognitive,
motivational, and achievement outcomes is needed.
GENDER AND ACHIEVEMENT
The relation of gender to achievement is a massive and com-
plex topic. Even deﬁning what is included under the topic of
achievement is complex. For this chapter, we limit the dis-
cussion to school-related achievement and both educational
and career planning during the adolescent and young adult
years, focusing on the gendered patterns associated with
these objective indicators of achievement. But even within
this limited scope, the relation of gender to achievement is
complex. The patterns of gender differences are not consis-
tent across ages and there is always greater variation within
gender than across gender. The relation of gender to achieve-
ment is even more complex. To make sense of this hetero-
geneity, we present the ﬁndings in relation to the Eccles et al.
“expectancy-value model of achievement-related choices,”
with a speciﬁc focus on the ways in which gender as a social
system inﬂuences individual’s self-perceptions, values, and
experiences (see Eccles, 1987).
We also limit the discussion to studies focused primarily on
European Americans because they are the most studied popu-
lation. Studies on gender differences in achievement in other
populations are just becoming available, and even these are fo-
cused on only a limited range of groups. In addition, none of
the existing studies on other populations have the range
of constructs we talk about in this entry—making comparisons
of ﬁndings across groups impossible at this point in time. More
work is desperately needed to determine the generalizability of
these patterns to other cultural and ethnic groups.
Gender and Academic Achievement
Over the last 30 years, there have been extensive discussions
in both the media and more academic publication outlets
regarding gender differences in achievement. Much of
this discussion has focused on how girls are being “short-
changed” by the school systems. Recently, the American
Association of University Women (AAUW; 1992) published
reports on this topic. This perspective on gender inequity in
secondary schools has been quite consistent with larger
concerns being raised about the negative impact of adoles-
cence on young women’s development. For example, in
recent reports, the AAUW reported marked declines in girls’
self-conﬁdence during the early adolescent years. Similarly,
Gilligan and her colleagues (Gilligan, Lyons, & Tammer,
1990) have reported that girls lose conﬁdence in their ability
to express their needs and opinions as they move into the
early adolescent years—she refers to this process as losing
one’s voice (see also Pipher, 1994).
However, in the 1960s, the big gender equity concern
focused on how schools were “shortchanging” boys. Con-
cerns were raised about how the so-called “feminized
culture” in most schools ﬁt very poorly with the behavioral
styles of boys—leading many boys to become alienated
and then to underachieve. The contrast between these two
pictures of gender inequities in school was recently high-
lighted by Sommers in an article in the May 2000 issue of the
Atlantic Monthly.
So what is the truth? Like most such situations, the truth is
complex. On the one hand, female and male youth (both chil-
dren and adolescents) on average fare differently in American
public schools in terms of both the ways in which they are
treated and their actual performance. On the other, it is
not the case that one gender is consistently treated less equi-
tably than the other is: Female and male youth appear to be
differentially advantaged and disadvantaged on various indi-
cators of treatment and performance. In terms of perfor-
mance, females earn better grades, as well as graduate from
high school, attend and graduate from college, and earn mas-
ter’s degrees at higher rates than males. In contrast, males
do slightly better than females do on standardized tests—
particularly in math and science—and obtain more advanced
degrees than do women in many areas of study, particularly
in math-related, computer-related, engineering, and physical
science ﬁelds. Men also are more likely than are women
to obtain advanced graduate degrees in all ﬁelds except the
social sciences and education. These patterns are more

336
Cognitive Development in Adolescence
extreme in European American samples than in samples
of some other ethnic groups within the United States of
America.
In terms of treatment, in most ethnic groups in the United
States, boys are more likely than girls are to be assigned to all
types of special-remedial education programs, and to either
be expelled from or forced to drop out of school before high
school graduation (National Center on Educational Statistics,
1999). Low-achieving boys (in both European American and
African American samples) receive more negative discipli-
nary interactions from their teachers than do students in any
other group—disproportionately more than their “fair” share.
In addition, in most studies of academic underachievers,
male youth outnumber female youth two to one (McCall,
Evahn, & Kratzer, 1992). In contrast, high-achieving boys
(particularly European American high-achieving boys)
receive more favorable interactions with their teachers
than do students in any other group and are more likely to be
encouraged by their teachers to take difﬁcult courses, to
apply to top colleges, and to aspire to challenging careers
(Sadker & Sadker, 1994).
More consistent gender differences emerge for college
major and for enrollment in particular vocational educational
programs. Here the story is one of gender-role stereotyping.
European American women and men are most likely to spe-
cialize or major in content areas that are consistent with their
gender–roles—that is, in content areas that are most heavily
populated by members of their own gender. This gendered
pattern is especially marked in vocational education pro-
grams for non–college-bound youth; for physical science, en-
gineering, and computer science majors; and for professional
degrees in nursing, social welfare, and teaching. Again this
pattern is less extreme in other ethnic groups. Finally, there
has been substantial movement of women into previously
male-dominated ﬁelds like medicine, law, and business over
the last 20 years (Astin & Lindholm, 2001).
Why do these gendered matters in educational and occu-
pational aspirations exist? Discussing all possible mediating
variables is beyond the scope of a single chapter. Instead, we
focus on a set of social and psychological factors related to
the Eccles’ “expectancy-value model of achievement-related
choices and performance” (see Figure 13.1).
Eccles’ Expectancy-Value Model of Achievement-Related
Choices and Performance
Over the past 20 years, Eccles and her colleagues have studied
the motivational and social factors inﬂuencing such achieve-
ment goals and behaviors as educational and career choices,
recreational activity selection, persistence on difﬁcult tasks,
and the allocation of effort across various achievement-
related activities. Given the striking gender differences in
educational, vocational, and avocational choices, they have
been particularly interested in the motivational factors
Identity T1
Identity T2
Achievement-related
choices and performance
1.  Causal attributions.
2. Locus of control.
Child’s interpretations of
experience
Socializers’ beliefs and
behaviors
Differential aptitudes
of child
Previous
achievement-related
experiences
Child’s goals and
general self-schemas
1. Self-schemas.
2.  Short-term goals.
3.  Long-term goals.
4.  Ideal self.
5.  Self-concept of
 one’s abilities.
6.  Perceptions of
 task demands.
Child’s perception of…
1.  Socializer’s beliefs,
 expectations, and
 attitudes.
2.  Gender roles.
3.  Activity stereotypes.
1.  Incentive and
 attainment value.
2.  Utility value.
3.  Cost.
Subjective task value
Cultural milieu
1.  Gender role
 stereotypes.
2.  Cultural stereotypes
 of subject matter
 and occupational
 characteristics.
Child’s affective
memories
Expectation of success
Figure 13.1
General model of achievement choices.

Gender and Achievement
337
underlying males’ and females’ achievement-related deci-
sions. Drawing upon the theoretical and empirical work
associated with decision-making, achievement theory, and
attribution theory, they elaborated a comprehensive theoreti-
cal model of achievement-related choices that can be used to
guide subsequent research efforts. This model, depicted in
Figure 13.1, links achievement-related choices directly to two
sets of beliefs: the individual’s expectations for success and
the importance or value the individual attaches to the various
options perceived by the individual as available. The model
also speciﬁes the relation of these beliefs to cultural norms,
experiences, and aptitudes—and to those personal beliefs and
attitudes that are commonly assumed to be associated with
achievement-related activities by researchers in this ﬁeld. In
particular, the model links achievement-related beliefs, out-
comes, and goals to interpretative systems like causal attribu-
tions, to the input of socializers (primarily parents, teachers,
and peers), to gender-role beliefs, to self-perceptions and self-
concept, to personal and social identities and to one’s percep-
tions of the task itself.
For example, consider course enrollment decisions. The
model predicts that people will be most likely to enroll in
courses that they think they can master and that have high
task value for them. Expectations for success (and a sense
of domain-speciﬁc personal efﬁcacy) depend on the conﬁ-
dence the individual has in his or her intellectual abilities and
on the individual’s estimations of the difﬁculty of the course.
These beliefs have been shaped over time by the individual’s
experiences with the subject matter and by the individual’s
subjective interpretation of those experiences (e.g., does the
person think that her or his successes are a consequence of
high ability or lots of hard work?). Likewise, Eccles et al.
assume that the value of a particular course to the individual
is inﬂuenced by several factors. For example, does the person
enjoy doing the subject material? Is the course required? Is
the course seen as instrumental in meeting one of the individ-
ual’s long- or short-range goals? Have the individual’s
parents or counselors insisted that the course be taken, or—
conversely—have other people tried to discourage the indi-
vidual from taking the course? Is the person afraid of the
material to be covered in the course? The fact that women
and men may differ in their choices is likely to reﬂect gender
differences in a wide range of predictors, mediated primarily
by differences in self-perceptions, values, and goals rather
than motivational strength, drive, or both.
Competence and Expectancy-Related Self-Perceptions
In the last 30 years, there has been considerable public atten-
tion focused on the issue of young women’s declining
conﬁdence in their academic abilities. In addition, researchers
and policy makers interested in young women’s educational
and occupational choices have stressed the potential role that
such declining conﬁdence might play in undermining young
women’s educational and vocational aspirations, particularly
in the technical ﬁelds related to math and physical science.
For example, these researchers suggested that young women
may drop out of math and physical science because they lose
conﬁdence in their math abilities as they move into and
through adolescence—resulting in women who are less likely
than are men to pursue these types of careers. Similarly, these
researchers suggest that gender differences in conﬁdence in
one’s abilities in other areas underlie gender differences
across the board in educational and occupational choices.
Finally, Eccles and her colleagues suggested that the individ-
ual differences in women’s educational and occupational
choices are related to variations among women in the hierar-
chy of women’s conﬁdence in their abilities across different
domains (Eccles, 1994).
But do females and males differ on measures commonly
linked to expectations for success, particularly with regard to
their academic subjects and various future occupations? And
are females more conﬁdent of their abilities in female gender-
role stereotyped domains? In most studies, the answer is yes.
For example, both Kerr (1985) and Subotnik and Arnold
(1991) found that gifted European American girls were more
likely to underestimate their intellectual skills and their rela-
tive class standing than were gifted European American
boys—who were more likely to overestimate theirs.
Gender differences in the competence beliefs of more typ-
ical samples are also often reported, particularly in gender-
role stereotyped domains and on novel tasks. Often these
differences favor the males. For example, in the studies of
Eccles, Wigﬁeld and their colleagues (see also Crandall,
1969), high-achieving European American girls were more
likely than were European American boys to underestimate
both their ability level and their class standing; in contrast,
the European American boys were more likely than were
European American girls to overestimate their likely perfor-
mance. When asked about speciﬁc domains, the gender
differences depended on the gender-role stereotyping of the
activity. For example, in the work by Eccles and her
colleagues, European American boys and young men had
higher competence beliefs than did their female peers for
math and sports, even after all relevant skill-level differences
were controlled; in contrast, the European American girls
and young women had higher competence beliefs than did
European American boys for reading, instrumental music,
and social skills—and the magnitude of differences some-
times increase and sometimes decrease following puberty
(Eccles, Adler, & Meece, 1984; Jacobs, Lanza, Osgood,
Eccles, & Wigﬁeld, 2002).

338
Cognitive Development in Adolescence
Furthermore, in these studies, the young women, on aver-
age, had greater conﬁdence in their abilities in reading and
social skills than in math, physical science, and athletics; and,
when averaged across math and English, the male students
had lower conﬁdence than did their female peers in their
academic abilities in general. By and large, these gender
differences were also evident in preliminary studies of
African American adolescents (Eccles, Barber, Jozefowicz,
Malanchuk, & Vida, 1999). This could be one explanation for
the fact that the young men in these samples—as in the nation
more generally—are more likely to drop out of high school
than were the young women.
Finally, the European American female and male students
in the Eccles and Wigﬁeld studies ranked these skill
areas quite differently: for example, the girls rated them-
selves as most competent in English and social activities and
as least competent in sports; the boys rated themselves as
most competent by a substantial margin in sports, followed
by math, and then social activities; the boys rated themselves
as least competent in English (Eccles et al., 1993; Wigﬁeld
et al., 1998). Such within-gender, rank-order comparisons are
critically important for understanding differences in life
choices. In the follow-up studies of these same youths,
Jozefowicz, Barber, and Eccles (1993) were able to predict
within-gender differences in the young women’s and men’s
occupational goals with the pattern of their conﬁdences
across subject domains. The youth who wanted to go into oc-
cupations requiring a lot of writing, for example, had higher
conﬁdence in their artistic and writing abilities than in their
math and science abilities. In contrast, the youth who wanted
to go into science and advanced health-related ﬁelds (e.g.,
becoming a physician) had higher conﬁdence in their math
and science abilities than in their artistic and social abilities
(see Eccles et al., 1997).
One of the most interesting ﬁndings from existing studies
of academic self-conﬁdence is that the gender differences in
self-perceptions are usually much larger than one would
expect, given objective measures of actual performance and
competence. First, consider mathematics: With the exception
of performance on the most anxiety-provoking standardized
test, girls do as well as boys do on all measures of math com-
petence throughout primary, secondary, and tertiary educa-
tion. Furthermore, the few gender differences that do exist
have been decreasing in magnitude over the last 20 years and
do not appear with great regularity until late in the primary
school years. Similarly, the gender difference in perceived
sports competence is much larger (accounting for 9% of the
variance in one of our studies) than was the gender difference
in our measures of actual sport-related skills (which accounted
for between 1–3% of the variance on these indicators).
So why do female students rate their math and sports com-
petence so much lower than their male peers do and so much
lower than they rate their own English ability and social skills?
Some theorists have suggested that female and male students
interpret variations in their performance in various academic
subjects and leisure activities in a gender-role stereotyped
manner. For example, females might be more likely to at-
tribute their math and sports successes to hard work and ef-
fort and their failures in these domains to lack of ability
than males; in contrast, males might be more likely than fe-
males to attribute their successes to natural talent. Similarly,
females might be more likely to attribute their English and so-
cial successes to natural ability. Such differences in causal at-
tributions would lead to both the between- and within-gender
differences in conﬁdence levels reported in the preceding
discussion.
The evidence for these differences in causal attributions is
mixed (Eccles-Parsons, Meece, Adler, & Kaczala, 1982; see
Ruble & Martin, 1998). Some researchers ﬁnd that European
American females are less likely than European American
males are to attribute success to ability and more likely to
attribute failure to lack of ability. Others have found that this
pattern depends on the kind of task used—occurring more
with unfamiliar tasks or stereotypically masculine achieve-
ment tasks. The most consistent difference occurs for attribu-
tions of success to ability versus effort: European American
females are less likely than are European American males to
stress the relevance of their own ability as a cause of their
successes. Instead, European American females tend to rate
effort and hard work as a more important determinant of their
success than ability. We ﬁnd it interesting that their parents
do also (Yee & Eccles, 1988). There is nothing inherently
wrong with attributing one’s successes to hard work. In fact,
Stevenson and his colleagues stress that this attributional
pattern is a major advantage that Japanese students have
over American students (Stevenson, Chen, & Uttal, 1990).
Nonetheless, it appears that within the context of the United
States, this attributional pattern undermines students’ conﬁ-
dence in their ability to master increasingly more difﬁcult
material—perhaps leading young women to stop taking
mathematics courses prematurely.
Gender differences are also sometimes found for locus of
control. For example, in Crandall et al. (1965), the girls
tended to have higher internal locus of responsibility scores
for both positive and negative achievement events, and the
older girls had higher internality for negative events than did
the younger girls. The boys’ internal locus of responsibility
scores for positive events decreased from 10th to 12th grade.
A result of these two developmental patterns was that older
girls accepted more blame for negative events than the older

Gender and Achievement
339
boys did (Dweck & Repucci, 1973). Similarly, Connell
(1985) found that boys attributed their (negative) outcomes
more than girls did to either powerful others or unknown
causes in both the cognitive and social domains.
This greater propensity for girls to take personal responsi-
bility for their failures, coupled with their more frequent
attribution of failure to lack of ability (a stable, uncontrollable
cause) has been interpreted as evidence of greater learned
helplessness in females (see Dweck & Elliott, 1983). How-
ever, evidence for gender differences on behavioral indicators
of learned helplessness is quite mixed. In most studies of un-
derachievers, boys outnumber girls two to one (see McCall
et al., 1992). Similarly, boys are more likely than girls are to
be referred by their teachers for motivational problems and
are more likely to drop out of school before completing high
school. More consistent evidence exists that females (com-
pared to males) select easier laboratory tasks, avoid challeng-
ing and competitive situations, lower their expectations
more following failure, shift more quickly to a different col-
lege major when their grades begin to drop, and perform more
poorly than they are capable of on difﬁcult, timed tests
(see Dweck & Elliott, 1980; Parsons & Ruble, 1977; Ruble &
Martin, 1998; Spencer, Steele, & Quinn, 1995).
Somewhat related to constructs like conﬁdence in one’s
abilities, personal efﬁcacy, and locus of control, gender differ-
ences also emerge regularly in studies of test anxiety (e.g.,
Douglas & Rice, 1979; Meece, Wigﬁeld, & Eccles, 1990).
However, Hill and Sarson (1966) suggested that boys may be
more defensive than are girls about admitting anxiety on ques-
tionnaires. In support of this suggestion, Lord, Eccles, and
McCarthy (1994) found that test anxiety was a stronger pre-
dictor of poor adjustment to junior high school for boys, even
though the girls reported higher mean levels of anxiety.
Gender-role stereotyping has also been suggested as a
cause of the gender differences in academic self-concepts. The
extent to which adolescents endorse the European American
cultural stereotypes regarding which gender is likely to be
most talented in each domain predicts the extent to which
European American females and males distort their ability
self-concepts and expectations in the gender-stereotypical
direction. S. Spencer, Steele, and Quinn (1999) suggested a
mechanism linking culturally based gender stereotypes to
competence through test anxiety: stereotype vulnerability.
They hypothesized that members of social groups (like
women) stereotyped as being less competent in a particular
subject area (like math) will become anxious when asked to do
difﬁcult problems because they are afraid the stereotype may
be true of them. This vulnerability is also likely to increase fe-
males’ vulnerability to failure feedback on male-stereotyped
tasks, leading to lowered self-expectations and self-conﬁdence
in their ability to succeed for these types of tasks. To test these
hypotheses, S. Spencer, Steele, and Quinn gave college stu-
dents a difﬁcult math test under two conditions: (a) after being
told that men typically do better on this test or (b) after being
told that men and women typically do about the same. The
women scored lower than the men did only in the ﬁrst condi-
tion. Furthermore, the manipulation’s effect was mediated by
variations across condition in reported anxiety. Apparently,
knowing that one is taking a test on which men typically do
better than women do increases young women’s anxiety,
which in turn undermines their performance. This study also
suggests that changing this dynamic is relatively easy if one
can change the women’s perception of the gender-typing of
the test.
In sum, when either gender differences or within-gender
individual differences emerge on competence-related mea-
sures for academic subjects and other important skill areas,
they are consistent with the gender-role stereotypes held
by the group being studied (most often European Americans).
These differences have also been found to be important
mediators of both gender differences and within-gender indi-
vidual differences in various types of achievement-related
behaviors and choices. Such gendered patterns are theoreti-
cally important because they point to the power of gender-
role socialization processes as key to understanding both
girls’ and boys’ conﬁdence in their various abilities. And to
the extent that gender-role socialization is key, it is important
to study how and why young women differ in the extent to
which they are either exposed to these socialization pressures
or resist them when they are so exposed.
But even more important is that all of the relevant studies
have documented extensive variation within each gender.
Both females and males vary a great deal among themselves
in their intellectual conﬁdence for various academic domains.
They also vary considerably in their test anxiety, their attribu-
tional styles, and their locus of control. Such variations within
each gender are a major set of predictors of variation among
both young men and young women in their educational and
occupational choices. European American adolescent males
and females who aspire to careers in math and science and
who take advanced courses in math and physical science have
greater conﬁdence in their math and science abilities than
those who do not. They also have just as much—if not
more—conﬁdence in their math and science abilities as in
their English abilities (see Eccles et al., 1998).
Gendered Differences in Achievement Values
Achievement values are related to the different purposes or
reasons individuals have for engaging in different activities.

340
Cognitive Development in Adolescence
Eccles et al. (1983) deﬁned four components of task value:
attainment value, intrinsic value, utility value, and cost. They
deﬁned attainment value as the personal importance of doing
well on the task. They also linked attainment value to the rel-
evance of engaging in a task for conﬁrming or disconﬁrming
salient aspects of one’s self-schema or identity. Because tasks
provide the opportunity to demonstrate aspects of one’s
actual or ideal self-schema, such as masculinity, femininity,
or competence in various domains, tasks will have higher
attainment value to the extent that they allow the individual
to conﬁrm salient aspects of these self-schemas (see Eccles,
1984, 1987). Intrinsic value is the enjoyment the individual
gets from performing the activity or the subjective interest
the individual has in the subject. This component of value is
similar to the construct of intrinsic motivation as deﬁned by
Harter (1981) and by Deci and his colleagues (e.g., Deci &
Ryan, 1985; Ryan, Connell, & Deci, 1985). Utility value is
determined by how well a task relates to current and future
goals, such as career goals. A task can have positive value to
a person because it facilitates important future goals, even if
he or she is not interested in task for its own sake. In one
sense, then, this component captures the more “extrinsic”
reasons for engaging in a task; but it also relates directly to
individuals’ internalized short- and long-term goals. Finally,
cost is conceptualized in terms of the negative aspects of
engaging in the task, such as performance anxiety and fear
of both failure and success as well as the amount of effort that
is needed to succeed and the lost opportunities that result
from making one choice rather than another.
Eccles, Wigﬁeld, and their colleagues have found gender-
role stereotypical differences in both children’s and adoles-
cents’ valuing of sports, social activities, and English (e.g.,
Eccles et al., 1989; Eccles et al., 1993; Wigﬁeld et al., 1991,
Wigﬁeld et al., 1998). Across these studies, boys value
sports activities more than girls do, whereas girls value read-
ing, English, and instrumental music more than boys do. It
is interesting to note that in the studies they conducted prior
to the 1990s, high-school girls valued math less than did
high-school boys (Eccles, 1984); this gender difference,
however, has disappeared in more recent studies (see Jacobs
et al., in press). Although it is encouraging that boys and
girls now value math equally, the fact that adolescent girls
have less positive views of their math ability is problematic
because these differences probably contribute to girls’ lower
probability of taking optional advanced-level math and
physical science courses and of entering math-related scien-
tiﬁc and engineering ﬁelds, thus contributing to gender-
differentiated cognitive outcomes and career choices (see
Eccles, 1994). We return to career choice issues later in this
chapter.
Values also can be conceived more broadly to include no-
tions of what are appropriate activities for males and females
to do. Sometimes such values can conﬂict with engagement in
achievement. The role of conﬂict between gender roles and
achievement in gifted girls’ lives is well illustrated by results
of an ethnographic study of a group of gifted elementary-
school girls. Bell (1989) interviewed a multiethnic group of
third- to sixth-grade gifted girls in an urban elementary school
regarding the barriers they perceived to their achievement in
school. Five gender-role related themes emerged with great
regularity: (a) concern about hurting someone else’s feel-
ings by winning in achievement contests; (b) concern about
seeming to be a braggart if one expressed pride in one’s ac-
complishments; (c) overreaction to nonsuccess experiences
(apparently, not being the very best is very painful to these
girls); (d) concern over their physical appearance and what it
takes to be beautiful; and (e) concern with being overly ag-
gressive in terms of getting the teacher’s attention. In each
case, the gifted girls felt caught between doing their best and
appearing either feminine or caring.
Gender differences have also been found on many of the
psychological processes proposed by Eccles and her col-
leagues to underlie gender differences in subjective task
value. For example, Eccles-Parsons et al. (1983) predicted
that the attainment value of particular tasks would be linked to
(a) conceptions of one’s personality and capabilities, (b) long-
range goals and plans, (c) schemas regarding the proper roles
of men and women, (d) instrumental and terminal values
(Rokeach, 1979), (e) ideal images of what one should be like,
and (f) social scripts regarding proper behavior in a variety of
situations. If gender-role socialization leads males and fe-
males to differ on these core self- and role-related beliefs,
then related activities will have differential value for males
and females. In support, in a study of the link between per-
sonal values and college major, Dunteman, Wisenbaker, and
Taylor (1978) identiﬁed two sets of values that both predicted
college major and differentiated the genders: the ﬁrst set
(labeled thing-orientation) reﬂected an interest in manipulat-
ing objects and understanding the physical world; the second
set (labeled person-orientation) reﬂected an interest in under-
standing human social interaction and a concern with helping
people. Students with high thing-orientation and low person-
orientation were more likely than were other students to select
a math or a science major. Not surprisingly, the females were
more likely than were the males to major in something other
than math or science because of their higher person-oriented
values. Similarly, the young women in the Jozefowicz et al.
(1993; see Eccles, Barber, & Jozefowicz, 1999) study placed
more value than did the young men on a variety of female-
stereotyped career-related skills and interests, such as doing

Gender and Achievement
341
work that directly helps people and meshes well with child-
rearing responsibilities. These values along with ability self-
concepts predicted the gender-stereotyped career plans of
both males and females (see Eccles & Harold, 1992, for re-
view of the gender-role stereotypical patterns for personal
values, occupational values, and personality traits).
Explanations for these gender differences in interests and
task values have focused on several things, including adoles-
cents’understanding of what is appropriate for each gender to
do. To the extent that adolescents know and have internalized
the gender-role stereotypes of their cultures, they are likely to
place greater value on activities consistent with their gender’s
gender role than on activities consistent with the opposite
gender’s gender role (see Eccles, 1984; Ruble & Martin,
1998).
Gender differences in academic values could also reﬂect
the conﬂuence of both gender-role stereotypes and gender
differences in perceived competence. Drawing on the
writings of William James (1892/1963), Eccles and her
colleagues suggested that children would lower the value
they attach to particular activities or subject areas—if they
lack conﬁdence in these areas—in order to maintain their
self-esteem (Eccles, 1994; Eccles et al., 1998; Harter, 1990).
To the extent that girls feel less competent in math than in
other subject areas, they may reduce the value they attach to
math versus other academic subject areas. This in turn might
lead them to be less likely than males to consider future
occupations in math-related ﬁelds. S. Spencer, Steele, and
Quinn (1999) suggested a similar phenomenon related to
stereotype vulnerability. They hypothesized that women
would disidentify with those subject areas in which females
are stereotyped as less competent than males. By disidentify-
ing with these areas, the women will not only lower the value
they attach to these subject areas, they will also be less likely
to experience pride and positive affect when they are doing
well in these subjects. Consequently, these subjects should
become less relevant to their self-esteem. These hypotheses
remain to be tested. As we noted earlier, girls and young
women do not report valuing math less than do boys and
young men, at least through the early high-school years. What
they do value less than males do are physical science and en-
gineering. Because math is required for both of these ﬁelds,
this gender difference in values could explain the differential
course taking in these ﬁelds during both high school and col-
lege (Updegraff, Eccles, Barber, & O’Brien, 1996).
In summary, as with competence beliefs, there are gender
differences in children’s and adolescents’ valuing of and
interest in different activities. These differences are important
for understanding the development of gender differences in
cognition and performance. In our research, children’s and
adolescents’ valuing of different activities relates strongly to
their choices of whether to continue to pursue the activity
(Eccles-Parsons et al., 1983; Meece et al., 1990; Updegraff
et al., 1996). Such choices should have an impact on changes in
actual competence and subsequent performance, with partici-
pation leading to greater increases than nonparticipation.
Gender and Occupational Ability Self-Concepts
Eccles and her colleagues have extended the work on aca-
demic and athletic self-concepts by looking at European
American and African American adolescents’ competence
ratings for skills more directly linked to adult occupational
choice. As their samples moved into and through high school,
these investigators asked the students a series of questions di-
rectly related to future job choices. First, they asked them to
rate how good they were compared to other students at each
of several job-related skills. Second, they asked the students
to rate the probability that they would succeed at each of a se-
ries of standard careers. On the one hand, the results are quite
gender-role stereotyped: The young women (both African
American and European American) were less conﬁdent of
success than were their male peers in both science-related
professions and male-typed skilled labor occupations. In con-
trast, the young men (both African American and European
American) were less conﬁdent of their success than were
their female peers in health-related professions and female-
typed skilled labor occupations. On the other hand, there
were no gender differences in these 12th graders’ ratings of
either their conﬁdence of success in business and law or
their leadership, independence, intellectual, and computer
skills. Furthermore, although the young men were more con-
ﬁdent of success in physical science and engineering ﬁelds,
the young women were more conﬁdent than were their
male peers of success in health-related ﬁelds that involve ex-
tensive scientiﬁc training (Eccles et al., 1997).
The within-gender patterns were equally interesting. On
the average, these young women saw themselves as quite
competent in traditionally female-typed jobs and skills
related to human service, particularly in comparison to their
conﬁdence for science-related jobs and mechanical skills. An
interesting ﬁnding was that these young women also saw
themselves as quite competent in terms of their leadership,
intellectual skills, and independence.
Gender and Occupational-Choice–Related Values
Do women and men make gender-role stereotypical life
choices because they have gender-role stereotypical values?
In most studies, the answer is “yes” for the populations most

342
Cognitive Development in Adolescence
studied (European Americans and to a lesser extent African
Americans). Gender-role stereotypical patterns in adoles-
cents’ valuing of sports, social activities, and English have
emerged consistently. It is interesting to note that the gen-
dered pattern associated with the value of math does not
emerge until high school. Finally, the gendered pattern of
valuing math, physics, and computer skills has emerged as
the key predictor of both gender differences and individual
differences among female students in adolescents’ plans to
enter math-related scientiﬁc and engineering ﬁelds (see
Eccles et al., 1997).
It is important to note, however, that these gendered
patterns have decreased over time for women of most ethnic
groups in the United States. Young women today are more
likely to aspire to the male-stereotyped ﬁelds of medicine,
law, and business than were their mothers and grandmothers.
And although the numbers are not nearly as large, young
women today are also much more likely to seek out occupa-
tions related to engineering and physical science. Finally,
young women today are also much more involved in athletic
activities than were their mothers and grandmothers (see
Astin & Lindholm, 2001; Gill, 2001).
Because of their interest in understanding career choice,
Eccles and her colleagues asked their African American and
European American senior high-school participants to rate
how important each of a series of job-related and life-related
values and a series of job characteristics were to them (see
Eccles et al., 1997). As was true for the job-related skills,
they found evidence of both gender-role stereotypical differ-
ences and of gender-role transcendence. In keeping with
traditional stereotypes, the young women rated family and
friends as more important to them than did their male peers;
the young women were also more likely than the male peers
were to want jobs that were people-oriented. In contrast, but
also consistent with traditional stereotypes, the young men
placed a higher value on high-risk and competitive activities
and wealth; they also were more interested in jobs that
allowed for work with machinery, math, or computers. How-
ever, counter to traditional stereotypes, there were no gender
differences in careerism (focus on career as critical part of
one’s identity), and the women and men were equally likely
to want jobs that allowed ﬂexibility to meet family obliga-
tions, that entailed prestige and responsibility, and that
provided opportunities for creative and intellectual work.
Evidence of both gender-role typing and transcendence
was also evident in the within-gender patterns. Although
these young women still, on the average, attached most
importance to having a job with sufﬁcient ﬂexibility to meet
family obligations and with the opportunity to help people,
they also placed great importance on the role of their career
for their personal identity (careerism) and on the importance
of both prestige-responsibility and creativity as key compo-
nents of their future occupations.
Predicting Occupational Choice
Eccles and her colleagues next used these values and ability
self-concepts to predict the young men’s and women’s occu-
pational aspirations (see Eccles et al., 1997). As expected,
ability self-concepts were key predictors of both between-
and within-gender differences in career aspirations. Also
as predicted by the Eccles expectancy-value model of
achievement-related choices, the lifestyle and valued job
characteristics were signiﬁcant predictors of career aspira-
tions. The within-gender analyses were especially interest-
ing. Values did an excellent job of discriminating between
these young women’s occupational plans. Perhaps most in-
teresting was that the value placed on helping other people
predicted which women aspired to advanced-level health-
related professions (e.g., a physician) and which women as-
pired to doctoral-level science careers. Both of these groups
of women had very high conﬁdence in their math and sci-
ence abilities. In contrast, they differed dramatically in the
value they placed on helping others: The women aspiring to
the health-related ﬁelds placed more importance on this di-
mension than on any other value dimension; in contrast, the
women aspiring to doctoral-level science careers placed less
importance on this dimension than on any other dimension,
particularly less than on the value of being able to work with
math and computers.
In summary, there is still evidence of gendered patterns in
the valuing of different academic subject areas and activities.
And although it is encouraging that girls value math during
elementary school, the fact that European American young
women have less positive views of both their math ability and
the value of math is problematic because these differences
lead young European American women to be less likely than
young European American men to take optional advanced-
level math and physical science courses.
Gender and Self-Esteem
Work on gender differences in self-esteem among European
Americans also has produced some interesting ﬁndings.
During the middle childhood years, boys and girls report
similar levels of self-esteem. By the early adolescent
years, however, European American girls tend to report lower
self-esteem than do European American boys. Although self-
esteem tends to rise as children move through adolescence
(Dusek & Flaherty, 1981), the gender difference remains

Racial and Ethnic Group Differences in Achievement Motivation
343
(Kling, Hyde, Showers, & Buswell, 1999). Further, young
women seem more likely than do young men to develop more
serious negative self-evaluations such as depression during
the adolescent years (see Eisenberg, Marin, & Fabes, 1996;
Harter, 1998; Nolen-Hoeksema & Girigus, 1994).
A variety of explanations have been offered for these
gender differences in the self-esteem of European Americans.
European American boys have been described as being more
likely to handle difﬁculties by engaging in “externalizing”
behavior such as aggression. European Americans girls, by
contrast, tend to “internalize” problems to a greater extent
(see Eisenberg et al., 1996). Nolen-Hoeksema and Girigus
(1994) suggested that females’ self esteem is based more on
the approval of others and on pleasing others, making it more
difﬁcult for them to maintain self-approval, especially when
they encounter difﬁculties.
Physical appearance issues are likely to be central as well,
particularly for European American females. Harter (1990,
1998) made three essential points about physical appearance
and self-esteem, based on her own work and on that of others.
First, as European American boys and girls go through child-
hood and move into adolescence, the girls (relative to boys)
become increasingly less satisﬁed with their own appearance.
Second, society and the media place an incredibly strong em-
phasis on physical appearance as a basis for self-evaluation,
and this is especially true for European American women.
There are clear (and often unrealistic) standards for women’s
appearance that young women strive to attain, often unsuc-
cessfully. Third, Harter’s empirical work clearly has shown
that for both European American males and females, satisfac-
tion with physical appearance is the strongest predictor of
self-esteem. Taking these three points together, European
American girls are increasingly unhappy about an aspect of
themselves that seems to be the primary predictor of self-
esteem. Hence, European American girls are more likely to
develop lower self-esteem at this time.
RACIAL AND ETHNIC GROUP DIFFERENCES
IN ACHIEVEMENT MOTIVATION
As is the case in many areas of psychology (see Graham,
1992), less is known about the motivation of adolescents
from non-European American racial and ethnic groups.
However, work in this area is growing quickly, with much of
it focusing on the academic achievement difﬁculties of many
African American youth (see Berry & Asamen, 1989; Eccles
et al., 1998; Hare, 1985; Jencks & Phillips, 1998; Slaughter-
Defoe, Nakagawa, Takanishi, & Johnson, 1990). Recent
work has also focused on other minority groups within the
United States and on recent immigrant populations, some of
whom are doing much better in school than both European
American middle-class children and the third- and fourth-
generation members of their same national heritage (e.g.,
Chen & Stevenson, 1995, Kao & Tienda, 1995; Slaughter-
Defoe et al., 1990).
Ethnic Group Differences in Children’s Competence,
Control, and Attribution Beliefs
Graham (1994) reviewed the literature on differences
between African American and European American students
on such motivational constructs as need for achievement,
locus of control, achievement attributions, and ability beliefs
and expectancies; she concluded that these differences are
not very large. She also argued that many existing studies
have not adequately distinguished between race and SES,
making it very difﬁcult to interpret even those differences
that did emerge. Cooper and Dorr (1995) did a meta-analysis
of some of the same studies reviewed by Graham in order to
compare more narrative and more quantitative types of re-
views. Although there were some important points of agree-
ment across the two reviews, Cooper and Dorr concluded that
there were signiﬁcant race differences in need for achieve-
ment favoring European Americans, especially in lower-SES
and younger samples.
In their study of educational opportunity, Coleman et al.
(1966) reported that perceived control was a very important
predictor of African American children’s school achieve-
ment. Graham (1994) found some evidence that African
Americans are more external than European Americans.
However, she also noted that studies looking at relations of
locus of control to various achievement outcomes have not
shown this greater externality to be a problem; indeed, in
some studies greater externality is associated with higher
achievement among African Americans.
Research on competence beliefs and expectancies has
revealed more optimism among African American children
than among European American children, even when the
European American children are achieving higher marks
(e.g., Stevenson et al., 1990). A more important result,
however, was that in Stevenson et al. (1990), the European
American children’s ratings of their ability were related to
their performance, whereas the African American children’s
were not. Graham (1994) suggested the following explana-
tions: (a) African American and European American children
may use different social comparison groups to help judge
their own abilities; and (b) African American children may
say they are doing well to protect their general self-esteem,
and they may also devalue or disidentify academic activities

344
Cognitive Development in Adolescence
at which they do poorly in order to protect their self-esteem.
However, neither of these explanations has been adequately
tested, and more work is needed to determine whether and
when Stevenson et al.’s results replicate. More recent studies
suggest that this ethnic group difference is less extreme than
reported by Stevenson et al. (Winston, Eccles, Senior, &
Vida, 1997; Winston, 2001).
Ethnic Group Differences in Achievement
Values and Goals
There are few ethnic comparative studies speciﬁcally focused
on the kinds of achievement values measured by Eccles,
Wigﬁeld, and their colleagues, or on the kinds of achievement
goals measured by Ames, Dweck, Midgley, and their col-
leagues (see earlier discussion). Researchers studying minor-
ity children’s achievement values have focused instead on the
broader valuing of school by minority children and their par-
ents. In general, these researchers ﬁnd that minority children
and parents highly value school (particularly during the ele-
mentary school years) and have high educational aspirations
for their children (e.g., Stevenson et al., 1990). However, the
many difﬁculties associated with poverty (see Duncan,
Brooks-Gunn, & Klevbanov, 1994; Huston, McLoyd, & Coll,
1994; McLoyd, 1990) make these educational aspirations dif-
ﬁcult to attain. It is important for researchers to extend this
work to more speciﬁc value-related constructs.
Ethnicity and Motivation at the Interface Between
Expectancies and Values
Researchers interested in ethnic and racial differences in
achievement have proposed models linking social roles,
competence-related beliefs, and values. For example, Steele
has proposed stereotype vulnerability and disidentiﬁcation
to help explain the underachievement of African American
students(e.g.,Steele&Aronson,1995):Confrontedthroughout
their school career with mixed messages about their compe-
tence and potential as well as the widespread negative cultural
stereotypes about their academic potential and motivation,
African American students should ﬁnd it difﬁcult to concen-
trate fully on their schoolwork due to the anxiety induced
by their stereotype vulnerability (for support, see Steele &
Aronson, 1995). In turn, to protect their self-esteem, they
shoulddisidentifywithacademicachievement,leadingtoboth
a lowering of the value they attach to academic achievement
and a detachment of their self-esteem from both positive and
negativeacademicexperiences.Insupport,severalresearchers
have found that academic self-concept of ability is less predic-
tive of general self-esteem among African-American youth
than among European American youth (Bledsoe, 1967;
Winston, Eccles, Senior, & Vida, 1997).
Fordham and Ogbu (1986) made a similar argument link-
ing African American students’ perception of limited future
job opportunities to lowered academic motivation: Because
society and schools give African American youth the dual
message that academic achievement is unlikely to lead to
positive adult outcomes for them and that they are not valued
by the system, some African American youth may create an
oppositional culture that rejects the value of academic
achievement. Ogbu (1992) argued that this dynamic should
be stronger for involuntary minorities who continue to be
discriminated against by mainstream American culture
(e.g., African Americans) than for voluntary minority immi-
grant groups (e.g., recent immigrants from Southeast Asia).
Although voluntary minorities have initial barriers due to
language and cultural differences, these barriers can be over-
come somewhat more easily than the racism faced by invol-
untary minorities, giving voluntary minorities greater access
to mainstream culture and its beneﬁts.
Contrary to this view, several investigators have found no
evidence of greater disidentiﬁcation with school among
African American students than among other groups includ-
ing European Americans (e.g., Eccles, 2001; Steinberg,
Dornbusch, & Brown, 1992; Taylor, Casten, Flickinger,
Roberts, & Fulmore, 1994). Nonetheless, several studies show
that disidentiﬁcation—particularly as a result of inequitable
treatment and failure experiences at school—can undermine
achievement and academic motivation (e.g., see Finn, 1989;
Taylor et al., 1994). It is likely that some students, particularly
members of involuntary minority groups, will have these ex-
periences as they pass through the secondary school system.
Longitudinal studies of the process of disidentiﬁcation—and
of ameliorating intervention efforts—are badly needed.
Any discussion of performance and motivational differ-
ences across different ethnic groups must take into account
larger contextual issues. For example, M. B. Spencer and
Markstrom-Adams (1990) argued that many minority
children—particularly those living in poverty—have to deal
with several difﬁcult issues not faced by majority adoles-
cents, such as racist prejudicial attitudes, conﬂict between the
values of their group and those of larger society, and scarcity
of high-achieving adults in their group to serve as role
models. Such difﬁculties can impede identity formation in
these adolescents, leading to identity diffusion or inadequate
exploration of different possible identities (Taylor et al.,
1994). Similarly, Cross (1991) argued that one must consider
the development of both personal identities and racial group
identity. For instance, some African American adolescents
may have positive personal identities but be less positive

References
345
about their racial group as a whole, whereas others may have
negative personal identities but have positive orientations
toward their group. Cross argued that many researchers have
confounded these two constructs, leading to confusion in our
understanding of identity development in—and its motiva-
tional implications for—African Americans.
Finally, it is critical to consider the quality of the educa-
tional institutions that serve many of these youth. Thirty-
seven percent of African American youth and 32% of
Hispanic youth—compared to 5% of EuropeanAmerican and
22% of Asian American youth—are enrolled in the 47 largest
city school districts in this country; in addition,AfricanAmer-
ican and Hispanic youth attend some of the poorest school
districts in this country. Twenty-eight percent of the youth en-
rolled in city schools live in poverty, and 55% are eligible for
free or reduced-cost lunch, suggesting that class may be as
important as (or more important than) race in the differences
that emerge. Teachers in these schools report feeling less safe
than do teachers in other school districts, dropout rates are
highest, and achievement levels at all grades are the lowest
(Council of the Great City Schools, 1992). Finally, schools
that serve these populations are less likely than schools serv-
ing more advantaged populations to offer either high-quality
remedial services or advanced courses and courses that facil-
itate the acquisition of higher-order thinking skills and active
learning strategies. Even children who are extremely moti-
vated may ﬁnd it difﬁcult to perform well under these educa-
tional circumstances (Lee & Bryk, 1989).
Graham (1994) made several important recommendations
for future work on African American children’s motivation.
We think these recommendations can be applied more
broadly to work on different racial and ethnic groups. Two
particularly important recommendations are (a) the need to
separate out effects of race and social class; and (b) the need
to move beyond race-comparative studies to studies that look
at individual differences within different racial and ethnic
groups and at the antecedents and processes underlying
variations in achievement outcomes among minority youth
(e.g., Connell, Spencer, & Aber, 1994; Luster & McAdoo,
1994; Schneider & Coleman, 1993; Steinberg, Lamborn,
Dornbusch, & Darling et al., 1992; Kao & Tienda, 1995).
Studies of recent immigrant populations and comparative
studies of different generations of immigrant populations
move in these directions. For example, work by Stevenson
and his colleagues, by Tienda and her colleagues, and by
Fuligni all demonstrate the power of the types of motivational
constructs discussed thus far in explaining both within- and
between-group variation in academic achievement (e.g.,
Chen & Stevenson, 1995; Fuligni, 1997; Kao & Tienda,
1995; Lummis & Stevenson, 1990).
SUMMARY
In this chapter, we focused on two major aspects of adoles-
cent development: cognitive development and both achieve-
ment and achievement motivation. First we discussed
cognitive development, pointing out the relevance of recent
work for both learning and decision making. We pointed out
that more research is needed on ethnic group differences and
on the link between decision-making skills and actual-
decision making behaviors in complex situations. Next we
summarized current patterns of school achievement and
recent changes in both school completion and differential
performance on standardized tests of achievement. We
pointed out the educational gains that have been made over
the last century as well as the continuing ethnic group and
national differences in test performance. We then summa-
rized both the positive and negative age-related changes in
school motivation and discussed how experiences in school
might explain these developmental patterns. Recent efforts at
middle-school reform have supported many of the hypothe-
ses discussed in that section of the paper. More efforts at
understanding the difﬁculty of school reform are badly
needed. Finally, we discussed both gender and ethnic group
differences in achievement motivation and linked these
differences to gender and ethnic group differences in acade-
mic achievement and longer-term career aspirations. We now
have a very good understanding of the psychological and
social origins of gender differences in achievement patterns.
More work is desperately needed on the inﬂuences on acade-
mic performance and both educational and occupational
choices of adolescents of color. It is encouraging that the rate
of such work has increased dramatically over the last
10 years. We look forward to being able to summarize this
new and exciting work in future chapters.
REFERENCES
American Association of University Women. (1990). Shortchanging
girls, shortchanging America: Full data report. Washing-
ton, DC: American Association of University Women Press.
Ames, C. (1992). Classrooms: Goals, structures, and student moti-
vation. Journal of Educational Psychology, 84, 261–271.
Arnett, J. J. (1999). Adolescent storm and stress, reconsidered.
American Psychologist, 54, 317–326.
Astin, H. S., & Lindholm, J. A. (2001). Academic aspirations and
degree attainment of women. In J. Worell (Senior Ed.) Encyclo-
pedia of women and gender (Vol. 1, pp. 15–28). San Diego, CA:
Academic Press.
Baltes, P. B., Linderberger, U., & Staudinger, U. M. (1998). Life-
span theory in developmental psychology. In W. Damon &

346
Cognitive Development in Adolescence
R. M. Lerner (Eds.), Handbook of child psychology (5th ed.,
Vol. 1, pp. 1029–1145). New York: Wiley.
Barker, R., & Gump, P. (1964). Big school, small school: High
school size and student behavior. Stanford, CA: Stanford
University Press.
Beatty, A. S., Reese, C. M., Perksy, H. R., & Carr, P. (1996). The
NAEP 1994 U.S. History Report Card for the nation and
the states. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education,
Ofﬁce of Educational Research and Improvement, National
Center for Educational Statistics.
Bell, L. A. (1989). Something’s wrong here and it’s not me: Chal-
lenging the dilemmas that block girls success. Journal for the
Education of the Gifted, 12, 118–130.
Berry, G. L., & Asamen, J. K. (Eds.). (1989). Black students:
Psychosocial issues and academic achievement. Newbury Park,
CA: Sage.
Bjorklund, D. F. (1999). Children’s thinking: Developmental function
and individual differences. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Bledsoe, J. (1967). Self-concept of children and their intelligence,
achievement, interests, and anxiety. Childhood Education, 43,
436–438.
Brophy, J. E., & Evertson, C. M. (1976). Learning for teaching: A
developmental perspective. Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
Bryk, A. S., Lee, V. E., & Smith, J. B. (1989, May). High school
organization and its effects on teachers and students: An inter-
pretative summary of the research. Paper presented at the invi-
tational conference on “Choice and Control in American
Education,” Robert M. La Follette Institute of Public Affairs,
University of Wisconsin, Madison.
Byrnes, J. P. (1998). The nature and development of decision-
making: A self-regulation perspective. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Byrnes, J. P. (1999). The nature and development of representation:
Forging a synthesis of competing approaches. In I. Sigel (Ed.),
Development of representation (pp. 273–294). Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Byrnes. J. P. (2001a). Cognitive development and learning in
instructional contexts (2nd ed.). Needham Heights, MA: Allyn
and Bacon.
Byrnes, J. P. (2001b). Minds, brains, and education: Understanding
the psychological and educational relevance of neuroscientiﬁc
research. New York: Guilford Press.
Byrnes, J. P., & McClenny, B. (1994). Decision-making in
young adolescents and adults. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 58, 359–388.
Byrnes, J. P., Miller, D. C., & Reynolds, M. (1999). Learning to
make good decisions: A self-regulation perspective. Child
Development, 70, 1121–1140.
Byrnes, J. P., Miller, D. C., & Schaefer, W. D. (1999). Sex-
differences in risk-taking: A meta-analysis. Psychological Bul-
letin, 125, 367–383.
Byrnes, J. P., & Overton, W. F. (1986). Reasoning about certainty
and uncertainty in concrete, causal, and propositional contexts.
Developmental Psychology, 22, 793–799.
Call, K. T., & Mortimer, J. T. (2001). Arenas of comfort in adoles-
cence: A study of adjustment in context. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Chen, C., & Stevenson, H. W. (1995). Motivation and mathematics
achievement: A
comparative study of Asian-American,
Caucasian-American, and East Asian high school students. Child
Development, 66, 1215–1234.
Coleman, J. S., Campbell, E. Q., Hobson, C. J., McPartland,
J., Mood, A., Weinfeld, F. D., & York, R. L. (1966). Equality of
educational opportunity. Washington, DC: U.S. Government
Printing Ofﬁce.
Connell, J. P. (1985). A new multidimensional measure of children’s
perception of control. Child Development, 56, 1018–1041.
Connell, J. P., Spencer, M. B., & Aber, J. L. (1994). Educational risk
and resilience in African American youth: Context, self, and
action outcomes in school. Child Development, 65, 493–506.
Cooper, H., & Dorr, N. (1995). Race comparisons on need for
achievement: A meta-analytic alternative to Graham’s narrative
review. Review of Educational Research, 65, 483–508.
Council of the Great City Schools. (1992). National urban educa-
tion goals: Baseline indicators, 1990–91. Washington, DC:
Council of the Great City Schools.
Crandall, V. C. (1969). Sex differences in expectancy of intellectual
and academic reinforcement. In C. P. Smith (Ed.), Achievement-
related motives in children (pp. 11–45). New York: Russell Sage.
Crandall, V. C., Katkousky, W., & Crandall, V. J. (1965). Children’s
beliefs in their own control of reinforcements in intellectual-
academic achievement situations. Child Development, 36,
91–109.
Cross, W. E., Jr. (1991). Shades of black: Diversity in African-
American identity. Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press.
Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (1985). Intrinsic motivation and self-
determination in human behavior. New York: Plenum Press.
De Lisi, R., & McGillicuddy-De Lisi, A. (2002). Sex differences in
mathematical ability and achievement. In A. McGillicuddy-
De Lisi & R. De Lisi (Eds.), Biology, society, and behavior: The
development of sex differences in cognition (pp. 155–182).
Westport, CT: Ablex.
Dias, M. G., & Harris, P. L. (1988). The effect of make-believe play
on deductive reasoning. British Journal of Developmental
Psychology, 6, 207–221.
DiClemente, R. J., Hansen, W. B., & Ponton, L. E. (1995). Hand-
book of adolescent health risk behavior. New York: Plenum
Press.
Douglas, J. D., & Rice, K. M. (1979). Sex differences in children’s
anxiety and defensiveness measures. Developmental Psychol-
ogy, 15, 223–224.
Duncan, G. J., Brooks-Gunn, J., & Klevbanov, P. K. (1994). Eco-
nomic deprivation and early childhood development. Child
Development, 65, 296–318.
Dunteman, G. H., Wisenbaker, J., & Taylor, M. F. (1978). Race and
sex differences in college science program participation. Report
to the National Science Foundation. North Carolina: Research
Triangle Park.

References
347
Dusek, J. B., & Flaherty, J. (1981). The development of the self
during the adolescent years. Monographs of the Society for
Research in Child Development, 46(4), 1–61.
Dweck, C. S., & Elliott, E. S. (1983). Achievement motivation. In
P. H. Mussen (Ed.), Handbook of child psychology (3rd ed.,
Vol. 4, pp. 643–691). New York: Wiley.
Dweck, C. S., & Leggett, E. (1988). A social-cognitive approach to
motivation and personality. Psychological Review, 95, 256–273.
Dweck, C. S., & Repucci, N. D. (1973). Learned helplessness and
reinforcement responsibility in children. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 25, 109–116.
Eccles, J. S. (1984). Sex differences in achievement patterns. In
T. Sonderegger (Ed.), Nebraska Symposium on Motivation
(Vol. 32, pp. 97–132). Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
Eccles, J. S. (1987). Gender roles and women’s achievement-related
decisions. Psychology of Women Quarterly, 11, 135–172.
Eccles, J. S. (1993). School and family effects on the ontogeny of
children’s interests, self-perceptions, and activity choice. In
J. Jacobs (Ed.), Nebraska Symposium on Motivation, 1992:
Developmental perspectives on motivation (pp. 145–208).
Lincoln, NB: University of Nebraska Press.
Eccles, J. S. (1994). Understanding women’s educational and
occupational choices: Applying the Eccles et al. model of
achievement-related choices. Psychology of Women Quarterly,
18, 585–609.
Eccles, J. S. (2001, March). Social identities and adolescent devel-
opment. Talk given at the Society for Research on Adolescence,
Minneapolis, MN.
Eccles, J. S., Adler, T. F., & Meece, J. L. (1984). Sex differences in
achievement: A test of alternate theories. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 46, 26–43.
Eccles, J. S., & Barber, B. L. (1999). Student council, volunteering,
basketball, or marching band: What kind of extracurricular
involvement matters? Journal of Adolescent Research, 14,
10–43.
Eccles, J. S., Barber, B., & Jozefowicz, D. (1999). Linking gender to
educational, occupational, and recreational choices: Applying
the Eccles et al. model of achievement-related choices. In W. B.
Swann, J. H. Langlois, & L. A. Gilbert (Ed.), Sexism and stereo-
types in modern society: The gender science of Janet Taylor
Spence (pp. 153–192). Washington, DC: American Psychologi-
cal Association Press.
Eccles, J. S., Barber, B., Jozefowicz, D., Malanchuk, O., & Vida, M.
(1999). Self-evaluations of competence, task values and self-
esteem. In N. G. Johnson, M. C. Roberts, & J. Worrell (Eds.),
Beyond appearance: A new look at adolescent girls (pp. 53–84).
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association Press.
Eccles, J. S., & Harold, R. D. (1992). Gender differences in educa-
tional and occupational patterns among the gifted. In N.
Colangelo, S. G. Assouline, & D. L. Amronson (Eds.), Talent
Development: Proceedings form the 1991 Henry B. and Jocelyn
Wallace National Research Symposium on Talent Development
(pp. 3–29). Unionville, NY: Trillium Press.
Eccles, J. S., Lord, S., & Buchanan, C. M. (1996). School transitions
in early adolescence: What are we doing to our young people. In
J. L. Graber, J. Brooks-Gunn, & A. C. Petersen (Eds.), Transi-
tions through adolescence: Interpersonal domains and context
(pp. 251–284). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Eccles, J. S., Lord, S. E., Roeser, R. W., Barber, B. L., & Jozefowicz,
D. M. H. (1997). The association of school transitions in early
adolescence with developmental trajectories through high
school. In J. Schulenberg, J. Maggs, & K. Hurrelmann, K. (Eds.),
Health risks and developmental transitions during adolescence
(pp. 283–320). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Eccles, J. S., & Midgley, C. (1989). Stage/environment ﬁt: Devel-
opmentally appropriate classrooms for early adolescents. In
R. Ames & C. Ames (Eds.), Research on motivation in education
(Vol. 3, pp. 139–181). New York: Academic Press.
Eccles, J. S., Midgley, C., Buchanan, C. M., Wigﬁeld, A., Reuman,
D., & Mac Iver, D. (1993). Development during adolescence:
The impact of stage/environment ﬁt. American Psychologist, 48,
90–101.
Eccles, J. S., Wigﬁeld, A., Flanagan, C., Miller, C., Reuman, D., &
Yee, D. (1989). Self-concepts, domain values, and self-esteem:
Relations and changes at early adolescence. Journal of Person-
ality, 57, 283–310.
Eccles, J. S., Wigﬁeld, A., & Schiefele, U. (1998). Motivation. In N.
Eisenberg (Ed.), Handbook of child psychology (5th ed., Vol. 3,
pp. 1017–1095). New York: Wiley.
Eccles-Parsons, J., Adler, T. F., Futterman, R., Goff, S. B., Kaczala,
C. M., Meece, J. L., & Midgley, C. (1983). Expectancies, values,
and academic behaviors. In J.T. Spence (Ed.), Achievement and
achievement motivation (pp. 75–146). San Francisco: W. H.
Freeman.
Eccles-Parsons, J., Meece, J. L., Adler, T. F., & Kaczala, C. M.
(1982). Sex differences in attributions and learned helplessness.
Sex Roles, 8, 421–432.
Eisenberg, N., Marin, C. L., & Fabes, R. A. (1996). Gender devel-
opment and gender effects. In D. C. Berliner & R. C. Calfee
(Eds.), Handbook of educational psychology (pp 358–396). New
York: Macmillan.
Elder, G. H., Jr., & Conger, R. D. (2000). Children of the land.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Epstein, J. L., & McPartland, J. M. (1976). The concept and
measurement of the quality of school life. American Educational
Research Journal, 13, 15–30.
Ericsson (1996). The road to excellence: The acquisition of expert
performance in the arts, science, sports, and games. Mahwah,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Erikson, E. H. (1968). Identity, youth and crisis. New York: W. W.
Norton.
Feldlaufer, H., Midgley, C. M., & Eccles, J. S. (1988). Student,
teacher, and observer perceptions of the classroom environment
before and after the transition to junior high school. Journal of
Early Adolescence, 8, 133–156.
Finn, J. D. (1989). Withdrawing from school. Review of Educational
Research, 59, 117–142.

348
Cognitive Development in Adolescence
Fordham, S., & Ogbu, J. U. (1986). Black students’ school success:
Coping with “the burden of ‘acting white.’” The Urban Review,
18, 176–206.
Fuligni, A. J. (1997). The academic achievement of adolescents
from immigrant families: The role of family background, atti-
tudes, and beliefs. Child Development, 68, 351–363.
Gill, D. L. (2001). Sport and athletics. In J. Worell (Senior Ed.),
Encyclopedia of women and gender (Vol. 2, pp. 1091–1100). San
Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Gilligan, C., Lyons, N. P., & Tammer, T. J. (1990). Making connec-
tions: The relational world of adolescent girls at the Emma
Willard School. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Girotto, V., Gilly, M., Blaye, A., & Light, P. (1989). Children’s per-
formance in the selection task: Plausibility and familiarity.
British Journal of Psychology, 80, 79–95.
Graham, S. (1992). Most of the subjects were European American
and middle class: Trends in published research on African Amer-
icans in selected APA journals 1970–1989. American Psycholo-
gist, 47, 629–639.
Graham, S. (1994). Motivation in African Americans. Review of
Educational Research, 64, 55–117.
Haars, V. J., & Mason, E. J. (1986). Children’s understanding of
class inclusion and their ability to reason with implication. Inter-
national Journal of Behavioral Development, 9, 45–63.
Halpern-Felsher, B. L., & Cauffman, E. (2001). Costs and beneﬁts
of a decision: Decision-making competence in adolescents
and adults. Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology, 22,
257–276.
Hamilton, S. (1990). Apprenticeship for adulthood: Preparing
youth for the future. New York: Free Press.
Hare, B. R. (1985). Stability and change in self-perceptions and
achievement among African American adolescents: A longitudi-
nal study. Journal of African American Psychology, 11, 29–42.
Harter, S. (1981). A new self-report scale of intrinsic versus extrin-
sic orientation in the classroom: Motivational and informational
components. Developmental Psychology, 17, 300–312.
Harter, S. (1998). The development of self-representations. In W.
Damon (Series Ed.) & N. Eisenberg (Vol. Ed.), Handbook of
child psychology (5th ed., Vol. 3, pp. 553–618). New York:
Wiley.
Harter, S. (1990). Causes, correlates and the functional role of
global self-worth: A life-span perspective. In J. Kolligian &
R. Sternberg (Eds.), Perceptions of competence and incompe-
tence across the life-span (pp. 67–98). New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press.
Hill, K. T., & Sarason, S. B. (1966). The relation of test anxiety and
defensiveness to test and school performance over the elemen-
tary school years: A further longitudinal study. Monographs for
the Society for Research in Child Development, 31(2, Serial
No. 104), 1–76.
Hunt, D. E. (1979). Person-environment interaction: A challenge
found wanting before it was tried. Review of Educational
Research, 45, 209–230.
Huston, A. C., McLoyd, V., & Coll, C. G. (1994). Children and
poverty: Issues in contemporary research. Child Development,
65, 275–282.
Jackson, A. W., & Davis, G. A. (2000). Turning points 2000:
Educating adolescents in the 21st century. New York: Teachers
College Press.
Jacobs, J. E., Lanza, S., Osgood, W. D., Eccles, J. S., & Wigﬁeld,
A. (2002). Changes in children’s self-competence and values:
Gender and domain differences across grades one through
twelve. Child Development, 73, 509–527.
James, W. (1963). Psychology. New York: Fawcett. (Original work
published 1892)
Janveau-Brennan, G., & Markovits, H. (1999). The development of
reasoning with causal conditionals. Developmental Psychology,
35, 904–911.
Jencks, C. L., & Brown, M. (1975). The effects of high schools on
their students. Harvard Educational Review, 45, 273–324.
Jencks, C., & Phillips, M. (Eds.). (1998). The black-white test score
gap. Washington, DC: Brookings Institute Press.
Jozefowicz, D. M., Barber, B. L., & Eccles, J. S. (1993, March).
Adolescent work-related values and beliefs: Gender differences
and relation to occupational aspirations. Paper presented at the
Biennial Meeting of the Society for Research in Child Develop-
ment. New Orleans, LA.
Kao, G., & Tienda, M. (1995). Optimism and achievement: The
educational performance of immigrant youth. Social Science
Quarterly, 76, 1–19.
Kavrell, S. M., & Petersen, A. C. (1984). Patterns of achievement in
early adolescence. In M. L. Maehr (Ed.), Advances in motivation
and achievement (pp. 1–35). Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Kazdin, A. E. (1993). Adolescent mental health: Prevention and
treatment programs. American Psychologist, 48, 127–141.
Keating, D. P. (1990). Adolescent thinking. In S. S. Feldman &
G. R. Elliott (Eds.), At the threshold: The developing adolescent
(pp. 54–89). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Kerr, B. A. (1985). Smart girls, gifted women. Dayton, OH: Ohio
Psychology Publishing.
Klaczynski, P. A. (1993). Reasoning schema effects on adolescent
rule acquisition and transfer. Journal of Educational Psychology,
85, 679–692.
Klaczynski, P. A., Byrnes, J. E., & Jacobs, J. E. (2001). Introduction
to the special issue on the development of decision-making.
Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology, 22, 225–236.
Klaczynski, P. A., & Narasimham, G. (1998). Representations as
mediators of adolescent deductive reasoning. Developmental
Psychology, 34, 865–881.
Kling, K. C., Hyde, J. S., Showers, C. J., & Buswell, B. N. (1999).
Gender differences in self-esteem: A meta-analysis. Psychologi-
cal Bulletin, 125, 470–500.
Kuhn, D., Garcia-Mila, M., Zohar, A., & Andersen, C. (1995).
Strategies of knowledge acquisition. Monographs of the Society
for Research in Child Development, 60(4), 1–128.

References
349
Lee, V. E., & Bryk, A. S. (1989). A multilevel model of the social
distribution of high school achievement. Sociology of Education,
62, 172–192.
Lewis, C. (1981). How do adolescents approach decisions: Changes
over grades seven to twelve and policy implications. Child
Development, 52, 538–544.
Lipsitz, J. (1984). Successful schools for young adolescents. New
Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Books.
Lord, S., Eccles, J. S., & McCarthy, K. (1994). Risk and protective
factors in the transition to junior high school. Journal of Early
Adolescence, 14, 162–199.
Lummis, M., & Stevenson, H. W. (1990). Gender differences in
beliefs and achievement: A cross-cultural study. Developmental
Psychology, 26, 254–263.
Luster, T., & McAdoo, H. P. (1994). Factors related to the achieve-
ment and adjustment of young African American children. Child
Development, 65, 1080–1094.
Mac Iver, D. J., & Reuman, D. A. (1988, April). Decision-making in
the classroom and early adolescents’ valuing of mathematics.
Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Educa-
tional Research Association, New Orleans, LA.
Maehr, M. L., & Anderman, E. M. (1993). Reinventing schools for
early adolescents: Emphasizing task goals. The Elementary
School Journal, 93, 593–610.
Maehr, M. L., & Midgley, C. (1996). Transforming school cultures.
Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Markovits, H., & Vachon, R. (1990). Conditional reasoning, repr-
sentation, and abstraction. Developmental Psychology, 26,
942–951.
McCall, R. B., Evahn, C., & Kratzer, L. (1992). High school under-
achievers: What do they achieve as adults? Newbury Park, CA:
Sage.
McLoyd, V. C. (1990). The impact of economic hardship on African
American families and children: Psychological distress, parent-
ing, and socioemotional development. Child Development, 61,
311–346.
Meece, J. L., Wigﬁeld, A., & Eccles, J. S. (1990). Predictors of math
anxiety and its consequences for young adolescents’ course
enrollment intentions and performances in mathematics. Journal
of Educational Psychology, 82, 60–70.
Midgley, C., Anderman, E., & Hicks, L. (1995). Differences
between elementary and middle school teachers and students: A
goal theory approach. Journal of Early Adolescence, 15, 90–113.
Midgley, C., & Feldlaufer, H. (1987). Students’ and teachers’
decision-making ﬁt before and after the transition to junior high
school. Journal of Early Adolescence, 7, 225–241.
Midgley, C., Feldlaufer, H., & Eccles, J. S. (1988). The transition to
junior high school: Beliefs of pre- and post-transition teachers.
Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 17, 543–562.
Midgley, C. M., Feldlaufer, H., & Eccles, J. S. (1989a). Changes in
teacher efﬁcacy and student self- and task-related beliefs during
the transition to junior high school. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 81, 247–258.
Midgley, C., Feldlaufer, H., & Eccles, J. S. (1989b). Student/teacher
relations and attitudes toward mathematics before and after the
transition to junior high school. Child Development, 60, 981–992.
Miller, C. L., Eccles, J. S., Flanagan, C., Midgley, C., Feldlaufer, H.,
& Harold, R. D. (1990). Parents’ and teachers’ beliefs about
adolescents: Effects of sex and experience. Journal of Youth and
Adolescence, 19, 363–394.
Miller, D. C., & Byrnes, J. P. (2001). Adolescents’ decision-making
in social situations: A self-regulation perspective. Journal of
Applied Developmental Psychology, 22, 237–256.
Moos, R. H. (1979). Evaluating educational environments. San
Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Moshman, D. (1998). Cognitive development beyond childhood. In
W. Damon (Series Ed.), D. Kuhn, & R. S. Siegler (Vol. Eds.),
Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 2. Cognition, language, and
perception (pp. 947–978). New York: Wiley.
Moshman, D., & Franks, B. A. (1986). Development of the concept
of inferential validity. Child Development, 57, 153–165.
National Center for Education Statistics. (1995). Overview of
TIMSS Project. Washington, DC: National Center for Educa-
tional Statistics.
National Center for Education Statistics. (1999). On-line reports.
Washington, DC: National Center for Education Statistics.
Nicholls, J. G. (1979a). Development of perception of own attain-
ment and causal attributions for success and failure in reading.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 71, 94–99.
Nicholls, J. G. (1979b). Quality and equality in intellectual develop-
ment: The role of motivation in education. American Psycholo-
gist, 34, 1071–1084.
Nicholls, J. G. (1989). The competitive ethos and democratic
education. Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press.
Nolen-Hoeksema, S., & Girigus, J. S. (1994). The emergence of
gender differences in depression during adolescence. Psycholog-
ical Bulletin, 115, 424–443.
Ofﬁce of Educational Research and Improvement. (1988). Youth Indi-
cators 1988. Washington DC: U.S. Government Printing Ofﬁce.
Ogbu, J. G. (1992). Understanding cultural diversity and learning.
Educational Researcher, 21, 5–14.
Ormond, C., Luszcz, M. A., Mann, L., & Beswick, G. (1991).
A metacognitive analysis of decision-making in adolescence.
Journal of Adolescence, 14, 275–291.
Parsons, J. E., & Ruble, D. N. (1977). The development of
achievement-related expectancies. Child Development, 48,
1075–1079.
Piaget, J., & Inhelder, B. (1973). Memory and intelligence. London:
Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Pipher, Mary (1994). Reviving ophelia. NewYork: Ballantine Books.
Reese, C. M., Miller, K. E., Mazzeo, J., & Dossey, J. A. (1997). The
NAEP 1996 Mathematics Report Card for the Nation and
the States. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education,
Ofﬁce of Educational Research and Improvement, National
Center for Educational Statistics.

350
Cognitive Development in Adolescence
Roderick, M. (1993). The path to dropping out: Evidence for inter-
vention. Westport, CT: Auburn House.
Rokeach, M. (1979). From individual to institutional values with
special reference to the values of science. In M. Rokeach (Ed.),
Understanding human values (pp. 47–70). New York: Free
Press.
Rosenbaum, J. E. (1976). Making inequality: The hidden curricu-
lum of high school tracking. New York: Wiley.
Rosenholtz, S. J., & Simpson, C. (1984). The formation of ability
conceptions: Developmental trend or social construction?
Review of Educational Research, 54, 31–63.
Ruble, D. N., & Martin, C. L. (1998). Gender development. In
N. Eisenberg (Ed.), Handbook of child psychology (5th ed.,
Vol. 3, pp. 933–1016). New York: Wiley.
Ryan, R. M., Connell, J. P., & Deci, E. L. (1985). A motiva-
tional analysis of self-determination and self-regulation in edu-
cation. In C. Ames & R. Ames (Eds.), Research on motivation
in education: Vol. 2. The classroom milieu (pp. 13–51). London:
Academic Press.
Sadker, M., & Sadker, D. (1994). Failing at fairness: How
America’s schools cheat girls. New York: Scribner.
Schneider, B., & Coleman, J. S. (1993). Parents, their children, and
schools. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Selman, R. L. (1980). The growth of interpersonal understanding.
New York: Academic Press.
Simmons, R. G., & Blyth, D. A. (1987). Moving into adolescence:
The impact of pubertal change and school context. Hawthorn,
NY: de Gruyter.
Slaughter-Defoe, D. T., Nakagawa, K., Takanishi, R., & Johnson,
D. J. (1990). Toward cultural/ecological perspectives on school-
ing and achievement in African- and Asian-American children.
Child Development, 61, 363–383.
Sommers, C. H. (2000, May). Girls rule! Mythmakers to the
contrary, it’s boys who are in trouble. Atlantic Monthly, 59–74.
Spencer, M. B., & Markstrom-Adams, C. (1990). Identity processes
among racial and ethnic minority children in America. Child
Development, 61, 290–310.
Spencer, S. J., Steele, C. M., & Quinn, D. M. (1999). Stereotype
threat and women’s math performance. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 35, 4–28.
Steele, C. M., & Aronson, J. (1995). Stereotype threat and the intel-
lectual test performance of African-Americans. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 69(5), 797–811.
Steinberg, L., Dornbusch, S., & Brown, B. (1992). Ethnic differ-
ences in adolescents achievements: An ecological perspective.
American Psychologist, 47, 723–729.
Steinberg, L., Lamborn, S. D., Dornbusch, S. M., & Darling,
N. (1992). Impact of parenting practices on adolescent
achievement: Authoritative parenting, school involvement,
and encouragement to succeed. Child Development, 63,
1266–1281.
Stevenson, H. W., Chen, C., & Uttal, D. H. (1990). Beliefs and
achievement: A study of black, white, and Hispanic children.
Child Development, 61, 508–523.
Subotnik, R. F., & Arnold, K. D. (1991). Remarkable women:
Perspectives on female talent development. Cresskill, NJ:
Hampton Press.
Swanson, H. L. (1999). What develops in working memory? A life
span perspective. Developmental Psychology, 35, 986–1000.
Taylor, R. D., Casten, R., Flickinger, S., Roberts, D., & Fulmore,
C. D. (1994). Explaining the school performance of African-
American adolescents. Journal of Research on Adolescence, 4,
21–44.
Updegraff, K. A., Eccles, J. S., Barber, B. L., & O’Brien, K. M.
(1996). Course enrollment as self-regulatory behavior: Who
takes optional high school math courses. Learning and Individ-
ual Differences, 8, 239–259.
Ward,B.A.,Mergendoller,J.R.,Tikunoff,W.J.,Rounds,T.S.,Dadey,
G. J., & Mitman,A. L. (1982). Junior high school transition study:
Executive summary. San Francisco: Far West Laboratory.
Ward, S. L., Byrnes, J. P., & Overton, W. F. (1990). Organization of
knowledge and conditional reasoning. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 82, 832–837.
Ward, S. L. & Overton, W. F. (1990). Semantic familiarity, rele-
vance, and the development of deductive reasoning. Develop-
mental Psychology, 26, 488–493.
Wigﬁeld, A., Eccles, J., Mac Iver, D., Reuman, D., & Midgley,
C. (1991). Transitions at early adolescence: Changes in chil-
dren’s domain-speciﬁc self-perceptions and general self-esteem
across the transition to junior high school. Developmental
Psychology, 27, 552–565.
Wigﬁeld, A., Eccles, J. S., Yoon, K. S., Harold, R. D., Arbreton,
A. J., Freedman-Doan, C. R., & Blumenfeld, P. C. (1997).
Changes in children’s competence beliefs and subjective task
values across the elementary school years: A three year study.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 89, 451–469.
Winston, C. (2001, November 7). Towards a better understanding of
African Americans’school achievement. Talk given at University
of Michigan. Ann Arbor, MI.
Winston, C., Eccles, J. S., Senior, A. M., & Vida, M. (1997). The
utility of an expectancy/value model of achievement for under-
standing academic performance and self-esteem in African-
American and European-American adolescents. Zeitschrift Fur
Padagogische Psychologie [German Journal of Educational
Psychology], 11, 177–186.
Yee, D., & Eccles, J. S. (1988). Parent perceptions and attributions
for children’s math achievement. Sex Roles, 19, 317–333.
Youniss, J., McLellan, J. A., & Yates, M. (1997). What we know
about engendering civic identity. American Behavioral Scientist,
40, 620–631.
Zald, D. H., & Iacono, W. G. (1998). The development of spatial
working memory abilities. Developmental Neuropsychology, 14,
563–578.

351
CHAPTER 14
Emotional and Personality Development in Adolescence
NANCY L. GALAMBOS AND CATHERINE L. COSTIGAN
EMOTIONAL DEVELOPMENT
352
Indicators of Adaptive Emotion Regulation
353
Indicators of Emotion Dysregulation
354
PERSONALITY DEVELOPMENT
356
The Structure of Personality
357
The Origins of Personality in Temperament
358
Continuity in Temperament and Personality
358
The Goodness-of-Fit Model of Temperament
359
EMERGING TRENDS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
360
A Focus on Optimal Development
360
Cultural Variations in Emotional and
Personality Development
361
Integration of Temperament Into the Study
of Adolescent Adjustment
362
Person Approaches to Understanding Emotion
and Personality
364
SUMMARY
365
REFERENCES
366
What is personality? How is temperament related to person-
ality? Where does emotion ﬁt in? What is the signiﬁcance of
emotion, personality, and temperament for understanding
behavior and emotional well-being in adolescence? How does
culture inﬂuence the expression of emotion and personality?
These are critical and challenging questions that underlie the
study of individual differences in emotional and personality
development. Emotional and personality development are
complicated, interrelated processes that occur across the life
span. The story of emotion and personality in adolescence is
essentially a study in identifying indicators and predictors of
adolescents’ emotional well-being and distress, ascertaining
core personality traits seen in adolescence, documenting the
evolution of personality characteristics across time, and in-
vestigating the links among emotion, emotional well-being
and distress, personality, and temperament.
There is a vast array of theory and research on emotion and
personality across the life span. This chapter focuses on recent
research into the emotional well-being and distress of adoles-
cents, as well as personality and temperament development in
adolescence. The examination of emotion and personality
in adolescence is interesting for at least two reasons. First, it is
in the period of adolescence that we may begin to observe not
only the crystallization of emotional and personality styles,
but also how emotion and personality will shape the course of
individuals’ lives. Perhaps for the ﬁrst time, interested ob-
servers such as parents can be more conﬁdent in predicting
what kind of adult the individual is likely to become. Continu-
ities in emotional well-being and personality across time are
the source for these predictions about future behavior, but to
be sure, discontinuities can make those predictions wrong.
Second, the ﬁeld of research on adolescent development that
has burgeoned in the last few decades has demonstrated not
only that there are signiﬁcant biological, cognitive, social, and
behavioral changes that occur during adolescence, but also
that these changes are inextricably linked with one another. It
is crucial to understand the role of emotion and personality in
producing and affecting these changes.
Given the large amount of research in each of the areas of
emotion, personality, and temperament, it is not possible
within the conﬁnes of this chapter to conduct a comprehen-
sive review of relevant studies. Several excellent books and
reviews suit this purpose (e.g., Caspi, 1998; Kagan, 1998;
Larson & Richards, 1994; Rothbart & Bates, 1998; Sanson &
Rothbart, 1995; Shiner, 1998; van Lieshout, 2000). In this
chapter we aim to identify the major issues seen in research
on emotional and personality development pertaining specif-
ically to adolescence, to provide examples of illustrative
research in these domains, and to explore how future research
can increase our understanding of adolescent emotion and
personality. In the ﬁrst section of this chapter we present
research on some important issues in emotional development

352
Emotional and Personality Development in Adolescence
during adolescence. In the second section we discuss some
of the key issues related to personality and temperament in
adolescence. In the third and ﬁnal section we identify four
emerging themes in research on emotion and personality that
will shape the direction of research for some time to come.
EMOTIONAL DEVELOPMENT
Guided by G. Stanley Hall’s storm and stress hypothesis (the
view that adolescence is ﬁlled with hormone-induced emo-
tional turmoil), one focus of research on emotions in adoles-
cence has been to examine variability in emotional or mood
states (Brooks-Gunn, Graber, & Paikoff, 1994). Larson and
Lampman-Petraitis (1989), for example, charted hour-to-
hour changes in mood over a week in a sample of preadoles-
cent and adolescent children. It is interesting to note that
there was little evidence of variability in the mood states of
adolescents compared to preadolescents. The average adoles-
cent, however, was more likely than the average preadoles-
cent to report more mildly negative mood states and fewer
extremely positive mood states. Although overall mood may
take on a slightly different character in adolescence, rapid
mood swings were not evidenced in this research. Another
focus of research has examined direct links between hor-
monal levels in adolescence and emotions such as aggression
and depression (Susman, 1997; see chapter by Susman, Dorn,
& Schiefelbein in this volume). Some consistent associations
have been found between speciﬁc hormones and feelings
of aggression (particularly among boys) and depression
(Brooks-Gunn et al., 1994; Buchanan, Eccles, & Becker,
1992), but only small proportions of variance in emotion
(up to 6%) are attributable to hormones (Susman, 1997).
More complicated models of hormone-emotion relation-
ships have been proposed, based on research indicating that
hormones interact with personality and contextual character-
istics to affect emotional states and behavior (Richards &
Larson, 1993). These models, which require the use of longi-
tudinal designs, will lead to a better understanding of how
hormones are linked to adolescents’ emotions indirectly
through their impact on the outward physical changes of
puberty, the adolescents’responses to these changes and their
implications, and others’reactions to the changing adolescent
(Brooks-Gunn et al., 1994; Susman, 1997).
Often implicit in the research on the link between
hormones and emotion is the assumption that emotions may be
something to be feared, that they are linked directly to negative
and irrational behavior. Increasingly, though, the conceptual-
ization of emotions in contemporary research has moved away
from viewing emotions as sources of negative and irrational
behavior toward a view of emotions as adaptive and capable of
organizing behavior in ways that can enhance as well as dis-
rupt functioning (Cole, Michel, & Teti, 1994; Thompson,
1994). A dominant paradigm for studying emotions and
emotion-related phenomena is emotion regulation.
Emotion regulation may be broadly deﬁned as the way in
which a person uses emotional experiences to provide for
adaptive functioning (Thompson, 1994). The construct of
emotion regulation has been used to refer to both outcome and
process. In terms of outcome, some researchers deﬁne emo-
tion regulation as the extent to which an individual shows
emotional control versus emotional reactivity (Maedgen &
Carlson, 2000). In this view, important components of emo-
tion regulation include emotional lability, maladaptive
emotional displays, and negative mood states. Others focus
more on process variables such as the coping strategies that
individuals employ to modify emotional reactions (Contreras,
Kerns, Weimer, Gentzler, & Tomich, 2000; Rossman, 1992;
Underwood, 1997). Emotion regulation in this sense refers to
how the individual deals with each experience of emotion
(Campos, Mumme, Kermoian, & Campos, 1994; Gross &
Muñoz, 1995). This view of emotion regulation focuses not
only on the modulation of distress but also on attempts to
stimulate positive emotions or improve emotional arousal
to achieve important interpersonal goals (Calkins, 1994;
Thompson, 1994).
A variety of skills are necessary for effective emotion
regulation, including ﬂexibility and responsiveness to chang-
ing situational demands (Cole et al., 1994; Thompson, 1994).
Other skills include an awareness of one’s emotional state,
the capacity to detect emotions in other people, knowledge of
cultural display rules for emotions, and the ability to
empathize with others’ emotional states (Saarni, 1990; cited
in Underwood, 1997). These skills are initially primarily ex-
ternally supported, such as when a parent helps a child label
and talk about their emotions, selectively reinforces adaptive
emotional displays, and models effective emotion regulation.
With development, socialization inﬂuences on emotion regu-
lation give way to more internally mediated emotion reg-
ulation processes (Calkins, 1994; Thompson, 1994). By
adolescence, individuals are better able to structure their own
environment as a way of regulating their emotions, and they
are capable of cognitively sophisticated emotion regulation
strategies such as reframing and taking another’s point of
view (Gross & Muñoz, 1995).
This broader view of emotion regulation—that is, as the
behavioral strategies one uses to modify, intensify, diminish,
or transform emotional reactions—is an integral part of the
functionalist perspective on emotion (Campos et al., 1994;
Thompson, 1994). The functionalist perspective highlights
several characteristics of emotion regulation. For instance,
optimal emotion regulation is best conceptualized as context

Emotional Development
353
dependent, rather than as a stable feature of individual func-
tioning (Thompson, 1994). Different contexts present diverse
emotional challenges, and optimal emotion regulation varies
depending on the goals of the individual in speciﬁc situations
(Thompson, 1994). Accordingly, individuals have different
goals depending on the interpersonal context (friend vs.
stranger vs. authority ﬁgure), and the most adaptive way of
dealing with emotions such as anger in each of these situations
may differ (Underwood, 1997). Similarly, individuals may
show effective emotion regulation in one context (e.g., with
peers) but not in another (e.g., with siblings; Thompson, 1994;
Whitesell & Harter, 1996). A related emphasis in the func-
tionalist perspective is that emotion regulation is an
interpersonal phenomenon more than an intrapsychic phe-
nomenon (Campos et al., 1994). For instance, core emotions
such as happiness, guilt, pride, and shame all reﬂect core
relationship themes (Campos et al., 1994). In addition, beliefs
about the availability of support and the likely response of
others can facilitate or hamper effective emotion regulation
(Thompson, 1994). In turn, emotion regulation skills can
facilitate or hamper the achievement of important interper-
sonal developmental tasks, such as forming secure relation-
ships with others (Cole et al., 1994).
Most research on emotion regulation has focused on
infants (e.g., Field, 1994) and young children (e.g., Shields &
Cicchetti, 1997; Underwood, 1997). Less attention has been
directed at how emotion regulation operates in adolescence.
Despite this lack of formal theorizing about emotion regula-
tion in adolescence, the emotion regulation framework can
be useful for conceptualizing and integrating a variety of
constructs that have been the subject of much empirical
attention in the literature on adolescence. For instance, indi-
cators of adolescents’ psychological well-being (e.g., self-
esteem, positive mood) can be interpreted from an emotion
regulation perspective as illustrative of the successful regula-
tion of emotions, or adaptive emotional functioning. Like-
wise, indicators of psychological distress (e.g., depression)
can be viewed as capturing emotion dysregulation. In this
section we examine research that bears on adaptive emo-
tional regulation, followed by research important to under-
standing emotion dysregulation.
Indicators of Adaptive Emotion Regulation
How do we know when adolescents are doing well? By what
measure can we achieve some level of conﬁdence that teens
are successfully negotiating their way around their world,
mastering important developmental tasks, and learning to reg-
ulate their emotions in ways that will ensure their eventual
success in adulthood? Throughout the empirical literature on
adolescence, there are a host of constructs and indicators of
emotional well-being, including, but not limited to, a high
self-esteem (Haney & Durlak, 1998; Zimmerman, Copeland,
Shope, & Dielman, 1997), a positive self-concept and stable
sense of identity (Harter, 1990; Nurmi, 1997), a high level of
ego development (Allen, Hauser, Bell, & O’Connor, 1994;
Hauser & Safyer, 1994), social competence (Bustra, Bosma,
& Jackson, 1994; Gullotta, Adams, & Montemayor, 1990), a
positive mood or emotional tone (Larson & Richards, 1994;
Petersen et al., 1993), school engagement and competence
(Sandler, Ayers, Suter, Schultz, & Twohey, in press; Wigﬁeld
& Eccles, 1994), and feelings of attachment to parents
and friends (Allen, Moore, Kuperminc, & Bell, 1998;
Greenberger & McLaughlin, 1998; Paterson, Pryor, & Field,
1995). Although each of these indicators alone is the subject
of a large body of research, studies have found that these
measures of emotional well-being are typically positively
correlated with one another (e.g., DuBois, Bull, Sherman, &
Roberts, 1998; Paterson et al., 1995; Petersen et al., 1993). A
review of each of these indicators is beyond the scope of this
chapter. However, many of these constructs have been gener-
ally incorporated into larger integrative models that represent
the adolescent’s overall level of adaptation. From the
perspective of emotion regulation, models of the self-system
and psychosocial maturity are particularly appropriate to
consider.
The Self-System
In decades of research, many aspects of self have been deﬁned
and measured. One of the most common is self-esteem, which
is typically deﬁned as an affective evaluation of the self,
involving feelings of self-worth (DuBois & Hirsch, 2000). A
long history of research shows that high levels of global self-
esteem are linked with positive adjustment in adolescents,
including higher academic achievement and lower levels
of internalizing and externalizing problems (DuBois et al.,
1998; Haney & Durlak, 1998; Zimmerman et al., 1997). Self-
concept is typically seen as a cognitive representation of the
self, or perceptions of one’s personal and interpersonal char-
acteristics (Haney & Durlak, 1998). Although there is no sin-
gle deﬁnition or understanding of self-concept, self-concept is
increasingly seen to be multidimensional in nature, incorpo-
rating elements of self-evaluation in speciﬁc domains, such as
the school, peer, and athletic contexts (Harter, 1990; Harter,
Bresnick, Bouchey, & Whitesell, 1997).
Self-system is a term recently used to describe in a broad
sense the many elements of adolescents’ representations
of self, including self-esteem, perceived self-efﬁcacy, possible
selves, standards for self, values, and motivations (DuBois &
Hirsch, 2000; Harter et al., 1997). There is no question that
adolescents’ positive self-attributions and closer connections

354
Emotional and Personality Development in Adolescence
between their multiple actual and ideal selves are linked with
positive developmental outcomes (DuBois & Hirsch, 2000;
Harter et al., 1997). With respect to identity development, the
establishment of a stable sense of identity (the integration of
a coherent sense of self that persists over time) is a key
developmental task of adolescence (Erikson, 1968; Harter,
1990). Identity formation requires not only the consolidation
of self-attributes into an organized system but also the
integration of self with societal roles (Harter, 1990).
Haviland, Davidson, Ruetsch, Gebelt, and Lancelot (1994)
have argued that emotion is a central part of identity struc-
tures, with adolescents’self-descriptions varying in the extent
to which positive and negative emotions are represented.
Thus, constructs such as self-esteem, self-concept, and iden-
tity fall under the general rubric of the self-system and speak
to the issue of successful emotional regulation.
Psychosocial Maturity
Indicators of emotional well-being are also a key feature
of psychosocial maturity, as deﬁned by Greenberger and
colleagues (Greenberger, Josselson, Knerr, & Knerr, 1975;
Greenberger & Sørenson, 1974). This model encompasses
three major domains of development, each consisting of
multiple dimensions, which must be fostered if the child is to
become a productive adult. The ﬁrst domain is autonomy,
or the individual’s ability to function independently. The
achievement of autonomy is characterized by self-reliance
(the capacity to take initiative and to have a sense of control
over one’s life and activities), identity (a coherent self-
concept, complete with life goals and internalized values), and
work orientation (standards for competence and taking plea-
sure in work). The second domain is interpersonal adequacy,
or the individual’s ability to communicate and interact well
with others. This requires effective communication skills,
such as empathy and the ability to understand and receive
messages, a sense of trust in others, and knowledge of role-
appropriate behavior. The third domain of psychosocial matu-
rity is social responsibility, or the individual’s capacity to
contribute to the well-being of society. This involves a sense
of social commitment to the good of the community, an open-
ness to social and political change to achieve higher order
goals, and a tolerance and acceptance of individual and cul-
tural differences (Greenberger & Sørenson, 1974). It is easy to
observe that speciﬁc indicators of emotional well-being (e.g.,
social competence, attachment to parents and peers, school
engagement, strong ego development, and a coherent identity)
overlap with elements in this model of psychosocial maturity.
Aside from the fact that various indicators of emotional
well-being are contained within larger models of the self
and of psychosocial maturity, how can the diverse array of
constructs, such as school engagement, self-esteem, identity,
positive mood, and attachment to parents and peers, be in-
dicators of “emotional” well-being? What do they have in
common? According to Cole et al. (1994), children have a
number of emotion-based developmental tasks that they must
accomplish, including tolerance for frustration, establishing
and enjoying friendships, defending the self, and acquiring in-
terest in learning. In adolescence, major developmental tasks
are to search for and establish an identity, pursue and succeed
in intimate friendships, accept responsibility for oneself, and
prepare for an education and career (Arnett, 2000). Cole et al.
argued that the accomplishment of tasks such as these in-
volves the ability to regulate emotions. Emotional regulation,
therefore, is a tie that links together and perhaps underlies con-
structs such as self-esteem, mood, school engagement, iden-
tity, social competence, and feelings about parents and peers.
The importance of emotion regulation to the basic task of
maturing and becoming an adult is recognizable in adoles-
cents’ descriptions of what it means to be “grown up.” In
a qualitative study (Tilton-Weaver, Vitunski, & Galambos,
2001) examining adolescents’ implicit theories of maturity,
sixth- and ninth-grade adolescents were told, “Please think of
someone your age who seems more ‘grown up’ than most
other kids (do not name him or her). What are some words that
describe the ways in which this person seems grown up?” Half
of the adolescents described what appeared to be genuinely
mature adolescents. Incorporated into these adolescents’ rich
descriptions of genuine maturity were behaviors indicative
of emotional regulation: “Doesn’t let anger get in the way of
good judgment,” “if someone wants to ﬁght him, he just walks
away,” “they are very calm, are helpful, do not get agitated
easily,” “can control and explain his feelings,” and “he talks
about feelings instead of hiding them.” Not only was control of
one’s own emotions important in their descriptions of gen-
uinely mature adolescents, but so was the ability to deal with
others’strong emotions, as in this description of a peacemaker:
“she is very calm when people are ﬁghting, she tries to break it
up or get them back together.”Tolerance is another feeling that
came across in these adolescents’ descriptions: “Respects
others’ feelings, opinions, decisions, character” and “the per-
son doesn’t judge people by what they look like . . . which I
think is good.” Emotion regulation may not be the only hall-
mark of psychosocial maturity, but it is an important one.
Indicators of Emotion Dysregulation
The construct of emotion regulation not only unites the liter-
ature on emotional well-being just reviewed, but it also is
central to the study of emotional distress. Emotion-related

Emotional Development
355
symptoms are a deﬁning feature of most categories of psy-
chopathology, and the development of emotion regulation is
an implied goal of most psychological treatments (Cole et al.,
1994). Emotion dysregulation refers to strategies that
individuals use to cope with emotions that are maladaptive,
such as restricted or inﬂexible emotional responding (Cole
et al., 1994). Examples of emotion dysregulation include not
having access to a full range of emotions, an inability to mod-
ulate the intensity or duration of emotions, not conforming to
cultural display rules for emotions, an inability to integrate
mixed emotions, and an inability to think and talk about
emotions (Cole et al., 1994).
Emotion dysregulation is not the same as an absence of reg-
ulation; dysregulated emotions such as anger or withdrawal
serve some adaptive purpose in the short term even though
they may interfere with optimal development in the long term
(Cole et al., 1994). However, dysregulated emotional styles
are considered a vulnerability because maladaptive short-term
strategies may become characteristic coping styles and de-
velop into internalizing or externalizing disorders over time
(Calkins, 1994; Cole et al., 1994).
Much research into adolescent emotional development
has focused implicitly on emotion dysregulation by examin-
ing predictors and consequences of internalizing and exter-
nalizing disorders. Internalizing problems generally refer to
subjective emotions such as depressive feelings and anxiety,
whereas externalizing problems refer to more objectively
disruptive behaviors such as overt aggressive and antisocial
conduct. Although there is a high degree of comorbidity
between the two and difﬁculties such as peer problems
and low school motivation may be excluded from the
internalizing-externalizing dichotomy (Wångby, Bergman, &
Magnusson, 1999), the distinction is still a useful heuristic
device for considering maladaptive adjustment patterns in
adolescence. Because the development of externalizing prob-
lem behaviors is covered elsewhere in this volume (e.g., see
chapter by Lerner, Easterbrooks, & Mistry in this volume),
we focus our review on the experience of internalizing prob-
lems in general and in major depressive disorder (MDD) in
particular. An emotion regulation perspective provides a
framework for integrating the diverse theoretical orientations
related to the experience of depression (see Gross & Muñoz,
1995, for a review).
The Emergence of Internalizing Disorders
During Adolescence
Adolescence has traditionally been viewed as a time of
increased negative emotions and emotional lability (Arnett,
1999). Reviews of adolescent depression indicate that
adolescents report depressed mood at a higher rate than do
preadolescents or adults (Petersen et al., 1993). Longitudinal
studies of emotion development consistently ﬁnd that nega-
tive affect increases from preadolescence to adolescence
(Buchanan et al., 1992) and that depressed mood increases in
early adolescence and decreases around late adolescence
(Chen, Mechanic, & Hansell, 1998).
Epidemiological studies of the incidence of formal psychi-
atric disorders also point to adolescence as a time of increased
emotional distress relative to later points in the life span. For
instance, in the U.S. National Comorbidity Study, the 12-
month prevalence of psychiatric disorders was highest in the
youngest cohort (ages 15–24 years; Kessler et al., 1994). Sim-
ilarly, Canada’s National Population Health Survey found that
major depressive episodes were highest in women ages 12 to
24 compared to males and older women (Beaudet, 1999).
Generally, the point prevalence of psychiatric disturbance
in adolescence is about 1 in 4 or 5 (Casper, Belanoff, & Offer,
1996; Offer, Ostrov, Howard, & Atkinson, 1992). Newman
et al. (1996) interviewed almost 1,000 adolescents ﬁve times
over a 10-year period in a nonselected cohort in New
Zealand. They found that internalizing disorders were among
the most prevalent diagnoses. For instance, at age 21, 16.8%
of the sample was diagnosed with MDD. Signiﬁcantly, they
found a sharp increase in depressive disorders during mid- to
late adolescence (ages 15 to 18), which suggests that this may
be a critical time for studying vulnerability to depression
(Hankin et al., 1998).
Similar increases in the rate of depression during adoles-
cence were found in the Oregon Adolescent Depression
Project, a longitudinal study of over 1,700 adolescents
(Lewinsohn, Rohde, & Seeley, 1998). In this study approxi-
mately 28% of adolescents had experienced an episode of
MDD by age 19, with a mean age of onset of 14.9 years.
Almost half (43%) of adolescents with MDD had a comorbid
diagnosis, and in 80% of the cases the MDD was secondary
to the comorbid condition. An important ﬁnding was that
subthreshold levels of depressive symptoms were associated
with almost as much psychosocial impairment as clinical
levels of depression.
Gender Differences in Internalizing Disorders
Studies of both nonclinical levels of depressed and anxious
mood, as well as studies of clinical levels of depression, all re-
port higher rates of distress for females compared with males
in adolescence (Chen et al., 1998; Leadbeater, Kuperminc,
Blatt, & Hertzog, 1999; Nolen-Hoeksema, 1994). Prospective
longitudinal studies indicate that internalizing symptoms
remain high or increase for females, whereas they remain

356
Emotional and Personality Development in Adolescence
at relatively lower levels for males across adolescence
(Leadbeater et al., 1999; Scaramella, Conger, & Simons,
1999). Gender differences in clinical levels of depression fol-
low similar patterns. Gender differences in MDD are nonex-
istent in preadolescence, ﬁrst emerge in early adolescence
(ages 12–14), and increase dramatically in middle to late ado-
lescence (ages 15–18; Hankin et al., 1998; Lewinsohn et al.,
1998). By midadolescence the prevalence of MDD among
females is more than double that of males; by age 18 approx-
imately 11% of males compared with 24% of females are
diagnosed with depression (Hankin et al., 1998; Lewinsohn
et al., 1998).
Several explanations for these gender differences have
been proposed. According to Nolen-Hoeksema (1994), gen-
der differences in the emotion regulation strategies that males
and females use to cope with distress partially account for
differential rates of depression. In particular, she argued that
females tend to employ passive, ruminative coping styles that
place them at greater risk for depression compared with the
more active and distracting coping styles of males. Other fac-
tors that may be related to gender differences in depression
are adolescents’ self-representations. For instance, females
report lower levels of self-competence than males, and these
differences partially account for differences in symptoms of
depression and anxiety (Ohannessian, Lerner, Lerner, & von
Eye, 1999). In addition, females show more preoccupation
with relationships, threats of abandonment, and loss of nur-
turing compared with males, and these interpersonal vulnera-
bilities are associated with increased internalizing symptoms
(Leadbeater et al., 1999). In general, the quality of relation-
ships with parents and peers shows a stronger relationship to
internalizing symptoms in females than males (Leadbeater
et al., 1999), and females may feel more pressure to conform
to the expectations of parents and peers (Nolen-Hoeksema,
1994). Finally, gender differences in the experience of de-
pression may be related to the ﬁnding that females experience
greater stress during adolescence (Nolen-Hoeksema, 1994).
For instance, the changes in body shape and size that females
experience during puberty are generally unwelcome, whereas
the pubertal changes to male body shape and size are
generally valued. In addition, females experience dramati-
cally greater rates of sexual abuse in early adolescence com-
pared with males, which is associated with elevated rates
of depression.
Predictors and Correlates of Internalizing Disorders
Depressed mood has been associated with poor school moti-
vation and performance, marital discord and family conﬂict,
the experience of stressful life events, low popularity, and, for
females, both early- and late-onset puberty (Leadbeater et al.,
1999; Lewinsohn et al., 1998; Petersen et al., 1993; Roeser,
Eccles, & Sameroff, 1998). Many studies highlight the im-
portance of the interpersonal context of adolescent depressive
disorders. For instance, the quality of attachment between
parents and adolescents plays a role in internalizing adjust-
ment problems. Adolescents with secure attachments experi-
ence fewer symptoms of depression and anxiety, whereas
adolescents with preoccupied, anxious, or avoidant attach-
ment relationships experience relatively more psychological
distress (Allen et al., 1998; Cooper, Shaver, & Collins, 1998;
Marton & Maharaj, 1993; Noom, Dekovic, & Meeus, 1999).
Furthermore, interactions in families with a depressed ado-
lescent are observed to be less cohesive and supportive com-
pared with families with well-adjusted adolescents (Sheeber
& Sorensen, 1998). In addition, inept and inadequate parent-
ing, characterized by less warmth and acceptance, more hos-
tility, greater psychological control, and less consistent
discipline, is associated with increased risk for internaliz-
ing symptoms and clinical depression across adolescence
(Conger, Conger, & Scaramella, 1997; Ge, Conger, Lorenz,
& Simons, 1994; Marton & Maharaj, 1993; Scaramella et al.,
1999). For males, greater psychological control by siblings is
also associated with increases in internalizing symptoms over
time (K. Conger et al., 1997).
These disruptions in parenting and parent-adolescent
relationships may affect depressive symptoms through their
effects on adolescents’self-representations. For instance, lower
maternal acceptance and greater psychological control are
associated with lower levels of self-worth, which in turn are
associated with elevated levels of depression (Garber,
Robinson, & Valentiner, 1997). Similarly, disrupted parent-
adolescent relationships (i.e., separation-individuation conﬂicts,
parental rejection, or excessive dependency) are associated
with greater self-critical and interpersonal vulnerabilities,
which in turn are associated with increased depressed mood
(Frank, Poorman, Van Egeren, & Field, 1997). Other intrapsy-
chic variables, such as lower levels of attitudinal and emo-
tional autonomy (Noom et al., 1999) and greater self-awareness
(Chen et al., 1998), are also associated with increased depressed
mood.
PERSONALITY DEVELOPMENT
Much of what we know about personality development is
actually based on research with either young children or
adults. These have been largely disconnected lines of inquiry

Personality Development
357
with a long history of research on young children devoted to
studying temperament and a great deal of research on adults
examining personality.These separate lines of inquiry are now
being joined as researchers attempt to understand the overlap
and the connections between temperament in childhood and
personality in adulthood (Sanson & Rothbart, 1995). As the
transition period between childhood and adulthood, adoles-
cence is perhaps an ideal time for considering personality and
temperament. In research on adolescent personality and tem-
perament, several key issues have been identiﬁed. These is-
sues include (a) the core structure of personality, (b) the
origins of personality, (c) continuity in personality across the
life span, and (d) the ﬁt between temperament/personality di-
mensions and the social context. These issues as they pertain
to research on adolescence are elaborated in this section.
The Structure of Personality
The search for core features of personality has a long history.
In personality research across the twentieth century, a myriad
of personality traits has been identiﬁed, measured, examined,
and linked to each other as well as to the individual’s
psychosocial adjustment. Given the large array of possible
personality constructs, the search for a taxonomy, or descrip-
tive model, of core personality traits has occupied the efforts
of many researchers, particularly those examining personal-
ity in adults (John, 1990). One taxonomy, the Big Five, is
a comprehensive model consisting of ﬁve broad personality
traits or factors under which most if not all other descriptors
of personality are subsumed (Goldberg, 1993). This model
is based largely on clusters of adjectives that people use
to describe themselves. The ﬁve factors and examples of
adjectives attached to these factors are Extroversion (as-
sertive, enthusiastic, outgoing), Agreeableness (generous,
kind, sympathetic), Conscientiousness (organized, planful,
responsible), Neuroticism (anxious, self-pitying), and Open-
ness/Intellect (curious, imaginative, wide interests; Caspi,
1998; Goldberg, 1993; John, 1990). Growing support for the
Big Five as a meaningful framework for understanding per-
sonality dispositions has emerged over the years. This sup-
port is based on accumulating empirical evidence that the
ﬁve-factor structure is robust across many studies and cul-
tures and that it can be used to predict behaviors such as job
performance (Goldberg, 1993; McCrae et al., 1999). Never-
theless, there are other models of personality structure, some
with two or three factors and some with many more (Church,
1994; Eysenck, 1992; Goldberg, 1993).
Given that most research on the Big Five has been con-
ducted on samples of adults, an important question has been
whether these ﬁve factors describe the personality structures
of children and adolescents. Studies examining this issue in
American and Dutch samples have appeared in the last
decade, with a ﬁve-factor model ﬁnding support in samples
of individuals ranging in age from early childhood
through adolescence, including girls and boys (Digman,
1989; Graziano & Ward, 1992; Havill, Allen, Halverson, &
Kohnstamm, 1994; Kohnstamm, Halverson, Havill, &
Mervielde, 1996; van Lieshout & Haselager, 1994). One
study of 12- to 13-year-old African American and Caucasian
boys, rated by their mothers on a set of personality character-
istics, found evidence that the Big Five replicated in this
ethnically diverse sample (John, Caspi, Robins, Mofﬁtt, &
Stouthamer-Loeber, 1994). The results were suggestive also
of two additional dimensions of personality at this age: irri-
tability (whines, feelings are easily hurt, has tantrums) and
positive activity (energetic, physically active). This research
also found that the ﬁve factors were linked differentially with
indicators of adolescents’ emotional well-being. For exam-
ple, adolescent boys with externalizing problems were less
agreeable, less conscientious, and more extroverted than
were those not showing externalizing behavior. Boys with
internalizing disorders were high on neuroticism and low
on conscientiousness. Poorer school performance was seen
among boys who scored lower on conscientiousness and
lower on openness (e.g., curiosity).
There are several advantages to identifying a comprehen-
sive model of personality. If researchers agree on and mea-
sure the same set of core dimensions of personality in their
research, the results of their studies are more directly com-
parable. Essentially, acceptance of a model such as the
Big Five ensures that researchers are speaking the same
language. A body of research based on a similarly shared
understanding of constructs can lead to clearer and more
integrated knowledge of the origins, course of development,
and implications of personality (John, 1990). Without a com-
mon set of constructs that can be measured across the life
span, it is more difﬁcult to draw conclusions about how
personality develops from infancy through adulthood—a key
question in developmental psychology. The ﬁeld of research
on adolescence generally has not been driven by such a
model. Rather, there is wide diversity in the personality
constructs that have been measured in research on ado-
lescence. Typically, selected personality traits such as self-
restraint, aggression, and sensation seeking have been
measured, often in isolation from other personality charac-
teristics (Shiner, 1998). These selected characteristics are
then related to individual differences in adolescent behaviors
such as risk taking, early childbearing, and delinquency

358
Emotional and Personality Development in Adolescence
(e.g.,
Black,
Ricardo,
&
Stanton,
1997;
Feldman
&
Weinberger, 1994; Underwood, Kupersmidt, & Coie, 1996).
The Big Five is a promising model that could be used by re-
searchers of adolescent development as a way to understand
links between adolescents’ personalities and their behaviors
and emotional well-being.
The Origins of Personality in Temperament
Whereas the study of personality has been located largely in
the empirical literature on adults, the study of temperament
has been conﬁned mostly to infants and children (for excep-
tions, see Tubman & Windle, 1995; Wills, DuHamel, &
Vaccaro, 1995; Windle, 1992). Only recently has research
on personality and temperament begun to be integrated
(Sanson & Rothbart, 1995). Although researchers concur
neither on a single deﬁnition of temperament nor on a core
set of temperamental dimensions, it is generally assumed
that a child’s temperament is composed of multiple be-
havioral attributes present at birth (Kagan, 1998). More-
over, there is purported evidence from twin and adoption
studies of a substantial genetic inﬂuence on temperamental
and personality attributes in childhood and adolescence,
although there are nonshared environmental inﬂuences as
well (Braungart, Plomin, DeFries, & Fulker, 1992; Caspi,
1998;
Rowe,
Almeida,
&
Jacobson,
1999;
Saudino,
McGuire, Reiss, Hetherington, & Plomin, 1995). Many
authors believe that temperament forms the substrate of
personality. Speciﬁcally, through the inﬂuence of the child’s
increasing capacities and interactions with the environment,
temperament evolves or becomes elaborated across child-
hood into a set of differentiated personality traits (Caspi,
1998; Goldsmith et al., 1987; Sanson & Rothbart, 1995;
Shiner, 1998).
The modern study of temperament began with the classic
work of Thomas and Chess (1977; see also Chess & Thomas,
1999), who followed a group of infants into adulthood. Based
on observations of the behavioral styles of these infants,
Thomas and Chess identiﬁed nine dimensions of tempera-
ment along which infants varied. Among these dimensions
were activity level, adaptability, intensity of reaction, quality
of mood, rhythmicity, and approach. Thomas and Chess also
classiﬁed children as having “difﬁcult” or “easy” tempera-
ments on the basis of their patterns on a select set of tem-
peramental dimensions. Their pioneering work recognized
that early individual differences in temperament were an
inﬂuential source of individual differences in parent-child
relations and in later emotional well-being.
Other models of temperament followed, most of which
identiﬁed several core dimensions of temperament (Buss &
Plomin, 1984; Goldsmith & Campos, 1986; Rothbart &
Derryberry, 1981). For instance, Buss and Plomin’s (1984)
EAS model identiﬁed Emotionality (primarily negative
emotions), Activity, and Sociability as basic dimensions of
temperament. Rothbart and Derryberry (1981) deﬁned tem-
perament as individual differences in two broad dimensions:
reactivity to internal and external stimulation (or the arous-
ability of one’s behavioral, emotional, and biological re-
sponses) and self-regulation (or processes such as attention,
approach, withdrawal, and self-soothing that modulate reac-
tivity). Models of temperament have undergone modiﬁca-
tions and development as research has accumulated (Buss &
Plomin, 1984; Windle & Lerner, 1986). Rothbart and
colleagues have reported that across a number of studies
from early childhood to adulthood, three broad factors of
temperament emerge (Ahadi & Rothbart, 1994; Capaldi &
Rothbart, 1992; Sanson & Rothbart, 1995). The ﬁrst, labeled
Positive Emotionality, Surgency, or Sociability, is captured
by higher scores on approach, high-intensity pleasure,
and activity subscales. The second, labeled Negative Emo-
tionality or Affectivity, is based on feelings of fear, anger,
discomfort, and sadness. A third factor, called Effortful
Control or Persistence, is deﬁned by inhibitory control,
attentional focusing, low-intensity pleasure, and perceptual
sensitivity.
Generally, personality is seen to be broader and more
differentiated than temperament, with personality incorporat-
ing behavior, motives, emotions, attitudes, and values
(Digman, 1994). Because early-emerging temperamental
characteristics are believed to mature and become elaborated
over time into distinct personality traits (Caspi, 1998), re-
searchers have attempted to delineate how dimensions of
temperament converge with the Big Five personality dimen-
sions (Halverson, Kohnstramm, & Martin, 1994). Interest-
ingly, the three factors of Positive Emotionality, Negative
Emotionality, and Effortful Control appear to map onto
three of the Big Five personality dimensions. Speciﬁcally,
Positive Emotionality maps onto the Extroversion personal-
ity dimension in the Big Five, Negative Emotionality maps
onto Neuroticism, and Effortful Control maps onto Consci-
entiousness (Ahadi & Rothbart, 1994; Sanson & Rothbart,
1995). Other scholars, too, have pointed to the overlap
between early emerging dimensions of temperament and
adolescent and adult personality structure (Caspi, 1998;
Digman, 1994; John et al., 1994; Shiner, 1998).
Continuity in Temperament and Personality
Theassumptionthattemperamentalattributespresentinchild-
hood are predictive of later temperamental or personality

Personality Development
359
attributes leads us to ask whether there is continuity in these
attributes—a question that can only be answered with longitu-
dinalstudiesfollowingthesameindividualsfromchildhoodto
adulthood. Such studies have examined stability coefﬁcients,
that is, correlations between speciﬁc temperamental attributes
in infancy or childhood and those same aspects of tempera-
ment at a later point. Earlier studies of temperamental stability
indicated only moderate stability across time, but more recent
studies that have controlled for conceptual and methodologi-
cal problems show relatively high stabilities (in the .70s to
.80s) in temperamental characteristics such as sociability and
irritability from infancy to age 7 or 8 years (Pedlow, Sanson,
Prior, & Oberklaid, 1993; Sanson & Rothbart, 1995). Thus,
there is evidence for continuity in temperamental characteris-
tics, although there is also room for change.
Insight into the issue of continuity is also gained by exam-
ining how early temperament is linked with later personality
traits. One study, conducted in New Zealand, followed indi-
viduals from age 3 to young adulthood (Caspi, 2000; Caspi &
Silva, 1995). At the age of 3, analyses identiﬁed three replic-
able groups of children based on ratings of their behavior.
These groups were labeled as Undercontrolled (e.g., impul-
sive), Inhibited (e.g., fearful), and Well Adjusted (e.g., coped
well, friendly). At the age of 18, these groups were re-
assessed for personality traits. There were clear and signiﬁ-
cant associations between temperamental styles at age 3 and
personality at age 18. For example, children who were under-
controlled at age 3 had similar characteristics at age 18: They
were characterized as impulsive, danger-seeking, high on
negative emotionality, and engaged in conﬂict with others.
Inhibited children became rather cautious as young adults,
showing a restrained behavioral style: harm-avoidant, not
aggressive, and not interpersonally assertive. Well-adjusted
children became normal young adults, showing no extreme
scores on any personality dimension.
Thus, this study provided evidence for continuity in
behavioral styles from early childhood through adolescence.
Moreover, in the longer term the early temperamental
characteristics of these children were predictive of a wide
variety of aspects of functioning, including the quality of
interpersonal relations, the availability of social support,
unemployment, psychiatric disorders, and criminal behavior
(Caspi, 2000). Other studies, too, demonstrate continuities
in temperament and personality characteristics such as be-
havioral inhibition and shyness (Kagan, 1989; Katainen,
Räikkönen, & Keltikangas-Järvinen, 1998). Continuities in
personality may result from a kind of snowballing effect
in which early temperamental styles create consequences,
situations, and interactions with others that serve to reinforce
natural tendencies (Caspi & Silva, 1995).
The Goodness-of-Fit Model of Temperament
Even though there are clear links between one’s early person-
ality and later functioning, some authors assert that the
import of temperament is best understood by examining the
context in which it takes place. A goodness-of-ﬁt model of
temperament posits that the impact of children’s tempera-
ment on their development is a function of how well their
temperamental characteristics ﬁt the demands of the social
context (Chess & Thomas, 1999; Thomas & Chess, 1977).
When the child’s temperament matches those demands, there
is a greater likelihood that social interactions will be favor-
able to the child’s development. A poor ﬁt, however, may
jeopardize his or her social interactions and subsequent
psychosocial adjustment (Chess & Thomas, 1999; Lerner &
Lerner, 1983; Nitz, Lerner, Lerner, & Talwar, 1988; Talwar,
Nitz, & Lerner, 1990; Thomas & Chess, 1977). In one study
(East et al., 1992), young adolescents’ ﬁt with their peer
group was measured by assessing the difference between
adolescents’ own temperamental characteristics and their
classroom peers’judgments of preferred temperamental char-
acteristics in classmates. These difference or ﬁt scores were
then correlated with measures of adolescents’ psychosocial
competence. As expected, the adolescent’s ﬁt with peer
group demands for particular temperamental attributes was
linked with a variety of measures. For instance, adolescents
whose characteristics of adaptability (mood, ﬂexibility, and
approach behaviors) matched their peers’ demands for adapt-
ability received favorable nominations from peers on socio-
metric measures. Fit scores for adaptability and rhythmicity
also were linked with self- and teacher-rated psychosocial
competence. Moreover, some of the relations between ﬁt and
psychosocial competence were found consistently across
three times of measurement from the beginning to the end of
Grade 6. These ﬁndings provide evidence that a closer match
between the adolescent’s temperament and the social context
is linked with more desirable psychosocial functioning.
Goodness-of-Fit in Parent and Adolescent Temperaments
One way to conceptualize adolescents’ ﬁt with the social
context is to consider how adolescents’ and parents’ tempera-
ments work together. That is, both members of a parent-
adolescent dyad bring to their relationship temperamental
characteristics that may be complementary—or that may
clash. In this sense, one family member’s temperament im-
poses demands on the other, whose own temperament may
not ﬁt with those demands (Kawaguchi, Welsh, Powers, &
Rostosky, 1998). For example, an adolescent who is rigid
with respect to approaching new situations might have a

360
Emotional and Personality Development in Adolescence
more harmonious relationship with a parent who is ﬂexible
than with a parent who is equally rigid. Mismatched tem-
peramental styles might eventuate in conﬂicted or perhaps
even hostile relations. Few researchers have examined parent-
adolescent relations as a joint function of the temperaments of
parents and adolescents, although there are such studies of
younger children (Belsky, 1996; Kawaguchi et al., 1998).
In a test of a goodness-of-ﬁt model in parent and adoles-
cent temperaments, Galambos and Turner (1999) examined
in 7th-grade adolescents and their parents whether two broad
dimensions of parent and adolescent temperaments (i.e.,
adaptability and activity level) combined or interacted to
predict the quality of parent-adolescent relations. There were
signiﬁcant interactions between parent and adolescent di-
mensions of temperament in the prediction of some aspects
of the parent-adolescent relationship. For example, mother-
son conﬂict was highest in dyads comprised of mothers low
on adaptability and their low-activity sons. The authors
speculated that low activity levels in sons were not inter-
preted happily by less adaptable mothers who might have
expected boys to be highly active (in keeping with sex stereo-
types). On the other hand, mother-daughter conﬂict was
highest in dyads in which mothers were less adaptable and
daughters were more active. Again, less adaptable mothers
may have had difﬁculties with girls whose patterns of high
activity were not in keeping with traditional sex stereotypes
of appropriate female behavior. Another set of results demon-
strated that the combination of low adaptability in both
fathers and daughters was associated with more psychologi-
cally controlling behavior in the fathers. Moreover, less
adaptable daughters reported higher levels of conﬂict with
their less adaptable fathers than did other daughters. Low
adaptability may be a risk factor for less optimal parent-
adolescent relations, particularly when found in both mem-
bers of the parent-adolescent dyad. Although these results
were based on correlational data, they are consistent with a
goodness-of-ﬁt model. Selected aspects of parent and adoles-
cent temperaments ﬁt better with each other than do others, as
indicated by the quality of parent-adolescent relations.
EMERGING TRENDS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
In the previous sections we have reviewed contemporary
research related to emotional well-being, emotional distress,
personality, and temperament during adolescence. In this
ﬁnal section we would like to highlight four emerging areas
of investigation in research on emotions and personality
in adolescence. These trends include (a) a more explicit
focus on indications of optimal emotional adjustment in
adolescence, (b) an examination of cultural variations in
emotions and personality during adolescence, (c) an integra-
tion of temperament into the study of adolescent adjustment,
and (d) the increasing use of person approaches to studying
emotion and personality.
A Focus on Optimal Development
The ﬁrst emerging theme in research on adolescents’
emotional and personality development is a focus on positive
adolescent development (Lerner, Fisher, & Weinberg, 2000;
Lerner & Galambos, 1998). Adolescent research has been
criticized for focusing too much on adolescent problem
behaviors and distress, or deﬁning positive development as
the absence of difﬁculties, rather than focusing explicitly on
the development of positive, adaptive qualities (Galambos &
Leadbeater, 2000; Larson, 2000; Schulenberg, Maggs, &
Hurrelmann, 1997; Wagner, 1996). However, research into
healthy adolescent development is emerging. Some of this
work identiﬁes the protective factors that enable youth in
high-risk environments to reach their full potentials. For
example, a review of programs designed to promote healthy
youth development (Roth, Brooks-Gunn, Murray, & Foster,
1998) highlights the diverse ways in which communities and
schools are working to build strengths among adolescents.
Other research in this area explores the development of
speciﬁc positive qualities among all adolescents. For instance,
Wentzel and McNamara (1999) examined the development of
prosocial behaviors among early adolescents. Prosocial be-
haviors, such as cooperation, sharing, and helping, were as-
sessed through peer nominations. They found that prosocial
behaviors are facilitated by feelings of peer acceptance. The
role of family support in the development of prosocial behav-
iors was indirect, mediated by emotional distress. Thus, ado-
lescents who are accepted by their peers and who are able to
regulate their emotions effectively may have more opportuni-
ties to learn prosocial skills. Larson (2000) focused on the
development of initiative during adolescence. He deﬁned ini-
tiative as the internal motivation to pursue a challenging goal
and saw it as a prerequisite for the development of other posi-
tive qualities such as leadership and altruism. Adolescents
who display initiative feel invested in and excited about their
futures. Larson’s research highlights the types of contexts
that promote initiative and other positive qualities. These con-
texts consist of structured extracurricular activities, such as
sports or organized hobbies, which provide the intrinsic moti-
vation and concentrated attention that are believed to foster
initiative.
In order to examine positive adolescent development
systematically, a model or deﬁnition of the components of

Emerging Trends and Future Directions
361
optimal development is necessary. Lerner et al. (2000) out-
lined a model of adolescent development in which ﬁve broad
features of positive adolescent development are identiﬁed.
These ﬁve characteristics include (a) Caring/Compassion
(e.g., empathy), (b) Competence (cognitive, behavioral, and
social), (c) Character (e.g., integrity), (d) Connection (e.g.,
positive bonds with others and with society), and (e) Con-
ﬁdence (e.g., self-efﬁcacy). Similarly, Wagner (1996) de-
veloped a model of optimal development in adolescence.
He deﬁned aspects of optimal development within six
domains: Biological, Cognitive, Emotional, Social, Moral,
and Vocational. Within the Emotional domain, for example,
optimal development is indicated by qualities such as emo-
tional awareness, self-conﬁdence, optimism, and resilience.
Such attention to positive adolescent development holds
great promise to increase our understanding of the de-
velopmental factors and assets that enable adolescents not
just to survive but to thrive (Scales, Benson, Leffert, & Blyth,
2000).
Cultural Variations in Emotional and
Personality Development
A second theme that is emerging in research on adolescents’
emotional and personality development concerns the role of
culture and ethnicity in adolescent development. It is beyond
the scope of this chapter to review all of the literature on
cultural inﬂuences and differences in adolescent develop-
ment. However, here we survey some of the major areas
of inquiry.
The past decade has seen increasing interest in examining
the emotional well-being of ethnically diverse adolescents
(e.g., Luster & McAdoo, 1994; McAdoo, 1993).AmongAsian
and
Asian
American
adolescents,
researchers
have
investigated indicators of adjustment such as psychosocial
competence (Mantzicopoulos & Oh-Hwang, 1998; Sim,
2000), autonomy (Juang, Lerner, McKinney, & von Eye,
1999), and self-esteem (Watkins, Dong, & Xia, 1997), as well
as indicators of maladjustment, such as anxiety (Hishinuma,
Miyamoto, Nishimura, & Nahalu, 2000), depression (Ying,
Lee, Tsai, Yeh, & Huang, 2000), and psychological distress
(Chiu, Feldman, & Rosenthal, 1992). Because most theories
of emotional development in adolescence were developed
based on research with European American participants,
research with ethnically diverse participants is necessary to
evaluate whether theories of adolescence generalize to other
segments of the population. Some of this literature highlights
similarities in the predictors of adolescent emotional de-
velopment across ethnic groups. Using Chinese adolescents as
an example, many aspects of positive parenting, such as warm
parent-child relationships, ﬁrm control, monitoring, and the
absence of coercive exchanges, are related to higher levels of
adolescent emotional well-being in locations such as Hong
Kong (Shek, 1997a, 1997b) and Shanghai (Chen, Dong, &
Zhou, 1997; Chen, Liu, & Li, 2000; Chen, Rubin, & Li, 1997).
However, within North America the evidence is mixed. Some
researchers ﬁnd similar relationships between parenting and
adolescents’ emotional adjustment across cultural groups
(Greenberger & Chen, 1996; Kim & Ge, 2000), whereas oth-
ers ﬁnd that these relationships do not replicate in different
cultural groups (e.g., Barrett Singer &Weinstein, 2000) or that
the speciﬁc domains of adolescent adjustment that are affected
vary by cultural group (e.g., Bradley & Corwyn, 2000).An im-
portant area for future research is to continue to evaluate
whether the cultural context within North America moderates
the effects of external factors on adolescent’s emotional
well-being and distress (e.g., Collins, Maccoby, Steinberg,
Hetherington, & Bornstein, 2000).
Research with adolescents from ethnically diverse back-
grounds also highlights the need to consider emotional devel-
opment in a cultural context. For instance, Costigan and
Cauce (in press) examined developmental changes in adoles-
cent autonomy and parent-adolescent conﬂict across adoles-
cence among a sample of African American mothers and
daughters. Although past literature has described African
American mothers as restrictive or authoritarian, ﬁndings
from this study suggested that mothers were appropriately
selective in their willingness to relinquish control and grant
autonomy. For example, mothers retained a higher amount of
decision-making authority around important safety-related
issues, despite a high level of conﬂict, whereas they allowed
greater adolescent autonomy around personal issues such as
hairstyles. These ﬁndings illustrate the challenge that African
American mothers face in balancing the demands of protect-
ing children while also fostering a sense of competence. For
African American families such parenting challenges may be
met through the assistance of an extended family network
that provides goods, services, and emotional support to
its members (McAdoo, 1997). Clearly, how the cultural con-
texts helps shape adolescents’ emotional development merits
further attention.
Another way in which culture may affect adolescents’
emotional development is by inﬂuencing adolescents’ ten-
dencies to express different emotions and the strategies used
to regulate emotions. Emotions are managed in culture-
speciﬁc ways (Thompson, 1994). First, there are cultural dif-
ferences in how adolescents construe emotional events. For
example, Liem, Lim, and Liem (2000) argued that the emo-
tional responses of Asian Americans are generally more other
oriented, focusing on interdependence, whereas European

362
Emotional and Personality Development in Adolescence
Americans are generally more self-oriented, focusing on
independence. They ﬁnd that these self-construals change as
a result of acculturation. Second, cultures differ in their
expectations for emotional displays (Campos et al., 1994).
Chinese parents, for example, view dependency, caution,
behavioral inhibition, and self-restraint in children more
favorably than do parents in Western cultures (Chen, Rubin,
& Li, 1997). Finally, cultures have varying emotional base-
lines and tolerances for the expression of emotions such
as support, disagreement, and disapproval (Stillars, 1995).
When there is a higher overall baseline for an emotion, there
is also a greater tolerance for its expression, so that its
expression in any given instance carries less impact. Alterna-
tively, the impact of expressing an emotion for which there is
less tolerance is accentuated (Stillars, 1995). This may be one
mechanism by which culture moderates the effects of exter-
nal events, such as parenting, on adolescent adjustment. For
example, if lower levels of emotional expressiveness are
more normative in Chinese culture, then Chinese parents may
not be experienced as less warm by their children (e.g., Chao,
1994). In comparison with Western adolescents, an objec-
tively lower amount of warmth may need to be present before
the Chinese adolescents experience it as such.
A consideration of cultural inﬂuences also highlights
culture-speciﬁc predictors of emotional well-being and
culture-speciﬁc domains of emotional development. For
example, for African American adolescents, perceptions
of differential treatment based on race are associated with
increases in depression and anger over time (Roeser et al.,
1998). Furthermore, issues such as family obligations
(e.g., Fuligni, Tseng, & Lam, 1999), parental respect (e.g.,
Chao, 2000), intergenerational value discrepancies (e.g.,
Phinney, Ong, & Madden, 2000), and acculturative stress are
important constructs to examine in order to gain a full under-
standing of the emotional adjustment of immigrant and
minority adolescents (e.g., Fuertes & Westbrook, 1996;
Hovey & King, 1996; Kwan & Sodowsky, 1997; Thompson,
Anderson, & Bakeman, 2000).
Perhaps the most salient culture-speciﬁc domain of
emotional adjustment for ethnically diverse adolescents is
ethnic identity. Ethnic identity is an important component of
overall identity formation, and adolescence is a crucial time
for ethnic identity exploration and commitment (Phinney,
1992). Spencer and colleagues (Spencer, Dupree, &
Hartmann, 1997) proposed a phenomenological variant of
ecological systems theory (PVEST) model to explain the de-
velopment of stable identities (including ethnic identity) and
other aspects of healthy youth development. This model sug-
gests that ethnic identity formation results from an interac-
tion between the stressors that youths encounter in daily life
and the subjective understanding or meaning that adolescents
ascribe to these experiences.
Ethnic identity is comprised of two primary factors: ethnic
identiﬁcation (e.g., pride in one’s ethnic group) and explo-
ration (e.g., trying to ﬁnd out more about one’s ethnic group;
Spencer, Icard, Harachi, Catalano, & Oxford, 2000). Adoles-
cence is a key time for ethnic identity development because
of advancing cognitive abilities as well as speciﬁc ethnic
socialization experiences (Quintana, Castañeda-English, &
Ybarra, 1999; Spencer et al., 1997). The salience of ethnic
identity changes with changes in context, such as moving
to a location where one is a minority member (Ichiyama,
McQuarrie, & Ching, 1996). However, greater acculturation to
a host culture does not necessarily mean a decrease in ethnic
identiﬁcation (Liu, Pope-Davis, Nevitt, & Toporek, 1999).
Finally, ethnic identity has implications for adolescents’ emo-
tional well-being. In general, a stronger sense of one’s ethnic
identity is related to higher feelings of self-esteem (Gray-Little
& Hafdahl, 2000; Phinney, Cantu, & Kurtz, 1997; Phinney &
Chavira, 1992) and self-efﬁcacy (Smith, Walker, Fields,
Brookins, & Seay, 1999). However, the relationship between
ethnic identity and psychological adjustment is not always
consistent and may depend on other factors such as one’s iden-
tiﬁcation with the host culture and the ethnic density of one’s
community (Eyou,Adair, & Dixon, 2000; McAdoo, 1993).
Integration of Temperament Into the Study
of Adolescent Adjustment
Athird emerging theme in research on adolescents’emotional
and personality development concerns integrating the role of
temperament into models of adolescent adjustment. Research
in this area has accelerated as the construct of emotion regu-
lation has gained prominence in the study of adolescent de-
velopment. The ﬁrst step in integrating temperament into this
research is to differentiate temperament from related con-
structs such as mood and emotion regulation. For instance, as
outlined by Kagan (1994), the concept of emotion has been
used to refer to acute and temporary changes in feeling, more
permanent affective states that endure over years, and tem-
peramentally based predispositions to react to events in cer-
tain ways. Kagan argues that we need to distinguish between
chronic mood states and temperamental characteristics. Indi-
viduals with various temperaments differ in the ease with
which they experience different emotions, and the emotions
experienced may be qualitatively different. Indeed, Kagan
(1998) concluded that variation in temperamental character-
istics helps to explain why some children do not experience
trauma-related symptoms even in the face of major stressors
such as kidnapping or divorce. Rothbart and Bates (1998)

Emerging Trends and Future Directions
363
proposed a number of possible models of the direct, indirect,
and interactive effects of multiple temperamental traits on
multiple adjustment indicators. Their explication of such
linkages provides an abundance of possible processes that
can and should be investigated.
Furthermore, we need to differentiate between tempera-
ment and emotion regulation skills (Underwood, 1997).
Temperament affects the intensity of emotional experi-
ence. As a result, an individual who experiences emotions
more intensely faces a greater challenge in emotion regula-
tion. Similarly, individuals with different temperaments
experience different levels of arousability. Because of differ-
ences in arousability, it is difﬁcult to determine whether an
adolescent who is apparently effectively managing an emo-
tionally challenging situation is superior at emotion regulation
compared with an adolescent who is having more difﬁculty, or
whether that adolescent is simply less reactive (Kagan, 1994).
Future research needs to distinguish purposeful emotion regu-
lation from low arousability.
The concept of emotion regulation highlights the role of
temperament in socialization processes (e.g., Contreras et al.,
2000). Much attention has been directed at the environmental
antecedents of different emotional states, positive and nega-
tive. For instance, as reviewed earlier, parenting behaviors
inﬂuence the development of adaptive emotion regulation,
such as self-esteem and psychosocial maturity, as well as
dysregulated emotions such as depression. However, adoles-
cent adjustment and maladjustment are affected not only by
an interpersonal environment that encourages or discourages
certain qualities, but also by a person’s temperamental dispo-
sitions (Kagan, 1994). Future research needs to assess how
temperament and socialization work together to inﬂuence the
development of emotion regulation (Underwood, 1997).
Different models for considering both temperament and
socialization in adolescent adjustment are emerging. For
instance, Calkins (1994) integrated research on the develop-
mental consequences of temperament and parenting styles in
her model of the development of social competence in child-
hood. She examines the relative contributions of internal and
external sources of individual differences in emotion regula-
tion. Internal factors include temperamental characteristics
such as physiological regulation (e.g., heart rate) and be-
havioral tendencies (e.g., soothability, reactivity). External
factors include parents’ explicit training in emotion regula-
tion skills as well as more global parenting styles (e.g.,
responsiveness, control). In this model, these internal and
external factors independently inﬂuence a child’s emotion
regulation style, which in turn affects subsequent interper-
sonal functioning such as relationships with peers (Calkins,
1994).
Other models highlight the transactional, bidirectional
relationship between temperament and socialization (Collins
et al., 2000; Wills et al., 1995). Reciprocal models of parent
and child effects (e.g., Bell & Chapman, 1986) are not new to
the study of child development. These models consider not
only how parenting practices affect child development but
also how children’s behavioral qualities affect the type of
parenting they receive. Some of the research in this area has
focused speciﬁcally on temperament. For instance, children
with impulsive and irritable temperaments elicit more nega-
tive parenting than do children with less difﬁcult tempera-
ments (Dix, 1991). A longitudinal study found that parental
punitive reactions to children’s negative emotions at ages 6 to
8 were linked to increases in these children’s problem behav-
iors and negative emotions by early adolescence (ages 10 to
12; Eisenberg et al., 1999). Such bidirectional models are
rare, but much needed, in the study of emotions and social-
ization in adolescence.
Another model of how temperament can be integrated into
studies of adolescent adjustment is emerging from research
demonstrating how temperamental traits affect adolescents’
susceptibility to parenting and other external events (e.g.,
Colder, Lochman, & Wells, 1997). What might promote pos-
itive adjustment for one adolescent, or most adolescents, may
be relatively ineffective with other adolescents. In childhood,
evidence is accumulating that different children may require
and respond to different levels of structure and support based
on their temperamental characteristics (e.g., Belsky, Hsieh, &
Crnic, 1998). For example, a hyperactive child may respond
well to the type of strict limit setting that would stiﬂe the
competence of a shy child. Thus, temperament may moderate
the association between parenting practices and adolescent
adjustment.
Recent work with youth in late childhood and early
adolescence examines these models. For instance, Lengua
and colleagues (Lengua & Sandler, 1996; Lengua, Wolchik,
Sandler, & West, 2000) have examined the role of tempera-
ment in early adolescents’ adaptation to parental divorce. In
one study the temperamental trait of approach-ﬂexibility
(one’s orientation toward change and new situations) moder-
ated relationships between adolescents’ coping styles and
their psychological symptoms. In particular, active coping
strategies were related to less anxiety for adolescents with
ﬂexible temperaments but was unrelated to adjustment for
adolescents with less ﬂexible temperaments. Avoidant coping
styles were related to greater anxiety and conduct problems
for adolescents with less ﬂexible temperaments but were un-
related to adjustment for adolescents with more ﬂexible
temperaments. Thus, certain temperamental styles appear
to be protective.

364
Emotional and Personality Development in Adolescence
In another study of adolescent adjustment to parental
divorce, Lengua et al. (2000) found that early adolescents’
temperaments moderated the relationship between parenting
practices and their psychological adjustment. Speciﬁcally,
they found that inconsistent discipline and parental rejection
were related to adolescent depression only for adolescents
with more difﬁcult temperaments (high on impulsivity and
low on positive emotionality). Similarly, inconsistent dis-
cipline and parental rejection were related to conduct prob-
lems for adolescents low in positive emotionality and high on
impulsivity. These parenting styles were unrelated to conduct
problems for adolescents with easier temperaments (high on
positive emotionality and low on impulsivity).
Finally, in a sample of fourth- and ﬁfth-grade boys, Colder
et al. (1997) found that temperament (i.e., fear and activity lev-
els) moderated the relationship between parenting behaviors
and children’s adjustment. For example, harsh parenting was
related to high levels of aggression only for boys with highly
fearful temperaments, and poor parental monitoring was re-
lated to higher levels of aggression only for boys with highly
active temperaments. In addition, both harsh parenting and
overinvolved parenting were related to greater symptoms of
depression only for boys with highly fearful temperaments.
Overall, the previous studies illustrate some of the
challenges faced by researchers who wish to incorporate
adolescent temperament into the study of adolescent adjust-
ment, as well as some of the theoretical models that are being
used to study these effects. Future research that continues to
integrate temperament will likely lead to important advances
in our understanding of how to promote healthy adolescent
adjustment.
Person Approaches to Understanding Emotion
and Personality
Afourth emerging theme is captured by the increasing number
of empirical studies of adolescent emotional and personal-
ity development that are based on person (or pattern) ap-
proaches (e.g., Caspi, 2000; Salmivalli, 1998; Schulenberg,
Wadsworth, O’Malley, Bachman, & Johnston, 1996).The per-
son approach considers individuals in a holistic manner, as
organisms consisting of multiple attributes (e.g., cognitive,
biological, behavioral) that are integrated into an organized
system (Block, 1971; Magnusson & Törestad, 1993; see also
chapter by Kerr, Stattin, & Ferrer-Wreder in this volume).
Advocates of the person approach argue that the individual’s
pattern or proﬁle across a number of indicators (the total con-
ﬁguration of variables) may carry more meaning for un-
derstanding that individual’s development than do single
variables (Magnusson & Cairns, 1996). The person is the unit
of analysis, and individuals who share similar proﬁles are
grouped together (Stattin & Magnusson, 1996). These groups
may then be compared on other relevant variables and devel-
opmental trajectories.
The person approach can be contrasted with the traditional
variable approach, on which most research on adolescence is
based. The variable approach examines interrelations among
single variables, assuming that these interrelations justify
inferences about how variables function in individuals
(Magnusson & Cairns, 1996). Magnusson and Törestad
(1993) argued, however, that the variable approach masks
qualitative differences among people and is limited with
respect to delineating how variables operate together within
subgroups of individuals. Indeed, in a longitudinal study fol-
lowing individuals from childhood to early adulthood, Stattin
and Magnusson (1996) showed that more variance in adult ex-
ternalizing behaviors was explained by the constellation of
characteristics present in adolescence (i.e., a combination of
the adolescent’s involvement in multiple risk behaviors such
as truancy and family background risks such as father’s alco-
holism) rather than by individual predictor variables.
The person approach can be applied to many phenomena
in the study of adolescent emotional and personality develop-
ment. It may be one way to answer the frequent call for more
examination and integration of multiple levels of adolescent
development, including the biological, psychological,
cognitive, and contextual (e.g., Susman, 1997; chapter by
Susman, Dorn, & Schiefelbein in this volume).
Consider a recent study by Galambos and Tilton-Weaver
(2000). These authors were intrigued by speculation in the
literature on psychosocial maturity that some adolescents,
rather than being psychosocially mature, were actually
pseudomature: They maintained the appearance of maturity
through behavioral means (e.g., engagement in problem
behaviors such as drinking) without showing genuine
psychological maturity (e.g., a stable sense of identity, self-
reliance, and a strong work ethic; Greenberger & Steinberg,
1986). Galambos and Tilton-Weaver were also intrigued by
previous ﬁndings showing that adolescents who engaged in
higher levels of problem behavior also had older subjective
ages (i.e., they felt older than their chronological ages),
indicating a possible mismatch between their subjective
levels of maturity and their actual behavior (Galambos,
Kolaric, Sears, & Maggs, 1999). Following a person ap-
proach, Galambos and Tilton-Weaver hypothesized that
pseudomaturity could be deﬁned by high levels of problem
behavior, an older subjective age, and low levels of psy-
chological maturity—a constellation of behavioral, psycho-
logical, and subjective attributes. Indeed, in a sample of
Canadian adolescents ranging in age from 10 to 17, 13%

Summary
365
emerged as pseudomature (high problem behavior, older sub-
jective age, low psychological maturity). There was also a
mature cluster (43% of the sample) who were low on prob-
lem behavior, felt slightly older than their chronological ages,
and scored high on psychological maturity. The ﬁnal cluster,
immature adolescents, comprised 44% of the sample. They
reported low levels of problem behavior, were psychologi-
cally immature, and felt relatively young.
The three clusters of adolescents who emerged differed in
other ways as well (Galambos & Tilton-Weaver, 2000). Com-
pared to the mature and immature adolescents, the pseudoma-
ture adolescents were more advanced with respect to pubertal
status, reported a stronger desire to be older and to attain adult
privileges, were more socially active, and reported more con-
ﬂict with mothers (among boys). Compared to mature adoles-
cents, immature adolescents reported a stronger desire to be
older, more conﬂict with mothers, and less acceptance from
mothers. The authors concluded that both pseudomature and
immature adolescents had a poorer ﬁt with their social envi-
ronments than did the mature adolescents.
This and similar research speak to the advantages of using
person approaches to understand the adolescent as a whole
person with multiple, interrelated attributes. Some research
questions demand that researchers attempt to integrate
biological (including hormonal), cognitive, emotional, psy-
chological, and contextual characteristics in seeking to un-
derstand adolescents’ lifelong development. The person
approach is an exciting paradigm that will add much to our
accumulating knowledge of emotional and personality devel-
opment in adolescence.
SUMMARY
In this chapter we highlighted research on adolescents’ emo-
tional development, describing emotion regulation as a useful
framework for viewing and uniting broad areas of research on
emotional well-being and distress. Theory on adolescents’
self-systems and their psychosocial maturity were discussed
as models that integrate a variety of indicators of adaptive
emotion regulation. The general concepts of internalizing and
externalizing problems were discussed as indicative of adoles-
cents’ emotional distress and reﬂective of the experience of
emotional dysregulation. Given the signiﬁcant gender differ-
ence in the prevalence of internalizing disorders (with more
adolescent girls affected), we reviewed recent research on pre-
dictors and correlates of internalizing symptoms.
We also reviewed some recent research on personality
and temperament in adolescence, identifying major issues in
the structure of personality, the origins of personality, and
continuity in personality and temperament across time. Re-
cent research shows that the Big Five model of personality,
based on years of research with adult samples, replicates in
samples of adolescents. Moreover, links have been estab-
lished between dimensions of temperament in childhood and
later personality traits. The goodness-of-ﬁt model of tem-
perament was reviewed as a way of understanding how
temperament may be shaped, viewed, and responded to dif-
ferently depending on the social context.
Finally, we identiﬁed four exciting themes in recent
research on emotion and personality development. The ﬁrst
is a focus on adolescents’ optimal development, with a call
for better measurement of successful outcomes. The second
refers to cultural variations in emotional and personality
development, a trend that has burgeoned over the last several
years. The third theme involves studies that integrate knowl-
edge of temperament into studies of adolescent adjustment,
focusing on the role that temperament may play in emotional
expression and regulation. The fourth emerging theme in-
volves increasing interest in conducting studies of adoles-
cents’ emotional and personality development from a person
approach, which considers intra-individual constellations of
multiple attributes in the search for understanding develop-
mental trajectories.
Knowledge emerging from research on these themes
has potentially important implications for the targeting, de-
sign, and effectiveness of prevention and intervention pro-
grams. The identiﬁcation of emotion regulation as a salient
marker of positive youth development means that school- and
community-based programs can be designed to help young
people regulate and cope with their emotions. Emotion reg-
ulation is a strength that consists of a set of skills and strate-
gies, and this asset can be acquired. Teaching effective
emotion regulation ﬁts with the goals of prevention programs
designed to promote healthy youth development by increasing
youth strengths (e.g., Roth et al., 1998).
But do all children and adolescents need training in
effective emotion regulation? The research examined here
suggests that successful emotion regulation is more of a
challenge for some children and adolescents than for others,
for example, those with a set of individual risk factors, such
as a temperament characterized by negative emotionality
and strong reactivity. Thus, in addition to general school- and
community-based programs for adolescents at large, some
intervention programs could be designed to target at-risk chil-
dren and adolescents (e.g., those who have been identiﬁed as
having anger control problems or being easily distressed). If
deﬁcits in emotion regulation are caught and addressed early
enough, it is likely that the individual will have a more positive
developmental trajectory into adulthood.

366
Emotional and Personality Development in Adolescence
Prevention and intervention programs should incorporate
the important role of parents in promoting positive youth
development. Research on the interaction between parenting
and temperament is moving toward a clearer understanding
of parenting behaviors that are more or less suited to particu-
lar temperaments (i.e., goodness of ﬁt). Given the central role
of parenting in promoting positive youth development, a wide
range of family strengthening and parent-training programs
has been developed (for a review, see Kumpfer, 1999). The
goals of these programs are to decrease the risk factors asso-
ciated with developmental problems and increase protective
family factors, including supportive parent-child relations.
The promotion of emotion regulation strategies and preven-
tion of emotional dysregulation among parents and adoles-
cents could be included as important components of these
programs.
In designing effective interventions and social policies,
we need to know more about how families, peers, schools,
and cultural contexts moderate the relationships among
temperament, emotional regulation, and adolescent adjust-
ment. Attention to diverse cultural contexts is particularly
important in this regard. For instance, we need to know more
about the contexts that promote the achievement of stable eth-
nic identities, the stressors that challenge ethnic identity de-
velopment, and the relationship of ethnic identity to other
indicators of well being. In addition, we need to identify ways
in which models of healthy youth development apply to cul-
turally diverse adolescents (e.g., universal protective factors)
and the ways in which they need to be modiﬁed to ﬁt unique
experiences (e.g., incorporating the experience of racism).
The four emerging themes that we have identiﬁed are just
beginning to provide the speciﬁc empirical knowledge we
need to design effective prevention and intervention efforts.
To accomplish this, however, it is essential that social
policies support (a) the view that the emotion regulation is an
issue of health promotion, (b) funding for basic research
in the general area of emotion regulation, (c) funding for
research and programming that explicitly addresses similari-
ties and differences in the needs and strengths of adolescents
from diverse ethnic backgrounds, and (d) funding for applied
research that evaluates the effectiveness of prevention and
intervention programs designed to increase effective emotion
regulation.
As this chapter has shown, researchers have learned a
great deal about adolescents’ emotional and personality
development. The ﬁeld of research on adolescence is a very
active and exciting one, with promising new developments
that bring us ever closer to obtaining a more comprehensive
understanding of the interacting forces that shape adolescent
behavior. With a more complete picture, we will be better
able to inﬂuence adolescents’ lives in ways that will be of
beneﬁt to them as they mature into adulthood.
REFERENCES
Ahadi, S.A., & Rothbart, M. K. (1994). Temperament, development,
and the Big Five. In C. F. Halverson, Jr., G. A. Kohnstamm, &
R. P. Martin (Eds.), The developing structure of temperament and
personality from infancy to adulthood (pp. 189–207). Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Allen, J. P., Hauser, S. T., Bell, K. L., & O’Connor, T. G. (1994).
Longitudinal assessment of autonomy and relatedness in
adolescent-family interactions as predictors of adolescent ego
development and self-esteem. Child Development, 65, 179–194.
Allen, J. P., Moore, C., Kuperminc, G., & Bell, K. (1998). Attach-
ment and adolescent psychosocial functioning. Child Develop-
ment, 69, 1406–1419.
Arnett, J. J. (1999). Adolescent storm and stress, reconsidered.
American Psychologist, 54, 317–326.
Arnett, J. J. (2000). Emerging adulthood: A theory of development
from the late teens through the twenties. American Psychologist,
55, 469–480.
Barrett Singer, A. T., & Weinstein, R. S. (2000). Differential
parental treatment predicts achievement and self-perceptions
in two cultural contexts. Journal of Family Psychology, 14,
491–509.
Beaudet, M. P. (1999). Psychological health—depression. Health
Reports, 11, 63–75.
Bell, R. Q., & Chapman, M. (1986). Child effects in studies using
experimental or brief longitudinal approaches to socialization.
Developmental Psychology, 22, 595–603.
Belsky, J. (1996). Parent, infant, and social-contextual antecedents
of father-son attachment security. Developmental Psychology,
32, 905–913.
Belsky, J., Hsieh, K., & Crnic, K. (1998). Mothering, fathering,
and infant negativity as antecedents of boys’ externalizing
problems and inhibition at age 3 years: Differential susceptibil-
ity to rearing experience? Development and Psychopathology,
10, 301–319.
Black, M. M., Ricardo, I. B., & Stanton, B. (1997). Social and
psychological factors associated with AIDS risk behaviors
among low-income, urban, African American adolescents.
Journal of Research on Adolescence, 7, 173–195.
Block, J. (1971). Lives through time. Berkeley, CA: Bancroft.
Bradley, R. H., & Corwyn, R. F. (2000). Moderating effect of
perceived amount of family conﬂict on the relation between
home environmental processes and the well-being of adoles-
cents. Journal of Family Psychology, 14, 349–364.
Braungart, J. M., Plomin, R., DeFries, J. C., & Fulker, D. W. (1992).
Genetic inﬂuence on test-rated infant temperament as assessed

References
367
by Bayley’s Infant Behavior Record: Nonadoptive and adoptive
siblings and twins. Developmental Psychology, 28, 40–47.
Brooks-Gunn, J., Graber, J. A., & Paikoff, R. L. (1994). Studying
links between hormones and negative affect: Models and
measures. Journal of Research on Adolescence, 4, 469–486.
Buchanan, C. M., Eccles, J., & Becker, J. (1992).Are adolescents the
victims of raging hormones? Evidence for activational effects of
hormones on moods and behavior at adolescence. Psychological
Bulletin, 111, 62–107.
Buss, A. H., & Plomin, R. (1984). Temperament: Early developing
personality traits. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Bustra, J. O., Bosma, H. A., & Jackson, S. (1994). The relation-
ship between social skills and psycho-social functioning in
early adolescence. Personality and Individual Differences, 16,
767–776.
Calkins, S. D. (1994). Origins and outcomes of individual dif-
ferences in emotion regulation. Monographs of the Society for
Research in Child Development, 59(2–3, Serial No. 240), 53–72.
Campos, J. J., Mumme, D. L., Kermoian, R., & Campos, R. G.
(1994). A functionalist perspective on the nature of emotion.
Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development,
59(2–3, Serial No. 240), 284–303.
Capaldi, D. M., & Rothbart, M. K. (1992). Development and vali-
dation of an early adolescent temperament measure. Journal of
Early Adolescence, 12, 153–173.
Casper, R. C., Belanoff, J., & Offer, D. (1996). Gender differences,
but no racial group differences, in self-reported psychiatric
symptoms in adolescents. Journal of the American Academy of
Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 35, 500–508.
Caspi, A. (1998). Personality development across the life course. In
W. Damon (Series Ed.) & N. Eisenberg (Vol. Ed.), Handbook of
child psychology: Vol. 3. Social, emotional, and personality
development (5th ed., pp. 311–388). New York: Wiley.
Caspi, A. (2000). The child is father of the man: Personality
continuities from childhood to adulthood. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 78, 158–172.
Caspi, A., & Silva, P. A. (1995). Temperamental qualities at age
three predict personality traits in young adulthood: Longitudi-
nal evidence from a birth cohort. Child Development, 66, 486–
498.
Chao, R. K. (1994). Beyond parental control and authoritarian
parenting style: Understanding Chinese parenting through the
cultural notion of training. Child Development, 65, 1111–1119.
Chao, R. K. (2000, March). How does the meaning of parenting
style differ for Asian immigrants compared to American-born
Asians and European Americans? Paper presented at the meet-
ing of the Society for Research on Adolescence, Chicago, IL.
Chen, H., Mechanic, D., & Hansell, S. (1998). A longitudinal study
of self-awareness and depressed mood in adolescence. Journal
of Youth and Adolescence, 27, 719–734.
Chen, X., Dong, Q., & Zhou, H. (1997). Authoritative and authori-
tarian parenting practices and social and school performance in
Chinese children. International Journal of Behavioral Develop-
ment, 21, 855–873.
Chen, X., Liu, M., & Li, D. (2000). Parental warmth, control, and in-
dulgence and their relations to adjustment in Chinese children: A
longitudinal study. Journal of Family Psychology, 14, 401–419.
Chen, X., Rubin, K. H., & Li, D. (1997). Relation between academic
achievement and social adjustment: Evidence from Chinese
children. Developmental Psychology, 33, 518–525.
Chess, S., & Thomas, A. (1999). Goodness of ﬁt: Clinical applica-
tion from infancy through adult life. Philadelphia: Bruner/Mazel.
Chiu, M. L., Feldman, S., & Rosenthal, D. A. (1992). The inﬂuence
of immigration on parental behavior and adolescent distress in
Chinese families residing in two Western nations. Journal of Re-
search on Adolescence, 2, 205–239.
Church, T. A. (1994). Relating the Tellegen and ﬁve factor models
of personality structure. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 67, 898–909.
Colder, C. R., Lochman, J. E., & Wells, K. C. (1997). The moderat-
ing effects of children’s fear and activity level on relations
between parenting practices and childhood symptomatology.
Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 25, 251–263.
Cole, P. M., Michel, M. K., & Teti, L. O. (1994). The development
of emotion regulation and dysregulation: A clinical perspective.
Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development,
59(2–3, Serial No. 240), 73–100.
Collins, W.A., Maccoby, E. E., Steinberg, L., Hetherington, E. M., &
Bornstein, M. H. (2000). Contemporary research on parenting:
The case for nature and nurture. American Psychologist, 55,
218–232.
Conger, K. J., Conger, R. D., & Scaramella, L. V. (1997). Parents,
siblings, psychological control, and adolescent adjustment.
Journal of Adolescent Research, 12, 113–138.
Contreras, J. M., Kerns, L. A., Weimer, B. L., Gentzler, A. L., &
Tomich, P. L. (2000). Emotion regulation as a mediator of
associations between mother-child attachment and peer relation-
ships in middle childhood. Journal of Family Psychology, 14,
111–124.
Cooper, M. L., Shaver, P. R., & Collins, N. L. (1998). Attachment
styles, emotion regulation, and adjustment in adolescence. Jour-
nal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74, 1380–1397.
Costigan, C. L., & Cauce, A. M. (in press). Changes in African-
American mother-daughter relationships during adolescence:
Conﬂict, autonomy, and warmth. In A. M. Cauce & S. Hauser
(Eds.), Adolescence and beyond: Family processes and develop-
ment. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Digman, J. M. (1989). Five robust trait dimensions: Development,
stability, and utility. Journal of Personality, 57, 195–214.
Digman, J. M. (1994). Child personality and temperament: Does the
ﬁve-factor model embrace both domains. In C. F. Halverson,
Jr., G. A. Kohnstamm, & R. P. Martin (Eds.), The developing
structure of temperament and personality from infancy to adult-
hood (pp. 323–338). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

368
Emotional and Personality Development in Adolescence
Dix, T. (1991). The affective organization of parenting: Adaptive
and maladaptive processes. Psychological Bulletin, 110, 3–25.
DuBois, D. L., Bull, C. A., Sherman, M. D., & Roberts, M. (1998).
Self-esteem and adjustment in early adolescence: A social-
contextual perspective. Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 27,
557–583.
DuBois, D. L., & Hirsch, B. J. (2000). Self-esteem in early adoles-
cence: From stock character to marquee attraction. Journal of
Early Adolescence, 20, 5–11.
East, P. L., Lerner, R. M., Lerner, J. V., Talwar Soni, R.,
Ohannessian, C. M., & Jacobson, L. P. (1992). Early adolescent-
peer group ﬁt, peer relations, and psychosocial competence: A
short-term longitudinal study. Journal of Early Adolescence, 12,
132–152.
Eisenberg, N., Fabes, R. A., Shepard, S. A., Guthrie, I. K., Murphy,
B. C., & Reiser, M. (1999). Parental reactions to children’s neg-
ative emotions: Longitudinal relations to quality of children’s
social functioning. Child Development, 70, 513–534.
Erikson, E. H. (1968). Identity: Youth and crisis. New York: Norton.
Eyou, M. L., Adair, V., & Dixon, R. (2000). Cultural identity and
psychological adjustment of adolescent Chinese immigrants in
New Zealand. Journal of Adolescence, 23, 531–543.
Eysenck, H. J. (1992). Four ways ﬁve factors are not basic. Person-
ality and Individual Differences, 13, 667–673.
Feldman, S. S., & Weinberger, D. A. (1994). Self-restraint as a
mediator of family inﬂuences on boys’ delinquent behavior: A
longitudinal study. Child Development, 65, 195–211.
Field, T. (1994). The effects of mother’s physical and emotional
unavailability on emotion regulation. Monographs of the Society
for Research in Child Development, 59(2–3, Serial No. 240),
208–227.
Frank, S. J., Poorman, M. O., Van Egeren, L. A., & Field, D. T.
(1997). Perceived relationships with parents among adolescent
inpatients with depressive preoccupations and depressed mood.
Journal of Clinical Child Psychology, 26, 205–215.
Fuertes, J. N., & Westbrook, F. D. (1996). Using the Social,
Attitudinal, Familial, and Environmental (SAFE) Acculturation
Stress Scale to assess the adjustment needs of Hispanic college
students. Measurement and Evaluation in Counseling and
Development, 29, 67–76.
Fuligni, A. J., Tseng, V., & Lam, M. (1999). Attitudes toward family
obligations among American adolescents with Asian, Latin
American, and European backgrounds. Child Development, 70,
1030–1044.
Galambos, N. L., Kolaric, G. C., Sears, H. A., & Maggs, J. L.
(1999). Adolescents’ subjective age: An indicator of perceived
maturity. Journal of Research on Adolescence, 9, 309–337.
Galambos, N. L., & Leadbeater, B. J. (2000). Trends in adolescent
research for the new millennium. International Journal of
Behavioral Development, 24, 289–294.
Galambos, N. L., & Tilton-Weaver, L. C. (2000). Adolescents’
psychosocial maturity, problem behavior, and subjective age:
In search of the adultoid. Applied Developmental Science, 4,
178–192.
Galambos, N. L., & Turner, P. K. (1999). Parent and adolescent
temperaments and the quality of parent-adolescent relations.
Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 45, 493–511.
Garber, J., Robinson, N. S., & Valentiner, D. (1997). The relation
between parenting and adolescent depression: Self-worth as a
mediator. Journal of Adolescent Research, 12, 12–33.
Ge, X., Conger, R. D., Lorenz, F. O., & Simons, R. L. (1994).
Parents’ stressful life events and adolescent depressed mood.
Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 35, 28–44.
Goldberg, L. R. (1993). The structure of phenotypic personality
traits. American Psychologist, 48, 26–34.
Goldsmith, H. H., Buss, A. H., Plomin, R., Rothbart, M. K.,
Thomas, A., Chess, S., Hinde, R. A., & McCall, R. B. (1987).
Roundtable: What is temperament? Four approaches. Child
Development, 58, 505–529.
Goldsmith, H. H., & Campos, J. J. (1986). Fundamental issues in the
study of early temperament: The Denver Twin Study. In M. E.
Lamb & A. Brown (Eds.), Advances in Developmental Psychol-
ogy (pp. 231–283). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gray-Little, B., & Hafdahl, A. R. (2000). Factors inﬂuencing racial
comparisons of self-esteem: A quantitative review. Psychologi-
cal Bulletin, 126, 26–54.
Graziano, W. G., & Ward, D. (1992). Probing the Big Five in ado-
lescence: Personality and adjustment during a developmental
transition. Journal of Personality, 60, 425–439.
Greenberger, E., & Chen, C. (1996). Perceived relationships and
depressed mood in early and late adolescence: A comparison of
European and Asian Americans. Developmental Psychology, 32,
707–716.
Greenberger, E., Josselson, R., Knerr, C., & Knerr, B. (1975). The
measurement and structure of psychosocial maturity. Journal of
Youth and Adolescence, 4, 127–143.
Greenberger, E., & McLaughlin, C. S. (1998). Attachment, coping,
and explanatory style in late adolescence. Journal of Youth and
Adolescence, 27, 121–139.
Greenberger, E., & Sørenson, A. B. (1974). Toward a concept of
psychosocial maturity. Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 3,
329–358.
Greenberger, E., & Steinberg, L. (1986). When teenagers work: The
psychological and social costs of adolescent employment. New
York: Basic.
Gross, J. J., & Muñoz, R. F. (1995). Emotion regulation and mental
health. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 2, 151–164.
Gullotta, T. P., Adams, G. R., & Montemayor, R. (Eds.). (1990).
Developing social competency in adolescence. Newbury Park,
CA: Sage.
Halverson, C. F., Jr., Kohnstamm, G. A., & Martin, R. P. (1994).
The developing structure of temperament and personality from
infancy to adulthood. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

References
369
Haney, P., & Durlak, J. A. (1998). Changing self-esteem in children
and adolescents: A meta-analytic review. Journal of Clinical
Child Psychology, 27, 423–433.
Hankin, B. L., Abramson, L. Y., Mofﬁtt, T. E., Silva, P. A., McGee,
R., & Angell, K. E. (1998). Development of depression from
preadolescence to young adulthood: Emerging gender differ-
ences in a 10-year longitudinal study. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 107, 128–140.
Harter, S. (1990). Self and identity development. In S. S. Feldman &
G. R. Elliott (Eds.), At the threshold: The developing adolescent
(pp. 352–387). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Harter, S., Bresnick, S., Bouchey, H. A., & Whitesell, N. R. (1997).
The development of multiple role-related selves during adoles-
cence. Development and Psychopathology, 9, 835–853.
Hauser, S. T., & Safyer, A. W. (1994). Ego development and
adolescent emotions. Journal of Research on Adolescence, 4,
487–502.
Haviland, J. M., Davidson, R. B., Ruetsch, C., Gebelt, J. L., &
Lancelot, C. (1994). The place of emotion in identity. Journal of
Research on Adolescence, 4, 503–518.
Havill, V. L., Allen, K., Halverson, C. F., & Kohnstamm, G. A.
(1994). Parents’ use of Big Five categories in their natural lan-
guage descriptions of children. In C. F. Halverson, Jr., G. A.
Kohnstamm, & R. P. Martin (Eds.), The developing structure
of temperament and personality from infancy to adulthood
(pp. 371–386). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Hishinuma, E. S., Miyamoto, S. T., Nishimura, S. T., & Nahulu,
L. B. (2000). Differences in state-trait anxiety inventory scores
for ethnically diverse adolescents in Hawaii. Cultural Diversity
and Ethnic Minority Psychology, 6, 73–83.
Hovey, J. D., & King, C. A. (1996). Acculturative stress, depression,
and suicidal ideation among immigrant and second-generation
Latino adolescents. Journal of the American Academy of Child
and Adolescent Psychiatry, 35, 1183–1192.
Ichiyama, M. A., McQuarrie, E. F., & Ching, K. L. (1996). Contex-
tual inﬂuences on ethnic identity among Hawaiian students
in the mainland United States. Journal of Cross-Cultural
Psychology, 27, 458–475.
John, O. P. (1990). The “Big Five” factor taxonomy: Dimensions
of personality in the natural language and in questionnaires.
In L. A. Pervin (Ed.), Handbook of personality: Theory and
research (pp. 66–100). New York: Guilford.
John, O. P., Caspi, A., Robins, R. W., Mofﬁtt, T. E., & Stouthamer-
Loeber, M. (1994). The “little ﬁve”: Exploring the nomological
network of the ﬁve-factor model of personality in adolescent
boys. Child Development, 65, 160–178.
Juang, L. P., Lerner, J. V., McKinney, J. P., & von Eye, A. (1999).
The goodness of ﬁt in autonomy timetable expectations between
Asian-American late adolescents and their parents. International
Journal of Behavioral Development, 23, 1023–1048.
Kagan, J. (1989). Temperamental contributions to social behavior.
American Psychologist, 44, 668–674.
Kagan, J. (1994). On the nature of emotion. Monographs of the
Society for Research in Child Development, 59(2–3, Serial No.
240), 7–24.
Kagan, J. (1998). Biology and the child. In W. Damon (Series Ed.)
& N. Eisenberg (Vol. Ed.), Handbook of child psychology:
Vol. 3. Social, emotional, and personality development (5th ed.,
pp. 177–235). New York: Wiley.
Katainen, S., Räikkönen, K., & Keltikangas-Järvinen, L. (1998).
Development of temperament: Childhood temperament and
the mother’s childrearing attitudes as predictors of adolescent
temperament in a 9-year follow-up study. Journal of Research on
Adolescence, 8, 485–509.
Kawaguchi, M. C., Welsh, D. P., Powers, S. I., & Rostosky, S. S.
(1998). Mothers, fathers, sons, and daughters: Temperament,
gender, and adolescent-parent relationships. Merrill-Palmer
Quarterly, 44, 77–96.
Kessler, R. C., McGonagle, K. A., Zhao, S., Nelson, C. B., Hughes,
M., Eshleman, S.,Wittchen, H., & Kendler, K. S. (1994). Lifetime
and 12-month prevalence of DSM-III-R psychiatric disorders in
the United States: Results from the National Comorbidity Survey.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 51, 8–19.
Kim, S. Y., & Ge, X. (2000). Parenting practices and adolescent
depressive symptoms in Chinese American families. Journal
of Family Psychology, 14, 420–435.
Kohnstamm, G. A., Halverson, C. F., Jr., Havill, V. L., &
Mervielde, I. (1996). Parents’ free descriptions of child charac-
teristics: A cross-cultural search for the developmental antece-
dents of the Big Five. In S. Harkness & C. M. Super (Eds.),
Parents’ cultural belief systems (pp. 27–55). New York:
Guilford.
Kumpfer, K. L. (1999). Strengthening America’s families: Pro-
mising parenting and family strategies for delinquency pre-
vention. A User’s Guide, prepared for the U. S. Department of
Justice under Grant No. 95-JN-FX-K010 from the Ofﬁce of
Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention, Ofﬁce of Juvenile
Programs, U. S. Department of Justice.
Kwan, K. L. K., & Sodowsky, G. R. (1997). Internal and external
ethnic identity and their correlates: A study of Chinese American
immigrants. Journal of Multicultural Counseling and Develop-
ment, 25, 51–67.
Larson, R. W. (2000). Toward a psychology of positive youth devel-
opment. American Psychologist, 55, 170–183.
Larson, R., & Lampman-Petraitis, C. (1989). Daily emotional states
as reported by children and adolescents. Child Development, 60,
1250–1260.
Larson, R., & Richards, M. H. (1994). Divergent realities: The
emotional lives of mothers, fathers, and adolescents. New York:
Basic.
Leadbeater, B. J., Kuperminc, G. P., Blatt, S. J., & Hertzog, C.
(1999). A multivariate model of gender differences in adoles-
cents’ internalizing and externalizing problems. Developmental
Psychology, 35, 1268–1282.

370
Emotional and Personality Development in Adolescence
Lengua, L. J., & Sandler, I. N. (1996). Self-regulation as a modera-
tor of the relation between coping and symptomatology in
children of divorce. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 24,
681–701.
Lengua, L. J., Wolchik, S. A., Sandler, I. N., & West, S. G. (2000).
The additive and interactive effects of parenting and tempera-
ment in predicting adjustment problems of children of divorce.
Journal of Clinical Child Psychology, 29, 232–244.
Lerner, J. V., & Lerner, R. M. (1983). Temperament and adaptation
across life: Theoretical and empirical issues. In P. B. Baltes &
O. G. Brim, Jr. (Eds.), Life-span development and behavior
(Vol. 5, pp. 197–231). New York: Academic Press.
Lerner, R. M., Fisher, C. B., & Weinberg, R. A. (2000). Toward a
science for and of the people: Promoting civil society through
the application of developmental science. Child Development,
71, 11–20.
Lerner, R. M., & Galambos, N. L. (1998). Adolescent development:
Challenges and opportunities for research programs and policies.
Annual Review of Psychology, 49, 413–446.
Lewinsohn, P. M., Rohde, P., & Seeley, J. R. (1998). Major depres-
sive disorder in older adolescents: Prevalence, risk factors, and
clinical implications. Clinical Psychology Review, 18, 765–794.
Liem, R., Lim, B. A., & Liem, J. H. (2000). Acculturation and emo-
tion among Asian Americans. Cultural Diversity and Ethnic
Minority Psychology, 6, 13–31.
Liu, W. M., Pope-Davis, D. B., Nevitt, J., & Toporek, R. L. (1999).
Understanding the function of acculturation and prejudicial
attitudes among Asian Americans. Cultural Diversity and Ethnic
Minority Psychology, 5, 317–328.
Luster, T., & McAdoo, H. P. (1994). Factors related to the achieve-
ment and adjustment of young African American children. Child
Development, 65, 1080–1094.
Maedgen, J. W., & Carlson, C. L. (2000). Social functioning and
emotional regulation in the attention deﬁcit hyperactivity disor-
der subtypes. Journal of Clinical Child Psychology, 29, 30–42.
Magnusson, D., & Cairns, R. B. (1996). Developmental science:
Toward a uniﬁed framework. In R. B. Cairns, G. H. Elder,
Jr., & E. J. Costello (Eds.), Developmental science (pp. 7–30).
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Magnusson, D., & Törestad, B. (1993). A holistic view of personal-
ity: A model revisited. Annual Review of Psychology, 44,
427–452.
Mantzicopoulos, P. Y., & Oh-Hwang, Y. (1998). The relationship
of psychosocial maturity to parenting quality and intellectual
ability for American and Korean adolescence. Contemporary
Educational Psychology, 23, 195–206.
Marton, P., & Maharaj, S. (1993). Family factors in adolescent
unipolar depression. Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 38,
373–382.
McAdoo, H. P. (1993). Ethnic families: Strengths that are found in
diversity. In H. P. McAdoo (Ed.), Family ethnicity: Strength in
diversity (pp. 3–14). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
McAdoo, H. P. (1997). Upward mobility across generations in
African American families. In H. P. McAdoo (Ed.), Black
families (3rd ed., pp. 162). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
McCrae, R. B., Costa, P. T., Jr., de Lima, M. P., Simões, A.,
Ostendorf, F., Angleitner, A., Marusˇi, I., Bratko, D., Caprara, G.
V., Barbarenelli, C., Chae, J.-H., & Piedmont, R. L. (1999). Age
differences in personality across the adult life span: Parallels in
ﬁve cultures. Developmental Psychology, 35, 466–477.
Newman, D. L., Mofﬁtt, T. E., Caspi, A., Magdol, L., Silva, P. A., &
Stanton, W. R. (1996). Psychiatric disorder in a birth cohort of
young adults: Prevalence, comorbidity, clinical signiﬁcance, and
new case incidence from ages 11 to 21. Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology, 64, 552–562.
Nitz, K., Lerner, R. M., Lerner, J. V., & Talwar, R. (1988). Parental
and peer ethnotheory demands, temperament, and early adoles-
cent adjustment. Journal of Early Adolescence, 8, 243–263.
Nolen-Hoeksema, S. (1994). An interactive model for the emer-
gence of gender differences in depression in adolescence. Jour-
nal of Research on Adolescence, 4, 519–534.
Noom, M. J., Dekovic´, M., & Meeus, W. H. J. (1999). Autonomy,
attachment and psychosocial adjustment during adolescence: A
double-edged sword? Journal of Adolescence, 22, 771–783.
Nurmi, J. E. (1997). Self-deﬁnition and mental health during ado-
lescence and young adulthood. In J. Schulenberg, J. L. Maggs, &
K. Hurrelmann (Eds.), Health risks and developmental transi-
tions during adolescence (pp. 395–419). Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Offer, D., Ostrov, E., Howard, K. I., & Atkinson, R. (1992). A study
of quietly disturbed and normal adolescents in ten countries.
In A. Z. Schwartzberg & A. H. Esman (Eds.), International
Annals of Adolescent Psychiatry (pp. 285–297). Chicago:
University of Chicago.
Ohannessian, C. M., Lerner, R. M., Lerner, J. V., & von Eye, A.
(1999). Does self-competence predict gender differences in
adolescent depression and anxiety? Journal of Adolescence, 22,
397–411.
Paterson, J., Pryor, J., & Field, J. (1995). Adolescent attachment to
parents and friends in relation to aspects of self-esteem. Journal
of Youth and Adolescence, 24, 365–376.
Pedlow, R., Sanson, A. V., Prior, M., & Oberklaid, F. (1993). The
stability of temperament from infancy to eight years. Develop-
mental Psychology, 29, 998–1007.
Petersen, A. C., Compas, B. E., Brooks-Gunn, J., Stemmler, M., Ey,
S., & Grant, K. E. (1993). Depression in adolescence. American
Psychologist, 48, 155–168.
Phinney, J. S. (1992). The Multigroup Ethnic Identity Measure: A
new scale for use with diverse groups. Journal of Adolescent
Research, 7, 156–176.
Phinney, J. S., Cantu, C. L., & Kurtz, D. A. (1997). Ethnic and
American identity as predictors of self-esteem among African
American, Latino, and White adolescents. Journal of Youth and
Adolescence, 26, 165–185.

References
371
Phinney, J. S., & Chavira, V. (1992). Ethnic identity and self-
esteem: An exploratory longitudinal study. Journal of Adoles-
cence, 15, 271–281.
Phinney, J. S., Ong, A., & Madden, T. (2000). Cultural values
and intergenerational value discrepancies and non-immigrant
families. Child Development, 71, 528–539.
Quintana, S. M., Castañeda-English, P., & Ybarra, V. C. (1999).
Role of perspective-taking abilities and ethnic socialization in
development of adolescent ethnic identity. Journal of Research
on Adolescence, 9, 161–184.
Richards, M. H., & Larson, R. (1993). Pubertal development and the
daily subjective states of young adolescents. Journal of Research
on Adolescence, 3, 145–169.
Roeser, R. W., Eccles, J. S., & Sameroff, A. J. (1998). Academic
and emotional functioning in early adolescence: Longitudinal
relations, patterns, and prediction by experiences in middle
school. Development and Psychopathology, 10, 321–352.
Rossman, B. B. R. (1992). School-age children’s perceptions of
coping with distress: Strategies for emotion regulation and the
moderation of adjustment. Journal of Child Psychology and
Psychiatry, 33, 1373–1397.
Roth, J., Brooks-Gunn, J., Murray, L., & Foster, W. (1998). Promot-
ing healthy adolescents: Synthesis of youth development program
evaluations. Journal of Research on Adolescence, 8, 423–460.
Rothbart, M. K., & Bates, J. E. (1998). Temperament. In W. Damon
(Series Ed.) & N. Eisenberg (Vol. Ed.), Handbook of child
psychology: Vol. 3. Social, emotional, and personality develop-
ment (5th ed., pp. 105–176). New York: Wiley.
Rothbart, M. K., & Derryberry, D. (1981). Development of indi-
vidual differences in temperament. In M. E. Lamb & A. L.
Brown (Eds.), Advances in developmental psychology (Vol. 1,
pp. 37–86). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Rowe, D. C., Almeida, D. M., & Jacobson, K. C. (1999). School
context and genetic inﬂuences on aggression in adolescence.
Psychological Science, 10, 277–280.
Salmivalli, C. (1998). Intelligent, attractive, well-behaving,
unhappy: The structure of adolescents’ self-concept and its
relations to their social behavior. Journal of Research on Adoles-
cence, 8, 333–354.
Sandler, I., Ayers, T., Suter, J., Schultz, A., & Twohey, J. (in press).
In K. Maton, C. Schellenbach, B. Leadbeater, & A. Solarz (Eds.),
Investing in children, youth, and families: Strengths-based
research and policy. Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association.
Sanson, A., & Rothbart, M. K. (1995). Child temperament and par-
enting. In M. H. Bornstein (Ed.), Handbook of parenting: Vol. 4.
Applied and practical parenting (pp. 299–321). Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Saudino, K. J., McGuire, S., Reiss, D., Hetherington, E. M., &
Plomin, R. (1995). Parent ratings of EAS temperaments in twins,
full siblings, half siblings, and step siblings. Journal of Person-
ality and Social Psychology, 68, 723–733.
Scales, P. C., Benson, P. L., Leffert, N., & Blyth, D. A. (2000). Con-
tribution of developmental assets to the prediction of thriving
among adolescents. Applied Developmental Science, 4, 27–46.
Scaramella, L. V., Conger, R. D., & Simons, R. L. (1999). Parental
protective inﬂuences and gender-speciﬁc increases in adolescent
internalizing and externalizing problems. Journal of Research on
Adolescence, 9, 111–141.
Schulenberg, J., Maggs, J. L., & Hurrelmann, K. (Eds.). (1997).
Health risks and developmental transitions during adolescence.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Schulenberg, J., Wadsworth, K. N., O’Malley, P. M., Bachman,
J. G., & Johnston, L. D. (1996). Adolescent risk factors for binge
drinking during the transition to young adulthood: Variable- and
pattern-centered approaches to change. Developmental Psychol-
ogy, 32, 659–674.
Sheeber, L., & Sorensen, E. (1998). Family relationships of de-
pressed adolescents: Amultimethod assessment. Journal of Clin-
ical Child Psychology, 27, 268–277.
Shek, D. T. L. (1997a). Family environment and adolescent psy-
chological well-being, school adjustment, and problem behavior:
A pioneer study in a Chinese context. Journal of Genetic Psy-
chology, 158, 113–128.
Shek, D. T. L. (1997b). The relation of family functioning to adoles-
cent psychological well-being, school adjustment, and problem
behavior. Journal of Genetic Psychology, 158, 467–479.
Shields, A., & Cicchetti, D. (1997). Emotion regulation among
school-aged children: The development and validation of a new
criterion Q-sort scale. Developmental Psychology, 33, 906–916.
Shiner, R. L. (1998). How shall we speak of children’s personalities
in middle childhood? A preliminary taxonomy. Psychological
Bulletin, 124, 308–332.
Sim, T. N. (2000). Adolescent psychosocial competence: The
importance and role of regard for parents. Journal of Research
on Adolescence, 10, 49–64.
Smith, E. P., Walker, L., Fields, L., Brookins, C. C., & Seay, R. C.
(1999). Ethnic identity and its relationship to self-esteem,
perceived efﬁcacy and prosocial attitudes in early adolescence.
Journal of Adolescence, 22, 867–880.
Spencer, M. B., Dupree, D., & Hartmann, T. (1997). A phenomeno-
logical variant of ecological systems theory (PVEST): A
self-organization perspective in context. Development and
Psychopathology, 9, 817–833.
Spencer, M. S., Icard, L. D., Harachi, T. W., Catalano, R. F., &
Oxford, M. (2000). Ethnic identity among monoracial and
multiracial early adolescents. Journal of Early Adolescence, 20,
365–387.
Stattin, H., & Magnusson, D. (1996). Antisocial development:
A holistic approach. Development and Psychopathology, 8,
617–645.
Stillars, A. L. (1995). Communication and family culture. In M. A.
Fitzpatrick & A. L. Vangelisti (Eds.), Explaining family interac-
tions (pp. 375–399). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

372
Emotional and Personality Development in Adolescence
Susman, E. J. (1997). Modeling developmental complexity in
adolescence: Hormones and behavior in context. Journal of
Research on Adolescence, 7, 283–306.
Talwar, R., Nitz, K., & Lerner, R. M. (1990). Relations among early
adolescent temperament, parent and peer demands, and adjust-
ment: A test of the goodness of ﬁt model. Journal of Adoles-
cence, 13, 279–298.
Thomas, A., & Chess, S. (1977). Temperament and development.
New York: Bruner/Mazel.
Thompson, C. P., Anderson, L. P., & Bakeman, R. A. (2000). Effects
of racial socialization and racial identity on acculturative stress
in African American college students. Cultural Diversity and
Ethnic Minority Psychology, 6, 196–210.
Thompson, R. A. (1994). Emotion regulation: A theme in search of
deﬁnition. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child
Development, 59(2–3, Serial No. 240).
Tilton-Weaver, L. C., Vitunski, E. T., & Galambos, N. L. (2001).
Five images of maturity in adolescence: What does “grown up”
mean? Journal of Adolescence, 24, 143–158.
Tubman, J. G., & Windle, M. (1995). Continuity of difﬁculty
temperament in adolescence: Relations with depression, life
events, family support, and substance use across a one-year
period. Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 24, 133–153.
Underwood, M. K. (1997). Top ten pressing questions about the
development of emotion regulation. Motivation and Emotion,
21, 127–146.
Underwood, M. K. , Kupersmidt, J. B., & Coie, J. D. (1996). Child-
hood peer sociometric status and aggression as predictors of
adolescent childbearing. Journal of Research on Adolescence, 6,
201–223.
van Lieshout, C. F. M. (2000). Lifespan personality development:
Self-organising goal-oriented agents and developmental out-
come. International Journal of Behavioral Development, 24,
276–288.
van Lieshout, C. F. M., & Haselager, G. J. T. (1994). The Big Five
personality factors in Q-sort descriptions of children and adoles-
cents. In C. F. Halverson, Jr., G. A. Kohnstamm, & R. P. Martin
(Eds.), The developing structure of temperament and personality
from infancy to adulthood (pp. 293–318). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Wagner, W. G. (1996). Optimal development in adolescence: What
is it and how can it be encouraged? Counseling Psychologist, 24,
360–400.
Wångby, M., Bergman, L. R., & Magnusson, D. (1999). Develop-
ment of adjustment problems in girls: What syndromes emerge?
Child Development, 70, 678–699.
Watkins, D., Dong, Q., & Xia, Y. (1997). Age and gender differ-
ences in the self-esteem of Chinese children. The Journal of
Social Psychology, 137, 374–379.
Wentzel, K. R., & McNamara, C. C. (1999). Interpersonal relation-
ships, emotional distress, and prosocial behavior in middle
school. Journal of Early Adolescence, 19, 114–125.
Whitesell, N. R., & Harter, S. (1996). The interpersonal context of
emotion: Anger with close friends and classmates. Child Devel-
opment, 67, 1345–1359.
Wigﬁeld, A., & Eccles, J. S. (1994). Children’s competence beliefs,
achievement values, and general self-esteem: Change across
elementary and middle school. Journal of Early Adolescence,
14, 107–138.
Wills, T. A., DuHamel, K., & Vaccaro, D. (1995). Activity and mood
temperament as predictors of adolescent substance use: Test of a
self-regulation mediational model. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 68, 901–916.
Windle, M. (1992). Temperament and social support in adolescence:
Interrelations with depressive symptoms and delinquent
behaviors. Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 21, 1–21.
Windler, M., & Lerner, R. M. (1986). Reassessing the dimensions of
temperamental individuality across the life span: The Revised
Dimensions of Temperament Survey (DOTS-R). Journal of
Adolescent Research, 1, 213–230.
Ying, Y., Lee, P. A., Tsai, J. L., Yeh, Y., & Huang, J. S. (2000). The
conception of depression in Chinese American college stu-
dents. Cultural Diversity and Ethnic Minority Psychology, 6,
183–195.
Zimmerman, M. A., Copeland, L. A., Shope, J. T., & Dielman, T. E.
(1997). A longitudinal study of self-esteem: Implications for
adolescent development. Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 26,
117–141.

373
CHAPTER 15
Positive Behaviors, Problem Behaviors,
and Resiliency in Adolescence
DANIEL F. PERKINS AND LYNNE M. BORDEN
RISK BEHAVIORS AND RISK FACTORS
373
TEENAGE SEXUAL ACTIVITY
374
Individual Characteristics
375
Contextual Characteristics
375
ALCOHOL AND SUBSTANCE USE/ABUSE
376
Individual Characteristics
376
Contextual Characteristics
377
DELINQUENCY AND ANTISOCIAL BEHAVIOR
377
Individual Characteristics
378
Contextual Characteristics
379
SCHOOL UNDERACHIEVEMENT AND FAILURE
380
Individual Characteristics
380
Contextual Characteristics
381
CO-OCCURRENCE OF RISK BEHAVIORS
382
RESILIENCY
383
PROTECTIVE FACTORS AND RESILIENCY
385
Models of Protective Factors and Processes
385
Identiﬁed Protective Factors
386
Kumpfer’s Resiliency Framework
386
FUTURE DIRECTIONS AND CONCLUSIONS
388
REFERENCES
389
Adolescence is a time of life marked by change and rapid
development. In fact, few developmental periods are charac-
terized by so many changes at so many different levels as is
adolescence. These changes are associated with pubertal
development and the emergence of reproductive sexuality;
social role redeﬁnitions; cognitive, emotional, and moral
development; and school transitions (e.g., Hamburg, 1974;
Lerner, 1995; Simmons & Blyth, 1987).
The purpose of this chapter is to examine risk and protective
factors within adolescents and their environments and the man-
ifestation of those factors in terms of risk behaviors or re-
siliency. Presented ﬁrst is a detailed exploration of four major
risk behaviors in adolescents (i.e., teenage sexual activity, alco-
hol and substance use/abuse, delinquency and antisocial behav-
ior, and school failure) and the risk factors found to be
associated with them. The comorbidity of those behaviors and
factors is also discussed. The chapter then investigates the be-
ginning of resiliency research and follows the ﬁeld’s develop-
ment through to its current status and theoretical understanding
of resiliency. Also discussed are the empirical ﬁndings related
to protective factors and their interaction with risk factors.
Finally, directions for future research are presented.
We hope that readers will gain a clearer understanding of
the factors that enhance positive development and those
factors that inhibit positive development. This chapter strives
to provide speciﬁc attention to the major risks as well as their
comorbidity. Understanding risk behaviors forms a founda-
tion that fosters our understanding of the inﬂuence of risk
behaviors on the developmental trajectory of young people.
Moreover, speciﬁc attention to major risk behaviors also
offers a basis for understanding the importance of multiple
ecological inﬂuences, multiple constitutional inﬂuences, and
the interactions that occur between them. These interactions
are critical to the overall development of adolescents, both in
positive and negative directions. In addition, understanding
why so many are able to overcome adversity provides us with
some direction in intervention efforts. Clearly, the ability
to intervene within contexts that comprise the adolescents’
world is essential if we are to create opportunities that will
promote the positive development of young people.
RISK BEHAVIORS AND RISK FACTORS
The term risk behavior refers to any behaviors or actions
that have the potential to compromise the biological and
psychosocial aspects of a developmental period. Involve-
ment in risk behaviors jeopardizes several areas of human

374
Positive Behaviors, Problem Behaviors, and Resiliency in Adolescence
development: (a) physical health, physical growth; (b) the ac-
complishment of normal developmental tasks; (c) the fulﬁll-
ment of expected social roles; (d) the acquisition of essential
skills; (e) the achievement of a sense of adequacy and com-
petence; and (f) the appropriate preparation for the next
developmental period of the life span, (i.e., young adulthood
for adolescents; e.g., Jessor, Turbin, & Costa, 1998).
The literature provides evidence that risk pertains to the
relationship between the individual and the context (e.g.,
Elliott & Eisdorfer, 1982; Masten, 2001; Werner & Smith,
1992). Moreover, research has found that possession of a par-
ticular instance or level of either individual characteristics or
embeddedness in a speciﬁc context affords different proba-
bilities of experiencing risk (e.g., Dohrenwend, Dohrenwend,
Pearlin, Clayton, & Hamburg, 1982; Garbarino, 1994). Risk
characteristics refer, then, to those individual and contextual
characteristics associated with a decreased likelihood of
healthy psychosocial and physical development. Outcome
behaviors might include dropping out of high school, delin-
quency, teen pregnancy, violence, and crime (e.g., Dryfoos,
1990; Masten, 2001; Schorr, 1988); these behaviors may re-
sult in outcomes such as unemployability, prolonged welfare
dependency, incarceration, and a shortened life span.
Conducting a meta-analysis of the risk behavior research,
Dryfoos (1990) found four distinct categories of risk behav-
ior during adolescence: delinquency, crime, and violence;
substance use; teenage pregnancy and parenting; and school
failure and dropout. Moreover, Irwin and Millstein (1991)
provided support for the ﬁndings of Dryfoos’s research
regarding substance use and teenage pregnancy as major risk
behaviors.
Social scientists have progressed through several stages in
their approach to understanding covariates of risks (e.g.,
Luthar, Cicchetti, & Becker, 2000; Masten & Coatsworth,
1998; Werner & Smith, 1992). In the initial stage of investi-
gation, researchers emphasized simple bivariate associations,
such as a link between factors like low birth weight or a stress-
ful life event (e.g., parental discord) and a single risk behavior
(e.g., drug use). Borrowing from the ﬁeld of epidemiology,
several social scientists moved beyond bivariate associations
and employed an approach to studying risk behaviors and
their covariates that suggested that there are probably many
diverse paths that lead to the development of particular risk
behaviors (e.g., Irwin & Millstein, 1991; Masten, 2001;
Newcomb, Maddahian, Skager, & Bentler, 1987). Indeed,
efforts to ﬁnd a single covariate may not be useful because
most behaviors have multiple covariates (e.g., Perry, 2000).
Thus, researchers in the social sciences have moved from a
bivariate model of risk/vulnerability to a multivariate model,
one that emphasizes the possibility of interactions among
variables, such as the co-occurrence of parental addiction
(e.g., alcoholism), poverty, and youth problem behaviors
(e.g., aggression and school problems; e.g., Masten, 2001;
Werner & Smith, 1992).
Although there are variations in the deﬁnitions of risk,
risk factors, and risk behavior correlates, the research on risk
behaviors provides support for the presence of associations
among certain individual and contextual characteristics with
adolescents’ involvement in risk behaviors. These two types
of characteristics are examined here in terms of their rela-
tionship to the above-mentioned four categories of risk be-
havior speciﬁed by Dryfoos (1990): teenage sexual activity,
alcohol and substance use/abuse, delinquency and antisocial
behavior, and school failure.
TEENAGE SEXUALACTIVITY
The 1970s and 1980s saw a steady increase in the number of
teenagers in the United States who were sexually active (Child
Trends, 2001). However, the most recent trend data from the
National Center for Health Statistics show a steady decline in
the teen birthrate (Child Trends, 2001). The 2000 rate of 48.7
births per 1,000 females ages 14 to 19 is 22% lower than the
1991 rate of 61/1,000 (Child Trends, 2001). Despite these de-
clines the United States has one of the highest teen birthrates
of all the developed countries (Child Trends, 2001). For ex-
ample, a recent report concerning the incidence of sexual in-
tercourse among adolescents younger than age 15 reported
rates ranging from 12% to 55% (Meschke, Bartholomae, &
Zentall, 2000). By age 19 there is a marked increase in these
rates: 85% of males and 77% of females have had sexual in-
tercourse at least once (Moore, Driscoll, & Lindberg, 1998).
This increase in sexual experimentation during adoles-
cence has been coupled with adolescents’frequent use of con-
traception. By 1995 three quarters of teens reported using
some form of contraception at ﬁrst sex (Abma, 1999). How-
ever, youth who are sexually active fail to engage in safe sex
(e.g., sex with a condom). Thus, they are more likely to
contractAIDS and other sexually transmitted diseases (STDs)
and become pregnant during adolescence (Abma, 1999;
Meschke et al., 2000). The number of cases of STDs has been
increasing since the 1970s, and adolescents account for one
quarter of the estimated 12 million cases of STDs that occur
annually (e.g., Meschke et al., 2000). Research has further
identiﬁed the antecedents and correlates of sexual intercourse
during the adolescent years, the onset of sexual inter-
course, and the use of contraception (e.g., Brooks-Gunn &

Teenage Sexual Activity
375
Furstenberg, 1989; Catalano, Bergund, Ryan, Lonczak, &
Hawkins, 1999; Dryfoos, 1990; Jessor, 1998; Luster & Small,
1994).
Individual Characteristics
Numerous individual characteristics are associated with
adolescent sexual activity. Generally, boys have sexual inter-
course at an earlier age than girls (e.g., Dryfoos, 1990; Perry,
2000). Timing of pubertal maturation has also been linked to
early sexual activity (e.g., Brooks-Gunn & Furstenberg,
1989; Irwin & Millstein, 1991). Not surprisingly, both males
and females who undergo maturation earlier than their peers
initiate sexual intercourse earlier than their age-related
peers (e.g., Brooks-Gunn & Furstenberg, 1989). The earlier
the age of initiation, the more likely it is that an adolescent
female will become pregnant or contract an STD. Likewise,
the earlier the age of initiation, the more likely an adolescent
male is to impregnate a female or contract an STD because
both are less likely to use any type of contraception (e.g.,
Luster & Small, 1994; Ozer, Brindis, Millstein, Knopf, &
Irwin, 1998; Perry, 2000).
Ethnicity has also been found to be associated with early
sexual activity (Irwin & Millstein, 1991). There is a dispropor-
tionate representation of African American adolescents who
are sexually active and who experience negative outcomes of
sexual activity (e.g., teenage pregnancy or STDs; Ozer et al.,
1998). On average, African American and Hispanic male ado-
lescents initiate sexual intercourse earlier than their European
American counterparts (e.g., Moore et al., 1998; Perkins,
Luster, Villarruel, & Small, 1998; Terry & Manlove, 2000).
African American females are the most likely to become
teen mothers, followed by Latina adolescents and European
American adolescents, respectively (e.g., Ozer et al., 1998). It
should be noted that ethnicity and socioeconomic status (SES)
covary. When ethnicity is controlled statistically, SES remains
associated with adolescent sexual activity. Indeed, low SES is
associated with earlier onset of sexual activity (e.g., Brooks-
Gunn & Furstenberg, 1989; Perry, 2000).
Several studies have found a linkage between low aspira-
tions or poor school performance and early engagement in
sexual activity (e.g., Brooks-Gunn & Furstenberg, 1989;
Luster & Small, 1994). In addition, adolescents who lack
hope and a positive view of the future are more likely to
participate earlier in sexual activity than are those who have a
positive view of the future (e.g., Dryfoos, 1990; Perry, 2000).
Adherence to conventional religious values is associated with
decreased sexual initiation and behavior (e.g., Jessor & Jessor,
1977; Perkins et al., 1998). Some evidence suggests that
self-esteem is usually not reported as a signiﬁcant factor asso-
ciated with sexual activity in adolescence (Luster & Small,
1994; Perkins, 1995). However, Orr, Wilbrandt, Brack,
Rauch, and Ingersoll (1989) found gender differences in re-
gard to the linkage between teenage sexual activity and self-
esteem. Adolescent males who had high self-esteem also had
the highest levels of sexual activity; however, the opposite
was true for females (Orr et al., 1989). Moreover, adolescent
sexual behavior is generally associated with or often preceded
by other risk behaviors, such as alcohol and drug use and tru-
ancy (e.g., Irwin & Millstein, 1991; Jessor, 1998; Jessor &
Jessor, 1977; Perry, 2000).
Contextual Characteristics
Research has provided evidence for the association between
characteristics of the context and engagement in sexual
activity. Adolescents who perceive themselves as having
parental support (i.e., communication, accessibility) are less
likely to get involved in sexual activity. A similar association
has been found between parental monitoring and engagement
in sexual activity (e.g., Dryfoos, 1990; Jessor & Jessor, 1977;
Meschke et al., 2000). Thus, adolescents who are monitored
are less likely to engage in sexual activity (e.g., Dryfoos,
1990; Furstenberg & Hughes, 1995).
Family structure has also been linked with adolescent
engagement in sexual activity.Adolescents from single-parent
families are more likely to engage in sexual activity and to
engage in those activities at an earlier age than are their age-
related peers from two-parent homes (e.g., Brooks-Gunn &
Furstenberg, 1989; Ketterlinus, Lamb, & Nitz, 1994). How-
ever, this association may be confounded by the fact that sin-
gle-parent families have, on average, considerably lower
incomes than two-parent families, as well as the fact that a
higher percentage of single-parent families are ethnic minori-
ties than is the case with two-parent families (Calhoun Davis &
Friel, 2001). As noted previously, SES (in particular poverty)
and ethnicity have been linked to adolescents’ engagement in
sexual activity. Studying a sample of 8,266 adolescents living
in single-parent families, Benson and Roehlkepartain (1993)
found that the association between family structure and ado-
lescent sexual activity exists even when income and ethnicity
are held constant. Moreover, a history of sexual or physical
abuse has also been found to be associated with adolescent en-
gagement in sexual activity (e.g., Benson & Roehlkepartain,
1993; Perkins et al., 1998).
There is some evidence that peer relations are asso-
ciated with sexual behavior in adolescence (e.g., Masten &
Coatsworth, 1998; Perry, 2000; Stättin & Magnusson, 1990).

376
Positive Behaviors, Problem Behaviors, and Resiliency in Adolescence
However, peer inﬂuence is more strongly related to perceived
sexual behavior than to actual behavior (Perry, 2000). Indeed,
adolescents (especially girls) who perceive their best friends
as sexually active are more likely to be sexually active them-
selves (e.g., Billy & Udry, 1985). However, Small and Luster
(1994) did not ﬁnd a signiﬁcant correlation between peer
conformity and sexual behavior in adolescence. They sug-
gested that researchers may overestimate the role that peers
play in inﬂuencing sexual behavior.
Poor neighborhood characteristics are associated with the
increased probability of adolescents’ early engagement in
sexual activity (e.g., Duncan &Aber, 1997; Kowaleski-Jones,
2000).Adolescents who live in neighborhoods with low mon-
itoring were more likely to become sexually active at an ear-
lier age than were their peers who lived in neighborhoods
characterized by high monitoring; thus, nonparental adults in
the neighborhood can play an important role in supervising
the behavior of adolescents (Small & Luster, 1994).
ALCOHOLAND SUBSTANCE USE/ABUSE
In recent years there have been declines in most alcohol and
drug use among adolescents (Johnson, O’Malley, & Bachman,
2001; Kandel, 1991). However, according to data derived
from a national sample of high school seniors (Johnson et al.,
2001), 52% of 8th graders, 71% of 10th graders, and 80% of
12th graders had tried alcohol, and 15% of 8th graders, 24% of
10th graders, and 31% of 12th graders had smoked cigarettes.
Indeed, in that same study over half had tried an illicit drug,
and over one third had used an illicit drug other than mari-
juana. Furthermore, the article stated that “by the end of eighth
grade, nearly four in every ten (35%)American eighth graders
have tried illicit drugs” (p. 33). Moreover, many adolescents
will experiment with cigarettes, chewing tobacco, alcohol,
and marijuana (Johnson et al., 2001).
The statistics pertinent to adolescents about frequent or
heavy use of alcohol (e.g., having more than two drinks per
day or binge drinking, which is ﬁve or more drinks in a row
three or more times during the past two weeks), about heavy
use of cigarettes (smoking ﬁve or more cigarettes a day), and
about heavy use of illicit drugs (e.g., smoking marijuana
20 times or more in the past 30 days or using cocaine, crack,
heroin, or LSD once a week) reﬂect alarmingly high rates
(Johnson et al., 2001). The Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (1998) found that 70.2% of 9th through 12th
graders have tried smoking. The Monitoring the Future Study
found that “marijuana use rose substantially among sec-
ondary school and college students between 1992 and 2000,
but somewhat less so among young adults. Nearly one in
seventeen (6.0%) twelfth graders is now a current daily mar-
ijuana user” (Johnson et al., 2001, p. 45). As noted previ-
ously, the abuse of any one of these substances can have
harmful short-term and long-term effects on an individual’s
physical and mental health (e.g., Hawkins, Catalano, &
Miller, 1992; Kandel, 1991).
For adolescents who get heavily involved in drugs (either
with one or multiple drugs), the consequences can be devas-
tating, both physically and psychologically. Drug use can
severely limit educational, career, and marital success (e.g.,
Hawkins et al., 1992; Perry, 2000) and has been associated
with many societal problems (Dryfoos, 1990; Perry 2000).
Indeed, over one third of all automobile fatalities are alcohol
related (Perry, 2000). Frequent use of alcohol in the short
term is also associated with impaired functioning in school,
family problems, depression, and accidental death (e.g.,
drowning; Perry, 2000).
The heavier the use of a seemingly harmless substance in
the early years, the more likely it is that multiple use will
occur later (e.g., Johnson et al., 2001; Kandel, 1991). Alcohol
and smoking are characterized as gateway drugs because
they often lead to more serious substance abuse (e.g.,
Johnson et al., 2001; Kandel, 1991; Perry, 2000). As with
heavy alcohol use, frequent use of marijuana has been linked
with the following short-term consequences: impaired psy-
chological functioning, impaired driving ability, and loss of
short-term memory.
Over the past 20 years research has identiﬁed the an-
tecedents and correlates of alcohol and drug use/abuse during
the adolescent years (e.g., Jessor & Jessor, 1977; Johnson
et al., 2001; Kandel, 1991). Several studies have identiﬁed the
individual and contextual characteristics that appear to be as-
sociated with alcohol and substance use/abuse in adolescence
(e.g., Catalano et al., 1999; Dryfoos, 1990; Jessor & Jessor,
1977; Lerner, 1995; Newcomb et al., 1987).
Individual Characteristics
Several individual characteristics have been associated with
adolescents’use of alcohol and drugs. Investigators have pre-
sented data suggesting that experimentation at an early age
leads to a higher risk of using more dangerous drugs (e.g.,
Dryfoos, 1990; Johnson et al., 2001; Perry, 2000). The link
between ethnicity and alcohol and drug use/abuse is compli-
cated by the underrepresentation of adolescent minorities in
empirical research (e.g., African American inner-city youth;
Barnes & Farrell, 1994; Dryfoos, 1990). In general, however,
European American and Native American adolescents, espe-
cially those in urban areas, report the highest rates of alcohol
and drug use/abuse, whereas Latino and African American

Delinquency and Antisocial Behavior
377
adolescents report intermediate rates of use, and Asian
American adolescents report the lowest rates of use (e.g.,
Barnes & Farrell, 1994; Newcomb et al., 1987; Ozer et al.,
1998).
Low grades in school (especially in junior high school) are
associated with an increased likelihood of engagement in
alcohol and substance use/abuse (e.g., Hawkins et al., 1992;
Ketterlinus et al., 1994; Masten, 2001). Indeed, Hundleby
and Mercer (1987) found that good school performance
reduced the likelihood of frequent drug use in ninth graders.
However, adolescents who have low educational aspira-
tions are more likely to participate in alcohol and substance
use/abuse than those youth who are interested in scholastic
achievement, such as attending a postsecondary institution
(e.g., Catalano et al., 1999; Newcomb et al., 1987). Several
studies have found a linkage between low attendance at
church services and the likelihood that adolescents will en-
gage in substance use/abuse (e.g., Barnes & Farrell, 1994;
Perry, 2000).
Involvement in two speciﬁc risk behaviors, school failure
and antisocial behavior/delinquency, has been associated
with alcohol and substance use/abuse. For instance, adoles-
cents who perform poorly in school and who possess low
educational aspirations are more likely to become involved in
alcohol and substance use/abuse (Dryfoos, 1990; Hawkins
et al., 1992). Not surprisingly, then, school failure (deﬁned as
being two or more grades behind in school) has been linked
with engagement in alcohol and drug use/abuse (e.g.,
Hawkins et al., 1992; Ketterlinus et al., 1994; Newcomb
et al., 1987). School dropout is also related to alcohol and
drug use/abuse (Lerner, 2002).
The relationship between antisocial behavior (delin-
quency) and alcohol and drug use/abuse has been well estab-
lished (e.g., Farrington, 1998; Jessor, 1998; Johnson et al.,
2001). For example, antisocial behavior that is exhibited
through ﬁghting, school misbehavior, and truancy in adoles-
cence is linked to an increased likelihood of alcohol and
substance abuse (e.g., Dryfoos, 1990; Farrington, 1998;
Jessor & Jessor, 1977). Moreover, several investigators have
found that antisocial behavior in the form of lack of law
abidance (i.e., delinquency) is associated with alcohol and
drug abuse in adolescence (Hawkins et al., 1992).
Contextual Characteristics
A large number of investigations have found evidence for a
relationship between the context within which an adolescent
is embedded and alcohol and drug use/abuse. Parental-
adolescent communication that is characterized by negative
patterns (e.g., criticism and lack of praise) has been linked
with adolescent engagement in alcohol and drug use/abuse
(e.g., Barnes & Farrell, 1994; Hawkins et al., 1992). In
addition, lack of parental monitoring and discipline are re-
lated to an increased likelihood of adolescent alcohol and
substance use/abuse (e.g., Dryfoos, 1990; Hawkins et al.,
1992; Scheer, Borden, & Donnermeyer, 2000).
Adolescents who have one or both parents who are
addicted to a substance are more likely to engage in alcohol
and substance use/abuse than are adolescents who do not
have an addicted parent or parents (e.g., Dryfoos, 1990;
Masten & Coatsworth, 1998; Resnick et al., 1997). In addi-
tion, adolescents who have an older addicted sibling are more
likely to get involved in such use than are adolescents who do
not have such a sibling (Dryfoos, 1990). There is also a link
between parental involvement in a youth’s activities and a
decrease in the probability that the adolescent will engage in
alcohol and drug use/abuse (e.g., Jessor, 1998; Jessor &
Jessor, 1977; Resnick et al., 1997).
Consistently, one of the most powerful predictors of
adolescent alcohol and drug use/abuse is the behavior of a
youth’s best friend (e.g., Borden, Donnermeyer, & Scheer,
2001; Jessor & Jessor, 1977; Newcomb et al., 1987). Adoles-
cents whose friends use alcohol and drugs are much more
likely to use/abuse them than are those adolescents whose
peers do not engage in such behavior. In fact, there is
evidence that initiation of alcohol and drug use is through
friends rather than strangers (Kandel, 1991).
DELINQUENCY AND ANTISOCIAL BEHAVIOR
The terms antisocial behavior and delinquency suggest a wide
range of behaviors, from socially unacceptable but not neces-
sarily illegal acts to violent and destructive illegal behaviors.
Two types of offenses will be presented here in regard to crim-
inal acts. First, status offenses are those offenses that are ille-
gal acts due to the age of the individual who commits them.
Status offenses are sometimes classiﬁed as juvenile offenses,
such as running away, truancy, drinking under age, sexual
promiscuity, and uncontrollability. Second, index offenses are
offenses that are always illegal and are not dependent on age.
Thus, index offenses are criminal acts whether they are com-
mitted by juveniles or adults and, as categorized by the Fed-
eral Bureau of Investigation, include offenses such as robbery,
vandalism, aggravated assault, rape, and homicide (Dryfoos,
1990).
Although most individuals with a history of juvenile
delinquency do not go on to become convicted criminals,
most convicted criminals do have a history of juvenile delin-
quency (Dryfoos, 1990). Antisocial behavior has been found

378
Positive Behaviors, Problem Behaviors, and Resiliency in Adolescence
to be prevalent in general community samples of adoles-
cents (e.g., Tolan, 1988). For example, the FBI reported that
juveniles accounted for 17% of all arrests and 16% of all
violent crime arrests in 1999. The substantial growth in
juvenile violent crime arrests that began in the late 1980s
peaked in 1994. Between 1994 and 1999 the juvenile arrest
rate for Violent Crime Index offenses fell by 36% (Snyder,
2000).
Approximately one third of juvenile arrests involved
younger juveniles (under age 15). The types of crimes com-
mitted included arson (67%), followed by sex offenses (51%),
vandalism (44%), and other assaults (43%). “Of all the delin-
quency cases processed by the Nation’s juvenile courts in
1997, 58% involved juveniles younger than 16” (Ofﬁce of
Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention, 2001, p. 22). In
fact, in the course of a year, an estimated 500,000 to 1.5 mil-
lion young people run away from or are forced out of their
homes, and an estimated 200,000 are homeless and living on
the streets (Administration on Children, Youth, and Families,
2001). Past research suggests that the majority of these youth
are female (Dryfoos, 1990). Moreover, “in 1999, 27% ju-
venile arrests involved female offenders arrested. Between
1990 and 1999, the number of female juvenile offenders ar-
rested increased more or decreased less than the number of
male juvenile offenders arrested in most offense categories”
(Ofﬁce of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention,
2001, p. 22).
The proportion of violent crimes attributed to juveniles has
declined in recent years. The proportion of violent crimes that
occurred by juvenile arrests grew from 9% in the late 1980s to
14.2% in 1994 and then declined to 12.4% in 1999.Arrest rates
are much higher forAfricanAmerican males than for any other
group. African American youths experience rates of rape, ag-
gravated assault, and armed robbery that are approximately
25% higher than those for European American adolescents.
Rates of motor vehicle theft are about 70% higher for African
Americans, rates of robbery victimization are about 150%
higher, and rates of African American homicide are typically
between 600% and 700% higher (e.g., National Research
Council, 1993; Snyder, 2000).
Self-report data by adolescents indicate a wide gap
between rates of self-reported antisocial behavior and juvenile
arrest and conviction rates (National Research Council, 1993).
The rates of self-report are consistently much higher than are
the arrest rates (Dryfoos, 1990). Indeed, a review of the litera-
ture on self-report surveys concluded that no more than 15%
of all delinquent acts result in police contact (Farrington &
West, 1982). The majority of adolescents report that they have
participated in various forms of delinquent behavior (Dryfoos,
1990). Dryfoos suggested that the number of index offenses
committed by adolescents may be 10 times greater than the
number of cases that are discovered and end up in juvenile
court. An estimated six million 10- to 17-year-olds reported
that within a one-year period they had participated in an
act that was against the law; of these, 3.3 million youth were
under the age of 14 (Dryfoos, 1990).
Delinquency and antisocial behavior can have harmful
short-term and long-term effects on individuals’ physical and
mental health. Antisocial behavior has been linked with
psychiatric problems, early and heavy alcohol and drug
use/abuse, and school problems. Over the long term, antiso-
cial behavior is associated with an increased likelihood of
adult criminal behavior, unemployment, low occupational
status and low income, poor marital adjustment and stability,
out-of-wedlock parenting, impaired offspring, and reliance
on welfare (e.g., Jessor, 1998; Perry, 2000; Werner & Smith,
1992).
Research has identiﬁed the antecedents and correlates of
antisocial behavior and delinquency during the adolescent
years (e.g., Dryfoos, 1990; Glueck & Glueck, 1968; Hawkins
et al., 2000; Jessor & Jessor, 1977; Pakiz, Reinherz, & Frost,
1992). These studies identiﬁed the individual and contextual
characteristics that appear to be associated with antisocial
behavior and delinquency during adolescence. Consensus
among researchers about these antecedents and correlates is
substantial (Hawkins et al., 2000; Herrenkohl, Maguin, Hill,
Hawkins, & Abbott, 2001).
Individual Characteristics
Numerous individual characteristics have been associated
with antisocial behavior and delinquency during adolescence.
Age of initiation in antisocial behaviors has been found to be
related to antisocial behavior and delinquency during adoles-
cence. Early onset of adolescent antisocial behavior is associ-
ated with high rates of more serious criminal offenses in later
adolescence (e.g., Dodge, 2001; Farrington, 1998; Hawkins
et al., 2000).
Studies that have utilized self-reports and arrest statistics
have consistently demonstrated that there are large gender
differences in the prevalence and incidence of most antisocial
and delinquent behaviors. Adolescent males engage in con-
siderably more delinquent behaviors than do adolescent
females (e.g., Dryfoos, 1990; Farrington, 1998; Hawkins
et al., 2000). This difference is more pronounced in serious
and violent crimes. Girls, then, are more likely to be involved
in status offenses (e.g., running away) than in serious or vio-
lent crimes.
Within the studies using arrest statistics, there is a consis-
tent ﬁnding that African Americans are disproportionately
represented in the arrest data, victimization reports, and in-
carceration statistics (e.g., Dodge, 2001; Farrington, 1998;

Delinquency and Antisocial Behavior
379
Herrenkohl et al., 2001). However, self-report measures have
yielded minimal racial differences in antisocial and delin-
quent behaviors (National Research Council, 1993).
There is consistent evidence from both cross-sectional and
longitudinal research that poor performance in school is
associated with antisocial and delinquent behavior (e.g.,
Dahlberg & Potter, 2001; Hawkins et al., 2000; Herrenkohl
et al., 2001). School failure (being two or more years behind
in school or dropping out of school) has been found to be as-
sociated with antisocial and delinquent behaviors (e.g.,
Barnes & Farrell, 1994; Hawkins et al., 2000; Herrenkohl
et al., 2001). Furthermore, low educational expectations and
aspirations have been linked with an increased likelihood of
antisocial and delinquent behaviors in youth (e.g., Hawkins
et al., 2000; Herrenkohl et al., 2001).
Employment can provide a legitimate means for obtaining
material possessions, acquiring status and career paths, and
attenuating the negative effects of poor academic achieve-
ment (Duster, 1987). Studies have produced inconsistent data
on the association of part-time employment and delinquency.
Cross-sectional data provide support for an association be-
tween employment and lower levels of antisocial and delin-
quent behaviors during adolescence (e.g., Dodge, 2001;
Tolan, 1988). In the longitudinal literature, however, there is
little evidence supporting this association, and, in fact, part-
time employment may have deleterious effects on adolescent
behaviors (e.g., Mortimer & Johnson, 1998; Perry, 2000).
The research ﬁndings are mixed with regard to the indi-
vidual characteristics of self-esteem. Comparison between
delinquents and nondelinquents has provided evidence that
delinquent adolescents have lower self-esteem (Arbuthnot,
Gordon, & Jurkovic, 1987). However, some studies do not
provide evidence for the association between self-esteem and
delinquency (e.g., Dodge, 2001; Herrenkohl et al., 2001). In
his review of the literature, Henggeler (1989) suggested that
the association between self-esteem and delinquency is due
to association with a third variable (e.g., intelligence quo-
tients, family relations, or school performance).
As noted in the previous section, numerous studies have
established the relationship among antisocial and delinquent
behaviors and alcohol and drug use/abuse (e.g., Dryfoos,
1990; Hawkins et al., 2000; Herrenkohl et al., 2001; Jessor,
1998). Indeed, antisocial and delinquent behaviors are asso-
ciated with early and heavy alcohol and substance use/abuse
(e.g., Hawkins et al., 2000; Herrenkohl et al., 2001; Jessor &
Jessor, 1977; Kandel, 1991).
Contextual Characteristics
Research on antisocial and delinquent behavior has pro-
vided support for the association among several contextual
characteristics and the presence or development of antiso-
cial or delinquent behavior in adolescence. In general, re-
searchers have found a negative linear relationship between
parental support (e.g., positive communication, affection)
and adolescent antisocial and delinquent behaviors, such that
the more parental support that exists, the less likely the ado-
lescent is to be involved in antisocial or delinquent behaviors
(e.g., Barnes & Farrell, 1994; Farrington, 1998; Hawkins
et al., 2000; Herrenkohl et al., 2001). In addition, many of the
already-noted studies found that a signiﬁcant relationship
exists between parental control (e.g., monitoring, discipline)
and antisocial and delinquent behaviors (e.g., Barnes &
Farrell, 1994; Dahlberg & Potter, 2001; Farrington, 1998;
Henggeler, 1989; Herrenkohl et al., 2001; Mahoney &
Stättin, 2000). Higher parental monitoring is associated with
low instances of antisocial and delinquent behaviors. More-
over, lax or markedly inconsistent discipline has been linked
to high rates of antisocial behavior and delinquency (e.g.,
Farrington, 1998; Glueck & Glueck, 1968; Herrenkohl et al.,
2001; Hirschi & Stark, 1969).
Parental practice of high-risk behaviors is another charac-
teristic of the parent-adolescent relationship that has been
linked to antisocial and delinquent behaviors (e.g., Barnes &
Farrell, 1994; Farrington, 1998; Glueck & Glueck, 1968;
Hawkins et al., 2000). Furthermore, parental physical and
sexual abuse of children and adolescents has been found to be
associated with antisocial and delinquent behavior (Brown,
1984). Adolescents who are physically or sexually abused
by their parent or parents are more likely to participate in
delinquent acts (Brown, 1984; Hawkins et al., 2000;
Herrenkohl et al., 2001).
In addition to the parent-adolescent relationship, other
characteristics of the family have been linked with antisocial
behaviors and delinquency. For example, there is an associa-
tion between adolescent antisocial and delinquent behaviors
and family support. Low family support, as measured by
low warmth and affection among family members, has been
linked with antisocial behaviors during adolescence (e.g.,
Farrington, 1998; Hawkins et al., 2000; Henggeler, 1989;
Herrenkohl et al., 2001). In addition, several studies have
found that antisocial and delinquent behavior is associated
with low family cohesion and high family conﬂict (e.g.,
Farrington, 1998; Herrenkohl et al., 2001; Pakiz et al., 1992;
Tolan, 1988).
An association has been found between family structure
(whether the household is headed by one or two parents) and
antisocial behaviors and delinquency (Barnes & Farrell,
1994; Farrington, 1998). For example, adolescents living in
mother-only homes and natural parent-stepparent homes
were more susceptible to negative peer pressure and engaged
in more antisocial behaviors and delinquent acts than did

380
Positive Behaviors, Problem Behaviors, and Resiliency in Adolescence
their age-related peers living in homes with two natural
parents (Steinberg, 1987). No data have been presented with
regard to father-only homes. However, family structure is not
as signiﬁcant in predicting antisocial behavior and delin-
quency as is the quality of the parent-adolescent relationship
(e.g., Dryfoos, 1990; Farrington, 1998).
For many adolescents, involvement with deviant peers has
become a critical aspect of their own delinquent behavior
(e.g., Dahlberg & Potter, 2001; Hawkins et al., 2000;
Herrenkohl et al., 2001; Mahoney & Stättin, 2000; Perry,
2000). Thus, researchers have found evidence for an asso-
ciation between antisocial behavior and delinquency and
engagement with peers who participate in antisocial behaviors
and delinquent acts (e.g., Farrington, 1998; Hawkins et al.,
2000; Herrenkohl et al., 2001). In fact, there is evidence that a
high percentage of antisocial and delinquent behavior is car-
ried out with peers (Emler, Reicher, & Ross, 1987).
Certain types of neighborhoods are linked to adolescent
antisocial behaviors, to delinquent behaviors, and to delin-
quent gang activities (e.g., Dahlberg & Potter, 2001; Duncan
& Aber, 1997; Herrenkohl et al., 2001; Taylor, 1990). Neigh-
borhoods that are located in an area with high crime rates,
poverty, and dense living conditions are associated with an
increased likelihood of adolescent antisocial behavior and
delinquent acts, including the emergence of gangs (e.g., Dun-
can & Aber, 1997; Henggeler, 1989; Taylor, 1990).
Finally, it should be noted that the impact of SES is
unclear. Studies have found evidence for a link between low
SES and an increased likelihood of adolescent antisocial
behavior and delinquency (e.g., Gorman-Smith & Tolan,
1998). However, recent studies have not found SES to be of
primary importance in predicting adolescent antisocial and
delinquent behavior (e.g., Dahlberg & Potter, 2001; Tolan,
1988).
SCHOOL UNDERACHIEVEMENT AND FAILURE
As noted earlier, low achievement in school has been linked
to the three previously mentioned risk behaviors—adolescent
sexual activity, alcohol and drug use/abuse, and antisocial
behavior and delinquency. In addition, many of the individ-
ual and contextual characteristics previously mentioned are
linked to school underachievement and failure.
Low school achievement, poor grades, and being overage
for grade are often associated with dropping out (e.g.,
Dryfoos, 1990; Rumberger, 2001). Yet not everyone who has
low grades or is overage drops out. The consequences for
poorly equipped high school graduates, however, may inhibit
their chances of getting into a postsecondary school, and this,
in turn, may limit their chances of getting a well-paying job.
High school dropouts are two to three times more likely to be
in marginal jobs and to be employed intermittently (Eccles,
1991). Conversely, each added year of secondary education
reduces the probability of public welfare dependency in
adulthood by 35% (Berlin & Sum, 1988).
School failure here will be deﬁned as possessing poor
grades (e.g., half of a student’s grades are D or less in re-
gard to academic content areas) and being retained one or
more grades. Although some recent studies have suggested
that retention may have some positive effects on aca-
demic achievement (Roderick, Bryk, Jacob, Easton, &
Allensworth, 1999), falling behind one’s age-related peers
has been found in numerous studies to be strongly predictive
of dropping out (e.g., Goldschmidt & Wang, 1999; Jimerson,
1999; Roderick et al., 1999; Rumberger, 2001); even when
achievement, SES, and gender are controlled, being held
back increases the probability of eventually dropping out of
school by 20% to 30% (Smith & Shepard, 1988). Each year,
about 5% of all high school students drop out of school
(Kaufman, Kwon, Klein, & Chapman, 1999). The majority of
adolescents who do eventually drop out of school will en-
counter long-term employment problems. In 1998 the unem-
ployment rate for dropouts was 75% higher than for high
school graduates (United States Department of Education,
National Center for Education Statistics, 2000b, Figure 24).
Over their lifetimes, each year’s class of dropouts will cost
$260 billion in lost earnings and foregone taxes (Catterall,
1987). Thus, there are devastating long-term effects of school
failure and dropout.
Individual Characteristics
Several individual characteristics have been found to be re-
lated to school failure and dropout. Many studies have found
that older adolescents who have been retained (held back)
from advancing to the next grade level with their age-related
peers are more likely to do poorly in school and to drop
out (e.g., Eccles, 1991; Powell-Cope & Eggert, 1994;
Rumberger, 2001; Wang, Haertel, & Walberg, 1999). Fur-
thermore, in general, adolescents’ average course grades de-
cline as they move from primary school into secondary
school; that decline is especially marked at each of the school
transition points (Simmons & Blyth, 1987).
Females are less likely to be involved in behavior prob-
lems in school, and problem behaviors have been linked to
school failure and dropout (e.g., Barnes & Farrell, 1994;
Hawkins et al., 2001; Jessor, 1998; National Research Coun-
cil, 1993). For example, in 1995 males were two-thirds more
likely to be retained in a grade than were females (United

School Underachievement and Failure
381
States Department of Education, National Center for Educa-
tion Statistics, 1997).
Ethnicity has been linked with trends in achievement, inas-
much as being a member of an ethnic minority increases the
probability of school failure and dropout (except for Asian
American youth; Eccles, 1991; Kaufman et al., 1999; National
Research Council, 1993). Indeed, African American and
Latino adolescents have a greater probability of being left
behind a grade than do European American students (United
States Department of Education, National Center for Educa-
tion Statistics, 1997; National Research Council, 1993).
SimmonsandZhou(1993)obtainedsimilarﬁndingswhenthey
examined African American and European American sixth to
ninth graders. They found that African American males
showed the highest degrees of school problem behavior in
general, and probation and suspensions in particular. This
higher frequency of minority adolescents failing in school or
dropping out may be confounded by the greater incidence of
poverty and lower SES among ethnic minorities, especially
African Americans and Latinos. Indeed, lower levels of
resources and poorer learning environments are more common
in high-poverty schools, which are more likely to be attended
by minority students (United States Department of Education,
National Center for Education Statistics, 1997).
Adolescents who value school less or who have a negative
attitude about school are more likely to fail or drop out
than are adolescents who value school and possess a positive
attitude about school (e.g., Goldschmidt & Wang, 1999;
Powell-Cope & Eggert, 1994; Rumberger, 2001; Simmons &
Blyth, 1987). Simmons and Zhou (1993), for example, found
that at transitions to junior high school and to high school,
African Americans’ attitudes toward school dropped rela-
tively precipitously. Not surprisingly, adolescents who have
low educational aspirations are more likely to fail at school or
to drop out of school (e.g., Goldschmidt & Wang, 1999;
Rumberger, 2001; Simmons & Blyth, 1987). Moreover, a lack
of basic skills and problem-solving abilities has been linked
with school failure and dropout; adolescents who are deﬁcient
in basic skills and problem-solving skills have an increased
probability of failing or dropping out of school (e.g., Dryfoos,
1990; Goldschmidt & Wang, 1999; Rumberger, 2001).
Steinberg and Darling (1993) found that time spent on
homework was associated with school failure. They found
that adolescents who spent little or no time on their home-
work were likely to fail at school. However, Dryfoos (1990)
did not ﬁnd lack of time spent on homework to be a signiﬁ-
cant correlate of school failure or dropout. Thus, more
research is needed to test the association between time spent
on homework and school failure or dropout. In turn, other
investigations have found that potential school failures and
dropouts spend more time socializing, dating, and riding
around in cars (e.g., Rumberger, 2001).
An association has been found between self-esteem and
school failure and dropout (e.g., Powell-Cope & Eggert,
1994; Simmons & Blyth, 1987). Adolescents who have low
self-esteem are more likely to do poorly in school and to drop
out. Several researchers have identiﬁed an association be-
tween involvement in school activities and school failure and
dropout. Low interest in school activities and low partici-
pation in school activities are linked with an increased
likelihood of school failure and dropout (e.g., Eccles, 1991;
Eccles & Barber, 1999; Goldschmidt & Wang, 1999;
Rumberger, 2001).
Research has also found a link between school failure and
dropout and other risk behaviors, such as antisocial behavior
and delinquency, alcohol and drug use/abuse, and adolescent
sexual activity (e.g., Barnes & Farrell, 1994; Hawkins et al.,
1992; Jessor, 1998; Jimerson, 1999; National Research
Council, 1993). As noted previously, adolescent pregnancy is
a signiﬁcant antecedent of dropping out. However, drop-
ping out is also an antecedent of teenage childbearing
(e.g., Eccles, 1991; Luster & Small, 1994; Perry, 2000). In
addition, antisocial behavior and delinquency have been
shown to be associated with an increased likelihood of school
failure or dropout (e.g., Farrington, 1998; Hawkins et al.,
2000; Henggeler, 1989; Herrenkohl et al., 2001). Further-
more, adolescents who frequently use and abuse alcohol and
drugs have been found to have a higher probability of failing
or dropping out of school (e.g., Dryfoos, 1990; Hawkins
et al., 2000; Hawkins et al., 1992). The overlapping of these
risk behaviors is discussed in the ﬁnal section of this litera-
ture review.
Contextual Characteristics
Several contextual characteristics have been associated with
school failure and dropout. Investigators have found a link
between parental support (e.g., positive communication,
affection) and school failure and dropout. Adolescents who
have parental support and are able to discuss issues with their
parents are less likely to fail or drop out of school (e.g.,
Barnes & Farrell, 1994; Dryfoos, 1990; Goldschmidt &
Wang, 1999; Rumberger, 2001). Moreover, authoritatively
reared adolescents are less likely to fail or drop out of school
(e.g., Simmons & Blyth, 1987; Steinberg & Darling, 1993).
Low parental monitoring is associated with failing school
and dropping out (Barnes & Farrell, 1994; Rumberger, 2001).
Parental education is also strongly related (Rumberger,
2001). Adolescents whose parents have low levels of edu-
cation have an increased likelihood of school failure and

382
Positive Behaviors, Problem Behaviors, and Resiliency in Adolescence
dropout (e.g., Eccles, 1991; McNeal, 1999; Pong & Ju, 2000;
Rumberger, 2001).
There has been inconsistent evidence that family struc-
ture is associated with school failure and dropout. Adoles-
cents who are from larger families (e.g., more than two
siblings) are more likely to fail or drop out of school than
are adolescents from smaller families (McNeal, 1997). This
association may be related to the consistently low SES of
large families. Adolescents who live in single-parent homes
have a higher probability of failing or dropping out of school
than do adolescents who live in two-parent homes (e.g.,
Goldschmidt & Wang, 1999; McNeal, 1999; Rumberger,
2001). However, several studies found that the association of
family structure with school failure and dropout was minimal
when SES was accounted for in the analysis (e.g., National
Research Council, 1993; Pong & Ju, 2000). Thus, the re-
lationship between family structure and school failure and
dropout is not clear.
Adolescents who have afﬁliations with peers who have
low expectations for school or have friends who have
dropped out are more likely to fail or drop out of school than
are adolescents whose peers have high expectations and pos-
itive attitudes toward school (e.g., Powell-Cope & Eggert,
1994; Rumberger, 2001; Wang et al., 1999). Moreover,
Steinberg and Darling (1993) found that, for Asian American,
African American, and Latino adolescents, peers are rel-
atively more inﬂuential in their academic achievement than
are parents. For European American adolescents, parents
were a more potent source of inﬂuence (Steinberg & Darling,
1993).
Larger schools and larger classrooms are associated with
increased likelihood of school failure and dropout (e.g.,
Rumberger & Thomas, 2000). In addition, school climate has
been found to be associated. Schools that emphasize compe-
tition, testing, and tracking and have low expectations have a
higher number of school failures and dropouts than do
schools that have high expectations, encourage cooperation,
and have teachers who are supportive (e.g., Powell-Cope &
Eggert, 1994; Rumberger & Thomas, 2000; Rutter, 1979).
However, McNeal (1997) found no effect of academic or
social climate on high school dropout rates after controlling
for the background characteristics of students, social compo-
sition, school resources, and school structure.
There has been a lack of consensus and consistency
of ﬁndings regarding the association between adolescents’
part-time employment and school failure and dropout (e.g.,
Steinberg & Darling, 1993). For example, D’Amico’s (1984)
analysis of the National Longitudinal Study (NLS) youth
data demonstrated that employment at low intensity (less
than 20 hours per week) lessened dropout rates. However,
Steinberg and Avenevoli (1998) found that those who worked
more than 20 hours a week were more likely to become dis-
engaged from school. Furthermore, Mortimer and Johnson
(1998) found no association between adolescent employment
and school failure or dropout.
A few studies have found some evidence of a positive link
between stress/depression and school failure and dropout,
such that high stress is associated with school failure and
dropout (e.g., Dryfoos, 1990; Eccles, 1991; Rumberger,
2001; Simmons & Blyth, 1987). For example, Brack, Brack,
and Orr (1994) found that females who were failing at school
had higher levels of reported stress/depression than those
females who were doing average or better; however, they did
not ﬁnd a similar relationship for males.
In his extensive review, Rumberger (2001) provided
evidence from several studies that communities inﬂuence
students’ withdrawal from school. For example, neighbor-
hood characteristics seemed to predict differences in dropout
rates among communities, apart from the inﬂuence of
families (e.g., Brooks-Gunn, Duncan, Klebanov, & Sealand,
1993).
Neighborhoods that are characterized as urban, high-
density, and poverty-stricken are associated with adolescent
school failure and dropout (e.g., Brooks-Gunn et al., 1993;
Dryfoos, 1990; Eccles, 1991; Schorr, 1988). For example,
students in urban areas appeared to drop out at a higher rate
than students in rural areas; however, the difference between
the rates for these two groups is not statistically signiﬁcant
(United States Department of Education, National Center for
Education Statistics, 2000a).
Finally, there is consistent evidence from both cross-
sectional and longitudinal research that school failure and
dropout are associated with low SES (e.g., Eccles, 1991;
National Research Council, 1993; Rumberger, 2001; Schorr,
1988). For example, adolescents from low-income families
are three times more likely to drop out of school than are
children from middle-income families, and they are nine
times more likely to drop out of school than students from
high-income families (e.g., United States Department of
Education, National Center for Educational Statistics,
2000b).
CO-OCCURRENCE OF RISK BEHAVIORS
As evidenced earlier, risk behaviors do not exist in isolation;
they tend to covary (e.g., Dryfoos, 1990; Hawkins et al.,
2000; Jessor & Jessor, 1977; Masten, 2001; Perry, 2000).
Moreover, among the previously noted risk behaviors there
are common individual and contextual characteristics with

Resiliency
383
which they are associated (e.g., early age of initiation,
school underachievement, school misconduct, negative peer
behaviors, inadequate parent-adolescent relationships, and
low quality neighborhoods). The list of common character-
istics has been corroborated by several researchers and is
presented in Table 15.1 (e.g., Hawkins et al., 2000; Jessor,
1998; Perry, 2001). In her meta-analysis of the literature on
the four risk behaviors noted earlier, Dryfoos (1990), for
example, found six overarching characteristics associated
with involvement in the four risk behaviors.
First, heavy involvement in risk behaviors and more
negative consequences from those behaviors are linked with
early initiation or occurrence of any of the risk behaviors. Sec-
ond, common to all problem behaviors is doing poorly in
school and having low expectations of future performance.
Third, misconduct in school and other conduct disorders are
related to each of the risk behaviors. Fourth, adolescent
involvement in any of the risk behaviors is increased when
youthhavepeersthatengageintheriskbehaviorsorwhenado-
lescents have a low resistance to peer inﬂuence. Fifth, an inad-
equate parent-adolescent relationship is common to all risk
behaviors. Areas that characterize an inadequate relationship
arelackofcommunication,lackofmonitoring,inadequatedis-
cipline, role modeling of problem behaviors (e.g., exhibiting
risk behaviors), and low parental education. Sixth, low quality
neighborhoods are associated with involvement in risk behav-
iors. These neighborhoods are characterized by poverty, vio-
lence, urbanization, and high-density conditions.
Several other studies have assessed the co-occurrence
of
risk
behaviors
(e.g.,
Bingham
&
Crockett,
1996;
Farrington & West, 1982; Zucker, Fitzgerald, & Moses,
1995). For instance, in their extensive review of research
on alcohol use and alcoholism, Zucker et al. (1995) found that
antisocial behavior in adolescence is consistently related to
alcoholic behavior. Moreover, ﬁndings from the 18-year-long
Michigan State University Longitudinal Study have provided
evidence that difﬁculty in achievement-related activity in
adolescence is consistently found in youths who later become
alcoholics (e.g., Zucker et al., 1995). Bingham and Crockett
(1996), who examined adolescent sexual activity longitudi-
nally, have found similar relationships among adolescent
sexual activity, antisocial behavior, underachievement, and
alcohol use. In addition, they found that the later in ontogeny
that adolescents initiated sexual intercourse, the lower was
their involvement in other problem behaviors (e.g., antisocial
behaviors, alcoholism, and school misconduct).
Clearly, research has found a link between certain charac-
teristics (see Table 15.1), risk factors, and adolescents’ par-
ticipation in risk behaviors. Yet many adolescents exposed to
a context containing some or all of the stated risk factors do
not engage in risk behaviors and, in fact, appear to adapt well
and live successful lives. Moreover, evidence exists demon-
strating that some children thrive despite their high-risk
status. This phenomenon has been the focus of much research
in the last 30 years.
RESILIENCY
Social scientists have gone through several stages in their
approach to understanding vulnerability and resiliency
(Werner & Smith, 1992). Generally, researchers have studied
individuals exposed to biological risk factors and stressful
life events as the major focus of vulnerability and resiliency
research. In the initial stages of research, investigators em-
phasized the association between a single risk variable, such
as low birth weight or a stressful life event (e.g., parental dis-
cord), and negative developmental outcomes. Borrowing
from the ﬁeld of epidemiology, several social scientists have
more recently employed an approach suggesting that many
diverse paths lead to the development of particular risk be-
haviors (Newcomb et al., 1987) and that efforts to ﬁnd a sin-
gle cause may not be useful because most behaviors have
multiple causes (e.g., Small & Luster, 1994). Thus, re-
searchers in the social science ﬁeld have moved from a “main
effect” model of vulnerability research to a model that em-
phasizes interactional effects among multiple stressors, for
example, as in the literature that stresses the co-occurrence
TABLE 15.1
Common Individual and Contextual Characteristics
Associated With the Four Risk Behaviors
Source
Characteristic
Individual
Age of initiation.
Gender.
Ethnicity.
Poor school performance.
Low educational aspirations.
Lack of involvement in activities.
Negative view of the future.
Lack of religiosity.
Low self-esteem.
Family
Poor parent-adolescent communication.
Poor parental monitoring.
Parental addiction (e.g., alcohol and drugs).
Lack of family support.
Family structure.
Extrafamilial context
Negative peer relations.
Large school.
Negative school climate.
Poor neighborhood quality.
Low socioeconomic status.
Nonparental adult relations.
Source. Adapted from Perkins (1995).

384
Positive Behaviors, Problem Behaviors, and Resiliency in Adolescence
of parental psychopathology (e.g., alcoholism or mental
illness) and poverty (Masten & Coatsworth, 1998; Werner &
Smith, 1992).
Finally, resiliency research has shifted its focus from the
emphasis on negative developmental outcomes (e.g., risk
behaviors) to an emphasis on successful adaptation in spite of
childhood adversity (Luthar, 1991; Masten & Coatsworth,
1998; Werner & Smith, 1992). Indeed, in the last 25 years
developmental psychopathologists and other social scientists
have increasingly explored the concept of invulnerability
rather than focusing predominantly on vulnerability and
maladjustment (Luthar et al., 2000). For example, in the mid-
1970s, Anthony (1974), a child psychiatrist, introduced
the concept of the psychologically invulnerable child into
the literature of developmental psychopathology to describe
children who, despite a history of severe or prolonged adver-
sity and psychological stress, managed to achieve emotional
health and high competence (Werner & Smith, 1992).
However, Rutter (1985) noted that resistance to stress in an
individual is relative, not absolute. Thus, an individual’s abil-
ity to overcome stress is dependent on the level of the stress
not exceeding the level of the individual’s resiliency charac-
teristics. In addition, the bases of resistance to stress are both
environmental and constitutional, and the degree of resistance
varies over time according to life circumstances (e.g., Luthar
et al., 2000; Masten, 2001; Rutter, 1985). Invulnerability may
imply an unbreakable individual, one able to conquer any
level of stress. Therefore, the concept of resilience or stress
resistance, rather than invulnerability, is preferred by many
researchers (e.g., Masten & Garmezy, 1985; Rutter, 1985;
Werner & Smith, 1992) because it acknowledges a history of
success while also implying the possibility of succumbing to
future stressors.
The assumption in these investigations is that resiliency
can be displayed or detected only through an individual’s
response to adversity, whether it is a stressful life event or a
situation of continuous stress (e.g., war, abuse; Masten &
Coatsworth, 1998).Accordingly, resilient individuals are well
adapted despite serious stressors in their lives (Luthar et al.,
2000; Masten, 2001). Indeed, resilient individuals are those
who cope effectively with stresses arising as consequences of
their vulnerability; and a balance, congruence, or ﬁt, among
risk, stressful life events, and protective characteristics of the
individual and the individual’s ecology accounts for the di-
versity of developmental outcomes (Ford & Lerner, 1992;
Kumpfer, 1999). Therefore, studying resiliency involves an
examination of the link between the person and the demands
of the context in variables, factors, and processes that will ei-
ther promote or subvert adaptation.
An individual’s ability to adapt to the changes within the
environment and to alter the environment is basic to that
individual’s survival. Whether situations are marked by high
stress or by low stress found in the challenges of daily life,
adaptation is a basic function of human development. Re-
siliency, then, is the organism’s ability to adapt well to its
changing environment, an environment that includes stressors
(e.g., accidents, death of a loved one, war, and poverty) and
daily hassles (e.g., negative peer pressures and grades). Thus,
studies of resiliency and risk are investigations about human
adaptation to life or about competence. Competence is a gen-
eralization about adaptation that implies at the least “good” ef-
fectiveness (Masten & Coatsworth, 1998).
Human adaptation or competence is composed of the
interplay between the context/ecology and the developing
organism (Lerner, 2002; Schneirla, 1957). In resiliency the
processes involved in the context/ecology interplay are com-
posed of the interaction over time between the protective
factors or risk factors at multiple levels that contributes to
the direction of the developmental outcomes, whether posi-
tive or negative. This interaction is complex and requires a
holistic, comprehensive perspective in order to be adequately
examined and understood. Models derived from this perspec-
tive posit that there are reciprocal inﬂuences between the
organism and the context/environment (Schneirla, 1957) and
that development occurs through these mutual inﬂuences
(Bronfenbrenner, 1979; Ford & Lerner, 1992; Kumpfer,
1999; Lerner, 2002). Moreover, these models assert that any
single explanation of risk-taking behaviors with regard to
protective factors and risk factors is too simplistic, in that
such explanations are likely to ignore the importance of mul-
tiple ecological inﬂuences, multiple constitutional inﬂuences,
and the interactions that develop among them. In fact, several
scholars have suggested that the use of the term factor may in
fact suggest too static a relationship between risk characteris-
tics, protective characteristics, and risk behaviors (Kumpfer,
1999; Rutter, 1985). Process may be a better way to describe
the dynamic nature of risk and protective characteristics.
Resiliency involves competence in the face adversity, but
more than that, it involves an assessment based on some
criteria of the adaptation as “good” or “OK” (Masten, 2001).
These assessment criteria are based on speciﬁc cultural
norms within the historical and social contexts for the behav-
ior of that age and situation (Luthar & Cushing, 1999). Bor-
rowing from Masten (2001), resiliency is deﬁned “as a class
of phenomena characterized by good outcomes in spite of se-
rious threats to adaptation or development” (p. 228).
Moreover, resiliency is multidimensional in nature. Thus,
one may be resilient in one domain but not exhibit resiliency
in another domain. As Luthar et al. (2000) stated, “some
high-risk children manifest competence in some domains but
exhibit problems in other areas” (p. 548). In a study by
Kaufman, Cook, Arny, Jones, and Pittinsky (1994), for

Protective Factors and Resiliency
385
example, approximately two thirds of children with histories
of maltreatment were academically resilient; however, when
examining these same children in the domain of social
competence, only 21% exhibited resiliency.
PROTECTIVE FACTORS AND RESILIENCY
Risk and resiliency research provides evidence that speciﬁc
variables and factors are involved in safeguarding and pro-
moting successful development. That is, research has identi-
ﬁed particular variables that are responsible for adolescent
resiliency in spite of adverse contexts, while, in turn, other
variables have been found to promote failure and to encour-
age participation in risk behaviors (e.g., Garmezy, 1985;
Kumpfer, 1999; Luthar, 1991; Luthar et al., 2000; Masten,
2001; Rutter, 1985; Werner & Smith, 1992). As noted previ-
ously in this chapter, risk factors are deﬁned, then, as indi-
vidual or environmental hazards that increase an individual’s
vulnerability to negative developmental behaviors, events, or
outcomes (e.g., Masten, 2001; Werner & Smith, 1992). How-
ever, the presence of risk factors does not guarantee that a
negative outcome will occur; rather, it simply increases the
probability of its occurrence (e.g., Garmezy, 1985; Masten,
2001; Werner & Smith, 1992).
The probabilities of a negative outcome vary as a conse-
quence of the presence of protective factors. Such factors
buffer, modify, or ameliorate an individual’s reaction to a
situation that, in ordinary circumstances, would lead to
maladaptive outcomes (Kumpfer, 1999; Masten, 2001;
Werner & Smith, 1992). According to this deﬁnition, then, a
protective factor is evident only in combination with a risk
variable. Thus, a protective factor has no effect in low-risk
populations, but its effect is magniﬁed in the presence of the
risk variable (e.g., Rutter, 1987; Werner & Smith, 1992). In
turn, Rutter (1987) suggested that while protective factors
may have effects on their own, such factors have an impact
on adjustment by virtue of their interaction with risk vari-
ables. However, still another possibility is that protective
factors can be deﬁned as variables that are linked with an
individual experiencing positive developmental outcomes as
compared to negative developmental outcomes.
Although there are variations in the deﬁnitions of risk,
endangerment, risk factors, and protective factors, the
research on resilient or stress-resistant children, adolescents,
and young adults provides support for the existence of speciﬁc
individual and contextual characteristics, namely protective
factors (e.g., temperament and social support networks, re-
spectively; Garmezy, 1985; Rutter, 1987; Werner & Smith,
1992). Protective factors are incorporated into adolescents’
lives and enable them to overcome adversity. On the other
hand, some individual and contextual variables (e.g., difﬁcult
temperament, poverty, and lack of adult support) are risk fac-
tors that increase the probability of involvement in risk be-
haviors (e.g., Garmezy, 1985; Luthar et al., 2000; Masten &
Coatsworth, 1998; Werner & Smith, 1992).
Models of Protective Factors and Processes
It is not known whether protective variables or protective
processes have any effect on low-risk populations because
the research has focused on high-risk groups (Masten &
Coatsworth, 1998). Rutter (1987) suggested that a protective
variable’s effect may be magniﬁed in high-risk situations.
According to this idea, vulnerability and protection are the
negative and positive poles of the same processes. Thus, the
potential for involvement in risk behaviors is crucial to this
deﬁnition because without the risk behavior’s presence there
is no method of differentiating risk processes from protective
processes. Consequently, most resiliency and risk studies
have investigated individuals who are living in high-stress
situations and life events (e.g., born with low birth weight or
living in poverty, war, or economic depression) or who have
experienced highly stressful situations (e.g., separation from
a parent due to divorce or death, or the experience of physical
or sexual abuse; Garmezy, 1985, Masten, 2001). The reason
for this focus is that individuals experiencing a lot of stress
have a higher probability of involvement in maladaptive be-
haviors, that is, involvement in risk behaviors (Rutter, 1993).
The level of resiliency needed differs depending upon the
stressfulness of the ecology of an adolescent. Adolescents
who are under severe, multiple stresses (e.g., poverty,
parental discord, and maltreatment) will need a higher degree
of resiliency or a larger number of protective processes in
order to develop positively than would another person who is
experiencing mild stress (e.g., difﬁculty in school). However,
the level of stress is also somewhat dependent on the individ-
ual’s perception of stress (e.g., Kumpfer, 1999).
Using different models, researchers have described several
mechanisms through which protective factors help reduce
or offset the adverse effects of risk factors (Zimmerman &
Arunkumar, 1994). Three models have been developed by
Garmezy (1985): (a) the compensatory model, (b) the inocu-
lation model, and (c) the protective factor model. In the com-
pensatory model, the protective factor does not interact with
the risk factor; rather, it interacts with the outcome directly
and neutralizes the risk factor’s inﬂuence. In the inoculation
model each risk factor is treated as a potential enhancer of
successful adaptation provided that it is not excessive (Rutter,
1987). This occurs when there is an optimal level of stress that
challenges the individual and, when overcome, strengthens
the individual. Thus, the relationship between stress and

386
Positive Behaviors, Problem Behaviors, and Resiliency in Adolescence
TABLE 15.2
Characteristics of Resilient Children and Adolescents
Source
Characteristic
Individual
Good intellectual functioning (e.g., high
verbal skills, divergent thinking).
Appealing, sociable, easygoing disposition.
Self-efﬁcacy, self-conﬁdence, high self-esteem.
Talents.
Faith.
Family
Close relationship to caring parent ﬁgure.
Authoritative parenting: warmth, structure,
high expectations.
Socioeconomic advantages.
Low family stress.
Orderly household environment.
Connections to extended, supportive
family networks.
Prosocial family values.
Positive role models.
Extrafamilial 
Bonds to prosocial adults outside of the family.
context
Connections to prosocial organizations.
Attending effective schools (see Wang et al., 1999).
Source: Adapted from Kumpfer (1999) and Masten & Coatsworth (1998).
competence is curvilinear: At low or moderate levels of stress
competence increases, but at higher levels of stress it
decreases (Wang et al., 1999). In the third model the protec-
tive factor interacts with the risk factor in reducing the proba-
bility of a negative outcome (Zimmerman & Arunkumar,
1994). Thus, the protective factor is acting as a moderator.Al-
though the protective factor may have a direct effect on an
outcome, its effect is stronger in the presence of a risk factor.
These three models of interaction describe a process that em-
phasizes the dynamic nature of the relationship between risk
characteristics and protective characteristics. Thus, the term
process may provide a more adequate description of protec-
tive characteristics than the term factor, since the latter im-
plies a static condition.
Identiﬁed Protective Factors
In their longitudinal study of a cohort of children from the is-
land of Kauai, Werner and Smith (1992) described three
types of protective factors that emerge from analyses of the
developmental course of high-risk children from infancy to
adulthood: (a) dispositional attributes of the individual, such
as activity level and social ability, at least average intelli-
gence, competence in communication skills (language and
reading), and internal locus of control; (b) affectional ties
within the family that provide emotional support in times of
stress, whether from a parent, sibling, spouse, or mate; and
(c) external support systems, whether in school, at work, or at
church, that reward the individual’s competencies and deter-
mination and provide a belief system by which to live.
Bogenschneider (1998) derived similar conclusions in her
review of resiliency literature. She concluded that variables
operated as protective factors in adolescence at various levels
of the ecosystems of youth: (a) individual level—such as well-
developed problem-solving skills and intellectual abilities; (b)
familial level—for example, a close relationship with one par-
ent; (c) peer level—a close friend; (d) school level—positive
school experiences; and (e) community level—required help-
fulness (e.g., as it occurs when the adolescent is needed to
bring in extra income or help manage the home), and a posi-
tive relationship with a nonparental adult (e.g., neighbor,
teacher).
In their extensive review of resiliency research, Masten
and Coatsworth (1998) summarized the ﬁndings from over
25 years of research. As shown in Table 15.2, they noted that
similar protective factors are found across resiliency studies
that have been conducted in a wide variety of situations
throughout the world (e.g., war, living with parents who have
severe mental illness, family violence, poverty, and natural
disasters).
Kumpfer’s Resiliency Framework
In her recent examination of resiliency, Kumpfer (1999)
integrated the work of others into a resiliency framework that
employs a transactional model based on the social ecological
model (Bronfenbrenner, 1979) and the person-process-
contextual model (Ford & Lerner, 1992). According to
Kumpfer (1999), this framework is composed of (a) environ-
mental characteristics that are antecedents (i.e., risk and pro-
tective factors), (b) characteristics of the resilient person, and
(c) the individual’s resilient reintegration or positive outcome
after a negative life experience, as well as the dynamic
mechanisms that mediate between the person and the envi-
ronment and the person and the outcome.
Many of the risk factors presented earlier in this chapter re-
side in the environment. Indeed, high-risk youth are often la-
beled as such due to a high-risk environment rather than internal
high-risk characteristics (Kumpfer, 1999). Protective factors are
also found in that same environment. According to Garmezy
(1985), microniches of support with adequate growth opportu-
nities for some individuals exist even in these high-risk envi-
ronments. As noted earlier, protective factors interact with risk
factors to act as buffers. The interaction between risk and pro-
tective factors describes the ﬁrst oval of the resiliency frame-
work found in Figure 15.1. Generally, youth adjust reasonably
well to one or two risk factors, but beyond two risk factors the
likelihood for damage and maladjustment increases rapidly
(e.g., Jessor, 1998; Masten, 1999; Rutter, 1993). Conversely,
increasing the number of protective processes can help buffer
those risk factors (e.g., Masten, 2001; Rutter, 1993, 1997).

Protective Factors and Resiliency
387
The second oval of the resiliency framework shown in
Figure 15.1 involves the transactional processes that mediate
between a person and his or her environment. This involves
the ways a person consciously or unconsciously modiﬁes his
or her environment or selectively perceives the environment.
Kumpfer (1999) explains this notion thus:
Resilient youth living in high drug and crime communities seek
ways to reduce environmental risk factors by seeking the proso-
cial elements in their environment. They maintain close ties with
prosocial family members, participate in cultural and community
events, seek to be school leaders, and ﬁnd non-drug using friends
and join clubs or youth programs that facilitate friendships with
positive role models or mentors. (p. 191)
Kumpfer (1999) identiﬁed some transactional processes
that help high-risk youth transform a high-risk environment
into a more protective environment. These include selective
perception, cognitive reframing, planning and dreaming,
identiﬁcation and attachment with prosocial people, active
environmental modiﬁcations by the youth, and active coping.
For example, Kumpfer suggested that resilient youth seek
out nurturing adults who facilitate and foster protective
processes by positive socialization or caregiving. According
to Kumpfer (p. 192), these caring adults provide that positive
socialization through “1) role modeling, 2) teaching, 3) advice
giving, 4) empathetic and emotionally responsive caregiving,
5) creating opportunities for meaningful involvement, 6) ef-
fective supervision and disciplining, 7) reasonable develop-
mental expectations, and 8) other types of psychosocial
facilitation or support.”
Therefore, a transactional process occurs between the envi-
ronmental context (risk and protective factors) and internal
resiliency factors to create the resiliency process or outcome.
Through her review, Kumpfer (1999) found that internal re-
siliency factors involve the following internal characteristics:
cognitive (e.g., academic skills, intrapersonal reﬂective skills,
planning skills, and creativity), emotional (e.g., emotional man-
agement skills, humor, ability to restore self-esteem, and happi-
ness), spiritual (e.g., dreams/ goals and purpose in life, religious
faith or afﬁliation, belief in oneself and one’s uniqueness, and
perseverance), behavioral/social competencies (e.g., interper-
sonal social skills, problem-solving skills, communication
skills, and peer resistant skills), and physical well-being and
physical competencies (e.g., good physical status, good health
maintenance skills, physical talent development, and physical
attractiveness).
The far right of the resiliency framework (Figure 15.1)
presents three potential outcomes for the resiliency process
(Kumpfer, 1999). Resilient reintegration outcomes involve
being made stronger and reaching a higher state of resiliency.
Homeostatic reintegration outcomes involve bouncing back
to the original state that existed before the stress or crisis
occurred. Maladaptive reintegration outcomes involve not
demonstrating resiliency, in that the individual functions at a
lower state.
The research on resiliency to date has focused on the
factors that place individuals at greater risk and the factors
that counteract those risk factors. In addition, the insightful
criticisms of several scholars (e.g., Masten, 1999; Luthar
et al., 2000) have advanced our thinking about the construct,
methods, and ﬁndings of this work. This research is very
useful in that it directs researchers toward potential processes
that are worth investigating and toward instruments for
analyzing resilience (Masten, 1999). The resiliency research,
thus far, also provides us with a greater awareness of the
Person–
Environment
Transactional
Process
Environmental
Context
Internal
Resiliency
Factors
Resiliency
Processes
Resilient
Reintegration
Maladaptive
Reintegration
Adaptation
Risk
Factors
Family
Culture
Community
School
Peers
Protective
Factors
•  Perception
•  Reframing
•  Changing Environments
•  Active Coping
Stressors
or
Challenges
Behavioral
Physical
Emotional
Cognitive
Spiritual
Figure 15.1
Kumpfer’s (1999) resiliency framework.

388
Positive Behaviors, Problem Behaviors, and Resiliency in Adolescence
complexity of the concept or resilience (Masten, 2001)
because of its integration within the human adaptation
system. Indeed, Masten (2001) states,
The great surprise of resilience research is the ordinariness of the
phenomena. Resilience appears to be a common phenomenon
that results in most cases from the operation of basic human
adaptational systems. If those systems are protected and in good
working order, development is robust even in the face of severe
adversity; if these major systems are impaired, antecedent
or consequent to adversity, then the risk for developmental
problems is much greater, particularly if the environmental
hazards are prolonged. (p. 227)
FUTURE DIRECTIONS AND CONCLUSIONS
The research being conducted in the area of risk factors, risk
behaviors, protective factors, and resiliency points to new
directions for future study. According to Rutter (1997), a
main topic for future research is to examine the interplay
between nature and nurture in development. Thus, future
topics include how adolescents’ exposure to adversity is
related to parent behaviors, peer behaviors, and other signiﬁ-
cant individuals’ behaviors and also how that exposure
shapes cognitive and emotional development. These topics
include the need for longitudinal studies, interdisciplinary
research teams, and robust applied research.
There is a strong need for transactional, cross-lagged
longitudinal studies that focus on elucidating the develop-
mental processes underlying the protective and risk factors
and the dynamic interactions of those factors, as well as the
developmental pathways of individuals. These longitudinal
studies and normative samples need to incorporate multifac-
torial designs and large samples (Masten, 1999). This design
and methodology will enable an examination of the individ-
ual in the context and an investigation of transactional
systems simultaneously. Studies would enable investigators
to direct their inquiries toward discovering how assets,
moderators, and other mechanisms work, that is, how they
confer protective or risk characteristics and how these
processes change as a function of development. Through
examining mediators and moderators, an investigation could
provide insight into the degree to which various mechanisms
might inﬂuence the effects of a speciﬁc risk or protective
factor or the interaction of those characteristics (Luthar et al.,
2000).
The longitudinal studies proposed previously require
integrated teams of researchers that comprise multiple disci-
plines and address multiple risk factors, protective factors,
and outcomes (e.g., prosocial behaviors and risk behaviors).
Research has provided ample evidence of the co-occurrence
of risk factors, protective factors, and risk behaviors (Jessor,
1997; Lerner, 1995; Masten, 1999; Perkins, 1995), thus mak-
ing the notion of single-issue studies seem unwise and inefﬁ-
cient. From the multiple processes (e.g., psychological,
sociological, biological), varied pathways to resilience may
result in the same effect as well as those that eventuate in
multiﬁnality among at-risk individuals (Luthar & Cushing,
1999). Therefore, the complex nature of this research neces-
sitates expertise from various disciplines.
In the short term, comprehensive multivariate studies
could be implemented to examine sets of the risk and protec-
tive factors simultaneously. These types of studies would
enable an investigation of the extent to which one context
(e.g., school, peer group, neighborhood) can compensate for
another high-risk context or can detract from an enhancing
context. Moreover, case studies of adolescents who demon-
strate resiliency or engagement in risk behaviors would fur-
ther elucidate the processes and mechanisms involved in
multiple developmental pathways (Wang et al., 1999).
Applied research is needed that employs the accumulated
knowledge of basic research to develop and test interventions.
Multifaceted and longitudinal interventions need to target
multiple risk and protective processes involving various lev-
els of the ecology: micro system (organism, family, peers,
schools), macro system (community and culture), and meso
system (family and peer interaction; Masten, 1999). Indeed
Masten (1999) states,
Intervention and prevention efforts can be conceptualized as
deliberate protective efforts. The key to intervention could lie in
triggering or facilitating natural protective systems. A crucial
question for the future is whether such efforts are best modeled
on naturally occurring resiliency or not. (p. 293)
Experimental designs are required to test intervention and
prevention strategies and to further enhance our understand-
ing of the dynamic interactions of risk factors, protective
factors, and the outcomes (e.g., engagement in risk behaviors
or prosocial behaviors). This research also needs to explore
the importance of the timing of the intervention; that is, there
may be targeted interventions that will be most efﬁcacious at
particular times in an adolescent’s life (Perry, 2000). Given
the co-occurrence of risk factors, protective factors, and risk
behaviors, intervention and prevention efforts must have a
triadic focus of increasing multiple protective factors at
multiple levels of the ecology, decreasing multiple risk
factors at multiple levels of the ecology, and increasing
competencies of individuals and systems. Indeed, recent
research provides evidence that in communities where the
citizens and institutions focus their attention on increasing

References
389
both competencies of youth and external supports at all levels
of the ecology, there is a great likelihood for successfully
creating conditions that enable the development of strong and
resourceful youth (Furstenberg & Hughes, 1995; Perkins,
Haas, & Keith, 1997).
The review of literature on risk factors, risk behaviors,
protective factors, and resiliency presented here indicates
that we have increased our scientiﬁc knowledge and under-
standing. However, we still have much to learn from
the lives of adolescents who succumb to the adverse ef-
fects of risk factors, as well as those who do attain normal
developmental trajectories despite signiﬁcant threats to their
development.
REFERENCES
Abelson, H., & diSessa, A. (1980). Turtle geometry. The computer
as a medium for exploring mathematics. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Administration on Children, Youth, and Families. (2001, February).
Youth programs: Runaway and homeless youth program: Fact
Sheet. Washington, DC: Administration on Children, Youth, and
Families. Available at http://www.acf.dhhs.gov/programs/opa/
facts/youth.htm.
Anthony, E. J. (1974). The syndrome of the psychologically invul-
nerable child. In E. J. Anthony & C. Koupernik (Eds.), The child
and his family: Children at psychiatric risk (pp. 529–544). New
York: Wiley.
Arbuthnot, J., Gordon, D. A., & Jurkovic, G. J. (1987). Personality.
In H. C. Quay (Ed.), Handbook of juvenile delinquency
(pp. 139–183). New York: Wiley.
Barnes, G. M., & Farrell, M. P. (1994). Parental support and control
as predictors of adolescent drinking, delinquency, and related
problem behaviors. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 54,
763–776.
Benson, P. L., & Roehlkepartain, E. C. (1993). Youth in single-
parent families: Risk and resiliency. Minneapolis, MN: Search
Institute.
Berlin, G., & Sum, A. (1988). Toward a more perfect union: Basic
skills, poor families, and our economic future: Project on social
welfare and the American future (Occasional Paper No. 3). New
York: Ford Foundation.
Beyer, J. (1999). Designing tessellations. Chicago, IL: Contempo-
rary Books.
Billy, J. O. G., & Udry, J. R. (1985). The inﬂuence of male and
female best friends on adolescent sexual behavior. Adolescence,
20, 21–32.
Bingham, C. R., & Crockett, L. J. (1996). Longitudinal adjustment
patterns of boys and girls experiencing early, middle, and late
sexual intercourse. Developmental Psychology, 32, 647–658.
Bogenschneider, K. (1998). What youth need to succeed: The roots
of resiliency. In K. Dogen Schneider (Ed.), Wisconsin family im-
pact seminars brieﬁng report: Building resiliency and reducing
risk: What youth need from families and communities to succeed
(pp. 1–16). Madison: University of Wisconsin.
Borden, L. M., Donnermeyer, J. F., & Scheer, S. D. (2001). Extra-
curricular activities and peer inﬂuence on substance use. Journal
of Adolescent and Family Health, 2(1), 12–19.
Brack, C. J., Brack, G., & Orr, D. P. (1994). Dimensions underlying
problem behaviors, emotions, and related psychosocial factors in
early and middle adolescents. Journal of Early Adolescence, 14,
345–370.
Bronfenbrenner, U. (1979). The ecology of human development:
Experiments by nature and design. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Brooks-Gunn, J., Duncan, G. J., Klebanov, P. K., & Sealand, N.
(1993). Do neighborhoods inﬂuence child and adolescent
development? American Journal of Sociology, 99, 353–395.
Brooks-Gunn, J., & Furstenburg, F. (1989). Adolescent sexual
behavior. American Psychologist, 44, 249–257.
Brown, S. E. (1984). Social class, child maltreatment, and delin-
quent behavior. Criminology, 22, 259–278.
Calhoun Davis, E., & Friel, L. V. (2001). Adolescent sexuality:
Disentangling the effects of family structure and family context.
Journal of Marriage and Family, 63, 669–681.
Catalano, R. F., Bergund, M. L., Ryan, J. A. M., Lonczak, H. S., &
Hawkins, J. D. (1999). Positive youth development in the United
States: Research ﬁndings on evaluations of positive youth devel-
opment programs. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services, National Institute of Child Health and
Human Development.
Catterall, J. S. (1987). On the social cost of dropping out of school.
The High School Journal, 71, 19–30.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (1998). Selected
cigarette smoking initiation and quitting behaviors among high
school students—United States, 1997. Morbidity and Mortality
Weekly Report, 47, 386–389.
Child Trends. (2001). CTS Trends: At a glance. Washington, DC:
Author.
Cramer, K. (in press). Using a translation model for curriculum de-
velopment and classroom instruction. In R. Lesh & H. M. Doerr
(Eds.), Beyond constructivism: Models and modeling perspec-
tives on mathematics teaching, learning, and problem solving.
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Dahlberg, L. L., & Potter, L. B. (2001). Youth violence: Develop-
mental pathways and prevention challenges. American Journal
of Preventive Medicine, 20(1S), 3–14.
D’Amico, R. J. (1984). Does employment during high school impair
academic progress? Sociology of Education, 57, 152–164.
Dodge, K. A. (2001). The science of youth violence prevention:
Progressing from developmental epidemiology to efﬁcacy to

390
Positive Behaviors, Problem Behaviors, and Resiliency in Adolescence
effectiveness to public policy. American Journal of Preventive
Medicine, 20(1S), 63–70.
Dohrenwend, B. P., Dohrenwend, B. S., Pearlin, L., Clayton, P., &
Hamburg, B. (1982). Reports on stress and life events. In G. R.
Elliott & C. Elsdorfer (Eds.), Stress and human health: Analysis
and implications of research (pp. 55–80). New York: Springer.
Dryfoos, J. G. (1990). Adolescents at risk: Prevalence and preven-
tion. New York: Oxford University Press.
Duncan, G. J., & Aber, L. (1997). Neighborhood models and
measures. In G. Duncan, J. Brooks-Gunn, & L. Aber (Eds.),
Neighborhood poverty: Context and consequences for children
(Vol. 1). New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Duster, T. (1987). Crime, youth, unemployment, and black urban
underclass. Crime and Delinquency, 33, 300–316.
Eccles, J. S. (1991). Academic achievement. In R. M. Lerner, A. C.
Petersen, & J. Brooks-Gunn (Eds.), Encyclopedia of adoles-
cence (pp. 1–5). New York: Garland.
Eccles, J. S., & Barber, B. (1999). Student council, volunteering, bas-
ketball, or marching band: What kind of extra-curricular involve-
ment matters? Journal of Adolescent Research, 14, 10–43.
Elliott, G. R., & Elsdorfer C. (1982). Conceptual issues in stress re-
search. In G. R. Elliott & C. Elsdorfer (Eds.), Stress and human
health: Analysis and implications of research (pp. 11–24). New
York: Springer.
Emler, N., Reicher, S., & Ross, A. (1987). The social context of
delinquent conduct. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychia-
try, 28, 99–109.
Farrington, D. P. (1998). Predictors, causes, and correlates of male
youth violence. In M. Tonry & M. H. Moore (Eds.), Youth
violence, crime, and justice (Vol. 24; pp. 421–475). Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press.
Farrington, D. P., & West, D. J. (1982). The Cambridge study in
delinquency development, 1980. In F. Dutile, C. Fouste, & D.
Webster (Eds.), Early childhood intervention and juvenile justice
(pp. 11–21). Lexington, MA: D.C. Health.
Ford, D. H., & Lerner, R. M. (1992). Developmental systems theory:
An integrated approach. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Furstenburg, F., Jr., & Hughes, M. E. (1995). Social capital and suc-
cessful development among at-risk youth. Journal of Marriage
and the Family, 57, 580–592.
Garbarino, J. (1994, November). Growing up in a socially toxic en-
vironment: Childhood in the1990’s. Presentation at the National
Council on Family Relations, Baltimore, MD.
Garmezy, N. (1985). Stress-resistant children: The search for
protective factors. In J. Stevens (Ed.), Recent research in
developmental psychopathology (pp. 213–233). Oxford, England:
Pergamon Press.
Glueck, S., & Glueck, E. (1968). Delinquents and nondelinquents in
perspective. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Goldschmidt, P., & Wang, J. (1999). When can schools affect
dropout behavior? A longitudinal multilevel analysis. American
Educational Research Journal, 36, 715–738.
Goodwin, C. (1996). Transparent vision. In E. Ochs, E. A. Scheg-
loff, & S. A. Thompson (Eds.), Interaction and grammar
(pp. 370–404). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gorman-Smith, D., & Tolan, P. (1998). The role of exposure to com-
munity violence and developmental problems among inner city
youth. Development and Psychopathology, 10, 101–116.
Gravemeijer, K. P. (1998). From a different perspective: Building
on students’ informal knowledge. In R. Lehrere & D. Chazan
(Eds.), Designing learning environments for developing under-
standing of geometry and space (pp. 45–66). Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Gravemeijer, K., Cobb, P., Bowers, J., & Whitenack, J. (2000).
Symbolizing, modeling, and instructional design. In P. Cobb,
E. Yackel, & K. McClain (Eds.), Symbolizing and communicating
in mathematics classrooms (pp. 225–273). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Grosslight, L., Unger, E. J., & Smith, C. L. (1991). Understanding
models and their use in science: Conceptions of middle and high
school students and experts. Journal of Research in Science
Teaching, 28, 799–822.
Hamburg, B. (1974). Early adolescence: A speciﬁc and stressful
stage of the life cycle. In G. Coelho, D. A. Hamburg, & J. E.
Adams (Eds.), Coping and adaptation (pp. 101–125). New York:
Basic Books.
Hanna, G. (1990). Some pedagogical aspects of proof. Interchange,
21(1), 6–13.
Hawkins, J. D., Catalano, R. F., & Miller, J. Y. (1992). Risk and
protective factors for alcohol and other drug problems in
adolescence and early adulthood: Implications for substance
abuse prevention. Psychological Bulletin, 112, 64–105.
Hawkins, J. D., Guo, J., Hill, K., Battin-Pearson, S., & Abbott, R.
(2001). Long term effects of the Seattle social development
intervention on school bonding trajectories. In J. Maggs &
J. Schulenberg (Eds.), Applied Developmental Sciences Special
Issue: Prevention or Altering the Course of Development, 5,
225–236.
Hawkins, J. D., Herrenkohl, T. I., Farrington, D. P., Brewer, D.,
Catalano, R. F., Harachi, T. W., & Cothern, L. (2000, April).
Predictors of youth violence. Washington, DC: Ofﬁce of Juvenile
Justice and Delinquency Prevention.
Henggeler, S. W. (1989). Delinquency in adolescence. Newbury
Park, CA: Sage.
Herrenkohl, T. I., Maguin, E., Hill, K. G., Hawkins, J. D., & Abbott,
R. D. (2001). Developmental risk factors for youth violence.
Journal of Adolescent Health, 26, 176–186.
Hirschi, T., & Stark, R. (1969). Hellﬁre and delinquency. Social
Problems, 17, 202–213.
Hundleby, J. D., & Mercer, G. W. (1987). Family and friends as
social environments and their relationship to young adolescents’
use of alcohol, tobacco, and marijuana. Journal of Clinical
Psychology, 44, 125–134.
Inhelder, B., & Piaget, J. (1958). The growth of logical thinking from
childhood to adolescence. New York: Basic Books.

References
391
Irwin, C. E., Jr., & Millstein, S. G. (1991). Risk taking behaviors
during adolescence. In R. M. Lerner, A. C. Petersen, &
J. Brooks-Gunn (Eds.), Encyclopedia of adolescence (pp. 934–
943). New York: Garland.
Jessor, R. (1998). New perspectives on adolescent behavior.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Jessor, R., & Jessor, S. L. (1977). Problem behavior and psychoso-
cial development: A longitudinal study of youth. New York:
Academic Press.
Jessor, R., Turbin, M. S., & Costa, F. M. (1998). Risk and protection
in successful outcomes among disadvantaged adolescents.
Applied Developmental Science, 2, 194–208.
Jimerson, S. R. (1999). On the failure of failure: Examining the
association between early grade retention and education and
employment outcomes during late adolescence. Journal of
School Psychology, 37, 243–272.
Johnson, L. D., O’Malley, P. M., & Bachman, J. G. (2001). Moni-
toring the Future national survey results on drug use,
1975–2000: Vol. 1. Secondary school students (NIH Publica-
tion No. 01-4924, pp. 1–226). Bethesda, MD: National Institute
on Drug Abuse.
Kandel, D. B. (1991). Epidemiology and developmental stages of
involvement in drug use. In R. M. Lerner, A. C. Petersen, & J.
Brooks-Gunn (Eds.), Encyclopedia of adolescence (pp. 262–
264). New York: Garland.
Kaput, J. (1991). Notations and representations as mediators of con-
structive processes. In E. von Glasersfeld (Ed.), Radical con-
structivism in mathematics education (pp. 53–74). Dordrecht,
The Netherlands: Kluwer.
Kaput, J., Roschelle, J., & Stroup, W. (2000). SimCalc: Accelerating
students’ engagement with the mathematics of change. In M. Ja-
cobson & R. Kozma (Eds.), Innovations in science and mathe-
matics education: Advanced designs for technologies of learning
(pp. 47–75). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Karmiloff-Smith, A. (1979). Micro- and macro-developmental
changes in language acquisition and other representation sys-
tems. Cognitive Science, 3, 91–118.
Kaufman, J., Cook, A., Arny, L., Jones, B., & Pittinsky, T. (1994).
Problems deﬁning resiliency: Illustrations from the study of mal-
treated children. Development and Psychopathology, 6, 215–229.
Kaufman, P., Kwon, J. Y., Klein, S., & Chapman, C. D. (1999).
Dropout rates in the United States: 1998. Washington, DC: U.S.
Department of Education.
Kerr, D. R., & Lester, F. K. (1986). An error analysis model for mea-
surement. In D. Nelson & R. E. Reys (Eds.), Measurement in
school mathematics (pp. 105–122). Reston, VA: National Coun-
cil of Teachers of Mathematics.
Ketterlinus, R. D., Lamb, M. E., & Nitz, K. A. (1994). Adolescent
nonsexual and sex-related problem behaviors: Their prevalence,
consequences, and co-occurrence. In R. D. Ketterlinus & M. E.
Lamb (Eds.), Adolescent problem behaviors: Issues and
research (pp. 17–39). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Knuth, E. (2002). Teachers’ conceptions of proof in the context of
secondary school mathematics. Journal of Mathematics Teacher
Education, 5, 61–88.
Koellner Clark, K., & Lesh, R. (in press). A modeling approach to
describe teacher knowledge. In R. Lesh & H. M. Doerr (Eds.),
Beyond constructivism: Models and modeling perspectives on
mathematics teaching, learning, and problem solving. Mahwah,
NJ: Erlbaum. 
Kowaleski-Jones, L. (2000). Staying out of trouble: Community
resources and problem behavior among high-risk adolescents.
Journal of Marriage and the Family, 62, 449–464.
Kumpfer, K. L. (1999). Factors and processes contributing to
resilience: The resilience framework. In M. D. Glantz & J. L.
Johnson (Eds.), Resiliency and development: Positive life adap-
tations (pp. 179–224). New York: Kluwer Academic.
Latour, B. (1990). Drawing things together. In M. Lynch & S. Wool-
gar (Eds.), Representation in scientiﬁc practice (pp. 19–68).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Lee, K., & Karmiloff-Smith, A. (1996). Notational development:
The use of symbols. In E. C. Carterette & M. P. Friedman (Series
Eds.) & R. Gelman  & T. Au (Vol. Eds.), Handbook of percep-
tion, Vol. 13, Perceptual and cognitive development (pp. 185–
211). New York: Academic Press.
Lehrer, R., Guckenberg, T., & Sancilio, L. (1988). Inﬂuences of
Logo on children’s intellectual development. In R. E. Meyer
(Ed.), Teaching and learning computer programming: Multiple
research perspectives (pp. 75–110). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Lehrer, R., Jaslow, L., & Curtis, C. (in press). Developing under-
standing of measurement in the elementary grades. 2003 NCTM
Yearbook on Measurement. Reston, VA: National Council of
Teachers of Mathematics.
Lehrer, R., Schauble, L., Strom, D., & Pligge, M. (2001). Similarity
of form and substance: Modeling material kind. In S. M. Carver
& D. Klahr (Eds.), Cognition and instruction: Twenty-ﬁve years
of progress (pp. 39–74). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Lerner, R. M. (1995). America’s youth in crisis: Challenges and
options for programs and policies. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Lerner, R. M. (2002). Adolescence: Development, diversity, context,
and application. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Lesh, R. (2002). Research design in mathematics education: Focus-
ing on design experiments. In L. English (Ed.), International
Handbook of Research Design in Mathematics Education. Hills-
dale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Lesh, R., Cramer, K., Doerr, H. M., Post, T., & Zawojewski, J. S. (in
press). Model development sequences. In R. Lesh & H. M. Doerr
(Eds.), Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. Beyond constructivism: Models
and modeling perspectives on mathematics teaching, learning,
and problem solving.
Lesh, R., & Doerr, H. M. (in press). Foundations of a model and
modeling perspective on mathematics teaching, learning, and
problem solving. In R. Lesh & H. M. Doerr (Eds.), Beyond con-
structivism: Models and modeling perspectives on mathematics

392
Positive Behaviors, Problem Behaviors, and Resiliency in Adolescence
teaching, learning, and problem solving.
Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Lesh, R., Hoover, M., Hole, B., Kelly, A., & Post, T. (2000). Princi-
ples for developing thought-revealing activities for students and
teachers. In A. Kelly & R. Lesh (Eds.), Handbook of research de-
sign in mathematics and science education (pp. 591–646). Mah-
wah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Luster, T., & Small, S. A. (1994). Factors associated with sexual
risk-taking behaviors among adolescents. Journal of Marriage
and the Family, 56, 622–632.
Luthar, S. S. (1991). Vulnerability and resiliency: A study of high
risk adolescents. Child Development, 62, 600–616.
Luthar, S. S., Cicchetti, D., & Becker, B. (2000). The construct of
resilience: A critical evaluation and guidelines for future work.
Child Development, 71, 543–562.
Luthar, S. S., & Cushing, G. (1999). Measurement issues in the
empirical study of resiliency: An overview. In M. D. Glantz &
J. L. Johnson (Eds.), Resiliency and development: Positive life
adaptations (pp. 129–160). New York: Kluwer Academic.
Maher, C. A., & Martino, A. M. (1996). The development of the idea
of mathematical proof: A5-year case study. Journal for Research
in Mathematics Education, 27, 194–214.
Masten, A. S. (1999). Resilience comes of age: Reﬂections on the
past and outlook for the next generation of research. In M. D.
Glantz & J. L. Johnson (Eds.), Resiliency and development:
Positive life adaptations (pp. 281–295). New York: Kluwer
Academic.
Masten, A. S. (2001). Ordinary magic: Resilience processes in
development. American Psychologist, 56, 227–238.
Masten, A. S., & Coatsworth, J. D. (1998). The development of
competence in favorable and unfavorable environments:
Lessons from research on successful children. American
Psychologist, 53, 205–220.
Masten, A. S., & Garmezy, N. (1985). Risk vulnerability and
protective factors in developmental psychopathology. In B. B.
Lahey & A. E. Kazidin (Eds.), Advances in clinical child
psychology (Vol. 8, pp. 1–52). New York: Plenum Press.
Mahoney, J. L., & Stättin, H. (2000). Leisure activities and
adolescent social behavior: The role of structure and social con-
text. Journal of Adolescence, 23, 113–127.
McNeal, R. B. (1997). High school dropouts: A
closer
examination of school effects. Social Science Quarterly, 78,
209–222.
McNeal, R. B. (1999). Parental involvement as social capital:
Differential effectiveness on science achievement, truancy, and
dropping out. Social Forces, 78, 117–144.
Mead, G. H., (1910). Social consciousness and the consciousness of
meaning. Psychological Bulletin, 7, 397–405.
Meschke, L. L., Bartholomae, S., & Zentall, S. R. (2000). Adoles-
cent sexuality and parent-adolescent processes: Promoting
healthy teen choices. Family Relations, 49, 143–154.
Moore, K. A., Driscoll, A. K., & Lindberg, L. D. (1998). A statisti-
cal portrait of adolescent sex, contraception, and childbearing.
Washington, DC: National Campaign to Prevent Teenage
Pregnancy.
Mortimer, J. T., & Johnson, M. K. (1998). New perspectives on
adolescent work and the transition to adulthood. In R. Jessor
(Ed.), New perspectives on adolescent risk taking behaviors
(pp. 425–496). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Moschkovich, J. N. (2002). Bringing together workplace and aca-
demic mathematical practices during classroom assessments. In
M. E. Brenner & J. N. Moschkovich (Eds.), Everyday and Aca-
demic Mathematics in the Classroom. Reston, VA: National
Council of Teachers of Mathematics.
National Research Council. (1993). Losing generations: Adolescents
in high risk settings. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Newcomb, M. D., Maddahian, E., Skager, E., & Bentler, P. M.
(1987). Substance abuse and psychosocial risk factors among
teenagers: Associations with sex, age, ethnicity, and type of
school. American Journal of Drug and Alcohol Abuse, 13,
413–433.
Noss, R. (1987). Children’s learning of geometrical concepts
through Logo. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education,
18, 343–362.
Ochs, E., Gonzales, P., & Jacoby, S. (1996). “When I come down
I’m in the domain state”: Grammar and graphic representation in
the interpretive activity of physicists. In E. Ochs, E. A. Schegloff,
& S. A. Thompson (Eds.), Interaction and grammar (pp. 328–
369). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ofﬁce of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention. (2001).
OJJDP Research 2000. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of
Justice.
Olive, J. (1991). LOGO programming and geometric understand-
ing: An in-depth study. Journal for Research in Mathematics Ed-
ucation, 22, 90–111.
Olive, J. (1998). Opportunities to explore and integrate mathematics
with the Geometer’s Sketchpad. In R. Lehrer & D. Chazan
(Eds.), Designing learning environments for developing under-
standing of geometry and space (pp. 395–417). Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Orr, D. P., Wilbrandt, M. L., Brack, C. J., Rauch, S. P., & Ingersoll,
G. M. (1989). Reported sexual behaviors and self esteem among
young adolescents. American Journal of Diseases in Children,
143, 86–90.
Ozer, E. M., Brindis, C. D. Millstein, S. G., Knop, D. K., & Irwin,
C. E. (1998). America’s adolescents: Are they healthy? San
Francisco: University of California.
Pakiz, B., Reinherz, H. Z., & Frost, A. K. (1992). Antisocial behav-
ior in adolescence: A community study. Journal of Early
Adolescence, 12, 300–313.
Perkins, D. F. (1995). An examination of the organismic, behav-
ioral, and contextual covariates of risk behaviors among diverse

References
393
groups of adolescents. Unpublished doctoral dissertation.
University Park, PA: The Pennsylvania State University.
Perkins, D. F., Haas, B., & Keith, J. G. (1997). An integration of
positive youth development within the runaway youth and
homeless shelter system. New Designs for Youth Development,
13, 36–41.
Perkins, D. F., Luster, T., Villarruel, F. A., & Small, S. (1998). An
ecological risk-factor examination of adolescents’ sexual
activity in three ethnic groups. Journal of Marriage and the
Family, 60, 660–673.
Perry, C. L. (2000). Preadolescent and adolescent inﬂuences on
health. In B. D. Smedley & S. L. Syme (Eds.), Promoting
health: Intervention strategies from social and behavioral re-
search (pp. 217–253). Washington, DC: National Academy
Press.
Piaget, J. (1970). Genetic epistemology. New York: Norton.
Pong, S. L., & Ju, D.-B. (2000). The effects of change in family
structure and income on dropping out of middle and high school.
Journal of Family Issues, 21, 147–169.
Powell-Cope, G. M., & Eggert, L. L. (1994). Psychosocial risk and
protective factors: Potential high school dropouts versus typical
youth. In R. C. Moss (Ed.), Using what we know about at-risk
youth: Lessons from the ﬁeld (pp. 23–51). Lancaster, PA:
Technomic.
Reid, D. A. (2002). Conjectures and refutations in grade 5 mathe-
matics. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 33,
90–111.
Resnick, M. D., Bearman, P. S., Blum, R. W., Bauman, K. E., Harris,
K. M., Jones, J., Tabor, J., Beuhring, T., Sieving, R. E., Shew, M.,
Ireland, M., Bearinger, L. H., & Udry, J. R. (1997). Protecting
adolescents from harm: Findings from the National Longitudinal
Study on Adolescent Health. Journal of American Medical
Association, 278, 823–832.
Rips, L. J., & Marcus, S. L. (1976). Suppositions and the analysis of
conditional sentences. In M. A. Just & P. A. Carpenter (Eds.),
Cognitive processes in comprehension (pp. 185–220). Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Roderick, M., Bryk, A. S., Jacob, B. A., Easton, J. Q., &
Allensworth, E. (1999). Ending social promotion: Results from
the ﬁrst two years. Chicago: Consortium on Chicago School
Research.
Rosch, E. H. (1973). Natural categories. Cognitive Psychology, 4,
328–350.
Rumberger, R. W. (2001, January 13). Why students drop out of
school and what can be done. A paper prepared for the confer-
ence, “Dropouts in America: How Severe is the Problem? What
Do We Know About Intervention and Prevention?” Harvard
University.
Rumberger, R. W., & Thomas, S. L. (2000). The distribution of
dropout and turnover rates among urban and suburban high
schools. Sociology of Education, 73, 39–67.
Rutter, M. (1979). Protective factors in children’s response to stress
and disadvantage. In M. W. Kent, & J. E. Rolf (Eds.), Primary
prevention of psychopathology: Vol. 3. Social competence in
children (pp. 49–74). Hanover, NH: University Press of New
England.
Rutter, M. (1985). Resilience in the face of adversity: Protective fac-
tors and resistance to psychiatric disorder. British Journal of
Psychiatry, 147, 598–611.
Rutter, M. (1987). Psychosocial resilience and protective factors.
American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 57, 316–331.
Rutter, M. (1993). Resilience: Some conceptual considerations.
Journal of Adolescent Health, 14, 626–631.
Rutter, M. (1997). Nature-nurture integration: The example of anti-
social behavior. American Psychologist, 52, 390–398.
Schattschneider, D. (1997). Escher’s combinatorial patterns. Elec-
tronic Journal of Combinatorics, 4, 1–31.
Schneirla, T. C. (1957). The concept of development in compara-
tive psychology. In D. B. Harris (Ed.), The concept of develop-
ment (pp. 78–108). Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota
Press.
Schorr, L. B. (1988). Within our reach: Breaking the cycle of disad-
vantage. New York: Doubleday.
Scheer, S. D., Borden, L. M., & Donnermeyer, J. F. (2000). The re-
lationship between family factors and adolescent substance use
in rural, suburban, and urban settings. Journal of Child and Fam-
ily Studies, 9(1), 105–115.
Simmons, R. G., & Blyth, D. A. (1987). Moving into adolescence:
The impact of pubertal change and school context. New York:
Aldine DeGruyter.
Simmons, R. G., & Zhou, Y. (1993). Racial, school, and family
context among adolescents. In R. K. Silbereisen & E. Todt
(Eds.), Adolescence in context: The interplay of family, school,
peers, and work in adjustment (pp. 149–175). New York:
Springer.
Small, S. A., & Luster, T. (1994). Adolescent sexual activity: An
ecological, risk-factor approach. Journal of Marriage and
Family, 56, 181–192.
Smith, J. P. (1999). Tracking the mathematics of automobile pro-
duction: Are schools failing to prepare students for work? Amer-
ican Educational Research Journal, 36, 835–878.
Smith, M. S., & Shepard, L. (1989). Flunking grades: A recapitula-
tion. In L. Shepard & M. Smith (Eds.), Flunking grades:
Research on policies and retention (pp. 214–236). Philadelphia,
PA: Falmer Press.
Snyder, H. (2000). Juvenile arrests: 1999. Juvenile Justice Bulletin,
December. Washington, DC: Ofﬁce of Juvenile Justice and
Delinquency Prevention.
Sowder, L. (1994). University faculty views about mathematics’
majors understanding of proof. San Diego, CA: San Diego State
University, Dept. of Math and Computer Science.

394
Positive Behaviors, Problem Behaviors, and Resiliency in Adolescence
Spillane, J. P., & Zeuli, J. S. (1999). Reform and teaching: Explor-
ing patterns of practice in the context of national and state math-
ematics reforms. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis,
21, 1–27.
Stättin, H., & Magnusson, D. (1990). Pubertal maturation in female
development. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Steinberg, L. D. (1987). Single parents, stepparents, and the suscep-
tibility of adolescents to peer pressure. Child Development, 58,
269–275.
Steinberg, L., & Avenevoli, S. (1998). Disengagement from school
and problem behavior in adolescence: A developmental-
contextual analysis of the inﬂuences of family and part time
work. In R. Jessor (Ed.), New perspectives on adolescent risk
taking behaviors (pp. 392–424). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Steinberg, L. D., & Darling, N. (1993). The broader context of
social inﬂuence in adolescence. In R. K. Silbereisen, & E.
Todt (Eds.), Adolescence in context: The interplay of family,
school, peers, and work in adjustment (pp. 25–45). New York:
Springer.
Taylor, C. S. (1990). Dangerous society. East Lansing: Michigan
State University Press.
Terry, E., & Manlove, J. (2000). Trends in sexual activity and
contraceptive use among adolescent. Child Trends Research
Brief. Washington, DC: Child Trends.
Tolan, P. (1988). Socioeconomic, family, and social stress correlates
of adolescent antisocial and delinquent behavior. Journal of
Abnormal Child Psychology, 16, 317–333.
United States Department of Education, National Center for
Education Statistics. (1997). Drop out rates in the United States:
1995. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Ofﬁce.
United States Department of Education, National Center for Educa-
tion Statistics. (2000a). The condition of education, 2000.
Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Ofﬁce.
United States Department of Education, National Center for Educa-
tion Statistics. (2000b). Digest of Education Statistics, 1999.
Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Ofﬁce.
Ventura, S. J., Mosher, W. D., Curtin, S. C., Abma, J. C., Henshaw,
S. (1999, December). Highlights of trends in pregnancies and
pregnancy rates by outcome: estimates for the United States,
1976–96. National Vital Statistics Report, 15, 47(29), 1–9.
Walkerdine, V. (1988). The mastery of reason. London: Routledge.
Wang, M. C., Haertel, G. D., & Walberg,, H. J. (1999). Psychologi-
cal and educational resilience. InA. J. Reynolds, H. J. Walberg, &
R. P. Weissberg (Eds.), Promoting positive outcomes: Issues in
children’s and families’ lives (pp. 329–365). Washington, DC:
Child Welfare League of America.
Washburn, D. K., & Crowe, D. W. (1988). Symmetries of culture:
Theory and practice of plane pattern analysis. Seattle: Univer-
sity of Washington Press.
Werner, E., & Smith, R. (1992). Overcoming the odds: High risk
children from birth to adulthood. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University.
Zech, L., Vye, N. J., Baransford, J. D., Goldman, S. R., Barron, B. J.,
Schwartz, D. L., Kisst-Hackett, R., Mayﬁeld-Stewart, C., & The
Cognition and Technology Group (1998). In R. Lehrer & D.
Chazan (Eds.), Designing learning environments for developing
understanding of geometry and space (pp. 439–463). Mahwah,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Zimmerman, M. A., & Arunkumar, R. (1994). Resiliency research:
Implications for schools and policy. Social Policy Report, 8,
1–17.
Zucker, R. A., Fitzgerald, H. E., & Moses, H. D. (1995). Emer-
gence of alcohol problems and the several alcoholisms: A de-
velopmental perspective on etiologic theory and life course
trajectory. In D. Cicchetti & D. J. Cohen (Eds.), Developmental
psychopathology: Risk, disorder, and adaptation (pp. 677–711).
New York: Wiley.

CHAPTER 16
Relationships With Parents and Peers in Adolescence
MARGARET KERR, HÅKAN STATTIN, GRETCHEN BIESECKER, AND LAURA FERRER-WREDER
395
CURRENT MODELS AND RESEARCH
395
Parenting Models
395
Peer Relationships
402
Parent and Peer Models: A Need for Integration
407
EXPLAINING THE CONNECTIONS BETWEEN PARENT
RELATIONSHIPS, PEER ASSOCIATION, AND
ADOLESCENT ADJUSTMENT
408
Parent and Peer Relationships and Their Contexts
408
Structural Features of Parent and Peer Contexts
410
Context Choice
410
CONCLUSIONS
412
REFERENCES
412
How do parents and peers inﬂuence adolescent development?
At the beginning of the twenty-ﬁrst century, what is unknown
about this topic far outweighs what is known; in this chapter,
we argue that this is partly because of the question itself. As
it is phrased, the question assumes that parents and peers
inﬂuence adolescent development separately in a unidirec-
tional fashion. These assumptions might actually block the
way to a true understanding of the roles of parents and peers
in adolescent development; such assumptions ignore the
interrelatedness between parent and peer relationships and
the roles that adolescents play as active agents in these
relationships.
In this chapter, we start with certain assumptions about
adolescents’ relationships with parents and peers—assump-
tions that have not necessarily been incorporated into the
research in these areas. First, we assume that these relation-
ships are bidirectional, meaning that adolescents are not just
passively inﬂuenced by the important people in their lives;
they are active agents in choosing with whom they spend
time, and they evoke certain reactions from people. Second,
we assume that relationships are not simply related to adjust-
ment but are themselves forms of adjustment. Parenting
behaviors and peer relations do not just produce adjustment;
they are also indicators and results of adjustment. Finally, we
assume that parent and peer relationships are linked to each
other. The form and quality of relationships with parents will
determine which peer contexts the adolescent chooses, and
that choice will evoke reactions from parents that will affect
the parent-child relationship. In short, we argue that adoles-
cents play active roles in choosing and shaping their relation-
ships with parents and peers.
CURRENT MODELS AND RESEARCH
There are large bodies of research on both parenting and peer
relationships. Several well-deﬁned causal models are cur-
rently used in research on parenting, but this is less true in
peer research. The peer literature is deﬁned less by clear
causal models and more by characteristics of the particular
peers that are considered, such as peer groups and best
friends. Because these literatures are largely separate, we
deal with them separately in the following sections.
Parenting Models
In this section, we discuss several of the most inﬂuential the-
oretical models dealing with parenting of adolescents. We do
not endeavor to review all of the research that has been done
on parenting of adolescents. Rather, we focus on models that
have had the widest inﬂuence on the broad conclusions that
have been drawn about parenting of adolescents—which par-
enting strategies are effective and why—and which lie
behind the practical advice that parents often receive. In turn,
for each model we take the most inﬂuential research as repre-
sentative of the model.
Acknowledgments: Work on this chapter was supported by grants
from the Swedish Research Council and The Bank of Sweden
Tercentenary Foundation.

396
Relationships With Parents and Peers in Adolescence
The Parenting Styles Model
The parenting styles model has spawned a vast literature
related to both child and adolescent development. Different
parenting styles instruments have been created, and scores of
empirical studies have been done. For the present purposes,
we focus on the work that has been the most inﬂuential for
adolescent research. This, of course, means the theoretical
and empirical work of Baumrind and the theoretical work of
Maccoby and Martin. We consider, in addition, the empirical
work on adolescence that has appeared in ﬂagship develop-
mental journals such as Child Development and Developmen-
tal Psychology, and much of that has come from the
Steinberg and Dornbusch research groups.
Background.
The parenting styles model is based on
the theoretical ideas originally presented by Baumrind (1967)
and later revised by Maccoby and Martin (1983). Baumrind
grouped nursery-school children according to their social
adjustment and then determined how the parents of those
groups differed. Her initial results were that (a) “children
who were most self-reliant, self-controlled, explorative, and
content” had parents who were “controlling and demanding;
but they were also warm, rational, and receptive to the child’s
communication;” (b) “children who . . . were discontent,
withdrawn, and distrustful” had parents who were “detached
and controlling, and somewhat less warm than other par-
ents;” and (c) “the least self-reliant, explorative, and self-
controlled children” had parents who were “noncontrolling,
nondemanding, and relatively warm” (Baumrind, 1971,
pp. 1–2). Baumrind termed these three groups of parents
authoritative, authoritarian, and permissive, respectively.
Believing that parental control was particularly important,
she further articulated the qualititative differences between
authoritative and authoritarian parents’ control strategies
(Baumrind, 1968). Authoritative parents, according to Baum-
rind, communicated with the child about the demands that
they placed on the child, whereas authoritarian parents
tended to shut down communication about their demands.
Later, Maccoby and Martin (1983) argued that Baumrind’s
three styles and a wealth of other ﬁndings in the parenting
literature could be roughly subsumed into a four-ﬁeld table,
with one axis contrasting parents who are controlling and
demanding with those who are not and the other contrasting
parents who are warm, responsive, and child-centered with
those who are not. To their credit, Maccoby and Martin re-
lated these constructs more broadly to the psychological liter-
ature, and they suggested mechanisms through which such
constructs might work. For instance, responsiveness, accord-
ing to them, meant a willingness to respond to the child’s sig-
nals. It was closer to the ideas of contingent responsiveness in
attachment theory, to Pulkkinen’s (1982) child centeredness,
or to the concept of reinforcement in learning theory than it
was to warmth in the sense of unconditional, noncontingent
expressions of love and support. Based on Seligman’s (1975)
learned-helplessness studies, they suggested that parents’ re-
sponsiveness should give the child a sense of control that—in
authoritative families—would be balanced by the control that
parents exerted over the child. Bidirectional communication
between parents and child was an essential part of this
process.
Yet although the four-ﬁeld table has been widely used in
the parenting styles research that has followed, in conceptual
discussions of authoritativeness, communication has faded as
an important feature and the concepts of warmth and respon-
siveness have been blurred. In this body of work, the major
conceptual difference between authoritative and authoritar-
ian parents is the presence or absence of warmth along with
the high levels of control that both types of parents are
thought to exert over their children.
Extensions of the Parenting Styles Model.
More re-
cently, parenting styles have been distinguished from parent-
ing practices in an attempt to conceptually reﬁne the model
and improve the possibilities for discovering mechanisms
(Darling & Steinberg, 1993). The argument was that parent-
ing style should be thought of as the general emotional cli-
mate that parents create, whereas practices should be
recognized as the goal-directed behaviors in which parents
engage in order to change or shape the child’s behavior. Prac-
tices can be more or less effective depending upon the emo-
tional climate that parents have set up, because the emotional
climate will make the child more or less receptive to being
shaped by the practices.
In the empirical research that has followed this original,
theoretical work, however, the differentiation between styles
and practices is unclear. Sometimes, exactly the same full
scales as had previously been used to measure styles are
used again and labeled practices (e.g., Avenevoli, Sessa, &
Steinberg, 1999). Other times, the majority of items in the
measures of practices are identical or nearly identical to
items previously used to measure parenting styles (e.g., B. B.
Brown, Mounts, Lamborn, & Steinberg, 1993). Furthermore,
it is difﬁcult to look at these measures and determine whether
they are conceptually tapping styles or practices.
Limitations of the Parenting Styles Model.
We intro-
duce the limitations of the parenting styles model with a
history of parenting styles research that might have been. The
story is ﬁction, but we tell it in order to point out how far the
actual history of parenting styles research is from ideal. Our
story anticipates the critique that follows, but it also points

Current Models and Research
397
out that the division of that critique into subtopics is
somewhat artiﬁcial because the different limitations are all
interrelated.
A Tale of Parenting Styles Research That We Wish We
Could Tell.
Once upon a time, more than 30 years ago, a
researcher named Baumrind published her ﬁrst works on par-
enting style. During the years that have followed, the original
ideas have been reﬁned so much that they are barely recog-
nizable, but they are universally seen as the beginning of
what is now a rich understanding of the parent-child interac-
tion processes that are involved in development. These
processes used to be called parenting, but that term is now
recognized as simplistic and misleading because it denotes
only part of the process. The search for knowledge in this
area proceeded much like one would expect of a scientiﬁc en-
deavor. Baumrind’s ﬁrst studies were somewhat descriptive.
She reported that in a small sample of mostly wealthy, white
families, there was a covariation between broad patterns of
parents’behaviors and broad patterns of children’s behaviors.
Her explanations of these ﬁndings assumed that parents with
certain features had shaped certain behaviors in their chil-
dren, mainly through behavioral mechanisms. Naturally, the
untested assumptions and missing links in her logic were
immediately pointed out, and researchers began working
swiftly to (a) break down the global, conceptually heteroge-
neous parenting styles into their simplest, most basic ele-
ments; (b) develop construct-valid measures of those basic
elements and clear, testable explanations of the mechanisms
involved; (c) determine whether any of the children’s charac-
teristics—or any unrecognized third variables—might be
driving Baumrind’s correlational ﬁndings; and (d) determine
whether any causal relations existed between parents’ and
children’s characteristics, what the directions of effects were,
whether they should be seen as main effects or interactions,
and what mechanisms were involved, including moderating
and mediating effects. These efforts helped to build an under-
standing of the complex links between parents’behaviors and
children’s adjustment—and everyone lived happily ever
after. In the following section we present a detailed discus-
sion of the more serious shortcomings in the parenting styles
research. We limit our critique to the major theoretical works
and the empirical studies that have been published in major
journals. In the vast literature that exists outside of these
major works, the same problems exist, often in more extreme
forms.
What’s Causing What?
Correlation does not prove
causality. This is what students learn in their ﬁrst psychology
course. Yet one of the most striking features of the parenting
styles literature, from Baumrind’s early works to the present,
is the assumption that causality is known—parents, through
their attitudes and behaviors, shape, mold, or otherwise
produce children with certain characteristics. Examples can
be found in the introduction and discussion sections of nearly
every article on parenting styles—sometimes even in the
titles. (Italics ours in these quotations.)
“Effects of Authoritative Parental Control on Child Behavior.”
(Baumrind, 1966, title)
“The Inﬂuence of Parenting Style on Adolescent Competence
and Substance Use.” (Baumrind, 1991, title)
“The success of authoritative parents in protecting their ado-
lescents from problem drug use and in generating competence
should be emphasized . . . Unlike any other pattern, authoritative
upbringing . . . consistently generated competence and deterred
problem behavior.” (Baumrind, 1991, p. 91)
Multiple examples can easily be found in a single article
(e.g., Glasgow, Dornbusch, Troyer, Steinberg, & Ritter,
1997):
“the beneﬁcial inﬂuence of authoritative parenting does not di-
minish during adolescence” (p. 508)
“authoritative parenting promotes academic success through
a positive effect on adolescents’ psychological orientation to-
ward work” (p. 509)
“Different constellations of parental behaviors and affective
expressions produce variations in adolescents’ perceptions of
their own performance capacities . . . Among the four distinct
parenting styles, authoritative parenting is the most successful in
fostering personal and social responsibility in adolescents, with-
out limiting their emerging autonomy and individuality” (p. 521)
“characteristics of authoritative parenting contribute to the
development of instrumental competence” (p. 511)
“Indulgent parenting fosters instrumental competence . . . but
to a lesser degree than authoritative parenting” (p. 511)
“[this] characteristic of authoritarian parents thwarts the de-
velopment of instrumental competence in adolescents” (p. 511)
“use of extrinsic reinforcements . . . undermines adolescents’
perceptions of competence” (p. 511)
The causality assumption began with Baumrind’s original
identiﬁcation of parenting styles, because she identiﬁed
parenting behaviors and child characteristics that covaried
and then gave explanations for that covariation that implic-
itly and explicitly made parents the causal agents (e.g.,
Baumrind, 1966; Baumrind & Black, 1967). Perhaps this was
a reﬂection of the behaviorist leanings of Baumrind and other
parenting styles researchers, or perhaps it was a reﬂection
of the assumptions of the broader culture, as has been sug-
gested earlier (Bell, 1968). At any rate, the assumption that
causality is known has continued, and the language seems to
have gotten progressively stronger with time, as though the

398
Relationships With Parents and Peers in Adolescence
accumulation of correlational results could somehow prove
causality.
Although longitudinal studies of parenting styles have
been conducted, rarely have the data been used to determine
whether causality might be bidirectional. They have instead
focused on arguing for parent-to-child effects. For example, a
cross-lagged design with parenting and child-behavior mea-
sures at two points in time could potentially be used to pro-
vide information about whether the correlations between
adolescent adjustment and parenting represent unidirec-
tional or bidirectional effects. When only half of this pattern
is tested with only parenting as the earlier predictor (e.g.,
Steinberg, Lamborn, Darling, Mounts, & Dornbusch, 1994),
it is impossible to ﬁnd a bidirectional effect. The use of this
design reveals a disinterest in potential bidirectional effects.
Parenting styles researchers have held to a unidirectional,
causal interpretation of their correlational ﬁndings in spite of
growing literatures that present convincing alternative views.
For instance, a number of scholars have offered alternative
interpretations of the correlations between parents’ and chil-
dren’s behaviors that exist in the literature, including—but
not limited to—the parenting styles literature (e.g., Bell,
1968; C. Lewis, 1981; Harris, 1995, 1998). At about the same
time that Baumrind published her ﬁrst parenting styles study,
Bell (1968) published a review paper questioning the unidi-
rectional interpretations that had been made in socialization
studies in general. He cited many examples of experimental
ﬁndings in which parents’ and other adults’ behaviors had
changed in response to certain children’s behaviors; he
argued that because of these ﬁndings, parent-child correla-
tions should not be interpreted as only parent-to-child effects.
Later, C. Lewis (1981) questioned the directionality
assumption in Baumrind’s published studies—particularly
Baumrind’s claim that parental control produced well-
adjusted children. She pointed out that in Baumrind’s studies
it was impossible to tell whether the parental control mea-
sures tapped control or simply harmonious relationships, for
which the child’s temperament could be as important as
the parents’ ways of dealing with the child (see Baumrind,
1983, for a reply). Furthermore, Lewis pointed out that in
Baumrind’s published studies the items that really distin-
guished the parents of competent children from all other
groups of parents had nothing to do with the use of control.
The strongest predictors were “respect the child’s decision,”
“use reason to obtain compliance,” “encourage verbal give
and take,” and “satisfy child,” (C. Lewis, 1981, p. 562), which
leaves open the possibility that competence had developed
through some process other than parental control. This is es-
pecially evident because items such as respect and use reason
may depend on child characteristics.
More recently, Harris (1995, 1998) offered a controversial
critique of the assumption that parents inﬂuence children in
unidirectional fashion. Her critique ‘like Bell’s and Lewis’s,
covered the parenting literature more broadly, and was not
limited to parenting styles. Concerning the parenting styles
ﬁndings, however, she offered a reverse-causality explana-
tion for the correlations between authoritative parenting and
good child adjustment. She argued that most parents in West-
ern cultures try to be authoritative because they know that is
what parents “should” be. If the child behaves well (i.e., is
well-adjusted), then parents have no reason to change their
strategy. If the child is difﬁcult to manage (i.e., not well-
adjusted), however, then they have to become more control-
ling and less democratic (i.e., more authoritarian). Hence,
according to this reinterpretation, parents adjust to the child’s
behavior rather than producing it, and this adjustment ex-
plains the correlation between parenting styles and children’s
behavior.
In addition, in the parenting literature more broadly there
are now numerous experimental and longitudinal studies—
from which causality can actually be inferred—that show
very clearly that parents and other adults do sometimes react
to children’s characteristics and adjust their behavior accord-
ingly (e.g., Anderson, Lytton, & Romney, 1986; Bell &
Chapman, 1986 for a review; Buss, 1981; Dix, Ruble,
Grusec, & Nixon, 1986; Lerner & Spanier, 1978; M. Lewis &
Rosenblum, 1974; Mulhern & Passman, 1981; Passman &
Blackwelder, 1981) or that show good evidence for bidirec-
tional effects (e.g., Hastings & Rubin, 1999; Kochanska,
1998; Lytton, 1990, 2000; Mink & Nihira, 1986; Stice &
Barrera, 1995).
Finally, behavioral genetic studies also cast reasonable
doubt on the unidirectional assumption (e.g., Ge et al., 1996;
Reiss, Neiderhiser, Hetherington, & Plomin, 2000). They
offer evidence that the links between parenting behaviors and
children’s adjustment are affected by the child’s genetic
makeup from both directions. First, the child’s genetic
makeup—expressed in temperament and dispositions—
evokes certain parenting behaviors, which then inﬂuence the
child’s adjustment. Second, the child’s genetic makeup—
again expressed in temperament and dispositions—affects
adjustment directly, and that inﬂuences how parents react to
the child (parenting behaviors). Twin, adoption, and sibling
studies also suggest that parents react to their child’s unique
genetic makeup in that children’s unique experiences are
more predictive of adjustment than are the experiences they
share with their siblings (i.e., parenting factors; Plomin &
Daniels, 1987; Plomin, Reiss, Hetherington, & Howe, 1994).
Let us be clear. We are not arguing that solely child-to-
parent effects are driving the correlations between parenting

Current Models and Research
399
styles and child adjustment. We do argue, however, that there
is enough evidence that child-to-parent effects exist and that
they cannot be discounted. In our view, a bidirectional model
of parent-adolescent relationships is needed. Any model that
takes a unidirectional view—parent-to-child or child-to-
parent—is of limited usefulness.
What’s Driving the Results?
This is another question
that has not been pursued rigorously. Actually, it is a whole
complex series of questions about the basic constructs, the
measures, and the mechanisms through which the basic con-
structs are thought to work. Concerning the basic constructs,
even if one limits oneself to the major publications in this
area, one can end up wondering what is authoritative parent-
ing? Is it as complex as Maccoby and Martin (1983) theo-
rized, involving ﬁrm control, demands for mature behavior,
emotional warmth, responsiveness to the child’s expressed
needs and desires, being encouraging of bidirectional com-
munication and devoted to democratic decision-making,
and being child- rather than parent-centered? Or is it as sim-
ple as warmth-involvement and strictness-supervision (e.g.,
Lamborn, Mounts, Steinberg, & Dornbusch, 1991; Steinberg
et al., 1994)? Concerning the measures, if authoritative par-
enting is as simple as warmth-involvement and strictness-
supervision, then why do items that speciﬁcally tap
communication appear on both types of scales? And why, for
example, is knowing a lot about who the child’s friends are a
warmth-involvement item, whereas knowing a lot about what
the child does after school and in his or her free time is
a strictness-supervision item (e.g., Lamborn et al., 1991;
Steinberg et al., 1994)? Indeed, how is knowing (an end prod-
uct) a measure of either warmth or strictness? Moreover
(although a more detailed discussion of this issue is beyond
the scope of this chapter), one gets an even more confusing
picture if one looks at the parenting styles literature as a
whole—and not just at the major theoretical works and the
empirical studies in ﬂagship journals.
Then, concerning mechanisms, without having these
construct and measurement issues sorted out, it is difﬁcult to
begin to sort out the inﬂuences of the various elements,
how many of the features of the different styles are really
important, the direction of effects, and whether they work
additively or interactively. Indeed, parenting styles re-
searchers have seemed fairly unconcerned about demonstrat-
ing empirically why or how authoritative parenting might
work. The literature abounds with post hoc explanations and
untested assumptions. Baumrind clearly favored learning
explanations. In her view, authoritative parents modeled de-
sirable behavior through their willingness to communicate;
created classically conditioned good feelings through their
warmth and acceptance that would improve their ability to re-
inforce their children’s desirable behavior; and provided
appropriate reinforcements and limits through their ﬁrm be-
havioral control (Baumrind, 1971). Still, these explanations
remained untested.
The rare studies that have tried to look at mechanisms
have been weak in terms of design. For instance, one study
tried to test the idea that the connection between authoritative
parenting and school performance was due to the fact that au-
thoritative parents foster the right attributional styles in chil-
dren, which in turn are linked to school performance
(Glasgow et al., 1997). But the hypothesized mechanism, fos-
tering, was never examined. Only the concurrent correlation
between styles and attributions was examined; again, this
correlation between a parenting measure and a child behavior
was assumed to represent a causal connection in which par-
ents had fostered the attributional style. Hence, this study was
not really a test of a mechanism.
Summary.
The parenting styles model is a static, unidi-
rectional view of socialization in the family context. It is sta-
tic in that it assumes that parents are a certain way throughout
the child’s life, and that their way of being produces—at
some undeﬁned point in time—a child with certain character-
istics. Furthermore, parents are assumed to have the same
style with each child. There is no recognition that parenting
might be a developmental process in which parents learn
what works and does not work with each child, or in which
they develop certain undesirable parenting behaviors through
repeated frustrations with a difﬁcult child—as stated by one
of the most prominent parenting styles research groups: “Par-
enting style is a characteristic of the parent (i.e., it is a feature
of the child’s social environment), independent of character-
istics of the developing person” (Darling & Steinberg, 1993,
p. 487). Under assumptions such as these, the parenting
styles paradigm can bring us no further toward understanding
the bidirectional processes operating over time between par-
ents and children that are inextricably linked to the child’s
adjustment.
The Attachment Model
Attachment theory (Bowlby, 1969/1982) does offer a way of
looking at relationships that could be truly dyadic. It views
the emotional bond between parents and children as a
feedback system, controlling a balance between children’s
desires for closeness with parents and those for exploring
the world. This has been likened to the physiological control
systems that maintain physiological measures—such as
blood pressure and body temperature—within set limits

400
Relationships With Parents and Peers in Adolescence
(Bowlby, 1988). According to this theory, optimally, during
times of stress, infants and adolescents will seek comfort
from their caregivers, and parents will give their children a
sense of security—a feeling that all is well (Ainsworth,
1990). The need to be close to parents in times of distress—
and for parents to respond to their children’s distress—are
theorized to be biologically based to promote survival of the
species. The attachment system draws parents and children
together, therefore, to protect children from harm. The posi-
tive emotions that can be derived from closeness, such as a
sense of security, make attachment behaviors rewarding to
both parents and children.
A balance between emerging independence and closeness
with parents is a central feature of attachment theory and
particularly relevant as children grow into adolescence. Chil-
dren and parents are increasingly able to take each other’s
perspectives into consideration and to negotiate in their rela-
tionship. Adolescents continue to use parents as a secure base
for exploration, using temporary returns to the safe haven of
parents to help them, particularly in times of distress, illness,
fear, or stress (Marvin & Britner, 1999). The emotional avail-
ability of the attachment ﬁgure rather than physical proximity
becomes the more frequent goal of the attachment system.
Attachment experiences not only provide a secure base for
adolescents to explore their talents and experiences in a vari-
ety of contexts, but such experiences also prepare adolescents
to become socially connected with others and to learn how to
be caregivers for others (Crittenden, 1992).
Not all attachment relationships, however, provide a truly
secure base. The security of attachment relationships can be
distinguished by the ways that members of the dyad—such as
a parent and child—respond to each other during times of
distress. Attachment theory predicts that parents of securely
attached children respond consistently and sensitively
(Ainsworth, Blehar, Waters, & Wall, 1978). Secure attach-
ments are characterized by open, ﬂexible communication
between parents and children around emotion signals, pro-
moting a balance and range of positive and negative emotions
(Bowlby, 1988; Cassidy, 1994). Insecure attachments, in con-
trast, reveal problematic ways of communicating emotions—
partners may exhibit a restricted range of emotions or
heighten their displays of emotion (Bowlby, 1988; Cassidy,
1994). Parents of insecurely attached children, for example,
may respond inconsistently to expressions of distress, ignore
them, or act punitively.
Attachment theory suggests that the quality of individu-
als’ interactions with caregivers over time creates a model of
how relationships work and of their own value in relation-
ships (Bowlby, 1969/1982; Bretherton, 1985). These cogni-
tive models are thought to guide feelings, behaviors, and how
information about the world is processed. Bowlby described
these representations of attachment relationships as working
models because he viewed them as being open to new input
and modiﬁcation as circumstances and relationships change.
Individuals are believed to learn both sides of the attachment
relationship, and children are motivated to reenact both sides
of their attachment relationship in their other relationships
with peers, teachers, and others (Sroufe & Fleeson, 1986).
Children learn, for instance, whether important people in
their lives will come to their aid when they need help and
ways of responding to the distress of others.
This aspect of attachment theory offers a perspective to
understanding relations among relationships with parents,
peers, and other signiﬁcant people in children’s lives. As ado-
lescents begin to spend more time with peers of their own
choosing, working models are hypothesized to inﬂuence their
selection of friends and the quality of their peer interactions.
Adolescents are likely to choose friends as attachment ﬁgures
who ﬁt with their existing working models. The central
importance of peers in the lives of adolescents has received a
great deal of attention (Allen, Moore, Kuperminc, & Bell,
1998; Csikszenthmihalyi & Larson, 1984), with intimacy in
friendships being described as one of the deﬁning character-
istics of this age group (Buhrmester, 1990; Sullivan, 1953).
The exceptional intensity of adolescent peer relationships has
in fact been likened to that of attachment relationships
(Ainsworth, 1989; Ainsworth & Marvin, 1995; Allen et al.,
1998; Bowlby, 1988).
Furthermore, ways of communicating in attachment
relationships appear relevant to understanding adolescents’
adjustment (Allen, Aber, & Leadbeater, 1990; Cooper,
Shaver, & Collins, 1998; Engels, Finkenauer, Meeus, &
Dekovic, 2001) and emotion regulation (Biesecker, 2001;
Kobak & Sceery, 1988; Zimmermann, Maier, Winter, &
Grossmann, 2001). Adolescents using insecure attachment
strategies may have difﬁculties understanding their own and
others’ emotions, leaving them more vulnerable to misinter-
preting ambiguous situations as hostile and less able to repair
disruptions in relationships (Kobak & Cole, 1994). These
misinterpretations may lead to hostile or aggressive actions,
withdrawal from peers, or other behaviors that undermine the
formation of healthy relationships and foster negative
feelings about the self. Therefore, understanding the role of
these insecure attachment strategies—or ways of communi-
cating and responding to feelings of distress—may shed
some light on certain adolescents’ “problem behaviors”
(Allen et al., 1990) such as substance abuse and conduct
disorder.
The attachment model has come further than the other
models reviewed here have in portraying the adolescent as an

Current Models and Research
401
active agent in his or her own adjustment and in trying to
explain the links between parent and peer relationships.
This model, however, suffers from some of the same limita-
tions as the other parenting models. First, until recently there
has been a tendency to view parent relations separately from
other relationship experiences. We need more information
about how attachment relationships with mothers and
fathers, siblings, extended family, peers, and romantic part-
ners relate, interact, and possibly modify each other over
time.
A second issue is that the different measures used to assess
attachment at different ages—particularly after early child-
hood—have not always demonstrated conceptual equiva-
lence or construct validity. A variety of techniques have been
developed to tap attachment in adolescence and adulthood,
most of which are based on interviews and self-reports (e.g.,
Bartholomew & Horowitz, 1991; Brennan, Clark, & Shaver,
1998; Collins & Read, 1990; C. George, Kaplan, & Main,
1985; Hazan & Shaver, 1987; Kenny, 1987), but there is a
lack of convergence about a common, reliable method.
Although adult measures share theoretical links with mea-
sures used in infancy and childhood, the underlying ap-
proaches can differ radically between them; little research
has been conducted or published to address relations between
these different measures. These sorts of psychometric issues
make it difﬁcult for attachment researchers to ensure that
they are communicating about the same constructs (Brennan
et al., 1998). A piece of this problem is an overly broad use of
the term attachment to encompass more general qualities
of the parent-child relationship. Although attachment may be
associated with other aspects of parenting, researchers need
to make sure that they mean the same thing when they
measure it.
Last, attachment researchers are as likely as other parent-
ing researchers are to look almost exclusively at parent
effects unless the focus of research is to study certain child
inﬂuences on the attachment relationship, such as infant
temperament (Calkins & Fox, 1992; Crockenberg, 1981;
Goldsmith & Alansky, 1987; Susman-Stillman, Kalkose,
Egeland, & Waldman, 1996) or Down Syndrome (Ganiban,
Barnett, & Cicchetti, 2000; Thompson, Cicchetti, Lamb, &
Malkin, 1985). Otherwise, the direction of causality between
the quality of attachment relationships and other constructs is
almost always examined in one way, suggesting attachment
as a predictor of child psychopathology (Greenberg, 1999),
for example. The possibility of reverse effects on working
models remains largely unknown; for instance, do insecure
attachments to parents cause a youth to become delinquent,
or do parents who know that their child is delinquent
disengage emotionally, perpetuating a pattern of insecurity?
Although the attachment system is said to reside within the
individual—the child—considering it as a feedback system
makes it reasonable to consider the effects of the child’s ways
of responding to situations of distress on the parent. How do
adolescents, for example, give parents a sense that all is well,
and how do they activate their parents’ attachment systems?
How do parents respond when the stressor activating their at-
tachment system is their own adolescent’s behavior? How do
parents’ attachment histories with their own parents and part-
ners color their reactions to adolescents’behaviors? Who sets
the thermostat of the attachment system when?
The Direct Parental Control Model
The main assumption behind this model is that parents need
to control their adolescents’ behavior and that they will
have their inﬂuence through direct supervision and control of
the adolescents’ activities and associations (e.g., Laub &
Sampson, 1988; Leibner & Wacker, 1997; Wells & Rankin,
1988). The criterion variables are usually delinquency, drug
use, and other problem behaviors. Studies of delinquency in
the criminality literature often lean heavily on this model.
There is a problem inherent in the direct control idea, how-
ever, which is that parents are seldom physically present when
their adolescents are away from home (Csikszentmihalyi &
Larson, 1984; Hirschi, 1969; Nye,1958). Therefore, direct
control of their behavior is not usually possible.Another prob-
lem with this literature lies in the assumptions that are made
about intervening processes that are not studied directly. The
literature on parental monitoring, which rests on the direct
parental control model, provides an illustration.The main idea
is that parents’ tracking and control efforts are necessary to
keep youths from engaging in problem behavior and away
from deviant peers who would draw them into problem
behavior. A large literature links high parental monitoring to
lower levels of (a) delinquency, (b) associations with deviant
peers, (c) drug and alcohol use, (d) cigarette smoking, and
(e) risky sexual activity (for a review of early work, see Pat-
terson & Stouthamer-Loeber, 1984; for some of the many em-
pirical examples, see Biglan, Duncan, Ary, & Smolkowski,
1995; Cernkovich & Giordano, 1987; Chassin, Pillow,
Curran, Molina, & Barrera, 1993; Crouter, MacDermid,
McHale, & Perry-Jenkins, 1990; Dishion, Capaldi, Spracklen,
& Li, 1995; Flannery, Vazsonyi, Torquati, & Fridrich, 1994;
Fletcher, Darling, Steinberg, & Dornbusch, 1995; Fridrich &
Flannery, 1995; McCord, 1986; Metzler, Noell, Biglan,Ary, &
Smolkowski, 1994; Romer et al., 1994; Sampson & Laub,
1994; Weintraub & Gold, 1991; White & Kaufman, 1997).
This literature involves at least two untested assump-
tions. The ﬁrst is that if parents have knowledge, it is

402
Relationships With Parents and Peers in Adolescence
because they have done tracking and surveillance to get it.
This assumption is inherent in the operationalization of
monitoring in this whole literature. Even though monitoring
has been conceptualized as tracking and surveillance, which
are actions, it has almost universally been operationalized as
knowledge, which is not an action but an end result. This lit-
erature involves a second untested assumption regarding
why parents’ knowledge might be important or why it is
linked to fewer adolescent problem behaviors and better
overall adjustment. The assumption is that if parents have
knowledge about their youths’ activities and associations,
they will be aware if small infractions of rules occur or if
dangerous associations with deviant peers start to develop,
and they can step in with direct control to stop these small
problems before they become large problems. Hence, direct
control is an intervening process that is assumed to explain
the connection between parents’ knowledge and adolescent
behavior.
In our research, we have questioned both of these assump-
tions. We have pointed out this mismatch between the con-
ceptualization of monitoring as tracking and surveillance and
its operationalization as parents’ knowledge, and we have
presented empirical evidence to suggest that parents get most
of their information about adolescents’ day-to-day activities
through the youth’s free, spontaneous disclosure of informa-
tion (Stattin & Kerr, 2000). Parents’ active efforts to get in-
formation, in contrast, are only weakly related to their
knowledge. We have shown, further, that children who tell
their parents a lot about their daily activities, rather than
those who are strongly controlled by their parents, are better
adjusted in a number of different ways (Kerr & Stattin,
2000). In our work, high disclosure of daily activities was
linked to less involvement in antisocial behavior, less school
maladjustment, less depressed mood, higher self-conﬁdence,
better relationships with both parents, and fewer friends with
undesirable characteristics. Parents’ active efforts showed
few links to adjustment. In fact, they were sometimes related
to poorer rather than better adjustment. We went on to show
that parents’ direct control strategies (controlling adoles-
cents’ freedom to come and go as they please without in-
forming parents and getting their permission ahead of time or
explaining themselves afterward) were correlated with
youths’ feelings of being overly controlled—which in turn
were linked to poor adjustment on all the measures men-
tioned previously.
These results suggest that the link between parents’
knowledge and adolescent adjustment does not exist because
surveillance prevents undesirable behavior, as has so often
been claimed. Rather, it is because child disclosure is heavily
represented in parents’ knowledge, and children who talk
openly with their parents tend to be better adjusted. Hence,
this raises the larger theoretical question of whether parents’
knowledge in and of itself is actually important. Does it play
any causal role in adolescent adjustment? If it does, and if
that role is not what has been assumed—allowing parents to
know when to intervene with direct control—then what is it?
Or alternatively, is this just a classic example of an apparent
cause-and-effect relation that only appears because there is a
third variable that is producing both the apparent cause and
the apparent effect? In our research, we have suggested that
parents’ knowledge is important, but not for the reasons that
researchers have assumed (so that parents will know when to
intervene with direct control). We have theorized instead that
knowledge underlies trust, and trust is an important part of a
complex, ongoing, bidirectional process within the family in
which parents and children react to each other. This process
in turn inﬂuences the child’s adjustment both directly and
indirectly through mechanisms that we describe later in this
chapter.
Conclusions
The major views of parenting that have dominated research
on adolescence during the past 20 years have concentrated on
two broad classes of parenting behaviors. One concerns
the relational side of parenting—emotional warmth and re-
sponsiveness to the youth’s needs. The other concerns the
regulatory-supervisory side of parenting—active regulation
of the youth’s activities and associations. Both these classes
of parenting behaviors are considered important, particularly
the regulatory-supervisory behaviors. All of these models are
limited by an assumption that causality resides in parents’
behavior, and some models are further limited by measures
that have questionable construct validity.
Peer Relationships
In current thinking, the adolescent peer context is regarded as
a prime instigator of new behaviors and lifestyles. Friend-
ships are considered more egalitarian than are adult-child
relations and are thought to provide young people with
approval and support in daily life; experiences of sharing and
cooperating; standards for social comparison; opportunities
to try out adult roles; leisure time recreation; and forums for
personal and intimate disclosure of experiences, thoughts,
and ideas (Bagwell, Newcomb, & Bukowski, 1998; Cairns &
Cairns, 1994; Hartup, 1983; Parker, Rubin, Price, &
DeRosier, 1995).

Current Models and Research
403
Friendships are voluntary and self-initiated, but they are
also constrained by the broader physical context. Hence,
peer networks, cliques, and friendships all describe social
associations between individuals of roughly the same age
who share about the same ecological conditions, interests,
and activities (Kirchler, Palmonari, & Pombeni, 1996; Ladd,
1989; Reisman, 1985). They live in the same neighborhood,
are members of the same clubs and associations, and attend
the same school or class. They also tend to be of the same sex
and ethnicity (Hartup, 1983; Kandel, 1978). These features,
however, say more about the physical environment in
which adolescents live than about the actual content of the
friendships.
Adolescents also tend to choose peers who are attitudi-
nally and behaviorally similar to themselves (Dishion,
Patterson, & Griesler, 1994; Hartup, 1983, 1996; Kandel,
1978, 1986). Yet to focus only on similarities is to ignore one
of the possible developmental functions of peer associa-
tion—that it forces youths to understand differences between
themselves and others. We should expect that young people
choose peers who are different from themselves in certain
ways and who satisfy different needs—peers whom they ad-
mire for some reason, who have talents they do not have or
interests that are different from theirs, and whom they can
talk with, learn from, and gain insights from (Eder, 1985;
Smith & Inder, 1990).
The theoretical models of peer inﬂuences that have been
used in research have mainly been the social-cognitive de-
velopment model and the social learning model. The ﬁrst
rests on the ideas of theorists such as Piaget, Cooley, Mead,
Sullivan, and—to some extent—Erikson and Vygotsky. The
main idea is that peer relationships help adolescents gain a
more sophisticated social understanding and develop cogni-
tively because negotiating relationships and disagreements
with peers forces them to take another person’s point of
view and develop empathy and understanding. Sullivan’s
clinically derived theory of interpersonal relations was one
of the ﬁrst approaches to directly address the developmental
function of peer groups and friendships. From Sullivan’s
perspective, “chums” or best friends were essential for the
evolution of the self-system, cognitive-emotional develop-
ment, and good adjustment. From a contemporary life span
developmental perspective, Youniss (1980) proposed a the-
ory of relationships and self-development that was drawn
from the writings of Sullivan and Piaget. The social learning
model rests on the ideas of theorists such as Bandura,
Cairns, Patterson, Dishion, and colleagues, Coleman, and
Bronfenbrenner. The main idea is that peers socialize each
other by modeling, imitating, encouraging, and rewarding
certain behaviors. This general idea can be seen in much of
the research on peer inﬂuences.
Research on Peer Relationships
Research on peer relationships addresses questions that
derive directly from the particular peers under consideration.
Research on dyadic peer relationships examines how friend-
ships develop. Research on groups of peers in predeﬁned
settings such as school classrooms looks at how adolescents
acquire peer-group status and how that status and the charac-
teristics of the peers inﬂuence the individual’s behavior.
Research on peers in self-chosen settings looks at how peer
groups are formed in the natural ecology and how these
groups inﬂuence individual behavior.
Dyadic Peer Relationships.
Many scholars agree that
close friends have the potential to serve unique functions
in development. Friendships help adolescents build social
skills and learn that others think and feel differently from the
way they do. Most adolescents have a good friend—often
several (Hartup, 1992). A huge literature suggests that inti-
macy and empathy, self-disclosure, and mutual responsive-
ness emerge within these friendships. Friendships are
self-initiated and are based on openness, affection, empathy,
loyalty, and reciprocity, and they make adolescents sensitive
to others’ perspectives, roles, and feelings (Berndt, 1982;
Marcus, 1996; Sullivan, 1953). The behavioral interactions
that differentiate friends from nonfriends typically involve
positive engagement, conﬂict management, and ability to en-
gage in tasks together (Hartup, 1996). Similarity and dissim-
ilarity; friendship selection, maintenance, and dissolution;
and gender differences in friendships also have all been ad-
dressed in the literature on best friends.
Relationships With Groups of Peers: The Peers in
Predeﬁned Social Settings.
Most studies of peer relations
and interactions have been done in the classroom or school, a
setting that is predeﬁned for adolescents. During the 1970s
and 1980s, hundreds of studies were conducted that exam-
ined the relationship between peer status (popular vs. unpop-
ular, neglected, controversial, and rejected) and coping and
problem solving, social skills and competence, school adjust-
ment and achievement, personality, emotions, loneliness,
prosocial and agonistic behavior, and more (Parker, et al.,
1995). These studies showed a strong link between peer sta-
tus and individual behavior at school and indicated that status
and behavior are correlated with later school dropout, delin-
quency, and mental health problems. These studies present a

404
Relationships With Parents and Peers in Adolescence
unidirectional view of causality, however, because they as-
sume that peer status plays a causal role in these correlations.
Relationships With Natural Groups of Peers: The
Peers in Self-Chosen Settings.
Demographic and ecologi-
cal investigations have provided insights into how peer
groups naturally evolve over time, how broader networks are
formed, and how and when cliques and crowds emerge (B. B.
Brown et al., 1993; Dunphy, 1963). They have shed light on
the role of social networks for adolescents with behavioral
problems—and on how deviant peer groups and gangs are
formed and maintained (Goldstein, 1994). They have dealt
with group processes and behavior stability (Sarnecki, in
press). Studies in this domain have shown the close connec-
tion between leisure settings and transition behaviors
(Silbereisen & Noack, 1988) and between choosing to enter a
particular activity such as sports and encountering new
friendship experiences (B. B. Brown, 1990; Fine, 1980).
These studies have provided some information about proper-
ties of peer groups; bases of peer group selection, main-
tenance, and dissolution; and gender- and age-related
differences in peer group conﬁgurations.
Peer Associations: Unidirectional Effects?
Historically, adolescents have been portrayed as being recep-
tive to the inﬂuence of peers. In view of (a) the number of
empirical studies that have claimed to demonstrate that peers
inﬂuence adolescents’ behaviors, (b) existing theoretical
models that depict peers as a major socialization inﬂuence
(cf. differential association, Sutherland & Cressey, 1978; and
social control theories, Hirschi, 1969), (c) the many text-
books that support the argument that peers have a pervasive
socializing inﬂuence on behavior of adolescents, and (d)
layman’s views, undoubtedly peers should be viewed as hav-
ing an important steering inﬂuence on adolescents’ behavior
and development. Indeed, one ﬁnding that consistently turns
up in empirical studies is that peer characteristics are out-
standing correlates of individuals’ transition behaviors. For
smoking, sexuality, delinquency, and drinking or drug use,
there is a strong link between individual behavior and peer
behavior. In the majority of studies that have looked at the rel-
ative roles of parent and peer characteristics in social
behavior, peer relationships turn out to be the most predictive.
Factors That Interfere With the Ability to Infer Causality
Researchers refer to peer association with causal terms such
as inﬂuence, impact, or pressure. But many studies do not
take adequate account of selection factors, do not control
appropriately for relevant individual differences, are not
based on independent reports of peers, are ecologically ques-
tionable, fail to consider alternative explanations, or suffer
from any combination of these problems.
Cross-Sectional Designs.
It goes without saying that a
correlation between characteristics in subjects and their
friends in any cross-sectional study cannot be interpreted
causally. The direction of inﬂuence may go both ways. For
more ﬁrm conclusions about causality, longitudinal designs
are needed. But causal language—implying a unidirectional
peer impact on individual behavior and development—is fre-
quently used in studies that look at concurrent correlates.
Shared Activities.
If we focus on behaviors that usually
occur in groups, high subject-peer group correlations are not
in and of themselves evidence of peer inﬂuence. Consider
one example: Because delinquent acts are most often
performed in groups, one would be very surprised not to ﬁnd
an association between delinquency in the adolescent and
delinquency in his or her peer group. However, this associa-
tion does not indicate whether the adolescent was pressured
to offend, tended to be the active instigator, or was an active
part of planning these offenses (Farrington, 1998).
Perceptual Biases.
Many studies deduce peer inﬂu-
ences from adolescents’ self-reports of peer behavior. For ex-
ample, many investigations have reported that self-reports of
friends’ deviance are strongly linked to the subject’s own
delinquency. Indeed, based on ﬁndings from peer perception
measures, delinquent peers have been referred to as the best
predictor of delinquency (Dishion et al., 1994; Oetting &
Donnermeyer, 1998). This raises the old problem of shared
method-variance. High correlations between one’s own and
one’s peers’ behavior might be partly explained by the fact
that adolescents project their own behavior onto friends or
justify or rationalize their own behaviors, thereby misreport-
ing their friends’ deviance (Conger & Rueter, 1996; Kandel,
1996; Urberg, Degirmencioglu, & Pilgrim, 1997). Studies
suggest that self-reports of peers’behaviors are more strongly
associated with individuals’ own behavior than are indepen-
dent measures of peers’ behaviors (cf. Iannotti, Bush, &
Weinfurt, 1996). Hence, data from self-reports of peer behav-
ior are likely to systematically overestimate the role of peer
association in individual development (Kandel, 1985).
School as the Analytic Unit.
Adolescent peer studies
have typically dealt with peer groups in one setting—the
school—and the ecological validity of this practice is ques-
tionable (Adler & Adler, 1998; Campbell, 1980; T. P. George
& Hartmann, 1996; Giordano, Cernkovich, & Pugh, 1986;

Current Models and Research
405
Hartup, 1983). A school is an administrative system.
Although circumstances can vary with the type of school,
students usually have little choice about their classmates
and they cannot inﬂuence the social environment much.
Undoubtedly, the school context should be considered the
major breeding ground for peer associations from childhood
into late adolescence (Parker & Asher, 1993). But many
leisure-time friends are not classmates (T. P. George &
Hartmann, 1996; Smith & Inder, 1990). Out-of-school peers
are more heterogeneous than in-school peers in both age and
gender (cf. Allen, 1989; T. P. George & Hartmann, 1996;
Smith & Inder, 1990), and they might have more important
implications for individual behavior—concurrently or pre-
dictively (Krappmann et al, 1993). It is likely that peers out-
side of school will be particularly important for adolescents
who do not consider school as a valued context or who for
reasons such as being rejected by their classmates are not part
of the activities of the majority in their class (Ladd, 1983).
T. P. George and Hartmann (1996) reported that unpopular
11- to 12-year-olds had more friends outside of school than
did average and popular subjects, and the unpopular youths
in the class had almost twice as many friends of a different
age as the popular youths had. In their investigations of the
implications of pubertal maturation on transition behaviors,
Stattin and Magnusson (1990) showed that the peers who
were most strongly associated with the social behaviors
of early-developing females were not conventional types of
peers. Most inﬂuential were the peers who were chronologi-
cally older and those who were in other classes or had quit
school—particularly older males. Classroom-based studies
would exclude these important peer contacts.
Little is known about leisure-time peer groups or the
differences between in-school and out-of-school friends. For
example, one of the common questions about deviant peers is
the proportion of close friends that the individual has (from
none, to half, to all) who engage in delinquent acts (Elliot,
Huizinga, & Menard, 1989). This question is standard in
research on juvenile delinquency, but it is not informative
about who these peers are, where and when they interact with
the youth, or what their support or inﬂuence is. More research
on relationships with peers outside of school is needed for a
more accurate picture of how the individual inﬂuences and is
inﬂuenced by his or her peers across contexts.
Peer Selection and Peer Socialization.
Kandel (1978,
1985) ﬁrst questioned the common practice of interpreting
peer association causally and unidirectionally when in
studies of homophily, she differentiated peer selection from
peer socialization processes. According to a peer socializa-
tion interpretation, youths become similar to their peers as
they gradually conform to the behaviors, fashions, values,
and attitudes that are normative in the peer group. In contrast,
according to a peer selection interpretation, similarity exists
because youths choose to engage with peers who are similar
to themselves. If selection is a major operating factor, then
correlations between peer association and individual behav-
ior are spurious (Hartup, 1983, 1992).
Cross-sectional studies cannot possibly differentiate peer
selection from peer socialization; this requires longitudinal
data. Kandel’s studies on juvenile drinking (1978; 1985)
were based on best friend nominations at two time points, and
they showed that both these processes operated to produce
similarities between adolescents and their friends. Other
studies have conﬁrmed Kandel’s ﬁndings. In the domains of
drinking and smoking, peer selection is as important as
peer socialization (Engels, Knibbe, de Vries, Drop, & van
Breukelen, 1999; Engels, Knibbe, Drop, & de Haan, 1997;
Ennet & Bauman, 1994; Farrell & Danish, 1993; Fisher &
Bauman, 1998; Mounts & Steinberg, 1995; Urberg et al.,
1997). These studies clearly show that peer socialization is
not the whole story behind the often-found associations be-
tween measures of individual and peer behavior.
Other longitudinal studies support this view. For example,
they reveal that peer associations change greatly in adoles-
cence, but aggressiveness and antisocial behavior are quite
stable (Loeber, 1991; Olweus, 1979; Stattin & Magnusson,
1989), and this pattern of ﬁndings argues for selection. Also,
several strong longitudinal studies that have looked into com-
plex networks of peer relations over time suggest a reciprocal
relationship between peer selection and peer socialization
(Patterson, Reid, & Dishion, 1992). Peer association, it ap-
pears, is best viewed as a process that includes selection, de-
selection, and socialization in the peer group (Kandel, 1985,
1986).
In the delinquency literature, studies have looked more
closely at the conditions under which selection versus social-
ization operates. They suggest that the common view that
teenagers are drawn into delinquency because of “bad peers”
is too simple. Rather, active selection of deviant peers by
problem-prone adolescents seems to be particularly pro-
nounced during the early stages of engaging in delinquency
and other risk behaviors (Conger & Rueter, 1996; Galambos
& Silbereisen, 1987; Kandel, 1985; Maggs & Galambos,
1993; Patterson, DeBaryshe, & Ramsey, 1989). During the
later stages, interactions with deviant friends and the mutual
reinforcement of common activities accelerate and diversify
the criminal activities of adolescents who have a previ-
ous history of problematic adjustment (Dishion, French, &
Patterson, 1995). According to the deviancy training hypoth-
esis, collective antisocial talk among peers in these circles

406
Relationships With Parents and Peers in Adolescence
reinforces antisocial talk and antisocial behavior, thereby es-
calating the level of delinquent behavior for the group mem-
bers over time (Dishion et al., 1994).
Other studies in the literature show that peer inﬂuence is an
issue of individual characteristics, youths’ prior experiences,
and peer characteristics (Agnew, 1991; Fergusson, Lynskey,
& Horwood, 1996; Mofﬁtt, 1993; Mounts & Steinberg, 1995;
Vitaro, Tremblay, Kerr, Pagani, & Bukowski, 1997). For ex-
ample, association with deviant friends is considered more
likely to predict future delinquency among late starters or tran-
sitory delinquents, but it is less likely to affect the behavior of
early starters or life-course persistent delinquents. In support
of this suggestion, Vitaro et al. (1997) found that having de-
viant friends was associated with an increase in delinquent be-
havior among moderately disruptive youths but not among
highly disruptive youths.
Still, the general problem of using the school context in
peer research prevails. The conclusions about peer selection
and peer socialization processes discussed previously were
based on data taken from friends at school (Kandel, 1978,
1985). There is little information about peer selection and
socialization in out-of-school settings. To our knowledge, a
study conducted by Kiesner (2000) is unique in that it in-
cluded peers in the school context as well as neighborhood
friends; this was accomplished by studying an entire commu-
nity at once. Kiesner’s results suggested that in-school and
out-of-school peer groups both contribute to the concurrent
prediction of individual problem behavior and homework
and curfew compliance, whereas only the out-of-school
group explained individual involvement in sports (which in
Italy take place outside the school) and social activities.
Moreover, in-school and out-of-school peer status (deﬁned as
the number of nominations received as a member of the other
participants’ in-school and out-of-school groups) interacted
in explaining individual differences in depressed mood, even
after controlling for a traditional measure of in-class peer sta-
tus. Speciﬁcally, frequent nominations as an out-of-school
group member appeared to buffer individuals from the nega-
tive emotional effects of low peer status within the school.
Peer Relations and Community Settings.
When par-
ents buy a new house or rent an apartment in a certain area,
they mark out the limits of the future life courses of all family
members (Barker, 1964; G. W. Brown, Harris, & Peto, 1973;
Magnusson & Stattin, 1998). The availability of social situa-
tions in a local community determines the possibilities for
particular social activities and for the functioning and
development of individuals and peer groups. Within these
limits, individuals determine their own peer associations by
selecting certain types of leisure settings and recreational
contexts over others (Brook, Nomura, & Cohen, 1989). On
the group level, the local society to some extent shapes the
social activities of peer groups by providing or failing to pro-
vide settings that promote prosocial activities.
Adolescent research has only recently started to gain in-
sights into how broader sociocultural inﬂuences—as they are
represented in the community, the neighborhood, and in
particular leisure-time settings—affect peer relations. A few
examples of this work in naturalistic settings are Fine and
Glassner’s (1979) study of baseball little leagues, Mahoney
and Stattin’s (2000) examination of youth recreation centers,
Jackson and Csikszentmihalyi’s (1999) studies of the role of
sports in adolescent life, and the Berlin Youth Longitudinal
Study, which revealed the dual quality of many adolescent
behaviors—both compromising momentary or future psy-
chosocial health and being tools in the pursuit of satisfy-
ing important personal and social goals of the individual
(Silbereisen & Noack, 1988).
A variety of mechanisms have been proposed by which
leisure activities may enhance individual competence and
protect against adjustment problems. A distinction can be
made between structured and unstructured leisure-time activ-
ities. A common ﬁnding in the literature is that well-adjusted
adolescents tend to be more actively involved in structured
leisure-time activities and settings such as organized sports,
hobbies, religious activities, music, theater, art, and politics.
These activities occur during scheduled hours, are often led by
an adult, and aim explicitly at skill building. By contrast, ado-
lescents with more problematic personal and social adjust-
ment are more likely to hang out on the streets, attend public
drinking places, and be less involved in organized activities
(Cochran & Bo, 1987). These more spontaneous or unstruc-
tured activities are seldom under direct adult supervision.
Although it is likely that different individuals beneﬁt from
leisure pursuits for different reasons, high levels of structure,
skill-building aims, exposure to conventional values, and the
presence of nondeviant peers appear to be particularly
strongly linked to lower levels of antisocial behavior (Agnew
& Peterson, 1989; Allen, Philliber, Herrling, & Kuperminc,
1997; Csikszentmihayli, 1990; Csikszentmihalyi, Rathunde,
Whalen, & Wong, 1993; Fletcher, Elder & Mekos, 2000;
Hirschi, 1969; Jones & Offord, 1989; Kinney, 1993;
Mahoney, 2000; McCord, 1978).
Studies of Swedish youth recreation centers show that the
same principles of selection and socialization that are com-
monly found in peer research also apply to leisure settings
(Mahoney & Stattin, 2000; Mahoney, Stattin, & Magnusson,
2001). These government-supported centers are available to

Current Models and Research
407
adolescents age 13 and older. The overall philosophy for the
youth centers has remained constant across the last three
decades—that youths should be allowed to develop their own
interests. An explicit aim of centers has been to reduce anti-
social activities by keeping adolescents away from certain
settings during the evening. The centers are usually accessi-
ble every evening of the week, opening around dinnertime
and closing as late as 11:30 p.m. on weekends and during the
summer. Attendance and activity participation are strictly
voluntary. The activities are typically low in structure and do
not aim at skill building; they include pool, ping-pong, video
games, darts, TV, music, and coffee drinking. Adults are pre-
sent at the center, but they do not direct or place demands on
the youths’ activities.
Investigations in different regions have shown that as a
group, youths who attended the centers regularly were more
antisocial, had more antisocial peers, had more conﬂicted
parent relations, and had parents who knew less about their
activities than did those who did not attend the centers
(Mahoney & Stattin, 2000). In fact, youths who attended the
centers were overrepresented among those with problematic
personal and social adjustment on almost all measures stud-
ied. Using a longitudinal design, and following 500 boys in a
middle-sized Swedish town from ages 10 to 30, clear indica-
tions of selection effects for attending these centers were
documented (Mahoney et al., 2001). Boys with a multiple
problem proﬁle of social and academic deﬁcits at age 10 were
most likely to attend the youth centers at age 13. But—even
after controlling for relevant factors at age 10 (family and
demographic factors and several aspects of child social-
academic competence prior to involvement in the centers)—
the youths who attended these centers at age 13 had
signiﬁcantly higher rates of criminal offenses up to the age of
30 than did those who did not attend the centers. The ﬁndings
are consistent with the proposition that the combination of
unstructured leisure and socialization inﬂuences among
problem-oriented peers may promote antisocial behavior, but
detailed investigations have not yet addressed the issue of
mechanisms: whether these differences are due to low struc-
ture of the activities at the centers and associated preference
for unstructured leisure pursuits of the youths involved, little
or no adult supervision, deviancy training, few opportunities
for skill building, and so forth. Such analyses have to be con-
ducted to determine why some leisure activities are associ-
ated with criminal behavior. In comparison, North American
studies have shown that youth centers can operate in highly
effective and potentially beneﬁcial ways for disadvantaged
youths (Heath & McLaughlin, 1993; McLaughlin, Irby, &
Langman, 1994). However, the Swedish studies suggest that
community-sponsored gathering places for youths should not
by default be viewed as beneﬁcial.
Conclusions.
The available empirical evidence suggests
that peer relations, activities, and contexts are related and
considerably self-chosen by the individual within the con-
ﬁnes of the existing social milieus in the local community.
This view of the adolescent as active and self-determining
and this contextualized view of peer relations are in line
with recent theoretical discussions in developmental, social,
and personality psychology (Bronfenbrenner, 1988; Lerner,
1996; Magnusson & Stattin, 1998). The literature suggests
that an agency perspective is needed to understand peer
relations in everyday life. Adolescents have much freedom to
select their own lifestyles, activities, and interpersonal con-
texts; peer relations are voluntary and self-chosen.
Empirical data also suggest that to understand adolescent
behavior, one must understand the contexts in which ado-
lescents interact with others. A contextual perspective is
needed to understand how peer relationships are formed,
stabilized, and broken. The choice of peer activities is con-
founded with the available settings. Attending a particular
leisure setting with particular types of activities implies
meeting certain (rather than other) kinds of peers. In a Jour-
nal of Adolescent Research special issue on adolescent so-
cialization in context, Eccles, Early, Frasier, Belansky, and
McCarthy (1997) acknowledged the widespread recognition
in models of adolescent development that adolescents live
their everyday lives in multiple settings, that these contexts
are linked to each other, and that each has its special impli-
cations for youths. At the same time they noted that almost
no systematic research had been done to examine simultane-
ously the roles of these contexts for personal and social ad-
justment and for adolescents’ social relations. Despite
decades of research on the role of peers for individual func-
tioning and development, researchers have only started to
clarify how peer relations, activities, and settings are inter-
related, and few empirical studies actually test the causal
links.
Parent and Peer Models: A Need for Integration
Adolescents have close relationships with parents and peers
simultaneously, and certain aspects of both these relation-
ships are linked to adjustment. Most relevant theories have
been developed to explain one type of relationship—parents
or peers—and they have largely viewed youths as being
shaped by parent or peer inﬂuences. Thus, they suffer from
two weaknesses: a failure to theorize about the possible

408
Relationships With Parents and Peers in Adolescence
importance of connections between parent relationships and
peer relationships and a failure to consider the active role of
youths themselves.
EXPLAINING THE CONNECTIONS BETWEEN
PARENT RELATIONSHIPS, PEER ASSOCIATION,
AND ADOLESCENT ADJUSTMENT
As revealed in the preceding discussion, adolescent adjust-
ment such as involvement in delinquency has been linked to
both parenting factors and peer factors, but the connection be-
tween the two has not been adequately explained. The expla-
nation that parents who are effective monitors are able to keep
their youths from associating with deviant peers falls apart
when one uses construct-valid measures of monitoring rather
than relying on parental knowledge measures (Kerr & Stattin,
2000; Stattin & Kerr, 2000). Similarly, authoritative parenting
has been said to work by making youths open to their parents’
socialization efforts (Darling & Steinberg, 1993), but the ef-
fects often seem to be connected more to the neglectful style
than to the authoritative style (e.g., Glasgow et al., 1997;
Lamborn et al., 1991; Steinberg et al., 1994), and neither the
direction of effects nor the mechanisms are clear. The con-
struct validity of these measures can also be questioned. As a
theoretical explanation for the ﬁndings that delinquent youths
have poor emotional bonds to their parents (e.g., Elliot,
Huizinga, & Ageton, 1985; Hawkins & Weiss, 1985; Hirschi,
1969), it has been proposed that interactions with parents can
undermine youths’ self-esteem, which causes them to choose
deviant friends who are different from their parents (Kaplan,
1982; Kaplan, Johnson, & Bailey, 1986; Kaplan, Martin, &
Johnson, 1986). But there are many missing links in this theo-
retical chain. For instance, why would youths with low self-
esteem choose deviant friends? Why would they not instead
choose very nurturing friends who would build up their self-
esteem? What kinds of interactions with parents produce low
self-esteem? And is self-esteem the really important factor, or
could it be a marker for something else?
In what follows, we offer a theoretical explanation for
these and other ﬁndings that family and parenting factors are
linked to youths’ choices of friends, such as deviant or delin-
quent friends. The mechanism that we propose leans on the
ideas that (a) adolescents have little choice about their parents,
their parent context, or interactions with their parents that
evoke strong feelings, but they have much more choice about
their peers and peer contexts; (b) peers and peer contexts are
inseparably linked; and (c) when adolescents choose certain
types of peers and peer activities, they might be choosing the
context as much as they are choosing the peers.
Parent and Peer Relationships and Their Contexts
Over the past two decades, person-context models have
received much theoretical attention (see Magnusson &
Stattin, 1998, for a review). These models advance the ideas
that individuals live and develop in multiple settings that
change over time and are active agents in their own develop-
ment. We draw upon these ideas as well.
Relationships Can Evoke Strong Feelings That Are
Psychologically Important
Interactions with others can evoke a variety of emotions such
as shame, anger, resentment, love, disappointment, and pride.
In addition to bringing about these emotions, other people
also can give us the sense that we have some degree of con-
trol over the environment or can make us feel that we are
largely under their control. Whether this is emotional or cog-
nitive is debatable, but the psychological literature—broadly
speaking—suggests that individuals experience the loss of
personal control negatively. In Rodin and Langer’s (1977)
classic nursing home study, nursing home patients who were
allowed to make their own choices about the details of small
privileges such as seeing a weekly movie and having a plant
in their rooms were happier and healthier on a whole host of
measures than were patients who got the same beneﬁts with-
out being able to exert control over them. In social psychol-
ogy, reactance theory and other research suggests that when
people feel as though someone is trying to control their free-
dom of action, they react against the threatened loss of con-
trol by adopting attitudes or taking actions that are strongly
against the would-be controller (Brehm & Brehm, 1981;
Heilman, 1976; Nail & Van Leeuwen, 1993). In Seligman’s
learned-helplessness study (Overmier & Seligman, 1967),
dogs who could not control the end of an electrical shock by
jumping out of the cage eventually exhibited behavior similar
to that of depressed people. The same lack of control over
one’s circumstances seems to underlie some forms of depres-
sion (Klein & Seligman, 1976; Peterson & Seligman, 1984;
Seligman, 1975). Interactions with others, then, can evoke
emotions that have obvious implications for people’s psycho-
logical well-being and feelings such as being overly con-
trolled that also have strong implications for well-being.
A Working Model of Parent-Child Interactions and
the Feelings They Evoke
In our own recent work, we have developed a model, shown
in Figure 16.1, of some of the family interaction processes
that are related to parents’ knowledge of their youths’ daily
activities. The model also shows the role of negative and

Explaining the Connections Between Parent Relationships, Peer Association, and Adolescent Adjustment
409
Child
disclosure
Manipulation
& failure
expectations
Manipulation
& failure
expectations
Parents’
knowledge
Parents’
trust
Child’s
feelings
about parents
Parents’
bad
reactions
Parents’
bad
reactions
Child’s
feeling
controlled
Parents’
warmth
Parents’
solicitation
Parents’
solicitation
Parents’
control
Parents’
control
Parents’
trust
Parents’
knowledge
Child
disclosure
Child’s
feelings
about parents
Child’s
feeling
controlled
Parents’
warmth
Parents’
trust
Figure 16.1
A model of bidirectional, ongoing communication and
control processes within the family.
positive feelings that interactions with parents can evoke in
the child, including the feeling of being overly controlled by
parents. We have empirically tested most of the links in this
model with cross-sectional and short-term longitudinal data.
Hence, this working model has considerable empirical
support.
Child disclosure of information about daily activities has a
central position in this model, because our studies suggest
that parents get most of their information this way and little
through their own monitoring efforts (Kerr & Stattin, 2000;
Stattin & Kerr, 2000). Because parents’ knowledge is
strongly linked to adolescent adjustment, explaining why
youths do or do not disclose has become a crucial concern for
us and for others (Darling, Cumsille, Hames, & Caldwell,
2000; Darling & Dowdy, 2000; Stattin, Kerr, & Ferrer-
Wreder, 2000).
As shown in the ﬁgure, there is much that we know
about adolescents who disclose a lot to their parents about
their daily lives. Their parents seldom react negatively (with
sarcasm, judgment, or ridicule) to their spontaneous disclo-
sure, and these adolescents do not feel overly controlled by
their parents (Kerr & Stattin, 2000). In addition, high-
disclosing adolescents expect success on difﬁcult tasks and
do not interact with people in deceptive, manipulative ways,
whereas secretive adolescents tend to expect failure and to
be deceptive and manipulative (Stattin et al., 2000). High-
disclosing youths are also low on depression, high on self-
esteem, and high on self-reported warm feelings toward
parents (Kerr & Stattin, 2000). Taken together, these ﬁnd-
ings suggest that high-disclosing adolescents have positive
experiences in the parent context, and high disclosure could
be seen as a marker for positive feelings about the parent
context.
As seen in the model, child disclosure provides parents
with knowledge, and knowledgeable parents tend to be trust-
ing (Kerr, Stattin, & Trost, 1999). Trusting parents in turn do
not react negatively to their adolescents’ disclosure (with
sarcasm, ridicule, or negative judgments), but untrusting par-
ents do tend to do so (Kerr et al., 1999). The model proposes
that parents’ trust or mistrust will affect the way they relate
to and communicate with the adolescent in the future, and
that will affect the adolescent’s willingness to disclose his or
her feelings and everyday life experiences. Thus, the ongo-
ing process continues, as shown in the upper part of Figure
16.1. The process is bidirectional in that parents act, children
react, and parents react back. For the present purposes, it is
important to note that the child’s feelings—feelings of being
overly controlled and positive or negative emotions toward
parents—are important links in this chain of actions and
reactions.

410
Relationships With Parents and Peers in Adolescence
Structural Features of Parent and Peer Contexts
We argue that over time, children will connect the feelings
that interactions with parents evoke with the context in which
those interactions take place. Some features of those parent
and peer contexts are what we call structural, meaning
that they are not unique to the particular family or peer group,
but they are part of parent or peer contexts themselves.
Structural Features of Parent Contexts Are Fixed
There are some features that are similar across families,
regardless of the particular parenting practices or the interac-
tions that take place in the family. We think of them as the
structural features of a family context in the same way that
walls and windows can be thought of as the structural
features of a room. Nearly all rooms have walls and
windows, even though they vary in details such as size and
shape, and nearly all family contexts have features such as
close interactions with adults, the presence of authority
ﬁgures, the need to share scarce resources, a certain degree
of supervision by higher-status others, some rules and struc-
ture, and the presence of behavioral values, for want of a
better term, or assumptions about how people should
behave—in general and in relation to each other. There will
of course be individual variations in the expression of these
structural features both in degree and in kind (e.g., some fam-
ilies have more rules and structure than others do; some par-
ents believe that they should make all the decisions, whereas
others give children a democratic voice in decisions).
Nonetheless, these basic structural features still exist in
families.
Structural Features of Peer Contexts Vary
There are many different peer contexts, and there are two
important ways in which peer contexts differ from each other.
First, some peer contexts are not just peer contexts because
they exist within adult-controlled settings that include struc-
tural features that are determined by adults. For instance, the
school classroom, extracurricular activities, and other orga-
nized activities such as adult-coached sports are usually
thought of as peer contexts, but they all have features that are
very similar to the family context: interaction with adults,
rules and structure, the need to share resources, authority ﬁg-
ures, supervision, and behavioral expectations. In contrast,
peer settings such as street corners, arcades, cafes, and neigh-
borhood playgrounds have few or none of the same structural
features as the parent context.
Asecond important distinction among peer contexts is that
the peers one encounters in different contexts will differ
systematically from each other. For instance, the peers who
play an organized sport at school will on average be better
adjusted and will have internalized their parents’ behavioral
values to a greater degree than will those playing the same
sport in an unstructured setting such as a neighborhood
playground (Mahoney & Stattin, in press; Mahoney et al., in
press). Similarly, youths who are hanging out in arcades,
cafes, and street corners will probably have internalized their
parents’ behavioral values to a lesser degree and will be less
well adjusted than will those in more structured, adult-
supervised situations such as theater groups, bands, orches-
tras, or choirs. Hence, different peer settings bear different
degrees of structural similarity to the parent context, and
the different peers that one encounters in those settings will
show different degrees of social adjustment, according to
adult standards.
Context Choice
The crux of our argument about family contexts and the
feelings associated with them is that adolescents use these
associations as a basis for gravitating toward some peer
contexts and away from others.
Adolescents Can Choose
With adolescence comes increasing freedom and indepen-
dence. For the ﬁrst time, adolescents are able to choose their
contexts, and they make two types of choices. First, they
choose how to divide their time between their parents and
their peers—to spend more or less time at home with the fam-
ily as opposed to being away from home with their peers.
Second, they decide which particular peers with whom to as-
sociate. Although talents, interests, and long- and short-term
goals affect the types of activities that adolescents choose,
the same activities can be pursued in different peer contexts.
Because a variety of behaviors can be socialized in those con-
texts, it is important to understand why youths choose partic-
ular peer contexts over others. We suggest that one important
factor is that the feelings that are evoked in the parent context
become associated in the child’s experience with the struc-
tural features of the family context. Then those feelings gen-
eralize to some peer contexts and not to others, making some
peer contexts more appealing than others.
The Choice of a Peer Context Can Depend Upon Feelings
About the Parent Context
Because emotions are easily classically conditioned to con-
texts, it is reasonable to believe that positive or negative emo-
tions that arise in relationships will become linked, in the

Explaining the Connections Between Parent Relationships, Peer Association, and Adolescent Adjustment
411
child’s experience, to parents, peers, and the broad and spe-
ciﬁc features of the contexts in which interactions with them
take place. It is also reasonable to believe that these emotions
generalize to similar situations. Most of us can verify this
from our own experience, because we have known people
with whom we have felt particularly valued and secure (a
trusted best friend, perhaps, or a grandparent), and we have
noticed that elements of situations in which we spent time
with that person (e.g., the smell of a backyard where we used
to play or of something that Grandmother used to bake) have
the power to evoke those good emotions even years later.
We suggest that the structural features of the parent
context that we previously described become linked to spe-
ciﬁc emotions, and those emotions then generalize to settings
with similar features. Thus, a child who has bad experiences
such as feeling overly controlled in the parent context
connects those negative feelings with contexts that have
similar structural features (e.g., close interaction with adults,
rules and structure, authority ﬁgures, etc.). There are many
reasons that negative emotions might arise. Parents might
have an authoritarian or parent-centered philosophy that does
not lead them to respond well to the child’s wishes or
demands. The child might have a difﬁcult temperament or be
overly active or impulsive, thus leaving parents believing that
they have no choice but to exert a lot of control. Or there
might be some combination of or interaction between the
parents’ characteristics and the child’s that results in bad
feelings. Whatever the cause, the child will undoubtedly end
up associating negative feelings with the parents’ particular
behavioral values and styles of interacting, and we suggest
that the child will also associate negative feelings with the
broader structural features of the parent context—features
such as close interaction with adults, supervision, the pres-
ence of authority ﬁgures, rules and structure, and the need to
share resources.
In our formulation, this association of negative or positive
feelings with the parent context becomes important when the
child reaches adolescence and is able to choose among dif-
ferent peer contexts. At that time, those who have associated
negative experiences with the structural features of the parent
context ﬁnd that those negative feelings generalize to peer
contexts that have similar features. Naturally, they gravitate
away from such contexts. Avoiding those situations might
then become reinforcing in its own right because it could
bring a pleasant relief from the negative feelings that are
linked to the parent context. In our view, avoiding situations
that make one feel bad could be an important reason that
some youths choose to hang out on the streets with poorly ad-
justed peers while others choose to participate in organized
activities with better-adjusted peers. It also helps to explain
why those who choose to hang out on the streets with poorly
adjusted peers have been found to have poor relationships
with their parents.
Context Choice as an Ongoing Process
Through the direct and indirect processes outlined previ-
ously, parents can inﬂuence an adolescent’s initial engage-
ment with certain types of peers. Adolescents will choose
certain peer groups or leisure settings on the basis of their
relationships—good or bad—with parents. After the adoles-
cent is a regular part of a speciﬁc setting or peer group, the
parents’ reactions can then maintain, escalate, or inhibit the
adolescents’ activities. For example, interactions could
develop between (even well-meaning) parents and children
that leave the child with negative feelings about the parent
context. That child might then seek to avoid those feelings in
the peer context by gravitating away from school activities
and other adult-led, structured activities. In doing so, the
child might encounter other peers who are also gravitating
away from adult inﬂuences.
Our data support this idea in that low child disclosure,
negative feelings toward parents, and feelings of being overly
controlled by parents are all concurrently linked to higher
delinquency, to belonging to deviant peer groups, and to
doing poorly in school both socially and academically
(Kerr & Stattin, 2000; Stattin & Kerr, 2000). After the child
has joined a group of peers who have bad feelings about au-
thority, rules and structure, and adult contact, these peers
might coax or reinforce each other into more and more de-
viant activities, as suggested by the work of Dishion and
colleagues (Dishion, McCord, & Poulin, 1999; Dishion,
Spracklen, Andrews, & Patterson, 1996; Poulin, Dishion, &
Haas, 1999). Parents’ disapproving responses to the child’s
association with deviant peers and the slide into delinquent
behavior might make the child feel even more negative about
the parent context, thus exaggerating the contrast between the
negative feelings that are associated with the parent context
and the relief from negative feelings that is associated with
the peer context; this could only serve to reinforce the child’s
ties to those particular peers. This prediction is consistent
with Fuligni and Eccles’s (1993) ﬁnding that what they called
“extreme peer orientation” in early adolescence was associ-
ated with believing that parents were not loosening their
control and not allowing the youth a voice in decision-
making.
What is likely to happen next is consistent with past
research on parental monitoring (operationalized as parents’
knowledge of the youth’s activities) and on adolescent life
values. If youths become entrenched in a peer context that
bears minimal resemblance to the parent context, they will
probably avoid telling their parents whom they are with and

412
Relationships With Parents and Peers in Adolescence
what they are doing, thus limiting their parents’knowledge of
their activities in the peer context—which can help explain
why lowknowledge is sorobustly correlated with delinquency
(see Dishion & McMahon, 1998, for a review). Furthermore,
these adolescents will probably place greater value and impor-
tance on these peer activities and the things that get attention
and respect from these peers (Cohen & Cohen, 1996; Stattin &
Kerr, in press; see also Bear & Rys, 1994). One can easily
imagine that parents’ efforts to track or control these adoles-
cents’ activities will be ineffective (Kerr & Stattin, 2000;
Stattin & Kerr, 2000). In the most extreme scenario, even well-
meaning parents might give up on such a child, withdrawing
both their emotional support and their communication and
control efforts; this provides an interpretation different from
that usually offered for the common ﬁnding that delinquents
tend to have disengaged or uninvolved parents.
Thus, we argue that peers and parents can both contribute
to a certain type of behavior at different points in time in
ways that do not show up in cross-sectional studies. For many
behaviors, peers seem to have more inﬂuence than parents
do; but parents might have played a critical role in the
adolescent’s choice of a particular peer context, and parents’
reactions to that choice might stabilize a negative trajectory.
Longitudinal data are needed to provide a more complete
understanding of these processes.
CONCLUSIONS
In a recent presidential address, the president of the Society
for Research on Adolescence declared optimistically that “we
can stop asking what type of parenting most positively affects
[italics added] adolescent development. We know the answer
to this question.” (Steinberg, 2001, p. 13). In this chapter, we
too have argued that researchers should stop asking about
unidirectional effects concerning both parenting and peer
relationships, but not because we already know the answers;
they were the wrong questions.
What exists in the parent and peer literatures extant are
basically snapshot views of parent, peer, and individual
characteristics and their correlations with certain aspects
of adjustment (or with each other). These views are beneﬁcial
in that they have illuminated the global aspects of family
and peer relationships that are likely to be linked to behavior
problems and psychopathology. They have not, however,
provided much knowledge about the mechanisms involved,
the processes operating over time, or possible bidirectional
effects. Construct validity can be a problem, as can the as-
sumptions that the intervening processes are known. Another
problem is that these studies are sometimes based on
simplifying assumptions that restrict the generalizability of
the ﬁndings, such as when studies of friendships are based
solely on peers in the classroom.
In this chapter, we have advanced the notion that adoles-
cents are active agents in their own development. Within the
constraints of the surrounding physical and social ecology—
and based on their personalities, interests, and talents—they
choose their different leisure contexts. We argue that this
choice has been largely ignored in the literatures on both par-
enting and peer relationships, and we have offered a theoret-
ical explanation of why youths’ choices of peer contexts are
not independent of their home environments.
Overall, in order to advance knowledge in this area, re-
searchers must be willing to do the difﬁcult studies. By difﬁ-
cult studies, we mean studies that (a) begin with bidirectional
or recursive models; (b) take the person-context idea
seriously and include it in the design; (c) are longitudinal in
order to capture development and experimental in order to
test causality and hypothesized mechanisms; (d) speciﬁcally
measure and study processes and mechanisms rather than
rely on assumptions about them; and (e) go to extra lengths to
capture the phenomena that actually exist, in ecologically
valid contexts, even when that makes data collection difﬁcult
(e.g., adolescent peer groups outside of the classroom).
Adolescence is a time of choices. Adolescents are free for
the ﬁrst time to make individual choices that they have never
had the freedom to make before, and they face many oppor-
tunities to go astray. The ultimate goal of research is to
understand why some adolescents do go astray and how that
could have been prevented. Undoubtedly, there will be many
different answers to the question why—each with its own im-
plications for prevention and intervention. But these answers
will come from an understanding of adolescents in their com-
plexity as both active and reactive agents who are choosing
their contexts for complex reasons. Developing this under-
standing is the challenge that lies ahead.
REFERENCES
Adler, P. A., & Adler, P. (1998). Peer power: Preadolescent culture
and identity. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
Agnew, R. (1991). The interactive effect of peer variables on delin-
quency. Criminology, 29, 47–72.
Agnew, R., & Peterson, D. M. (1989). Leisure and delinquency.
Social Problems, 36, 332–350.
Ainsworth, M. D. S. (1989). Attachments beyond infancy. American
Psychologist, 44, 709–716.
Ainsworth, M. D. S. (1990). Some considerations regarding theory
and assessment relevant to attachments beyond infancy. In M. T.

References
413
Greenberg, D. Cicchetti, & E. M. Cummings (Eds.), Attachment
in the preschool years: Theory, research, and intervention
(pp. 463–487). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Ainsworth, M. D. S., Blehar, M. C., Waters, E., & Wall, S. (1978).
Patterns of attachment: A psychological study of the Strange
Situation. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Ainsworth, M. D. S., & Marvin, R. S. (1995). On shaping of attach-
ment theory and research: An interview with Mary D. S.
Ainsworth (Fall 1994). In E. Waters, B. E. Vaughn, G. Posada, &
K. Kondo-Ikemura (Eds.), Caregiving, cultural, and cognitive
perspectives on secure-base behavior and working models.
Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development,
60(2–3, Serial No. 244).
Allen, J. P. (1989). Social impact of age mixing and age segregation
in school: A context-sensitive investigation. Journal of Educa-
tional Psychology, 81, 408–416.
Allen, J. P., Aber, L., & Leadbeater, B. (1990). Adolescent problem
behaviors: The inﬂuence of attachment and autonomy. Psychi-
atric Clinics of North America, 13, 455–467.
Allen, J. P., Moore, C., Kuperminc, G., & Bell, K. (1998). Attach-
ment and adolescent psychosocial functioning. Child Develop-
ment, 69(5), 1406–1419.
Allen, J. P., Philliber, S., Herrling, S., & Kuperminc, G. P. (1997).
Preventing teen pregnancy and academic failure: Experimental
evaluation of a developmentally based approach. Child Develop-
ment, 64, 729–742.
Anderson, K. E., Lytton, H., & Romney, D. M. (1986). Mothers’
interactions with normal and conduct-disordered boys: Who
affects whom? Developmental Psychology, 22, 604–609.
Avenevoli, S., Sessa, F. M., & Steinberg, L. (1999). Family
structure, parenting practices and adolescent adjustment: An
ecological examination. In E. M. Hetherington (Ed.), Coping
with divorce, single parenting, and remarriage: A risk and
resiliency perspective (pp. 65–90). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Bagwell, C. L., Newcomb, A. F., & Bukowski, W. M. (1998). Pread-
olescent friendship and peer rejection as predictors of adult
adjustment. Child Development, 69, 140–153.
Barker, R. G. (1964). Ecological psychology: Concepts and meth-
ods for studying the environment of human behavior. Stanford,
CA: Stanford University Press.
Bartholomew, K., & Horowitz, L. M. (1991). Attachment styles
among young adults: A test of a four-category model. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 61(2), 226–244.
Baumrind, D. (1966). Effects of authoritative parental control on
child behavior. Child Development, 37, 887–907.
Baumrind, D. (1967). Child care practices anteceding three patterns
of preschool behavior. Genetic Psychology Monographs, 75,
43–88.
Baumrind, D. (1968). Authoritarian vs. authoritative parental
control. Adolescence, 3, 255–272.
Baumrind, D. (1971). Current patterns of parental authority.
Developmental Psychology Monographs, 4, 1–103.
Baumrind, D. (1983). Rejoinder to Lewis’s reinterpretation of
parental ﬁrm control effects: Are authoritative families really
harmonious? Psychological Bulletin, 94, 132–142.
Baumrind, D. (1991). The inﬂuence of parenting style on adolescent
competence and substance abuse. Journal of Early Adolescence,
1, 56–95.
Baumrind, D., & Black, A. E. (1967). Socialization practices associ-
ated with dimensions of competence in preschool boys and girls.
Child Development, 38, 291–327.
Bear, G. G., & Rys, G. S. (1994). Moral reasoning, classroom
behavior, and sociometric status among elementary school
children. Developmental Psychology, 30, 633–638.
Bell, R. Q. (1968). A reinterpretation of the direction of effects in
studies of socialization. Psychological Review, 75, 81–95.
Bell, R. Q., & Chapman, M. (1986). Child effects in studies using
experimental or brief longitudinal approaches to socialization.
Developmental Psychology, 22, 595–603.
Berndt, T. J. (1982). The features and effects of friendship in early
adolescence. Child Development, 53, 1447–1460.
Biesecker, G. (2001). Attachment to parents and peers and emotion
regulation in middle adolescence. Unpublished doctoral disser-
tation, Tufts University, Medford, MA.
Biglan, A., Duncan, T. E., Ary, D. V., & Smolkowski, K. (1995).
Peer and parental inﬂuences on adolescent tobacco use. Journal
of Behavioral Medicine, 18, 315–330.
Bowlby, J. (1982). Attachment and loss: Vol. 1. Attachment. New
York: Basic Books. (Original work published 1969)
Bowlby, J. (1988). A secure base. New York: Basic Books.
Brehm, S., & Brehm, J. W. (1981). Psychological reactance: A
theory of freedom and control. New York: Academic Press.
Brennan, K. A., Clark, C. L., & Shaver, P. R. (1998). Self-reported
measurement of adult attachment: An integrative overview. In
J. A. Simpson & W. S. Rholes (Eds.), Attachment theory and
close relationships (pp. 46–76). New York: Guilford Press.
Bretherton, I. (1985). Attachment theory: Retrospect and prospect.
In I. Bretherton & E. Waters (Eds.), Growing points in attach-
ment theory and research. Monographs of the Society for
Research in Child Development, 50(1–2, Serial No. 209), 3–35.
Bronfenbrenner, U. (1988). Interacting systems in human develop-
ment. Research paradigms: Present and future. In N. Bolger,
A. Caspi, G. Downey, & M. Moorehouse (Eds.), Persons in
context: Developmental processes (pp. 217–243). New York:
Guilford Press.
Brook, J. S., Nomura, C., & Cohen, P. (1989). A network of inﬂu-
ences on adolescent drug involvement: Neighborhood, school,
peer, and family. Genetic, Social, and General Psychology
Monographs, 115, 125–145.
Brown, B. B. (1990). Peer groups and peer cultures. In S. S.
Feldman & G. R. Elliott (Eds.), At the threshold: The developing
adolescent (pp. 171–196). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.

414
Relationships With Parents and Peers in Adolescence
Brown, B. B., Mounts, N., Lamborn, S. D., & Steinberg, L. (1993).
Parenting practices and peer group afﬁliation in adolescence.
Child Development, 64, 467–482.
Brown, G. W., Harris, T. O., & Peto, J. (1973). Life events and psy-
chiatric disorders: II. Nature of causal link. Psychological Medi-
cine, 3(2), 159–176.
Buss, D. M. (1981). Predicting parent-child interactions from chil-
dren’s activity level. Developmental Psychology, 17, 59–65.
Cairns, R. B., & Cairns, B. D. (1994). Lifelines and risks: Pathways
of youth in our time. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Calkins, S. D., & Fox, N. A. (1992). The relations among infant
temperament, security of attachment, and behavioral inhibition
at twenty-four months. Child Development, 63, 1456–1472.
Campbell, A. C. (1980). Friendship as a factor in male and female
delinquency. In H. C. Foot, A. J. Chapman, & J. R. Smith (Eds.),
Friendship and social relations in children (pp. 365–389). New
York: Wiley.
Cassidy, J. (1994). Emotion regulation: Inﬂuences of attachment re-
lationships. In N. A. Fox (Ed.), The development of emotion reg-
ulation: Biological and behavioral considerations. Monographs
of the Society for Research in Child Development, 59(2–3, Serial
No. 240), 228–249.
Cernkovich, S. A., & Giordano, P. C. (1987). Family relationships
and delinquency. Criminology, 24, 295–321.
Chassin, L., Pillow, D. R., Curran, P. J., Molina, B. S., & Barrera, M.
(1993). Relation of parental alcoholism to early adolescent
substance use: A test of three mediating mechanisms. Journal of
Abnormal Psychology, 102, 3–19.
Cochran, M. M., & Bo, I. (1987). Connections between the social
networks, family involvement and behavior of adolescent
males in Norway (Tech. Rep. No. 75). University of Rogaland,
Norway.
Cohen, P., & Cohen, J. (1996). Life values and adolescent mental
health. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Coleman, J. C. (1978). Current contradictions in adolescent theory.
Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 7(1), 1–11.
Collins, N. L., & Read, S. J. (1990). Adult attachment, working
models, and relationship quality in dating couples. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 58, 644–663.
Conger, R. D., & Rueter, M. A. (1996). Siblings, parents, and peers:
A longitudinal study of social inﬂuences in adolescent risk for
alcohol use and abuse. In G. Brody (Ed.), Sibling relationships:
Their causes and consequences (pp. 1–30). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Cooper, M. L., Shaver, P. R., & Collins, N. L. (1998). Attachment
styles, emotion regulation, and adjustment in adolescence. Inter-
national Journal of Behavioral Development, 25(4), 331–343.
Crittenden, P. (1992). Attachment in the preschool years. Develop-
ment and Psychopathology, 4(2), 209–241.
Crockenberg, S. B. (1981). Infant irritability, mother responsive-
ness, and social support inﬂuences on the security of mother
infant attachment. Child Development, 52, 857–868.
Crouter, A. C., MacDermid, S. M., McHale, S. M., & Perry-Jenkins,
M. (1990). Parental monitoring and perceptions of children’s
school performance and conduct in dual- and single-earner
families. Developmental Psychology, 26, 649–657.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1990). Flow: The psychology of optimal
experience. New York: Harper & Row.
Csikszentmihalyi, M., & Larson, R. (1984). Being adolescent. New
York: Basic Books.
Csikszentmihalyi, M., Rathunde, K., Whalen, S., & Wong, M.
(1993). Talented teenagers: The roots of success and failure.
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Darling, N., Cumsille, P., Hames, K., & Caldwell, L. L. (2000).
Adolescents as active agents in the monitoring process: Disclo-
sure strategies and motivations. Under editorial review.
Darling, N., & Dowdy, B. (2000). Monitoring, disclosure, and trust:
Mothers’ and adolescents’ perspectives. Manuscript submitted
for publication.
Darling, N., & Steinberg, L. (1993). Parenting style as context:
an integrative model. Psychological Bulletin, 113(3), 487–
496.
Dishion, T. J., Capaldi, D., Spracklen, K. M., & Li, F. (1995). Peer
ecology of male adolescent drug use. Development and
Psychopathology, 7, 803–824.
Dishion, T. J., French, D. C., & Patterson, G. R. (1995). The
development and ecology of antisocial behavior. In D. Cicchetti
& D. J. Cohen (Eds.), Developmental psychology: Vol. 2. Risk,
disorder, and adaptation: Wiley series on personality processes
(pp. 421–471). New York: Wiley.
Dishion, T. J., McCord, J., & Poulin, F. (1999). When interventions
harm: Peer groups and problem behavior. American Psycholo-
gist, 54, 755–764.
Dishion, T. J., & McMahon, R. J. (1998). Parental monitoring and
the prevention of child and adolescent problem behavior: A
conceptual and empirical formulation. Clinical Child and Fam-
ily Psychology Review, 1, 61–75.
Dishion, T. J., Patterson, G. R., & Griesler, P. C. (1994). Peer
adaptations in the development of antisocial behavior. In L. R.
Huesmann (Ed.), Current perspectives on aggressive behavior
(pp. 61–95). New York: Plenum Press.
Dishion, T. J., Spracklen, K. M., Andrews, D. W., & Patterson, G. R.
(1996). Deviancy training in male adolescents friendships.
Behavior Therapy, 27, 373–390.
Dix, T., Ruble, D. N., Grusec, J. E., & Nixon, S. (1986). Social cog-
nition in parents: Inferential and affective reactions to children of
three age levels. Child Development, 57, 879–894.
Dunphy, D. C. (1963). The social structure of urban adolescent peer
groups. Society, 26, 230–246.
Eccles, J. S., Early, D., Frasier, K., Belansky, E., & McCarthy,
K. (1997). The relation of connection, regulation, and support for
autonomy to adolescents’ functioning. Journal of Adolescent
Research, 12, 263–286.

References
415
Eder, D. (1985). The cycle of popularity: Interpersonal relations
among female adolescents. Sociology of Education, 58,
154–165.
Elliott, D. S., Huizinga, D., & Ageton, S. S. (1985). Explaining
delinquency and drug use. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Elliott, D. S., Huizinga, D., & Menard, S. (1989). Multiple problem
youth: Delinquency, substance use, and mental health problems.
New York: Springer-Verlag.
Engels, R. C. M. E., Finkenauer, C., Meeus, W., & Dekovic, M.
(2001). Parental attachment and adolescents’
emotional
adjustment: The associations with social skills and rela-
tional competence. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 48(4),
428–439.
Engels, R. C. M. E., Knibbe, R. A., de Vries, H., Drop, M. J., &
van Breukelen, G. J. P. (1999). Inﬂuences of parental and
best friends’ smoking and drinking on adolescent use: A
longitudinal study. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 29,
337–361.
Engels, R. C. M. E., Knibbe, R. A., Drop, M. J., & de Haan, J. T.
(1997). Homogeneity of smoking behavior in peer groups: Inﬂu-
ence or selection? Health Education and Behavior, 24, 801–811.
Ennett, S., & Bauman, K. (1994). The contribution of inﬂuence and
selection to adolescent peer group homogeneity: The case of
adolescent cigarette smoking. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 67, 653–663.
Erikson, E. H. (1959). Identity and the life cycle. New York: W. W.
Norton.
Farrell, A. D., & Danish, S. J. (1993). Peer drug associations and
emotional restraint: Causes or consequences of adolescents’drug
use? Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 61,
327–334.
Farrington, D. P. (1998). Youth crime and antisocial behavior. In A.
Campbell & S. Muncer (Eds.), The social child (pp. 353–392).
Hove, UK: Erlbaum.
Fergusson, D. M., Lynskey, M. T., & Horwood, L. J. (1996). Factors
associated with continuity and changes in disruptive behavior
patterns between childhood and adolescence. Journal of
Abnormal Child Psychology, 24, 533–553.
Fine, G. A. (1980). The natural history of preadolescent male friend-
ship groups. In H. C. Foot, A. J. Chapman, & J. R. Smith (Eds.),
Friendship and social relations in children (pp. 293–320). New
York: Wiley.
Fine, G. A., & Glassner, B. (1979). The promise and problems
of participant observation with children. Urban Life, 8, 153–
174.
Fisher, L. A., & Bauman, K. E. (1988). Inﬂuence and selection in the
friendship-adolescent relationship: Findings from studies of
adolescent smoking and drinking. Journal of Applied Social
Psychology, 18, 289–314.
Flannery, D. J., Vazsonyi, A. T., Torquati, J., & Fridrich, A.
(1994). Ethnic and gender differences in risk for early adolescent
substance use. Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 23, 195–213.
Fletcher, A. C., Darling, N. E., Steinberg, L., & Dornbusch, S.
(1995). The company they keep: Relation of adolescents’
adjustment and behavior to their friends’ perceptions of authori-
tative parenting in the social network. Developmental Psychol-
ogy, 31, 300–310.
Fletcher, A. H., Flannery, D. J., & Mekos, D. (2000). Parental
inﬂuences on adolescent involvement in community activities.
Journal of Research on Adolescence, 10(1), 29–48.
Fridrich, A. H., & Flannery, D. J. (1995). The effects of ethnicity
and acculturation on early adolescent delinquency. Journal of
Child and Family Studies, 4, 69–87.
Fuligni, A. J., & Eccles, J. S. (1993). Perceived parent child
relationships and early adolescents’ orientation toward peers.
Developmental Psychology, 29, 622–632.
Galambos, N. L., & Silbereisen, R. K. (1987). Substance use in
West German youth: A longitudinal study of adolescents’ use of
alcohol and tobacco. Journal of Adolescent Research, 2, 161–
174.
Ganiban, J., Barnett, D., & Cicchetti, D. (2000). Negative reactivity
and attachment: Down syndrome’s contribution to the attach-
ment-temperament debate. Development and Psychopathology,
12(1), 1–21.
Ge, X., Conger, R. D., Cadoret, R. J., Neiderhiser, J. M., Yates, W.,
Troughton, E., & Stewart, M. A. (1996). The developmental in-
terface between nature and nurture: A mutual inﬂuence model of
child antisocial behavior and parent behaviors. Developmental
Psychology, 32, 574–589.
George, C., Kaplan, N., & Main, M. (1985). The Berkeley Adult
Attachment Interview. Unpublished protocol, Department of
Psychology, University of California, Berkeley.
George, T. P., & Hartmann, D. P. (1996). Friendship networks of
unpopular average, and popular children. Child Development,
67, 2301–2316.
Giordano, P. C., Cernkovich, S. A., & Pugh, M. D. (1986). Friend-
ships and delinquency. American Journal of Sociology, 91,
1170–1202.
Glasgow, K. L., Dornbusch, S. M., Troyer, L., Steinberg, L., &
Ritter, L. (1997). Parenting styles, adolescents’ attributions, and
educational outcomes in nine heterogeneous high schools. Child
Development, 68, 507–529.
Goldsmith, H. H., & Alansky, J. A. (1987). Maternal and infant
temperamental predictors of attachment: A meta-analytic re-
view. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 55(6),
805–816.
Goldstein, A. P. (1994). Delinquent gangs. In L. R. Huesmann (Ed.),
Aggressive behavior: Current perspectives (pp. 255–273). New
York: Plenum Press.
Greenberg, M. T. (1999). Attachment and psychopathology in child-
hood. In J. Cassidy & P. R. Shaver (Eds.), Handbook of attach-
ment: Theory, research, and clinical applications (pp. 469–496).
New York: Guilford Press.
Harris, J. R. (1995). Where is the child’s environment? A group so-
cialization theory of development. Psychological Review, 102,
458–489.

416
Relationships With Parents and Peers in Adolescence
Harris, J. R. (1998). The nurture assumption: Why children turn out
the way they do. New York: Free Press.
Hartup, W. W. (1983). Peer relations. In E. M. Hetherington (Ed.),
Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 4. Socialization, personality,
and social development (4th ed., pp. 103–196). New York:
Wiley.
Hartup, W. W. (1992). Friendships and their developmental signiﬁ-
cance. In H. McGurk (Ed.), Childhood social development: Con-
temporary perspectives (pp. 175–205). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Hartup, W. W. (1996). The company they keep: Friendships and
their developmental signiﬁcance. Child Development, 67, 1–13.
Hastings, P. D., & Rubin, K. H. (1999). Predicting mothers’ beliefs
about preschool-aged children’s social behavior: Evidence for
maternal attitudes moderating child effects. Child Development,
70, 722–741.
Hawkins, J. D., & Weiss, J. G. (1985). The social development
model: An integrated approach to delinquency prevention.
Journal of Primary Prevention, 6, 73–97.
Hazan, C., & Shaver, P. R. (1987). Romantic love conceptualized
as an attachment process. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 52, 511–524.
Heilman, M. E. (1976). Oppositional behavior as a function of
inﬂuence attempt intensity and retaliation threat. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 33, 574–578.
Hirschi, T. (1969). Causes of delinquency. Berkeley: University of
California Press.
Iannotti, R. J., Bush, P. J., & Weinfurt, K. P. (1996). Perceptions of
friends’ use of alcohol, cigarettes, and marijuana among urban
schoolchildren: A longitudinal analysis. Addictive Behaviors, 21,
615–632.
Jackson, S.A., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1999). Flow in sports: The
keys to optimal experiences and performances. Champaign, IL:
Human Kinetics Books.
Jones, M. B., & Offord, D. R. (1989). Reduction of antisocial be-
havior in poor children by nonschool skill-development. Journal
of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 30, 737–750.
Kandel, D. B. (1978). Similarity in real-life adolescent friendship
pairs. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 36, 306–312.
Kandel, D. B. (1985). On processes of peer inﬂuences in adolescent
drug use: A developmental perspective. Advances in Alcohol and
Substance Abuse, 4, 139–163.
Kandel, D. B. (1996). Processes of peer inﬂuences in adolescence.
In R. K. Silbereisen, K. Eyferth, & G. Rudinger (Eds.), Develop-
ment as action in context: Problem behaviors and normal youth
development (pp. 203–227). Heidelberg, Germany: Springer-
Verlag.
Kaplan, H. B. (1982). Self-attitudes and deviant behavior: New
directions for theory and research. Youth and Society, 14, 185–211.
Kaplan, H. B., Johnson, R. J., & Bailey, C. A. (1986). Self-rejection
and the explanation of deviance: Reﬁnement and elaboration of
a latent structure. Social Psychological Quarterly, 49, 110–128.
Kaplan, H. B., Martin, S. S., & Johnson, R. J. (1986). Self-rejection
and the explanation of deviance: Speciﬁcation of the structure
among the latent constructs. American Journal of Sociology, 92,
384–411.
Kenny, M. E. (1987). The extent and function of parental attachment
among ﬁrst-year college students. Journal of Youth and Adoles-
cence, 16, 17–29.
Kerr, M., & Stattin, H. (2000). What parents know, how they know
it, and several forms of adolescent adjustment: Further evidence
for a reinterpretation of monitoring. Developmental Psychology,
36, 366–380.
Kerr, M., Stattin, H., & Trost, K. (1999). To know you is to trust
you: Parents’ trust is rooted in child disclosure of information.
Journal of Adolescence, 22, 737–752.
Kiesner, J. (2000, December). Peer relations across settings: Mea-
surement issues and relations with individual adjustment. Paper
presented at the Peer Research Workshop, Örebro, Sweden.
Kinney, D. A. (1993). From nerds to normals: The recovery of
identity among adolescents from middle school to high school.
Sociology of Education, 66, 21–40.
Kirchler, E., Palmonari, A., & Pombeni, M. L. (1996). Developmen-
tal tasks and adolescents’ relationships with their peers and their
family. In S. Jackson & H. Rodriguez-Tomé (Eds.), Adolescence
and its social worlds (pp. 145–167). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Klein, D. C., & Seligman, M. E. P. (1976). Reversal of performance
deﬁcits and perceptual deﬁcits in learned helplessness and
depression. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 85, 11–26.
Kobak, R., & Cole, H. (1994). Attachment and meta-monitoring:
Implications for adolescent autonomy and psychopathology.
In D. Cicchetti & S. L. Toth (Eds.), Rochester Symposium on
Developmental Psychopathology: Vol. 5. Disorders and dysfunc-
tions of the self (pp. 267–297). Rochester, NY: University of
Rochester Press.
Kobak, R., & Sceery, A. (1988). Attachment in late adolescence:
Working models, affect regulation, and representations of self
and others. Child Development, 59, 135–146.
Kochanska, G. (1998). Mother-child relationship, child fearfulness,
and emerging attachment: A short-term longitudinal study.
Developmental Psychology, 34, 480–490.
Ladd, G. W. (1983). Social networks of popular, average, and
rejected children in school settings. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly,
29, 283–307.
Ladd, G. W. (1989). Children’s social competence and social
supports: Precursors of early school adjustment? In B. H.
Schneider, G. Attili, J. Nadel, & R. P. Weissberg (Eds.), Social
competence in developmental perspective. NATO Advanced Sci-
ence Institutes series: Series D. Behavioural and social sciences
(Vol. 51, pp. 277–291). Norwell, MA: Kluwer.
Lamborn, S. D., Mounts, N. S., Steinberg, L., & Dornbusch, S. M.
(1991). Patterns of competence and adjustment among adoles-
cents from authoritative, authoritarian, indulgent and neglectful
families. Child Development, 62, 1049–1065.

References
417
Laub, J. H., & Sampson, R. J. (1988). Unraveling families and
delinquency: A reanalysis of the Gluecks’ data. Criminology, 26,
355–380.
Leibner, M. J., & Wacker, M. E. E. (1997). A theoretical and empir-
ical assessment of power-control theory and single-mother fam-
ilies. Youth and Society, 28, 317–350.
Lerner, R. M. (1996). Relative plasticity, integration, temporality,
and diversity in human development: A developmental contex-
tual perspective about theory, process, and method. Develop-
mental Psychology, 32(4), 781–786.
Lerner, R. M., & Spanier, G. B. (Eds.). (1978). Child inﬂuences on
marital and family interaction: A lifespan perspective. New
York: Academic Press.
Lewis, C. (1981). The effects of parental ﬁrm control: A reinterpre-
tation of ﬁndings. Psychological Bulletin, 90(3), 547–563.
Lewis, M., & Rosenblum, L. A. (1974). The effect of the infant on its
caregiver. New York: Wiley.
Loeber, R. (1991). Antisocial behavior: More enduring than change-
able? Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry, 30, 383–397.
Lytton, H. (1990). Child and parent effects in boys’ conduct
disorder: A reinterpretation. Developmental Psychology, 26,
683–697.
Lytton, H. (2000). Toward a model of family-environmental and
child-biological inﬂuences on development. Developmental
Review, 20, 150–179.
Maccoby, E. E., & Martin, J. A. (1983). Socialization in the context
of the family: parent-child interaction. In P. Mussen & E. M.
Hetherington (Eds.), Handbook of Child Psychology (Vol. 4,
pp. 1–101). New York: Wiley.
Maggs, J. L., & Galambos, N. L. (1993). Alternative structural mod-
els for understanding adolescent problem behavior in two-earner
families. Journal of Early Adolescence, 13, 79–101.
Magnusson, D., & Stattin, H. (1998). Person-context interaction
theories. In W. Damon & R. M. Lerner (Eds.), Handbook of child
psychology: Vol. 1. Theoretical models of human development
(pp. 685–759). New York: Wiley.
Mahoney, J. L. (2000). Participation in school extracurricular activ-
ities as a moderator in the development of antisocial patterns.
Child Development, 71, 502–516.
Mahoney, J. L., & Stattin, H. (2000). Leisure time activities and
adolescent anti-social behavior: The role of structure and social
context. Journal of Adolescence, 23, 113–127.
Mahoney, J. L., Stattin, H., & Magnusson, D. (2001). Youth recre-
ation centre participation and criminal offending: A 20-year lon-
gitudinal study of Swedish boys. International Journal of
Behavioral Development, 25(6), 509–520.
Marcus, R. F. (1996). The friendships of delinquents. Adolescence,
31, 145–158.
Marvin, R. S., & Britner, P. A. (1999). Normative development: The
ontogeny of attachment. In J. Cassidy & P. R. Shaver (Eds.),
Handbook of attachment theory, research, and clinical applica-
tions (pp. 44–67). New York: Guilford Press.
McCord, J. (1978). A 30-year follow-up of treatment effects.
American Psychologist, 33, 284–289.
McCord, J. (1986). Instigation and insulation: How families affect
antisocial aggression. In J. Block, D. Olweus, & M. R. Yarrow
(Eds.), Development of antisocial and prosocial behavior
(pp. 343–357). New York: Academic Press.
McLaughlin, M. W., Irby, M. A., & Langman, J. (1994). Urban
sanctuaries: Neighborhood organizations in the lives and futures
of inner-city youth. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Metzler, C. W., Noell, J., Biglan, A., Ary, D., & Smolkowski, K.
(1994). The social context for risky sexual behavior among ado-
lescents. Journal of Behavioral Medicine, 17, 419–438.
Mink, I. T., & Nihira, K. (1986). Family life-styles and child behav-
iors: A study of direction of effects. Developmental Psychology,
22, 610–616.
Mofﬁtt, T. E. (1993). Adolescence-limited and life-course-persistent
antisocial behavior: A developmental taxonomy. Psychological
Review, 100, 674–701.
Mounts, N. S., & Steinberg, L. (1995). An ecological analysis of
peer inﬂuence on adolescent grade point average and drug use.
Developmental Psychology, 31, 915–922.
Mulhern, R. K., Jr., & Passman, R. H. (1981). Parental discipline as
affected by the sex of the parent, the sex of the child, and the
child’s apparent responsiveness to discipline. Developmental
Psychology, 17, 604–613.
Nail, P. R., & Van Leeuwen, M. D. (1993). An analysis and restruc-
turing of the diamond model of social response. Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin, 19, 106–116.
Nye, F. I. (1958). Family relationships and delinquent behavior.
New York: Wiley.
Oetting. E. R., & Donnermeyer, J. F. (1998). Primary socialization
theory: The etiology of drug use and deviance: I. Substance Use
and Misuse, 33, 995–1026.
Olweus, D. (1979). Stability of aggressive reaction patterns in
males: A review. Psychological Bulletin, 86, 852–875.
Overmier, J. B., & Seligman, M. E. P. (1967). Effects of in-
escapable shock upon subsequent escape and avoidance learning.
Journal of Comparative and Physiological Psychology, 63, 23–33.
Parker, J. G., & Asher, S. R. (1993). Friendship and friendship qual-
ity in middle childhood: Links with peer group acceptance and
feelings of loneliness and social dissatisfaction. Developmental
Psychology, 29, 611–621.
Parker, J. G., Rubin, K. H., Price, J. M., & DeRosier, M. E. (1995).
Peer relationships, child development, and adjustment: A
developmental psychopathology perspective. In D. Cicchetti &
D. Cohen (Eds.), Developmental psychopathology (Vol. 2,
pp. 96–161). New York: Wiley.
Passman, R. H., & Blackwelder, D. E. (1981). Rewarding and pun-
ishing by mothers: The inﬂuence of progressive changes in the

418
Relationships With Parents and Peers in Adolescence
quality of their sons’apparent behavior. Developmental Psychol-
ogy, 17, 614–619.
Patterson, G. R., DeBaryshe, B. D., & Ramsey, E. (1989). A
developmental perspective on antisocial behavior. American
Psychologist, 44, 329–335.
Patterson, G. R., Reid, J. B., & Dishion, T. (1992). Antisocial boys.
Eugene, OR: Castilia.
Patterson, G. R., & Stouthamer-Loeber, M. (1984). The correlation
of family management practices and delinquency. Child Devel-
opment, 55, 1299–1307.
Peterson, C., & Seligman, M. E. P. (1984). Causal explanations as a
risk factor for depression: Theory and evidence. Psychological
Review, 91, 347–374.
Plomin, R., & Daniels, D. (1987). Why are children in the same
family so different from one another? Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 10, 1–16.
Plomin, R., Reiss, D., Hetherington, E. M., & Howe, G. (1994).
Nature and nurture: Genetic inﬂuences on measures of family
environment. Developmental Psychology, 30, 32–43.
Poulin, F., Dishion, T. J., & Haas, E. (1999). The peer inﬂuence para-
dox: Friendship quality and deviancy training within male ado-
lescent friendships. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 45, 42–51.
Pulkkinen, L. (1982). Self-control and continuity from childhood to
adolescence. In P. B. Balter & O. G. Brim (Eds.), Life-span
development and behavior (Vol. 4). New York: Academic Press.
Reisman, J. M. (1985). Friendship and its implications for mental
health or social competence. Journal of Early Adolescence, 5,
383–391.
Reiss, D., Neiderhiser, J. M., Hetherington, E. M., & Plomin, R.
(2000). The relationship code: Deciphering genetic and social
inﬂuences on adolescent development. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Rodin, J., & Langer, E. J. (1977). Long-term effects of a control-
relevant intervention with the institutionalized aged. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 35, 897–902.
Romer, D., Black, M., Ricardo, I., Feigelman, S., Kaljee, L.,
Galbraith, J., Nesbit, R., Hornik, R. C., & Stanton, B. (1994). So-
cial inﬂuences on the sexual behavior of youth at risk for HIV
exposure. American Journal of Public Health, 84, 977–985.
Sampson, R. J., & Laub, J. H. (1994). Urban poverty and the family
context of delinquency: A new look at structure and process
in a classic study [Special issue: Children and poverty]. Child
Development, 65, 523–540.
Sarnecki, J. (in press). Co-offending youth networks in Stockholm.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press..
Seligman, M. E. P. (1975). Helplessness: On depression, develop-
ment, and death. San Francisco: W. H. Freeman.
Silbereisen, R. K., & Noack, P. (1988). On the constructuve role of
problem behavior in adolescence. In N. Bolger, A. Caspi, G.
Downey, & M. Moorehouse (Eds.), Persons in context:
Developmental processes (pp. 152–180). Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Smith, A. B., & Inder, P. M. (1990). The relationship of classroom
organisation to cross-age and cross-sex friendships. Educational
Psychology, 10, 127–140.
Sroufe, L. A., & Fleeson, J. (1986). Attachment and the construction
of relationships. In W. Hartup & Z. Rubin (Eds.), Relationships
and development. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Stattin, H., & Kerr, M. (2000). Parental monitoring: A reinterpreta-
tion. Child Development, 71, 1070–1083.
Stattin, H., & Kerr, M. (2001). Values matter. In J.-E. Nurmi (Ed.),
Navigating
through
adolescence:
European
perspectives
(pp. 21– 58). London, UK: RoutledgeFalmer.
Stattin, H., Kerr, M., & Ferrer-Wreder, L. (2000). Two routes to
silence: Why nondisclosure to parents is linked to delinquency.
Manuscript in preparation.
Stattin, H., & Magnusson, D. (1989). The role of early aggressive
behavior for the frequency, seriousness, and types of later
crime. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 57, 710–
718.
Stattin, H., & Magnusson, D. (1990). Pubertal maturation in female
development. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Steinberg, L. (2001). We know some things: Parent-adolescent rela-
tionships in retrospect and prospect. Journal of Research on
Adolescence, 11(1), 1–19.
Steinberg, L., Lamborn, S., Darling, N., Mounts, N., & Dornbusch,
S. M. (1994). Over-time changes in adjustment and competence
among adolescents from authoritative, authoritarian, indulgent,
and neglectful families. Child Development, 65, 754–770.
Stice, E., & Barrera, M., Jr. (1995). A longitudinal examination of
the reciprocal relations between perceived parenting and adoles-
cents’substance use and externalizing behaviors. Developmental
Psychology, 31, 322–334.
Sullivan, H. S. (1953). The interpersonal theory of psychiatry. New
York: W. W. Norton.
Susman-Stillman, A., Kalkose, M., Egeland, B., & Waldman, I.
(1996). Infant temperament and maternal sensitivity as predic-
tors of attachment security. Infant Behavior and Development,
19(1), 33–47.
Sutherland, E. H., & Cressey, D. (1978). Criminology (8th ed.).
New York: Lippincott.
Thompson, R. A., Cicchetti, D., Lamb, M. E., & Malkin, C. (1985).
Emotional responses of Down syndrome and normal infants in
the Strange Situation: The organization of affective behavior in
infants. Developmental Psychology, 21(5), 828–841.
Urberg, K. A., Degirmencioglu, S. M., & Pilgrim, C. (1997). Close
friend and group inﬂuence on adolescent cigarette smoking and
alcohol use. Developmental Psychology, 33, 834–844.
Vitaro, F., Tremblay, R. E., Kerr, M., Pagani, L., & Bukowski, W. M.
(1997). Disruptiveness, friends’ characteristics, and delinquency

References
419
in early adolescence: A test of two competing models of devel-
opment. Child Development, 68, 676–689.
Weintraub, K. J., & Gold, M. (1991). Monitoring and delinquency.
Criminal Behaviour and Mental Health, 1, 268–281.
Wells, L. E., & Rankin, J. H. (1988). Direct parental controls and
delinquency. Criminology, 26, 263–285.
White, M. J., & Kaufman, G. (1997). Language usage, social capi-
tal, and school completion among immigrants and native-born
ethnic groups. Social Science Quarterly, 78, 385–398.
Youniss, J. (1980). Parents and peers in social development: A
Sullivan-Piaget perspective. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Zimmermann, P., Maier, M. A., Winter, M., & Grossmann, K. E.
(2001). Attachment and adolescents’emotion regulation during a
joint problem-solving task with a friend. International Journal
of Behavioral Development, 25(4), 331–343.


PART FIVE
ADULTHOOD AND AGING


423
CHAPTER 17
Disease, Health, and Aging
ILENE C. SIEGLER, HAYDEN B. BOSWORTH, AND LEONARD W. POON
BASIC FACTS ABOUT TODAY’S
AGING POPULATION
424
Twenty-First Century Middle Age
424
Twenty-First Century Old Age
425
CHANGES IN OTHER DISCIPLINES
426
THE EMPHASIS ON ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE
426
HEALTH STATUS IN CENTENARIANS
428
GENETICS REVOLUTION
429
SOME BASIC CONCEPTUAL ISSUES
430
Health-Related Quality of Life (HRQoL)
430
Support for this chapter was provided from National Institute on
Aging (R01 AG12458; R01 AG19605), National Cancer Institute
(P01 CA72099), and National Heart Lung and Blood Institute
(R01 HL55356, P01 HL36587) for Ilene C. Siegler. Hayden
Bosworth was supported in part by the Department of Veterans
Affairs, Veterans Health Administration, HSR&D Service, through
Program 824 Funds. Leonard W. Poon was supported in part by the
National Institute on Aging (P01-AG17553), National Institute of
Mental Health (5R01-MH43435-09), and in part by the AARP
Andrus Foundation.
Self-Rated Health (SRH)
431
Other Approaches to Measuring Health
433
Medical Comorbidity
433
Psychiatric Comorbidity and Aging
434
Caregiving as a Threat to Health
434
METHODOLOGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
435
Period Effects of Disease Detection and Treatments
435
Selection Effects
435
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
436
REFERENCES
437
Developmental psychology’s goal is to describe, predict, and
understand the changes that come with age. Developmental
psychology is a multidisciplinary ﬁeld within psychology—a
ﬁeld that cuts across all of the standard areas of psychology.
We adopt the conventional terminology for changes, which
implies variations in longitudinal measurements on the same
persons over time; this is the core of the psychology of aging.
We reserve the term age differences for cross-sectional age
comparisons at a single point in time; such comparisons are
the province of experimental aging research or a psychology
of the aged. Understanding the variance accounted for by
particular health problems or disease statuses requires both
approaches. The key term in developmental psychology is
age—that is, the age at time of measurement, the age at the
beginning and at the end of the measurement period, the age
at the onset of a disorder, and the age at death. Developmen-
tal psychology sees age as more than just a marker variable or
placeholder. A basic contribution of developmental psychol-
ogy has been the development of methodological advances to
improve ways to assess age changes in the aforementioned
contexts. Health and disease are prominent factors that inﬂu-
ence changes associated with age; thus, this chapter examines
the measurement and meanings of health and disease and
their contribution to our understanding of the aging process.
In this chapter we seek to answer the question of what
understanding health can add to developmental psychology.
It is clear that developmental psychology sees health primar-
ily as a topic of worry and concern to aging persons. It is a
source of stress, requires coping, and can start a cascade of
life events. It is an extremely important contextual variable
whose content can exert considerable impact, depending on
the particular area of study.
Disease is an entity physicians treat; it is the province
of medicine and—for psychologists—behavioral medicine.
Cognition is perhaps the most important aspect of develop-
ment that is changed when health is compromised. What is
important to note here is that the relationships are bidirec-
tional. Not only do changes in health status precede changes
in personality, cognition, and social functioning, for example,

424
Disease, Health, and Aging
but changes in health status can also be the result of basic
developmental changes in other areas of life. Developmental
psychology’s perspective is closer in this regard to public
health concerns about the global burden of disease—which
seeks to measure the cost in human terms of these parts of
the human condition (Murray & Lopez, 1996) rather than as
mechanisms for understanding developmental change.
In 1990 a special issue of the Journal of Gerontology: Psy-
chological Sciences examined the relationship between health
and aging (Siegler, 1990). Confronting the study of aging for
the next century are new realities that have developed since
that special issue was published over 10 years ago: (a) the ex-
plosion of input from other disciplines, (b) the emphasis on
Alzheimer’s disease and what this has meant for research,
(c) changes in the health status of aging populations reﬂected in
demography and centenarian studies, and (d) the genetic revo-
lution. A subtext of these ﬁndings is reﬂected in the samples
that are being studied. In the past—when developmental psy-
chology researchers required respondents to be healthy enough
to get to the laboratory (see Siegler, Nowlin, & Blumenthal,
1980)—researchers found that selection biases were occurring
as the group got older; they simply noted the fact, however, and
continued to do research the way they always have. As data
have become available from epidemiological studies that in-
clude measures of cognition, personality, or both (e.g., see
Fried et al., 1998, from the Cardiovascular Health Study; M. F.
Elias, Elias, D’Agostino, & Wolf, 2000, from the Framingham
Study), we are seeing an explosion of relevant articles in the
epidemiological literature that can contribute to our under-
standing of aging and health. The use of population samples in
our research—such as in the Berlin Aging Study (Baltes &
Mayer, 1999)—and the addition of measures of cognition to
the Asset and Health Dynamics Among the Oldest Old
(AHEAD) study (e.g., see Herzog & Wallace, 1997; Zelinski,
Crimmins, Reynolds, & Seeman, 1998) have allowed us to bet-
ter understand estimates of the effects of varying amounts of
complete data and to better evaluate the costs and beneﬁts of
various sampling approaches.
Some material that might be expected to appear in this
chapter is not addressed here because other authors in this
volume have integrated health-related issues into their dis-
cussions of speciﬁc areas of adult development. Clearly,
there are important bidirectional relationships between health
and cognition (see the chapter by Dixon & Cohen in this
volume), personality (see the chapter by Bertrand & Lachman
in this volume), social relationships (see the chapter by
Pruchno & Rosenbaum in this volume), and—in particular—
the very deﬁnition of successful aging (see the chapter by
Freund & Riediger in this volume). These psychosocial
factors have an impact on health status and disease incidence
and progression, and speciﬁc diseases have major impacts on
cognitive, personality, and social functioning. These relation-
ships were recognized by the National Academy of Science
Committee’s report on the aging mind (Stern & Carstensen,
2000), and they can be seen in a commissioned chapter by
Waldstein (2000) that reviews the ﬁndings of medical condi-
tions on cognitive functioning. The regular inclusion of health
reﬂects a major research development in adult development
and aging; this development has taken place in the past 5 years
and reﬂects recognition of the centrality of the study of health
to the study of aging. Thus, in this chapter we focus on data
from newly available data sets not collected by other authors
in this volume. Most of the very best new work was done in
a multidisciplinary context; we draw our illustrations from
these research teams.
BASIC FACTS ABOUT TODAY’S
AGING POPULATION
First, what is middle age like now? What is old age like now?
In the following discussion we ﬁrst answer these questions
and then discuss how these new realities affect the study of
health, behavior, and aging. Finally, we examine the question
of which basic issues are important to a study of disease,
health, and aging for the future development of this area.
Twenty-First Century Middle Age
An increasing life span is changing the concept of middle age.
The ages from 40–60 years are clearly now middle-aged, be-
cause many people can reasonably expect to live to 80 to 100
and beyond. In 1995, the age-adjusted death rate for the total
population reached an all-time low, and life expectancy at
birth increased to 75.8 years, with a high of 79.6 years for
White women (R. N.Anderson, Kochanek, & Murphy, 1997);
put another way, 70% of people today will live to age 65—the
normal retirement age—and 72% of deaths will come from
persons over age 65 (Rowe & Kahn, 1998). This makes mid-
dle age a potentially different time of life from what it was
only 25 years ago. Kaplan, Haan, and Wallace (1999) show
how relatively recent this phenomenon is. “Between 1940 and
1995 life expectancy at birth increased 21% for females and
19% for males. Men and women who reach 65 can expect
to live 15.7 and 18.9 years more; while life expectancy at age
80 has increased to 8.9 years for women and 7.3 years for
men” (p. 90). Individuals now enter middle age under surveil-
lance for diseases and are able to beneﬁt from treatments that
allow them to survive with many diagnoses that may not have
any impact on their ability to function.
The explosion of interest in middle age is well represented
in the collection of chapters in volumes edited by Lachman

Basic Facts About Today’s Aging Population
425
and James (1997) and Willis and Reid (1999). In terms of
health, disease, and aging, the major topic for most middle-
aged persons is how to maintain health status as long as
possible and how to put off old age. Successful aging really
means not aging at all—or not appearing to have aged at
all. Health psychology has been very successful at helping to
determine the factors that predict disease onset in middle age
and premature morbidity and mortality—now deﬁned as
below the average population age at death, which in the
United States is around 75 years old. In fact, the same set of
behavioral risk factors that are related to the onset of major
chronic diseases (heart disease, cancer) also predict long-term
disability-free survival (Siegler & Bastian, in press).
Bernice Neugarten’s (1974) term young-old (which
divided the aging life cycle into two phases: 55–74 and 75
and older) has now become the expected rite of passage—
refusing the old part of the young-old label entirely. How-
ever, it is important to recognize that successes in disease
prevention in middle age make incidence of these same or
related diseases higher later in life.
By midlife, health becomes important in deﬁnitions of self
(Whitbourne & Collins, 1998), and bad health is a major
feared possible self. Among middle-aged respondents, 67%
versus 49% of the older respondents feared negative health
changes (Hooker, 1999). Health threats can have an impact on
coping, appraisal risk, and well-being (H. Leventhal et al.,
1997). These changes in the boundaries of midlife are also
reﬂected in survival differences that have implications for
middle-aged persons—they are increasingly likely to have
older parents and in-laws who require help with daily activi-
ties. These transfers of help across generations can take the
form of time or of money and can have signiﬁcant impact on
both generations (Soldo & Hill, 1995). These experiences also
have mental and physical health effects (Hooker, Shifren, &
Hutchinson, 1992). Regardless of the relationship of the care-
giver to the care recipient or the type of care recipient illness,
the vast caregiving literature has shown that caregiving is as-
sociated with increased levels of distress, marital strain, and
health problems among parents of children with chronic ill-
ness (Bristol, Gallagher, & Schopler, 1988; Schulz & Quittner,
1998), family members of organ transplant patients (Buse &
Pieper, 1990; Zabora, Smith, Baker, Wingard, & Cubroe,
1992), both children of dementia patients (Haley, Levine,
Brown, & Bartolucci, 1987) and spouses of dementia patients
(Vitaliano, Russo, Young, Teri, & Maiuro, 1991; Vitaliano
et al., 1999; Vitaliano et al., 2002), reﬂecting the well-known
facts that psychological stress is linked to disease (see Baum &
Posluszny, 1999).
Decisions about health made in midlife have long-term
consequences. Women at around age 50, for example, must
make decisions about hormone replacement therapy that may
affect their risk of Alzheimer’s disease and osteoporosis in
the future (Siegler et al., 2002). Furthermore, individual dif-
ferences in personality predict risk behavior proﬁles, which
also have long-term health consequences (Siegler, Kaplan,
Von Dras, & Mark, 1999), personality also predicts just as
do screening behaviors such as mammography (Siegler,
Feaganes, & Rimer, 1995) and the use of hormone replace-
ment therapy (Bastian, Bosworth, Mark, & Siegler, 1998;
Matthews, Owens, Kuller, Sutton-Tyrell, & Jansen-
McWilliams, 1998).
Afeature of middle age for women is the menopausal tran-
sition (Sowers, 2000), and the literature is starting to question
endocrine changes in middle-aged men (Morley, 2000).An in-
triguing developmental question is whether age at menopause
is a marker for rates of normal aging in women (Matthews,
Wing, Kuller, Meilahn, & Owens, 2000, Perls et al., 2000),
such that later menopause is a marker for longevity. Endocrine
changes in men are more gradual than in women, but such
changes are becoming an area of research interest (Morley,
2000; Tenover, 1999). Like estrogen levels, androgen levels
decrease with age and have a broad range of effects on sexual
organs and metabolic processes. Androgen deﬁciency in men
older than 65 leads to a decrease in muscle mass, osteoporosis,
decrease in sexual activity, and changes in mood and cognitive
function—leading us to speculate that there may be at least
two phases of chronic diseases related to androgen levels in
men. Whether men over 65 would beneﬁt from androgen re-
placement therapy is not known (Tenover, 1999). Any poten-
tial beneﬁts from this therapy would need to be weighed
against the possible adverse effects on the prostate and the car-
diovascular system. Thus, considering men and women sepa-
rately may be useful (Siegler et al., 2001).
Twenty-First Century Old Age
Let us remind ourselves of what we know—but that which is
not obvious—about those known as “the elderly.” A new em-
phasis on centenarians has meant that national statistics are
now available up to age 100 and are often broken down more
ﬁnely by age than they were before. The age of an older person
provides some information about the probability of disability
and the probability of living independently in the community;
this can be seen in Table 17.1.
Note that until age 80, these indicators are reasonably
stable for the older population—that is over 75% with no
disability and less than 10% in institutions. We have known
for a long time that institutionalization is a marker for the
supporting network as much as it is for the functional capac-
ities of the individual, at least until the person is no longer
mobile or continent. By age 85, half are disabled. Although
these ﬁgures vary by gender and other indicators, this is a

426
Disease, Health, and Aging
TABLE 17.1
What Are Older People Like and How Old Is Old?
Age Group
% No Disability
% in Nursing Home
65–69
83
3
70–74
83
5
80–84
62
10
85–89
45
17
90–94
35
32
95–99
20
42
100+
18
48
Note. From USDHHS (1999). Centenarians in the United States: 1990. See
Siegler & Bastian (in press).
reasonable guideline for thinking about current population
statistics for today’s older population. The great variation in
the population makes the design and interpretation of studies
increasingly challenging.
Demographic projections suggest that rates ofdisability are
declining (Manton, Corder, & Stallard, 1997) and that the
gender ratio may be starting to move towards equalization in
countries such as the United States due to efforts at prevention
of cardiovascular heart disease (CHD)—beneﬁting men—and
the long-term consequences of smoking in women (Guralnik,
Balfour, & Volpato, 2000). However, most older people are
women (E. Leventhal, 2000). There is evidence that women
have different experiences with health and thus may report
symptoms differently (E. Leventhal, 2000). Even when they
have the same disease (such as a heart attack), the outcomes
may be different (Vaccarino, Berkman, & Krumholz, 2000),
and the perceptions of health-related quality of life also differ
between men and women with the same disease (Bosworth,
Siegler, Brummett, Barefoot, Williams, Clapp-Channing,
etal.,1999;Bosworth,Siegler,Brummett,Barefoot,Williams,
Vitaliano, et al., 1999).
CHANGES IN OTHER DISCIPLINES
Geriatric medicine is a branch of internal medicine that
specializes in the care of older persons—particularly the
oldest-old—and differs from developmental psychology in
that it is unconcerned with adult development or midlife.
Geriatric medicine is now a well-recognized discipline that
has regular handbooks that update the new ﬁndings on each
disease and its presentation in the elderly—with implications
for treatment. The Principles of Geriatric Medicine and
Gerontology (e.g., see Hazzard, Blass, Ettinger, Halter, &
Ouslander, 1999) as well as the Encyclopedia of Aging
(Maddox et al., 2001) have reasonable summaries of each
disease and physiological system; the latter is a good refer-
ence for developmental psychologists, as are textbooks in
gerontology, which provide reviews of physiological systems
(e.g., Aldwin & Gilmer, 1999). Epidemiology looks at the
distributions of disease in the population and is starting to
consider age as more than a variable to be statistically con-
trolled and a primary risk factor, whereas developmental
epidemiology seeks to understand the role of age (see Fried,
2000; NIA Genetic Epidemiology Working Group, 2000).
All of these references are good primary sources for develop-
mental psychologists who want to keep up with important
developments in health-related ﬁelds.
Demographers are way ahead of psychologists in their
thinking about the role of behavioral and social variables on
survival and the role that age plays in such models. In particu-
lar, the detailed discussion—in a chapter by Ewbank (2000)—
of the apolipoprotein E (APOE) gene polymorphism, which
has implications for both Alzheimer’s disease and ischemic
heart disease, is particularly useful. The chapter discusses the
contributions that genetics will make to demographic studies
of aging and is a useful introduction to this complex and im-
portant set of issues for psychologists.
THE EMPHASIS ON ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE
One can not overemphasize the importance of the creation of
the National Institute on Aging (NIA) in 1974 and the push
by NIA to develop the Alzheimer’s Centers programs.
Research on basic biological mechanisms of the aging pro-
cess is progressing at such a rate that from the time this chap-
ter is written to the time it is published, this rate of new
knowledge generation will have changed signiﬁcantly what
we know. The focus on Alzheimer’s disease has also had an
impact on understanding cognition and aging so that the age-
related and disease-related components can be separated.
Progress in developmental psychology does not happen at
anywhere near the same rate, but developmental psychology
must take into account the developing knowledge base in the
biomedical sciences.
This emphasis has also produced some extraordinary stud-
ies with multidisciplinary teams of psychological, medical,
and epidemiological sophistication; these teams are produc-
ing extraordinary data to answer important questions. Even
better is that the results are being published in Psychology
and Aging—our primary journal. Wilson, Gilley, Bennett,
Beckett, and Evans (2000) provide an example of the type of
research that sets a standard for the future. Their research
asks the right questions, has compelling data, and was well-
designed to understand the role that age plays in the rate of
change in cognitive decline in Alzheimer’s disease (AD).
Why is this study design so good?
This study (a) was based on a population sample of
everyone with AD in the community under study; (b) had
state-of-the-art diagnostic measures of the medical condition

The Emphasis on Alzheimer’s Disease
427
under study; (c) veriﬁed those measures; (d) had state-of-
the-art measures of the psychological factors under study;
(e) collected repeated-measures data; (f) paid attention to
study attrition and reasons for loss to follow-up; (g) used
modern statistical methods—growth curve analyses to look
at individual patterns of change—that allow for variations in
measurement periods, missing data, and multiple measure-
ments; and (h) asked and answered questions about initial
level of cognitive functioning and the association of that
level with eventual patterns of decline.
Approximately 400 persons with a diagnosis of AD were
tested at yearly intervals for up to ﬁve repeated measures with
a battery of psychometrically validated measures, including
17 key cognitive components of functioning changed in AD.
The scales were combined into a composite such that raw
scores were transformed to z scores and then averaged if at
least eight of the scores were not missing. At the start of the
study, individuals were aged 45–95 with a mean of 70.9
years, had graduated from high school, and were primarily
female (67%) and White (85%). Mental status scores ranged
from 11–29, excluding those with extremely impaired cogni-
tive functioning.
The main results were that cognitive change was large, lin-
ear, and progressive (about one half of a standard unit per
year). Those with better initial cognitive functioning changed
more slowly, and younger persons declined faster than did
older persons. Data were presented for estimates of the indivi-
duals studied and in 5-year age groups. When the data were re-
analyzed substituting changes in mental status with the Mini
Mental Status Examination (MMSE; Folstein, Folstein, &
McHugh, 1975) a standard screening measure, the basic con-
clusions were the same: There was an annual loss of 3.26
pointsperyear,withbiggerlossesforthoseintheir60sthanfor
those in their 80s. Of individuals who died during the course of
the study, autopsy conﬁrmed diagnosis in 96% of the cases.
In their discussion, Wilson et al. (2000) raised important
issues that their study was not able to solve. These questions
primarily had to do with how to address initial level of cog-
nitive functioning. Everyone in the study had AD at the start
of the study as a criterion for selection. Premorbid levels of
cognition were not known. Similarly, age at ﬁrst testing and
age of onset of the disease could only be estimated by retro-
spective accounts of time of ﬁrst symptoms. One could have
started studying a very large population at age 40, conducted
a 50-year study, and perhaps have had premorbid estimates
of functioning and age at onset. Yet the design employed
was an efﬁcient way to help answer some important ques-
tions about the age-related nature of cognitive change in pa-
tients with AD.
The previously described study is not the only work in the
ﬁeld that meets these criteria—it is just one of the most recent
and available in a single article, and a particular disease was
of interest that is not considered a normal part of the aging
process. The work of M. F. (Pete) Elias and his colleagues,
combining insights from his longitudinal study of hyperten-
sion (M. F. Elias, Robbins, Elias, & Streeten, 1998) with
work on the Framingham Study population (M. F. Elias et al.,
2000; P. K. Elias, Elias, D’Agostino, Cupples, et al., 1997;
M. F. Elias, Elias, D’Agostino, & Wolf, 1997; M. F. Elias,
Elias, Robbins, Wolf, & D’Agostino, 2000), is also superb. In
reviewing the role of age versus particular health conditions
in the Framingham population, M. F. Elias et al. (in press)
compared the adjusted odds ratios of performing at or below
the 25th percentile on the Framingham neuropsychological
test measurements controlling for education, occupation,
gender, alcohol consumption, previous history of cardiovas-
cular disease, and antihypertensive treatment. They found
that age itself was the strongest factor—getting 5 years older
increased the odds to 1.61 of performing at or below the 25th
percentile on a battery of neuropsychological tests, compared
to having Type II diabetes (1.21) or an increase in diastolic
blood pressure of 10 mm of mercury (1.30).
The M. F. Elias et al. (2000) data from the Framingham
study were reanalyzed to answer two important questions:
Does the impact of hypertension interact with age, and what
is the practical signiﬁcance of blood-pressure–related versus
age-related changes? In addition, they reviewed ﬁndings
from their longitudinal study of hypertensive and normoten-
sive individuals (M. F. Elias et al., 1998). Their very careful
analyses indicated that increasing age, increasing blood
pressure, and chronicity of hypertension were all related to
worse neuropsychological performance; there were no age
interactions in these cross-sectional analyses of longitudinal
data sets. The authors point to the methodological problem
with longitudinal studies that do not have groups of non-
treated hypertensive participants to follow over time. Thus,
although it is clear that increased rates of hypertension
are deleterious to cognitive functioning, it is important in fu-
ture clinical trials that the impact of treatment on cognitive
performance of older persons be monitored as well. For ad-
ditional information, see Siegler, Bosworth, and Elias (in
press).
Research examining the factors predicting cognitive
decline is not limited to health factors. Fratiglioni, Wang,
Ericsson, Maytan, and Winblad (2000) reported that social in-
tegration predicted the 3-year incidence ofAD in community-
dwelling residents of a neighborhood in Stockholm, Sweden.
The reason for their ﬁnding is unclear but provocative. It will
be interesting to follow this cohort until it is depleted and see
how many eventually become demented, at what age, and
what role social participation plays in understanding the full
process.

428
Disease, Health, and Aging
HEALTH STATUS IN CENTENARIANS
The study of centenarians illustrates many important aspects
of how studies of behavior, health, and aging have changed in
the past 10 years. Table 17.1 shows the amount of disability
that comes with increasing age; thus, longevity does not
guarantee good health. This is surprising because most peo-
ple expect that those who live until 100 should be in excellent
physical and mental health. Increased survival does not
amount to providing a disease-free old age for everyone.
Research reported in the Georgia and New England
Centenarian Studies (Perls & Silver, 1999; Poon, Martin,
Clayton, Messner, & Noble, 1992) seemed to indicate that
those who survived to extreme old age tended to escape
catastrophic disease episodes until they surpassed the average
life span. If these ﬁndings are generalizable to other long-
lived individuals, then the trajectories of health and function-
ing over the life span would indeed be signiﬁcantly different
from those of the average population. For the long-lived,
variations in health and cognition increased for participants
in the Georgia Centenarian Study as well as for participants
in the Swedish Centenarian Study (Hagberg, Alfredson,
Poon, & Homma, 2001). The large within-group variation re-
ﬂects the diversity and range of health and functioning in the
oldest-old.
Estimates are generally that a third of extremely aged
individuals are healthy enough to be independent and commu-
nity dwelling, a third are functionally impaired, and a third are
extremely frail and disabled (Forette, 1997). Franceschi et al.
(2000) provides similar estimates (within 10%) from all of
Italy, with criteria-based disease status and functional ability.
The authors point out that the study of centenarians is a type
of archeological research that includes social and historical
circumstances over the past 100 years. Similar ﬁndings were
reported by Franke (1977, 1985) on two centenarian samples
in Germany. Western Europe has even greater proportions of
older persons than does the United States, with 40% of the
population expected to be over the age of 60 by 2030
(Giampoli, 2000). Studies of the full centenarian population
are more common when measures of cognition are not re-
quired for study (see Jeune & Andersen-Ranberg, 2000; Poon
et al., 1992); thus, past studies that focused on so-called expert
survivors (Poon, Johnson, & Martin, 1997) may have given an
overly optimistic picture of this age group.
Study and observation of centenarians are rare in the
repertoire of life span researchers and gerontologists. The
original data and papers were collected by Belle Boone Beard
(1991), and comprehensive interview and testing video tapes
of over 140 centenarians from the Georgia Centenarian Study
are archived at the Hargrett Library of the University of
Georgia. The material is available to all serious researchers
who wish to pursue research on this important group of aging
persons.
Longitudinal studies of aging can inform studies of the
long-lived on predictors of survival. For example, the
Alameda County Study (Breslow & Breslow, 1993) isolated
seven health practices as risk factors for higher mortality.
They are excessive alcohol consumption, smoking cigarettes,
being obese, sleeping fewer or more than seven to eight hours
per night, having very little physical activity, eating between
meals, and skipping breakfast. These ﬁndings are very similar
to those found in the Harvard College Alumni Study
(Paffenbarger et al., 1993). The Dutch Longitudinal Study
(Deeg, van Zonneveld, van der Maas, & Habbema, 1989)
found that physical, mental, and social indicators of health
status are important for predicting the probability of dying.
It is clear that there is strong agreement among longitudi-
nal aging studies that maintenance of health, cognition, and
support systems; a positive hereditary predisposition; and an
active lifestyle are all inﬂuential in prolonging longevity in
the general population. An important question is whether
these same predictors are equally important for the very long-
lived—for example, those whose longevity extends beyond
100 years. There are very limited data that could address this
question. Poon et al. (2000) examined survival among a
group of 137 centenarians (75.9% women) who participated
in the Georgia Centenarian Study, of whom 21 were still alive
at the time of the investigation in 1999. They found the
following relationships among characteristics of centenarians
and length of survival beyond 100 years:
•
Women on the average survived 1,020 days after attaining
100 years. Men, on the other hand, survived an average of
781 days. The gender difference in survival in the ﬁrst
2 years after 100 is not signiﬁcantly different; however,
the difference is quite glaring after 3 years.
•
Father’s age at death was found to exert a positive effect
on the number of days of survival after 100 years. No
effect was found for mother’s age of death.
•
Three variables in social support seem to relate to length of
survival among centenarians. They are talking on the
phone, having someone to help, and having a caregiver.
•
Four anthropometric measures were found to correlate
positively to survival. They are triceps skin fold, body
mass index, and waist-to-hip ratio.
•
Higher level of cognition after 100 was positively related
to longer length of survival; this was found for problem
solving, learning and memory, and intelligence tests, such
as picture arrangement and block design. In this study,
gender, family longevity, social support, anthropometry,
and cognition all seemed to impact on survivorship after
100 years.

Genetics Revolution
429
Within centenarians, it is clear that variation is extraordi-
nary in health just as in most other characteristics mentioned.
There are special problems associated with studying psycho-
logical characteristics in the full centenarian population.
Poon et al. (2000) demonstrated the effects of attrition in
longitudinal studies of centenarians. If attrition and patterns
of attrition are not accounted for in the analyses, the outcome
would essentially focus on the survivors—and this would
not be representative of the entire population. In this study,
attrition seemed to affect different psychological measures
differently. In cognition, for example, ﬂuid intelligence
seems to be affected more by attrition than is crystallized
intelligence.
Data from the Cardiovascular Health Study evaluated
5-year survival from ages 65–101 at baseline (Fried et al.,
1998) in almost 6,000 persons, including both White and
African American participants. The participants were well-
characterized medically for both clinical and subclinical
measures of health status and standard CHD risk factors. In
addition, depressive symptoms were assessed by the Center
for Epidemologic Study Depression Scale (CES-D; Radloff,
1977), cognition with the MMSE (Folstein et al., 1975), and
the Digit Symbol Substitution task of the Wechsler Adult
Intelligence Scale (WAIS). Participants were reinterviewed
every 6 months and had been followed for 5 years at the
time of the article. Individuals from four communities in
the United States were identiﬁed by random sample from the
Health Care Financing Administration, and 57% of the sam-
pled individuals participated. Mortality follow-up was
complete for 100% of the sample. There were 646 deaths—
12% of the population had died in 5 years. The effect of age
on mortality was greatly reduced by adjusting for other
demographic, disease, behavioral, and functional indicators.
The effect of age on mortality became substantially weaker
with adjustment coded into the prediction equation than
when it was analyzed in isolation. Digit Symbol Substitution
remained a signiﬁcant predictor even after adjustment for
everything else, including objective measures of both clinical
and subclinical disease. Thus, much of the effect of age on
mortality is explained by the other disease and personal char-
acteristics. If it were not for the diseases and health habits,
people would live longer.
GENETICS REVOLUTION
The genetics revolution affects the study of psychology of
aging in two important ways. First, as the source of individ-
ual differences, understanding genetic polymorphisms, how
they relate to behavior, and how these then change with age
becomes critical. Secondly, the genetics of survival and
longevity are a major concern of understanding the biology
of aging and of gender differences, which have changed over
time and need to be taken into account as the background for
theories about life span development and aging.
Although answers to the preceding two sources of genetic
inﬂuences on behavioral aging are still to be found, McClearn
and Heller (2000) provide an interesting explanation of how
to assess the literature in this area. They point out that at
different ages, the relative contributions of genetic and envi-
ronmental variance in important characteristics may change—
this is a new way of thinking about genetic variation. It is
generally assumed that after a genetic marker is known, it
will be a stable individual difference characteristic. Although
genes are ﬁxed at birth, they can have different effects at
different ages, interact with environments differentially at
different ages, and behave differentially in different popula-
tions. There are age-related changes in heritability—that is,
the amount of variance in a population due to genetic variance.
In addition to age-related changes in heritability, it is quite
possible that different genes or different combinations of
genes are operative at different parts of the life cycle. Illustra-
tions from the Swedish/Adoption Twin Study ofAging for un-
derstanding stability of personality are given by Pederson and
Reynolds (1988), and a discussion of patterns for three choles-
terol indicators is given by McClearn and Heller (2000).
Together, these data sets illustrate the complex interac-
tions of genes and environment over the adult life cycle. As
more and more data become available that attest to the gene-
environment interactions across the life cycle, we will be
better able to make use of them. To extend this line of think-
ing further, issues of longitudinal stability and change may be
affected or interpreted differently when both genetic and
environmental factors are included over time (Pederson &
Reynolds, 1998).
The genetic basis of longevity has not been part of devel-
opmental psychology. The literature has yet to successfully
partial out the inﬂuences of genetics and environment on
longevity and behavioral aging. However, ﬁndings from cen-
tenarian studies could begin to shed light on some of these
issues. For example, ﬁndings from the French Centenarian
Study (Robine, Kirkwood, & Allard, 2001) showed a trade-
off of fertility and longevity—that is, women who bear no
or few children tend to live longer. Does the lower-stress
environment of fewer children contribute to longevity, or is
there a genetic predisposition to protect women with fewer
children in order to decrease stress?
In the Georgia Centenarian Study (Kim, Bramlett,
Wright, & Poon, 1998), gender and race were found to com-
bine to inﬂuence longevity after 100. African Americans
showed longer survival times than did European Americans,
and females (as noted earlier) showed increased survivorship

430
Disease, Health, and Aging
in comparison to males. At any given time, the risk of death
for women was only 54% of that of men. Likewise, risk of
death for African Americans was 57% of that of European
Americans at any given time. The order of increasingly longer
survival for sex-race subgroups was European American
males,AfricanAmerican males, EuropeanAmerican females,
and African American females. These ﬁndings suggest that
the differentiation of genetics and environmental inﬂuences
would help us better understand the impact of race and gender
on longevity. Similarly, the Georgia study found that higher
levels of cognition are related to longer life—and that among
the independent centenarians, everyday problem-solving
abilities seemed to be maintained (Poon et al., 1992).
Does experience acquired over one’s lifetime help to
buffer and maintain problem-solving abilities, which in turn
help the individual live longer? These are intriguing ques-
tions that could add a new dimension to the study of devel-
opmental psychology.
SOME BASIC CONCEPTUAL ISSUES
As our population continues to age, a better understanding of
how disease, health, and aging are interrelated becomes all the
more important—and more difﬁcult to measure and under-
stand. Health is an odd concept. It does have psychological
meaning to individuals and to developmental psychologists. It
is not the inverse of disease and it also has a developmental tra-
jectory and importance. How it is deﬁned makes a major dif-
ferences in the conclusions about health and aging. It is
important to remember that health is often deﬁned from the re-
search participants’(not the researchers’) perspective.
Health-Related Quality of Life (HRQoL)
HRQoL has been deﬁned as a multidimensional concept
that includes the physical, mental, and social aspects of
health (e.g., Sherbourne, Meredith, & Ware, 1992). HRQoL
is important for measuring the impact of chronic disease
(Patrick & Erickson, 1993). There is evidence of great
individual variation in functional status and well-being that is
not accounted for by age or disease condition (Sherbourne
et al., 1992). HRQoL is typically conceptualized as an
outcome of psychological and functional factors that individ-
uals ascribe to their health.
We have completed a series of studies using a measure of
HRQoL using the Short-Form Health Survey (SF-36; Ware,
1993). The speciﬁc item that most investigators use to measure
health is the question How do you rate your health? Excellent,
very good, good, fair, or poor? This is also a question on the
SF-36 in the domain of General Health and could be consid-
ered the SF-1. The SF-36, the complete HRQoL measure, has
proven to be very useful to evaluate a patient’s perspective as
a medical outcome and is typically scored as eight scales.
The Medical Outcomes Study (MOS) 36-item SF-36 is a
Likert-type or forced-choice measure that contains eight brief
indexes of general health perceptions, general mental health,
physical functioning, role limitations due to emotional prob-
lems, limitations in social functioning because of physical
health problems, role limitations due to physical problems,
bodily pain, and vitality. These indexes have been factored
into two overall measures of physical health and mental
health.
Our work has been based on a sample of patients referred
for coronary angiography; the patients can be separated
into those with and those without signiﬁcant heart disease.
Coronary angiography is a surgical procedure used to deter-
mine how much stenosis or blockage exists for the major ar-
teries. This group is an interesting sample to study because
their actual disease and physiological status have been
measured and can be used to control for physical health or dis-
ease status. Our work was designed to ﬁnd out why and how
social support can moderate the effects of disease; it followed
our report that social support and income predicted mortality
from coronary heart disease when actual physical health was
accounted for (Williams et al., 1992).
All patients referred to Duke University Medical Center
for an evaluation of their symptoms to see whether they had
blocked arteries (1992–1996) were invited to be in the study
upon admission and given a large battery of psychosocial in-
struments. Those without coronary artery disease were not
studied further. Those with disease were followed for the next
3 years with repeated assessments—including the SF-36—of
psychosocial factors. The Duke Cardiovascular Database fol-
lows all coronary patients at Duke for assessment of future
disease and mortality (Califf et al., 1989). Understanding the
characteristics of the sample is important because it allows us
to ask some questions from an aging point of view such that
we can evaluate younger and older persons with the same
disease and see whether psychosocial factors play the same
role in younger and older patients.
We looked at the relationship between social support and
HRQoL in this sample and observed that a lack of social
support was associated with signiﬁcantly lower levels of
HRQoL across all eight SF-36 HRQoL domains after consid-
ering disease severity and other demographic factors. We also
observed an interesting relationship between age and HRQoL.
Older adults were likely to experience lower levels of physical
function and physical role function; however, older adults
were also more likely to report higher levels of mental health,

Some Basic Conceptual Issues
431
emotional role function, and vitality compared to younger
adults (Bosworth, Siegler, et al., 2000). A possible explana-
tion for this ﬁnding is that older patients show mental health
better than that of younger patients with similar diseases be-
cause the onset of chronic illness in old age is more usual
and—subsequently—possibly less disruptive than in younger
adults. In addition, older persons may have developed more
effective skills with which to manage health deﬁcits (Deeg,
Kardaun, & Fozard, 1996). These two points coincide with
Neugarten’s (1976, 1979) view that the onset of chronic ill-
ness in old age is more usual in that part of the life cycle and
therefore possibly less disruptive. Subsequently, as individu-
als lose physical function, they may focus and channel more
of their energy and attention on the maintenance of psycho-
logical quality of life.
Self-Rated Health (SRH)
After Mossey and Shapiro (1982) found that self-ratings of
health (SRH) were predictive of 7-year survival among older
adults, there has been an enhanced interest in the use of SRH
(usually measured by asking respondents whether they would
rate their health as excellent, very good, good, fair, or poor) as
a measure of health status.This interest among researchers has
grown because this item is easy to administer to large popula-
tions, and it captures perceptions of health by using criteria
that are as broad and inclusive as the responding individual
chooses to make them (Bosworth, Siegler, Brummett,
Barefoot, Williams, Vitaliano, et al., 1999).
SRH is a speciﬁc component of HRQoL and reﬂects more
than the individuals’ perceptions of their physical health.
Psychological well-being also is a relevant factor in SRH
(George & Clipp, 1991; Hooker & Siegler, 1992). For exam-
ple, some researchers have suggested that SRHs reﬂect a
person’s integrated perception of his or her health—including
its biological, psychological, and social dimensions—that is
normally inaccessible to other observers (Mülunpalo, Vuori,
Oja, Pasanen, & Urponen, 1997; Parkerson, Broadhead, &
Tse, 1992; Ware, 1987)
This sample of patients with coronary artery disease
(CAD) has both medically determined and self-perceived
ratings of health. It is a particularly interesting group to study
because we can help explain the import of SRH measures and
how to interpret the single-item index in the context of aging
persons who are well-characterized in terms of their actual
health-disease status. Some data from this sample are
presented inTable 17.2, which shows demographic indicators,
the functional scales of the SF-36, and two psychosocial indi-
cators. Table 17.3 shows the other medical conditions present
in this population.
The data show that when restricted to the 2,900 persons
(ranging in age from 28–93) who had serious and signiﬁcant
coronary artery disease, people rated their health all along the
SRH continuum from excellent (3%) to very good (15%) to
TABLE 17.2
Demographic and Psychosocial Characteristics of Study Sample by Self-Rated Health
Rating
Excellent
Very Good
Good
Fair
Poor
Number of subjects
95
442
831
950
544
General health
86.68 (15.8)
75.70 (13.1)
60.77 (14.4)
40.30 (14.4)
26.24 (13.7)
Age
60.3 (11.2)
62.7 (11.1)
61.9 (11.1)
62.8 (11.1)
63.4 (10.4)
% male
86%
78%
74%
62%
61%
% White
84%
88%
84%
79%
78%
Education
13.18 (3.9)
12.87 (3.9)
12.16 (3.6)
10.8 (3.6)
9.87 (3.8)
Income
3.76 (1.9)
3.81 (1.8)
3.34 (1.7)
2.63 (1.6)
2.13 (1.5)
% married
85%
83%
80%
72%
67%
Physical function
82.21 (21.6)
72.25 (24.5)
63.49 (25.4)
44.02 (25.4)
27.70 (22.4)
Physical role
72.80 (37.6)
58.96 (42.0)
47.04 (42.0)
25.31 (36.7)
12.16 (27.2)
Emotional role
89.61 (22.5)
80.02 (35.5)
75.40 (37.7)
60.5 (44.2)
48.67 (44.0)
Social function
87.63 (20.6)
81.81 (22.9)
75.94 (24.0)
61.50 (27.3)
43.94 (27.3)
Bodily pain
66.81 (28.1)
63.91 (25.7)
57.06 (25.1) 
45.65 (24.9)
31.75 (23.7)
Mental health
82.67 (16.9)
77.85 (18.0)
74.74 (18.3)
66.47 (21.0)
58.42 (22.0)
Vitality
69.56 (22.9)
59.06 (23.4)
50.20 (22.7)
37.09 (21.4)
24.35 (19.5)
Social support
40.6 (6.8)
41.0 (6.2)
39.6 (6.8)
37.8 (7.2)
35.9 (7.7)
CESD
8.93 (9.3)
9.88 (8.7)
12.47 (10.5)
16.78 (10.7)
21.91 (11.5)
Note. All of the variables except age were signiﬁcantly related to levels of self-rated health. Standard deviations in parentheses. Signif-
icance tests were calculated after adjusting for age, education, and gender. Income on a scale from 1 to 6; 1 = $10,000 or less, 2 =
$10,001 −$20,000, 3 = $20,001 −$30,000, 4 = $30,001−$45,000, 5 = $45,001 −$60,000, 6 = $60,001 or greater. CESD = Center
for Epidemiological Studies Depression Scale. Social support = Interpersonal Social Evaluation List.

432
Disease, Health, and Aging
TABLE 17.3
Characteristics of Study Sample by Self-Rated Health
and Comorbid Conditions
Conditions
Very
Excellent
good
Good
Fair
Poor
Chronic pulmonary
2%
6%
9%
14%
24%
Hypertension
39%
49%
57%
66%
70%
Cerebrovascular
5%
6%
10%
13%
19.5%
Peripheral vascular 
5%
9%
11%
14%
23%
Renal insufﬁciency
2%
6%
10%
16%
24%
Diabetes
1.6%
2%
3%
7%
16%
Depression
0%
1%
4.3%
4.5%
7%
good (29%), to fair (33%), and poor (19%). The average age
of each subgroup ranged from 60 to 63.4 years. These ﬁnd-
ings can be compared to national ﬁgures from 1996, in which
the percent of the U.S. population that rated their health as
fair or poor aged 55–64 was 21.2% and aged 65 and over was
27% (United States Department of Health and Human
Services, 1999, p. 211, Table 60). In our sample of a wider
age range, with signiﬁcant heart disease, by comparison, 52%
rated their health as fair or poor.
Thus, in a sample with documented serious heart disease,
the rate of fair or poor health was twice as high as in a
national population sample of the same age. These levels
were associated with the hazard score (Harrell, Lee, Califf,
Pryor, & Rosati, 1984), an index of age and disease severity
that captures the probability of 1-year survival (90% at excel-
lent to 75% at poor). For comparison purposes, at baseline, in
the University of North Carolina Alumni Heart Study, which
started in 1986 (Siegler et al., 1992), among middle-aged
persons unselected for health at age 40, 57.3% rated their
health as excellent and 39.3% as good. Four years later the
ratings were 53.2% excellent and 43.4% good, with 2.8% and
3.4% fair and poor, respectively (Siegler, 1997).
Thus, as a single item, the measure is easy to implement
and has predictive validity. It is also predictive of mortality in
a wide variety of populations (Bosworth, Siegler, Brummett,
Barefoot, Williams, Clapp-Channing, et al., 1999a; Idler &
Benyamini, 1997; Idler & Kasl, 1991; Kaplan & Camacho,
1983; Mülunpalo et al., 1997; Mossey & Shapiro, 1982;
Wolinsky & Johnson, 1992). Self-rated health captures a lot of
summary information about health status, but it does not rep-
resent the speciﬁc disease status of an individual. Note that
even those who say they are in excellent health with major
heart disease have comorbid conditions (as shown in Table
17.3), are not clinically depressed, and do not see their disease
as affecting their ability to function on a day-to-day basis.
Thus, although the ﬁndings reported here do support the
importance of assessing SRH, it is not synonymous with
disease. Second, global SRH tends to reﬂect to a large degree
those health problems that are salient for study participants.
SRH measures are often used as covariates in examinations
of the effect of age. An important question that needs to be
answered is what it means to use a single measure of health
status as a covariate. Although physical and mental health
problems appear to play a major role in shaping an individ-
ual’s perception of his or her health, a signiﬁcant proportion
of what this single-item indicator explains remains unknown.
Treating health status as a covariate reduces the variance
associated with age. SRH also reduces the variance due to
depression and is differentially associated with gender, race,
income, and education. Despite the increased interest among
researchers in the use of SRH as a measure of health, it is still
unclear how this item relates to health and well-being and
how clinicians can use this measure.
One way this item may be used by clinicians is to predict
health care utilization. Bosworth, Butterﬁeld, Stechuchak,
and Bastian (2000) examined whether SRH predicted health
service use among women in an equal-access primary care
clinic setting. Women who had poor or fair health were
signiﬁcantly more likely to have more outpatient clinic visits
than were women who reported excellent or very good
health. Bosworth, Butterﬁeld, et al. (2000) concluded that
these ﬁndings demonstrate the potential of a single question
to provide information about the future needs for health care.
The fact that self-rated health was not related to age in our
clinical population is an interesting observation that requires
some comment. It may reﬂect the fact than when younger
individuals have the same disorder as older individuals, it is
generally more serious in younger persons; or it may reﬂect
age-related differences in expectations. The other interest-
ing observation that has not been well documented is a
phenomenon referred to as a response shift (Sprangers &
Schwartz, 1999). Patients confronted with a life-threatening
or chronic disease are faced with the necessity to accommo-
date to the disease. A response shift is potentially an impor-
tant mediator of this adaptation process; it involves changing
internal standards, values, and conceptualizations of quality
of life (Sprangers & Schwartz, 1999). Potential age differ-
ences in response shifts may explain why it is not uncommon
to observe an 80-year-old man who recently underwent
coronary bypass surgery as reporting that his health is
excellent.
In sum, some guidelines may be proposed for using health
measures. First, although the ﬁndings reported here do support
the importance of assessing SRH, it is not synonymous with
disease. Second, global SRH tends to reﬂect to a large degree
those health problems that are salient for study participants.
Third, in order to make correct attributions about normal

Some Basic Conceptual Issues
433
development and behavior change expected under speciﬁc
conditions and speciﬁc ages, developmental psychologists
need to learn to verify self-reports of diseases and also include
hard disease outcomes such as blood pressure or ejection frac-
tion. Veriﬁcation of diseases can be very instructive. Medical
criteria are not always uniform, which is why epidemiologists
obtain actual medical records and code to criteria.As develop-
mental psychologists, we need to know what it is like to age
with each disease and each condition, as well as what it is like
for those who are fortunate enough to age without them.To ac-
complish this recommendation, developmental psychologists
need to develop long-term collaborative research programs
and work with investigators who understand the pathophysiol-
ogy of the disease process being studied.
In order to better interpret studies that use SRH, it is
important to remember that (a) these ﬁndings will have an
socioeconomic status (SES) gradient related to timing and
quality of medical care such that a more severe disease proﬁle
will tend to be seen earlier in the life cycle in the disadvan-
taged (N.A.Anderson &Armstead, 1995; House et al., 1992);
(b) the reports will be related to cognitive status because indi-
viduals need to remember what the diagnosis is to be able to
report it; (c) the reports will be related to psychological symp-
toms because individuals are more likely to seek medical care
if symptomatic (Costa & McCrae, 1995); (d) the self-rated
measures will be more highly correlated with psychosocial
constructs that are also associated with the same underlying
dimensions of personality.
Other Approaches to Measuring Health
Most other approaches used to measure health in psycholog-
ical research are really measures of disease that require the
input of medical colleagues for a diagnosis or an understand-
ing of medical records that can be reviewed and characterized
(see E. Leventhal, 2000); in addition, they may be a combi-
nation of physiological indicators and medical records re-
views (see Vitaliano, Scanlan, Siegler, McCormick, &
Knopp, 1998). Zhang, Vitaliano, Scanlan, and Savage (2001)
present data on the associations of SRH, biological measures,
and medical records in their longitudinal study of caregivers.
Self-reports of heart disease were moderately correlated with
heart disease diagnoses from the medical records (r = .64),
which is signiﬁcant but not comforting. Self-reports of heart
disease and biological indicators (e.g., lipids, blood pressure,
insulin, glucose, and obesity) were uncorrelated, whereas
these same measured indicators were signiﬁcantly correlated
with the medical record reports of disease. In a principle
components analysis, SRH loaded on a component with
the other psychosocial measures (anxiety, depression, life
satisfaction), whereas the biological measures loaded on a
component with the medical records.
Many developmental psychologists measure disease by
simply asking patients whether they have or had a particular
disease. Although this information is easy to obtain, it is
important to realize the potential for patients to not recall
having the particular disease or not wanting to report having
had the particular disease. A case in point was recently
reported by Desai, Livingstone, Desai, and Druss (2001),
who examined the accuracy of self-reported cancer history.
The authors compared self-reported responses in the New
Haven Epidemiologic Catchment Study and were linked to
the Connecticut Tumor Registry—the overall rate of false-
negative was 39.2%. Non-European Americans, older adults,
increased time since cancer diagnosis, number of previous
tumors, and type of cancer treatment received were all related
to increased likelihood of not reporting having had a tumor.
Thus, despite developmental psychologists’ and epidemiolo-
gists’ using self-reported data about disease, it is important to
determine the validity of these reports when possible.
Medical Comorbidity
A relatively unique characteristic of older populations is the
coexistence of several chronic conditions. Among persons
aged 65–101 at baseline in the Cardiovascular Health Study,
25% had one chronic condition and 61% had two or more
chronic conditions (Fried et al., 1998). The tendency has
been to construct scales that add up all comorbid condi-
tions (Charlson, Szatrowski, Peterson, & Gold, 1994). This
approach may allow a general assessment of chronic disease
burden and can be predictive of broad patterns of mortality
outcomes; but the process of combining conditions into a sin-
gle scale obscures considerable pathophysiological detail that
may have etiological importance. In addition, simply adding
up the number of comorbidities ignores the variability in
severity of a particular disease. Patients may vary in the effects
of the same disease. For example, patients may have one of
four stages of congestive heart failure (New York Heart Clas-
siﬁcation 1–4) or one of three stages of cancer (local, regional,
and distance). In addition, simply adding up the number of co-
morbidity factors assumes that two diseases have the same im-
pact on patients. For example, most clinicians would argue
that experiencing a stroke or a myocardial infarction is more
severe than experiencing arthritis, although the resultant dis-
ability may vary.
In our own studies in which we examined the relationship
between SRH and various comorbid illnesses (seeTable 17.3),
we observed that various diseases and disorders examined
varied in their association with SRH. Stroke, hypertension,

434
Disease, Health, and Aging
diabetes, depression, and chronic obstructive pulmonary dis-
order were all found to be related to poorer SRH. However, 12
of the other 19 comorbid illnesses were not signiﬁcantly re-
lated, including abdominal aortic aneurysm, thoracic aortic
aneurysm, dialysis-dependent renal failure, cancer, substance
abuse, depression, arthritis, back pain, peptic ulcer, hepatitis-
cirrhosis, and myocardial infarctions. Thus, using a summated
comorbidity measure, as commonly used, assumes that each
disease is equally inﬂuential in affecting whatever the out-
come may be. Summation of comorbidities does not consider
the variations in prevalence and incidence of diseases, nor
does it consider—more important—the severity of diseases
(Bosworth, Siegler, Brummett, Barefoot, Williams, Vitaliano
et al., 1999b).
Psychiatric Comorbidity and Aging
When considering health, disease, and aging, depression is a
particularly important comorbidity that needs to be consid-
ered. Medically ill patients often suffer from depression.
Depression is common among coronary heart disease patients
(Brummett et al., 1998; Carney et al., 1987; Forrester et al.,
1992; Hance, Carney, Freeland, & Skala, 1996; Schleifer,
Macari-Hinson, & Coyle, 1989) and is predictive of rehospi-
talization (Levine et al., 1996) and increased disability (Ormel
et al., 1994; Steffens et al., 1999). Depression during hospital-
ization following a myocardial infarction (MI), for example,
predicts both long- and short-term survival rates (Barefoot,
1997; Frasure-Smith, Lesperance, & Talajic, 1993).
Depression has consistently been implicated in the causal
web of incident disability and of functional decline in popula-
tion samples (Stuck et al., 1999). Major depressive disorder
(MDD), minor depression, and depressive symptoms have
each been associated with functional disability. Depression
and physical function are intertwined; a feedback loop exists
such that depression causes increased disability and increased
disability exacerbates depression. Similarly, medication ad-
herence among depressed older persons is poor, and this feed-
back loop exists such that depression causes nonadherence
with medical treatment and nonadherence further exacerbates
depression so that a focus on both is essential (DiMatteo,
Lepper, & Croghan, 2000). DiMatteo et al. (2000), for exam-
ple, reported that the relationship between depression and
nonadherence was signiﬁcant and substantial, with an odds
ratio of 3.03 (95%; 1.96–4.89).
Depression may increase nonadherence with treatment for
multiple reasons. First, positive expectations and beliefs in the
beneﬁts and efﬁcacy of treatment have been shown (DiMatteo
et al., 1993) to be essential to patient adherence. Depression
often involves an appreciable degree of hopelessness, and
adherence might be difﬁcult or impossible for a patient who
holds little optimism that any action will be worthwhile. Sec-
ond, considerable research (DiMatteo & DiNicola, 1982;
DiMatteo, 1994) underscores the importance of support from
the family and social network in a patient’s attempts to be
compliant with medical treatments. Often accompanying de-
pression are considerable social isolation and withdrawal
from the very individuals who would be essential in providing
emotional support and assistance. Third, depression might be
associated with reductions in the cognitive functioning essen-
tial to remembering and following through with treatment rec-
ommendations (e.g., taking medication).
Caregiving as a Threat to Health
Depression is often an outcome of studies of stress and aging.
This is well represented by the caregiving literature. Two
recent special issues (Vitaliano, 1997; Schulz & Quittner,
1998) give an indication of the types of studies that have been
done.WorkbyVitalianoandcolleaguesshowsthatthestressof
caregiving also has signiﬁcant effects on measures of physical
health status when indexed with medical records—and with
(a) biological indicators of the metabolic syndrome (Vitaliano
et al., 1998) and (b) measures of immune system functioning
and sleep disturbance (Vitaliano et al., 1999). These relations
are found both cross-sectionally and longitudinally. It is also
most interesting that women who use hormone replacement
therapy (HRT; both caregivers and controls) are better off
physiologically than their counterparts who do not use HRT
(Vitaliano et al., 2002); Whether this is another example of
(a) the so-called healthy woman effect, wherein women who
have a risk proﬁle that reduces disease are more likely to take
HRT; (b) the effect of estrogen (see Matthews et al., 2000);
or (c) the effect of some additional mechanisms is not clear.
Nevertheless, this is an observation that should be pursued.
Life tasks are made harder when health problems are
present. Multiple problems require more complex manage-
ment of medications, and increasingly complex decisions
about care choices need to be made. Not only are the problems
to be solved more complex, the cognitive capacities of the
older person may not be operating at peak efﬁciency (Peters,
Finucane, MacGregor, & Slovic, 2000). One solution suggests
that there is a greater need for intergenerational collaboration
in decision making. When family members are available, this
becomes part of the caregiving task.As increasing numbers of
older persons have fewer siblings and children than do current
older persons, new solutions will need to be found to deal with
difﬁculties in decision making among the elderly.

Methodological Considerations
435
METHODOLOGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
In the study of health and disease, two particular method-
ological issues are worthy of note: (a) the role of period ef-
fects and (b) selection effects from study designs that sample
the actual age distribution of the population versus those that
oversample the oldest old.
Period Effects of Disease Detection and Treatments
A period effect or time effect is a societal or cultural change
that may occur between two measurements that presents
plausible alternative rival explanations for the outcome of a
study (Baltes, Reese, & Nesselroade, 1988; Schaie, 1977).
Studies have often focused on cohort and aging effects, but
there has been a lack of focus on period effects that may
explain observed age changes in longitudinal and age differ-
ences in cross-sectional studies that examine the relationship
between health, behavior, and aging (Siegler et al., 2001).
In addition, period effects may affect the prevalence and
incidence of disease.
As discussed elsewhere (Siegler et al., 2001), the introduc-
tion of the prostate-speciﬁc antigen (PSA) test is an example
of the effects of period-time effects accounting for changes in
the detection of prostate cancer.A PSAtest is a diagnostic tool
for identifying prostate cancer, and since its introduction in
1987 there have been increasing numbers of prostate cancers
being diagnosed among older adults that would not have been
diagnosed based upon previous techniques (Amling et al.,
1998). Subsequently, there has been an observed increase in
number of prostate cancer diagnoses, and because prostate
cancer prevalence rates increase with age, researchers study-
ing longitudinally the relationship between age and onset of
prostate cancer would have to account for the introduction of
this relatively new diagnostic tool.
Information is being made available more quickly and
improvements in diagnostic techniques and treatments are
increasing in frequency. This is a beneﬁt for the popula-
tion, but it makes research more difﬁcult, particularly if an
intervention is in process and new information or changes in
medical procedure are being made available to the public at
large. Subsequently, developmental psychologists and other
researchers are going to have to become more aware and
ﬂexible in the way they deal with these increasing period-
time effects.
An example of researchers who are adapting to historical
or period effects is the ongoing Women’s Health Initiative
Study, in which information on estrogen use is being
collected. There have been increased data that suggest the
inﬂuence of estrogen is related to long-term beneﬁts such as
prevention or delay of osteoporosis, heart disease, and
Alzheimer’s disease (Jacobs & Hillard, 1996), but recent
information about raloxifene and tamoxifen have altered
women’s perception of the use of hormonal replacement
medication.
News of health and aging has been gaining more public
attention, which also needs to be considered in both cross-
sectional and longitudinal studies of aging, health, and
disease. Thus, the context in which the study was conducted
now must be better characterized. One example comes from
our own research, in which we conducted telephone inter-
views between October 1998 and February 1999 among a
random sample of women aged 45–54 residing in Durham
County, North Carolina. Women were recruited for a random-
ized clinical trial to test the efﬁcacy of a decision aid inter-
vention on HRT decision making. One of the factors that
determines HRT use and inﬂuences HRT decision making has
been the cardio-protective effects of HRT. However, an inﬂu-
ential publication in the Journal of the American Medical As-
sociation indicated that women using HRT in the short term
were at a increase risk for CHD events (Hulley et al., 1998).
Although limited data are available at this time, our study and
others looking at HRT decision making are likely to be inﬂu-
enced by these recent results.
Selection Effects
Individuals at higher risk for mortality, morbidity, physical
function, and so on may be selected out of the populations at
earlier ages.Although this selection applies to any age cohort,
the forces of proper selection are much stronger in older popu-
lations. The analysis of the consequences of selective survival
is complex and can lead to a variety of age-related patterns in
differential survival (Vaupel & Yashin, 1985). It is useful to
think of three ways in which selective survival might inﬂuence
age-related trends in risk factor-outcome associations. If those
with a particular risk factor experience higher and earlier mor-
tality, then the distribution of risk factors in the survivor popu-
lation would be altered relative to the original distribution and
should reﬂect lower levels of risk factors (i.e., less likely to
smoke, be overweight). This would occur because those with
high levels of risk factors are more likely to have been re-
moved from the population. Second, it is possible that there
are unmeasured differences in susceptibility to the risk factor
among both those previously exposed and those unexposed.
Third, the survivors may have other characteristics—genetic
or environmental in origin—that prevent or slow the progres-
sion of disease, shifting the onset to a later age. Thus, it is

436
Disease, Health, and Aging
important to consider survival effects when conducting re-
search on health and aging.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
There were a series of old questions that were always part
of the chapters written about aging and health (e.g., see
Eisdorfer & Wilkie, 1977; M. F. Elias, Elias, & Elias, 1990;
Siegler & Costa, 1985). These old and current questions and
answers include the following: 
•
Do variations in physical health account for aging effects?
Not necessarily; it really depends on the age group
studied. New data in centenarians are changing our under-
standing of these relationships.
•
Is there such a thing as normal aging? No. It is a moving
target, changing with each new publication.
One explanation for this change is period effects—that is,
changes such as improved survival of persons with coronary
heart disease inﬂuence the deﬁnition of normal aging. These
changes in survival are due to medical interventions such as
angioplasty and coronary artery bypass surgery, which are
increasingly made available to older persons with heart
disease. How we die is different from what was the case when
previous chapters addressing these questions were published.
More people now die later in life when the cause may not be
due to a speciﬁc disease (Fried et al., 1998; Nuland, 1995).
Does this situation mean that there is no longer a need for
developmental psychology to be concerned with health?
No—we now have new opportunities to consider along with
a tremendous base of work on which to stand. Work is under-
way in all of the following areas.
How should researchers measure the important psycholog-
ical constructs in everyone who is aging—that is, how they
measure psychological constructs for extremely aged persons
or those with exceptional longevity? Developmental psychol-
ogists know that there is great variation in mental and physical
health status and in sensory and motor capacities. Until we can
fully measure psychological factors in everyone, we cannot
understand these factors completely.
Now that epidemiology and geriatric medicine are measur-
ing disease in the elderly and extreme aging population, we
needpsychologicalmeasuresdesignedtobeusedinlaboratory
settings that are associated with disease outcomes and biolog-
ical indicators. The discussion in Finch, Vaupel, and Kinsella
(2000) provides an instructive discussion of this issue.
We also need to continue to develop and validate psycho-
logical measures that are appropriate and valid in survey
research. Burkhauser and Gertler (1995) describe the Health
and Retirement Study, Herzog and Wallace (1997) lay out the
issues for the Asset and Health Dynamics of the Oldest-Old
Study, while Zelinski et al. (1998) provide an example of the
strengths and weaknesses of current approaches. Additional
development will require some basic psychometric work for
age, content, and size of scales that measure important
psychological constructs. This development will require some
basic psychometric work for age, content, and size of scale.
We know the problems but not the solutions. We also need to
conceptualize health in ways that make sense psychologi-
cally. Self-rated health is a good single item, but can we do
better (Kennedy, Kasl, & Vaccarino, 2001)? How do we mea-
sure well-being when health is completely compromised?
This is an area of research that Powell Lawton started (1997)
and unfortunately did not live long enough to complete. He
called for a valuation of life that is possible in all health status
conﬁguration.
Reevaluate a life span approach. Our life span may have
been too conservative, given the data by Kuh and Ben Shlomo
(1997) wherein infant and prenatal variables predicted adult
onset of disease and adult health, whereas mid-life variables
appeared to have no relevance to geriatric syndromes.
Make psychology relevant to important concerns in
economics and public policy. Health disparities due to social
class, race, and ethnic differences do not disappear with age.
The disparity is real and we do not know the causes. How
much variability could genetics contribute to resolve the
disparity? Is it related to life course exposures? Are there crit-
ical periods at various points in the lifecycle? In 1999, Health,
United States (USDHHS, 1999) picked aging as its special
topic for the year, as “older people are major consumers of
health care and their numbers are increasing” (p. iii). Some
highlights of the report are worth noting: (a) By 2030, 20% of
the U.S. population will be over age 65; (b) life expectancy at
age 65 and at age 85 has increased over the past 50 years—at
age 65 European Americans have a higher life expectancy,
whereas at age 85 African Americans have a higher life ex-
pectancy; however, health disparities by race are shocking.
Mortality rates are 55% higher for African Americans—age-
adjusted death rates were 77% higher for stroke, 47% higher
for heart disease, and 34% higher for cancer. In an important
sense, these mean fundamentally that lower SES persons
appear to age faster—that is, things that happen later in the life
cycle for those further up the SES ladder happen earlier for
those on the bottom of the ladder. Trying to fully understand
what this means is a major challenge for our ﬁeld.
Developmental psychologists know a lot about aging
processes and measurement and are interested broadly in all
aspects of human development. However, for the study of

References
437
health and disease to progress, investigators must conduct
research in conjunction with research teams expert in all
aspects required to solve particular problems. Other disci-
plines and other countries are well ahead of us on this problem.
What can we contribute as developmental psychologists?
Responding to the fears of the public and policy makers
about the explosion of aging in the population, Carstensen in
a New York Times editorial (2001) rightly points out the
opportunity to design a new stage of life. She argues that not
all aging changes need to be bad. She assumed that medical
and psychological science will solve the problems of the
elderly today and ﬁnd a cure for frailty that is not necessarily
disease-related. We may have reached Fries’s (1980) com-
pression of morbidity, where function is preserved until the
ﬁnal 1, 3, or 5 years of life. After most of the population gets
there, what will happen with health maintained until the ninth
decade?
We have the knowledge to improve the odds and postpone
the deleterious consequences that had previously been attrib-
uted to normal aging or even to disease-related aging. World-
wide studies of centenarians and supercentenarians are
seeking answers as to what determines the characteristics that
lead to 110 years of disability-free life? The simpleminded
answer of preventing disease is probably not going to be the
correct one. The real future challenge is to ﬁgure out how to
ask the right questions. Health will play an increasingly
important role for developmental psychologists, and—as
changes in health care and the demographic revolution con-
tinue to occur—we need to be able to include contextual
inﬂuences and period changes in order to better understand
the role of health and disease among older adults.
REFERENCES
Aldwin, C. M., & Gilmer, D. F. (1999). Immunity, disease processes
and optimal aging. In J. C. Cavanaugh & S. K. Whitbourne
(Eds.), Gerontology: An interdisciplinary perspective. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Amling, C. L., Blute, M. L., Lerner, S. E., Bergstralh, E. J.,
Bostwick, D. G., & Zincke, H. (1998). Inﬂuence of prostate-
speciﬁc antigen testing on the spectrum of patients with prostate
cancer undergoing radical prostatectomy at a large referral prac-
tice. Mayo Clinic Proceedings, 73, 401–406.
Anderson, N. A., & Armstead, C. A. (1995). Toward understanding
the association of socioeconomic status and health: A new chal-
lenge for the bio-psychosocial approach. Psychosomatic Medi-
cine, 57, 213–225.
Anderson, R. N., Kochanek, K. D., & Murphy, S. L. (1997, June).
Report of ﬁnal mortality statistics. Monthly Vital Statistics
Report, 45(11), Supplement 2.
Baltes, P. B., & Mayer, K. U. (Eds.). (1999). The Berlin Aging
Study: Aging from 70–100. Cambridge UK: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
Baltes, P. B., Reese, H. W., & Nesselroade, J. R. (1988). Introduc-
tion to research methods: Life-span developmental psychology.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Barefoot, J. C. (1997). Depression and coronary heart disease.
Cardiologia, 42, 1245–1250.
Bastian, L. A., Bosworth, H. B., Mark, D. B., & Siegler, I. C.
(1998, November). Are personality traits associated with the use
of Hormone Replacement Therapy in a cohort of middle aged
women undergoing cardiac catherization? Paper presented at
the meetings of the Gerontological Society of America,
Philadelphia, PA.
Baum, A., & Posluszny, D. M. (1999). Health Psychology: Mapping
biobehavioral contributions to health and illness. Annual Review
of Psychology, 50, 137–163.
Beard, B. B. (1991). Centenarians: The new generation. New York:
Greenwood Press.
Bosworth, H. B., Butterﬁeld, M. I., Stechuchak, K. M., & Bastian,
L. A. (2000). The relationship between self-rated health and
health care service use among women veterans in a primary care
clinic. Women’s Health Issues, 10(5), 278–285.
Bosworth, H. B., Siegler, I. C., Brummett, B. H., Barefoot, J. C.,
Williams, R. B., Clapp-Channing, N., Lytle, B. L., & Mark, D. B.
(1999). Self-rated health as a predictor of mortality in a sample
of coronary artery disease patients. Medical Care, 37(12),
1226–1236.
Bosworth, H. B., Siegler, I. C., Brummett, B. H., Barefoot, J. C.,
Williams, R. B., Vitaliano, P. P., Clapp-Channing, N., Lytle,
B. L., & Mark, D. B. (1999). The relationship between self-rated
health and health status among coronary artery patients. Journal
of Aging and Health, 13(4), 565–584.
Bosworth, H. B., Siegler, I. C., Olsen, M. K., Brummett, B. H.,
Barefoot, J. C., Williams, R. B., Clapp-Channing, N., & Mark,
D. B. (2000). Social support and quality of life in patients with
coronary artery disease. Quality of Life Research, 9(7), 829–839.
Breslow, L., & Breslow, N. (1993). Health practices and disability:
Some evidence from Alameda County. Preventive Medicine,
22(1), 86–95.
Bristol, M. M., Gallagher, J. J., & Schopler, E. (1988). Mothers and
fathers of young developmentally disabled and non-disabled
boys: Adaptation and spousal support. Developmental Psychol-
ogy, 24, 442–445.
Brummett, B. H., Babyak, M. A., Barefoot, J. C., Bosworth, H. B.,
Clapp-Channing, N. E., Siegler, I. C., Williams, R. B., Jr., & Mark,
D. B. (1998). Social support and hostility as predictors of depres-
sive symptoms in cardiac patients one month after hospitalization:
A prospective study. Psychosomatic Medicine, 60(6), 707–713.
Burkhauser, R. V., & Gertler, P. J. (Eds.). (1995). The health and
retirement study. Data quality and early results [Special issue].
Journal of Human Resources, 30(Supplement).

438
Disease, Health, and Aging
Buse, S., & Pieper, B. (1990). Impact of cardiac transplantation on
the spouse’s life. Heart and Lung, 19, 641–648.
Califf, R. M., Harrell, F. E., Jr., Lee, K. L., Rankin, J. S., Hlatky,
M. A., Mark, D. B., Jones, R. H., Muhlbaier, L. H., & Oldham,
H. N. (1989). The evolution of medical and surgical therapy for
coronary artery disease: A 15-year perspective. Journal of the
American Medical Association, 261, 2077–2086.
Carney, R., Rich, M. W., teVelde, A., Saini, J., Clark, K., & Jaffe,
A. S. (1987). Major depressive disorder in coronary artery
disease. American Journal of Cardiology, 60, 1273–1275.
Carstensen, L. L. (2001). On the brink of a brand-new old age. New
York Times, p. A19.
Charlson, M., Szatrowski, T. P., Peterson, J., & Gold, J. (1994).
Validation of a combined co-morbidity index. Journal of Clini-
cal Epidemiology, 47, 1245–1251.
Deeg, D. H. J., Kardaun, J. W. P. F., & Fozard, J. L. (1996). Health,
behavior and aging. In J. E. Birren & K. W. Schaie (Eds.), Hand-
book of the psychology of aging (4th ed., pp. 129–149). San
Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Deeg, D. H. J., van Zonneveld, R. J., van der Maas, P. J., &
Habbema, J. D. (1989). Medical and social predictors of
longevity in the elderly: total predictive value and interdepen-
dence. Social Science Medicine, 29(11), 1271–1280.
Desai, M., Bruce, M. L., Desai, R. A., & Druss, B. G. (2001). Valid-
ity of self-reported cancer history: A comparison of health
interview data and cancer registry records. American Journal of
Epidemiology, 153(3), 299–306.
DiMatteo, M. (1994). Enhancing patient adherence to medical
recommendations. Journal of the American Medical Associa-
tion, 271, 79–83.
DiMatteo, M., & DiNicola, D. D. (1982). Achieving patient compli-
ance. Elmsford, NY: Pergamon Press.
DiMatteo, M., Lepper, H. S., & Croghan, T. W. (2000). Depres-
sion is a risk factor for noncompliance with medical treatment:
Meta-analysis of the effects of anxiety and depression on pa-
tient adherence. Archives of Internal Medicine, 160(14), 2101–
2107.
DiMatteo, M., Sherbourne, C. D., Hays, R. D., Ordway, L., Kravitz,
R. L., McGlynn, E. A., Kaplan, S., & Rogers, W. H. I. (1993).
Physicians’ characteristics inﬂuence patients’ adherence to
medical treatment: Results from the Medical Outcomes Study.
Health Psychology, 12(2), 93–102.
Eisdorfer, C., & Wilkie, F. W. (1977). Stress, disease, aging and
behavior. In J. E. Birren & K. W. Schaie (Eds.), Handbook of the
psychology of aging (pp. 251–275). New York: Van Nostrand
Reinhold.
Elias, M. F., Elias, J. W., & Elias, P. K. (1990). Biological and health
inﬂuences on behavior. In J. E. Birren & K. W. Schaie (Eds.),
Handbook of the psychology of aging (3rd ed., pp. 79–102). San
Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Elias, M. F., Elias, P. K., D’Agostino, R. B., & Wolf, P. A. (1997).
Role of age, education and gender on cognitive performance in
the Framingham Heart Study: Community based norms. Experi-
mental Aging Research, 23, 201–235.
Elias, M. F., Elias, P. K., D’Agostino, R. B., & Wolf, P. A. (2000).
Comparative effects of age and blood pressure on neuropsycho-
logical test performance: The Framingham Study. In S. B.
Manuck, R. Jennings, B. S. Rabin, & A. Baum (Eds.), Behavior,
health and aging (pp. 199–223). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Elias, M. F., Elias, P. K., Robbins, M. A., Wolf, P. A., & D’Agostino,
R. B. (2000). Cardiovascular risk factors and cognitive func-
tioning: An epidemiological perspective. In S. R. Waldstein &
M. F. Elias (Eds.), Neuropsychology of cardiovascular disease
(pp. 83–104). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Elias, M. F., Robbins, M. A., Elias, P. K., & Streeten, D. H. P.
(1998). A longitudinal study of blood pressure in relation to per-
formance on the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale. Health Psy-
chology, 17, 486–493.
Elias, P. K., Elias, M. F., D’Agostino, R. B., Cupples, L. A., Wilson,
P. W., Silbershatz, H., & Wolf, P. A. (1997). NIDDM and blood
pressure as risk factors for poor cognitive performance: The
Framingham Study. Diabetes Care, 20, 1388–1395.
Ewbank, D. (2000). Demography and the age of genomics: A ﬁrst
look at the prospects. In C. E. Finch, J. W. Vaupel, & K. Kinsella
(Eds.), Cells and Surveys (pp. 64–109). Washington, DC:
National Academy Press.
Finch, C. E., Vaupel, J. M., & Kinsella, K. (Eds.). (2000). Cells and
surveys. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Folstein, M., Folstein, S. E., & McHugh, P. R. (1975). “Mini-Mental
State”: A practical method for grading the cognitive state of
patients for the clinical. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 12,
189–198.
Forette, B. (1997). Centenarians: Health and frailty. In J.-M. Robine,
J. W. Vaupel, B. Jeune, & M. Allard (Eds.), Longevity: To the lim-
its and beyond (pp. 105–112). New York: Springer-Verlag.
Forrester, A., Lipsey, J. R., Teitelbaum, M. L., DePaulo, J. R.,
Andrzekewsli, P. L., & Robinson, R. G. (1992). Depression
following myocardial infarction. International Journal of
Psychiatry in Medicine, 22, 33–46.
Franceschi, C., Motta, L., Valensin, S., Rapisarda, R., Franzone, A.,
Berardelli, M., Motta, M., Monti, D., Bonafe, M., Ferrucci, L.,
Deiana, L., Pes, G. M., Carru, C., Desole, M. S., Barbi, C.,
Sartoni, G., Gemelli, C., Lescai, F., Olivieri, F., Marchegiani, F.,
Cardelli, M., Cavallone, L., Gueresi, P., Cossarizza, A., Troiano,
L., Pini, G., Sansoni, P., Passeri, G., Lisa, R., Spazzafumo, L.,
Amadio, L., Giunta, S., Stecconi, R., Morresi, R., Viticchi, C.,
Mattace, R., De Benedictis, G., & Baggio, G. (2000). Do men and
women follow different trajectories to reach extreme longevity?
Aging Clinical and Experimental Research, 12, 93–105.
Franke, H. (1977). Centenarians in the Federal Republic of
Germany: State of health and clinical observations. Schweiz-
erische Rundschau fur Medizin Praxis, 66(36), 1149–1157.
Franke, H. (1985). Auf den Spuren der Langlebigkeit. [Following
the paths of longevity] Stuttgart, Germany: Schatthauer.

References
439
Frasure-Smith, N., Lesperance, F., & Talajic, M. (1993). Depression
following myocardial infarction. Journal of the American
Medical Association, 270, 1819–1825.
Fratiglioni, L., Wang, H.-X., Ericsson, K., Maytan, M., & Winblad,
B. (2000). Inﬂuence of social network on occurrence of demen-
tia: A community based longitudinal study. The Lancet, 355,
1315–1319.
Fried, L. P. (2000). Epidemiology of aging. Epidemiologic Reviews,
22, 77–84.
Fried, L. P., Kronmal, R., Newman, A., Bild, D. E., Mittelmark,
M. B., Polak, J. F., Robbins, J. A., & Gardin, J. M. (1998). Risk
factors for 5-year mortality in older adults: The Cardiovascular
Health Study. Journal of the American Medical Association,
279, 585–592.
Fries, J. F. ( 1980). Aging natural death and the compression of
morbidity. New England Journal of Medicine, 303, 130–135.
George, L. K., & Clipp, E. C. (1991). Subjective components of
aging well. Generations, 15, 57–60.
Giampoli, S. (2000). Epidemiology of major age-related diseases in
women compared to men. Aging Clinical and Experimental
Research, 12, 93–105.
Guralnik, J. M., Balfour, J. M., & Volpato, S. (2000). The ratio of
older women to men: Historical perspectives and cross-national
comparisons. Aging Clinical and Experimental Research, 12,
65–76.
Hagberg, B., Alfredson, B., Poon, L. W., & Homma, A. (2001). Cog-
nitive functioning in centenarians: A coordinated analysis of
results from three countries. Journal of Gerontology Series B:
Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences, 56, P141–P151.
Haley, W. E., Levine, E., Brown, S. L., & Bartolucci, A. (1987).
Stress, appraisal and social support as predictors of adaptational
outcome among dementia caregivers. Psychology and Aging, 2,
323–330.
Hance, M., Carney, R. M., Freeland, K. E., & Skala, J. (1996).
Depression in patients with coronary heart disease. General
Hospital Psychiatry, 18, 61–65.
Harrell, F. E., Lee, K. L., Califf, R. M., Pryor, D. B., & Rosati, R. A.
(1984). Regression modeling strategies for improved prognostic
prediction. Statistics in Medicine, 3, 143–152.
Hazzard, W. R., Blass, J. P., Ettinger, W. H., Halter, J. B., &
Ouslander, J. G. (1999). Principles of geriatric medicine and
gerontology. New York: McGraw Hill.
Herzog, A. R., & Wallace, R. B. (1997). Measures of cog-
nitive functioning in the AHEAD study [Special issue].
Journal of Gerontology: Psychological and Social Sciences,
52B, 37–48.
Hooker, K. (1999). Possible selves in adulthood. In T. Hess &
F. Blanchard-Fields (Eds.), Social cognition and aging (pp. 97–
122). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Hooker, K., Shifren, K., & Hutchinson, C. (1992). Mental and
physical health of spouse caregivers: the role of personality.
Psychology and Aging, 7(3), 367–375.
Hooker, K., & Siegler, I. C. (1992). Separating apples from oranges
in health ratings: Perceived health includes psychological well-
being. Behavior, Health, and Aging, 2, 81–92.
House, J. S., Kessler, R. C., Herzog, A. R., Mero, R. P., Kinney,
R. P., & Breslow, M. J. (1992). Social stratiﬁcation, age and
health. In K. W. Schaie, J. House, & D. G. Blazer (Eds.), Aging,
health behaviors and health outcomes (pp. 1–32). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Hulley, S., Grady, D., Bush, T., Furberg, C., Herrington, D., Riggs,
B., & Vittinghoff, E. (1998). Randomized trial of estrogen plus
progestin for secondary prevention of coronary heart disease in
postmenopausal women. Heart and Estrogen/progestin Replace-
ment Study (HERS) Research Group. Journal of the American
Medical Association, 280(7), 605–613.
Idler, E. L., & Benyamini, Y. (1997). Self-rated health and mortality:
A review of twenty-seven community studies. Journal of Health
and Social Behavior, 38, 21–37.
Idler, E. L., & Kasl, S. V. (1991). Health perceptions and survival:
Do global evaluations of health status really predict morality?
Journal of Gerontology: Social Sciences, 46, S55–S65.
Jacobs, S., & Hillard, T. C. (1996). Hormone replacement therapy in
the aged: A state of the art review. Drugs Aging, 8(3), 193–213.
Jeune, B., & Andersen-Ranberg, K. (2000). What can we learn from
centenarians? In P. Martin, C. Rott, B. Hagberg, & K. Morgan
(Eds.), Centenarians: Autonomy vs. dependence in the oldest old
(pp. 9–24). Paris: Serdi Edition.
Kaplan, G. A., & Camacho, T. (1983). Perceived health and mortal-
ity: A nine-year follow-up of the Human Population Laboratory
Cohort. American Journal of Epidemiology, 117, 292–304.
Kaplan, G. A., Haan, M. N., & Wallace, R. B. (1999). Understand-
ing changing risk factor associations with increasing age in
adults. Annual Review of Public Health, 20, 89–108.
Kennedy, B. S., Kasl, S. V., & Vaccarino, V. V. (2001). Repeated
hospitalizations and self-rated health among the elderly: A mul-
tivariate failure time analysis. American Journal of Epidemio-
logic, 153(3), 232–241.
Kim, J. S., Bramlett, M. H., Wright, L. K., & Poon, L. W., (1998).
Racial differences in health status and health behaviors of older
adults. Nursing Research, 47(4), 243–250.
Kuh, D., & Ben-Shlomo, Y. (Eds.). (1997). A life-course ap-
proach to chronic disease epidemiology. Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press.
Lachman, M. E., & James, J. (Eds.). (1997). Multiple paths of
midlife development. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Leventhal, E. (2000). Aging women, getting older getting better?
In S. B. Manuck, R. Jennings, B. S. Rabin, & A. Baum (Eds.)
Behavior, health and aging (pp.199–223). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Leventhal, H., Benyamini, Y., Brownlee, S., Diefenbach, M.,
Leventhal, E. A., Patrick-Miller, L., & Robitaille, C. (1997).
Illness representations: Theoretical foundations. In K. J.
Petrie & J. A. Weinman (Eds.), Perceptions of health and
illness. Amsterdam: Harwood.

440
Disease, Health, and Aging
Levine, J., Covino, N. A., Slack, W. V., Safran, C., Safran, D. B.,
Boro, J. E., Davis, R. B., Buchanan, G. K., Gervino, E. V. (1996).
Psychological predictors of subsequent medical care among
patients hospitalized with cardiac disease. Journal of Cardiopul-
monary Rehabilitation, 16, 109–116.
Maddox, G. L., Atchley, R. C., Evans, J. G., Finch, C. E., Kane,
R. A., Mezey, M. D., Poon, L. W., & Siegler, I. C. (Eds.). (2001).
Encyclopedia of aging: A comprehensive multidisciplinary
review of gerontology and geriatrics (3rd ed.). New York:
Springer.
Manton, K. G., Corder, L., & Stallard, E. (1997). Chronic disability
trends in elderly United States populations: 1982–1994. Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 94,
2593–2598.
Matthews, K. A., Owens, J. F., Kuller, L. H., Sutton-Tyrell, K., &
Jansen-McWilliams, L. (1998). Are hostility and anxiety associ-
ated with carotid atherosclerosis in healthy postmenopausal
women? Psychosomatic Medicine, 60, 633–638.
Matthews, K. A., Wing, R. R., Kuller, L. H., Meilahn, E. N., &
Owens, J. F. (2000). Menopause as a turning point in midlife.
In S. B. Manuck, R. Jennings, B. S. Rabin, & A. Baum
(Eds.), Behavior, health and aging (pp. 43–56). Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
McClearn, G. E., & Heller, D. A. (2000). Genetics and aging. In
S. B. Manuck, R. Jennings, B. S. Rabin, & A. Baum (Eds.),
Behavior, health and aging (pp. 1–14). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Morley, J. E. (2000). Androgen deﬁciency in aging males and
healthy aging. In J.-M. Robine, T. B. L. Kirkwood, & M. Allard
(Eds.), Sex and longevity: Sexuality, gender, reproduction,
parenthood (pp. 103–115). Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Mossey, J. M., & Shapiro, E. (1982). Self-rated health: A predictor
of mortality among the elderly. American Journal of Public
Health, 72, 800–808.
Mülunpalo, S., Vuori, I., Oja, P., Pasanen, M., & Urponen, H.
(1997). Self-rated health status as a health measure: The predic-
tive value of self-reported health status on the use of physician
services and on mortality in the working-age population. Journal
of Clinical Epidemiology, 50, 517–528.
Murray, C. L. G., & Lopez, A. D. (Eds.). (1996). The global burden
of disease. Washington, DC: World Health Organization.
National Institute on Aging and Genetic Epidemiology Working
Group. (2000). Genetic epidemiologic studies on age-speciﬁed
traits. American Journal of Epidemiology, 152, 1003–1008.
Neugarten, B. L. (1974). Age groups in American society and the
rise of the young old. Annals of the American Academy of Polit-
ical and Social Science, 415, 187–198.
Neugarten, B. L. (1976). Adaptation and the life cycle. The
Counseling Psychologist, 6, 16–20.
Neugarten, B. L. (1979). Time, age, and the life cycle. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 136, 887–894.
Nuland, S. B. (1995). How we die: Reﬂections of life’s ﬁnal chapter.
New York: Random House.
Ormel, J., VonKorff, M., Ustun, T. B., Pini, S., Korten, A., &
Oldehinkel, T. (1994). Common mental disorder and disability
across cultures: Results from the WHO Collaborative Study on
Psychological Problems in General Health Care. Journal of the
American Medical Association, 272, 1741–1748.
Paffenbarger, R. S., Hyde, R. T., Wing, A. L., Lee, I. M., Jung,
D. L., & Kampert, J. B. (1993). The association of changes in
physical activity level and other lifestyle characteristics with
mortality among men. New England Journal of Medicine, 328,
538–545.
Parkerson, G. R., Jr., Broadhead, W. E., & Tse, C. J. (1992). Quality
of life and functional health of primary care patients. Journal of
Clinical Epidemiology, 45, 1303–1313.
Patrick, D., & Erickson, P. (1993). Health status and health policy:
Quality of life in health care evaluation and resources alloca-
tion. New York: Oxford University Press.
Pederson N. L., & Reynolds C. A. (1988). Stability and change in
adult personality: Genetic and environmental components.
European Journal of Personality, 12, 365–386.
Perls, T., Fretts, R., Daly, M., Brewester S., Kunkel, L., & Pucca,
A. (2000). Genes and centenarians. In J.-M. Robine, T. B. L.
Kirkwood, & M. Allard (Eds.), Sex and longevity: Sexuality,
gender, reproduction, parenthood (pp. 43–57). Berlin: Springer-
Verlag.
Perls, T. T., & Silver, M. H. (1999). Living to 100. Lessons in
living to your maximum potential at any age. New York, Basic
Books.
Peters, E., Finucane, M. L., MacGregor, D. G., & Slovic, P. (2000).
The bearable lightness of aging: Judgment and decision
processes in older adults. In P. C. Stern & L. L. Carstensen
(Eds.), The aging mind (pp. 144–165). Washington, DC:
National Academy Press.
Poon, L. W., Johnson, M. A., Davey, A., Dawson, D. V., Siegler,
I. C., & Martin, P. (2000). Psychosocial predictors of survival
among centenarians. In P. Martin, C. Rott, B. Hagberg, & K.
Morgan (Eds.), Centenarians: Autonomy versus dependence in
the oldest old (pp. 77–90). Paris: Serdi.
Poon, L. W., Johnson, M. A., & Martin, P. (1997). Looking into the
crystal ball: Will we ever be able to accurately predict individual
differences in longevity? In J. M. Robine, J. W. Vaupel, B. Jeune,
& M. Allard (Eds.). Longevity: To the limits and beyond
(113–119). New York: Springer-Verlag.
Poon, L. W., Martin, P., Clayton, G. M., Messner, S., & Noble, C. A.
(1992). The inﬂuences of cognitive resources on adaptation and
old age. International Journal of Aging and Human Develop-
ment, 34(1), 31–46.
Radloff, L. S. (1977). The CES-D scale: A self report depression
scale for research in the general population. Applied Psycholog-
ical Measurement, 1, 385–401.
Robine, J.-M., Kirkwood, T. B. L., & Allard, M. (Eds.). (2001). Sex
and longevity: Sexuality, gender, reproduction and parenthood.
Berlin: Springer-Verlag.

References
441
Rowe, J. W., & Kahn, R. L. (1998). Successful aging. New York:
Pantheon Books.
Schaie, K. W. (1977). Quasi-experimental designs in the psychology
of aging. In J. E. Birren & K. W. Schaie (Eds.), Handbook of
the psychology of aging (pp. 39–58). New York: Van Nostrand
Reinhold.
Schleifer, S., Macari-Hinson, M. M., & Coyle, D. A. (1989). The na-
ture and course of depression following myocardial infarction.
Archives of Internal Medicine, 49, 1785–1789.
Schulz, R., & Quittner, A. L. (1998). Caregiving for children and
adults with chronic conditions: introduction to the special issue.
Health Psychology, 17(2), 107–111.
Sherbourne, C., Meredith, L. S., & Ware, J. E. (1992). Social sup-
port and stressful life events: Age differences in their effects on
health-related quality of life among the chronically ill. Quality of
Life Research, 1, 235–246.
Siegler, I. C. (1990). Paradigms in developmental health psychology:
From theory to application: Introduction to a special issue.
Journal of Gerontology: Psychological Sciences, 45(4), P113–
P115.
Siegler, I. C. (1997). Promoting health and minimizing stress. In
M. E. Lachman & J. James (Eds.), Multiple paths of midlife de-
velopment (pp. 243–255). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Siegler, I. C., Bastian L. A., & Bosworth, H. B. (2001). Health, be-
havior and aging. In A. Baum, T. R. Revenson, & J. E. Singer
(Eds.), Handbook of health psychology (pp. 469–476). Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Siegler, I. C., Bastian, L. A., Steffens, D. C., Bosworth, H. B., &
Costa, P. T. (2002). Behavioral medicine and aging: Middle age,
aging and the oldest-old. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 70(3), 843–851.
Siegler, I. C., & Costa, P. T. (1985). Health behavior relationships.
In J. E. Birren & K. W. Schaie (Eds.), Handbook of the psychol-
ogy of aging (2nd ed., pp. 144–166). New York: Van Nostrand
Reinhold.
Siegler, I. C., Feaganes, J. R., & Rimer, B. K. (1995). Predictors of
adoption of mammography in women under age 50. Health Psy-
chology, 14, 274–278.
Siegler, I. C., Kaplan, B. H., Von Dras, D. D., & Mark, D. B. (1999).
Cardiovascular health: A challenge for midlife. In S. Willis & J.
Reid (Eds.), Life in the middle (pp. 147–157). San Diego, CA:
Academic Press.
Siegler, I. C., Nowlin, J. B., & Blumenthal, J. A. (1980). Health and
behavior: Methodological considerations for adult development
and aging. In L. W. Poon (Ed.), Aging in the 1980’s: Psycholog-
ical issues (pp. 559–612). Washington, DC: American Psycho-
logical Association.
Siegler, I. C., Peterson, B. L., Barefoot, J. C., Harvin, S. H.,
Dahlstrom, W. G., Kaplan, B. H., Costa, P. T. Jr., & Williams,
R. B. (1992). Using college alumni populations in epidemiologic
research: The UNC Alumni Heart Study. Journal of Clinical
Epidemiology, 45(11), 1243–1250.
Soldo, B. J., & Hill, M. S. (1995). Family structure and transfer
measures in the Health and Retirement Study. The Journal of
Human Resources, 30(Supplement), S108–S137.
Sowers, M. F. R. (2000). The menopause transition and the aging
process: A population perspective. Aging Clinical and Experi-
mental Research, 12, 85–92.
Sprangers, M. A., & Schwartz, C. E. (1999). Integrating response
shift into health-related quality of life research: A theoretical
model. Social Science and Medicine, 48(11), 1507–1515.
Steffens, D., O’Connor, C. M., Jiang, W. J., Pieper, C. F.,
Kuchibhatla, M. N., Arias, R. M., Look, A., Davenport, C.,
Gonzalez, M. B., & Krishnan, K. R. R. (1999). The effect of
major depression on functional status in patients with coronary
artery disease. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 47,
319–322.
Stern, P. C., & Carstensen, L. L. (2000). The aging mind: Opportu-
nities in cognitive research. Washington, DC; National Academy
Press.
Stuck,A. E., Walthert, J. M., Nikolaus, T., Bula, C. J., Hohmann, C., &
Beck, J. C. (1999). Risk factors for functional status decline in
community-living elderly people: a systematic literature review.
Social Science and Medicine, 48(4), 445–469.
Tenover, J. L. (1999). Trophic factors and male hormone replace-
ment. In W. R. Hazzard, J. P. Blass, W. H. Ettinger, J. B. Halter, &
J. G. Ouslander (Eds.), Principles of geriatric medicine and
gerontology (pp. 1029–1040). New York: McGraw Hill.
United States Department of Health and Human Services. (1999).
Health, United States, 1999 with Health and Aging Chartbook.
Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health Statistics (PHS No.
99-1232).
Vaccarino, V., Berkman, L. F., & Krumholz, H. M. (2000). Long-
term outcome of myocardial infarction in women and men: A
population perspective. American Journal of Epidemiology, 152,
965–973.
Vaupel, J. W., & Yashin, A. I. (1985). The deviant dynamics of death
in heterogeneous populations. In. N. B. Tuma (Ed.), Sociological
methodology. Jossey-Bass social and behavioral science series.
(pp. 179–211). San Franciso: Jossey-Bass.
Vitaliano, P. P. (1997). Physiological and physical concomitants of
caregiving: Introduction to a special issue. Annals of Behavioral
Medicine, 19, 75–77.
Vitaliano, P. P., Russo, J., Young, H. M., Teri, L., & Maiuro, R. D.
(1991). Predictors of burden in spouse caregivers of individuals
with Alzheimer’s disease. Psychology and Aging, 6(3), 392–402.
Vitaliano, P. P., Scanlan, J. M., Siegler, I. C., McCormick, W. C., &
Knopp, R. H. (1998). Coronary heart disease moderates the rela-
tionship of chronic stress with the metabolic syndrome. Health
Psychology, 17, 520–529.
Vitaliano, P. P., Scanlan, J. M., Zhang, J. P., Siegler, I. C., Young,
H., & McCormick, W. C. (1999, June). Associations of caregiv-
ing with health outcomes. National Institute on Aging (NIA)
Consensus Conference on Caregiving, Las Vegas, NV.

442
Disease, Health, and Aging
Vitaliano, P. P., Scanlan, J. M., Zhang, J., Savage, M. V., Hirsch,
I. B., & Siegler, I. C. (2002). A path model of chronic stress, the
Metabolic Syndrome, and Coronary Heart Disease. Psychoso-
matic Medicine, 64, 418–435.
Waldstein, S. R. (2000). Health effects on cognitive aging. In P. C.
Stern & L. L. Carstensen (Eds.), The aging mind (pp. 189–217).
Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Ware, J. E., Jr. (1993). SF-36 Health Survey: Manual and interpre-
tation guide. Boston, MA: The Health Institute, The New
England Medical Center.
Ware, J. E., Jr. (1987). Standards for validating health measures:
Deﬁnition and content. Journal of Chronic Diseases, 40,
473–480.
Williams, R. B., Barefoot, J. C., Califf, R. M., Haney, T. L.,
Saunders, W. B., Pryor, D. B., Hlatky, M. A., Siegler, I. C., &
Mark, D. B. (1992). Prognostic importance of social and eco-
nomic resources among medically treated patients with angio-
graphically documented coronary artery disease. Journal of the
American Medical Association, 267, 520–524.
Willis, S. L., & Reid, J. (Eds.). (1999). Life in the middle: Psycho-
logical and social development in the third quarter of life. San
Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Wilson, R. S., Gilley D. W., Bennett, D. A., Beckett, L. A., & Evans,
D. A. (2000). Person-speciﬁc paths of cognitive decline in
Alzheimer’s Disease and their relation to age. Psychology and
Aging, 15, 18–28.
Wolinsky, F. D., & Johnson, R. J. (1992). Perceived health status
and mortality among older men and women. Journal of Geron-
tology: Social Sciences, 47, S303–S312.
Zabora, J. R., Smith, E. D., Baker, F., Wingard, J. R., & Cubrow, B.
(1992). The family: The other side of bone marrow transplanta-
tion. Journal of Psychosocial Oncology, 10, 35–46.
Zelinski, E. M., Crimmins, E., Reynolds, S., & Seeman, T. (1998).
Do medical conditions affect cognition in older adults? Health
Psychology, 17, 504–512.
Zhang, J., Vitaliano, P. P., Scanlan, J. M., & Savage, M. V. (2001,
March). Interrelationships of psychological variables, self-
reported health, biological measures and medical records in old
adults: What goes with what? Paper presented at the meeting of
the Society for Behavioral Medicine, Seattle, Washington.

CHAPTER 18
Cognitive Development in Adulthood
ROGER A. DIXON AND ANNA-LISA COHEN
443
INTELLIGENCE
444
Patterns of Intellectual Aging
445
Crystallized and Fluid Intelligence
445
Seattle Longitudinal Study
446
MEMORY
447
Systems of Memory
448
Emerging Memory Topics
449
COGNITIVE POTENTIAL IN ADULTHOOD
452
Concept of Cognitive Gains
453
Plasticity and Experience
453
Wisdom
454
Creativity
455
Compensation
456
CONCLUSIONS
458
REFERENCES
458
The area of developmental research focusing on the study of
cognitive changes in adulthood is often referred to as the ﬁeld
of cognitive aging. The orienting question for this ﬁeld is,
How does cognition change with aging? Three components of
this question may be highlighted initially. First, the term cog-
nition is used broadly and inclusively in this chapter to accom-
modate multiple aspects, dimensions, theories, and measures
of a variety of mental activities executed by the brain. These
include, but are not limited to, classes of activities known as
intelligence, memory, attention, reasoning, problem solving,
and wisdom. Second, the term change is used broadly and
inclusively to accommodate several theories, phenomena, di-
rections, and research designs.Thus, the present approach per-
mits consideration of structural, stage-like, or incremental
cognitive changes with aging, as investigated with any of nu-
merous legitimate research designs. No assumptions are made
about the nature of cognitive developmental change with
aging. Third, the term aging is used broadly and inclusively
to reﬂect processes occurring throughout adulthood. It is a
neutral term tantamount to “changes with age that occur
during adulthood” regardless of the direction or quality of the
changes.
Cognitive aging (the ﬁeld) is a particularly active and
vibrant domain of research, one that is at the crossroads of both
classic questions and novel trends. Several brief examples of
each of the paths leading to this crossroads may be useful.
First, classic questions about cognitive aging revolve around
core developmental issues such as directionality (i.e., whether
adult cognitive changes are gains, losses, or maintenance), uni-
versality (i.e., the extent to which there are individual differ-
ences in proﬁles of changes throughout adulthood), and
reversibility (i.e., whether experience or intervention may
promote recovery or improvement in functioning). For more
than a century scholars have wondered about whether the
lengthening adult life span would be ineluctably accompanied
by diminishing cognitive resources (Dixon, Kramer, & Baltes,
1985). Moreover, because contemporary adulthood represents
about 75% of the normal expected life span, few adults would
fail to have a vested interest in the cognitive changes they
might expect as they grow through their middle and into their
later years. Second, novel trends reﬂect inﬂuences that are as
easily incorporated into cognitive aging research as into any
other developmental area. Recent trends include methodologi-
cal advances, such as the means of analyzing structure, change,
and variability (e.g., Hertzog & Dixon, 1996; Salthouse,
2000). Other novel trends in cognitive aging are often adapted
from neighboring disciplines and given new clothing in the
context of understanding long-term change.Among recent de-
velopments are such new topics as metamemory and memory
Preparation of this chapter was supported by a grant from the U.S.
National Institute on Aging (AG08235) to Roger A. Dixon and by a
grant from the Swedish STINT foundation to Lars-Göran Nilsson
and Roger A. Dixon. Anna-Lisa Cohen was supported by a doctoral
fellowship from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research
Council of Canada.

444
Cognitive Development in Adulthood
self-efﬁcacy (e.g., Cavanaugh, 1996, 2000), social cognition
(Hess & Blanchard-Fields, 1999), practical cognition (e.g.,
Berg & Klaczynski, 1996; Park, 2000), collaborative cognition
(e.g., Dixon, 1999), and brain and cognition (e.g., Raz, 2000;
Woodruff-Pak, 1997). How cognition changes with aging is
seen as a developmental question, and one that reﬂects classic
developmental issues and relates to numerous neighboring
developmental processes.
Issues considered in the study of cognitive aging go to the
heart of our view of both the human life course, in general,
and of individual aging adults, in particular. Personal expec-
tations about aging are based in part on personal perceptions
of cognitive skills—how adaptive they are and how they are
believed to change during the adult years (e.g., Cavanaugh,
1996; Hertzog & Hultsch, 2000). Similarly, one of the promi-
nent themes in societal stereotypes of aging is that of cogni-
tive decline (e.g., Hummert, Garstka, Shaner, & Strahm,
1994). Notably, however, some stereotypes of aging include
processes believed to improve or grow into and throughout
late life (e.g., Heckhausen & Krueger, 1993). Some of these
potential growth-like processes have substantial cognitive
components (e.g., wisdom). Overall, whether cognitive aging
should be characterized as consisting of gains or losses (or
both) has been the topic of much debate for many decades
(Baltes, 1987; Dixon, 2000; Uttal & Perlmutter, 1989).
Although it may be used in different ways and to accom-
plish different goals, cognition is no less important in late
adulthood than in early adulthood. Not only is it a basis of
one’s achievements and competence, but it contributes to—or
detracts from—one’s sense of self-efﬁcacy and the efﬁciency
with which one engages in life planning and life management
and pursues life goals. Therefore, it is instructive to compare
the basic stories told about cognitive development during the
ﬁrst 20 or so years of life, on the one hand, and during the re-
maining 40 or 50 (or more) years of life, on the other. Obvi-
ously, the stories told of infant, child, adolescent, and even
early adult cognitive development are generally optimistic.
Cognition during these years is progressing and growing, and
cognitive potential is being realized. For normally develop-
ing individuals there are some differences in level of perfor-
mance attained and in the rate at which growth occurs, but
virtually no differences in the direction of change. Cognition
improves from early infancy.
Around early adulthood, however, the story of cognitive
development evidently changes. The word “evidently” is used
because there is some controversy about the range and causes
of aging-related changes in cognition. There is, however, lit-
tle remaining controversy regarding the fact that there is sub-
stantial and necessary cognitive decline (see, e.g., Craik &
Salthouse, 2000). Nevertheless, an important theme in cogni-
tive aging is one of individual differences in proﬁles, rates,
and causes of change. Increasingly, researchers are attending
to questions concerning such issues as whether people differ
in when they start to decline, whether processes differ in rate
of decline, what processes are maintained and for how long,
how normal decline differs from that associated with various
brain-related diseases (e.g., Alzheimer’s disease), and the ex-
tent to which this decline affects individuals’ everyday lives.
Acommon proposal is that individual differences in cognitive
development are greater in late life than in early life. Research
in cognitive aging is ideally suited to investigating why such
individual differences in change patterns occur.
In this chapter we summarize selected aspects of the ﬁeld
of cognitive aging. Reﬂecting the breadth of the ﬁeld, we
have elected to focus on several clusters or processes of cog-
nitive functioning. Naturally, this results in numerous unat-
tended processes; interested readers may turn to several recent
volumes of collected works in which scholars have re-
viewed a variety of processes of cognitive aging (e.g., Craik &
Salthouse, 2000; Park & Schwartz, 2000). A long-standing
area of study in cognitive aging is intelligence; we begin by
reviewing scholarship in this area. Perhaps the most com-
monly researched domain in cognitive aging is memory. Ac-
cordingly, we review basic systems and results in this ﬁeld and
indicate several novel directions of research. More recently,
numerous researchers have attended to issues of potential or
resilience in cognitive aging. Included in this domain are such
topics as plasticity and susceptibility to effects of experience,
mechanisms of compensating for cognitive impairments, and
such intriguing cognitive processes as wisdom and creativity.
INTELLIGENCE
Cognition can be viewed from several related perspectives.
From one such perspective, the focus is on cognition as intel-
ligence as an intellectual ability. There is a long tradition of
research on intelligence and a surprisingly long history of
research on intellectual aging. Research on the aging of in-
tellectual abilities typically uses procedures adapted from
research on psychometric intelligence. This means that intel-
ligence is measured by one or more tests. These tests may be
composed of more than one scale, or subtest. Each subtest
measures a relatively unique aspect of intelligence. There are
a variety of statistical means through which the uniqueness
of the subtests can be evaluated. In addition, however, the
subtests typically should be linked both conceptually and
empirically.
Contemporary psychometric approaches to adult intel-
lectual development employ multidimensional theories of

Intelligence
445
intelligence. Therefore, they also use intelligence tests in
which performance on multiple scales or dimensions may be
tested. Using multiple scales of intelligence allows the inves-
tigator to examine the extent to which dimensions of intelli-
gence change similarly or differently across adulthood. The
psychometric approach to intellectual aging has a long and
illustrious history.
Patterns of Intellectual Aging
A typical expectation about intellectual aging is that intelli-
gence increases until early adulthood and then declines
through late adulthood. This results in an inverted-U-shaped
curve. Botwinick (1977) referred to this curve as a classic pat-
tern, partly because it was so frequently supported in the lit-
erature. Interestingly, however, even the earliest theories and
research did not lead to the unequivocal conclusion that intel-
ligence inevitably and universally declined after early adult-
hood. Contemporary research has conﬁrmed the prescient
early theorists, who operated without the beneﬁt of modern
technology, contemporary theories, or even much research
data. Several examples illustrate this point.
Issues of age fairness and late life potential and plasticity
were identiﬁed early. Kirkpatrick (1903) noted that age-fair
intelligence tests were crucial to identifying patterns of intel-
lectual aging. Almost a century ago he also speculated that
adults could be trained to perform better on intelligence tests;
recently, several researchers (e.g., Schaie, 1996) reported that
this was indeed possible. Another important issue raised
almost 100 years ago is the potentially close connection
between the aging body and the aging mind. For example,
Sanford (1902) noted that intellectual decline was likely asso-
ciated with the inevitable physical decline that accompanies
late life. Thus, Sanford anticipated some aspects of contempo-
rary theories focusing on the roles of physiological, neurolog-
ical, and sensory factors (e.g., Baltes & Lindenberger, 1997).
Could older adults overcome such inevitable changes?
Sanford speculated that some maintenance of performance
levels is possible if aging adults made an effort to maintain
them by, for example, continuing challenging activities. This
idea, too, has recently been the target of considerable research
(e.g., Gold et al., 1995; Hultsch, Hertzog, Small, & Dixon,
1999). Still in the ﬁrst half of the century, Weisenburg, Roe,
and McBride (1936) attended to the questions of whether all
adults developed in the same pattern and whether all intellec-
tual abilities changed in the same way. They reported a wide
range of ages in adulthood at which performance on intelli-
gence tests peaked. This implies that individuals may differ in
peak age, rate of growth and decline, overall degree of decline,
and perhaps even ﬁnal performance level. If some individuals
decline relatively early in adulthood, and if their decline is
sharply downward, others may decline relatively late and
quite gradually, and perhaps not even noticeably. This predic-
tion, too, proved to be uncannily accurate.
One ﬁnal similarity between early and recent research on
intellectual development may be noted: The study of intellec-
tual aging has long been viewed as a research topic with im-
portant and immediate practical implications. That is, how
well society understands the characteristics of intellectual
aging may have a direct impact on the welfare of individuals
and of the society. For example, in the early 1920s, R. M.
Yerkes set out to enhance the recruitment and training of ex-
cellent military ofﬁcers. Shortly after World War I it was clear
that each side in a war would want people in charge who were
intellectually competent, if not intellectually superior. How
would the best people be selected and promoted to sensitive
and inﬂuential positions? How could the best ofﬁcers be iden-
tiﬁed and retained? Were older ofﬁcers less competent than
younger ofﬁcers? Yerkes found that older ofﬁcers performed
worse on an intelligence test than did younger adults. Never-
theless, he argued that many older ofﬁcers had accumulated
valuable experience and had command of speciﬁc relevant
domains of knowledge. It could take years for younger ofﬁ-
cers to acquire similar levels of knowledge. Yerkes believed
that this actually put older adults at an advantage in the intel-
lectually demanding role of planning and executing war.
Thus, even when a great deal is at stake, some observers opted
for (older) adults possessing age-related experience and a
seasoned mind over (younger) adults who might be able to
learn novel information more quickly.
In sum, many early researchers identiﬁed remarkably con-
temporary concerns in the study of intelligence and aging.
Moreover, several early leaders commented on the implica-
tions of intellectual development for continued cognitive
potential throughout life.
Crystallized and Fluid Intelligence
Beginning in the 1960s John Horn and Raymond Cattell
began developing an alternative view of the classic aging pat-
tern. Horn and Cattell collected a variety of intelligence-test
data from adults of varying ages. Rather than interpreting the
scores from each of the tests, or even collapsing across cate-
gories of tests (such as Verbal and Performance), Horn and
Cattell conducted complicated statistical analyses. In these
analyses they sought to assess empirically whether there was
indeed more than one category (or factor) of intelligence. If
so, this would support the notion that intelligence in adult-
hood was multidimensional. Empirical support for this fact
would then allow Horn and Cattell to investigate three major

446
Cognitive Development in Adulthood
issues. First, how many and what were the dimensions of in-
telligence? Second, what were the age-related patterns of per-
formance on these dimensions? Third, to what explanatory
processes could these empirically derived dimensions be
linked?
In their research, Horn and Cattell (1966; Horn, 1982)
identiﬁed two major dimensions of intelligence. These dimen-
sions of intellectual abilities were called ﬂuid intelligence
(Gf) and crystallized intelligence (Gc). Fluid intelligence re-
ﬂected the level of intellectual competence associated with
casual learning processes. This learning is assessed by perfor-
mance on novel, usually nonverbal tests. Crystallized intelli-
gence, on the other hand, reﬂects intellectual competence
associated with intentional learning processes. This variety of
learning is assessed by measures of knowledge and skills ac-
quired during school and other cultural learning experiences.
Most verbal tests tap processes thought to underlie crystal-
lized intelligence.
How is this perspective an alternative to the classic aging
pattern? Because crystallized intelligence indexes life-long
accumulation of cultural knowledge, it should show a pattern
of maintenance or increase during the adult years. According
to the theory, ﬂuid intelligence is more dependent on physio-
logical functioning, including the neurological system. The
physiological and neurological base declines with advancing
age (e.g., Medina, 1996; Raz, 2000). If this neurological base
is impaired, the ability to perform associated intellectual
skills is undermined. Horn and Cattell have therefore
provided the classic aging pattern with two contributions.
First, they provided a ﬁrmer empirical basis for the common
verbal-performance distinction. Roughly speaking, crystal-
lized intelligence corresponds to verbal intelligence scales,
and ﬂuid intelligence corresponds to performance intelli-
gence scales. Second, they have provided potential expla-
nations for the common observation of differential decline
across the two dimensions.
Seattle Longitudinal Study
Longitudinal research in intellectual aging has been carried
out in a number of locations (Schaie, 1983).Although longitu-
dinal investigations have the advantage of examining age
changes rather than simply age differences, they have their as-
sociated limitations as well (see Hultsch, Hertzog, Dixon, &
Small, 1998; Schaie, 1983). For example, selective sampling
and selective attrition factors plague longitudinal designs but
are now manageable with contemporary design features and
statistical techniques (e.g., Hultsch et al., 1998; Schaie, 1996).
Individuals who volunteer to participate in longitudinal
studies are committing considerable time and effort over a pe-
riod of many years. The sample of people who would volun-
teer for such a long-term commitment are generally positively
selected on a number of dimensions that may be relevant to in-
tellectual performance. As well, those who continue in such
studies are also positively selected. Indeed, these participants
often perform initially on the intelligence tests at a higher level
than those who drop out. In this way, a volunteer longitudinal
sample is somewhat selective at the outset, and the continuers
are more positively selected than the dropouts. Because of this
bias, simple longitudinal designs may underestimate the ex-
tent of age-related declines.
In 1956 K. Warner Schaie began a carefully designed and
exhaustive longitudinal and cohort-sequential study of intelli-
gence in adulthood. Schaie administered the Primary Mental
Abilities (PMA) test and additional measures related to intel-
ligence. His initial sample was approximately 500 adults liv-
ing in the community. This sample was carefully constructed
to be representative, and participants ranged in age from 20 to
70 years. Testing was done at seven-year intervals beginning
in 1956. At each occasion new participants were added and
then followed in subsequent occasions. Thus, there was a se-
quence of longitudinal studies. Because of the location of all
the testing, Schaie’s study has become known as the Seattle
Longitudinal Study (Schaie, 1996).
Schaie applied special techniques for comparing longitudi-
nal samples to new cross-sectional samples. In doing so, he
was able to estimate that until the age of 50 a substantial por-
tion of the age differences observed in cross-sectional studies
were not due exclusively to aging-related decline. Instead,
much of the observed age differences in cross-sectional studies
were due to cohort effects. That is, observed age differences
may be related to cultural and historical changes. Indeed,
Schaie (1990) reported such a phenomenon when he noted that
historical analyses indicate that successive generations have
performed at higher levels on intelligence tests. Notably, the
patterns suggest that the historical increases may be greater for
older than for younger cohorts. If so, future studies may ﬁnd
reduced age differences between younger and older partici-
pants. Such a trend can only provide more pressure to utilize
the productive potential of older adults.
Throughout his career Schaie (1994, 1996) has emphasized
that there are considerable individual differences in degree of
decline and age at onset of decline. Indeed, up to age 70 some
individuals do not decline at all. Some of these individuals
even show modest gains for all of the intellectual abilities that
he evaluates. Nevertheless, a prominent conclusion is that the
age at which each ability peaks and the patterns of decline
thereafter are quite different. For example, those abilities

Memory
447
associated with ﬂuid intelligence have earlier peaks and
longer declines than those abilities associated with crystal-
lized intelligence. He also pointed out that the patterns vary for
women and men. For example, one ﬁnding was that women
generally decline earlier on ﬂuid intelligence, whereas men
generally decline earlier on crystallized intelligence. There is
diversity not only in how dimensions of intelligence develop,
but also in how men and women develop in different dimen-
sions. Because of this diversity, Schaie (1994, 1996) under-
scored the warning that an overall index of ability such as the
IQ score should not be used in research on intellectual devel-
opment in adulthood.
Schaie also examined issues of intervention or applica-
tion. As the Seattle Longitudinal Study progressed, he real-
ized that he could address a unique question with profound
implications for both theory and application. The issue is the
age at which substantial cognitive decline actually begins.
Whether substantial decline begins earlier or later in life
could have a profound inﬂuence on social policy problems
such as mandatory retirement (e.g., Perlmutter, 1990; Schaie,
1994). Schaie’s studies suggested that such decline is not ob-
served on average for all dimensions of intelligence until
about the late 60s (Schaie, 1996). These results may be sur-
prising to even the most optimistic theorist and practitioner,
for they imply that the overall proﬁle of intellectual aging is
one of maintenance. In fact, in one analysis Schaie (1990)
reported that over 70% of 60-year-olds and over 50% of
81-year-olds declined on only one ability over the previous
seven years. Thus, intellectual declines occur with aging, but
not appreciably until quite late in life, and then not uniformly
across dimensions of intelligence.
Schaie discovered some tentative answers to frequently
asked questions about risk and protection factors. Everyone
would like to know what they can do to increase the probabil-
ity that their cognitive aging will by characterized by mainte-
nance and growth and to minimize the probability that it will
instead be characterized by decline and decay. By analyzing
the differences among individuals in decline versus growth
patterns, Schaie (1996) cited several factors that may lead to
reducing the risk of cognitive decline in late life. These pro-
tective factors include (a) avoiding chronic illnesses, espe-
cially cardiovascular disease, or lifestyles that lead to these
diseases; (b) pursuing high levels of education and having
professions that involve high complexity and higher-than-
average incomes; (c) continuing to be active in reading, travel,
culture, and further education; (d) being married to a spouse
with high and similar cognitive skills; and (e) feeling generally
satisﬁed with life (Schaie, 1996). Of course, these factors were
not linked causally or directly to maintenance of intellectual
functioning, so the above list should not be interpreted too
literally. Therefore, it is not yet a list of dos and don’ts for
maintaining high levels of cognitive performance into late
adulthood. Nevertheless, such hypotheses highlight the close
link between research on cognitive aging and questions of
application to real life. Overall, it can safely be said that the
previous factors cannot hurt one’s chances of maintaining
intellectual functioning; in fact, they may help.
MEMORY
If research on intellectual aging is characterized principally by
psychometric assumptions and procedures, research on mem-
ory and aging is typically conducted by implementing one or
more of a wide range of experimental tasks and techniques in
the service of answering a broad range of speciﬁc questions.
To be sure, all prominent developmental research designs—
that is, those that compare age groups (cross-sectionally) or
those that follow samples across time (longitudinally)—may
be enacted for either psychometric or experimental research.
In the case of memory, the bulk of extant research has been
cross-sectional and experimental in nature, but there are a
growing number of examples of change-oriented, longitudinal
studies populating the scholarly literature. Thus, at the most
general level the motivating issues of memory and aging re-
search are similar to those propelling scholarship in intelli-
gence and aging. These include (a) whether aging-related
changes may be characterized as gains, losses, or both and
(b) what accounts for differences in performance as observed
across time, age, task, and individuals.
Overall, research on memory and aging is focused on
processes through which individuals may recall previously
experienced events or information, the extent to which these
processes change with advancing age, and the conditions, cor-
relates, or predictors of such changes. Reﬂecting the sheer vol-
ume of research in this ﬁeld, numerous reviews of memory and
aging have been published in recent decades (e.g., Bäckman,
Small, Wahlin, & Larsson, 2000; Craik, 2000; Craik &
Jennings, 1992; Hultsch & Dixon, 1990; Kausler, 1994; Light,
1992;A. D. Smith & Earles, 1996). Of all aspects of cognitive
aging, memory may be the one that has most captivated gen-
eral human interest and academic attention. Nearly all review-
ers begin by noting that (a) memory is viewed as a functional,
if not essential, tool of successful development; (b) memory is
one of the most frequently mentioned complaints of older
adults; (c) memory loss is one of the most feared signs and im-
plications of aging; and (d) many adults believe that, whereas
memory abilities improve through childhood, they decline

448
Cognitive Development in Adulthood
with aging. For these and other reasons, researchers and lay
adults are profoundly interested in whether and when their and
others’ memory abilities change (decline) throughout adult-
hood (Dixon, 2000).
Systems of Memory
Over the last several decades, research on memory and aging
reveals provocative patterns of results. Whereas some tasks
are associated with robust ﬁndings of age-related deﬁcits,
other tasks are associated with less pronounced losses or even
equivalent performance by younger and older adults. Tasks
typically associated with losses include remembering lists of
information, expository texts, picture characteristics, spatial
locations, and those that tap the limits of online memory pro-
cessing. Tasks often associated with relatively unimpaired
performance include implicit memory, facts and knowledge,
and those that reﬂect familiar situations with substantial en-
vironmental or human support. Although others are available,
one well-developed theoretical treatment of memory per se
has proven helpful in organizing these disparate results.
Speciﬁcally, the memory systems perspective has been espe-
cially inﬂuential in research on memory and aging (Bäckman
et al., 1999; Craik, 2000; Dixon, 2000; Schacter & Tulving,
1994).
Positing that there are up to ﬁve systems of memory, a cen-
tral goal of this perspective is to explicate the organization of
the systems. A memory system is deﬁned as a set of related
processes, linked by common brain mechanisms, information
processes, and operational principles (Schacter & Tulving,
1994). We deﬁne four of the systems brieﬂy and summarize
some principal ﬁndings with respect to aging. We begin with
the two most commonly encountered forms of memory, those
to which most people refer when they express their beliefs
and fears about the effects of aging on memory functioning
(Ryan, 1992).
Episodic Memory
This form refers to memory for personally experienced events
or information. Everyday examples are bountiful: trying to
remember the names of people one has met at a party, where
one parked the car, a conversation or joke one heard, the loca-
tion of an object in a spatial arrangement, an anecdote one read
in a newspaper, or an unwritten list of items to purchase at a
store. It is thought to be the latest developing memory system,
and some reviewers have suggested that it is correspondingly
among the ﬁrst to begin showing signs of aging-related
decline. Indeed, cross-sectional research using a variety of
episodic memory tasks (e.g., memory for digits, words, texts,
pictures, objects, faces) and procedures (e.g., free recall,
cued recall, recognition) has observed that older adults
commonly perform worse than younger adults. Much recent
research has targeted potential moderating factors, such as
health, lifestyle activities, education, environmental support,
collaborative condition, and ecological relevance of the task
(e.g., Bäckman et al., 2000; Hultsch et al., 1998). Although
no evidence has been marshaled to dispute persuasively the
conclusion that episodic memory performance generally de-
clines with advancing age, some cross-sectional (e.g., Nilsson
et al., 1997) and longitudinal (Dixon, Wahlin, Maitland,
Hertzog, & Bäckman, in press) research has indicated that the
magnitude of aging-related change may be more gradual
than precipitous for normally aging adults, at least until the
mid-70s (Bäckman et al., 2000).
Semantic Memory
This system of memory is expressed through the acquisition
and retention of generic facts, knowledge, and beliefs. In re-
search, it is evaluated by administering tests of general world
knowledge, facts, words, concepts, and associations.As such,
it is similar to the domain represented by crystallized intelli-
gence. The typical ﬁnding for semantic memory is that older
adults may remember as much information of this sort as do
younger adults. For example, normal older adults, through ex-
tended cultural and educational experiences, may possess
knowledge bases regarding world facts (sports, celebrities,
geographical information, political lore) that are superior to
those of younger adults. A typical ﬁnding in cognitive aging
literature is that the vocabulary performance of older adults
is similar to or better than that of younger adults. Thus, older
adults display similar knowledge structures or associative net-
works. Nevertheless, some studies have suggested that older
adults may access such information more slowly and with
more frequent blockages than do younger adults. In a large
cross-sectional study, only small differences were observed
across the ages of 35 to 80 years (Bäckman & Nilsson, 1996).
Moreover, a recent longitudinal study observed modest
changes over a 12-year period for adults originally aged 55 to
85 years (Hazlitt, 2000).
Procedural Memory
This form of memory is reﬂected in the gradual learning
(through practice) of a wide variety of cognitive and behav-
ioral skills. Naturally, as one learns a skill, one may acquire
information or actions intentionally, deliberately, explicitly,
and with awareness. However, other phases and aspects of
learning the skill may be accomplished more automatically,

Memory
449
implicitly, and without speciﬁc awareness. This latter aspect
of memory is the one reﬂected in this system. It is involved in
the identiﬁcation of words, objects, or movements that have
been experienced by an individual but about which that indi-
vidual may have little direct awareness—little episodic mem-
ory of having previously encountered the word or object.
Memory thus used has been said to be automatic or implicit,
as contrasted with intentional or explicit (Howard, 1996). A
common expectation is that procedural memory, as evaluated
through priming techniques (e.g., Howard, 1996), is relatively
unaffected by aging, as long as the involvement of explicit
memory is minimized (Craik, 2000; Craik & Jennings, 1992).
Although this seems to indicate a beneﬁcial aspect of memory
functioning in late life, it may lead unintentionally to a greater
propensity to generate and remember false information (see
Schacter, Koutsaal, & Norman, 1997).
Primary Memory
Although differing in some respects, this system is also known
popularly as working memory and, in some restricted in-
stances, as short-term memory. The terms are selected to
convey the fact that some expressions of memory are brief,
temporary, not yet (or ever) stored, or still in consciousness.
Distinguishing between primary and working memory has
proven useful for aging research (Craik, 2000). Speciﬁcally,
primary memory is observed in conditions in which individu-
als must repeat minimal information presented immediately
prior to the task. For example, primary memory is tapped
when an individual must repeat a short list of letters or digits
immediately after it is read. For such brief and passive tasks,
older adults perform as well as younger adults, or at least not
as poorly as in tasks requiring further manipulation of more
complex information over a longer duration. Performing
working memory tasks requires more active processing and
manipulation of incoming information. As such, older adults
are typically at a disadvantage as compared to younger adults
in performing such tasks. As Craik (2000) noted, this diver-
gent pattern within a memory system implies that aging
processes do not adversely affect some everyday memory de-
mands (e.g., copying addresses and numbers as they are read),
but it does negatively affect more active aspects of online
memory processing.
Emerging Memory Topics
As can be inferred from the preceding summary, memory,
like intelligence, is a multidimensional construct. As with
other multidimensional constructs of interest in developmen-
tal psychology, differentiable dimensions may reveal distinct
developmental patterns. Researchers continue to explore with
increasing ingenuity each of the clusters of memory phenom-
ena. In addition, many researchers push the boundaries of
these memory systems as they apply to aging by considering
ever-broader ranges of memory phenomena, as well as corre-
lates and predictors. In this section we brieﬂy note a few
trends in memory and aging research, selecting for somewhat
more discussion two of these domains.
Biological to the Social
Among the promising new trends in memory and aging
research is the ever-increasing attention that biological inﬂu-
ences are receiving. This is an entirely logical development,
if only because the brain is a crucial site of activation that is
representative of memory and other cognitive processing.
Structural and functional changes in the brain are related to,
if not predictive of, cognitive performance in adults (e.g.,
Cabeza & Nyberg, 2000; Raz, 2000; Reuter-Lorenz, 2000).
Also within a biological level, much current research in
memory and aging has focused on the extent to which physi-
ological, sensory, and physical health changes may have an
effect on cognitive functioning in late life (e.g., Baltes &
Lindenberger, 1997; Waldstein, 2000).
Shifting to a cognitive level of analysis, recent efforts have
been made to identify other cognitive factors that inﬂuence
target cognitive functions. For example, working memory
has been identiﬁed as a relevant inﬂuence on episodic and se-
mantic memory functioning (e.g., Hultsch et al., 1998). The-
oretical constructs such as processing resources, inhibitory
control, and information-processing speed have, in empirical
applications, accounted for age-related variance in memory
performance (see Craik, 2000; Salthouse, 1991). At still an-
other level of analysis, recent progress in examining the role
of background characteristics such as gender, education, and
lifestyle activities on cognitive aging have been made (e.g.,
Herlitz, Nilsson, & Bäckman, 1997; Hultsch et al., 1999).
Finally, social and cultural aspects of memory and aging have
been explored with much promise (e.g., Hess & Blanchard-
Fields, 1999; Park, Nisbett, & Hedden, 1999). In sum, the
goal of understanding memory changes with aging suggests a
complex web of changing relationships—among systems of
memory, other cognitive inﬂuences, and correlates ranging
from the neurological to the social-cultural.
Metamemory
Adults of all ages often wonder about their memory—how it
works or does not work, why one remembers some things but
not others, and whether memory skills will change over the life

450
Cognitive Development in Adulthood
course. The term metamemory refers to such cognitions about
memory—thinking about how, why, and whether memory
works. Speciﬁc aspects of metamemory include knowledge of
memory functioning, insight into memory changes or impair-
ment, awareness of current memory processes, beliefs about
and interpretations of memory skills and demands, and even
memory-related affect. This chapter features an overview of
the concept of metamemory and how it applies to aging. The
view of metamemory presented here is useful when consider-
ing both basic (e.g., how memory and metamemory change
and relate to one another in aging) and applied (e.g., the role
metamemory may play in compensating for memory impair-
ments and decline) research questions.
Overall, research and theory in metamemory in adulthood
incorporate many of the issues raised in the neighboring
domains of metamemory research. It does so in part through
implementation of an inclusive and multidimensional concept
of metamemory (e.g., Dixon, 1989; Hertzog & Hultsch,
2000). Four principal characteristics of this are that (a) it in-
cludes a wide variety of behaviors (knowledge, beliefs, evalu-
ations, and estimates), indicating the level, degree, or extent of
an individual’s metamemory performance or skill; (b) it fea-
tures a multidimensional concept, in that the multiple facets or
behaviors are viewed as separable but linked dimensions of a
coherent construct of metamemory; (c) it assumes that multi-
ple operations and dimensions would converge on a higher
order construct of metamemory and that metamemory can be
discriminated from related constructs; and (d) metamemory is
a construct of intrinsic interest in the study of normal cognitive
aging, but one that may also have substantial implications for
understanding impairments of memory in late life.
Metamemory represents one’s knowledge, awareness, and
beliefs about the functioning, development, and capacities of
one’s own memory and of human memory in general (Dixon,
1989). As such, metamemory includes three principal cate-
gories (Hertzog & Dixon, 1994). First, declarative knowledge
about how memory functions includes knowledge of how
the characteristics of memory tasks have an impact on mem-
ory performance, whether strategies are required, and which
strategies may be usefully applied to particular situations.
Second, self-referent beliefs about one’s capability to use
memory effectively in memory-demanding situations deﬁne
memory self-efﬁcacy and controllability (e.g., Cavanaugh,
1996, 2000). One’s beliefs about one’s ability to remember
may determine (a) the extent to which one places oneself in
memory-demanding situations, (b) the degree of effort one
applies to perform the memory task, (c) one’s expectation re-
garding level of memory performance, and (d) one’s actual
memory performance. Certain aspects of affect regarding
memory (in general) or one’s memory performance and
change (in particular) may also play a role (e.g., motivation to
do well, fear of memory-demanding situations).
Third, awareness of the current, general, and expected
state of one’s memory performance includes processes of
memory insight and memory monitoring. Effective remem-
berers are able to monitor actively and accurately their
performance vis-à-vis the demands of the memory task. A
high degree of accuracy in predictions of performance, evalu-
ations of encoding demands, and on-line judgments of learn-
ing may indicate an effective and accomplished rememberer
(e.g., Hertzog & Hultsch, 2000; Moulin, Perfect, & Jones,
2000). In clinical situations, an awareness of a deﬁcit may
be an important precursor to memory compensation (e.g.,
Dixon & Bäckman, 1995, 1999; Wilson & Watson, 1996).
In aging research, these categories of metamemory have
been related to one another theoretically and empirically (see
Hertzog & Dixon, 1994; Hertzog & Hultsch, 2000). In prin-
ciple, for older adults, high performance on given memory
tasks should be promoted by the following metamemory pro-
ﬁle: (a) a well-structured declarative knowledge base about
how memory functions in given tasks, (b) reﬁned knowledge
of one’s own memory skills, (c) accurate and high memory
self-efﬁcacy, and (d) skill at the monitoring and control activ-
ities during acquisition, retention, and retrieval. In addition, it
could be useful to have (e) stable or low memory-related
affect, such that the potential deleterious effects of memory-
related anxiety or depression could be avoided. In contrast,
some older adults with poorer—and perhaps impaired—
performance could be experiencing some components of the
following proﬁle: (a) and (b) an ill-structured, incomplete, or
erroneous knowledge base pertaining to general memory
functioning or one’s own memory skills; (c) inaccurate or
low memory self-efﬁcacy; (d) an inability to monitor and
control the requisite activities of effective remembering;
and (e) ﬂuctuant, uncontrolled, or excessive memory-related
anxiety or depression. These proﬁles deﬁne two hypothetical
ends of a continuum.
Two practical implications of these hypothetical proﬁles
in older adults are evident. First, some aging-related memory
disorders or impairments may be remedied through clinical
intervention designed to assess and improve selected cate-
gories of metamemory. Second, the diagnosis and re-
mediation of some organic memory disorders (e.g., the result of
injuries or disease) may be enhanced through the use of
metamemory or awareness information. Research on these
provocative issues is advancing on a variety of fronts, including
cognitive neurorehabilitation (e.g., Prigatano, 2000; Wilson &
Watson, 1996), memory compensation in late life (e.g., Dixon,

Memory
451
de Frias, & Bäckman, 2001), awareness and insight neuropsy-
chological conditions (e.g., Lovelace, 1990; Markova &
Berrios, 2000; Schacter, 1990), memory complaints and
their origins and implications (e.g., Gilewski & Zelinski, 1986;
Grut et al., 1993; G. E. Smith, Petersen, Ivnik, Malec, &
Tangalos, 1996), and potential effects of metamemory training
on memory (e.g., Lachman, Weaver, Bandura, Elliott, &
Lewkowicz, 1992; Verhaeghen, Marcoen, & Goosens, 1992).
Memory in Interactive Situations
For several decades researchers in a surprising variety of
ﬁelds have addressed aspects of everyday memory activity
that appear to operate in the inﬂuential context of other indi-
viduals. Many observers have noted the frequency with
which everyday adult cognitive activity occurs in interactive
contexts (e.g., Clancey, 1997; Greeno, 1998). A collaborative
context frequently envelops cognitive performance in mod-
ern life. Everyday examples of collaborative cognition in-
clude (a) family groups or lineages reconstructing stories
from their shared past; (b) spouses enlisted to help remember
important appointments, duties, or dates; and (c) strangers in
unknown cities consulted in order to solve way-ﬁnding or
map-reading problems (Dixon, 1999; see also Strough &
Margrett, 2002). Lurking behind this observation is the con-
tention that collaboration may lead to functional performance
outcomes, practical solutions, and improved performance.
Of particular importance in cognitive aging research is the
possibility that the strategic deployment or use of human cog-
nitive aids (other individuals) may be a means of compensat-
ing for individual-level aging-related losses or deﬁcits.
In other literatures the phenomenon has been also called
collective (e.g., Middleton & Edwards, 1990), situated (e.g.,
Greeno, 1998), group (e.g., Clark & Stephenson, 1989),
socially shared (e.g., Resnick, Levine, & Teasley, 1991), or
interactive (e.g., Baltes & Staudinger, 1996) cognition. In the
case of collaborative memory, an assumption is made that
two or more individuals attend to the same set of learning
or memory tasks and are working cooperatively (although
not necessarily effectively) to achieve a recall-related goal.
Notably, the members of the collaborating group can be vari-
ously passive listeners, conversational interactants, produc-
tive collaborators, seasoned tutors, counterproductive or even
disruptive inﬂuences, or optimally effective partners. There-
fore, according to a neutral deﬁnition of collaborative mem-
ory espoused in this chapter, no a priori assumptions are made
about the effectiveness or logical priority of the memory-
related interaction. It has long been clear that group processes
can vary in their effectiveness and thus that group products
can vary in their accuracy and completeness (e.g., Steiner,
1972).
The issue of the extent to which collaborative memory is
effective has been evaluated from numerous perspectives for
several decades. Indeed, much research has focused on this
contentious issue (e.g., Dixon, 1999; Hill, 1982), and several
key factors appear to play roles in the observations and infer-
ences. These factors include (a) whether the participants are
collaborative-interactive experts (e.g., friends or couples),
(b) the type of outcome measure observed (i.e., a simple prod-
uct such as total items recalled or a variety of recall-related
products such as elaborations and inferences), (c) the extent to
which the actual processes (e.g., strategic negotiations) and
byproducts (e.g., affect and sharing) of the collaborative
communication are investigated, and (d) the comparison or
baseline by which the effectiveness of collaborative perfor-
mance is evaluated. In general, little extra beneﬁt is observed
under conditions in which researchers reduce the dimension-
ality of the tasks, the familiarity of the interactants, the variety
of the memory-related products measured, and the richness
of the collaborative communication (e.g., Meudell, Hitch, &
Kirby, 1992). In contrast, evidence for notable collabora-
tive beneﬁt may be observed when researchers attend to
collaborative expertise, multidimensional outcomes, mea-
surement of actual collaborative processes, and compar-
isons accommodated to memory-impaired or vulnerable
groups (e.g., Dixon & Gould, 1998). In particular, evidence
has accumulated that expert older collaborators (long-term
married couples) may be able to solve complicated memory
problems at levels not otherwise expected for such individu-
als through cooperative mechanisms that resemble compen-
satory devices (Dixon, 1999, for review). This is a growing
and promising area of both basic and applied research in
memory and aging.
Memory for Future Events
The classical sense of memory—and all the examples just
noted—refer to remembering events that have occurred in the
past. There is, however, a common class of memory activities
that refer to future events. Among the plethora of everyday
memory experiences are those in which one must remember
to carry out an action in the future, such as remembering to
take medication, keep an appointment, give a message to a
colleague, pick up a loaf of bread on the return trip home, or
perform an errand such as mailing a letter. This class of mem-
ory has become known as prospective memory. Accordingly,
it is contrasted with the sizable set of memory activities for
past events, which, from this perspective, may be classiﬁed as

452
Cognitive Development in Adulthood
retrospective memory. Thus, retrospective memory includes
the principal memory systems, such as episodic and semantic
memory. Although memory and aging research has been pre-
dominantly interested in retrospective memory phenomena,
in recent years prospective memory has become a salient
research topic (Einstein, McDaniel, Richardson, & Guynn,
1995).
Like retrospective memory, prospective memory and
aging have been studied with both naturalistic and experi-
mental procedures. The two classes of memory share also a
considerable amount of research examining age-related pat-
terns of performance. In a groundbreaking naturalistic study,
Moscovitch (1982) instructed younger and older adults to call
an experimenter at prearranged times throughout a period of
several days. The intriguing results indicated that older
adults’ prospective memory performance was actually better
than that of the younger adults. Further investigation revealed
an unexpected potential explanation; namely, older adults
were motivated to perform such tasks and were more likely to
use reminders (e.g., written notes) as a way of remembering
the intention of phoning the experimenter. Thus, this early
study suggested the possibility that older adults may have
identiﬁed a potential everyday memory deﬁcit as well as an
effective compensatory mechanism (see also Dixon, de Frias,
et al., 2001).
To investigate such issues further, experimental re-
searchers developed procedures for controlling the strategies
that participants might use (e.g., Einstein & McDaniel,
1990). Such laboratory experiments have revealed divergent
ﬁndings. For example, Dobbs and Rule (1987) asked younger
and older adults at the beginning of an experiment to remind
the experimenter to give them a red pen at a particular later
point in the session. Thus, participants had to monitor this
intention over a period of time, without the beneﬁt of external
memory aids, while performing other demanding or primary
tasks. In this study older adults performed signiﬁcantly worse
than did their younger counterparts.
Einstein et al. (1995) proposed a subdivision of pro-
spective memory tasks. From this analysis, one subset of
prospective memory tasks is event-based, as represented in
those situations in which an external event acts as a trigger for
some previously encoded intention. Theoretically, the occur-
rence of the event prompts a memory search that will eventu-
ally result in the retrieval of the intention. For example, an
event could be the sudden meeting of a friend that triggers the
memory that one has a message to deliver. In contrast, time-
based prospective memory reﬂects the situation in which the
appropriateness of an action or intention is determined by the
passage of time. Accordingly, one must remember to take a
pill in two hours; in order to do this with no external event,
one must monitor time while performing other (distracting)
actions. The provocative hypothesis was that time-based
tasks would produce more negative aging-related effects than
would event-based tasks because the former require more
self-initiated processing (Einstein et al., 1995). The key to
older adults’successful performance may be the ability to im-
plement compensatory procedures such as strategic use of en-
vironmental cues. Although this idea remains controversial
(e.g., Park, Hertzog, Kidder, & Morrell, 1997), the ideas of
decomposing this class of memory actions and relating
performances to other factors is advancing our understanding
of how aging might affect memory for future events.
COGNITIVE POTENTIAL IN ADULTHOOD
Taken together, the bodies of research on intellectual and
memory aging reveal that despite robust evidence of gradual
decline in performance, there may be some room for slightly
optimistic interpretations. To be sure, among the multidimen-
sional constructs and processes considered to be the mechan-
ics of cognitive aging (Park, 2000), intelligence and memory
may offer the greatest opportunity to observe even this extent
of mixed aging-related patterns. Recent reviews of other
more basic processes (e.g., attention, perception) and those
more closely linked to biological aging (e.g., those heavily
involving sensory, physiological, and neurological function-
ing) evaluate almost exclusively the magnitude and rate of
decline, as well as the extent to which such changes affect
other cognitive performances, with little space devoted to
maintenance or growth (see Dixon, Bäckman, & Nilsson, in
press). Nevertheless, the overall balance between the gains
and losses of cognitive aging continues to be an issue of vig-
orous and compelling debate (e.g., Baltes, 1987; Dixon,
2000; Park, 2000; Salthouse, 1991; Schaie, 1996; Uttal &
Perlmutter, 1989). Why is this the case? Perhaps the most
compelling reason has been identiﬁed by Salthouse (1990),
who noted that one of the most vexatious challenges facing
cognitive aging researchers is to reconcile what we have
learned about cognitive decline from laboratory and psycho-
metric research with the common observation that many
older adults are quite competent in cognitively demanding
everyday leisure and professional activities into very late life.
How can older adults—all of whom will have experienced
at least detectable decline in a variety of fundamental cogni-
tive processes—still perform well as world political leaders,
CEOs of large corporations, scientists, novelists and poets,
expert bridge and chess players, composers and painters, and
a variety of other roles? In brief, there must be some aspects
or processes of cognitive aging that are not deﬁnitively

Cognitive Potential in Adulthood
453
represented or determined by commonly researched do-
mains. In this section we review brieﬂy some of the possible
scenarios for observing or optimizing cognitive potential in
adulthood, midlife, and beyond.
Concept of Cognitive Gains
With most empirically investigated psychological processes,
aging-related changes may follow multiple directions. This is
the case, despite the fact that many biologically based
processes are in decline for much of middle and late adult-
hood. In fact, Baltes (1987, p. 613) referred to this idea as
one of the principal theoretical propositions of life-span
developmental psychology: “Considerable diversity . . . is
found in the directionality of changes that constitute ontoge-
nesis, even within the same domain . . . [and] during the same
developmental periods.” An important implication of this is
that the concept of psychological development contains both
gains (growth, increases) and losses (decline, decrements).
From this perspective, life-span psychological development
is not simply or exclusively characterized by incremental
growth or structural advances. Instead, development is a con-
cept that contains multiple possible directions—as widely
varied as these directions can be (i.e., that between gains
and losses). Moreover, as Baltes noted, multiple directions
of change can occur within a single multidimensional
construct.
Memory is an excellent example. Recall that multiple sys-
tems have been posited and that these systems may undergo
somewhat different developmental changes with aging
(Craik, 2000; Craik & Jennings, 1992). This example is of
multiple directions of change across dimensions of a multidi-
mensional construct (e.g., intelligence, personality, memory).
It may, as Baltes noted, also apply within a single dimension
but across individuals in a single developmental period. That
is, a diverse group of adults in their 60s may be at different
points, following different trajectories, in the developmental
paths of any single psychological process.
Thus, gains and losses have become a key organizing fea-
ture of psychological aging (Baltes, 1987; Dixon, 2000).
Among the principal challenges for psychologists is not only
to describe the cognitive losses that occur with aging and to
articulate the mechanisms accounting for those losses. A
great deal of evidence pertains to both these descriptive and
explanatory undertakings (e.g., Park, 2000). Instead, an im-
portant challenge is to articulate classes of examples of gains
with psychological aging. In what manner and by what
means may there be improvement in psychological function-
ing with advancing age? Accordingly, several such classes of
examples have been identiﬁed (e.g., Dixon, 2000).
Speciﬁcally, one model proposes that given substantial and
unavoidable losses in basic biological and cognitive function-
ing with aging (Park, 2000), three main categories of gains
may still be articulated. These are (a) gains qua gains, or the
possibility that some gains may emerge and continue indepen-
dent of the constraints provided by surrounding aging-related
losses; (b) gains as losses of a lesser magnitude, or the idea
that some consolation or adjustment may be made given that
some psychological losses occur later than expected (person-
ally or in stereotypes) or to an extent not as devastating as had
been feared; and (c) gains as a function of losses, or the evident
possibility that some psychological gains are linked to speciﬁc
losses, occasioned by those losses, and that may even com-
pensate partially for such losses, mitigating their detrimental
effects (see Dixon, 2000). Interestingly, the latter category in-
cludes many examples that operate principally at a basic or
neurological level of analysis. In sum, at many levels cogni-
tive aging appears to be multidirectional; this is the case even
though much overall loss (decline) occurs with aging.
Plasticity and Experience
Under what circumstances can older adults experience gains
in cognitive performance? Whereas early twentieth century
researchers only speculated about this matter, recent re-
searchers have produced useful empirical information. Some
evidence regarding potential is revealed in intervention
research, such as training older adults to perform better on
challenging cognitive tasks. For example, this literature sup-
ports four principal theses. First, many normal older adults can
improve their performance on intelligence tests simply by
having the opportunity for some self-directed practice (e.g.,
Baltes & Willis, 1982). Second, healthy older adults can ben-
eﬁt from speciﬁc training on how to perform cognitive tasks
(e.g., Verhaeghen, Marcoen, & Goosens, 1992). Third, se-
lected older adults who have experienced severe or pathologi-
cal decline can beneﬁt from speciﬁc and aggressive interven-
tions (e.g., Camp & McKitrick, 1992). Fourth, there may be
some conditions in which training higher levels of perfor-
mance on intelligence tests can lead to better performance in
some cognitive tasks of everyday life (e.g., Neely & Bäckman,
1995; Willis, Jay, Diehl, & Marsiske, 1992).
Overall, some interventions work to improve performance
or even reverse losses associated with aging. Theoretically,
this implies that some degree of normally observed decline in
intellectual aging may be due to disuse. Older adults decline
partly because they no longer have the experience or the so-
cial and cultural context that will help them maintain some in-
tellectual abilities. Recall that several very early observers
had produced prescient speculations remarkably consistent

454
Cognitive Development in Adulthood
with this empirical generalization. The implication is not,
however, that there is no real decline, or that simply providing
mental exercises or social support will overcome observed
decline. Intellectual decline is real, but there is some degree
of plasticity available to many older adults. This conclusion
supports the contention that the potential for improvement
may be present into late life.
The “potential for potential” in late life is of interest not
only to theorists and researchers interested in cognitive aging.
It is of interest—or should be of interest—also to politicians,
policy makers, aging workers, and just about everyone who
knows someone who is nearing the retirement years or who
plans to reach old age themselves. Why should so many peo-
ple be interested in the fact that aging individuals retain the po-
tential for cognitive maintenance and growth? One reason is
that our population is increasingly an aging one. More people
are getting older; more people are reaching retirement age and
beyond; and more people may be feeling that they are being
closed off from making useful contributions at an age in which
they feel quite competent and potentially useful. Many recent
books have addressed precisely this issue and its many impli-
cations, as the titles of several of them indicate: Late Life Po-
tential (Perlmutter, 1990), Successful Aging (Baltes & Baltes,
1990), Promoting Successful and Productive Aging (Bond,
Cutler, & Grams, 1995), and Compensating for Psychological
Deﬁcits and Declines: Managing Losses and Promoting
Gains (Dixon & Bäckman, 1995). These and similar recent
contributions explore the possibility that there is consider-
able cognitive potential in late life, as well as how such poten-
tial can be actuated or preserved.
Some authors have focused also on the social policy impli-
cations of late life potential. For example, Achenbaum (1990)
suggested that North American society may have to place a
greater emphasis on adult education. In particular, training
and retraining programs may have to be instituted so that po-
tentially competent workers are not placed on the sidelines
simply because of their age. A critical issue, however, is how
and who will fund such training and retraining programs. Nu-
merous other policy issues can be speciﬁed, but most have the
same fundamental theme: How do we take advantage of in-
creasing numbers of adults who getting older but not substan-
tially less competent? If this challenge is not addressed soon,
the number of individuals who are prematurely discarded or
discounted—whose skills and potential contributions will be
forever lost—will grow.
Wisdom
The study of wisdom is as old as the study of human thought
or philosophy. Although philosophers have struggled with
the concept of wisdom for centuries, psychologists and other
researchers in human development have addressed it only
more recently. In the ﬁeld of gerontology wisdom is naturally
of considerable interest. There are relatively few processes
that are generally thought to improve substantially with ad-
vancing age. Wisdom is one such process.
Many provocative questions have been addressed. What is
wisdom, and how does one know if someone is wise? What
are the signs of wisdom, and how might it be recognized?
Until the late 1980s only a few researchers had attempted
to study the aging of wisdom (e.g., Baltes & Smith, 1990;
Baltes & Staudinger, 1993; Clayton & Birren, 1980; Freund &
Riediger, this volume; Sternberg, 1990). One early psycholo-
gist, G. Stanley Hall (1922), thought that wisdom was one of
the desirable characteristics of late adulthood. For Hall, wis-
dom included taking perspective, synthesizing signiﬁcant fac-
tors of life, and moving toward higher levels. Other observers
have portrayed wisdom as good or sound judgment regarding
the conduct of life. Good judgment about a life problem would
probably involve consideration of a variety of aspects of the
situation: personal strengths and weaknesses, talents and emo-
tions, health and physical abilities, as well as social and cul-
tural considerations.
Recent investigators have explored empirically whether
wisdom does indeed develop in late life and, if so, whether it
is in fact an important aspect of successful aging. The ﬁrst
step is to deﬁne wisdom in a way that allows for empirical
study. It is clear from common conceptions of wisdom that it
involves good judgment about life problems. As pointed out
by Kekes (1983), the life problems that bring out wisdom are
those for which there may be multiple considerations and
even multiple solutions, each with a variety of repercussions.
For example, it is likely to require some wisdom to deal with
a life problem such as deciding whether to leave college and
get a job or whether to marry or divorce somebody. These are
everyday problems with many uncertainties associated with
them—this is what makes them complex and difﬁcult. Solv-
ing such problems well (or wisely) is important because of
the signiﬁcant implications for the individual’s (and family’s)
future.
Wise decisions would therefore involve several ingredi-
ents (Baltes & Staudinger, 1993). First, there would be some
analysis of the problem. This would include knowledge about
(a) the individual and his or her talents and weaknesses, (b) the
situation or problem with which they are faced, (c) the context
of this problem, especially with respect to the individual’s
life-span development. In cognitive psychology this kind
of knowledge—knowledge about something—is known as
declarative knowledge. Second, wisdom would involve some
knowledge about how to solve the problem. This would

Cognitive Potential in Adulthood
455
include strategies and procedures that typically work for a
particular kind of problem. In cognitive psychology this kind
of knowledge—knowledge about how to do something—is
known as procedural knowledge. Third, wisdom would in-
volve good judgment about what to do in particular situations.
In this way, the declarative knowledge would be combined
with the procedural knowledge and decisions or suggestions
would result. Because of the uncertainty associated with many
life problems, it is likely that even these judgments would be
qualiﬁed. That is, good judgments may be characterized less
by absolute recommendations than by qualiﬁed suggestions.
Such tentative suggestions would be dependent on new devel-
opments in the life course, new information obtained, or other
changing aspects of the context.
Is wise advice therefore inherently indeterminate? Pro-
bably not, for the wisest way to solve some life problems
could be known with certainty. Solving a problematic life
situation by turning to addictive drugs is not a wise decision.
A wise person would be unlikely to give a feeble answer to
someone seeking advice about whether to begin taking
heroin as an escape from a given set of life problems. This
fact makes the measurement of wisdom difﬁcult.
How can wisdom be measured? Some researchers have
presented a variety of life problems in the form of personal
vignettes to adults of all ages (J. Smith & Baltes, 1990). They
then asked them to indicate how they would go about giving
advice to the character in the vignette. Wisdom is measured
by analyzing the responses given to these problems. Two
kinds of problems have been used. J. Smith and Baltes (1990)
used life-planning problems. In these problems individuals
learn about a problem in the life of a character and are asked
to indicate what the character should do and consider in plan-
ning the future. Staudinger, Smith, and Baltes (1992) used
life-review problems. In these problems a similar vignette is
presented in which a character experiences a life event that
causes the person to look back over his or her life. The indi-
vidual solving the problem is asked to describe the aspects of
life that the character might remember, as well as how the
character might explain or evaluate his or her life.
Would older adults do better at these tasks than younger
adults? Or would wise (but not unwise) older adults do better
than younger adults? These questions are critical in evaluating
the results of the life-planning and life-review wisdom studies.
Results from both studies indicate a substantial similarity be-
tween young, middle-aged, and older adults in how they re-
spond to these problems. Obviously, an initial expectation
would have been that if wisdom is associated with aging, then
older adults would do better than younger adults.That this was
not found may reﬂect on (a) the adequacy of the measures of
wisdom and (b) the deﬁnition of wisdom being used. Future
research will further reﬁne the measures and theories of wis-
dom and aging (e.g., Simonton, 1990; Sternberg, 1990). One
avenue to explore is whether the development of wisdom oc-
curs only for a select few older adults. If this is true, it would
be unlikely that a group of normal older adults would perform
at a particularly high level. Some results from these studies ap-
pear to be promising. For example, middle-aged and older
adults who were selected to be tested on the basis of having
been nominated by a peer performed slightly better than did
comparison groups on some indicators related to wisdom
(Baltes & Staudinger, 1993). Wisdom, like intelligence, may
require some training and effort to maintain.
Creativity
Creativity is the “ability to innovate, to change the environ-
ment rather than merely adjust to it in a more passive sense”
(Simonton, 1990, p. 320). If the popular stereotype about wis-
dom is that it grows with age, the stereotype about creativity
may be that it declines during adulthood.Are people more cre-
ative in their 20s than in their 60s? Think about all the creative
people whom you know—scientists, poets, artists, novelists,
actors, musicians, and so forth. Are younger individuals typi-
cally better than older individuals in the same ﬁeld? Are their
most creative products generated during their early years in
the ﬁeld? Or are creative people always creative, regardless of
their age? Many researchers have investigated these issues.
For example, some samples believe that aging is accompanied
by an increase in conservatism and cautiousness and a
decrease in creative achievement and productivity (e.g.,
Heckhausen, Dixon, & Baltes, 1989; Hummert et al., 1994).
Unlike research on wisdom, there are clear results about the
development of creativity during adulthood.
In 1953 Lehman published an inﬂuential but controversial
volume titled Age and Achievement, in which he plotted
creative productivity as a function of age.After examining the
historical records in numerous domains of productivity, he
found that there was an increase in creative output in early
adulthood, followed by a decline.Although there were numer-
ous criticisms of his methods and interpretations (e.g., Dennis,
1954, 1956; Lehman, 1956), recent reviewers argue that
Lehman’s basic results are correct. More recently, Simonton
(1990, 1994) noted that across a wide range of studies a robust
age-related function can be observed but that there are some
important qualiﬁcations. For example, in some cases the life-
span trajectories have two peaks, one in early adulthood and
one in late adulthood. The latter can be thought of as the sec-
ond-wind phenomenon. That is, in some cases there may be a
general decline in creative output until a second wind hits
about retirement age.

456
Cognitive Development in Adulthood
A second important qualiﬁcation to Lehman’s model is
that both the age at peak performance and the steepness of the
decline in creative productivity vary according to domain.
This means that peak creativity in some domains may occur
much earlier in life than in other domains. For example, in
ﬁelds such as pure mathematics, lyric poetry, and theoretical
physics, the peaks are in the late 20s or early 30s. In contrast,
in ﬁelds such as history, philosophy, novel writing, and gen-
eral scholarship, the peaks are in the 40s or 50s, and the de-
clines are not very steep. For a number of ﬁelds—including
psychology—the peak of creative output is in the late 30s or
early 40s (see Lehman, 1956; Simonton, 1990, 1994).
What about the argument that creativity should not be
measured simply by amount of creative output—a quantita-
tive measure? Instead, it should be measured by quality of
output—a focus on the truly creative part of productivity.
Would this shift in emphasis result in a different proﬁle
across the life span? As Simonton (1994) elegantly showed,
the answer to this intriguing question is no. Separating the
truly creative productions from the less inspired pieces re-
sults in virtually identical patterns across the life course. This
implies that the quantity of creative output is highly related
to the quality of that output. This relationship holds through-
out the life course, or the career of an individual. Speciﬁcally,
those who begin their careers with a great deal of productive
output can continue this output throughout their careers. Peo-
ple who are less precocious may also have careers character-
ized by a stable quality-to-quantity ratio of productivity.
There are several reasons that some careers can be curtailed
or become substantially less productive. As Simonton (1990,
1994) noted, these include declining physical health, increas-
ing family responsibilities, and accumulating administrative
activities. Declining physical health can, of course, make con-
centrated effort more laborious or even less frequent. Both in-
creasing family responsibilities and administrative duties can
reduce the amount of time available for productive and cre-
ative work. Few administrators in universities, for example,
are able to maintain full and energetic scholarship programs.
However, with seniority some compensatory mechanisms
may be available. For example, highly accomplished senior
researchers may be called upon to perform full-time admin-
istrative duties (e.g., chair of a department at a university),
but they may be able to employ several highly qualiﬁed and
ambitious postdoctoral fellows, as well as numerous graduate
students, to carry on their scholarly programs. These younger
collaborators become, in this way, human compensatory
mechanisms for senior creative scholars.
Overall, Simonton’s (1990, 1994) research has generated
three general statements about the life course of creativity.
First, there is age-related decline in creativity in the late years
of life. However, this decline is rarely so substantial as to turn
a creative person into a noncreative person. Most creative in-
dividuals’lives end before their potential for creative produc-
tion is exhausted. Second, how creative or productive older
adults are depends more on their early-life creativity than on
their age. Simonton argued that people who are exceptionally
creative in early adulthood are often quite proliﬁc throughout
their careers. Indeed, they may continue to produce excellent
creative products into very late life.Third, there is no evidence
to suggest that the decline in creative output occurs because of
a corresponding decline in cognitive skills. Even individuals
who enter new arenas of interest in middle or late life have the
opportunity to have productive new careers. Creativity, then,
may be one area in which potential in late life may be actuated.
At the least, it is possible to contend that creative people may
continue to be creative across their careers.
Compensation
Compensation is a promising new concept in the ﬁeld of cog-
nitive aging. It refers to a set of mechanisms through which an
individual may continue to perform difﬁcult or complex skills
although they are experiencing some loss in relevant abilities
required to perform a particular task. As noted earlier, aging
involves decline in fundamental sensory, motor, neurological,
and cognitive abilities. Many of these abilities are components
of higher level skills. Some of these skills may be maintained
into late life. One mechanism through which such mainte-
nance can occur is compensation. Adults may be able to com-
pensate for declines that they experience in even very basic
components; they may continue to perform even complex
skills (composing, writing novels, driving) at competent, if not
creative, levels.
Several forms of compensation have been identiﬁed
(Bäckman & Dixon, 1992; Dixon & Bäckman, 1995, 1999;
Salthouse, 1995). For older adults all forms of compensation
begin with the experience of a mismatch between their avail-
able abilities and the requirements they either place upon
themselves (as personal expectations) or accept as given by
the community in which they operate. The term community
can refer to a wide range of environmental demands, such
as those accruing as a function of professional requirements,
social and interactive obligations, familial responsibilities,
sensory and physical contexts, and so forth. The important
point is that by using one or more of the forms of compensa-
tion, the gap between their ability and their expected level of
performance can be closed. In this way, a satisfactory level
of performance for a given skill can be attained, and an indi-
vidual’s potential can be maximized. Compensation can
occur in normal aging, but also as a form of recovery from

Cognitive Potential in Adulthood
457
brain injury or other pathogenic neurological conditions
(e.g., Dixon & Bäckman, 1999; Wilson & Watson, 1996).
Compensation is also a viable concept in recovery from a
wide range of social and personal deﬁcits and losses, many of
which are quite pertinent to the study of cognitive aging (see
Dixon & Bäckman, 1995).
What are the forms of compensation applicable to aging
in general, and to cognitive aging in particular? Scholars
offer somewhat different perspectives on these forms (e.g.,
Marsiske, Lang, Baltes, & Baltes, 1995; Salthouse, 1995),
but the convergence and overlap are impressive (Dixon &
Bäckman, 1995). Four forms appear to cover most of the
situations in which compensation might occur in late life.
The ﬁrst form is perhaps the simplest. It reﬂects investing
time and effort when there is a deﬁcit in learning or perform-
ing a target skill. For example, an individual whose work en-
vironment is becoming ever-more computerized, and whose
understanding of hardware and speciﬁc applications is lag-
ging behind, may compensate for the gap between her envi-
ronmental demands and skill level by putting more time and
effort into acquiring the requisite skills. This deliberate and
effortful upgrading of her skill level such that it matches the
requirements of her community can result in successful
compensation.
The second form of compensation, substitution, originates
in a deﬁcit that is the result of important components of skills
declining with age, and therefore contributing ineffectively to
overall skill performance (e.g., Salthouse, 1995). Compensa-
tion as substitution occurs when other components of the skill
are correspondingly improved, such that the overall skill
performance level is maintained. That is, the global skill is
supported by new, emerging components after the original
components decline. One well-known example concerns
aging typists who can no longer tap their ﬁngers as fast as they
might have as younger adults, and who can no longer respond
to visual stimuli (e.g., to-be-typed characters) as quickly as
they might have in earlier years (Salthouse, 1995). Finger tap-
ping and reaction time are components of the global skill of
typing, in that speeded typing cannot be accomplished without
some contribution from these abilities.As Salthouse observed,
however, some successful older typists compensated for these
decrements by possibly developing a substitutable mecha-
nism, namely, eye-hand coordination. That is, they compen-
sated for slower speeds of reaction and tapping by looking
further ahead in the to-be-typed text so that their ﬁngers had
more time to prepare for the upcoming characters. In this way,
their overall performance (typing rate) could be maintained
into late life.
A third compensatory process, selection and optimization,
involves optimizing one’s development overall by selecting
different paths or goals when the original one is blocked or
unattainable (e.g., chapter by Freund & Riediger in this
volume; Marsiske et al., 1995). If the deﬁcit is too great to
overcome through investment of time and effort, and if no sub-
stitutable components are available, then this form of com-
pensation might be invoked. Essentially, the deﬁcit in the
global skill is accepted, and alternative skills and performance
domains are emphasized. For example, an aging typist for
whom substitution is unavailable might become an ofﬁce
manager, combining “people” or supervisory skills with
declarative and procedural knowledge about the ofﬁce and
business. In this way, one has selectively optimized one’s
development by choosing an alternative path, after the original
trajectory was blocked.
A fourth category reﬂects processes in which one adjusts
goals and criteria of success. Speciﬁcally, individuals
may accommodate deﬁcits by modifying their goals (e.g.,
Brandtstädter & Wentura, 1995) or lowering their criteria of
what constitutes successful performance (Dixon & Bäckman,
1995). For example, older adults may modify their goals or
personal expectations of performance such that it is no longer
necessary to perform at quite the same level or with quite the
same speed as they did when they were younger. Given
no other available form of compensation, an older typist
might decide that her personally required typing rate can be
adjusted downward, focusing perhaps instead on maintain-
ing accuracy. A complication, of course, is that employers or
senior colleagues may not concur with the lowered per-
formance goals. For some everyday, social, and life skills,
however, such changing expectations may indeed be a
viable form of compensating for increasing limitations and
performance decrements (Brandtstädter & Wentura, 1995).
Managing one’s changing resources efﬁciently may involve
devaluing and disengaging from some blocked goals while
selecting new and feasible goals. Some aging-related losses
may be compensated by rearranging priorities or constructing
palliative meanings (i.e., selecting positive interpretations;
Baltes, Staudinger, & Lindenberger, 1997; Brandtstädter &
Wentura, 1995).
Compensation may be an important mechanism of suc-
cessful aging, a means of realizing and maintaining cognitive
potential into late life (Baltes & Baltes, 1990; Dixon, 1995).
It is perhaps not an achievement that will garner awards from
historians or critics (as would the creative products of a
renowned composer), and it may not be a success that brings
the respect accorded to the wise sage. It is, however, a practi-
cal and functional process associated with both elite levels of
technical and artistic performance and everyday life skills
such as driving, working, and leisure activities (Dixon,
1995).

458
Cognitive Development in Adulthood
CONCLUSIONS
Cognitive aging is a vibrant ﬁeld of developmental psychol-
ogy. The ﬁeld of cognitive aging has become one of increas-
ing theoretical complexity, methodological sophistication,
and practical utility. Theoretical attention is given to diversity,
directionality, multidimensionality, context, and (of course)
changes with age. Also notable is the fact that the re-
searchable contexts of cognitive aging extend from the bio-
logical (especially neurological) to the social (especially
interactional) and even to the historical and cultural. This may
be one reason that so many large-scale longitudinal studies of
cognitive aging are being undertaken in many corners of the
globe. These include the Seattle Longitudinal Study, as de-
scribed in this chapter, as well as the Victoria Longitudinal
Study (e.g., Dixon, Wahlin, et al., in press), the Swedish
Betula Project (e.g., Nilsson et al., 1997), and the Berlin
Aging Study (e.g., Baltes & Smith, 1997).
Because cognitive aging is a complex set of developmental
phenomena intrinsically involving processes at many levels
of analysis, with methods and techniques originating in dis-
parate disciplines, it is proﬁtably studied from select and com-
plementary perspectives. In this chapter we illustrated some
of the main domains of research in cognitive aging, as well as
selected emerging trends.Although numerous handbooks and
primers are available covering a broader range with more de-
tail, we trust that this brief overview represents principal
facets of this growing area of developmental science.
REFERENCES
Achenbaum, W. A. (1990). Policy challenges of late life potential.
In M. Perlmutter (Ed.), Late life potential (pp. 121–142).
Washington, DC: The Gerontological Society of America.
Bäckman, L., & Dixon, R. A. (1992). Psychological compensation:
A theoretical framework. Psychological Bulletin, 112, 259–283.
Bäckman, L., & Nilsson, L. G. (1996). Semantic memory function-
ing across the adult life span. European Psychologist, 1, 27–33.
Bäckman, L., Small, B. J., Wahlin, A., & Larsson, M. (2000). Cog-
nitive functioning in very old age. In F. I. M. Craik & T. A.
Salthouse (Eds.), The handbook of aging and cognition (2nd ed.,
pp. 499–558). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Baltes, P. B. (1987). Theoretical propositions of life-span develop-
mental psychology: On the dynamics between growth and
decline. Developmental Psychology, 23, 611–626.
Baltes, P. B., & Baltes, M. M. (Eds.). (1990). Successful aging: Per-
spectives from the behavioral sciences. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Baltes, P. B., & Lindenberger, U. (1997). Emergence of a powerful
connection between sensory and cognitive functions across the
adult life span: A new window to the study of cognitive aging?
Psychology and Aging, 12, 12–21.
Baltes, P. B., & Smith, J. (1990). Toward a psychology of wisdom
and its ontogenesis. In R. J. Sternberg (Ed.), Wisdom: Its nature,
origins, and development (pp. 87–120). New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Baltes, P. B., & Smith, J. (1997). Proﬁles of psychological function-
ing in the old and oldest old. Psychology and Aging, 12,
458–472.
Baltes, P. B., & Staudinger, U. (1993). The search for a psychol-
ogy of wisdom. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 2,
1–6.
Baltes, P. B., & Staudinger, U. M. (Eds.). (1996). Interactive minds:
Life-span perspectives on the social foundation of cognition.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Baltes, P. B., Staudinger, U. M., & Lindenberger, U. (1997). Life-
span psychology: Theory and application to intellectual func-
tioning. Annual Review of Psychology, 50, 471–507.
Baltes, P. B., & Willis, S. L. (1982). Enhancement (plasticity) of
intellectual functioning in old age: Penn State’s Adult Develop-
ment and Enrichment (ADEPT) Project. In F. I. M. Craik & S. E.
Trehub (Eds.), Aging and cognitive processes (pp. 353–389).
New York: Plenum Press.
Berg, C. A., & Klaczynski, P. A. (1996). Practical intelligence and
problem solving: Searching for perspectives. In F. Blanchard-
Fields & T. M. Hess (Eds.), Perspectives on cognitive change in
adulthood and aging (pp. 323–357). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Bond, L. A., Cutler, S. J., & Grams, A. (Eds.). (1995). Promoting
successful and productive aging. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Botwinick, J. (1977). Intellectual abilities. In J. E. Birren & K. W.
Schaie (Eds.), Handbook of the psychology of aging (pp. 580–
605). New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold.
Brandtstädter, J., & Wentura, D. (1995). Adjustment to shifting pos-
sibility frontiers in later life: Complementary adaptive modes. In
R. A. Dixon & L. Bäckman (Eds.), Compensating for psycholog-
ical deﬁcits and declines: Managing losses and promoting gains
(pp. 83–106). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Cabeza, R., & Nyberg, L. (2000). Imaging cognition: Pt. 2. An
empirical review of 275 PET and fMRI studies. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 12, 1–47.
Camp, C. J., & McKitrick, L. A. (1992). Memory interventions in
Alzheimer’s-type dementia populations: Methodological and
theoretical issues. In R. L. West & J. D. Sinnott (Eds.), Everyday
memory and aging: Current research and methodology
(pp. 155–172). New York: Springer.
Cavanaugh, J. C. (1996). Memory self-efﬁcacy as a moderator of
memory change. In F. Blanchard-Fields & T. M. Hess (Eds.),
Perspectives on cognitive change in adulthood and aging
(pp. 488–507). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Cavanaugh, J. C. (2000). Metamemory from a social-cognitive per-
spective. In D. C. Park & N. Schwarz (Eds.), Cognitive aging: A
primer (pp. 115–130). Philadelphia: Taylor & Francis.

References
459
Clancey, W. J. (1997). Situated cognition. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Clark, N. K., & Stephenson, G. M. (1989). Group remembering. In
P. B. Paulus (Ed.), Psychology of group inﬂuence. Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Clayton, V. P., & Birren, J. E. (1980). The development of wisdom
across the life span: A re-examination of an ancient topic. In P. B.
Baltes & O. G. Brim (Eds.), Life-span development and behavior
(Vol. 3, pp. 103–135). New York: Academic Press.
Craik, F. I. M. (2000). Age-related changes in human memory. In
D. C. Park & N. Schwarz (Eds.), Cognitive aging: A primer
(pp. 75–92). Philadelphia: Taylor & Francis.
Craik, F. I. M., & Jennings, J. (1992). Human memory. In F. I. M.
Craik & T. A. Salthouse (Eds.), The handbook of aging and cog-
nition (pp. 51–110). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Craik, F. I. M., & Salthouse, T. (Eds.). (2000). The handbook of
aging and cognition (2nd ed.). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Dennis, W. (1954). Review of Age and achievement. Psychological
Bulletin, 51, 306–308.
Dennis, W. (1956). Age and achievement: A critique. Journal of
Gerontology, 9, 465–467.
Dixon, R. A. (1989). Questionnaire research on metamemory and
aging: Issues of structure and function. In L. W. Poon, D. C.
Rubin, & B. A. Wilson (Eds.), Everyday cognition in adulthood
and old age (pp. 394–415). New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Dixon, R. A. (1995). Promoting competence through compensation.
In L. A. Bond, S. J. Cutler, & A. Grams (Eds.), Promoting suc-
cessful and productive aging (pp. 220–238). Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage.
Dixon, R. A. (1999). Exploring cognition in interactive situations:
The aging of N  1 minds. In T. M. Hess & F. Blanchard-Fields
(Eds.), Social cognition and aging (pp. 267–290). San Diego,
CA: Academic Press.
Dixon, R. A. (2000). Concepts and mechanisms of gains in cogni-
tive aging. In D. Park & N. Schwarz (Eds.), Cognitive aging: A
primer (pp. 23–42). Philadelphia: Psychology Press.
Dixon, R. A., & Bäckman, L. (Eds.). (1995). Compensating for psy-
chological deﬁcits and declines: Managing losses and promot-
ing gains. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Dixon, R. A., & Bäckman, L. (1999). Principles of compensation in
cognitive neurorehabilitation. In D. T. Stuss, G. Winocur, & I. H.
Robertson (Eds.), Cognitive neurorehabilitation (pp. 59–72).
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Dixon, R. A., Bäckman, L., & Nilsson, L.-G. (in press). (Eds.), New
frontiers in cognitive aging. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Dixon, R. A., de Frias, C. M., & Bäckman, L. (2001). Characteris-
tics of self-reported memory compensation in late life. Journal
of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology, 23, 650–661.
Dixon, R. A., & Gould, O. N. (1998). Younger and older adults col-
laborating on retelling everyday stories. Applied Developmental
Science, 2, 160–171.
Dixon, R. A., Kramer, D. A., & Baltes, P. B. (1985). Intelligence: A
life-span developmental perspective. In B. B. Wolman (Ed.),
Handbook of intelligence: Theories, measurements, and applica-
tions (pp. 301–350). New York: Wiley.
Dixon, R. A., Wahlin, A., Maitland, S., Hultsch, D. F., & Bäckman,
L. (in press). Episodic memory change in late adulthood: Gener-
alizability across samples and performance indices. Memory &
Cognition.
Dobbs, A., & Rule, B. (1987). Prospective memory and self-reports
of memory abilities in older adults. Canadian Journal of Psy-
chology, 41, 209–222.
Einstein, G. O., & McDaniel, M. A. (1990). Normal aging and
prospective memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 16, 717–726.
Einstein, G. O., McDaniel, M. A., Richardson, S. L., & Guynn,
M. J. (1995). Aging and prospective memory: Examining the
inﬂuences of self-initiated retrieval. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 21, 996–1007.
Gilewski, M. J., & Zelinski, E. M. (1986). Questionnaire assessment
of memory complaints. In L.W. Poon (Ed.), Handbook for clinical
memory assessment of older adults (pp. 93–107). Washington,
DC: American Psychological Association.
Gold, D. P., Andres, D., Etezadi, J., Arbuckle, T., Schwartzman, A.,
& Chaikelson, J. (1995). Structural equation model of intellec-
tual change and continuity and predictors of intelligence in older
men. Psychology and Aging, 10, 294–303.
Greeno, J. G. (1998). The situativity of knowing, learning, and re-
search. American Psychologist, 53, 5–26.
Grut, M., Jorm, A. F., Fratiglioni, L., Forsell, Y., Viitanen, M., &
Winblad, B. (1993). Memory complaints of elderly people in a
population survey: Variation according to dementia stage and
depression. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 41,
1295–1300.
Hall, G. S. (1922). Senescence: The last half of life. New York:
Appleton.
Hazlitt, J. E. (2000). Longitudinal and structural analyses of
semantic memory and aging. Unpublished master’s thesis,
University of Victoria, Victoria, BC, Canada.
Heckhausen, J., Dixon, R. A., & Baltes, P. B. (1989). Gains and
losses in development throughout adulthood as perceived by
different adult age groups. Developmental Psychology, 25,
109–121.
Heckhausen, J., & Krueger, J. (1993). Developmental expectations
for the self and most other people: Age grading in three func-
tions of social comparison. Developmental Psychology, 29,
539–548.
Herlitz, A., Nilsson, L. G., & Bäckman, L. (1997). Gender differ-
ences in episodic memory. Memory and Cognition, 25, 801–811.
Hertzog, C., & Dixon, R. A. (1994). Metacognitive development
in adulthood and old age. In J. Metcalfe & A. P. Shimamura
(Eds.), Metacognition: Knowing about knowing (pp. 227–251).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

460
Cognitive Development in Adulthood
Hertzog, C., & Dixon, R. A. (1996). Methodological issues in
research on cognition and aging. In F. Blanchard-Fields & T. M.
Hess (Eds.), Perspectives on cognitive change in adulthood and
aging (pp. 66–121). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Hertzog, C., & Hultsch, D. F. (2000). Metacognition in adulthood
and old age. In F. I. M. Craik & T. A. Salthouse (Eds.), The hand-
book of aging and cognition (2nd ed., pp. 417–466). Mahwah,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Hess, T. M., & Blanchard-Fields, F. (1999). Social cognition and
aging. San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Hill, G. W. (1982). Group versus individual performance: Are
N  1 heads better than 1? Psychological Bulletin, 91, 517–
539.
Horn, J. L. (1982). The theory of crystallized and ﬂuid intelligence
in relation to concepts of cognitive psychology and aging in
adulthood. In F. I. M. Craik & S. Trehub (Eds.), Aging and cog-
nitive processes (pp. 237–278). New York: Plenum Press.
Horn, J. L., & Cattell, R. (1966). Reﬁnement and test of a theory of
ﬂuid and crystallized intelligence. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 57, 253–270.
Howard, D. V. (1996). The aging of implicit and explicit memory. In
F. Blanchard-Fields & T. M. Hess (Eds.), Perspectives on cogni-
tive change in adulthood and aging (pp. 221–254). New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Hultsch, D. F., & Dixon, R. A. (1990). Learning and memory in
aging. In J. E. Birren & K. W. Schaie (Eds.), Handbook of the
psychology of aging (3rd ed., pp. 258–274). San Diego, CA:
Academic Press.
Hultsch, D. F., Hertzog, C., Dixon, R. A., & Small, B. J. (1998).
Memory change in the aged. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Hultsch, D. F., Hertzog, C., Small, B. J., & Dixon, R. A. (1999). Use
it or lose it: Engaged lifestyle as a buffer of cognitive decline in
aging? Psychology and Aging, 14, 245–263.
Hummert, M. L., Garstka, T. A., Shaner, J. L., & Strahm, S. (1994).
Stereotypes of the elderly held by young, middle-aged, and
elderly adults. Journal of Gerontology: Psychological Sciences,
49, P40–P49.
Kausler, D. (1994). Learning and memory in normal aging. San
Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Kekes, J. (1983). Wisdom. American Philosophical Quarterly, 20,
277–286.
Kirkpatrick, E. A. (1903). Fundamentals of child study: A discus-
sion of instincts and other factors in human development with
practical applications. New York: Macmillan.
Lachman, M. E., Weaver, S. L., Bandura, M., Elliott, E., &
Lewkowicz, C. J. (1992). Improving memory and control be-
liefs through cognitive restructuring and self-generated strate-
gies. Journal of Gerontology: Psychological Sciences, 47,
P293–P299.
Lehman, H. C. (1953). Age and achievement. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Lehman, H. C. (1956). Reply to Dennis’ critique of Age and
achievement. Journal of Gerontology, 11, 128–134.
Light, L. L. (1992). The organization of memory in old age. In
F. I. M. Craik & T. A. Salthouse (Eds.), The handbook of aging
and cognition (pp. 111–165). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Lovelace, E. A. (Ed.). (1990). Aging and cognition: Mental
processes, self-awareness, and interventions. Amsterdam:
North-Holland.
Markova, I. S., & Berrios, G. E. (2000). Insight into memory
deﬁcits. In G. E. Berrios & J. R. Hodges (Eds.), Memory disor-
ders in psychiatric practice (pp. 204–233). Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Marsiske, M., Lang, F. R., Baltes, P. B., & Baltes, M. M. (1995).
Selective optimization with compensation: Life-span perspec-
tives on successful human development. In R. A. Dixon & L.
Bäckman (Eds.), Compensating for psychological deﬁcits and
declines: Managing losses and promoting gains (pp. 35–79).
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Medina, J. J. (1996). The clock of ages. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Meudell, P. R., Hitch, G. J., & Kirby, P. (1992). Are two heads better
than one? Experimental investigations of the social facilitation
of memory. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 6, 525–543.
Middleton, D., & Edwards, D. (Eds.). (1990). Collective remember-
ing. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Moscovitch, M. (1982). A neuropsychological approach to memory
and perception in normal and pathological aging. In F. I. M.
Craik & S. Trehub (Eds.), Aging and cognitive processes
(pp. 55–78). New York: Plenum Press.
Moulin, C. J. A., Perfect, T. J., & Jones, R. W. (2000). Evidence for
intact memory monitoring in Alzheimer’s disease: Metamemory
sensitivity at encoding. Neuropsychologia, 38, 1242–1250.
Neely, A. S., & Bäckman, L. (1995). Effects of multifactorial
memory training in old age: Generalizability across tasks and
individuals. Journal of Gerontology: Psychological Sciences,
50, 134–140.
Nilsson, L. G., Bäckman, L., Erngrund, K., Nyberg, L., Adolfsson,
R., Bucht, G., Karlsson, S., Widing, M., & Winblad, B. (1997).
The Betula prospective study: Memory, health, and aging.
Aging, Neuropsychology, and Cognition, 4, 1–32.
Park, D. C. (2000). The basic mechanisms accounting for age-
related decline in cognitive function. In D. Park & N. Schwarz
(Eds.), Cognitive aging: A primer (pp. 3–22). Philadelphia:
Psychology Press.
Park, D. C., Hertzog, C., Kidder, D. P., & Morrell, R. W. (1997).
Effect of age on event-based and time-based prospective mem-
ory. Psychology and Aging, 12, 314–327.
Park, D. C., Nisbett, R. E., & Hedden, T. (1999). Aging, culture, and
cognition. Journal of Gerontology: Psychological Sciences,
54B, 75–84.
Park, D. C., & Schwarz, N. (2000). Cognitive aging: A primer.
Philadelphia: Psychology Press.

References
461
Perlmutter, M. (Ed.). (1990). Late life potential. Washington, DC:
The Gerontological Society of America.
Prigatano, G. P. (2000). Motivation and awareness in cognitive neu-
rorehabilitation. In D. T. Stuss, G. Winocur, & I. H. Robertson
(Eds.), Cognitive neurorehabilitation (pp. 240–251). Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press.
Prigatano, G. P., & Schacter, D. L. (Eds.). (1991). Awareness of
deﬁcit after brain injury: Clinical and theoretical issues. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Raz, N. (2000). Aging of the brain and its impact on cognitive
performance: Integration of structural and functional ﬁndings. In
F. I. M. Craik & T. A. Salthouse (Eds.), The handbook of aging
and cognition (2nd ed., pp. 1–90). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Resnick, L. B., Levine, J. M., & Teasley, S. D. (Eds.). (1991)
Perspectives on socially shared cognition. Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association.
Reuter-Lorenz, P. A. (2000). Cognitive neuropsychology of the
aging brain. In D. Park & N. Schwarz (Eds.), Cognitive aging: A
primer (pp. 93–114). Philadelphia: Psychology Press.
Ryan, E. B. (1992). Beliefs about memory changes across adult-
hood. Journal of Gerontology: Psychological Sciences, 47,
P41–P46.
Salthouse, T. A. (1990). Cognitive competence and expertise in
aging. In J. E. Birren & K. W. Schaie (Eds.), Handbook of the
psychology of aging (pp. 310–319). San Diego, CA: Academic
Press.
Salthouse, T. A. (1991). Theoretical perspectives on cognitive
aging. San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Salthouse, T. A. (1995). Reﬁning the concept of psychological com-
pensation. In R. A. Dixon & L. Bäckman (Eds.), Compensating
for psychological deﬁcits and declines: Managing losses and
promoting gains (pp. 21–34). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Salthouse, T. A. (2000). Pressing issues in cognitive aging. In
D. Park & N. Schwarz (Eds.), Cognitive aging: A primer
(pp. 43– 54). Philadelphia: Psychology Press.
Sanford, E. C. (1902). Mental growth and decay. American Journal
of Psychology, 13, 426–449.
Schacter, D. L. (1990). Toward a cognitive neuropsychology of
awareness: Implicit knowledge and anosognosia. Journal of
Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology, 12, 155–178.
Schacter, D. L., Koutsaal, W. E., & Norman, K. A. (1997). False
memories and aging. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 1, 229–236.
Schacter, D. L., & Tulving, E. (1994). Memory systems 1994.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Schaie, K. W. (1983). The Seattle Longitudinal Study: A twenty-
one-year exploration of psychometric intelligence in adulthood.
In K. W. Schaie (Ed.), Longitudinal studies of adult psychologi-
cal development (pp. 64–135). New York: Guilford Press.
Schaie, K. W. (1990). Intellectual development in adulthood. In J. E.
Birren & K. W. Schaie (Eds.), Handbook of the psychology and
aging (3rd ed., pp. 291–309). New York: Academic Press.
Schaie, K. W. (1994). The course of adult intellectual development.
American Psychologist, 49, 304–314.
Schaie, K. W. (1996). Intellectual development in adulthood:
The Seattle Longitudinal Study. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Simonton, D. K. (1990). Creativity and wisdom in aging. In J. E.
Birren & K. W. Schaie (Eds.), Handbook of the psychology of
aging (3rd ed., pp. 320–329). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Simonton, D. K. (1994). Greatness: Who makes history and why.
New York: Guilford Press.
Smith, A. D., & Earles, J. (1996). Memory changes in normal aging.
In F. Blanchard-Fields & T. M. Hess (Eds.), Perspectives on cog-
nitive change in adulthood and aging (pp. 192–220). New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Smith, G. E., Petersen, R. C., Ivnik, R. J., Malec, J. F., & Tangalos,
E. G. (1996). Subjective memory complaints, psychological
distress, and longitudinal change in objective memory perfor-
mance. Psychology and Aging, 12, 272–279.
Smith, J., & Baltes, P. B. (1990). Wisdom-related knowledge:
Age/cohort differences in response to life-planning problems.
Developmental Psychology, 26, 494–505.
Staudinger, U. M., Smith, J., & Baltes, P. B. (1992). Wisdom-related
knowledge in a life review task: Age differences and the role of
professional specialization. Psychology and Aging, 7, 271–281.
Steiner, I. D. (1972). Group Process and Productivity. New York:
Academic Press.
Sternberg, R. J. (Ed.). (1990). Wisdom: Its nature, origins, and
development. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Strough, J., & Margrett, J. (Eds.). (2002). Special section: Collabo-
rative cognition in later adulthood. International Journal of
Behavioral Development, 26, 2–59.
Uttal, D. H., & Perlmutter, M. (1989). Toward a broader conceptu-
alization of development: The role of gains and losses across the
life span. Developmental Review, 9, 101–132.
Verhaeghen, P., Marcoen, A., & Goosens, L. (1992). Improving
memory performance in the aged through mnemonic training: A
meta-analytic study. Psychology and Aging, 7, 242–251.
Waldstein, S. R. (2000). Health effects on cognitive aging. In P. C.
Stern & & L. L. Carstensen (Eds.), The aging mind: Opportuni-
ties in cognitive research (pp. 189–217). Washington, DC:
National Academy Press.
Weisenburg, T., Roe, A., & McBride, K. E. (1936). Adult intelli-
gence: A psychological study of test performance. London:
Commonwealth Fund.
Willis, S. L., Jay, G. M., Diehl, M., & Marsiske, M. (1992). Longi-
tudinal change and prediction of everyday task competence in
the elderly. Research on Aging, 14, 68–91.
Wilson, B. A., & Watson, P. C. (1996). A practical framework for
understanding compensatory behavior in people with organic
memory impairment. Memory, 4, 456–486.
Woodruff-Pak, D. S. (1997). The neuropsychology of aging.
Malden, MA: Blackwell.


CHAPTER 19
Personality Development in Adulthood and Old Age
ROSANNA M. BERTRAND AND MARGIE E. LACHMAN
463
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND
464
THEORETICAL PERSPECTIVES ON PERSONALITY
464
Trait Theories
464
Stage Theories
466
Contextual Models
471
Subjective Changes in Personality
475
Personality as a Predictor of Later Life Outcomes
476
THE SELF
477
Identity
478
The Sense of Control
479
Well-Being
480
Emotions and Coping
480
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
481
REFERENCES
481
Personality development in adulthood and old age has
been the focus of considerable research interest over the
last several decades, amassing a body of literature that is
richly diverse in its theoretical and methodological ap-
proaches. Although some personality research shows that
early experiences inﬂuence the developmental trajectory
(e.g., Caspi, 1987), it is also generally accepted that disconti-
nuity or change in personality makes it possible for individu-
als to respond appropriately to major, meaningful events as
they present themselves later in life (e.g., Haan, Millsap, &
Hartka, 1986). Indeed, the primary focus of personality
research has turned from questions regarding the stability or
susceptibility to change across adulthood to the multidirec-
tional paths of personality and the impact of individual dif-
ferences throughout the life span (Lachman, 1989; Lachman
& Bertrand, 2001; Nesselroade, 1992). For instance, there is
increasing evidence that the nature and experiences in
adulthood and old age are determined in large part by indi-
vidual differences in personality. By adopting a life-span
approach for the study of personality in adulthood and aging,
the impact of variations in personality based on such factors
as gender, cohort, and culture can be modeled, and change
over time can be tracked (Baltes, Lindenberger, &
Staudinger, 1998).
In this chapter we deﬁne and examine the nature of
personality in adulthood and old age from multiple perspec-
tives. We ﬁrst provide a historical overview of theoretical
approaches, and then we present the current major theoreti-
cal perspectives in the ﬁeld, including a discussion of rele-
vant ﬁndings from key empirical studies. We examine trait
approaches (e.g., McCrae & Costa, 1987; Roberts &
DelVecchio, 2000) to the study of personality with a focus on
rank-order and mean-level consistency, as well as individual
differences in personality and how these differences shape
the experiences of older adults. We also examine theories
with a life-span approach to personality such as stage theo-
ries (e.g., Erikson, 1963; Levinson, 1978) and contextual
models that incorporate person-environment interactions
(e.g., Caspi, 1987; Helson, 1984; Neugarten & Gutmann,
1958). The phenomenological approach to personality is also
relevant to the study of adulthood and old age. Some of the
major ﬁndings regarding subjective personality change (e.g.,
Fleeson & Baltes, 1998) and personality as a predictor of
later life outcomes (e.g., Caspi, 1987) are discussed. We also
examine speciﬁc aspects of the self-construct such as iden-
tity (e.g., Whitbourne, 1987), self-efﬁcacy and control (e.g.,
Bandura, 1997; Lachman & Weaver, 1998), well-being
(e.g., Ryff, 1989), and emotions and coping (e.g., Lazarus &
Folkman, 1984). Finally, we summarize the current state of
The authors would like to acknowledge the generous support of the
John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation Research Network
on Successful Midlife Development and the National Institute on
Aging #AG17920 (ML) and T32 AG 00204 (RB).

464
Personality Development in Adulthood and Old Age
the adult personality literature and make suggestions for the
direction of future research.
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND
The view of development as a lifelong process can be traced
to the eighteenth and nineteenth century philosophers
Quetelet, Carus, and Tetens (Baltes, 1983). However, psy-
chological development beyond young adulthood was not
embraced by those studying human behavior until much later.
Early theorists conceptualized development as a phenome-
non unique to the early years of life, suggesting that beyond
this point development was virtually nonexistent. This popu-
lar sentiment was epitomized in the classic statement by
William James when he wrote that by the age of 30, character
is “set like plaster, and will never soften again” (W. James,
1890, p. 121). Others, such as Freud, believed that psy-
chological maturity was reached at an even younger age.
According to Freud’s psychoanalytic theory, personality is
determined at some time during middle childhood. Any ob-
servation of psychological change after this point in life was
seen as the result of early experiences and not of continued
development. The child-centric view of development has its
roots in the work of Rousseau (1762/1948) and has been re-
inforced by the writings of Freud (1905) and other preemi-
nent theorists such as Piaget (1936/1974) and Bowlby (1982).
A life-span view of personality development emerged in
the early twentieth century with work by C. Jung, C. Buhler,
G. Stanley Hall, and E. Erikson. The most well known of these
perspectives are Jung’s (1933) psychoanalytic theory, which
dealt primarily with issues of balancing polarities such as mas-
culinity and femininity throughout adulthood, and Erikson’s
(1963) psychosocial model of ego development, which ex-
panded Freud’s theory to include developmental stages
throughout the life-span, including old age.
Advanced primarily by Erikson’s psychosocial theory of
lifelong development and by early empirical studies con-
ducted by Neugarten and Gutmann (1958), which support the
idea of change in later adulthood, research and theory have
expanded beyond the child-centric approach to psychological
development (e.g., Field & Millsap, 1991; Loevinger, 1976;
Vaillant, 1977). A recent surge of theoretical conceptualiza-
tions and empirical investigations has culminated in a sizable
literature that adopts the view of personality as a lifelong
process of development (e.g., Baltes, 1987; Baltes et al.,
1998; Featherman & Lerner, 1985; Lachman & Baltes, 1994;
R. M. Lerner, 1976). The life-span approach is a useful
perspective from which to study personality development
in later adulthood. First, through a comprehensive host of
theories, the life-span approach represents the dynamic com-
plexities inherent in the experiences of middle-aged and
older adults. In addition, this approach integrates sources of
variation such as sociocultural, historical, and genetic factors
that are especially important to consider when examining the
trajectory of development into adulthood and old age.
Furthermore, the advancement of powerful methodologi-
cal techniques has provided developmentalists with the tools
necessary for effectively modeling personality and the self in
later years within the context of the life-span perspective
(e.g., Schaie, 1996). We are no longer restricted to the inves-
tigation of normative individual differences; longitudinal
research designs and sophisticated statistical techniques pro-
vide the opportunity to model intra-individual change so that
complex patterns of development throughout the life span
can be explored. With longitudinal designs and state-of-the-
art methodological techniques, confounding factors such as
age and cohort effects can be teased apart and contextual
qualities such as socioeconomic status can be tested for the
efﬁcacy of their mediational effects. The adoption of a life-
span approach for the study of personality facilitates the
investigation of stability and change well into old age. 
THEORETICAL PERSPECTIVES
ON PERSONALITY
The research on personality development in adulthood and
aging has been guided by a variety of theoretical perspectives
and conceptual models. For example, some investigations
employ contextual models that emphasize the life-span
approach. These studies focus on the dynamic interaction be-
tween social and historical contexts on personality patterns
(Schaie & Hendricks, 2000). Other studies utilize trait and
stage theories of development. The underlying premise of trait
theory (e.g., Costa & McCrae, 1988; Roberts & DelVeccho,
2000) is that personality attributes are formed early in life and
that they exhibit consistency across adulthood. In contrast,
stage theories (e.g., Erikson, 1963; Levinson, 1977) are built
on the concept that personality continues to evolve throughout
adulthood according to the epigenetic principle (see R. M.
Lerner, 2002); each stage unfolds from its previous stage in a
predetermined, sequential way. Human personality in adult-
hood and old age is a complex, multifaceted phenomenon that
is best represented using multiple perspectives.
Trait Theories
Perhaps the most well-known perspective on personality is
the trait view (Costa & McCrae, 1984). A trait is commonly

Theoretical Perspectives on Personality
465
described as an enduring personality characteristic that
remains stable over time and is consistent across situations.
Purportedly, roots of traits can be traced to genetic com-
ponents, and their expression is manifested in early tempera-
ment (Bouchard, 1997; but see R. M. Lerner, 2002, for a
contrasting point of view based on life-span developmental
systems theory or Baltes et al., 1998). From the perspective
of trait theory, personality can be deﬁned as the expression of
these sustaining inherent attributes.
The Big Five
Although several trait taxonomies have been proposed to de-
lineate the structure of personality, the ﬁve-factor model
known as the Big Five is the most widely applied to adult-
hood and aging. The ﬁve-factor model includes the following
dimensions: neuroticism, extroversion, openness to experi-
ence, agreeableness, and conscientiousness. There is wide-
spread support for the Big Five using multiple measures
including the California Q-Set (McCrae, Costa, & Busch,
1986) and the NEO Personality Inventory (McCrae & Costa,
1987), which have demonstrated convergent and discrimi-
nant validity for self-reports and peer and spouse ratings. 
Stability and Change
The preponderance of empirical research points to rank-order
stability across time on the trait dimensions (e.g., Costa &
McCrae, 1988; Haan et al., 1986; Roberts & DelVecchio,
2000). This implies that the ordinal position of individuals
within a group remains the same relative to other individuals
on trait dimensions over time. For example, using the
California Q-sort (see Block, in collaboration with Hann,
1971), Haan et al. (1986) found substantial stability over 50
years (i.e., ages 5–62) in the Oakland Growth and Guidance
studies. With one exception occurring in the component of
“warm/hostile” during the transition from late adolescence to
early adulthood, all test-retest, interval-speciﬁc correlations
were positive across the life span and into old age. 
Support for the stability position comes largely from stud-
ies based on the Baltimore Longitudinal Study of Aging. This
ongoing, large-sample survey of relatively healthy, highly
educated individuals was begun in 1958 and includes indi-
viduals from across adulthood ranging in age from the late
20s into the 90s. When analyzed longitudinally, ﬁndings from
these studies demonstrate remarkable stability on self-reports
of personality behavior across approximately 30 years of
adulthood (e.g., Costa & McCrae, 1984, 1988; McCrae &
Costa, 1985, 1987, 1994). Converging evidence for these
ﬁndings comes from peer ratings on personality dimensions
(Costa & McCrae, 1988; McCrae & Costa, 1987). Across a
6-year span, consistency in the ratings of personality traits
reported by participants’ spouses was also revealed. 
Meta-analyses conducted by Roberts and DelVecchio
(2000) provide a more complicated picture with less deﬁni-
tive answers regarding stability. Their examination of 124
longitudinal studies revealed high levels of rank-order con-
sistency on personality trait dimensions over time, but it
was not until the period between middle and older adulthood
(i.e., ages 50–59 and 60–73) that trait consistency stabilized,
a ﬁnding that conﬂicts with the popular notion that trait
stability peaks by the age of 30 (e.g., Costa & McCrae, 1988;
W. James, 1890; McCrae & Costa, 1994). 
It is important to note that rank order stability does not
imply stability at the mean level. Although there is strong ev-
idence for trait consistency when considering rank order,
there is also evidence from longitudinal investigations for
normative, mean-level changes in some of the traits across
time and suggestive support from cross-sectional studies for
age differences (e.g., McCrae & Costa, 1994; Haan et al.,
1986). For example, Roberts and DelVecchio (2000) reported
that although high levels of rank-order stability were found in
their meta-analysis, the estimates of between-age-group con-
sistency were not high enough to argue that personality
dimensions are impervious to change. This conclusion is sup-
ported in the ﬁndings from other studies that examine mean-
level change in personality traits. For example, McCrae and
Costa (1994) reported that compared to younger adults, older
adults reported lower levels of extroversion, particularly
activity and thrill-seeking, neuroticism, and openness to ex-
perience. As a result, older adults were less anxious and self-
conscious but also less likely to explore new horizons. 
In a 14-year longitudinal study of older adults, Field and
Millsap (1991) found an increase in the dimension of agree-
ableness between ages 69 and 83. Similarly, Haan et al.
(1986) noted that in the Oakland Growth and Guidance stud-
ies substantial changes in personality continued to occur into
later adulthood. Theses authors concluded that with increased
age, people confront greater experiential change that, in turn,
can lead to a change in the expression of personality. In con-
trast, other researchers explain consistency in personality
dimensions across time as due to fewer novel experiences
confronted by the older adult (Glenn, 1980). 
Further suggestive evidence for mean-level differences in
personality across adulthood comes from the study of Midlife
in the United States (MIDUS; John D. and Catherine T.
MacArthur Foundation Research Network on Successful
Midlife Development) using trait attribute ratings. Findings
from this nationally representative cross-sectional study
revealed signiﬁcant mean age-group differences between

466
Personality Development in Adulthood and Old Age
young, middle-aged, and older adults on some of the Big Five
traits (Markus & Lachman, 1996). Speciﬁcally, results indi-
cated that scores on agreeableness were highest in the group
of older adults, whereas scores on openness to experience
and neuroticism were lowest among the older adults. Consci-
entiousness was highest in the midlife group. 
It appears from the discussion of rank-order versus mean-
level consistency in trait dimensions that to a large degree the
ﬁndings vary based on the type of question asked and the type
of methodology utilized to answer the question (see Caspi &
Roberts, 1999). Speciﬁcally, among the studies reported here,
those investigating rank order across time by examining test-
retest correlations largely demonstrated stability, whereas
those interested in between-age-group comparisons revealed
mean-level differences on some personality dimensions.
Moreover,mean-leveldifferenceswererevealedinbothlongi-
tudinal studies that examined intra-individual change in per-
sonality dimensions over time and cross-sectional studies that
exploreddifferencesbetweenage/cohortgroups.Forexample,
intra-individual change over time in average agreeableness
was demonstrated longitudinally (Field & Millsap, 1991),
with supporting cross-sectional evidence revealing age/cohort
differences favoring older adults (Markus & Lachman, 1996).
Further, between-group differences in neuroticism and open-
ness to experience were found in cross-sectional studies with
older adults showing lower levels in these personality traits
than younger groups (McCrae & Costa, 1994). Although the
issue of stability versus change in personality development
acrossthelifespancontinuestobeaninterestingtopicofstudy,
the focus of personality research has shifted to the potentially
more important question of how these stable personality styles
impact the course of aging (Lachman, 1989).
Personality Dimensions as Antecedents
Personality attributes are believed to play a major role in the
nature and course of development in adulthood and old age
(Lachman & Bertrand, 2001). For example, on one hand, it is
possible that certain personality styles such as neuroticism
may drive individuals toward risk-taking behaviors that
could negatively inﬂuence their life course and health status
in older adulthood. On the other hand, personality styles such
as conscientiousness may direct individuals to practice pro-
tective health-behaviors that could delay morbidity and mor-
tality in the later adult years (Schwartz et al., 1995; Friedman
et al., 1995). Longitudinal evidence from the Terman Life
Cycle Study of Children with High Ability supports the hy-
pothesis that childhood personality dispositions predict later
life outcomes. Findings demonstrated that certain childhood
and early adult personality traits such as conscientiousness
predict increased longevity (Schwartz et al., 1995). The au-
thors concluded that conscientious children were healthier
and lived longer because they were more likely to adopt
healthy self-care patterns that would prevent or delay illness.
In addition, they were more likely to avoid dangerous situa-
tions that would put their health at risk. The issue of how the
course of aging varies as a function of personality attributes
will be addressed in greater detail in a subsequent section of
this chapter.
The trait view assumptions of individual differences in
personality and stability across adulthood are in direct con-
trast to stage views of personality development. In the fol-
lowing section we examine some of the predominant stage
models of psychological development giving particular at-
tention to the later stages that include adulthood and old age.
Stage Theories
Whereas trait theories assume that personality characteristics
are acquired early in life and demonstrate life-long stability
(e.g., Costa & McCrae, 1988), stage theories are character-
ized by the premise of continued development and change
across the life span (e.g., Erikson, 1950). In general, stage
models divide the life span into periods loosely tied to
chronological age to describe normal, sequential patterns of
developmental change (Reese & Overton, 1970). According
to stage theory, each period is associated with a particular de-
velopmental task. When successfully straddled, it provides
the foundation from which to confront the challenge of the
next stage (Havighurst, Neugarten, & Tobin, 1968). Based on
the tenets of stage theory, personality can be deﬁned as a life-
long process of maturity in which internal forces interact with
external forces through a stepwise series of stages to produce
outward behavior. 
Erik H. Erikson
Several stage models of development that include adulthood
and old age have been theorized (e.g., Erikson, 1950;
Vaillant, 1977; Levinson, 1977; Loevinger, 1976); however,
perhaps the most preeminent and inﬂuential is Erik H.
Erikson’s (1950) eight-stage psychosocial model of develop-
ment. An extension of Freud’s theory of psychosexual devel-
opment, Erikson’s model has two primary advantages over
Freud’s. First, it includes a life-span view of development,
second, it incorporates societal and cultural inﬂuences on de-
velopment. Freud’s theory describes personality as relatively
ﬁxed by age 5. Any change in behavior beyond that point is

Theoretical Perspectives on Personality
467
viewed as the result of early childhood inﬂuences and not
continued development. In addition, Freud assigned primary
importance to largely unconscious intrapsychic processes in
determining personality development. Erikson expanded on
Freud’s theory by creating a developmental model in which
the ego evolves through the dynamic interaction between in-
ternal and external forces throughout the entire life course.
According to Erikson’s model, there are eight stages of
psychosocial development that are biologically hardwired to
unfold in a predetermined, sequential manner. Following his
version of the epigenetic principle, Erikson believed that the
ego evolves out of this preprogrammed schedule in stages in
which different components of the ego have the opportunity
to develop during speciﬁc times. Erikson proposed that
each of the eight stages is marked by a tension or crisis be-
tween two opposing challenges (e.g., generativity vs. stagna-
tion). The crises are resolved through a dynamic interaction
between inner ego strength that evolves and develops from
the previous stage and outer societal and cultural demands.
The result of each crisis is a strengthened or weakened
ego that, in turn, becomes the basis for resolving the crisis in
the next succeeding stage. Development continues to evolve
in this manner throughout the life span with later stages built
on the foundation of previous ones. The possibility of com-
plete psychosocial maturity is acquired only in later adult-
hood after all eight stages have been positively resolved (i.e.,
ego integrity is achieved). Healthy psychosocial develop-
ment may be comprised, however, if an individual progresses
to a stage without the successful resolution of a task at a pre-
vious stage. In optimal development the sequence of stages is
followed precisely with each respective crisis resolved suc-
cessfully. However, certain environmental experiences can
send an individual off course, thereby changing the timing
and pattern of development and hindering the successful
resolution of a successive stage. A developmental course in-
ﬂuenced in such a way will result in a weakened ego and neg-
atively impact present and future development (Whitbourne,
Zuschlag, Elliot, & Waterman, 1992).
Relevant to adulthood, Erikson proposed three distinct
stages in which the individual must confront a crisis between
opposing forces: intimacy versus isolation in young adult-
hood, generativity versus stagnation in midlife, and ego in-
tegrity versus despair in old age. In young adulthood, after
achieving a sense of ego identity, the challenge set forth in
Erikson’s theory is to establish a relationship with a signiﬁ-
cant other without losing one’s own sense of self. Erikson
theorized that middle-aged adults reach a point in their ego
development at which they must struggle between assuming
a sense of responsibility toward the next generation (i.e., gen-
erativity) and maintaining a position of self-absorption (stag-
nation). As already discussed, each stage is built on the
strength of the ego as it evolves from the resolution of the
previous stage. As a result, the midlife adult whose ego was
strengthened by successfully achieving intimacy as opposed
to isolation as a young adult is more likely to resolve the
midlife stage toward generativity. This individual will be
trusting and willing to propagate his or her skills and knowl-
edge to the next generation. Although generativity is com-
monly thought of as the adoption of a parenting role, it can
also be carried out via other roles such as a teacher, mentor,
or coach. Generativity is reﬂected in any activity in which the
adult assumes the responsibility for guiding the next genera-
tion in a productive or creative way (Erikson, 1963;
McAdams, 2001). Erikson proposed that the virtues of car-
ing, giving, sharing, and teaching develop out of the need to
nurture and direct the next generation.
In contrast, the midlife adult who progressed through the
young adult stage with an imbalance toward isolation will
have a weakened ego that is likely to inhibit the establish-
ment of generativity. In midlife this adult will be self-
centered and self-absorbed and lack interest in training or
guiding the next generation. The resultant imbalance toward
stagnation will further weaken the ego and render it unable to
carry out a successful resolution of the crisis in the ﬁnal stage
of development. 
The ﬁnal stage of psychosocial development proposed by
Erikson (1963) is that of ego integrity versus ego despair. As
individuals age, there is an increasing awareness of the limits
of time—a realization of inevitable, impending death. The ef-
fect of this awareness is to inspire older adults to reﬂect on
how they lived their lives. Older adults who look back with
satisfaction and contentment and an acceptance of both the
negative and positive aspects of their lives are at peace and, in
this way, are prepared to accept the inevitability of death.
These adults have integrated the past and present and have
embraced the importance and meaningfulness of their lives;
they have achieved ego integrity. On the other hand, older
adults who have not resolved the past, who experience anxi-
ety about making amends for prior mistakes, and who feel the
need to complete unﬁnished business are not ready to accept
the inevitability of death. In fact, these adults may fear or
dread their impending death and view it as another in a series
of failures and disasters that have comprised the quality of
their lives. These adults have failed to ﬁnd purpose and mean-
ing in their lives and have not achieved ego integrity; rather,
they are in a state of ego despair (Erikson, 1963; Ryff, 1989).
Although Erikson’s theory emphasizes the resolution of
tasks that are stage speciﬁc and unfold in a preprogrammed

468
Personality Development in Adulthood and Old Age
sequence, there is also recognition that it is possible to revisit
tasks of earlier stages throughout the life span. In adulthood,
driven by an urge to establish a sense of integrated whole-
ness, adults may strive to reconcile earlier unresolved crises.
In other words, although the adult has passed through the
stages in a preprogrammed, sequential manner, the opportu-
nity to go back to a stage that was not successfully resolved
in order to reprocess the crisis exists. The issues associated
with each stage are also prevalent throughout life even
though they may be most salient at a given time in the life
course.
Eriksonhasbeencreditedforbeingamongtheﬁrsttheorists
to propose a model of lifelong development and to integrate
both inner forces and external circumstances in determining
the fate of ego development. Indeed, his work has inspired the
conceptualization and publication of several other stage theo-
ries, such as those by Vaillant (1977), Levinson (1977), and
Loevinger (1976). However, limitations to Erikson’s theory
shouldbeaddressed.First,ithasbeencriticizedforbeingbased
on highly educated males and Western cultural norms without
an acknowledgment that women and non-Western cultures
mayhavedifferentdevelopmentaltrajectories(Gilligan,1982;
Kahn, Zimmerman, Cskiszentmihalyi, & Getzels, 1985). Al-
though Erikson’s theory should be cautiously applied to more
diverse groups, there is some evidence for its generalizability
to less privileged samples (Vallaint & Milofsky, 1980).
A second criticism of Erikson’s psychosocial theory is that
although it is a viable model of development, it is very dif-
ﬁcult to quantify and measure. As a result, few empirical
studies have been conducted to test the theory. The most
comprehensive investigation to date is the Rochester study
conducted by Whitbourne and colleagues (Whitbourne &
Waterman, 1979; Whitbourne et al., 1992). This cross-
sequential, longitudinal study has followed several groups of
graduates from the University of Rochester beginning in
1966 with the oldest cohort entering midlife (i.e., age 42) in
the most recent analysis (1988). Data that include older
adults are not available, nor are they available from a range of
ages in midlife. However, based on the sample tested, ﬁnd-
ings from this study provide moderate support for the validity
of Erikson’s ﬁnal stages of development. The college-aged
cohort scored lower than the older cohorts on measures of
generativity (Stage 7) and ego integrity (Stage 8). In other
words, as proposed by Erikson, it appears as though these de-
velopmental tasks are not confronted until later adulthood.
However, to make such a statement deﬁnitively, it will be
necessary to follow this sample throughout midlife and into
old age. Vaillant and Milofsky (1980) also tested and found
support for the invariant sequence of Erikson’s stages in
adulthood.
Regardless of the limitations of Erikson’s theory of psy-
chosocial development, the contribution that it has made to
the ﬁeld of developmental psychology cannot be ignored. In
addition to expanding the possibility of development into old
age and incorporating societal and cultural inﬂuences on de-
velopment, his model has been the inspiration for the work of
many other developmental theorists. 
George Vaillant
Similar to Erikson, George Vaillant (1977) believed that the
ego evolves and develops as it passes through stages through-
out the life span. Based on data collected from the Grant
Foundation study of Harvard graduates begun in 1937,
Vaillant revised Erikson’s eight-stage model by adding
two additional stages in adulthood. First, after Stage 6, “inti-
macy,” Vaillant found evidence for a stage that he called “ca-
reer consolidation versus self-absorption.” Individuals who
face career consolidation have already established intimacy
in the previous stage and are now ready to identify with a
career or occupational commitment. These issues seem to
preoccupy adults in early adulthood prior to experiencing
generativity (Vaillant & Milofsky, 1980). The second addi-
tional stage, “keepers of the meaning versus rigidity,” was
introduced after Stage 7, “generativity.” The difference be-
tween generativity and keepers of the meaning lies in the
basic concepts of caring and wisdom. Generativity includes
those who demonstrate the capacity for care, productivity,
and guidance for the next generation; however, keepers of the
meaning emote a sense of wisdom and cultural preservation.
Whereas the earlier generativity stage focuses on more
concrete expressions of caring and transmission to the next
generation, keepers of the meaning reﬂects a more abstract
exchange of ideology and values.
Although the focus of Vaillant’s theory is also the devel-
opment of the ego, the process is quite different from that in
Erikson’s model, where each stage is marked by a task that
involves resolving a conﬂict. According to Vaillant’s theory,
the ego evolves through the process of interpreting the envi-
ronment and daily experiences through Freudian defense
mechanisms. However, unlike Freud’s use of defense mecha-
nisms as protectors of the ego, Vaillant utilizes defense
mechanisms as central to a lifelong process through which
the ego matures and develops by adapting to conﬂict between
the environment and inner consciousness. Findings from the
Grant Foundation study (Vaillant, 1977) support this conclu-
sion by demonstrating that throughout adulthood the quality
of the defense mechanism matures. In particular, Vaillant
noted that immature defenses such as denial and projection
were utilized less often and that mature defenses such as

Theoretical Perspectives on Personality
469
intellectualization, sublimation, and humor were used more
often as the individual advances through the stages of adult-
hood. These ﬁndings were supported in a study that expanded
on the Harvard sample by adding a group of inner-city adults
who were interviewed at ages 25, 32, and 47 (Vaillant &
Milofsky, 1980). Further, these authors concluded that
although their ﬁndings demonstrate that personality unfolds
in a predetermined sequential manner, ego maturation is
open-ended and has no ﬁxed chronological age. In essence,
the opportunity for the personality to develop, mature, and
change exists throughout adulthood.
The major contribution of Vaillant’s work with the Grant
Foundation study (Vaillant, 1977; Vaillant & Milofsky, 1980)
is the longitudinal nature of the study design. With data col-
lected at multiple time points, changes in the use of defense
mechanisms could be identiﬁed, and movement through the
stages of ego development could be tracked. For instance,
results from Vaillant’s longitudinal studies cast doubt on
Levinson’s claim of a midlife crisis by revealing that individ-
uals in midlife are no more likely than individuals at other
stages of adulthood to experience signiﬁcant life events that
are often associated with the midlife crisis (Costa & McCrae,
1980; Lachman & Bertrand, 2001).
Despite the positive contributions that Vaillant’s work has
made to the ﬁeld, some limitations should be noted. For in-
stance, the Grant Foundation study (1977) was comprised of
a group of well-educated, White, middle-class males, there-
fore restricting the generalizability of the ﬁndings to a larger
population. A follow-up study conducted by Vaillant and
Milofsky (1980) added a group of inner-city men to the
sample, thereby broadening the generalizability to include
other socioeconomic groups, but still restricting it to males.
An additional limitation of the Grant Foundation study is that
the data were collected as descriptive narratives. Although
they can provide a rich picture, the subjective nature of the
data collection and coding methods place some limits on the
interpretation of the ﬁndings. Finally, although Vaillant has
set forth a model of life-span personality development, the
studies in which he tested the model did not include adults
beyond the age of 47. As a result, the ﬁnal two stages of the
model (keepers of the meaning and integrity) were not em-
pirically tested. 
Daniel Levinson
Other theories, such as Daniel Levinson’s stage theory
(1977), emerged at about the same time as Vaillant’s theory
and were also inspired by the writings of Erikson. Similar to
Erikson’s stage theory, Levinson’s theory of adult develop-
ment has a series of distinct, sequential stages that span the
life-course and are each associated with a speciﬁc develop-
mental task. In addition, as in Erikson’s theory, each stage,
when accomplished, becomes the foundation for the next
stage. However, rather than a model of ego development as
proposed by Erikson, the central theme of Levinson’s theory
is the life structure. The life structure evolves through ﬁve
stages (i.e., preadulthood; early adulthood; middle adult-
hood; late adulthood; and late, late adulthood) by ﬂuctuating
between phases of relative stability (life structure) and phases
of transition (Levinson, 1978). During the transitional phase
the individual reappraises the existing life structure and ex-
plores the possibility of change by analyzing his or her inter-
nal and external world. The end product of the transitional
phase is a committed choice and the beginning of a phase
of stability during which a new life structure is built and
expanded.
Levinson argues that the transitional phases are universal
and necessary aspects of development. As the individual set-
tles into building a life structure around choices that were
made during the previous transitional phase, mistakes and re-
grets come to be realized. The urge to rectify and change
these choices eventually becomes paramount and catapults
the individual into the next transitional phase (Levinson,
Darrow, Kline, Levinson, & McKee, 1978). 
Although Levinson’s theory spans the entire life course, he
is most noted for the midlife transitional phase. According to
Levinson et al. (1978), the midlife crisis is the product of the
tension and stress caused by resolving the conﬂict between
four opposing forces. Adopted from Jung’s theory of oppos-
ing polarities, Levinson argued that middle-aged adults
struggle between the competing forces of young versus old,
destruction versus creation, masculine versus feminine, and
attachment versus separation. The tension during the transi-
tional phase is resolved and the next life structure begun
when midlife adults have accepted that these opposing forces
can coexist within themselves.
Regardless of the notoriety and popularization of the term
midlife crisis, there is little support for its widespread occur-
rence (see Lachman & Bertrand, 2001; McCrae & Costa,
1990; Whitbourne, 1986a). Several limitations of Levinson’s
data from which his theory was derived have been identiﬁed.
First, the sample was small (N  = 40) and consisted wholly of
well-educated men, three quarters of whom were engaged in
professional careers. Subsequently, Levinson conducted a
similar study with women (Levinson & Levinson, 1996) and
concluded that similar patterns and developmental ﬂuctua-
tions between life structure and transitional phases existed
for women.
A second limitation of Levinson’s work comes from
the fact that the research was based on qualitative clinical

470
Personality Development in Adulthood and Old Age
interview data that were not statistically analyzed. Qualita-
tive, retrospective reports are inherently biased because of
the subjectivity of the respondent and the interpreter. In fact,
Levinson acknowledged that “at 46, I wanted to study the
transition into middle age in order to understand what I had
been through myself” (Levinson et al., 1978, p. x). A ﬁnal
limitation of this descriptive study is that it was a based on a
cross-sectional design that captured only one point in time.
To understand the nature of the transitions that Levinson de-
scribes and to make statements regarding change in behavior
from one stage to the next, it is necessary to follow a cohort
or group of individuals over time.
Despite its methodological limitations, Levinson’s work
has made a valuable contribution to the ﬁeld for underscoring
the need for sound scientiﬁc research on psychological devel-
opment in the middle years of adulthood and by adding to the
growing body of literature that attempts to describe develop-
mental change throughout the life course and into old age.
Jane Loevinger
Intrigued by the writing of Erikson, Jane Loevinger (1976)
conceptualized a theory of ego development that was based on
Erikson’s psychosocial model, although it was modiﬁed
theoretically.ForbothEriksonandLoevinger,theegowasthe-
orized to mature and evolve through stages across the life span
astheresultofadynamicinteractionbetweentheinnerselfand
the outer environment. However, according to Loevinger, the
ego was a more complex structure than described by Erikson.
For instance, she placed a strong emphasis on the importance
of considering moral development when attempting to under-
standing personality. She argued that individual differences
are central to personality and that by tracing moral stages of
development, individual differences in adult personality will
be revealed (Loevinger, 1983). Loevinger’s theory deﬁnes the
ego as the organizer, synthesizer, and interpreter of cognition,
morality, the self, and other related concepts that encapsulate
personality (Loevinger, 1976, 1983). The individual’s pro-
gression through the stages is motivated by the need to inter-
pret and adjust to changes in the outer social and inner
biological environments. During this process, the personality
develops slowly as the individual gains an increasingly more
precise understanding of him- or herself.
Six of Loevinger’s 10 stages or transitional levels of
ego development are relevant to adulthood: conformist,
conscientious-conformist, conscientious, individualistic, au-
tonomous, and integrated (Loevinger, 1983). Each stage is
related to an increasingly differentiated ego that strives to-
ward perfection. The point of ego perfection is reached in the
ﬁnal, integrated stage, when a discrepancy no longer exists
between who the individual really is and how the individual
acts. At this stage of development there is a complete accep-
tance of inner conﬂict, and outward behavior becomes the ex-
pression of the true inner self (Loevinger, 1983). Although
Loevinger did not believe that all individuals develop
through the ﬁnal stages of her model, she argued that it is un-
likely that they will revert to a prior cognitive level once a
higher level has been attained (Loevinger, 1976). 
To build the sequential model of ego development,
Loevinger used data from the Sentence Completion Test
(SCT; Loevinger, Wessler, 1970). Originally designed to mea-
sure the ego development of women, the SCT has since been
revised to include men (Loevinger, 1985). The measure
consists of a series of sentence fragments that respondents
are required to complete. Responses are scored according to
the developmental stage that they represent. Support for the
SCT as a measure of ego development has been demonstrated
in studies in which convergent validity was established against
tests of similar concepts (e.g., Kohlberg’s test of moral matu-
rity; Kohlberg & Kramer, 1969; see Loevinger, 1979). In a
more recent study that included adults from diverse racial and
socioeconomic backgrounds, the validity of the test items for
use with a male population was examined (Loevinger, 1985).
Results of these analyses indicate that although the items were
more valid for women than for men, when differences in vari-
ability were corrected, the resulting estimates were similar,
and justiﬁcation for the use of the SCT with men and women
was concluded.
TheSCThasbeenusedbymanypsychologists,particularly
those whose research has focused on the interface between
cognitive and ego development (e.g., Blanchard-Fields, 1986;
Hy & Loevinger, 1996; Labouvie-Vief, Hakim-Larson, &
Hobart, 1987). For example, in a study that examined coping
strategies across the life span, Labouvie-Vief et al. (1987)
found that ego level as measured by the SCT was a strong pre-
dictoroftheuseofcopingstrategiesfromchildhoodtooldage.
The advantages of Loevinger’s theory of ego development
are twofold. First, similar to Erikson’s psychosocial theory of
ego development, it considers as viable the possibility of de-
velopment throughout the life span. In addition, the stages
postulated by Loevinger are not restricted by chronological
age. As a result, individual differences in the pattern of pro-
gression through the stages are possible. Second, Loevinger
has constructed a measure of ego development that has made
it possible to test the model empirically. This is a clear advan-
tage over Erikson’s theory, where very little research has been
conducted because of the difﬁculty in quantifying the stages.
Unfortunately, the generalizability of Loevinger’s work
has a few limitations. One is the lack of longitudinal studies
to test this life-span model. Without longitudinal research de-
signs, individual differences in the patterns of sequencing
through the stages cannot be addressed, and statements that

Theoretical Perspectives on Personality
471
draw such conclusions cannot be made. A second limitation
of Loevinger’s work is the fact that the scoring of the ego
development instrument is somewhat subjective and difﬁcult
to standardize. 
In summary, the theories and research just presented that
represent stage models of personality development have
demonstrated support for the concept of lifelong develop-
ment. Indeed, the theorists and the models of development
that they have proposed that were discussed in this section
have served to advance the life-span view of personality and
to inspire other researchers in the ﬁeld. Despite the obvious
contributions that have been made by these theorists, limita-
tions have also been identiﬁed. For example, most of the data
collected to test the theories were gathered from samples that
were biased toward highly educated, middle-class White
males. As a result, the generalizability of the ﬁndings to other
populations is limited. A second limitation common to most
of the studies is the lack of longitudinal data. With the excep-
tion of the Rochester study (Whitbourne & Waterman, 1979;
Whitbourne et al., 1992) and the Grant Foundation study
(Vaillant, 1977; Vaillant & Milofsky, 1980), most of the work
that has been conducted to test the models has utilized cross-
sectional data. This is especially problematic for theories that
describe development or change across time. To address is-
sues of change conﬁdently, groups of individuals should be
followed over time; otherwise, the question becomes one of
differences between groups rather than change across time.
In addition, although the theories presented cover lifelong de-
velopment, the studies conducted to test the models did not
include older adults. To capture an accurate picture of per-
sonality development in older adulthood, individuals of ad-
vanced age should be followed as they enter and progress
through the ﬁnal stages presented in the developmental
models. The ﬁnal limitation of the stage models of personal-
ity development that will be noted is their focus on internal
forces, such as the ego, as the primary motivator of develop-
mental change. Although environmental forces are noted for
their interaction effect with internal forces, it is an inner dri-
ving force that is central to these theories.
In response to this ﬁnal point, the following section pre-
sents a model that places greater emphasis on the impact of
the environmental context on personality development. Con-
textual models emphasize the importance of the interaction
between social and historical conditions and personality
characteristics. According to this perspective, a behavior is
not carried out in isolation, but is inﬂuenced by the continu-
ally ﬂuctuating immediate context that was borne out of the
past and proliferates into the future. In addition, some con-
textualists pay particular attention to the impact of cultural
age norms and social transitions on development (e.g., Caspi,
1987; Helson & Moane, 1987; Neugarten, 1977). 
Contextual Models
The contextual model of personality development is compat-
ible with a life-span developmental perspective. For instance,
contextual models view developmental trajectories over an
extended period of time; they incorporate multidisciplinary
perspectives; and they consider cultural and historical con-
texts in their models—all tenets of the life-span perspective
(Baltes, 1983; Baltes et al., 1998). Personality, as deﬁned by
the framework of the contextual model, is the behavioral ex-
pression of the dynamic interaction between internal attrib-
utes and sociocultural and historical conditions, with a strong
inﬂuence generated from the timing of transitions relative to
socially prescribed age-graded roles, historical period, and
nonnormative inﬂuences (Baltes, 1983). For researchers who
support the contextual model of development, the timing of
entry into age-graded roles is important because the meaning
of these social transitions can be internalized quite differently
depending on the individual’s personal life history, socioeco-
nomic resources, and the prevailing historical context. The
dynamic interaction among these parameters is theorized to
hold lasting developmental implications for the individual
and to bring about the effects of stability or change through-
out the life course (Elder & Hareven, 1994).
Sociocultural Context
Some of the proponents of the contextual perspective focus
their investigations on the impact of sociocultural contexts on
personality development (e.g., Caspi, Elder, & Bem, 1987;
Kohn & Schooler, 1978; Roberts, 1997; Roberts & Friend,
1998). Caspi and colleagues explored the social context in
which childhood personality characteristics predict later life
outcomes(e.g.,Caspi,1987;Caspietal.,1987;Caspi,Elder,&
Bem, 1988). An underlying assumption that guides this
research is the belief that personality is stable across the life
span.Withage,thestabilityofpersonalitycharacteristicsleads
to an increasingly congruent, consistent way of responding to
experiences across time and across situation (Caspi, 1987).
Caspi’s work suggests a deterministic view of development,
yet he maintains a belief in the dynamic interaction between
personality traits and environmental contexts. For Caspi, it is
this interaction that reinforces the consistency of personality
over time.
To explain and test the sustainability of the dynamic inter-
action between the environment and personality, Caspi et al.
(1987) deﬁned two interactional styles: cumulative continu-
ity and interactional continuity. Cumulative continuity is the
result of the process through which the individual’s personal-
ity attributes systematically select him or her into speciﬁc en-
vironments that in turn reinforce and sustain those attributes.

472
Personality Development in Adulthood and Old Age
For example, “maladaptive behaviors increasingly channel
the individual into environments that perpetuate these behav-
iors; they are sustained by the progressive accumulation of
their own consequences” (Caspi et al., 1987, p. 308). Interac-
tional continuity refers to the reciprocal, dynamic interaction
between individuals and their environment: “The person acts,
the environment reacts, and the person reacts back” (Caspi
et al., 1987, p. 308).
Using longitudinal data from the Berkeley Guidance
Study, Caspi et al. (1987) determined the impact of early
personality dispositions (i.e., explosive, undercontrolled be-
havior) on the shape of the life course by examining the con-
sistency of interactional styles over a 30-year span; 186 men
and women were interviewed at ages 10, 30, and 40. Initial
data on childhood temper tantrums were obtained from clini-
cal interviews with the participants and their mothers. Results
from these analyses support the hypotheses proposed by
Caspi and colleagues that patterns of maladaptive behavior
persist over time and have lasting effects on the individual’s
life trajectory. Findings support the idea that individuals seek
out and set up reciprocal person-environment interactions,
thus demonstrating a coherent way of approaching and re-
sponding to their social world. Children who were reported to
display uncontrolled temper tantrums in childhood experi-
enced difﬁculty across several life tasks such as jobs, mar-
riage, and parenting (Caspi et al., 1987). 
For instance, ill-tempered males from middle-class back-
grounds demonstrated a progressive deterioration of socioe-
conomic status that rendered them indistinguishable from
their working-class peers by midlife. In addition, they were
less likely to receive a formal education and to hold a high-
status occupation than were their even-tempered middle-class
peers. Ill-tempered women from middle-class backgrounds
tended to married men who, into midlife, held and maintained
low-status jobs. They were also over twice as likely to be di-
vorced by midlife and more likely to be perceived by their hus-
bands and children as less adequate and more ill-tempered
than were their even-tempered peers.
In a related study, Caspi et al. (1988) examined the impact
of childhood shyness on the transition to adulthood and ex-
plored the cumulative effects of this transitional phase on
later life outcomes. Results indicate that men who had
demonstrated shyness as children experienced delayed age-
graded transitions in adulthood such as marriage, parenthood,
and establishing a stable career. As a result of these off-time
transitions for shy men, occupational status and stability as
well as marital stability were compromised in adulthood. In
contrast, women with a history of childhood shyness were
more likely than other women to follow a conventional pat-
tern of marriage, childbearing, and homemaking. It is quite
interesting to note that the developmental trajectories for in-
dividuals with reported childhood shyness were moderated
by gender.
In summary, the ﬁndings reported by Caspi et al. (1987,
1988) lend support to the concepts of cumulative and interac-
tional continuity; individuals with speciﬁc personality styles
seek out a context that will support and reinforce personality
homeostasis. In turn, the individual reacts to the environment
in such a way that further perpetuates sustaining personality
dispositions. Children who exhibited explosive, uncontrolled
behavior sought and received reciprocal reinforcement from
the environment for the maintenance of their maladaptive
personality dispositions into adulthood. Similarly, men with a
childhood history of shyness delayed engagement in age-
graded events such as marriage, parenthood, and career. In-
stead, they remained in an environment that continued to
support their shy dispositions and delayed the transition into
an environment in which they would be required to assert
themselves and initiate social contacts. In contrast, shy
women sought the refuge of conventional marriage patterns,
thereby selecting a context that no doubt reinforced their ret-
icent, reserved personality style.
This work also demonstrates that the lives of individuals
with similar personality dispositions can follow different de-
velopmental trajectories given variance in social contexts.
For example, middle-class individuals with an undercon-
trolled personality style showed a greater downward spiral in
socioeconomic status than did their working-class peers. In
addition, different life trajectories were revealed for men and
women of similar personality dispositions. A ﬁnal implica-
tion of this work is that late entry into age-graded transitions
may lead to negative outcomes. As Neugarten (1977) and
Helson, Mitchell, and Moane (1984) proposed, being off time
on a given social clock can impede psychological adjustment
including well-being. Overall, the work of Caspi et al. (1987,
1988) lends support to the idea that interactional styles, for-
mulated early in life, are sustained throughout adulthood and
serve as the underlying process through which personality
characteristics remain consistent across the life span.
Additional support for the interactional continuity model
comes from an investigation conducted by Roberts and
Friend (1998) in which data from the Mills Longitudinal
Study were prospectively examined for the impact of person-
ality and life context patterns on career momentum (i.e., the
perception of mobility in one’s career). The ongoing Mills
study was begun in 1958 with a group of predominately
White, middle-class female seniors from Mills College in
Oakland California. Initial assessment was conducted when
the women were approximately age 21 with follow-up as-
sessments at ages 43 and 52. Data on career momentum were

Theoretical Perspectives on Personality
473
collected when the women were approximately age 52.
Results revealed that the classiﬁcation of women as exhibit-
ing high, maintaining, or low career momentum could be
determined by examining personality dispositions from
30 years earlier. Speciﬁcally, women in the high career-mo-
mentum group were more conﬁdent and independent at age
21 than were women in the maintaining or low-momentum
groups. Women who were classiﬁed as maintaining career
momentum scored high on measures of effective functioning
and well-being at initial assessment; however, their trajecto-
ries showed a precipitous drop from age 21 to 43. Finally,
women in the low-momentum group scored low on measures
of self-acceptance, independence, and well-being at each as-
sessment point across adulthood (i.e., ages 21, 43, and 52).
The ﬁndings from this study also demonstrated that various
life structures at age 43 were useful in predicting career mo-
mentum at age 52. For example, the high career-momentum
women were engaged in higher status occupations at age
43 than were women in the other groups. Taken together,
these ﬁndings suggest that status in later life on career mo-
mentum cannot be reduced to either individual differences in
personality traits or variations in life contexts. Rather, they
provide support for the concept of interactional continuity
by highlighting the importance of the integration of personal-
ity characteristics and contextual factors in determining con-
sistency in later life outcomes (Roberts & Friend, 1998).
Other research has also noted the importance of the
dynamic interaction between personality dispositions and en-
vironmental factors. For example, to assess the relationship
between occupational conditions and psychological function-
ing, Kohn and Schooler (1978) reinterviewed 785 men who
were under the age of 65 and who had participated in a 1964
nationally representative study of civil service employees.
Results from structural equation analyses demonstrated a rec-
iprocal relationship between occupational conditions and
personality characteristics. Furthermore, these analyses indi-
cated high levels of stability on the measures of intellectual
ﬂexibility and substantive complexity over a 10-year period.
Kohn and Schooler suggested that the consistency in intellec-
tual ﬂexibility across time reﬂects the stability of the social
context in which people live. 
Finally, Roberts (1997) found evidence for the importance
of the interaction between contextual circumstances and per-
sonality dispositions in promoting change, rather than stabil-
ity. Utilizing the Mills Longitudinal Study, data on women at
ages 21, 27, and 43 were analyzed to explore the plaster ver-
sus the plasticity hypotheses, that is, whether personality is
ﬁxed or malleable (Roberts, 1997). Personality change pat-
terns for each individual were examined via autoregressive
latent variable models. This type of analysis allowed for the
examination of interindividual differences in intra-individual
change. Results revealed high rank-order consistency across
adulthood on the latent personality dimensions of agency and
norm adherence. However, individual differences in person-
ality development across time were demonstrated with work
experiences explaining a signiﬁcant amount of variance be-
tween individuals on the personality dimensions. Increased
participation and success in the work place were predictors of
individual differences on the construct of agency (e.g., self-
assertion, self-conﬁdence, and independence), and increased
job success was a predictor of individual differences on norm
adherence. Overall, this study generated support for the plas-
ticity of personality. Under certain contextual circumstances,
change in personality is not only possible but also likely, at
least into middle adulthood.
Social Clock
Neugarten (1977) and Helson (1984) were among the ﬁrst to
formulate contextual theories of development, basing their
models on the concept of the timing of events. Development is
marked by the pattern of entry into socially prescribed major
lifeeventsandtransitionalphases.Neugarten(1977)theorized
that development over the life span may occur on time or off
time (early or late) with regard to cultural norms. When
individuals confront events at culturally prescribed, age-
appropriate times, they are considered on time, and the in-
tegrityofpersonalitydevelopmentismaintainedbecausethere
is congruence between the societal expectation and the indi-
vidual’s experience. On the other hand, when individuals face
these events off time, they are perceived as more stressful to
the individual because they are not consistent with societal
expectations (Helson et al., 1984). Helson (1984) coined the
term social clock to represent the phenomenon of the timing of
events and argued that the degree to which the individual stays
in tune with it throughout the life span determines personality
consistency or change (Helson et al., 1984).
Helson et al. (1984) utilized data from the Mills Longitu-
dinal Study to explore the usefulness of the social clock
paradigm. Women were categorized into social clock groups
according to the path they took to fulﬁll their family and
work roles. The categories included (a) the Feminine Social
Clock (FSC), starting a family by the early to middle 20s; (b)
the Masculine Occupational Clock (MOC), choosing a career
with status potential by age 28; and (c) Neither Social Clock
(NSC), adhering to neither social clock by age 28. Findings
revealed that personality characteristics measured in young
adulthood were effective in distinguishing between social
clock patterns. Women who were assessed during their
early 20s with high levels of achievement, socialization,

474
Personality Development in Adulthood and Old Age
intellectual efﬁciency, and well-being were more likely than
their lower scoring peers to adhere to the FSC. In contrast,
women who in their early 20s demonstrated greater impul-
sivity, less awareness and internalization of conventional val-
ues, and less motivation to achieve socially structured goals
were more likely than their peers to depart from the FSC pat-
tern. Additional ﬁndings from this study support the impor-
tance of the timing of events. For example, women who by
age 28 had either started families or obtained potentially
high-status careers demonstrated normative, positive patterns
of personality development. These on-time women scored
high on scales of well-being and effective functioning in
midlife. The off-time women, on the other hand, who had
failed to adhere to a social clock (i.e., NSC) by their early 40s
reported feeling depressed, alienated, and embittered (Helson
et al., 1984). 
Helson and Moane (1987) utilized the Mills Longitudinal
Study to examine change in personality characteristics with
referencetotheoriesofadultdevelopment.Forexample,based
on Gutmann’s theory (1975), it was hypothesized that femi-
ninity would decrease between the ages of 27 and 43. Consid-
erable rank-order stability in personality dispositions was
revealed; however, a normative pattern of personality change
basedondevelopmentaltheorywasalsodemonstrated.Aspre-
dicted, femininity increased in the younger adulthood years
but decreased between the ages of 27 and 43.There was also an
increase in coping skills, ego development, independence, and
conﬁdence for this group of women. This study also revealed
thatwomenwhowereontimeintermsofbeginningafamilyor
launching a successful career changed on personality dimen-
sions in the normative direction. However, women who were
off time on these major life events failed to demonstrate
normative change. The authors noted that young adults
are confronted with a series of age-graded tasks that direct the
developmental trajectory toward normative change if they are
met at age-appropriate times.
In more recent work, Helson and colleagues (Mitchell &
Helson, 1990; Helson & Wink, 1992) reexamined the Mills
graduates and added an additional time of measure (i.e., age
of early 50s). Hierarchical regression analyses demonstrated
that a sense of well-being in early midlife signiﬁcantly pre-
dicted quality of life among women in their early 50s
(Mitchell & Helson, 1990). In a related study, Helson and
Wink (1992) examined personality change over time and re-
vealed evidence for inconsistency in personality dispositions
in the early 40s followed by a period of stability in the early
50s. Masculinity and femininity scores were among those
that resulted in the greatest magnitude of change between the
ages of 43 and 52. The women in this sample demonstrated
an increase in variables that are associated with masculine
traits such as decisiveness and action orientation and a de-
crease in those associated with feminine characteristics such
as vulnerability. This supports the gender-role crossover
hypothesis raised by Neugarten and Gutmann (1958), which
is discussed next.
In sum, the ﬁndings from the studies conducted by Helson
and colleagues (Helson et al., 1984; Helson & Moane, 1987;
Helson & Wink, 1992; Mitchell & Helson, 1990) illustrate
that the social clock serves as a barometer by which individ-
uals evaluate their success in the world. When on time, the in-
dividual receives social approval and a positive feeling that
comes from being in sync with society. When off time, the
individual may experience a lack of social acceptance that re-
sults in an unsettled feeling of detachment from society
(Helson et al., 1984). The second point based on the ﬁndings
from these studies is that they conﬁrm the notion that person-
ality dispositions are susceptible to change throughout adult-
hood. Although this is in contrast to the ﬁndings of Caspi
et al. (1987), both lines of research emphasize the integral
role that context plays in personality development across
adulthood.
Gender-Role Crossover Hypothesis
The early work of Neugarten and Gutmann (1958) also sup-
ports the existence of change in personality characteristics
across adulthood. Utilizing a population of adults between
the ages of 40 and 70 from the Kansas City Study of Adult
Lives, they explored the use of projective techniques in the
study of age-sex roles. Although using a cross-sectional de-
sign, the results of this study suggest that, with age, there is a
consistent shift in gender-role qualities. Respondents in the
Kansas City study were presented with an ambiguous picture
of an older and younger adult male and an older and younger
adult female. They were then asked to create a story based on
the picture. With age, respondents increasingly described the
man as passive and no longer symbolizing masculine author-
ity and the woman as assertive and controlling (Neugarten &
Gutmann, 1958). These projective data, which demonstrate a
cross-over of gendered attributes with older women seen as
becoming more agentic and older men as more communal (J.
B. James, Lewkowicz, Libhaber, & Lachman, 1995), were
interpreted as additional support for the hypothesis that per-
sonality has a dynamic quality and is susceptible to over time
change.
Person-Environment Fit
Earlier contextual views of personality emerged from the de-
bate over activity (Cavan, Burgess, Havighurst, & Goldhamer,

Theoretical Perspectives on Personality
475
1949) versus disengagement (Cummings & Henry, 1961)
theories.Boththeactivityanddisengagementtheoriesarecon-
cerned with the way in which older adults adapt to decreasing
roles and societal detachment. The activity theory, on one
hand,proposesthatdetachmentisimposedbysocietyandneg-
atively affects the well-being of the older adult unless the older
adult is able to “resist the shrinkage of his social world”
(Havighurst, Neugarten, & Tobin, 1996, p. 281). Older adults
who remain active by ﬁnding new roles are expected to fair
well. The disengagement theory, on the other hand, suggests
that detachment from society is mutual with the older adult
withdrawing psychologically from social activities and rela-
tionships at the same time that society withdraws support and
interest from the older adult. The mutuality of withdrawal
results in successful aging according to the disengagement
theory.
Research ﬁndings from the Kansas City study did not sup-
port either view: that the key to well-being is to remain active
or to succumb to society’s withdrawal. Rather, personality
was found to play an integral role in promoting successful
adaptation in later life (Havighurst et al., 1968). Achieving a
match in later life with one’s life-long personal style was as-
sociated with the greatest adjustment. This ﬁnding led to the
formulation of the continuity theory (Atchley, 1989), in
which it was argued that either forced disengagement or
forced activity leads to a loss of well-being. According to the
continuity theory, older adults who are not allowed to main-
tain their desired level of involvement in society will suffer a
loss of well-being. In some ways, this supports more recent
ﬁndings about personality stability and the need to maximize
person-environment ﬁt (J. V. Lerner, Baker, & Lerner, 1985).
For some, remaining active was associated with well-being,
and for others becoming less involved and withdrawing was
adaptive.
In sum, the contextual model provides a rich, complex for-
mat from which to view personality development. Contextual
models take a life-span approach by viewing development
over time in an interdisciplinary, dynamic, interactive frame-
work. From this perspective, it is believed that personality is
formed by a continuous reciprocity between the personal
style that the individual brings to a situation and the social
structure of the prevailing historical time period. The innova-
tive theoretical models of Caspi, Helson, and Neugarten have
advanced the ﬁeld of personality psychology by adopting a
life-span view and by bringing to the forefront the impor-
tance of the context in which personality evolves. 
Ironically, while the advantage of the contextual frame-
work is its multilevel, multidimensional model, it is also a
disadvantage. The sophisticated methodological and statisti-
cal techniques needed to analyze change over time and to
model the complex relationships among antecedents and con-
sequences have only recently become available. Future re-
search that tests contextual models will beneﬁt tremendously
from these advances.
Subjective Changes in Personality
As we have seen thus far, there are many methods and mea-
sures available to examine personality development across
the life span. Another approach is the examination of phe-
nomenological changes—self-perceived changes across
time. Studies of subjective change show that individuals typ-
ically report more change than they show with objective in-
dexes. In a study by Woodruff and Birren (1972), personality
test scores assessed by the California Test of Personality
(Kimber, 1947; Woodruff & Birren, 1971) were administered
to a group of college graduates in 1944 when they were
21 years old and again in 1969 when they were approxi-
mately 46 years old. Participants were asked to complete the
personality test two times during the 1969 testing occasion.
Instructions given for the ﬁrst test required that the respon-
dents answer the questions based on their current personality
status. Instructions for the second test required that they an-
swer each question the way they thought they had answered
in 1944 when they were 21 years old. Findings from this
study revealed a high level of stability on the subjective per-
sonality ratings across the 25-year period. However, differ-
ences were found when the retrospective data were compared
with the concurrent data. Results demonstrated that people
remembered themselves as less well adjusted 25 years previ-
ously than their actual scores indicated. They believed that
they had improved across adulthood even though there was
no evidence for such a positive change. This ﬁnding suggests
that adults tend to expect change, especially improvement in
personality across adulthood. 
Other researchers (Fleeson & Baltes, 1998; Fleeson &
Heckhausen, 1997; Lachman, Walen, & Staudinger, 2000;
Ryff, 1995) have also found that changes in personality are
expected by a large percentage of adults. Participants were
asked to rate their personalities in the past, the present, and in
the future so that retrospective and prospective comparisons
could be made relative to concurrent reports. In a recent study
using representative samples from the United States and
Germany, Fleeson and Baltes (1998) compared the predictive
value of perceived changes relative to concurrent measures.A
personality questionnaire (NEO; Costa & McCrae, 1984) was
administered to 398 adults between the ages of 26 and 64. In
addition, participants were asked to describe their own current
personality, their personality when they were 20 to 25 years
old, and their projected personality when they will be 65 to

476
Personality Development in Adulthood and Old Age
70 years old. Fleeson and Baltes found that many participants
anticipated change across adulthood. In addition, although
they believed that late adulthood would contain more losses
than gains, they expected gains at each life stage including late
adulthood. It was also revealed that perceived changes in per-
sonality traits accounted for a signiﬁcant amount of variance
beyond the effects of concurrent ratings of personality when
predicting health and well-being. This ﬁnding suggests that
self-ratings of personality dimensions can add meaning when
placed within the context of the life course (Fleeson & Baltes,
1998; Fleeson & Heckhausen, 1997).
Lachman et al. (2000) recently conducted a study of indi-
vidual differences in past, present, and future subjective eval-
uations of personality characteristics in national samples
from the United States and Germany. Although perceived sta-
bility of personality was the most prevalent pattern in both
countries, 32% of the U.S. and 63% of the German sample
showed evidence of perceived change, either incremental or
decremental. Based on discriminant function analyses, re-
sults revealed that in both samples internal control beliefs
were the most important variable in distinguishing between
groups of individuals based on perceived change patterns.
Participants with high-perceived internal control had more
optimistic views of expecting stability or improvements over
time, whereas those with a low sense of control remembered
the past as better than the present and expected things to get
worse in the future.
In general, the ﬁndings of subjective personality studies il-
lustrate that adults hold a relatively optimistic view of their
developmental trajectory. Except under certain circum-
stances, such as a low sense of internal control or depression,
adults expect to have more positive personality attributes and
greater life satisfaction in the future than in the past. The in-
clusion of subjective reports in the picture of personality adds
another dimension to the developmental trajectory and can be
useful in predicting patterns of health and well-being in later
life.
Personality as a Predictor of Later Life Outcomes
Much of the research on personality development across the
life span either tracks the trajectory of personality traits
across time in order to assess rank-order stability or explores
mean-level change to assess differences between groups. In
addition to the empirical questions that can be addressed by
these approaches, other interesting developmental issues
can be addressed by studying the role that individual differ-
ences in personality traits play on later life outcomes (Costa
& McCrae, 1988; Lachman, 1989). As discussed earlier,
patterns of personality development in adulthood and old age
such as health and mortality, intelligence and wisdom, and
adulthood roles (e.g., marital stability/satisfaction, family,
work) can be predicted by individual differences in personal-
ity attributes assessed earlier in life (e.g., Arbuckle, Gold,
Andres, Schwartzman, & Chaikelson, 1992; Baltes, Smith, &
Staudinger, 1992; Schwartz et al., 1995). A key issue for per-
sonality research is how the course of aging varies as a func-
tion of personality attributes.
Health
There is growing evidence that personality characteristics
can inﬂuence health through a variety of psychosocial mech-
anisms (Smith & Gallo, 2001; Tucker & Friedman, 1996).
For example, certain personality characteristics inﬂuence un-
stable social relationships and initiate the onset of unhealthy
behaviors (e.g., smoking and excessive drinking), both po-
tential mechanisms for the link between personality charac-
teristics and later life morbidity and mortality. A study based
on the Terman Life Cycle Study of Children with High
Ability used archival data to investigate the relationships
between childhood personality characteristics and longevity
and health outcomes across 70 years (Tucker & Friedman,
1996). Participants in this study had been assessed on a vari-
ety of physical health and psychological factors every 5 to
10 years since 1922. A clear link between childhood person-
ality dispositions and longevity was revealed. Speciﬁcally,
social dependability and lack of impulsivity were the most
signiﬁcant predictors of longevity. In addition, childhood
conscientiousness predicted engagement in protective health
behaviors that lead to the maintenance of good health in older
adulthood. Tucker and Friedman noted that given the multi-
tude of inﬂuences on longevity, the strong link to certain per-
sonality dispositions suggests that psychological health plays
a major role in physical health.
Cognitive Functioning
There is also evidence that early personality patterns are
associated with cognitive functioning including intelli-
gence and wisdom in later life. For example, data from the
Seattle Longitudinal Study, an ongoing study begun in 1956
(Schaie, 1996), were analyzed to determine whether a ﬂexi-
ble personality style was related to intellectual aging. By
computing cross-lagged correlations, Schaie revealed that a
ﬂexible personality style at midlife was related to the mainte-
nance of higher levels of intellectual performance in old age.
This ﬁnding implies that a rigid response style will result in
earlier declines in intellectual performance in old age. There-
fore, older adults need to maintain cognitive ﬂexibility in

The Self
477
order to respond to the inevitable changes that are associated
with advancing years (Schaie, 1996). 
Additional evidence for the relationship between person-
ality dispositions and intellectual outcomes in later life
comes from a study of 326 male World War II veterans
(Arbuckle et al., 1992) on whom intelligence scores had been
obtained when they were young adults. It was found that
being less neurotic and more intellectually active predicted
reduced intellectual decline and, indirectly, better memory
performance. Path models indicated that lower neuroticism
scores at an earlier age were associated with higher scores on
the M test (a general intelligence test used by the Canadian
army) and tests of free recall in later life.
Wisdom
Wisdom has been deﬁned as “expert knowledge in the funda-
mental pragmatics of life permitting exceptional insight and
judgment involving complex and uncertain matters of the
human condition” (Baltes et al., 1992, p. 136). In a study that
explored the antecedents of wisdom, Staudinger, Lopez, and
Baltes (1997) found a relationship between certain personal-
ity dimensions and wisdom. In particular, individuals who re-
mained open to experience and interested in understanding
and responding to the needs of others (i.e., psychological-
mindedness) demonstrated high levels of wisdom-related
performance. Indicators of ﬂuid and crystallized intelligence
were also related to wisdom. However, after the shared vari-
ance between intelligence and personality was considered,
only measures of personality-intelligence interface (e.g., ju-
dicious, creativity) contributed signiﬁcant unique variance to
the wisdom-related performance measure.
Midlife Crisis
Another example of personality inﬂuencing adult outcomes
was found in the MIDUS Study (see Lachman & Bertrand,
2001). Those adults who were higher in neuroticism were
more likely to report having a midlife crisis. The evidence
suggests that it is personality style that predisposes adults to
experience crises and that these crises may not be restricted
to midlife but may occur at other transitional stages through-
out the life course as well.
Adulthood Roles
A ﬁnal domain that is relevant to the impact of personality
dispositions on later life outcomes is adulthood roles such as
marriage, family, and work. Kelly and Conley (1987) noted
that one of the causes of marital dissatisfaction stems from
intrapersonal causes of incompatibility. In other words, the
personality characteristics that each partner brings to the re-
lationship, in combination, may inhibit the well-being of the
marriage. To examine this hypothesis, Kelly and Conley
tested the effectiveness of personality dispositions as an-
tecedents of marital stability and marriage satisfaction. Their
longitudinal study consisted of a group of 300 couples as-
sessed from 1930 until 1980. It was found that personality
characteristics were signiﬁcant predictors of both marital sat-
isfaction and marital stability. In particular, neuroticism from
the husband or the wife demonstrated the strongest relation-
ship to the marital outcomes. Other studies that explore these
phenomena were described in detail in the section in which
contextual models were discussed. For example, Caspi et al.
(1987, 1988) found that children who displayed explosive
dispositions in childhood experienced difﬁculty across many
life tasks such as jobs, marriage, and parenting. Further, in
the domain of work and occupational status, Roberts (1997),
Roberts and Friend (1998), and Kohn and Schooler (1978)
demonstrated the relationship between early life personality
patterns and occupational statuses. 
The results of the investigations reported here provide ev-
idence that supports the link between early life personality
dispositions and later life outcomes across a broad spectrum
of domains such as physical health and longevity, cognitive
functioning, and the status of work and family. The implica-
tions point to the importance of establishing healthy psycho-
logical patterns of behavior early in life because they will
have lasting effects that may proliferate into multiple do-
mains of adult life.
THE SELF
The self is a multifaceted component at the core of personal-
ity (Markus, 1977). It is usually seen as a cognitive dimen-
sion that represents the way individuals think about and view
themselves. Proponents of the self believe that personality
development is an evolving process in which new informa-
tion from the environment is integrated into existing knowl-
edge structures. These knowledge structures are called
schemas and are the guides and regulators of behavior
(Crocker & Wolfe, 2001). Schemas are subjective interpreta-
tions of past reality that either adjust to new experience or
remain the same by ﬁltering out new information that is
interpreted as threatening to the self-concept (Markus, 1977).
Individuals are continually facing experiences that require
the adjustment of existing schemas or the rejection of
environmental information. As a result, the self-concept is
in a continual state of ﬂux between stability and change

478
Personality Development in Adulthood and Old Age
(Whitbourne, 1987). Over long periods of time, however,
various aspects of the self-concept remain stable. As a result,
they can be used as an anchor or resource for older adults
who face later life changes.
Identity
Identity Process Theory
Identity, as deﬁned by Whitbourne and Connolly (1999), is
“the individual’s self-appraisal of a variety of attributes along
the dimensions of physical and cognitive abilities, personal
traits and motives, and the multiplicity of social roles includ-
ing worker, family member, and community citizen” (p. 28).
It is ﬂexible and susceptible to change across the life span. 
Using data from a study of 94 adults ranging in age from
24 to 61, Whitbourne (1986b) developed a self-concept
model based on Piagetian theory. The identity process theory
(Whitbourne, 1987; Whitbourne & Connolly, 1999) moves
beyond Piaget’s view, however, in that it can be used to
explain the process of development across the life span. In
the identity process model, identity styles are formed when
the individual’s experiences are interpreted through the
processes of assimilation and accommodation. Assimilation
occurs by incorporating life events and new experiences into
the identity. Assimilation can lead individuals to distort their
views of themselves in order to preserve their self-concepts.
Although it preserves a positive view of the self, in older
adults an imbalance of assimilation has the potential for neg-
ative effects. Individuals with a strong assimilative style are
seen as rigid and inﬂexible and deny age-related changes
such as physical limitations. For example, they may ignore
the advice of a doctor who recommends limiting physical ac-
tivity. They may react to a difﬁcult situation either by placing
blame elsewhere or by avoiding situations in which their
physical abilities are challenged.
In contrast to assimilation, accommodation is the process
of changing the identity to conform to new experiences. An
imbalance of accommodation can also bring about a negative
outcome. These individuals have a weak, incoherent identity
and overreact to changes. For example, the ﬁrst sign of gray
hair may be the catalyst that causes the adult to take on the
identity of an old person. In addition, adults who rely heavily
on an accommodative style fail to set goals or to make com-
mitments. Although a balance or equilibrium between the
two opposing process styles is desirable, it is the imbalance
of one over the other that leads to the formation of different
identity styles (Whitbourne & Connolly, 1999). When in
balance, the processes produce a healthy approach to new
experiences. When out of balance, however, leaning more
heavily toward assimilation or accommodation, the approach
is likely to be neurotic or otherwise emotionally unstable. 
Whitbourne’s model of identity processing is useful for
understanding the complexity and dynamic qualities of per-
sonality in adulthood and aging. It allows one to grasp the no-
tion of an evolving identity and understand how change can
occur across the life span. 
Possible Selves
Another important aspect of self-concept relates to the
ideas that people have about who they could become, who
they would like to become, and who they are afraid of be-
coming. Markus and Nurius (1986) developed a theory that
describes the formation of identity across the life span by ad-
dressing these aspects of the self. Their concept of possible
selves incorporates hopes and dreams for the self as well as
fears and anxieties of undesirable selves. These are integrated
into the structure of the self and serve as motivators to
achieve their hoped-for selves or to avoid their dreaded
selves. When hoped-for selves are realized and feared selves
are avoided, positive psychological outcomes occur. How-
ever, when the individual perceives that he or she has become
the feared or dreaded self at the expense of the hoped for self,
the self-concept becomes threatened, and negative outcomes
result.
To describe the nature of possible selves across the life
span, Cross and Markus (1991) asked a group of respondents
between the ages of 18 and 86 to describe their hoped-for and
feared possible selves. The groups were compared on the
basis of age-related qualities. Across age groups, progres-
sively fewer possible selves (hoped for or feared) were gener-
ated. In other words, older adults (i.e., ages 60–86) had fewer
expectations of positive choices left in their lives, but they
also had fewer fears. However, this should not be taken to
imply that the older adults had lost hope. On the contrary, they
indicated that hoped-for selves were still important to them.
They were also more likely than their younger peers to focus
on developing and achieving in their current roles. These per-
sonal domains suggest that self-development and growth
remain important to the older adult. The fears most frequently
reported by older adults were in the physical and personal
domains, no doubt reﬂecting physical and social changes that
are associated with aging.
As demonstrated by the work of Cross and Markus (1991),
the concept of possible selves facilitates our understanding of
the older adult’s adaptation to changing roles and losses that
are commonly associated with aging. Furthermore, similar to

The Self
479
the contextual model, the possible selves framework suggests
a reciprocal model where an individual may change or adjust
his or her possible selves in response to external inﬂuences
and personal growth.
The Sense of Control
The sense of control can be understood as the degree to which
individuals believe that their behavior will inﬂuence out-
comes in their lives (Rodin, 1986). The perception that one’s
behavior will affect outcomes is likely to result in a different
response than if one perceives that outcomes are due to
chance or other people’s actions (Bandura, 1997). Control
beliefs have been found to have widespread effects in many
different domains of life including work, family, and health.
Furthermore, beliefs about control may vary across these dif-
ferent domains (Clarke-Plaskie & Lachman, 1999; Lachman
& Weaver, 1998). Research ﬁndings provide evidence that
control beliefs change in adulthood. For example, based on
ﬁndings from the MIDUS study, Lachman and Weaver (1998)
found that adults increased their sense of control over their
work, ﬁnances, and marriage. However, in the domains of sex
life and children, there was evidence for reduced control. In
addition, other studies have found age-related declines in per-
ceived control for health and memory (Lachman, 1991).
Control Beliefs and Health
An indirect link between control beliefs and physical
health, including recovery from illness and disability in
adulthood and old age, has been found (Bandura, 1997;
Lachman & Prenda, in press). Individuals who believe that
they are responsible for outcomes in their lives are more
likely to engage in effortful and persistent behavior that is
goal oriented. They believe that their health is within their
own control and are conﬁdent in their ability to change. As a
result, they will be more likely to act in harmony with the de-
sired outcome by engaging in health-promoting behaviors
such as exercise, a healthy diet, and regular physical exami-
nations (Bandura, 1997; Lachman & Prenda, in press). Main-
taining a sense of control in adulthood and old age may serve
as an important psychosocial resource by fostering preven-
tive and remedial health behaviors (Lachman & Bertrand,
2001). Indeed, there is compelling evidence that factors
under personal control (e.g., alcohol use, smoking, mental
stability, exercise, body mass index, coping mechanisms, and
education) have a strong impact on psychological, physical,
and social indicators of successful aging (Vaillant &
Mukamal, 2001).
Self-Efﬁcacy
The study of control beliefs has focused on many related
constructs including self-efﬁcacy, locus of control, and pri-
mary and secondary control beliefs (e.g., Bandura, 1997;
Heckhausen & Shulz, 1995). Bandura (1997) argued that as
adults age, they will increasingly ﬁnd themselves in situations
inwhichtheywillbeneﬁtbyastrongsenseofself-efﬁcacy.For
instance,olderadultswillbefacedwiththetaskofestablishing
new relationships to replace those that have been lost through
retirement, relocation, or death. A low sense of social efﬁcacy
in these situations will increase the older adult’s vulnerability
to stress and depression by inhibiting the formation of neces-
sary social supports (Bandura, 1997). In another situation—
the routinized, controlled environment in nursing homes and
other residential institutions for older adults—there is an un-
dermining of the individual’s sense of efﬁcacy. Numerous
studies have shown that nursing home residents who have the
opportunity to exert control over their environment have better
physical and psychological outcomes including a longer life
than those residents who do not (see Bandura, 1997).
Primary and Secondary Control
Other forms of control during adulthood and old age such as
primary and secondary control beliefs have also been investi-
gated. Heckhausen and Schulz’s (1995) model of primary and
secondary control is based on the hypothesis that the individual
has a strong desire to control his or her interactions with the en-
vironment. This control is accomplished by maintaining a bal-
ance between the two strategies of control. Primary control
strategies involve working toward reaching a goal by changing
the situation or the environment. Secondary control strategies
focus on changing the self to accommodate the situation or en-
vironmental constraints. According to Heckhausen and Schulz
(1995), primary and secondary control strategies work in con-
cert to cope with the demands and challenges encountered
across the life span. Evidence is provided for the notion that,
with aging, there is a shift from the use of primary to secondary
control strategies when faced with uncontrollable situations or
difﬁcult challenges (Heckhausen & Schulz, 1995). Additional
support for age-related shifts in control strategy use comes from
a study in which age-related changes in physical, cognitive, and
social processes were shown to inﬂuence the developmental
trajectory and resulted in the older adult’s adoption of strategies
to compensate for developmental losses (Heckhausen, 1997).
Finally, Wrosch, Heckhausen, and Lachman (2000) found that
the use of secondary control strategies was more adaptive for
older adults, whereas the use of primary control strategies was

480
Personality Development in Adulthood and Old Age
more adaptive for younger and middle-age adults when faced
with health or ﬁnancial difﬁculties.
Well-Being
A common myth regarding older adults is to view them as un-
happy and depressed. According to Mroczek and Kolarz
(1998), this misconception is the result of a belief in the so-
cial indicator model, in which social and demographic factors
such as gender, income, marital status, and age serve as
markers for well-being. Because older adults often experi-
ence loss in the physical and social realms, an expectation of
depression and low satisfaction could erroneously be made.
However, evidence is building to support the argument that
regardless of the marked losses as gauged by the social indi-
cator model, older adults are not unhappy or depressed. For
example, based on the MIDUS sample, Mroczek and Kolarz
(1998) found that the majority of older adults rated them-
selves as “very” or “pretty” happy. In general, they found that
positive emotions increased and negative emotions decreased
as adults reached midlife and beyond.
Ryff (1989) deﬁned well-being along six dimensions: pos-
itive relations with others, environmental mastery, self-
acceptance, having a purpose in life, personal growth, and
autonomy. Ryff asked 321 adults to rate themselves along
these dimensions. Results demonstrated that adults are more
likely to maintain or increase well-being in terms of self-
acceptance, positive relations with others, autonomy, and
environmental mastery as they reach midlife and beyond.
Purpose in life and personal growth was more likely to show
declines in later adulthood.
Cross-national data support the ﬁndings reported here
(Diener & Diener, 1996); world-wide, most adults report
being happy. Across the 43 nations that were analyzed, 86%
of all studies reported mean happiness and well-being ratings
that were above neutral. Among older adults the percentage
of participants with positive subjective well-being was be-
tween 64% and 97%. These ﬁndings suggest that adulthood
and old age seem to be periods in which there is a positive
sense of well-being. Because well-being can be utilized as an
indicator of successful aging, the implication of these ﬁnd-
ings for older adults is that successful aging is attainable
(Rowe & Kahn, 1998).
Emotions and Coping
Emotions have been deﬁned as “the primary forces in orga-
nizing human thought and action . . . [namely,] the emotional
component of consciousness and experience that gives rich-
ness and meaning to individual life and relationships”
(Dougherty, Abe, & Izard, 1996, p. 17). Many argue that
emotions maintain their salience and expressiveness across
the life span (Dougherty et al., 1996).
Socioemotional Selectivity Theory
Carstensen (1995) suggested that, with age, emotions become
more important. For example, in a study in which participants
were presented with a story narrativeolder people, compared
with younger people, had a better recollection of emotional
text than they had for neutral text (Carstensen & Turk-
Charles, 1994). Carstensen noted that emotions are especially
important in the social interactions of older adults, where they
serve as the motivating force in the choice and maintenance of
relationships. Accordingly, she conceptualized the socioemo-
tional selectivity theory (Carstensen, 1993), an organizing
conceptual framework that describes the mechanisms in-
volved in the change in social relationships across the life
span. The theory posits that there is a fundamental change in
quality and quantity of the motives for maintaining social re-
lationships with age. Although similar goals function
throughout the life course, there is a change in the importance
of the goals, depending on the age of the individual. For ado-
lescents and younger adults, information seeking is the most
salient factor in their selection of social relationships. They
select new partners frequently because they are seeking to
gain information about their social world and their place in it
relative to others. In contrast, for infants and older adults emo-
tion regulation is the most important factor in selecting rela-
tionships. For example, older individuals are highly selective
in their social relationships and generally choose partners
with whom they have an established relationship. According
to Carstensen (1995) emotion regulation is most salient for
older adults for two primary reasons. First, with years of ac-
quired experience, there are fewer individuals who can pro-
vide novel information to the older adult; second, as older
adults become more aware of their limited time, they tend to
base their relationships on the potential for emotional re-
wards. In this way, older adults cope with the realization that
their time is limited by placing more emotional salience on the
maintenance of meaningful, long-term relationships and less
on relationships that serve to provide novel information.
Coping
Lazarus (1996) noted that an understanding of coping
processes is necessary to understand the concept of emotions.
He argues that coping is a fundamental aspect of emotion be-
cause it incorporates the components of thinking, acting, and
action impulses. Lazarus and Folkman (1984, p. 141) deﬁned
coping as “constantly changing cognitive and behavioral ef-
forts to manage speciﬁc external and/or internal demands that

References
481
are appraised as taxing or exceeding the resources of the per-
son.” They conceptualized two approaches to coping with
stress: emotion-focused and problem-focused strategies. In
emotion-focused coping individuals attempt to lower their
levels of stress by changing the way they view the stressor. In
problem-focused coping individuals attempt to lower their
levels of stress by altering or confronting the situation head-
on. In this type of coping strategy, the individual uses logic
and planful solutions. 
Several studies have been conducted that examine change
in emotion- and problem-focused coping strategies across
time. Of particular interest are two studies that revealed dis-
crepant ﬁndings. The ﬁrst is a study by Folkman, Lazarus,
Pimley, and Novacek (1987) in which older adults were
found to use less problem-focused coping and more emotion-
focused (i.e., escape avoidance) styles than younger adults.
However, a subsequent study by Aldwin (1991) could not
replicate this ﬁnding. In fact, older adults in her study re-
ported as many problem-focused strategies as younger adults
and fewer emotion-focused strategies. Aldwin (1994) argued
that adults learn to distinguish between problems that can be
controlled by problem-focused strategies and those that can-
not, and they may actually engage in less coping because they
are aware of the best strategies that work in a given situation.
Tenacious Goal Pursuit Versus Flexible Adjustment
Related to coping strategies and similar to Heckhausen and
Schulz’s (1995) primary/secondary control model and Whit-
bourne’s identity process theory (1987) are the concepts of
tenacious goal pursuit and ﬂexible adjustment (Brandtstädter
& Renner, 1990). This model can account for how older
adults cope with obstacles or difﬁcult situations in a way that
maintains their sense of well-being and prevents depression.
Because adults in old age are increasingly encumbered by
physical limitations and disabilities, it becomes more difﬁcult
for them to attain their desired goals. Adjustment of goals and
expectancies (i.e., ﬂexible goal pursuit) becomes adaptive in
order for them to maintain a sense of well-being and avoid
depression. Similar to Schaie’s (1996) work that demon-
strates that a ﬂexible personality style helps to preserve cog-
nitive decline, ﬂexible goal pursuits help to maintain a sense
of well-being. In contrast, tenacious goal pursuits in the face
of unattainable goals may lead to depression and despair.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
In this chapter we have presented an overview of the ﬁeld of
personality development in adulthood and aging. We summa-
rized theoretical ideas, conceptual models, and empirical
research covering over ﬁve decades of work. The voluminous
body of literature has enriched the ﬁeld of personality devel-
opment but has also made it difﬁcult to synthesize in one
chapter. An attempt was made, therefore, to present key theo-
retical and empirical works relevant to personality develop-
ment in adulthood and old age. As we have seen, researchers
continue to conduct research on issues of change and stabil-
ity in personality dispositions across the life span. Recently,
however, the focus has shifted to include the underlying
mechanisms involved in the process of personality develop-
ment. The life-span perspective and the contextual models of
development have supported investigations using more
complex, multidimensional models. The future of research
on personality in adulthood and old age must cut across dis-
ciplines to include sociocultural contexts, prevailing histori-
cal inﬂuences, physical and psychological health, genetics,
and other physiological factors. 
Furthermore, the trajectory of development is multidirec-
tional and operates as a dynamic process reciprocally inter-
acting between internal and external forces. For example, as
a predictor of later life outcomes, personality transcends a
particular perspective or a speciﬁc domain of later life. Given
the demographic swing toward a larger percentage of older
adults, a major concern for researchers, practitioners, and
laypersons is the delay and prevention of age-related disease
and disability. Aspects of the self such as adaptive emotional
regulation, coping strategies, and control beliefs may provide
an important link between early personality dispositions and
later life outcomes. 
Research is beginning to focus on understanding the me-
diators of personality and adaptive outcomes. For example,
there is an emerging body of work examining the mecha-
nisms linking aspects of personality and the self with adap-
tive functioning and health in adulthood and old age (Smith
& Gallo, 2001). Speciﬁc personality characteristics have
been linked with the onset and progression of diseases (e.g.,
Tucker & Friedman, 1996). Identifying behavioral and phys-
iological factors associated with personality, such as exer-
cise, stress hormones, and immune functioning, can provide
useful information for designing interventions to promote
successful aging. Such interventions are likely to be most ef-
fective if they are tailored to take individual differences in
personality into account.
REFERENCES
Arbuckle, T. Y., Gold, D. P., Andres, D., Schwartzman, A., &
Chaikelson, J. (1992). The role of psychosocial context, age, and
intelligence in memory performance of older men. Psychology
and Aging, 7, 25–36.

482
Personality Development in Adulthood and Old Age
Aldwin, C. (1991). Does age affect the stress and coping process?
Implications of age differences in perceived control. Journal of
Gerontology, 46, 174–180.
Aldwin, C. (1994). Stress, coping, and development. New York:
Guilford Press.
Atchley, R. C. (1989). A continuity theory of normal aging. Geron-
tologist, 29, 183–190.
Baltes, P. B. (1983). Life-span developmental psychology: Observa-
tions on history and theory revisited. In R. M. Lerner (Ed.),
Developmental psychology: Historical and philosophical
perspectives (pp. 79–111). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Baltes, P. B. (1987). Theoretical propositions of life-span develop-
mental psychology: On the dynamics between growth and de-
cline. Developmental Psychology, 23, 611–626.
Baltes, P. B., Lindenberger, U., & Staudinger, U. M. (1998). Life-
span theory in developmental psychology. In R. M. Lerner (Ed.),
Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 1. Theoretical models of
human development (5th ed., pp. 1029–1143). New York: Wiley.
Baltes, P. B., Smith J., Staudinger, U. M. (1992). Wisdom and suc-
cessful aging. In Sonderegger, T. B. (Ed.), Nebraska Symposium
on Motivation 1991: Vol. 39. Psychology and aging, (pp. 123–
167). Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
Bandura, A. (1997). Self-efﬁcacy: The exercise of control. New
York: W. H. Freeman.
Blanchard-Fields, F. (1986). Reasoning on social dilemmas varying
in emotional saliency: An adult developmental study. Psychol-
ogy and Aging, 1, 325–333.
Block, J. (with Hann, N.). (1971). Lives through time. Berkeley, CA:
Bancroft Books.
Bouchard, T. J. (1997). The genetics of personality. In K. Blum &
E. P. Noble (Eds.), Handbook of psychiatric genetics (pp. 273–
296). Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
Bowlby, J. (1982). Attachment and loss (Vol. 1). New York: Basic
Books.
Brandtstädter, J., & Renner, G. (1990). Tenacious goal pursuit and
ﬂexible goal adjustment: Explication and age-related analysis of
assimilative and accommodative strategies of coping. Psychol-
ogy and Aging, 5, 58–67.
Carstensen, L. L. (1993). Motivation for social contact across the
life span: A theory of socioemotional selectivity. In J. Jacobs
(Ed.), Nebraska Symposium on Motivation 1992: Vol. 40. Devel-
opmental perspectives on motivation (pp. 209–254). Lincoln:
University of Nebraska Press.
Carstensen, L. L. (1995). Evidence for a life-span theory of socioe-
motional selectivity. Current Directions in Psychological Sci-
ence, 4, 151–156.
Carstensen, L. L., & Turk-Charles, S. (1994). The salience of emo-
tion across the adult life span, Psychology of Aging, 9, 259–264.
Caspi, A. (1987). Personality in the life course. Journal of Person-
ality and Social Psychology, 53(6), 1203–1213.
Caspi, A., Elder, G., H., & Bem, D. J. (1987). Moving against the
world: Life-course patterns of explosive children. Developmen-
tal Psychology, 23, 308–313.
Caspi, A., Elder, G. H., & Bem, D. J. (1988). Moving against the
world: Life-course patterns of shy children. Developmental Psy-
chology, 24, 824–831.
Caspi, A., & Roberts, B. W. (1999). Personality continuity and
change across the life course. In L. A. Pervin & O. P. John (Eds.),
Handbook of personality: Theory and research (pp. 300–326).
New York: Guilford Press.
Cavan, R. S., Burgess, E. W., Havighurst, R. J., & Goldhamer, H.
(1949). Personal adjustment in old age. Chicago: Science
Research Associates.
Clarke-Plaskie, M., & Lachman, M. E. (1999). The sense of con-
trol in midlife. In S. L. Willis & J. D. Reid (Eds.), Life in the
middle: Psychological and social development in middle age
(pp. 182–208). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Costa, P. T., & McCrae, R. R. (1980). Still stable after all these
years: Personality as a key to some issues in adulthood and old
age. Life Span Development and Behavior, 3, 65–102.
Costa, P. T., & McCrae, R. R. (1984). Personality as a lifelong de-
terminant of wellbeing. In C. A. Malatesta & C. E. Izard (Eds.),
Emotion in adult development (pp. 141–157). Beverly Hills, CA:
Sage.
Costa, P. T., & McCrae, R. R. (1988). Personality in adulthood: A
six-year longitudinal study of self-reports and spouse ratings on
the NEO Personality Inventory. Journal of Personality and So-
cial Psychology, 54, 853–863.
Crocker, J., & Wolfe, C. T. (2001). Contingencies of self-worth
[Special Issue]. Psychological Review, 108, 593–623.
Cross, S., & Markus, H. (1991). Possible selves across the life span.
Human Development, 34, 230–255.
Cummings, E., & Henry, W. (1961). Growing old. New York: Basic
Books.
Diener, E., & Diener, C. (1996). Most people are happy. Psycholog-
ical Science, 7(3), 181–185.
Dougherty, L. M., Abe, J. A., & Izard, C. E. (1996). Differential
emotions theory and emotional development in adulthood and
later life. In C. Magai & S. H. McFadden (Eds.), Handbook of
emotion, adult development, and aging (pp. 27–41). San Diego,
CA: Academic Press.
Elder, G. H., & Hareven, T. K. (1994). Rising above life’s
disadvantage: From the Great Depression to war. In G. H. Elder,
J. Modell, & R. D. Parke (Eds.), Children in time and place:
Developmental and historical insights (pp. 47–72). New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Erikson, E. (1950). Childhood and society. New York: W. W.
Norton.
Erikson, E. (1963). Childhood and society (2nd ed.). New York:
W. W. Norton.

References
483
Featherman, D. L., & Lerner, R. M. (1985). Ontogenesis and socio-
genesis: Problematics for theory and research about develop-
ment and socialization across the lifespan. American Sociologi-
cal Review, 50, 659–676.
Field, D., & Millsap, R. E. (1991). Personality in advanced old age:
Continuity or change? Journal of Gerontology: Psychological
Sciences, 46, 659–676.
Fleeson, W., & Baltes, P. B. (1998). Beyond present-day personality
assessment: An encouraging exploration of the measurement
properties and predictive power of subjective lifetime personal-
ity. Journal of Research in Personality, 12, 125–136.
Fleeson, W., & Heckhausen, J. (1997). More or less “me” in past,
present, and future: Perceived lifetime personality. Psychology
and Aging, 12, 125–136.
Folkman, S., Lazarus, R. S., Pimley, S., & Novacek, J. (1987). Age
differences in stress and coping processes. Psychology and
Aging, 2, 171–184.
Freud, S. (1905). Three contributions to the theory of sex (A. A.
Brill, Ed. and Trans.). In The basic writing of Sigmund Freud.
New York: Modern Library.
Friedman, H. S., Tucker, J. S., Schwartz, J. E., Martin, L. R., Tom-
linson-Keasy, C., Wingard, D. L., & Criqui, M. H. (1995). Child-
hood conscientiousness and longevity: Health behaviors and
cause of death. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
68, 696–703.
Gilligan, C. (1982). In a different voice: Psychological theory and
women’s development. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Glenn, N. D. (1980). Values, attitudes, and beliefs. In O. G. Brim &
J. Kagan (Eds.), Constancy and change in human development
(pp. 596–640). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Gutmann, D. T. (1975). Parenthood: Key to the comparative
psychology of the life cycle? In N. Datan & L. Ginsberg (Eds.),
Life-span developmental psychology: Normative life crises
(pp. 167–184). New York: Academic Press.
Haan, N., Millsap, R., & Hartka, E. (1986). As time goes by: Change
and stability in personality over ﬁfty years. Psychology and
Aging, 1, 220–232.
Havighurst, R. J., Neugarten, B. L., & Tobin, S. S. (1968). Personal-
ity and patterns of aging. In B. L. Neugarten (Ed.), Middle age
and aging (pp. 173–177). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Havighurst, R. J., Neugarten, B. L., & Tobin, S. S. (1996). Disen-
gagement, personality and life satisfaction in the later years. In
D. A. Neugarten (Ed.), The meaning of age: Selected papers of
Bernice L. Neugarten (pp. 281–287). Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Heckhausen, J. (1997). Developmental regulation across adulthood:
Primary and secondary control of age-related challenges. Devel-
opmental Psychology, 33, 176–187
Heckhausen, J., & Schulz, R. (1995). A life-span theory of control.
Psychological Review, 102, 284–304.
Helson, R. (1984). E. Nesbit’s 41st year: Her life, times, and sym-
bols of personality growth. Imagination, Cognition, and Person-
ality, 4, 53–68.
Helson, R., Mitchell, V., & Moane, G. (1984). Personality and pat-
terns of adherence and nonadherence to the social clock. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 46, 1079–1096.
Helson, R., & Moane, G. (1987). Personality change in women from
college to midlife. Journal of Personality and Social Psychol-
ogy, 53, 176–186.
Helson, R., & Wink, P. (1992). Personality change in women from
the early 40s to the early 50s. Psychology and Aging, 7, 46–55.
Hy, L. X., & Loevinger, J. (1996). Measuring ego development
(2nd ed.). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
James, W. (1890). The principles of psychology. New York: Dover.
James, J. B., Lewkowicz, C., Libhaber, J., & Lachman, M. E.
(1995). Rethinking the gender identity crossover hypothesis: A
test of a new model. Sex Roles, 32, 185–207.
Jung, C. (1933). Modern man in search of a soul. New York:
Harcourt Press and World.
Kahn, S., Zimmerman, G., Csikszentmihalyi, M., & Getzels, J. W.
(1985). Relations between identity in young adulthood and inti-
macy at midlife. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
49, 1316–1322.
Kelly, E. L., & Conley, J. J. (1987). Personality and compatibility: A
prospective analysis of marital satisfaction. Journal of Personal-
ity and Social Psychology, 52, 27–40.
Kimber, J. A. M. (1947). The insight of college students into the
items of a personality test. Educational and Psychological Mea-
surement, 7, 411–420.
Kohlberg, L., & Kramer, R. (1969). Continuities and discontinuities
in childhood and adult moral development. Human Develop-
ment, 12, 3–120.
Kohn, M. L., & Schooler, C. (1978). The reciprocal effects of the
substantive complexity of work and intellectual ﬂexibility: A
longitudinal assessment. American Journal of Sociology, 84(1),
24–52.
Labouvie-Vief, G., Hakim-Larson, J., & Hobart, C. J. (1987). Age,
ego level, and the life-span development of coping and defense
processes. Psychology and Aging, 2, 286–293.
Lachman, M. E. (1989). Personality and aging at the crossroads:
Beyond stability versus change. In K. W. Schaie & C. Schooler
(Eds.), Social structure and aging: Psychological processes
(pp. 167–190). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Lachman, M. E. (1991). Perceived control over memory aging:
Developmental and intervention perspectives. Journal of Social
Issues, 47, 159–175.
Lachman, M. E., & Baltes, P. B. (1994). Psychological aging in
lifespan perspective. In M. Rutter & D. F. Hay (Eds.), Develop-
ment through life: A handbook for clinicians (pp. 583–606).
London: Blackwell Scientiﬁc.

484
Personality Development in Adulthood and Old Age
Lachman, M. E., & Bertrand, R. B. (2001). Personality and the self
in midlife. In M. E. Lachman (Ed.), Handbook on midlife devel-
opment (pp. 279–309). New York: Wiley.
Lachman, M. E., & Prenda, K. (in press). The adaptive value of feel-
ing in control in midlife. In C. Ryff, R. Kessler, & O. G. Brim
(Eds.), A portrait of midlife in the United States. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Lachman, M. E., Walen, H., & Staudinger, U. (2000). Perceived
trajectories of subjective well-being: Patterns and predictors
in German and American adults. Manuscript submitted for
publication.
Lachman, M. E., & Weaver, S. L. (1998). Sociodemographic
variations in the sense of control by domain: Findings from
the MacArthur studies of midlife. Psychology and Aging, 13,
553–562.
Lazarus, R. S. (1996). The role of coping in the emotions and how
coping changes over the life course. In C. Magai & S. H. Mc-
Fadden (Eds.), Handbook of emotion, adult development, and
aging (pp. 289–306). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Lazarus, R. S., & Folkman, S. (1984). Stress, appraisal, and coping.
New York: Springer. 
Lerner, R. M. (2002). Concepts and theories of human development
(3rd ed.). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Lerner, R. M. (1976). Concepts and theories of human development.
Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Lerner, J. V., Baker, N., & Lerner, R. M. (1985). A person-context
goodness of ﬁt model of adjustment. In P. C. Kendall (Ed.),
Advances in cognitive-behavioral research and therapy (Vol. 4,
pp. 111–136). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Levinson, D. J. (1977). The mid-life transition. Psychiatry, 40,
99–112.
Levinson, D. J. (1978). Eras: The anatomy of the life cycle. Psychi-
atric Opinion, 15(9), 39–48.
Levinson, D. J., Darrow, C., Kline, E., Levinson, M., & McKee, B.
(1978). The seasons of a man’s life. New York: Knopf.
Levinson, D. J., & Levinson, J. D. (1996). The seasons of a woman’s
life. New York: Ballantine Books.
Loevinger, J. (1976). Ego development. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Loevinger, J. (1979). Construct validity of the sentence completion
test of ego development. Applied Psychological Measurement, 3,
281–311.
Loevinger, J. (1983). Personality: Stages, traits, and the self. Annual
Review of Psychology, 34, 195–222.
Loevinger, J. (1985). Revision of the sentence completion test for
ego development. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
48, 420–427.
Loevinger, J., & Wessler, R. (1970). Measuring ego development
(Vol. 1). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Markus, H. R. (1977). Self-schemata and processing information
about the self. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 35,
63–78.
Markus, H. R., & Lachman, M. E. (1996, September). Attributes
and traits: Collective and individual approaches. Paper pre-
sented at (MIDMAC) the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur
Foundation Research Network on Successful Midlife Develop-
ment meeting, Cambridge, MA.
Markus, H. R., & Nurius, P. (1986). Possible selves. American Psy-
chologist, 41(9), 954–969.
McAdams, D. P. (2001). Generativity in midlife. In M. E. Lachman
(Ed.), Handbook on midlife development (pp. 395–443). New
York: Wiley.
McCrae, R. R., & Costa, P. T. (1985). Updating Norman’s adequate
taxonomy: Intelligence and personality dimensions in natural
language and in questionnaires. Journal of Personality and So-
cial Psychology, 49, 710–721.
McCrae, R. R., & Costa, P. T. (1987). Validation of the ﬁve-factor
model of personality across instruments and observers. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 54, 81–90.
McCrae, R. R., & Costa, P. T. (1990). Personality in adulthood.
New York: Guilford.
McCrae, R. R., & Costa, P. T. (1994). The stability of personality:
Observation and evaluations. Current Directions in Psychologi-
cal Science, 3, 173–175.
McCrae, R. R., Costa, P. T., & Busch, C. M. (1986). Evaluating com-
prehensiveness in personality systems: The California Q-Set and
ﬁve factor model. Journal of Personality, 54(2), 430–446.
Mitchell, V., & Helson, R. (1990). Women’s prime of life: Is it the
50s? Psychology of Women Quarterly, 14, 451–470.
Mroczek, D. K., & Kolarz, C. M. (1998). The effect of age on positive
and negative affect: A developmental perspective on happiness.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75, 1333–1349.
Nesselroade, J. R. (1992). Adult personality development: Issues in
assessing constancy and change. In R. A. Zucker, A. I. Rabin, &
J. Aronoff (Eds.), Personality structure in the life course: Essays
on personality in the Murray tradition (pp. 221–275). New York:
Springer.
Neugarten, B. T. (1977). Personality and aging. In J. E. Birren &
K. W. Schaie (Eds.), Handbook of the psychology of aging
(pp. 626–649). New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold.
Neugarten, B. T., & Gutmann, D. L. (1958). Age-sex roles and per-
sonality in middle age: A thematic apperception study. Psycho-
logical Monographs, 72, 1–33.
Piaget, J. (1974). The origins of intelligence in children (M. Cook,
Trans.). New York: International Universities Press. (Original
work published 1936) 
Reese, H. W., & Overton, W. F. (1970). Models of development and
theories of development. In L. R. Goulet & P. B. Baltes (Eds.),
Life-span developmental psychology: Research and theory
(pp. 115–145). New York: Academic Press.
Roberts, B. W. (1997). Plaster or plasticity: Are adult work experi-
ences associated with personality change in women? Journal of
Personality, 65, 205–232.

References
485
Roberts, B. W., & DelVecchio, W. F. (2000). The rank-order consis-
tency of personality traits from childhood to old age: A quantita-
tive review of longitudinal studies. Psychological Bulletin,
126(1), 3–25.
Roberts, B. W., & Friend, W. (1998). Career momentum in midlife
women: Life context, identity, and personality correlates. Jour-
nal of Occupational Health Psychology, 3, 195–208.
Rodin, J. (1986). Aging and health: Effects of the sense of control.
Science, 233, 1271–1276.
Rousseau, J. J. (1948). Emile or education (B. Foxley, Trans.).
London: J. M. Dent. (Original work published 1762)
Rowe, J. W., & Kahn, R. L. (1998). Successful aging. New York:
Random House.
Ryff, C. D. (1989). Happiness is everything, or is it? Explorations on
the meaning of psychological well-being. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 57, 1069–1181.
Ryff, C. D. (1995). Psychological well-being in adult life. Current
Directions in Psychological Science, 4, 99–104.
Schaie, K. W. (1996). Intellectual development in adulthood: The
Seattle Longitudinal Study. New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Schaie, K. W., & Hendricks, J. (Eds.). (2000). Evolution of the aging
self: Societal impact. New York: Springer.
Schwartz, J. E., Friedman, H. S., Tucker, J. S., Tomlinson-Keasey,
C., Wingard, D. L., & Criqui, M. H. (1995). Sociodemographic
and psychosocial factors in childhood as predictors of adult mor-
tality. American Journal of Public Health, 85(9), 1237–1245.
Smith, T. W., & Gallo, L. C. (2001). Personality traits as risk factors
for physical illness. In A. Baum, T. A. Revenson, & J. E. Singer
(Eds.), Handbook of health psychology (pp. 139–173). Mahwah,
NJ: Erlbaum. 
Staudinger, U. M., Lopez, D. F., & Baltes, P. B. (1997). The psy-
chometric location of wisdom-related performance: Intelligence,
personality, and more? Personality and Social Psychology Bul-
letin, 23(11), 1200–1214.
Tucker, J. S., & Friedman, H. S. (1996). Emotion, personality, and
health. In C. Magai & S. H. McFadden (Eds.), Handbook of
emotion, adult development, and aging (pp. 307–326). San
Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Vaillant, G. E. (1977). Adaptation to life. Boston: Little, Brown.
Vaillant, G. E., & Milofsky, E. (1980). Natural history of male psy-
chological health: IX. Empirical evidence for Erikson’s model of
the life cycle. American Journal of Psychiatry, 137, 1348–1359.
Vaillant, G. E., & Mukamal, K. (2001). Successful aging. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 158, 839–847.
Whitbourne, S. K. (1986a). The me I know: A study of adult identity.
New York: Springer-Verlag.
Whitbourne, S. K. (1986b). Openness to experience, identity ﬂexi-
bility, and life change in adults. Journal of Personality and So-
cial Psychology, 50, 163–168.
Whitbourne, S. K. (1987). Personality development in adulthood
and old age: Relationships among identity style, health, and
well-being. In K. W. Schaie & C. Eisdorfer (Eds.), Annual re-
view of gerontology and geriatrics (Vol. 7, pp. 189–216). New
York: Springer.
Whitbourne, S. K., & Connolly, L. A. (1999). The developing
self in midlife. In S. L. Willis & J. D. Reid (Eds.), Life in the
middle: Psychological and social development in middle age
(pp. 25–45). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Whitbourne, S. K., & Waterman, A. S. (1979). Psychosocial devel-
opment during the adult years: Age and cohort comparisons.
Developmental Psychology, 15, 373–378.
Whitbourne, S. K., Zuschlag, M. K., Elliot, L. B., & Waterman,
A. S. (1992). Psychosocial development in adulthood: A 22-year
sequential study. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
63, 260–271.
Woodruff, D. S., & Birren, J. E. (1971). Age and personality: A
twenty-ﬁve year follow-up. Unpublished manuscript, University
of Southern California, Los Angeles.
Woodruff, D. S., & Birren, J. E. (1972). Age changes and cohort dif-
ferences in personality. Developmental Psychology, 6, 252–259.
Wrosch, C., Heckhausen, J., & Lachman, M. E. (2000). Primary and
secondary control strategies for managing health and ﬁnancial
stress across adulthood. Psychology and Aging, 15, 387–399.


CHAPTER 20
Social Relationships in Adulthood and Old Age
RACHEL PRUCHNO AND JENNIFER ROSENBAUM
487
THEORETICAL PERSPECTIVES
487
Convoys of Social Relationships
488
Socioemotional Selectivity Theory
488
Weiss’s Theory of Social Provisions
488
CRITICAL QUESTIONS
489
Do Relationships With Family and With Friends Have
Different Effects on People?
489
Can Social Relationships Have Negative as Well as Positive
Effects on People?
490
Does the Quantity or Quality of Social Support Best Predict
Well-Being?
490
Can Social Relationships Reduce the Risk of Functional
Decline and Mortality?
491
SOCIAL RELATIONSHIPS IN THE CONTEXT
OF HEALTH
491
Spouse
491
Parent-Adult Child
493
Siblings
494
Friends
494
SOCIAL RELATIONSHIPS IN THE CONTEXT OF ILLNESS
AND DISABILITY
495
Spouse
495
Parent-Adult Child
497
Siblings
498
Friends
498
LOSING SOCIAL RELATIONSHIPS
499
Spouse
499
Parent-Adult Child
500
Sibling
500
Friends
501
NEXT STEPS
501
REFERENCES
502
Social relationships between adults are complex. They enable
people to derive information, affection, and assistance from
one another; to learn and convey knowledge about their his-
tory; to acquire and maintain self-identity; and to regulate
affect (Carstensen, 1992). Most social relationships that in-
clude an adult are the product of a lifetime of associations;
many have the potential to affect such far-reaching outcomes
as physical health and psychological well-being. Virtually all
social relationships between adults have the potential to be
affected by illness and disability.
In this chapter we review what is known about social rela-
tionships between adults. We focus exclusively on social
relationships in which all parties are adults and concentrate
on those in which at least one person would be considered
elderly. Not included, therefore, are relationships between
parents and adolescent children and those between grandpar-
ents and young grandchildren. We take a life-course perspec-
tive on social relationships in this review, meaning that we
are concerned with how individuals change over time and
how their transitions are linked to the people with whom
they maintain close relationships. More speciﬁcally, in this
chapter we focus on adult social relationships between
(a) spouses, (b) parents and their children, (c) siblings, and
(d) friends. We examine these bonds both within the context
of health and of disability, reviewing conceptual frameworks
as well as empirical literature. We concentrate on reviewing
critical themes, highlighting recently published literature,
and identifying key research questions and ﬁndings. On the
basis of our review of the state of the art, we conclude by
making recommendations for future directions that the next
generation of knowledge about social relationships between
adults should take.
THEORETICAL PERSPECTIVES
Theories about social relationships between adults gen-
erally have sought to predict those aspects of social rela-
tionships that are stable over the life course and those that
change. They have also been concerned with predicting
how social relationships can help to explain psychological
well-being.

488
Social Relationships in Adulthood and Old Age
Convoys of Social Relationships
One of the earliest theoretical frameworks to focus on inter-
personal relationships from a life-course perspective was
that proposed by Kahn and Antonucci (1980). Their central
proposition was that social support is important to individual
well-being throughout the life course, both for its direct con-
tributions and for its ability to moderate the effects of stress.
They deﬁne social support as interpersonal transactions that
include one or more of the following elements: affect, afﬁr-
mation, and aid.
Based on theories of attachment and of roles, Kahn and
Antonucci developed the concept of convoys. They concep-
tualized an individual as moving through the life cycle sur-
rounded by a set of other people to whom he or she is related
by the giving or receiving of social support. An individual’s
convoy at any point in time, they suggest, consists of the set
of people on whom he or she relies for support and those who
rely on him or her for support.
Kahn and Antonucci (1980) suggested that relationships
between individuals could be symmetrical, with an exchange
of approximately equal amounts of support, or asymmetrical,
with one individual providing more support to the other. Fur-
thermore, they contended that a person’s requirements for
social support at any given time are jointly determined by
properties of the situation and of the person. They suggested
that either too much support or too little support could be
detrimental to an individual.
Convoys are conceptualized as being dynamic and lifelong
in nature.Although some components will most likely change
over time, others will remain stable across time and situations.
Kahn and Antonucci suggest that losses and gains in convoys
could have a variety of causes, including death, betrayal,
changes in role, or location. For additional information about
the structure and function of convoys among olderAmericans,
readers are referred to Antonucci and Akiyama (1987).
Socioemotional Selectivity Theory
Consistent with Kahn and Antonucci’s theory, Carstensen
(1991, 1992) proposed the socioemotional selectivity theory,
which posits that reduced rates of social interaction in later
life are the result of lifelong selection processes by which
people strategically and adaptively cultivate their social net-
works to maximize social and emotional gains and minimize
their risks. The theory is rooted in the functions of social con-
tact; it proposes that although these basic functions remain
consistent across the life span, one’s place in the life cycle
inﬂuences the salience and effectiveness of speciﬁc func-
tions. Carstensen contends that over the life course there is a
reduced likelihood that interaction with casual social partners
will be rewarding, whereas interaction with a select group of
signiﬁcant others becomes increasingly more valuable.
In an empirical test of the model, Fredrickson and
Carstensen (1990) studied the salience of information poten-
tial, potential for future contact, and affective rewards from
social partners among adolescents, middle-aged people, and
healthy and inﬁrm elderly people. They found that adoles-
cents placed the greatest emphasis on the potential for future
contact and gathering information about social partners to
know them better, whereas elderly people placed the greatest
emphasis on the potential for positive rather than negative
affect in social interactions. Results provide strong support
for the socioemotional selectivity theory, which maintains
that reductions in social contacts across the life span reﬂect
increasing selectivity in one’s choice of social partners.
Although rates of interaction with acquaintances decline
steadily from early adulthood on, interactions in signiﬁcant
relationships increase. The ﬁndings that interactions with a
core group of social partners from whom people derive affec-
tive gains become more frequent, satisfying, and emotionally
close over the adult life course, while interactions with more
casual social contacts provide fewer affective rewards and
become less satisfying and frequent support the socioemo-
tional selectivity theory.
In a more recent study Lansford, Sherman, and Antonucci
(1998) examined the socioemotional selectivity theory within
and across three historical cohorts, from samples interviewed
in 1957, 1976, and 1980. Data from three cohorts of national
representative samples were analyzed to determine whether
respondents’satisfaction with the size of their social networks
differed by age, cohort, or both. Results support socioemo-
tional selectivity theory, with more older adults than younger
adults reporting feeling satisﬁed with the current size of their
social networks rather than wanting larger networks.
Weiss’s Theory of Social Provisions
R. Weiss (1974) developed an elegant theory about provision
of support from kin and from nonkin. He maintains that indi-
viduals require six key social provisions in order to maintain
well-being and to avoid loneliness. These provisions include
those that are assistance-related (reliable alliance, guidance)
and those that are non–assistance-related (social integration,
reassurance or worth, nurturance, attachment). These com-
ponents, provided by primary group relationships (character-
ized by closeness, warmth, and commitment), provide the
total perceived support to people and supply distinctive ben-
eﬁts to them. People lacking each social provision experience
negative effects. For example, a person lacking attachment

Critical Questions
489
would experience emotional isolation. Someone lacking so-
cial integration would experience social isolation.
R. Weiss (1974) maintains that social relationships tend to
become specialized in their provisions.As a result, individuals
must maintain a number of different relationships in order to
maintain psychological well-being. Some of these provisions
typically are provided by family members, and others typi-
cally are provided by friends. Reliable alliance or instrumen-
tal support is most often provided by family members. Weiss
states that instrumental support is often provided by family re-
gardless of the level of mutual affection or whether one has
reciprocated in the past. Guidance—especially important in
times of stress—is provided by signiﬁcant others who are seen
as trustworthy and authoritative. Friendships offer provisions
associated with a community of interest such as social inte-
gration. Reassurance of worth is provided by relationships
that support a person’s competence in a social role, such as
colleagues in the workplace or family members at home. Nur-
turance is provided by a relationship in which an individual
takes responsibility for the well-being of another.Attachment-
providing relationships tend to be an exception where special-
ization is concerned. The marital relationship is deﬁned by its
sense of attachment, yet attachment can also be provided by
relationships with other family members or close friends.
R. Weiss’s (1974) model holds that multiple needs must be
satisﬁed by an individual’s support network. Moreover, he
contends that there is probably an element of almost every
relational provision in each supportive relationship. Weiss’s
theoretical model has received substantial empirical support
(Cutrona & Russell, 1987; Felton & Berry, 1992; Mancini &
Simon, 1984).
CRITICAL QUESTIONS
Four critical questions have been the focus of scholars of
adult social relationships. They are (a) Do relationships with
family and with friends have different effects on people,
(b) Can social relationships have negative as well as positive
effects on people, (c) Does the quantity or quality of social
support best predict well-being, and (d) Can social relation-
ships reduce the risk of functional decline and mortality?
Recent literature regarding the status of each question is sum-
marized in the following discussions.
Do Relationships With Family and With Friends
Have Different Effects on People?
Ties to both family and friends are important. Data consis-
tently indicate that although family members are close and
intimate members of most elderly people’s network, friends
are named as the people with whom they enjoy spending
time, engage in leisure activities, and have daily or frequent
contact. The proportion of same-sex friends reported does not
change across age groups from the teen years through old
age. Although the absolute number of social relations is
smaller in succeeding age groups, the role of friends remains
important throughout life (Davis & Todd, 1985).
There are, however, different roles for family and friends.
Friends are expected to provide companionship and short-
term crisis intervention, whereas family members are ex-
pected to provide more signiﬁcant resources in areas such as
ﬁnancial matters, health, tasks of daily living, discussion of
family problems when necessary, and long-term support for
chronic needs (Cantor, 1979; Connidis & Davies, 1990).
Research for two decades has consistently found that
friends are more important to the psychological well-being of
adults than are family members (Adams & Blieszner, 1995;
Antonucci & Akiyama, 1995; Lynch, 1998; Pinquart &
Sorensen, 2000). At the same time, adults who have no fam-
ily or who have poor relationships with family have much
lower levels of general well-being than do others (M. G.
Thompson & Heller, 1990).
Several explanations have been offered to explain this
empirical ﬁnding. One explanation provided by Antonucci
(1985) suggests that it is a function of obligatory versus
optional relationships. Family relationships are obligatory;
friend relationships are optional. Family should be available;
thus, their absence is felt as a deﬁcit. Friends do not have
to be available; therefore, their presence is so much more a
beneﬁt. A second explanation is grounded in the fact that
family relationships are ascribed, whereas relationships with
friends are chosen. People cannot choose or substitute their
parents, siblings, and children, even when these relationships
are a constant source of stress. In contrast, people establish
and maintain friendships by mutual choice based on a con-
sensus of common experiences, interests, values, affection,
and reciprocity. The feeling of being desirable elicited by
friendship relations enhances well-being and builds self-
esteem. A third explanation focuses on the extent to which
relationships can be severed. Relationships with family
members clearly are more difﬁcult to sever; this—combined
with the fact that people of all ages are more likely to report
that family members get on their nerves than do friends
(Antonucci & Akiyama, 1995)—may make relationships
with friends more important to psychological well-being.
Fourth, the effect may be a function of the fact that friends are
typically members of the same age group and often share
personal characteristics, cohort experiences, and lifestyles.
Compared with younger family members, higher similarity

490
Social Relationships in Adulthood and Old Age
in values and experiences may promote a higher satisfaction
with friendship than with family relationships. Finally,
Larson, Mannell, and Zuzanek (1986) suggest that relation-
ships with friends are more likely than relationships with
family members to be characterized by positive interactions.
Friends are more often a source of enjoyment and socializing;
as such, they are a more signiﬁcant source of satisfaction.
Family members, on the other hand, are more likely to be re-
sponsible for providing day-to-day physical and emotional
assistance and to serve as sources of security and insulation
against threats and losses. In this role, family relationships
contribute to well-being within a global time frame, as a gen-
eral state dependent on an individual’s overall security and
satisfaction. Friends, in contrast, primarily inﬂuence immedi-
ate well-being.
Can Social Relationships Have Negative as Well as
Positive Effects on People?
Although a great deal of research has focused on the positive
effects that social support can have on adults, recently re-
searchers have urged greater attention to the negative side of
informal social relationships. At issue has been the question
of whether positive or negative social exchanges have a
greater impact on older adults’ health and well-being. Since
Rook (1984) demonstrated that social relationships can
adversely inﬂuence the psychological well-being of older
adults, several investigators have examined the effects of
both positive and negative social ties in later life (Ingersoll-
Dayton, Morgan, & Antonucci, 1997; Okun & Keith, 1998).
Rook (1990, 1994), reviewing this literature, concludes that
negative and positive social exchanges are unrelated to one
another, and that the detrimental effects of negative social
exchange are more potent than are the beneﬁcial effects of
positive social exchanges. More recently Rook (1997) has
shown that negative social exchanges are related to more life
stress and less supportive networks. Her ﬁndings led her to
conclude that both personal characteristics (such as daily
mood and self-esteem) and life context (such as the experi-
ence of stressful life events) inﬂuence older people’s vulner-
ability to negative social exchanges.
Recent results from research by Okun and Keith (1998)
suggest that the picture may be more complicated. Among a
sample of respondents aged 60–92 years old, they found that
positive social exchanges with children cushioned the ad-
verse effects of negative social exchanges with both one’s
spouse and other relatives and friends. Furthermore, when
these older adults experienced negative social exchanges with
children, positive social exchanges with other relatives and
friends were especially helpful. An interesting result was
that this relationship was not found in a younger sample of
respondents.
Does the Quantity or Quality of Social Support Best
Predict Well-Being?
Most adults are entrenched in social relationships with peo-
ple who are important to them. Although social isolation is
rare, its effects are devastating in terms of poorer mental and
physical health as well as increased likelihood of morbidity
and mortality (Berkman & Syme, 1979; Chappell & Badger,
1989).
Extensive research has examined the importance of a sin-
gle, close, personal relationship. The importance of a conﬁ-
dant as a buffer against decrements that include role loss and
reduction of social interaction was ﬁrst introduced by
Lowenthal and Haven (1968). Availability of a conﬁdant has
been associated with higher morale and lower levels of lone-
liness and social isolation in old age (Wenger, Davies, &
Shahtahmasebi, 1995). Having someone in whom one can
conﬁde seems to be equally important for men and women
(Slater, 1995).
Older people who lack conﬁdants report more psycholog-
ical distress and higher rates of depression (Hays et al.,
1998). There is no evidence that widowhood affects levels of
conﬁdant support (Dean, Matt, & Wood, 1992). In a study
that controlled for health behaviors and other confounders
(age, race, education, health conditions), Michael, Colditz,
Coakley, and Kawachi (1999) identiﬁed elements of a
woman’s social network as signiﬁcant predictors of her func-
tional status. Strong predictors of high functioning among
older women were having close friends and relatives and the
presence of a conﬁdant.
The existence of a special conﬁdant is especially impor-
tant to unmarried older people without close relatives, who
rely on these relationships to satisfy the need for intimacy
and emotional security (Gupta & Korte, 1994). Longitudinal
research by Wenger and Jerrome (1999) revealed that al-
though marital status and parenthood are important factors in
the nature of the conﬁdant relationship, over a 16-year period
most older people changed conﬁdants, usually as a result of
increased dependency, disability, or death. Daughters are
preferred over sons as conﬁdants; sisters are preferred over
brothers.
Research indicates that there are differences in the adult
friendships of men and women. Women tend to have more
intimate friendships than do men; men have a greater ten-
dency to focus their friendships around activities (Antonucci,
1990). In addition, whereas women are more likely to have a
female friend as a conﬁdant, men are more likely to rely on

Social Relationships in the Context of Health
491
their spouse as a conﬁdant (Hess & Soldo, 1985). These gen-
der differences are characteristic throughout the life course
(P. H. Wright, 1989).
A great deal of research has examined the number of close
ties that adults have. Wellman and Wortley (1989) found that
adults have between four and seven close, supportive inti-
mates. In their national sample of men and women over 50
years of age, Antonucci and Akiyama (1987) reported an av-
erage of 3.5 very close intimates and 3.5 close intimates.
More recently, Antonucci, Akiyama, and Lansford (1998)
report that the average number of close relationships named
by men and women age 50 and older was 3.65. Women had
signiﬁcantly more close social relations than did men.
The relationship between the number of close ties and
psychological well-being is complex. Antonucci et al. (1998)
found that for women, the larger the number of close social
relations, the less happy they reported being. For men no
such association existed. These ﬁndings are consistent with
Turner and Troll’s (1994) caution that the effects on women
of having more social ties may not always be positive.
The quality of social relations rather than the structural
characteristics of these relations has the most signiﬁcant
effect on well-being (Antonucci & Jackson, 1987; Oxman,
Berkman, Kasl, Freeman, & Barrett, 1992). People who are
not satisﬁed with their social relations report higher levels of
depressive symptomatology at all ages than do those who are
satisﬁed. This is consistent with Carstensen’s (1991) theory
of optimization, suggesting that as people age, they are in-
creasingly selective about the relationships in which they
choose to invest.
Can Social Relationships Reduce the Risk of Functional
Decline and Mortality?
Social relationships have been associated with a host of health
outcomes in adults, including a lower risk of mortality, car-
diovascular disease, cancer, and functional decline (Berkman,
1995; House, Landis, & Umberson, 1988). These beneﬁts ap-
pear to persist into late life (Oxman et al., 1992; Seeman,
1996; Unger, McAvay, Bruce, Berkman, & Seeman, 1999).
They have also been shown to improve survival and recovery
following acute medical conditions (Berkman, Leo-Summers,
& Horwitz, 1992; Glass, Matchar, Belyea & Feussner, 1993;
Jenkins, Stanton, & Jono, 1994; Wilcox, Kasl, & Berkman,
1994). Recent research by Mendes de Leon et al. (1999) re-
veals that being embedded in social relationships reduces the
risk of functional disability and enhances recovery from func-
tional disability.
These protective effects of social relationships may result
from several processes. They include provision of access
to information about health and health care services (Bloom,
1990), encouragement of health behaviors (Bovbjerg et al.,
1995; Mermelstein, Cohen, Lichtenstein, Kanmark, & Baer,
1986), provision of tangible aid (Thoits, 1995), provision of
emotional support to facilitate coping with life stress (Thoits,
1995), enhancement of feelings of self-esteem and control
(Krause & Borawski-Clark, 1994), and inﬂuences on neuroen-
docrine or immune functioning (Seeman et al., 1994; Uchino,
Cacioppo, & Kiecolt-Glaser, 1996).
Consistent research indicates that widowhood has more
harmful effects on cardiovascular morbidity and mortality for
men than for women (Berkman et al., 1993; Seeman, 1996).
In a recent study, Unger et al. (1999) found that social rela-
tionships had a stronger effect on functional status for men
than for women. These investigators also found stronger
protective effects of social relationships among respondents
with lower levels of physical performance.
SOCIAL RELATIONSHIPS IN THE CONTEXT
OF HEALTH
The section that follows presents state-of-the-art information
about the social relationships of normal, healthy adults.
Spouse
Although the overwhelming majority of adults marry, signif-
icant changes during the past several decades characterize the
patterns of marriage, divorce, widowhood, and remarriage.
Cherlin and Furstenberg (1994) report that one third of adults
can now expect to marry, divorce, and remarry during their
lifetimes.
Married men and women have better psychological well-
being than do their unmarried peers (Gove, Style, & Hughes,
1990; G. R. Lee, Seccombe, & Shehan, 1991). Research by
Marks (1996) suggests that the pattern may in fact be more
complex. She found that separated or divorced women, wid-
owed women, and single men were signiﬁcantly more dis-
tressed than were their married counterparts. However,
women who had never married by midlife were not signiﬁ-
cantly different from married women on ratings of psycho-
logical distress. Although she concludes that being single at
midlife appears to be more problematic for men than for
women, she cautions that results are far from conclusive.
For decades cross-sectional research consistently indi-
cated that marital satisfaction changed over the course of
time, with satisfaction being high at the beginning of the mar-
riage, lower during the child-raising years, and then high
again after the children leave home (Orbuch, House, Mero, &

492
Social Relationships in Adulthood and Old Age
Webster, 1996). More recently, however, evidence seems to
be mounting suggesting that marital satisfaction drops
markedly over the ﬁrst 10 years of marriage and then drops
more gradually in the ensuing decades. Analyses by Glenn
(1998), for example, fail to support the widespread belief that
marriages tend to improve at midterm and that the later years
of marriage are the golden ones. Rather, his ﬁndings strongly
suggest that the differences in marital satisfaction between
midterm and long-term marriages are largely a function of
cohort differences.
The majority of older adults evaluate their marriages as
happy or very happy, and marital adjustment seems to be
stable over time in enduring relationships (Huyck, 1995).
Levenson, Carstensen, and Gottman (1993) revealed that
compared with middle-aged couples, older couples evi-
denced reduced potential for conﬂict and greater potential for
pleasure. It remains unclear, however, whether this observed
change is cohort-speciﬁc; due to divorce, which removes
those who were unhappy at earlier ages; to the empty nest,
which gives couples the opportunity to attend more closely to
their relationships; or to characteristics that increase with
marital duration, such as shared memories and knowledge of
one another. Longitudinal research has shown that over time
husbands report greater marital happiness and more affection
than do wives (Field, Minkler, Falk, & Leino, 1993).
Much has been learned about marriages by studying those
relationships that survive the test of time. One of the ﬁrst
studies of marriages lasting at least 50 years was conducted
by Roberts (1979). He reports that signiﬁcant elements in
long-lasting marriages include independence, commitment,
companionship, and qualities of caring. In a similar vein,
Lauer, Lauer, and Kerr (1990) report that people in long-term
marriages identiﬁed the following as important to their mar-
riages: being married to someone they liked as a person and
enjoyed being with; commitment to the spouse and to the
institution of marriage; a sense of humor; and consensus on
matters including aims and goals in life, friends, and decision
making. Husbands and wives were similar in their views.
Goodman (1999a) reports that spouses in long-term mar-
riages felt that intimacy and avoidance of hostile control were
more important than autonomy. Goodman (1999b) also found
that spouses in long-term marriages characterized by higher
levels of reciprocity rated their marriages as most positive.
Retirement represents a major life transition that has the
potential to affect the marriage. Although much of the current
literature on retirement has been characterized by its almost
exclusive focus on individuals, some recent research has
begun to examine the ways in which marital relationships
affect retirement as well as the effect that retirement has on
marriage (Szinovacz & Ekerdt, 1995). Demographic changes
in the past century have created a situation in which more
people than ever before make the retirement transition as
members of couples (Szinovacz, Ekerdt, & Vinick, 1992). A
growing number of couples face the retirement of both
spouses. Issues such as how couples time their labor force
exits in relation to one another and how they anticipate and
adapt to each other’s retirement have gained the attention of
researchers.
Retirement timing is affected by marital status, spouse’s
employment, and family obligations. Married men are more
likely than are nonmarried men to be employed at all ages.
Among women, however, nonmarried and divorced women
tend to delay retirement. They are also more likely than are
married women to report plans for postponed retirement or
plans not to retire at all (Hatch & Thompson, 1992; Morgan,
1992). Married women frequently adjust their retirement to
coincide with that of their husbands, thus retiring relatively
early (Hurd, 1990). Some literature suggests that spouses
time their retirement in relation to one another and tend to opt
for joint retirement unless adverse circumstances preclude or
render that option too costly (O’Rand, Henretta, & Krecker,
1992). There is some evidence that when a husband retires
before his wife does, marital strain may occur (G. R. Lee &
Shehan, 1989; Szinovacz, 1989).
Being married at retirement yields more positive retire-
ment attitudes, higher retirement satisfaction, and better post-
retirement adaptation than does being unmarried (Atchley,
1992; Seccombe & Lee, 1986). Social and emotional support
from spouses is particularly important for married men
(Szinovacz, 1992).
The relationship between retirement and division of
household work has been well studied. Studies consistently
ﬁnd that retirement does not substantially alter the preretire-
ment division of household work along traditional gender
lines. Rather, partners remain responsible for their respective
feminine and masculine tasks (Szinovacz, 1989). There is,
however, research suggesting that some retired husbands par-
ticipate more in household work after retirement than they
did before retirement. For these couples, the division of labor
becomes more egalitarian after retirement (Dorfman, 1992).
An egalitarian division of labor seems to be gratifying to cou-
ples in retirement (Hill & Dorfman, 1982). Research by Keith
and Schafer (1986, 1991) found that too much help from
husbands may induce marital tensions. They found that the
husband’s presence in the wife’s domain as well as his in-
creased scrutiny of her housework performance can increase
perceptions of conﬂict and disenchantment among both
partners.
A growing body of research discourages the idea that re-
tirement is a serious threat to marital quality (Atchley, 1992;

Social Relationships in the Context of Health
493
Szinovacz & Ekerdt, 1995). Rather, it seems that marital
quality is stable across the retirement transition. Retirement
does, however, have positive as well as negative affects on
marriages. Positive changes brought about by retirement
include increased freedom to develop joint endeavors,
increased companionship, fewer time pressures, and a more
relaxed atmosphere at home (Szinovacz & Ekerdt, 1995).
Negative changes are evident predominantly from wives’
complaints about husbands’ being underfoot, a lack of pri-
vacy, and too much togetherness (Dorfman & Hill, 1986;
Vinick & Ekerdt, 1991).
Parent-Adult Child
Ties between parents and their adult children have been
the subject of study of Bengtson and his colleagues at the
University of Southern California. Their longitudinal study,
begun in 1971, of three-generation families led to the devel-
opment of a theory of intergenerational family solidarity
(Bengtson & Roberts, 1991). According to that theory, inter-
generational solidarity is marked by six essential compo-
nents. They are association or contact, affection or emotional
closeness, consensus or agreement, function or instrumental
support and source sharing, familism or normative obliga-
tions, and opportunity structures for family interaction.
Empirical tests of the theory have demonstrated its useful-
ness for understanding the nature and quality of relationships
between parents and adult children (Parrott & Bengtson,
1999; Whitbeck, Hoyt, & Huck, 1994) and the effects of fam-
ily relationships on the well-being of older adults (Starrels,
Ingersoll-Dayton, & Neal, 1995).
Because the lives of parents and their adult children are
connected in signiﬁcant ways for as long as both generations
are alive, life-course transitions experienced by members of
one generation can have consequences for members of the
other generation. Kaufman and Uhlenberg (1998) report that
parental divorce and declines in parents’health lead to deteri-
orating parent-child relationships. Similarly, problems in a
child’s marriage cause strain in parent-child relationships.
A good deal of research has sought to understand whether
the relationships between parents and adult children are more
important to the parents or to the children. The developmen-
tal stake hypothesis posited by Bengtson and Kuypers (1971)
suggests that young adult children and their parents vary in
their perception of generational relations based on their loca-
tion within the family lineage and their developmental stage.
Speciﬁcally, young adults need to perceive large differences
in values and attitudes among family lineage members as
they develop an identity separate from that of their parents.At
the same time, middle-aged parents have a need to perceive
closer ties with their adolescent and young adult children as
they strive to achieve generativity and enjoy the fruits of their
parenting efforts. Thus, according to the developmental stake
hypothesis, members of the older generation should perceive
less distance between the generations than do members of
the younger generation. The developmental stake hypothesis
has been supported by several studies of intergenerational ties
(Lynott & Roberts, 1997) More recently, Giarrusso, Stallings,
and Bengtson (1995) presented the term intergenerational
stake to emphasize that the stake refers to relationships be-
tween generations. Their analysis of changing perceptions
of affectual solidarity among middle-generation parents and
their adult children support the concept of an intergenera-
tional stake.
Relationships between parents and their adult children
are marked by mutual reliance across the generations
(Umberson, 1992). Both generations prefer to live apart from
one another; when the generations do live together, however,
there has been controversy regarding whether they do so
more because of the parent’s or the child’s needs. Aquilino
(1990) and Ward, Logan, and Spitze (1992) present data indi-
cating that parental needs are irrelevant to coresidence and
that it is characteristics of adult children that lead to these
arrangements. Furthermore, Aquilino (1990) reports that
when parents and adult children live together, they usually
reside in the parent’s rather than the child’s home. G. R. Lee
and Dwyer (1996), however, caution that these ﬁndings may
be unique to young-old people and their adult children, while
the picture is quite different for very old people. Their analy-
sis, similar to ﬁndings by Crimmins and Ingegneri (1990),
and Soldo, Wolfe, and Agree (1990), indicates that in addi-
tion to children’s characteristics (marital status, employment
status), the probability of coresiding with adult children is in-
creased by parents’ advanced age, failing health, and absence
of a spouse.
The accomplishments of adult children have signiﬁcant
effects on the well-being of their parents. Research by Ryff,
Schmutte, and Lee (1996) revealed that parents’well-being is
linked to assessments of how their children have turned out,
how the accomplishments of these children compare with
those of their parents, and the extent to which the parents see
themselves as responsible for their children. Parents felt
better about themselves when they saw their children as
doing well. However, parents who felt that their children
were doing better than they themselves had done as young
adults had lower levels of well-being. Parents who evaluated
their children as less successful reported lower levels of
responsibility and had the lowest levels of well-being.
Much has been written about ﬁlial responsibility. Early
research by Seelbach (1984) investigated the extent to which

494
Social Relationships in Adulthood and Old Age
older parents expected their children to assist them in times
of need, live near or share a home with them, have contact
with them, and provide various forms of emergency assis-
tance. This research found that holding expectations of high
ﬁlial responsibility was inversely related to morale of the
older parents. An interesting analysis contrasting expecta-
tions for ﬁlial responsibility from the perspective of multiple
generations of women by Brody, Johnsen, and Fulcomer
(1984) revealed that although each successively younger
generation expressed more egalitarian attitudes about the ap-
propriateness of both sons’ and daughters’ providing parental
care than the previous one, all respondents believed that
children should be available to help parents when help is
needed.
In the United States, parents and their adult children usu-
ally have frequent contact with one another (Troll, Miller, &
Atchley, 1979), and even where geographic distance is con-
siderable, they usually maintain contact (Dewit, Wister, &
Burch, 1988). In addition to being in contact with one an-
other, parents and their adult children are often involved in
extensive exchange networks with one another (G. R. Lee &
Ellithorpe, 1982). On the whole, older parents continue to
provide support of various kinds to their adult children and
are more likely to give help to than to receive help from their
adult children (Riley & Foner, 1968) until forced by health
declines to stop.
Siblings
The sibling bond occupies a unique position among family
relationships. It has the potential to last longer than any other
human relationship; it includes people who share a common
genetic, cultural, and experiential heritage; and because it is
an ascribed rather than an achieved role, it remains part of an
individual’s identity regardless of changes in marital status,
place of residence, or ﬁnancial well-being (Bedford, 1996a,
1996b; Cicirelli, 1995). Yet despite the sibling bond’s cen-
trality within an individual’s life, research about adult sibling
relationships has received little scholarly attention, especially
when contrasted with the vast number of studies that have
examined spouse and parent-child relationships (Campbell,
Connidis, & Davies, 1999; Goetting, 1986).
Sibling relationships vary over the life course. After in-
tense relations in childhood and adolescence, siblings tend to
withdraw into families of procreation in adulthood, but come
closer together again as their children leave home and their
spouses die (Campbell et al., 1999; Goetting, 1986; T. R. Lee,
Mancini, & Maxwell, 1990). Research regarding relation-
ships among siblings during middle and old age varies in its
conclusions about the strength of ties between siblings.
Most studies of the relationships between adult siblings
indicate that these relationships are characterized by support-
iveness, concern, and mutual affection (Cicirelli, 1995, 1996;
Miner & Uhlenberg, 1997), yet these relationships are ex-
pressed differently from the way they were in early childhood
(Cicirelli, 1988; Scott, 1990). In terms of exchange, some
studies ﬁnd that adult siblings exchange many services and
have frequent contact (e.g., Wellman & Wortley, 1989),
whereas other studies ﬁnd evidence of limited support and
contact (Avioli, 1989). When instrumental aid is exchanged
between adult siblings, the situation is ordinarily temporary
in duration, aid is received reluctantly, and it is accepted only
if assistance from a spouse or adult child is not available
(Avioli, 1989; Cicirelli, 1991). Both Cicirelli (1995) and
Ross and Milgram (1982) found that the frequency of contact
and kinds of involvement adult siblings have with one an-
other are volitional and dependent on circumstances. Siblings
stand ready to help one another in time of need and provide
a sense of companionship and support when there is a crisis
or serious family problem (Connidis, 1994).
Sibling support is especially important for unmarried
adults, for older people, and for people experiencing short-
term crises (Campbell et al., 1999; Connidis, 1989). Nonethe-
less, direct care by one sibling for another in middle or old
age is the exception rather than the rule. Research indicates
that most older people have at least one living sibling
(Cicirelli, 1996) and that they see their siblings at least sev-
eral times a year. Very few siblings actually lose contact with
one another.
In general, adults express positive feelings about their
sibling relationships, with gender (females higher than
males) and race (African Americans higher than European
Americans) affecting feelings of intimacy, congeniality, and
loyalty (Bedford, 1995; Cicirelli, 1995; Miner & Uhlenberg,
1997). Relationships with sisters are particularly important in
old age, whether it is a sister-sister or brother-sister relation-
ship (Cicirelli, 1996).
Sibling rivalry is low throughout adulthood and old age.
Rivalry is greatest between pairs of brothers and least
between cross-sex siblings (Cicirelli, 1985). Research by
Bedford (1992) suggests that the sibling relationship waxes
and wanes depending on critical events, including marriage
or divorce, changing interests, employment change, reloca-
tion, illness and death, behavior and achievement of children,
and family arguments.
Friends
In contrast to most primary social relationships, those be-
tween friends are marked by their voluntary nature. Scholars

Social Relationships in the Context of Illness and Disability
495
have been interested in understanding how friendships are
formed and maintained. They have also analyzed friendship
networks (Blieszner & Adams, 1992). Adams and Blieszner
(1994) presented an integrative conceptual framework for
studying adult friendships. The framework posits that the
social structural and psychological aspects of individual
characteristics operate together to shape behavioral motifs,
which in turn inﬂuence friendship patterns. However, very
few empirical studies of adult friendships exist.
Research on friends has focused on describing the effects
of various personal characteristics on friendship patterns.
Fischer and Oliker (1983) found that middle-aged men tend
to have a larger number of friends and middle-aged women
tend to have friendships that are more intimate. Friendship
patterns are likely to change as people make life-course
transitions (Allan & Adams, 1989) or as they mature
(Brown, 1991). L. Weiss and Lowenthal (1975) found that
older adults—more than middle-aged or younger ones—
tended to have complex, multidimensional friendships.
Adult friendship networks tend to be homogeneous in terms
of occupational status, ethnicity, age, marital status, income,
education, gender, and religion (Fischer, 1982; Laumann,
1973).
SOCIAL RELATIONSHIPS IN THE CONTEXT
OF ILLNESS AND DISABILITY
As indicated previously, social relationships between adults
are marked by varying degrees of reciprocity and interdepen-
dence. When an adult suffers from illness or disability, the
nature of most of the social relationships in which he or she is
engaged changes dramatically. Although a vast literature has
focused on the effects that illness and disability have on the
mental health of caregivers (Schulz, O’Brien, Bookwala, &
Fleissner, 1995), less attention has been paid to the effects
that chronic illness and disability have on social relation-
ships. The next section reviews what is known about rela-
tionships between spouses, parents and children, siblings,
and friends in the context of illness and disability.
When a person becomes ill or disabled and requires assis-
tance, this aid is generally provided by one primary caregiver.
Shanas’s (1979) observation that caregivers respond follow-
ing a “principle of substitution” still rings true. The hierarchy
of caregivers begins with a spouse. In the absence of a
spouse, an adult daughter generally assumes the role of pri-
mary caregiver. Sons and daughters-in-law play signiﬁcant
roles when daughters and spouses are not available. Other
family members and friends play the role of caregiver when
alternatives are not available, although there is evidence
that the caregiving role becomes less intense as the caregiver
becomes more removed from the care receiver.
There has been some discussion in the literature about
how the quality of the relationship between caregiver and
care recipient affects various outcomes. One of the few
theoretical perspectives to examine the role that quality of
relationship has on outcomes was posited by Lawrence,
Tennstedt, and Assmann (1998). Their perspective suggested
that quality of the relationship would play a signiﬁcant role as
mediator or moderator of the relationship between primary
stressors and caregiver well-being. Empirically they found
that relationship quality had a direct effect on outcomes, with
higher levels of relationship quality related to lower levels of
depression. The mediating and moderating roles of rela-
tionship quality were more modest. Relationship quality
mediated the linkage between problem behaviors and role
captivity, a ﬁnding that Lawrence et al. (1998) explain as due
to problem behaviors’ causing a decrease in relationship
quality because of increased role captivity. Townsend and
Franks (1995) found evidence that the quality of relation-
ships between adult child caregivers and their elderly parents
mediated the impact of the parents’ impairment on the adult
children’s well-being.
Spouse
Chronic illness can affect marital status, marital satisfaction,
marital quality, and marital interaction (Burman & Margolin,
1992) by shifting the core relationship. The literature examin-
ing a link between the onset of chronic illness and divorce is
equivocal, with some studies ﬁnding that divorce is more
prevalent among individuals with chronic illness, whereas
others ﬁnd that the divorce rates of persons with chronic ill-
ness do not differ from those in the general population
(Revenson, 1994). Rolland (1994) has suggested that the
onset of chronic illness forcefully challenges the emotional
and physical boundaries of a couple’s relationship. Maintain-
ing emotional connection and knowing how to help one an-
other and how to build the other’s self-esteem are important
processes in achieving good marital functioning in illness.
Litman (1979) posited that strong marriages become
stronger and weak marriages deteriorate in the face of
chronic illness. An alternative hypothesis is that close fami-
lies become severely strained and less enmeshed relation-
ships are better able to adapt to illness. Empirical studies
suggest that although some couples report that their mar-
riages become stronger during the course of illness (Fuller &
Swensen, 1992), other couples become overwhelmed by the
demands of the illness. Wallerstein and Blakeslee (1995) sug-
gest that change of any kind has the potential to strengthen or

496
Social Relationships in Adulthood and Old Age
weaken marriage depending on the transactional patterns
developed to meet illness tasks or challenges.
Husbands and wives experience unique stresses as a result
of living with a person who is chronically ill. Spouses oc-
cupy a dual role when one member has a chronic illness.
They are the primary providers of support to the ill person
and they are also the family members who need support as
they cope with illness-related stressors. Revenson (1994) has
suggested that some of the stresses emanate directly from
caregiving—spouses are inextricably involved in decision-
making about treatment and day-to-day care. Other stresses
emerge from the need to restructure family roles and respon-
sibilities as the disease progresses. Still other stresses are ﬁl-
tered through the lens of the individual’s experience, as in the
case of a spouse who feels helpless at seeing his or her part-
ner in pain.
The chronic illness of a spouse can be particularly chal-
lenging when the concomitant role responsibilities lie outside
of traditional gender roles. For example, when married
women are afﬂicted with disabling illness such as rheumatoid
arthritis or multiple sclerosis, husbands need to take on a
greater share of household chores. Similarly, some wives of
men whose employment is terminated by disability ﬁnd that
they need to work outside the home.
Spouses are the ﬁrst line of defense when it comes to care-
giving. They provide love and affection as well as tangible
assistance with day-to-day responsibilities and special needs
created by treatment regimens; validate the patient’s emo-
tions or coping choices; help their partners reappraise the
meaning of the illness; and share the existential and practical
concerns about how the illness may affect the marriage and
family in the future. Frail older people who are cared for by
spouses are likely to be more impaired and in greater need of
long-term care than are those assisted by other informal care-
givers (Hess & Soldo, 1985). Studies focusing on spouse
caregivers reveal that although women do not necessarily
provide more hours of care than do men, they tend to provide
more intimate types of care, have more frequent contacts, and
more often have to deal with disruptive and aggressive be-
haviors (L. K. Wright, Clipp, & George, 1993). When men do
care for an impaired spouse, they are more likely to receive
outside sources of assistance than when women provide care
to an impaired spouse (Johnson & Catalano, 1983).
Spouses of individuals with chronic illness often experi-
ence depression and anxiety, marital communication difﬁcul-
ties, sleeping disorders, problems at work, and compromised
immune system functioning (Coyne & Smith, 1991; Elliot,
Trief, & Stein, 1986; Kiecolt-Glaser et al., 1987). Some
research has found that spouses of ill persons experience
even greater levels of distress than their partners do (Coyne,
Ellard, & Smith, 1990) and that this distress persists over
time (Michela, 1987).
Because sexual intimacy is often important within the
marital relationship, chronic illness has the potential to dra-
matically alter this relationship. Research across a number of
different illness conditions has documented decreased sexual
desire and activity, interference with sexual performance, and
increased dissatisfaction with sexual functioning (Andersen,
Anderson, & DeProsse, 1989).
Much of the research that has examined changes in the
marital relationship in the context of disability has focused on
people who are coping with cognitive impairment. These
studies reported that signiﬁcant declines in marital inti-
macy and quality were associated with the caregiving role
(Blieszner & Shifﬂett, 1990; Morris, Morris, & Britton, 1988;
L. K. Wright, 1991). Theories invoked to explain these
changes include social exchange, equity theory, and role the-
ory. Social exchange and equity theories suggest that persons
who become caregivers will experience less marital happi-
ness than will noncaregivers because of the inequities in ben-
eﬁts and costs associated with the caregiving role (Buunk &
Hoorens, 1992). Role theory suggests that marriages coping
with chronic illness and caregiving may “suffer a crisis be-
cause of the resulting challenge to the established role and
myths that maintained the system” (S. C. Thompson & Pitts,
1991, p. 121). Russo and Vitaliano (1995) found that care-
giver spouses reported signiﬁcantly more changes in their
marital relationship over time than did noncaregivers.
Burman and Margolin (1992) found that spousal illness can
affect marital quality and marital interaction. Townsend and
Franks (1997) found that greater cognitive impairment of a
spouse (but not greater functional impairment) was related to
less emotional closeness between spouses. Booth and
Johnson (1994) reported that health declines in a spouse were
associated with declining marital happiness and with an
increase in proneness to divorce.
Tower, Kasl, and Moritz (1997) contend that cognitive
impairment can alter the marital relationship in a number of
ways. Cognitive decline in a partner can result in changes in
personality, mood regulation, behavior, memory, planning,
reason, and judgment, all of which have the capacity to inter-
fere with maintenance of empathic connections in close
relationships. Cognitive decline can represent the loss of a
resource, loss of emotional closeness, and change in the
meaning of dependency. Tower et al. (1997) suggest that cop-
ing with the cognitive impairment of a spouse may be far
more difﬁcult when the couple is emotionally close than
when a less intense relationship characterizes the couple.
They posit that continuation of mutual closeness in the con-
text of a spouse’s severe impairment may represent a failure

Social Relationships in the Context of Illness and Disability
497
in adaptation. There is some evidence that close couples are
more affected by changes in a spouse than are less close cou-
ples (Tower & Kasl, 1996). Tower et al. (1997) found that
marital closeness moderated the impact of a wife’s cognitive
impairment, with husbands in close marriages affected more
strongly than husbands in less close marriages. These effects
were not found for wives.
The nature and intensity of distress experienced by
spouses of persons with chronic illness may be linked to the
particular challenges presented by a particular diagnosis
(Revenson, 1994). The emotional turmoil experienced by
spouses of cancer patients parallels the concerns expressed
by patients, focusing on fears of recurrence and death (van
der Does & Duyvis, 1989). Spouses of heart disease patients,
concerned about a second—possibly fatal—infarction, walk
a tightrope between being supportive and protective of their
partner, yet not trying to be too controlling and solicitous, and
minimizing or hiding their fears and concerns from their
spouses (Coyne & Smith, 1991). Studies of patients with
rheumatoid arthritis, a highly painful and disabling condition,
but one with low life-threat, suggest that the greatest burden
is in the areas of social and leisure activities, family activi-
ties, sex, and taking on additional household responsibilities
as the patient becomes more disabled (Newman & Revenson,
1993).
Cannon and Cavanaugh (1998) describe the changes that
ensue for couples when one member develops chronic ob-
structive pulmonary disease. They ﬁnd that when illness al-
ters system inputs and increases stress, interpersonal stress
and tension may disorganize system functioning. As the
patient experiences dyspnea, both partners may limit social
activities in order to reduce demands on the patient. As a con-
sequence, opportunities fostering support and self-worth are
lost, and feelings of sadness, depression, and guilt can occur.
Over time, demands on marital functioning spiral upward as
physical functioning declines for the patient and support out-
side the marital dyad decreases. The physical changes may
interfere with each spouse’s perceptions and responses to the
other’s behaviors and expressed feelings, emotions, and
thoughts. Over time the health of both spouses as well as their
relationship may become jeopardized.
Marital functioning in chronic illness is altered by the
increasing demands of illness-related tasks (Cannon &
Cavanaugh, 1998). Corbin and Strauss (1984) describe the
need for collaboration between partners in the concurrent
management of their individual life trajectories and the
chronic illness trajectory.
Little is known about how the marital relationship is al-
tered when one member of the couple is dying and the end of
the relationship is near. Research on cancer patients and their
spouses describes an increase in the expression of affection
(Rait & Lederberg, 1989) and an increase in problems in the
relationship caused by the stress of cancer (Knakal, 1988;
Pederson & Valanis, 1988). Swensen and Fuller (1992) found
that husbands and wives coping with cancer reported ex-
pressing more love to each other after the diagnosis of cancer
and more love than did a comparison group not coping with a
life-threatening health condition. There were no differences
in marriage problems reported by the two groups of spouses.
Cancer couples reported feeling less committed to one an-
other after the diagnosis of cancer, suggesting that a process
of anticipatory grief and “letting go” had begun.
Parent-Adult Child
In the absence of a spouse, an adult daughter usually assumes
responsibility for caring for a disabled parent (Horowitz,
1985a). Although sons do participate in parent care, they typ-
ically become primary caregivers only when there is not an
available female sibling (Horowitz, 1985b). Of the caregiv-
ing sons surveyed by Horowitz (1985b), 88% were either
only children, had only male siblings, or were the only child
geographically available. Moreover, when sons were identi-
ﬁed as the primary caregiver, they were more likely than
were daughters to rely on their spouses for additional sup-
port, less likely to provide as much overall assistance to their
parents, and less likely to help with “hands-on” tasks such as
bathing and dressing. Dwyer and Coward (1991), in a multi-
variate analysis, found that even after controlling for a vari-
ety of factors known to inﬂuence the relationship between
gender and the provision of care to impaired elders (age,
gender, and level of impairment of the elder; marital status,
age, employment status, and proximity of the adult child),
daughters were 3.22 times more likely than sons to provide
assistance with activities of daily living (ADL) and 2.56
times more likely to provide assistance with instrumental
activities of daily living (IADL).
Although the stereotypical model of help for elderly par-
ents is that of one adult daughter who assumes the entire bur-
den of providing help to elderly parents, there is evidence
suggesting that in many families adult siblings share parent
care responsibilities more equitably. Matthews and her col-
leagues (Matthews, Delaney, & Adamek, 1989; Matthews &
Rosner, 1988) examined the helping behaviors of the entire
sibling subsystem. Pairs of sisters in a two-child family
tended to share responsibility for both tangible help and
moral support to their parents, with an almost equal division
when both sisters were employed. In larger families, sisters
tended to provide regular, routine help to the parents or to
help in a backup capacity, whereas help provided by brothers

498
Social Relationships in Adulthood and Old Age
tended to be limited to a few areas of male expertise, to be
sporadic, or to be nonexistent. Coward and Dwyer (1990)
also found that brothers from mixed-gender sibling networks
provided signiﬁcantly less help to parents than did their sis-
ters, but that brothers from single-gender siblings provided
approximately as much help as did sisters from single-gender
sibling relationships. Dwyer, Henretta, Coward, and Barton
(1992) found that a given adult child’s initiation or cessation
of help to an impaired elderly parent was dependent on the
helping behaviors of that child’s siblings. Cicirelli (1992)
reports that in about half the families he studied, all siblings
coordinated their efforts in providing care to disabled par-
ents. In about a fourth of the families there was partial coor-
dination of efforts, and in the remaining fourth of the families
each sibling helped with care as he or she wished, indepen-
dently of the others.
Although the overwhelming majority of literature about
the effects of disability on parent-child relationships has cen-
tered on situations in which the parent becomes ill, there is
growing attention to understanding parent-child relationships
of adult children with chronic disability. As parents of chron-
ically disabled children enter old age, they face not only the
health problems and social changes experienced by their age
peers, but they also must confront the challenges associated
with the needs of their aging child. As time passes, the situa-
tion ensues in which there is increased likelihood that the
older adult child may require care from very old parents who
themselves may require care. Because of differences in life
expectancy between men and women—as well as the ten-
dency for the current cohort of women to have assumed the
primary role of lifelong caregiver—mothers of chronically
disabled adult children are more likely than fathers are to ﬁnd
themselves in the role of primary caregiver.
The trend towards deinstitutionalization has resulted in
parents—especially mothers—having long-term caregiving
responsibilities for their severely disabled adult children suf-
fering from developmental disability or from severe mental
illness, including schizophrenia (Fujiura & Braddock, 1992;
Leﬂey, 1987). Although the majority of empirical studies
have focused on the effects that these caregiving relation-
ships have on the caregiving parents (Greenberg, Seltzer, &
Greenley, 1993; Pruchno, Patrick, & Burant, 1996), it is
likely that relationship quality and reciprocity between parent
and adult play important roles.
Siblings
Although people with disabilities and poor health generally
do not turn to their siblings for support, among people who
never married and those who are widowed, help from
siblings often becomes the ﬁrst line of defense (Johnson &
Catalano, 1981). Gold (1989) reports that sisters both give
and receive more help than do brothers. Gold also found that
when people stopped providing assistance to their siblings, it
was because their own health had declined.
Friends
Although friendships remain important to well-being into
late life, certain concomitants of age—especially old age—
have been shown to negatively affect friendship relation-
ships. Poor health, especially when it involves functional
limitations, has a negative impact on friendships (Allan &
Adams, 1989; Mendes de Leon et al., 1999).
Little scholarly research has examined the conditions
under which friends become caregivers, the extent to which
they provide care, and for whom care is provided. Himes and
Reidy (2000) suggest that the role of friends in caregiving is
important from two perspectives. First, in some instances
friends provide the bulk of care and are an important source
of support. Although friends may constitute a small part of
the national informal care network, for some individuals they
may be a vital source of assistance (Cantor, 1979). Second,
the role of friends may increase over time if families become
unable or unwilling to provide the level of care needed by
frail and disabled family members.
When illness strikes, friends are more likely to provide
support when family support is not an option, when short-
term assistance is needed, when the need for help is unpre-
dictable, or when it is convenient. Cantor (1979) found that
nonrelatives, both friends and neighbors, were a valuable
source of care for those without family members. Unmarried
older women rely more on their friends for both emotional
and instrumental support than do their married peers
(Roberto & Scott, 1984). Friends often provide emotional
support to one another (Adams & Blieszner, 1989; Roberto,
1996). They generally provide only limited instrumental sup-
port, with the most common type of help being transporta-
tion (Roberto, 1996; Roberto & Scott, 1984). Furthermore,
research indicates that friends help with transportation when
they can do so conveniently, or in an emergency when no one
else is available. They also help with home repairs, with
shopping or errands, and with household tasks. Reinhardt
(1996) documented the importance of friendship support in-
dependent of family support to people adapting to chronic
visual impairment.
Using data from the National Survey of Families and
Households, Himes and Reidy (2000) examined the roles that
friends play in the provision of care. They found that among
caregivers, women providing care to a friend are more likely

Losing Social Relationships
499
to be age peers and less likely to be employed or married than
were family caregivers. Friends were less likely than were
family members to take on care responsibilities when those
responsibilities conﬂicted with other roles. Additionally,
when friends do provide care, they provide that care for
shorter periods of time and for fewer hours.
LOSING SOCIAL RELATIONSHIPS
Much can be understood about the value of social relation-
ships from research that has examined reactions to lost social
relationships. Loss of a signiﬁcant social relationship can
affect the structure and dynamics of other relationships
(Perkins, 1990). A death in the family, for example, may lead
to increased closeness or strain in relationships among sur-
viving family members.
Spouse
In the United States, the marital relationship can be termi-
nated either by death or by divorce. With age, the likelihood
of divorce decreases, whereas the likelihood of death of a
spouse increases. However, women are more likely to expe-
rience divorce and less likely to experience widowhood
today than they were 30 years ago.
In 1998, 19.4 million adults—representing 9.8% of the
adult population—were divorced (Lugaila, 1998). Divorce is
prevalent in the United States, with projections suggesting
that almost half of all marriages will end in divorce (Cherlin,
1992; Furstenberg, 1990). Marital disruption is not randomly
distributed. The risk of divorce in ﬁrst marriages is far higher
for younger couples than for those marrying after their
early twenties (Furstenberg, 1990). Similarly, high-school
dropouts have twice the rate of marital breakup as those with
at least some college, and the rate of divorce is about 50%
higher among African Americans than among European
Americans (Castro-Martin & Bumpass, 1989). Second mar-
riages have a higher risk of divorce than do ﬁrst marriages
(McCarthy, 1978).
A great deal of research has addressed the extent to which
divorce is predictable. Gottman and Levenson (2000) con-
tend that there are two periods critical to the survival of a
marriage: the ﬁrst 7 years of the marriage, during which half
of all divorces occur (Cherlin, 1992); and at midlife, when
people often have young teenage children. The set of vari-
ables that predicted early divorcing was different from the set
that predicted later divorcing. Negative affect during conﬂict
predicted early divorcing, but it did not predict later divorc-
ing. In contrast, the lack of positive affect in events of the day
and conﬂict discussions predicted later divorcing but not
early divorcing.
Research consistently indicates that people who are di-
vorced experience lower levels of psychological well-being
than do people who are married (Aseltine & Kessler, 1993;
Davies, Avison, & McAlpine, 1997; Marks & Lambert,
1998). Wang and Amato (2000) found that adjustment to di-
vorce was positively associated with income, dating someone
steadily, remarriage, having favorable attitudes toward mari-
tal dissolution prior to divorce, and being the partner who ini-
tiated the divorce. Economically, divorce has more severe
implications for women than for men (Furstenberg, 1990).
Divorce has been called a transitional family status be-
cause eventually nearly 75% of divorced men and 60% of
divorced women reenter marriage (Spanier & Furstenberg,
1987). Men remarry more quickly than do women, in large
measure due to the greater availability of marriage partners.
When a spouse dies, the survivor must not only adjust to
the loss of a close relationship, but also manage the daily de-
cisions and responsibilities that were once shared by both
spouses (Wortman, Kessler, & Umberson, 1992). Consistent
evidence indicates that widowhood is associated with re-
duced psychological health (Stroebe & Stroebe, 1987). Most
research ﬁnds that within the ﬁrst few months of bereave-
ment, recently widowed people show worse mental health
than do married controls (Gallagher-Thompson, Futterman,
Farberow, Thompson, & Peterson, 1993; Lund, Caserta, &
Dimond, 1993).
It is unclear, however, how long these effects last. Al-
though longitudinal studies typically ﬁnd that widowed and
married people are similar to one another after a year or two
(Gallagher-Thompson et al., 1993; Harlow, Goldberg, &
Comstock, 1991; Lund et al., 1993; Mendes de Leon,
Kasl, & Jacobs, 1994), cross-sectional studies typically ﬁnd
that widowed individuals score higher on depression scales
than do married people even 4 years postdeath (Lehman,
Wortman, & Williams, 1987; Zisook & Shuchter, 1986).
Using a prospective research design that contrasted the
experiences of twins—one who experienced widowhood and
one who did not—Lichtenstein, Gatz, Pedersen, Berg, and
McClearn (1996) found that widowhood had both short-term
and long-term effects on psychosocial health. They found
that recently bereaved individuals of both sexes reported
more loneliness and depressive symptoms and less satisfac-
tion with life compared to their married twins. These twin
control analyses also indicated that among women, the
married twin experienced greater well-being than did her
long-term bereaved twin, even after 5 years of widowhood.
Results from this study show that long-term widowed indi-
viduals who have been bereaved an average of 17 years for

500
Social Relationships in Adulthood and Old Age
women and 13 years for men still have lower psychosocial
health than do married individuals. These investigators found
that widowhood had no effects on self-rated health status.
All losses, however, are not equal. An interesting analysis
by Carr et al. (2000) concludes that adjustment to widow-
hood is most difﬁcult for those experiencing high levels of
warmth and instrumental dependence and low levels of con-
ﬂict in their marriages.
An issue that has been the subject of many studies is
whether widowhood is more traumatic for men or for women.
Widowhood is a more common experience among women
than among men. Although some studies report no gender
differences in the psychological consequences of widowhood
(Faletti, Gibbs, Clark, Pruchno, & Berman, 1989; Lund,
Caserta, & Dimond, 1989), others found widowed women to
be more distressed than widowed men (L. W. Thompson,
Gallagher, Cover, Galewski, & Peterson, 1989). Most stud-
ies, however, have found widowhood to have a more adverse
effect on men than on women (G. R. Lee, DeMaris, Bavin, &
Sullivan, 2001; Mendes de Leon, Kasl et al., 1994). G. R. Lee
et al. (2001) explain that this effect is largely due to the com-
paratively low levels of depressive symptoms among married
men. Although widowed men and women experience similar
rates of depressive symptomatology, for men, marriage is
such a strong barrier to the symptoms of depression that the
end of marriage results in higher rates of depression.
Parent-Adult Child
One of the most common deaths faced by adults is the death of
a parent. Demographers report that the death of a mother is
most likely to occur when children are between the ages of 45
and64andthatthedeathofafatherismostlikelytooccurwhen
children are between the ages of 35 and 54 (Winsborough,
Bumpass, & Aquilino, 1991). Annually, approximately 5% of
the U.S. population experiences this type of loss (Moss &
Moss, 1983).
Researchers have examined the impact of death of a par-
ent on their middle-aged children’s emotions (Norris &
Murrell, 1990; Scharlach, 1991). Scharlach (1991) found that
adult children had a range of persistent emotional responses
to their parent’s death, including being upset, crying, having
painful memories, experiencing loneliness, and being preoc-
cupied with thoughts of their parent. Research by Douglas
(1990–1991), Kowalski (1986), Robbins (1990), and
Scharlach (1991) examined the extent to which death of a
parent affects the sense of self experienced by their middle-
aged children.
Another aspect of bereavement that has been examined is
family relationships. Umberson (1995), studying a national
sample, found that marital quality is negatively affected by
the death of a parent. Compared with nonbereaved individu-
als, individuals who have recently experienced the death of a
mother exhibit a greater decline in social support from their
partner and an increase in their partner’s negative behavior.
Compared with nonbereaved individuals, individuals who
have recently experienced the death of a father exhibit a
greater increase in relationship strain and frequency of con-
ﬂict, as well as a greater decline in relationship harmony;
similar ﬁndings are reported by Douglas (1990–1991) and
Guttman (1991). Rosenthal (1985) found that if the deceased
parent had a central role in the family, that person’s death
caused a ripple effect in the same and younger generations.
Fuller-Thomson (2000) reports that people who have experi-
enced the death of at least one parent and those who have a
parent in ill health are more likely to report that they do not
get along well with a sibling.
A number of background characteristics of adult children
and their parents have been associated with bereavement.
Scharlach (1991) and Moss, Moss, Rubinstein, and Resch
(1993) found that younger adult children were more affected
by grief than were older adult children. Scharlach found that
children with higher levels of income and education were
more affected by a parent’s death than were those with lower
socioeconomic status. Moss, Resch, and Moss (1997) report
that daughters expressed more emotional upset, somatic re-
sponse, and continuing ties with their deceased parent than
did sons, whereas sons reported more acceptance of their par-
ent’s death than did daughters.
Sibling
Adults generally have siblings throughout their lives. When
an adult dies there is often a surviving sibling to grieve over
the loss. Moss and Moss (1986, 1989) identiﬁed three inter-
twined themes experienced by adults who lose a sibling to
death: impact on the personal meaning of death, threat
to self, and shifts in family alignments. They contend that
when a sibling dies, the survivor often experiences feelings
of personal vulnerability to death. Because siblings are
members of the same generation, sibling deaths—except
among those who are extremely old—are perceived as “off
time.” The sense of vulnerability may be especially strong
for the last surviving sibling. Death of a sibling has the po-
tential to require a shift in the expectations and goals that
the survivor has for him- or herself. It can also alter the
unity of the family and realign family relationships. It can
lead to a redistribution of roles and a shift in family expec-
tations as family members renegotiate relationships with one
another.

Next Steps
501
Friends
Death of a friend has received very little research attention.
Sklar and Hartley (1990) used the term hidden grief to de-
scribe friends who silently grieve the death of close friends.
They suggest that these forgotten mourners are at increased
risk for complications of bereavement because they may
experience the social and emotional transformations of be-
reavement while they are forced to suffer the lack of institu-
tional outlets that act as supports for the transformations. The
degree of grief and mourning that follow the death of a friend
varies as a function of the age of the friends and the intensity
and centrality of the friendship (Kemp, 1999).
NEXT STEPS
Although a great deal is known about social relationships be-
tween adults, scientists have only begun to scratch the sur-
face regarding our understanding of these relationships and
the effects that they can have. Conceptual thinking about so-
cial relationships has been anchored in descriptions of how
social relationships change over time. The concept of a con-
voy of supportive people—some of whom change over time,
others who remain stable, surrounding an individual as he or
she ages—is compelling. That reduced rates of social interac-
tion in later life are the result of a lifelong selection process
by which people strategically use these convoys to maximize
rewards and minimize risk suggests the active role that peo-
ple take in making and breaking social relationships.
Relationships with close family members and with friends
are different. They have different functions and different
effects on people. Yet little is known about the processes
through which these relationships affect psychological well-
being. Future studies examining this issue are needed.
One of the striking conclusions about the current state of
the art regarding social relationships in adulthood and aging is
the extent to which there is consistency in ﬁndings across the
empirical studies. Although on the one hand this similarity is
reassuring, one wonders whether it represents a true picture of
social relationships or whether it is a function of the homo-
geneity of people who have participated in the research. There
has been very little attention to diversity in studies of social
relationships in adulthood. As a result, it is unclear whether
these ﬁndings can be generalized to people of different races,
socioeconomic classes, and ethnic backgrounds. One very ex-
citing area for future research is exploration of the extent to
which these ﬁndings generalize to diverse populations.
One of the most compelling aspects of research about so-
cial relationships in adulthood and aging is that these rela-
tionships can have negative as well as positive effects on
people. The tendency for too much support to be as detri-
mental as too little is intriguing and begs for further research.
Questions such as How much support is too much? await
future study. More research is needed to understand how
negative social relationships develop, how people cope with
them, and how they change over time.
Despite the overwhelming number of research studies that
have examined social relationships in adulthood and aging,
the current knowledge base is marked by its uneven under-
standing of these primary associations. Not surprisingly, rela-
tionships between spouses and those between parents and
children have received the greatest attention. However, our
understanding of the importance of sibling relationships and
of relationships between friends is in its infancy. Questions
about the role of lifelong friends and of relatively newfound
friends abound, as do questions about the ways in which
brothers and sisters affect the lives of one another. As re-
search begins to unravel more about these relationships, it
will be critical to do so with an understanding of the other
signiﬁcant social relationships in which individuals are en-
twined. The importance of friends and siblings for unmarried
people has been hinted at. These relationships will be espe-
cially important to study in the future.
Certainly a great deal remains to be learned about the
endings and loss of social relationships. Although much is
known about the effects of divorce, death of a spouse, and
death of a parent, little is known about the end of sibling and
friend relationships.
Research about social relationships in health and research
about these relationships in illness have developed relatively
independently of one another. Yet, it is important to under-
stand how relationships change as health changes. In order
to better understand these transitions, prospective studies of
social relationships are needed. By studying the social rela-
tionships of people who have illnesses that have different
trajectories and different effects on patients, greater under-
standing of how illnesses create changes in social relation-
ships will ensue.
Finally, it is interesting that although by deﬁnition, social
relationships include multiple actors, the overwhelming ma-
jority of research about social relationships has relied on
data collected from individuals. A more comprehensive un-
derstanding of social relationships in adulthood and aging
requires that data be collected from multiple perspectives
and analyzed from a group—rather than an individual—
perspective. For example, a more complete picture of the ef-
fects of illness on the marital dyad would collect and analyze
data from both the patient and the spouse, and greater under-
standing of parent-child relationships would derive from stud-
ies that collect and analyze data from both generations.

502
Social Relationships in Adulthood and Old Age
A number of unresolved issues remain regarding adult
social relationships. Their signiﬁcance to the psychological
and physical well-being of individuals has been documented,
but we have only begun to scratch the surface regarding our
understanding of the processes by which these effects ensue.
Whereas the focus of the previous several decades of re-
search has been on identifying the importance of social
relationships to individuals, the challenge for the next gener-
ation of research is to examine how these intricate associa-
tions develop and why they have such powerful and intricate
effects.
REFERENCES
Adams, R. G., & Blieszner, R. (1989). Perspectives on later life
friendship. Newbury, CA: Sage.
Adams, R. G., & Blieszner, R. (1994). An integrative conceptual
framework for friendship research. Journal of Social and Per-
sonal Relationships, 11, 163–184.
Adams, R. G., & Blieszner, R. (1995). Aging well with friends and
family. American Behavioral Scientist, 39, 209–224.
Allan, G., & Adams, R. G. (1989). Aging and the structure of friend-
ship. In R. G. Adams & R. Blieszner (Eds.), Older adult
friendship: Structure and processes (pp. 45–65). Newbury Park,
CA: Sage.
Andersen, B. L., Anderson, B., & DeProsse, C. (1989). Controlled
prospective longitudinal study of women with cancer I: Sexual
functioning outcomes. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psy-
chology, 57, 683–691.
Antonucci, T. C. (1985). Personal characteristics, social support,
and social behavior. In R. H. Binstock & E. Shanas (Eds.), Hand-
book on aging and the social sciences (2nd ed., pp. 94–128).
New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold.
Antonucci, T. C. (1990). Social supports and social relationships. In
R. H. Binstock & L. K. George (Eds.), Handbook of aging and
the social sciences (3rd ed., pp. 205–227). San Diego, CA:
Academic Press.
Antonucci, T. C., & Akiyama, H. (1987). Social networks in adult
life and a preliminary examination of the convoy model. Journal
of Gerontology, 42, 519–527.
Antonucci, T. C., & Akiyama, H. (1995). Convoys of social rela-
tions: Family and friendships within a lifespan context. In R.
Blieszner & V. H. Bedford (Eds.), Handbook of aging and the
family (pp. 355–371). Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
Antonucci, T. C., Akiyama, H., & Lansford, J. E. (1998). Negative
effects of close social relations. Family Relations, 47, 379–384.
Antonucci, T. C., & Jackson, J. S. (1987). Social support, interper-
sonal efﬁcacy, and health. In L. L. Carstensen & B. A. Edelstein
(Eds.), Handbook of clinical gerontology (pp. 291–311).
New York: Pergamon Press.
Aquilino, W. S. (1990). The likelihood of parent-adult child coresi-
dence: Effects of family structure and parental characteristics.
Journal of Marriage and the Family, 52, 405–419.
Aseltine, R. H., & Kessler, R. C. (1993). Marital disruption and de-
pression in a community sample. Journal of Health and Social
Behavior, 34, 237–251.
Atchley, R. C. (1992). Retirement and marital satisfaction. In M.
Szinovacz, D. J. Ekerdt, & B. H. Vinick (Eds.), Families and
retirement (pp. 145–158). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Avioli, P. S. (1989). The social support functions of siblings in later
life: A theoretical model. American Behavioral Scientist, 33,
45–57.
Bedford, V. H. (1992). Memories of parental favoritism and the
quality of parent-child ties. Journal of Gerontology: Social
Sciences, 47, S149–S155.
Bedford, V. H. (1995). Sibling relationships in middle and old age.
In R. Blieszner & V. H. Bedford (Eds.), Handbook of aging and
the family (pp. 201–222). Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
Bedford, V. H. (1996a). Relationships between adult siblings. In
A. E. Auhagen & M. von Salisch (Eds.), The diversity of human
relationships (pp. 120–140). New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Bedford, V. H. (1996b). Sibling interdependence in adulthood and
old age. In T. Brubaker (Ed.), Vision 2010: Families and aging
(pp. 18–19). Minneapolis, MN: National Conference on Family
Relations Press.
Bengtson, V. L., & Kuypers, J. A. (1971). Generational difference
and the developmental stake. Aging and Human Development, 2,
249–260.
Bengtson, V. L., & Roberts, R. E. L. (1991). Intergenerational soli-
darity in aging families: An example of formal theory construc-
tion. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 53, 856–870.
Berkman, L. F. (1995). The role of social relations in health promo-
tion. Psychosomatic Medicine, 57, 245–254.
Berkman, L. F., Leo-Summers, L., & Horwitz, R. I. (1992). Emo-
tional support and survival after myocardial infarction. Annals of
Internal Medicine, 117, 1003–1009.
Berkman, L. F., Seeman, T. E., Albert, M., Blazer, D., Kahn, R.,
Mohs, R., Finch, C., Schneider, E., Cotman, C., & McClearn, G.
(1993). High, usual and impaired functioning in community-
dwelling older men and women: Findings from the MacArthur
Foundation Research Network on Successful Aging. Journal of
Clinical Epidemiology, 46, 1129–1140.
Berkman, L. F., & Syme, S. L. (1979). Social networks, host resis-
tance, and mortality: A nine-year follow-up study of Alameda
County residents. American Journal of Epidemiology, 109,
186–204.
Blieszner, R., & Adams, R. G. (1992). Adult friendship. Newbury
Park, CA: Sage.
Blieszner, R., & Shifﬂett, P. A. (1990). The effects of Alzheimer’s
disease on close relationships between patients and caregivers.
Family Relations, 39, 57–62.

References
503
Bloom, J. R. (1990). The relationship of social support and health.
Social Science & Medicine, 30, 635–637.
Booth, A., & Johnson, D. R. (1994). Declining health and marital
quality. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 56, 218–223.
Bovbjerg, V. E., McCann, B. S., Brief, D. J., Follette, W. C., Retzlaff,
B. M., Dowdy, A. A., Walden, C. E., & Knopp, R. H. (1995).
Spouse support and long-term adherence to lipid-lowering diets.
American Journal of Epidemiology, 141, 451–460.
Brody, E., Johnsen, P. T., & Fulcomer, M. C. (1984). What should
adult children do for elderly parents? Opinions and preferences
of three generations of women. Journal of Gerontology, 39,
736–746.
Brown, B. B. (1991). A life-span approach to friendship choices. In
H. Z. Lopata & D. R. Maines (Eds.), Friendship in context
(pp. 23–50). Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Burman, B., & Margolin, G. (1992). Analysis of the association
between marital relationships and health problems: An interac-
tional perspective. Psychological Bulletin, 112, 39–63.
Buunk, B., & Hoorens, V. (1992). Social support and stress: The role
of social comparison and social exchange processes. British
Journal of Clinical Psychology, 31, 445–457.
Campbell, L. D., Connidis, I. A., & Davies, L. (1999). Sibling ties in
later life: A social network analysis. Journal of Family Issues,
20, 114–148.
Cannon, C. A., & Cavanaugh, J. C. (1998). Chronic illness in the
context of marriage: A systems perspective of stress and coping
in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Families, Systems and
Health, 16, 401–418.
Cantor, M. H. (1979). Neighbors and friends: An overlooked re-
source in the informal support system. Research on Aging, 1,
434–463.
Carr, D., House, J. S., Kessler, R. C., Nesse, R. M., Sonnega, J., &
Wortman, C. (2000). Marital quality and psychological adjust-
ment to widowhood among older adults: A longitudinal analysis.
Journal of Gerontology: Social Sciences, 55B, S197–S207.
Carstensen, L. L. (1991). Socioemotional selectivity theory: Social
activity in life-span context. Annual Review of Gerontology and
Geriatrics, 11, 195–217.
Carstensen, L. L. (1992). Social and emotional patterns in adult-
hood: Support for socioemotional selectivity theory. Psychology
and Aging, 7, 331–338.
Castro-Martin, T., & Bumpass, L. (1989). Recent trends and differ-
entials in marital disruption. Demography, 26, 37–51.
Chappell, N. L., & Badger, M. (1989). Social isolation and well-
being. Journal of Gerontology: Social Sciences, 44, S169–S176.
Cherlin, A. J., & Furstenberg, F. F., Jr. (1994). Stepfamilies in the
United States: A reconsideration. Annual Review of Sociology,
20, 359–381.
Cherlin, A. J. (1992). Marriage, divorce, remarriage. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Cicirelli, V. G. (1985). Sibling relationships throughout the life
cycle. In L. L’Abate (Ed.), The handbook of family psychology
and therapy (1st ed., pp. 177–214). Homewood, IL: Dorsey
Press.
Cicirelli, V. G. (1988). Interpersonal relationships among elderly
siblings: Implications for clinical practice. In M. D. Kahn &
K. G. Lewis (Eds.), Siblings in therapy (pp. 435–456). New
York: W.W. Norton.
Cicirelli, V. G. (1991). Sibling relationships in adulthood. Marriage
and Family Review, 16, 291–310.
Cicirelli, V. G. (1992). Family caregiving: Autonomous and pater-
nalistic decision making. Newbury, CA: Sage.
Cicirelli, V. G. (1995). Sibling relationships across the life span.
New York: Plenum Press.
Cicirelli, V. G. (1996). Sibling relationships in middle and old age.
In G. H. Brody (Ed.), Sibling relationships: Their causes and
consequences (pp. 47–73). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Connidis, I. A. (1989). Siblings as friends in later life. American
Behavioral Scientist, 33, 81–93.
Connidis, I. A. (1994). Sibling support in older age. Journal of
Gerontology: Social Sciences, 49, S309–S317.
Connidis, I. A., & Davies, L. (1990). Conﬁdants and companions
in later life. Journal of Gerontology: Social Sciences, 45,
S141–S149.
Corbin, J. M., & Strauss, A. L. (1984). Collaboration: Couples
working together to manage chronic illness. Image, 16, 109–115.
Coward, R. T., & Dwyer, J. W. (1990). The association of gender,
sibling network composition, and patterns of parent care by adult
children. Research on Aging, 12, 158–181.
Coyne, J. C., Ellard, J. H., & Smith, D. A. F. (1990). Social support,
interdependence, and the dilemmas of helping. In B. R. Sarason,
I. G. Sarason, & G. R. Pierce (Eds.), Social support: An interac-
tional view (pp. 129–149). New York: Wiley.
Coyne, J. C., & Smith, D. A. F. (1991). Couples coping with a
myocardial infarction: A perspective on wives distress. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 61, 404–412.
Crimmins, E. M., & Ingegneri, D. G. (1990). Interaction and living
arrangements of older parents and their children: Past trends,
present determinants, future implications. Research on Aging,
12, 3–35.
Cutrona, C. E., & Russell, D. W. (1987). The provisions of social
relationships and adaptation to stress. In W. H. Jones &
D. Perlman (Eds.), Advances in personal relationships (Vol. 1,
pp. 37–67). Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Davies, L., Avison, W. R., & McAlpine, D. D. (1997). Signiﬁcant
life experiences and depression among single and married
mothers. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 59, 294–308.
Davis, K. E., & Todd, M. J. (1985). Assessing friendship: Pro-
totypes, paradigm cases and relationship description. In S.
Duck & D. Perlman (Eds.), Understanding personal relation-
ships (pp. 17–37). London: Sage.
Dean, A., Matt, G. E., & Wood, P. (1992). The effects of widowhood
on social support from signiﬁcant others. Journal of Community
Psychology, 20, 309–325.

504
Social Relationships in Adulthood and Old Age
Dewit, D. J., Wister, A. V., & Burch, T. K. (1988). Physical distance
and social contact between elders and their adult children.
Research on Aging, 10, 56–80.
Dorfman, L. T. (1992). Couples in retirement: Division of household
work. In M. Szinovacz, D. J. Ekerdt, & B. H. Vinick (Eds.), Fam-
ilies and retirement (pp. 159–173). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Dorfman, L. T., & Hill, E. A. (1986). Rural housewives and retire-
ment: Joint decision-making matters. Family Relations, 35, 507–
514.
Douglas, J. D. (1990–1991). Patterns of change following parent
death in midlife adults. Omega, 22, 123–137.
Dwyer, J. W., & Coward, R. T. (1991). A multivariate comparison
of the involvement of adult sons versus daughters in the care of
impaired parents. Journal of Gerontology, 46, S259–S269.
Dwyer, J. W., Henretta, J. C., Coward, R. T., & Barton, A. J. (1992).
Changes in the helping behaviors of adult children as caregivers.
Research on Aging, 14, 351–375.
Elliot, D. J., Trief, P. M., & Stein, N. (1986). Mastery, stress, and
coping in marriage among chronic pain patients. Journal of
Behavioral Medicine, 9, 549–558.
Faletti, M. V., Gibbs, J. H., Clark, M. C., Pruchno, R. A., & Berman,
E. A. (1989). Longitudinal course of bereavement in older
adults. In D. A. Lund (Ed.), Older bereaved spouses: Research
with practical applications (pp. 37–51). New York: Hemisphere.
Felton, B. J., & Berry, C. A. (1992). Do the sources of the urban
elderly’s social support determine its psychological conse-
quences? Psychology and Aging, 7, 89–97.
Field, D., Minkler, M., Falk, R. F., & Leino, E. V. (1993). The in-
ﬂuence of health on family contacts and family feelings in
advanced old age: A longitudinal study. Journal of Gerontology:
Psychological Sciences, 48, P18–P28.
Fischer, C. S. (1982). To dwell among friends. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.
Fischer, C. S., & Oliker, S. J. (1983). A research note on friendship,
gender, and the life cycle. Social Forces, 62, 124–133.
Frederickson, B. L., & Carstensen, L. L. (1990). Choosing social
partners: How old age and anticipated endings make people
more selective. Psychology and Aging, 5, 163–171.
Fujiura, G. T., & Braddock, D. (1992). Fiscal and demographic
trends in mental retardation services: The emergence of the fam-
ily. In L. Rowitz (Ed.), Mental retardation in the year 2000
(pp. 203–217). New York: Springer.
Fuller, S., & Swensen, C. H. (1992). Marital quality and quality of
life among cancer patients and their spouses. Journal of Psy-
chosocial Oncology, 10, 41–56.
Fuller-Thomson, E. (2000). Loss of kin-keeper? Sibling conﬂict
following parental death. Omega, 40, 547–559.
Furstenberg, F. F. (1990). Divorce and the American family. Annual
Review of Sociology, 16, 379–403.
Gallagher-Thompson, D., Futterman, A., Farberow, N., Thompson,
L. W., & Peterson, J. (1993). The impact of spousal bereavement
on older widows and widowers. In M. S. Stroebe, W. Stroebe, &
R. O. Hansson (Eds.), Handbook of bereavement: Theory, re-
search, and intervention (pp. 227–239). New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Giarrusso, R., Stallings, M., & Bengtson, V. L. (1995). The “Inter-
generational Stake” hypothesis revisited. In V. L. Bengtson,
K. W. Schaie, & L. M. Burton (Eds.), Adult intergenerational
relations (pp. 227–263). New York: Springer.
Glass, T. A., Matchar, D. B., Belyea, M., & Feussner, J. R. (1993).
Impact of social support on outcome in ﬁrst stroke. Stroke, 24,
64–70.
Glenn, N. D. (1998). The course of marital success and failure in
ﬁve American 10-year marriage cohorts. Journal of Marriage
and the Family, 60, 569–576.
Goetting, A. (1986). The developmental tasks of siblingship over
the life cycle. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 48, 703–714.
Gold, D. T. (1989). Generational solidarity: Conceptual antecedents
and consequences. American Behavioral Scientist, 33, 19–32.
Goodman, C. C. (1999a). Intimacy and autonomy in long term
marriage. Journal of Gerontological Social Work, 32, 83–97.
Goodman, C. C. (1999b). Reciprocity of social support in long-term
marriage. Journal of Mental Health & Aging, 5, 341–357.
Gottman, J. M., & Levenson, R. W. (2000). The timing of divorce:
Predicting when a couple will divorce over a 14-year period.
Journal of Marriage and the Family, 62, 737–745.
Gove, W. R., Style, C. B., & Hughes, M. (1990). The effect of
marriage on the well-being of adults. Journal of Family Issues,
11, 4–35.
Greenberg, J. S., Seltzer, M. M., & Greenley, J. R. (1993). Aging
parents of adults with disabilities: The gratiﬁcations and frustra-
tions of later-life caregiving. Gerontologist, 33, 542–550.
Gupta, V., & Korte, C. (1994). The effects of a conﬁdant and a peer
group on the well-being of single elders. International Journal of
Aging and Human Development, 39, 293–302.
Guttman, H. A. (1991). Parental death as a precipitant of marital
conﬂict. Journal of Marital and Family Therapy, 17, 81–87.
Harlow, S. D., Goldberg, E. L., & Comstock, G. W. (1991). A longi-
tudinal study of the prevalence of depressive symptomatology in
elderly widowed and married women. Archives of General Psy-
chiatry, 48, 1065–1068.
Hatch, L. R., & Thompson, A. (1992). Family responsibilities and
women’s retirement. In M. Szinovacz, D. J. Ekerdt, & B. H.
Vinick (Eds.), Families and retirement (pp. 99–113). Newbury
Park, CA: Sage.
Hays, J. C., Landerman, L. R., George, L. K., Flint, E. P., Koenig,
H. G., Land, K. C., & Blazer, D. G. (1998). Social correlates of
the dimensions of depression in the elderly. Journal of Gerontol-
ogy: Psychological Sciences, 53B, P31–P39.
Hess, B., & Soldo, B. J. (1985). Husband and wife networks. In W. J.
Sauer & R. T. Coward (Eds.), Social support networks and the
care of the elderly: Theory, research, and practice (pp. 67–92).
New York: Springer.

References
505
Hill, E. A., & Dorfman, L. T. (1982). Reactions of housewives to the
retirement of their husbands. Family Relations, 31, 195–200.
Himes, C. L., & Reidy, E. B. (2000). The role of friends in caregiv-
ing. Research on Aging, 22, 315–336.
Horowitz, A. (1985a). Family caregiving to the frail elderly. In
C. Eisdorfer (Ed.), Annual review of gerontology and geriatrics
(Vol. 5, pp. 194–246). New York: Springer.
Horowitz, A. (1985b). Sons and daughters as caregivers to older
parents: Differences in role performance and consequences.
Gerontologist, 25, 612–617.
House, J. S., Landis, K. R., & Umberson, D. (1988). Social relation-
ships and health. Science, 241, 540–544.
Hurd, M. D. (1990). The joint retirement decision of husbands and
wives. In D. A. Wise (Ed.), Issues in the economics of aging
(pp. 231–258). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Huyck, M. H. (1995). Marriage and close relationships of the mari-
tal kind. In R. Blieszner & V. H. Bedford (Eds.), Handbook of
aging and the family (pp. 181–200). Westport, CT: Greenwood
Press.
Ingersoll-Dayton, B., Morgan, D., & Antonucci, T. (1997). The ef-
fects of positive and negative social exchanges on aging adults.
Journal of Gerontology: Social Sciences, 52B, S190–S199.
Jenkins, C. D., Stanton, B. A., & Jono, R. T. (1994). Quantifying
and predicting recovery after heart surgery. Psychosomatic
Medicine, 56, 203–212.
Johnson, C. L., & Catalano, D. J. (1981). Childless elderly and their
family supports. Gerontologist, 21, 610–618.
Johnson, C. L., & Catalano, D. J. (1983). A longitudinal study of
family supports to impaired elderly. Gerontologist, 23, 612–618.
Kahn, R. L., & Antonucci, T. C. (1980). Convoys over the life
course. In P. B. Baltes & O. Brim (Eds.), Life span development
and behavior (Vol. 3, pp. 254–286). New York: Academic Press.
Kaufman, G., & Uhlenberg, P. (1998). Effects of life course transi-
tions on the quality of relationships between adult children and
their parents. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 60, 924–938.
Keith, P. M., & Schafer, R. B. (1986). Housework, disagreement,
and depression among younger and older couples. American
Behavioral Scientist, 29, 405–422.
Keith, P. M., & Schafer, R. B. (1991). Relationships and well-being
over the life stages. New York: Praeger.
Kemp, H. V. (1999). Grieving the death of a sibling or the death of a
friend. Journal of Psychology and Christianity, 18, 354–366.
Kiecolt-Glaser, J. K., Glaser, R., Shuttleworth, E., Dyer, C.,
Ogrocki, P., & Speicher, C. (1987). Chronic stress and immunity
in family caregivers of Alzheimer’s disease victims. Psychoso-
matic Medicine, 49, 523–535.
Knakal, J. (1988). A couples group in oncology social work practice:
An innovative modality. Dynamic Psychotherapy, 6, 153–156.
Kowalski, N. C. (1986). Anticipating the death of an elderly parent.
In T. A. Rando (Ed.), Loss and anticipatory grief (pp. 187–199).
Lexington, MA: Lexington Books.
Krause, N., & Borawski-Clark, E. (1994). Clarifying the functions
of social support in later life. Research on Aging, 16, 251–279.
Lansford, J. E., Sherman, A. M., & Antonucci, T. C. (1998). Satis-
faction with social networks: An examination of socioemotional
selectivity theory across cohorts. Psychology and Aging, 13,
544–552.
Larson, R., Mannell, R., & Zuzanek, J. (1986). Daily well-being of
older adults with friends and family. Psychology and Aging, 1,
117–126.
Lauer, R. H., Lauer, J. C., & Kerr, S. T. (1990). The long-term
marriage: Perceptions of stability and satisfaction. International
Journal on Aging and Human Development, 31, 189–195.
Laumann, E. O. (1973). Bonds of pluralism: The form and sub-
stance of urban social networks. New York: Wiley.
Lawrence, R. H., Tennstedt, S. L., & Assmann, S. F. (1998). Quality
of the caregiver-care recipient relationship: Does it offset nega-
tive consequences of caregiving for family caregivers? Psychol-
ogy and Aging, 13, 150–158.
Lee, G. R., DeMaris, A., Bavin, S., & Sullivan, R. (2001). Gender
differences in the depressive effect of widowhood in later life.
Journal of Gerontology: Social Sciences, 56B, S56–S62.
Lee, G. R., & Dwyer, J. W. (1996). Aging parent-adult child coresi-
dence. Journal of Family Issues, 17, 46–59.
Lee, G. R., & Ellithorpe, E. (1982). Intergenerational exchange and
subjective well-being among the elderly. Journal of Marriage
and the Family, 44, 217–224.
Lee, G. R., Seccombe, K., & Shehan, C. (1991). Marital status and
personal happiness: An analysis of trend data. Journal of Mar-
riage and the Family, 53, 839–844.
Lee, G. R., & Shehan, C. L. (1989). Retirement and marital satis-
faction. Journal of Gerontology: Social Sciences, 44, S226–
S230.
Lee, T. R., Mancini, J. A., & Maxwell, J. W. (1990). Sibling
relationships in adulthood: Contact patterns and motivations.
Journal of Marriage and the Family, 52, 431–440.
Leﬂey, H. P. (1987). Aging parents as caregivers of mentally ill adult
children: An emerging social problem. Hospital and Community
Psychiatry, 38, 1063–1070.
Lehman, D. R., Wortman, C. B., & Williams, A. F. (1987). Long-
term effects of losing a spouse or child in a motor vehicle crash.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 52, 218–231.
Levenson, R. W., Carstensen, L. L., & Gottman, J. M. (1993). Long-
term marriage: Age, gender, and satisfaction. Psychology and
Aging, 8, 301–313.
Lichtenstein, P., Gatz, M., Pedersen, N. L., Berg, S., & McClearn,
G. E. (1996). Aco-twin-control study of response to widowhood.
Journal of Gerontology: Psychological Sciences, 51B, P279–
P289.
Litman, T. J. (1979). The family in health and health care: A socio-
behavioral overview. In E. G. Jaco (Ed.), Patients, physicians,
and illness (pp. 69–101). New York: Free Press.

506
Social Relationships in Adulthood and Old Age
Lowenthal, M. F., & Haven, C. (1968). Interaction and adaptation:
Intimacy as a critical variable. American Sociological Review,
33, 20–30.
Lugaila, T. (1998). Marital status and living arrangements:
March 1998 (Update). Washington, DC: U.S. Bureau of the
Census.
Lund, D. A., Caserta, M. S., & Dimond, M. F. (1989). Impact of
spousal bereavement on the subjective well-being of older
adults. In D. A. Lund (Ed.), Older bereaved spouses: Research
with practical applications (pp. 3–15). New York: Hemisphere.
Lund, D. A., Caserta, M. S., & Dimond, M. F. (1993). The course of
spousal bereavement in later life. In M. S. Stroebe, W. Stroebe,
& R. O. Hanssen (Eds.), Handbook of bereavement: Theory,
research, and intervention (pp. 240–254). New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Lynch, S. A. (1998). Who supports whom? How age and gender
affect the perceived quality of support from family and friends.
Gerontologist, 38, 231–238.
Lynott, P. P., & Roberts, R. E. L. (1997). The developmental stake
hypothesis and changing perceptions of intergenerational rela-
tions, 1971–1985. Gerontologist, 37, 394–405.
Mancini, J. A., & Simon, J. (1984). Older adults expectations of
support from family and friends. Journal of Applied Gerontol-
ogy, 3, 150–160.
Marks, N. F. (1996). Flying solo at midlife: Gender, marital status,
and psychological well-being. Journal of Marriage and the
Family, 58, 917–932.
Marks, N. F., & Lambert, J. D. (1998). Marital status continuity and
change among young and midlife adults. Journal of Family
Issues, 19, 652–686.
Matthews, S. H., Delaney, P. J., & Adamek, M. E. (1989). Male
kinship ties: Bonds between adult brothers. American Behav-
ioral Scientist, 33, 58–69.
Matthews, S. H., & Rosner, T. T. (1988). Shared ﬁlial responsibility:
The family as the primary caregiver. Journal of Marriage and the
Family, 50, 185–195.
McCarthy, J. F. (1978). A comparison of the probability of dissolu-
tion of the ﬁrst and second marriages. Demography, 15, 345–359.
Mendes de Leon, C. F., Glass, T. A., Beckett, L. A., Seeman, T. E.,
Evans, D. A., & Berkman, L. F. (1999). Social networks and dis-
ability transitions across eight intervals of yearly data in the New
Haven EPESE. Journal of Gerontology: Social Sciences, 54B,
S162–S172.
Mendes de Leon, C. F., Kasl, S. V., & Jacobs, S. (1994). A prospec-
tive study of widowhood and changes in symptoms of de-
pression in a community sample of the elderly. Psychological
Medicine, 24, 613–624.
Mermelstein, R., Cohen, S., Lichtenstein, E., Kanmark, T., & Baer,
J. S. (1986). Social support and smoking cessation and main-
tenance. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 54,
447–453.
Michael, Y. L., Colditz, G. A., Coakley, E., & Kawachi, I. (1999).
Health behaviors, social networks, and healthy aging: Cross-
sectional evidence from the Nurses’Health Study. Quality of Life
Research, 8, 711–722.
Michela, J. L. (1987). Interpersonal and individual impacts of a hus-
band’s heart attack. In A. Baum & J. E. Singer (Eds.), Handbook
on psychology and health (Vol. 5, pp. 255–301). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Miner, S., & Uhlenberg, P. (1997). Intragenerational proximity and
the social role of sibling neighbors after midlife. Family Rela-
tions, 46, 145–153.
Morgan, L. A. (1992). Marital status and retirement plans: Do wid-
owhood and divorce make a difference? In M. Szinovacz, D. J.
Ekerdt, & B. H. Vinick (Eds.), Families and retirement (pp. 114–
126). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Morris, L. W., Morris, R. G., & Britton, P. G. (1988). The relation-
ship between marital intimacy, perceived strain, and depression
in spouse caregivers of dementia sufferers. British Journal of
Medical Psychology, 61, 231–236.
Moss, M. S., & Moss, S. Z. (1983). The impact of parental death on
middle aged children. Omega Journal of Death and Dying, 14,
65–75.
Moss, M. S., & Moss, S. Z. (1986). Death of an adult sibling. Inter-
national Journal of Family Psychiatry, 7, 397–418.
Moss, M. S., & Moss, S. Z. (1989). Death of an elderly sibling.
American Behavioral Scientist, 33, 94–106.
Moss, M. S., Moss, S. Z., Rubinstein, R., & Resch, N. (1993).
Impact of elderly mother’s death on middle age daughters. In-
ternational Journal on Aging and Human Development, 37,
1–22.
Moss, M. S., Resch, N., & Moss, S. Z. (1997). The role of gender in
middle-age children’s responses to parent death. Omega, 35,
43–65.
Newman, S., & Revenson, T. A. (1993). Coping with rheumatoid
arthritis. In S. Newman & M. Shipley (Eds.), Balliere’s clinical
rheumatology: Vol. 7. Psychological aspects of rheumatic dis-
ease (pp. 259–280). London: Bailliere Tindal.
Norris, F. H., & Murrell, S. A. (1990). Social support, life events and
stress as modiﬁers of adjustment to bereavement by older adults.
Psychology and Aging, 5, 429–436.
Okun, M. A., & Keith, V. M. (1998). Effects of positive and negative
social exchanges with various sources on depressive symptoms
in younger and older adults. Journal of Gerontology: Psycholog-
ical Sciences, 53B, P4–P20.
O’Rand, A. M., Henretta, J. C., & Krecker, M. L. (1992). Family
pathways to retirement. In M. Szinovacz, D. J. Ekerdt, & B. H.
Vinick (Eds.), Families and retirement (pp. 81–98). Newbury
Park, CA: Sage.
Orbuch, T. L., House, J. S., Mero, R. P., & Webster, P. S. (1996).
Marital quality over the life course. Social Psychology Quar-
terly, 59, 162–171.

References
507
Oxman, T. C., Berkman, L. F., Kasl, S., Freeman, D. H., & Barrett,
J. (1992). Social support and depressive symptoms in the elderly.
American Journal of Epidemiology, 135, 356–368.
Parrott, T. M., & Bengtson, V. L. (1999). The effects of earlier inter-
generational affection, normative expectations, and family
conﬂict on contemporary exchanges of help and support. Re-
search on Aging, 21, 73–105.
Pederson, L. M., & Valanis, B. G. (1988). The effects of breast can-
cer on the family: A review of the literature. Journal of Psy-
chosocial Oncology, 6, 95–118.
Perkins, H. W. (1990). Familial bereavement and health in adult life
course perspective. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 52,
233–241.
Pinquart, M., & Sorensen, S. (2000). Inﬂuences of socioeconomic
status, social network, and competence on subjective well-being
in later life: A meta-analysis. Psychology and Aging, 15,
187–224.
Pruchno, R. A., Patrick, J. M. H., & Burant, C. J. (1996). Mental
health of aging women with children who are chronically dis-
abled: Examination of a two-factor model. Journal of Gerontol-
ogy: Social Sciences, 51B, S284–S296.
Rait, D., & Lederberg, M. (1989). The family of the cancer patient.
In J. C. Holland & H. Rowland (Eds.), Handbook of psychoon-
cology (pp. 585–597). New York: Oxford University Press.
Reinhardt, J. P. (1996). The importance of friendship and family
support in adaptation to chronic vision impairment. Journal of
Gerontology: Psychological Sciences, 51B, P268–P278.
Revenson, T. A. (1994). Social support and marital coping with
chronic illness. Annals of Behavioral Medicine, 16, 122–130.
Riley, M. W., & Foner, A. (1968). Aging and society: An inventory
of research ﬁndings (Vol. 1). New York: Russell Sage.
Robbins, M. A. (1990). Midlife women and death of mother. New
York: Peter Lang.
Roberto, K. A. (1996). Friendships between older women: Interac-
tions and reactions. Journal of Women and Aging, 8, 55–73.
Roberto, K. A., & Scott, J. P. (1984). Friendship patterns among
older women. Journal of Aging and Human Development, 19,
1–10.
Roberts, W. L. (1979). Signiﬁcant elements in the relationship of
long-married couples. International Journal of Aging and
Human Development, 10, 265–271.
Rolland, J. S. (1994). In sickness and in health: The impact of illness
on couples’ relationships. Journal of Marital and Family Ther-
apy, 20, 327–347.
Rook, K. S. (1984). The negative side of social interaction: Impact
on psychological well-being. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 46, 1097–1108.
Rook, K. S. (1990). Stressful aspects of older adults’ social relation-
ships: Current theory and research. In M. A. P. Stephens, J. H.
Crowther, S. E. Hobfoll, & D. L. Tennenbaum (Eds.), Stress and
coping in later life (pp. 173–192). Washington, DC: Hemisphere.
Rook, K. S. (1994). Assessing the health-related dimensions
of older adults’ social relationships. In M. P. Lawton & J. A.
Teresi (Eds.), Annual review of gerontology and geriatrics
(pp. 142–181). New York: Springer.
Rook, K. S. (1997). Positive and negative social exchanges:
Weighing their effects in later life. Journal of Gerontology:
Social Sciences, 52, S167–S169.
Rosenthal, C. J. (1985). Kinkeeping in the familial division of labor.
Journal of Marriage and the Family, 47, 965–974.
Ross, H. R., & Milgram, J. I. (1982). Important variables in adult
sibling relationships: A qualitative study. In M. E. Lamb &
B. Sutton-Smith (Eds.), Sibling relationships: Their nature and
signiﬁcance across the lifespan (pp. 225–250). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Russo, J., & Vitaliano, P. P. (1995). Life events as correlates of bur-
den in spouse caregivers of persons with Alzheimer’s disease.
Experimental Aging Research, 21, 273–294.
Ryff, C. D., Schmutte, P. S., & Lee, Y. H. (1996). How children
turn out: Implications for parental self-evaluation. In C. D.
Ryff & M. M. Seltzer (Eds.), The parental experience in midlife
(pp. 383–422). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Scharlach, A. E. (1991). Factors associated with ﬁlial grief follow-
ing the death of an elderly parent. American Journal of
Orthopsychiatry, 61, 307–313.
Schulz, R., O’Brien, A. T., Bookwala, J., & Fleissner, K. (1995).
Psychiatric and physical morbidity effects of dementia care-
giving: Prevalence, correlates, and causes. Gerontologist, 35,
771–791.
Scott, J. P. (1990). Sibling interaction in later life. In T. H. Brubaker
(Ed.), Family relationships in later life (2nd ed., pp. 86–89).
Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Seccombe, K., & Lee, G. R. (1986). Gender differences in retire-
ment satisfaction and its antecedents. Research on Aging, 8,
426–440.
Seelbach, W. C. (1984). Filial responsibility and the care of aging
family members. In W. H. Quinn & G. A. Hughston (Eds.), Inde-
pendent aging: Family and social system perspectives (pp. 92–
109). Rockville, MD: Aspen.
Seeman, T. E. (1996). Social ties and health. Annals of Epidemiol-
ogy, 6, 442–451.
Seeman, T. E., Charpentier, P. A., Berkman, L. F., Tinetti, M. E.,
Guralnik, J. M., Albert, M., Blazer, D., & Rowe, J. W. (1994).
Predicting changes in physical performance in a high-functioning
elderly cohort: MacArthur Studies of Successful Aging. Journal
of Gerontology: Medical Sciences, 49, M97–M108.
Shanas, E. (1979). The family as a social support system in old age.
Gerontologist, 19, 169–174.
Sklar, F., & Hartley, S. F. (1990). Close friends as survivors: Bereave-
ment patterns in a “hidden” population. Omega, 21, 103–112.
Slater, R. (1995). The psychology of growing old: Looking forward.
Buckingham, UK: Open University Press.

508
Social Relationships in Adulthood and Old Age
Soldo, B. J., Wolf, D. A., & Agree, E. M. (1990). Family, households,
and care arrangements of frail older women: Astructural analysis.
Journal of Gerontology: Social Sciences, 45, S238– S249.
Spanier, G., & Furstenberg, F. F., Jr. (1987). Remarriage and recon-
stituted families. In M. B. Sussman & S. K. Steinmetz (Eds.),
Handbook of marriage and the family (pp. 419–434). New York:
Plenum.
Starrels, M. E., Ingersoll-Dayton, B., & Neal, M. B. (1995). Inter-
generational solidarity and the workplace: Employees caregiv-
ing for their parents. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 57,
751– 762.
Stroebe, W., & Stroebe, M. S. (1987). Bereavement and health: The
psychological and physical consequences of partner loss. New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Swensen, C. H., & Fuller, S. R. (1992). Expression of love, marriage
problems, commitment and anticipatory grief in the marriages
of cancer patients. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 54,
191–196.
Szinovacz, M. (1989). Retirement, couples, and household work.
In S. J. Bahr & E. T. Peterson (Eds.), Aging and the family
(pp. 33–58). Lexington, MA: Lexington Books.
Szinovacz, M. (1992). Social activities and retirement adaptation:
Gender and family variations. In M. Szinovacz, D. J. Ekerdt, &
B. H. Vinick (Eds.), Families and retirement (pp. 236–253).
Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Szinovacz, M., & Ekerdt, D. J. (1995). Families and retirement. In
R. Blieszner & V. H. Bedford (Eds.), Handbook of aging and the
family (pp. 375–400). Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
Szinovacz, M., Ekerdt, D. J., & Vinick, B. H. (1992). Families
and retirement: Conceptual and methodological issues. In M.
Szinovacz, D. J. Ekerdt, & B. H. Vinick (Eds.), Families and re-
tirement (pp. 1–19). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Thoits, P. A. (1995). Stress, coping, and social support processes:
Where are we? What next? Journal of Health and Social Behav-
ior, 36, 53–79.
Thompson, L. W., Gallagher, D., Cover, H., Galewski, M., &
Peterson, J. (1989). Effects of bereavement on symptoms of psy-
chopathology in older men and women. In D. A. Lund (Ed.),
Older bereaved spouses: Research with practical applications
(pp. 17–24). New York: Hemisphere.
Thompson, M. G., & Heller, K. (1990). Facets of support related to
well-being: Quantitative social isolation and perceived family
support in a sample of elderly women. Psychology and Aging, 5,
535–544.
Thompson, S. C., & Pitts, J. S. (1991). In sickness and in health:
Chronic illness, marriage, and spousal caregiving. In S.
Spacapan & S. Oskamp (Eds.), Helping and being helped: Natu-
ralistic studies (pp. 115–151). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Tower, R. B., & Kasl, S.V. (1996). Depressive symptoms across
older spouses: Longitudinal inﬂuences. Psychology and Aging,
11, 683–697.
Tower, R. B., Kasl, S. V., & Moritz, D. J. (1997). The inﬂuence of
spouse cognitive impairment on respondents’ depressive symp-
toms: The moderating role of marital closeness. Journal of
Gerontology: Social Sciences, 52B, S270–S278.
Townsend, A. L., & Franks, M. M. (1995). Binding ties: Closeness
and conﬂict in adult children’s caregiving relationships. Psychol-
ogy and Aging, 10, 343–351.
Townsend, A. L., & Franks, M. M. (1997). Quality of the relation-
ship between elderly spouses: Inﬂuence on spouse caregivers’
subjective effectiveness. Family Relations, 46, 33–39.
Troll, L. E., Miller, S. J., & Atchley, R. C. (1979). Families in later
life. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Turner, B. F., & Troll, L. E. (1994). Women growing older: Psycho-
logical perspectives. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Uchino, B. N., Cacioppo, J. T., & Kiecolt-Glaser, J. K. (1996). The
relationship between social support and physiological processes:
A review with emphasis on underlying mechanisms and implica-
tions for health. Psychological Bulletin, 119, 488–531.
Umberson, D. (1992). Relationships between adult children and
their parents: Psychological consequences for both generations.
Journal of Marriage and the Family, 54, 664–674.
Umberson, D. (1995). Marriage as support or strain? Marital quality
following the death of a parent. Journal of Marriage and the
Family, 57, 709–723.
Unger, J. B., McAvay, G., Bruce, M. L., Berkman, L., & Seeman, T.
(1999). Variation in the impact of social network characteristics
on physical functioning in elderly persons: MacArthur Studies of
Successful Aging. Journal of Gerontology: Social Sciences, 54B,
S245–S251.
van der Does, J. V. S., & Duyvis, D. J. (1989). Psychosocial adjust-
ment of spouses of cervical carcinoma patients. Journal of Psy-
chosomatics in Obstetrics Gynecology, 10, 163–171.
Vinick, B. H., & Ekerdt, D. J. (1991). The transition to retirement:
Responses of husbands and wives. In B. B. Hess & E. Markson
(Eds.), Growing old in America (4th ed., pp. 305–317). New
Brunswick, NJ: Transaction.
Wallerstein, J. S., & Blakeslee, S. (1995). The good marriage: How
and why love lasts. Boston: Houghton Mifﬂin.
Wang, H., & Amato, P. R. (2000). Predictors of divorce adjustment:
Stressors, resources, and deﬁnitions. Journal of Marriage and
the Family, 62, 655–668.
Ward, R., Logan, J., & Spitze, G. (1992). The inﬂuence of parent
and child needs on coresidence in middle and later life. Journal
of Marriage and the Family, 54, 209–221.
Weiss, L., & Lowenthal, M. F. (1975). Life-course perspectives on
friendship. In M. E. Lowenthal, M. Thurnher, & D. Chiriboga
(Eds.), Four stages of life (pp. 48–61). San Francisco, CA:
Jossey-Bass.
Weiss, R. (1974). The provisions of social relationships. In Z. Rubin
(Ed.), Doing unto others (pp. 17–26). Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice Hall.

References
509
Wellman, B., & Wortley, S. (1989). Brothers’keepers: Situating kin-
ship relations in broader networks of social support. Sociological
Perspectives, 32, 273–306.
Wenger, G. C., Davies, R., & Shahtahmasebi, S. (1995). Morale in
old age: Reﬁning the model. International Journal of Geriatric
Psychiatry, 10, 933–943.
Wenger, G. C., & Jerrome, D. (1999). Change and stability in conﬁ-
dant relationships: Findings from the Bangor Longitudinal Study
of Aging. Journal of Aging Studies, 13, 269–294.
Whitbeck, L., Hoyt, D. R., & Huck, S. M. (1994). Early family rela-
tionships, intergenerational solidarity, and support provided to
parents by their adult children. Journal of Gerontology: Social
Sciences, 49, S85–S94.
Wilcox. V. L., Kasl, S., & Berkman, L. F. (1994). Social support and
physical disability in older people after hospitalization: A
prospective study. Health Psychology, 13, 170–179.
Winsborough, H. H., Bumpass, L. L., & Aquilino, W. S. (1991). The
death of parents and the transition to old age (Working
Paper NSFH-39). Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Center
for Demography and Ecology.
Wortman, C. B., Kessler, R. C., & Umberson, D. (1992). Widow-
hood and depression: Explaining long-term gender differences in
vulnerability. Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 33, 10–24.
Wright, L. K. (1991). The impact of Alzheimer’s disease on the mar-
ital relationship. Gerontologist, 31, 224–237.
Wright, L. K., Clipp, E. C., & George, L. K. (1993). Health conse-
quences of caregiver stress. Medicine, Exercise, Nutrition and
Health, 2, 181–195.
Wright, P. H. (1989). Gender differences in adults’ same- and cross-
gender friendships. In R. G. Adams & R. Blieszner (Eds.), Older
adult friendship: Structure and process (pp. 197–221). Newbury
Park, CA: Sage.
Zisook, S., & Shuchter, S. R. (1986). The ﬁrst four years of widow-
hood. Psychiatric Annals, 15, 288–294.


PART SIX
APPLIED DEVELOPMENTAL PSYCHOLOGY
ACROSS THE LIFE SPAN


CHAPTER 21
Disabilities and Development
PENNY HAUSER-CRAM AND ANGELA HOWELL
513
DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES AND
DEFINITIONAL DILEMMAS
514
A BRIEF HISTORY OF ATTITUDES ABOUT CHILDREN
WITH DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES
514
SCHOLARSHIP ON DISABILITIES BY
DEVELOPMENTAL THEORISTS
516
The Mechanistic Perspective
516
The Organismic Perspective
516
The Developmental Contextualist Perspective
517
Summary
518
RESEARCH ON CHILDREN WITH
DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES
518
Longitudinal Studies
518
Contextually Based Studies
519
RESEARCH ON FAMILIES OF CHILDREN WITH
DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES
521
Theoretically Based Research
522
Fathers of Children With
Developmental Disabilities
524
Siblings of Children With
Developmental Disabilities
524
The Role of Social Support to Families of Children
With Developmental Disabilities
526
IMPLICATIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
527
REFERENCES
528
Children often exhibit individual proﬁles of strengths and
weaknesses as they develop. Some children walk at a young
age but learn language slowly; others draw elaborate pictures
but struggle to ride a bicycle. Such proﬁles indicate that
children display developmental discrepancies, sometimes
delayed in one domain of development in relation to others.
Formanychildren,delaysaremodestandtemporary.Forother
children, however, delays are extensive and pervasive. How
are children with slow or unusual patterns of development
viewed from the perspective of developmental psychology?
Are the mechanisms of development the same for children
with and without disabilities? Are family processes similar
in families in which a child has a developmental disability as
for other families? How can developmental psychology as a
ﬁeld beneﬁt from studies of children with developmental
disabilities?
According to current estimates, 12.3% of children in the
United States who are not in residential care have difﬁculty
performing one or more everyday activities, including learn-
ing, communication, mobility, and self-care (Forum on Child
and Family Statistics, 1999). Both historically and currently,
Western psychologists have tended to assign pejorative
words like imbecile, feebleminded, backwards, moron, and
idiot to children who do not accomplish the developmental
milestones within speciﬁed age limits (Jordan, 2000). The
current term, developmental disabilities, which is used to
refer to children whose development deviates from expecta-
tions, is also potentially stigmatizing. In the United Kingdom
the term mental retardation is no longer accepted; instead,
learning disabilities is used to refer to all individuals who
have difﬁculty learning or exhibit below-average intelligence
(Baron-Cohen, 1998). Concerns about nomenclature con-
tinue to plague those who study or work with individuals who
deviate from normative development.
In this chapter we focus on theoretical approaches and
empirical investigations that have examined evidence about
the development of young children with biologically based
developmental disabilities. We begin with a discussion of the
difﬁculties in constructing deﬁnitional and diagnostic criteria
of children with developmental disabilities. Next, we offer a
perspective on how the study of developmental disabilities
ﬁts into the history of developmental psychology. Then we
Preparation of this chapter was partially supported by grant R40 MC
00177 from the Maternal and Child Health Bureau (Title V, Social
Security Act), Health Resources and Services Administration,
Department of Health and Human Services and by a grant from the
Argyelan Family Education Research Fund.

514
Disabilities and Development
consider current theoretical perspectives and empirical work
on children with developmental disabilities and their families
emanating from various perspectives. We conclude with im-
plications for application and reﬂections on potential direc-
tions for future work.
DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES AND
DEFINITIONAL DILEMMAS
Developmental disabilities is a general term that describes a
wide range of disabilities that occur prenatally or during child-
hood. This heterogeneous category includes global mental re-
tardation, distinct syndromes (e.g., Down syndrome, Fragile
X syndrome), autism and related communication disorders,
motor impairment such as cerebral palsy, and developmental
delays of unknown etiology. Indeed, the term is rarely deﬁned
but generally refers to those individuals who are not exhibiting
typical developmental patterns.
Deﬁnitional quagmires persist, as even the term mentally
retarded is difﬁcult to deﬁne. From its earliest conception until
the present day, debate has existed about the criterion and
terminology used in the deﬁnition of mental retardation
(Baumeister, 1987; MacMillan, Gresham, & Siperstein, 1993).
Predominant classiﬁcation schemes from 1973 to 1992 deﬁned
individuals as mentally retarded if they scored 70 or less on
standard intelligence tests. This cutoff point reﬂects scores that
lie 2 standard deviations below the mean of the population.
The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Dis-
order also included levels of severity based on IQ (e.g.,
borderline, mild, moderate, severe, and profound mental
retardation; e.g., American Psychiatric Association, 1968,
1994). Many individuals raised concerns about deﬁnitional
criteria based solely on intelligence tests. Some argued that
standardized intelligence tests are culturally and linguisti-
cally biased and discriminate against members of minority
groups (Hawkins & Cooper, 1990), resulting in an over-
representation of minorities labeled with mental retardation.
Others noted that children with mental retardation often
display markedly different performance within and be-
tween testing sessions, demonstrating avoidance behaviors
and inconsistent motivation (Wishart & Duffy, 1990).
These behaviors tend to make scores on any one assessment
unreliable.
Current deﬁnitions of mental retardation have moved away
from singular reliance on intelligence testing and instead in-
corporate knowledge of the individual’s adaptive functioning
(Luckasson et al., 1992). The latest deﬁnition of mental retar-
dation endorsed by the American Association on Mental
Retardation (AAMR) and by the American Psychological
Association is
substantial limitations in present functioning . . . characterized
by signiﬁcantly subaverage intellectual functioning, existing
concurrently with related limitations in two or more of the
following applicable adaptive skill areas: communication, self-
care, home living, social skills, community use, self-direction,
health and safety, functional academics, leisure and work. Men-
tal retardation manifests before age 18. (AAMR, 1992, p. 1)
This deﬁnition also replaces earlier classiﬁcation schemes that
emphasized the severity of retardation (i.e., mild, moderate, se-
vere, profound) with an approach that describes the amount of
support needed by the individual in the various adaptive skill
areas. Four levels of support are delineated: intermittent, limited,
extensive, and pervasive. Although this deﬁnition represents a
move away from determining mental retardation based on cog-
nitive deﬁcit alone, it raises questions about appropriate meth-
ods of assessment. For example, many of the skill areas (e.g.,
community use, work) are not applicable at all ages, and none of
the skill areas are useful in assessing newborns (MacMillan et
al., 1993). Indeed, some claim that mental retardation (and by
extension, developmental disabilities, more broadly) is, in fact, a
socially constructed term (Blatt, 1985), as the delineation of nor-
mality and abnormality are based on culturally constructed
ideals of age-appropriate behaviors and skills.
A BRIEF HISTORY OF ATTITUDES
ABOUT CHILDREN WITH
DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES
Philosophical constructs have often served to guide the way
psychologists think about phenomena, such as the processes
and mechanisms of development (Overton, 1998). Current
perspectives on individuals with “slower than expected”
development have been shaped historically by philosophical
and ideological views. Much of that history reveals exclu-
sionary attitudes and practices toward those with develop-
mental disabilities. Even Aristotle, who viewed humans as
unique in comparison to other species because of their ratio-
nality, claimed in Politics that “as to the exposure and rearing
of children, let there be a law that no deformed child shall
live” (Aristotle, n.d., p. 315). In the Middle Ages, individuals
with developmental disabilities were seen as products of “sin”
(Szymanski & Wilska, 1997). During the Inquisition, those
with mental retardation were viewed as witches, and their
“disease” caused by the devil (Scheerenberger, 1983).

A Brief History of Attitudes About Children With Developmental Disabilities
515
The Reformation brought little enlightenment to public
attitudes toward those with disabilities. Martin Luther
claimed that a child with mental retardation had no soul and
therefore should be drowned (Scheerenberger, 1983). Thus,
throughout Western history, children with developmental
disabilities often were considered defective and not worthy
of care. This historical perspective is important because it has
shaped current thinking, even if the current view is one of
reacting against the past.
A change in societal perspective ﬁrst occurred at the end of
the eighteenth century in Paris when Philipe Pinel developed an
approach to caring for individuals with developmental dis-
abilities employing “moral management.” He advocated gentle
and humane care, education, and recreation in contrast to for-
mer approaches that focused on obedience. Pinel’s student,
Edouard Seguin, developed educational systems, especially
based on physical therapies, which he believed would improve
the skills of individuals with mental retardation. Seguin
maintained that education of the muscular system would lead to
development of the nervous system (Connell, 1980). In the
mid-nineteenth century Seguin’s ideas ﬂowed to the United
States and formed the foundation of the ﬁrst schools for
individuals with developmental disabilities. Seguin himself im-
migrated to the United States and in 1876 founded theAmerican
Institutions for the Feeble Minded with several other physicians
(now called the American Association on Mental Retardation).
Around the turn of the last century, however, the treatment of
individuals with developmental disabilities in the United States
changed and became far less humane. Custodial care, instead of
education, became the norm in overcrowded state institutions
where those with developmental disabilities were often isolated
(Meisels & Shonkoff, 2000). This deleterious change occurred
in a sociopolitical context in which the science of human devel-
opment was emerging. Several ideological movements fused
in ways that ultimately were detrimental for the nurturing and
education of children with developmental disabilities.
First, G. Stanley Hall’s initiation of the child study move-
ment stimulated beliefs about the possibility of collecting
scientiﬁc information on children’s development (Cairns,
1998). Through extensive questionnaires, Hall attempted to
gather information with the goal of constructing norms of
development against which all children could be measured.
Several of Hall’s students, notably Goddard, Kuhlmann, and
Terman, developed intelligence tests that, in time, were used
to segregate individuals with developmental disabilities.
Terman, in particular, argued against the malleability of
intelligence (Minton, 1984); without belief in malleability,
the hope of productively educating those with developmental
disabilities was diminished.
Second, in England at the turn of the last century, Frances
Galton, a cousin of Charles Darwin, advocated the use of
eugenics principles to promote social policies. Galton argued
that the only way to improve the human race was through
breeding “better people” (Degler, 1991). The eugenics move-
ment became a strong force inAmerican social science, and its
proponents maintained that they had an obligation to prevent
the reproduction of those with mental retardation (Degler,
1991). The Nazi regime justiﬁed “mercy killing” of children
with disabilities or deformities with a similar rationale
combined with a view that such children met the principle
of “life unworthy of life” (Lifton, 1986, p. 46). Finally,
genealogical studies led to the belief that mental retardation
was associated with criminality (Szmanski &Wilska, 1997). In
fact, the term feebleminded, which was often used at the turn of
the twentieth century to describe those with mental retardation,
implied both cognitive impairment and moral decay (Winship,
1900). The combination of these social forces resulted in soci-
etal attitudes such as those exempliﬁed by Goddard (1914):
The feeble-minded person is not desirable, he is a social encum-
brance, often a burden to himself. In short it were better both for
him and for society had he never been born. Should we not then,
in our attempt to improve the race, begin by preventing the birth
of more feeble-minded? ( p. 558)
Several decades later changes in the treatment of individ-
uals with developmental disabilities were again brought
about by the conﬂuence of public ideology and advances in
developmental science. Stimulated at least in part by the
civil rights movement in the 1950s and 1960s, support for
the human rights of all citizens and optimism about the po-
tential beneﬁts of publicly supported programs grew. The
contributions of developmental psychologists D. O. Hebb
(1949), followed by that of J. McVicker Hunt (1961) and
Benjamin Bloom (1964), on the malleability of intelligence
during the ﬁrst few years of life, added scholarly support
for the ideological shift away from genetic determinism of
intelligence.
During the last decades of the twentieth century several
important policy changes were made in the United States in
support of the normalization of the lives of individuals with
developmental disabilities. One of these movements is dein-
stitutionalization, which has resulted in more families raising
children with disabilities at home and thus normalizing chil-
dren’s daily experiences (Lakin, Bruininks, & Larson, 1992).
Educational initiatives have been a second force. Beginning
in 1975 with Public Law 94-142, legislation has focused on
educating children with disabilities in the “least restricted

516
Disabilities and Development
environment” and including them in general education pro-
grams. Other important legislation followed, including Pub-
lic Law 99-47, the Education for All Handicapped Children
Act Amendments of 1986, which encouraged states to pro-
vide services for children with disabilities younger than
school age. This law which was reauthorized in 1997–1998
and titled Public Law 105-17, the Individuals with Disabili-
ties Education Act (IDEA) requires states to provide free and
appropriate public education for children as young as age 3.
As a consequence, children with disabilities are now entitled
to publicly supported services before school age and are
included in general education (with or without support
services) to the extent deemed advantageous to their learning
(Meisels & Shonkoff, 2000).
In this brief summary, it is apparent that public views
about those with developmental disabilities have changed
enormously. Caldwell (1973) summarized these views in the
United States as representing three phases: (a) forget and
hide, (b) screen and segregate, and (c) identify and help. A
fourth phase could be added today: educate and include
(Meisels & Shonkoff, 2000). At all points, the dual forces of
psychological science and public ideology have exerted
inﬂuence on the treatment of children with disabilities. 
SCHOLARSHIP ON DISABILITIES BY
DEVELOPMENTAL THEORISTS
Based on a view that all children have the potential for change,
several child development theorists conducted studies on
children with developmental disabilities. A small but instruc-
tive history exists about the questions they examined and
the ﬁndings they published. We discuss these in terms of
three of the major metatheories evident in developmental psy-
chology today: mechanistic, organismic, and developmental
contextualist perspectives (Lerner, 1986; Overton & Reese,
1973).
The Mechanistic Perspective
The mechanistic perspective emphasizes quantitative change
and the role of external activity that impinges on the individ-
ual (Dixon & Lerner, 1992). It is best exempliﬁed by behav-
iorism or learning theory as ﬁrst described by B. F. Skinner
(1953) and later by Sidney Bijou and Donald Baer (1961),
who applied the principles of learning theory to child de-
velopment. They maintained that the child differs from the
adult only as a consequence of having a more limited set of
responses and contingencies. Bijou (1966) asserted that
children with retardation differ from other children primarily
by their more constrained set of responses. Thus, “a retarded
individual is one who has a limited repertory of behavior
shaped by events that constitute his history” (Bijou, 1966,
p. 2). According to Bijou, despite having a more constricted
repertoire, children with mental retardation learn according
to the same principles as other children do.
Prior to Bijou’s work, behaviorists had applied principles
of operant conditioning to individuals with mental retardation.
Fuller (1949) based an empirical investigation on prior work
that indicated that children with mental retardation could form
conditioned responses to shock faster than other children did.
He reported that after withholding food, he could condition a
“vegetative idiot” to learn to move his right hand when rein-
forced with sweetened milk. This led to Fuller’s claim that
behavioristic principles, especially operant conditioning,
could be used to improve learning in individuals with devel-
opmental disabilities.
As the number of studies using operant conditioning
with individuals with mental retardation grew, behaviorists
showed increasing interest in the applications of this approach,
primarily to replace undesirable behaviors with socially
acceptable ones (Spradlin & Girardeau, 1966). Applied be-
havior analysis and behavior modiﬁcation techniques were
used frequently in institutions for individuals with develop-
mental disabilities during the 1960s and 1970s (Ellis, 1979).
Indeed, although much of developmental psychology has
moved away from the mechanistic perspective, behavioral
approaches are still active models in many classrooms and
institutional settings. Applied behavioral analysis remains a
recommended intervention for individuals with certain dis-
abilities, particularly autism (Rush & Frances, 2000). In gen-
eral, the principles of behaviorism are believed to apply to all
individuals, including those with developmental disabilities
(Glenn, 1997).
The Organismic Perspective
In contrast to mechanistic approaches, the organismic
perspective stresses qualitative aspects of change and agency
of the organism in bringing about change (Dixon & Lerner,
1992). Heinz Werner, one of the ﬁrst psychologists to operate
from this perspective, applied this theoretical approach to
individuals who have mental retardation. In studies on
children with mental retardation, H. Werner and Strauss
(1939) emphasized the importance of a functional analysis of
the processes involved in children’s learning over data gath-
ered from objective outcome-based assessments like achieve-
ment tests.They further maintained that the sequence in which

Scholarship on Disabilities by Developmental Theorists
517
children with mental retardation learn constructs is similar to
that of other children, though delayed chronologically. Fi-
nally, H. Werner (1957) reported that in contrast to expecta-
tion, children with mental retardation sometimes had greater
success with tasks (e.g., completing a puzzle) than their peers
because they were using more basic, rather than analytical,
processes (such as focusing on individual pieces rather
than the puzzle as a whole). These studies have the seeds of
H. Werner’s (1957) classic work in which he constructed the
orthogenetic principle that “development proceeds from a
state of relative globality and lack of differentiation to a state
of differentiation, articulation, and hierarchical integration”
(p. 126). H. Werner’s study of children with developmental
disabilities served as a catalyst in constructing principles that
apply to the development of all children.
Piaget’s studies also emanate from the organismic per-
spective. Piaget himself, however, seldom wrote about
developmental disabilities, although his colleague, Barbel
Inhelder (1966), conducted several studies with children who
were mentally retarded. The purpose of those investigations
was twofold: to determine whether children with mental
retardation demonstrated the same sequence of stage-related
changes as hypothesized by Piaget and to demonstrate the
diagnostic value of Piagetian approaches to child assessment.
Inhelder (1966) reasoned that through the study of operative
and symbolic processes of children with mental retardation,
children’s ﬁxations at particular stages could be understood.
In general, her empirical studies support the hypothesis that
children with mental retardation develop through the same
sequence of stages as do other children but at a slower pace.
She also reported, however, that children with mental retarda-
tion reached a type of “false equilibrium” and concluded that
“access to certain structures seems to be an end in itself, with-
out hope of subsequent evolution” (Inhelder, 1966, p. 313).
Inhelder further indicated that children with mental retarda-
tion made regressions to earlier substages under conditions of
cognitive challenge. Thus, she found general support for
Piaget’s model and also raised questions about discrepancies
in the cognitive development of children with mental retarda-
tion. Nevertheless, Inhelder did not regard these discrepan-
cies as a threat to the principle of similar sequence.
The Developmental Contextualist Perspective
From the developmental contextualist (or more generally, the
developmental systems) perspective, children are participants
in many intersecting interacting systems (Bronfenbrenner,
1979; Ford & Lerner, 1992; Thelen & Smith, 1998). Those
systems generate and are affected by sociocultural ideologies.
Vygotsky’s work regarding individuals with developmental
disabilities takes a developmental systems approach. In con-
trast to Skinner and Piaget, Vygotsky wrote extensively about
the development of children with disabilities, a ﬁeld that
was termed defectology in Russia. Like those working from ei-
ther the mechanistic or the organismic perspective, Vygotsky
maintained that the principles of development do not differ for
those with mental retardation or other disabilities. This claim is
apparent in his statement that “the difference in the intellect of
a retarded and a normal child appears insigniﬁcant; the nature
of the intellectual process appears identical for both” (Rieber
& Carton, 1993, p. 222; Vygotsky, 1929/ 1931/1993).
Vygotsky viewed the primary difﬁculty for the child with
developmental disabilities as the lack of acceptance within
the sociocultural milieu. In emphasizing the importance
of the effect of social attitudes on the child over the speciﬁc
effects of the disability per se, he claimed that the
immediate consequences of the defect is to diminish the child’s
social standing; the defect manifests itself as a social aberration.
All contact with people, all situations which deﬁne a person’s
place in the social sphere, his role and fate as a participant in life,
all the social functions of daily life are reordered. (Rieber &
Carton, 1993, p. 35; Vygotsky, 1929/1931/1993)
Vygotsky considered collaboration as essential for the
development of higher psychological processes, and he em-
phasized the importance of children collaborating in a di-
verse group. Foreshadowing current views about inclusion,
he argued that when children with mental retardation are
isolated from other children, their development becomes
impaired. According to him, a
one-sided collective, composed entirely of mentally retarded
children who are absolutely identical in level of development, is
a false pedagogical ideal. It contradicts the basic law of develop-
ment of higher psychological processes and conﬂicts with the
general notion of the diversity and dynamics of psychological
functions in any child, and particularly in a retarded child.
(Rieber & Carton, 1993, p. 130; Vygotsky, 1929/1931/1993)
Vygotsky’s view was that children compensate for their
disabilities. The task of the collaborative community, then, is
to aid in that compensation. He considered the compensa-
tions to be “round about developmental processes” (Rieber &
Carton, 1993, p. 34; Vygotsky, 1929/1931/1993) that re-
structure and stabilize psychological functioning. Thus,
although Vygotsky considered the fundamental processes of
development to be the same for children with developmental
disabilities, he maintained that support from the sociocultural
superstructure was essential for optimal development.

518
Disabilities and Development
Summary
Though not well known, the scholarship of many of the giants
of developmental psychology considered children with devel-
opmental disabilities. Vygotsky concentrated directly and ex-
tensively on children with disabilities, but his work in this
arena is only beginning to be recognized. The scholarship of
individuals representing all three major metatheories, how-
ever, is similar in the conclusion that the principles of devel-
opment apply to children with developmental disabilities as
they do to other children.The deviance perspective that histor-
ically has been prevalent in public attitudes toward disabili-
ties, then, is inconsistent with the signiﬁcant scholarship in
psychology that indicates that general developmental princi-
ples apply broadly.
RESEARCH ON CHILDREN WITH
DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES
Contemporary psychological investigations of young chil-
dren with developmental disabilities tend to be based on
current views of children as part of complex interacting
systems (Lerner, 1998) in which the transactions between
individuals are important mechanisms of development
(Sameroff & Fiese, 2000). In this section we ﬁrst review the
few longitudinal studies of children with disabilities and then
consider contemporary perspectives on the developmental
role of the most proximal system in which young children are
nurtured, namely, the family.
Longitudinal Studies
Development is about change (Overton, 1998), and one of the
most productive ways to study change is through empirical
longitudinal investigations. Though less frequently under-
taken than cross-sectional examinations, longitudinal studies
offer distinct advantages. They allow us to (a) map pathways
of development, (b) study emerging processes, (c) under-
stand the relations among reciprocal changes, (d) examine
the plasticity of developmental processes, and (e) test theo-
retically constructed hypotheses about development (Lerner,
Hauser-Cram, & Miller, 1998).
Classic longitudinal studies (e.g., Elder, 1974; E. Werner &
Smith, 1992) in developmental psychology have led to
important knowledge about developmental processes. Lon-
gitudinal studies of children with developmental disabilities,
though sparse, also have yielded valuable ﬁndings. In general,
these studies have occurred in two phases. During the ﬁrst
phase children’s development (usually IQ) was mapped over
time to provide knowledge about developmental trajectories
of children with speciﬁc disabilities. In the second phase
researchers used theoretical models to study features and pre-
dictors of developmental change. Examples of the major stud-
ies in each of these phases are described next.
The First Phase: Developmental Mapping
The longitudinal studies in which children’s development has
been charted over time focus primarily on children with Down
syndrome. Perhaps this is because a deﬁnite diagnosis can be
made based on karyotype and because of a belief that children
with a similar genetic syndrome might develop in a similar
way. Evidence indicates that this is true to an extent.
In England, Carr (1988, 1995) conducted the most exten-
sive study of children with Down syndrome. She followed 45
children born in 1963 or 1964 from age 6 weeks to 21 years.
Because children with Down syndrome were often institu-
tionalized at the time of that study, she included a home-reared
and a non-home-reared group. She conducted interviews with
mothers and extensive psychological and achievement tests
with the children. In mapping the IQ score for children in both
groups over the entire study period, Carr found the groups to
differ during the early years of life, with differences favoring
the home-reared children. The groups did not differ subse-
quently, and both showed a declining trajectory in IQ during
middle childhood followed by stability in IQ during the early
adult years. Individual variation was similar to that expected
of any sample of children taking an IQ test (i.e., approxi-
mately 15 points). In relation to family adaptation, Carr found
that although mothers of children with Down syndrome re-
ported more malaise and poorer health than mothers of typi-
cally developing children, their malaise scores were not
related to their child’s level of disability or to social restric-
tions due to their child’s disability (Carr, 1988). Carr’s study is
remarkable for its longevity and its contributions in charting
changes in IQ over time.
Reed, Pueschel, Schnell, and Cronk (1980) also studied
children with Down syndrome but only for the ﬁrst three
years of life. Their study began as an assessment of the
treatment of 89 children with medical interventions thought
to improve serotonin levels (i.e., 5-hydroxytryptophan, 5-
hydroxytryptophan/pyridoxine, pridoxine; Pueschel, 1980).
They found no effect of the treatment but reported data on
developmental change in all samples, including a placebo
group. In terms of psychomotor cognitive assessments, they
found that children performed at mental age equivalents of
about half their chronological age and exhibited relatively
greater delays in language development and lesser delays
in adaptive behavior (Schnell, 1984). Individual variation

Research on Children With Developmental Disabilities
519
appeared to be slightly less than that reported by Carr, but in
general, they found similar patterns of change in cognitive
performance.
In a longitudinal investigation of children with mild
to moderate delays of unknown etiology, Bernheimer and
Keogh (1988) investigated a sample of 44 children for 6 years
beginning in the preschool years. In analyses of data on chil-
dren’s cognitive performance scores over four time points,
they reported strong and consistent stability of scores over the
76-month period; only 4 children demonstrated improvement
of more than 1 standard deviation. They concluded that
children who were cognitively delayed during the preschool
years had a strong probability of continuing to exhibit delays
during the early school years (Keogh, Bernheimer, Gallimore,
& Weisner, 1998). Their study is unique because of its empha-
sis on children with delays rather than those with distinct
disabilities.
The Second Phase: Theoretically Guided
Longitudinal Studies
One would expect theoretically guided longitudinal studies
of children with developmental disabilities to appear chrono-
logically after some baseline studies have yielded data on
developmental milestones. This appears to be the case. Those
investigating the mechanisms of change in the development
of children with disabilities have taken a range of theoretical
perspectives, however.
The work of Cicchetti and Beeghly represents a clear
departure from earlier studies of children with Down syn-
drome because of its examination of system organization.
Operating from an organismic perspective, Cicchetti and
Beeghly (1990) tested hypotheses about the extent to which
hierarchical organization of behavior applies to children with
Down syndrome. They conducted a short-term longitudinal
study (i.e., 18 months) of 41 children with Down syndrome
ranging in age from 20 to 76 months. Beeghly and Cicchetti
(1987) focused on children’s representational abilities, espe-
cially in communication and symbolic play, and found the
development of children with Down syndrome to be delayed
but organized in ways similar to their typically developing
peers. They concluded that despite the slower rate of skill
acquisition, the patterns of development in the social-
communication systems are as organized and coherent for
children with Down syndrome as they are for other children.
Understanding the complex relation between children’s
development and family processes has been the focus of
the investigators of the Early Intervention Collaborative
Study, an ongoing longitudinal study of children with Down
syndrome, motor impairment, or developmental delays of
unknown etiology (Shonkoff, Hauser-Cram, Krauss, &
Upshur, 1992). That study also has been guided by a transac-
tional-ecological model of development (Bronfenbrenner,
1979; Sameroff & Chandler, 1975) and by a developmental-
contextual perspective (Lerner, 1991). In accordance with
these approaches, children are viewed as agents of develop-
ment and as participants in multiple interacting systems that
have bidirectional relations that change over time.
Based on an investigation of the subsample of children
with Down syndrome, Hauser-Cram, Warﬁeld, Shonkoff,
Krauss, Upshur, and Sayer (1999) reported that features of
the family system, notably mother-child interaction and fam-
ily cohesiveness, were signiﬁcant predictors of children’s de-
velopmental trajectories in social, communication, and daily
life skills over the ﬁrst ﬁve years of life. Employing growth
analyses of children’s development and changes in parental
well-being for the full sample of 183 children over a 10-year
period, Hauser-Cram, Warﬁeld, Shonkoff, and Krauss (2001)
found that children’s self-regulatory mastery skills (i.e., their
ability to persist with problem-posing tasks) were key predic-
tors of children’s developmental change in cognitive and
daily living skills. Thus, to some extent children act as agents
of their own development. Family dynamics, however, con-
tributed additional predictive power in children’s outcomes.
Children whose mothers had more positive styles of interac-
tion displayed greater growth in cognitive performance, com-
munication, and social skills. Children from families with
more positive relationships among family members had more
growth in the development of social skills. Children’s
emotional self-regulatory skills also were found to inﬂuence
parental well-being. Children who displayed more behavior
problems had parents whose trajectory of stress showed
dramatic increases over the 10-year period of study. These
results point to the bidirectional inﬂuences of the parent-child
relationship and highlight the importance that family pro-
cesses have in predicting developmental change in children
with disabilities.
The investigations just described represent an important
advance in longitudinal research on children with devel-
opmental disabilities. Although each set of investigators
operated from a different theoretical perspective and thus
poseddifferentquestions,theinvestigationsaresimilarintheir
focus on the interrelation among developmental processes and
systems.
Contextually Based Studies
Given the nature of the difﬁculty of conducting longitudinal
investigations, much of the work on developmental disabili-
ties has remained cross-sectional or focused on a brief time

520
Disabilities and Development
span. The bulk of contemporary psychological research stud-
ies on children with disabilities have emanated from a
contextual perspective in which the family is considered the
primary context in which young children learn and are
nurtured (Bronfenbrenner, 1986). In considering children
with developmental disabilities, Guralnick (1997) proposed a
model that identiﬁes key predictors of children’s develop-
ment based on family factors. He delineated three proximal
patterns of family interactions that inﬂuence children’s devel-
opment: (a) quality of parent-child interaction; (b) family-
orchestrated child experiences; and (c) health and safety
provided by the family. Of the three, only the quality of
parent-child interaction has received substantial research
attention.
Mother-Child Interaction
Studies of dyadic relationships within families in which a
child has a disability have focused primarily on the mother-
child dyad. Based on much research that indicates that the
quality of the mother-child relationship has consequences for
the cognitive and socioemotional development of typical
children (e.g., Bornstein, 1989; Sroufe, 1996), several re-
searchers have focused on this relationship in dyads where the
child has a disability. A transactional approach (Sameroff &
Chandler, 1975) has guided most empirical studies of mother-
child dyads. This theoretical framework describes a transac-
tional process in which mothers and infants inﬂuence each
other’s behaviors in concert, through reciprocal interaction
that continues to regulate more complex behaviors over time
and across contexts (Sameroff & Fiese, 2000). Those operat-
ing from a transactional approach emphasize that characteris-
tics of both mothers and children must be considered as a
dynamic interactive system.
Consistent with R. Q. Bell’s (1968) theory of bidirectional
interaction, early social signals of infants and mothers, such as
eye contact, smiles, and vocal turn taking enable mothers to
understand their child’s general temperament and become pro-
ﬁcient at responding to their child’s needs. The contingency of
a mother’s response to her child then regulates the child’s
future behaviors as infants begin to recognize the relationship
between their actions and responses from the environment
(Goldberg, 1977). A mother’s sensitivity and contingent
responsiveness to her child’s social signals are essential for
the infant’s development of security and attachment, which
supports the child’s exploration of the environment and devel-
opment of autonomy (S. M. Bell & Ainsworth, 1972). Alter-
natively, high levels of control or parental intrusion into the
child’s play and exploration can diminish the child’s motiva-
tion to explore objects in the environment independently and
thus reduce the child’s opportunities to develop self-efﬁcacy
(Heckhausen, 1993).
Barnard et al. (1989) referred to the rhythmic interactive
pattern between mother and child as a mutually adaptive
dance. The more contingent the responsiveness between
mother and child, the more enjoyable the dance is for both
partners. When one partner does not have the adequate steps,
the dance will be less satisfying, however. Similarly, when
one partner leads before the other is ready to follow, the
tempo will be disrupted (Barnard et al., 1989). Several stud-
ies on the mother-child interactive pattern conclude that such
disruption often occurs when the child has a developmental
disability (Kelly & Barnard, 2000).
Empirical observations of mother-child dyads engaged in
teaching interactions have found that mothers of children
with disabilities tend to be highly directive and controlling of
their child’s behaviors. These mothers also provide more sup-
portive and helping behaviors than mothers of typically
developing children (Mahoney, Fors, & Wood, 1990). Even
during free play interactions, mothers of preschool children
with Down syndrome tend to instruct their children in the ap-
propriate use of toys, displaying more instrumental teaching
in comparison to mothers of children without a disability
(Eheart, 1982).
Most studies of mother-child dyads have involved chil-
dren with Down syndrome because this form of mental retar-
dation is prevalent, and often identiﬁed prenatally or at birth.
During observations of mother-child dyadic interaction, chil-
dren with Down syndrome often display social signals that
are labile (Kasari, Mundy, Yirmiya, & Sigman, 1999) and
more delayed (Berger, 1990) compared to those of typically
developing children of the same mental age. The social cues
of children with Down syndrome are difﬁcult to predict
because they often do not match with characteristics of the
ongoing interaction. For example, Knieps, Walden and
Baxter (1994) found that toddlers with Down syndrome
responded with positive affect to their mother’s signals of
fear during a social referencing task, unlike typically devel-
oping children who tended to match their mother’s facial
expressions. Some investigators suggest that such unusual
social interaction patterns of children with Down syndrome
may be due to difﬁculty in shifting attention, especially under
situations of high cognitive load (Kasari, Freeman, Mundy, &
Sigman, 1995).
Some delayed behaviors of children with developmental
disabilities may be related to sensory impairments or health
problems. For example, children with Down syndrome often
experience transient hearing loss due to middle ear infections
or more permanent hearing loss (Cunningham & McArthur,
1981) which can diminish responsiveness to their mother’s

Research on Families of Children With Developmental Disabilities
521
vocal cues. Neuropsychological development related to
sensory-tactile and attentional processes is impaired in chil-
dren who have autism, limiting their ability to understand
social information (Resch, Grand, & May, 1988). As infants,
they demonstrate minimal interest in people, rarely display-
ing eye contact or responding to parents’ attempts to engage
them in play (Hoppes & Harris, 1990). These behaviors may
reduce the opportunities of infants with autism to engage
their caregivers in joint attention, necessary for the develop-
ment of language (Sigman & Ruskin, 1999). The diminished
responsiveness of children who exhibit autism has been
reported by parents to violate their expectations and reduce
their perception of attachment to their child (Hoppes &
Harris, 1990).
Some researchers suggest that maternal directiveness
represents diminished sensitivity and responsiveness of moth-
ers to their children’s abilities as a consequence of the unclear
social cues of their infants with Down syndrome (Berger,
1990). During observations of free play, mothers of children
with Down syndrome directed their child’s attention away
from objects that the child was playing with and instead di-
rected the child toward tasks that were too difﬁcult (Mahoney
et al., 1990). These ﬁndings suggested that mothers were not
always able to assess the developmental competence of their
child appropriately. Thus, the degree of scaffolding necessi-
tated by children with developmental disabilities may be
difﬁcult for their mothers to judge. Other researchers maintain
that the high level of directiveness observed in mothers of chil-
dren with Down syndrome reﬂects an adaptive response by
mothers to counter their children’s lower competence (e.g.,
Marfo, 1990). Mothers of children with Down syndrome
have been found to vary their directive behavior according to
their perception of their child’s needs and the demands of
the context (Landry, Garner, Pirie, & Swank, 1994). For ex-
ample, they use fewer directives when their child is engaged
in developmentally appropriate play (Maurer & Sherrod,
1987) and use more directives as a task becomes more
structured (Landry et al., 1994). This may be especially true
in observational settings where mothers are aware that
their behavior and the competence of their child is being
assessed.
Various researchers have found that directive behaviors
are multidimensional and often distinct from the supportive
strategies that mothers use to facilitate their child’s efforts to
master challenging tasks (Roach, Barratt, Miller, & Leavitt,
1998). Maternal directives may beneﬁt children with mental
retardation when combined with supportive behaviors
(Landry et al., 1994). For example, greater maternal support
of children’s use of objects has been associated with more
object play and greater vocalization in children with Down
syndrome (Roach et al., 1998). Directive behavior of mothers
of toddlers with Down syndrome may be especially impor-
tant in facilitating the complexity of children’s play (Landry
et al., 1994).
Signiﬁcant interindividual variation in the interactional
styles of mothers of children with developmental disabilities
and changes in these styles over time have been observed.
For example, McCubbin and Patterson (1982) emphasized
that a mother’s perception of her child and her role as a par-
ent change over time, affecting her parenting style. The
delayed social cues and responsiveness of children with
disabilities to their mother’s initiatives may affect mothers’
perceptions of their children and reduce responsiveness to
their children’s changing abilities (Zirpoli & Bell, 1987). The
ongoing transactional processes between mothers and infants
with disabilities may then inﬂuence the parenting style that
the mother adapts. The dominant and supportive behavior
observed in mother-child dyads during teaching tasks may be
a reﬂection of a mother’s lower expectation of her child’s
ability to act independently (Kelly & Barnard, 2000). Others
have found that parental beliefs about their child’s compe-
tence become increasingly dependent on characteristics of
the child over time (Clare, Garnier, & Gallimore, 1998).
In summary, the research on mother-child interactions
indicates that when children have disabilities, the mother-
child dyad tends to develop different patterns of interaction
than those noted when children are developing typically. Chil-
dren often provide less clarity in their social cues, and mothers
tend to be more directive, providing more instrumental teach-
ing while often supporting their child’s successes. Debates
exist, however, about the extent to which maternal directive-
ness and supportiveness extend or undermine children’s opti-
mal development. Nevertheless, current research indicates
that maternal interaction is a key predictor of the cognitive,
communicative, and social development of children with dis-
abilities over time (Hauser-Cram et al., 2001).
Children affect the interactions and ongoing relationship
with their mothers, but they also inﬂuence other aspects of
their mothers’ lives. Moreover, children inﬂuence the lives
of all members of the family system, including fathers and
siblings. In the next section we consider research on families
of children with developmental disabilities.
RESEARCH ON FAMILIES OF CHILDREN WITH
DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES
Historically, research on the effects that a child with a devel-
opmental disability has on the family has been based on an
assumption that children with disabilities disturb and distort

522
Disabilities and Development
typical family life (Gallimore, Bernheimer, & Weisner, 1999).
Therefore, most research on this topic is based on doc-
umenting deleterious outcomes, usually of mothers. Many
investigators searched for pathology in mothers, such as de-
pression, whereas others focused on adaptive, but still pro-
gressively negative, outcomes such as chronic sorrow (Wikler,
1981). Even recently, when psychiatrists were provided with
guidance about not regarding parents of children with disabil-
ities as patients, they were alerted to the need to recognize
parents’ongoing sadness (Szymanski & Wilska, 1997).
Theoretically Based Research
Four theoretical perspectives have guided the predominant
empirical work on family adaptation to children with disabil-
ities: stage theory models, stress and coping models, family
systems models, and social-ecology models. Historically, a
stage theory model (i.e., a sequenced pattern of change) was
used to explain the patterns of adjustment that parents pass
through when coping with the birth or diagnosis of a child
with a disability (e.g., Parks, 1977). The exact number of
stages and their nomenclature vary with investigators, but in
general three stages have been delineated (Blacher, 1984). In
the ﬁrst stage parents cope with the initial crisis of the diag-
nosis, often by shopping for physicians and treatments. In the
next stage parents experience guilt, anger, and disappoint-
ment. In the third stage parents reorient themselves toward
adjustment and acceptance. The empirical evidence for these
stages has been mixed (Blacher, 1984), however, and schol-
arly work has turned away from attempts to document stages
and moved toward developing a deeper understanding of
variations among families and across the family life cycle
(Krauss, 1997).
Beliefs that having a child diagnosed with a disability
precipitates a crisis or creates undue stress on the family
continue to dominate theoretical and empirical work on
families of children with disabilities. Costigan, Floyd, Harter,
and McClintock (1997) proposed that at the time of the birth
of a child with a disability families often experience resilient
disruption. Even though family patterns and routines may be
disrupted at the time of a child’s birth, families adapt, and
relationships and patterns often regain equilibrium.
Over the last two decades much research has been stim-
ulated by the ABCX model of family adaptation (Hill, 1949).
In this model the family’s adaptation to an atypical event, or
crisis, is explained by several factors, including the nature of
the crisis, the internal and external resources of the family,
and the meaning ascribed to the event. The birth or diagnosis
of a child with disabilities is considered to be a crisis
warranting adaptation. An expanded version, termed the
Double ABCX model, includes developmental processes be-
lieved to relate to family adaptation to chronic stress. This
new model also allows for changes in stressors, resources,
and the meaning ascribed to the crisis over time (McCubbin
& Patterson, 1982).
One set of resources that individuals bring to the parenting
experience is their skill in coping with stress. Stress-and-
coping models have generated much research in psychology
(Somerﬁeld & McCrae, 2000), as well as guided studies of
parents who have a child with a disability. Stress is often
differentiated into two domains: stress related to the charac-
teristics of the child, often related to the child’s temperament
and self-regulatory skills (e.g., demandingness, adaptability,
and distractibility), and stress related to the demands of the
parenting role (e.g., social isolation and sense of competence
as a parent; Abidin, 1995).
Several investigators have compared stress in parents of
children with disabilities with that reported by other parents.
Innocenti, Huh, and Boyce (1992) found that during the early
childhood years parents of children with disabilities had
greater than normative stress in the child domain after the in-
fant period. They did not differ from the normative sample,
however, with respect to stress related to the parenting role.
Thus, the more stressful challenges for parents emerged
around children’s self-regulatory behaviors and temperament
than in parenting tasks per se.
Orr, Cameron, Dobson, and Day (1993) examined age-
related differences in stress among mothers of children with
developmentaldelaysduringthepreschool,middlechildhood,
and adolescent periods. They found relatively high stress
scores on the child-related domain but primarily normative
scores on the parenting domain. They also indicated that
the highest levels of stress were reported by mothers
during the middle childhood period, a ﬁnding replicated in
other samples (Warﬁeld, Krauss, Hauser-Cram, Upshur, &
Shonkoff, 1999). Thus, like Innocenti et al. (1992), they
concluded that for mothers of children with disabilities, stress
is related to children’s self-regulatory behaviors and tem-
perament; they further added, however, that age-related differ-
ences occur and that the middle childhood period is an
especially vulnerable time.
Others have looked at parenting stress in relation to
children with speciﬁc disabilities. For example, Duis, Sum-
mers, and Summers (1997) found that parents of children
with Down syndrome in dual-parent families reported similar
stress levels to their counterparts who had typically develop-
ing children but lower stress levels than parents of children
with hearing impairments or developmental delay. Different
aspects of the family ecological system, however, predicted
different aspects of stress. Child-related stress was best

Research on Families of Children With Developmental Disabilities
523
predicted by general family resources, whereas parent-
related stress was best predicted by the level of external sup-
port and the quality of the sibling relationship.
Thus, in comparison to prior studies that focused on
parental stages of acceptance and adaptability, the studies
on parenting stress indicate that parents’ reactions to the
parenting demands of raising a child with a disability are
somewhat similar to parents’ reactions to raising any child.
More volatile patterns of stress, however, are evident in
relation to the child’s self-regulation, mood, and temperament.
Children with speciﬁc disabilities that tend to have higher
rates of behavior problems or greater difﬁculties with mood
may be more taxing for parents. It appears that such stress
becomes accentuated during the middle childhood period,
when children’s behaviors are typically expected to demon-
strate increasing levels of self-regulation.
Stress and coping are particular processes that parents
activate as they raise a child, but they are only one part of
the family dynamic. Family systems theory incorporates a
broader conceptual model of family processes. From the
family systems perspective the family is considered to be an
open, interactive system that operates according to a general-
ized set of principles (Walsh, 1980). Changes in one family
member affect changes in other members, producing multiple
iterative responses. Thus, rather than focusing on unidirec-
tional effects of a particular child on the family, those operat-
ing from the family systems model consider simultaneous
multiple effects of family members on each other (Lewis &
Lee-Painter, 1974; Minuchin, 1988).
Several aspects of the family system have been studied in re-
lation to parenting a child with a disability. Mink, Nihira, and
colleagues conducted a series of investigations in which they
developed family typologies based on the psychosocial envi-
ronment of the home. They studied the homes of children with
mild retardation (Mink, Nihira, & Meyers, 1983), children who
are “slow learning” (Mink, Meyers, & Nihira, 1984), and chil-
dren with severe mental retardation (Mink, Blacher, & Nihira,
1988). Through employing cluster analysis on measures of the
home environment, they described seven distinct family types:
cohesive, control oriented, responsive to child, moral-religious
oriented, achievement oriented, conﬂictual, and low disclosure.
Cohesive families are highly accepting of the child and provide
a safe and organized home environment. Control-oriented
families focus on children’s safety and physical needs but
place less emphasis on emotional and verbal expressiveness.
In contrast, the responsive-to-child family has members
who are verbally and emotionally responsive to each other
but offer little intellectual stimulation or concern with routines
and organization. Moral-religious-oriented families focus on
religious expression, often at the expense of emotional
expression. Achievement-oriented families also offer little em-
phasis on emotional expression but instead focus on offering a
variety of activities and experiences. As might be expected,
conﬂictual families have high rates of disagreements, whereas
low-disclosure families are ones in which members reveal little
of themselves.
The family typologies were used to analyze the relation
between family types and children’s development. For exam-
ple, in a sample of children with mild mental retardation,
Mink and Nihira (1986) found that children from cohesive
families had more positive self-esteem and social adjustment
than did children in other family types. Although the investi-
gators suggested that effects are most likely bidirectional—
the child affects the family and the family inﬂuences the child
(Mink et al., 1988)—the bidirectional process has rarely been
captured in empirical studies.
Mink and Nihira’s work served the important function of
helping researchers and service providers recognize that
children live and are cared for in a variety of family systems.
Their typology moved the ﬁeld of family research beyond
unidimensional questions about whether having a child with
a disability affects the family to broader questions about the
ﬁt between the ways a child and family function.
Investigators operating from the perspective of ecocul-
tural theory have broadened the ﬁeld of family research even
further. From this perspective, the family environment is
embedded in multiple interacting systems (Bronfenbrenner,
1979), and adaptation is a continuing activity for all families
(Weisner, 1993). Gallimore, Coots, Weisner, Garnier, and
Guthrie (1996) investigated the functional adjustments that
families make to sustain daily routines when raising a child
with a disability. The types of accommodations parents make
include arranging for suitable child care, making decisions
about employment based on their child’s needs, and home
adaptations based on their child’s motor abilities. Although
parents make a wide range of accommodations during all
phases of childhood, more accommodations tend to be made
during middle childhood in comparison to earlier periods
(Gallimore et al., 1996). Gallimore et al. (1999) maintained
that understanding the many ways families organize their
lives, the sources of their daily activities, and the mean-
ing that they attribute to their family patterns of living are
critical for the development of a fuller understanding of fam-
ily functioning.
Both intrafamilial and extrafamilial components of fami-
lies are critical aspects of the family system. With respect
to intrafamilial inﬂuences, although the bulk of research has
focused on mothers, knowledge is expanding on the well-
being of fathers and siblings. Family members often provide
support to each other, but they also receive support from

524
Disabilities and Development
those outside of the family (e.g., neighbors, friends, and
professionals). Considering extrafamilial inﬂuences, the role
of social support in parental (and by extension, familial)
well-being is an area of rich research on families with a child
with disabilities. In the following sections we review the
research on fathers, siblings, and the role of social support in
family functioning.
Fathers of Children With Developmental Disabilities
Mothers are often the primary caregivers of children and
have been the focus of most research on children with
disabilities. Indeed, mothers are often asked to be the
spokesperson for the family. Although fathers often also have
a central role in the life of the family, they have been studied
less extensively than mothers, especially in families in which
a child has a disability (Lamb & Billings, 1997). Early inves-
tigations focused on the extent to which fathers’ supportive-
ness to their wives related to maternal well-being (Bristol,
Gallagher, & Schopler, 1988). Thus, fathers were included in
investigations as adjuncts to their wives.
In subsequent studies, however, paternal well-being has
been investigated as an outcome in addition to being a medi-
ator of maternal outcome. In a study of 30 couples of school-
aged children with developmental disabilities, Dyson (1997)
reported that fathers and mothers did not differ in their level
of parenting stress, social support, or family functioning.
Parenting stress was related, however, to problems encoun-
tered due to the child’s needs and to parents’pessimism about
the child’s future. For both parents, stress was related to the
family environment in terms of nurturance, facilitation of
personal growth, and system maintenance.
In a comparison study of parents of children with Down
syndrome and parents of children developing typically,
Roach, Orsmond, and Barratt (1999) found that although
parents of children with Down syndrome reported higher
levels of caregiving difﬁculties, paternal and maternal ratings
did not differ. Further, even though parents of children with
Down syndrome reported higher rates of parenting stress
than did comparison parents, mothers and fathers had similar
levels of parenting stress.
In contrast, Scott, Atkinson, Minton, and Bowman (1997)
found that mothers, in comparison to fathers, of young
children with Down syndrome reported more psychologi-
cal stress. Krauss (1993) compared the parenting stress of
mothers and fathers of toddlers participating in the Early In-
tervention Collaborative Study (described earlier; Shonkoff
et al., 1992). She reported that although levels of stress
were quite similar for mothers and fathers (mainly within
normative ranges), fathers reported more stress related to
their child’s temperament and to their relationship with the
child whereas mothers’ stress derived from the demands of
the parenting role. In longitudinal analyses of the same sam-
ple, Hauser-Cram et al. (2001) reported that although both
mothers and fathers had increasing levels of stress related to
their child with a disability from the early through middle
childhood years, fathers showed greater increases in stress
than mothers during the early childhood period. Further, tra-
jectories of both maternal and paternal stress were predicted
by children’s self-regulatory behaviors, especially behavior
problems. In addition, increasing patterns of stress were
found for mothers with less helpful social support networks
and for fathers with fewer problem-focused coping skills.
The relation between changes in maternal and paternal well-
being is an important area for researchers to address in the
future.
Siblings of Children With Developmental Disabilities
Sibling relationships often provide the longest lasting inti-
mate family bond. When reared together, siblings share nu-
merous experiences and know intimate details of each other’s
history, forming a relationship that is distinct from any other.
The familiarity and frequent interaction between siblings
provides a context for children to develop perspective taking
skills and the management of emotions and behavior (Dunn,
1999).
Similar to other families, siblings of children with develop-
mental disabilities assume multiple roles such as companion,
teacher, conﬁdante, and friend (Stoneman, Brody, Davis, &
Crapps, 1987). To accommodate the needs and abilities of
their siblings with disabilities, they often provide instrumental
teaching, behavioral management, and emotional support
(Brody, Stoneman, Davis, & Crapps, 1991). Siblings of
children with developmental disabilities are also more likely
to perform these teaching roles for a longer period of time.
Further, roles may be reversed at times when the older sibling
has a developmental disability and the younger sibling be-
comes more advanced developmentally (Stoneman, Brody,
Davis, Crapps, & Malone, 1991).
Zetlin (1986) emphasized that all family relationships,
including the sibling dyad, change throughout the life span. In
a longitudinal study of young children with Down syndrome
and their siblings, differences between the cognitive and so-
cial abilities of children with developmental disabilities and
their siblings affected the relationship less when children
were younger (Abramovitch, Stanhope, Pepler, & Corter,
1987). As differences in language and adaptive skills
increase, siblings tend to spend less time engaged in rec-
iprocal interactions such as play or conversation (Wilson,

Research on Families of Children With Developmental Disabilities
525
McGillivray, & Zetlin, 1992). School-aged children and their
siblings with mental retardation have been observed to play
together as frequently as matched comparison groups
(Abramovitch et al., 1987). Nondisabled siblings often learn
to accommodate to their sibling’s lower cognitive abilities by
playing less competitively and choosing appropriate toys that
interest their siblings (Stoneman et al., 1987). As the reci-
procity and equality between siblings decrease, roles can
become asymmetric, with the typically developing sibling
becoming more dominant and directive during interactions
(Wilson et al., 1992).
Many adolescent siblings of individuals with mental retar-
dation report a strong attachment to their brothers and sisters
along with signiﬁcant worries and concerns about the future
care of their siblings (Eisenberg, Baker, & Blacher, 1998). In
a study of adolescent and adult siblings, the majority indi-
cated a willingness to be responsible for their brothers or
sisters with disabilities in the future (Greenberg, Seltzer,
Orsmond, & Krauss, 1999). Similar to siblings of typically
developing children, more opportunities for interaction
between siblings is related to the greater likelihood of
stronger feelings, both positive and negative, reported by
siblings (Bank & Kahn, 1982).
Much of the research on typically developing siblings
indicates age and gender differences. Females who are older
than their sibling with a disability have been found to assume
a greater proportion of caregiving and household responsibil-
ities than male siblings do (e.g., McHale & Gamble, 1989).
Brody et al. (1991) found that greater responsibility of older
school-aged siblings was associated with less time spent in
leisure activities outside the home and, in some cases, more
conﬂictual sibling interaction. In contrast, younger siblings
(ranging in age from 4 to 20 years) who provided signiﬁcant
caregiving for an older sibling with a disability did not reveal
negative adjustment but rather displayed a high degree of
warmth and closeness to their brother or sister (Stoneman
et al., 1991). Sibling outcomes appear to be dependent on
multiple factors involving characteristics of the child with a
disability, the sibling, as well as the adaptive functioning of
the family as a unit.
Just as studies on parents of children with developmental
disabilities often assumed pathology, early studies of siblings
of children with disabilities assumed disadvantageous out-
comes. Typically developing siblings were considered to be
at risk for maladjustment as a consequence of the chronic
stress, stigma, and responsibilities associated with the care
of a sibling with disabilities (e.g., Farber, 1959). Some
siblings reported lower self-concepts, anger, and subse-
quent guilt from perceptions that they received less attention
from parents in comparison to their brother or sister with a
disability (McHale & Gamble, 1989). Observations of fami-
lies of children with disabilities have found that siblings of
children with disabilities often receive signiﬁcantly less
parental attention than do siblings of typically developing
children (Corter, Pepler, Stanhope, & Abramovitch, 1992).
As a consequence of greater time spent caring for their
brother or sister with a disability, some typically developing
siblings report loneliness due to having fewer opportunities to
play outside the home or engage in normative sibling inter-
actions (McHale & Gamble, 1989). Other siblings report feel-
ing pressure to achieve to compensate their parents for
the lower skills of their brother or sister with a disability
(Seligman, 1983). In some studies, high rates of depression
and conduct problems were reported, especially among sisters
(Cuskelly & Gunn, 1993; McHale & Gamble, 1989).
In contrast, other researchers found positive adjustment
among siblings and the provision of valuable experiences in
sibling relationships (e.g., Eisenberg et al., 1998). Indeed,
most recent reviews of sibling relationships indicate mixed
support for the hypothesis that siblings of children with
disabilities assume greater caregiving or are at greater risk for
psychopathology (Damiani, 1999; Stoneman, 1998). Dyson
(1989) reported that male siblings of children with mental
retardation compared to male siblings of typically developing
children demonstrated fewer behavior problems. Some ado-
lescent and adult siblings have reported that the experience of
living with a brother or sister with mental retardation helped
them to develop greater empathy, as well as increased pa-
tience and acceptance of differences (Eisenberg et al., 1998).
Among adult siblings of children with mental retardation,
greater psychological adjustment was positively related to
the degree of emotional intimacy between siblings (Seltzer,
Greenberg, Krauss, & Gordon, 1997).
The adjustment of siblings is affected by multiple factors
including the severity of their brother’s or sister’s disability
and related needs, the temperament of each sibling, and
behavioral, psychological, or health problems related to the
sibling’s disability (Stoneman, 1998). The most consistent
ﬁnding in studies on sibling relationships is that problematic
behaviors of the child with a disability are associated with
higher conﬂict among siblings and less time engaged in
activities together (Brody, Stoneman, & Burke, 1987).
Children with certain disabilities are more likely to exhibit
problem behaviors. For example, children with Fragile X
syndrome tend to exhibit behaviors that are less prosocial and
more emotionally volatile than those of same-age children
(Kerby & Dawson, 1994). Although children with Williams
syndrome display high verbal skills and friendliness,
they often exhibit attention-seeking and deﬁcient social
skills (Einfeld, Tonge, & Florio, 1997). These maladaptive

526
Disabilities and Development
behaviors have the potential of leading to conﬂictual rela-
tionships between siblings, as well as negatively affecting
family functioning (Stoneman, 1998).
Many of the studies on sibling relationships focus on that
relationship in the absence of knowledge about the overall
functioning of the family system and the broader social-
ecological settings in which families are embedded. The
ﬁndings of several recent studies, however, indicate that
sibling adjustment often parallels that of parents. Parents
who perceive their child with a disability and the function-
ing of their family more positively tend to have siblings
who have more positive feelings about their family and bet-
ter psychological adjustment (e.g., Weinger, 1999). Simi-
larly, Dyson, Edgar and Crnic (1989) reported that siblings
from families who were less argumentative and more sup-
portive toward family members were rated as more socially
competent.
Open communication and responsiveness of family mem-
bers to each other may be especially important for the posi-
tive adjustment of siblings of children with disabilities.
Lynch, Fay, Funk, and Nagel (1993) found that conﬂict
between parents and disorganized family functioning was
associated with poor outcomes for siblings of children with
mental retardation. The degree of cohesive, communicative
functioning within the parent-child dyad as well as qualities
of the sibling temperament predict fewer behavior problems
and more positive adjustment in siblings (Dyson et al., 1989).
Self-reports from adolescent siblings of children with mental
retardation revealed that adolescents wished that their
families would discuss issues concerning their sibling more
often. These siblings reported that greater openness and
expressiveness between family members would reduce their
anxiety and strengthen their relationship with other family
members (Eisenberg et al., 1998). Thus, future understanding
of sibling relationships will beneﬁt by considering the family
context in which such relationships develop.
The Role of Social Support to Families of Children With
Developmental Disabilities
Although many factors are hypothesized to explain why some
families adjust positively and others experience dysfunction
when raising a child with disabilities, social support is a fac-
tor that has received much attention from researchers. Social
networks supply emotional and instrumental support to indi-
viduals and are composed of formally constructed (e.g., pro-
fessionals and service providers) and informally constructed
(e.g., friends, neighbors) groups (Dunst, Trivette, & Jodry,
1997). Thus, support networks are both an intrafamilial and
an extrafamilial factor. The construct of support includes
objective and subjective perspectives (Crnic & Stormshak,
1997). Support can be measured objectively by the size of
support networks, and subjectively by the extent to which
network members are appraised as helpful. Measures of help-
fulness and satisfaction with one’s support network, rather
than network size, have generally been more useful indicators
of the utility of support (Crnic & Stormshak, 1997).
Although Cochran and Brassard (1979) maintained that
support networks could have both direct and indirect effects
on children’s development, most studies have indicated that
social support serves to assist parents in their parenting role.
Parental functioning, then, inﬂuences children’s develop-
ment. In studies of families with children with disabilities,
social support has been found to relate to several parent and
family outcomes. Crnic, Greenberg, Ragozin, Robinson, and
Basham (1983) found that support from a spouse or partner
and others in personal networks was related to maternal satis-
faction with parenting and to general life satisfaction. Sup-
port has been found to interact with family characteristics,
however. For example, in a study of families of children with
or at risk for disabilities, Dunst, Trivette, and Cross (1986)
reported that child progress was greatest for families with
higher socioeconomic status and whose parents reported
greater satisfaction with their support networks.
Investigations into the role of social support in the func-
tioning of families of children with disabilities have been
extensive because social support is often considered to be an
intervention (Dunst et al., 1997). As an intervention, social
support functions to assist families when it responds to the
explicit needs of family members. Researchers have found
that for parents with young children with developmental dis-
abilities, hours of early intervention service are related
to positive changes in perceived helpfulness of support
(Warﬁeld, Hauser-Cram, Krauss, Shonkoff, & Upshur, 2000).
By providing increasing links with other families of young
children with disabilities and creating access to knowledge-
able service providers, programs like early intervention en-
hance the helpfulness of maternal support networks. This, in
turn, makes it possible for families to mobilize the resources
necessary to meet their needs. Social support is not a panacea,
however, and increases in social support are only effective in
inﬂuencing parental well-being and family functioning when
parents’ current support networks are inadequate to meet
their needs. Some investigators have found that program-
developed sources of support (i.e., formal support) provided
to families who did not perceive a need for additional support
resulted in deleterious parental outcomes (Afﬂeck, Tennen,
Rowe, Roscher, & Walker, 1989). Nevertheless, social sup-
port is recognized as an important factor in the ecology and
functioning of the family system.

Implications and Future Directions
527
IMPLICATIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
The perspective of deviance that has dominated the history of
public ideology and attitudes toward individuals with devel-
opmental disabilities is also somewhat reﬂected in the ﬁeld of
developmental psychology. To a large extent, the study of
children with disabilities has been relegated to investigators
in the ﬁelds of medicine, psychopathology, and special
education. Indeed, very few, if any, prior handbooks in child
psychology or developmental psychology include sections or
chapters on children with disabilities. The relative neglect of
investigations of children with disabilities in developmental
psychology has led to a constricted view of normal develop-
ment. In this way, developmental psychology remains an
incomplete science.
Some have conceptualized the study of developmental
delay as an experiment in nature because it creates a natural
context in which to examine developmental processes and
mechanisms in populations that exist at the extreme of the
normal distribution (Hodapp & Burack, 1990). For example,
Zigler (1969) studied children with mental retardation to
understand if they evidenced a functional delay (and thus
behaved like chronologically younger children) or a deﬁcit
(and thus behaved differently from other children). Zigler
and Balla (1982) posed a question of whether children with
mental retardation develop in ways similar to other children
in terms of sequence and structure; this question is of central
importance to those interested in understanding the process
of human development. Other scholars have studied atypical
populations to elucidate the extent to which speciﬁc develop-
mental principles, such as orthogenesis and structural whole-
ness, generalize to all individuals (Cicchetti & Beeghly,
1990; H. Werner, 1957). An understanding of the way in
which such principles apply to all individuals is critical to the
growth of developmental psychology as a ﬁeld in which
the full spectrum of human development is studied and the
role of individual regulation in the development of plasticity
is investigated. Moreover, such understanding is also essen-
tial for the promotion of optimal functioning of individuals
with developmental disabilities.
Within the past “Decade of the Brain” (Carnegie Task
Force on Meeting the Needs of Young Children, 1994; Shore,
1997), advances in neurophysiology have increased knowl-
edge about genetic disorders associated with developmental
disabilities. For example, more than 750 genetic disorders
have been associated with developmental disabilities, and 350
are related to mental retardation speciﬁcally (Matalainen,
Airaksinen, Mononen, Launiala, & Kaariainen, 1995; Opitz,
1996). Diverse etiology and an array of behavioral pheno-
types also have been speciﬁed (Dykens, 1995).The signiﬁcant
interindividual variability in the behavioral phenotypes of
individuals with developmental delay demonstrates the nu-
merous ways that typical development can be compromised
by the multiple interactions of genetic, neurological, and
environmental factors. In particular, a host of environmental
teratogens have been identiﬁed that can modulate prenatal and
postnatal neurological and behavioral development (e.g.,
Omaye, 1993). The differential probability of these effects,
however, reﬂects the multiple risk or promotive factors that
contribute to individual differences in the child’s constitu-
tional resilience (Shonkoff & Marshall, 2000; Volpe, 1995).
Developmental delay exempliﬁes the developmental prin-
ciples of equiﬁnality and multiﬁnality (Cicchetti & Rogosch,
1996; Bertalanffy, 1968). In the former a variety of develop-
mental processes can lead to a similar outcome, whereas in
the latter a singular process or mechanism can lead to a range
of outcomes. Outcomes are highly dependent on the organi-
zation and functioning of the systems in which development
occurs. For example, equiﬁnality is demonstrated by individ-
uals with developmental disabilities of different etiologies
who demonstrate similar levels of cognitive and adaptive
functioning. Likewise, individuals who evidence the same
chromosomal anomaly may develop very different outcomes
depending on the support or organization of the family and
related interacting systems in which they live.
The psychological research on the development of chil-
dren with disabilities highlights the value of understanding
the family and multiple systems in which children learn and
are nurtured. The patterns found across empirical studies
have implications for those developing programs or provid-
ing services to families of children with disabilities. Positive
relationships within families (regardless of the composition
of the family) are central to the optimal development of chil-
dren with disabilities, their typically developing siblings,
and parental well-being. Services during a child’s early
years typically focus on the child as a member of a family
(Meisels & Shonkoff, 2000). Research ﬁndings suggest that
such a focus is justiﬁed. In particular, synchronous styles of
mother-child interaction relate to children’s development
and to the well-being of other family members. School-age
services, however, typically focus on the child rather than
on the child and family (McWilliam, Maxwell, & Sloper,
1999). Findings from empirical studies indicate, however,
that parents are reporting higher levels of stress during the
middle childhood period and may beneﬁt from additional
support during this time. Siblings’ relationships also appear
to reﬂect the relationships within the family system. Thus,
school-age services may be more beneﬁcial to children with
disabilities if they become more family focused and family
friendly.

528
Disabilities and Development
We are only beginning to construct an understanding
of the complex interrelation between the development of
children with disabilities and the adaptations and accommo-
dations of their families. For example, despite the growing
recognition that culture provides the frame in which children
develop, few have investigated how cultural conceptions of
development relate to parenting a child with a disability
(Garcia Coll & Magnuson, 2000). We also know little about
the way families negotiate the multiple systems (e.g., health,
education, and therapeutic services) in which they function
and how that negotiation inﬂuences children’s outcomes and
family well-being. Aside from a comparatively large set of
studies on mother-child interaction, bidirectional relations
between children and other family members or among the
various systems in which children develop remain unstudied.
It is essential that such investigations be undertaken because
children with developmental disabilities, like all children,
deserve to be nurtured in ways that will optimize their devel-
opment and help them to lead meaningful lives.
REFERENCES
Abidin, R. (1995). Parenting Stress Index: Manual (3rd ed.).
Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.
Abramovitch, R., Stanhope, L., Pepler, D., & Corter, C. (1987). The
inﬂuence of Down’s syndrome in sibling interaction. Journal of
Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 28, 865–879.
Afﬂeck, G., Tennen, H., Rowe, J., Roscher, B., & Walker, L. (1989).
Effects of formal support on mothers’ adaptation to the hospital-
to-home transition of high-risk infants: The beneﬁts and costs of
helping. Child Development, 60, 488–501.
American Association on Mental Retardation (AAMR). (1992).
Mental retardation: Deﬁnition, classiﬁcation, and systems of
supports (9th ed.) Washington, DC: American Association on
Mental Retardation.
American Psychiatric Association. (1968). Diagnostic and statisti-
cal manual of mental disorders (2nd ed.). Washington, DC:
Author.
American Psychiatric Association. (1994). Diagnostic and statisti-
cal manual of mental disorders (4th ed.). Washington, DC:
Author.
Aristotle (n.d.). The politics and the constitution of Athens.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Bank, S., & Kahn, M. D. (1982). The sibling bond. New York: Basic
Books.
Barnard, K. E., Hammond, M. A., Booth, C. L., Bee, H. L., Mitchell,
S. K., & Spieker, S. J. (1989). Measurement and meaning of
parent-child interaction. In F. Morrison, C. Lord, & D. Keating
(Eds.), Applied developmental psychology (Vol. 3). New York:
Academic Press. 
Baron-Cohen, S. (1998). Modularity in developmental cognitive
neuropsychology: Evidence from autism and Gilles de la
Tourette syndrome. In J. A. Burack, R. M. Hodapp, & E. Zigler
(Eds.), Handbook of mental retardation and development
(pp. 334–348). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Baumeister, A. A. (1987). Mental retardation: Some conceptions
and dilemmas. American Psychologist, 52, 796–800.
Beeghly, M., & Cicchetti, D. (1987). An organizational approach to
symbolic development in children with Down syndrome. In
D. Cicchetti & M. Beeghly (Eds.), Symbolic development in
atypical children (pp. 5–30). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Bell, R. Q. (1968). A reinterpretation of effects in studies of social-
ization. Psychological Review, 75, 81–95.
Bell, S. M., & Ainsworth, M. D. S. (1972). Infant crying and mater-
nal responsiveness. Child Development, 43, 1171–1190.
Berger, J. (1990). Interactions between parents and their infants with
Down syndrome. In D. Cicchetti & M. Beeghly (Eds.), Children
with Down syndrome: A developmental perspective (pp. 101–
146). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Bernheimer, L. P., & Keogh, B. K. (1988). Stability of cognitive per-
formance of children with developmental delays. American
Journal on Mental Retardation, 92, 539–542.
Bertalanffy, L., von (1968). General systems theory: Foundation,
development, and applications. New York: Braziller.
Bijou, S. W. (1966). A functional analysis of retarded development.
In N. R. Ellis (Ed.), International review of research in mental
retardation (pp. 1–19). New York: Academic Press.
Bijou, S. W., & Baer, D. M. (1961). Child development: A system-
atic and empirical theory. New York: Appelton.
Blacher, J. (1984). Sequential stages of parental adjustment to the
birth of a child with handicaps: Fact or artifact? Mental Retarda-
tion, 22, 55–68.
Blatt, B. (1985). The implications of the language of mental retarda-
tion for LD. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 18, 625–626.
Bloom, B. (1964). Stability and change in human characteristics.
New York: Wiley.
Bornstein, M. H. (1989). Between caretakers and their young: Two
modes of interaction and their consequences for cognitive
growth. In M. H. Bornstein & J. S. Bruner (Eds.), Interaction in
human development (pp. 197–214). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Bristol, M. M., Gallagher, J. J., & Schopler, E. (1988). Mothers and
fathers of young developmentally disabled and nondisabled
boys: Adaptation and spousal support. Developmental Psychol-
ogy, 24, 441–451.
Brody, G. H., Stoneman, Z., & Burke, M. (1987). Child tempera-
ments, maternal differential behavior, and sibling relations.
Developmental Psychology, 23, 354–362.
Brody, G. H., Stoneman, Z., Davis, C. H., & Crapps, J. M. (1991).
Observations of the role relations and behavior between older
children with mental retardation and their younger siblings.
American Journal on Mental Retardation, 95, 527–536.

References
529
Bronfenbrenner, U. (1979). The ecology of human development.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Bronfenbrenner, U. (1986). Ecology of the family as a context for
human development: Research perspectives. Developmental
Psychology, 22, 723–742.
Cairns, R. B. (1998). The making of developmental psychology. In
W. Damon (Series Ed.) & R. M. Lerner (Vol. Ed.), Theoretical
models of human development: Vol. 1. Handbook of child
psychology (5th ed., pp. 25–105). New York: Wiley.
Caldwell, B. M. (1973). The importance of beginning early. In M. B.
Karnes (Ed.), Not all little wagons are red: The exceptional
child’s early years (pp. 2–10). Arlington, VA: Council for
Exceptional Children.
Carnegie Task Force on Meeting the Needs of Young Children.
(1994). Starting points: Meeting the needs of our youngest
children. New York: Carnegie Corporation of New York. 
Carr, J. (1988). Six months to twenty-one years old: A longitudinal
study of children with Down’s syndrome and their families.
Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry and Allied Disci-
plines, 29, 407–431.
Carr, J. (1995). Down’s syndrome: Children growing up. Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press.
Cicchetti, D., & Beeghly, M. (1990). Children with Down
syndrome: A developmental perspective. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Cicchetti, R., & Rogosch, F. A. (1996). Equiﬁnality and multi-
ﬁnality in developmental psychopathology. Development and
Psychopathology, 8, 597–600.
Clare, L., Garnier, H., & Gallimore, R. (1998). Parents’ develop-
mental expectations and child characteristics: Longitudinal
study of children with developmental delays and their families.
American Journal on Mental Retardation, 103, 117–129.
Cochran, M. M., & Brassard, J. A. (1979). Child development and
personal social networks. Child Development, 50, 601–615.
Connell, W. F. (1980). A history of education in the twentieth
century. New York: Teachers College Press.
Corter, C., Pepler, D., Stanhope, L., & Abramovitch, R. (1992).
Home observations of mothers and sibling dyads comprised of
Down’s syndrome and non-handicapped children. Canadian
Journal of Behavioural Science, 24, 1–13.
Costigan, C. L., Floyd, F. J., Harter, K. S., & McClintock, J. C.
(1997). Family process and adaptation to children with mental
retardation: Disruption and resilience in family problem-solving
interactions. Journal of Family Psychology, 11, 515–529.
Crnic, K., Greenberg, M. T., Ragozin, A. S., Robinson, N. M., &
Basham, R. B. (1983). Effects of stress and social support on
mothers and premature and full-term infants. Child Develop-
ment, 54, 209–217.
Crnic, K., & Stormshak, E. (1997). The effectiveness of providing
social support for families of children at risk. In M. J. Guralnick
(Ed.), The effectiveness of early intervention (pp. 209–225).
Baltimore: Paul H. Brookes.
Cunningham, C., & McArthur, K. (1981). Hearing loss and treat-
ment in young Down syndrome children. Child: Health, Care,
and Development, 7, 357–374.
Cuskelly, M., & Gunn, P. (1993). Maternal reports of the behavior
of siblings of children with Down syndrome. American Journal
on Mental Retardation, 97, 521–529.
Damiani, V. B. (1999). Responsibility and adjustment in siblings
of children with disabilities: Update and review. Families in
Society, 80, 34–40.
Degler, C. (1991). In search of human nature: The decline and
revival of Darwinism in American social thought. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Dixon, R. A., & Lerner, R. M. (1992). History of systems in devel-
opmental psychology. In M. H. Bornstein & M. E. Lamb (Eds.),
Developmental psychology: An advanced textbook (3rd ed.,
pp. 3–58). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Duis, S., Summers, M., & Summers, C. R. (1997). Parent versus
child stress in diverse family types: An ecological approach.
Topics in Early Childhood Special Education, 17, 53–73.
Dunn, J. (1999). Siblings, friends, and the development of social
understanding. In A. W. Collins & B. Laursen (Eds.), Relation-
ships as developmental contexts: The Minnesota symposia on
child psychology (Vol. 30, pp. 263–279). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Dunst, C. J., Trivette, C. M., & Cross, A. (1986). Mediating inﬂu-
ences of social support: Personal, family, and child outcomes.
American Journal of Mental Deﬁciency, 90, 403–417.
Dunst, C. J., Trivette, C. M., & Jodry, W. (1997). Inﬂuences of social
support on children with disabilities and their families. In M.
Guralnick (Ed.), The effectiveness of early intervention (pp. 499–
522). Baltimore: Paul H. Brookes.
Dykens, E. M. (1995). Measuring behavioral phenotypes: Provoca-
tions from the “New Genetics.” American Journal on Mental
Retardation, 99, 522–532.
Dyson, L. L. (1989). Adjustment of siblings of handicapped
children: A comparison. Journal of Pediatric Psychology, 14,
215–229.
Dyson, L. L. (1997). Fathers and mothers of school-age children
with developmental disabilities: Parental stress, family function-
ing, and social support. American Journal on Mental Retarda-
tion, 102, 267–279.
Dyson, L. L., Edgar, E., & Crnic, K. (1989). Psychological pre-
dictors of adjustment of siblings of developmentally disabled
children. American Journal on Mental Retardation, 94, 292–
302.
Eheart, B. K. (1982). Mother-child interactions with non-retarded
and mentally retarded preschoolers. American Journal of Mental
Deﬁciency, 87, 20–25.
Einfeld, S. L., Tonge, B. J., & Florio, T. (1997). Behavioral and
emotional disturbance in individuals with Williams syndrome.
American Journal on Mental Retardation, 102, 45–53.
Eisenberg, L., Baker, B. L., & Blacher, J. (1998). Siblings of chil-
dren with mental retardation living at home or in residential

530
Disabilities and Development
placement. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry and
Allied Disciplines, 39, 355–363.
Elder, G. H., Jr. (1974). Children of the Great Depression: Social
change in life experience. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Ellis, N. R. (1979). Introduction. In N. R. Ellis (Ed.), Handbook of
mental deﬁciency, psychological theory and research (2nd ed.,
pp. xxv–xxix). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Farber, B. (1959). The effects of the severely retarded child on the
family system. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child
Development, 24(Serial No. 2).
Ford, D. L., & Lerner, R. M. (1992). Developmental systems theory:
An integrative approach. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Forum on Child and Family Statistics. (1999). America’s children
1999. Retrieved April 26, 2002, from www.childstats.gov/
AC1999/spectxt.asp
Fuller, P. (1949). Operant conditioning of a vegetative human
organism. American Journal of Psychology, 62, 587–590.
Gallimore, R., Bernheimer, L. P., & Weisner, T. S. (1999). Family
life is more than managing crisis: Broadening the agenda of
research on families adapting to childhood disability. In R.
Gallimore, L. P. Bernheimer, D. L. MacMillan, D. L. Speece, &
S. Vaughn (Eds.), Developmental perspectives on children
with high-incidence disabilities (pp. 55–80). Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Gallimore, R., Coots, J., Weisner, T., Garnier, H., & Guthrie, D.
(1996). Family responses to children with early developmental
delays: II. Accommodation intensity and activity in early and
middle childhood. American Journal on Mental Retardation,
101, 215–232.
Garcia Coll, C., & Magnuson, K. (2000). Cultural differences as
sources of developmental vulnerabilities and resources. In J. P.
Shonkoff & S. J. Meisles (Eds.), Handbook of early childhood
intervention (2nd ed., pp. 94–114). New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Glenn, S. S. (1997). Understanding human behavior: A key to
solving social problems. In D. M. Baer & E. M. Pinkston (Eds.),
Environment and behavior (pp. 13–14). Boulder, CO: Westview
press.
Goddard, H. H. (1914). Feeblemindedness: Its causes and conse-
quences. New York: MacMillan.
Goldberg, S. (1977). Social competence in infancy: A model of
parent-infant interaction. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 29, 163–
177.
Greenberg, J. S., Seltzer, M. M., Orsmond, G. I., & Krauss, M. W.
(1999). Siblings of adults with mental illness or mental retarda-
tion: Current involvement and expectation of future caregiving.
Psychiatric Services, 50, 1214–1219.
Guralnick, M. J. (1997). Second-generation research in the ﬁeld of
early intervention. In M. J. Guralnick (Ed.), The effectiveness of
early intervention (pp. 3–20). Baltimore: Paul H. Brookes.
Hauser-Cram, P., Warﬁeld, M. E., Shonkoff, J. P., & Krauss, M. W.
(2001). Children with disabilities: A longitudinal study of child
development and parent well-being. Monographs of the Society
for Research in Child Development, 66(3, Serial No. 266).
Hauser-Cram, P., Warﬁeld, M. E., Shonkoff, J. P., Krauss, M. W.,
Upshur, C. C., & Sayer, A. (1999). Family inﬂuences on adaptive
development in young children with Down syndrome. Child
Development, 70, 979–989.
Hawkins, G. D., & Cooper, D. H. (1990). Adaptive behavior
measures in mental retardation research: Subject description
in AJMD/AJMR articles (1979–1987). American Journal on
Mental Retardation, 94, 654–660.
Hebb, D. O. (1949). The organization of behavior: A neuropsycho-
logical theory. New York: Wiley.
Heckhausen, J. (1993). The development of mastery and its percep-
tion within caretaker-child dyads. In D. J. Messer (Ed.), Mastery
motivation in early childhood: Development, measurement, and
social processes (pp. 55–79). London: Routledge.
Hill, R. (1949). Families under stress. New York: Harper & Row.
Hodapp, R. M., & Burack, J. A. (1990). What mental retar-
dation tells us about typical development: The examples of
sequences, rates, and cross-domain relations. Development and
Psychopathology, 2, 213–225.
Hoppes, K., & Harris, S. L. (1990). Perceptions of child attachment
and maternal gratiﬁcation in mothers of children with autism and
Down syndrome. Journal of Clinical Child Psychology, 19,
365–370.
Hunt, J. M. (1961). Intelligence and experience. New York: Ronald
Press.
Inhelder, B. (1966). Cognitive development and its contribution to
the diagnosis of some phenomena of mental deﬁciency. Merrill-
Palmer Quarterly, 11, 299–319.
Innocenti, M. S., Huh, K., & Boyce, G. (1992). Families of children
with disabilities: Normative data and other considerations on
parenting stress. Topics in Early Childhood Special Education,
12, 403–427.
Jordan, T. E. (2000). Down’s (1866) essay and its sociomedical
context. Mental Retardation, 38, 322–329.
Kasari, C., Freeman, S., Mundy, P., & Sigman, M. D. (1995). Atten-
tion regulation by children with Down syndrome: Coordinated
joint attention and social referencing looks. American Journal
on Mental Retardation, 100, 128–136.
Kasari, C., Mundy, P., Yirmiya, N., & Sigman, M. (1991). Affect
and attention in children with Down syndrome. American
Journal on Mental Retardation, 95, 55–67.
Kelly, J. F., & Barnard, K. E. (2000). Assessment of parent-child
interaction: Implications for early intervention. In J. Shonkoff
& S. Meisels (Eds.), Handbook of early childhood intervention
(2nd ed., pp. 258–289). New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Keogh, B. K., Bernheimer, L. P., Gallimore, R., & Weisner, T. S.
(1998). Child and family outcomes over time: A longitudinal
perspective on developmental delays. In M. Lewis & C. Feiring
(Eds.), Families, risk, and competence (pp. 269–287). Mahwah,
NJ: Erlbaum.

References
531
Kerby, D. S., & Dawson, R. L. (1994). Autistic features, personality
and adaptive behavior in males with Fragile X syndrome and no
autism. American Journal on Mental Retardation, 98, 455–462.
Knieps, L. J., Walden, T. A., & Baxter, A. (1994). Affective expres-
sions of toddlers with and without Down syndrome in a social
referencing context. American Journal on Mental Retardation,
99, 301–312.
Krauss, M. W. (1993). Child-related and parenting stress: Similari-
ties and differences between mothers and fathers of children
with disabilities. American Journal on Mental Retardation, 97,
393–404.
Krauss, M. W. (1997). Two generations of family research in early
intervention. In M. J. Guralnick (Ed.), The effectiveness of early
intervention (pp. 611–624). Baltimore: Paul H. Brookes.
Lakin, K. C., Bruininks, R. H., & Larson, S. A. (1992). The
changing face of residential services. In L. Rowitz (Ed.), Mental
retardation in the year 2000 (pp. 197–247). New York: Springer-
Verlag.
Lamb, M. E., & Billings, L. A. (1997). Fathers of children with
special needs. In M. E. Lamb (Ed.), The role of the father in child
development (pp. 179–190). New York: Wiley.
Landry, S. H., Garner, P. W., Pirie, D., & Swank, P. R. (1994).
Effects of social context and mothers’ requesting strategies on
Down’s syndrome children’s social responsiveness. Develop-
mental Psychology, 30, 293–302.
Lerner, R. M. (1986). Concepts and theories of human development
(2nd ed.). New York: Random House.
Lerner, R. M. (1991). Changing organism-context relations as the
basic process of development: A developmental contextual
perspective. Developmental Psychology, 27, 27–32.
Lerner, R. M. (1998). Theories of human development: Contempo-
rary perspectives. In W. Damon (Series Ed.) & R. M. Lerner
(Vol. Ed.), Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 1. Theoretical
models of development (5th ed., pp. 1–24). New York: Wiley.
Lerner, R. M., Hauser-Cram, P., & Miller, E. (1998). Assumptions
and features of longitudinal designs: Implications for early child-
hood education. In B. Spodek, O. N. Saracho, & A. Pellegrini
(Eds.), Yearbook in early education: Issues in early childhood
educational research (pp. 113–138). New York: Teachers
College Press.
Lewis, M., & Lee-Painter, S. (1974). An interactional approach to
the mother-child dyad. In M. Lewis & L. A. Rosenblum (Eds.),
The effect of the infant on its caregiver (pp. 21–48). New York:
Wiley. 
Lifton, R. J. (1986). The Nazi doctors. New York: Basic Books.
Luckasson, R., Coulter, D. L., Polloway, E. A., Reiss, S., Schalock,
R. L., Snell, M. E., Spitalnik, D. M., & Stark, J. A. (1992).
Mental retardation: Deﬁnition, classiﬁcation, and systems of
support. Washington, DC: American Association on Mental
Retardation.
Lynch, D. J., Fay, L., Funk, J., & Nagel, R. (1993). Siblings of
children with mental retardation: Family characteristics and
adjustment. Journal of Child and Family Studies, 2, 87–96.
MacMillan, D. L., Gresham, F. M., & Siperstein, G. N. (1993).
Conceptual and psychometric concerns over the 1992 AAMR
deﬁnition of mental retardation. American Journal on Mental
Retardation, 98, 325–335.
Mahoney, G., Fors, S., & Wood, S. (1990). Maternal directive
behavior revisited. American Journal on Mental Retardation, 94,
398–406.
Marfo, K. (1990). Maternal directiveness in interactions with
mentally handicapped children: An analytical commentary.
Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 31, 531–549.
Matalainen, R., Airaksinen, E., Mononen, T., Launiala, K., &
Kaariainen, R. (1995). A population-based study on the causes of
severe and profound mental retardation. Acta Pediatrica, 84,
261–266.
Maurer, H., & Sherrod, K. B. (1987). Context of directives given to
young children with Down syndrome and nonretarded children:
Development over two years. American Journal of Mental
Deﬁciency, 91, 579–590.
McCubbin, H. I., & Patterson, J. M. (1982). Family adaptation to
crises. In H. I. McCubbin & J. M. Patterson (Eds.), Family stress,
coping, and social support (pp. 26–47). Springﬁeld, IL: Charles
C. Thomas.
McHale, S. M., & Gamble, W. C. (1989). Sibling relationships of
children with disabled and nondisabled brothers and sisters.
Developmental Psychology, 25, 421–429.
McWilliam, R. A., Maxwell, K. L., & Sloper, K. M. (1999). Beyond
“involvement:” Are elementary schools ready to be family-
centered? School Psychology Review, 28, 378–394.
Meisels, S. J., & Shonkoff, J. P. (2000). Early childhood interven-
tion: A continuing evolution. In J. P. Shonkoff & S. J. Meisels
(Eds.), Handbook of early childhood intervention (2nd ed.,
pp. 3–34). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Mink, I. T., Blacher, J., & Nihira, K. (1988). Taxonomy of family
life styles: III. Replication with families with severely mentally
retarded children. American Journal on Mental Retardation, 93,
250–264.
Mink, I. T., Meyers, C. E., & Nihira, K. (1984). Taxonomy of family
life styles: II. Homes with slow-learning children. American
Journal of Mental Deﬁciency, 89, 111–123.
Mink, I. T., & Nihira, K. (1986). Family life-styles and child behav-
iors: A study of direction of effects. Developmental Psychology,
22, 610–616.
Mink, I. T., Nihira, K., & Meyers, C. E. (1983). Taxonomy of family
life styles: I. Homes with TMR children. American Journal of
Mental Deﬁciency, 87, 484–497.
Minton, H. L. (1984). The Iowa Child Welfare Research Station and
the 1940 debate on intelligence: Carrying on the legacy of a
concerned mother. Journal of the History of the Behavioral
Sciences, 20, 160–176.
Minuchin, P. P. (1988). Relationships within the family: A systems
perspective on development. In R. A. Hinde & J. Stevenson-
Hinde (Eds.), Relationships within families: Mutual inﬂuences
(pp. 7–26). New York: Oxford University Press.

532
Disabilities and Development
Omaye, S. T. (1993). Nutrient deﬁciencies and pregnancy outcome.
In R. P. Sharma (Ed.), Dietary factors and birth defects
(pp. 12–41). San Francisco: Paciﬁc Division, AAAS.
Opitz, J. M. (1996, March). Histiography of the causal analysis of
mental retardation. Paper presented at the 29th annual Gatlin-
burg Conference on Research and Theory in Mental Retardation
and Developmental Disabilities, Gatlinburg, TN.
Orr, R. R., Cameron, S. J., Dobson, L. A., & Day, D. M. (1993).
Age-related changes in stress experienced by families with a
child who has developmental delays. Mental Retardation, 31,
171–176.
Overton, W. F. (1998). Developmental psychology: Philosophy,
concepts, and methodology. In W. Damon (Series Ed.) & R. M.
Lerner (Vol. Ed.), Theoretical models of human development:
Vol. 1. Handbook of child psychology (5th ed., pp. 107–188).
New York: Wiley. 
Overton, W. F., & Reese, H. W. (1973). Models of development:
Methodological implications. In J. R. Nesselroade & H. W.
Reese (Eds.), Life-span developmental psychology: Methodolog-
ical issues (pp. 65–86). New York: Academic Press.
Parks, R. (1977). Parental reactions to the birth of a handicapped
child. Health and Social Work, 2, 52–66.
Pueschel, S. M. (1980). Description of the Down syndrome
program. In S. M. Pueschel (Ed.), The young child with Down
syndrome (pp. 27–37). New York: Human Sciences Press. 
Reed, R. B., Pueschel, S. M., Schnell, R. R., & Cronk, C. E. (1980).
Interrelationships of biological, environmental, and competency
variables. In S. M. Pueschel (Ed.), The young child with Down
syndrome (pp. 285–299). New York: Human Sciences Press. 
Resch, R. C., Grand, S., & May, M. (1988). Eye, hand, and the
mother: The mother’s role in neuromaturation and development
of an autistic child. Bulletin of the Menninger Clinic, 52,
304–320.
Roach, M. A., & Barratt, M., Miller, J. F., & Leavitt, L. A. (1998).
The structure of mother-child play: Young children with Down
syndrome and typically developing children. Developmental
Psychology, 34, 77–87.
Roach, M. A., Orsmond, G. I., & Barratt, M. (1999). Mothers and
fathers of children with Down syndrome: Parental stress and
involvement in child care. American Journal on Mental Retar-
dation, 104, 422–436.
Rush, J., & Frances, A. (Eds.). (2000). Expert consensus guideline
series: Treatment of psychiatric and behavioral problems in
mental retardation. American Journal on Mental Retardation,
105, 159–226.
Sameroff, A. J., & Chandler, M. J. (1975). Reproductive risk and
the continuum of caretaking casuality. In F. D. Horowitz, M.
Hetherington, S. Scarr-Salapatek, & G. Siegel (Eds.), Review of
child development research (Vol. 4., pp. 187–244). Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Sameroff, A. J., & Fiese, B. H. (2000). Transactional regulation: The
developmental ecology of early intervention. In J. P. Shonkoff &
S. J. Meisels (Eds.), Handbook of early childhood intervention
(2nd ed., pp.135–159). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Scheerenberger, R. C. (1983). A history of mental retardation.
Baltimore: Paul H. Brookes.
Schnell, R. R. (1984). Psychomotor development. In S. M. Pueschel
(Ed.), The young child with Down syndrome (pp. 207–226). New
York: Human Sciences Press.
Scott, B. S., Atkinson, L., Minton, H., & Bowman, T. (1997).
Psychological distress of parents of infants with Down syn-
drome. American Journal on Mental Retardation, 102, 161–
171.
Seligman, M. (1983). Sources of psychological disturbance among
siblings of handicapped children. Personnel and Guidance
Journal, 67, 529–531.
Seltzer, M. M., Greenberg, J. S., Krauss, M. W., & Gordon, R. M.
(1997). Siblings of adults with mental retardation or mental
illness: Effects of lifestyle and psychological well-being. Family
Relations: Interdisciplinary Journal of Applied Family Studies,
46, 395–405.
Shonkoff, J. P., Hauser-Cram, P., Krauss, M. W., & Upshur, C. C.
(1992). Development of infants with disabilities and their
families. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child
Development, 57(6, Serial No. 230).
Shonkoff, J. P., & Marshall, P. C. (2000). The biology of develop-
mental vulnerability. In J. P. Shonkoff & S. J. Meisels (Eds.),
Handbook of early childhood intervention (2nd ed., pp. 35–53).
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Shore, R. (1997). Rethinking the brain: New insights into early
development. New York: Families and Work Institute. 
Sigman, M., & Ruskin, E. (1999). Continuity and change in the
social competence of children with autism, Down syndrome, and
developmental delays. Monographs of the Society for Research
in Child Development, 64(Serial No. 256).
Skinner, B. F. (1953). Science and human behavior. New York:
Macmillan.
Somerﬁeld, M. R., & McCrae, R. R. (2000). Stress and coping
research: methodological challenges, theoretical advances, and
clinical applications. American Psychologist, 55, 620–625.
Spradlin, J. E., & Girardeau, F. L. (1966). The behavior of
moderately and severely retarded persons. In N. R. Ellis
(Ed.), International review of research in mental retardation
(pp. 257–298). New York: Academic Press.
Sroufe, L. A. (1996). Emotional development: The organization
of emotional life in the early years. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Stoneman, Z. (1998). Research on siblings of children with mental
retardation: Contributions of developmental theory and etiology.
In J. A. Burack, R. M. Hodapp, & E. Zigler (Eds.), Handbook of
mental retardation and development (pp. 669–692). New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Stoneman, Z., Brody, G. H., Davis, C. H., Crapps, J. M. (1987).
Mentally retarded children and their older same-sex siblings:

References
533
Naturalistic in-home observations. American Journal on Mental
Retardation, 92, 290–298.
Stoneman, Z., Brody, G. H., Davis, C. H., Crapps, J. M., & Malone,
D. M. (1991). Ascribed role relations between children with
mental retardation and their younger siblings. American Journal
on Mental Retardation, 95, 537–550.
Szymanski, L. S., & Wilska, M. (1997). Mental retardation. In
A. Tasman, J. King, & J. A. Lieberman (Eds.), Psychiatry
(pp. 605–635). Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders.
Thelen, E., & Smith, L. B. (1998). Dynamic systems theories. In
W. Damon (Series Ed.) & R. M. Lerner (Vol. Ed.), Handbook of
child psychology: Vol. 1. Theoretical models of human develop-
ment (5th ed., pp. 563–633). New York: Wiley.
Volpe, J. J. (1995). Neurology of the newborn. Philadelphia: W. B.
Saunders.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1993). In R. W. Rieber & A. S. Carton (Eds.), The
collected works of L. S. Vygotsky: Vol. 2. The fundamentals of
defectology. New York: Plenum. (Original work published in
1924–1931)
Walsh, F. (Ed.). (1980). Normal family processes. New York:
Guilford Press.
Warﬁeld, M. E., Hauser-Cram, P., Krauss, M. W., Shonkoff, J. P., &
Upshur, C. C. (2000). The effect of early intervention services on
maternal well-being. Early Education and Development, 11,
499–517.
Warﬁeld, M. E., Krauss, M. W., Hauser-Cram, P., Upshur, C. C., &
Shonkoff, J. P. (1999). Adaptation during early childhood among
mothers of children with disabilities. Journal of Developmental
and Behavioral Pediatrics, 20, 9–16.
Weinger, S. (1999). Views of the child with mental retardation:
Relationship to family functioning. Family Therapy, 26, 63–79.
Weisner, T. S. (1993). Siblings in cultural place: Ethnographic and
ecocultural perspectives on siblings of developmentally delayed
children. In Z. Stoneman & P. Berman (Eds.), Siblings of
individuals with mental retardation, physical disabilities, and
chronic illness (pp. 51–83). Baltimore: Paul H. Brookes.
Werner, E., & Smith, R. S. (1992). Overcoming the odds: High risk
children from birth to adulthood. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University
Press.
Werner, H. (1957). The concept of development from a comparative
and organismic point of view. In D. B. Harris (Ed.), The con-
cept of development (pp. 125–148). Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press.
Werner, H., & Strauss, A. (1939). Problems and methods of func-
tional analysis in mentally deﬁcient children. Journal of Abnor-
mal and Social Psychology, 34, 37–62.
Wikler, L. (1981). Chronic stresses of families of mentally retarded
children. Family Relations, 30, 281–288.
Wilson, C. J., McGillivray, J. A., & Zetlin, A. G. (1992). The
relationship between attitude to disabled siblings and ratings
of behavioural competency. Journal of Intellectual Disability
Research, 36, 325–336.
Winship, A. E. (1900). Jukes—Edwards: A study in education and
heredity. Harrisburg, PA: R. L. Myers.
Wishart, J. G., & Duffy, L. (1990). Instability of performance on
cognitive tests in infants and young children with Down’s
syndrome. British Journal of Educational Psychology, 60,
10–22.
Zetlin, A. (1986). Mentally retarded adults and their siblings.
American Journal of Mental Deﬁciency, 91, 217–225.
Zigler, E. (1969). Developmental versus difference theories of
retardation and the problem of motivation. American Journal of
Mental Deﬁciency, 73, 536–556.
Zigler, E., & Balla, D. (1982). Motivational and personality factors
in the performance of the retarded. In E. Zigler & D. Balla
(Eds.), Mental retardation: The developmental-difference con-
troversy (pp. 9–26). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Zirpoli, T. J., & Bell, R. Q. (1987). Unresponsiveness in children
with severe disabilities: Potential effects on parent-child interac-
tions. Exceptional Child, 34, 31–40.


CHAPTER 22
Applied Developmental Science of Positive
Human Development
RICHARD M. LERNER, PAMELA M. ANDERSON, AIDA BILALBEGOVIC´ BALSANO, ELIZABETH M. DOWLING,
AND DEBORAH L. BOBEK
535
The Principles of Applied Developmental Science
536
Foci of Applied Developmental Science
537
FROM DEVELOPMENTAL SYSTEMS THEORIES TO
APPLIED DEVELOPMENTAL SCIENCE
538
Explanation and Application: A Synthesis
538
Toward the Testing of a Developmental Systems Approach
to Applied Developmental Science
540
MODELS OF PERSON-CONTEXT RELATION
540
The Goodness of Fit Model of Person-Context Relations
in Families
542
Temperament and Tests of the Goodness-of-Fit Model
542
The Stage-Environment Fit Model of
Adolescent-School Relations
546
The Integration of Individual and Community Assets in
the Promotion of Positive Youth Development
548
CONCLUSIONS
552
REFERENCES
553
The latter part of the twentieth century was marked by public
anxiety about a myriad of social problems—some old, some
new, but all affecting the lives of vulnerable children, adoles-
cents, adults, families, and communities (Fisher & Murray,
1996; R. M. Lerner & Galambos, 1998; R. M. Lerner, Sparks,
& McCubbin, 1999). In America, for instance, a set of
problems of historically unprecedented scope and severity in-
volved interrelated issues of economic development, envi-
ronmental quality, health and health care delivery, poverty,
crime, violence, drug and alcohol use and abuse, unsafe sex,
and school failure.
Indeed, in the latter portion of the twentieth century and
into the present one, and across the United States and in other
nations, infants, children, adolescents, and the adults who
care for them continued to die from the effects of these social
problems (Dryfoos, 1990; Hamburg, 1992; Hernandez, 1993;
Huston, 1991; R. M. Lerner, 1995; Schorr, 1988, 1997). If
people were not dying, their prospects for future success
were being reduced by civil unrest and ethnic conﬂict, by
famine, by environmental challenges (e.g., involving water
quality and solid waste management), by school under-
achievement and dropout, by teenage pregnancy and par-
enting, by lack of job opportunities and preparedness, by
prolonged welfare dependency, by challenges to their health
(e.g., lack of immunization, inadequate screening for disabil-
ities, insufﬁcient prenatal care, and lack of sufﬁcient infant
and childhood medical services), and by the sequelae of per-
sistent and pervasive poverty (Huston, McLoyd, & Garcia
Coll, 1994; R. M. Lerner & Fisher, 1994). These issues chal-
lenge the resources and the future viability of civil society in
America and throughout the world (R. M. Lerner, Fisher, &
Weinberg, 2000a, 2000b).
The potential role of scientiﬁc knowledge about human de-
velopment in addressing these issues of individuals, families,
communities, and civil society resulted in growing interest
and activity in what has been termed applied developmental
science (ADS). As explained by Wertlieb (this volume),
scholars such as Celia B. Fisher (Fisher & Lerner, 1994;
Fisher et al., 1993), Richard A. Weinberg (e.g., R. M. Lerner,
Fisher, & Weinberg, 1997, 2000a, 2000b), Lonnie R. Sherrod
(e.g., 1999a, 1999b), Jacquelynne Eccles (Eccles, Lord, &
Buchanan, 1996), Ruby Takanishi (1993), and Richard M.
Lerner (1998b, 2002a, 2002b) specify thatADS is scholarship
that is predicated on a developmental systems theoretical per-
spective. This theoretical approach sees the multiple levels of
organizations involved in human development—including
biology, psychology, social relations, group/institutions, cul-
ture, physical environment, and history—as existing in an in-
tegrated, fused system. The perspective stresses that relations
among components of the system are the appropriate units of

536
Applied Developmental Science of Positive Human Development
developmental analysis (R. M. Lerner, 1998b, 2002a; chapter
by Wertlieb in this volume). This approach also views indi-
viduals as active producers of their own development through
the relationships they have with their contexts (R. M. Lerner,
1982; R. M. Lerner & Walls, 1999). Given that development
occurs through the changing relations that individuals have
with their contexts, there is an opportunity for plasticity, for
systematically changing the course of human development by
altering the trajectory of these relations (Fisher & Lerner,
1994; chapter by Wertlieb in this volume).
Consistent with its emphasis on integrated systems, ADS
seeks to synthesize developmental research with community
outreach in order to describe, explain, and enhance the life
chances of vulnerable children, adolescents, young and old
adults, and their families across the life span (Fisher &
Lerner, 1994; chapter by Wertlieb in this volume). Given its
roots in developmental systems theory, ADS challenges the
usefulness of decontextualized knowledge and, as a conse-
quence, the legitimacy of isolating scholarship from the
pressing human problems of our world.
In this chapter we discuss key facets of the theoretical
bases for the integrated approach taken byADS to knowledge
generation and knowledge application. We emphasize the
central role of fused relations between individuals and con-
texts (or, more generally, among levels of organization in the
developmental system) in the theoretical and empirical work
legitimating theADS approach to knowledge. To advance our
argument we ﬁrst review the key conceptual principles asso-
ciated with ADS and the relational foci of ADS scholarship.
We emphasize the synthetic view of basic, explanatory re-
search and applied research that is brought to the fore by the
developmental systems thinking that framesADS, and we ex-
plain why person-context relations constitute the core focus
of research designed to study the basic process of human de-
velopment envisioned within ADS. Several lines of research
that model such person-context relations are reviewed, in-
cluding those associated with the goodness-of-ﬁt model (e.g.,
Chess & Thomas, 1999), the stage-environment ﬁt model
(e.g., Eccles, Midgley, et al., 1993), and models integrating
individual and community assets in the promotion of positive
youth development (Benson, 1997; Damon, 1997).
The Principles of Applied Developmental Science
As explained in detail in Wertlieb (this volume), Fisher and
her colleagues (Fisher et al., 1993) delineated ﬁve conceptual
components that characterize the principles or core substan-
tive features of ADS. Taken together, these conceptual fea-
tures make ADS a unique approach to understanding and
promoting positive development.
The ﬁrst conceptual component of ADS is the notion of
the temporality, or historical embeddedness, of change perti-
nent to individuals, families, institutions, and communities.
Some components of the context or of individuals remain sta-
ble over time, and other components may change historically.
Because phenomena of human behavior and development
vary historically, one must assess whether generalizations
across time periods are legitimate. Thus, temporality has im-
portant implications for research design, service provision,
and program evaluation.
Interventions are aimed at altering the developmental tra-
jectory of within-person changes. To accomplish this aim, the
second conceptual feature of ADS is that applied develop-
mental scientists take into account interindividual differences
(diversity) among, for instance, racial, ethnic, social class,
and gender groups, as well as intra-individual changes, such
as those associated with puberty. 
The third conceptual feature of ADS places an emphasis
on the centrality of context. There is a focus on the relations
among all levels of organization within the ecology of human
development. These levels involve biology, families, peer
groups, schools, businesses, neighborhoods and commu-
nities, physical-ecological settings, and the sociocultural,
political, legal-moral, and economic institutions of society.
Together, bidirectional relations among these levels of the
developmental system necessitate systemic approaches to
research, program and policy design, and program and policy
implementation.
The fourth principle of ADS emphasizes descriptively
normative developmental processes and primary prevention
and optimization rather than remediation. Applied develop-
mental scientists emphasize healthy and normative develop-
mental processes and seek to identify the strengths and assets
of individual groups and settings, rather than focusing on
deﬁcits, weaknesses, or problems of individuals, families, or
communities. Instead of dwelling on the problems faced by
people, applied developmental scientists aim to ﬁnd combi-
nations of individual and ecological assets associated with
thriving among people (e.g., Benson, 1997; Benson, Leffert,
Scales, & Blyth, 1998; Leffert et al., 1998; Scales, Benson,
Leffert, & Blyth, 2000) and with the ﬁve Cs of positive indi-
vidual development: competence, conﬁdence, connection,
character, and caring/compassion (Hamilton & Hamilton,
1999; R. M. Lerner, 2002b; Little, 1993; Pittman, 1996).
The ﬁnal principle of ADS is the appreciation of the bi-
directional relationship between knowledge generation and
knowledge application. By acknowledging bidirectionality,
applied developmental scientists recognize the importance
of knowledge about life and development that exists among
the individuals, families, and communities being served by

Applied Developmental Science of Positive Human Development
537
ADS. For applied developmental scientists, collaboration
and colearning between researchers/universities and com-
munities are essential features of the scholarly enterprise
(R. M. Lerner, 1998a, 1998b). Such community-collaborative
efforts are termed outreach scholarship (R. M. Lerner &
Miller, 1998).
In other words, given the developmental systems perspec-
tive that ADS is predicated on, applied developmental scien-
tists assume that
there is an interactive relationship between science and applica-
tion. Accordingly, the work of those who generate empirically
based knowledge about development and those who provide pro-
fessional services or construct policies affecting individuals and
families is seen as reciprocal in that research and theory guide
intervention strategies and the evaluation of interventions and
policies provides the bases for reformulating theory and future re-
search. . . .As a result, applied developmental [scientists] not only
disseminate information about development to parents, profes-
sionals, and policy makers working to enhance the development
of others, they also integrate the perspectives and experiences of
these members of the community into the reformulation of theory
and the design of research and interventions. (Fisher & Lerner,
1994, p. 7)
Foci of Applied Developmental Science
The National Task Force on Applied Developmental Science
(Fisher et al., 1993) indicated that the activities of ADS span
a continuum from knowledge generation to knowledge appli-
cation (see also chapter by Wertlieb in this volume). These
activities include, but are not limited to, research on the
applicability of scientiﬁc theory to growth and development
in natural, ecologically valid contexts; the study of develop-
mental correlates of phenomena of social import; the con-
struction and utilization of developmentally and contextually
sensitive assessment instruments; the design and evaluation
of developmental interventions and enhancement programs;
and the dissemination of developmental knowledge to indi-
viduals, families, communities, practitioners, and policy
makers through developmental education, printed and elec-
tronic materials, the mass media, expert testimony, and com-
munity collaborations. 
Given their belief in the importance for developmental
analysis of systemically integrating all components within
the ecology of human development, and their stress on inte-
grating through collaboration and colearning the expertise of
the researcher with the expertise of the community, propo-
nents of ADS believe that researchers and the institutions
within which they work are part of the developmental system
that ADS tries to understand and enhance. ADS emphasizes
that the scholar/university-community partnerships that they
seek to enact are an essential means of contextualizing
knowledge. By embedding scholarship about human devel-
opment within the diverse ecological settings within which
people develop, applied developmental scientists foster bidi-
rectional relationships between research and practice. Within
such relationships developmental research both guides and is
guided by the outcomes of community-based interventions,
for example, public policies or programs aimed at enhancing
human development.
The growth of such outreach scholarship has fostered a
scholarly challenge to prior conceptions of the nature of the
world (Cairns, Bergman, & Kagan, 1998; R. M. Lerner &
Miller, 1998; W. Overton, 1998; Valsiner, 1998). The idea that
all knowledge is related to its context has promoted a change
in the typical ontology within current scholarship. This
change has emerged as a focus on relationism and an avoid-
ance of split conceptions of reality, such as nature versus nur-
ture (W. Overton, 1998). This ontological change has helped
advance the view that all existence is contingent on the
speciﬁcs of the physical and social-cultural conditions that
exist at a particular moment of history (W. Overton, 1998;
Pepper, 1942). Changes in epistemology that have been asso-
ciated with this revision in ontology and contingent knowl-
edge can be understood only if relationships are studied.
Accordingly, any instance of knowledge (e.g., the core
knowledge of a given discipline) must be integrated with
knowledge of (a) the context surrounding it and (b) the rela-
tion between knowledge and context. Thus, knowledge that
is disembedded from the context is not basic knowledge.
Rather, knowledge that is relational to its context, for exam-
ple, to the community, as it exists in its ecologically valid
setting (Trickett, Barone, & Buchanan, 1996), is basic
knowledge. Having an ontology of knowledge as ecologi-
cally embedded and contingent rationalizes the interest of
ADS scholars in learning to integrate what they know with
what is known of and by the context (Fisher, 1997). It thus
underscores the importance of colearning collaborations
between scholars and community members as a key part of
the knowledge-generation process (Higgins-D’Alessandro,
Fisher, & Hamilton, 1998; R. M. Lerner & Simon, 1998a,
1998b). In sum, signiﬁcant changes that have occurred in
the way in which social and behavioral scientists (and
human developmentalists more speciﬁcally) have begun to
reconceptualize their roles and responsibilities to society is
in no greater evidence than in the ﬁeld of ADS (Fisher &
Murray, 1996; R. M. Lerner, 2002a, 2002b; R. M. Lerner
et al., 2000a, 2000b).
Human developmental science has long been associated
with laboratory-based scholarship devoted to uncovering

538
Applied Developmental Science of Positive Human Development
universal aspects of development by stripping away contex-
tual inﬂuences (Cairns et al., 1998; Hagen, 1996; Youniss,
1990). However, the mission and methods of human devel-
opment are being transformed into an ADS devoted to dis-
covering diverse developmental patterns by examining the
dynamic relations between individuals within the multiple,
embedded contexts of the integrated developmental systems
in which they live (Fisher & Brennan, 1992; Horowitz, 2000;
Horowitz & O’Brien, 1989; Morrison, Lord, & Keating,
1984; Power, Higgins, & Kohlberg, 1989; Sigel, 1985). This
theoretical revision of the target of developmental analysis
from the elements of relations to interlevel relations has sig-
niﬁcant implications for applications of developmental sci-
ence to policies and programs aimed at promoting positive
human development. Arguably the most radical feature of the
theoretical, research, and applied agenda of applied develop-
mental scientists is the idea that research about basic rela-
tional processes of development and applications focused on
enhancing person-context relations across ontogeny are one
and the same. To explain this fusion, it is important to discuss
in some detail the link between developmental systems the-
ory and ADS.
FROM DEVELOPMENTAL SYSTEMS THEORIES
TO APPLIED DEVELOPMENTAL SCIENCE
Paul Mussen, the editor of the third edition of the Handbook
of Child Psychology, presaged what today is abundantly clear
about the contemporary stress on systems theories of human
development. Mussen (1970, p. vii) said, “The major con-
temporary empirical and theoretical emphases in the ﬁeld of
developmental psychology . . . seem to be on explanations of
the psychological changes that occur, the mechanisms and
processes accounting for growth and development.” This
vision alerted developmental scientists to a burgeoning inter-
est not in structure, function, or content per se, but in change,
in the processes through which change occurs, and in the
means through which structures transform and functions
evolve over the course of human life.
Today, Mussen’s (1970) vision has been crystallized. The
cutting edge of contemporary developmental theory is repre-
sented by systems conceptions of process, of how structures
function and how functions are structured over time. Thus,
developmental systems theories of human development
are not tied necessarily to a particular content domain,
although particular empirical issues or substantive foci
(e.g., motor development, successful aging, wisdom, extraor-
dinary cognitive achievements, language acquisition, the self,
psychological complexity, or concept formation) may lend
themselves readily as exemplary sample cases of the processes
depicted in a given theory (see R. M. Lerner, 1998a).
The power of developmental systems theories lies in their
ability not to be limited or confounded by an inextricable
association with a unidimensional portrayal of the develop-
ing person. In developmental systems theories the person is
neither biologized, psychologized, nor sociologized. Rather,
the individual is systemized. A person’s development is em-
bedded within an integrated matrix of variables derived from
multiple levels of organization. Development is conceptual-
ized as deriving from the dynamic relations among the vari-
ables within this multitiered matrix.
Developmental systems theories use the polarities that en-
gaged developmental theory in the past (e.g., nature/nurture,
individual/society, biology culture; R. M. Lerner, 1976, 1986,
2002a), not to split depictions of developmental processes
along conceptually implausible and empirically counterfac-
tual lines (Gollin, 1981; W. Overton, 1998) or to force coun-
terproductive choices between false opposites (e.g., heredity
or environment, continuity or discontinuity, constancy or
change; R. M. Lerner, 2002a), but to gain insight into the
integrations that exist among the multiple levels of organiza-
tion involved in human development. These theories are cer-
tainly more complex than their one-sided predecessors. They
are also more nuanced, more ﬂexible, more balanced, and
less susceptible to extravagant or even absurd claims (e.g.,
that nature split from nurture can shape the course of human
development; that there is a gene for altruism, militarism, or
intelligence; or that when the social context is demonstrated
to affect development the inﬂuence can be reduced to a ge-
netic one; e.g., Hamburger, 1957; Lorenz, 1966; Plomin,
1986, 2000; Plomin, Corley, DeFries, & Faulker, 1990;
Rowe, 1994; Rushton, 1987, 1988a, 1988b, 1997, 1999).
These mechanistic and atomistic views of the past have
been replaced, then, by theoretical models that stress the dy-
namic synthesis of multiple levels of analysis, a perspective
having its roots in systems theories of biological develop-
ment (Cairns, 1998; Gottlieb, 1992; Kuo, 1930, 1967, 1976;
T. C. Schneirla, 1956; T. C. Schneirla, 1957; von Bertalanffy,
1933). In other words, development, understood as a property
of systemic change in the multiple and integrated levels of or-
ganization (ranging from biology to culture and history)
comprising human life and its ecology, is an overarching
conceptual frame associated with developmental systems
models of human development.
Explanation and Application: A Synthesis
This stress on the dynamic relation between the individual and
his or her context results in the recognition that a synthesis of

From Developmental Systems Theories to Applied Developmental Science
539
perspectives from multiple disciplines is needed to under-
stand the multilevel integrations involved in human devel-
opment. In addition, to understand the basic process of human
development both descriptive and explanatory research must
be conducted within the actual ecology of people’s lives.
Explanatory studies, by their very nature, constitute inter-
vention research. The role of the developmental researcher
conducting explanatory research is to understand the ways in
which variations in person-context relations account for the
character of human developmental trajectories, life paths that
are enacted in the natural laboratory of the real world. To
gain an understanding of how theoretically relevant varia-
tions in person-context relations may inﬂuence developmen-
tal trajectories, the researcher may introduce policies or
programs as experimental manipulations of the proximal or
distal natural ecology. Evaluations of the outcomes of such
interventions become a means to bring data to bear on theo-
retical issues pertinent to person-context relations. More
speciﬁcally, these interventions have helped applied develop-
mental scientists to understand the plasticity in human devel-
opment that may exist and that may be capitalized on to
enhance human life (Csikszentmihalyi & Rathunde, 1998;
R. M. Lerner, 1984).
The interindividual differences in intra-individual change
that exist as a consequence of these naturally occurring inter-
ventions attest to the magnitude of the systematic changes
in structure and function—the plasticity—that characterize
human life. Explanatory research is necessary, however, to
understand what variables, from what levels of organization,
are involved in particular instances of plasticity that have
been seen to exist. In addition, such research is necessary to
determine what instances of plasticity may be created by
science or society. In other words, explanatory research is
needed to ascertain the extent of human plasticity or, in turn,
to test the limits of plasticity (Baltes, Lindenberger, &
Staudinger, 1998; R. M. Lerner, 1984). 
From a developmental systems perspective, the conduct of
such research may lead the scientist to alter the natural ecol-
ogy of the person or group he or she is studying. Such re-
search may involve either proximal or distal variations in the
context of human development (R. M. Lerner & Ryff, 1978);
in any case, these manipulations constitute theoretically
guided alterations of the roles and events a person or group
experiences at, or over, a portion of the life span. 
These alterations are indeed, then, interventions: They are
planned attempts to alter the system of person-context rela-
tions that constitute the basic process of change; they are con-
ducted in order to ascertain the speciﬁc bases of, or to test the
limits of, particular instances of human plasticity (Baltes,
1987; Baltes & Baltes, 1980). These interventions are a
researcher’s attempt to substitute designed person-context
relations for naturally occurring ones in an attempt to
understand the process of changing person-context relations
that provides the basis of human development. In short, basic
research in human development is intervention research
(R. M. Lerner et al., 1994). 
Accordingly, the cutting edge of theory and research in
human development lies in the application of the conceptual
and methodological expertise of human developmental sci-
entists to the natural ontogenetic laboratory of the real world.
This placement into the actual ecology of human develop-
ment of explanatory research about the basic, relational
process of development involves the fusion of application
with basic developmental science. To pursue the study of
ontogeny from a developmental systems perspective, a
research-application agenda that is focused on the relations
between diverse individuals and their similarly diverse con-
texts is brought to the fore (R. M. Lerner, 2002a). In addition,
however, scholars involved in such research must have at
least two other concerns, ones deriving from the view that
basic, explanatory research in human development is, in its
essence, intervention research. 
Research in human development that is concerned with
one or even a few instances of individual and contextual di-
versity cannot be assumed to be useful for understanding the
life course of all people. Similarly, policies and programs de-
rived from such research, or associated with it in the context
of a researcher’s tests of ideas pertinent to human plasticity,
cannot hope to be applicable, or equally appropriate and
useful, in all contexts or for all individuals. Accordingly,
developmental and individual differences–oriented policy
development and program (intervention) design and delivery
must be a key part of the approach to applied developmental
research for which we are calling. 
The variation in settings within which people live means
that studying development in a standard (e.g., a controlled)
environment does not provide information pertinent to the
actual (ecologically valid) developing relations between indi-
vidually distinct people and their speciﬁc contexts (e.g., their
particular families, schools, or communities). This point un-
derscores the need to conduct research in real-world settings
(Bronfenbrenner, 1974; Zigler, 1998) and highlights the
ideas that (a) policies and programs constitute natural exper-
iments (i.e., planned interventions for people and institu-
tions) and (b) the evaluation of such activities becomes a
central focus in the developmental systems research agenda
we have described (R. M. Lerner, 1995; R. M. Lerner,
Ostrom, & Freel, 1995).
In this view, then, policy and program endeavors do
not constitute secondary work, or derivative applications,

540
Applied Developmental Science of Positive Human Development
conducted after research evidence has been complied. Quite
to the contrary, policy development and implementation, as
well as program design and delivery, become integral com-
ponents of the ADS approach to research; the evaluation
component of such policy and intervention work provides
critical feedback about the adequacy of the conceptual frame
from which this research agenda should derive (Zigler, 1998;
Zigler & Finn-Stevenson, 1992). 
In essence, a developmental systems perspective leads us
to recognize that if we are to have an adequate and sufﬁcient
science of human development, we must integratively study
individual and contextual levels of organization in a relational
and temporal manner (Bronfenbrenner, 1974; Zigler, 1998).
And if we are to serveAmerica’s citizens and families through
our science, and if we are to help develop successful policies
and programs through our scholarly efforts—efforts that re-
sult in the promotion of positive human development—then
we may make great use of the integrative, temporal, and rela-
tional model of the person and of his or her context that is em-
bodied in the developmental systems perspective forwarded
in developmental system theories of human development.
Toward the Testing of a Developmental Systems
Approach to Applied Developmental Science
The key test of the usefulness of the integrative, relational
ideas of applied developmental scientists lies in a demonstra-
tion of the greater advantages for understanding and applying
a synthetic focus on person-context relations—as compared
to an approach to developmental analysis predicated on
splitting individual from context or on splitting any level
within the developmental system from another (e.g., through
genetic reductionism, splitting biological from individual-
psychological or social levels; e.g., as in Rowe, 1994, or
Rushton, 1999, 2000). In other words, can we improve un-
derstanding of human development, and can we enhance our
ability to promote positive outcomes of changes across life
by adopting the relational approach of an ADS predicated on
developmental systems thinking? 
We believe the answer to this question is yes, and to sup-
port our position we consider scholarship that illustrates how
a focus on the person-context relation may enhance under-
standing of the character of human development and, as well,
of the ways in which applications linking person and context
in positive ways can enhance human development across the
life span. The scholarship we review considers the impor-
tance of understanding the match, congruence, quality of ﬁt,
or integration between attributes of individuals and charac-
teristics of their contexts for understanding and promoting
healthy, positive human development.
Although there are numerous ways in which the literature
pertinent to person-context relations may be partitioned in
order to ascertain the nature of the support that exists for the
developmental systems approach to ADS, we have elected to
concentrate on models of person-context relations focused
primarily on families, schools, and communities. We believe
the literatures associated with these instances of the context
afford an assessment of three settings integral to the lives
of people across much of the life span. As well, these three
foci provide a means to consider integrated issues of
research, policies, and programs pertinent to the promotion
of positive development across much of ontogeny.
MODELS OF PERSON-CONTEXT RELATION
Biological (organismic) characteristics of the individual af-
fect the context; for example, adolescents who look different
as a consequence of contrasting rates of biological growth
associated for instance with earlier versus later maturation
elicit different social behaviors from peers and adults
(Brooks-Gunn, 1987; R. M. Lerner, 1987a, 1987b; Petersen,
1988). At the same time, contextual variables in the organ-
ism’s world affect its biological characteristics (e.g., girls
growing up in nations or at times in history with better health
care and nutritional resources reach puberty earlier than do
girls developing in less advantaged contexts; Katchadourian,
1977; Tanner, 1991).
Accordingly, scholars using developmental systems think-
ing to frame their work seek to identify how variables from
the levels involved in person-context relations ﬁt together dy-
namically (i.e., in a reciprocally interactive way) to provide
bases for behavior and development. For instance, the
goodness-of-ﬁt model (Chess & Thomas, 1984; Thomas &
Chess, 1977) and the stage-environment ﬁt model (Eccles,
1991; Eccles & Midgley, 1989), both of which are discussed
in greater detail later, represent two important ways in which
scholars interested in developmental systems have explored
the import of dynamic person-context relations for positive
development.
Capitalizing on the tradition of person-context scholar-
ship embodied in such models, other scholars, interested in
applying developmental science to promote positive youth
development by improving person-context relations, have
attempted to understand and enhance the integration of
individual and ecological characteristics in the service of
fostering healthier developmental trajectories. This scholar-
ship expands the focus of person-context relations beyond
child-parent, person-family, or student-teacher (classroom,
school) foci to include community-level variables; as such, it

Models of Person-Context Relation
541
includes an explicit recognition of the ethos and values of a
community for marshalling its strengths or assets around a
vision of improved, healthy trajectories of person-context
relations for young people.
The idea involved in all of these variants of person-
context relational conceptions is the same. Just as a person
brings his or her characteristics of individuality to a particu-
lar social setting, there are characteristics of the context (e.g.,
social demands placed on the person) that exist by virtue of
the social and physical components of the setting. These
ecological characteristics may take the form of (a) attitudes,
values, or stereotypes that are held by others in the context
regarding the person’s attributes (either physical or behav-
ioral characteristics); (b) the attributes (usually behavioral) of
others in the context with whom the individual must coordi-
nate, or ﬁt, his or her attributes (also, in this case, usually be-
havioral) for adaptive interactions to exist; (c) the physical
characteristics of a setting (e.g., the presence or absence of
access ramps for those with motor handicaps) that require the
person to possess certain attributes (again, usually behavioral
abilities) for the most efﬁcient interaction within the setting
to occur; or (d) the social assets, resources, or strengths of a
neighborhood or community (e.g., mentoring programs for
students, community policing programs, or educationally
enriching after-school programs for young children). 
A congruence, match, or goodness of ﬁt between a per-
son’s attributes of individuality (e.g., her/his temperamental
characteristics, developmental level) and the features of his
or her social and physical ecology (e.g., the demands placed
on her/him for particular behaviors by parents, classroom
teachers, school peer groups, or other signiﬁcant people in
her/his life) may be established because the individual has
characteristics that act on the environment and, at the same
time, because the environment acts on her or his characteris-
tics (Chess & Thomas, 1984, 1999;  J. V. Lerner & Lerner,
1983; R. M. Lerner & Lerner, 1989; Thomas & Chess, 1977).
These two components of the developmental system—
individual attributes and ecological characteristics (such as
demands and resources)—may interact to promote either
adaptive or unhealthy outcomes.
Of course, any instance of match, congruence, positive
integration, or ﬁt may result in either positive or negative out-
comes, depending on the characteristics extant across the
other levels of the developmental system at a given point in
time (Bronfenbrenner & Morris, 1998; Elder, 1998). How-
ever, given that the individual is at the center of these recip-
rocal actions (or dynamic interactions), individuals, through
their own actions, are a source of their own development
(R. M. Lerner & Busch-Rossnagel, 1981; R. M. Lerner &
Walls, 1999). In short, within developmental systems theo-
ries there is a third source of development—the individual
(see, e.g., Schneirla, 1957).
The basis of the speciﬁcations provided by these models
of person-context relations for positive development lies in
this third source of development. Given the inﬂuences of the
individual (e.g., the child) on his or her context, and thus as a
producer of her or his own development, one implication of
developmental systems thinking for the understanding of
human development is through the creation of person effects.
To illustrate, consider the person during his or her child-
hood (and thus consider child effects on the developmental
process; R. M. Lerner & Busch-Rossnagel, 1981; R. M.
Lerner & Walls, 1999). How we behave and think as adults—
and especially as parents—is very much inﬂuenced by our
experiences with our children. Our children rear us as much
as we do them (R. M. Lerner, Rothbaum, Boulos, &
Castellino, in press). The very fact that we are parents makes
us different adults than we would be if we were childless.
But, more importantly, the speciﬁc and often special charac-
teristics of a particular child inﬂuence us in very unique
ways. How we behave toward our children depends quite a
lot on how they have inﬂuenced us to behave. Such child in-
ﬂuences are the basis of child effects.
Child effects emerge largely as a consequence of a child’s
individual distinctiveness. All children, with the exception of
genetically identical (monozygotic) twins, have a unique
genotype, that is, a unique genetic inheritance. Similarly,
no two children, including monozygotic twins, experience
precisely the same environment. As such, because of person-
context fusions, all individuals have systematic charac-
teristics of individuality, distinct features that arise from a
probabilistic epigenetic interrelation of genes and environ-
ment (Gottlieb, 1970, 1983, 1991, 1992, 1997).
Child effects elicit a “circular function” (Schneirla, 1957)
in individual development: Children stimulate differential re-
actions in their parents, and these reactions provide the basis
of feedback to the child; that is, return stimulation inﬂuences
children’s further individual development. The bidirectional
child-parent relationships involved in these circular functions
underscore the point that children (and adolescents and
adults) are producers of their own development and that indi-
viduals’ relations to their contexts involve bidirectional
exchanges (R. M. Lerner, 1982). The parent shapes the child,
but part of what determines the way in which parents do this
is children themselves.
In short, children shape their parents—as adults, as
spouses, and of course as parents per se—and in so doing chil-
dren help organize feedback to themselves, feedback that con-
tributes further to their individuality and thus starts the
circular function all over again (i.e., returns the child effects

542
Applied Developmental Science of Positive Human Development
process to its ﬁrst component). Characteristics of behavioral
or personality individuality allow the child to contribute to
this circular function. However, this idea of circular functions
needs to be extended; that is, in and of itself the notion is mute
regarding the speciﬁc characteristics of the feedback (e.g., its
positive or negative valence) that children will receive as a
consequence of their individuality. In other words, to account
for the speciﬁc character of child-family relations, the circular
functions model needs to be supplemented. The ﬁrst model of
person-context relations we shall consider—the goodness-of-
ﬁt model—makes this contribution to the understanding of
circular functions within the family.
The Goodness-of-Fit Model of Person-Context
Relations in Families
The goodness-of-ﬁt model speciﬁes that a person’s character-
istics differentially meet the demands of his or her setting,
providing a basis for the speciﬁc feedback attained from the
socializing environment. Although the goodness-of-ﬁt model
is put forward as a general model to assist in understanding
the valence of the feedback associated with circular functions
within and across all instances of person-context relations
(Chess & Thomas, 1999; Thomas & Chess, 1970, 1977,
1981), much of the literature involving tests of this model
have been linked either to understanding family relations or
to the differences between interactions in the family and other
key contexts of child development (e.g., the school).
For example, teachers and parents may have relatively in-
dividual and distinct expectations about behaviors desired of
their students and children; these different expectations typi-
cally derive from contrasting attitudes, values, or stereotypes
associated with the school versus the home. For instance,
teachers may prefer students who show little distractibility,
whereas parents might prefer their children to be moderately
distractible, for example, when they require their children to
move from watching television to the dinner table and then
on to bed. Children whose behavioral individuality is either
generally distractible or generally not distractible would dif-
ferentially meet the demands of these two contexts. Problems
of adjustment to school or to home might thus develop as a
consequence of a child’s lack of match (or goodness of ﬁt) in
either or both settings. By this analysis, distractible children
should, therefore, never be blamed for a poor ﬁt. It is, rather,
the dynamic relationship between the child and his or her
context(s) that determines the adaptability of the ﬁt (i.e., the
functional signiﬁcance of the ﬁt, e.g., for positive social rela-
tions in the context). 
When looking speciﬁcally at the child’s contribution to ﬁt,
one may specify different competencies that a child might
possess to attain a good ﬁt within and across time within
given contexts. These competencies include appropriately
evaluating (a) the demands of a particular context, (b) the in-
dividual’s psychological and behavioral characteristics, and
(c) the degree of match that exists between the two. In addi-
tion, other cognitive and behavioral skills are necessary. The
child must have the ability to select and gain access to those
contexts with which there is a high probability of match and
to avoid those contexts where poor ﬁt is likely. In contexts
that are assigned rather than selected—for example, family of
origin or assigned elementary school class—the child must
have the knowledge and skills necessary either to change
him- or herself to ﬁt the demands of the setting or to alter
the context to better ﬁt his or her attributes (Mischel, 1977;
Snyder, 1981). In most contexts multiple types of demands
will impinge on the person, each with distinct pressures on
the individual. The child needs to be able to detect and eval-
uate such complexity and judge which demand it is best to
adapt to when all cannot be met. In these instances, as the
child develops competency in self-regulation (Brandtstädter,
1998, 1999; Eccles, Early, Frasier, Belansky, & McCarthy,
1997; Heckhausen, 1999), the child will be able to become an
active selector and shaper of the contexts within which he or
she develops. Thus, as the child’s agency (Bakan, 1966) de-
velops, it will become increasingly true that he or she rears
his or her parents as much as they do him or her.
Alexander Thomas and Stella Chess (1977, 1980, 1981;
Chess & Thomas, 1984, 1999) asserted that if a child’s char-
acteristics of individuality provide a good ﬁt (or match) with
the demands of a particular setting, adaptive outcomes will
accrue in that setting. Those children whose characteristics
match most of the settings within which they exist should re-
ceive supportive or positive feedback from the contexts and
should show evidence of the most adaptive behavioral devel-
opment. In turn, of course, poorly ﬁt or mismatched children
should show alternative developmental outcomes. The char-
acteristics of individuality through which children may dif-
ferentially ﬁt their contexts involve what children do, why
children show a given behavior, and how children do what-
ever they do. 
Temperament and Tests of the Goodness-of-Fit Model
Much of the initial evidence supporting the use of the
goodness-of-ﬁt model is derived from the Thomas and Chess
(1977; Chess & Thomas, 1996, 1999) New York Longitudinal
Study (NYLS). For instance, information relevant to the
goodness-of-ﬁt model exists as a consequence of the multiple
samples present in the project. The core NYLS sample was
composed of 133 middle-class, mostly European American

Models of Person-Context Relation
543
children of professional parents who were followed from in-
fancy through young adulthood. In addition, a sample of 98
Puerto Rican children of working-class parents was followed
for about seven years. The children from both samples were
studied from at least the ﬁrst month of life onward. Although
the distribution of temperamental attributes was not different
in the two samples, the import of the attributes for psychoso-
cial adjustment was quite disparate.
Two examples that relate to the concept of “easy” versus
“difﬁcult” temperament (Chess & Thomas, 1984, 1999;
Thomas & Chess, 1977) may sufﬁce to illustrate this distinc-
tion. Chess and Thomas (1984, 1999) explained that the ﬁt
between the child’s temperament and the caregiver’s de-
mands may be associated with distinct types of parental or
family relations. For instance, temperamentally difﬁcult
children may be moody or biologically arrhythmic and, as a
result, may not ﬁt with the preferences, expectations, or
schedules of caregivers. By contrast, children with easy tem-
peraments may be rhythmic children and have a positive
mood and, as a result, have a better ﬁt with the preferences,
expectations, or schedules of the caregivers. However, a
child’s temperamental ease or difﬁculty does not reside in the
child but in the dynamic relations involving the child, the
parent, and the larger ecology of human development. What
may be difﬁcult in one setting, or a predictor of negative
developmental outcomes, may be irrelevant or, instead, a
predictor of positive outcomes under different conditions of
the developmental system.
To illustrate the signiﬁcance of individual temperament on
the goodness of ﬁt between person and context, the impact of
low regularity or rhythmicity of behavior, particularly in re-
gard to sleep-wake cycles, may be considered. Of the two
samples of families in the NYLS, the Puerto Rican parents
studied by Thomas and Chess (1977; Thomas, Chess, Sillen,
& Mendez, 1974) placed no demands in regard to rhythmic-
ity of sleep on the infant or child during at least the ﬁrst ﬁve
years of live. In fact, Puerto Rican parents allowed their child
during the ﬁrst ﬁve years of life to go to sleep and wake up at
any time. These parents molded their schedule around their
children. Because this sample of parents was so accom-
modating, there were no problems of ﬁt associated with an
arrhythmic infant or child. In addition, neither within the
infancy period nor throughout the ﬁrst ﬁve years of life did
arrhythmicity predict adjustment problems in the Puerto
Rican children. In this sample arrhythmicity remained con-
tinuous and independent of adaptive implications for the
child. In turn, in the predominantly European American,
middle-class families, strong demands for rhythmic sleep
patterns were maintained. Most of the mothers and fathers in
this sample worked outside the home (Korn, 1978), and sleep
arrhythmicity in the child interfered with parents’getting suf-
ﬁcient rest at night to perform optimally at work the next day.
Thus, an arrhythmic child did not ﬁt with parental demands,
and consistent with the goodness of ﬁt model, arrhythmicity
was a major predictor of problem behaviors both within the
infancy years and through the ﬁrst ﬁve years of life (Korn,
1978; Thomas et al., 1974).
There are at least two ways of viewing this ﬁnding. First,
consistent with the idea that children inﬂuence their parents,
it is signiﬁcant to note that sleep arrhythmicity in the
European American sample resulted in parental reports of
fatigue, stress, anxiety, and anger (Chess & Thomas, 1984,
1996, 1999; Thomas et al., 1974). It is possible that the pres-
ence of arrhythmicity altered previous parenting styles in this
NYLS sample in a way that constituted negative feedback
(negative parenting) directed to the child—feedback that was
then associated with the development of problem behaviors
in the child.
A second interpretation of this ﬁnding arises from the fact
that problem behaviors in the children were identiﬁed ini-
tially on the basis of parental report. Regardless of problem
behaviors evoked in the parent by the child or of any altered
parent-child interactions that thereby ensued, one effect of
the child on the parent was to increase the probability of the
parent labeling the child’s temperamental style as problem-
atic and so reporting it to the NYLS staff psychiatrist. The
current analyses of the NYLS data do not allow for a dis-
crimination between these two possibilities.
The data in the NYLS do indicate that the European
American sample took steps to change their arrhythmic chil-
dren’s sleep patterns. Because temperament may be modiﬁed
by person-context interactions, low rhythmicity tended to be
discontinuous for most of these children. That these parents
modiﬁed their children’s arrhythmicity is an instance of a
child effect on its psychosocial context. That is, the child
produced alterations in parental caregiving behaviors regard-
ing sleep. That these child effects on the parental context fed
back to the child and inﬂuenced her or his further develop-
ment is consistent with the ﬁnding that sleep arrhythmicity
was discontinuous among these children.
Thus, in the predominantly European American, middle-
class sample, early infant arrhythmicity tended to be a
problem during this time of life but proved to be neither con-
tinuous nor predictive of later adjustment problems. In turn,
in the Puerto Rican sample, arrhythmicity, though continu-
ous, was not a poor ﬁt with the context of the child during
infancy or within the ﬁrst ﬁve years of life. This is not to say
that the parents in the Puerto Rican families were not affected
by their children’s sleep arrhythmicity. As with the European
American parents, it may be that the Puerto Rican parents had

544
Applied Developmental Science of Positive Human Development
problems of fatigue or suffered family or work-related prob-
lems due to irregular sleep patterns produced in them as a
consequence of their child’s sleep arrhythmicity. Again, the
data analyses in the NYLS do not indicate this possible child
effect on the Puerto Rican parents.
The data do underscore the importance of considering the
ﬁt between the individual and the demands of the psychoso-
cial context of development, in that it indicates that arrhyth-
micity did begin to predict adjustment problems for the
Puerto Rican children when they entered the school system.
Their lack of a regular sleep pattern interfered with their get-
ting sufﬁcient sleep to perform well in school and often
caused them to be late to school (Korn, 1978; Thomas et al.,
1974). Thus, although before the age of 5 years only one
Puerto Rican child presented a clinical problem diagnosed as
a sleep disorder, between ages 5 and 9 years almost 50% of
the Puerto Rican children who developed clinically identiﬁ-
able problems were diagnosed as having sleep problems.
Another example of how the different demands of the two
family contexts studied in the NYLS provide different
presses for adaptation relates to differences in the demands of
the families’ physical contexts. As noted by Thomas et al.
(1974), as well as Korn (1978), there was a very low over-
all incidence of behavior problems in the Puerto Rican
sample of children in their ﬁrst ﬁve years of life, especially
when compared to the corresponding incidence among the
European American sample of children. If a problem did
arise during this time among the Puerto Rican sample, it was
most likely to be a problem of motor activity. Across the ﬁrst
9 years of their lives, of those Puerto Rican children who de-
veloped clinical problems, 53% presented symptoms diag-
nosed as involving problematic motor activity. The parents of
these children complained of excessive and uncontrollable
motor activity. However, in the European American sample,
only one child (a child with brain damage) was characterized
in this way.
The Puerto Rican parents’ reports of “excessive and un-
controllable” activity in their children do constitute an ex-
ample of a child effect on the parents. That is, a major value
of the Puerto Rican parents in the NYLS was child obedience
to authority (Korn, 1978). The type of motor activity shown
by the highly active children of these Puerto Rican parents
was inconsistent with parental perceptions of an obedient
child (Korn, 1978).
Moreover, the Puerto Rican children’s activity-level char-
acteristics serve as an illustration of the embeddedness of
the child temperament home-context relation in the broader
community context. The Puerto Rican families usually had
several children and lived in small apartments, where even
average motor activity tended to impinge on others in the set-
ting. At the same time, Puerto Rican parents were reluctant to
let their children out of the apartment because of the actual
dangers of playing on the streets of their (East Harlem)
neighborhood—perhaps especially for children with high
activity levels.
In the predominantly European American, middle-class
sample, the parents had the ﬁnancial resources to provide
large apartments or houses for their families. There were
typically suitable play areas for the children both inside and
outside the home. As a consequence, the presence of high
activity levels in the home of the European American sample
did not cause the problems for interaction that they did in the
Puerto Rican group. Thus, as Thomas, Chess, and Birch
(1968; Thomas et al., 1974) emphasized, the mismatch be-
tween temperamental attribute and physical environmental
demand accounted for the group difference in the import of
high activity level for the development of reported behavioral
problems in the children.
Chess and Thomas (1999) reviewed other data from the
NYLS, and from independent data sets, that tested their
temperament-context, goodness-of-ﬁt model. One very im-
portant study they discussed was conducted by de Vries
(1984), who assessed the Masai tribe living in the sub-Sahara
region of Kenya at a time when a severe drought was begin-
ning. After obtaining temperament ratings on 47 infants, aged
2 to 4 months, de Vries identiﬁed from within his sample the
10 infants with the easiest temperaments and the 10 with
the most difﬁcult temperaments. Five months later, at a time
when 97% of the cattle herd had died from the drought, he
returned to the tribal area. Given that the basic food supply
was milk and meat, both derived from the tribe’s cattle, the
level of starvation and death experienced by the tribe was
enormous. De Vries located the families of seven of the easy
babies and six of the difﬁcult ones. The families of the other
infants had moved to try to escape the drought. Of the seven
easy babies, ﬁve had died. All of the difﬁcult babies had
survived.
Chess and Thomas (1999) suggested two reasons for this
dramatic ﬁnding. First, difﬁcult infants cried louder and more
frequently than did the easy babies. Parents fed the difﬁcult
babies either to stop their excessive crying or because they
interpreted the cries as signals of extreme hunger. Alterna-
tively, there may be a cultural reason for the survival of the
difﬁcult infants, one that would not have emerged to affect
behavior during a time of plentiful food, when both easy and
difﬁcult babies could have been soothed easily when crying
due to hunger. Chess and Thomas suggested that the parents,
under the nonnormative historical conditions of the drought,
saw the difﬁcult babies not as a problem to be managed but as
an asset to the survival of the tribe. As a consequence, the

Models of Person-Context Relation
545
parents might have actually chosen “for survival these lusty
expressive babies who have more desirable characteristics
according to the tribe’s cultural standards” (Chess & Thomas,
1999, p. 111).
In the de Vries (1984) study, the parent-child relation,
embedded in the developmental system at a time of non-
normative natural environment disaster, led to a switch in
the valence, or meaning, of “difﬁculty” and resulted in a
dramatic difference in adaptive developmental outcome
(survival or death). Among the core NYLS sample, living
under “privileged” conditions in New York City, difﬁcult
babies comprised 23% of the clinical behavior problem
group (10 babies) but only 4% (4 cases) of the nonclinical
sample (Thomas et al., 1968, p. 78). From these collective
ﬁndings, Chess and Thomas (1999) stressed that the relation-
ship between child and parent—a relation interactive with the
multiple levels of the developmental system, including
the physical ecology, culture, and history—must be the frame
of reference for understanding the role of temperament in
parent-child relationships and in the enactment and outcomes
of parenting.
A similar conclusion may be derived from the research of
Super and Harkness (1981). Studying the Kipsigis tribe in
either the rural village of Kokwet, Kenya, or in the urban set-
ting of Nairobi, Kenya, Super and Harkness found that sleep
arrhythmicity had different implications for mother-infant
interactions. Rural Kipsigis is an agricultural community, and
the tribe assigns primary (and in fact virtually exclusive)
caregiving duties to the mother, who keeps the infant in close
proximity to her (either on her shoulder or within a few feet
of her), even if she is working in the ﬁelds (or is socializing,
sleeping, or the like). Sleep arrhythmicity in such a context is
not a dimension of difﬁculty for the mother because when-
ever the infant awakes, she or he can be fed or soothed by the
mother with little disruption of her other activities. By con-
trast, however, Kipsigis living in Nairobi are not farmers but
ofﬁce workers, professionals, and the like. In this context,
they cannot keep the infant close to them at all times and, as
a consequence, Super and Harkness found that sleep arrhyth-
micity is a sign of difﬁculty and is associated with problems
for the mother and for her interactions with the infant.
Still other studies support the idea that the goodness of ﬁt
between parent and child inﬂuences the quality of interrela-
tions between these individuals and is associated with the
nature of the developmental outcomes for youth. Galambos
and Turner (1999) examined adolescent and parent tempera-
ments as predictors of the quality of parent-adolescent rela-
tionships. They reported that both parent and adolescent
temperament explain unique portions of the variance in
parent-adolescent relationships. Adaptable adolescents are
more likely to have accepting mothers who tend not to rely
on the induction of guilt as a means of control as well as more
accepting fathers than other, less adaptable adolescents.
Mothers’ level of adaptability was also found to contribute
uniquely and additively to the parent-adolescent relationship,
in that mothers who were more highly adaptable were more
accepting of their adolescents. The level of acceptance by
mothers was highest when both mother and adolescent adapt-
ability were high.
Moreover, Galambos and Turner (1999) found that ado-
lescent and parent temperaments interact to affect the quality
of the parent-adolescent relationship. For instance, conﬂict
between mothers and sons was highest in relationships where
the mothers were less adaptable and sons were less active.
Conﬂict between mothers and daughters was highest in rela-
tionships where the mother was less adaptable and the daugh-
ter was more active. Similarly, as level of activity in female
adolescents increased, more conﬂicts with parents were
reported. This result was not found with male adolescents. In
turn, when both fathers and female adolescents were low in
adaptability, fathers used more psychological control and
female adolescents reported more conﬂicts with parents. 
Similarly, using parental stress as a measure of goodness
of ﬁt between parent and adolescent characteristics,
Bogenschneider, Small, and Tsay (1997) found that, within a
study of 8th- to 12th-graders and their parents, a mismatch
between a parent and adolescent led to levels of stress that in-
terfered with competent parenting. Schraeder, Heverly, and
O’Brien (1996) reported comparable ﬁndings. Assessing the
later-life effects of low birth weight on child adjustment in
the home and in the school, Schraeder et al. noted that fea-
tures of the social environment, as well as the ﬁt between the
child and the social environment, played a greater role in
shaping the behavior of the child than did an initial biological
risk of very low birth weight. Underscoring the idea that ﬁt
involves multiple instances or levels of the context of human
development, Flanagan and Eccles (1993) reported that de-
velopmental difﬁculties associated with school may be am-
pliﬁed by parental work status. A decline in parental work
status coupled with students’ transition to junior high school
were associated with an increase in school adjustment prob-
lems, as indicated by teachers’ assessments of disruptive be-
havior (Flanagan & Eccles, 1993). 
Thus, data pertinent to the goodness-of-ﬁt model under-
score the idea that ﬁt involves several levels of the develop-
mental system, that is, the developing individual and mul-
tiple contexts—family, school, and culture in the literature
just reviewed. Scholarship by Jacquelynne Eccles, Allan
Wigﬁeld, and James Byrnes (this volume) extends signiﬁ-
cantly the idea that the congruence between the person and

546
Applied Developmental Science of Positive Human Development
context is dependent on the child’s developmental level and
the appropriateness of the context to that level. Her concept
of stage-environment ﬁt serves as an important and relevant
supplement to the goodness-of-ﬁt model.
The Stage-Environment Fit Model of
Adolescent-School Relations
Through a focus on young adolescents and their transition
from elementary school to either junior high or middle school,
Jacquelynne Eccles and her colleagues (e.g., Eccles & Harold,
1996; Eccles et al., 1996; Fuligni, Eccles, & Barber, 1995;
Midgley, Feldlaufer, & Eccles, 1989a, 1989b) have offered a
theoretically nuanced and empirically highly productive ap-
proach to understanding the signiﬁcance of person-context
relations for healthy development. Eccles and her colleagues
argue that there is a connection between a child’s develop-
mental level and the developmental appropriateness of the
characteristics of the child’s social context. Eccles, Midgley,
et al. (1993) labeled this type of person-context ﬁt stage-
environment ﬁt.This model has been used to explore the nature
of developmental outcomes that children obtain in their envi-
ronments, such as school.As Eccles (1997) points out,
Exposure to the developmentally appropriate environment
facilitate[s] both motivation and continued growth; in contrast,
exposure to developmentally inappropriate environments, espe-
cially developmentally regressive environments, creates a par-
ticularly poor person-environment ﬁt, which lead[s] to declines
in motivation as well as detachment from the goals of the
institution. (p. 531)
Using the stage-environment ﬁt model to study adolescent-
school relations, Eccles and her colleagues have noted that
changes that young adolescents experience during their
transition from elementary school to junior high school (e.g.,
changes in self-esteem, motivation, and academic achieve-
ment) have the potential to negatively affect the adolescents’
positive development when junior high schools do not provide
developmentally adequate contexts (Eccles, Lord, & Midgley,
1991; Eccles & Midgley, 1989; Eccles & Roeser, 1999;
Wigﬁeld, Eccles, Mac Iver, Reumann, & Midgley, 1991).
Contrary to students’ developmental needs, the school envi-
ronments that young adolescents encounter on their transfer
from elementary to junior high school tend to emphasize
competition, social comparison, and ability self-assessment at a
time of heightened self-focus; decrease[d] decision making and
choices at a time when the desire for control is growing up; . . .
lower level cognitive strategies at a time when the ability to use
higher level strategies is increasing; and . . . [disruption of] social
networks at a time when adolescents are especially concerned
with peer relationships. (Eccles & Roeser, 1999, p. 533)
There may be several instances of this mismatch between
young adolescents’ developmental needs at their speciﬁc de-
velopmental stage and the demands of their school context.
For instance, characteristics of middle schools or junior high
schools, such as size and departmentalization, may negatively
effect early adolescents’ development, particularly by lower-
ing self-esteem (Simmons & Blyth, 1987; Simmons, Carlton-
Ford, & Blyth, 1987). Even though junior high schools afford
an opportunity to meet many new peers, they are much larger
in size than elementary schools and may therefore foster
alienation, isolation, and difﬁculties with intimacy (Simmons
et al., 1987). Similarly, Eccles and Midgley (1989) noted that
classrooms in junior high schools are characterized by greater
teacher control and emphasis on discipline; less positive
student-teacher relationships; and decreased opportunities for
students to make their own decisions, choose among different
options, and exercise self-management skills. Junior high
school teachers foster class practices that encourage the use
of social comparison, ability self-assessment, and higher
standards for judging students’ performance than do teachers
in elementary schools (Eccles & Midgley, 1989). Moreover,
teachers in junior high schools, compared to teachers in ele-
mentary schools, have been found to be stronger proponents
of students’ needing discipline and control, to consider their
students to be less trustworthy, and to feel less effective in
their work with young adolescent students (Eccles et al.,
1991). In addition, young adolescents who had high-efﬁcacy
teachers in elementary school but then moved to a low-
efﬁcacy teacher in junior high school had lower expectations
and perceptions of their own academic performance in their
ﬁrst year of junior high than did students who came from low-
efﬁcacy teachers or, once in junior high, were paired with a
high-efﬁcacy teacher (Eccles et al., 1991). Wigﬁeld et al.
(1991) found that less positive student-teacher relationships
and (mathematics) teachers’ feeling less efﬁcacious could be
partly responsible for early adolescents’decline in conﬁdence
in social skills on their transition to junior high school.
In turn, Roeser, Eccles, and Sameroff (1998, 2000) found
that academic motivation, achievement, and emotional well-
being are promoted when the school environment supports
the development of competence, autonomy, and positive
relationships with teachers. To the extent that the school
environment inhibits the development of feelings of compe-
tence, autonomy, and positive relationships, students will feel
alienated academically, emotionally, and behaviorally. As
such, Roeser et al. (1998, 2000) encouraged educators and
school counselors to examine school environments through a

Models of Person-Context Relation
547
“developmental lens” (Roeser et al., 1998, p. 345). Adoles-
cents who report positive academic motivation and emotional
well-being perceive their schools as “more developmentally
appropriate in terms of norms, practices, and teacher-student
interactions, whereas those manifesting poorer functioning
reported less developmentally appropriate school environ-
ments” (Roeser et al., 1998, p. 345). 
To support the development of a sense of competence in
early adolescence, through building a better ﬁt between the
developing adolescent and the school context, Roeser et al.
recommended that middle schools focus on and promote pos-
itive teacher regard for students and implement instructional
practices that enable students to view self-improvement,
effort, and mastery of tasks as the “hallmarks of competence
and academic success” (Roeser et al., 1998, p. 346) rather than
competition, ability relative to peers, and the rewarding of
high achievers. Roeser et al. cautioned that focusing on ability
rather than effort during the stage of early adolescence is an
inappropriate goal for schools, as all young adolescents are
self-conscious and susceptible to social comparisons. A focus
on school ability is a particularly detrimental goal for adoles-
cents having academic and/or emotional difﬁculties.
Similarly, to support the need for autonomy in middle
school, and thereby enhancing the development of positive
academic and emotional functioning in early adolescence,
Roeser et al. (1998, 2000) suggested that middle schools
provide students with opportunities to make choices (e.g., in
relation to class seating, topics of discussion, and curricula
development). In addition, middle schools should create and
nurture opportunities for teachers to design curricula that ﬁt
the needs and interests of their students so that students can
become more involved and invested in their own learning
(Roeser et al., 1998, 2000). Moreover, because adolescents
who perceive their teachers as providers of both emotional
and academic support are less likely to feel alienated from the
school environment or to experience emotional distress,
Roeser et al. suggested that middle schools provide smaller
communities of learning. 
The changes in the school context that Roeser et al. (1998,
2000) indicated are needed to promote or better ﬁt with the
developmental characteristics of adolescents may be espe-
cially important for youth who have expressed academic dif-
ﬁculties prior to a transition to a new school setting. These
adolescents are particularly vulnerable to developing the neg-
ative developmental outcomes as a consequence of poorness
of ﬁt (Eccles et al., 1991; Eccles et al., 1996). 
In short, negative developmental outcomes may derive
from a poorness of ﬁt between a student’s orientation to learn-
ing and the curriculum; between the student and the teaching
style or the instructional focus at the junior high or middle
school; or between the availability in the classroom of sufﬁ-
cient decision-making opportunities for students and their
needs to feel effective in class and to have more autonomy and
opportunities in their learning environment (Eccles, 1997;
Eccles et al., 1996). Moreover, adolescents’ perceptions of
stage-environment ﬁt can predict also motivation, achieve-
ment, and emotional functioning (Roeser et al., 1998).
For young adolescents making a transition into middle or
junior high school, changes in classroom environment and
teacher-student relations can impact the stage-environment
ﬁt (i.e., the balance between students’ developmental stage
and characteristics of their context). A poor ﬁt may have a
negative impact on student motivation and performance
(Eccles et al., 1991).
Eccles (1997) concluded that if we want to ensure that
adolescents’ experiences of the transition are positive and
that the match between the adolescents’developmental needs
and the school context is a good one, developmentally appro-
priate educational environments for young adolescents need
to be provided. An instance of a developmentally appropriate
environment for early adolescent girls, for example, would
be classrooms sensitive to gender-bound learning styles, that
is, classrooms in which instructions are taught in more coop-
erative and person-centered ways (Eccles, 1997), to which
girls may ﬁnd it easier to relate. Classrooms such as these are
likely to be more motivating as well as better equipped to
support students’ developmental needs, therefore contribut-
ing to students’ healthy developmental outcomes. 
In sum, by introducing to school environments changes
that will ensure better ﬁt between children’s developmental
needs and characteristics of the school environment, one can
create a balanced stage-environment ﬁt, one that will con-
tribute to the promotion of positive youth development. As
such, the utility of the student-school relational ideas that
Eccles and her colleagues have introduced could possibly be
extended to further our understanding of other instances of
person-context relations. In addition, the idea of ﬁt may apply
to other levels within the developmental system; if so, the
relational ideas of Eccles and colleagues and of Thomas and
Chess can provide guidance for program innovations or pol-
icy engagement aimed at inﬂuencing changes in the develop-
mental system in a manner that would continue to promote
positive development in young people. 
That is, the work of Thomas and Chess (e.g., 1977;
Chess & Thomas, 1999) and Eccles (e.g., 1991; Eccles, Lord
et al., 1997) supports the idea that by enhancing the ﬁt be-
tween individuals and their contexts, positive development
may be promoted. It may be possible, then, through the ideas
embodied in this work, to extend the utility of person-context
relations into more macro instances of individual-context

548
Applied Developmental Science of Positive Human Development
relations. One may ask if it is possible whether, through pro-
gram innovations at the level of communities, one can simul-
taneously understand the efﬁcacy of relational analyses of
human development and inﬂuence changes in the develop-
mental system that promote the positive development of peo-
ple. One way to address this issue is to explore work on the
links between individuals and community settings, which
have been studied by applied developmental scientists trying
to promote positive youth development among adolescents. 
The Integration of Individual and Community Assets in
the Promotion of Positive Youth Development
What is required at levels beyond the family or school—for
instance, at the level of an entire community—to promote
healthy, positive development among young people? Build-
ing on developmental systems ideas pertinent to positive
person-context relations as integral to healthy development,
Damon (1997) envisioned the creation of a youth charter in
each community in the United States and in the world. The
charter consists of a set of rules, guidelines, and plans of
action that each community can adopt to provide its youth
with a framework for development in a healthy manner, that
is, to build positive relations with other individuals and insti-
tutions in their community. 
The youth charter reﬂects “a consensus of clear expecta-
tions shared among the important people in a young person’s
life and communicated to the young person in multiple ways”
(Damon & Gregory, in press, p. 10). Damon and Gregory
explained that their approach constitutes a shift along four
dimensions in the study of youth:
a positive vision of youth strengths, a use of community as the
locus of developmental action, an emphasis on expectations for
service and social responsibility, and a recognition of the role of
moral values and religious or spiritual faith. (p. 7)
Consistent with the relational emphasis in developmental
systems theory, Damon and Gregory (in press) emphasize
that
in a whole community, it is possible to ﬁnd many people who can
introduce young people into the positive, inspirational possibili-
ties of moral commitment. Similarly, an entire community
affords many opportunities for authentic service activities, such
as helping those in need, that can provide young people with a
chance to experience the psychological rewards of moral com-
mitment. . . . In places that operate like true communities, there
are many ways in which families, schools, workplaces, agencies,
and peer groups connect with one another through their contact
with youth. For example, schools are inﬂuenced by the values
and attitudes that students pick up in their families. Students’
family lives are in turn inﬂuenced by their quest for academic
achievement, which ﬁlls their after school time with home-
work—and which in turn is supported on the home front. A
young person’s identity formation, rooted initially in the family,
is shaped by a sense of belonging in the community, including
sports teams, media, clubs, religious institutions, and jobs. In
such communities, there also is concordance between the norms
of the peer culture and those of adults. . . . A well-integrated and
consciously developed pattern of relationships can provide a sta-
bilizing transformational structure that produces equally inte-
grated identities as workers and citizens and parents; no single
institution has the resources to develop all of these roles alone
(Ianni, 1989, p. 279). Ianni’s name for this stabilizing structure is
a “youth charter.” (pp. 10–12)
Damon (1997) described how youth and signiﬁcant adults
in their community (e.g., parents, teachers, clergy, coaches,
police, and government and business leaders) can create
youth partnerships to pursue a common ideal of positive
moral development and intellectual achievement:
To build a youth charter, community members go through a
process of discussion, a movement towards agreement, and the
development and implementation of action plans. Elements of
the process include special town meetings sponsored by local
institutions; constructive media coverage on a periodic basis;
and the formation of standing committees that open new lines
of communication among parents, teachers, and neighbors.
(Damon & Gregory, in press, p. 13)
For example, Damon (1997) explained how a youth char-
ter can be developed to maximize the positive person-context
experiences and long-term desired developmental outcomes
of youth in community sports activities. For instance, he
noted that participation in sports is a signiﬁcant part of the
lives of many contemporary adolescents, and he pointed out
that there may be important beneﬁts of such participation.
Young people enhance their physical ﬁtness, learn athletic
and physical skills, and, through sports, experience lessons
pertinent to the development of their character (e.g., they
learn about the importance of diligence, motivation, team-
work, balancing cooperation versus competition, balancing
winning and losing, and the importance of fair play; Damon,
1997). Moreover, sports can be a context for positive parent-
child relations, and such interactions can further the ado-
lescent’s successful involvement in sports. For example,
parental support of their male and female adolescents’ partic-
ipation in tennis is associated with the enjoyment of the sport
by the youth and with an objective measure of their perfor-
mance (Hoyle & Leff, 1997).
However, Damon (1997) noted as well that organized and
even informal opportunities for sports participation for youth,

Models of Person-Context Relation
549
ranging from Little League, soccer, or pickup games in school
yards, often fall short of providing these relational beneﬁts for
young people. He pointed out that in modernAmerican society
sports participation is often imbued with a “win at any cost”
orientation among coaches and, in turn, their young players. In
addition, parents may also have this attitude. Together, a value
is conveyed that winning is not just the main goal of competi-
tion, but the only thing (Damon, 1997, p. 210).
Damon believes that this orientation to youth sports cor-
rupts the purposes of youth participation in sports. Parents and
coaches often forget that most of the young people on these
teams will not make sports a life career and, even if they do,
they—as well as the majority of young people involved in
sports—need moral modeling and guidance about sportsman-
ship and the signiﬁcance of representing, through sports, not
only physically but also psychologically and socially healthy
behaviors (Damon, 1997).
In order to enable youth sports to make these contributions
to positive adolescent development, Damon (1997) proposed
a youth charter that constitutes guidelines for the design and
conduct of youth sports programs. Adherence to the princi-
ples of the charter will enable communities to realize the
several assets for young people that can be provided by the
participation of youth in sports. Components of the charter
include the following commitments to
1. Make youth sports a priority for public funding and pro-
vide other forms of community support (space, facilities,
volunteer coaches);
2. Parents and coaches should emphasize standards of con-
duct as a primary goal of youth sports;
3. Young people should be provided opportunities to partici-
pate in individual as well as team sports;
4. Youth sports programs should encourage broad participa-
tion by ordinary players as well as stars; and
5. Sports programs for youth must be carefully coordinated
with other community events for young people. (Damon,
1997, pp. 123–125).
In sum, then, Damon and Gregory (in press) note that
The essential requirements of a youth charter are that 1) it must
address the core matters of morality and achievement necessary
for becoming a responsible citizen; and 2) it must focus on areas
of common agreement rather than on doctrinaire squabbles or
polarizing issues of controversy. A youth charter guides the
younger generation towards fundamental moral virtues such as
honesty, civility, decency, and the pursuit of benevolent purposes
beyond the self. A youth charter is a moral and spiritual rather
than a political document. (p. 13)
Consistent with the ideas of stage-environment ﬁt dis-
cussed by Eccles and her colleagues (e.g., Eccles et al., 1991;
chapter by Eccles, Wigﬁeld, & Byrnes in this volume),
Damon (1997) noted that embedding youth in a caring and
developmentally facilitative community can promote their
ability to develop morally and to contribute to civil society.
For instance, in a study of about 130 African American
parochial high school juniors, working at a soup kitchen for
the homeless as part of a school-based community service
program was associated with identity development and with
the ability to reﬂect on society’s political organization and
moral order (Yates & Youniss, 1996).
In a study of over 3,100 high school seniors (Youniss,
Yates, & Su, 1997), the activities engaged in by youth were
categorized into (a) school-based, adult-endorsed norms or
(b) engagement in peer fun activities that excluded adults.
Youth were then placed into groups that reﬂected orientations
to (a) school-adult norms, but not peer fun (the “School”
group); (b) peer fun but not school-adult norms (the “Party”
group); or (c) both (a) and (c) (the “All-around” group). The
School and the All-around seniors were both high in commu-
nity service, religious orientation, and political awareness. In
turn, the Party group seniors were more likely to use mari-
juana than were the School group (but not the All-around
group) seniors (Youniss et al., 1997).
Furthermore, African American and Latino adolescents
who were nominated by community leaders for having
shown unusual commitments to caring for others or for con-
tributions to the community were labeled “care exemplars”
and compared to a matched group of youth not committed to
the community (Hart & Fegley, 1995). The care exemplars
were more likely than the comparison youth to describe
themselves in terms reﬂective of moral characteristics, to
show commitment to both their heritage and to the future of
their community, to see themselves as reﬂecting the ideals of
both themselves and their parents, and to stress the impor-
tance of personal philosophies and beliefs for their self-
deﬁnitions (Hart & Fegley, 1995). 
Damon (1997) envisioned that by embedding youth in a
community where service and responsible leadership are pos-
sible, the creation of community-speciﬁc youth charters can
enable adolescents and adults together to systematically pro-
mote positive youth development. Youth charters can create
opportunities to actualize both individual and community
goals to eliminate risk behaviors among adolescents and pro-
mote in them the ability to contribute to high-quality individ-
ual and community life. Through community youth charters,
youth and adults may together engage in relationships that
serve to create a system wherein civil society is maintained
and perpetuated (Damon, 1997). 

550
Applied Developmental Science of Positive Human Development
What sort of person-context relations must be brought to-
gether by such charters to ensure the promotion of such
positive youth development? Benson and his colleagues at
Search Institute in Minneapolis, Minnesota, believe that what
is needed is the integration of individual and ecological assets
(Benson, 1997; Benson et al., 1998; Leffert et al., 1998; Scales
& Leffert, 1999). They noted that “developmental assets rep-
resent a theoretical construct identifying a set of environmen-
tal and intrapersonal strengths known to enhance educational
and health outcomes for children and adolescents” (Benson,
in press, p. 1). Benson and his colleagues stressed that positive
youth development is furthered when actions are taken to en-
hance the strengths of a person (e.g., a commitment to learn-
ing, a healthy sense of identity), a family (e.g., caring attitudes
toward children, rearing styles that both empower youth
and set boundaries and provide expectations for positive
growth), and a community (e.g., social support, programs that
provide access to the resources for education, safety, and men-
torship available in a community; Benson, 1997).
Consistent with the relational focus of developmental sys-
tems theory, Benson (in press) explained that
the asset framework is intended to speak to and elicit the en-
gagement of multiple sources of asset building energy. These in-
clude informal, non-programmatic relationships between adults
and youth; traditional socializing systems such as families,
neighborhoods, schools, congregations, and youth organiza-
tions; and the governmental, economic, and policy infrastruc-
tures which inform those socializing systems. (p. 10)
. . . ﬁve sources of asset-building potential are hypothe-
sized to exist within all communities, each of which can be
marshaled via a multiplicity of community mobilization strate-
gies. These sources of potential asset-building inﬂuence include:
(1) sustained relationships with adults, both within and beyond
family; (2) peer group inﬂuence (when peers choose to acti-
vate their asset-building capacity); (3) socializing systems;
(4) community-level social norms, ceremony, ritual, policy and
resource allocation; and (5) programs, including school-based
and community-based efforts to nurture and build skills and
competencies. (p. 16)
In short, Benson (in press) underscored that “asset-building
communities are distinguished as relational and intergenera-
tional places” (p. 16).
Benson and colleagues believe that both internal (indi-
vidual) and external (contextual, ecological) attributes com-
prise the developmental assets needed by youth. Benson
explained that
The human development infrastructure has to do with the pat-
terns, rhythms, and ﬂow of community attentiveness to essential
developmental needs and milestones. In essence, we are speak-
ing here of the constancy and equity of core developmental
experiences such as support, engagement, empowerment,
belonging, afﬁrmation, boundary-setting, structure, and connect-
edness, all of which are grounded less in program and policy
and more in how citizens and socializing systems identify and
utilize their inherent, relational capacities. (Benson & Saito,
2000, p. 5)
Through the research of Search Institute, 40 developmen-
tal assets, 20 internal ones, and 20 external ones have been
identiﬁed. These attributes are presented in Table 22.1. 
Benson and his colleagues found that the more develop-
mental assets possessed by an adolescent, the greater is his or
her likelihood of positive, healthy development. For instance,
in a study of 99,462 youth in Grades 6 through 12 in public
and alternative schools from 213 U.S. cities and towns who
were assessed during the 1996–1997 academic year for their
possession of the 40 assets presented in Table 22.1, Leffert
et al. (1998) found that the more assets present among youth,
the lower was the likelihood of alcohol use, depression and
suicide risk, and violence. 
For instance, the level of alcohol use risk for youth in
Grades 6 through 8 combined, and for youth in Grades 9
through 12 combined, decreases with the possession of more
assets. Youth with 0 to 10 assets have the highest risk, fol-
lowed by youth with 11 to 20 assets, youth with 21 to 30 as-
sets, and youth with 31 to 40 assets. Thus, consistent with
Benson’s (1997) view of the salience of developmental assets
for promoting healthy behavior among young people, the fact
that the group with the most assets has the lowest level of risk
shows the importance of the asset approach in work aimed at
promoting positive development in children and adolescents.
Moreover, other data presented by Leffert et al. (1998) repli-
cated these trends for males and females in regard to depres-
sion and suicide risk and for combinations of males and
females in different grade groupings in regard to violence
risk. In both cases, higher levels of assets were linked with
lower levels of risk. This congruence strengthens the argu-
ment for the critical signiﬁcance of a focus on developmental
assets in the promotion of positive youth development and, as
such, in the enhancement of the capacity and commitment of
young people to contribute to civil society.
Other data by Benson and his colleagues provide direct
support for this argument. Scales et al. (2000) measured a
concept termed thriving among 6,000 youth in Grades 6
through 12 evenly divided across six ethnic groups (American
Indian, African American, Asian American, Latino, European
American, and multiracial). Thriving was deﬁned as involv-
ing seven attributes: school success, leadership, valuing di-
versity, physical health, helping others, delay of gratiﬁcation,

Models of Person-Context Relation
551
TABLE 22.1
The 40 Developmental Assets Speciﬁed by Search Institute
Asset Type
Asset and Description
External Support
1. Family Support: Family life provides high levels of love and support.
2. Positive Family Communication: Young person and her or his parent(s) communicate positively, and young person is willing to 
seek advice and counsel from parents.
3. Other Adult Relationships: Young person receives support from three or more nonparent adults.
4. Caring Neighborhood: Young person experiences caring neighbors.
5. Caring School Climate: School provides a caring, encouraging environment.
6. Parent Involvement in Schooling: Parents are actively involved in helping young person succeed in school.
Empowerment
7. Community Values Youth: Young person perceives that adults in the community value youth.
8. Youth as Resources: Young people are given useful roles in the community.
9. Service to Others: Young person serves in the community one hour or more per week.
10. Safety: Young person feels safe at home, at school, and in the neighborhood. 
Boundaries and
11. Family Boundaries: Family has clear rules and consequences and monitors the young person’s whereabouts.
Expectations
12. School Boundaries: School provides clear rules and consequences.
13. Neighborhood Boundaries: Neighbors take responsibility for monitoring young people’s behavior.
14. Adult Role Models: Parents and other adults model positive, responsible behavior.
15. Positive Peer Inﬂuence: Young person’s best friends model responsible behavior.
16. High Expectations: Both parent(s) and teachers encourage the young person to do well.
Constructive
17. Creative Activities: Young person spends three or more hours per week in lessons or practice in music, theater, or other arts.
Use of Time
18. Youth Programs: Young person spends three or more hours per week in sports, clubs, or organizations at school and/or in
the community.
19. Religious Community: Young person spends one or more hours per week in activities in a religious institution.
20. Time at Home: Young person is out with friends “with nothing special to do” two or fewer nights per week.
Commitment
21. Achievement Motivation: Young person is motivated to do well in school.
to Learning
22. School Engagement: Young person is actively engaged in learning.
23. Homework: Young person reports doing at least one or more hour of homework every school day.
24. Bonding to School: Young person cares about her or his school.
25. Reading for Pleasure: Young person reads for pleasure three or more hours per week.
Positive Values
26. Caring: Young person places high value on helping other people.
27. Equality and Social Justice: Young person places high value on promoting equality and reducing hunger and poverty.
28. Integrity: Young person acts on convictions and stands up for her or his beliefs.
29. Honesty: Young person “tells the truth even when it is not easy.”
30. Responsibility: Young person accepts and takes personal responsibility.
31. Restraint: Young person believes it is important not to be sexually active or to use alcohol or other drugs.
Social 
32. Planning and Decision Making: Young person knows how to plan ahead and make choices.
Competencies
33. Interpersonal Competence: Young person has empathy, sensitivity, and friendship skills.
34. Cultural Competence: Young person has knowledge of and comfort with people of different cultural/racial/ethnic
backgrounds.
35. Resistance Skills: Young person can resist negative peer pressure and dangerous situations.
36. Peaceful Conﬂict Resolution: Young person seeks to resolve conﬂict nonviolently.
Positive Identity
37. Personal Power: Young person feels he or she has control over “things that happen to me.”
38. Self-Esteem: Young person reports having a high self-esteem.
39. Sense of Purpose: Young person reports that “my life has a purpose.”
40. Positive View of Personal Future: Young person is optimistic about her or his personal future.
Source. Reprinted with permission from P. L. Benson, N. Leffert, P. C. Scales, & D. A. Blyth, “Beyond the ‘village’rhetoric: Creating healthy communities for chil-
dren and adolescents,” Applied Developmental Science, 2(3), 138–159 (Minneapolis, MN: Search Institute). © Search Institute, 1998. www.search-institute.org.
and overcoming adversity. Most, if not all, of these attributes
are linked to the presence of prosocial behavior (e.g., helping
others, delay of gratiﬁcation) and to the behaviors requisite
for competently contributing to civil society (e.g., valuing
diversity, leadership, overcoming adversity). The greater the
number of developmental assets possessed by youth, the more
likely they were to possess the attributes of thriving. For
instance, as developmental assets increased, thriving in
regard to helping others, valuing diversity, and possessing
leadership qualities increased.
It is important to note that Benson and his colleagues (e.g.,
Scales et al., 2000) linked these assets for healthy youth
development to community-based programs that involve the
facilitation of positive person-context relations. That is, in
their research, Benson and his colleagues found that time
spent in youth programs was the developmental asset that
seemed to best predict thriving. Scales et al. interpreted this
ﬁnding to derive from the fact that youth programs provide
young people with access to social networks with caring
adults and with responsible peers. 

552
Applied Developmental Science of Positive Human Development
Other data support the importance of focusing on person-
context relational and developmental assets in understanding
the bases of positive youth development. Luster and McAdoo
(1994) sought to identify the factors that contribute to indi-
vidual differences in the cognitive competence of African
American children in early elementary grades. Consistent
with an asset-based approach to promoting the positive de-
velopment of youth (Benson, 1997; Scales & Leffert, 1999),
they found that favorable outcomes in cognitive and socio-
emotional development were associated with high scores on
an advantage index. This index was formed by scoring chil-
dren on the basis of the absence of risk factors (e.g., pertain-
ing to poverty or to relationship problems that affected the
quality of the home environment) and of the presence of
more favorable economic and family-relationship circum-
stances in their lives. 
Luster and McAdoo (1994) reported that whereas only 4%
of the children in their sample who scored low on the advan-
tage index had high scores on a measure of vocabulary, 44%
of the children who had high scores on the advantage index
had high vocabulary scores. Similar contrasts between low
and high scores on the advantage index were found regarding
measures of math achievement (14% vs. 37%, respectively),
word recognition (0% vs. 35%, respectively) and word mean-
ing (7% vs. 46%, respectively). 
Luster and McAdoo (1996) extended the ﬁndings of their
1994 research. Seeking to identify the factors that contribute
to individual differences in the educational attainment of
African American young adults from low socioeconomic sta-
tus, Luster and McAdoo (1996) found that assets linked with
the individual (cognitive competence, academic achievement,
and personal adjustment in kindergarten) and the context
(parental involvement in schools) were associated longitudi-
nally with academic achievement and educational attainment.
Other research points to the variation in the outcomes
of developing in socioeconomically poor settings that
exist in relation to different arrays of person-context assets.
For instance, and consistent with the ﬁndings of Luster
and McAdoo (1994, 1996), Leventhal and Brooks-Gunn
(in press) noted that the pathway between poverty and child
development (e.g., achievement) is moderated by the quality
of the home learning environment. Similarly, during young
childhood the presence in the community of high-quality
child care and early intervention programs has immediate
and longer term beneﬁts for poor children’s academic and
social development (Leventhal & Brooks-Gunn, 2000). For
instance, when poor neighborhoods are characterized by
crime, underemployment, lack of resources, few role models,
and absence of adult supervision of children and youth, chil-
dren’s emotional and social well-being may be adversely
effected (Leventhal & Brooks-Gunn, in press). In turn, afﬂu-
ence in high socioeconomic neighborhoods in comparison to
middle-income neighborhoods has assets linked to beneﬁcial
inﬂuences on children’s school readiness and achievement
(Leventhal & Brooks-Gunn, in press). 
In sum, consistent with the perspective forwarded by
Benson (1997) and with the data provided by Benson et al.
(1998), Leffert et al. (1998), Scales et al. (2000), Luster and
McAdoo (1994, 1996), and Leventhal and Brooks-Gunn
(2000, in press), the individual and contextual assets of youth
are linked to their positive development. These data under-
score the value of integrating the strengths of young people,
their families, and their communities in the service of such
development. As suggested by the developmental systems
perspective that frames our orientation to ADS, such a syn-
thetic approach to positive development seems both to have
substantial empirical validity and, as a consequence, to be an
optimally productive frame for policy and program innova-
tions aimed at increasing the probability of healthy develop-
ment across the life span of current and future generations.
We believe that the beneﬁt of such applications of develop-
mental science will accrue not only for today’s young people
but also, because contemporary youth are the future stewards
of our democracy, for civil society in our nation.
CONCLUSIONS
Represented by the literature pertinent to the goodness-of-ﬁt
model, the stage-environment ﬁt model, and the individual
and ecological asset approach to community resources for
youth, a focus on person-context relations underscores
the key implications of developmental systems models for
research and applications pertinent to promoting positive
human development. At any given point in ontogenetic and
historical time, neither individual’s attributes nor the features
of their context (e.g., the demands of their parents regarding
temperamental style) per se are the foremost predictors of
their healthy functioning. Instead, the relations between the
child, the parent, the school, the community, and the other
levels of organization within the developmental system are
most important in understanding the character of human
development and of the role of the ecology of human devel-
opment in a person’s ontogeny. 
Essentially, the developmental systems model speciﬁes
that applied developmental scholarship pertinent to under-
standing and enhancing the life course should focus on the
relational process of human development by longitudinally
integrating the study of the actions of both the individual
and the parents, peers, teachers, neighbors, and the broader

References
553
institutional context within which the individual is embed-
ded. Bearing in mind the centrality of this complex relational
system, the synthetic research and application agenda seems
clear. Applied developmental scientists must continue to edu-
cate themselves about the best means available to promote
(through integrating the developmental system) enhanced
life chances among all individuals and families, but espe-
cially among those whose potential for positive contributions
to civil society is most in danger of being wasted (Dryfoos,
1998; Hamburg, 1992; R. M. Lerner, 2002a; Schorr, 1997).
The collaborative expertise of the research and program
delivery communities can provide much of this information,
especially if it is obtained in partnership with strong, empow-
ered communities. Such coalitions could become an integral
component of an integrated child, family, and human devel-
opment policy aimed at creating caring communities with the
capacity to further the healthy development of children, ado-
lescents, adults, and families (Jensen, Hoagwood, & Trickett,
1999; Kennedy, 1999; B. J. Overton & Burkhardt, 1999;
Sherrod, 1999a; Spanier, 1999; Thompson, 1999).
Given the enormous and historically unprecedented chal-
lenges facing the youth and families of America and the
world, there is no time to lose in the development of such col-
laborations if there is the aspiration to raise healthy and suc-
cessful children capable of leading civil society productively,
responsibly, and morally across the twenty-ﬁrst century
(Benson, 1997; Damon, 1997; R. M. Lerner, 1995). The ﬁeld
of human development has an opportunity through the publi-
cation of its ADS research to serve our world’s citizens and
demonstrate that there is nothing of greater value to civil so-
ciety than a science devoted to using its scholarship to im-
prove the life chances of all people.
REFERENCES
Bakan, D. (1966). The duality of human existence. Chicago:
Rand-McNally.
Baltes, P. B. (1987). Theoretical propositions of life-span develop-
mental psychology: On the dynamics between growth and
decline. Developmental Psychology, 23, 611–626.
Baltes, P. B., & Baltes, M. M. (1980). Plasticity and variability
in psychological aging: Methodological and theoretical issues.
In G. E. Gurski (Ed.), Determining the effects of aging on the
central nervous system (pp. 41–66). Berlin: Schering AG
(Oraniendruck).
Baltes, P. B., Lindenberger, U., & Staudinger, U. M. (1998). Life-
span theory in developmental psychology. In W. Damon (Series
Ed.) & R. M. Lerner (Vol. Ed.), Handbook of child psychology:
Vol. 1. Theoretical models of human development (5th ed.,
pp. 1029–1144). New York: Wiley.
Benson, P. L. (1997). All kids are our kids: What communities must
do to raise caring and responsible children and adolescents. San
Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Benson, P. L. (in press). Developmental assets and asset-building
communities: Implications for research, policy, and practice. In
R. M. Lerner & P. Benson (Eds.), Developmental assets and
asset-building communities: Implications for research, policy,
and programs. Norwell, MA: Kluwer.
Benson, P. L., Leffert, N., Scales, P. C., & Blyth, D. A. (1998).
Beyond the “village” rhetoric: Creating healthy communities
for children and adolescents. Applied Developmental Science,
2(3), 138–159.
Benson, P. L., & Saito, R. N. (2000). The scientiﬁc foundations of
youth development. In Youth development: Issues, challenges, and
directions (pp. 125–147). Philadelphia: Public/Private Ventures.
Bogenschneider, K., Small, S. A., & Tsay, J. C. (1997). Child, par-
ent, and contextual inﬂuences on perceived parenting compe-
tence among parents of adolescents. Journal of Marriage and the
Family, 59, 345–362.
Brandtstädter, J. (1998). Action perspectives on human develop-
ment. In W. Damon (Series Ed.) & R. M. Lerner (Vol. Ed.),
Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 1. Theoretical models of
human development (5th ed., pp. 807–863). New York: Wiley.
Brandtstädter, J. (1999). The self in action and development: Cul-
tural, biosocial, and ontogenetic bases of intentional self-
development. In J. Brandtstädter & R. M. Lerner (Eds.), Action
and self-development: Theory and research through the life-span
(pp. 37–65). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Bronfenbrenner, U. (1974). Developmental research, public policy,
and the ecology of childhood. Child Development, 45, 1–5.
Bronfenbrenner, U., & Morris, P. A. (1998). The ecology of devel-
opmental process. In W. Damon (Series Ed.) & R. M. Lerner
(Vol. Ed.), Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 1. Theoretical
models of human development (5th ed., pp. 993–1028).
New York: Wiley.
Brooks-Gunn, J. (1987). Pubertal processes in girls’ psychological
adaptation. In R. M. Lerner & T. T. Foch (Eds.), Biological-
psychosocial interactions in early adolescence: A life-span
perspective (pp. 123–153). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Cairns, R. B. (1998). Intellectual, cultural, and scientiﬁc foundations
of human development. In W. Damon (Series Ed.) & R. M. Lerner
(Vol. Ed.), Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 1. Theoretical
models of human development (5th ed., pp. 25–106). Editor in
Chief: William Damon. New York: Wiley.
Cairns, R. B., Bergman, L. R., & Kagan, J. (1998). Methods and
models for studying the individual: Essays in honor of Marian
Radke-Yarrow. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Chess, S., & Thomas, A. (1984). The origins and evolution of
behavior disorders: Infancy to early adult life. New York:
Brunner/Mazel.
Chess, S., & Thomas, A. (1996). Temperament: Theory and prac-
tice. New York: Brunner/Mazel.

554
Applied Developmental Science of Positive Human Development
Chess, S., & Thomas, A. (1999). Goodness of ﬁt: Clinical applica-
tions from infancy through adult life. Philadelphia: Brunner/
Mazel.
Csikszentmihalyi, M., & Rathunde, K. (1998). The development of
the person: An experiential perspective on the ontogenesis of
psychological complexity. In W. Damon (Series Ed.) & R. M.
Lerner (Vol. Ed.), Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 1. Theo-
retical models of human development (5th ed., pp. 635–684).
New York: Wiley.
Damon, W. (1997). The youth charter: How communities can work
together to raise standards for all our children. New York: Free
Press.
Damon, W., & Gregory, A. (in press). Bringing in a new era in the
ﬁeld of youth development. In R. M. Lerner & P. Benson (Eds.),
Developmental assets and asset-building communities: Implica-
tions for research, policy, and programs. Norwell, MA: Kluwer.
de Vries, M. W. (1984). Temperament and infant mortality among
the Masai of East Africa. American Journal of Psychiatry, 141,
1189–1194.
Dryfoos, J. G. (1990). Adolescents at risk: Prevalence and preven-
tion. New York: Oxford University Press.
Dryfoos, J. G. (1998). Safe passage: Making it through adolescence
in a risky society. New York: Oxford University Press.
Eccles, J. S. (1991). Academic achievement. In R. M. Lerner, A. C.
Petersen, & J. Brooks-Gunn (Eds.), Encyclopedia of adoles-
cence (Vol. 1, pp. 1–9). New York: Garland.
Eccles, J. S. (1997). User-friendly science and mathematics: Can it
interest girls and minorities in breaking through the middle
school wall? In D. Johnson (Ed.), Minorities and girls in school:
Effects on achievement and performance: Vol. 1. Leaders in psy-
chology (pp. 65–104). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Eccles, J. S., Early, D., Frasier, K., Belansky, E., & McCarthy, K.
(1997). The relation of connection, regulation, and support for
autonomy to adolescents’ functioning. Journal of Adolescent
Research, 12(2), 263–286.
Eccles, J. S., & Harold, R. D. (1996). Family involvement in chil-
dren’s and adolescents’ schooling. In A. Booth & J. F. Dunn
(Eds.), Family-school links: How do they affect educational out-
comes? (pp. 3–34). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Eccles, J. S., Lord, S., & Buchanan, C. M. (1996). School transitions
in early adolescence: What are we doing to your young people?
In J. A. Graber, J. Brooks-Gunn, & A. C. Petersen (Eds.),
Transitions through adolescence (pp. 251–284). Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Eccles, J. S., Lord, S., & Midgley, C. (1991). What are we doing
to early adolescents? The impact of educational contexts on
early adolescents. American Journal of Education, 99(4),
521–542.
Eccles, J. S., Lord, S. E., Roeser, R. W., Barber, B. L., & Jozefowicz,
D. M. H. (1997). The association of school transitions in
early adolescence with developmental trajectories through high
school. In J. Schulenberg, J. L. Maggs, & K. Hurrelmann (Eds.),
Health risks and developmental transitions during adoles-
cence (pp. 283–320). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press.
Eccles, J. S., & Midgley, C. (1989). Stage-environment ﬁt: Devel-
opmentally appropriate classrooms for young adolescents. In C.
Ames & R. Ames (Eds.), Research on motivation in education:
Goals and cognitions (pp. 139–186). New York: Academic
Press.
Eccles, J. S., Midgley, C., Wigﬁeld, A., Buchanan, C. M., Reuman,
D., Flanagan, C., & Mac Iver, D. (1993). Development during
adolescence: The impact of stage-environment ﬁt on young
adolescents’ experiences in schools and in families. American
Psychologist, 48, 90–101.
Eccles, J. S., & Roeser, R. W. (1999). School and community inﬂu-
ences on human development. In M. H. Bornstein & M. E. Lamb
(Eds.), Developmental psychology: An advanced textbook
(4th ed., pp. 503–554). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Elder, G. H., Jr. (1998). The life course and human development. In
W. Damon (Series Ed.) & R. M. Lerner (Vol. Ed.), Handbook of
child psychology: Vol. 1. Theoretical models of human develop-
ment (5th ed., pp. 939–991). New York: Wiley.
Fisher, C. B. (1997). A relational perspective on ethics-in-science
decision-making for research with vulnerable populations. IRB:
A Review of Human Subjects Research, 19, 1–4.
Fisher, C. B., & Brennan, M. (1992). Application and ethics in de-
velopmental psychology. In D. L. Featherman, R. M. Lerner, &
M. Perlmutter (Eds.), Life-span development and behavior
(pp. 189–219). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Fisher, C. B., & Lerner, R. M. (1994). Foundations of applied de-
velopmental psychology. In C. B. Fisher & R. M. Lerner (Eds.),
Applied developmental psychology (pp. 3–20). New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Fisher, C. B., & Murray, J. P. (1996). Applied developmental science
comes of age. In C. B. Fisher, J. P. Murray, & I. E. Sigel (Eds.),
Applied developmental science: Graduate training for diverse
disciplines and educational settings (pp. 1–22). Norwood, NJ:
Ablex.
Fisher, C. B., Murray, J. P., Dill, J. R., Hagen, J. W., Hogan, M. J.,
Lerner, R. M., Rebok, G. W., Sigel, I., Sostek, A. M., Smyer,
M. A., Spencer, M. B., & Wilcox, B. (1993). The national
conference on graduate education in the applications of develop-
mental science across the life span. Journal of Applied Develop-
mental Psychology, 14, 1–10.
Flanagan, C. A., & Eccles, J. S. (1993). Changes in parents’ work
status and adolescents’ adjustment at school. Child Develop-
ment, 64, 246–257.
Fuligni, A. J., Eccles, J. S., & Barber, B. L. (1995). The long-term
effects of seventh-grade ability grouping in mathematics. Journal
of Early Adolescence, 15(1), 58–89.
Galambos, N. L., & Turner, P. K. (1999). Parent and adolescent
temperaments and the quality of parent-adolescent relations.
Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 45(3), 493–511.

References
555
Gollin, E. S. (1981). Development and plasticity. In E. S. Gollin
(Ed.), Developmental plasticity: Behavioral and biological
aspects of variations in development (pp. 231–251). New York:
Academic Press.
Gottlieb, G. (1970). Conceptions of prenatal behavior. In L. R.
Aronson, E. Tobach, D. S. Lehrman, & J. S. Rosenblatt (Eds.),
Development and evolution of behavior: Essays in memory of
T. C. Schneirla (pp. 111–137). San Francisco: W. H. Freeman.
Gottlieb, G. (1983). Development of species identiﬁcation in duck-
lings: Perceptual speciﬁcity in the wood duck embryo requires
sib stimulation for maintenance. Developmental Psychobiology,
16, 323–333.
Gottlieb, G. (1991). Experiential canalization of behavioral devel-
opment: Theory. Developmental Psychology, 27(1), 4–13.
Gottlieb, G. (1992). The genesis of novel behavior: Individual de-
velopment and evolution. New York: Oxford University Press.
Gottlieb, G. (1997). Synthesizing nature-nurture: Prenatal roots of
instinctive behavior. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Hagen, J. W. (1996). Graduate education in the applied develop-
mental sciences: History and background. In C. B. Fisher & J. P.
Murray (Eds.), Applied developmental science: Graduate train-
ing for diverse disciplines and educational settings: Advances in
applied developmental psychology (pp. 45–51). Norwood, NJ:
Ablex.
Hamburg, D. A. (1992). Today’s children: Creating a future for a
generation in crisis. New York: Time Books.
Hamburger, V. (1957). The concept of development in biology. In
D. B. Harris (Ed.), The concept of development (pp. 49–58).
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Hamilton, S. F., & Hamilton, M. (1999). Creating new pathways to
adulthood by adapting German apprenticeship in the United
States. In W. R. Heinz (Ed.), From education to work: Cross-
national perspectives (pp. 194–213). New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Hart, D., & Fegley, S. (1995). Prosocial behavior and caring in ado-
lescence: Relations to self-understanding and social judgment.
Child Development, 66, 1346–1359.
Heckhausen, J. (1999). Developmental regulation in adulthood:
Age-normative and sociocultural constraints as adaptive chal-
lenges. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Hernandez, D. J. (1993). America’s children: Resources for fam-
ily, government, and the economy. New York: Russell Sage
Foundation.
Higgins-D’Alessandro, A., Fisher, C. B., & Hamilton, M. G. (1998).
Educating 
the 
applied 
developmental 
psychologist 
for
university-community partnerships. In R. M. Lerner & L. A. K.
Simon (Eds.), University-community collaborations for the
twenty-ﬁrst century: Outreach scholarship for youth and fami-
lies (pp. 157–183). New York: Garland.
Horowitz, F. D. (2000). Child development and the PITS: Simple
questions, complex answers, and developmental theory. Child
Development, 71, 1–10.
Horowitz, F. D., & O’Brien, M. (1989). In the interest of the nature:
A reﬂective essay on the state of our knowledge and challenges
before us. American Psychologist, 44, 441–445.
Hoyle, R. H., & Leff, S. S. (1997). The role of parental involvement
in youth sport participation and performance. Adolescence,
32(125), 233–243.
Huston, A. C. (1991). Children in poverty: Child development and
public policy. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Huston, A. C., McLoyd, V. C., & Garcia Coll, C. (1994). Children
and poverty: Issues in contemporary research. Child Develop-
ment, 65, 275–282.
Ianni, F. (1989). The search for structure: A report on American
youth today. New York: Free Press.
Jensen, P., Hoagwood, K., & Trickett, E. (1999). Ivory towers or
earthen trenches? Community collaborations to foster “real
world” research. Applied Developmental Science, 3(4), 206–212.
Katchadourian, H. (1977). Temperament and infant mortality among
the Masai of East Africa. American Journal of Psychiatry, 141,
1189–1194.
Kennedy, E. M. (1999). University-community partnerships: A mu-
tually beneﬁcial effort to aid community development and im-
prove academic learning opportunities. Applied Developmental
Science, 3(4), 197–198.
Korn, S. J. (1978, September). Temperament, vulnerability, and
behavior. Paper presented at the Louisville Temperament
Conference, Louisville, KY.
Kuo, Z. Y. (1930). The genesis of the cat’s response to the rat. Jour-
nal of Comparative Psychology, 11, 1–35.
Kuo, Z. Y. (1967). The dynamics of behavior development. New
York: Random House.
Kuo, Z. Y. (1976). The dynamics of behavior development: An epi-
genetic view. New York: Plenum Press.
Leffert, N., Benson, P., Scales, P., Sharma, A., Drake, D., & Blyth,
D. (1998). Developmental assets: Measurement and prediction
of risk behaviors among adolescents. Applied Developmental
Science, 2, 209–230.
Lerner, J. V., & Lerner, R. M. (1983). Temperament and adaptation
across life: Theoretical and empirical issues. In P. B. Baltes &
O. G. Brim, Jr. (Eds.), Life-span development and behavior
(pp. 197–231). New York: Academic Press.
Lerner, R. M. (1976). Concepts and theories of human development.
Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Lerner, R. M. (1982). Children and adolescents as producers of their
own development. Developmental Review, 2, 342–370.
Lerner, R. M. (1984). On the nature of human plasticity. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Lerner, R. M. (1986). Concepts and theories of human development
(2nd ed.). New York: Random House.
Lerner, R. M. (1987a). The concept of plasticity in development. In
J. Gallagher & C. T. Ramey (Eds.), The malleability of children
(pp. 3–14). Baltimore: Paul H. Brooks.

556
Applied Developmental Science of Positive Human Development
Lerner, R. M. (1987b). A life-span perspective for early adoles-
cence. In R. M. Lerner & T. T. Foch (Eds.), Biological-
psychosocial interactions in early adolescence (pp. 9–34).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Lerner, R. M. (1995). America’s youth in crisis: Challenges and
options for programs and policies. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Lerner, R. M. ( Ed.). (1998a). The handbook of child psychology:
Theoretical models of human development. (5th ed., Vol. 1).
Editor in Chief: William Damon. New York: Wiley.
Lerner, R. M. (1998b). Theories of human development: Con-
temporary perspectives. In W. Damon (Series Ed.) & R. M.
Lerner (Vol. Ed.), Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 1. Theo-
retical models of human development (pp. 1–24). New York:
Wiley.
Lerner, R. M. (2002a). Concepts and theories of human develop-
ment (3rd ed.). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Lerner, R. M. (2002b). Adolescence: Development, diversity, con-
text, and application. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Lerner, R. M., & Busch-Rossnagel, N. (1981). Individuals as pro-
ducers of their development: Conceptual and empirical bases. In
R. M. Lerner & N. A. Busch-Rossnagel (Eds.), Individuals as
producers of their development: A life-span perspective (pp. 1–
36). New York: Academic Press.
Lerner, R. M., & Fisher, C. B. (1994). From applied developmental
psychology to applied developmental science: Community
coalitions and collaborative careers. In C. B. Fisher & R. M.
Lerner (Eds.), Applied developmental psychology (pp. 505–522).
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Lerner, R. M., Fisher, C. B., & Weinberg, R. A. (1997). Applied
developmental science: Scholarship for our times [Editorial].
Applied Developmental Science, 1(1), 2–3.
Lerner, R. M., Fisher, C. B., & Weinberg, R. A. (2000a). Applying
developmental science in the twenty-ﬁrst century: International
scholarship for our times. International Journal of Behavioral
Development, 24, 24–29.
Lerner, R. M., Fisher, C. B., & Weinberg, R. A. (2000b). Toward a
science for and of the people: Promoting civil society through
the application of developmental science. Child Development,
71, 11–20.
Lerner, R. M., & Galambos, N. (1998). Adolescent development:
Challenges and opportunities for research, programs, and poli-
cies. In J. T. Spence (Ed.), Annual review of psychology
(pp. 413–446). Palo Alto, CA: Annual Reviews.
Lerner, R. M., & Lerner, J. V. (1983). Temperament-intelligence
reciprocities in early childhood: A contextual model. In
M. Lewis (Ed.), Origins of intelligence: Infancy and early child-
hood (pp. 399–421). New York: Plenum Press.
Lerner, R. M., & Lerner, J. V. (1989). Organismic and social-
contextual bases of development: The sample case of ado-
lescence. In W. Damon (Ed.), Child development today and
tomorrow: The Jossey-Bass social and behavioral science series
(pp. 69–85). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Lerner, R. M., & Miller, J. R. (1998). Developing multidisciplinary
institutes to enhance the lives of individuals and families:
Academic potentials and pitfalls. Journal of Public Service and
Outreach, 3(1), 64–73.
Lerner, R. M., Miller, J. R., Knott, J. H., Corey, K. E., Bynum, T. S.,
Hoopfer, L. C., McKinney, M. H., Abrams, L. A., Hula, R. C., &
Terry, P. A. (1994). Integrating scholarship and outreach in
human development research, policy, and service: A develop-
mental contextual perspective. In D. L. Featherman, R. M.
Lerner, & M. Perlmutter (Eds.), Life-span development and
behavior (pp. 249–273). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Lerner, R. M., Ostrom C. W., & Freel, M. A. (1995). Promoting
positive youth and community development through outreach
scholarship: Comments on Zeldin and Peterson. Journal of
Adolescent Research, 10, 486–502.
Lerner, R. M., Rothbaum, F., Boulos, S., & Castellino, D. R. (2002).
A developmental systems perspective on parenting. In M. H.
Bornstein (Ed.), Handbook of parenting (2nd ed., pp. 315–344).
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Lerner, R. M., & Ryff, C. (1978). Implementation of the life-span
view of human development: The sample case of attachment.
In P. B. Baltes (Ed.), Life-span development and behavior
(pp. 1–44). New York: Academic Press.
Lerner, R. M., & Simon, L. A. K. (1998a). University-community
collaborations for the twenty-ﬁrst century: Outreach scholarship
for youth and families. New York: Garland.
Lerner, R. M., & Simon, L. A. K. (1998b). Directions for the
American outreach university in the twenty-ﬁrst century. In
R. M. Lerner & L. A. K. Simon (Eds.), University-community
collaborations for the twenty-ﬁrst century: Outreach scholarship
for youth and families (pp. 463–481). New York: Garland.
Lerner, R. M., Sparks, E. S., & McCubbin, L. (1999). Family diver-
sity and family policy: Strengthening families for America’s chil-
dren. Norwell, MA: Kluwer.
Lerner, R. M., & Walls, T. (1999). Revisiting individuals as produc-
ers of their development: From dynamic interactionism to devel-
opmental systems. In J. Brandtstädter & R. M. Lerner (Eds.),
Action and self-development: Theory and research through the
life-span (pp. 3–36). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Leventhal, T., & Brooks-Gunn, J. (2000). The neighborhoods they
live in: The effects of neighborhood residence on child and
adolescent outcomes. Psychological Bulletin, 126(2), 309–337.
Leventhal, T., & Brooks-Gunn, J. (2001). Poverty and child devel-
opment. In N. J. Smelser & P. B. Baltes (Eds.), The international
encyclopedia of the social and behavioral sciences (pp. 11889–
11894). Oxford: Elsevier.
Little, R. R. (1993, April). What’s working for today’s youth: The
issues, the programs, and the learnings. Paper presented at the
ICYF Fellows Colloquium, Michigan State University. East
Lansing, Michigan.
Lorenz, K. (1966). On aggression. New York: Harcourt Brace &
World.

References
557
Luster, T., & McAdoo, H. (1994). Factors related to the achievement
and adjustment of young African American children. Child
Development, 65, 1080–1094.
Luster, T., & McAdoo, H. (1996). Family and child inﬂuences on
educational attainment: A secondary analysis of the High/Scope
Perry Preschool data. Developmental Psychology, 32(1), 26–39.
Midgley, C., Feldlaufer, H., & Eccles, J. S. (1989a). Changes in
teacher efﬁcacy and student self- and task-related beliefs in
mathematics during the transition to junior high school. Journal
of Educational Psychology, 81, 247–258.
Midgley, C., Feldlaufer, H., & Eccles, J. S. (1989b). Student/teacher
relations and attitudes toward mathematics before and after the
transition to junior high school. Child Development, 60, 981–992.
Mischel, W. (1977). On the future of personality measurement.
American Psychologist, 32, 246–254.
Morrison, F. J., Lord, C., & Keating, D. P. (1984). Applied de-
velopmental psychology. In F. J. Morrison, C. Lord, & D. P.
Keating (Eds.), Applied developmental psychology (pp. 4–20).
New York: Academic Press.
Mussen, P. H. (1970). Carmichael’s manual of child psychology
(3rd ed.). New York: Wiley.
Overton, W.
(1998).
Developmental
psychology:
Philosophy,
concepts, and methodology. In W. Damon (Series Ed.) & R. M.
Lerner (Vol. Ed.), Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 1. Theoret-
ical models of human development (pp. 107–187). New York:
Wiley.
Overton, B. J., & Burkhardt, J. C. (1999). Drucker could be right,
but. . . : New leadership models for institutional-community part-
nerships. Applied Developmental Science, 3(4), 217–227.
Pepper, S. C. (1942). World hypotheses: A study in evidence.
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Petersen, A. C. (1988). Adolescent development. In M. R.
Rosenzweig (Ed.), Annual review of psychology (Vol. 39,
pp. 583–607). Palo Alto, CA: Annual Reviews.
Pittman, K. (1996). Community, youth, development: Three goals
in search of connection. New Designs for Youth Development,
Winter, 4–8.
Plomin, R. (1986). Development, genetics, and psychology. Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Plomin, R. (2000). Behavioral genetics in the 21st century. Interna-
tional Journal of Behavioral Development, 24, 30–34.
Plomin, R., Corley, R., DeFries, J. C., & Faulker, D. W. (1990).
Individual differences in television viewing in early childhood:
Nature as well as nurture. Psychological Science, 1, 371–377.
Power, F. C., Higgins, A., & Kohlberg, L. (1989). Lawrence
Kohlberg’s approach to moral education. New York: Columbia
University Press.
Roeser, R. W., Eccles, J. S., & Sameroff, A. J. (1998). Academic and
emotional functioning in early adolescence: Longitudinal rela-
tions, patterns, and prediction by experience in middle school.
Development and Psychopathology, 10, 321–352.
Roeser, R. W., Eccles, J. S., & Sameroff, A. J. (2000). School as a
context of early adolescents’ academic and social-emotional de-
velopment: A summary of research ﬁndings. The Elementary
School Journal, 100, 443–472.
Rowe, D. (1994). The limits of family inﬂuence: Genes, experience,
and behavior. New York: Guilford Press.
Rushton, J. P. (1987). An evolutionary theory of health, longevity,
and personality: Sociobiology, and r/K reproductive strategies.
Psychological Reports, 60, 539–549.
Rushton, J. P. (1988a). Do r/K reproductive strategies apply to
human differences? Social Biology, 35, 337–340.
Rushton, J. P. (1988b). Race differences in behavior: A review and
evolutionary analysis. Personality and Individual Differences, 9,
1009–1024.
Rushton, J. P. (1997). More on political correctness and race differ-
ences. Journal of Social Distress and the Homeless, 6, 195–198.
Rushton, J. P. (1999). Race, evolution, and behavior (Special
Abridged ed.). New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction.
Rushton, J. P. (2000). Race, evolution, and behavior (2nd Special
Abridged ed.). New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction.
Scales, P., & Leffert, N. (1999). Developmental assets: A synthe-
sis of the scientiﬁc research on adolescent development.
Minneapolis, MN: Search Institute.
Scales, P., Benson, P., Leffert, N., & Blyth, D. A. (2000). The con-
tribution of developmental assets to the prediction of thriving
among adolescents. Applied Developmental Science, 4(1), 27–46.
Schneirla, T. C. (1956). Interrelationships of the innate and the
acquired in instinctive behavior. In P. P. Grassé (Ed.), L’instinct
dans le comportement des animaux et de l’homme (pp. 387–
452). Paris: Mason et Cie.
Schneirla, T. C. (1957). The concept of development in comparative
psychology. In D. B. Harris (Ed.), The concept of development:
An issue in the study of human behavior (pp. 78–108).
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Schorr, L. B. (1988). Within our reach: Breaking the cycle of disad-
vantage. New York: Doubleday.
Schorr, L. B. (1997). Common purpose: Strengthening families and
neighborhoods to rebuild America. New York: Doubleday.
Schraeder, B. D., Heverly, M. A., & O’Brien, C. M. (1996). Home
and classroom behavioral adjustment in very low birthweight
children: The inﬂuence of caregiver stress and goodness of ﬁt.
Children’s Health Care, 25(2), 117–131.
Sherrod, L. R. (1999a). Funding opportunities for applied develop-
mental science. In P. Ralston, R. M. Lerner, A. K. Mullis, C.
Simerly, & J. Murray (Eds.), Social change, public policy, and
community collaboration: Training human development profes-
sionals for the twenty-ﬁrst century (pp. 121–129). Norwell, MA:
Kluwer.
Sherrod, L. R. (1999b). Giving child development knowledge away:
Using university-community partnerships to disseminate re-
search on children, youth, and families. Applied Developmental
Science, 3(4), 228–234.

558
Applied Developmental Science of Positive Human Development
Sigel, I. E. (1985). Parental belief systems: The psychological con-
sequences for children. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Simmons, R. G., & Blyth, D. A. (1987). Moving into adolescence:
The impact of pubertal change and school context. Hawthorne,
NJ: Aldine.
Simmons, R. G., Carlton-Ford, S. L., & Blyth, D. A. (1987). Pre-
dicting how a child will cope with the transition to junior high
school. In R. M. Lerner & T. T. Foch (Eds.), Biological-
psychosocial interactions in early adolescence (pp. 325–375).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Snyder, M. (1981). On the inﬂuence of individuals on situations. In
N. Cantor & J. F. Kihlstorm (Eds.), Cognition, social interaction,
and personality (pp. 309–329). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Spanier, G. B. (1999). Enhancing the quality of life: A model for the
21st century land-grant university. Applied Developmental
Science, 3(4), 199–205.
Super, C. M., & Harkness, S. (1981). Figure, ground, and gestalt:
The cultural context of the active individual. In R. M. Lerner &
N. A. Busch-Rossnagel (Eds.), Individuals as producers of
their own development: A life-span perspective (pp. 69–86).
New York: Academic Press.
Takanishi, R. (1993). An agenda for the integration of research and
policy during early adolescence. In R. M. Lerner (Ed.), Early
adolescence: Perspectives on research, policy, and intervention
(pp. 457–470). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Tanner, J. (1991). Menarche, secular trend in age of. In R. M.
Lerner, A. C. Petersen, & J. Brooks-Gunn (Eds.), Encyclopedia
of adolescence (pp. 637–641). New York: Garland.
Thomas, A., & Chess, S. (1970). Behavioral individuality in
childhood. In L. R. Aronson, E. Tobach, D. Lehrman, & J. S.
Rosenblatt (Eds.), Development and evolution of behavior
(pp. 529–541). San Francisco: W. H. Freeman.
Thomas, A., & Chess, S. (1977). Temperament and development.
New York: Brunner/Mazel.
Thomas, A., & Chess, S. (1980). The dynamics of psychological
development. New York: Brunner/Mazel.
Thomas, A., & Chess, S. (1981). The role of temperament in the
contributions of individuals to their development. In R. M.
Lerner & N. A. Busch-Rossnagel (Eds.), Individuals as pro-
ducers of their own development: A life-span perspective.
New York: Academic Press.
Thomas, A., Chess, S., & Birch, H. (1968). Temperament and
behavioral disorders in childhood. New York: New York
University.
Thomas, A., Chess, S., Sillen, J., & Mendez, O. (1974). Cross-
cultural study of behavior in children with special vulnerabilities
to stress. In D. F. Ricks, A. Thomas, & M. Roff (Eds.), Life his-
tory research in psychopathology (pp. 53–63). Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota.
Thompson, L. (1999). Creating partnerships with government, com-
munities, and universities to achieve results for children. Applied
Developmental Science, 3(4), 213–216.
Trickett, E. J., Barone, C., & Buchanan, R. M. (1996). Elaborating
developmental contextualism in adolescent research and inter-
vention: Paradigm contributions from community psychology.
Journal of Research on Adolescence, 6(3), 245–269.
Valsiner, J. (1998). The development of the concept of development:
Historical and epistemological perspectives. In W. Damon
(Series Ed.) & R. M. Lerner (Vol. Ed.), Handbook of child psy-
chology: Vol. 1. Theoretical models of human (5th ed., pp. 189–
232). New York: Wiley.
von Bertalanffy, L. (1933). Modern theories of development.
London: Oxford University Press.
Wigﬁeld, A., Eccles, J. S., MacIver, D., Reumann, D. A., &
Midgley, C. (1991). Transitions during early adolescence:
Changes in children’s domain-speciﬁc self-perceptions and gen-
eral self-esteem across the transition to junior high. Develop-
mental Psychology, 27, 552–565.
Yates, M., & Youniss, J. (1996). Community service and political-
moral identity in adolescents. Journal of Research on Adoles-
cence, 6(3), 271–284.
Youniss, J. (1990). Cultural forces leading to scientiﬁc develop-
mental psychology. In C. B. Fisher & W. W. Tryon (Eds.),
Ethics in applied developmental psychology: Emerging issues
in an emerging ﬁeld: Vol. 4. Annual advances in applied
developmental psychology
(pp. 285–300). Stamford, CT:
Ablex.
Youniss, J., Yates, M., & Su, Y. (1997). Social integration: Commu-
nity service and Marijuana use in high school seniors. Journal of
Adolescent Research, 12(2), 245–262.
Zigler, E. (1998). A place of value for applied and policy studies.
Child Development, 69, 532–542.
Zigler, E., & Finn-Stevenson, M. (1992). Applied developmental
psychology. In M. H. Bornstein & M. E. Lamb (Eds.), Develop-
mental psychology: An advanced textbook (pp. 677–729).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

CHAPTER 23
Child Development and the Law
MICHAEL E. LAMB
559
MAXIMIZING THE INFORMATIVENESS OF CHILD SEX
ABUSE VICTIMS
560
Factors Inﬂuencing Children’s Informativeness
560
Research on Investigative Interviews
564
Enhancing Children’s Informativeness
564
Conclusion
566
PROTECTING THE CHILDREN OF DIVORCE
567
The Development of Infant-Parent Attachments
567
Maintaining Relationships With Parents 
Who Live Apart
568
Conclusions
570
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
FOR RESEARCH, POLICY, AND PRACTICE
571
REFERENCES
572
The law, broadly conceived, touches the lives of increasing
numbers of children in a variety of different ways. For ex-
ample, legal authorities intervene when parents appear inca-
pable of caring for their children appropriately, when parents
are required to work or are incarcerated and thus must place
their children in the care of others, when parents cannot agree
with one another regarding the custody and care of their
children following divorce, and when children have been vic-
timized. Although legal intervention in these cases is often
justiﬁed by reference to children’s best interests, the inter-
ventions themselves are seldom informed by reference to
developmental theory or the results of scientiﬁc research. In-
deed, political ideology and cultural values, rather than sci-
entiﬁc knowledge, tend to guide the development of policies
like those requiring parents to seek employment or job train-
ing in exchange for public support, those that emphasize
family preservation rather than the removal and adoption of
children who have not received adequate care from their par-
ents, or even those that permit the prosecution of juvenile of-
fenders as though they were adults. 
That policy makers and enforcers fail to take advantage of
a burgeoning and increasingly sophisticated understanding of
child development is unfortunate because superior public
policy and law would surely emerge if they were better in-
formed. Researchers actually know a great deal about young
children’s ability to tolerate separations or be inﬂuenced by
variations in the quality of their parents’ and care providers’
behavior (R. A. Thompson, 1998). They are increasingly
aware of the variability among children with respect to their
vulnerability and resilience (Masten & Garmezy, 1985; Rolf,
Masten, Cicchetti, Naechterlein, & Weintraub, 1990), and
they have documented age-related changes in children’s
awareness of their responsibility for the consequences of
their actions as well as the inconsistency and fallibility of
their moral and causal reasoning (Levesque, 2001; Schwartz,
2001). All of this information could be of value to policy
makers and jurists.
In at least two areas, however, legal practice has been at
least somewhat responsive to scientiﬁc input. I examine
these two topics closely in this chapter because they illus-
trate both (a) how applied research and basic research by
developmentalists have combined to offer compelling rec-
ommendations to those practitioners whose efforts can have
crucial implications for the lives and futures of vulnerable
children and (b) how slowly the insights gleaned from scien-
tiﬁc research affect ﬁrst the letter of the law and then, much
later, practices in the ﬁeld. In the ﬁrst half of the chapter I
review research on the extent to which children of different
ages are capable of providing detailed information about
their experiences—particularly their experiences of child
abuse—and the ways in which interview procedures in-
formed by developmental research improve the quality of
information provided by children about their alleged abuse.
In the second half I discuss the ways in which research on
parent-child relationships and on the effects of divorce create
a knowledge base that can be used to guide those profession-
als who must make decisions about children’s living arrange-
ments when their parents no longer live together. In both
cases, we see how scholarly research can indeed inform
practice in the real world, promoting children’s welfare and

560
Child Development and the Law
best interests in the process. In both cases, furthermore, close
study of children’s actual experiences and performance in
real-world settings (the court room, the forensic interview,
the disintegrating family) has enhanced our cumulative un-
derstanding of developmental processes, often in unique
ways. This point deserves emphasis because academic psy-
chologists too often view applied research as intellectually
and methodologically inferior, unlikely to enhance our
broader understanding. I hope to demonstrate in this chapter
how basic research and applied research can complement
one another and thus that a complete understanding of devel-
opmental processes may only be obtained when we are able
to learn from the close study of children in experimental,
analog, and real-world contexts.
MAXIMIZING THE INFORMATIVENESS OF CHILD
SEX ABUSE VICTIMS
Although sex crimes against children are alleged with
some—albeit declining—frequency (L. Jones & Finkelhor,
2001; Sedlak & Broadhurst, 1996), such crimes are ex-
tremely difﬁcult to investigate because corroborative
physical or medical evidence is rarely available, leaving con-
tradictory accounts by the alleged victims and suspects as the
only available evidence. This difﬁculty has increased the im-
portance of obtaining and evaluating information provided
by children, and as a result many researchers have studied the
capacity of young children to provide reliable and valid
information about their experiences (for recent reviews, see
Kuehnle, 1996; Lamb, Sternberg, Orbach, Hershkowitz, &
Esplin, 1999; Memon & Bull, 1999; Milne & Bull, 1999;
Poole & Lamb, 1998; Westcott, Davies, & Bull, 2002). The
research summarized in this section has helped identify
children’s strengths, weaknesses, and characteristics, thereby
facilitating improvements in the quality of forensic inter-
viewing and our evaluation of the information elicited from
children in this way.
Factors Inﬂuencing Children’s Informativeness
Language Development
Linguistic and communicative immaturity clearly make it dif-
ﬁcult for children to describe their experiences intelligibly,
especially because so many interviewers fail to recognize the
gradual pace of communicative development and thus overes-
timate children’s linguistic capacities. The more impover-
ished the children’s language, the greater is the likelihood that
their statements will be misinterpreted or that children will
misinterpret the interviewers’questions and purposes (King &
Yuille, 1987; Perry &Wrightsman, 1991;Walker, 1999). Most
children say their ﬁrst word by early in the second year of life,
begin to create two-word sentences by 20 months, and can
draw upon an average vocabulary of 8,000 to 14,000 words by
the time they are 6 years old (Carey, 1978). The vocabularies
of young children are often much more limited and less
descriptive than those of adults, however (Brown, 1973; Dale,
1976; de Villiers & de Villiers, 1999). Adjectival and ad-
verbial modiﬁers are especially likely to be absent in their
accounts, which tend to be extremely brief and sparse (Marin,
Holmes, Guth, & Kovac, 1979), perhaps in part because syn-
tactical development is so slow. Unlike adults and older chil-
dren, furthermore, young children cannot draw on an array of
past experiences to enrich and clarify their descriptive ac-
counts (Johnson & Foley, 1984). In addition, children do not
articulate individual sounds consistently even after they seem
to have mastered them (Reich, 1986), and thus it is not un-
common for interviewers to misunderstand children’s speech.
Misunderstandings occur also because children’s rapid vo-
cabulary growth often leads adults to overestimate their
linguistic capacities. Despite their apparent maturity, young
children—especially preschoolers—frequently use words be-
fore they know their conventional adult meaning, use words
that they do not understand, and often misunderstand some
apparently simple concepts, such as “any,” “some,” “touch,”
“yesterday,” and “before” (Harner, 1975; Walker, 1999).
The informativeness of conversations with children is
greatly inﬂuenced by the linguistic style and the complexity
of the language addressed to them by investigators. A partic-
ularly widespread problem involves compound questions,
responses to which are inherently uninterpretable (Walker &
Hunt, 1998), but other poorly worded questions pose prob-
lems as well. Mismatches between children’s abilities and the
language addressed to them are not limited to preschoolers,
furthermore. Brennan and Brennan (1988) showed that fewer
than two thirds of the questions addressed to 6- to 15-year-
old children during cross-examination in court were compre-
hensible to their peers, and lawyers seemed especially likely
to overestimate the abilities of 10- to 15-year-olds. Similarly,
inappropriate questioning strategies also characterize the vast
majority of forensic interviews, as shown later. To make mat-
ters worse, Roberts and Lamb (1999) showed that when in-
terviewers misrepresent what children say, they are seldom
corrected, and thus the mistakes, rather than the correct infor-
mation, are recalled later in the interview. Overall, as Poole
and Lamb (1998, p. 155) warned, “we cannot assume that
the question the child ‘heard’ was the one the adult asked.
Consequently, if the child later answered a similar question
differently, we could not assume that the event had not really
happened or that the child was an unreliable witness.”

Maximizing the Informativeness of Child Sex Abuse Victims
561
Children’s accounts of abusive experiences are also inﬂu-
enced by social or pragmatic aspects of communication, par-
ticularly their expectations regarding the goals of the forensic
interview. In the process of learning words and the rules for
combining words into sentences, children learn how to par-
ticipate in conversations and how to structure story narratives
(Warren & McCloskey, 1997). Children’s conversations
often lack the logical structure that adults expect, with many
loose association and digressions, but individual differences
are large and developmental changes rapid. Like adults, fur-
thermore, young witnesses are typically unaware of the
amount and type of information being sought by forensic in-
vestigators and are most likely to be guided by the everyday
experience of conversing with adults who already know an-
swers to the questions they ask (e.g., “What color are daddy’s
shoes?”) or are interested in rather brief responses (“What did
you do at the playground?”). As a result, interviewers need to
communicate their needs and expectations clearly, motivat-
ing children to provide as much information as they can, and
it is often valuable to train young witnesses explicitly to pro-
vide detailed narrative responses before starting to discuss
the substantive issues under investigation (Saywitz, Snyder,
& Nathanson, 1999; Sternberg et al., 1997). The fact that
communicative clarity and careful explanation of the alleged
victim’s role as a potential source of unique information can
affect children’s informativeness illustrates that children can
indeed remember details of their experiences, although the
interviewer’s inability to elicit information and the child’s
unwillingness or inability to express it may obscure the
child’s ability to remember it.
Memory
Nevertheless, most doubts about the informative capacities
of young witnesses focus on the presumed fallibility of their
memories, although both their capacities and their weak-
nesses are frequently misunderstood and misrepresented.
Research on memory development suggests that as chil-
dren grow older, the length, informativeness, and complexity
of their recall memories increase, but the basic structure
remains the same (Schneider & Bjorklund, 1998; Davies,
Tarrant & Flin, 1989; Flin, Boon, Knox, & Bull, 1992;
Nelson & Gruendel, 1981; Saywitz, 1988). Flin and her
colleagues (1992) reported that 6-year-old children reported
less information than did 9-year-old children and adults and
that, like adults, 6- and 9-year-olds reported less information
ﬁve months after the event. Of particular note is that the
amount of incorrect information provided did not increase
over time. Memory is a reconstructive process, however:
Like adults, children actively work on memory traces in
order to understand and organize them. Thus when children
are repeatedly interviewed, as is often the case when sexual
abuse has been alleged, this is likely not only to consolidate
the memory (facilitating subsequent recall) but also to shape
it (Ornstein, Larus, & Clubb, 1992). In a recent ﬁeld study of
investigative interviews, Lamb, Sternberg, and Esplin (2000)
found that both delay and age affected the amount of infor-
mation recalled, although in this study it was of course im-
possible to assess the accuracy of the children’s accounts.
In general, young children tend to provide briefer ac-
counts of their experiences than do older children and adults,
but their accounts are equivalently accurate (e.g., Goodman
& Reed, 1986; Johnson & Foley, 1984; Marin et al., 1979;
Oates & Shrimpton, 1991). As time passes, information
is forgotten by children just as it is forgotten by adults
(Flin et al., 1992). Errors of omission are much more com-
mon than errors of commission among both adults and
children (Oates & Shrimpton, 1991; Steward, 1993), but the
former are a special problem where children are concerned
because their accounts—especially their recall narratives—
are often so brief.
It is important to distinguish between memory perfor-
mance and memory capacity, however. Young children’s
accounts may be brief not only because their memories are
poor or because their limited experiences do not provide a
rich network of associations from which to draw analogies or
metaphors but also because their vocabularies are much more
limited and less elaborate than those of adults and because
they may not be motivated to reveal what they do remember.
Whenever events recur with any regularity, both children
and adults tend to blur distinctions among incidents and
establish script memories (representations of averaged or
typical events rather than particular incidents). Accounts
based on script memories are likely to contain fewer distinc-
tive details than are memories of discrete incidents (Nelson &
Gruendel, 1981), and the passage of time between experience
and recall increases the tendency to rely on scripts (Myles-
Worsley, Cromer, & Dodd, 1986). Scripts are useful because
they help individuals to focus on and remember the important
features of repetitive events or sequences while enabling
them to ignore less central or repetitious elements (Nelson,
1986; Shank & Abelson, 1977). In addition, scripts may pro-
vide the temporal sequence or structure that makes the
accounts of speciﬁc experiences more comprehensible.
However, scripts lead reporters to use general knowledge
about a class of events to describe speciﬁc events incorrectly.
For example, Ornstein, Staneck, Agosto, and Baker-Ward
(2001) reported that after a 12-week delay 6-year-olds
incorporated into their memory details that were typical of
medical checkups but had not actually been experienced

562
Child Development and the Law
during a speciﬁc checkup. The tendency to embellish restate-
ments of stories with items and events that were part of the
children’s scripts generally declines with age (Collins, 1970;
Collins & Wellman, 1982; Collins, Wellman, Keniston, &
Westby, 1978), and script-based errors can be reduced by
preinterview counseling or instruction (Saywitz & Snyder,
1993). Children also tend to remember unusual speciﬁc
events better than speciﬁc events that are congruent with their
general or script memories (Davidson, 1991).
Experimental research in the last two decades makes clear
that the distinction between recall and recognition testing is
crucial when evaluating children’s memory capacities and
the ways in which memories are accessed (Dale, Loftus, &
Rathbun, 1978; Dent, 1982, 1986; Dent & Stephenson, 1979;
Goodman & Aman, 1990; Goodman, Hirschman, Hepps, &
Rudy, 1991; Hutcheson, Baxter, Telfer, & Warden, 1995;
Oates & Shrimpton, 1991; Peterson & Bell, 1996). These
researchers have shown that when adults and children are
asked to describe events from free recall (“Tell me everything
you remember . . . ”), their accounts tend to be incomplete
and sketchy but are likely to be very accurate. When
prompted for more details using open-ended prompts like
“Tell me more about that” or “And then what happened?”
children often recall additional details, and their accuracy
remains high. However, when interviewers prompt with
focused questions—especially option-posing questions such
as “Did he have a beard?” “Did he touch you with his
private?” or “Did this happen in the day or in the night?”—
they shift from recall to recognition testing, and the probabil-
ity of error rises dramatically. Open-ended prompts encour-
age respondents to provide as much relevant information as
they remember, whereas recognition probes focus the child
on categories of information or topics of interest to the inves-
tigator and exert greater pressure to respond, whether or not
the child is sure of the response, often by conﬁrming or re-
jecting information provided by the interviewer. Such probes
are also more likely to elicit erroneous responses from re-
spondents who recognize details that are not remembered
from the actual incident but were mentioned in previous con-
versations (or interviews) or are inferred from the gist of the
experienced events (Brainerd & Reyna, 1996). Effective in-
terviewers must thus maximize the opportunities for recall by
offering open-ended prompts to minimize the risk of eliciting
erroneous information. Recall memories are not always accu-
rate, of course, especially when the events occurred long
before the interview or when there have been opportunities
for contamination (Leichtman & Ceci, 1995; Poole & Lind-
say, 1995, 1996; Poole & White, 1993; Warren & Lane,
1995), but accounts based on recall memory are much more
likely to be accurate than those elicited using recognition cues
or prompts, regardless of the informants’ ages. 
Forensic investigators often dismiss the relevance of exper-
imental research on children’s memory by arguing that the
stressful nature of sexual abuse makes memories of abuse
distinctlydifferent.Infact,considerablecontroversypersistsin
the experimental literature concerning the effects of increased
arousal or stress on the accuracy of children’s memory. Some
researchers argue that stress improves children’s accuracy
(Goodman, Bottoms, Schwartz-Kenney, & Rudy, 1991;
Goodman, Hirschman, et al., 1991; Ochsner & Zaragoza,
1988;Steward&Steward,1996).StewardandSteward(1996),
for example, reported that children’s ratings of distress were
correlated with the completeness and accuracy of their descrip-
tions of medical examinations that they had experienced. Other
researchers (Oates & Shrimpton, 1991; Ornstein, Gordon, &
Larus, 1992; D. P. Peters, 1987, 1991; D. P. Peters & Hagan,
1989; Peterson & Bell, 1996; Vandermaas, 1991) reported that
arousal either reduces accuracy or has no effect. In most of
these studies, unfortunately, the children experienced low
levels of stress, and the ability to recall central elements of
experienced events was not assessed. In addition, researchers
have not yet studied the effects of social support, which pre-
sumably reduces stress (Greenstock & Pipe, 1996; Moston &
Engelberg, 1992).
Children are certainly more likely to remember personally
meaningful and salient as opposed to meaningless items and
events (see Ornstein, Gordon, et al., 1992, for a review) but
this does not mean that incidents of maltreatment will neces-
sarily be recalled better. First of all, not all incidents of sexual
abuse are distinctive or traumatic, and thus the potentially
facilitative effects of arousal on the process of encoding in-
formation cannot be assumed. Second, the context in which
the child is asked to retrieve information about the experi-
enced event—during interviews with a child protection ser-
vice worker, a police ofﬁcer, an attorney, or a judge—may be
stressful regardless of whether the target event itself was
(Goodman et al., 1992). Third, stress may affect memory
encoding, processing, and retrieval in different ways.
Suggestibility
Most researchers agree that the manner in which children
are questioned can have profound implications for what is
“remembered,” and this increases the importance of careful
interviewing, particularly in light of studies demonstrating the
deleterious (and sometimes devastating) effects of suggestion
(Ceci & Bruck, 1993, 1995). Misleading or suggestive ques-
tioning can manipulate both young and old witnesses, but the

Maximizing the Informativeness of Child Sex Abuse Victims
563
very young are especially vulnerable (Ceci & Bruck, 1993).
Suggestibility is a multifaceted concept that involves social,
communicative, and memory processes. Children may re-
spond inaccurately because they (a) infer that the interviewer
would prefer a particular response (Ceci & Bruck, 1993),
(b) do not understand the questions but are eager to be coop-
erative (e.g. Hughes & Grieve, 1980), (c) retrieve the most
recently acquired information about the event in question
although they might be able to retrieve information about the
actual event if prompted to do so (Newcombe & Siegal, 1996,
1997), or (d) suffer from genuine source-monitoring confu-
sion that prevents them from discriminating between the orig-
inal event and misinformation about it (Poole & Lindsay,
1997).
Because so many processes underlie suggestibility, it is
not surprising that, at ﬁrst glance, research on children’s sug-
gestibility appears to reveal a mixed and confusing picture.
These apparently contradictory ﬁndings are not difﬁcult to
reconcile, however. In the studies documenting the resistance
to suggestion by 3- to 4-year-olds (Goodman & Aman, 1990;
Goodman, Aman, & Hirschman, 1987; Goodman, Bottoms,
et al., 1991; Goodman, Wilson, Hazan, & Reed, 1989), re-
searchers have not repeated misleading questions over a short
period of time, exposed children to misleading stereotypes
about target individuals, provided incentives to respond
falsely, or instructed children to think about nonevents, pre-
tend, or guess. All of these conditions increase the suscepti-
bility to suggestion (e.g. Bruck, Ceci, Francouer, & Barr,
1995; Bruck, Ceci, Francouer, & Renick, 1995; Cassel,
Roebers, & Bjorklund, 1996; Ceci, Huffman, Smith, &
Loftus, 1994; Ceci, Ross, & Toglia, 1987a, 1987b; Garven,
Wood, Malpass, & Shaw; 1998; King & Yuille, 1987;
Leichtman & Ceci, 1995; W. C. Thompson, Clarke-Stewart,
& Lepore, 1997; Toglia, Ceci, & Ross, 1989). Likewise, sug-
gestive interviewing is most likely to be inﬂuential when the
memory is not rich or recent, when the content was imagined
rather than experienced, when the questions themselves are
so complicated that the witness is confused, and when the
interviewer appears to have such authority or status that
the witness feels compelled to accept his or her implied con-
struction of the events. By contrast, suggestions are less
likely to affect children’s accounts when they pertain to cen-
tral or salient details (Dent & Stephenson, 1979; Dodd &
Bradshaw, 1980; King & Yuille, 1987) and when interview-
ers counsel children to report personally experienced events
only (Poole & Lindsay, 1997). Unfortunately, little research
has been conducted on suggestibility regarding memories of
incidents that traumatized or affected individuals profoundly,
although Goodman, Hirschman, et al. (1991) found that
children who were more distressed by inoculations were less
suggestible than were children who appeared less stressed by
the inoculations.
Implications for Practice
As evidence regarding children’s linguistic, communicative,
social, and memorial capacities and tendencies has accumu-
lated, a surprisingly coherent international consensus has
emerged concerning the ways in which children should be
interviewed forensically (e.g., American Professional Soci-
ety on the Abuse of Children [APSAC], 1990/1997; Bull,
1992, 1995, 1996; Fisher & Geiselman, 1992; D. P. H.
Jones, 1992; Lamb, Sternberg, & Esplin, 1994, 1995, 1998;
Lamb, Sternberg, et al., 1999; Memorandum of Good Prac-
tice, 1992; Poole & Lamb, 1998; Raskin & Esplin, 1991;
Raskin & Yuille, 1989; Sattler, 1998). Clearly, it is possible to
obtain valuable information from children, but doing so re-
quires careful investigative procedures as well as a realistic
awareness of their capacities and tendencies. In particular, ex-
perts recommend that questions and statements be worded
carefully, with due consideration for the child’s age and com-
municative abilities. They further recommend that as much
information as possible should be obtained using broad open-
ended prompts, like the invitations deﬁned in the next section.
When recall memory is probed using open-ended prompts,
respondents attempt to provide as much relevant information
as they remember; whereas when recognition is probed using
focused questions, children may have to conﬁrm or reject in-
formation or options provided by the interviewer. Such
probes refocus the child on domains of interest to the investi-
gator and exert greater pressure to respond, whether or not the
respondent is sure of the response. Recognition probes are
more likely to elicit erroneous responses in eyewitness con-
texts because of response biases (e.g., tendencies to say “yes”
or “no” without reﬂection) and false recognition of details
that were only mentioned in previous interviews or are in-
ferred from the gist of the experienced events (Brainerd &
Reyna, 1996). For these reasons, open-ended questions are
assumed to yield the most information and the fewest errors
in forensic contexts as well. When more focused questions,
especially option-posing questions, are necessary, they
should be used as sparingly as possible, and only after open-
ended prompts have been exhausted. Suggestive and coercive
questions and practices should be avoided completely. As
we have just seen, all of these recommendations ﬂow di-
rectly from the accumulating body of research—most of it
conducted in laboratory analog experiments—on children’s
capacities and tendencies.

564
Child Development and the Law
Research on Investigative Interviews
Of course, consensus among experts about the manner in
which interviews should be conducted does not mean that in-
terviews are typically conducted in accordance with these
recommendations, and thus my colleagues and I have under-
taken a series of studies designed to determine how forensic
interviews are actually conducted by social workers, investi-
gators, and police ofﬁcers in the everyday course of their
work. Our research in this area has all been conducted using
verbatim transcriptions of forensic interviews conducted in
Israel, the United States, the United Kingdom, and Sweden
by social workers, sheriffs, or police ofﬁcers. For purposes of
the analyses summarized here, we focused on the portion of
each interview concerned with substantive issues by having
coders review the transcripts and tabulate the number of new
details identifying and describing individuals, objects, or ac-
tions relevant to the alleged incident. Coders also categorized
each interviewer utterance, focusing particularly on four
common types of utterances:
1. Invitations request an open-ended response from the child.
Such utterances do not delimit the child’s focus except in
the most general way (e.g., “And then what happened?”).
2. Directive utterances focus the child’s attention on details
or aspects of the event that the child had previously men-
tioned. Most of these are wh-questions (e.g., “What color
was that shirt?”).
3. Option-posing utterances focus the child’s attention on as-
pects of the event that the child had not previously men-
tioned and prompt the child to choose among two or more
possible answers (e.g., “Did you see a knife?” or “Were
his clothes on or off?”).
4. Suggestive utterances are stated in such a way that the in-
terviewer strongly communicates what response is ex-
pected (“It hurt, didn’t it?”) or assumes details that have
not been revealed by the child (e.g., “Did he touch your
breasts or your vagina?” when the child has not mentioned
being touched). Most of these utterances would be called
leading by lawyers, jurists, and researchers.
Directive, option-posing, and suggestive utterances are some-
times grouped as focused questions, although they lie along a
continuum of risk, varying with respect to the degree of sug-
gestive inﬂuence they exert on children’s responses.
When used in forensic interviews, invitations consistently
yield responses that are three to four times longer and three
times richer in relevant details than responses to focused
interviewer utterances (e.g., Lamb, Hershkowitz, Sternberg,
Boat, & Everson, 1996; Lamb, Hershkowitz, Sternberg,
Esplin, et al., 1996; Orbach et al., 2000; Sternberg et al.,
1996). The superiority of open-ended utterances is apparent
regardless of the age of the children being interviewed; un-
fortunately, however, focused utterances are much more
common in the ﬁeld than are open-ended questions. In the
ﬁeld sites we studied initially, for example, around 80% of
the interviewer utterances were focused, whereas fewer than
6% were invitations, and the overreliance on focused ques-
tions was evident regardless of the children’s age, the nature
of the offenses, the professional background of the interview-
ers, or the utilization of props such as anatomical dolls
(Craig, Sheibe, Kircher, Raskin, & Dodd, 1999; Davies,
Westcott, & Horan, 2000; Lamb, Hershkowitz, Sternberg,
Boat, et al., 1996; Lamb, Hershkowitz, Sternberg, Esplin,
et al., 1996; Sternberg et al., 1996; Walker & Hunt, 1998).
Similar ﬁndings were obtained in diverse sites across the
United States, the United Kingdom, Sweden, and Israel.
Furthermore, despite research-based warnings concerning
the risks of asking option-posing and suggestive questions,
analyses of investigative interviews conducted at sites in the
United States, the United Kingdom, Sweden, and Israel all
reveal that the majority of the information obtained from
child victim-witnesses is typically elicited using focused
questions (e.g., Aldridge & Cameron, 1999; Cederborg,
Orbach, Sternberg, & Lamb, 2000; Craig et al., 1999; Davies
et al., 2000; Davies & Wilson, 1997; Lamb, Hershkowitz,
Sternberg, Boat, et al., 1996; Lamb, Hershkowitz, Sternberg,
Esplin, et al., 1996; Lamb et al., 2000; Sternberg et al., 1996;
Sternberg, Lamb, Davies, & Westcott, 2001; Walker & Hunt,
1998; Warren, Woodall, Hunt, & Perry, 1996). These descrip-
tive data are noteworthy because they reveal widespread
similarities in forensic interview practices across countries
and cultures. Interview practices are at considerable variance
with the practices recommended by experts and professional
advisory groups from around the world. In other words, de-
spite consistent research documenting the superiority of cer-
tain ways of obtaining information from children about their
experiences, forensic interviewers continue to employ infe-
rior and potentially dangerous practices when they interview
alleged victims.
Enhancing Children’s Informativeness
Fortunately, forensic interviewers can be trained to conduct
better interviews—interviews in which fewer suggestive
questions are asked and in which greater proportions of the
information are elicited using open-ended prompts, ideally
before any focused or leading questions are asked. In
one early study, Sternberg et al. (1997) had forensic inter-
viewers train Israeli children to give narrative responses by

Maximizing the Informativeness of Child Sex Abuse Victims
565
asking them a series of open-ended questions about recent
neutral events. When later questioned about alleged inci-
dents of abuse, these children provided responses that were
2.5 times more detailed than did children who were (like
children in most forensic interviews) trained to respond to
focused questions in earlier discussions of neutral events.
Comparable ﬁndings were obtained when similar training
was given by police investigators to alleged victims in
the United States (Sternberg, Lamb, Esplin, & Baradaran,
1999).
These ﬁndings prompted the development of a fully struc-
tured investigative interview protocol designed to translate
empirically based research guidelines into a practical tool to
be used by investigators conducting forensic interviews
(Orbach et al., 2000). The National Institute of Child Health
and Human Development’s (NICHD) investigative interview
protocol covers all phases of the investigative interview and
is designed to translate research-based recommendations into
operational guidelines in order to enhance the retrieval of
informative, complete, and accurate accounts of alleged inci-
dents of abuse by young victim-witnesses. This is accom-
plished by creating a supportive interview environment
(before substantive rapport building), adapting interview
practices to children’s developmental levels and capabilities
(e.g., minimizing linguistic complexity and avoiding inter-
ruptions), preparing children for their tasks as information
providers (by clarifying the rules of communication and
training children to report event-speciﬁc episodic memories),
and maximizing the interviewers’ reliance on utterance types
(e.g., invitations) that tap children’s free recall memory.
When following the protocol, interviewers maximize the use
of open-ended questions and probes, introduce focused ques-
tions only after exhausting open-ended questioning modes,
use option-posing questions only to obtain essential informa-
tion later in the interview, and eliminate suggestive practices.
Interviewers are also encouraged to use information provided
by the children themselves as cues to promote further free-
recall retrieval. In essence, the protocol is thus designed
to maximize the amount of information elicited using recall
memory prompts because information elicited in this way is
more likely to be accurate. In addition, the structured inter-
view protocol minimizes opportunities for contamination of
the children’s accounts.
Analyses revealed dramatic improvements in the organi-
zation of interviews, the quality of questions asked by inter-
viewers, and the quality of information provided by children
when Israeli youth investigators followed the protocol when
interviewing 50 4- to 13-year-old alleged victims of sexual
abuse (Orbach et al., 2000). Almost all of the children inter-
viewed using the structured protocol made a disclosure and
provided a narrative account of the alleged abuse in response
to the ﬁrst invitation, and the interviewers offered more than
ﬁve times as many open-ended invitations as they did in
comparable interviews conducted before the structured
protocol was introduced. The number of option-posing
questions dropped by almost 50% as well, and much more
of the information was obtained using free recall rather than
investigator-directed recognition probes in the protocol-
guided interviews. Children in the protocol condition pro-
vided proportionally more of the total number of details in
their ﬁrst narrative response than did children in the nonpro-
tocol condition, and they also provided signiﬁcantly more
information before being asked the ﬁrst option-posing ques-
tion. More of the details they provided were elicited by open-
ended prompts, whereas fewer were elicited by directive,
option-posing, and suggestive utterances. Although this was
not studied systematically, the interviewers using the NICHD
interview protocol also became better critics of their own and
of their colleagues’ interviews.
Similar results were obtained when investigative inter-
views conducted by police ofﬁcers in the western United
States were studied (Sternberg, Lamb, Esplin, Orbach, &
Hershkowitz, 2002; Sternberg, Lamb, Orbach, Esplin, &
Mitchell, 2001). In addition to being better organized,
interviewers using the structured protocol used more open-
ended prompts and fewer option-posing and suggestive ques-
tions than in the comparison (baseline) interviews. In the
baseline condition, only 10% of the interviewers’ questions
were invitations, whereas in the protocol interviews a third
of the interviewers’ questions were invitations. The total
amount of information elicited from free recall memory also
increased dramatically; whereas only 16% of the information
was elicited using free recall in the preprotocol interviews,
about half of the information was obtained using free recall
in the protocol interviews. The protocol also reduced the use
of directive, option-posing, and suggestive prompts. In the
baseline interviews, 41% of the information was obtained
using option-posing and suggestive questions compared with
24% in the protocol interviews. Furthermore, this pattern of
results was similar regardless of the children’s age. Although
younger children provided shorter and less detailed responses
than did older children, analyses of interviews with 4- to 6-
year-old children revealed that the interviewers relied heavily
on invitations (34% of their questions) and succeeded in
eliciting a substantial amount of information (49% of the
total) using free-recall prompts.
To further clarify the ability of preschoolers to address
open-ended questions, Lamb et al. (2002) studied forensic
interviews of 130 4- to 8-year-olds. Like Sternberg et al.
(2001), they showed clearly that children as young as 4 years

566
Child Development and the Law
of age can indeed provide substantial amounts of information
about alleged abuse in response to open-ended questions in-
cluded in well-structured and planned forensic interviews.
On average, one half of the information provided by the
children came in response to open-ended utterances. Even
though the older children reported more details in total and
in response to the average invitation than the younger chil-
dren did, furthermore, the proportion of invitations eliciting
new details did not change, suggesting that preschoolers are
not uniquely incapable of responding to open-ended prompts.
As in other studies, more forensically relevant details were
elicited by individual invitations than by other types of utter-
ances at all ages. Because both laboratory analog and ﬁeld
studies consistently show that the information provided in
response to invitations is more likely to be accurate, these
results suggested that open-ended invitations are superior
investigative tools regardless of the interviewees’ ages.
Lamb et al. (2002) found that many interviewers made
effective use of cued invitations (e.g., “You said that he
touched your vagina; tell me more about that”) rather than
risky focused questions (“So did he put his ﬁnger in your
vagina?”). An interesting point is that action-based cues
(“Tell me more about him touching you”) were consistently
more effective than were time-segmenting cues (e.g., “Tell
me more about what happened after he came into the room”)
at all ages. Developmental improvements were especially
dramatic with respect to time-segmenting cues, however, and
these were extremely effective when addressed to 8-year-
olds. With younger children, by contrast, references to ac-
tions already mentioned by the child proved more effective,
presumably because such cues are less cognitively demand-
ing than cues that required awareness of temporal sequences.
At all ages, furthermore, more information would likely have
been elicited if the interviewers had made greater use of cued
invitations.
Clearly, forensic interviewers need to provide children of
all ages with opportunities to recall information in response
to open-ended prompts before assuming that special (i.e.,
more risky) interview techniques are needed. This admoni-
tion is important especially in light of repeated demonstra-
tions that younger children are more likely than older
children to give inaccurate responses to yes-no questions
(Brady, Poole, Warren, & Jones, 1999), to respond afﬁrma-
tively to misleading questions about nonexperienced events
(Poole & Lindsay, 1998), and to acquiesce to suggestions
(e.g., Cassel et al., 1996; Ceci & Huffman, 1997; Ceci et al.,
1987b; Robinson & Briggs, 1997). Risky questions are even
riskier when addressed to children aged 6 and under,
and forensic investigators must thus make special efforts to
maximize the amounts of information elicited from such chil-
dren using less risky, open-ended prompts.
Conclusion
These ﬁndings are particularly encouraging in light of the dif-
ﬁculties that interviewers frequently encounter when inter-
viewing young children, and they illustrate the ways in which
applied research can sometimes raise doubts about the inter-
pretation and generalization of the results obtained in experi-
mental laboratory analog settings. In this instance, students
of memory and communicative development had long be-
lieved that preschoolers were incapable of providing narra-
tive responses to invitations (Bourg et al., 1996; Hewitt,
1999; Kuehnle, 1996). The ﬁeld research has demonstrated,
however, that when invitations are carefully formulated and
children are appropriately prepared for their role as infor-
mants, even very young children are capable of providing
detailed responses to narrative questions. Through a combi-
nation of applied and basic research, it has thus been possible
to enhance our understanding both of normative develop-
mental processes and of the forensic interview process. In ad-
dition, careful research has made it possible to enhance the
value of children’s testimony in ways that should enable law
enforcement, child protection, and judicial agencies to pro-
tect children better from further maltreatment. 
Studies demonstrating that children can be much more
useful informants when they are effectively interviewed have
also documented how difﬁcult it is to alter the ways in which
forensic interviewers typically perform. As noted earlier, pro-
fessional consensus regarding the ways in which children
should be interviewed did not translate into changes in inter-
viewers’ behavior even when they knew what they should do
and believed that they were following these recommenda-
tions (Aldridge & Cameron, 1999; Warren et al., 1999). My
colleagues and I have demonstrated that improvements
occurred only when forensic interviewers reviewed tran-
scripts of their interviews and received critical feedback from
expert consultants and fellow interviewers (Lamb, Sternberg,
Orbach, Hershkowitz, et al., 2002). Somewhat disconcert-
ingly, furthermore, improvements derived from this close
monitoring and feedback rapidly diminished when the inter-
viewers stopped attending regular feedback sessions (Lamb,
Sternberg, Orbach, Esplin, & Mitchell, 2002). Within six
months after the training/supervision ended, police ofﬁcers in
the United States were conducting forensic interviews that
resembled their original interviews more than the interviews
conducted with the assistance of the NICHD interview
protocol and the expert feedback.

Protecting the Children of Divorce
567
PROTECTING THE CHILDREN OF DIVORCE
Researchers can also offer scientiﬁc advice to legal practi-
tioners grappling with complex issues while attempting to
ensure that children are protected and well cared for when
their parents divorce. Although the rates of divorce have
leveled recently, about half of the children in America are still
likely to experience the separation of their parents before
they reach adulthood, and most of them will experience
the loss of meaningful contact with their fathers. Common
sense and scientiﬁc research tell us that these experiences are
likely to have psychological costs.
There is substantial consensus that children are better off
psychologically and developmentally in two- rather than one-
parent families (see reviews by Amato, 2000; Hetherington &
Stanley-Hagan, 1997, 1999; Lamb, 1999; McLanahan &
Sandefur, 1994; McLanahan & Teitler, 1999). As these
reviewers have shown, children growing up in fatherless
families are disadvantaged relative to peers growing up in
two-parent families with respect to psychosocial adjustment,
behavior and achievement at school, educational attain-
ment, employment trajectories, income generation, involve-
ment in antisocial and even criminal behavior, and the
ability to establish and maintain intimate relationships. For
researchers, of course, it is important to determine why these
differences emerge.
The Development of Infant-Parent Attachments
The effects are best understood in the context of normative
developmental processes. Scholars have long recognized that
the attachments formed to parents are among the most critical
achievements of the ﬁrst year of life (Bowlby, 1969). Bowlby
(1969) proposed that there is a sensitive period during which
attachments are most easily formed, and early research on
adoptions lent support to this belief (Yarrow & Goodwin,
1973) even though scholars have come to believe that the
sensitive period is actually quite extensive (Rutter, 1972).
Attachment formation depends on reciprocal interactive
processes that foster the infants’ ability to discriminate their
parents from others and to develop emotional relationships
with their parents. These relationships or attachments are
consolidated by the middle of the ﬁrst year of life and are
characterized by the onset of separation anxiety and separa-
tion protest (Ainsworth, 1969). Infants who receive sensitive,
responsive care from familiar adults in the course of feeding,
holding, talking, playing, soothing, and being physically
close become securely attached to them (Ainsworth, Blehar,
Waters, & Wall, 1978; DeWolff & van IJzendoorn, 1997;
R. A. Thompson, 1998). Even adequate levels of responsive
parenting foster the formation of infant-parent attachments,
although some of these relationships may be insecure.
Children are nonetheless better off with insecure attachments
than without attachment relationships because these enduring
ties play essential formative roles in later social and emo-
tional functioning. Infant-parent attachments promote a sense
of security, the beginnings of self-conﬁdence, and the devel-
opment of trust in other human beings (Ainsworth et al.,
1978; Lamb, 1981).
Most infants form meaningful attachments to both of their
parents at roughly the same age (6 to 7 months; see Lamb,
1997a, in press a, for reviews) even though most fathers in our
culture spend less time with their infants than mothers do
(Pleck, 1997). This indicates that the amount of time spent
together is not the only factor affecting the development of
attachments, although some threshold level of interaction is
necessary. Rather, opportunities for regular interaction, even
when the bouts themselves are brief, appear sufﬁcient. Most
infants come to prefer the parents who take primary responsi-
bility for their care (typically their mothers), but this does not
mean that relationships with their fathers are unimportant.The
preference for primary caretakers appears to diminish with
age and by 18 months has often disappeared.After this age, in
fact, many infants seem to prefer their fathers, especially in
emotionally undemanding situations. There is no evidence
that the amount of time infants spend with their two parents
affects the security of either attachment relationship.
Although some studies of both infant-mother and infant-
father attachment fail to reveal signiﬁcant associations be-
tween the quality of parental behaviors and the security of
infant-parent attachment, meta-analyses reveal that in both
cases the quality of parental behavior is reliably associated
with the security of infant-parent attachment (DeWolff & Van
IJzendoorn, 1997; Van IJzendoorn & DeWolff, 1997). The
association between the quality of paternal behavior and the
quality of infant-father attachment appears to be weaker than
the parallel association between maternal behavior and the
security of infant-mother attachment, however. In neither
case does the quality of parental behavior explain more than
a small proportion of the variance in the security of attach-
ment, although the quality of maternal and paternal behavior
and of both mother- and father-child interaction remains the
most reliable correlate of individual differences in psycho-
logical, social, and cognitive adjustment in infancy, as well
as in later childhood (R. A. Thompson, 1998). Not surpris-
ingly, therefore, children in both two- and one-parent fami-
lies appear better adjusted when they enjoy warm positive re-
lationships with two actively involved parents (Amato &

568
Child Development and the Law
Gilbreth, 1999; Hetherington & Stanley-Hagan, 1999; Lamb,
1999b, 2002b; R. A. Thompson & Laible, 1999).
The empirical literature also shows that infants and tod-
dlers need regular interaction with their attachment ﬁgures in
order to foster and maintain the relationships (Lamb, 2002a;
Lamb, Bornstein, & Teti, 2002). Extended separations from
either parent are undesirable because they unduly stress
developing attachment relationships (Bowlby, 1973). In addi-
tion, infants need to interact with both parents in a variety of
contexts (feeding, playing, diapering, soothing, putting to
bed, etc.) to ensure that the relationships are consolidated and
strengthened. In the absence of such opportunities for regular
interaction across a broad range of contexts, infant-parent
relationships fail to develop and may instead weaken. For the
same reason, it is extremely difﬁcult to reestablish relation-
ships between infants or young children and their parents
when these have been disrupted. Instead, it is considerably
better to avoid such disruptions in the ﬁrst place.
In general, relationships with parents play a crucial role in
shaping children’s social, emotional, personal, and cognitive
development (Lamb, Hwang, Ketterlinus, & Fracasso, 1999),
and there is a substantial literature documenting the adverse
effects of disrupted parent-child relationships on children’s
development and adjustment. Children who are deprived of
meaningful relationships with one of their parents are at
greater risk psychosocially, even when they are able to main-
tain relationships with their other parents (Amato, 2000;
Hetherington & Stanley-Hagan, 1997, 1999; Lamb, 1999;
McLanahan & Sandefur, 1994; McLanahan & Teitler, 1999).
Stated differently, there is substantial evidence that children
are more likely to attain their psychological potential when
they are able to develop and maintain meaningful relation-
ships with both of their parents, whether or not the two par-
ents live together. If the parents lived together prior to the
separation and the relationships with both parents were of at
least adequate quality and supportiveness, the central chal-
lenge is to maintain both infant-parent attachments after
separation or divorce.
Maintaining Relationships With Parents 
Who Live Apart
Inﬂuenced by Freud (e.g., 1954) and others following in his
tradition (e.g., Spitz, 1965), developmental psychologists ini-
tially focused exclusively on mothers and infants, presuming
fathers to be quite peripheral and unnecessary to children’s
development and psychological adjustment. When parents
separated, therefore, neoanalysts emphasized the impor-
tance of continuity in the relationships between infants and
mothers, with children living with their mothers and having
limited contact with their fathers (Goldstein, Freud, & Solnit,
1973). When such recommendations were implemented,
infants or toddlers who were accustomed to seeing both par-
ents each day abruptly began seeing one parent, usually their
fathers, only once every week (or two weeks) for a few hours.
Such arrangements were often represented by professionals
as being “in the best interests” of the child due to the mis-
taken belief, based on Freud’s (1948) and Bowlby’s (1969)
speculation, that infants had only one signiﬁcant or primary
attachment. The resulting custody arrangements sacriﬁced
continuity in infant-father relationships, with long-term
socioemotional and economic consequences for children.
Very large research literatures now document the adverse
effects of severed father-child relationships as well as the
positive contributions that nonresidential fathers can make to
their children’s development (see Lamb, 1999, 2002b, for
reviews). It is thus preferable to seek arrangements that pre-
serve the continuity of relationships with both parents. The
quality of the relationships between both parents and their
children remains important in the majority of divorcing fam-
ilies, just as in the majority of two-parent families. Unfortu-
nately, however, most contemporary custody and visitation
decrees do not foster the maintenance of relationships be-
tween children and their noncustodial parents (e.g., Maccoby
& Mnookin, 1992; H. E. Peters, 1997). Furthermore, initially
restrictive awards are typically followed by declining levels
of paternal involvement over time, with increasing numbers
of children having less and less contact with their noncusto-
dial parents as time goes by (Furstenberg & Cherlin, 1991;
Furstenberg, Nord, Peterson, & Zill, 1983). To the extent that
contact is beneﬁcial, of course, such data suggest that many
children are placed at risk by the withdrawal or apparent
disappearance of their noncustodial fathers. Many fathers
drift away from their children after divorce, perhaps because
they are deprived of the opportunity to be parents rather than
visitors. Most noncustodial parents are awarded visitation,
and they function as visitors, taking their children to the zoo,
to movies, to dinner, and to other special activities in much
the same way that grandparents or uncles and aunts behave.
Children may well enjoy these excursions and may not regret
the respite from arguments about getting homework done,
getting their rooms cleaned up, behaving politely, going to
bed on time, and getting ready for school, but the exclusion
of fathers from these everyday tribulations is crucial, ulti-
mately transforming the fathers’ roles and making these men
increasingly irrelevant to their children’s lives, socialization,
and development. Many men describe this as a sufﬁciently
painful experience that they feel excluded from and pushed

Protecting the Children of Divorce
569
out of their children’s lives (Clark & McKenry, 1997).
Among the experts who drafted a recent consensus statement
on the effects of divorce and custody arrangements on chil-
dren’s welfare and adjustment, there was agreement that
parents not only need to spend adequate amounts of time with
their children, but also need to be involved in a diverse array
of activities with their children:
To maintain high-quality relationships with their children, par-
ents need to have sufﬁciently extensive and regular interactions
with them, but the amount of time involved is usually less
important than the quality of the interaction that it fosters. Time
distribution arrangements that ensure the involvement of both
parents in important aspects of their children’s everyday lives
and routines . . . are likely to keep nonresidential parents playing
psychologically important and central roles in the lives of their
children. (Lamb, Sternberg, & Thompson, 1997, p. 400)
The ideal situation is one in which children have opportu-
nities to interact with both parents every day or every other
day in a variety of functional contexts (feeding, play, disci-
pline, basic care, limit setting, putting to bed, etc.). The
evening and overnight periods (like extended days with nap-
times) with nonresidential parents are especially important
psychologically for infants, toddlers, and young children.
They provide opportunities for crucial social interactions and
nurturing activities, including bathing, soothing hurts and
anxieties, bedtime rituals, comforting in the middle of the
night, and the reassurance and security of snuggling in the
morning that one- to two-hour-long visits cannot provide.
These everyday activities promote and maintain trust and con-
ﬁdence in the parents while deepening and strengthening
child-parent attachments, and thus they need to be both en-
couraged when decisions about custody and access are made.
One implication is that even young children should spend
overnight periods with both parents, even though neoanalysts
have long counseled against this. As Warshak (2000) pointed
out, the prohibition of overnight “visitation” has been justiﬁed
by prejudices and beliefs rather than by any empirical evi-
dence. As noted here, however, parents who are not allowed
overnight periods with their children are excluded from an im-
portant array of activities, and the strength or depth of their
relationships suffer as a result. Again, empirical research on
normative child development can guide the design of policies
that promote better child adjustment, even in the face of the
stresses imposed by parental separation and divorce. To mini-
mize the deleterious impact of extended separations from
either parent, furthermore, attachment theory tells us there
should be more frequent transitions than would perhaps be de-
sirable with older children. To be responsive to the infant’s
psychological needs, in other words, the parenting schedules
adopted for children under age 2 or 3 years should actually
involve more transitions, rather than fewer, to ensure the
continuity of both relationships and to promote the child’s se-
curity and comfort during a potentially stressful period. From
the third year of life, the ability to tolerate longer separations
begins to increase, so most toddlers can manage two consecu-
tive overnights with each parent without stress. Schedules in-
volving separations spanning longer blocks of time, such as 5
to 7 days, should be avoided, as children this age may still be-
come upset when separated from either parent for too long.
Interestingly, psychologists have long recognized the
need to minimize the length of separations from attachment
ﬁgures when devising parenting plans, but they have typi-
cally focused only on separations from mothers, thereby
revealing their presumption that young children are not
meaningfully attached to their fathers. To the extent that
children are attached to both of their parents, however, sepa-
rations from both parents are stressful and at minimum gen-
erate psychic pain. As a result, parenting plans that allow
children to see their fathers “every Wednesday evening and
every other weekend” clearly fail to recognize the adverse
consequences of weeklong separations from noncustodial
parents. It is little wonder that such arrangements lead to at-
tenuation of the relationships between noncustodial parents
and their children.
The adverse long-term effects of divorce on children
appear to be associated with the disruption of one or both of
the child-parent relationships, typically the father-child rela-
tionship, and it is important to recognize that divorce is asso-
ciated with a number of other adverse circumstances as well.
First, the family’s ﬁnancial status is adversely affected by the
loss of a major source of income, usually the principal bread-
winner. Even in the best of circumstances, furthermore, it is
more expensive to maintain two households than one, and
the standards of living thus tend to decline. Second, because
mothers need to work more extensively outside the home
when their partners leave, adults are less likely to be present,
and the supervision and guidance of children becomes less
intensive and reliable in one- than in two-parent families.
Fourth, conﬂict between the parents commonly precedes or
emerges during the divorce process. Fifth, single parenthood
is associated with a variety of social and ﬁnancial stresses
with which individuals must cope, largely on their own.
Researchers have shown that all of these factors have
adverse effects on children’s adjustment, and it is thus not
surprising to ﬁnd that the co-occurrence of these factors at
the time of divorce has adverse consequences for children
(Amato, 2000; Hetherington & Stanley-Hagan, 1997, 1999;

570
Child Development and the Law
Lamb, 2002b; McLanahan & Teitler, 1999). Less clear are the
speciﬁc processes by which these effects are mediated, yet an
understanding of how divorce and custody arrangements af-
fect child development is absolutely crucial if we as a society
are to minimize or reverse the adverse effects of divorce on
children. Stepparenthood and remarriage further complicate
efforts to understand the effects of diverse postdivorce cus-
tody arrangements on child well-being because these shape
family dynamics and child adjustment in complex ways
(Hanson, McLanahan, & Thomson, 1996; Hetherington &
Henderson, 1997).
As Amato (1993, 2000; Amato & Gilbreth, 1997) showed
with particular clarity, the associations between father ab-
sence or postdivorce father-child contact and their contrast-
ing effects on child adjustment after divorce are much weaker
than one might expect. In part this may well reﬂect variation
in the exposure to the other pathogenic circumstances
described earlier, but it likely reﬂects the diverse types of
father-child relationships represented in the samples studied,
with abusive, incompetent, or disinterested fathers likely to
have much different effects than devoted, committed, and
sensitive fathers. In addition, high-quality contacts between
fathers and children are surely more beneﬁcial than encoun-
ters that lack breadth and intensity. Consistent with this,
Amato and Gilbreth (1997) reported following a meta-
analysis that children’s well-being was signiﬁcantly en-
hanced when their relationships with nonresidential fathers
were positive and when the nonresidential fathers engaged in
active parenting. As explained earlier, most children do not
simply need more contact, but rather contact of an extent and
type sufﬁcient to potentiate rich and multifaceted parent-
child relationships. Clearly, then, postdivorce arrangements
should speciﬁcally seek to maximize positive and meaningful
paternal involvement because regular but superﬁcial contact
appears unlikely to promote either the maintenance of rela-
tionships between noncustodial fathers and their children or
the children’s psychological adjustment and well-being.
Of course, several factors affect the development of chil-
dren when parents divorce, including the level of involve-
ment and quality of relationships between residential or
custodial parents and their children, the level of involvement
and quality of the relationships between nonresidential par-
ents and their children, the amount of conﬂict between the
two parents, the amount of conﬂict between the children
and their parents, and the socioeconomic circumstances in
which the children reside. These factors are interrelated,
however, and in the absence of intensive and reliable longitu-
dinal data, it is difﬁcult either to discern casual relationships
unambiguously or to establish the relative importance of dif-
ferent factors. In addition, these factors may operate together
in complex ways, such that, for example, contact with
noncustodial parents may not have the same positive effect
on children when there is substantial conﬂict between the
parents that it is does when levels of conﬂict are lower
(Johnston, Kline, & Tschann, 1989).
Because high conﬂict is associated with poorer child
outcomes following divorce (Johnston, 1994; Kelly, 2000;
Maccoby & Mnookin, 1992), it is preferable that interparental
conﬂict be avoided, but it is important to understand how high
conﬂict is conceptualized in the relevant research because the
ﬁndings are often misunderstood. Almost by deﬁnition, of
course, custody and access disputes involve conﬂict, but it is
clear that such conﬂict in and of itself is not necessarily harm-
ful. Conﬂict localized around the time of divorce is regrettable
but is unlikely to have adverse effects on the children, and its
occurrenceshouldnotbeusedtojustifyrestrictionsonthechil-
dren’s access to either of the parents. The high conﬂict found
harmful by researchers such as Johnston (1994) typically
involved repeated incidents of spousal violence and verbal
aggressionandcontinuedatintenselevelsforextendedperiods
of time, often in front of the children.As a result, Johnston em-
phasized the importance of continued relationships with both
parents except in those relatively uncommon circumstances in
which intense, protracted conﬂict occurs and persists.
Conclusions
If noncustodial parents are to maintain and strengthen rela-
tionships with their children, they need to participate in a
range of everyday activities that allow them to function as
parents rather than simply as regular, genial visitors. Unfortu-
nately, those constructing custody and visitation awards
do not always appear to understand what sort of interaction is
needed to consolidate and maintain parent-child relation-
ships; as a result, their decisions seldom ensure either sufﬁ-
cient amounts of time or adequate distributions of that time
(overnight and across both school and nonschool days) to pro-
mote healthy parent-child relationships. The statistics popu-
larized by Furstenberg and Cherlin (1991) may show fathers
drifting away largely because they no longer have the oppor-
tunities to function as fathers in relation to their children and
because decision makers have failed to recognize the knowl-
edge of children’s needs and developmental trajectories that
has been compiled over the last few decades of intensive
research. In this case, research on normative developmental
processes, supplemented by the results of descriptive studies
designed to elucidate the effects of divorce and various access
arrangements on child development, have combined to iden-
tify the deﬁciencies of common practices and to articulate
ways in which child adjustment could be promoted.

Conclusions and Recommendations for Research, Policy, and Practice
571
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS FOR
RESEARCH, POLICY, AND PRACTICE
When developmental psychology emerged as a distinct sub-
discipline about a century ago, it focused very heavily on
applied issues, with prominent scholars offering generous and
often deﬁnitive advice to parents, pediatricians, and teachers
(Clarke-Stewart, 1998; Sears, 1975). By the middle of the
century, however, many psychologists shifted their focus to
basic research questions, often implying in the process that the
concern with applied issues made developmental psychology
less credible as a science. Today, we see a new appreciation of
applied research, which may provide a forum for meaningful
contributions to children’s welfare and at the same time per-
mit insight into normative developmental processes that could
not be obtained by conducting basic research alone.
Both of the topics discussed in this chapter illustrate well
the multifaceted value of applied developmental science. In
one instance, basic research on the development of memory,
communication, and social perceptions allowed researchers
to devise and implement forensic interview processes that
greatly improved the informativeness of child witnesses.
Research on investigative interviews in turn fostered an en-
hanced understanding of basic developmental processes,
such as the richness and reliability of children’s memories,
and we can expect these lessons to affect many aspects of
research in the years ahead.
Developmental psychologists have learned a great deal
about memory development from experimental research, and
many of those ﬁndings (e.g., those concerning the superior
accuracy of information obtained using recall rather than
recognition prompts) clearly apply outside the experimental
laboratory. There are limitations to the validity and generaliz-
ability of experimental research, however. The memorable-
ness of experiences varies depending on the salience and
meaningfulness of those experiences: Experienced events are
not the same as nonsense syllables or tokens, and the motiva-
tion to remember or recall information or events clearly inﬂu-
ences the amount of information retrieved. Only through ﬁeld
studies of forensic interviews have researchers come to recog-
nize how much young children can recall when the importance
of complete reporting is stressed and when they are urged in
diverse ways to recount detailed episodic information, not
simply asked a single question (“Can you tell me what hap-
pened?”). Both laboratory analog and ﬁeld studies of these
processes have clearly advanced our understanding of memory
development more generally (Lamb & Thierry, in press).
Meanwhile, basic research on early social development
and descriptive research on the multifaceted correlates of
divorce have together yielded a clearer understanding of the
ways in which divorce affects children. This has in turn
helped us to understand better the multidetermined complex-
ity of socialization processes while offering legal practi-
tioners practical advice regarding ways in which they can
minimize the adverse effects of divorce on child develop-
ment. In particular, psychologists have been reminded how
complex the socialization process really is. In order to make
their studies interpretable and manageable, researchers have
tended to oversimplify, typically focusing on single issues,
such as early experiences or mother-child relationships. The
literature reviewed in this chapter makes clear not only that
children are shaped by relationships with both of their parents
(and others) but also that these are dynamic relationships that
must be nourished through continuing interactions in order to
ensure that the beneﬁts continue to ﬂow. Many other social
relationships, as well as many other social, emotional, and
cognitive experiences, shape development as well. Further-
more, children are not inoculated from psychological harm
by positive early experiences—their susceptibility to inﬂu-
ence and change continues throughout the life span. This fact
notwithstanding, the burgeoning literature on divorce and its
effects underscores the resilience of many children and the
fact that children can thrive in diverse contexts, some of
which would appear pathogenic.
The research on forensic interviews of alleged abuse victims
has clear implications for policy and practice. In particular, re-
searchers have shown that children are capable of providing
considerable amounts of forensically valuable information
about their experiences, provided that they are carefully inter-
viewed by investigators who explain the importance of the
interviews, empower the children to correct them or admit
ignorance, motivate the children to be as informative as possi-
ble, use age-appropriate terms, and help children to recall in-
formation rather than to select from among options generated
by the interviewers. Such practices have been incorporated into
the NICHD Investigative Interview Protocol, which increases
the quality of information provided by alleged victims when
implemented in the ﬁeld. Unfortunately, simply understanding
the components of an effective interview does not guaran-
tee that interviewers will continue to interview effectively.
Clearly, then, investment in intensive training and ongoing su-
pervision can permit practitioners to beneﬁt from the fruits of
many years of research. This, in turn, can permit the legal sys-
tem to intervene more judiciously on behalf of children.
Similarly, research on the effects of divorce, viewed in the
context of research on socialization, also has implications
for policy and practice. The most important fact we have
learned is that children beneﬁt from supportive relationships
with both of their parents, whether or not those parents live
together. We also know that relationships are dynamic and

572
Child Development and the Law
are thus dependent on continued opportunities for interac-
tion. In order to ensure that both adults become or remain
parents to their children, postdivorce parenting plans need to
encourage participation by both parents in as broad as possi-
ble an array of social contexts on a regular basis. Brief din-
ners and occasional weekend visits do not provide a broad
enough or extensive enough basis for such relationships to be
fostered, whereas weekday and weekend daytime and night-
time activities are important for children of all ages. In the
absence of sufﬁciently broad and extensive interactions,
many fathers drift out of their children’s lives. Their children
are thereby placed at risk psychologically and materially, be-
cause involved fathers are much more likely to contribute
ﬁnancially to the costs of raising their children.
REFERENCES
Ainsworth, M. D. S. (1969). Object relations, dependency and
attachment: A theoretical review of the infant-mother relation-
ship. Child Development, 40, 969–1025.
Ainsworth, M. D. S., Blehar, M., Waters, E., & Wall, S. (1978).
Patterns of attachment. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Amato, P. R. (1993). Children’s adjustment to divorce: Theories,
hypotheses, and empirical support. Journal of Marriage and the
Family, 55, 23–38.
Amato, P. R. (2000). The consequences of divorce for adults and
children. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 62, 1269–1287.
Amato, P. R., & Gilbreth, J. G. (1999). Nonresident fathers and chil-
dren’s well-being: A meta-analysis. Journal of Marriage and the
Family, 61, 557–573.
American Professional Society on the Abuse of Children. (1997).
Guidelines for psychosocial evaluation of suspected sexual
abuse in young children. Chicago, IL: Author. (Original work
published 1990)
Bourg, W., Broderick, R., Flagor, R., Kelly, D. M., Ervin, D. L., &
Butler, J. (1996). A child interviewer’s guidebook. Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage.
Bowlby, J. (1969). Attachment and loss: Vol. 1. Attachment.
New York: Basic Books.
Bowlby, J. (1973). Attachment and loss: Vol. 2. Separation: Anxiety
and anger. New York: Basic Books.
Brady, M. S., Poole, D. A., Warren, A. R., & Jones, H. R. (1999).
Young children’s responses to yes-or-no questions: Patterns and
problems. Applied Developmental Science, 3, 47–57.
Brainerd, C. J., & Reyna, V. F. (1996). Mere memory testing creates
false memories in children. Developmental Psychology, 32,
467–476.
Brennan, M., & Brennan, R. E. (1988). Strange language: Child
victims under cross-examination (3rd ed.). Wagga Wagga, NSW,
Australia: Riverina Literacy Centre.
Brown, R. (1973). A ﬁrst language. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Bruck, M., Ceci, S. J., Francouer, E., & Barr, R. (1995). “I hardly
cried when I got my shot!” Inﬂuencing children’s reports about a
visit to their pediatrician. Child Development, 66, 193–208.
Bruck, M., Ceci, S. J., Francouer, E., & Renick, A. (1995). Anatom-
ically detailed dolls do not facilitate preschoolers’ reports of a
pediatric examination involving genital touching. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Applied, 1, 95–109.
Bull, R. (1992). Obtaining evidence expertly: The reliability of
interviews with child witnesses. Expert Evidence, 1, 5–12.
Bull, R. (1995). Innovative techniques for the questioning of child
witnesses, especially those who are young and those with
learning disability. In M. S. Zaragoza, J. R. Graham, G. C. N.
Hall, R. Hirschman, & Y. S. Ben-Porath (Eds.), Memory and
testimony in the child witness (pp. 179–194). Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage.
Bull, R. (1996). Good practice for video-recorded interviews with
child witnesses for use in criminal proceedings. In G. Davies,
S. Lloyd-Bostock, M. McMarran, & C. Wilson (Eds.), Psy-
chology, law, and criminal justice: International develop-
ments in research and practice (pp. 100–117). Berlin: Walter
de Gruyter.
Carey, S. (1978). The child as word learner. In M. Halle, J. Bresnan,
& G. A. Miller (Eds.), Linguistic theory and psychological real-
ity (pp. 264–293). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Cassel, W. S, Roebers, C. E. M., & Bjorklund, D. F. (1996).
Developmental patterns of eyewitness responses to repeated and
increasingly suggestive questions. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology, 61, 116–133.
Ceci, S. J., & Bruck, M. (1993). Suggestibility of the child witness:
A historical review and synthesis. Psychological Bulletin, 113,
403–439.
Ceci, S. J., & Bruck, M. (1995). Jeopardy in the courtroom: A
scientiﬁc analysis of children’s testimony. Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association.
Ceci, S. J., & Huffman, M. L. C. (1997). How suggestible are
preschool children: Cognitive and social factors. Journal of the
American Academy of Child Psychiatry, 36, 948–958.
Ceci, S. J., Huffman, M. L. C., Smith, E., & Loftus, E. F. (1994).
Repeatedly thinking about a non-event: Source misattributions
among preschoolers. Consciousness and Cognition, 3, 388–407.
Ceci, S. J., Ross, D. F., & Toglia, M. P. (1987a). Suggestibility of
children’s memory: Psycholegal issues. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 116, 38–49.
Ceci, S. J., Ross, D. F., & Toglia, M. P. (1987b). Age differences in
suggestibility: Narrowing the uncertainties. In S. J. Ceci, M. P.
Toglia, & D. F. Ross (Eds.), Children’s eyewitness memory
(pp. 79–91). New York: Springer-Verlag.
Cederborg, A., Orbach, Y., Sternberg, K. J., & Lamb, M. E. (2000).
Investigative interviews of child witnesses in Sweden. Child
Abuse and Neglect, 24, 1355–1361.

References
573
Clark, K., & McKenry, P. C. (1997). Unheard voices: Divorced
fathers without custody. Unpublished manuscript, Department of
Family Relations and Human Development, Ohio State Univer-
sity, Columbus.
Clarke-Stewart, K. A. (1998). Historical shifts and underlying
themes in ideas about rearing young children in the United
States. Where have we been? Where are we going? Early Devel-
opment and Parenting, 7, 101–117.
Collins, W. A. (1970). Learning of media content: A developmental
study. Child Development, 41, 1113–1142.
Collins, W. A., & Wellman, H. (1982). Social scripts and develop-
ment patterns in comprehension of televised narratives. Commu-
nication Research, 9, 380–398.
Collins, W. A., Wellman, H., Keniston, A., & Westby, S. (1978).
Age-related aspects of comprehension and inference from a tele-
vised dramatic narrative. Child Development, 49, 389–399.
Craig, R. A, Sheibe, R., Raskin, D. C., Kircher, J., & Dodd, D.
(1999). Interviewer questions and content analysis of children’s
statements of sexual abuse. Applied Developmental Science, 3,
77–85.
Dale, P. S. (1976). Language development: Structure and function.
New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston.
Dale, P. S., Loftus, E. F., & Rathbun, L. (1978). The inﬂuence of the
form of the question on the eyewitness testimony of preschool
children. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 74, 269–277.
Davidson, D. (1991, April). Children’s recognition and recall mem-
ory for typical and atypical actions in script-based stories. Paper
presented to the meeting of the Society for Research in Child
Development, Seattle, WA.
Davies, G. M., Tarrant, A., & Flin, R. (1989). Close encounters of
the witness kind: Children’s memory for a simulated health
inspection. British Journal of Psychology, 80, 415–429.
Davies, G. M., Westcott, H. L., & Horan, N. (2000). The impact of
questioning style on the content of investigative interviews with
suspected child abuse victims. Psychology, Crime and Law, 6,
81–97.
Davies, G., & Wilson, C. (1997). Implementation of the Memoran-
dum: An overview. In H. Westcott & J. Jones (Eds.), Perspec-
tives on the Memorandum: Policy, practice and research in
investigative interviewing (pp. 1–12). Aldershot, UK: Arena.
Dent, H. R. (1982). The effects of interviewing strategies on the
results of interviews with child witnesses. In A. Trankell (Ed.),
Reconstructing the past: The role of psychologists in criminal
trials (pp. 279–297). Stockholm: Norstedt.
Dent, H. R. (1986). An experimental study of the effectiveness
of different techniques of questioning mentally-handicapped
child witnesses. British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 25,
13–17.
Dent, H. R., & Stephenson, G. M. (1979). An experimental study of
the effectiveness of different techniques of questioning child
witnesses. British Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 25,
13–17.
de Villiers, J., & de Villiers, P. (1999). Language development. In
M.H.Bornstein&M.E.Lamb(Eds.), Developmentalpsychology:
An advanced textbook (4th ed., pp. 313–376). Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
DeWolff, M. S., & van IJzendoorn, M. H. (1997). Sensitivity and
attachment: A meta-analysis on parental antecedents of infant
attachment. Child Development, 68, 571–591.
Dodd, D. H., & Bradshaw, J. M. (1980). Leading questions and
memory: Pragmatic constraints. Journal of Verbal Learning and
Verbal Behavior, 19, 695–704.
Fisher, R. P., & Geiselman, R. E. (1992). Memory-enhancing tech-
niques for investigative interviewing: The cognitive interview.
Springﬁeld, IL: Charles C. Thomas.
Flin, R., Boon, J., Knox, A., & Bull, R. (1992). The effect of a ﬁve
month delay on children’s and adults’ eyewitness memory.
British Journal of Psychology, 83, 323–336.
Freud, S. (1948). An outline of psychoanalysis. New York: W. W.
Norton.
Freud, S. (1954). Collected works, standard edition. London:
Hogarth Press.
Furstenberg, F. F., Jr., & Cherlin, A. J. (1991). Divided families:
What happens to children when parents part. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Furstenberg, F. F., Jr., Nord, C. W., Peterson, J. L., & Zill, N. (1983).
The life course of children of divorce. American Psychological
Review, 48, 656–668.
Garven, S., Wood, J. M., Malpass, R. S., & Shaw, J. S. (1998). More
than suggestion: The effect of interviewing techniques from the
McMartin Preschool case. Journal of Applied Psychology, 83,
347–359.
Goldstein, J., Freud, A., & Solnit, A. (1973). Beyond the best inter-
ests of the child. New York: Free Press.
Goodman, G. S., & Aman, C. (1990). Children’s use of anatomically
detailed dolls to recount an event. Child Development, 61,
1859–1871.
Goodman, G, S., Aman, C., & Hirschman, J. E. (1987). Child sexual
and physical abuse: Children’s testimony. In S. J. Ceci, M. P.
Toglia, & D. P. Ross (Eds.), Children’s eyewitness memory
(pp. 1–23). New York: Springer-Verlag.
Goodman, G. S., Bottoms, B., Schwartz-Kenney, B., & Rudy, L.
(1991). Children’s testimony about a stressful event: Improving
children’s reports. Journal of Narrative and Life History, 1,
69–99.
Goodman, G. S., Hirschman, J. E., Hepps, D., & Rudy, L. (1991).
Children’s memory for stressful events. Merrill-Palmer Quar-
terly, 37, 109–158.
Goodman, G. S., & Reed, R. S. (1986). Age differences in eyewit-
ness testimony. Law and Human Behavior, 10, 317–332.
Goodman, G. S., Taub, E. P., Jones, D. P. H., England, P., Port,
L. K., Rudy, L., & Prado, L. (1992). Testifying in criminal court.
Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development,
57(5, Serial No. 229).

574
Child Development and the Law
Goodman, G. S., Wilson, M. E., Hazan, C., & Reed, R. S. (1989,
April). Children’s testimony nearly four years after an event.
Paper presented to the Eastern Psychological Association,
Boston, MA.
Greenstock, J., & Pipe, M.-E. (1996). Interviewing children about
past events: The inﬂuence of peer support and misleading
questions. Child Abuse and Neglect, 20, 69–80.
Hanson, T. L., McLanahan, S. S., & Thomson, E. (1996). Double
jeopardy: Parental conﬂict and step-family outcomes for
children. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 58, 141–154.
Harner, L. (1975). Yesterday and tomorrow: Development of early
understanding of the terms. Developmental Psychology, 11,
864–865.
Hetherington, E. M., & Henderson, S. H. (1997). Fathers in
stepfamilies. In M. E. Lamb (Ed.), The role of the father in child
development (3rd ed., pp. 212–226, 369–373). New York:
Wiley.
Hetherington, E. M., & Stanley-Hagan, M. M. (1997). The effects of
divorce on fathers and their children. In M. E. Lamb (Ed.), The
role of the father in child development (3rd ed., pp. 191–211).
New York: Wiley.
Hetherington, E. M., & Stanley-Hagan, M. M. (1999). The adjust-
ment of children with divorced parents: A risk and resiliency per-
spective. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry and Allied
Disciplines, 40, 129–140.
Hewitt, S. K. (1999). Assessing allegations of sexual abuse in
preschool children: Understanding small voices.Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage.
Hutcheson, G. D., Baxter, J. S., Telfer, K., & Warden, D. (1995).
Child witness statement quality: Question type and errors of
omission. Law and Human Behavior, 19, 631–648.
Hughes, M., & Grieve, R. (1980). On asking children bizarre
questions. First Language, 1, 149–160.
Johnson, M. M., & Foley, M. A. (1984). Differentiating fact from
fantasy: The reliability of children’s memory. Journal of Social
Issues, 40, 33–50.
Johnston, J. R. (1994). High-conﬂict divorce. The Future of Chil-
dren, 4, 165–182.
Johnston, J. R., Kline, M., & Tschann, J. (1989). Ongoing postdi-
vorce conﬂict in families contesting custody: Effects on children
of joint custody and frequent access. American Journal of
Orthopsychiatry, 59, 576–592.
Jones, D. P. H. (1992). Interviewing the sexually abused child:
Investigation of suspected abuse (4th ed.). London: Gaskell.
Jones, L., & Finkelhor, D. (2001). The decline in child sexual abuse
cases. Juvenile Justice Bulletin (NCJ184741). Washington, DC:
U.S. Department of Justice.
Kelly, J. B. (2000). Children’s adjustment in conﬂicted marriage
and divorce: A decade review of research. Journal of the
America Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 39,
963–973.
King, M. A., & Yuille, J. C. (1987). Suggestibility and the child wit-
ness. In S. J. Ceci, D. F. Ross, & M. P. Toglia (Eds.), Children’s
eyewitness memory (pp. 24–35). New York: Springer-Verlag.
Kuehnle, K. (1996). Assessing allegations of child sexual abuse.
Sarasota, FL: Professional Resource Press.
Lamb, M. E. (1981). The development of social expectations in the
ﬁrst year of life. In M. E. Lamb & L. R. Sherrod (Eds.), Infant
social cognition: Empirical and theoretical considerations
(pp. 155–175). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Lamb, M. E. (1997a). The development of infant-father attach-
ments. In M. E. Lamb (Ed.), The role of the father in child
development (3rd ed., pp. 104–120, 332–342). New York:
Wiley.
Lamb, M. E. (Ed.). (1997b). The role of the father in child develop-
ment (3rd ed.). New York: Wiley.
Lamb, M. E. (1999). Non-custodial fathers and their impact on the
children of divorce. In R.A. Thompson & P. R.Amato (Eds.), The
post-divorce family: Research and policy issues (pp. 105–125).
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Lamb, M. E. (2002a). Infant-father attachments and their impact on
child development. In C. S. Tamis-LeMonda & N. Cabrera
(Eds.), Handbook of father involvement: Multidisciplinary per-
spectives (pp. 93–117). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Lamb, M. E. (2002b). Noncustodial fathers and their children.
In C. S. Tamis-LeMonda & N. Cabrera (Eds.), Handbook of
father involvement: Multidisciplinary perspectives (pp. 169–
184). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Lamb, M. E., Bornstein, M. H., & Teti, D. M. (2002). Development
in infancy (4th ed.). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Lamb, M. E., Hershkowitz, I., Sternberg, K. J., Boat, B., & Everson,
M. D. (1996). Investigative interviews of alleged sexual abuse
victims with and without anatomical dolls. Child Abuse and
Neglect, 20, 1251–1259.
Lamb, M. E., Hershkowitz, I., Sternberg, K. J., Esplin, P. W., Hovav,
M., Manor, T., & Yudilevitch, L. (1996). Effects of investigative
utterance types on Israeli children’s responses. International
Journal of Behavioral Development, 19, 627–637.
Lamb, M. E., Hwang, C. P., Ketterlinus, R., & Fracasso, M. P.
(1999). Parent-child relationships. In M. H. Bornstein & M. E.
Lamb (Eds.), Developmental psychology: An advanced textbook
(4th ed., pp. 411–450). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Lamb, M. E., Sternberg, K. J., & Esplin, P. W. (1994). Factors inﬂu-
encing the reliability and validity of statements made by young
victims of sexual maltreatment. Journal of Applied Developmen-
tal Psychology, 15, 255–280.
Lamb, M. E., Sternberg, K. J., & Esplin, P. W. (1995). Making
children into competent witnesses: Reactions to the amicus
brief In re Michaels. Psychology, Public Policy, and Law, 1,
438–449.
Lamb, M. E., Sternberg, K. J., & Esplin, P. W. (1998). Conducting
investigative interviews of alleged sexual abuse victims. Child
Abuse and Neglect, 22, 813–823.

References
575
Lamb, M. E., Sternberg, K. J., & Esplin, P. W. (2000). Effects of age
and delay on the amount of information provided by alleged sex
abuse victims in investigative interviews. Child Development,
71, 1586–1596.
Lamb, M. E., Sternberg, K. J., Orbach, Y., Esplin, P. W., & Mitchell,
S. (2002). Is ongoing feedback necessary to maintain the quality
of investigative interviews with allegedly abused children?
Applied Developmental Science, 6, 35–41.
Lamb, M. E., Sternberg, K. J., Orbach, Y., Esplin, P. W., Stewart, H.,
& Mitchell, S. (2002, March 9). Age differences in young chil-
dren’s responses to open-ended invitations in the course of foren-
sic interviews. Paper presented to the American Psychology—
Law Society Biennial Conference, Austin, TX.
Lamb, M. E., Sternberg, K. J., Orbach, Y., Hershkowitz, I., &
Esplin, P. W. (1999). Forensic interviews of children. In A.
Memon & R. Bull (Eds.), Handbook of the psychology of inter-
viewing (pp. 253–277). New York: Wiley.
Lamb, M. E., Sternberg, K. J., Orbach, Y., Hershkowitz, I.,
Horowitz, D., & Esplin, P. W. (2002). The effects of intensive
training and ongoing supervision on the quality of investigative
interviews with alleged sex abuse victims. Applied Developmen-
tal Science, 6, 114–125.
Lamb, M. E., Sternberg, K. J., & Thompson, R. A. (1997). The
effects of divorce and custody arrangements on children’s
behavior, development, and adjustment. Family and Concilia-
tion Courts Review, 35, 393–404.
Lamb, M. E., & Thierry, K. L. (in press). Understanding children’s
testimony regarding their alleged abuse: Contributions of ﬁeld
and laboratory analog research. In D. M. Teti (Ed.), Handbook of
research methods in developmental psychology. Malden, MA:
Blackwell.
Leichtman, M. D., & Ceci, S. J. (1995). The effects of stereotypes
and suggestions on preschoolers’ reports. Developmental Psy-
chology, 31, 568–578.
Levesque, R. A. (2001). Adolescents, sex and the law. Washington,
DC: American Psychological Association.
Maccoby, E. E., & Mnookin, R. H. (1992). Dividing the child:
Social and legal dilemmas of custody. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Marin, B. V., Holmes, D. L., Guth, M., & Kovac, P. (1979). The
potential of children as eyewitnesses. Law and Human Behavior,
3, 295–305.
Masten, A. S., & Garmezy, N. (1985). Risk, vulnerability, and
protective factors in developmental psychology. Advances in
Clinical Child Psychology, 8, 1–52.
McLanahan, S. S., & Sandefur, G. (1994). Growing up with a single
parent: What hurts, what helps. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
McLanahan, S. S., & Teitler, J. (1999). The consequences of father
absence. In M. E. Lamb (Ed.), Parenting and child develop-
ment in “nontraditional” families (pp. 83–102). Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Memon, A., & Bull, R. (Eds.). (1999). Handbook of the psychology
of interviewing. New York: Wiley.
Memorandum of Good Practice. (1992). London: Her Majesty’s
Stationery Ofﬁce.
Milne, R., & Bull, R. (1999). Investigative interviewing: Psychol-
ogy and practice. Chichester, UK: Wiley.
Moston, S., & Engelberg, T. (1992). The effects of social support on
children’s eyewitness testimony. Applied Cognitive Psychology,
6, 61–75.
Myles-Worsley, M., Cromer, C., & Dodd, D. (1986). Children’s
preschool script reconstruction: Reliance on general knowledge
as memory fades. Developmental Psychology, 22, 2–30.
Nelson, K. (1986). Event knowledge: A functional approach to
cognitive development. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Nelson, K., & Gruendel, J. (1981). Generalized event representa-
tions: Basic building blocks of cognitive development. In M. E.
Lamb & A. L. Brown (Eds.), Advances in development psychol-
ogy (Vol. 1, pp. 131–158). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Newcombe, P. A., & Siegal, M. (1996). Where to look ﬁrst for
suggestibility in your children. Cognition, 59, 337–356.
Newcombe, P. A., & Siegal, M. (1997). Explicitly questioning the
nature of suggestibility in preschoolers’ memory and retention.
Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 185–203.
Oates, K., & Shrimpton, S. (1991). Children’s memories for stressful
and non-stressful events. Medical Science and the Law, 31, 4–10.
Ochsner, J. E., & Zaragoza, M. S. (1988, March). The accuracy and
suggestibility of children’s memory of neutral and criminal
eyewitness events. Paper presented to the American Psychology
and Law Association, Miami, FL.
Orbach, Y., Hershkowitz, I., Lamb, M. E., Sternberg, K. J., Esplin,
P. W., & Horowitz, D. (2000). Assessing the value of structured
protocols for forensic interviews of alleged child abuse victims.
Child Abuse and Neglect, 24, 733–752.
Ornstein, P. A., Gordon, B. N., & Larus, D. M. (1992a). Children’s
memory for a personally experienced event: Implications for
testimony. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 6, 49–60.
Ornstein, P. A., Larus, D. M., & Clubb, P. A. (1992b). Understand-
ing children’s testimony: Implications of the research on chil-
dren’s memory. In R. Vasta (Ed.), Annals of child development
(Vol. 8, pp. 147–176). London: Jessica Kingsley.
Ornstein, P. A., Staneck, C. H., Agosto, C. D., & Baker-Ward, L.
(2001, April). Differentiating between what happened and what
might have happened: The impact of knowledge and expecta-
tions on children’s memory. Paper presented to the Society for
Research in Child Development, Minneapolis, MN.
Perry, N. W., & Wrightsman, L. S. (1991). The child witness: Legal
issues and dilemmas. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Peters, D. P. (1987). The impact of naturally occurring stress on chil-
dren’s memory. In S. J. Ceci, M. P. Toglia, & D. F. Ross (Eds.),
Children’s eyewitness testimony (pp. 122–141). New York:
Springer-Verlag.

576
Child Development and the Law
Peters, D. P. (1991). The inﬂuence of stress and arousal on the child
witness. In J. Doris (Ed.), The suggestibility of children’s recol-
lections (pp. 60–76). Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association.
Peters, D. P., & Hagan, S. (1989, April). Stress and arousal effects
on the child’s eyewitness testimony. Paper presented to the Soci-
ety for Research in Child Development, Kansas City, MO.
Peters, H. E. (1997). Child custody and monetary transfers in
divorce negotiations: Reduced form and simulation results.
Unpublished manuscript, Department of Economics, Cornell
University, Ithaca, NY.
Peterson, C., & Bell, M. (1996). Children’s memory for traumatic
injury. Child Development, 67, 3045–3070.
Pleck, J. H. (1997). Paternal involvement: Levels, sources, and con-
sequences. In M. E. Lamb (Ed.), The role of the father in child
development (3rd ed., pp. 66–103). New York: Wiley.
Poole, D. A., & Lamb, M. E. (1998). Investigative interviews of
children: A guide for helping professionals. Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association.
Poole, D. A., & Lindsay, D. S. (1995). Interviewing preschoolers:
Effects of nonsuggestive techniques, parental coaching, and
leading questions on reports of nonexperienced events. Journal
of Experimental Child Psychology, 60, 129–154.
Poole, D. A., & Lindsay, D. S. (1996, June). Effects of parental
suggestions, interviewing techniques, and age on young chil-
dren’s event reports. Paper presented to the NATO Advanced
Study Institute on Recollections of Trauma, Port de Bourgenay,
France.
Poole, D. A., & Lindsay, D. S. (1997, April). Misinformation from
parents and children’s source monitoring: Implications for testi-
mony. Paper presented to the Society for Research in Child
Development, Washington, DC.
Poole, D. A., & Lindsay, D. S. (1998). Assessing the accuracy of
young children’s reports: Lessons from the investigation of child
sexual abuse. Applied and Preventive Psychology, 7, 1–26.
Poole, D. A., & White, L. T. (1993). Two years later: Effects of ques-
tion repetition and retention interval on the eyewitness testimony
of children and adults. Developmental Psychology, 29, 844–853.
Raskin D., & Esplin, P. W. (1991). Statement validity assessments:
Interview procedures and content analyses of children’s state-
ments of sexual abuse. Behavioral Assessment, 13, 265–291.
Raskin, D., & Yuille, J. (1989). Problems in evaluating interviews
of children in sexual abuse cases. In S. J. Ceci, M. P. Toglia, &
D. F. Ross (Eds.), Adults’ perceptions of children’s testimony
(pp. 184–207). New York: Springer-Verlag.
Reich, P. A. (1986). Language development. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall.
Roberts, K. P., & Lamb, M. E. (1999). Children’s responses when
interviewers distort details during investigative interviews.
Legal and Criminological Psychology, 4, 23–31.
Robinson, J., & Briggs, P. (1997). Age trends and eye-witness
suggestibility and compliance. Psychology Crime and Law, 3,
187–202.
Rolf, J., Masten, A. S., Cicchetti, D., Nuerchterlein, D. H., &
Weintraub, S. (Eds.). (1990). Risk and protective factors in the
development of psychopathology. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Rutter, M. (1972). Maternal deprivation reassessed. London:
Penguin.
Sattler, J. (1998). Clinical and forensic interviewing of children and
families. San Diego, CA: Author.
Saywitz, K. J. (1988). The credibility of the child witness. Family
Advocate, 10, 38.
Saywitz, K. J., & Snyder, L. (1993). Improving children’s testimony
with preparation. In G. S. Goodman & B. L. Bottoms (Eds.),
Child victims, child witnesses: Understanding and improving
testimony (pp. 117–146). New York: Guilford Press.
Saywitz, K. J., Snyder, L., & Nathanson, R. (1999). Facilitating
the communicative competence of the child witness. Applied
Developmental Science, 3, 58–68.
Schwartz, R. (2001). Youth and the criminal justice system.
Washington, DC: American Bar Association.
Schneider, W., & Bjorklund, D. F. (1998). Memory. In W. Damon,
D. Kuhn, & R. S. Siegler (Eds.), Handbook of child psychology:
Vol. 2. Cognition, perception, and language (5th ed., pp. 467–
521). New York: Wiley.
Sears, R. R. (1975). Your ancients revisited: A history of child
development. In E. M. Hetherington (Ed.), Review of child
development research (Vol. 5, pp. 7–73). Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Sedlak, A. J., & Broadhurst, D. D. (1996). Third national incidence
study of child abuse and neglect: Final report. Washington, DC:
U.S. Department of Health and Human Resources, Administra-
tion for Children and Families.
Shank, R., & Abelson, R. (1977). Scripts, plans, goals, and under-
standing. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Spitz, R. A. (1965). The ﬁrst year of life. New York: International
Universities Press.
Sternberg, K. J., Lamb, M. E., Davies, G. M., & Westcott, H. L.
(2001). The Memorandum of Good Practice: Theory versus
application. Child Abuse and Neglect, 25, 669–681.
Sternberg, K. J., Lamb, M. E., Esplin, P. W., & Baradaran, L. B.
(1999). Using a scripted protocol in investigative interviews: A
pilot study. Applied Developmental Science, 3, 70–76.
Sternberg, K. J., Lamb, M. E., Esplin, P. W., Orbach, Y., &
Hershkowitz, I. (2002). Using a structured protocol to improve
the quality of investigative interviews. In M. L. Eisen, J. A.
Quas, & G. S. Goodman (Eds.), Memory and suggestibility in
the forensic interview (pp. 409–436). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Sternberg, K. J., Lamb, M. E., Hershkowitz, I., Esplin, P. W.,
Redlich, A., & Sunshine, N. (1996). The relation between
investigative utterance types and the informativeness of child
witnesses. Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology, 17,
439–451.
Sternberg, K. J., Lamb, M. E., Hershkowitz, I., Yudilevitch, L.,
Orbach, Y., Esplin, P. W., & Hovav, M. (1997). Effects of

References
577
introductory style on children’s ability to describe experiences of
sexual abuse. Child Abuse and Neglect, 21, 1133–1146.
Sternberg, K. J., Lamb, M. E., Orbach, Y., Esplin, P. W., & Mitchell,
S. (2001). Use of a structured investigative protocol enhances
young children’s responses to free recall prompts in the course
of forensic interviews. Journal of Applied Psychology, 86,
997–1005.
Steward, M. S. (1993). Understanding children’s memories of
medical procedures: “He didn’t touch me and it didn’t hurt!”
In C. A. Nelson (Eds.), Memory and affect in development
(pp. 171–225). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Steward, M. S., & Steward, D. S. (with L. Farquhar, J. E. B. Myers,
M. Reinhart, J. Welker, N. Joye, J. Driskill, & J. Morgan).
(1996). Interviewing young children about body touch and han-
dling. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Devel-
opment, 61(4–5, Serial No. 248).
Toglia, M. P., Ceci, S. J., & Ross, D. F. (1989, April). Prestige vs.
source monitoring in children’s suggestibility. Paper presented to
the Society for Research in Child Development, Kansas City,
MO.
Thompson, R. A. (1998). Early sociopersonality development. In
W. Damon & N. Eisenberg (Eds.), Handbook of child develop-
ment: Vol. 3. Social, emotional, and personality development
(5th ed., pp. 25–104). New York: Wiley. 
Thompson, R. A., & Laible, D. J. (1999). Noncustodial parents. In
M. E. Lamb (Ed.), Parenting and child development in “nontra-
ditional” families (pp. 103–123). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Thompson, W. C., Clarke-Stewart, K. A., & Lepore, S. J. (1997).
What did the janitor do? Suggestive interviewing and the ac-
curacy of children’s accounts. Law and Human Behavior, 21,
405–426.
Vandermaas, M. (1991, April). Does anxiety affect children’s event
reports? Paper presented to the Society for Research in Child
Development, Seattle, WA.
Van IJzendoorn, M. H., & DeWolff, M. S. (1997). In search of the
absent father—Meta-analyses of infant-father attachment: A
rejoinder to our discussants. Child Development, 68, 604–609.
Walker, A. G. (1999). Handbook on questioning children: A linguis-
tic perspective (2nd ed.). Washington, DC: ABA Center on
Children and the Law.
Walker, N., & Hunt, J. S. (1998). Interviewing child victim-
witnesses: How you ask is what you get. In C. P. Thompson,
D. J. Herrman, J. D. Read, D. Bruce, D. Payne, & M. P. Toglia
(Eds.), Eyewitness memory: Theoretical and applied perspec-
tives (pp. 55–87). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Warren, A. R., & Lane, P. (1995). Effects of timing and type of
questioning on eyewitness accuracy and suggestibility. In M. S.
Zaragoza, J. R. Graham, G. C. N. Hall, R. Hirschman, & Y. S.
Ben-Porath (Eds.), Memory and testimony in the child witness
(pp. 44–60). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Warren, A. R., & McCloskey, L. A. (1997). Language in social
contexts. In S. B. Gleason (Ed.), The development of language
(4th ed., pp. 210–258). New York: Allyn & Bacon.
Warren, A. R., Woodall, C. E., Hunt, J. S., & Perry, N. W. (1996).
“It sounds good in theory, but . . .”: Do investigative inter-
viewers follow guidelines based on memory research? Child
Maltreatment, 1, 231–245.
Warren, A. R., Woodall, C. E., Thomas, M., Nunno, M., Keeney,
J. M., Larson, S. M., & Stadfeld, J. A. (1999). Assessing the
effectiveness of a training program for interviewing child
witnesses. Applied Developmental Science, 3, 128–135.
Warshak, R. A. (2000). Blanket restrictions: Overnight contact
between parents and young children. Family and Conciliation
Courts Review, 38, 422–445.
Westcott, H. L., Davies, G. M., & Bull, R. (Eds.). (2002).
Children’s testimony: Psychological research and forensic prac-
tice. Chichester, UK: Wiley.
Yarrow, L. J., & Goodwin, M. (1973). The immediate impact of
separation: Reactions of infants to a change in mother ﬁgures. In
L. J. Stone, H. T. Smith, & L. B. Murphy (Eds.), The competent
infant (pp. 1032–1040). New York: Basic Books.


CHAPTER 24
Health and Human Development
CATHLEEN M. CONNELL AND MARY R. JANEVIC
579
Biological Development
580
Cognitive Development
580
Social Development
581
Structural Inﬂuences on Development and Health
581
Physical Activity Across the Life Span
581
Diabetes Across the Life Span
582
INFANCY AND CHILDHOOD
582
Biological Development and the Health
Behavior of Children
582
Cognitive Development and the Health Behavior
of Children
583
Social Development and the Health
Behavior of Children
584
ADOLESCENCE
585
Biological Development and the Health
Behavior of Adolescents
586
Cognitive Development and the Health Behavior
of Adolescents
586
Social Development and the Health Behavior
of Adolescents
588
MIDLIFE
589
Biological Development and the Health Behavior
of Adults in Midlife
589
Cognitive Development and the Health Behavior
of Adults in Midlife
590
Social Development and the Health Behavior
of Adults in Midlife
591
OLDER ADULTHOOD
592
Biological Development and the Health Behavior
of Older Adults
592
Cognitive Development and the Health Behavior
of Older Adults
593
Social Development and the Health Behavior
of Older Adults
594
DIRECTIONS FOR FUTURE RESEARCH
595
REFERENCES
596
Examining health and health-related factors within a life-
span developmental framework is important for several rea-
sons. First, health and development share many important
characteristics—both are lifelong processes that involve
gains (growth) and losses (decline), are multidimensional,
and change as a function of adaptation to changing biologi-
cal, psychological, social, environmental, and cultural condi-
tions (Baltes, Staudinger, & Lindenberger, 1999; Whitman,
1999). Second, developmental processes inﬂuence health and
illness behavior, the experience of illness, illness prevention
and health promotion, and the assessment and treatment of
disease (Penny, Bennett, & Herbert, 1994). An understanding
of how these processes operate to affect health outcomes can
help to optimize the effectiveness of interventions and deter-
mine when they are most appropriately offered (Peterson,
1996; Roberts, Maddux, & Wright, 1984). Third, a life-span
developmental framework can aid in the understanding of
health by identifying unique patterns of risk and protective
factors that vary predictably by developmental stage (Baltes
et al., 1999; Whitman, 1999). Finally, attention to develop-
mental factors fosters an appreciation of how health-related
experiences at earlier stages can affect health and health be-
haviors at later stages of the life-span. To date, little attention
has been given to the ways in which development as a dy-
namic force shapes health and health behaviors (Peterson,
1996), although there are several notable exceptions (e.g.,
Schulenberg, Maggs, & Hurrelmann, 1997a). In fact, most
models of health and illness ignore developmental factors,
limiting their external validity beyond the age group for
which they were developed (Whitman, 1999).
The goals of this chapter are (a) to elaborate on the utility of
a life-span developmental approach to health; and (b) to discuss
how biological, cognitive, and social development inﬂuences
health and health behavior in each of ﬁve life stages—infancy,
childhood, adolescence, midlife, and older adulthood. The fact
that extrinsic factors such as social class and gender interact
with these processes should be kept in mind throughout this
discussion. Findings from empirical literature on physical

580
Health and Human Development
activity and diabetes self-care are used to illustrate the role of
these factors in each of the selected life stages.
Biological Development
The ways in which biological systems change with develop-
ment inﬂuence an individual’s risk of morbidity and mortality
across the life span (Kolberg, 1999). Kolberg (1999) classiﬁes
diseases and conditions according to their incidence across the
life span: diseases of childhood, which decrease with age; dis-
eases of aging, which increase with age; diseases of adult-
hood; diseases that are most frequent in infants and the elderly;
and diseases that affect all age groups consistently.As an indi-
vidual moves from infancy to older adulthood, biological sys-
tems change in ways that can either protect health or increase
risk for morbidity and mortality (Kolberg, 1999). Biological
development follows a sequential pattern: physical (and cog-
nitive) abilities resemble an inverted U shape such that they
are at their lowest levels of efﬁcacy in very early and very late
life (Schulz & Heckhausen, 1996); correspondingly, individu-
als are at greatest risk for medical problems in very early life
and older adulthood (Kolberg, 1999). Some diseases (e.g.,
coronary artery disease or lung cancer) are most associated
with older adulthood because of cumulative insult, or “wear
and tear” (Kolberg, 1999), highlighting the need for consider-
ing the impact of risk factors and stressors across the life
course.
Characterizing health status by age group, however, is a
complex process (Whitman, 1999) because it depends to a
great extent on external factors—for example, the health of
midlife adults with low socioeconomic status (SES) tends to
be inferior to that of high-SES older adults (House et al.,
1990). In addition to the direct effects of age-related changes
in biological systems on health status, the likelihood of ill-
ness at any given stage may also be an important determinant
of health behaviors. For example, in late midlife and older
adulthood, a greater propensity toward chronic illness may
make the likely consequences of risky health behaviors seem
particularly salient. Among adolescents and young adults,
current good health may increase the likelihood of engaging
in health-risk behaviors because the perceived threat of fu-
ture illnesses is relatively remote.
Cognitive Development
Cognitive abilities such as intellectual functioning and feel-
ings of control also vary over the course of the life span and
have implications for making decisions about health-related
behavior.At the beginning of the life span, increases in cogni-
tive sophistication enable children to become better able to un-
derstand concepts of health and illness (Bibace & Walsh,
1980). At the end of the life span, decrements in mechanical
(or ﬂuid) intelligence and—to a lesser extent—pragmatic (or
crystallized) intelligence have been found among the old
and very old (Baltes, Lindenberger, & Staudinger, 1998;
Lindenberger & Baltes, 1997); however, some older adults
also exhibit high levels of wisdom, or knowledge about
the meaning and conduct of life (Baltes et al., 1998).
Heckhausen and Schulz (1995) describe shifts in the use of
control strategies—either primary control (i.e., over the exter-
nal world) or secondary control (i.e., cognitive or internally
directed processes) in accordance with differing developmen-
tal needs over the life span. All such changes in cognitive
processes may affect both the nature of health-related deci-
sions and the extent to which individuals are able to make au-
tonomous choices over the life course regarding their own
health behavior.
The implications of developmental differences in cogni-
tive factors, however, are rarely considered in theories that
address health decision making. Theories that predict and
explain health decision making in adults, for example, might
not be appropriate for children and adolescents (Sturges &
Rogers, 1996). Prohaska and Clark (1997) note that the
Health Belief Model (HBM; Janz & Becker, 1984), one of the
most widely used theories to predict health-related behavior,
may not adequately predict behavior across age groups.
This model assumes that perceived health threat is a strong
motivator for engaging in preventive health behaviors; yet
adolescents may be more motivated by social pressures than
by personal health beliefs (Prohaska & Clark, 1997) or may
use health behaviors as a way of accomplishing developmen-
tal tasks (Schulenberg, Maggs, Steinman, & Zucker, 2001).
Developmental stages may also inﬂuence the relative impor-
tance of HBM components in predicting health outcomes
(i.e., perceived susceptibility to and severity of a health threat
and perceived beneﬁts and barriers of taking action to reduce
the threat) in midlife (Merluzzi & Nairn, 1999).
The components of Social Cognitive Theory (Bandura,
1986, 2001; N. M. Clark & Zimmerman, 1990), another
widely used model to explain health behavior change, can
also be affected by age and developmental stage. Self-
efﬁcacy—the belief of an individual that he or she can suc-
cessfully perform a certain behavior and one of the central
constructs of this theory—may be affected either positively
(through experience) or negatively (by repeated failures) by
age. Another SCT construct, outcome expectancy—that is,
the belief that a behavior will lead to a positive result—may
also vary with age, in part because health behaviors will not
bring about the same positive results equally across the life
span (Prohaska & Clark, 1997).

Health and Human Development
581
Social Development
Several theories of health behavior include social factors. For
example, the Theory of Planned Behavior (Ajzen, 1991;
Montano, Kasprzyk, & Taplin, 1997) includes a component
that assesses how an individual perceives important others
to think about health and health behavior choices. SCT
(Bandura, 1986, 2001) includes the role of others as behav-
ioral models affecting health decision making. These social
inﬂuences, however, vary by developmental period (Pro-
haska & Clark, 1997). For example, peer models may be par-
ticularly inﬂuential during adolescence. In addition, because
the primary sources (e.g., friends, parents, spouses) of infor-
mational, tangible, and emotional social support are likely to
vary predictably throughout the life span (Schulz & Rau,
1985), the way this support shapes health decisions is also
likely to vary over the life course. Kahn and Antonucci
(1980), for example, propose that an individual’s social net-
work is a dynamic convoy that changes in structure and com-
position throughout the life course in response to changing
situational factors of the individual. These changes are likely
to affect the amount and type of inﬂuence that network mem-
bers have on an individual’s health behaviors.
Structural Inﬂuences on Development and Health
Developmental inﬂuences on health operate concurrently
with external factors that affect health and health behaviors
both directly and indirectly. Murphy and Bennett (1994) sug-
gest that health behavior may be best understood as “an
interaction between individual features, the micro- and
macro-social environment, and different stages in the life
cycle.” SES is a prominent example of a structural variable
that inﬂuences development, health, health behavior, and
their interaction. Across the life span, health risks and con-
ditions can be traced directly to poverty (e.g., violence in
adolescence and young adulthood; mental health problems
and lack of insurance in adulthood)—demonstrating that the
health proﬁles of the poor across the life span are marked by
risk and prevalence of disease greater at every point than
those of their economically better-off counterparts (Bolig,
Borkowski, & Brandenberger, 1999). Moreover, malnutrition
early in life can affect the cognitive, behavioral, and social
development of children, and prolonged exposure to poverty
can affect the beliefs, attitudes, and cognitions of adolescents
(Bolig et al., 1999). It should also be noted that economic
poverty, particularly when combined with discrimination or
racism from the society at large, may be associated with the
development and maintenance of resources such as social
networks and religiosity (McAdoo, 1995) that ultimately
affect developmental trajectories, health, and health behavior
choices.
SES may also affect the timing of health-related life tran-
sitions (e.g., earlier marriage and widowhood among those of
low SES). This is exempliﬁed in the weathering hypothesis
(Geronimus, 1996), which explains high rates of teenage
childbearing among the African American population as an
adaptive response to impoverished circumstances that foster
cumulative health risks in early adulthood (i.e., a weathering
effect) that contribute to infant mortality. SES also deter-
mines the point in the life span at which the onset of chronic
illness is likely to occur; this onset is more likely to take place
in midlife for individuals of low SES than it is for their high-
SES counterparts (House et al., 1990). 
Race and ethnicity, due to their association with SES, dis-
crimination, cultural practices, and health beliefs, are also
important structural factors that inﬂuence the impact of
development on health and health behaviors. For example, the
relative importance of family and peers during adolescence in
shaping health-related decisions may vary with differences
in cultural beliefs such as familism. Race may also affect the
timing of developmental stages in ways that have implica-
tions for health and health behaviors; for example, poorer
health among midlife and older African American males is
associated with earlier exit from the labor force relative to
Whites (Bound, Schoenbaum, & Waidman, 1996). Race also
inﬂuences the length of the life span itself—for example,
White males and females have a longer life expectancy than
their African American counterparts do (R. N. Anderson,
1999)—which may in turn have an impact on health attitudes
and practices throughout the life course.
The remaining sections of this chapter are devoted to a
stage-speciﬁc look at developmental and life span inﬂuences
on health behavior. A rationale for selecting physical activity
and diabetes self-management behaviors to illustrate how
these inﬂuences operate at each stage is provided ﬁrst.
Physical Activity Across the Life Span
Physical activity is an “independent risk factor or potential
treatment for most of the major causes of morbidity and mor-
tality in western societies” and has been associated with pos-
itive physical and mental health across the life span (Singh,
2000, p. 6). For example, physical activity is associated with
lower blood pressure, reduced risk of heart disease and can-
cer, improved cognitive functioning and mood, maintenance
of functional independence, higher self-esteem, lower levels
of stress, and improved well-being (DiLorenzo, Stucky-
Ropp, Vander Wal, & Gotham, 1998; National Center for
Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Centers

582
Health and Human Development
for Disease Control and Prevention, 1997). Physical activity
is also an important component of self-management regimens
for many prevalent chronic illnesses, including diabetes,
heart disease, hypertension, arthritis, and stroke (Singh,
2000).
In addition to the general beneﬁts of physical activity,
there are unique reasons for exploring the determinants of
physical activity during each of the developmental periods
highlighted in this chapter. For example, several risk factors
for chronic diseases (e.g., hypertension) are associated with
health practices, such as sedentary behavior, that originate
during childhood (DiLorenzo et al., 1998). In addition, life-
long physical activity patterns may be established early. For
example, adolescents who engage in regular physical activity
are more likely to be active in adulthood than are sedentary
adolescents (Telama, Yang, Laakso, & Viikari, 1997). Among
midlife and older adults, regular physical activity is consid-
ered an integral part of preventive gerontology (Hazzard,
1995). Examining the developmental factors that inﬂuence
physical activity will assist in the identiﬁcation of age- and
stage-appropriate interventions to foster regular exercise
habits across the life span.
Diabetes Across the Life Span
Diabetes is one of the most prevalent chronic health condi-
tions that is diagnosed across the life span. More than 15 mil-
lion Americans have been diagnosed with this condition, and
it is estimated that 5.4 million remain undiagnosed (Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention, 1998). In general, chil-
dren and adolescents are affected by Type 1 diabetes, also
known as insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM). The
vast majority of cases of diabetes diagnosed in adulthood are
referred to as Type 2 or non–insulin-dependent diabetes
(NIDDM). The prevalence of this condition increases with
age, as does the prevalence of diabetes-related complications
(Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 1998).
Diabetes serves as a useful model for self-care, or self-
management behavior, because it requires the coordina-
tion of several behaviors on a daily basis, including diet,
exercise, insulin administration, and blood glucose testing
(Delamater, 1993). Adherence to a complex behavioral regi-
men is important for maintaining optimal blood glucose
levels and decreasing the risk of complications, including
heart disease, stroke, and kidney disease (The Diabetes
Control and Complications Trial Research Group, 1993).
Normal developmental processes among children and
adolescents may both affect and be affected by diabetes self-
care behaviors. For example, diabetes self-management be-
haviors (e.g., adherence to a strict diet) may interfere with
normal striving for independence as children mature and the
desire for independence may in turn interfere with regimen
adherence. The need to adhere to a complex behavioral regi-
men presents unique challenges for people with diabetes in
midlife and older adulthood, who may be managing other
chronic health conditions and may lack appropriate educa-
tion, support, and motivation to engage in appropriate self-
care behaviors (Glasgow et al., 1992). Throughout this
chapter, examples from the empirical literature on diabetes
self-management are used to illustrate the importance of con-
sidering a life-span developmental approach.
INFANCY AND CHILDHOOD
A great deal of attention has been afforded to the inﬂuence of
developmental processes on health issues during the early
stages of life, particularly infancy, childhood, and adoles-
cence. From a life-span perspective, studying health behav-
iors during these periods is critical, as this may be the time at
which the stage is set for health attitudes and behaviors that
will persist into adulthood (O’Brien & Bush, 1997; Roberts
et al., 1984). The following sections summarize the inﬂuence
of biological, cognitive, and social developmental factors on
health behaviors in childhood (Tinsley, 1992). Although sev-
eral examples from the infancy period are used, the primary
focus of this section is on children, who are able—at least to
a limited extent—to perform health-related behaviors and
make health-related decisions. The reciprocal effects of
health behavior on developmental processes and tasks are
also considered in this section. 
Biological Development and the Health
Behavior of Children
Biological development during infancy and childhood affects
health behavior in several ways. First, as children move from
infancy to preadolescence, the diseases, conditions, and
injuries for which they are at highest risk change. For exam-
ple, infants, especially newborns, may be at highest risk for
infectious disease, and young adolescents are at greater risk
for morbidity associated with sexual behavior or substance
abuse (Kolberg, 1999; Millstein et al., 1992). The importance
of speciﬁc preventive health behaviors, therefore, also
changes along with these risk proﬁles. For example, the risk
of sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS) in infancy requires
appropriate preventive behaviors on the part of parents—for
example, placing the infant on his or her back when sleeping
(Whitman, White, O’Mara, & Goeke-Morey, 1999). Second,
children’s motoric and physical maturation and growth allow

Infancy and Childhood
583
them ever greater independence in interacting with the phys-
ical environment, making them more likely to encounter
certain health hazards (Roberts et al., 1984)—for example,
bike-related injuries, necessitating instruction in appropriate
use of a bike helmet, or infant exploration that necessitates
“baby-prooﬁng” by parents (Kolberg, 1999).
Third, as children grow and mature, they become able to
perform preventive and self-management behaviors on their
own, such as wearing a seatbelt, brushing their teeth, or in-
jecting insulin (Roberts et al., 1984). Fourth, favorable bio-
logical conditions during childhood make chronic illnesses
such as diabetes relatively rare. Thus, for children with
chronic illness, the nonnormative nature of its occurrence has
implications for adjustment and regimen adherence. For ex-
ample, Delamater (1993) reports that adherence with diabetic
regimens may be compromised when children are with their
peers, suggesting that the fear of appearing different inhibits
the practice of self-management behaviors.
Cognitive Development and the Health
Behavior of Children
Children’s beliefs about health and illness and their implica-
tions for preventive and self-care behaviors have been the
focus of a sizable body of research. Children make health de-
cisions very differently from the way adults do, given quali-
tative differences in reasoning and logical thinking skills
(O’Brien & Bush, 1997). It is therefore essential to consider
cognitive development when attempting to understand the
determinants of health behavior in children and when design-
ing effective ways to educate children about health and ill-
ness. In general, improvements over time in the ability to
think, reason, and understand allow children to make increas-
ingly thoughtful and independent decisions about their
health-related behavior (Roberts et al., 1984). However, by
the time children reach adolescence, the so-called egocen-
trism (Elkind, 1967) that is typical of this period—along with
social pressures—may actually increase the likelihood of en-
gaging in health risk behaviors or of nonadherence to medical
regimens (but see Beyth-Marom & Fischhoff, 1997). Indeed,
in spite of increased cognitive sophistication, compliance
with diabetic regimens is more of a problem among older
children and adolescents who are beginning to test limits and
authority than it is among younger children (Delamater,
1993; Kreipe & Strauss, 1989). 
Cognitive Development and Health: Theories and Models
Several theories and models offer insight into how cogni-
tive development affects health behavior. Tinsley (1992)
distinguishes between (a) developmental models that empha-
size similarities in how children progress through stages in their
conceptualizations of health and illness; and (b) individual
differences models that consider personality, social, and cultural
variables in explaining health behaviors in children. An exam-
ple of each of these two types of models is described next.
Bibace
and
Walsh’s
model
(1980;
Thompson
&
Gustafson, 1996) is one of the most frequently cited cognitive
development models of health- and illness-related behavior
for children. This model posits six stages—phenomenism,
contagion, contamination, internalization, physiological, and
psychophysiological—that closely parallel Piaget’s preopera-
tional, concrete, and formal operational stages. These stages
are characterized by increasing logic, complexity of thought,
ability to think abstractly, and sophistication regarding the
causes of health and the relationships between behavior and
illness. For example, in the early stages, children conceive of
the causes of illness as being spatially proximate to the body
and may confuse symptoms and causes of disease. Later, chil-
dren begin to realize a degree of control over causes or cures
of illness by avoiding or performing certain behaviors.
Roberts et al. (1984) discuss the implications of this stage-
based model for guiding health behavior interventions. For
example, programs designed to teach children about health-
promoting behaviors should be sensitive to cognitive devel-
opmental stages. Efforts that are too sophisticated may be
confusing, and those that are too simplistic may be ignored or
discounted, although individual differences certainly need to
be considered.
The Children’s Health Belief Model (CHBM; Iannotti &
Bush, 1993), adapted from the widely used Health Belief
Model (HBM; Janz & Becker, 1984), examines how individ-
ual beliefs inform children’s health behavior choices. The
HBM posits that the likelihood that an individual will per-
form a given health behavior depends on (a) the threat an in-
dividual perceives from a given health risk, (b) the perceived
severity of this risk, (c) the beneﬁts of taking action to coun-
teract the threat relative to the barriers associated with this
action, (d) the presence of a cue to action, and (e) the indi-
vidual’s level of self-efﬁcacy for taking action. Similarly, the
CHBM considers several readiness factors: motivation, per-
ceived vulnerability to the health threat, perceived severity of
the threat, and perceived beneﬁts and barriers to taking action
to avoid the threat. Unlike the HBM, however, the CHBM
posits that these readiness factors are affected by modifying
factors that are inﬂuenced by developmental stage. These
modifying factors are classiﬁed as cognitive-affective (e.g.,
health locus of control, knowledge), enabling (e.g., auton-
omy), and environmental (e.g., attitudes and motivations of
the child’s caregiver). 

584
Health and Human Development
Cognitive Development and Illness Self-Care Behaviors
In addition to general cognitive developmental theories and
models of health behavior, research has also provided insight
into how cognitive development affects self-management be-
haviors among chronically ill children. Changes in memory,
perception of time, and an understanding of causality and
consequences all inﬂuence children’s ability to carry out
complex behavioral regimens and to understand and commu-
nicate with health care providers (Iannotti & Bush, 1993;
Johnson, 1993). Cognitive development—in particular, so-
cial reasoning and the ability to regulate emotions—may also
inﬂuence the types of coping strategies used by chronically ill
children. For example, younger children may be less able to
engage in cognitive distraction or emotion-focused coping
than are older children (Thompson & Gustafson, 1996).
Chronic illness may also have an indirect impact on cognitive
development among children to the extent that it limits active
exploration of the environment or results in school absences
(Patterson, 1988).
The effect of cognitive development on self-management
behaviors can be clearly illustrated in the case of childhood
diabetes. Savinetti-Rose (1994) notes that children who have
diabetes and who are in the early stages of cognitive devel-
opment may not be able to conceive of a connection between
their treatment regimen and their illness. She describes how
more advanced cognitive development enables children with
diabetes to better understand the rationale behind the treat-
ment plan and also to take greater responsibility for carrying
it out. For example, after a child is able to understand number
concepts and seriation and when memory skills improve, he
or she can better plan the timing of insulin doses, meals, and
physical activity. 
Social Development and the Health Behavior of Children
Two important social inﬂuences—parents and peers—on
health behaviors during childhood are considered brieﬂy in
this section. Special attention is given to the way in which the
relative importance of these social inﬂuences changes as a
child develops. Also highlighted is the increasing autonomy a
child experiences in health decision making and health be-
havior choices. Indeed, the increasing responsibility children
assume for their own behavior is one of the most important
effects of social development at this stage (Roberts et al.,
1984).
Parental Inﬂuence
The primary role of parents in shaping health behavior
choices among children has been highlighted by a number of
researchers (e.g., O’Brien & Bush, 1997; Tinsley, 1992).
DiLorenzo et al. (1998) discuss the importance of socializa-
tion within the family and of parental modeling of health
behaviors through “patterns of interaction, imposition of op-
portunities and restraints, and reinforcement of health-related
activities” (p. 471). 
Empirical evidence, however, for similarities in preven-
tive health behaviors between parents and children has been
mixed (O’Brien & Bush, 1997; Tinsley, 1992). DiLorenzo
et al. (1998) examined the inﬂuence of parental beliefs, atti-
tudes, and behaviors about physical activity on the exercise
habits of ﬁfth and sixth graders. Results of this longitudinal
study demonstrate that parental inﬂuence may vary by age
and gender, change over time, and operate in conjunction
with other social, cognitive, and environmental variables. For
boys, encouragement and modeling of physical activity by
friends and family were important determinants of physical
activity. For girls, both peer support and family support of
physical activity were important, along with exercise knowl-
edge and mother’s physical activity level. 
Kimiecik, Horn, and Shurin (1996) also examined the im-
pact of the family on children’s (ages 11–15) moderate-to-
vigorous physical activity. Results indicate that children’s
beliefs about physical activity were strongly related to their
perceptions of their parents’ beliefs (in terms of the value
placed on physical activity and the child’s physical activity
competence), although these perceptions were not related to
actual physical activity levels. Despite the lack of relationship
in this case between beliefs and behavior, this study high-
lights the congruence between children’s and parent’s beliefs
regarding physical activity and the potential for parental atti-
tudes to shape health behavior-related cognitions in children.
Peer Inﬂuence
As children grow and develop, the role of peers in inﬂuenc-
ing health attitudes and behaviors increases (Tinsley, 1992).
General research on peer inﬂuences suggests that this inﬂu-
ence might vary a great deal depending on individual factors
among children (e.g., self-esteem; Tinsley, 1992). In a quali-
tative analysis of the personal illness models of children with
diabetes, Standiford, Turner, Allen, Drozda, and McCain
(1997) found that both preadolescents (ages 10–12) and ado-
lescents (ages 13–17) relied strongly on their families for
help with diabetes treatment regimens, but that families were
mentioned more often by the younger group. More respon-
dents in the older group mentioned support from friends as
being important. 
As with cognitive development, there may also be a recip-
rocal effect of illness on social development. This effect may
be especially salient in the case of peer relationships. Res-
ponses to illness by peers (Thompson & Gustafson, 1996),

Adolescence
585
absences from school, or feelings of being different may im-
pede friendships and make acceptance by peers more difﬁcult
(Miceli, Rowland, & Whitman, 1999). In general, chronic ill-
ness during childhood poses challenges to the normative
transition to greater involvement with a peer group as child-
hood progresses.
Finally, it is important to keep in mind that developmental
variations in the sources of inﬂuence on health behavior deci-
sion making are likely to be more complex and involve more
factors than a simple peer-versus-parent model would sug-
gest. For example, Tinsley, Holtgrave, Reise, Erdley, and
Cupp (1995) found that habit and enjoyment (personal fac-
tors) were better predictors of preventive (e.g., seat belt use)
and risky (e.g., cigarette use) health behaviors than was the
perceived inﬂuence of parents, teachers, friends, and various
media sources across elementary and high school students.
They also discovered that personal factors played a larger
role in the health behavior decisions of older compared to
younger students (Tinsley et al., 1995).
Autonomy in Diabetes Self-Care
Another important transition for children is the gradual
process of assuming responsibility for their own health-
related decisions and behaviors. Autonomy in health decision
making during childhood can be deﬁned as “those behaviors
indicating that the child cooperates in, takes the initiative
for, has the capability for, or has responsibility for health
promotion or treatment” (Iannotti & Bush, 1993, p. 64). The
issue of when children are ready to make their own health de-
cisions—and when they actually do so—has increased in im-
portance over the last couple of decades, a development
particularly evident in the increased attention to the self-
management of childhood chronic illness.
Issues associated with autonomy can be clearly illustrated
in the case of diabetes self-care. For example, if too much re-
sponsibility is placed on children who are not cognitively
ready, they may be inadvertently noncompliant because of
knowledge absences or skill deﬁcits (Johnson, 1993). This
notion is supported by a study by Wysocki et al. (1996), who
found that high levels of self-care autonomy for diabetes (de-
ﬁned by the ratio of diabetes self-management autonomy to
intellectual, social-cognitive, and academic maturity) was as-
sociated with poorer treatment adherence, poorer diabetes
control, lower levels of diabetes knowledge, and increased
hospitalizations. These results, however, do not suggest that
children are unable to engage in self-care; rather that the ex-
pectation for their self-care must be informed by develop-
mental issues.
In fact, research suggests that relatively few self-care re-
sponsibilities are perceived as appropriate for preadolescent
children by diabetes professionals. Wysocki, Meinhold, Cox,
and Clark (1990) asked 229 health professionals to estimate
the age at which children typically are able to master 38 dia-
betes-related skills. Recognizing and reporting hypoglycemia
was thought to be appropriate for children at 6.5 years. On
the other end of the age continuum, planning an exercise
routine and taking into account insulin schedule and diet
were thought to be inappropriate until age 14. An interesting
result was that the estimates given varied greatly according to
profession, with physicians tending to give the highest age
estimates for each of the tasks.
This section has highlighted how biological, cognitive,
and social development inﬂuences health-related behaviors
during childhood. Adolescence is associated with a host of
developmental transitions that are likely to have a strong im-
pact on the behavioral choices—and ultimately the health
status—of members of this age group. These factors are pre-
sented in the following section. 
ADOLESCENCE
This section focuses on the effects of biological development
(i.e., physiological changes associated with puberty), cogni-
tive development (i.e., increasing cognitive sophistication
and egocentric beliefs), and social development (i.e., the in-
creasing importance of peers) on health behaviors during
adolescence. As noted earlier, environmental, contextual, and
structural factors may inﬂuence adolescent health behaviors
directly and may also shape the way in which developmental
factors affect health behavior choices ( Brooks-Gunn, 1993;
Cowell & Marks, 1997; Lerner, Ostrom, & Freel, 1999;
Schulenberg, Maggs, & Hurrelmann, 1997a). Such factors
include—but are not limited to—gender, race-ethnicity, so-
cial class, culture, religion, social environment, and access to
health care services. Thus, the reader is cautioned that the de-
velopmental inﬂuences as described in subsequent sections
are only main effects that must eventually be embedded in a
much broader context that includes both structural and demo-
graphic factors. Consequently, developmental variables in-
evitably explain only a limited amount of the variance in
health behavior choices among adolescents. Nonetheless,
understanding the potential effects on health behavior of the
“fundamental and nearly universal transitions” that charac-
terize adolescence is an essential starting point when plan-
ning interventions to affect adolescent health (Maggs,
Schulenberg, & Hurrelmann, 1997).
Health behaviors take on particular importance in adoles-
cence for two primary reasons. First, several of the leading
causes of morbidity and mortality in this age group are
related to behavior (Cowell & Marks, 1997). Second,

586
Health and Human Development
adolescence marks an important period of transition from
parental control to self-determination of behavior (Brooks-
Gunn, 1993). Although a number of factors suggest that this
developmental period should be characterized by optimal
health (e.g., increased strength and stamina, a lack of vulner-
ability to the major health threats of adulthood), many ado-
lescents face signiﬁcant health risks, particularly those
related to accidents (e.g., motor vehicle injuries) and lifestyle
choices (e.g., sexually transmitted diseases, substance abuse;
Gondoli, 1999). Moreover, these health risks may be increas-
ing with subsequent cohorts of adolescents, lending urgency
to the study of adolescent health behaviors and their determi-
nants (Lerner et al., 1999). 
Because adolescence is a time of biological, cognitive,
emotional, and social transitions (Cowell & Marks, 1997;
Gondoli, 1999), it provides a unique context for examining
health behavior choices. Although adolescence is most fre-
quently associated with problem health behaviors (e.g., to-
bacco and alcohol use; Petersen, 1988), this developmental
period may have both positive and negative effects on
health-related behaviors (Schulenberg et al., 1997b). For
example, health risk behaviors may play a constructive
role in negotiating developmental transitions (e.g., binge
drinking may ease the transition to the college social envi-
ronment by increasing acceptance by peer groups), while at
the same time posing serious health risks (Maggs et al.,
1997; Schulenberg et al., 1997b). The impact of adolescent
development on preventive health behaviors has received
limited attention in the empirical literature, despite the po-
tential for establishing positive lifelong habits at this stage
(Maggs et al., 1997). Among adolescents with a chronic ill-
ness, health behaviors take on special importance because
they face the usual developmental risks for suboptimal
health, as well as additional risks related to illness self-
management.
Biological Development and the Health
Behavior of Adolescents
Puberty has been deﬁned as “a series of hormonal and so-
matic changes that adolescents experience as they attain re-
productive capacity” (Gondoli, 1999, p. 149); it includes
development of the adrenal glands, gonads, and secondary
sex characteristics (Cowell & Marks, 1997). Although there
is a great deal of individual variation in the timing of these
changes, they generally take place between 8 and 13 years of
age in girls and between 9.5 and 13.5 years of age in boys
(Gondoli, 1999).
Gondoli (1999) has identiﬁed three themes emerging
from research on puberty and health. First, puberty affects
how adolescents perceive themselves and how they are
perceived by others. These perceptions in turn may affect
health behavior. Among adolescent girls, for example, the in-
crease in body fat associated with puberty may increase their
susceptibility to eating disorders (Brooks-Gunn, 1993). Sec-
ond, the timing of puberty appears to carry a great deal of sig-
niﬁcance when it comes to health behavior decisions. For
example, early or precocious puberty appears to be associ-
ated with greater prevalence of risk behaviors such as alcohol
and tobacco use in both genders; moreover, in girls, off-time
puberty—whether precocious or delayed—might pose a
greater risk for low self-esteem (Silbereisen & Kracke,
1999), which might ultimately inﬂuence health behavior.
Third, the social context in which puberty occurs determines
in large part its effects on behavioral choices. 
In addition to affecting health risk behaviors, pubertal
status may also affect the practice of preventive health be-
haviors. Lindquist, Reynolds, and Goran (1999) found inde-
pendent effects of pubertal development and age on physical
activity among children ages 6–13 years. Speciﬁcally, they
found that although older children were more likely than
were younger children to participate in organized sports, chil-
dren in a higher stage of pubertal development were less
likely to do so than were children with less advanced devel-
opment. They conclude that the social, psychological, and
behavioral consequences of pubertal development have a
negative impact on physical activity levels, and that the
apparent effect of age in previous studies on decreases in
physical activity may actually be due to physical maturation.
Goran, Gower, Nagy, and Johnson (1998) found evidence for
a sharp reduction in girls’ physical activity preceding puber-
tal changes that may be related to biological development
or to behavioral or environmental changes accompanying
puberty. 
Hartman-Stein and Reuter (1988) have discussed the po-
tential effects of pubertal status on diabetes self-care behav-
iors. After puberty, for example, in an effort to maintain or
lose weight, adolescent girls with diabetes may be more
likely to develop disordered eating patterns that jeopardize
blood glucose control. In addition, there may be a reciprocal
effect of self-care behaviors on pubertal markers; for exam-
ple, poor diabetic control in adolescent girls may lead to
missed or light menstrual periods.
Cognitive Development and the Health
Behavior of Adolescents
Increasing cognitive sophistication among adolescents
has important implications for health decision making. Most
adolescents have entered the formal operations stage of cog-
nitive development, marked by the ability to engage in ab-
stract thought and to understand the psychological and

Adolescence
587
physiological causes of illness (Schulz & Rau, 1985). In ad-
dition, by adolescence, the knowledge base regarding health
and illness is much larger than that in childhood (Cowell &
Marks, 1997). One result of these changes may be a height-
ened belief by adolescents in their ability to affect symptoms
and health outcomes (Patterson, 1988).
Brooks-Gunn (1993) highlights three additional cognitive
processes that may inﬂuence adolescent health behavior: per-
ceptions of costs and beneﬁts, perceptions of risk, and under-
standing of future consequences of health-related actions.
The costs and beneﬁts of health-related actions may be eval-
uated by adolescents differently from the way those in other
age groups evaluate them; for example, among adolescents,
the social beneﬁts of engaging in a particular risk behavior
such as smoking may be more likely to outweigh the known
negative consequences. 
Although teenagers may be increasingly able to under-
stand concepts of probability and risk, other factors associ-
ated with adolescence may foster risk-taking behaviors. For
example, perceptions of good health and lack of experience
with poor health may lead to feelings of invulnerability. In-
deed, one manifestation of  so-called adolescent egocentrism
is said to be belief in a “personal fable” in which adolescents
imagine themselves to be invincible (Elkind, 1967). Such
feelings are often assumed to contribute to a propensity for
risk behaviors, although it has been argued that there is little
empirical evidence to support this notion (Gondoli, 1999).
Moreover, later scholars have suggested that the creation of
personal fables is adaptive and contributes to resilience and
coping (Lapsley, 1993); hence, the inﬂuence of such fables
might be expected to ultimately have positive inﬂuences on
health behaviors. Therefore, the precise ways in which ado-
lescent perceptions of invulnerability affect health behavior
choices remain unclear.
Other factors that foster health-risk behavior in adolescents
may include lack of experience with the consequences of risk,
lack of information, or denial (Brooks-Gunn, 1993). Re-
searchers have also suggested that adolescent’s risk percep-
tions reﬂect their behavioral experiences, instead of the other
way around. For example, Halpern-Felsher et al. (2001) found
that adolescents and young adults who had engaged in partic-
ular health risk behaviors (e.g., related to sexual activity and
alcohol use) judged the risks of negative outcomes from those
behaviors as less likely than did nonengagers. Such ﬁndings
have implications for attempts to modify behavior-speciﬁc
risk perceptions among adolescents and may underscore the
importance of preventing initiation of risk behaviors in late
childhood or early adolescence.
Finally, the ability of adolescents to consider long-term
consequences of health-related actions (Brooks-Gunn, 1993)
may have special relevance when it comes to decision making
about preventive health behaviors with long-term beneﬁts,
such as diet or physical activity. However, the extent to which
adolescents consider the proximal versus long-term beneﬁts
when it comes to making decisions about these behaviors has
not been well established.
Explaining Physical Activity Patterns in Adolescence 
In general, levels of physical activity decline between child-
hood and adolescence (National Center for Chronic Disease
Prevention and Health Promotion, Centers for Disease Con-
trol and Prevention, 1997), challenging health researchers
and professionals to identify the developmental and contex-
tual factors that contribute to this decrease. Much of the re-
search on the determinants of physical activity among
adolescents considers cognitive and social-cognitive factors
in tandem, along with demographic and social-structural fac-
tors. Variables such as SES, ethnicity, gender, and the physi-
cal environment all predict patterns of activity in this age
group; for example, female adolescents and those of lower
SES engage in less activity—as do adolescents living in high-
crime areas (Gordon-Larsen, McMurray, & Popkin, 2000);
these factors and their interaction with psychosocial factors
therefore are an important focus of current research in this
area.
Garcia, Pender, Antonakos, and Ronis (1998) conducted a
study that explores changes in cognitive and social factors
related to physical activity during the transition to adoles-
cence. Their sample (n  132) was tracked from elementary
to junior high school. Results indicate that when girls reached
junior high school, they were less likely to report that the
beneﬁts of exercise outweighed the barriers, and they had
fewer physically active role models than they had at younger
ages. Boys making the transition had less self-efﬁcacy for
physical activity and were less likely to perceive social ex-
pectations that they would be active compared to when they
were in elementary school. Both boys and girls were less
likely to report social support for exercise from family and
friends following the transition to junior high school. In other
words, positive beliefs about physical activity declined for
both boys and girls.
Allison, Dwyer, and Makin (1999) examined the impact
of self-efﬁcacy, perceived barriers, and life strain on the
physical activity of 1,041 students in Grades 9 and 11. Re-
sults indicated that one component of self-efﬁcacy (i.e., con-
ﬁdence despite external barriers) was positively associated
with physical activity participation. Life strain and perceived
barriers were not strongly related to physical activity. These
ﬁndings suggest that efﬁcacy-enhancing strategies may pre-
sent one way to offset a decline in physical activity as chil-
dren mature.

588
Health and Human Development
Cognitive Development and Diabetes
Self-Care in Adolescence
Cognitive changes during adolescence are likely to affect di-
abetes self-care behaviors in several ways. During early ado-
lescence, children in the concrete operational stage may be
unable to consider the potential future complications result-
ing from noncompliance and may focus instead on more
immediate concerns (e.g., inconvenience of blood glucose
monitoring, embarrassment of eating a snack during class;
Kreipe & Strauss, 1989). By middle adolescence—with the
advent of formal operational thinking and an increasing sense
of personal control—children may be better able to under-
stand the role of self-care behaviors in preventing long-term
complications (Hartman-Stein & Reuter, 1988). Despite this
new level of cognitive sophistication, adherence to strict be-
havioral regimens may be compromised by the fact that ado-
lescents at this stage are striving for independence, identity,
and autonomy and are testing limits and authority (Kreipe &
Strauss, 1989). Kriepe and Strauss (1989) suggest that at this
stage, treatment options should be structured to maximize the
adolescent’s sense of control and independence. For exam-
ple, adolescents could be offered the option of using an in-
sulin pump in an effort to avoid regular insulin injections that
may interrupt valued social activities.
Astudy by Ingersoll, Orr, Herrold, and Golden (1986) pro-
vides evidence that cognitive development affects diabetes
self-care behavior. Among adolescents aged 12–21, Ingersoll
et al. (1986) found that those who practiced anticipatory glu-
cose control (i.e., adjusting an insulin dose according to antic-
ipated changes in exercise and diet) had a level of conceptual
maturity higher than the conceptual maturity level of those
who did not. These results suggest that health care profession-
als should consider the extent to which an adolescent is able to
make the complex decisions involved in diabetes manage-
ment; they should then work with parents to ensure that the de-
gree of autonomy given to an adolescent to manage his or her
treatment plan is developmentally appropriate.
Social Development and the Health
Behavior of Adolescents
The increased importance of peer inﬂuence is an accepted
hallmark of adolescence (Brooks-Gunn, 1993). Adolescents
have larger networks of peers than do children, as well
as more stable, intimate, and supportive friendships that oc-
cupy more time and have more inﬂuence over attitudes and
behaviors (Brown, Dolcini, & Leventhal, 1997; Petersen,
1988). Despite the central role of peers, research has also
demonstrated the ongoing inﬂuence of parents on health
behavior choices. For example, Lau, Quadrel, and Hartman
(1990) found in a longitudinal study that although peers had
a strong effect on the extent to which adolescents experi-
enced changes in health behaviors such as drinking and exer-
cise during the ﬁrst 3 years of college, the effect of parental
inﬂuence (particularly via modeling) on these behaviors also
remained strong throughout the study period.
Several transformations in peer relationships during the
adolescent years may have an impact on health behaviors.
These transformations include (a) the development of emo-
tionally supportive friendships, (b) the initiation of romantic
relationships, and (c) the emergence of peer crowds (Brown
et al., 1997; Gondoli, 1999). Each of these changes may have
either a positive or negative inﬂuence on health behavior.
For example, research has demonstrated both positive and
negative associations between the intimacy and level of sup-
port from friendships and the practice of health risk (Brown
et al., 1997). For example, becoming part of a romantic rela-
tionship may increase the probability that an adolescent will
engage in sexual risk-taking, but such relationships may also
be associated with decreases in risk behaviors more common
in same-sex cliques (e.g., alcohol use; Brown et al., 1997).
The relationship between peer crowd membership and health
behaviors is complex, because peers are often deﬁned (both
by researchers and by youth themselves) in terms of the types
of health behaviors in which their members engage (e.g.,
druggies, jocks). Thus, individual differences in the practice
of health behaviors may channel youth into certain peer
crowds, and peer crowd norms may reinforce positive and
negative health behaviors (Brown et al., 1997). 
Social Development and Diabetes Self-Care
Adolescent social transitions—in particular, the increase in
the importance and inﬂuence of peer relationships—are
commonly seen as a barrier to effective diabetes self-
management. Compared to children, adolescents have been
shown to have poorer adherence to diabetic regimens, and
older adolescents may be less adherent than younger adoles-
cents (Kovacs, Goldston, Obrosky, & Iyengar, 1992; La
Greca et al., 1995). Attaining optimal adherence and meta-
bolic control has been called “more problematic” for adoles-
cents than for any other age group (La Greca et al., 1995).
Researchers have noted that adolescents with diabetes expe-
rience conﬂicts between the drive to attain independence and
gain peer acceptance on one hand and adherence to their
diabetes regimen on the other (Anderson, Wolf, Burkhart,
Cornell, & Bacon, 1989; Hartman-Stein & Reuter, 1988).
Moreover, barriers to adherence are present at precisely a
time when parents and providers begin to expect adolescents
to assume a greater degree of independence and autonomy in
their self-care (Anderson et al., 1989; Wysocki et al., 1996).

Midlife
589
The inﬂuence of peer relationships on diabetes self-care
behavior, however, is not uniformly negative. As demon-
strated by LaGreca et al. (1995), the friendships of adoles-
cents with diabetes can be an important source of support
by providing assistance with insulin administration, blood
glucose monitoring, following a meal plan, exercising, and
“feeling good about diabetes.” Although family members
provided more tangible support such as preparing meals and
helping with blood glucose monitoring, friends offered com-
panionship and emotional support and encouraged physical
activity. LaGreca’s (1995) study underscores the value of
considering the important role of friends in addition to family
members in the design of educational interventions for ado-
lescents with diabetes. 
MIDLIFE
Compared to early and late in the life span (i.e., infancy, child-
hood, adolescence, older adulthood), relatively little is known
about health and development during midlife (Lachman &
James, 1997; Merluzzi & Nairn, 1999; Willis & Reid, 1999).
In fact, the middle years are often depicted as little more than
a “staging area on the way to old age” (Baruch & Brooks-
Gunn, 1984, p. 1). Several factors, however, will result in in-
creased emphasis on midlife in the scholarly literature in the
decades ahead; such factors include the movement of the
largest cohorts in U.S. history through this developmental
period and an accompanying increase in the median age of the
U.S. population (Willis & Reid, 1999).
A life-span perspective on health during midlife is impor-
tant because this transition is inﬂuenced by the health behav-
ior choices and patterns of young adulthood and sets the stage
for older adulthood. As stated by Willis and Reid (1999),
“optimal physical and psychological development in late life
will depend largely on the experiences of baby boomers dur-
ing middle age” (p. xv). Despite the fact that midlife is a pe-
riod of relatively good health for most people, the frequency
of chronic illnesses, persistent symptoms, disability, and
mortality rates accelerate during this period (Merrill &
Verbrugge, 1999). Thus, middle age represents a shift in how
people view their health—in part due to their increased sense
of vulnerability to health threats (Hooker & Kaus, 1994;
Merluzzi & Nairn, 1999). It should be noted, however,
that perceptions of health in middle age are embedded in
existing social structures that present both opportunities and
constraints (Elder, 1998), including social class, education,
gender, and race (Moen & Wethington, 1999).
Although chronological age is an imperfect proxy for
marking developmental periods, it provides a starting point
for purposes of discussion. Despite the popular view that
midlife begins at age 35 (Moen & Wethington, 1999), other
conceptualizations of this period have been more reﬁned. For
example, Merluzzi and Narin (1999) describe early adult-
hood as the period from age 22–34 years; early middle age as
between 35 and 44 years of age, and late middle age as be-
tween 45 and 64 years of age. Age 45 has been viewed as
marking the beginning of the period of midlife in the U.S.
census as well as by researchers (Merrill & Verbrugge, 1999).
Rather than rely on chronological age, several markers of
midlife boundaries have been examined in research on this
period, including transitions in employment (e.g., career
peaking and early retirement; Moen & Wethington, 1999)
and parenting (i.e., the period when children move into
school age, adolescence, and early adulthood; Brooks-Gunn
& Kirsh, 1984). 
In midlife, there are few markers of physical change as
dramatic as those that occur in childhood and adolescence
(e.g., walking, puberty) or in old age (e.g., rapid decline in
health, death; Merrill & Verbrugge, 1999). Most physical
changes are very gradual, and individual differences greatly
affect the rate of physiological change. 
As summarized by Merrill and Verbrugge (1999), signs of
physiological change include alterations in physical appear-
ance (e.g., wrinkles, age spots, gray hair), losing height and
gaining weight, decreased muscle strength, loss of bone den-
sity, lower basal metabolic rate, weaker immune response, di-
minished sense of smell and taste, gradual hearing loss,
decline in eyesight, and poorer sleep habits. The extent to
which these age-related processes—particularly weight gain
and changes in appearance—provide an incentive to engage
in health-promoting behaviors and limit health-damaging be-
haviors has not been explored to any great extent in the liter-
ature. Extensive research evidence, however, supports the
link between health habits and chronic illnesses and condi-
tions, and it suggests that engaging in health-promoting be-
haviors can prevent or delay disease and some of the aging
changes that occur in midlife (Merrill & Verbrugge, 1999). 
In keeping with the general framework established for this
chapter, this section highlights how speciﬁc aspects of bio-
logical (i.e., menopause), cognitive (i.e., personal control,
self-efﬁcacy), and social (i.e., social support) development
affect health and self-management behaviors during the
middle years. 
Biological Development and the Health Behavior
of Adults in Midlife
Menopause is thought to represent a major cultural, psycho-
logical, and physiological milestone for women during
the middle years (Avis, 1999), and it represents one of the
few distinct health events of midlife. In fact, most of the

590
Health and Human Development
health-related research among women at midlife focuses on
experiences of menopause and the management of its symp-
toms (Woods & Mitchell, 1997). Although there is wide vari-
ability among women in the age of menopause, the median
age of last menstrual period is between 50 and 52 years of age
(Brambilla & McKinlay, 1989), and 80% of women experi-
ence their last menstrual period between 45 and 55 (Avis,
1999). The hormonal changes associated with menopause af-
fect the musculoskeletal, cardiovascular, and urogenital sys-
tems, precipitating increases in heart disease, hypertension,
osteoporosis, urinary incontinence, autoimmune disease, and
diabetes (Avis, 1999). Although menopause represents a sig-
niﬁcant life event, few empirical studies have examined the
impact of this milestone on health behaviors. 
Menopause and Physical Activity
One qualitative study of 17 women in middle age lends in-
sight into how menopause might inﬂuence women’s deci-
sions about health behaviors such as physical activity. Jones
(1997) discovered that women perceive menopause as a
marker or symbol of more general life-stage developmental
issues and respond with lifestyle adjustments, including
changes in physical activity (i.e., exercising more regularly
and vigorously) and diet (i.e., eating more low-fat foods,
introducing or increasing calcium supplements). The women
who participated in the study all reported engaging in
high levels of exercise and being healthy eaters before
menopause; these behaviors increased or became more disci-
plined with the onset of negative health-related changes asso-
ciated with menopause (Jones, 1997). Additional research is
needed to reveal the speciﬁc ways in which attitudes and be-
liefs about physical activity are affected by this important
transition (see Avis & McKinlay, 1995; Pinto, Marcus, &
Clark, 1996; Scharff, Homan, Kreuter, & Brennan, 1999).
Menopause and Diabetes Self-Care
More research attention is also needed to determine how the
physical transitions experienced in midlife may affect dia-
betes self-management behavior. According to the HBM,
individuals are more likely to engage in preventive and self-
management behaviors if they perceive a signiﬁcant health
threat. Perceived threat derives from perceptions of the sever-
ity of the health condition and of susceptibility to negative
health outcomes attributed to behavior. Thus, to the extent
that menopause heightens perceptions of threat, women in
midlife may engage in high levels of regimen adherence.
Although empirical evidence of the possible impact of
menopause on self-management behaviors is limited, a small
body of research addresses the impact of menopause on a
variety of diabetes-related and psychosocial outcomes. In a
review of the literature, Javanovic (1997, 1998) concludes
that menopause decreases the insulin requirement in women
with Type 1 diabetes, increases the risk of depression and
cardiovascular disease, and increases percentage of body
fat, resulting in increased insulin resistance in women with
Type 2 diabetes. In her discussion of diabetes among women,
Poirier and Coburn (2000) suggest that menopause results in
extreme swings in blood glucose levels, which can compli-
cate self-management efforts. She also describes how women
with diabetes may not be able to distinguish between episodes
of hypoglycemia and hot ﬂashes. Additional research is
needed to determine how changes related to menopause affect
the experience of diabetes, diabetes-related outcomes, and—
ultimately—self-management behaviors.
Cognitive Development and the Health Behavior
of Adults in Midlife
As discussed by Merluzzi and Nairn (1999), one of the over-
arching themes in the transition from perceived invulnerabil-
ity and risk taking in the early part of the life span to
substantial vulnerability to health threats toward the end is
a sense of personal control. The middle years have been
described as a time of “settling down” (Levinson, 1977),
marked by the perception of increased control and feelings
of security and stability that are greater than those at other
developmental periods (Lachman, Lewkowicz, Marcus, &
Peng, 1994; Wallston & Smith, 1994). Thus, the role played
by cognitive phenomena—including perceptions of control—
in the health behavior decisions of adults at midlife is of
particular interest.
Although several conceptualizations of control have been
advanced in the literature, self-efﬁcacy is one of the most fre-
quently used measures of this construct. Self-efﬁcacy is de-
ﬁned as the belief that an individual can successfully engage
in a particular behavior (Bandura, 1997). This construct is
used often in the empirical literature on the determinants and
effects of health behaviors, such as physical activity and dis-
ease self-management.
Self-Efﬁcacy and Physical Activity in Midlife
In an empirical study of factors associated with physical ac-
tivity in 653 women across the life span, Scharff et al. (1999)
discovered that women in midlife reported having higher
levels of self-efﬁcacy for physical activity than did older
women; however, women in midlife also reported much
lower levels of self-efﬁcacy than did younger women. In fact,

Midlife
591
the authors report that women in midlife (aged 40–49) were
more than twice as likely as the younger women (18–39 years
of age) to be unsure of their ability to meet their physical
activity goals (Scharff et al., 1999). In terms of their current
levels of physical activity, older women were the least likely
to be physically active.
Other ﬁndings from this study are also of interest. Family
characteristics associated with midlife—particularly having
children at home—were consistently related to patterns of
physical activity. For example, women at midlife with chil-
dren at home reported signiﬁcantly higher levels of physical
activities of daily living (e.g., house and yard work) than did
women without children at home (Scharff et al., 1999). This
study represents one of the few examples of research that ac-
knowledges the possible impact of developmental milestones
(e.g., menarche, having children, menopause, career choices)
on self-efﬁcacy related to the initiation and maintenance of
physical activity in women.
Self-Efﬁcacy and Diabetes Self-Care in Midlife
The role of personal control and self-efﬁcacy in diabetes
self management has been the focus of a great deal of empirical
research across life stages. Adherence to challenging medical
regimens
like
those
required
for
the
successful
self-
management of diabetes is thought to be more consistent and
longer lasting among people with strong beliefs in their abili-
ties to affect their health (O’Leary, 1985). In a recent study of
296 adults with diabetes (with a mean age of 52 years),Watkins
et al. (2000) discovered that perceived control of diabetes was
a signiﬁcant predictor of diabetes-speciﬁc health behaviors, in-
cluding following a diet and engaging in regular exercise.
In terms of our understanding of how personal control
affects diabetes self-management at midlife, additional
research is needed to answer such questions as (a) Does the
overall increase in general perceptions of control in mid-
life translate into higher levels of self-efﬁcacy for self
management behaviors; (b) Are levels of control and self-
efﬁcacy for managing illness relatively stable over the life
span, or are they affected signiﬁcantly by the developmental
context; and (c) How might control and self-efﬁcacy work dif-
ferently for people who are diagnosed with diabetes in midlife
compared to those who have lived with the disease since
adolescence? Such research could help to identify strategies
used to maintain high levels of control and self-efﬁcacy for
self-management tasks across the life span, including adopt-
ing age-related performance standards, engaging in social
comparison with same-age peers, and optimizing skills in
selected areas such as health beliefs and physical-capacity
change over time (Merluzzi & Nairn, 1999).
Social Development and the Health Behavior
of Adults in Midlife
Two aspects of the social environment take on particular
importance at midlife—social support and social roles
(Antonucci & Akiyama, 1997). A vast empirical literature ex-
amines the impact of social support on a variety of mental
and physical health outcomes, including morbidity and mor-
tality (for a review, see Berkman & Glass, 2000). A smaller
body of literature examines the impact of social support on
self-management behaviors during adulthood (for a review,
see Gallant, in press). For example, family members and
friends may facilitate or impede health and self-management
behaviors by offering information, advice, and encourage-
ment, and by providing emotional and tangible support
(Lewis & Rook, 1999).
Although the general social support literature is very com-
pelling in its quantity and overall quality, it rarely incorporates
speciﬁc discussion of the unique developmental context of the
middle years (for an exception, see Connell & D’Augelli,
1988). Kahn and Antonucci (1980) argue that there are four
major reasons for considering the changing nature of social
support over an individual’s life: (a) role entries and exits cre-
ate changing needs and circumstances for support; (b) the
forms and amount of support appropriate for a given time and
place depend on these changing life stations; (c) individual
differences among adults in the need and desire for social sup-
port must be understood via reference to earlier life experi-
ences; and (d) age, period cohort, and history effects may be
discerned by a reference to individual experiences.
In addition to the changing patterns of social support over
the life span, the pattern and types of social roles held during
adulthood—particularly work and family—are critical to an
understanding of health behavior choices during midlife
(Moen & Wethington, 1999). Studies of the interplay of so-
cial support, role trajectories, and health in midlife that reﬂect
a developmental perspective, however, are uncommon
(Moen & Wethington, 1999). 
Social Factors and Physical Activity in Midlife 
It is generally assumed that both general and exercise-
speciﬁc social support factors are positively associated with
physical activity. Eyler et al. (1999) conducted one of the few
empirical studies to examine the relationship between social
support and physical activity levels of women in midlife and
older adulthood. Using a national sample of minority women
aged 40 and older, results indicate that women with low lev-
els of social support for physical activity were more likely
to be sedentary than were women with high levels of such

592
Health and Human Development
support. The authors suggest that interventions designed to
increase physical activity should incorporate the social net-
works of potential participants to increase the likelihood that
women will initiate and maintain an exercise program (Eyler
et al., 1999). The authors did not speciﬁcally address issues
of midlife, however, despite having a large sample size (n 
2,912) that would lend itself to comparisons in study out-
comes across the life span and contribute to the discussion of
how social roles associated with midlife might increase or in-
hibit physical activity.
Social Factors and Diabetes Self-Care in Midlife
Because diabetes is a psychologically and behaviorally de-
manding illness, psychosocial factors are particularly rele-
vant to the process of self-management (Delamater et al.,
2001). In fact, the psychosocial impact of diabetes has been
recognized as a predictor of mortality in people with diabetes
that is stronger than many clinical and physiological vari-
ables (Davis, Hess, & Hiss, 1988). 
In general, the empirical research suggests that higher lev-
els of social support—especially diabetes-related support
from spouses and other family members—is associated with
better regimen adherence, including diet, exercise, and
weight management (Glasgow & Toobert, 1988; Wilson
et al., 1986). This research, typically conducted with samples
of adults spanning a large age range and based on cross-
sectional designs, provides a snapshot of the relationships
among social factors and diabetes self-management behav-
iors. Additional research, however, is needed to determine
how the key social roles of midlife (e.g., parent, spouse, em-
ployee) affect the relationship between social support and
self-management behavior during this period.
OLDER ADULTHOOD
Although a great deal of attention has been afforded to the
general area of health and aging, a relatively small subset of
this work overtly incorporates a life-span developmental per-
spective. Because a life-span view of development is dy-
namic and marked by the continuous interplay between
growth and decline, research guided by this perspective is
more likely to include a focus on positive (rather than only
negative) age-related changes and gains (rather than only
losses; Baltes & Baltes, 1990; Lachman, Ziff, & Spiro, 1994).
In addition, a life-span developmental perspective empha-
sizes intra-individual variability; thus, this view recognizes
that people—even in later life—have the potential to improve
their adaptive capacity and to experience unique develop-
mental trajectories (Baltes, Reese, & Nesselroade, 1988).
In light of this potential, it is apparent that older adults
should be a major focus of the growing body of research on
the determinants of health behavior and interventions to
shape this behavior (Schulz & Martire, 1999). A selected re-
view of the health behavior literature, however, suggests that
older adults are not well represented (Connell, 1999). Specif-
ically, only 15% of articles published in two leading health
behavior journals (i.e., Health Education and Behavior, for-
merly entitled Health Education Quarterly; and Health Edu-
cation Research: Theory and Practice) over a 10-year period
included older adults in the sample. In the majority of the ar-
ticles that included older adults, age was not examined in the
data analysis, and the context of older adulthood was not con-
sidered in the discussion of ﬁndings. A similar ﬁnding is re-
ported by Peterson (1996), who found that less than one
quarter of the studies published in the journal Health Psy-
chology over a 3-year period dealt with older adults. Of the
few studies that included adults in more than one period (e.g.,
midlife and older adulthood), the inﬂuence of development
was rarely addressed (Peterson, 1996). Thus, despite the vast
literature on issues related to health and aging, much remains
to be learned about the health behaviors of older adults, par-
ticularly from a life-span developmental perspective.
The ﬁnal section of this chapter focuses on how speciﬁc
aspects of biological (i.e., functional capacity), cognitive
(i.e., personal control, self-efﬁcacy), and social (i.e., social
support, social roles) development affect health and self-
management behaviors during older adulthood. As with other
periods of the life span, the importance of structural factors
such as gender, class, race, and ethnicity should be consid-
ered throughout this discussion because they are likely to
have both independent effects on the health behaviors of
older adults (Markides, 1989) and interactive effects with
development-related factors discussed here.
Biological Development and the Health Behavior
of Older Adults
Normal aging has been described as the time-dependent, irre-
versible changes that lead to progressive loss of functional
capacity (i.e., respiratory function) after the point of maturity
(Moody, 1998). Age-related physical changes include sen-
sory declines, loss of muscle mass and bone density, in-
creased risk of fractures, wrinkled skin, and short-term
memory lapses. About 80% of people over the age of 65 have
one or more chronic conditions. Three quarters of all deaths
of people over the age of 65 are due to heart disease, cancer,
and stroke (National Center for Health Statistics, 1996).
Despite the health declines that are typically associated
with aging, older adults may be more likely than their
younger counterparts to engage in positive health behaviors.

Older Adulthood
593
For example, results from the National Health Interview Sur-
vey suggest that older adults are more likely than younger
adults to report never having smoked cigarettes, abstaining
from alcohol, drinking in moderation, eating breakfast regu-
larly, and obtaining general medical exams (Thornberry,
Wilson, & Golden, 1986). Older adults, however, are much
less likely than are young and middle-aged adults to be phys-
ically active (Healthy People, 2000, 1991; U.S. Department
of Health and Human Services, 1996).
Biological Aging and Physical Activity
The bidirectional relationship between physical activity and
the declines in functioning associated with aging has not been
fully explored. Although it has been established that physical
activity is an important avenue for delaying the negative
health consequences of aging (e.g., risk of physical decline,
chronic disease, and mortality) and promoting a variety of
positive psychological and physical outcomes among older
adults (for a review, see McAuley & Katula, 1999), little is
known about how physiological changes associated with
aging affect attitudes and beliefs about physical activity.
Just as during midlife, negative age-related health changes
in older adulthood may affect health behaviors such as phys-
ical activity in a variety of ways. For example, the onset
of illness or a perceived decline in physical ability may pro-
vide incentive for people who have engaged in physical ac-
tivity throughout their adult years to maintain and even
increase their patterns of exercise. Alternatively, some adults
may feel resentful when confronted with the need to adapt
their lifelong exercise routines to their gradually diminishing
physical capacity. Age-associated health changes can also
mean that individuals who have never engaged in regular
exercise may ﬁnd this period a particularly daunting time to
begin a routine of regular physical activity. 
Becauseexerciseisacornerstoneofmanyself-management
regimens, older adults who are diagnosed with a chronic illness
may be motivated to increase their level of physical activity,
even if they had been sedentary earlier in life. This motivation
may be bolstered by advice from a health care professional to
initiate or maintain physical activity (Russell & Roter, 1993).
Additional research is needed to assess how attitudes and be-
liefs about physical activity may evolve as a result of biological
changes—both normal and pathological—associated with
older adulthood.
Cognitive Development and the Health Behavior
of Older Adults
Perceptions of control may be particularly important for
the health of older adults (Mirowsky, 1995; Rodin, 1986).
Empirical evidence, however, suggests that older adults re-
port a decrease in objective and subjective control (Bandura,
1997), and this loss is related to functional impairment, car-
diovascular disease, cancer, deterioration of the immune sys-
tem, and mortality (as summarized in Bergeman & Wallace,
1999). As described in an earlier section, the concept of self-
efﬁcacy (i.e., belief that an individual can successfully en-
gage in a particular behavior) is one aspect of perceived
control that has demonstrated a strong association with health
behavior. 
Self-Efﬁcacy and Physical Activity in Older Adulthood
Of the considerable literature that has identiﬁed self-efﬁcacy
as an important predictor of exercise behavior and vice versa
(McAuley, 1992; O’Leary, 1985), several empirical studies
have included or focused exclusively on older adults (D. O.
Clark, 1996). For example, Resnick (2001) found that among
a sample of 175 older adults in a retirement community, self-
efﬁcacy for exercise signiﬁcantly predicted moderate exer-
cise. In another empirical study, McAuley, Lox, and Duncan
(1993) examined the extent to which physical activity facili-
tates self-efﬁcacy over time. Results from a sample of 44
older adults who completed a 20-week exercise program in-
dicated that self-efﬁcacy was the only signiﬁcant predictor of
exercise behavior at 9 months postintervention. Among 225
community-dwelling older adults aged 65–92, Conn (1997)
demonstrated that self-efﬁcacy was a strong predictor of
physical activity. Finally, in a study of 327 women aged
70–98 years living in Vancouver, British Columbia, self-
efﬁcacy for physical activity later in life was found to be as-
sociated with recollections of speciﬁc childhood physical
activity competencies from decades earlier (Cousins, 1997).
This study is important because it is one of the few that ex-
amines how health-related experiences at earlier stages can
affect speciﬁc health behaviors at later stages.
Kaplan and his colleagues have conducted several studies
to examine the physical and psychosocial responses to phys-
ical activity in older adults with chronic obstructive pul-
monary disorder (Kaplan, Reis, Prewitt, & Eakin, 1994; Ries,
Kaplan, Limberg, & Prewitt, 1995; Toshima, Kaplan, & Ries,
1990). In one such study, Toshima et al. (1990) report that an
8-week exercise training intervention conducted with 119
older adults resulted in higher levels of self-efﬁcacy for exer-
cise and exercise tolerance compared to a comparison group.
Thus, the available evidence suggests that enhancing self-
efﬁcacy may be one important means of increasing exercise
levels among older adults.
Despite evidence that engaging in exercise increases lev-
els of self-efﬁcacy and that self-efﬁcacy for exercise predicts
exercise behavior, few studies have examined the extent to

594
Health and Human Development
which the decline in physical activity that is commonly asso-
ciated with older adulthood is related to more global de-
creases in perceived control. Obviously, a longitudinal design
is best suited to address this issue. Similarly, we know little
about how increasing physical activity levels via interven-
tions may offset age-related declines in control. 
In an ongoing study, Connell and colleagues are assessing
the impact of a telephone-based physical activity intervention
on psychosocial and physical outcomes among women who
are providing full-time care to a spouse with a dementing ill-
ness. A primary goal of the study is to examine whether
women who set and achieve realistic goals for increasing
physical activity also experience a heightened sense of self-
efﬁcacy in several key domains (e.g., physical activity and
self-care) and demonstrate subsequent improvement in indi-
cators of physical and psychological health. Positive ﬁndings
in this regard would suggest a potentially valuable means of
enhancing control among a vulnerable older population.
Additional research is also needed to examine how the de-
velopmental context of older adulthood affects the four types
of inﬂuence on efﬁcacy expectations—primary experience,
secondary experience, verbal persuasion, and physiological
states (Bandura, 1986). Older adults may have less direct ex-
perience with physical activity as a function of their birth co-
hort; less secondary experience because there are fewer
opportunities to observe exercise behavior in general and
among peers; and fewer sources of verbal persuasion to exer-
cise among the media, supportive others, and health care pro-
fessionals (D. O. Clark, 1996). Physiological states may play
a particularly important role in shaping efﬁcacy expectations
among older adults. Older adults are more likely than
younger and middle-aged adults to experience poorer over-
all health; more past failures at behavior change; and—
regarding physical activity—difﬁculty with balance, a fear of
falling, and complications from comorbidities (D. O. Clark,
1996). Future research should address the speciﬁc mecha-
nisms whereby self-efﬁcacy affects exercise behavior and ex-
ercise affects self-efﬁcacy among older adults; how the
conceptualization and measurement of self-efﬁcacy are
shaped by the context of older adulthood; and how contextual
variables such as SES, gender, and race affect self-efﬁcacy
expectations.
Self-Efﬁcacy and Diabetes Self-Care in Older Adulthood
Although research has demonstrated that self-efﬁcacy is a pre-
dictor of diabetes self-management among adults, older adults
have not been included in much of this work. An exception is
the development and evaluation of a self-management train-
ing program designed speciﬁcally for people 60 years of age
and over with Type 2 diabetes (Glasgow et al., 1992). Results
indicate that the program was effective in improving dietary
intake and glucose testing and resulting in weight loss among
the participants in the intervention group. Contrary to expec-
tations, however, behavior change was not attributed to
increases in diabetes-speciﬁc self-efﬁcacy. The authors con-
tend that this surprising ﬁnding may be attributed to ceiling
effects, given that levels of self-efﬁcacy were high at baseline
(Glasgow et al., 1992).
Although this study makes an important contribution to
the literature because it describes one of the few published in-
terventions designed exclusively for older adults with dia-
betes, the authors provide little information about how the
program was tailored to the needs of the target audience,
whether the process (e.g., self-efﬁcacy) and outcome (e.g.,
self-care behaviors, glycosylated hemoglobin, quality of life)
measures used in the study were appropriate for use with
older adults, and how the developmental context of older
adulthood may have affected the study ﬁndings.
To best examine changes in the relationship between self-
efﬁcacy and self-care behavior over the life span, longitudinal
research is needed. A case could be made that as people age,
they become more experienced at illness self-management,
resulting in increasing levels of self-efﬁcacy. Alternatively, it
is equally possible that the challenges of older adulthood
could erode self-efﬁcacy for illness management. The recip-
rocal and dynamic nature of these relationships needs to be
acknowledged and investigated in future research.
Social Development and the Health Behavior
of Older Adults
Social factors are central to the maintenance of health and
functioning in older adulthood. For some older adults, aging
is associated with good health and fulﬁllment, whereas for
others, aging brings chronic illness, disability, and disen-
gagement (Riley & Bond, 1987). As stated by Riley and
Bond (1987), such differences in how people age are inﬂu-
enced not only by biology, but also by the social environ-
ments in which they grow old—by the work they do, the
people with whom they interact, and the community in which
they live. Social factors also inﬂuence individuals’ percep-
tions of health and illness and their behavioral responses
(Riley & Bond, 1987). 
A small body of research examines the impact of life tran-
sitions during older adulthood on health behaviors and self-
care practices. Many of these life transitions have a direct
effect on the quality and quantity of social support available
to older adults. For example, dietary changes among older
adults may be a result of the loss of a spouse rather than an

Directions for Future Research
595
age-associated change (Prohaska & Clark, 1997). In an em-
pirical study by Rosenbloom and Whittington (1993), mar-
ried older adults were compared to same-aged adults who
were recently widowed. Compared to those whose spouses
were still living, widows reported a loss of appetite, a high
level of unintentional weight loss, and a lack of enjoyment
for eating meals.
Assuming the role of caregiver for an ill spouse is another
common life transition among older adults. The responsibili-
ties of caregiving may limit opportunities to engage in posi-
tive health behaviors and may promote reliance on negative
health behaviors. In an empirical study, Gallant and Connell
(1997) discovered that almost half of a sample of 233 spouse
caregivers reported being less physically active than they
were before they began providing care to their spouse. In ad-
dition, almost half of the women in the sample reported gain-
ing weight since caregiving began. The caregivers’ attributed
these negative health behaviors in part to their changing rela-
tionship with their husbands. Speciﬁcally, many study partic-
ipants reported that their patterns of exercise and meal
preparation had changed dramatically because they could no
longer count on the positive social inﬂuence that their hus-
band had provided (e.g., serving as an exercise buddy, having
someone with whom to prepare and enjoy healthy meals).
Thus, periods of life transition (e.g., widowhood, caregiving,
retirement, change in residence) may be viewed as an ideal
time to promote and support positive changes in health be-
haviors, including physical activity (King, 2001).
Social Development and Diabetes Self-Care
in Older Adulthood
The social context of older adulthood also affects self-
management behaviors of people with chronic illnesses.
Continuing with the example of diabetes self-management,
Connell, Fisher, and Houston (1992) examined the relation-
ships among both general and diabetes-speciﬁc measures of
social support and self-care in a sample of 191 older adults
with Type 2 diabetes. For men, results from this study support
the contention that social support speciﬁc to one’s diabetes
regimen increases self-care behavior. For women, neither
diabetes-speciﬁc nor general support was related to self-care
behavior. Men and women did not differ, however, in the
amount of assistance with their diabetes regimen that they re-
ceive or desire from their family and friends (e.g., help with
following a meal plan). These ﬁndings point to the complex-
ity of the relationship between support and self-management
behaviors and the importance of considering multiple con-
ceptualizations of support, demographic, and other contex-
tual factors (e.g., gender).
In a related study, Connell (1991) reported that a sample
of older adults with diabetes perceived high levels of
emotional support related to their diabetes self-care—
encouragement, reassurance, and someone to listen to their
problems and concerns. In terms of tangible support, how-
ever, the majority of older adults reported that they did not
want a lot of help from their family and friends related to
the self-management. More older adults reported receiving
help than reported wanting help with their regimen. Provid-
ing support that is not desired, even when offered with
good intentions, may be perceived as nagging or as inter-
ference (Connell, 1991). As suggested in other research, the
characteristics of and the relationship between potential
support providers and recipients may determine whether
support has a beneﬁcial impact on self-management behav-
ior. Additional research that considers the developmental
context of older adulthood is needed to deepen current un-
derstanding of the changing role of support over the life
span and how it affects both health behaviors and diabetes
self-care.
DIRECTIONS FOR FUTURE RESEARCH
The goal of this chapter was to adopt a life-span develop-
mental perspective to guide a discussion of the determinants
of health behaviors during ﬁve stages—infancy, childhood,
adolescence, midlife, and older adulthood. Obviously, the
published literature relevant to this topic is voluminous and
presented quite a challenge in terms of selecting the best pos-
sible examples to illustrate the major themes of the chapter.
Despite the impressive quantity and overall high quality of
the available research, a great deal of additional work needs
to be completed to better address how biological, cognitive,
and social development inﬂuences health behavior across the
life span.
The vast majority of relevant studies are based on cross-
sectional designs, which present implicit difﬁculties when the
goal is to assess change over time and the dynamic and reci-
procal inﬂuences of development on health behaviors. For
example, little is known about the effect of health behaviors
at one life stage on health behaviors at subsequent stages—in
part because of the relatively few longitudinal studies that
have been conducted in this area. Additional research is also
critical to increase our understanding of the developmental
context of health behaviors during midlife. Although great
strides have been made in recent research (e.g., Willis &
Reid, 1999), much remains to be done. 
Discussion of how best to adapt existing health behavior
theories (e.g., health belief model, social cognitive theory,

596
Health and Human Development
theory of planned behavior) to better address research ques-
tionsbasedonalife-spandevelopmentalperspectiveisneeded.
Similarly, a careful analysis of whether commonly used con-
ceptualizations of relevant concepts (e.g., self-efﬁcacy, per-
sonal control, social support) are appropriate for various life
stages would be of great value to those conducting research in
this area. Finally, in order to better account for the complexity
of the determinants of health behavior and to acknowledge the
broader context in which health decisions are made, there is a
critical need to examine the interaction between developmen-
tal phenomena and such extrinsic factors as SES, race, culture,
and gender.
REFERENCES
Ajzen, I. (1991). The theory of planned behavior. Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 50, 179–211.
Allison, K. R., Dwyer, J. J. M., & Makin, S. (1999). Self-efﬁcacy
and participation in vigorous physical activity by high school
students. Health Education and Behavior, 26(1), 12–24.
Anderson, B. J., Wolf, F. M., Burkhart, M. T., Cornell, R. G., &
Bacon, G. E. (1989). Effects of peer-group intervention on meta-
bolic control of adolescents with IDDM: Randomized outpatient
study. Diabetes Care, 12(3), 179–183.
Anderson, R. N. (1999). National Vital Statistics Report, 47(28).
Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health Statistics.
Antonucci, T. C., & Akiyama, H. (1997). Concern with others at
midlife: Care, comfort, or compromise? In M. E. Lachman &
J. B. James (Eds.), Multiple paths of midlife development
(pp. 147–169). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Avis, N. E. (1999). Women’s health at midlife. In S. L. Willis & J. D.
Reid (Eds.), Life in the middle: Psychological and social devel-
opment in middle age (pp. 105–137). San Diego, CA: Academic
Press.
Avis, N. E., & McKinlay, S. M. (1995). The Massachusetts women’s
health study: An epidemiologic investigation of the menopause.
Journal of the Medical Women’s Association, 50(2), 45–49.
Baltes, P. P., & Baltes, M. M. (1990). Psychological perspectives on
successful aging: The model of selective optimization with com-
pensation. In P. B. Baltes & M. M. Baltes (Eds.), Successful
aging: Perspectives from the behavioral sciences (pp. 1–34).
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Baltes, P. B., Lindenberger, U., & Staudinger, U. M. (1998). Life-
span theory in developmental psychology. In R. M. Lerner (Ed.),
Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 1. Theoretical models
of human development (5th ed., pp. 1029–1111). New York:
Wiley.
Baltes, P. B., Reese, H. W., & Nesselroade, J. R. (1988). Life-span
developmental psychology: Introduction to research methods.
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Baltes, P. B., Staudinger, U. M., & Lindenberger, U. (1999). Life-
span psychology: Theory and application to intellectual func-
tioning. Annual Review of Psychology, 59, 471–507.
Bandura, A. (1986). Social foundations of thought and action: A
social cognitive theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Bandura, A. (1997). Self-efﬁcacy: The exercise of control. New
York: W. H. Freeman.
Bandura, A. (2001). Social cognitive theory: An agentic perspective.
Annual Review of Psychology, 52, 1–26.
Baruch, G., & Brooks-Gunn, J. (Eds.). (1984). Women in midlife.
New York: Plenum Press.
Bergeman, C. S., & Wallace, K. A. (1999). Resiliency in later life. In
T. L. Whitman, T. L. Merluzzi, & R. D. White (Eds.), Life-span
perspectives on health and illness (pp. 207–225). Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Berkman, L. F., & Glass, T. (2000). Social integration, social net-
works, and health. In L. F. Berkman & I. Kawachi (Eds.), Social
epidemiology (pp. 137–173). New York: Oxford University
Press.
Beyth-Marom, R., & Fischhoff, B. (1997). Adolescents’ decisions
about risks: A cognitive perspective. In J. Schulenberg, J. L.
Maggs, & K. Hurrelmann (Eds.), Health risks and developmen-
tal transitions during adolescence (pp. 110–135). Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press.
Bibace, R., & Walsh, M. E. (1980). Development of children’s con-
cepts of illness. Pediatrics, 66(6), 912–917.
Bolig, E. E., Borkowski, J., & Brandenberger, J. (1999). Poverty and
health across the life span. In T. L. Whitman, T. L. Merluzzi, &
R. D. White (Eds.), Life-span perspectives on health and illness
(pp. 67–84). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Bound, J., Schoenbaum, M., & Waidman, T. (1996). Race differ-
ences in labor force attachment and disability status. Gerontolo-
gist, 36(3), 311–321.
Brambilla, D. J., & McKinlay, S. M. (1989). A prospective study of
factors affecting age at menopause. Journal of Clinical Epidemi-
ology, 42, 1031–1039.
Brooks-Gunn, J. (1993). Why do adolescents have difﬁculty adher-
ing to health regimes? In N. A. Krasnegor, L. Epstein, S. B.
Johnson, & S. J. Yaffe (Eds.), Developmental aspects of health
compliance behavior (pp. 125–152). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Brooks-Gunn, J., & Kirsh, B. (1984). Life events and the boundaries
of midlife for women. In G. K. Baruch & J. Brooks-Gunn (Eds.),
Women in midlife (pp. 11–30). New York: Plenum Press.
Brown, B. B., Dolcini, M. M., & Leventhal, A. (1997). Transforma-
tions in peer relationships at adolescence: Implications for
health-related behavior. In J. Schulenberg, J. L. Maggs, & K.
Hurrelmann (Eds.), Health risks and developmental transitions
during adolescence (pp. 161–189). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (1998). National dia-
betes fact sheet: National estimates and general information on
diabetes in the United States (Rev. ed.). Atlanta, GA: U.S.

References
597
Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention.
Clark, D. O. (1996). Age, socioeconomic status, and exercise self-
efﬁcacy. Gerontologist, 36(2), 157–164.
Clark, N. M., & Zimmerman, B. J. (1990). A social cognitive view
of self-regulated learning about health. Health Education
Quarterly, 5(3), 371–379.
Conn, V. S. (1997). Older women: Social cognitive theory correlates
of health behavior. Women and Health, 26(3), 71–85.
Connell, C. M. (1991). Psychosocial contexts of diabetes and older
adulthood:Reciprocaleffects.DiabetesEducator,17(5),364–371.
Connell, C. M. (1999). Older adults in health education research:
Some recommendations. Health Education Research, 14(3),
427–431.
Connell, C. M., & D’Augelli, A. R. (1988). Social support and
human development: Issues in theory, research, and practice.
Journal of Community Health, 13(2), 104–114.
Connell, C. M., Fisher, E. B., & Houston, C. A. (1992). Relation-
ships among social support, diabetes outcomes, and morale for
older men and women. Journal of Aging and Health, 4(1),
77–100.
Cousins, S. O. (1997). Elderly tomboys? Sources of self-efﬁcacy for
physical activity in later life. Journal of Aging and Physical
Activity, 5, 229–243.
Cowell, J. M., & Marks, B. A. (1997). Health behavior in adoles-
cents. In D. S. Gochman (Ed.), Handbook of health behavior
research: Vol. 3. Demography, development, and diversity
(pp. 73–96). New York: Plenum Press.
Davis, W. K., Hess, G. E., & Hiss, R. G. (1988). Psychosocial cor-
relates of survival in diabetes. Diabetes Care, 11(7), 538–545.
Delamater, A. M. (1993). Compliance interventions for children
with diabetes and other chronic diseases. In N. A. Krasnegor, L.
Epstein, S. B. Johnson, & S. Yaffe (Eds.), Developmental aspects
of health compliance behavior (pp. 335–354). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Delamater, A. M., Jacobson, A. M., Anderson, B., Cox, D., Fisher,
L., Lustman, P., Rubin, R., & Wysocki, T. (2001). Psychosocial
therapies in diabetes: Report of the Psychosocial Therapies
Working Group. Diabetes Care, 24(7), 1286–1292.
The Diabetes Control and Complications Trial Research Group.
(1993). The effect of intensive treatment of diabetes on the
development and progression of long-term complications in
insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. New England Journal of
Medicine, 329(14), 977–986.
DiLorenzo, T. M., Stucky-Ropp, R. C., Vander Wal, J. S., &
Gotham, H. J. (1998). Determinants of exercise among children:
Pt. II. A longitudinal analysis. Preventive Medicine, 27(3),
470–477.
Elder, G. H., Jr. (1998). The life course as developmental theory.
Child Development, 69(1), 1–12.
Elkind, D. (1967). Egocentrism in adolescence. Child Development,
38, 1025–1034.
Eyler, A. A., Brownson, R. C., Donatelle, R. J., King, A. C., Brown,
D., & Sallis, J. F. (1999). Physical activity social support and
middle- and older-aged minority women: Results from a US
survey. Social Science and Medicine, 49(6), 781–789.
Gallant, M. P. (in press). The inﬂuence of social support on chronic
illness self-management: A review and directions for research.
Health Education and Behavior.
Gallant, M. P., & Connell, C. M. (1997). Predictors of decreased
self-care among spouse caregivers of older adults with dement-
ing illnesses. Journal of Aging and Health, 9(3), 373–395.
Garcia, A. W., Pender, N. J., Antonakos, C. L., & Ronis, D. L.
(1998). Changes in physical activity beliefs and behaviors of
boys and girls across the transition to junior high school. Journal
of Adolescent Health, 22, 394–402.
Geronimus, A. T. (1996). Black/White differences in the relation-
ship of maternal age to birthweight: A population-based test of
the weathering hypothesis. Social Science and Medicine, 42(4),
589–597.
Glasgow, R. E., & Toobert, D. J. (1988). Social environment and
regimen adherence among type II diabetic patients. Diabetes
Care, 11(5), 377–386.
Glasgow, R. E., Toobert, D. J., Hampson, S. E., Brown, J. E.,
Lewinsohn, P. M., & Donnelly, J. (1992). Improving self-care
among older patients with Type II Diabetes: The “Sixty Some-
thing . . .” Study. Patient Education and Counseling, 19, 61–74.
Gondoli, D. M. (1999). Adolescent development and health. In T. L.
Whitman, T. L. Merluzzi, & R. D. White (Eds.), Life-span perspec-
tives on health and illness (pp. 147–164). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Goran, M. I., Gower, B. A., Nagy, T. R., & Johnson, R. K. (1998).
Developmental chances in energy expenditure and physical ac-
tivity in children: Evidence for a decline in physical activity in
girls before puberty. Pediatrics, 101(5), 887–891.
Gordon-Larsen, P., McMurray, R. G., & Popkin, B. M. (2000).
Determinants of adolescent physical activity and inactivity pat-
terns (Electronic article). Pediatrics, 105(6), e83–e90.
Halpern-Felsher, B., Millstein, S. G., Ellen, J. M., Adler, N. E.,
Tschann, J. M., & Biehl, M. (2001). The role of behavioral expe-
rience in judging risks. Health Psychology, 20(2), 120–126.
Hartman-Stein, P., & Reuter, J. M. (1988). Developmental issues in
the treatment of diabetic women. Psychology of Women Quar-
terly, 12, 417–428.
Hazzard, W. R. (1995). Weight control and exercise: Cardinal fea-
tures of successful preventive gerontology [Editorial]. Journal of
the American Medical Association, 274, 1964–1965.
Healthy People, 2000. (1991). National health promotion and
disease prevention objectives. (DHHS Publication No. PHS
91-51213). Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Ofﬁce.
Heckhausen, J., & Schulz, R. (1995). A life-span theory of control.
Psychological Review, 102(2), 284–304.
Hooker, K., & Kaus, C. R. (1994). Health-related possible selves in
young and middle adulthood. Psychology and Aging, 9(1),
126–133.

598
Health and Human Development
House, J. S., Kessler, R. C., Herzog, A. R., Mero, R. P., Kinney,
A. M., & Breslow, M. J. (1990). Age, socioeconomic status, and
health. Milbank Quarterly, 68(3), 383–411.
Iannotti, R. J., & Bush, P. J. (1993). Toward a developmental theory
of compliance. In N. A. Krasnegor, L. Epstein, S. B. Johnson, &
S. J. Yaffe (Eds.), Developmental aspects of health compliance
behavior (pp. 59–76). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Ingersoll, G. M., Orr, D. P., Herrold, A. J., & Golden, M. P. (1986).
Cognitive maturity and self-management among adolescents
with insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. Journal of Pediatrics,
108(4), 620–623.
Janz, N. K., & Becker, M. H. (1984). The Health Belief Model:
A decade later. Health Education Quarterly, 11(1), 1–47.
Johnson, S. B. (1993). Chronic diseases of childhood: Assessing
compliance with complex medical regimens. In N. A. Krasnegor,
L. Epstein, S. B. Johnson, & S. J. Yaffe (Eds.), Developmental
aspects of health compliance behavior (pp. 157–184). Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Jones, J. B. (1997). Representations of menopause and their health
care implications: A qualitative study. American Journal of
Preventive Medicine, 13(1), 58–65.
Jovanovic, L. (1998). Sex and the diabetic woman: Desire versus
dysfunction. Diabetes Reviews, 6, 65–72.
Jovanovic, L. et al. (1997). Diabetes mellitus in women over the
life phases and in pregnancy. In Lila Wallis (Ed.), In textbook
of women’s health (pp. 533–543). Philadelphia: Lippincott
Raven.
Kahn, R. L., & Antonucci, T. C. (1980). Convoys over the life
course: Attachment, roles, and social support. In P. B. Baltes &
O. Brim (Eds.), Life-span development and behavior (Vol. 3,
pp. 253–286). New York: Academic Press.
Kaplan, R., Reis, A., Prewitt, L., & Eakin, E. (1994). Self-efﬁcacy
expectations predict survival for patients with chronic obstruc-
tive pulmonary disease. Health Psychology, 13, 366–368.
Kimiecik, J. C., Horn, T. S., & Shurin, C. S. (1996). Relationships
among children’s beliefs, perceptions of their parents’ beliefs,
and their moderate-to-vigorous physical activity. Research
Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 67(3), 324–336.
King, A. C. (2001). Interventions to promote physical activity by
older adults. Journal of Gerontology, 56A(Special Issue II),
36–46.
Kolberg, K. J. S. (1999). Biological development and health risk. In
T. L. Whitman, T. L. Merluzzi, & R. D. White (Eds.), Life-span
perspectives on health and illness (pp. 23–45). Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Kovacs, M., Goldston, D., Obrosky, D. S., & Iyengar, S. (1992).
Prevalence and predictors of pervasive noncompliance with
medical treatment among youths with insulin-dependent dia-
betes. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry, 31(6), 1112–1119.
Kreipe, R. E., & Strauss, J. (1989). Adolescent medical disorders,
behavior, and development. In G. R. Adams, R. Montemayor, &
T. P. Gullotta (Eds.), Biology of adolescent behavior and devel-
opment (pp. 98–140). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
La Greca, A. M., Auslander, W. F., Greco, P., Spetter, D., Fisher,
E. B., & Santiago, J. V. (1995). I get by with a little help from
my family and friends: Adolescents’ support for diabetes care.
Journal of Pediatric Psychology, 20(4), 449–476.
Lachman, M. E., & James, J. B. (1997). Charting the course of
midlife development: An overview. In M. E. Lachman & J. B.
James (Eds.), Multiple paths of midlife development (pp. 1–17).
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lachman, M. E., Lewkowicz, C., Marcus, A., & Peng, Y. (1994).
Images of midlife development among young, middle-aged, and
elderly adults. Journal of Adult Development, 1, 201–211.
Lachman, M. E., Ziff, M. A., & Spiro, R. (1994). Maintaining a
sense of control in later life. In R. P. Abeles, H. C. Gift, & M. G.
Ory (Eds.), Aging and quality of life (pp. 216–232). New York:
Springer.
Lapsley, D. K. (1993). Toward an integrated theory of adolescent
ego development: The “new look” at adolescent egocentrism.
American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 63(4), 562–571.
Lau, R. R., Quadrel, M. J., & Hartman, K. A. (1990). Development
and change of young adults’preventive health beliefs and behav-
ior: Inﬂuence from parents and peers. Journal of Health and
Social Behavior, 31, 240–259.
Lerner, R. M., Ostrom, C. W., & Freel, M. A. (1999). Preventing
health-compromising behaviors among youth and promoting
their positive development: A developmental contextual per-
spective. In J. Schulenberg, J. L. Maggs, & K. Hurrelmann
(Eds.), Health risks and developmental transitions during ado-
lescence (pp. 498–521). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press.
Levinson, D. J. (1977). The mid-life transition: A period in adult
psychosocial development. Psychiatry, 40(2), 99–112.
Lewis, M. A., & Rook, K. S. (1999). Social control in personal rela-
tionships: Impact on health behaviors and psychological distress.
Health Psychology, 18(1), 63–71.
Lindenberger, U., & Baltes, P. B. (1997). Intellectual functioning in
old and very old age: Cross-sectional results from the Berlin
Aging Study. Psychology and Aging, 12(3), 410–432.
Lindquist, C. H., Reynolds, K. D., & Goran, M. I. (1999). Sociocul-
tural determinants of physical activity among children. Preven-
tive Medicine, 29(4), 305–312.
Maggs, J. L., Schulenberg, J., & Hurrelmann, K. (1997). Develop-
mental transitions during adolescence: Health promotion oppor-
tunities. In J. Schulenberg, J. L. Maggs, & K. Hurrelmann (Eds.),
Health risks and developmental transitions during adolescence
(pp. 522–546). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Markides, K. S. (1989). Aging and health: Perspectives on gender,
race, ethnicity, and class. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
McAdoo, H. P. (1995). Stress levels, family help patterns, and reli-
giosity in middle- and working-class African American single
mothers. Journal of Black Psychology, 21(4), 424–449.

References
599
McAuley, E. (1992). The role of efﬁcacy cognitions in the predic-
tion of exercise behavior in middle-aged adults. Journal of
Behavioral Medicine, 15(1), 65–88.
McAuley, E., & Katula, J. (1999). Physical activity interventions in
the elderly: Inﬂuence on physical health and psychological func-
tion. In R. Schulz, G. Maddox, & M. P. Lawton (Volume Eds.),
Annual review of gerontology and geriatrics (Vol. 18, pp. 111–
153). New York: Springer.
McAuley, E., Lox, C., & Duncan, T. E. (1993). Long-term mainte-
nance of exercise, self-efﬁcacy, and physiological change in
older adults. Journal of Gerontology: Psychological Sciences,
48(4), 218–224.
Merrill, S. S., & Verbrugge, L. M. (1999). Health and disease in
midlife. In S. L. Willis & J. D. Reid (Eds.), Life in the middle:
Psychological and social development in middle age (pp. 77–
103). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Merluzzi, T. V., & Nairn, R. C. (1999). Adulthood and aging: Tran-
sitions in health and health cognition. In T. L. Whitman, T. L.
Merluzzi, & R. D. White (Eds.), Life-span perspectives on health
and illness (pp. 189–206). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Miceli, P. J., Rowland, J. F., & Whitman, T. L. (1999). Chronic ill-
nesses in childhood. In T. L. Whitman, T. L. Merluzzi, & R. D.
White (Eds.), Life-span perspectives on health and illness
(pp. 165–186). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Millstein, S. G., Irwin, C. E., Adler, N. E., Cohn, L. D., Kegeles,
S. M., & Dolcini, M. M. (1992). Health risk behaviors and
health concerns among young adolescents. Pediatrics, 89, 422–
428.
Mirowsky, J. (1995). Age and the sense of control. Social Psychol-
ogy Quarterly, 58, 31–43.
Moen, P., & Wethington, E. (1999). Midlife development in a life
course context. In S. L. Willis & J. D. Reid (Eds.), Life in
the middle: Psychological and social development in middle age
(pp. 3–23). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Montano, D. E., Kasprzyk, D., & Taplin, S. H. (1997). The theory of
reasoned action and the theory of planned behavior. In K. Glanz,
F. M. Lewis, & B. K. Rimer (Eds.), Health behavior and health
education: Theory, research and practice (2nd ed., pp. 85–112).
San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Moody, H. R. (1998). Aging: Concepts and controversies (2nd ed.).
Thousand Oaks, CA: Pine Forge Press.
Murphy, R., & Bennett, P. (1994). Psychological perspectives
on young adults’ health behavior: Implications for health
promotion. In G. N. Penny, P. Bennett, & M. Herbert (Eds.), Health
psychology: A lifespan perspective. Philadelphia: Harwood.
National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promo-
tion, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (1997). Guide-
lines for school and community programs to promote lifelong
physical activity among young people. Journal of School Health,
67(6), 202–219.
O’Brien, R. W., & Bush, P. J. (1997). Health behavior in children. In
D. S. Gochman (Ed.), Handbook of health behavior research:
Vol. 3. Demography, development, and diversity (pp. 49–71).
New York: Plenum Press.
O’Leary, A. (1985). Self-efﬁcacy and health. Behaviour Research
and Therapy, 23(4), 437–451.
Patterson, J. M. (1988). Chronic illness in children and the impact
on families. In C. S. Chilman, E. W. Nunnally, & F. M. Cox
(Eds.), Chronic illness and disability (Vol. 2, pp. 69–107).
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Penny, G. N., Bennett, P., & Herbert, M. (1994). Health psychology:
A lifespan perspective, an introduction. In G. N. Penny, P.
Bennett, & M. Herbert (Eds.), Health psychology: A lifespan
perspective (pp. 1–9). Langhorne, PA: Harwood.
Petersen, A. C. (1988). Adolescent development. Annual Review of
Psychology, 39, 583–607.
Peterson, L. (1996). Establishing the study of development as a
dynamic force in health psychology. Health Psychology, 15(3),
155–157.
Pinto, B. M., Marcus, B. H., & Clark, M. M. (1996). Promoting
physical activity in women: The new challenges. American Jour-
nal of Preventive Medicine, 12(5), 395–400.
Poirier, L. M., & Coburn, K. M. (2000). Women and diabetes: Stay-
ing healthy in body, mind, and spirit (2nd ed.). Alexandria, VA:
American Diabetes Association.
Prohaska, T. R., & Clark, M. A. (1997). Health behavior and the
human life cycle. In D. S. Gochman (Ed.), Handbook of health
behavior research: Vol. 3. Demography, development, and diver-
sity (pp. 29–48). New York: Plenum Press.
Resnick, B. (2001). Testing a model of exercise behavior in older
adults. Reasearch in Nursing and Health, 24, 83–92.
Ries, A. L., Kaplan, R. M., Limberg, T. M., & Prewitt, L. M. (1995).
Effects of pulmonary rehabilitation on physiologic and psy-
chosocial outcomes in patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. Annals of Internal Medicine, 122(11), 823–
832.
Riley, M. W., & Bond, K. (1987). Foreword. In R. A. Ward & S. S.
Tobin (Eds.), Health in aging: Sociological issues and policy
directions (pp. vii–ix). New York: Springer.
Roberts, M. C., Maddux, J. E., & Wright, L. (1984). Developmental
perspectives in behavioral health. In J. D. Matarazzo, S. M.
Weiss, J. A. Herd, N. E. Miller, & S. M. Weiss (Eds.), Behavioral
health (pp. 56–68). New York: Wiley. 
Rodin, J. (1986). Aging and health: Effects of the sense of control.
Science, 233, 1271–1276.
Rosenbloom, C. A., & Whittington, F. J. (1993). The effects of
bereavement on eating behaviors and nutrient intakes in el-
derly widowed persons. Journal of Gerontology, 48(4), S223–
S229.
Russell, N. K., & Roter, D. L. (1993). Health promotion counseling
of chronic-disease patients during primary care visits. American
Journal of Public Health, 83(7), 979–982.
Savinetti-Rose, B. (1994). Developmental issues in managing
children with diabetes. Pediatric Nursing, 20(1), 11–15.

600
Health and Human Development
Scharff, D. P., Homan, S., Kreuter, M., & Brennan, L. (1999).
Factors associated with physical activity in women across the
life span: Implications for program development. Women
Health, 29(2), 115–134.
Schulenberg, J., Maggs, J. L., & Hurrelmann, K. (1997a). Health
risks and developmental transitions during adolescence.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Schulenberg, J., Maggs, J. L., & Hurrelmann, K. (1997b). Negotiat-
ing developmental transitions during adolescence and young
adulthood: Health risks and opportunities. In J. Schulenberg,
J. L. Maggs, & K. Hurrelmann (Eds.), Health risks and develop-
mental transitions during adolescence (pp. 1–19). Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press.
Schulenberg, J., Maggs, J. L., Steinman, K., & Zucker, R. A. (2001).
Development matters: Taking the long view on substance abuse
etiology and intervention during adolescence. In P. M. Monti,
S. M. Colby, & T. A. O’Leary (Eds.), Adolescents, alcohol, and
substance abuse: Reaching teens through brief intervention
(pp. 19–57). New York: Guilford Press.
Schulz, R., & Heckhausen, J. (1996). A life span model of success-
ful aging. American Psychologist, 51(7), 702–714.
Schulz, R., & Martire, L. A. (1999). Intervention research with older
adults: Introduction, overview, and future directions. In R. Schulz,
G. Maddox, & M. P. Lawton (Eds.), Annual Review of Gerontol-
ogy and Geriatrics (Vol. 18, pp. 1–16). New York: Springer.
Schulz, R., & Rau, M. T. (1985). Social support through the life
course. In S. Cohen & S. L. Syme (Eds.), Social support and
health (pp. 129–149). New York: Academic Press.
Silbereisen, R. K., & Kracke, B. (1999). Self-reported maturational
timing and adaptation in adolescence. In T. L. Whitman, T. L.
Merluzzi, & R. D. White (Eds.), Life-span perspectives on health
and illness (pp. 85–109). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Singh, M. A. F. (2000). Exercise and aging. In M. A. F. Singh (Ed.),
Exercise, nutrition, and the older woman: Wellness for women
over ﬁfty (pp. 3–36). New York: CRC Press.
Standiford, D. A., Turner, A. M., Allen, S. R., Drozda, D. J., &
McCain, G. C. (1997). Personal illness models of diabetes:
Preadolescents and adolescents. Diabetes Educator, 23(2),
147–151.
Sturges, J. W., & Rogers, R. W. (1996). Preventive psychology from
a developmental perspective: An extension of protection motiva-
tion theory. Health Psychology, 15(3), 158–166.
Telama, R., Yang, X., Laakso, L., & Viikari, J. (1997). Physical
activity in childhood and adolescence as predictor of physical
activity in young adulthood. American Journal of Preventive
Medicine, 13(4), 317–323.
Thompson, R. J., & Gustafson, K. E. (1996). Adaptation to chronic
childhood illness. Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association.
Thornberry, R., Wilson, W., & Golden, P. (1986). Health promotion
and disease prevention: Provisional data from the National
Health Interview Survey: United States, Jan.-June 1985. In
Advance data from vital and health statistics (DHHS Publication
No. PHS 86-1250). Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health
Statistics.
Tinsley, B. J. (1992). Multiple inﬂuences on the acquisition and
socialization of children’s health attitudes and behavior: An
integrative review. Child Development, 63, 1043–1069.
Tinsley, B. J., Holtgrave, D. R., Reise, S. P., Erdley, C., & Cupp,
R. G. (1995). Developmental status, gender, age, and self-
reported decision-making inﬂuences on students’ risky and pre-
ventive health behaviors. Health Education Quarterly, 22(2),
244–259.
Toshima, M. T., Kaplan, R. M., & Ries, A. L. (1990). Experimental
evaluation of rehabilitation in chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease: Short-term effects on exercise endurance and health
status. Health Psychology, 9(3), 237–252.
Wallston, K. A., & Smith, M. S. (1994). Issues of control and health:
The action is in the interaction. In G. N. Penny, P. Bennett, &
M. Herbert (Eds.), Health psychology: A lifespan perspective
(pp. 153–168). Langhorne, PA: Harwood.
Watkins, K. W., Connell, C. M., Fitzgerald, J. T., Klem, L., Hickey,
T., & Ingersoll-Dayton, B. (2000). Effect of adults’ self-
regulation of diabetes on quality-of-life outcomes. Diabetes
Care, 23(10), 1511–1515.
Whitman, T. L. (1999). Conceptual frameworks for viewing health
and illness. In T. L. Whitman, T. L. Merluzzi, & R. D. White
(Eds.), Life-span perspectives on health and illness (pp. 3–21).
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Whitman, T. L., White, R. D., O’Mara, K. M., & Goeke-Morey,
M. C. (1999). Environmental aspects of infant health and illness.
In T. L. Whitman, T. L. Merluzzi, & R. D. White (Eds.), Life-
span perspectives on health and illness (pp. 105–124). Mahwah,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Willis, S. L., & Reid, J. D. (1999). Life in the middle : Psychologi-
cal and social development in middle age. San Diego, CA:
Academic Press.
Wilson, W., Ary, D. V., Biglan, A., Glasgow, R. E., Toobert, D. J., &
Campbell, D. R. (1986). Psychosocial predictors of self-care
behaviors (compliance) and glycemic control in non-
insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. Diabetes Care, 9(6), 614–
622.
Woods, N. F., & Mitchell, E. S. (1997). Women’s images of midlife:
Observations from the Seattle midlife women’s health study.
Health Care for Women International, 18, 439–453.
Wysocki, T., Meinhold, P., Cox, D. J., & Clarke, W. L. (1990).
Survey of diabetes professionals regarding developmental
changes in diabetes self-care. Diabetes Care, 13(1), 65–68.
Wysocki, T., Taylor, A., Hough, B. S., Linscheid, T. R., Yeates,
K. O., & Naglieri, J. A. (1996). Deviation from developmentally
appropriate self-care autonomy. Association with diabetes out-
comes. Diabetes Care, 19(2), 119–125.

CHAPTER 25
Successful Aging
ALEXANDRA M. FREUND AND MICHAELA RIEDIGER
601
CHARACTERISTICS OF OLD AGE
601
Old Age Is Still Young
602
Physiological and Health-Related Changes in Old Age
603
Cognitive Abilities in Old Age
603
Social Relationships in Old Age
605
Everyday Competence in Old Age
606
Conclusions: What Characterizes Old Age?
608
SUCCESSFUL AGING: DEFINITION AND CRITERIA
609
Is Subjective Well-Being a Sufﬁcient Criterion for
Successful Aging?
609
Beyond Well-Being: Other Criteria for
Successful Aging
610
PROCESSES RELATED TO SUCCESSFUL AGING
613
Successful Aging: A Matter of Disengagement or
Continued Activity?
614
Selection, Optimization, and Compensation (SOC):
A Metamodel of Successful Aging
615
The Model of Optimization in Primary and
Secondary Control (OPS)
618
The Model of Assimilative and 
Accommodative Coping
619
SUMMARY
620
REFERENCES
621
What is successful aging? At ﬁrst glance, this seems like an
easy enough question. After all, don’t all humans want to be
happy, healthy, wealthy, and beloved well into old age? How-
ever, considering that older people are very likely to face
health-related problems, maybe healthy should be skipped
from the list. Similarly, when people advance into very old
age, the loss of their spouse or partner and of close friends is
the norm rather than the exception. Considering this, beloved
might take on a meaning in old age that is different from that
in younger age groups. Finally, happiness seems such an elu-
sive state that we might not want to make this the criterion for
successful aging. Maybe it is not so easy to answer the ques-
tion of what successful aging is after all. 
In this chapter, we approach the concept of successful
aging from three different perspectives:
1. We ﬁrst focus on the context of old age. What are the ex-
ternal and internal changes that distinguish old age from
younger age groups? What are the characteristics that
might render old age a time in life that is feared rather than
hoped for? Why is it (as the saying goes) that everybody
wants to get old but nobody wants to actually be old?
2. We then address the issue of how to deﬁne successful
aging. The term success implies some sort of normative
judgement on desirable and undesirable end states. This
raises two questions: What can be considered as a mean-
ingful end state of development? And which criteria
should be employed to evaluate the desirability of those
end states? We review the state of research on these ques-
tions and existing attempts to deﬁne successful aging in
the second part of this chapter.
3. In the ﬁnal part of this chapter, we discuss some of the
current models of developmental regulation in old and very
old age. These models shift the focus from a criteria-
oriented approach addressing the question What is success-
ful aging? to a more process-oriented approach addressing
the question How do people age successfully? These
models underscore that motivational processes of setting,
pursuing, and maintaining personal goals are of central
importance for understanding how individuals manage to
age well.
CHARACTERISTICS OF OLD AGE
When is a person considered to be old? Old age, the ﬁnal
phase in life, is commonly thought to begin somewhere be-
tween the ages of 60 and 70. An often cited (somewhat arbi-
trary) threshold is the age of 65. For employees, retirement
represents a cultural marker of entering old age. Many people

602
Successful Aging
in their 60s, however, appear still young, whereas others have
apparently been old for quite some time. Chronological age
does not tell much about a person’s biological (e.g., func-
tional capacity), psychological (e.g., feelings, attitudes, inter-
ests, future perspectives), or social age (e.g., life activities,
occupied roles; see Aiken, 1989). 
Even within a given person, aging is no uniform process.
Different organs, organ systems, and capacities in various
functional and psychological domains show differential pat-
terns and rates of aging (P. B. Baltes, 1989). For example,
the reproductive system usually ages more rapidly than the
nervous system. Furthermore, other variables—such as poor
nutrition, illness, or disuse of abilities—affect the rate and
degree of aging-related decline (e.g., Aiken, 1989; Krauss
Whitbourne, 1985). 
In other words, old age—like any other phase in life—is
characterized by tremendous inter- and intraindividual vari-
ability. In the subsequent sections we delineate some develop-
ments that represent general characteristics of old age. Aging
is a very complex process, and it is beyond the scope of this
chapter to attempt a comprehensive characterization of that
life phase (for a recent overview, see P. B. Baltes, Staudinger,
& Lindenberger, 1999). After characterizing aging as a young
phenomenon, so to speak, we restrict our discussion to four
domains of functioning in which age-related changes are
partly considered losses threatening positive functioning in
old age: (a) physiological and health-related changes, (b) cog-
nitive abilities, (c) social relationships, and (d) everyday
competence.
Old Age Is Still Young
Until relatively recently in human history, only a small pro-
portion of people survived long enough to become old in
today’s sense (see Vaupel, 1995): Throughout human history
up to about the beginning of the nineteenth century, life ex-
pectancy at birth (i.e., the average life span of persons born in
a given year) was low for most populations—namely, only
between 20 and 30 years. This was largely so because a large
proportion of newborns (about one third to one half) died be-
fore reaching the age of 5 years. Even for children surviving
to age 5, the expected remaining lifetime was only 30–40
years. Only a small minority of people survived diseases,
wars, and other life-threatening dangers to become 50. Even
for them, the remaining life expectancy was only about
10–15 years. 
During the 19th century, life expectancy slowly began to
increase. In Finland, for example, where reliable statistics on
mortality going back to that time are available (Kannisto,
Turpeinen, & Nieminen, 1999), life expectancy at birth
increased from 30.4 years for men and 33.2 years for women
born between 1801 and 1810 to 45.3 years for men and
48.2 years for women born 100 years later (i.e., between 1901
and 1910). Because of technological advances coupled with
improvements in nutrition, sanitation, public health care, and
so on, this increase in life expectancy further accelerated dur-
ing the twentieth century. Men and women born in Finland
between 1946 and 1950, for example, had a life expectancy of
58.4 years and 65.8 years, respectively. Estimated life ex-
pectancy for children born in Finland another 50 years later
(between 1991 and 1995) further increased to 72.1 years
(male) and 79.7 (female).
Prior to 1950, the increase in life expectancy largely
resulted from reductions in death rates at younger ages—
particularly reductions in infant mortality (i.e., from the fact
that more people survived to older ages; Vaupel, 1995). The
continuing growth of life expectancy since 1950, in contrast,
is attributable to the fact that older people live longer. In most
modern industrialized countries, death rates above the age of
60 have substantially declined since 1950. This decline has
even accelerated—especially since 1970. For example, in
modern industrialized countries in 1990, there were about
twice as many people in their 90s and four to ﬁve times as
many centenarians as there would have been if mortality rates
after age 80 had stayed the same as in 1960 (Vaupel et al.,
1998). To date, the lengthening of the human life span is no
longer restricted to modern industrialized countries. More
recently, developing countries have started to show similar
increases in life expectancy (Meeks, Nickols, & Sweaney,
1999; World Health Organization, 1998). It has been esti-
mated that by the year 2025, 72% of the world’s population
aged 60 years and above will be living in developing coun-
tries (United Nations, 1996).
In most (particularly in industrialized) countries, the in-
crease in life expectancy has been co-occurring with a decline
in fertility rates (i.e., a decrease in the average number of
children per woman in childbearing age). Both trends to-
gether (i.e., declining mortality and fertility rates) have dras-
tically altered the population’s composition—with the growth
of the older population outpacing the total population’s
growth. This trend is expected to continue in the future, with
the fastest expanding group being the oldest old (Dinkel,
1994). Prognoses of the World Health Organization (1998),
for example, predict that in Europe’s population, the propor-
tion of people older than 60 will increase from about 20% at
the end of the twentieth century to about 25% by the year
2020. Estimates indicate that by 2020, the proportion of peo-
ple older than 80 years in the age group above 60 will make
up 22% in Greece and Italy; 21% in Japan, France, and Spain;
and 20% in Germany (World Health Organization, 1998).

Characteristics of Old Age
603
This lengthening of the average human life might be
viewed by many as one of the most precious achievements in
recent human history. It does, however, also pose new chal-
lenges to cultural and societal developments. Societies need
to develop policies that ensure—despite declining propor-
tions of working-age people—adequate income, housing,
health care, and other living conditions that provide opportu-
nities for an independent, integrated life for the growing
number of older people (United Nations, 1996). To meet this
challenge, gerontology needs to seek knowledge about con-
ditions promoting positive aging and to give answers to such
questions as what represents adequate housing for the elderly
and how to support independent living in old age. This is one
of the reasons that the topic of successful aging is not only of
scientiﬁc but also of social and political importance.
Paradoxically, in one sense old age is a young phenome-
non. To date, not much is known about this life phase in gen-
eral or about processes and conditions that promote successful
aging in particular. As a ﬁrst step in approaching the topic of
successful aging, we brieﬂy outline the speciﬁc conditions
of old age. We start by giving a very short overview of the
physiological and health-related changes in old age.
Physiological and Health-Related 
Changes in Old Age
Aging is characterized by physiological changes that lead to
progressive structural and functional decrements in all tissues
and organs (for overviews, see Aiken, 1989; Whitbourne,
1985; Medina, 1996). Most obvious to the lay observer are
typical changes in appearance—for example, aging skin;
graying or whitening hair; changes in body shape and stature;
decreased muscular strength and endurance; increased stiff-
ness in the joints; and a general slowing, increased sway, and
insecurity while walking or performing motor tasks. Aging is
also accompanied by impairments in the functioning of all
the sense organs—vision, hearing, taste, smell, vestibular
senses (necessary for the maintenance of posture and bal-
ance), and sensitivity to touch, pain, and temperature (i.e.,
cutaneous senses). Sensations become increasingly dull, and
responses to sensory stimuli slow down with age. Physiolog-
ical aging is also characterized by a gradual deterioration of
internal organs, leading to a reduced efﬁciency of the body’s
vital systems. Age-associated changes in the various systems
generally interact. Cardiovascular functions, for example, are
inﬂuenced by age-associated changes in respiratory function,
which in turn are inﬂuenced by changes in the musculoskele-
tal system (Steinhagen-Thiessen, Gerok, & Borchelt, 1994). 
Overall, the physiological changes accompanying aging
result in reduced functional capacity, impaired biological
resilience in the face of stress, lessened ability to physiologi-
cally adapt to environmental changes, prolonged phases
necessary to physically recuperate from strenuous effort,
and—most important—increased susceptibility to acute and
chronic diseases (Aiken, 1989; Steinhagen-Thiessen et al.,
1994). It is therefore not always possible to clearly delineate
normal physiological aging and pathological changes.
Although age-associated physiological changes are in-
evitable, they represent no uniform biological process. The
kind and magnitude of age-related changes vary greatly from
individual to individual. Furthermore, physiological changes
interact, for example, with psychological, social, environ-
mental, and lifestyle factors to determine the course and ra-
pidity of aging (Fries, 1990; Rowe & Kahn, 1987; Siegler &
Costa, 1985). For example, attitudes and personality charac-
teristics may inﬂuence the degree to which an old person
seeks intellectual stimulation or engages in physical or social
activities, which in turn decelerate and attenuate decline in
relevant functional domains. On the other hand, reduced mo-
bility due to physiological impairment might obstruct such
activities, precipitating further decline (Bortz, 1982). In this
sense, physiological decline associated with aging is not en-
tirely uncontrollable. Particularly lifestyle habits, such as
regular exercise, balanced nutrition, and social and intellec-
tual stimulation through active participation might at least
temporarily postpone or attenuate physiological decrements
associated with aging (Fries, 1990).
In short, physiological changes accompanying aging
result in a reduction of the organism’s functional capacity and
an increased vulnerability to chronic and acute illnesses.
These detrimental effects of physiological aging become par-
ticularly pronounced in very old age (85 years and beyond).
Although it is unavoidable, physiological aging is no uniform
progress. It is in part determined by lifestyle factors and
thus—particularly in young-old age—temporarily and within
boundaries modiﬁable.
Cognitive Abilities in Old Age 
A popular view on aging is that cognitive abilities drastically
decline with age (e.g., Heckhausen, Dixon, & Baltes, 1989).
Old people are expected to become more and more forgetful,
to have large difﬁculties understanding new things, and to not
think as clearly as younger persons. On the other hand, wis-
dom, life experience, or professional expertise in their com-
monsensical understanding are clearly positively associated
with old age (Clayton & Birren, 1980; Sternberg, 1990).
What has science revealed about cognitive aging? 
Building on the recognition that cognitive functioning
is inﬂuenced by biological as well as cultural processes,

604
Successful Aging
research has distinguished two main categories of intellectual
abilities—the mechanics and pragmatics of cognition (P. B.
Baltes, 1987; P. B. Baltes, Lindenberger, & Staudinger, 1998;
P. B. Baltes et al., 1999).This distinction draws on and extends
earlier conceptualizations, such as the theory of ﬂuid and crys-
tallized intelligence by Cattell and Horn (Cattell, 1971; Horn,
1982). The mechanics of cognition stand as metaphor for the
largely neurophysiological basis of cognition as it evolved
during biological evolution. They represent the hardware of
the mind, so to speak, and become evident in the speed, accu-
racy, and coordination of basic information-processing opera-
tions. The pragmatics of cognition, in contrast, comprise the
culturally transmitted bodies of knowledge individuals ac-
quire in the course of their socialization. They stand for the
software of the mind. Typical examples of pragmatic abilities
include reading, writing, language, or professional skills.
Delineating mechanics and pragmatics of cognitive function-
ing does not imply that these represent abilities independent of
or exclusive from each other. Rather, mechanics and pragmat-
ics are assumed to determine intellectual functioning in their
interaction: There would not be pragmatics without mechan-
ics and vice versa—mechanics without pragmatics would lack
the very medium in which to unfold.
How do these two components of intellectual functioning
develop across the life span into old age? Empirical evidence
shows that the cognitive mechanics (e.g., memory, process-
ing speed) show a pattern of rapid growth during infancy and
childhood into adolescence, a monotonic and roughly linear
decline during adulthood, and a further acceleration of de-
cline in very old age (e.g., Case, 1985; Kail, 1991; Kail &
Salthouse, 1994; Lindenberger & Reischies, 1999; Schaie,
1994, 1996).
This trajectory of loss in the cognitive mechanics can be
counteracted to some degree by speciﬁc training. Training
studies have shown that the majority of healthy older adults
are able to improve their performance in tasks reﬂecting me-
chanic abilities during training (e.g., P. B. Baltes, Sowarka, &
Kliegl, 1989; P. B. Baltes & Willis, 1982; Hayslip, 1989;
Kliegl, Smith, & Baltes, 1990; Schaie & Willis, 1986;
Verhaegen, Marcoen, & Goossens, 1992). Those training
gains, however, are highly task-speciﬁc. Transfer to related
abilities or generalization to everyday functioning is unlikely
(P. B. Baltes, Dittmann-Kohli, & Kliegl, 1986; P. B. Baltes &
Lindenberger, 1988). Moreover, the amount of plasticity (i.e.,
the range of potential change) in the cognitive mechanics
clearly decreases with age (e.g., P. B. Baltes & Kliegl, 1992;
Singer, 2000).
Pragmatic abilities show a more favorable life-span tra-
jectory than the mechanics do. They remain stable or increase
well into young old age (i.e., up to about 75 years of age), and
only after that show some decline, which is much less pro-
nounced than the decline in the cognitive mechanics (e.g.,
skill-speciﬁc expertise: Bosman & Charness, 1996; Charness,
1981a, 1983; Knopf, Kolodziej, & Preussler, 1990; wisdom:
P. B. Baltes, Staudinger, Maercker, & Smith, 1995; Clayton &
Birren, 1980; Staudinger, 1996; complexity and differentia-
tion of self-representation: Labouvie-Vief, Chiodo, Goguen,
Diehl, & Orwoll, 1995).
As mentioned before, mechanics and pragmatics con-
jointly inﬂuence cognitive performance in all age groups.
Particularly important for understanding the development of
cognitive abilities in old age are two observations:
•
Up to a certain threshold in impairment of the cognitive
mechanics, pragmatic knowledge can be efﬁciently uti-
lized to compensate for age-based losses in mechanics.
Evidence for this has been provided by quasi-experimental
studies on age- and skill-related differences in chess (e.g.,
Charness, 1981a, 1981b), bridge (e.g., Charness, 1983,
1987), and transcription typing (e.g., Bosman, 1993; Salt-
house, 1984; Salthouse & Saults, 1987). A classic illustra-
tion is a study on aging typists (Salthouse, 1984); in this
study, age was negatively related to typing speed but posi-
tively related to eye-hand span. Older typists might have
compensated the slowing of their typing (as an expression
of cognitive mechanics) by looking further ahead in the
to-be-typed text (i.e., a strategy pertaining to knowledge-
based pragmatics). The idea that the knowledge-based
pragmatics efﬁciently compensate mechanic decline in
older adulthood is further supported by the ﬁnding that
compared to standard psychometric assessments using
artiﬁcial and isolated cognitive tasks, negative age trajec-
tories tend to be attenuated in familiar (i.e., knowledge-
relevant) domains with everyday relevance, such as
everyday problem solving (e.g., Berg & Klaszynski, 1996;
Willis, 1996) or memory in context (e.g., Hess & Pullen,
1996).
•
If, however, the mechanic information-processing capabil-
ities fall below some critical threshold, they delimit the
overall capability of cognitive integrity and consequently
also impair intellectual functioning in the pragmatic do-
main (P. B. Baltes, 1997). Individuals reaching a very ad-
vanced age are therefore particularly vulnerable to reach
such levels of impairment in mechanic abilities that intel-
lectual functioning in a more global manner is substan-
tially impaired. Indeed, correlations among abilities both
between and within the cognitive pragmatics and mechan-
ics are higher in very old adults than in younger or middle-
aged adults (for an overview, see Li & Lindenberger,
1999). This dedifferentiation in very old age appears to

Characteristics of Old Age
605
transcend the cognitive domain and to also affect sensory
and sensorimotor functioning (e.g., Anstey, Lord, &
Williams,
1997;
Lindenberger
&
Reischies,
1999;
Salthouse, Hancock, Meinz, & Hambrick, 1996). These
ﬁndings point to the impact of domain-general processing
constraints in very old age, which is further illustrated by
the empirical observation that in very old age, the differ-
ences in the directionality of the development of pragmatic
and mechanic abilities seem to disappear and to give way
to negative age-gradients in both domains (Lindenberger
& Reischies, 1999).
In sum, there is evidence for age-related decline in the bi-
ologically based cognitive mechanics. At least up to a certain
point, this development can be compensated by culturally
determined, knowledge-based cognitive pragmatics. Most
older adults are cognitively well able to manage everyday
life problems. In very advanced old age, however, a some-
what different picture emerges. Here, the cognitive mechan-
ics might reach a level of impairment that the efﬁciency of
intellectual functioning declines in a more global manner.
This development is also reﬂected if we take a look at patho-
logical cognitive changes in old age. The prevalence of
dementias increases steeply with age. Several studies have
observed that in adults above the age of 60, age-speciﬁc
prevalence rates of dementias almost double with each addi-
tional 5 years of age, leading to prevalence estimates of
more than 40% in the population aged 90 years and beyond
(e.g., Cooper, 1997; Hofman et al., 1991; Jorm, Korten, &
Henderson, 1987).
Social Relationships in Old Age
Kahn and Antonucci (Antonucci, 1985, 1990, 1991; Kahn &
Antonucci, 1980) coined the metaphor of social convoys to
express the idea that throughout their lives, people are sur-
rounded by signiﬁcant other persons who have a critical
inﬂuence on their lives. Social integration has been shown to
have a signiﬁcant beneﬁcial impact upon a person’s well-being
(e.g., Antonucci & Akiyama, 1995; Bowling, 1994; Brubaker,
1990; Kessler & McLeod, 1985), health (e.g., Antonucci &
Jackson, 1987; Lang & Carstensen, 1998; Schwarzer &
Leppin, 1991), and even mortality (e.g., Seeman, 1996;
Tucker, Schwartz, Clark, & Friedman, 1999). Social contact,
however, may also have its negative sides. Such experiences
include undesirable, ineffective, or excessive support; unpleas-
ant or overly demanding social contact; violence or neglect;
and anticipated or experienced loss of social partners (Lang &
Carstensen, 1998; Smith & Goodnow, 1999).
As people grow older, their relationships and social net-
works undergo considerable change not only as a result of
changing contexts (e.g., retirement, one’s own or others’ dis-
ease and frailty, grandparenthood, relocation, deaths of sig-
niﬁcant others) but also as a result of changes in the
individual’s behaviors and preferences (Lang & Carstensen,
1998). In any event, interpersonal contexts in old age remain
multifaceted and heterogeneous. Social networks of older
people who are widowed, have never married, or are child-
less, for example, differ in many respects from those who are
living with their partner or are highly involved in the families
of their children. 
Typically, the number of social contacts declines with
advancing age (e.g., Heller & Mansbach, 1984; Lang &
Carstensen, 1994; Palmore, 1981). Investigations in the
United States and Europe indicate that older people above
age 65 typically report having between 5 and 15 close social
partners in their social networks compared to a range from 15
to 35 network members in the social networks reported by
younger and middle-aged adults (e.g., Antonucci & Akiyama,
1994, 1995; Dykstra, 1993; Lang & Carstensen, 1994, 1998;
van Sonderen, Ormel, Brilman, & van Linden van den
Heuvell, 1990). As we elaborate when discussing socioemo-
tional selectivity theory later in this chapter, it is questionable
whether this decline indeed constitutes a developmental loss
as it might appear at ﬁrst glance (Carstensen, 1993). 
Functions of social relationships can be characterized by
three main themes—support, affectionate exchanges, and
socializing (i.e., interacting with visitors and engaging
in shared activities; e.g., Antonucci & Akiyama, 1995;
Wagner, Schütze, & Lang, 1999). Generally, the proportion
of network partners from whom emotional or instrumental
help is received increases with age because of aging-related
increases in frailty (e.g., Mares, 1995; Zarit & Eggebeen,
1995). Old and even very old persons, however, typically
also give support, but not to the same degree (e.g., Antonucci,
1991; Zarit & Eggebeen, 1995). Although social support re-
lationships gain in signiﬁcance with advancing age, socializ-
ing and affect exchange remain important functions of social
contact. In a sample of German older persons, for example,
the number of people with whom participants socialized
and with whom they were affectionate decreased into very
old age; yet the proportions within the network (around 30%
and 20% of the social partners, respectively) did not (Wagner
et al., 1999).
Historical increases in life expectancy have led to an in-
crease in the length of marital relationships among those who
do not divorce. These demographic developments have also
increased the average duration that is spent in illness or care-
giving before the relationship is eventually ended by the

606
Successful Aging
death of one partner. Because women at any given age have a
longer life expectancy than men have and also tend to marry
men who are somewhat older, they are more likely to be care-
takers of ailing husbands, are more likely to survive husbands
than to be survived, and tend to spend a larger proportion
of their life spans following the death of a spouse (Bradsher,
1997).
The death of one’s partner is undoubtedly one of the most
disruptive losses that an individual can be confronted with in
life. In addition to the immense grief over the loss of a loved
person, bereavement often brings with it signiﬁcant changes
and losses in everyday tasks and routines, economic or social
status, and even personal self-identity (Bradsher, 1997). The
most impressive evidence of the extreme mental and physical
suffering associated with losing a loved one is the well-
replicated observation that bereaved persons (particularly
men) have a higher mortality risk than do matched samples of
nonbereaved controls, especially in the weeks and months im-
mediately following the loss (Stroebe & Stroebe, 1993). The
vast majority of elderly people, however, eventually adapt to
their dramatically changed life situation within the ﬁrst few
years, as indicated by signiﬁcant reductions of psychological
distress and improvements of mental health and well-being
back to levels comparable to those before the loss (e.g.,
Gallagher-Thompson, Futterman, Farberow, Thompson, &
Peterson, 1993; Lund, Caserta, & Dimond, 1993).
Particularly after the loss or in the absence of other rela-
tionships, contact between siblings often gains in closeness in
late life (Cicirelli, 1985; Connidis, 1989; Scott, 1983). As
people grow old, their family of origin gradually disinte-
grates because its older members die. Sibling relations repre-
sent the most enduring ties of the original nuclear family
(Cicirelli, 1985). Their most signiﬁcant function in late life
seems to be reminiscence about shared experiences in “good
old times.” It has been argued that the validation of positive
feelings in previous family interactions may be related to
positive feelings about the family in later life (Brubaker,
1990). The role of siblings in providing instrumental support
is comparatively less important (Goetting, 1986)—especially
when sibling support is compared to assistance provided by
adult children (Cicirelli, 1982; Ross & Milgram, 1982; Scott,
1983), who are frequently important sources of emotional
and instrumental support in old age (for overviews, see
Antonucci & Akiyama, 1995; Brubaker, 1990; Lang &
Carstensen, 1998; Mares, 1995; Zarit & Eggebeen, 1995). 
Friends also often play a central role in older people’s so-
cial lives (Field, 1999; Wagner et al., 1999). They are, how-
ever, typically less important than family to old persons.
De Vries (1996) argued that later life is a phase with a partic-
ularly high likelihood of life events that might inﬂuence the
maintenance of friendships—for example, retirement, relo-
cation, or illness. Particularly for men, retirement often is as-
sociated with a relatively high risk of erosion of work-based
friendships. Female friendships that originated in work con-
texts are typically more broadly based and thus less prone to
dissolution after retirement. Relocation (e.g., moving closer
to one’s children or into a nursing home) may also affect the
maintenance of later life friendships. At the same time, it
might provide opportunities for forming new friendships, an
ability that is preserved well into old age (M. M. Baltes,
Wahl, & Reichert, 1991; Field, 1999). The most important
barriers to friendship contact in late life, at least for older per-
sons living in private households, are one’s own or the
friend’s illness and frailty. Furthermore, the likelihood of
outliving one’s friends increases with age; this is reﬂected by
observations in a sample of German older persons. Sixty-
nine percent of the 70- to 84-year-old participants reported
having at least one friend, compared to 43% of the (more
frail) participants aged 85 years and over (Wagner et al.,
1999).
To summarize, the majority of old people are well
integrated into their family and friendship networks. Overall,
the size of social networks declines with advancing age. The
decline in network size is typically due to a decrease in social
contact with emotionally not-very-close network partners.
Contact with emotionally close persons—particularly with
family, but also with some close friends—stays relatively sta-
ble. With increasing frailty or disability, support provided by
network partners gains in importance. Even in very old age,
however, support is not only received but also (at least to
some degree) given. Socializing and exchange of affection
also remain important into very old age. Social contact with
same-aged persons in old age is characterized by an increas-
ing likelihood that one’s own or the other’s frailty obstructs
possibilities for maintaining the relationship in habitual
ways. Also, the risk increases that relationships are ended
through the deaths of social partners, one of the most hurtful
experiences in the social lives of human beings. Most old
adults, however, are able to successfully cope with the expe-
rience of outliving peers.
Everyday Competence in Old Age 
So far we have discussed characteristics of aging pertaining
to a selected number of clearly circumscribed functional do-
mains—health-related and physiological changes, cognitive
abilities, and social relationships. Those and other domain-
speciﬁc characteristics of old age converge in an overarching
question: How well are old adults able to care for themselves,
manage their affairs, and live an autonomous life?

Characteristics of Old Age
607
The ability to perform activities essential for the effective
mastery of independent living has been referred to as every-
day competence (e.g., M. M. Baltes, Mayr, Borchelt, Maas, &
Wilms, 1993; Diehl, 1998; Schaie & Willis, 1999). M. M.
Baltes and colleagues (M. M. Baltes, Maas, Wilms, Borchelt,
& Little, 1999; M. M. Baltes et al., 1993; M. M. Baltes &
Wilms, 1995) distinguished two components—a basic and an
expanded level of competence. According to M. M. Baltes
and colleagues, the interplay of both components makes up
the ability to lead an autonomous and satisfying life. The
basic level of everyday competence reﬂects the ability to
independently execute personal maintenance activities, such
as toileting, grooming, dressing, walking, or shopping; these
are highly routinized activities necessary for survival. The
expanded level of everyday competence comprises activities
that reﬂect people’s active construction of their lives, their
preferences and motivations, and their engagement with the
world around them. Examples are engaging in leisure, out-
of-house, or social activities; helping others; and working.
Whereas the basic level of competence guarantees survival, it
is the expanded level that turns mere existence into meaning-
ful living. 
The Basic Level of Everyday Competence in Old Age
In clinical terms, the basic level of competence reﬂects an in-
dividual’s functional health or disability, which is typically
assessed by evaluating the degree of help needed for the exe-
cution of basic and instrumental activities of daily living (re-
ferred to as ADL and IADL; Katz, Ford, Moskowitz,
Jackson, & Jaffe, 1963; Lawton & Brody, 1969). The need
for assistance in the management of everyday life has been
shown to be determined primarily by impairments in the sen-
sory, sensorimotor, and motor domains (e.g., M. M. Baltes
et al., 1999; Steinhagen-Thiessen & Borchelt, 1999; see also
Diehl, 1998), as well as by functional impairment in the cog-
nitive domain (for summaries, see Diehl, 1998; Willis, 1996).
The main risk factor for such functional impairments is so-
matic morbidity. Different illnesses, however, differentially
inﬂuence a person’s ability to engage in independent living
(Furner, Rudberg, & Cassel, 1995). Boult, Kane, Louis,
Boult, and McCaffrey (1994), for example, reported that the
chronic conditions best predicting the development of depen-
dence in ADL and IADL were cerebrovascular disease,
arthritis, and coronary artery disease.
Several studies in modern, industrialized countries have ob-
served that the ongoing decrease in mortality rates in old and
very old age coincides with a decline in chronic disability
prevalence in that age group (i.e., a decline in the proportion of
elderly people with long-term dependence on help for the
execution of at least one ADL or IADL; e.g., Bebbington,
1988; Jagger, Clarke, & Clarke, 1991; Manton, Corder, &
Stallard, 1993). Manton et al. (1993), for example, reported
that whereas the total U.S. population above age 65 grew
14.7% between the years 1982 and 1989, the respective pro-
portion of chronically disabled community-dwelling and insti-
tutionalized persons only grew 9.2%. Consequently, the
overall prevalence (i.e., relative proportion) of chronic disabil-
ity or institutionalization dropped from 23.7% in 1982 to
22.6%in1989.Thedecreaseinchronicdisabilityprevalencein
developed countries has been attributed primarily to advances
in medical treatments and—to some degree—to increases of
the average education and income in elderly cohorts, which are
typically associated with an increased self-awareness of
health-related lifestyle factors and an early use of professional
prevention and therapy (Manton et al., 1993).
Originally developed in the context of mortality develop-
ments in old age, the concept of active life expectancy
addresses the basic level of everyday competence in the tem-
poral dimension of an individual’s expected remaining life-
time. Active life expectancy represents the period of life an
individual is expected to be able to perform functions
necessary for personal care and independent living. Inactive
life expectancy, in contrast, represents the remaining lifetime
when one is unable to perform these functions or would
be dependent upon others to perform them (Crimmins,
Hayward, & Saito, 1996). 
Signiﬁcant differences in active life expectancy exist with
respect to gender, age, and socioeconomic status (SES). A
well-known paradox of the aging process is that women tend
to live longer, yet they have a higher prevalence of disability
(i.e., dependence) than do men (Verbrugge, 1989). Crimmins
et al. (1996), for example, reported the total remaining life
expectancy for U.S. females at age 70 to be 13.9 years and for
same-aged U.S. males to be 10.3 years. The expected length
of life in an inactive state, however, was twice as high
for 70-year-old women (2.8 years or 20.1% of remaining
expected lifetime) as that for same-aged men (1.4 years or
13.6% of remaining expected lifetime). Gender differences in
the diseases that cause disability play a role in the explana-
tion of this paradox. Women have a higher prevalence of
more slowly evolving degenerative processes (e.g., arthritis,
skeletal problems, diabetes), whereas men are more at risk to
suffer (and die) from more rapidly developing lethal diseases
(e.g., cancer, heart attack; Manton, 1990). Overall, women
have a higher risk of experiencing longer phases of inactive
life, a greater likelihood of experiencing disabling events
(i.e., the transition from independent to dependent life), and a
greater likelihood of dying from a disabled state (Crimmins
et al., 1996).

608
Successful Aging
The percentage of remaining life time expected to be spent
in dependent states is higher at any age above 70 for women,
but for both sexes it increases rapidly with age. Crimmins et al.
(1996), for example, reported for U.S. women an increase
from 20.1% at age 70 to 60.4% at age 90. The corresponding
estimates for U.S. males increased from 13.6% at age 70 to
54.5% at age 90. On the other hand, there is a great variability
regarding independent living among old adults. Even in very
old age, quite a few individuals exhibit a high degree of in-
dependence. In a study of 109 Italian centenarians (aged
100–108 years), for example, 26% of the participants (34.6%
of the male and 24.0% of the female centenarians) were
classiﬁed as completely independent in basic activities of
daily living (Bauco et al., 1996).
In addition to gender and age, SES also is associated with
basic levels of everyday competence. Those of higher SES
are not only more likely to survive to old age, but they are
also more likely to live through old age in better functional
health (e.g., Feldman, Makuc, Kleinman, & Huntley, 1989;
Maddox & Clark, 1992; Matthews, Kelsey, Meilahn, Kuller,
& Wing, 1989). In the representative sample of U.S. older
persons investigated by Crimmins et al. (1996), active life ex-
pectancy for persons with at least 12 years of education was
about 1 year longer than that of persons of same age, race,
and sex with less education. 
The Expanded Level of Everyday Competence 
in Old Age
How do older adults structure their daily lives above and be-
yond activities necessary for self-maintenance and survival?
Detailed reconstructions of a complete day in the lives of
older Germans (M. M. Baltes et al., 1999; Horgas, Wilms, &
Baltes, 1998) indicated that on average, 60% of the waking
day was spent on activities that were not resting and not self-
care. Although there was a substantial amount of variability
in the amount of time spent with discretionary activities
(Horgas et al., 1998), it appeared that a large amount of time
was typically spent on leisure activities (mostly watching
TV; about 38%) and on instrumental activities (e.g., house-
work, dealing with authorities, banking; about 15%). Only
7% of the waking day were on average spent on social activ-
ities. The oldest old (aged 85 years and above) as well as in-
stitutionalized participants tended to spend less time with
instrumental and leisure activities and more time resting
compared to young old (aged 70–84 years) and noninstitu-
tionalized participants. Women tended to spend more of their
waking time on instrumental activities and less time on
leisure activities than did men, which reﬂects the culturally
typical housework distribution in that age group.
M. M. Baltes and colleagues (M. M. Baltes et al., 1999)
observed that the level of expanded everyday competence
(i.e., the degree of engagement in activities other than self-
care and resting) was substantially negatively related to
chronological age and substantially positively related to SES.
Both relationships were completely mediated by personality
characteristics, ﬂuid intelligence, and mobility. Thus, age dif-
ferences in expanded levels of everyday competence seem to
be due to associated differences in health and psychosocial
factors. Furthermore, psychosocial resources such as educa-
tion, ﬁnancial security, and openness to experience appear
to be necessary to guarantee high levels of involvement in
discretionary activities. They are, however, not sufﬁcient.
Activities indicative of expanded everyday competence also
require a critical level of physiological functioning.
In sum, there is great variability in old adults’ abilities to
lead independent, meaningful, and satisfying lives. Basic lev-
els of everyday competence (i.e., the ability to independently
execute activities necessary for self-maintenance and survival)
largely depend on the level of functional impairment in sen-
sory, sensorimotor, motor, and cognitive domains. In contrast,
the expanded level of competence (i.e., the degree of involve-
ment in discretionary activities that make a life meaningful) is
largely determined by psychosocial variables—particularly
personality characteristics and cognitive abilities, but it also
requires a minimum level of functional health. With advancing
age, levels of basic and expanded everyday competence tend to
decline, which is due to age-associated changes in physical
morbidity and psychosocial variables.
Conclusions: What Characterizes Old Age?
We have characterized the life phase of old age in four rela-
tively well-speciﬁed life domains—physiological changes,
cognitive functioning, social relations, and everyday compe-
tence. On a more abstract level, three central characteristics
of old adulthood can be inferred from this discussion:
•
With advancing old age, the likelihood of developmental
losses increases (e.g., development of chronic and acute
illnesses, impairment in the cognitive mechanics, deaths
of social partners, loss of the ability to lead an independent
life). Overall, the ratio of developmental gains and losses
becomes increasingly negative in old age. 
•
Aging is no uniform process. A large degree of hetero-
geneity exists both among and within persons. Different
functional domains are differentially affected by aging
processes.
•
Old adults in their 60s and 70s typically exhibit relatively
high levels of functioning in different life domains. In

Successful Aging: Deﬁnition and Criteria
609
very old age (85 years and older), however, detrimental
effects of aging become more pronounced. It is therefore
necessary to differentiate between a young-old and an
older- or oldest-old age.
After having portrayed characteristics of old age in gen-
eral, we next turn to the question of if and how one can char-
acterize successful aging. Following that discussion, we
review a number of theoretical approaches to developmental
regulatory processes in old age. 
SUCCESSFULAGING: DEFINITION
AND CRITERIA
For several decades, gerontology has struggled to understand
and deﬁne what successful aging is. As of yet, however, no
commonly accepted set of criteria characterizing successful
aging exists. In general, there has been a shift away from deﬁn-
ing successful aging solely in terms of adaptation to age-
related changes in a given context (e.g., Havighurst, 1963)
toward emphasizing the balance between a person’s needs and
competence on the one hand and environmental demands and
opportunity structures on the other hand (Lawton & Nahemow,
1973; Thomae, 1976). In accordance with life-span develop-
mental approaches (e.g., P. B. Baltes et al., 1998; Brandtstädter,
1998; Lerner, 1998; Lerner & Busch-Rossnagel, 1981;
Magnusson, 1996), these newer conceptualizations of success-
ful aging assume that development is best described as an on-
going and dynamic interaction of a person with his or her
environment. This implies that criteria of successful aging
should not exclusively comprise factors within the person
(e.g., happiness), but should also consider how well a person is
doing in a given context (e.g., living in a nursing home).
Attempts to deﬁne criteria of how well a person is aging
have—at least on a theoretical level—also shifted from a
one-criterion approach (mostly using subjective well-being
as the only criterion signaling successful aging) to a multicri-
teria approach. The multiple criteria that have been pro-
posed as characterizing successful aging comprise objective
and subjective, short-term and long-term, domain-speciﬁc
and general, and static and dynamic criteria (M. M. Baltes &
Carstensen, 1996; P. B. Baltes & Baltes, 1990). Thus far,
however, no consensus has been reached on the questions of
which of these criteria have to be met and what their relative
importance for determining successful aging is.
Based on the assumption that adaptation to challenges
speciﬁc to old age and a successful person-environment in-
teraction results in subjective well-being (e.g., Havighurst,
1963; Lawton, 1989), most research on successful aging has
employed subjective well-being as a single criterion for suc-
cessful aging. Next, we provide a brief overview of the
empirical evidence available on subjective well-being in old
age. Then we turn to a discussion of more comprehensive
conceptualizations proposing multiple criteria for the charac-
terization of successful aging. 
Is Subjective Well-Being a Sufﬁcient Criterion for
Successful Aging? 
The most prominent single criterion that has been used for
studying successful aging has been subjective well-being.
In this line of research, subjective well-being is viewed as a
person’s global evaluation of the quality of his or her life.
High subjective well-being is regarded as indicating that the
person successfully manages his or her life and ages well.
Subjective well-being is operationalized most often in
terms of life satisfaction, the presence of positive affect, and
the absence of negative affect (e.g., Diener, Suh, Lucas, &
Smith, 1999). Bradburn (1969) limited subjective well-being
to the affective reactions towards one’s life experiences.
More speciﬁcally, he deﬁned happiness as a preponderance
of positive over negative affect. Life satisfaction, on the other
hand, focuses on the cognitive assessment of progress to-
wards or achievement of one’s goals (Campbell, Converse, &
Rodgers, 1976; George, 1981; Lawton, 1985). 
Both the cognitive and affective aspects of subjective
well-being have been widely studied in gerontology. The cen-
tral question motivating this line of gerontological research is
Does subjective well-being decline with age? An assumption
underlying this question is that subjective well-being is
threatened in old age (e.g., Brandtstädter & Greve, 1994).
The expectation of an age-related decline in subjective well-
being is based on the observation that old age is a period in
life when one is more likely than in earlier phases to experi-
ence severe losses: Most old people are excluded from pro-
ductive employment, almost everybody in this age-group
experiences a decline in physical capacity and health (e.g.,
Steinhagen-Thiessen & Borchelt, 1999), and old people are
likely to lose close social partners (e.g., Lang & Carstensen,
1994). We have described a number of these developmental
losses associated with aging in more detail in the ﬁrst part of
this chapter. There also is much consensus in social expecta-
tions that old age is related to losses rather than gains
(Heckhausen et al., 1989). Wouldn’t one then expect older
people to be dissatisﬁed with their lives and unhappy? In the
following section, we brieﬂy review the literature on emo-
tional well-being and life satisfaction in old age.
With regard to age-related changes in the experience of
emotions, Schulz (1986) suggested that because of lifelong

610
Successful Aging
experiences, older persons should be habituated to emotions
and hence have a higher threshold for experiencing both posi-
tive and negative affect. This should lead to less frequent but
more intense emotions. Emotions might also linger for a
longer time because autonomous activation takes longer to go
back to baseline. Contrary to these expectations, Levenson,
Carstensen, Friesen, and Ekman (1991) found that the physio-
logical arousal pattern of older adults is comparable to that of
younger adult but of less intensity. These results have recently
been replicated in a sample of young and older European and
Chinese Americans (Tsai, Levenson, & Carstensen, 2000). In
this study, older adults showed smaller changes in cardiovas-
cular responding to positive (amusement) and negative (sad-
ness) emotions than did younger adults. Young and old adults
did not, however, differ in their self-reported and behavioral
expression of emotions during standardized situations (watch-
ing ﬁlm clips). Using a different methodology—namely, self-
reported intensity of emotions—Ferring and Filipp (1995)
found that the self-rated intensity of general positive emotions
seems to decline with age, whereas the intensity of general
negative emotions did not appear to be age-related.
With regard to old and very old age, ﬁndings from the
cross-sectional data set of the Berlin Aging Study (Smith,
Fleeson, Geiselmann, Settersten, & Kunzmann, 1999) sug-
gest that within the three decades from 70 to 100 years,
chronological age is not or is only weakly associated with the
self-reported frequency of affect. Although with increasing
age, self-rated frequency of positive affect tended to decrease
somewhat (r  .22), there was no signiﬁcant correlation of
age with frequency of negative affect. In a longitudinal study,
Ferring and Filipp (1995) found that with increasing age,
older adults reported less frequent positive and more frequent
negative emotions. Lawton, Kleban, and Dean (1993), on the
other hand, showed that older people reported less frequent
depression, anxiety, hostility, and shyness than did younger
adults, and—with the exception of contentment—did not
differ from younger adults with regard to positive affect
frequency.
Evidence from the Duke Longitudinal Study suggests that
there are neither cross-sectional nor longitudinal age-related
differences in the level of self-reported life satisfaction in
middle-aged and older adults (Palmore & Kivett, 1985); this
appears to be also true in very old age. Data from the Berlin
Aging Study showed only a small negative correlation of age
and satisfaction with aging and no signiﬁcant correlation of
age with life satisfaction (Smith et al., 1999).
The differences in some of the ﬁndings reviewed previ-
ously (e.g., regarding intensity of emotions) might be due
partly to methodological differences (questionnaires vs.
physiological assessment), partly to the speciﬁc age range of
the samples under study, and partly to differences between
longitudinal and cross-sectional ﬁndings. Although some
studies suggest that the frequency of positive emotions might
decline in old age (Smith et al., 1999; Ferring & Filipp,
1995), the age-related effects are small and the ﬁndings are
not consistent (e.g., Lawton et al., 1993). Overall, the empir-
ical evidence suggests stability rather than decline in subjec-
tive well-being in old age.
This phenomenon—average stability of subjective indica-
tors of well-being in a life phase when people are confronted
with loss and decline in both external and internal resources—
has been labeled a paradox (e.g., Brandtstädter & Greve,
1994; Staudinger, Marsiske, & Baltes, 1995) and has called
for explanations. Labeling this ﬁnding a paradox reﬂects the
assumption that age-related losses are detrimental to a per-
son’s well-being; yet research on subjective well-being shows
that the presence or absence of favorable living conditions
such as wealth or health does not have a strong or long-lasting
impact on people’s subjective well-being (see Diener et al.,
1999, for a comprehensive review of the literature).
One of the explanations for this counterintuitive ﬁnding is
that it is change in living conditions rather than their absolute
quality that affects a person’s well-being (Hobfoll, 2001).
According to models of hedonic adaptation (e.g., Frederick &
Loewenstein, 1999), persons emotionally adapt very quickly
to changes in their lives by setting new standards. Even when
drastic changes in living conditions occur, such as winning a
lottery or encountering an accident causing paraplegia, indi-
viduals seem to adapt astonishingly fast when subjective
well-being is used as a criterion (Brickman, Coates, & Janoff-
Bulman, 1978).
Consequently, there is no reason to expect that the losses
occurring in old age should have a long-term negative effect
on older persons’subjective well-being (Carstensen & Freund,
1994). Overall, then, subjective well-being does not appear to
be a sufﬁcient criterion signaling successful aging. Newer
conceptualizations, therefore, go beyond a single-criterion ap-
proach and propose multiple criteria to deﬁne successful
aging. In the subsequent section, we review the most promi-
nent of these multiple-criteria deﬁnitions.
Beyond Well-Being: Other Criteria for
Successful Aging
One of the recent attempts to take a more comprehensive
approach to characterizing well-being is Ryff’s (1989, 1995)
model of positive psychological functioning. Ryff differenti-
ates between six dimensions of positive psychological func-
tioning: autonomy, environmental mastery, personal growth,
positive relations, purpose in life, and self-acceptance. Ryff’s

Successful Aging: Deﬁnition and Criteria
611
model is partly based on subjective conceptions of positive
functioning in middle-aged and older adults. Ryff (1989)
found that older adults deﬁne fulﬁllment not primarily in
terms of positive emotions, but rather as a sense of accom-
plishment, enjoyment of life, and caring for others.
Ryff’s approach to deﬁning positive psychological func-
tioning, although it is more comprehensive than focusing ex-
clusively on emotional well-being and life satisfaction, is
also a subjective approach because it exclusively relies on
older persons’ self-reports. Going even further, P. B. Baltes
and Baltes (1990) argued for integrating objective (i.e., ob-
servable) and subjective (i.e., self-reported) criteria for deﬁn-
ing successful aging. They provided a list of objective and
subjective criteria that are most often considered in the liter-
ature on successful aging: longevity, physical and mental
health, cognitive functioning, social competence, productiv-
ity, perceived personal control, and life satisfaction. Accord-
ing to P. B. Baltes and Baltes (1990), integrating objective
and subjective criteria is important because on the one hand,
considering exclusively subjective criteria (such as self-
reported well-being) might lead to a neglect of optimizing
environmental conditions that support successful aging. A
prescriptive deﬁnition specifying exclusively objective crite-
ria for successful aging, on the other hand, is based on the sci-
entiﬁc community’s speciﬁc value system, which might not
be shared by the elderly person. Should an elderly person
who encounters health-related problems—as elaborated pre-
viously, an almost normative event in old and very old age
(e.g., Manton, 1990)—not be considered as aging success-
fully even if happy and satisﬁed with his or her life?
Addressing the high prevalence of health-related prob-
lems in old age, Rowe and Kahn (1987, 1998) distinguished
between successful aging and usual aging. Usual aging refers
to being able to function well but also being at risk for disease
or disability. Successful aging, on the other hand, denotes
“the ability to maintain three key behaviors or characteristics:
(i)
low risk of disease and disease-related disability;
(ii) high mental and physical function; and
(iii) active engagement with life” (Rowe & Kahn, 1998;
p. 38).
Rowe and Kahn pointed out that only the combination of
these three characteristics represents successful aging. Riley
(1998) criticized this approach by arguing that it neglects
social structures as an important aspect supporting successful
aging: “Successful aging involves the interplay between lives
and the complementary dynamic of structural change . . .
What Drs. Rowe and Kahn neglect is the dependence of
successful aging upon structural opportunities in schools,
ofﬁces, nursing homes, families, communities, social net-
works, and society at large” (p. 151).
Similar criticism was raised against early conceptions of
successful aging by Havighurst (1963; Havighurst &Albrecht,
1953), who deﬁned successful aging as the adaptation to the
speciﬁc conditions of old age. Thomae (1976), for instance,
stressed the role of the environment when he conceptu-
alized successful aging as the balance between an individual’s
needs and competence and the demands of the environment.
The previously discussed approaches do not pay attention
to the proactive and agentic role of the older person in inter-
acting with his or her environment. According to Lawton
(1989), a person does not simply passively adapt to environ-
mental conditions, but rather proactively shapes his or her en-
vironment. Proactive choices (such as moving to planned
housing) can have long-term consequences on how well the
environment ﬁts personal demands. One of the consequences
of a good person-environment ﬁt, according to Lawton, is
subjective well-being and life satisfaction. Accordingly,
Lawton (1983) proposed to deﬁne “the good life” (or in a
gerontological context, successful aging) along four indepen-
dent dimensions, including both subjective and objective
criteria in different life domains:
1. Perceived life quality (subjective satisfaction with various
life domains such as family, friends, housing, etc.).
2. Psychological well-being (happiness, optimism, congru-
ence between desired and attained goals).
3. Behavioralcompetence(health,motorbehavior,cognition).
4. Objective environment (income, living conditions, etc.).
Several aspects in this deﬁnition of successful aging are
worth pointing out. Note ﬁrst that perceived life quality is not
conceptualized as a global evaluation of one’s life as a whole
but rather as a multifaceted concept comprising satisfaction
with various life domains. As has been shown, for instance,
by Diener (1999), global life satisfaction is not simply the av-
erage of one’s satisfaction with different life domains. Global
life satisfaction seems to be more of a holistic impression of
how well one is doing (maybe taking the current mood as an
indicator, as suggested by Schwarz and Strack, 1999) than it
is the result of a computation of an aggregate score across
several life domains. To propose satisfaction with speciﬁc
life domains as indicators of successful aging is particularly
useful if one is interested in how well an aging person is
doing in a speciﬁc life domain. 
Second, note that psychological well-being in Lawton’s
sense is a concept broader than emotional well-being. It
includes not only positive emotions (happiness), but also

612
Successful Aging
optimism—that is to say, “the global expectation that good
things will be plentiful in the future and bad things, scarce”
(Peterson, 2000, p. 47). Optimism has been repeatedly shown
to be positively associated with a number of variables such as
positive emotions, high performance, and health (see Peterson,
2000, for an overview). According to Seligman (1991), opti-
mism is a generalized expectancy of the controllability of out-
comes. Feeling in control of events might lead elderly persons
to actually take more control over their lives and proactively
shape their environments in a way that matches their needs. In
this way, one might say that optimism is a factor contributing
to processes promoting successful aging rather than a criterion
for deﬁning successful aging.
Third, note that—as in the deﬁnition of Rowe and Kahn—
health is one of the criteria that Lawton lists for identifying
successful aging. Because Lawton, however, considers the
interaction of a person with his or her environment as crucial
for determining successful aging, impaired or sick older per-
sons nevertheless have the potential to age well. Even sick or
impaired older persons can successfully interact with their
environment by modifying their environment, their activities,
or both (i.e., environmental proactivity), thereby enhancing
the person-environment ﬁt. Lawton introduces the notion of
“control centers,” denoting that disabled older persons may
maintain a sense of control by creating an immediate envi-
ronment in which they can maximize stimulation, knowl-
edge, and security (e.g., by locating a chair in the living room
from which they can oversee the street, reach for medicine
and books, and keep in contact with the outside by telephone,
radio, and TV (Lawton, 1985). In this way, although listing
criteria that might imply a static view on successful aging,
Lawton’s model of successful aging represents a perspective
that focuses on the person-environment interaction. 
Taking a similar approach, M. M. Baltes and Carstensen
(1996) suggested addressing the problem of deﬁning success-
ful aging by going away from a criteria-oriented approach
(which implies the assessment of an end state) to a process-
oriented approach. Focusing, for instance, on the achieve-
ment of long-term goals as a criterion for successful aging as
proposed by Lawton, might neglect to consider that goals—
whether they will be achieved or not—have a positive func-
tion for individuals by organizing and guiding behavior over
time and across situations (e.g., Emmons, 1996) and by giv-
ing life a purpose (e.g., Klinger, 1977). Because of their func-
tion to organize behavior and to contribute to a sense of
purpose in life, the very process of having and pursuing per-
sonal goals can be viewed as one aspect of successful aging,
regardless of the actual achievement of the respective goals. 
This perspective adds a new dimension in deﬁning criteria
for successful aging—namely, the dimension of a static
versus a dynamic approach. According to M. M. Baltes and
Carstensen, it is important to assess not only whether an
elderly person has achieved positive outcomes (e.g., health,
good living conditions, personal goals) but also whether the
ongoing process of getting there is one that maximizes gains
and minimizes losses—that is, the gains associated with
achieving desired outcomes have to be balanced with the
costs associated with the outcomes’ attainment (Freund, Li,
& Baltes, 1999). Thus, the concept of successful develop-
ment does not denote a speciﬁc end point or state that can be
reached but has to take the process of how people achieve
desirable states into account. If meeting a certain criterion
(e.g., ﬁnancial security) can only be achieved at high costs
(e.g., suffering a number of years in an unfulﬁlling, boring
job), this way of goal pursuit cannot be regarded as being
successful (Freund et al., 1999).
A dynamic approach to successful aging also points to an-
other difﬁcult question that has not yet been resolved in the
literature—namely, the time window one should best con-
sider when evaluating how successfully an individual is
aging. Usually, snapshots of living conditions and well-being
of older persons are taken with one-time assessments (cf.
Diener et al., 1999). According to a static view on successful
aging, such snapshots are sufﬁcient to determine how well
older people are doing and what the relationship between
living conditions and subjective well-being in older people is
at a given point in time. According to a dynamic view on suc-
cessful aging, however, only multiple assessments in various
life domains over time can reveal whether a person interacts
with his or her environment in a manner that promotes suc-
cessful aging in the long run (Freund et al., 1999). For in-
stance, drinking a bottle of wine might help one to relax and
feel good in the short run. If continued daily over years, how-
ever, the costs of such drinking behavior for physical and
mental health are likely to outweigh the short-term gains.
On a very abstract and general level, successful aging can
be deﬁned as the simultaneous maximization of gains and
minimization of losses. When it comes to differentiating con-
crete criteria indicating how well a person is aging, however,
no generally accepted deﬁnition is available. As Pulkkinen
(2000, p. 278) stated, “successful development is not uniform
but polyform.” Because successful development can take
many different expressions, it seems more appropriate to spec-
ify criteria depending on the speciﬁc research question at hand
than to propose a single—necessarily abstract—deﬁnition of
successful aging.These speciﬁc criteria can vary along several
dimensions such as objective versus subjective, short-term
versus long-term, domain-speciﬁc versus general, and static
versus dynamic. In Table 25.1, we have summarized these
dimensions of criteria for successful aging, giving examples

Processes Related to Successful Aging
613
for two life domains that are frequently considered as central
to successful aging—namely, well-being and health.
PROCESSES RELATED TO SUCCESSFULAGING
An alternative route to studying successful aging is to shift
the focus away from attempting to deﬁne criteria as end
points of successful aging to identifying processes of devel-
opmental regulation in old age. Although such a process-
oriented approach does not resolve the question of criteria of
successful aging, it redirects the attention to the psychologi-
cally interesting question of which developmental processes
are central in the interaction of an aging person with his or
her environment (M. M. Baltes & Carstensen, 1996). This
approach is in line with E. Kahana and B. Kahana’s (1996,
p. 25) observation: “The conceptual framework of success-
ful aging is based on the assumption that the aged face
unique stresses and challenges. Successful aging requires
preventive actions that help delay or minimize normative
stresses of aging prior to their occurrence. It also calls for
effective corrective actions after older adults encounter nor-
mative stresses.” The central question, then, is what
processes are involved in minimizing the “normative
stresses of aging.” This question lies at the heart of different
models of developmental regulation in old age that we dis-
cuss next.
We begin by giving some historical background in the
form of two models that inspired a lot of theoretical and
empirical research activity—namely disengagement theory
(Cumming & Henry, 1961) and activity theory (e.g.,
Maddox, 1963). The debate over whether disengagement is
the central process promoting successful aging or whether
only those who continue to be actively involved in life are to
be considered successfully aging has been largely resolved in
newer models (discussed in more detail later in this section),
such as socioemotional selectivity theory by Carstensen and
colleagues (e.g., 1993, 1995; Carstensen, Isaacowitz, &
Charles, 1999).
Successful aging does not appear to be a question of either
engagement or disengagement; rather, it is a question of
specifying the conditions under which disengagement is
more adaptive and the conditions under which activity pro-
motes successful aging. We review three models addressing
this question: First, we present a metamodel of successful
aging—the model of selection, optimization, and compensa-
tion by P. B. Baltes, M. M. Baltes, and colleagues (SOC; e.g.,
M. M. Baltes & Carstensen, 1996, 1998; P. B. Baltes &
Baltes, 1990; P. B. Baltes, 1997; Freund & Baltes, 2000;
Freund et al., 1999; Marsiske, Lang, Baltes, & Baltes, 1995).
Then we present two models of successful aging that center
around the notion of control—namely, the model of primary
and secondary control by Heckhausen and Schulz (e.g.,
1995) and the model of assimilative and accommodative cop-
ing by Brandtstädter and colleagues (e.g., Brandtstädter &
Greve, 1994; Brandtstädter & Renner, 1990).
Despite differences among these models, they converge in
emphasizing the central role of motivational processes for
successful aging. Based on the assumption that a person can
take an active part in shaping his or her own development,
personal goals (i.e., future states a person desires to attain or
wishes to avoid) are seen as playing an important role in a
person’s aging process. Personal goals motivate and organize
behavior over time and across situations, giving directional-
ity to development. For instance, a person who pursues pri-
marily achievement-related goals might put many hours into
practicing golf in order to improve his or her handicap,
whereas a person who places more emphasis on afﬁliation-
related goals might try to spend as much time as possible
with his or her friends and family.
Personal goals also serve as a standard of comparison,
determining how well a person feels he or she is doing (e.g.,
Carver & Scheier, 1995). In this sense, the level of aspiration
is also associated with subjective well-being—a fact that
should be of particular relevance to aging when the likeli-
hood of being confronted with unobtainable or permanently
blocked goals is increased. Here, as particularly Brandtstädter
and Greve (1994) and Schulz and Heckhausen (1996) argue,
adjustment of goal standards should help to protect older
persons’ well-being. However, as we elaborate in the follow-
ing discussion, the SOC model, the model of primary and
secondary control, and the model of assimilative and accom-
modative coping do not focus exclusively on how older
TABLE 25.1
Central Dimensions of Criteria for Successful Aging:
Examples From Two Domains of Functioning Considered Important
for Successful Aging 
Domains of Functioning
Dimensions
Well-Being
Health
Objective
Household income.
Number of medical diagnoses.
Subjective
Satisfaction with ﬁnancial
Subjective physical health.
situation.
Short-term
Last week’s happiness.
Recovery from hip surgery.
Long-term
Meaning in life.
Progression of multiple 
sclerosis.
General
Life satisfaction.
General functional capacity.
Speciﬁc
Marital satisfaction.
Blood pressure.
Static
One-time assessment
Health status at a given 
of life satisfaction.
point in time.
Dynamic
Change in life satisfaction
Healthy lifestyle (e.g.,
over time.
exercising, balanced diet).

614
Successful Aging
people deal with losses; they also take the continued pos-
sibilities for growth and gains into account (Carstensen &
Freund, 1994).
Successful Aging: A Matter of Disengagement or
Continued Activity?
For a long time, the investigation of processes related to suc-
cessful aging was dominated by two opposed conceptions:
disengagement theory (Cumming & Henry, 1961) and
activity theory (e.g., Lemon, Bengtson, & Peterson, 1971;
Maddox, 1963, 1965, 1985). 
Disengagement theory posits that the psychological
energy of a person declines with age. Coinciding with a de-
crease in social roles in old age (e.g., because of retirement)
and the anticipation of one’s death, the diminished energy was
assumed to lead to a change in orientation away from activity
towards preoccupation with inner aspects of oneself, life re-
view, and one’s death (Cumming & Henry, 1961). According
to disengagement theory, the most important task of old age is
to disengage from involvement with society and to orient
oneself towards inner aspects of the self, accepting age-
related changes and the impending death. As Cumming and
Henry (1961, p. 226) put it, “the apprehension of death as a
not-so-distant goal may be a time of redeﬁnition of the self as
less bound to the surrounding network of interaction. The
anticipation of being apart from those nearby may accelerate
withdrawal of cathexis from them, and hasten the turning of
all cathexis inward—to the self for its own sake and the past
for its memories.”
Disengagement theory has been criticized primarily for
two reasons. First, interindividual differences in the level of
activity that are apparent in middle adulthood continue to
be present in old age. Disengagement can therefore not be
viewed as a universal process of old age (e.g., Reichard,
Livson & Peterson, 1962). Second, the loss of social roles
(e.g., professional occupation) can be substituted by other ac-
tivities (e.g., volunteer work) and hence does not inevitably
lead to a decreased level of activity (e.g., Atchley, 1982).
In contrast to disengagement theory, activity theory posits
that the maintenance of social roles and activities is crucial
for successful aging. According to activity theory, the loss of
social roles in old age threatens the self-deﬁnition of older
people and leads to a loss of orientation and guidance for be-
havior in everyday life (Blau, 1981; Lemon et al., 1971;
Maddox, 1963, 1965, 1985; Rosow, 1973). Hence, activity
theory views the maintenance of self-deﬁning roles through
active involvement in life as one of the central processes of
successful aging.
Taking a similar view, Rowe and Kahn (1998, p. 40)
stressed the role of active engagement when elaborating on
the difference between (merely) usual and (outstanding) suc-
cessful aging: “Successful aging goes beyond potential; it
involves activity, which we have labeled ‘engagement with
life.’Active engagement with life takes many forms, but suc-
cessful aging is most concerned with two—relationships with
other people, and behavior that is productive.”
One of the more recent theories dealing with the phenome-
non of reduced social contacts in old age—a phenomenon
that disengagement theory claims is a sign of withdrawal from
society towards life review and preparation for death, and
that activity theory views as problematic for the elderly—is
socioemotional selectivity theory (SST) by Carstensen and
her colleagues (e.g., 1993, 1995; Carstensen, Isaacowitz, &
Charles, 1999). Similar to disengagement theory, SST posits
that reduced social contacts in old age are due to a limited time
perspective—that is, due to the fact that older people tend to
perceive their remaining time to death as relatively limited. In
contrast to disengagement theory, however, SST postulates
that the reduced network size does not result primarily from a
deliberate withdrawal from society, but rather from the spe-
ciﬁc motivation for particular types of social relations in
situations in which time perspectives are limited.
According to SST, there are two primary motivations for
social interactions—emotion regulation and knowledge ac-
quisition. Emotion regulation is best achieved with familiar
and close social partners. Knowledge acquisition, on the
other hand, often requires one to meet and interact with new
people or with people who are emotionally not very close
(namely, those who have or can give access to desired knowl-
edge). The basic tenet of SST is that the perceived time ex-
pansion determines the relative importance of these two basic
motivations for social interaction. An extended future time
perspective is more strongly associated with knowledge-
related goals for social interactions. A limited time perspec-
tive, in contrast, brings about a stronger presence-orientation
involving goals related to feeling states, emotional meaning,
and satisfaction. Emotional meaning and satisfaction as well
as emotion regulation are more easily established with famil-
iar and close social partners than with unfamiliar or less
important persons. 
According to SST, the driving force behind reducing the
number of social partners in old age, therefore, is a predomi-
nance of the motivation for emotion regulation over knowl-
edge acquisition because of the older adults’ limited future
time perspective. Older persons choose to be with a smaller
circle of familiar social partners with whom they can have
emotionally meaningful interactions. The decline in the

Processes Related to Successful Aging
615
number of social partners in old age, accordingly, does not
result from withdrawing from social goals but instead reﬂects
a stronger focus on emotion regulation.
Several empirical studies have demonstrated that the re-
duction of social network size in old age is primarily due to
focusing on the closest social partners such as family and
conﬁdants (e.g., Field & Minkler, 1988; Lang & Carstensen,
1994; Lang, Staudinger, & Carstensen, 1998). The change in
the ranking of knowledge-related and emotional goals in so-
cial relations, however, is only related to age, caused by age.
When younger people are faced with time limitations and
when future social opportunities are perceived as con-
strained, the salience of emotion goals also increases; this has
been shown in studies in which younger adults were asked to
imagine a limited future and older adults were asked to imag-
ine an expansive future (e.g., Fredrickson & Carstensen,
1990), as well as in ﬁeld studies with younger samples who
actually experienced a very limited future time expansion,
such as HIV-infected persons (Carstensen & Fredrickson,
1998) or residents of Hong Kong 2 months before the city
would be handed over to the People’s Republic of China
(Fung, Carstensen, & Lutz, 1999).
SST suggests that there is no universal process of contin-
ued activity or disengagement in old age, but that it is per-
ceived time expansion that best explains whether older
people prefer to focus on close, familiar social partners or are
motivated to gain knowledge through knowledgeable novel
social partners. This view is also consistent with the ﬁnding
that activity level per se does not seem to be related to well-
being and life satisfaction in old age. An early study by
Havighurst, Neugarten, and Tobin (1968) suggests that in-
terindividual differences in personality styles might moderate
the relationship between activity and well-being. Similarly,
results from the Bonn Longitudinal Study (BOLSA) show
that the relationship between level of activity and well-being
depends on the speciﬁc life domains or role contents under
study (Thomae, 1987). Taken together, these results suggest
that depending on personality, lifestyle, and life domain, high
or low levels of activity can be associated with well-being in
old age.
Another factor determining the relationship between
activity and well-being might be how much control a person
has over whether to engage in an activity. Whereas disen-
gagement theory seems to imply that role losses are in-
evitable in old age, activity theory works on the assumption
that older people have control over ﬁnding alternative activi-
ties in which to engage. Two important theories of successful
development and aging center around the notion of control:
the theory of primary and secondary control by Heckhausen
and Schulz (1995) and the model of assimilative and accom-
modative coping by Brandtstädter and his colleagues
(Brandtstädter & Greve, 1994; Brandtstädter & Renner,
1990; Brandtstädter & Wentura, 1995). Both models sug-
gest that under conditions of reduced controllability—such
as those that occur in old age because of health-related re-
ductions in functional capacity and activity radius (Manton,
1990; Krauss Whitbourne, 1985)—disengagement from
rather than persistence in the pursuit of desired activities pro-
motes well-being. These two models are discussed in more
detail later in this chapter. First, however, we present a
metatheoretical framework of successful development—the
model of selection, optimization, and compensation (SOC),
which was ﬁrst formulated by P. B. Baltes and Baltes (1980,
1990).
Selection, Optimization, and Compensation (SOC):
A Metamodel of Successful Aging
The model of selection, optimization, and compensation
(SOC) provides a general framework for conceptualizing
processes of successful aging (P. B. Baltes & Baltes, 1990).
The SOC model is based on the assumption that through-
out the lifespan, individuals continually seek to successfully
manage their lives through the orchestration of three processes
of developmental regulation: selection, optimization, and
compensation.
As a metamodel, the SOC theory (M. M. Baltes, 1987; M.
M. Baltes & Carstensen, 1996, 1998; M. M. Baltes & Lang,
1997; P. B. Baltes, 1997; P. B. Baltes, & Baltes, 1990; P. B.
Baltes, Dittmann-Kohli, & Dixon, 1984; Freund & Baltes,
1998, 2000; Lerner, Freund, DeStefanis, & Habermas, 2001;
Marsiske et al., 1995; Wiese, Freund, & Baltes, 2000) repre-
sents a framework for the understanding of developmental
continuity and change across different periods of the life span
(e.g., early and late adulthood), across different levels of
analysis (e.g., individual, group), and across different do-
mains of functioning (e.g., social, cognitive, physical). 
Selection, optimization, and compensation, which we de-
ﬁne in more detail later in this section, are proposed to be
universal processes of developmental regulation that can
vary greatly in their phenotypic expression, depending on the
sociohistorical and cultural context, the domain of function-
ing, and the unit of analysis at hand (P. B. Baltes, 1997). The
SOC model in its general formulation therefore does not des-
ignate any speciﬁc content or mechanisms to its proposed de-
velopmental regulatory principles. In this sense, the model
represents a relativistic heuristic framework. In order to un-
derstand speciﬁc manifestations of the SOC processes in

616
Successful Aging
particular developmental domains, it is necessary to specify
the SOC processes by linking the metamodel with more spe-
ciﬁc theories pertaining to the phenomena of interest.
Taking an action-theoretical approach (e.g., Brandtstädter,
1999), one such content-driven speciﬁcation of the SOC
model conceptualizes expressions of selection, optimization,
and compensation in the context of goal-related action
(Freund & Baltes, 2000; Freund et al., 1999). This approach
integrates motivational processes into a life-span perspective
by considering processes of goal setting and goal pursuit
within a long-term temporal perspective. In our discussion of
the processes of selection, optimization, and compensation
in this section, we use this action-theoretical speciﬁcation of
the model to illustrate speciﬁc expressions of the general-
purpose processes in the domain of personal goals.
Selection
Throughout the life span, biological, social, and individual
opportunities and constraints both provide and delimit the
variety of developmental pathways a person can potentially
take. The number of those options, however, is usually larger
than the amount of resources available to the individual.
Selection—that is, focusing one’s resources on a subset of
potentially available options—thus functions as a precondi-
tion for canalization and developmental specialization. One
of the central functions of selection is to efﬁciently utilize the
limited amount of available resources. In old and very old
age, when resources become more constrained, selection
should hence be of particular importance. Consistent with
this view, Staudinger and Freund (1998) found that selecting
few life domains on which to focus was particularly adaptive
for older people with highly constrained resources.
In an action-theoretical framework, selection can be de-
ﬁned as developing, elaborating, and committing oneself to
personal goals. On this level of analysis, selection directs
development because personal goals guide and organize
behavior across situations and time (e.g., Emmons, 1996).
Successful goal selection requires developing and setting
goals in domains for which resources are available or can be
acquired and in domains that match a person’s needs and envi-
ronmental demands (Freund, 1997; Heckhausen, 1999).
The SOC model distinguishes between two kinds of selec-
tion, elective selection and loss-based selection. Both aspects
of selection differ in their speciﬁc developmental regulatory
function. Elective selection denotes the delineation of goals
in order to advance the match of a person’s needs and mo-
tives with the given or attainable resources and opportunity
structures. It aims at achieving higher levels of functioning.
In contrast, loss-based selection occurs as a response to
losses in previously available goal-relevant means threaten-
ing the maintenance of a goal. Loss-based selection involves
changes in goals or the goal system, such as reconstructing
one’s goal hierarchy by focusing on the most important
goal(s), adapting standards, or substituting for goals that are
no longer achievable (see also our discussion of assimilative
coping, Brandtstädter & Wentura, 1995, and our discussion
of compensatory secondary control, Heckhausen, 1999). The
SOC model posits that loss-based selection is an important
process of life mastery. Throughout the life span, individuals
encounter losses in goal-relevant resources affecting their
positive functioning. Loss-based selection allows focusing or
redirecting resources adaptively when other means for the
maintenance of positive functioning substituting the loss
(compensation) are either not available or would be invested
at the expense of other, more promising goals (M. M. Baltes,
1996; Heckhausen, 1999).
Selection promotes positive development in a number of
ways. To hold and feel committed to goals contributes to feel-
ing that one’s life has a purpose, thereby giving meaning to
life (e.g., Klinger, 1977; Little, 1989). Furthermore, goals
organize behavior into action sequences. They reduce the
complexity of any given situation as they guide attention
and behavior. In other words, goals can also be seen as
chronically available decision rules (implemental mind-set;
Gollwitzer, 1996) for directing attention and behavior to
those of the numerous stimuli and behavioral options in a
given situation that are goal-relevant. In this sense, goals help
one to efﬁciently interact with one’s environment. Instead of
deliberating about all of the possible alternatives one has in
any given situation, people scan their environment for possi-
bilities to pursue their goals. 
Goals do not necessarily need to be conscious in order to
function as guides for attention and behavior. According to
the auto-motive model by Bargh and Gollwitzer (1994), the
repeated activation of a goal in a certain situation leads to an
association of the respective goal and situational cues. Such
situational features can then automatically trigger a goal and
activate goal-relevant actions. In this sense, goals that are
very frequently and consistently activated can initiate and
guide behavior particularly efﬁciently.
Optimization
Whereas selection is the ﬁrst step towards positive function-
ing, the SOC model posits that for achieving desired out-
comes in selected domains, it is crucial to acquire, apply, and
reﬁne goal-relevant means, a process that is referred to as

Processes Related to Successful Aging
617
optimization. Which means are best suited for achieving one’s
goals varies according to the speciﬁc goal domain (e.g.,
achievement vs. social domain), personal characteristics
(e.g., gender), and the sociocultural context (e.g., institutional
support systems). It is possible, however, to identify a number
of general processes involved in the acquisition, application,
and reﬁnement of goal-relevant means (see P. B. Baltes, 1997;
Freund & Baltes, 2000; Freund et al., 1999). Later in this
section, we brieﬂy discuss some prototypical instances.
On the most general level, some sort of monitoring of the
discrepancy between the actual and the desired state (goal)
needs to take place (Carver & Scheier, 1995; Miller, Galanter,
& Pribram, 1960). This continuous monitoring, which might
occur outside of conscious awareness (Wegner, 1992), allows
a constant adaptation of goal-related action. Progress toward
the goal motivates the continuation of the invested goal-
relevant means, whereas lack of progress or even an increase
in the distance to the goal indicates that other means might be
better suited for achieving the respective goal.
Another example for a general process related to opti-
mization is the delay of immediate gratiﬁcation for the sake
of a more long-term payoff (e.g., Mischel, 1996). Long-term
goals often require investing resources without immediate
gains. Not giving in to temptations that offer short-term grat-
iﬁcations is thus a precondition for the persistent pursuit of a
goal over an extended period of time.
One of the most important general processes of optimiza-
tion is practice. As has been shown in the expertise literature,
deliberate practice is a key factor for acquiring new skills
and reaching peak performance (Ericsson, 1996). Repeated
practice leads to the reﬁnement of skill components, to their
integration and automatization that thereby become less
resource-demanding, and to free resources that can be devoted
to other goal-related means. Although the role of practice
might be most obvious in domains with a clear achievement
aspect such as academic achievement, sports, or music
(Ericsson, 1996), practice may also be important in domains
with less clearly deﬁned skills and success criteria, such as
interpersonal relationships.
In old age, optimization continues to be of great importance
for life management because engaging in growth-related goals
generally has positive regulative functions.Anumber of stud-
ies with younger adults (e.g., Coats, Janoff-Bulman, &Alpert,
1996; Elliot & Church, 1997; Elliot & Sheldon, 1997; Elliot,
Sheldon, & Church, 1997; Emmons, 1996) have shown that
trying to achieve gain- or growth-oriented goals (optimiza-
tion) is associated with a higher degree of self-efﬁcacy and
leads to positive emotions and well-being, whereas trying to
avoid losses and functional decline is related to negative emo-
tions and distress. In old age, when losses are prevalent and
expected, it might be of particular importance for promoting
well-being and a sense of self-efﬁcacy to sustain growth- or
gain-related goals and not to focus only on losses. In fact, data
from the Berlin Aging Study support the positive function of
optimization in old age: Older people who reported to engage
in optimization also reported more positive emotions and
higher satisfaction with aging (Freund & Baltes, 1998).
Compensation
How do older people manage to maintain positive function-
ing in the face of health-related constraints and other losses in
plasticity and reserve capacity that we discussed in the ﬁrst
part of this chapter? One relevant strategy for the regulation
of losses has already been mentioned—loss-based selec-
tion. This strategy denotes the restructuring of one’s goal
system—for example, by giving up unattainable goals and
developing new ones. Even in the face of losses, however,
when losses are not too pervasive, goals can often be main-
tained by using alternative means. This process is referred to
as compensation.
Compensation denotes the acquisition and use of means to
counteract loss or decline in goal-related means. Typical
instances are the substitution of previously available goal-
relevant means by acquiring new or activating unused internal
or external resources (Bäckman & Dixon, 1992; Carstensen,
Hanson, & Freund, 1995; Marsiske et al., 1995). As we dis-
cussed in the context of optimization, which means are best
suited for maintaining a given level of functioning in the face
of loss or decline depends on the domain of functioning. Once
again, such aspects of self-regulation as delay of gratiﬁcation,
control beliefs, and practice generally play an important role
in the acquisition and investment of compensatory means. In
contrast to optimization, compensation aims at counteracting
or avoiding losses rather than at approaching positive states.
Because of the losses associated with increasing age, aging
individuals have to allocate more and more of their resources
into the maintenance of functioning and the resilience against
losses rather than into processes of growth (Staudinger et al.,
1995). The negative effects of avoidance goals for younger
age groups that were mentioned above (e.g., Coats et al.,
1996; Elliot, & Church, 1997; Emmons, 1996) might be less
pronounced or even absent in old age, when a focus on main-
tenance might be experienced as something positive (Freund
& Baltes, 2000; Heckhausen, 1999). Again, data from the
Berlin Aging Study (Freund & Baltes, 1998) support the pos-
itive effect of compensation, showing that self-reported
compensation was associated with subjective indicators of

618
Successful Aging
successful aging (i.e., emotional well-being, satisfaction with
aging, and life satisfaction).
SOC and Age
Although selection, optimization, and compensation are con-
ceptualized as general processes of developmental regulation
that function throughout the life span, these processes also
undergo developmental changes. Regarding old age, two pre-
dictions seem plausible (Freund & Baltes, 2000): On the one
hand, older adults might become better at the use of SOC
strategies because of their increasing life experience. On the
other hand, the use of SOC strategies itself is resource depen-
dent and effortful. As the resources available to older persons
decrease, the engagement in SOC-related behaviors might
become more difﬁcult. In old age, SOC-related behaviors
might therefore decline. Consistent with the latter argument,
cross-sectional data revealed a decrease in self-reported SOC
with increasing age (Freund & Baltes, 1998, 2000). Despite
such a decline in self-reported SOC behaviors, however,
selection, optimization, and compensation continued to have
positive associations to well-being (Freund & Baltes, 1998,
1999, 2000) and to everyday functioning (M. M. Baltes &
Lang, 1997) well into old age. 
In sum, the SOC model conceptualizes successful aging as
the interplay of three processes:
•
Developing, elaborating, and committing to those goals of
functioning that promote a ﬁt between personal needs
or preferences, environmental, societal, or biological de-
mands and actual or acquirable resources (selection). In
old age, when an individual is confronted with changes in
personal needs or preferences, demands, and resources,
selection of goals in which all three of these factors
converge should be of particular importance for positive
functioning.
•
Acquiring, reﬁning, and investing (internal or external)
resources into the pursuit of the selected goals (optimiza-
tion). To promote gains and growth in old age—a life
phase in which developmental losses outweigh develop-
mental gains—it is important to acquire new or activate
previously unused goal-relevant external or internal
means (e.g., social support). 
•
Acquiring and investing resources into selected domains
of functioning in order to counteract losses of previously
available goal-relevant means (compensation). Given the
inevitable losses of old age, an important facet of success-
ful aging is the management of losses and the maintenance
of functioning. Because compensatory efforts also require
resources, careful selection of goals on which to focus in
the face of loss (i.e., loss-based selection) is essential for
successful aging.
In the following discussion, we present two models of
successful aging that are compatible with the SOC meta-
model but that put a particular emphasis on the controllabil-
ity of events: the model of primary and secondary control by
Heckhausen and Schulz (1995) and the model of assimilative
and accommodative coping by Brandtstädter and colleagues
(e.g., Brandtstädter & Renner, 1990).
The Model of Optimization in Primary
and Secondary Control (OPS)
Converging with the SOC model, the model of optimiza-
tion in primary and secondary control (OPS model) by
Heckhausen and Schulz stresses the importance of selectivity
and compensation for developmental regulation and success-
ful aging (Heckhausen, 1999; Heckhausen & Schulz, 1995,
1999; Schulz, 1986; Schulz & Heckhausen, 1996). Unlike the
developers of the SOC model, Heckhausen and Schulz
(1998, pp. 55–56) “conceptualize optimization as a higher
order regulatory process” that balances and maintains selec-
tivity and compensation. In the OPS model, selectivity
denotes the focused investment of resources into selected
goals, whereas compensation refers to strategies helping to
attain a selected goal when internal resources are insufﬁcient
or when faced with failure or losses. 
Heckhausen and Schulz propose that the challenges of life
can be mastered by jointly employing two modes of control:
primary and secondary control. According to their model, hu-
mans have an innate need to control their world. The primary
way to achieve control is by employing instrumental efforts
to modify the environment according to one’s goals (i.e.,
primary control). If such control strategies directed at the
external world are not available or if they fail, an internal
focus on changing one’s goals and standards or engaging in
self-protective attributions or social comparisons takes over
(i.e., secondary control). The main function of secondary
control is to focus and protect motivational resources for pri-
mary control. In general, Heckhausen and Schulz propose
that the maximization of primary control potential is the
criterion of adaptive functioning across the life span. This is
particularly difﬁcult in old age, when losses become more
prominent and less controllable, thereby depleting the poten-
tial for primary control (Schulz, 1986). Thus, in old age,
secondary control strategies should gain more and more in
importance for successful developmental regulation. 
Heckhausen and Schulz distinguish two forms of primary
and secondary control strategies—namely selective and

Processes Related to Successful Aging
619
compensatory forms. Selective primary control denotes
actions that are directly aimed at goal achievement, such as in-
vesting time, effort, and skills into the pursuit of goals. Com-
pensatory primary control—that is, the investment of external
resources (e.g., help of others) or the acquisition of alternative
resources takes place when available internal resources are
not sufﬁcient for achieving one’s goals. This process is partic-
ularly important in old age when internal resources are subject
to decline and losses. Selective secondary control refers to
enhanced selectivity of resource investment into already
existing goals through motivational processes such as enhanc-
ing commitment to a given goal. Finally, compensatory sec-
ondary control buffers negative effects of failure in primary
control strivings through cognitive reframing of goals, such as
decreasing the desirability of unobtainable goals or favorable
social comparisons. These strategies—again of particular
importance in old age when resource-intensive goals might
become increasingly difﬁcult to achieve due to loss and
decline in relevant resources—should contribute to the long-
term primary control potential because they work against the
negative motivational effects of failure experience and con-
tribute to the maintenance of self-efﬁcacy and well-being.
According to Heckhausen and Schulz, none of these four
types of control strategies alone is sufﬁcient to bring about suc-
cessful development. Instead, the four types of control have to
be orchestrated according to the opportunity structure and con-
straintsofanindividual’sdevelopmentalecology.Forinstance,
Wrosch and Heckhausen (1999) showed that control strategies
differ systematically between younger and older adults who
encounter the same situation—namely, separation or divorce
from a long-term partner. Based on demographic data, they as-
sumedthatthesetwoagegroupsdifferintheiropportunitiesfor
ﬁnding a new partner, such that younger adults have much bet-
ter chances than do older adults. In accordance with proposi-
tions of the OPS model, younger separated adults reported
more primary control strivings for attaining partnership goals,
whereas older separated adults reported higher levels of goal
deactivation (compensatory secondary control). Moreover,
Wrosch and Heckhausen could show that goal disengagement
was positively related to change in positive affect over time in
older adults but negatively related in younger adults.
With regard to aging, Heckhausen, Schulz, and Wrosch
(1998) found that in general, endorsement of control strategies
increases from young to old adulthood. The one exception to
this age pattern pertained to compensatory secondary control,
which was reported least in all age groups. The authors inter-
preted this ﬁnding as supporting their notion of the primacy of
primary control. Moreover, they concluded that “overall, with
increasing age adults appear to know about, appreciate, and
maybe rely more on strategies of developmental regulation”
(Heckhausen & Schulz, 1998, p. 70). All four types of control
strategies were shown to be positively related to self-esteem,
which further supports the importance of primary and sec-
ondary control strategies for successful aging.
The Model of Assimilative and Accommodative Coping 
Brandtstädter and his colleagues (Brandtstädter & Greve,
1994; Brandtstädter & Renner, 1990; Brandtstädter &
Wentura, 1995; Brandtstädter, Wentura, & Rothermund,
1999) proposed a model that addresses the question what
processes can explain the so-called paradox of stability in
well-being despite the many losses and constraints older per-
sons encounter. According to their model, people use primar-
ily two distinct, complementary forms of coping to achieve
“a match between actual developmental outcomes or
prospects and personal goals and ambitions” (Brandtstädter
et al., 1999, pp. 375–376)—namely, assimilation and accom-
modation. Assimilation refers to tenacious goal pursuit by
modifying the environment or the circumstances so that they
ﬁt personal goals. It involves actional (i.e., intentional) neu-
tralization of a mismatch between the current and the desired
states. In contrast, accommodation denotes processes of
ﬂexible goal adjustment by changing, downgrading, or dis-
carding personal goals or lowering one’s level of aspirations
so that they ﬁt the circumstances. It is characterized by men-
tal neutralizations of a mismatch between the actual and the
desired state that work primarily on a nonintentional, uncon-
scious level.
Brandtstädter and colleagues (e.g., Brandtstädter et al.,
1999) posit that people ﬁrst use assimilative strategies to cope
with loss—that is, they ﬁrst try to overcome obstacles block-
ing their goals by actional neutralizations. If goals remain
blocked despite assimilative attempts, a gradual shift to the
accommodative mode occurs. The gradual shift from the as-
similative to the accommodative mode is theorized to occur in
the following order: When attempts at altering the situation do
not succeed, auxiliary activities will be activated or acquired.
When these auxiliary attempts do not lead to the desired out-
comes, external aids or support systems might be engaged
(cf. the concept of proxy control by Bandura, 1982). When
all of these instrumental actions do not help to alter the situa-
tion in the desired way, people, according to Brandtstädter,
feel helpless and depressed. This state, however, is only
temporary and marks the shift to accommodative processes
such as disengagement from goals or adjustment of standards
take place.
Brandtstädter et al. (1999), however, also point out that the
shift from assimilative to accommodative coping does not
always follow this ﬁxed temporal pattern; rather, it depends on

620
Successful Aging
personal and situational factors. Brandtstädter and Wentura
(1995) list three key factors affecting assimilative and accom-
modative tendencies in opposite directions: (a) importance of
the goal—when a goal is of great personal importance, assim-
ilative tendencies are activated, whereas accommodative
tendencies are inhibited; (b) probability of success—if there
is a sufﬁcient probability of success in achieving a goal,
assimilative coping prevails over accommodative coping;
and (c) accessibility of palliative information—contextual or
chronically available palliative information (e.g., social norms,
personal attitudes) that eases the acceptance of a previously
aversive situation fosters a shift to the accommodative mode.
Brandtstädter and colleagues predict a general shift during
aging from assimilative to accommodative coping. When
losses begin to occur, people should ﬁrst respond with assim-
ilative coping directed at actively counteracting losses. When
with increasing age, losses begin to become more widespread
and hence both the probability of success and the resources to
engage in assimilative actions decline, accommodative cop-
ing should gain in importance. This theoretically expected
pattern, which has been empirically conﬁrmed (Brandtstädter
& Renner, 1990; Brandtstädter, Rothermund, & Schmitz,
1997), is seen as important for successful aging because
Brandtstädter et al. (1999, p. 391) “consider the process of
continuously readjusting goals and preferences to action
reserves as crucial to the maintenance of self-esteem and
even efﬁcacy in later life.” Again, empirical evidence sup-
ports this hypothesis. Brandtstädter and Renner (1990) could
show that accommodative tendencies such as ﬂexible goal
adjustment buffer the negative association between perceived
developmental deﬁcits and life satisfaction as well as buffer
the negative effect of health-related problems on subjective
well-being (Brandtstädter, Wentura, & Greve, 1993).
According to this model, successful aging can be charac-
terized primarily as a coping process that shifts from actively
counteracting beginning age-related losses to cognitively
restructuring personal goals or standards: “A comprehensive
theoretical view [of successful aging] . . . must also account
for the fact that to maintain a sense of efﬁcacy and self-
esteem, personal goals and self-evaluative standards have to
be continually revised and adjusted to the changes that char-
acterize the processes of physical, psychological, and social
aging” (Brandtstädter et al., 1999, p. 382).
SUMMARY
Old age is a relatively new phenomenon because life ex-
pectancy has only relatively recently extended into old age.
In many modern countries, this increase in life expectancy
has been co-occurring with a decline in fertility rates. This
has drastically altered the population’s composition. Declin-
ing proportions of working-age people have to ensure ade-
quate living conditions for a growing number of old people.
To meet this challenge, gerontology needs to provide knowl-
edge about positive or successful aging and the conditions
that foster it. In this chapter, we reviewed current knowledge
and theory on this topic. 
In the ﬁrst part of the chapter, we elaborated the speciﬁc
context of old age in four life domains: physiological
changes, cognitive functioning, social relations, and every-
day competence. From this discussion, we inferred (a) that
with advancing age, the ratio of developmental gains and
losses becomes increasingly negative; (b) that old age, like
any other phase in life, is characterized by tremendous intra-
and interindividual heterogeneity; and (c) that it is necessary
to distinguish between young-old and old-old age. Many in-
dividuals in their 60s and 70s exhibit relatively high levels of
functioning, whereas in very old age (85 years and older) the
detrimental effects of aging become more pronounced. 
Given the unfavorable ratio of developmental gains to
losses in older adulthood, the term successful aging sounds
like an oxymoron. This lead us to the question of how to best
deﬁne successful aging. We discussed the current state of
research on this question in the second part of this chapter.
On an abstract level, researchers typically agree that success-
ful aging can be deﬁned as the simultaneous maximization of
gains and minimization of losses. What exactly constitute
gains and losses, however, must be speciﬁed depending on
the speciﬁc research question at hand. Presumably because
of the inherent value-judgement required for delineating
criteria for successful aging, no generally accepted set of
criteria characterizing successful aging exists. It is, however,
generally acknowledged that an encompassing characteriza-
tion of how well a person is aging should comprise objective
as well as subjective, short-term as well as long-term, gen-
eral as well as domain-speciﬁc, and static as well as dynamic
indicators.
In the third part of this chapter, we shifted the focus away
from discussing criterion-centered approaches to deﬁning
successful aging to reviewing theories that address the ques-
tion of processes underlying successful aging. Recently, the
role of proactive processes in aging has been increasingly
recognized. A basic assumption underlying this notion is that
development is a dynamic process of both reacting to and
proactively shaping one’s environment as well as oneself
(e.g., Lawton, 1989; Lerner & Busch-Rossnagel, 1981). Ac-
cording to this view, individuals continuously adapt to their
changing environment, act upon their environment, and
actively create environments that ﬁt their needs (e.g., move

References
621
to a ground-ﬂoor apartment in which a wheelchair can be
used when mobility is impaired).
Recent models of successful aging stress the role of moti-
vational processes in understanding developmental regulation
in old age, such as the model of selection, optimization, and
compensation (P. B. Baltes, 1997; P. B. Baltes & Baltes, 1990;
Freund et al., 1999; Marsiske et al., 1995), the model of as-
similative and accommodative coping (e.g., Brandtstädter &
Greve, 1994; Brandtstädter & Renner, 1990), and the model of
primary and secondary control (e.g., Heckhausen & Schulz,
1995). According to these models, an important way in which
individuals play an active role in their development is by
choosing, committing to, and pursuing personal goals. By
adapting goals and standards to the increasingly constrained
resources (e.g., health-related decline), older people can
maintain their well-being and a certain degree of control.
At this point, most of the research on processes of develop-
mental regulation in old age is primarily concerned with
understanding how and under what conditions these processes
contribute to successful aging. We hope, however, that identi-
fying the central processes of successful aging will help to
develop prevention or intervention programs to enhance the
quality of older persons’lives in the not-so-distant future.
REFERENCES
Aiken, L. R. (1989). Later life (3rd ed.). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Anstey, K. J., Lord, S. R., & Williams, P. (1997). Strength in the
lower limbs, visual contrast, and simple reaction time predict
cognition in older women. Psychology and Aging, 12, 137–144.
Antonucci, T. C. (1985). Personal characteristics, social support,
and social behavior. In R. H. Binstock & E. Shanas (Eds.),
Handbook of aging and the social sciences (2nd ed., pp. 94–
128). New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold.
Antonucci, T. C. (1990). Social supports and social relationships. In
R. H. Binstock & L. K. George (Eds.), Handbook of aging and
the social sciences (3rd ed., pp. 205–226). San Diego, CA:
Academic Press.
Antonucci, T. C. (1991).Attachment, social support, and coping with
negative life events in mature adulthood. In E. M. Cummings,
A. L. Greene, & K. H. Karraker (Eds.), Life-span developmental
psychology: Perspectives on stress and coping (pp. 261–276).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Antonucci, T. C., & Akiyama, H. (1994). Convoys of attachment
and social relations in children, adolescents, and adults. In F.
Nestmann & K. Hurrelmann (Eds.), Social networks and social
support in childhood and adolescence (pp. 37–52). Berlin: de
Gruyter.
Antonucci, T. C., & Akiyama, H. (1995). Convoys of social
relations: Family and friendship within a lifespan context. In
R. Blieszner & V. H. Bedford (Eds.), Handbook of aging and the
family (pp. 355–371). Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
Antonucci, T. C., & Jackson, J. S. (1987). Social support, interper-
sonal efﬁcacy, and health: A life course perspective. In L. L.
Carstensen & B. A. Edelstein (Eds.), Handbook of clinical
gerontology (pp. 291–311). New York: Pergamon Press.
Atchley, R. C. (1982). The aging self. Psychotherapy: Theory,
Research and Practice, 19, 388–396.
Bäckman, L., & Dixon, R. A. (1992). Psychological compensation:
A theoretical framework. Psychological Bulletin, 112, 1–25.
Baltes, M. M. (1987). Erfolgreiches Altern als Ausdruck von
Verhaltenskompetenz und Umweltqualität [Successful aging
as expression of behavioral competence and environmental
quality]. In C. Niemitz (Ed.), Der Mensch im Zusammenspiel von
Anlage und Umwelt [The human being in the interaction of nature
and nuture] (pp. 353–376). Frankfurt, Germany: Suhrkamp.
Baltes, M. M. (1996). The many faces of dependency in old age.
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Baltes, M. M., & Carstensen, L. L. (1996). The process of success-
ful ageing. Ageing and Society, 16, 397–422.
Baltes, M. M., & Carstensen, L. L. (1998). Social psychological
theories and their applications to aging: From individual to
collective. In V. L. Bengtson & K. W. Schaie (Eds.), Handbook
of theories of aging (pp. 209–226). New York: Springer.
Baltes, M. M., & Lang, F. R. (1997). Everyday functioning and
successful aging: The impact of resources. Psychology and
Aging, 12, 433–443.
Baltes, M. M., Maas, I., Wilms, H.-U., Borchelt, M., & Little,
T. D. (1999). Everyday competence in old and very old age:
Theoretical considerations and empirical ﬁndings. In P. B. Baltes
& K. U. Mayer (Eds.), The Berlin Aging Study. Aging from 70 to
100 (pp. 384–402). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Baltes, M. M., Mayr, U., Borchelt, M., Maas, I., & Wilms, H.-U.
(1993). Everyday competence in old and very old age: An inter-
disciplinary perspective. Ageing and Society, 13, 657–680.
Baltes, M. M., Wahl, H.-W., & Reichert, M. (1991). Successful
aging in long-term care institutions? In K. W. Schaie & M. P.
Lawton (Eds.), Annual review of gerontology and geriatrics
(Vol. 11, pp. 311–337). New York: Springer.
Baltes, M. M., & Wilms, H.-U. (1995). Alltagskompetenz im Alter
[Everyday competence in old age]. In R. Oerter & L. Montada
(Eds.), Entwicklungspsychologie [Developmental psychology]
(pp. 1127–1136).Weinheim,Germany:PsychologieVerlagsUnion.
Baltes, P. B. (1987). Theoretical propositions of life-span develop-
mental psychology: On the dynamics between growth and
decline. Developmental Psychology, 23, 611–626.
Baltes, P. B. (1989). The dynamics between growth and decline.
Contemporary Psychology, 34, 983–984.
Baltes, P. B. (1997). On the incomplete architecture of human on-
togeny: Selection, optimization, and compensation as foundation
of developmental theory. American Psychologist, 52, 366–380.

622
Successful Aging
Baltes, P. B., & Baltes, M. M. (1980). Plasticity and variability in
psychological aging: Methodological and theoretical issues. In
G. Gurski (Ed.), Determining the effects of aging on the central
nervous system (pp. 41–60). Berlin: Schering.
Baltes, P. B., & Baltes, M. M. (1990). Psychological perspectives on
successful aging: The model of selective optimization with com-
pensation. In P. B. Baltes & M. M. Baltes (Eds.), Successful
aging: Perspectives from the behavioral sciences (pp. 1–34).
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Baltes, P. B., Dittmann-Kohli, F., & Dixon, R. A. (1984). New
perspectives on the development of intelligence in adulthood:
Toward a dual-process conception. In P. B. Baltes & J. O. G.
Brim (Eds.), Life-span development and behavior (Vol. 6,
pp. 33–76). New York: Academic Press.
Baltes, P. B., Dittmann-Kohli, F., & Kliegl, R. (1986). Reserve
capacity of the elderly in aging-sensitive tests of ﬂuid intelli-
gence: Replication and extension. Psychology and Aging, 1,
172–177.
Baltes, P. B., & Kliegl, R. (1992). Further testing of limits of cogni-
tive plasticity: Negative age differences in a mnemonic skill are
robust. Developmental Psychology, 28, 121–125.
Baltes, P. B., & Lindenberger, U. (1988). On the range of cognitive
plasticity in old age as a function of experience: 15 years of
intervention research. Behavior Therapy, 19, 283–300.
Baltes, P. B., Lindenberger, U., & Staudinger, U. M. (1998).
Life-span theory in developmental psychology. In R. M. Lerner
(Ed.), Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 1. Theoretical models
of human development (5th ed., pp. 1029–1143). New York:
Wiley.
Baltes, P. B., Sowarka, D., & Kliegl, R. (1989). Cognitive train-
ing research on ﬂuid intelligence in old age: What can older
adults achieve by themselves? Psychology and Aging, 4,
217–221.
Baltes, P. B., Staudinger, U. M., & Lindenberger, U. (1999). Life-
span psychology: Theory and application to intellectual func-
tioning. Annual Review of Psychology, 50, 471–507.
Baltes, P. B., Staudinger, U. M., Maercker, U. M., & Smith, J. (1995).
People nominated as wise: A comparative study of wisdom-
related knowledge. Psychology and Aging, 10, 155–166.
Baltes, P. B., & Willis, S. L. (1982). Enhancement (plasticity) of
intellectual functioning in old age: Penn State’s Adult Develop-
ment and Enrichment Project (ADEPT). In F. I. M. Craik &
S. Trehub (Eds.), Aging and cognitive processes (pp. 353–389).
New York: Plenum Press.
Bandura, A. (1982). Self-efﬁcacy mechanism in human agency.
American Psychologist, 37, 122–147.
Bargh, J. A., & Gollwitzer, P. M. (1994). Environmental control of
goal-directed action: Automatic and strategic contingencies
between situations and behavior. In W. D. Spaulding (Ed.),
Nebraska Symposium on Motivation: Vol. 41. Integrative views
of motivation, cognition, and emotion (pp. 71–124). Lincoln:
University of Nebraska Press.
Bauco, C., Golosio, F., Cinti, A. M., Borriello, C., Raganato, P.,
Cicconetti, P., Cacciafesta, M., & Marigliano, V. (1996). Func-
tional status and well-being of centenarians. Archives of Geron-
tology and Geriatry, 5, 363–366.
Bebbington, A. C. (1988). The expectation of life without disability
in England and Wales. Social Science Medicine, 27, 321–326.
Berg, C. A., & Klaszynski, P. A. (1996). Practical intelligence and
problem solving: Searching for perspectives. In F. Blanchard-
Fields & T. M. Hess (Eds.), Perspectives on cognitive change in
adulthood and aging (pp. 323–357). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Blau, Z. S. (1981). Aging in a changing society (2nd ed.). New York:
Franklin Watts.
Bortz, W. M. (1982). Disuse and aging. Journal of the American
Medical Association, 248, 1203–1208.
Bosman, E. A. (1993). Age-related differences in the motoric
aspects of transcription typing skill. Psychology and Aging, 8,
87–102.
Bosman, E. A., & Charness, N. (1996). Age-related differences
in skilled performance and skill acquisition. In F. Blanchard-
Fields & T. M. Hess (Eds.), Perspectives on cognitive change in
adulthood and aging (pp. 428–453). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Boult, C., Kane, R. L., Louis, T. A., Boult, L., & McCaffrey, D.
(1994). Chronic conditions that lead to functional limitations in
the elderly. Journal of Gerontology: Medical Sciences, 49,
M28–M36.
Bowling, A. (1994). Social networks and social support among
older people and implications for emotional well-being and psy-
chiatric morbidity. International Review of Psychiatry, 6, 41–58.
Bradburn, N. M. (1969). The structure of psychological wellbeing.
Chicago: Aldine.
Bradsher, J. E. (1997). Older women and widowhood. In J. M.
Coyle (Ed.), Handbook on women and aging (pp. 418–429).
Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
Brandtstädter, J. (1998). Action perspectives on human develop-
ment. In R. M. Lerner (Ed.), Handbook of child psychology:
Vol. 1. Theoretical models of human development (5th ed.,
pp. 807–866). New York: Wiley.
Brandtstädter, J. (1999). The self in action and development:
Cultural, biosocial, and ontogenetic bases of intentional self-
development. In J. Brandtstädter & R. M. Lerner (Eds.), Action
and self-development: Theory and research through the life span
(pp. 37–65). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Brandtstädter, J., & Greve, W. (1994). The aging self: Stabilizing
and protective processes. Developmental Review, 14, 52–80.
Brandtstädter, J., & Renner, G. (1990). Tenacious goal pursuit and
ﬂexible goal adjustment: Explication and age-related analysis of
assimilative and accommodative strategies of coping. Psychol-
ogy and Aging, 5, 58–67.
Brandtstädter, J., Rothermund, K., & Schmitz, U. (1997). Coping
resources in later life. European Review of Applied Psychology,
47, 107–114.

References
623
Brandtstädter, J., & Wentura, D. (1995). Adjustment to shifting pos-
sibility frontiers in later life: Complementary adaptive modes. In
R. A. Dixon & L. Bäckman (Eds.), Compensating for psycholog-
ical deﬁcits and declines: Managing losses and promoting gains
(pp. 83–106). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Brandtstädter, J., Wentura, D., & Greve, W. (1993). Adaptive
resources of the aging self: Outlines of an emergent perspective.
Journal of Behavioral Development, 16, 323–349.
Brandtstädter, J., Wentura, D., & Rothermund, K. (1999). Intentional
self-development through adulthood and later life: Tenacious
pursuit and ﬂexible adjustment of goals. In J. Brandtstädter &
R. M. Lerner (Eds.), Action and self-development: Theory and
research through the life span (pp. 373–400). Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage.
Brickman, P., Coates, D., & Janoff-Bulman, R. (1978). Lottery
winners and accident victims: Is happiness relative? Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 37, 917–927.
Brubaker, T. H. (1990). Families in later life: A burgeoning research
area. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 52, 959–981.
Campbell, A., Converse, P. E., & Rodgers, W. L. (1976). The qual-
ity of American life: Perceptions, evaluations, and satisfaction.
New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Carstensen, L. L. (1993). Motivation for social contact across the
life-span: A theory of socioemotional selectivity. In J. E. Jacobs
et al. (Ed.), Nebraska Symposium on Motivation, 1992: Develop-
mental perspectives on motivation. Current theory and research
in motivation (Vol. 40, pp. 209–254). Lincoln: University of
Nebraska Press.
Carstensen, L. L. (1995). Evidence for a life-span theory of socio-
emotional selectivity. Current Directions in Psychological
Science, 4, 151–156.
Carstensen, L. L., & Fredrickson, B. F. (1998). Socioemotional
selectivity in healthy older people and younger people living
with the human inmmunodeﬁciency virus: The centrality of
emotion when the future is constrained. Health Psychology, 17,
1–10.
Carstensen, L. L., & Freund, A. M. (1994). The resilience of the self.
Developmental Review, 14, 81–92.
Carstensen, L. L., Hanson, K. A., & Freund, A. M. (1995). Selection
and compensation in adulthood. In R. A. Dixon & L. Bäckman
(Eds.), Compensating for psychological deﬁcits and declines:
Managing losses and promoting gains (pp. 107–126). Mahwah,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Carstensen, L. L., Isaacowitz, D. M., & Charles, S. T. (1999).
Taking time seriously: A theory of socioemotional selectivity.
American Psychologist, 54, 165–181.
Carver, C. S., & Scheier, M. F. (1995). On the self-regulation of
behavior. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Case, R. (1985). Intellectual development: From birth to adulthood.
New York: Academic Press.
Cattell, R. B. (1971). Abilities: Their structure, growth, and action.
Boston: Houghton Mifﬂin.
Charness, N. (1981a). Search in chess: Age and skill differences.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 7, 467–476.
Charness, N. (1981b). Visual short-term memory and aging in chess
players. Journals of Gerontology, 36, 615–619.
Charness, N. (1983). Age, skill, and bridge bidding: A chronometric
analysis. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 22,
406–416.
Charness, N. (1987). Component processes in bridge bidding and
novel problem solving tasks. Canadian Journal of Psychology,
41, 223–243.
Cicirelli, V. G. (1982). Sibling inﬂuence throughout the life span. In
M. E. Lamb & B. Sutton-Smith (Eds.), Sibling relationships:
Their nature and signiﬁcance across the lifespan (pp. 267–284).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Cicirelli, V. G. (1985). The role of siblings as family caregivers. In
W. J. Sauer & R. T. Coward (Eds.), Social support networks and
the care of the elderly (pp. 93–107). New York: Springer.
Clayton, V. P., & Birren, J. E. (1980). The development of wisdom
across the life span: A reexamination of an ancient topic. In P. B.
Baltes & J. O. G. Brim (Eds.), Life-span development and
behavior (Vol. 3, pp. 103–135). New York: Academic Press.
Coats, E. J., Janoff-Bulman, R., & Alpert, N. (1996). Approach
versus avoidance goals: Differences in self-evaluation and
well-being. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 22,
1057–1067.
Connidis, I. A. (1989). Siblings as friends in later life. American
Behavioral Scientist, 33, 81–93.
Cooper, B. (1997). Epidemiology of the dementias in late life. In
R. Jacoby & C. Oppenheimer (Eds.), Psychiatry in the elderly
(pp. 439–453). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Crimmins, E. M., Hayward, M. D., & Saito, Y. (1996). Differentials
in active life expectancy in the older population of the United
States. Journals of Gerontology: Social Sciences, 51B, S111–
S120.
Cumming, E., & Henry, W. E. (1961). Growing old. New York:
Basic Books.
Diehl, M. (1998). Everyday competence in later life: Current status
and future directions. Gerontologist, 38(4), 422–433.
Diener, E. (1999, November). Measurement and ﬁndings on subjec-
tive well-being. Distinguished Lecture presented at the Max
Planck Institute for Human Development, Berlin, Germany.
Diener, E., Suh, E. K., Lucas, R. E., & Smith, H. L. (1999). Subjec-
tive well-being: Three decades of progress. Psychological
Bulletin, 125, 276–302.
Dinkel, R. H. (1994). Demographische Alterung: Ein Überblick
unter besonderer Berücksichtigung der Mortalitätsentwicklung
[Demographic aging: An overview with special consideration of
the development of mortality]. In P. B. Baltes, J. Mittelstraß, &
U. M. Staudinger (Eds.), Alter und Altern: Ein interdisziplinärer
Studientext zur Gerontologie [Age and Aging: An interdiscipli-
nary textbook on gerontology] (pp. 62–93). Berlin: de Gruyter.

624
Successful Aging
Dykstra, P. A. (1993). The differential availability of relationships
and the provision and effectiveness of support to older adults.
Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 10, 355–370.
Elliot, A. J., & Church, M. A. (1997). A hierarchical model of
approach and avoidance motivation. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 72, 218–232.
Elliot, A. J., & Sheldon, K. M. (1997). Avoidance achievement
motivation: A personal goal analysis. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 73, 171–185.
Elliot, A. J., Sheldon, K. M., & Church, M. A. (1997). Avoidance
personal goals and subjective well-being. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 23, 915–927.
Emmons, R. A. (1996). Striving and feeling: Personal goals and
subjective well-being. In P. M. Gollwitzer & J. A. Bargh (Eds.),
The psychology of action: Linking cognition and motivation to
behavior (pp. 313–337). New York: Guilford Press.
Ericsson, K. A. (1996). The road to excellence: The acquisition of
expert performance in the arts and sciences, sports and games.
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Feldman, J. J., Makuc, D. M., Kleinman, J. C., & Huntley, J. C.
(1989). National trends in educational differences in mortality.
American Journal of Epidemiology, 129, 919–933.
Ferring, D., & Filipp, S.-H. (1995). The structure of subjective well-
being in the elderly: Atest of different models by structural equa-
tion modeling. European Journal of Psychological Assessment,
11, 32.
Field, D. (1999). Continuity and change in friendships in advanced
old age: Findings from the Berkeley Older Generations Study.
International Journal of Aging and Human Development, 48,
325–346.
Field, D., & Minkler, M. (1988). Continuity and change in social
support between young-old and old-old or very-old age. Journal
of Gerontology: Psychological Sciences, 43, P100–P106.
Frederick, S., & Loewenstein, G. (1999). Hedonic adaptation. In
D. Kahneman, E. Diener, & N. Schwarz (Eds.), Well-being: The
foundations of hedonic psychology (pp. 302–329). New York:
Russell Sage Foundation. 
Fredrickson, B. C., & Carstensen, L. L. (1990). Choosing social
partners: How old age and anticipated endings make people
more selective. Psychology and Aging, 5, 163–171.
Freund, A. M. (1997). Individuating age-salience: A psychological
perspective on the salience of age in the life course. Human
Development, 40, 287–292.
Freund, A. M., & Baltes, P. B. (1998). Selection, optimization, and
compensation as strategies of life-management: Correlations
with subjective indicators of successful aging. Psychology and
Aging, 13, 531–543.
Freund, A. M., & Baltes, P. B. (1999). Selection, optimization, and
compensation as strategies of life management: Correction to
Freund and Baltes (1998). Psychology and Aging, 14, 700–702.
Freund, A. M., & Baltes, P. B. (2000). The orchestration of selec-
tion, optimization, and compensation: An action-theoretical
conceptualization of a theory of developmental regulation. In
W. J. Perrig & A. Grob (Eds.), Control of human behavior,
mental processes and consciousness (pp. 35–58). Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Freund, A. M., Li, K. Z. H., & Baltes, P. B. (1999). Successful
development and aging: The role of selection, optimization, and
compensation. In J. Brandtstädter & R. M. Lerner (Eds.), Action
and self-development: Theory and research through the life span
(pp. 401–434). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Fries, J. F. (1990). Medical perspectives upon successful aging. In
P. B. Baltes & M. M. Baltes (Eds.), Successful aging: Perspec-
tives from the behavioral sciences (pp. 35–49). Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Fung, H., Carstensen, L. L., & Lutz, A. (1999). Inﬂuence of time on
social preferences: Implications for life-span development.
Psychology and Aging, 14, 595–604.
Furner, S. E., Rudberg, M. A., & Cassel, C. K. (1995). Medical
conditions differentially affect the development of IADL disabil-
ity: Implications for medical care and research. Gerontologist,
35, 444–450.
Gallagher-Thompson, D., Futterman, A., Farberow, N., Thompson,
L. W., & Peterson, J. (1993). The impact of spousal bereavement
on older widows and widowers. In M. S. Stroebe, W. Stroebe, &
R. O. Hansson (Eds.), Handbook of bereavement: Theory,
research, and intervention (pp. 227–239). Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
George, L. K. (1981). Subjective well-being: Conceptual and
methodological issues. In C. Eisdorfer (Ed.), Annual review of
gerontology and geriatrics (Vol. 2). New York: Springer.
Goetting, A. (1986). The developmental tasks of siblingship over
the life cycle. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 48, 703–714.
Gollwitzer, P. M. (1996). Das Rubikonmodell der Handlungsphasen
[The rubicon model of action phases]. In J. Kuhl & H.
Heckhausen (Eds.), Motivation, Volition, und Handlung
[Motivation, volition, action] (Vol. 4, pp. 531–582). Göttingen,
Germany: Hogrefe.
Havighurst, R. J. (1963). Successful aging. In R. H. Williams, C.
Tibbitts, & W. Donahue (Eds.), The process of aging: Social and
psychological perspectives (Vol. 1, pp. 299–320). New York:
Atherton Press.
Havighurst, R. J., & Albrecht, R. (1953). Older people. New York:
Longmans Green.
Havighurst, R. J., Neugarten, B. L., & Tobin, S. S. (1968).
Disengagement and patterns of aging. Gerontologist, 4, 24.
Hayslip, B. (1989). Alternative mechanisms for improvements in
ﬂuid ability performance among older adults. Psychology and
Aging, 4, 122–124.
Heckhausen, J. (1999). Developmental regulation in adulthood:
Age-normative and sociostructural constraints as adaptive
challenges. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Heckhausen, J., Dixon, R. A., & Baltes, P. B. (1989). Gains and
losses in development throughout adulthood as perceived by

References
625
different adult age groups. Developmental Psychology, 25,
109–121.
Heckhausen, J., & Schulz, R. (1995). A life-span theory of control.
Psychological Review, 102, 284–304.
Heckhausen, J., & Schulz, R. (1998). Developmental regulation in
adulthood: Selection and compensation via primary and sec-
ondary control. In J. Heckhausen & C. S. Dweck (Eds.), Motiva-
tion and self-regulation across the life span (pp. 50–77). New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Heckhausen, J., & Schulz, R. (1999). Biological and societal
canalizations and individuals’ developmental goals. In J.
Brandtstädter & R. Lerner (Eds.), Action and self-development:
Theory and research through the life span (pp. 67–103). London,
UK: Sage.
Heckhausen, J., Schulz, R., & Wrosch, C. (1998). Developmental
regulation in adulthood: Optimization in primary and secondary
control. Berlin: Max Planck Institute for Human Development.
Heller, K., & Mansbach, W. E. (1984). The multifaceted nature of
social support in a community sample of elderly women. Journal
of Social Issues, 40, 99–113.
Hess, T. M., & Pullen, S. M. (1996). Memory in context. In F.
Blanchard-Fields & T. M. Hess (Eds.), Perspectives on cognitive
change in adulthood and aging (pp. 387–427). New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Hobfoll, S. E. (2001). The inﬂuence of culture, community, and the
nested-self in the stress process: Advancing conservation of
resources theory. Applied Psychology: An International Review,
50, 337–421.
Hofman, A., Rocca, W., Brayne, C., Breteler, M. B. B., Clarke, M.,
Cooper, B., Copeland, J. R., Dartigues, J. F., da Silva Droux, A.,
& Hagnell, O. (1991). The prevalence of dementia in Europe: A
collaborative study of 1980–1990 ﬁndings. International Jour-
nal of Epidemiology, 20, 736–748.
Horgas, A. L., Wilms, H.-U., & Baltes, M. M. (1998). Daily life in
very old age: Everyday activities as expression of successful liv-
ing. Gerontologist, 38, 556–568.
Horn, J. L. (1982). The theory of ﬂuid and crystallized intelligence
in relation to concepts of cognitive psychology and aging in
adulthood. In F. I. M. Craik & S. Trehub (Eds.), Aging and cog-
nitive processes (pp. 237–278). New York: Plenum Press.
Jagger, C., Clarke, M., & Clarke, S. J. (1991). Getting older—
feeling younger: The changing health proﬁle of the elderly.
International Journal of Epidemiology, 20, 234–238.
Jorm, A. F., Korten, A. E., & Henderson, A. S. (1987). The preva-
lence of dementia: A quantitative integration of the literature.
Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 76, 465–479.
Kahana, E., & Kahana, B. (1996). Conceptual and empirical advances
in understanding aging well through proactive adaptation. In V. L.
Bengtson (Ed.), Adulthood and aging: Research on continuities
and discontinuities (pp. 18–40). New York: Springer.
Kahn, R. L., &Antonucci, T. C. (1980). Convoys over the life course.
Attachment, roles, and social support. In P. B. Baltes & O. G.
Brim (Eds.), Life-span development and behavior (pp. 254–
283). New York: Academic Press.
Kail, R. (1991). Developmental change in speed of processing
during childhood and adolescence. Psychological Bulletin, 109,
490–501.
Kail, R., & Salthouse, T. A. (1994). Processing speed as a mental
capacity. Acta Psychologica, 86, 199–225.
Kannisto, V., Turpeinen, O., & Nieminen, M. (1999). Finnish life
tables since 1751. Rostock, Germany: Max Planck Institute for
Demographic Research. Retrieved from www.demographic-
research.org/Volumes/Vol1/1 (August 2000).
Katz, S., Ford, A. B., Moskowitz, R. W., Jackson, B. A., & Jaffe,
M. W. (1963). Studies of illness in the aged. The index of ADL:
A standardized measure of biological and psychosocial func-
tion. Journal of the American Medical Association, 185,
914–919.
Kessler, R. C., & McLeod, J. D. (1985). Social support and mental
health in community samples. In S. Cohen & S. L. Syme (Eds.),
Social support and health (pp. 219–240). New York: Academic
Press.
Kliegl, R., Smith, J., & Baltes, P. B. (1990). On the locus and
process of magniﬁcation of age differences during mnemonic
training. Developmental Psychology, 26, 894–904.
Klinger, E. (1977). Meaning and void: Inner experience and the
incentives in people’s lives. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
Press.
Knopf, M., Kolodziej, P., & Preussler, W. (1990). Der ältere Mensch
als Experte: Literaturübersicht über die Rolle von Expertenwis-
sen für die kognitive Leistungsfähigkeit im höheren Alter [The
elderly person as expert: Literature review on the role of expert
knowledge for cognitive performance in older age]. Zeitschrift
für Gerontopsychologie und -psychiatrie, 4, 233–248.
Labouvie-Vief, G., Chiodo, L. M., Goguen, L. A., Diehl, M., &
Orwoll, L. (1995). Representations of self across the life span.
Psychology and Aging, 10, 404–415.
Lang, F. R., & Carstensen, L. L. (1994). Close emotional relation-
ships in late life: Further support for proactive aging in the social
domain. Psychology and Aging, 2, 315–324.
Lang, F. R., & Carstensen, L. L. (1998). Social relationships and
adaptation in later life. In A. S. Bellack & M. Hersen (Ed.), Com-
prehensive clinical psychology: Vol. 7. Clinical geropsychology
(pp. 55–72). Oxford, UK: Elsevier Science.
Lang, F. R., Staudinger, U. M., & Carstensen, L. L. (1998). Perspec-
tives on socioemotional selectivity in late life: How personality
and social context do (and do not) make a difference. Journal of
Gerontology: Psychological Sciences, 53B, 21–30.
Lawton, M. P. (1983). Environment and other determinants of well-
being in older people. Gerontologist, 23, 349–357.
Lawton, M. P. (1985). The elderly in context: Perspectives from
environmental psychology and gerontology. Environment and
Behavior, 17, 501–519.

626
Successful Aging
Lawton, M. P. (1989). Environmental proactivity in older people. In
V. L. Bengston & K. W. Schaie (Eds.), The course of later life:
Research and reﬂections (pp. 15–23). New York: Springer.
Lawton, M. P., & Brody, E. M. (1969). Assessment of older people:
Self-maintaining and instrumental activities of daily living.
Gerontologist, 9, 179–186.
Lawton, M. P., Kleban, M. H., & Dean, J. (1993). Affect and
age: Cross-sectional comparisons of structure and prevalence.
Psychology and Aging, 8, 165–175.
Lawton, M. P., & Nahemow, L. (1973). Ecology and the aging
process. In C. Eisdorfer & M. P. Lawton (Eds.), The psychology
of adult development and aging (pp. 619–674). Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association.
Lemon, B. W., Bengtson, V. L., & Peterson, J. A. (1971). An explo-
ration of the activity theory of aging: Activity types and life sat-
isfactions among in-movers to a retirement community. Journal
of Gerontology, 27, 511–523.
Lerner, R. M. (Ed.). (1998). The handbook of child psychology:
Theoretical models of human development (5th ed., Vol. 1). New
York: Wiley.
Lerner, R. M., & Busch-Rossnagel, N. A. (1981). Individuals as
producers of their development: Conceptual and empirical bases.
In R. M. Lerner & N. A. Busch-Rossnagel (Eds.), Individuals
as producers of their development: A life-span perspective
(pp. 1–36). New York: Academic Press.
Lerner, R. M., Freund, A. M., DeStefanis, I., & Habermas, T.
(2001). Understanding Developmental Regulation in Adoles-
cence: The use of the selection, optimization, and compensation
model. Human Development, 44(1), 29–50.
Levenson, R. W., Carstensen, L. L., Friesen, W. V., & Ekman, P.
(1991). The inﬂuence of age and gender on affect, physiology,
and their interrelations: A study of long-term marriages. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 67, 56–68.
Li, S.-C., & Lindenberger, U. (1999). Cross-level uniﬁcation: A
computational exploration of the link between deterioration of
neurotransmitter systems and dedifferentiation of cognitive
abilities in old age. In L. G. Nilsson & H. Markowitsch (Eds.),
Cognitive neuroscience of memory (pp. 104–146). Toronto,
Canada: Hogrefe & Huber.
Lindenberger, U., & Reischies, F. M. (1999). Limits and potentials
of intellectual functioning in old age. In P. B. Baltes & K. U.
Mayer (Eds.), The Berlin Aging Study: Aging from 70 to 100
(Vol. 12, pp. 329–359). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Little, B. R. (1989). Personal projects analysis: Trivial pursuits,
magniﬁcent obsessions, and the search for coherence. New
York: Springer.
Lund, D. A., Caserta, M. S., & Dimond, M. F. (1993). The course of
spousal bereavement in later life. In M. S. Stroebe, W. Stroebe,
& R. O. Hansson (Eds.), Handbook of bereavement: Theory,
research, and intervention (pp. 240–254). Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Maddox, G. L. (1963). Activity and morale: A longitudinal study of
selected elderly subjects. Social Forces, 42, 195–204.
Maddox, G. L. (1965). Fact and artefact: Evidence bearing on
disengagement theory. Human Development, 8, 117–130.
Maddox, G. L. (1985). The process of disengagement: Unfalsiﬁable
theories never die [Special Issue]. Gerontologist, 25, 27.
Maddox, G. L., & Clark, D. O. (1992). Trajectories of functional
impairment in later life. Journal of Health and Social Behavior,
33, 114–125.
Magnusson, D. (Ed.). (1996). The life-span development of individ-
uals: Behavioural, neurobiological and psychosocial perspec-
tives. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Manton, K. G. (1990). Mortality and morbidity. In R. Binstock &
L. George (Eds.), Handbook of aging and social sciences (3rd
ed., pp. 64–89). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Manton, K. G., Corder, L. S., & Stallard, E. (1993). Estimates of
change in chronic disability and institutional incidence and
prevalence rates in the U.S. elderly population from the 1982,
1984, and 1989 National Long Term Care Survey. Journal of
Gerontology: Social Sciences, 48, S153–S166.
Mares, M.-L. (1995). The aging family. In M. A. Fitzpatrick & A. L.
Vangelisti (Eds.), Explaining family interactions (pp. 344–374).
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Marsiske, M., Lang, F. R., Baltes, P. B., & Baltes, M. M. (1995).
Selective optimization with compensation: Life-span perspec-
tives on successful human development. In R. A. Dixon &
L. Bäckman (Eds.), Compensating for psychological deﬁcits and
declines: Managing losses and promoting gains (pp. 35–79).
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Matthews, K. A., Kelsey, S. F., Meilahn, E. N., Kuller, L. H., & Wing,
R. R. (1989). Educational attainment and behavioral and bio-
logical risk factors for coronary heart disease in middle-aged
women. American Journal of Epidemiology, 129, 1132–1144.
Medina, J. J. (1996). The clock of ages. Why we age—how we age—
winding back the clock. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press.
Meeks, C. B., Nickols, S. Y., & Sweaney, A. L. (1999). Demo-
graphic comparisons of aging in ﬁve selected countries. Journal
of Family and Economic Issues, 20, 223–250.
Miller, G. A., Galanter, E., & Pribram, K.-H. (1960). Plans of struc-
ture of behavior. New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston.
Mischel, W. (1996). From good intentions to willpower. In P. M.
Gollwitzer & J. A. Bargh (Eds.), The psychology of action
(pp. 197–218). New York: Guilford Press. 
Palmore, E. (1981). Social patterns in normal aging: Findings from
the Duke Longitudinal Study. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Palmore, E. B., & Kivett, V. R. (1985). Change in life satisfaction.
In E. B. Balmore, E. W. Busse, G. L. Maddox, J. B. Nowline, &
I. C. Siegler (Eds.), Normal aging: Vol. 3. Reports from the Duke
Longitudinal Studies, 1975–1984 (pp. 373–380). Durham, NC:
Duke University Press.

References
627
Peterson, C. (2000). The future of optimism. American Psycholo-
gist, 55, 44–55.
Pulkkinen, L. (2000). Developmental psychology. In K. Pawlik &
M. R. Rosenzweig (Eds.), International handbook of psychology:
Vol. 2. Adulthood and aging (pp. 261–282). Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage.
Reichard, S., Livson, F., & Peterson, P. G. (1962). Aging and
personality. A study of eighty-seven older men. New York: Arno
Press.
Riley, M. W. (1998). Letters to the editor. Gerontologist, 38, 151.
Rosow, I. (1973). The social context of the aging self. Gerontologist,
13, 82–87.
Ross, H. G., & Milgram, J. I. (1982). Important variables in adult
sibling relationships: A qualitative analysis. In M. E. Lamb & B.
Sutton-Smith (Eds.), Sibling relationships: Their nature and
signiﬁcance across the lifespan (pp. 225–266). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Rowe, J. W., & Kahn, R. L. (1987). Human aging: Usual and
successful. Science, 237, 143–149.
Rowe, J. W., & Kahn, R. L. (1998). Successful aging. New York:
Pantheon Books.
Ryff, C. D. (1989). Happiness is everything, or is it? Explorations on
the meaning of psychological well-being. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 57, 1069–1081.
Ryff, C. D. (1995). Psychological well-being in adult life. Current
Directions in Psychological Science, 4, 99–104.
Salthouse, T. A. (1984). Effects of age and skill in typing. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 113, 345–371.
Salthouse, T. A., Hancock, H. E., Meinz, E. J., & Hambrick, D. Z.
(1996). Interrelations of age, visual acuity, and cognitive func-
tioning. Journal of Gerontology: Psychological Sciences, 51B,
P317–P330.
Salthouse, T. A., & Saults, J. S. (1987). Multiple spans in transcrip-
tion typing. Journal of Applied Psychology, 72, 187–196.
Schaie, K. W. (1994). The course of adult intellectual development.
American Psychologist, 49, 304–313.
Schaie, K. W. (1996). Intellectual development in adulthood: The
Seattle Longitudinal Study. New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Schaie, K. W., & Willis, S. L. (1986). Can intellectual decline in the
elderly be reversed? Developmental Psychology, 22, 223–232.
Schaie, K. W., & Willis, S. L. (1999). Theories of everyday compe-
tence and aging. In V. L. Bengtson & K. W. Schaie (Eds.), Hand-
book of theories of aging (pp. 174–195). New York: Springer.
Schulz, R. (1986). Successful aging: Balancing primary and sec-
ondary control. Adult Development and Aging News, 13, 2–4.
Schulz, R., & Heckhausen, J. (1996). A life-span model of success-
ful aging. American Psychologist, 51, 702–714.
Schwarz, N., & Strack, F. (1999). Reports of subjective well-being:
Judgmental processes and their methodological implications. In
D. Kahneman, E. Diener, & N. Schwarz (Eds.), Well-being: The
foundations of hedonic psychology (pp. 61–84). New York:
Russell Sage Foundation.
Schwarzer, R., & Leppin, A. (1991). Social support and health: A
theoretical and empirical overview. Journal of Social and
Personal Relationships, 8, 99–127.
Scott, J. P. (1983). Siblings and other kin. In T. H. Brubaker (Ed.),
Family relationships in later life (pp. 47–62). Beverly Hills, CA:
Sage.
Seeman, T. E. (1996). Social ties and health: The beneﬁts of social
integration. Annals of Epidemiology, 6, 442–451.
Seligman, M. E. P. (1991). Learned optimism. New York: Knopf.
Siegler, I. C., & Costa, P. T., Jr. (1985). Health behavior relation-
ships. In J. E. Birren & K. W. Schaie (Eds.), Handbook of the
psychology of aging (2nd ed., pp. 144–166). New York: Van
Nostrand Reinhold.
Singer, T. (2000). Testing-the-Limits in einer mnemonischen
Fähigkeit: Eine Studie zur kognitiven Plastizität im hohen
Alter [Testing-the-Limits in a mnemonic technique: A study of
cognitive plasticity in very old age]. Berlin, Germany: Free
University. Retrieved 2001, from www.Diss.FU-Berlin.de/2000/
78/index. html
Smith, J., Fleeson, W., Geiselmann, B., Settersten, R. A., Jr., &
Kunzmann, U. (1999). Well-being in very old age: Predictions
from objective life conditions and subjective experience. In P. B.
Baltes & K. U. Mayer (Eds.), The Berlin Aging Study: Aging
from 70 to 100 (pp. 450–471). New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Smith, J., & Goodnow J. J. (1999). Unasked-for support and unso-
licited advice: Age and the quality of social experience. Psychol-
ogy and Aging, 14, 108– 121.
Staudinger, U. M. (1996). Wisdom and the social-interactive foun-
dation of the mind. In P. B. Baltes & U. M. Staudinger (Eds.), In-
teractive minds: Life-span perspectives on the social foundation
of cognition (pp. 276–318). New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Staudinger, U. M., & Freund, A. M. (1998). Krank und “arm” im
hohen Alter und trotzdem guten Mutes? Untersuchungen im
Rahmen eines Modells psychologischer Widerstandsfähigkeit
[Sick and “poor” in old age and still in good spirits? A study of
psychological resilience]. Zeitschrift für Klinische Psychologie,
27, 78–85.
Staudinger, U. M., Marsiske, M., & Baltes, P.B. (1995). Resilience
and reserve capacity in later adulthood: Potentials and limits of
development across the life span. In D. Cicchetti & D. J. Cohen
(Eds.), Developmental psychopathology: Vol. 2. Risk, disorder,
and adaptation (pp. 801–847). New York: Wiley.
Steinhagen-Thiessen, E., & Borchelt, M. (1999). Morbidity, med-
ication, and functional limitations in very old age. In P. B. Baltes
& K. U. Mayer (Eds.), The Berlin Aging Study: Aging from 70 to
100 (pp. 131–166). New York: Cambridge University Press.

628
Successful Aging
Steinhagen-Thiessen, E., Gerok, W., & Borchelt, M. (1994). Innere
Medizin und Geriatrie [Internal medicine and geriatrics]. In P. B.
Baltes, J. Mittelstraß, & U. M. Staudinger (Eds.), Alter und
Altern: Ein interdisziplinärer Studientext zur Gerontologie [Age
and aging: An interdisciplinary textbook on gerontology]
(pp. 124–150). Berlin: de Gruyter.
Sternberg, R. J. (1990). Wisdom and its relations to intelligence
and creativity. In R. J. Sternberg (Ed.), Wisdom: Its nature, ori-
gins, and development (pp. 142–149). New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Stroebe, M. S., & Stroebe, W. (1993). The mortality of bereavement:
A review. In M. S. Stroebe, W. Stroebe, & R. O. Hansson (Eds.),
Handbook of bereavement: Theory, research, and intervention
(pp. 175–226). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Thomae, H. E. (1976). Patterns of aging. Basel, Switzerland:
Karger.
Thomae, H. E. (1987). Alternsformen: Wege zu ihrer methodischen
und begrifﬂichen Erfassung [Forms of aging: Approaches for
their methodological and conceptual assessment]. In U. Lehr &
H. Thomae (Eds.), Formen seelischen Alterns [Forms of mental
aging] (pp. 173–195). Stuttgart, Germany: Enke.
Tsai, J. L., Levenson, R. W., & Carstensen, L. L. (2000). Autonomic,
subjective, and expressive responses to emotional ﬁlms in older
and younger Chinese Americans and European Americans.
Psychology and Aging, 15, 684–693.
Tucker, J. S., Schwartz, J. E., Clark, K. M., & Friedman, H. S.
(1999).Age-related changes in the associations of social network
ties with mortality risk. Psychology and Aging, 14, 564–571.
United Nations. (1996). The ageing of the world’s population.
Retrieved August 2000, from http://www.un.org/ecosocdev/
geninfo/ageing/ageing-e.htm
van Sonderen, E., Ormel, J., Brilman, E., & van Linden van den
Heuvell, C.-M. (1990). Personal network delineation: A compar-
ison of the exchange, affective and role-relation approach. In
K. C. P. M. Knipscheer & T. C. Antonucci (Eds.), Social network
research (pp. 101–120). Amsterdam: Swets & Zeitlinger.
Vaupel, J. (1995). Life expectancy. In G. L. Maddox (Ed.), The
encyclopedia of aging (pp. 559–560). New York: Springer.
Vaupel, J. W., Carey, J. R., Christensen, K., Johnson, T. E., Yashin,
A. I., Holm, N. V., Iachine, I. A., Kannisto, V., Khazaeli, A. A.,
Liedo, P., Longo, V. D., Zeng, Y., Manton, K. G., & Curtsinger,
J. W. (1998). Biodemographic trajectories of longevity. Science,
280, 855–860.
Verbrugge, L. M. (1989). The twain meet: Empirical explanation of
sex differences in health and mortality. Journal of Health and
Social Behavior, 30, 282–304.
Verhaegen, P., Marcoen, A., & Goossens, L. (1992). Improving
memory performance in the aged through mnemonic training: A
metaanalytic study. Psychology and Aging, 7, 242–251.
Wagner, M., Schütze, Y., & Lang, F. R. (1999). Social relationships
in old age. In P. B. Baltes & K. U. Mayer (Eds.), The Berlin
Aging Study: Aging from 70 to 100 (pp. 282–301). New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Wegner, D. M. (1992). You can’t always think what you want: Prob-
lems in the suppression of unwanted thoughts. In M. Zanna
(Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 25,
pp. 193–225). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Whitbourne, S. K. (1985). The aging body. New York: Springer.
Wiese, B. S., Freund, A. M., & Baltes, P. B. (2000). Selection,
optimization, and compensation: An action-related approach to
work and partnership. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 57, 273–
300.
Willis, S. L. (1996). Everyday problem solving. In J. E. Birren &
K. W. Schaie (Eds.), Handbook of the psychology of aging
(4th ed., pp. 287–307). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
World Health Organization. (1998). Fact Sheet Nr 135. Population
aging: A public health challenge. Retrieved August 2000, from
http://www.who.int/inf-fs/fact135.html
Wrosch, C., & Heckhausen, J. (1999). Control processes before and
after passing a developmental deadline: Activation and deactiva-
tion of intimate relationship goals. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 77, 415–427.
Zarit, S. H., & Eggebeen, D. J. (1995). Parent-child relationships
in adulthood and old age. In M. H. Bornstein (Ed.), Handbook
of parenting: Vol. 1. Children and parenting (pp. 119–140).
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

Author Index
629
Aaronson, D., 177
Abbott, R. D., 378, 379, 380, 381
Abbott, R., 380
Abe, J. A., 213, 480
Abeles, R., 103
Abelson, R., 561
Aber, J. L., 152, 345
Aber, L., 376, 380
Aber, L., 400
Abidin, R., 522
Abramovitch, R., 524, 525
Abrams, L. A., 539
Abramson, L. Y., 355, 356
Achenbach, T. M., 303
Achenbaum, W. A., 454
Ackerman, B. P., 50, 213
Ackermann, C., 128
Acredolo, L. P., 38
Adair, V., 362
Adamek, M. E., 497
Adami, H. O., 309, 313
Adams, G., 155
Adams, G. R., 353
Adams, M. J., 48
Adams, R. G., 489, 495, 498
Adams, R. J., 72
Adamson, L., 96
Adelman, H. S., 48
Adler, N. E., 305, 582, 587
Adler, P., 255, 256, 404
Adler, P. A., 255, 256, 404
Adler, T. F., 337, 338, 340, 341
Administration on Children, Youth,
and Families, 378
Adolfsson, R., 448, 458
Adolph, K. E., 69
Afﬂeck, G., 526
Ageton, S. S., 408
Agnew, R., 406
Agosto, C. D., 561
Agree, E. M., 493
Ahadi, S. A., 358
Ahmed, M. L., 300
Aiken, L. R., 602, 603
Ainsworth, M., 253
Ainsworth, M. D., 196
Ainsworth, M. D. S., 100, 101, 136, 217, 223,
224, 400, 520, 567
Airaksinen, E., 527
Ajzen, I., 581
Akana, S. F., 115
Akhtar, N., 183, 188
Akiyama, H., 488, 489, 491, 591, 605, 606
Aksan, N., 217, 218
Alansky, J. A., 128, 401
Albert, M., 491
Albrecht, H. T., 306
Albrecht, R., 611
Albus, K. E., 101
Aldwin, C., 481
Aldwin, C. M., 52, 426
Alessandri, S. M., 214
Alfredson, B., 428
Alkon, A., 127
Allan, G., 495, 498
Allard, M., 429
Allen, J. P., 353, 356, 400, 405, 406
Allen, K., 357
Allen, K. R., 252
Allen, S. R., 584
Allen, V., 296, 306
Allensworth, E., 380
Allhusen, V. D., 135
Allison, K. R., 587
Allport, G. W., 148
Almeida, D. M., 358
Alpert, A., 226
Alpert, N., 617
Altaribba, J., 282
Altham, P. M., 304
Alwin, A., 126
Amadio, L., 428
Aman, C., 562, 563
Amaral, D. G., 118
Amato, P. R., 499, 567–568, 569, 570
American Association of University Women, 335
American Association on Mental Retardation
(AAMR), 514
American Professional Society on the Abuse of
Children, 563
American Psychiatric Association, 514
American Psychological Association, 43, 55
American Psychological Society, 43
Ames, C., 333
Ames, E. W., 67
Amling, C. L., 435
Ammons, C., 200, 202
Ampos, J. J., 149
Amsel, G., 77
Anastasi, A., 23
Anderman, E., 333
Anderman, E. M., 330
Anders, T., 121
Andersen, B. L., 496
Andersen, C., 19, 329
Andersen-Ranberg, K., 428
Anderson, B., 496, 592
Anderson, B.-E., 156, 157
Anderson, B. J., 588
Anderson, C., 128
Anderson, D. I., 98, 99, 104
Anderson, K. E., 398
Anderson, L. P., 362
Anderson, N. A., 433
Anderson, P. M., 94
Anderson, R. N., 424, 581
Andersson, T., 306
Andres, D., 445, 476, 477
Andrews, D. W., 257, 411
Aneshensel, C. S., 306
Angell, K. E., 355, 356
Angleitner, A., 357
Angold, A., 302–303, 306
Ansbacher, H. L., 258, 259
Ansbacher, R. R., 258, 259
Anstey, K. J., 605
Anthony, E. J., 384
Antonakos, C. L., 587
Antonova, T. G., 66
Antonucci, T. C., 488, 489, 490, 491, 581, 591,
605, 606
Antonucci, T., 490
Appelbaum, M., 83
Appelbaum, M. I., 98
Applebaum, J. C., 159
Apter, D., 309
Apter, D. L., 309
Aquilino, W. S., 493, 500
Arbreton, A. J., 340
Arbuckle, T., 445
Arbuckle, T. Y., 476, 477
Arbuthnot, J., 379
Archer, J., 301, 302
Arcus, D., 94, 128
Arias, R. M., 434
Aristotle, 514
Armstead, C. A., 433
Arnett, J., 156
Arnett, J. J., 330, 354, 355
Arnold, G. S., 302, 303, 304
Arnold, K. D., 337
Arny, L., 384
Aronson, J., 344
Arseneault, L., 302
Arsenio, W. F., 247
Arterberry, M. E., 72
Arunkumar, R., 385, 386
Ary, D., 401
Ary, D. V., 304, 401
Asamen, J. K., 343
Asarnow, J. R., 48, 315
Aseltine, R. H., 499

630
Author Index
Asendorpf, J. B., 13
Ashby, F. G., 119
Asher, S. R., 256, 257, 405
Ashman, S., 128
Ashman, S. B., 93
Aslin, R. N., 68, 185, 187, 188
Assmann, S. F., 495
Astin, H. S., 336, 342
Atchley, R. C., 426, 475, 492, 494, 614
Atkins, B., 298
Atkinson, C., 201, 202
Atkinson, L., 524
Atkinson, R., 355
Attanasio, W., 299
Auslander, W. F., 588, 589
Avenevoli, S., 382, 396
Avis, N. E., 589, 590
Avison, W. R., 499
Ayers, T., 353
Azuma, H., 96
Babyak, M. A., 434
Bachman, J. G., 364, 376, 377
Bachrach, L. K., 308
Bäckman, L., 447, 448, 449, 450–451, 452, 453,
454, 456, 457, 458, 617
Badger, M., 490
Baer, D. M., 1, 516
Baer, J. S., 491
Baggio, G., 428
Bagwell, C. L., 402
Bailey, C. A., 408
Baillargeon, R., 69, 70, 75, 77
Bakeman, M., 96
Bakeman, R. A., 362
Baker, A., 175
Baker, B. L., 525, 526
Baker, C. L., 173
Baker, F., 425
Baker, N., 475
Baker, N. D., 187
Baker-Ward, L., 561
Baldwin, D., 183
Baldwin, D. A., 99
Baldwin, J. M., 4
Bale, A. C., 70
Balfour, J. M., 426
Balla, D., 527
Balsano, A. B., 94
Baltes, M. M., 454, 457, 539, 592, 607, 608,
609, 611, 612, 613, 615, 616, 617,
618, 621
Baltes, P. B., 2–3, 47, 271, 328, 424, 435, 443,
444, 445, 449, 451, 452, 453, 454, 455,
457, 458, 463, 464, 465, 471, 475, 476,
477, 539, 579, 580, 592, 602, 604, 607,
609, 610, 611, 612, 613, 615, 616, 617,
618, 621
Baltes, P. P., 592
Bandesapt, J. J., 122
Bandi Rao, S., 185
Bandura, A., 463, 479, 580, 581, 590, 593, 619
Bandura, M., 451
Bank, L., 259
Bank, S., 525
Banks, M. S., 71, 78
Baradaran, L. B., 565
Barbarenelli, C., 357
Barbazanges, A., 120
Barber, B. K., 222
Barber, B., 381
Barber, B. L., 325, 334, 338, 340, 341, 342,
546, 547
Barbi, C., 428
Barbu-Roth, M. A., 98, 99, 104
Bardon, J. I., 47
Barefoot, J. C., 426, 430, 431, 432, 434
Barger, B. L., 312, 313
Bargh, J. A., 616
Barglow, P., 120, 151
Barker, R., 331
Barker, R. G., 406
Barksdale, C. M., 124
Barnard, K. E., 520, 521
Barnes, G. M., 376, 377, 379, 380, 381
Barnes, H. V., 300
Barnes, K. M., 298
Barnett, D., 401
Baron, J. A., 309, 313
Baron-Cohen, S., 513
Barone, C., 537
Barr, R., 563
Barr, R. G., 96, 121, 122
Barratt, M., 521, 524
Barrera, M., 78, 401
Barrera, M., Jr., 398
Barrett, J., 491
Barrett, K. C., 212, 213, 214, 225
Barrett Singer, A. T., 361
Barss, A., 176
Bartholomae, S., 374, 375
Bartholomew, K., 401
Bartholomew, M. J., 308
Bartlett, F. C., 283
Bartolucci, A., 425
Barton, A. J., 498
Barton, B. A., 309
Baruch, G., 589
Basham, R. B., 526
Basic Behavioral Science Task Force of the
National Advisor Mental Health
Council, 52
Bastian, L. A., 425, 432, 435
Bates, E., 70, 177, 185, 197, 204
Bates, E. A., 20, 176
Bates, J. E., 49, 93, 94, 220, 221, 257, 310,
351, 362
Battin-Pearson, S., 380
Bauco, C., 608
Bauer, P. J., 80
Baum, A., 425
Bauman, B., 231
Bauman, K., 405
Bauman, K. E., 377, 405
Baumeister, A. A., 514
Baumrind, D., 222, 223, 253, 254, 396, 397,
398, 399
Baumwell, L., 183
Bavin, S., 500
Baxter, A., 520
Baxter, J. S., 562
Bayles, K., 220
Bayley, N., 305
Bear, G. G., 412
Beard, B. B., 428
Bearinger, L. H., 377
Bearison, D., 207
Bearison, D. J., 48, 54
Bearman, P. S., 377
Beatty, A. S., 326
Beauchaine, T., 116
Beaudet, M. P., 355
Bebbington, A. C., 607
Bebbington, P. E., 301
Beck, J. C., 434
Becker, B., 50, 231, 232, 233, 374, 384, 385,
387, 388
Becker, J., 352, 355
Becker, M. H., 580, 583
Beckett, L. A., 426, 427, 491, 498
Bedeau, M. A., 207
Bedford, V. H., 494
Bee, H. L., 520
Beeghly, M., 519, 527
Beeghly-Smith, M., 99
Behl-Chadha, G., 79
Beilin, H., 197, 198, 200
Belanoff, J., 355
Belansky, E., 407, 542
Belar, C. D., 47
Bell, K., 353, 356, 400
Bell, K. L., 353
Bell, L. A., 340
Bell, M., 562
Bell, M. A., 122, 124, 219
Bell, R. Q., 217, 363, 397, 398, 520, 521
Bell, S. M., 520
Beller, R., 247, 257
Belsky, J., 102, 103, 104, 128, 151, 156, 223,
224, 226, 310, 311, 360, 363
Belyea, M., 491
Bem, D. J., 471, 472, 474, 477
Bengtson, V. L., 493, 614
Bengtsson, H., 248
Benjamin, L. T., Jr., 45
Bennett, D. A., 426, 427
Bennett, D. S., 220
Bennett, M., 214
Bennett, P., 579, 581
Ben-Shlomo, Y., 436
Benson, J. B., 74, 75
Benson, P., 536, 550, 551, 552
Benson, P. L., 48, 50, 375, 536, 550, 551,
552, 553
Bentler, P. M., 374, 376, 377, 383
Benyamini, Y., 425, 432
Berardelli, M., 428
Bereiter, C., 198, 202
Berenson, G. S., 307
Berg, C. A., 444, 604
Berg, S., 499
Berga, S., 309
Bergeman, C. S., 593
Berger, J., 520, 521
Bergman, L. R., 316, 355, 537, 538

Author Index
631
Bergstralh, E. J., 435
Bergstrom, R., 309, 313
Bergund, M. L., 375, 376, 377
Berkman, L., 491
Berkman, L. F., 127, 426, 490, 491,
498, 591
Berlin, G., 380
Berlin, L., 101–102, 152
Berlin, L. J., 149, 151
Berlyne, D. E., 67
Berman, E. A., 500
Berndt, T. J., 403
Bernhardt, B. H., 178
Bernheimer, L. P., 519, 522
Bernicot, J., 174
Berntson, G. G., 119, 127
Bernzweig, H., 125
Bernzweig, J., 216
Berr, S. S., 299
Berrios, G. E., 451
Berry, C. A., 489
Berry, G. L., 343
Berry, J. W., 268, 269, 274, 275, 282
Berry, Y. C., 301
Bertalanffy, L., von, 16, 137, 527
Bertenthal, B., 98
Bertrand, J., 181
Bertrand, R. B., 463, 466, 469, 477, 479
Bertrand, R. M., 424
Best, K., 232
Beswick, G., 328
Bettinardi, V., 176
Beuhring, T., 377
Bever, T. G., 176
Beyth-Marom, R., 583
Bhapkar, M. V., 298, 307, 308, 315
Bibace, R., 580, 583
Bickerton, D., 174
Bickhard, M. H., 35
Bidell, T., 3, 203, 206
Biehl, M., 587
Biesecker, G., 224, 400
Biglan, A., 304, 401
Bijou, S. W., 1, 516
Bild, D. E., 424, 429, 433, 436
Billings, L. A., 524
Billy, J. O. G., 296, 304, 312, 313, 376
Bingham, C. R., 383
Birch, H., 544, 545
Birch, H. G., 148
Birdsall, M. A., 309
Birdsong, D., 176
Biringen, Z., 97, 98
Birkett, A. M., 299
Biro, F., 308
Biro, F. M., 309
Birren, J. E., 454, 475, 603, 604
Bishop, D. V. M., 175
Bjorklund, D. F., 282, 283, 326, 561, 563, 566
Blacher, J., 522, 523, 525, 526
Black, A. E., 397
Black, M., 401
Black, M. M., 48, 358
Blackwelder, D. E., 398
Blakeslee, S., 495
Blanchard-Fields, F., 444, 449, 470
Blanton, M. G., 66
Blasi, A., 248
Blass, E. M., 121
Blass, J. P., 426
Blatt, B., 514
Blatt, S. J., 355, 356
Blau, D. M., 156
Blau, Z. S., 614
Blaye, A., 327
Blazer, D., 491
Blazer, D. G., 490
Bledsoe, J., 344
Blehar, M., 217, 223, 224, 253, 567
Blehar, M. C., 100, 101, 136, 400
Blieszner, R., 489, 495, 496, 498
Block, J., 34, 364, 465
Bloom, B., 515
Bloom, J. R., 491
Bloom, L., 35, 177, 180
Bloom, P., 177
Blos, P., 295
Blum, R. W., 377
Blum, W. F., 299
Blumenfeld, P. C., 340
Blumenthal, J., 301
Blumenthal, J. A., 424
Blum-Kulka, S., 282
Blute, M. L., 435
Blyth, A., 306
Blyth, D., 536, 550, 552
Blyth, D. A., 50, 306, 330, 331, 333, 334, 361, 373,
380, 381, 382, 536, 546, 550, 551, 552
Blythe, M. J., 307
Bo, I., 406
Board on Children, Youth, and Families, 298
Boat, B., 564
Bobek, D. L., 94
Boesch, E. E., 28, 37
Bogartz, R. S., 77
Bogenschneider, K., 386, 545
Bohlin, G., 220
Bolig, E. E., 581
Bonafe, M., 428
Bond, K., 594
Bond, L. A., 454
Bondy, P. K., 304
Bonjour, J., 300
Bonner, M. J., 52
Boocock, S. S., 157
Boodoo, G., 197
Bookwala, J., 495
Boon, J., 561
Booth, A., 302, 496
Booth, C. L., 520
Borawski-Clark, E., 491
Borchelt, M., 603, 607, 608, 609
Borden, L. M., 377
Boring, E., 196
Boring, E. G., 1, 46
Borkowski, J., 581
Born, J., 121
Bornstein, M. C., 228
Bornstein, M. H., 48, 49, 71, 72, 83, 96, 101, 125,
183, 188, 253, 361, 363, 520, 566, 568
Boro, J. E., 434
Borriello, C., 608
Bortz, W. M., 603
Bosma, H. A., 353
Bosman, E. A., 604
Bossom, J., 38
Bosworth, H. B., 425, 426, 431, 432, 434, 435
Bottoms, B., 562, 563
Botwinick, J., 445
Bouchard, T., 197
Bouchard, T. J., 465
Bouchey, H. A., 353
Boulerice, B., 302
Boulos, S., 541
Boult, C., 607
Boult, L., 607
Bound, J., 581
Bourdony, C. J., 298, 307, 308, 315
Bourg, W., 566
Bourne, E. J., 276, 277, 278
Boutin, P., 148
Bovbjerg, V. E., 491
Bower, T. G. R., 68, 69, 73, 77
Bowlby, J., 30, 100, 122, 136, 149, 223, 224, 225,
229, 399, 400, 464, 567, 568
Bowling, A., 605
Bowman, L. L., 184
Bowman, T., 524
Boyce, G., 522
Boyce, W. T., 127
Boykin, A., 197
Boylan, A., 100
Boyum, L., 222, 249, 250, 253, 254
Brack, C. J., 375, 382
Brack, G., 382
Brackbill, Y., 121, 156
Bradburn, N. M., 609
Bradbury, M. J., 115
Braddock, D., 498
Bradley, C. F., 120
Bradley, K., 80
Bradley, K. L., 76
Bradley, R. H., 153, 154, 361
Bradshaw, J. M., 563
Bradsher, J. E., 606
Brady, A. E., 105
Brady, M. S., 566
Braeges, J. L., 247
Brain, P. F., 301
Brainerd, C., 196, 198, 201, 201
Brainerd, C. J., 562, 563
Brakke, N. P., 257
Brambilla, D. J., 590
Bramlett, M. H., 429
Brandenberger, G., 122
Brandenberger, J., 581
Brandtstädter, J., 3, 21, 296, 297, 457, 481,
542, 609, 610, 613, 615, 616, 618,
619, 620, 621
Bratko, D., 357
Braungart, J. M., 100, 215, 227, 358
Braungart-Rieker, J. M., 93, 94, 220
Brayne, C., 605
Brazelton, T. B., 101, 270
Breckenridge, J. N., 147

632
Author Index
Bredekamp, S., 158
Brehm, J. W., 408
Brehm, S., 408
Breinlinger, K., 76, 77
Bremner, J. G., 72
Brener, N. D., 313
Brennan, K. A., 401
Brennan, L., 590, 591
Brennan, M., 538, 560
Brennan, P. J., 304
Brennan, R. E., 560
Brennemann, J., 47
Brenner, E., 215
Breslow, L., 428
Breslow, M. J., 433, 580, 581
Breslow, N., 428
Bresnick, S., 353
Breteler, M. B. B., 605
Bretherton, I., 99, 102, 400
Brewer, D., 378, 379, 380, 381, 382, 383
Brewester, S., 425
Brickman, P., 610
Bridger, W. H., 66, 82
Bridges, L. J., 100, 216
Bridges, M., 48
Bridson, W. E., 299
Brief, D. J., 491
Briggs, P., 566
Brill, S. A., 155
Brilman, E., 605
Brim, O. G., Jr., 1, 3
Brindis, C. D., 314, 375, 377
Bringuier, J.-C., 197, 199, 200, 201, 202, 204, 205
Brislin, R. W., 28
Bristol, M. M., 425, 524
Britner, P. A., 400
Britton, P. G., 496
Broadhead, W. E., 431
Broderick, R., 566
Brodersen, L., 122
Brody, E., 494
Brody, E. M., 607
Brody, G., 257, 259
Brody, G. H., 226, 305, 524, 525
Brody, N., 197
Brofenbrenner, U., 228
Bronfenbrenner, U., 3, 45, 46, 47, 51, 137,
139, 156, 243, 244, 271, 273, 274, 275,
384, 386, 407, 517, 519, 520, 523, 539,
540, 541
Bronfman, E., 97, 103
Bronshtein, A. I., 66
Bronson, G., 122, 124
Brook, J. S., 406
Brookes, S., 183
Brookins, C. C., 362
Brooks-Gunn, J., 138, 152, 296, 298, 299, 301,
302, 303, 304–305, 306, 308, 310, 344,
352, 353, 355, 356, 360, 365, 374–375,
382, 540, 552, 585, 586, 587, 588, 589
Brooks-Gunn, J. J., 303
Brophy, J. E., 332
Brown, B., 344
Brown, B. B., 396, 404, 495, 588
Brown, D., 591, 592
Brown, E., 72, 73, 75
Brown, G. W., 406
Brown, J., 214, 215
Brown, J. E., 582, 594
Brown, M., 334
Brown, M. M., 220
Brown, N., 188
Brown, P. S., 76
Brown, R., 204, 560
Brown, S. E., 379
Brown, S. L., 425
Brown, S. R., 102
Brownell, H. H., 176
Brownlee, S., 425
Brownson, R. C., 591, 592
Brubaker, T. H., 605, 606
Bruce, M. L., 433, 491
Bruck, M., 48, 562, 563
Brugha, T., 301
Brugman, E., 307
Bruininks, R. H., 515
Brummett, B. H., 426, 431, 432, 434
Bruner, J., 3, 195, 196, 198, 202, 203, 270
Bryan, Y. E., 123
Bryk, A., 175, 188
Bryk, A. S., 334, 335, 345, 380
Buchanan, C. M., 330, 331, 332, 338, 340, 352,
355, 535, 536, 546, 547
Buchanan, G. K., 434
Buchanan, R. M., 537
Buchs, B., 300
Buchsbaum, H. K., 99
Bucht, G., 448, 458
Buckley, S., 244, 245
Bugental, D. B., 243, 253, 255
Buitelaar, J. K., 120
Bukowski, W., 243, 251, 254, 256, 257
Bukowski, W. M., 257, 402, 406
Bula, C. J., 434
Bull, C. A., 353
Bull, R., 560, 561, 563
Bullock, M., 104
Bumpass, L., 499
Bumpass, L. L., 500
Burack, J. A., 527
Burant, C. J., 498
Burch, T. K., 494
Burchinal, M. R., 156
Burgess, E. W., 474, 475
Burghes, L., 153
Burgmeijer, R. J. F., 307
Buriel, R., 213, 221, 228, 229, 243, 245, 252,
253, 255, 259
Burke, M., 226, 525
Burkhardt, J. C., 553
Burkhauser, R. V., 436
Burks, V., 249, 250, 253, 254
Burks, V. M., 222
Burman, B., 226, 495, 496
Busch, C. M., 465
Busch-Rossnagel, N., 541
Busch-Rossnagel, N. A., 609, 620
Buse, S., 425
Bush, D., 306
Bush, G., 118, 119, 125
Bush, P. J., 404, 582, 583, 584, 585
Bush, T., 435
Buss, A. H., 93, 358
Buss, D. M., 398
Buss, K., 100, 128, 219
Buss, K. A., 217, 218, 219
Bustra, J. O., 353
Buswell, B. N., 343
Butkovsky, L., 215, 227
Butler, J., 154, 566
Butler, L., 256, 257
Butterﬁeld, M. I., 432
Butterworth, G. E., 80
Buunk, B., 496
Bynum, T. S., 539
Byrnes, J., 94, 545, 549
Byrnes, J. E., 328
Byrnes, J. P., 326, 327, 328, 329
Cabeza, R., 449
Cabrara, N., 152
Cabrera, N., 95
Cabrera, N. J., 153, 154
Cacciafesta, M., 608
Cacioppo, J. T., 119, 127, 491
Cadoret, R. J., 398
Cahan, E. D., 46
Cairns, B. D., 241, 242, 255, 256, 402
Cairns, R. B., 1, 4, 43, 45, 46, 47, 241, 242, 251,
255, 256, 296, 297, 301, 364, 402, 515,
537, 538
Caldji, C., 116, 121, 127
Caldwell, B. M., 155, 516
Caldwell, L. L., 409
Cale, M., 231
Calhun Davis, E., 375
Califf, R. M., 430, 432
Calkins, S., 125, 126
Calkins, S. D., 94, 100, 212, 215, 216, 219, 225,
352, 355, 363, 401
Call, J., 174
Call, K. T., 334
Callanan, M. A., 184
Camacho, T., 432
Cameron, O. G., 118
Camp, C. J., 453
Campbell, A., 609
Campbell, A. C., 404
Campbell, B., 313
Campbell, D. T., 269
Campbell, E. Q., 343
Campbell, F. A., 146
Campbell, J. J., 147
Campbell, L. D., 494
Campbell, N. D., 159
Campbell, S. B., 98, 102, 212, 221, 223, 228, 230,
231, 232, 233
Campos, J., 122, 124, 125
Campos, J. J., 17, 98, 99, 104, 212, 225, 243, 249,
250, 251, 352, 353, 358, 362
Campos, R. G., 212, 225, 352, 353, 362
Cannon, C. A., 497
Cannon, W. B., 114
Cantell, R., 446
Cantor, M. H., 489, 498

Author Index
633
Cantu, C. L., 362
Capaldi, D., 401
Capaldi, D. M., 358
Cappa, S. F., 176
Caprara, G. V., 357
Caputo, N. F., 79, 82
Carcia-Coll, C., 267, 285
Cardelli, M., 428
Carey, J. R., 602
Carey, S., 75, 196, 204, 560
Carlo, G., 247, 248
Carlsmith, J. M., 306
Carlson, C. L., 352
Carlson, E. A., 103, 224, 225
Carlson, N. A., 138
Carlson, V. R., 74
Carlton-Ford, S. L., 546
Carmichael Olson, H., 154
Carnegie Task Force on Meeting the Needs of
Young Children, 527
Carney, R., 434
Carney, R. M., 434
Caron, A. J., 74, 82, 83
Caron, C., 148
Caron, R. F., 74, 82, 83
Carpenter, M., 99, 174, 182, 183
Carr, B. R., 298
Carr, D., 500
Carr, J., 518
Carr, P., 326
Carraher, D. W., 203
Carraher, T. N., 203
Carrascosa, A., 309
Carriger, M., 83
Carru, C., 428
Carson, J., 249, 250, 253, 254
Carson, J. L., 222
Carstairs-McCarthy, A., 177
Carstensen, L. L., 424, 437, 480, 487, 488, 491,
492, 605, 606, 609, 610, 612, 613, 614,
615, 617
Carulli-Rabinowitz, V., 98
Casasola, M., 77
Case, R., 196, 198, 201, 202, 203, 204, 205,
206, 604
Caserta, M. S., 499, 500, 606
Cashon, C. H., 71, 77, 79, 83
Casper, L. M., 151
Casper, R. C., 355
Caspi, A., 94, 147, 154, 212, 217, 218, 305, 306,
310, 351, 355, 357, 358, 359, 364, 463,
466, 471, 472, 474, 477
Cassel, C. K., 607
Cassel, W. S., 563, 566
Cassell, T. Z., 138
Cassidy, J., 100, 101–102, 103, 149, 151, 215,
222, 223, 227, 400
Castañeda-English, P., 247, 362
Castellanos, F. X., 301
Castellino, D. R., 151, 161, 541
Casten, R., 344
Castro-Martin, T., 499
Catalano, D. J., 496, 498
Catalano, R. F., 362, 375, 376, 377, 378, 379, 380,
381, 382, 383
Catterall, J. S., 380
Cauce, A. M., 361
Cauffman, E., 328
Cavallo, A., 309
Cavallone, L., 428
Cavan, R. S., 474–475
Cavanaugh, J. C., 444, 450, 497
Cazden, C., 280
Ceci, S., 197
Ceci, S. J., 47, 48, 51, 562, 563, 566
Cederborg, A., 564
Cellerier, G., 199
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 312,
376, 582
Cernkovich, S. A., 401, 404
Chae, J.-H., 357
Chaikelson, J., 445, 476, 477
Chalmers, J. B., 247
Chamberlin, R., 144, 146
Chandler, D. W., 302
Chandler, M. J., 92, 519, 520
Chao, R. K., 362
Chapman, C. D., 380, 381
Chapman, M., 363, 398
Chappell, N. L., 490
Chaput, H. H., 71
Chard, T., 120
Charles, S. T., 613, 614
Charlson, M., 433
Charness, N., 604
Charpentier, P. A., 491
Chase-Lansdale, P. L., 48
Chassin, L., 401
Chaudhuri, J., 4
Chavajay, P., 270, 272
Chavira, V., 362
Chawla, S., 175
Chazan, R., 103
Cheek, N. H., 256
Chen, C., 338, 343, 344, 345, 361
Chen, H., 355, 356
Chen, W., 307
Chen, X., 361, 362
Cherlin, A. J., 491, 499, 568, 570
Chernausek, S. D., 308
Chess, S., 93, 94, 148, 217, 358, 359, 536, 540,
541, 542, 543, 544, 545, 547
Chi, M., 283
Chiarello, C., 176
Chiarello, R. J., 176
Chibucos, T., 54
Chien, Y.-C., 179
Child Trends, 374
Chinchilli, V., 303, 312, 313
Chinchilli, V. M., 303
Ching, K. L., 362
Chiodo, L. M., 604
Chipaungu, S. S., 135, 137
Chipman, H., 201
Chiu, M. L., 361
Choi, S. H., 269, 276, 277, 278
Chomsky, N., 172, 177, 195, 196, 204, 205
Choy, J., 188
Christensen, A., 225
Christensen, K., 602
Christian, J. C., 300
Chrousos, G. P., 114, 115, 116, 296, 298, 300,
302, 303, 304, 306, 307, 310, 311
Church, M. A., 617
Church, T. A., 357
Cibelli, C. D., 101
Cicchetti, D., 46, 48, 50, 100, 102, 213, 230, 231,
232, 233, 353, 374, 384, 385, 387, 388,
401, 519, 527, 559
Cicchetti, R., 527
Cicconetti, P., 608
Cicirelli, V. G., 494, 498, 606
Cinti, A. M., 608
Cizza, G., 300
Clancey, W. J., 451
Clapp-Channing, N., 426, 431, 432, 434
Clapp-Channing, N. E., 434
Clare, L., 521
Clark, A. J. L., 298
Clark, C. L., 401
Clark, D. O., 593, 594, 608
Clark, E. V., 181, 184
Clark, K., 434, 569
Clark, K. M., 605
Clark, M. A., 580, 581, 595
Clark, M. C., 500
Clark, M. M., 590
Clark, N. K., 451
Clark, N. M., 580
Clark, P. A., 299, 300, 301, 305
Clark, R., 217
Clark, S. J., 607
Clarke, L., 153
Clarke, M., 605, 607
Clarke-Plaskie, M., 479
Clarke-Stewart, K. A., 135, 153, 563, 571
Clausen, J. A., 51
Clayton, G. M., 428, 430
Clayton, P., 374
Clayton, V. P., 454, 603, 604
Clemens, D. C., 135
Clerici, A., 309
Clifford, R., 156
Clinton, W., 220
Clipp, E. C., 431, 496
Cliquet, R. L., 308
Clubb, P. A., 561
Coakley, E., 490
Coates, D., 610
Coats, E. J., 617
Coatsworth, J. D., 48, 50, 232, 374, 375, 377, 384,
385, 386
Coburn, K. M., 590
Cochran, M., 137
Cochran, M. M., 406
Cochran-Smith, M., 282
Cockerell, J. L., 309
Cocking, R. R., 3, 43, 270, 279
Coffey-Corina, S., 176
Cohen, D. J., 213, 230
Cohen, J., 412
Cohen, L. B., 71, 72, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80, 82,
83, 424
Cohen, L. J., 149
Cohen, M. R., 21

634
Author Index
Cohen, P., 406, 412
Cohen, R., 300
Cohen, S., 53, 491
Cohen-Kettenis, P. T., 304
Cohn, J. F., 97, 98, 102, 223
Cohn, L. D., 582
Coie, J. D., 48, 221, 257, 315, 358
Coker, D., 152
Colder, C. R., 363, 364
Colditz, G. A., 490
Cole, H., 400
Cole, M., 2, 3, 4, 202, 203, 204, 267, 269, 270,
272, 275, 276, 270, 275, 282, 283, 284
Cole, P., 127
Cole, P. M., 213, 214, 216, 225, 352, 353,
354, 355
Cole, S., 204
Coleman, J. S., 343, 345
Coley, R. L., 48, 136
Colin, V. L., 101
Coll, C. G., 344
Collins, J. L., 313
Collins, K., 301
Collins, N. L., 356, 400, 401
Collins, W. A., 48, 49, 241, 245, 250, 251, 252,
253, 254, 361, 363, 562
Colombo, J., 83
Comite, F., 298
Commissioner’s Ofﬁce of Research and
Evaluation, Head Start Bureau,
Administration on Children, Youth,
and Families, 142, 143
Commons, M., 200, 202
Compas, B., 216
Compas, B. E., 52, 353, 355, 356
Conboy, B. T., 176
Conger, K. J., 356
Conger, R. D., 305, 356, 398, 404, 405
Conley, J. J., 477
Conn, V. S., 593
Connell, C. M., 591, 595
Connell, J. P., 100, 216, 339, 340, 345
Connell, W. F., 515
Connidis, I. A., 489, 494, 606
Connolly, L. A., 478
Constantino, J. N., 302
Contreras, J. M., 352, 363
Converse, P. E., 609
Cook, A., 384
Cookson, K., 16
Coons, S., 122
Cooper, B., 605
Cooper, D. H., 514
Cooper, H., 343
Cooper, M. L., 356, 400
Coots, J., 523
Copeland, L. A., 353
Corbin, J. M., 497
Corder, L., 426
Corder, L. S., 607
Corey, K. E., 539
Corley, R., 538
Corns, K. M., 102
Cornu-Wells, A., 200, 201
Corsaro, W. A., 256
Corter, C., 524, 525
Corwyn, R. F., 361
Cossarizza, A., 428
Costa, F. M., 50, 374
Costa, P. T., 436, 463, 464, 465, 466, 469,
475, 476
Costa, P. T., Jr., 357, 432, 603
Costello, E. J., 303, 306
Costigan, C. L., 361, 522
Costigan, K. A., 120
Cote, R., 148
Cothern, L., 378, 379, 380, 381, 382, 383
Cotman, C., 491
Coulter, D. L., 514
Council of the Great City Schools, 345
Counts, D. R., 298
Coupey, S. M., 315
Courage, M. L., 72
Cousins, S. O., 593
Cover, H., 500
Covino, N. A., 434
Cowan, C. P., 48, 49, 221, 226, 228
Cowan, P., 202
Cowan, P. A., 48, 49, 221, 226, 228
Coward, R. T., 497, 498
Cowell, J. M., 585, 586, 587
Cox, D., 592
Cox, M. J., 226
Coy, K. C., 100, 225
Coyle, D. A., 434
Coyne, J. C., 231, 496, 497
Crago, M. B., 175
Craig, R. A., 564
Craik, F. I. M., 444, 447, 448, 449, 453
Crain, S., 173
Crandall, V. C., 337, 338
Crandall, V. J., 338
Crapps, J. M., 524, 525
Cressey, D., 404
Crick, N. R., 222, 248, 256
Crimmins, E., 424, 436
Crimmins, E. M., 493, 607, 608
Criqui, M. H., 466, 476
Crittenden, P., 400
Crnic, K., 104, 363, 526
Crockenberg, S., 104
Crockenberg, S. B., 401
Crocker, J., 477
Crockett, L., 306
Crockett, L. J., 306, 383
Croghan, T. W., 434
Cromer, C., 561
Cronin, N., 153
Cronk, C. E., 518
Crosby, L., 257
Cross, A., 526
Cross, S., 478
Cross, W. E., Jr., 344
Crouter, A. C., 244, 245, 253, 254, 258,
259, 401
Crowley, K., 19
Csikszentmihalyi, M., 3, 400, 401, 406, 539
Csordas, T. J., 37
Cubrow, B., 425
Cumberland, A., 216, 236, 247, 248
Cumming, E., 613, 614
Cummings, E., 475
Cummings, E. M., 93, 94, 95, 102, 212, 213, 221,
222, 225, 226, 227, 228, 229, 230, 231,
232, 233, 248
Cummings, M., 253
Cumsille, P., 409
Cunningham, C., 520
Cupples, L. A., 427
Curran, P. J., 401
Curtiss, S., 176
Curtsinger, J. W., 602
Cushing, G., 384, 388
Cuskelly, M., 525
Cutler, G. B., 296, 298, 302, 303, 304, 306
Cutler, G. B., Jr., 296, 298, 302, 303, 304, 311
Cutler, S. J., 454
Cutrona, C. E., 489
Cyphers, L., 183
D’Agostino, R. B., 424, 427
Dahl, R. E., 121
Dahlberg, L. L., 379, 380
Dahlstrom, W. G., 432
Dale, P. S., 175, 560, 562
Daling, J. R., 309
Dallman, M. F., 115
Daly, M., 425
Damasio, A., 27, 37
Damiani, V. B., 525
D’Amico, R. J., 382
Damon, W., 28, 198, 200, 202, 268, 271, 536,
548, 549, 553
Danbury, J., 247
D’Andrade, R. G., 270, 273
Daniels, D., 219, 398
Daniels, S. R., 309
Danish, S. J., 405
D’Arcangelo, M. R., 303, 312, 313
D’Arcangelo, R., 303
Darling, N., 222, 254, 345, 381, 382, 396, 398,
399, 408, 409
Darling, N. E., 401
Darroch, J. E., 312
Darrow, C., 469, 470
Das Eiden, R., 102
Dasen, P. R., 267, 268, 269, 270, 272, 273,
275, 282
D’Augelli, A. R., 591
Davenport, C., 434
Davey, A., 428, 429
Davidson, C. E., 103
Davidson, D., 562
Davidson, E. S., 45
Davidson, J. M., 304
Davidson, R. B., 354
Davidson, R. J., 119, 121, 125, 219
Davies, G. M., 560, 561, 564
Davies, L., 489, 494, 499
Davies, P., 95, 102, 253, 490
Davies, P. T., 212, 213, 221, 222, 225, 226, 228,
230, 231, 232, 233
Davis, B. T., 226
Davis, C. H., 524, 525
Davis, E. P., 92, 93, 127, 148

Author Index
635
Davis, G. A., 334
Davis, K. E., 489
Davis, R. B., 434
Davis, W. K., 592
Dawson, D. V., 428, 429
Dawson, G., 93, 124, 125, 128
Dawson, R. L., 525
Day, R. H., 73
D’Azevedo, W. A., 284
Ddey, G. J., 331
Dean, A., 490
Dean, J., 610
DeArth-Pendley, G., 231
Deater-Deckard, K., 254
DeBaryshe, B., 223
DeBaryshe, B. D., 405
De Benedictis, G., 428
De Bruin, R., 307
de Caprona, D., 200, 201
Deci, E. L., 340
Deeg, D. H. J., 428, 431
de Frias, C. M., 450–451
DeFries, J. C., 358, 538
Degirmencioglu, S. M., 404, 405
Degler, C., 515
de Haan, J. T., 405
de Haan, M., 127, 219
Dehaene, S., 176
Deiana, L., 428
de Kloet, E. R., 121
de Kloet, R., 115, 116
Dekovic, M., 356, 400
Delamater, A. M., 582, 583, 592
Delaney, P. J., 497
del Carmen, R., 123
de Lima, M. P., 357
De Lisi, R., 329
DeLoache, J., 285
DelVecchio, W. F., 463, 464, 465
DeMaris, A., 500
de Medina, P. G. R., 120
Demers, L., 303
Demers, L. M., 303, 308, 312, 313
Demick, J., 3
Demuth, K., 188
Denham, S. A., 212, 213, 214
Dennett, D., 35
Dennis, W., 455
Dent, H. R., 562, 563
Department of Health and Human Services,
142, 143
DeProsse, C., 496
DeRosier, M. E., 402, 403
Derryberry, D., 114, 119, 358
Desai, M., 433
Desai, R. A., 433
Desole, M. S., 428
DeStefanis, I., 615
Detre, K., 309
Dettling, A., 126
Deutsch, G., 176
de Villiers, J., 188, 560
de Villiers, P., 560
de Vries, H., 405
de Vries, M. W., 544, 545
Dewey, J., 4
Dewit, D. J., 494
de Wolf, M. S., 101
De Wolff, M., 149, 224
DeWolff, M. S., 567
The Diabetes Control and Complications Trial
Research Group, 582
Diamond, A., 74, 75, 77, 100, 124
Dias, M. G., 327
Dickstein, S., 101
DiClemente, R. J., 328
Diefenbach, M., 425
Diehl, M., 453, 604, 607
Dielman, T. E., 353
Diener, C., 480
Diener, E., 480, 609, 610, 611, 612
Dierschke, D. J., 299
Digman, J. M., 357, 358
Dill, J. R., 44, 535, 536, 537
DiLorenzo, T. M., 581, 582, 584
Dilthey, W., 21
DiMartino-Nardi, J., 309
DiMatteo, M., 434
Dimond, M. F., 499, 500, 606
DiNicola, D. D., 434
Dinkel, R. H., 602
Dinnsen, D. A., 178
Dionne, G., 175
Diorio, D., 118
DiPietro, J. A., 120
Dishion, T., 405
Dishion, T. J., 257, 401, 403, 404, 405, 406,
411, 412
Dittmann-Kohli, F., 604, 615
Dix, T., 363, 398
Dixon, R., 362
Dixon, R. A., 1, 271, 424, 443, 444, 445, 446,
447, 448, 449, 450–451, 452, 453, 454,
455, 456, 457, 458, 516, 603, 609,
615, 617
Dixon, S., 270
Dobbs, A., 452
Dobkin, P. L., 154
Dobrijansky, A., 309
Dodd, D., 561, 564
Dodd, D. H., 563
Dodge, K., 221, 254, 257
Dodge, K. A., 49, 216, 222, 248, 249, 257, 310,
378, 379
Doernberger, C. H., 232
Dohrenwend, Barbara, 374
Dohrenwend, Bruce, 374
Dokecki, P. R., 146
Dolcini, M. M., 582, 588
Dollaghan, C., 180
Donatelle, R. J., 591, 592
Dong, Q., 361
Donnelly, J., 582, 594
Donnermeyer, J. F., 377, 404
Donzella, B., 122, 126, 127
Dorfman, L. T., 492, 493
Dorn, L. D., 296, 298, 300, 302, 304, 306, 307,
308, 309, 310, 311, 352, 364
Dornbusch, S., 344, 401
Dornbusch, S. M., 306, 345, 397, 398, 399, 408
Dorr, N., 343
Dossey, J. A., 326
Dougherty, L. M., 122, 480
Douglas, J. D., 339, 500
Doussard-Roosevelt, J. A., 92, 122, 123
Dowdy, A. A., 491
Dowdy, B., 409
Dowling, E., 4
Dowling, E. M., 94
Downey, G., 231
Downs, A., 308
Dozier, M., 100
Drake, D., 536, 550, 552
Draper, P., 310, 311
Drayer, N. M., 307
Drevets, W. C., 118
Driscoll, A. K., 374, 375
Driskill, J., 562
Drop, M. J., 405
Drozda, D. J., 584
Drug and Therapeutics and Executive Committees
of the Lawson Wilkins Pediatric Endocrine
Society, 307
Druss, B. G., 433
Dryfoos, J. G., 374, 375, 376, 377, 378, 379, 380,
381, 382, 383, 535, 553
Dubas, J. S., 306
DuBois, D. L., 353
Duffy, L., 514
DuHamel, K., 358, 363
Duis, S., 522
Dunaif, A., 309
Duncan, G. J., 138, 152, 344, 376, 380, 382
Duncan, P. D., 306
Duncan, T. E., 304, 401, 593
Dunger, D. B., 300
Dunham, F., 183
Dunham, P. J., 183
Dunlop, L. C., 305
Dunn, G., 301
Dunn, J., 95, 104, 174, 214, 215, 257, 258,
259, 524
Dunphy, D. C., 404
Dunsmore, J. C., 249, 250, 251
Dunst, C. J., 526
Dunteman, G. H., 340
Dupous, E., 176
Dupree, D., 362
Durlak, J. A., 353
Du Rocher-Schudlich, T., 226, 231
Dusek, J. B., 342
Duster, T., 379
Duyvis, D. J., 497
Dweck, C. S., 333, 339
Dwyer, J. J. M., 587
Dwyer, J. W., 493, 497, 498
Dyer, C., 496
Dykens, E. M., 527
Dykstra, P. A., 605
Dyson, L. L., 524, 525, 526
Dziurawiec, S., 78
Eakin, E., 593
Earles, J., 447
Earls, F. J., 302

636
Author Index
Early, D., 407, 542
East, P. L., 313, 359
Easterbrooks, M. A., 78, 95, 97, 99, 100, 101,
102, 103, 104, 105, 148, 149, 224, 225,
226, 259, 331, 355
Easton, J. Q., 380
Eccles, J., 94, 245, 330, 340, 352, 355, 545,
546, 549
Eccles, J. S., 217, 241, 312, 313, 325, 330, 331,
332, 333, 334, 335, 337, 338, 339, 340,
341, 342, 343, 344, 353, 356, 362, 380,
381, 382, 407, 411, 535, 536, 540, 542,
545, 546, 547, 549
Eccles-Parsons, J., 338, 340, 341
Eckenrode, J., 52
Eckensberger, L. H., 28, 270
Economides, D. L., 120
Edelman, G. M., 27, 37
Eder, D., 256, 403
Edgar, E., 526
Edwards, D., 451
Egeland, B., 102, 103, 401
Eggebeen, D., 151
Eggebeen, D. J., 258, 605, 606
Eggert, L. L., 380, 381, 382
Eheart, B. K., 520
Ehrhart, J., 122
Eibach, R., 25
Eichorn, D., 305, 306
Eimas, P. D., 66, 68, 79, 80
Einfeld, S. L., 525
Einstein, G. O., 452
Eisdorfer, C., 436
Eisenberg, L., 525, 526
Eisenberg, M., 135
Eisenberg, N., 125, 211, 216, 219, 221, 222, 236,
242, 243, 247, 248, 249, 250, 257, 259,
271, 343, 363
Eisenbud, L., 219
Ekbom, A., 309, 313
Ekerdt, D. J., 492, 493
Ekman, P., 610
Elder, G. H., 47, 51, 305, 471, 472, 474, 477
Elder, G. H., Jr., 3, 305, 331, 518, 541, 589
Eley, T. C., 175
Elias, J. W., 436
Elias, M. F., 424, 427, 436
Elias, P. K., 424, 427, 436
Elkind, D., 48, 197, 201, 245, 583, 587
Ellard, J. H., 496
Ellen, J. M., 587
Elliot, A. J., 617
Elliot, D. J., 496
Elliot, L. B., 467, 468, 471
Elliott, D. S., 405, 408
Elliott, E., 451
Elliott, E. S., 333, 339
Elliott, G. R., 374
Ellis, B. J., 310
Ellis, D. A., 138, 154
Ellis, H. D., 78
Ellis, N. R., 516
Ellis, S., 285
Ellithorpe, E., 494
Elman, J. L., 20, 186
Elman, J., 70, 185, 197
Elsdorfer, C., 374
Emans, S. J., 308
Emde, R., 121
Emde, R. M., 122
Emde, R. N., 97, 98, 99, 100, 104, 153, 225,
226, 259
Emery, N. J., 118
Emery, R. E., 48, 212, 225, 227
Emler, N., 380
Emmons, R. A., 612, 616, 617
Enett, S., 405
Engelberg, T., 562
Engels, R. C. M. E., 400, 405
Engen, T., 66
England, P., 562
Englaro, P., 299
Engle, B. T., 114
Enke, J. L., 256
Ennis, R., 202
Enriques, V. G., 269
Eppler, M. A., 69
Epstein, J. L., 330
Erel, O., 226
Erickson, P., 430
Ericsson, K., 427
Ericsson, K. A., 617
Erikson, E., 104, 463, 464, 466, 467
Erikson, E. H., 16, 28, 30, 241, 245, 260, 325, 354
Erkanli, A., 303
Erngrund, K., 448, 458
Ervin, D. L., 566
Esplin, P. W., 560, 561, 563, 564, 565, 566
Essex, M. J., 217
Etezadi, J., 445
Ettinger, W. H., 426
Evahn, C., 336, 339
Evans, A. C., 301
Evans, D. A., 426, 427, 491, 498
Evans, J. G., 426
Everson, M. D., 564
Evertson, C. M., 332
Ewbank, D., 426
Ey, S., 353, 355, 356
Eyler, A. A., 591, 592
Eyou, M. L., 362
Eysenck, H. J., 357
Fabes, R. A., 125, 211, 216, 219, 222, 243,
343, 363
Fabot, B. I., 255
Fagan, J. F., 71, 81, 82, 83
Fagan, T. K., 45, 47
Fagot, B., 255
Fagot, B. I., 79
Faletti, M. V., 500
Falk, R. F., 492
Fantz, R. L., 67, 78, 81, 82
Farber, B., 525
Farberow, N., 499, 606
Farquhar, C. M., 309
Farquhar, L., 562
Farrar, M. J., 183
Farrell, A. D., 405
Farrell, M., 301
Farrell, M. P., 376, 377, 379, 380, 381
Farrington, D. P., 304, 377, 378, 379, 380, 381,
382, 383, 404
Farris, A. M., 225
Farwell, C. B., 186
Faulker, D. W., 538
Faust, M. S., 305
Fay, L., 526
Fazio, F., 176
Fazquez, A., 144
Feaganes, J. R., 425
Feagans, L., 280
Fearing, D., 79, 80
Featherman, D. L., 47, 464
Fegley, S., 279, 549
Fehm, H. L., 121
Feigelman, S., 401
Fein, G. G., 149
Feinman, S., 99
Feitelson, D., 281
Feldlaufer, H., 332, 546
Feldman, D. H., 3, 45, 197, 198, 199, 200, 201,
202, 203, 204, 205, 206, 207, 325, 326
Feldman, E., 257
Feldman, J. F., 81, 83
Feldman, J. J., 608
Feldman, S., 361
Feldman, S. S., 358
Feldstein, M., 52, 53
Felton, B. J., 489
Fenichel, E., 138, 141, 142
Ferguson, C., 186
Ferguson, C. A., 186
Fergusson, D. M., 406
Fering, D., 610
Ferketich, S. L., 220
Fernandez, S. C., 188
Ferrer-Wreder, L., 48, 364, 409
Ferrucci, L., 428
Feussner, J. R., 491
Field, D., 464, 465, 466, 492, 606, 615
Field, D. T., 356
Field, J., 353
Field, T., 123, 353
Fields, L., 362
Fiese, B. H., 52, 518
Filer, M., 52
Filipp, S.-H., 610
Finch, C., 491
Finch, C. E., 426, 436
Fincham, F., 225, 229
Fincham, F. D., 227
Fine, G., 207
Fine, G. A., 404, 406
Fine, M. A., 148
Finegold, D. N., 309
Finkelhor, D., 560
Finkelstein, J. W., 301, 303, 312, 313
Finkenauer, C., 400
Finn, J. D., 330, 344
Finney, J. W., 52
Finn-Stevenson, M., 48, 49, 540
Finucane, M. L., 434
Fischer, C. S., 495
Fischer, K., 213

Author Index
637
Fischer, K. W., 3, 104, 196, 197, 198, 201, 202,
203, 204, 206, 271, 285
Fischhoff, B., 583
Fisher, C. B., 4, 44, 45, 48, 54, 55, 105, 360, 361,
535, 536, 537, 538
Fisher, E. B., 588, 589, 595
Fisher, L., 592
Fisher, L. A., 405
Fisher, R. P., 563
Fishman, D. B., 48
Fisk, N. M., 120
Fitzgerald, H., 95
Fitzgerald, H. E., 135, 138, 143, 147, 148, 152,
153, 154, 157, 161, 383
Fitzsimmons, C. M., 180
Fivush, R., 184, 281, 285
Flagor, R., 566
Flaherty, J., 342
Flamer, G., 198
Flanagan, C., 330, 332, 340, 536, 546
Flanagan, C. A., 545
Flannery, D. J., 305, 401
Flavell, J., 195, 196, 197, 198
Flavell, J. H., 68, 69, 242
Fleeson, J., 103, 254, 400
Fleeson, W., 463, 475, 476, 610
Fleissner, K., 495
Fletcher, A. C., 401
Flickinger, S., 344
Flier, J. S., 299
Flin, R., 561
Flint, E. P., 490
Floyd, F. J., 522
Foch, T. T., 296, 297
Fodor, J., 29, 186, 196, 202, 205
Foley, M. A., 560, 561
Folkman, S., 52, 119, 463, 480, 481
Follenius, M., 122
Follette, W. C., 491
Folstein, M., 427, 429
Folstein, S. E., 427, 429
Fonagy, P., 46, 101
Fondacaro, K. I., 216
Foner, A., 494
Ford, A. B., 607
Ford, D. H., 137, 296, 384, 386
Ford, D. L., 2, 3, 7, 271, 517
Ford, M., 198
Ford, M. E., 247
Fordham, S., 344
Forehand, R. L., 310
Foreman, N. S., 220
Forest, M. G., 298
Forette, B., 428
Forrester, A., 434
Fors, S., 520, 521
Forsell, Y., 451
Forster, K. I., 176
Forum on Child and Family Statistics, 513
Foster, W., 360, 365
Fowler, C., 206
Fowler, W., 155
Fox, N., 249
Fox, N. A., 94, 121, 122, 123, 124, 125, 126, 127,
215, 219, 401
Fox, R. E., 47
Fox, R. P., 310
Fozard, J. L., 431
Fracasso, M. P., 568
Frances, A., 516
Franceschi, C., 428
Francis, D., 116, 121, 127
Francouer, E., 563
Frank, G., 47
Frank, L. G., 304
Frank, S. J., 356
Franke, H., 428
Frankel, K. A., 221
Frankenhaeuser, M., 114, 116
Franks, B. A., 327
Franks, M. M., 495, 496
Franzone, A., 428
Frasier, K., 407, 542
Frasure-Smith, N., 434
Fratiglioni, L., 427, 451
Frederick, S., 610
Frederickson, B. L., 488
Fredrickson, B. C., 615
Fredrickson, B. F., 615
Fredriks, A. M., 307
Freedman-Doan, C. R., 340
Freel, M. A., 539, 585, 586
Freeland, K. E., 434
Freeman, D. H., 491
Freeman, S., 520
French, D. C., 405
French, R., 70, 81
Fretts, R., 425
Freud, A., 568
Freud, S., 100, 136, 464, 568
Freund, A. M., 424, 454, 457, 610, 612, 613, 614,
615, 616, 617, 618, 621
Fridrich, A., 401
Fridrich, A. H., 401
Fried, L. P., 424, 426, 429, 433, 436
Friedman, H. S., 466, 476, 481, 605
Friedman, S. L., 82, 248
Friel, L. V., 375
Friend, W., 471, 472, 473, 477
Fries, J. F., 437, 603
Friesen, W. V., 610
Frisch, R. E., 299, 307
Frobose, C., 302
Frontera, M. A., 308
Frost, A. K., 378, 379
Fuertes, J. N., 362
Fujiura, G. T., 498
Fulcomer, M. C., 494
Fuligni, A. J., 345, 362, 411, 546
Fulker, D. W., 358
Fuller, B., 137
Fuller, M. J., 308
Fuller, P., 516
Fuller, S., 495
Fuller, S. R., 497
Fuller-Thomson, E., 500
Fulmore, C. D., 344
Fumerton, R., 31
Fung, H., 615
Funk, J., 526
Furberg, C., 435
Furner, S. E., 607
Furstenburg, F., 374–375
Furstenburg, F., Jr., 375, 389
Furstenberg, F. F., 499
Furstenberg, F. F., Jr., 491, 499, 568, 570
Futterman, A., 499, 606
Futterman, R., 340, 341
Futterweit, W., 309
Gaddis, A., 308
Gaensbauer, T. J., 122
Galambos, N., 535
Galambos, N. L., 354, 360, 364, 365, 405, 545
Galanter, E., 617
Galbraith, J., 401
Galewski, M., 500
Galinsky, E., 149
Gallagher, D., 500
Gallagher, J. J., 425, 524
Gallagher-Thompson, D., 499, 606
Gallant, M. P., 591, 595
Galles, N. S., 176
Gallese, V., 36, 37
Gallimore, R., 275, 276, 519, 521, 522, 523
Gallo, L. C., 476, 481
Galluzzo, D. C., 149
Gamble, W. C., 525
Ganer, J., 175
Ganiban, J., 401
Garbarino, J., 374
Garber, J., 216, 248, 257, 310, 356
Garcia, A. W., 587
Garcia Coll, C., 528, 535
Garcia-Mila, M., 19, 329
Gardin, J. M., 424, 429, 433, 436
Gardiner, H. W., 271
Gardner, H., 176, 195, 196, 197, 202, 204, 205
Gardner, S., 128
Gardner, W. P., 285
Gariepy, J. L., 242
Garite, T. J., 120
Garkness, S., 253
Garmezy, N., 51, 53, 232, 384, 385, 386, 559
Garn, S. M., 307
Garner, P. W., 248, 521
Garner, W. R., 44
Garnier, H., 521, 523
Garrett, M., 176
Garstka, T. A., 444
Garven, S., 563
Gathercole, V. C. M., 179
Gatz, M., 499
Gay, J., 203, 269, 272, 282, 283
Gay, V. L., 299
Gazzaniga, M. S., 176
Ge, X., 305, 356, 361, 398
Gearhart, M., 203
Gebelt, J. L., 354
Gee, U. P., 280, 281
Geiselman, R. E., 563
Geiselmann, B., 610
Gekoski, M. J., 98
Gell, J. S., 298
Gelman, R., 38, 196, 197, 198, 202, 204

638
Author Index
Gemelli, C., 428
Gentry, J. H., 47
Gentzler, A. L., 352, 363
George, C., 101, 401
George, L. K., 431, 490, 496, 609
George, T. P., 404, 405
Gerardi-Caulton, G., 125
Gerhardt, J., 172
Gerok, W., 603
Geronimus, A. T., 581
Gertler, P. J., 436
Gertner, J. M., 308
Gerver, W. J., 307
Gervino, E. V., 434
Gesell, A., 94
Giampoli, S., 428
Giangrande, S. K., 220
Gianino, A., 98
Giannakoulpoulos, X., 120
Giarrusso, R., 493
Gibbons, J., 218
Gibbs, J. H., 500
Gibson, E. J., 69, 200
Giedd, J. N., 301
Gilbert, K. M., 76
Gilbert, R., 225
Gilbreth, J. G., 567–568, 570
Gilewski, M. J., 451
Gilger, J. W., 174
Gill, D. L., 342
Gill, S., 144
Gillette, J., 188
Gilley, D. W., 426, 427
Gilligan, C., 247, 335, 468
Gilly, M., 327
Gilmer, D. F., 426
Gilovich, T., 25
Gimbert, C., 280
Ginsburg, A. P., 78
Ginsburg, H., 198, 199, 200, 201, 202
Giordano, P. C., 401, 404
Girardeau, F. L., 516
Girgus, J. S., 301
Girigus, J. S., 343
Girnius-Brown, O., 104
Girotto, V., 327
Gist, N. F., 150
Gitten, J., 247
Giunta, S., 428
Gladwin, T., 284
Glaser, R., 496
Glasgow, K. L., 397, 399, 408
Glasgow, R. E., 582, 592, 594
Glasow, A., 299
Glass, P., 82, 83
Glass, T., 591
Glass, T. A., 491
Glassner, B., 406
Gleitman, H., 183, 187, 188
Gleitman, L., 188
Gleitman, L. R., 174, 183, 187
Glenn, N. D., 465, 492
Glenn, S. S., 516
Glick, J., 198, 203, 269, 272, 282, 283
Glickman, S. E., 304
Glover, V., 120
Glueck, E., 378, 379
Glueck, S., 378, 379
Goddard, H. H., 515
Goeke-Morey, M. C., 227, 228
Goetting, A., 494, 606
Goff, S. B., 340, 341
Goguen, L. A., 604
Gold, D. P., 445, 476, 477
Gold, D. T., 498
Gold, E., 231
Gold, J., 433
Gold, M., 401
Gold, P. W., 114, 115, 116, 126, 302, 310, 311
Goldberg, L. R., 357
Goldberg, M., 155
Goldberg, S., 520
Goldberg, W. A., 95, 102, 225, 226
Golden, M. M., 257
Golden, M. P., 588
Golden, P., 593
Goldenburg, C., 275
Goldfarb, W., 150
Goldﬁeld, B. A., 280
Goldhamer, H., 474–475
Goldin-Meadow, S., 173, 204
Goldschmidt, P., 380, 381, 382
Goldsmith, D., 96
Goldsmith, H. H., 93, 128, 217, 218, 219,
358, 401
Goldstein, A. P., 404
Goldstein, J., 568
Goldstein, Z., 281
Goldston, D., 588
Goleman, D., 53
Golinkoff, R. M., 181
Gollin, E. S., 538
Gollwitzer, P. M., 616
Golosio, F., 608
Göncü, A., 274, 281, 285
Gondoli, D. M., 586, 587, 588
Gonzalez, M., 254
Gonzalez, M. B., 434
Goodman, C. C., 492
Goodman, G. S., 561, 562, 563
Goodman, J., 188
Goodnow, J., 244, 245, 268, 270, 273, 274
Goodnow, J. J., 3, 243, 253, 255, 270, 275, 605
Goodwin, M., 567
Goodwyn, S. W., 38
Goodyer, I. M., 304
Goosens, L., 451, 453
Goossens, L., 604
Gopnik, A., 196, 201
Gopnik, M., 175
Goran, M. I., 586
Gordon, B. N., 562
Gordon, D. A., 379
Gordon-Larsen, P., 587
Gore, S., 52
Goren, C. C., 78
Gormally, S. M., 122
Gorman-Smith, D., 380
Gotham, H. J., 581, 582, 584
Gottfried, A. W., 82
Gottlieb, G., 1, 2, 3, 4, 7, 36, 113, 137, 204, 271,
538, 541
Gottman, J. M., 95, 119, 153, 221, 250, 253, 255,
256, 492
Gottschalk, M., 308
Gould, O. N., 451
Gould, S. J., 100, 177
Gove, W. R., 491
Gower, B. A., 586
Graber, J. A., 304–305, 306, 310, 352
Grady, D., 435
Grafton, A., 119
Graham, C. A., 101
Graham, S., 343, 345
Gralen, S., 313
Gralinski, J. H., 104
Grams, A., 454
Grand, S., 521
Granrud, C. E., 73
Grant, J., 183
Grant, K. E., 353, 355, 356
Gray-Little, B., 362
Graziano, W. G., 357
Greco, P., 588, 589
Green, D, 198
Greenberg, G., 36
Greenberg, J. S., 498, 525
Greenberg, M., 152
Greenberg, M. T., 48, 50, 101, 144, 401, 526
Greenberger, E., 353, 354, 361, 364
Greenﬁeld, P., 197, 205, 206
Greenﬁeld, P. M., 3, 228, 270, 272, 274, 276, 278
Greenley, J. R., 498
Greenlund, K. J., 307
Greeno, J. G., 451
Greenstock, J., 562
Greer, S., 105
Gregory, A., 548
Gresham, F. M., 514
Greve, W., 609, 610, 613, 615, 619, 620, 621
Griesler, P. C., 403, 404, 406
Grieve, R., 563
Grigorenko, W., 204
Grimshaw, J., 179
Groark, C., 45, 54
Grodzinsky, Y., 179
Groff, T. R., 296, 304
Grolnick, W. S., 100
Grolnick, W. W., 216
Gross, J. J., 352, 355
Gross, R. T., 306
Grossmann, K. E., 127, 400
Grosz, D., 302
Grotevant, H. D., 28
Grotpeter, J. K., 256
Gruendel, J., 561
Grumbach, M. M., 298, 307
Grusec, J. E., 246, 248, 398
Grut, M., 451
Grych, J. H., 225, 226, 229
Guberman, S., 203
Gueresi, P., 428
Gulley, B. L., 305
Gullotta, T. P., 353
Gump, P., 331

Author Index
639
Gunn, P., 525
Gunnar, M., 100, 127, 219
Gunnar, M. R., 92, 93, 119, 120, 120, 121, 122,
123, 124, 125, 126, 127, 128, 148, 219
Guo, J., 172, 380
Gupta, V., 490
Guralnick, M. J., 520
Guralnik, J. M., 426, 491
Gurucharri, C., 247
Gussinye, M., 309
Gustafson, K. E., 583, 584
Guth, M., 560, 561
Guthrie, D., 523
Guthrie, I. K., 221, 247, 248, 363
Gutmann, D. L., 463, 464, 474
Gutmann, D. T., 474
Guttman, H. A., 500
Guynn, M. J., 452
Guzick, D., 309
Haan, M. N., 424
Haan, N., 463, 465
Haars, V. J., 327
Haas, B., 389
Haas, E., 411
Habbema, J. D., 428
Habermas, T., 615
Haertel, G. D., 380, 382, 386, 388
Hafdahl, A. R., 362
Haﬁtz, J., 180
Hagan, S., 562
Hagberg, B., 428
Hagekull, B., 220
Hagen, J. W., 44, 535, 536, 537, 538
Haggerty, R. J., 51
Haight, W., 175, 188, 281
Hains, S. M. J., 78
Hakim-Larson, J., 470
Halberstadt, A. G., 249, 250, 251
Haley, W. E., 425
Hall, G. S., 295, 454
Halpern, C. T., 312, 313
Halpern, D., 197
Halpern-Felsher, B., 587
Halpern-Felsher, B. L., 328
Halter, J. B., 426
Halverson, C. F., 357
Halverson, C. F., Jr., 217, 357, 358
Hambrick, D. Z., 605
Hamburg, B., 373, 374
Hamburg, D. A., 535, 553
Hamburger, V., 538
Hamer, L. D., 306
Hames, K., 409
Hamilton, C. E., 144, 149, 156, 157
Hamilton, M., 536
Hamilton, M. G., 537
Hamilton, S., 334
Hamilton, S. F., 536
Hamilton, W. G., 310
Hammer, L. D., 306
Hammond, M. A., 520
Hampson, S. E., 582, 594
Hance, M., 434
Hancock, H. E., 605
Handley, M., 314
Haney, P., 353
Haney, T. L., 430
Hanish, L., 125, 216
Hanitsch, S., 299
Hankin, B. L., 355, 356
Hann, D. M., 114
Hann, N., 465
Hansell, S., 355, 356
Hansen, W. B., 328
Hanson, E. S., 115
Hanson, K. A., 617
Hanson, N. R., 20, 29, 31, 32
Hanson, T. L., 570
Harachi, T. W., 362, 378, 379, 380, 381, 382, 383
Hardin, D. S., 308
Harding, S., 26
Hardy, D., 216
Hare, B. R., 343
Hareven, T. K., 471
Hargrove, E. C., 146
Harkness, S., 96, 273, 545
Harlan, E. T., 125
Harlow, S. D., 499
Harman, G. H., 31
Harmon, R. J., 102, 122
Harms, T., 156
Harner, L., 560
Harold, G. T., 228
Harold, R. D., 332, 340, 341, 546
Harre, R., 37
Harrell, F. E., 432
Harrell, F. E., Jr., 430
Harris, J. R., 48, 398
Harris, K. M., 377
Harris, M., 183, 245, 252, 254
Harris, P. L., 327
Harris, S. L., 521
Harris, T. O., 406
Harrist, A. W., 257
Hart, B., 174–175
Hart, D., 279, 549
Hart, J., 219
Harter, K. S., 522
Harter, S., 246, 255, 276, 277, 278, 325, 330,
340, 341, 343, 353, 354
Hartka, E., 463, 465
Hartley, S. F., 501
Hartman, K. A., 588
Hartmann, D. P., 256, 404, 405
Hartmann, T., 362
Hartman-Stein, P., 586, 588
Hartung, C. M., 231
Hartup, W. W., 256, 257, 402, 403, 405
Harvin, S. H., 432
Harwood, R. L., 96, 270, 273, 285
Haselager, G. J. T., 357
Hasemeier, C., 298, 307, 308, 315
Hastings, P. D., 398
Hatano, G., 267, 268, 270, 273, 274, 284
Hatch, L. R., 492
Hauser, S., 50, 52, 54
Hauser, S. T., 50, 353
Hauser-Cram, P., 518, 519, 521, 522, 524, 526
Haven, C., 490
Havighurst, R. J., 466, 474–475, 609, 611, 615
Haviland, J. M., 354
Havill, V. L., 357
Hawkins, G. D., 514
Hawkins, J. D., 48, 315, 375, 376, 377, 378, 379,
380, 381, 382, 383, 408
Hay, D. F., 95
Haydel, F., 306
Hayes, C. D., 156
Hayne, H., 79
Haynes, M. O., 188
Hays, J. C., 490
Hays, R. D., 434
Hayslip, B., 604
Hayward, C., 306
Hayward, M. D., 607, 608
Hazan, C., 401, 563
Hazlitt, J. E., 448
Hazzard, W. R., 426, 582
Head, M. R., 254
Healthy People, 593
Heath, S. B., 280, 281
Hebb, D. O., 515
Hechtman, L. T., 231
Heckhausen, J., 104, 444, 455, 475, 476, 479,
481, 520, 542, 580, 603, 609, 613, 615,
616, 617, 618, 619, 621
Hedden, T., 449
Heilman, M. E., 408
Heim, C., 115
Hein, A., 38
Heinman, M., 299
Held, R., 38
Heller, D. A., 429
Heller, K., 489, 605
Hellhammer, D. H., 119
Helson, R., 463, 471, 472, 473, 474
Hembree, E. A., 122
Hembrooke, H., 48
Hempel, C. G., 20
Hench, K. D., 298
Henderson, A. S., 605
Henderson, C. R., 144, 146
Henderson, H. A., 125, 126
Henderson, S. H., 156, 157, 570
Henderson, V. K., 226
Hendricks, J., 464
Hendricks, L. A., 121
Henggeler, S. W., 379, 380, 381
Henretta, J. C., 492, 498
Henry, B., 154, 305
Henry, W., 475
Henry, W. E., 613, 614
Hepps, D., 562, 563
Herbert, J., 304
Herbert, M., 579
Herlitz, A., 449
Herman-Giddens, M. E., 298, 307, 308, 315
Hernandez, D., 135
Hernandez, D. J., 243, 252, 258, 535
Heron, A., 269, 272, 282
Herrenkohl, T. I., 378, 379, 380, 381, 382, 383
Herrington, D., 435
Herrling, S., 406
Herrold, A. J., 588

640
Author Index
Hershkowitz, I., 560, 561, 563, 564, 565, 566
Herskovits, M. J., 269
Hertel, N. T., 299
Hertenstein, M. J., 98, 99, 104
Hertzog, C., 355, 356, 443, 444, 445, 446, 448,
449, 450, 452
Herzog, A. R., 424, 433, 436, 580, 581
Hess, B., 491, 496
Hess, G. E., 592
Hess, T. M., 444, 449, 604
Hetherington, E. M., 45, 48, 49, 253, 255, 358,
361, 363, 398, 567, 568, 569, 570
Hewitt, S. K., 566
Hewlett, B. S., 153
Hicks, L., 333
Higgins, A., 538
Higgins-D’Alessandro, A., 537
Hill, D., 124, 125
Hill, E. A., 492, 493
Hill, G. W., 451
Hill, J. P., 296
Hill, K., 380
Hill, K. G., 378, 379, 380, 381
Hill, K. T., 330, 339
Hill, M. S., 425
Hill, R., 522
Hillard, T. C., 435
Hilton, S. C., 120
Himes, C. L., 498
Hinde, R., 243, 252
Hinde, R. A., 93, 217, 311, 358
Hirsch, B. J., 353
Hirsch, I. B., 425, 434
Hirsch, J., 1, 176
Hirschi, T., 379, 401, 404, 406, 408
Hirschman, J. E., 562, 563
Hirsh-Pasek, K., 181
Hishinuma, E. S., 361
Hiss, R. G., 592
Hitch, G. J., 451
Hitt, S., 298, 307, 308, 309
Hlatky, M. A., 430
Ho, D. Y. F., 269
Hoagwood, K., 54, 553
Hobart, C. J., 470
Hobfoll, S. E., 610
Hobson, C. J., 343
Hodapp, R. M., 527
Hodgson, D. M., 120
Hoefnagel-Hohle, M., 176
Hofer, M., 121
Hoff, E., 172, 175, 181, 183, 184, 188, 195,
204, 279
Hofferth, S., 153, 154
Hofferth, S. L., 153, 155
Hoff-Ginsberg, E., 174, 175, 183, 187, 188
Hoffman, L. W., 55, 151, 243
Hoffman, M. L., 248
Hofman, A., 605
Hogan, M. J., 44, 535, 536, 537
Hogan, R., 38
Hogarty, P., 83
Hohmann, C., 434
Holden, G. W., 101, 102, 226
Hollich, G. J., 181
Holm, N. V., 602
Holmes, D. L., 560, 561
Holmes, H. A., 247
Holsboer, F., 115, 118
Homan, S., 590, 591
Homans, G. C., 1
Homma, A, 428
Hong, M., 127
Honig, A. S., 135, 138, 152, 155
Honour, J. W., 298
Hood, K. E., 242
Hooker, K., 425, 431, 589
Hoopfer, L. C., 539
Hoorens, V., 496
Hooven, C., 95, 221, 250, 253
Hoppes, K., 521
Hops, H., 226
Horan, N., 564
Horgas, A. L., 608
Horn, J. L., 446
Horn, T. S., 584
Horn, W. F., 153
Hornby, H., 137
Hornik, R. C., 401
Horowitz, A., 497
Horowitz, D., 564, 565, 566
Horowitz, F. D., 538
Horowitz, L. M., 401
Horwitz, R. I., 491
Horwood, L. J., 406
House, J. S., 433, 491–492, 500, 580, 581
Houston, C. A., 595
Hovav, M., 561, 564
Hovey, J. D., 362
Howard, D. V., 447
Howard, K. I., 355
Howe, G., 398
Howes, C., 95, 102, 144, 149, 155, 156, 157
Howes, P., 226
Hoyle, R. H., 548
Hoyt, D. R., 493
Hsieh, K., 363
Huang, J. S., 361
Hubbard, E. M., 98, 99, 104
Hubbard, J. A., 221
Huck, S. M., 493
Huffman, L., 123
Huffman, L. C., 114
Huffman, M. L. C., 563, 566
Hugdahl, K., 116
Hughes, C., 214
Hughes, M., 491, 563
Hughes, M. E., 375, 389
Hughes, R. B., 121
Hughes, S. O., 153
Huh, K., 522
Hui, S. L., 300
Huizinga, D., 405, 408
Huizink, A. C., 120
Hula, R. C., 539
Hulley, S., 435
Hultsch, D. F., 444, 446, 447, 448, 449, 450, 458
Hummert, M. L., 444
Hundleby, J. D., 377
Hunt, D. E., 331
Hunt, J. M., 68, 515
Hunt, J. S., 560, 564
Hunter, M. A., 67
Hunter, S. M., 256
Huntley, J. C., 608
Hunziker, U. A., 96
Hurd, M. D., 492
Hurlburt, N., 83
Hurrelmann, K., 360, 579, 585, 586
Huston, A. C., 48, 344, 535
Hutcheson, G. D., 562
Hutchinson, C., 425
Hutchinson, J. E., 181
Hutchinson, K. A., 312
Huttenlocher, J., 175, 188
Huttenlocher, P. R., 115
Huyck, M. H., 492
Hwang, C. P., 147, 568
Hy, L. X., 470
Hyde, J. S., 217, 343
Hyde, R. T., 428
Hyman, C., 257
Hymel, S., 256, 257
Hymes, D., 280
Iachine, I. A., 602
Iacono, W. G., 327
Ianni, F., 548
Iannotti, R. J., 404, 583, 584, 585
Ibáñez, L., 309
Icard, L. D., 362
Ichiyama, M. A., 362
Idler, E. L., 432
Ilarslch, A. L., 122
Ilg, U., 128
Inder, P. M., 403, 405
Ingegneri, D. G., 493
Ingersoll, G. M., 306, 375, 588
Ingersoll-Dayton, B., 490, 493
Inhelder, B., 73, 198, 199, 200, 201, 325, 517
Innocenti, M. S., 522
Inoff, G. E., 296, 306
Inoff-Germain, G., 296, 298, 302, 303, 304,
307, 310, 311
Insabella, G. M., 48
Insel, T. R., 115
Irby, M., 50
Irby, M. A., 407
Ireland, M., 377
Irizarry, N. L., 270, 273, 285
Irwin, C. E., 314, 582
Irwin, C. E., Jr., 305, 314, 374, 375
Irwin, O. C., 66
Irwin, W., 119, 125
Isaacowitz, D. M., 613, 614
Isabella, R. A., 101, 226
Isen, A. M., 119
Ispa, J. M., 148
Ivnik, R. J., 451
Iyengar, S., 588
Izard, C., 50
Izard, C. E., 122, 213, 480
Jaccard, J., 156
Jackson, A. W., 334

Author Index
641
Jackson, B. A., 607
Jackson, J. S., 491, 605
Jackson, S., 353
Jackson, S. A., 406
Jacob, B. A., 380
Jacobs, F., 48
Jacobs, F. H., 105
Jacobs, J. E., 328, 337, 340
Jacobs, S., 435, 499, 500
Jacobson, A., 50, 52, 54
Jacobson, A. M., 592
Jacobson, K., 76, 77
Jacobson, K. C., 358
Jacobson, L. P., 359
Jacobvitz, D., 101
Jaedicke, S., 216
Jaffe, A. S., 434
Jaffe, M. W., 607
Jagger, C., 607
Jahoda, G., 268, 269, 270, 282
James, J., 424–425
James, J. B., 474, 589
James, W., 341, 464, 465
Janoff-Bulman, R., 610, 617
Jansen-McWilliams, L., 425
Janveau-Brennan, G., 327
Janz, N. K., 580, 583
Jay, G. M., 453
Jeffries, N. O., 301
Jencks, C., 343
Jencks, C. L., 334
Jenkins, C. D., 491
Jenkins, R., 301
Jennings, J., 447, 449, 453
Jensen, P., 54, 553
Jerald, J., 141
Jerrome, D., 490
Jessor, R., 50, 374, 375, 376, 377, 378, 379, 380,
381, 382, 383, 386, 388
Jessor, S. L., 375, 376, 377, 378, 379, 382
Jeune, B., 428
Jia, G., 177
Jiang, W. J., 434
Jimerson, S. R., 380, 381
Jodry, W., 526
Joels, A., 115, 116
Joffe, L. S., 120
John, O. P., 357, 358
John, R. S., 225
Johnsen, P. T., 494
Johnson, C. B., 161
Johnson, C. L., 496, 498
Johnson, C. N., 54
Johnson, D. J., 147, 343
Johnson, D. L., 147
Johnson, D. R., 496
Johnson, E. O., 114, 115, 116
Johnson, J., 197
Johnson, L., 248
Johnson, L. D., 376, 377
Johnson, M., 38, 70, 207
Johnson, M. A., 428, 429
Johnson, M. C., 100
Johnson, M. H., 20, 70, 77, 78, 80, 81
Johnson, M. K., 154, 379, 382
Johnson, M. M., 560, 561
Johnson, N., 280
Johnson, R. B., 161
Johnson, R. J., 408, 432
Johnson, R. K., 586
Johnson, S. B., 584, 585
Johnson, S. P., 71, 75
Johnson, T. E., 602
Johnson, T. R., 120
Johnson, W. F., 99, 104
Johnston, C. C., 300
Johnston, J. R., 570
Johnston, L. D., 364
Jones, B., 310, 384
Jones, D., 183
Jones, D. P. H., 562, 563
Jones, H. E., 305
Jones, H. R., 566
Jones, J., 377
Jones, J. B., 590
Jones, L., 560
Jones, M. B., 406
Jones, M. C., 305
Jones, R. H., 430
Jones, R. W., 450
Jono, R. T., 491
Jopling, D. A., 278
Jordan, B., 152
Jordan, T. E., 513
Jorm, A. F., 451, 605
Josselson, R., 354
Jourdan, C., 174
Jouriles, E. N., 225
Jovanovic, L., 590
Joye, N., 562
Jozefowicz, D., 338, 340
Jozefowicz, D. M., 338, 340
Jozefowicz, D. M. H., 334, 338, 341, 342, 547
Ju, D.-B., 382
Juang, L. P., 361
Judge-Hawton, M., 161
Jung, C., 464
Jung, D. L., 428
Jurkovic, G. J., 379
Jusczyk, P. W., 68
Juul, A., 299
Kaariainen, R., 527
Kaczala, C. M., 338, 340, 341
Kagan, J., 1, 3, 91, 93, 94, 114, 117, 119,
125–126, 155, 218, 219, 351, 359, 362,
363, 537, 538
Kagitçibasi, C., 267, 268, 269, 271, 272, 273,
274, 276, 277, 278
Kahana, B., 613
Kahana, E., 613
Kahan-Kalman, R., 183
Kahn, A. J., 137
Kahn, M. D., 525
Kahn, R., 491
Kahn, R. L., 424, 480, 488, 581, 591, 603,
605, 611, 614
Kahn, S., 468
Kail, R., 604
Kainz, H. P., 38
Kaith, M. M., 70, 74, 75
Kakar, S., 269, 277, 279
Kako, E., 174
Kalin, N. H., 124
Kaljee, L., 401
Kalkose, M., 401
Kamenetskaya, A. G., 66
Kamerman, S. B., 137
Kamilaris, T. C., 114, 115, 116
Kampert, J. B., 309, 428
Kandel, D. B., 376, 377, 379, 403, 404, 405, 406
Kane, R. A., 426
Kane, R. L., 607
Kanfer, F. H., 47
Kanmark, T., 491
Kannisto, V., 602
Kao, G., 343, 345
Kao, H. S. R., 269
Kaplan, B. H., 425, 432
Kaplan, G. A., 424, 243
Kaplan, H. B., 408
Kaplan, N., 102, 401
Kaplan, R., 593
Kaplan, R. M., 47, 48, 593
Kaplan, S., 434
Kaplowitz, P. B., 307, 309
Karbon, M., 125, 216, 219
Kardaun, J. W. P. F., 431
Karlsson, S., 448, 458
Karmiloff-Smith, A., 20, 70, 197, 199, 205
Karraker, D., 137
Kasari, C., 520
Kasl, S., 491
Kasl, S. V., 432, 436, 496, 497, 499, 500
Kasprzyk, D., 581
Katainen, S., 359
Katchadourian, H., 540
Katkousky, W., 338
Katula, J., 593
Katz, J., 122
Katz, L. F., 95, 221, 250, 253
Katz, S., 607
Kaufman, G., 401, 493
Kaufman, J., 384
Kaufman, P., 380, 381
Kaufmann, M. B., 103
Kaufmann, R. B., 312
Kaus, C. R., 589
Kausler, D., 447
Kavrell, S. M., 333
Kawachi, I., 490
Kawaguchi, M. C., 359, 360
Kaye, H., 66
Kaye, K., 98
Kazdin, A. E., 330
Kearsley, R. B., 155
Keating, D. P., 325, 538
Keefer, C., 270
Keenan, K., 100
Keeney, J. M., 566
Kegeles, S. M., 305, 582
Keil, F., 196, 202, 205
Keiley, M. K., 137
Keister, M. E., 155
Keith, J. G., 389

642
Author Index
Keith, P. M., 492
Keith, V. M., 490
Kekes, J., 454
Keller, H., 228, 272
Kellman, P. J., 72, 75
Kello, C., 186
Kellogg Commission on the Future of State and
Land-Grant Colleges, 54
Kelly, D. M., 566
Kelly, E. L., 477
Kelly, J. B., 570
Kelly, J. F., 520, 521
Kelly, M. H., 187
Kelsey, S. F., 608
Keltikangas-Järvinen, L., 359
Kemp, H. V., 501
Kendall, P. C., 47
Keniston, A., 562
Kennedy, B., 202
Kennedy, B. S., 436
Kennedy, E. M., 553
Kenny, M. E., 401
Keogh, B. K., 519
Kerby, D. S., 525
Kerig, P. K., 226
Kermoian, R., 98, 99, 122, 124, 125, 352,
353, 362
Kern, W., 121
Kerns, K. A., 103
Kerns, L. A., 352, 363
Kerr, B. A., 337
Kerr, M., 48, 364, 402, 406, 408, 409, 411, 412
Kerr, S. T., 492
Kessel, F., 3, 45, 46, 47, 270
Kessen, W., 45, 46, 47, 66, 71, 72, 195, 202,
267, 285
Kessler, R. C., 355, 433, 499, 500, 580, 581, 605
Ketterlinus, R., 568
Ketterlinus, R. D., 156, 157, 375, 377
Key, T. J., 309
Khazaeli, A. A., 602
Kidder, D. P., 452
Kiecolt-Glaser, J. K., 491, 496
Kiesner, J., 406
Kiess, W., 299
Killen, J. D., 306
Kim, J. S., 429
Kim, K., 308
Kim, K. H. S., 176
Kim, S. Y., 361
Kim, U., 269, 272, 276, 277, 278
Kimber, J. A. M., 475
Kimiecik, J. C., 584
King, A. C., 591, 592, 595
King, A. P., 114
King, C. A., 362
King, M. A., 560, 563
Kinney, A. M., 580, 581
Kinney, D. A., 406
Kinney, R. P., 433
Kinsella, K., 436
Kipp, H., 231
Kirby, P., 451
Kircher, J., 564
Kirchler, E., 403
Kirkpatrick, E. A., 445
Kirkwood, T. B. L., 429
Kirschbaum, C., 119
Kirsh, B., 589
Kirsh, S., 103
Kisilevsky, B. S., 78
Kisker, E., 142
Kisley, A., 121
Kitayama, S., 3, 270, 276, 277, 278
Kitzman, K. M., 226
Kivett, V. R., 610
Klaczynski, P. A., 327, 328, 329, 444
Klahr, D., 196, 202
Klaszynski, P. A., 604
Kleban, M. H., 610
Klebanov, P. K., 382
Klein, D. C., 408
Klein, M. H., 217
Klein, R. P., 150
Klein, S., 380, 381
Kleiner, K. A., 78
Kleinman, J. C., 608
Kless, S. J., 255, 256
Klevbanov, P. K., 344
Kliegl, R., 604
Kline, E., 469, 470
Kline, M., 570
Kling, K. C., 343
Klinger, E., 616
Klinger, L. G., 124, 125
Knerr, B., 354
Knerr, C., 354
Knibbe, R. A., 405
Knieps, L. J., 520
Knight, G. P., 248
Knobil, E., 299
Knopf, D. K., 314
Knopf, M., 604
Knopp, R. H., 433, 434, 491
Knott, J. H., 539
Knox, A., 561
Kobak, R., 400
Koch, G. G., 298, 307, 308, 315
Koch, H. L., 259
Koch, S., 46
Kochanaksa, G., 214, 220
Kochanek, K. D., 424
Kochanska, G., 100, 102, 103, 104, 125, 225, 398
Koenig, H. G., 490
Kohlberg, L., 196, 247, 470, 538
Kohn, M., 255
Kohn, M. L., 471, 473, 477
Kohnstamm, G. A., 217, 357, 358
Kohut, H., 97
Kolaric, G. C., 364
Kolarz, C. M., 480
Kolberg, K. J. S., 580, 582, 583
Kolodziej, P., 604
Kondo-Ikemura, K., 102
Konner, M., 96
Kontos, S., 149
Koocher, G. P., 55
Kopp, C. B., 83, 104, 125, 215, 216, 221
Koren, G., 122
Korn, S. J., 543, 544
Kornhaber, M., 196, 197, 202
Korte, C., 490
Korten, A., 434
Korten, A. E., 605
Koslowski, B., 101
Kosmitzki, C., 271
Kourtis, P., 120
Koutsaal, W. E., 448
Kovac, P., 560, 561
Kovacs, M., 588
Kovacs, S., 38
Kowal, A., 259
Kowaleski-Jones, L., 376
Kowalski, N. C., 500
Kracke, B., 306, 586
Kraemer, H. C., 306
Krakow, J. B., 104
Kramer, D. A., 443
Kramer, L., 259
Kramer, R., 247, 470
Kratzer, L., 336, 339
Krause, N., 491
Krauss, M. W., 519, 521, 522, 524, 525, 526
Kravitz, R. L., 434
Krecker, M. L., 492
Kreipe, R. E., 583, 588
Kreppner, K., 4
Kreuter, M., 590, 591
Kreutzer, T., 103
Krewer, B., 268, 269, 270, 282
Krishnakumar, A., 48
Krishnan, K. R. R., 434
Kronmal, R., 424, 429, 433, 436
Kroonenberg, P. M., 272
Krueger, J., 444
Krueger, K., 122
Krueger, W. K., 126, 127
Kruger, A., 182
Kruger, A. C., 99
Krumholz, H. M., 426
Kucera, E., 102
Kuchibhatla, M. N., 434
Kuczynski, L., 104
Kuehnle, K., 560, 566
Kuh, D., 436
Kuhl, P., 201
Kuhn, D., 19, 200, 329
Kuhn, T. S., 20, 32
Kulin, H. E., 303, 308, 312, 313
Kuller, L., 309
Kuller, L. H., 425, 434, 608
Kumar, K., 278
Kumpfer, K. L., 366, 384, 385, 386, 387
Kunkel, L., 425
Kunselman, S., 303
Kunselman, S. J., 303, 312, 313
Kunzmann, U., 610
Kuo, Z. Y., 1, 4, 113, 538
Kuperminc, G., 353, 356, 400, 406
Kuperminc, G. P., 355, 356
Kupersmidt, J. B., 221, 257, 358
Kurtz, D. A., 362
Kuypers, J. A., 493
Kwan, K. L. K., 362
Kwon, J. Y., 380, 381

Author Index
643
Laakso, L., 582
Lab, M. E., 135, 401
Laboratory of Comparative Human Cognition,
269, 270, 272, 273, 283
Labouvie-Vief, G., 470, 604
Lachman, M. E., 424–425, 451, 463, 464,
466, 469, 474, 475, 476, 477, 479,
589, 590, 592
Ladd, G. W., 257, 259, 403, 405
La Greca, A. M., 588, 589
Laible, D. J., 102, 103, 568
Laing, R. D., 37
Lakatos, I., 20, 32
Lakin, K. C., 515
Lakoff, G., 38
Lally, R. J., 155
Lalonde, C., 100
Lalonde, C. E., 81
Lam, M., 362
Lamb, M. E., 48, 49, 95, 98, 144, 147, 153,
154, 156, 157, 277, 375, 377, 524, 560,
561, 563, 564, 565, 566, 567, 568, 569,
570, 571
Lambert, J. D., 499
Lamborn, S., 398, 399, 408
Lamborn, S. D., 345, 396, 399, 404, 408
Lampman-Petraitis, C., 352
Lancelot, C., 310, 354
Lancy, D., 269
Land, K. C., 490
Lande, J., 155
Landerman, L. R., 490
Landis, K. R., 491
Landrine, H., 276, 277
Landry, S. H., 521
Lane, P., 562
Lane-Garon, P. S., 247
Lang, F. R., 457, 605, 606, 609, 613, 615, 617,
618, 621
Langager, M., 154
Lange, N., 301
Langer, E. J., 408
Langer, J., 38, 202
Langman, J., 407
Lansford, J. E., 488, 491
Lanza, S., 337, 340
Lapsley, D. K., 587
Larson, M. C., 122
Larson, R., 244, 245, 352, 400, 401, 490
Larson, R. W., 351, 352, 360
Larson, S. A., 515
Larson, S. M., 566
Larsson, M., 447, 448
Larus, D. M., 561, 562
Laskarzewski, P., 309
Latour, B., 20, 21, 22, 27, 28
Lau, R. R., 588
Laub, J. H., 401
Laudan, L., 20, 31, 32
Lauer, J. C., 492
Lauer, R. H., 492
Laumann, E. O., 495
Laumann-Billings, L., 48
Launiala, K., 527
Lauritsen, J. L., 314
Laursen, B., 175
Lave, J., 203, 204, 275, 283
Lawrence, R. H., 495
Lawton, M. P., 607, 609, 610, 611, 612, 620
Layhey, B. B., 231
Lazarus, R. S., 52, 463, 480, 481
Leadbeater, B., 400
Leadbeater, B. J., 355, 356, 360
Leaper, C., 255
Leary, D. E., 46
Leavitt, L. A., 521
Lebra, T. S., 269
Lecuyer, R., 83
Lederberg, M., 497
Lederer, A., 188
Lederhendler, I. I., 114
Ledesma, S., 157
LeDoux, J., 37, 92
LeDoux, J. E., 121
Lee, G. R., 491, 492, 493, 494, 500
Lee, I. M., 428
Lee, K. L., 430, 432
Lee, K.-M., 176
Lee, P., 309
Lee, P. A., 309, 361
Lee, S., 231, 245, 253
Lee, T. R., 494
Lee, V. E., 334, 335, 345
Lee, Y. H., 493
Lee-Painter, S., 523
Leeton, J., 310
Lefcourt, H. M., 124
Leff, S. S., 548
Leffert, N., 48, 50, 361, 536, 550, 551, 552
Leﬂey, H. P., 498
Legorreta, A. P., 309
Lehman, D. R., 499
Lehman, H. C., 455, 456
Lehrman, D. S., 1
Leibner, M. J., 401
Leichtman, M. D., 562, 563
Leiderman, P. H., 270
Leinbach, M. D., 79
Leino, E. V., 492
LeMare, L., 257
Lemery, K. S., 218, 219
Lemon, B. W., 614
Lengua, L. J., 363, 364
Lennon, R., 247, 257
Leont’ev, A. N., 275, 276
Leo-Summers, L., 491
Lepore, S. J., 563
Lepper, H. S., 434
Leppin, A., 605
Lerner, J. V., 151, 356, 359, 361, 475, 541
Lerner, R., 202, 206, 207
Lerner, R. M., 1, 2, 3, 4, 7, 14, 20, 21, 23, 44, 45,
47, 48, 54, 55, 94, 103, 105, 113, 137, 242,
250, 271, 273, 274, 275, 296–297, 304,
331, 355, 356, 358, 359, 360, 361, 373,
376, 377, 384, 386, 388, 398, 407, 464,
465, 475, 516, 518, 519, 535, 536, 537,
538, 539, 540, 541, 553, 585, 586, 609,
615, 620
Lerner, S. E., 435
Lescai, F., 428
Lesperance, F., 434
Leung, K., 228
Leung, K. M., 309
Levenson, R. W., 492, 610
Leventhal, A., 588
Leventhal, E., 426, 433
Leventhal, E. A., 425
Leventhal, H., 425
Leventhal, T., 152, 552
Levesque, R. A., 559
Levine, E., 425
Levine, J., 434
Levine, J. M., 451
Levine, M. P., 313
LeVine, R., 202, 203, 204
LeVine, R. A., 268, 270, 273, 274
Levine, S., 116, 127
LeVine, S., 270
Levins, R., 312
Levinson, D. J., 463, 464, 466, 468, 469, 470, 590
Levinson, J. D., 469
Levinson, K., 50
Levinson, M., 469, 470
Levy, A. K., 103
Levy, L. H., 47
Lewedeg, V., 188
Lewin, K., 4
Lewinsohn, P. M., 355, 356, 582, 594
Lewis, C., 328, 398
Lewis, G., 301
Lewis, J. M., 226
Lewis, M., 91, 104, 122, 206, 212, 213, 214,
398, 523
Lewis, M. A., 591
Lewis, P., 66
Lewisohn, P. M., 306
Lewkowicz, C., 474, 590
Lewkowicz, C. J., 451
Lewontin, R., 312
Lewontin, R. C., 36, 177
Li, C. I., 309
Li, D., 361, 362
Li, F., 401
Li, K. Z. H., 612, 613, 616, 617, 621
Li, S.-C., 604
Liben, L., 200, 303
Liben, L. S., 26, 38, 303, 312, 313
Libert, J. P., 122
Libhaber, J., 474
Licht, P., 304
Lichtenstein, E., 491
Lichtenstein, P., 499
Lickliter, R., 1, 2, 113
Lieberman, P., 177
Liedo, P., 602
Liem, J. H., 361
Liem, R., 361
Lieven, E., 182, 183
Lieven, E. V. M., 174
Lifter, K., 180
Lifton, R. J., 515
Light, L. L., 447
Light, P., 327
Lim, B. A., 361

644
Author Index
Limberg, T. M., 593
Lindberg, L. D., 374, 375
Lindenberger, U., 2–3, 47, 271, 328, 445, 449,
463, 464, 465, 471, 539, 579, 580, 604,
605, 609
Linder, B., 309
Lindholm, J. A., 336, 342
Lindquist, C. H., 586
Lindsay, D. S., 562, 563, 566
Linton, E. A., 120
Lipsitt, L. P., 66, 271
Lipsitz, J., 331
Lisa, R., 428
Litman, C., 104
Litman, T. J., 495
Litt, I. F., 306
Little, B. R., 616
Little, R. R., 536
Little, T. D., 607, 608
Litvack-Miller, W., 248
Liu, H., 301
Liu, M., 361
Liu, W. M., 362
Livson, F., 614
Lloyd, T. A., 308
Lochman, J. E., 257, 363, 364
Loeber, R., 48, 405
Loehlin, J., 197
Loevinger, J., 202, 464, 466, 468, 470
Loewenstein, G., 610
Loftus, E. F., 562, 563
Logan, J., 493
Lonczak, H. S., 375, 376, 377
Loney, J., 231
Long, B., 48, 315
Long, P. J., 310
Longo, V. D., 602
Lonner, W. J., 268
Look, A., 434
Lookingbill, G., 303
Lookingbill, M. S., 303
Lopez, A. D., 424
Lopez, D. F., 477
Lord, A. B., 283
Lord, C., 538
Lord, S., 330, 339, 535, 546, 547, 549
Lord, S. E., 334, 338, 341, 342, 547
Lord, S. R., 605
Lorenz, F. O., 356
Lorenz, K., 538
Loriaux, D. L., 296, 298, 302, 303, 304, 306, 311
Lotsikas, A., 300
Louis, T. A., 607
Loukas, A., 154
Love, J., 141, 142
Lovejoy, J. C., 309
Lovelace, E. A., 451
Low, H., 302
Lowenthal, M. F., 490, 495
Lox, C., 593
Lucas, M.-A., 157, 159, 160
Lucas, R. E., 609, 610, 612
Luckasson, R., 514
Lugaila, T., 499
Lummis, M., 345
Lund, D. A., 499, 500, 606
Luppova, N. N., 66
Luster, T., 345, 361, 375, 380, 381, 552
Lustman, P., 592
Luszcz, M. A., 328
Luthar, S. S., 50, 52, 231, 232, 233, 374, 384,
385, 387, 388
Lutkenhaus, P., 104
Luu, P., 118, 119, 125
Lynch, D. J., 526
Lynch, K., 220
Lynch, S. A., 489
Lynott, P. P., 493
Lynskey, M. T., 406
Lyons, N. P., 335
Lyons, T., 175, 188
Lyons-Ruth, K., 97, 101, 103, 224
Lytle, B. L., 426, 431, 432, 434
Lytton, H., 246, 398
Maas, I., 607, 608
Maasten, A., 271
Mac Iver, D., 330, 331, 332, 338, 340, 536, 546
Mac Iver, D. J., 332
Macari-Hinson, M. M., 434
MacArthur, J., 299
Maccari, S., 120
Maccoby, E., 222, 223
Maccoby, E. E., 48, 49, 244, 252, 253, 254, 255,
311, 361, 363, 396, 399
MacDermid, S. M., 401
MacGregor, D. G., 434
MacIver, D., 183, 187, 546
Macken, M. A., 186
Mackey, W. C., 136, 153, 154
MacKinnon, C., 259
MacLean, P. D., 117, 118
MacMillan, D. L., 514
Macoby, E. E., 568, 570
Macomber, J., 76, 77
MacWhinney, B., 186
Maddahian, E., 374, 376, 377, 383
Madden, T., 362
Maddox, G. L., 426, 608, 613, 614
Maddux, J. E., 579, 582, 583, 584
Madole, K. L., 79, 80
Maedgen, J. W., 352
Maehr, M. L., 330, 331, 333
Maercker, U. M., 604
Magdol, 355
Maggs, J. L., 360, 364, 405, 579, 580, 585, 586
Magnuson, G., 267, 285
Magnuson, K., 528
Magnusson, C. M., 309, 313
Magnusson, D., 3, 21, 27, 34, 43, 296, 297, 304,
305, 306, 316, 355, 364, 375, 405, 406,
407, 408, 410, 609
Maguin, E., 378, 379, 380, 381
Maharaj, S., 356
Mahoney, G., 520, 521
Mahoney, J. L., 379, 380, 406, 407, 410
Mai, V., 299
Maier, M. A., 400
Maier, N. R. F., 1
Maier, S. F., 124
Maier, U., 128
Main, M., 101, 102, 401
Maiti, A. K., 92
Maitland, S., 448, 458
Maiuro, R. D., 425
Makin, S., 587
Makuc, D. M., 608
Malanchuk, O., 338
Malcarne, V., 216
Malcuit, G., 96
Malec, J. F., 451
Malkin, C., 401
Malkin, C. M., 98
Malo, J., 310, 311
Malone, D. M., 524, 525
Malone, K. E., 309
Malpass, R. S., 563
Mancini, J. A., 489, 494
Mandler, J., 280
Mandler, J. M., 66, 80
Mangelsdorf, S., 100, 128, 219
Mangelsdorf, S. C., 124
Manire, S. H., 153
Manlove, J., 375
Mann, L., 328
Mann, T., 95
Mann, T. L., 141, 142, 144
Mannell, R., 490
Manor, T., 564
Mansbach, W. E., 605
Manton, K. G., 426, 602, 607, 611, 615
Mantzicopoulos, P. Y., 361
Mantzoros, C. S., 299
Marans, A. E., 156
Maratsos, M., 178, 183, 187
Marchegiani, F., 428
Marchman, B., 197, 204
Marchman, V., 177
Marcoen, A., 103, 451, 453, 604
Marcus, A., 590
Marcus, B. H., 590
Marcus, G., 70
Marcus, G. F., 185, 186
Marcus, R. F., 403
Mares, M.-L., 605, 606
Mareschal, D., 70, 81
Margarf, L., 298
Margolin, G., 225, 495, 496
Margolis, J., 36
Margrett, J., 451
Marigliano, V., 608
Marin, B. V., 560, 561
Marin, C. L., 343
Mark, D. B., 425, 426, 430, 431, 432, 434
Markides, K. S., 592
Markman, E. M., 180, 181, 188
Markman, H. J., 48, 226
Markova, I. S., 451
Markovits, H., 327, 328
Marks, B. A., 585, 586, 587
Marks, N. F., 491, 499
Marksman, H. J., 315
Markstrom-Adams, C., 344
Markstrom-Adams, C. M., 247
Markus, H., 3, 268, 270, 273, 274, 478

Author Index
645
Markus, H. R., 270, 276, 277, 278, 466, 477, 478
Marriott, M., 269, 277, 278, 279
Marsella, A. J., 47, 267
Marshall, P. C., 527
Marshall, P. J., 126, 128
Marshall, T. R., 94
Marshall, W. A., 300, 301, 307, 311
Marsiske, M., 453, 457, 610, 613, 615, 617, 621
Marsland, K. W., 159
Martin, C. L., 338, 339, 341
Martin, E., 159
Martin, J., 222, 223
Martin, J. A., 254, 396, 399
Martin, L. R., 466
Martin, P., 428, 429, 430
Martin, R. P., 148, 217, 358
Martin, S., 187
Martin, S. S., 408
Martinson, K., 159
Martire, L. A., 592
Martland, N., 48
Marton, P., 356
Marusˇi, I., 357
Marvin, R. S., 400
Mascolo, M., 213
Maslin, C. A., 221
Mason, E. J., 327
Mason, J. I., 298
Masten, A. S., 48, 50, 232, 374, 375, 377, 382,
384, 385, 386, 387, 388, 559
Masterpasqua, F., 47
Maszk, P., 221
Matalainen, R., 527
Matas, L., 124
Matchar, D. B., 491
Matheson, C. C., 157
Mathy, R. M., 247, 257
Matsuyama, U. K., 280
Matt, G. E., 490
Mattace, R., 428
Matthews, K. A., 425, 434, 608
Matthews, S. H., 497
Matthys, W., 304
Mattock, A., 72, 73, 75
Mattson, A., 302
Maurer, D., 78
Maurer, H., 521
Maxwell, J. W., 494
Maxwell, K. L., 527
May, M., 521
Mayer, K. U., 424
Mayr, U., 607
Maytan, M., 427
Maziade, M., 148
Mazur, A., 302
Mazzeo, J., 326
Mazziotta, J. C., 176
McAdams, D. P., 467
McAdoo, H., 552
McAdoo, H. P., 345, 361, 362, 581
McAllister, C., 154
McAlpine, D. D., 499
McArthur, K., 520
McAuley, E., 593
McAvay, G., 491
McBride, K. E., 445
McCabe, A., 184, 280, 281, 282
McCaffrey, D., 607
McCain, G. C., 584
McCall, R. B., 45, 54, 83, 93, 217, 336, 339, 358
McCann, B. S., 491
McCarthy, J. F., 499
McCarthy, J. J., 173
McCarthy, K., 339, 407, 542
McCartney, K., 93, 148, 254
McClaskey, C. L., 257
McClearn, G., 491
McClearn, G. E., 429, 499
McClelland, J. L., 70, 77, 185
McClenny, B., 328
McClenny, B. D., 122
McClintock, J. C., 522
McClintock, M. K., 311
McCloskey, L. A., 561
McClowry, S. G., 220
McCord, J., 401, 406, 411
McCormick, W. C., 425, 433, 434
McCrae, R. B., 357
McCrae, R. R., 463, 464, 465, 466, 469, 475,
476, 522
McCubbin, H. I., 521, 522
McCubbin, L., 535
McDaniel, M. A., 452
McDonald, L., 95
McDonough, L., 80, 188
McDonough, S. C., 82
McDougall, D., 248
McDougall, W., 66
McDowell, D. J., 215
McEwen, B., 114, 116
McFadyen-Ketchum, S., 310
McGee, R., 355, 356
McGee, R. O., 154, 305
McGillicuddy-De Lisi, A., 329
McGillicuddy-DeLisi, A. V., 254, 255
McGillivray, J. A., 524–525
McGlynn, E. A., 434
McGonagle, K. A., 355
McGrath, M. P., 153
McGrath, S. K., 83
McGreal, C. E., 157
McGuire, S., 358
McHale, S. M., 245, 253, 258, 259, 401, 525
McHugh, P. R., 427, 429
McKee, B., 469, 470
McKenry, P. C., 569
McKenzie, B. E., 73
McKinlay, S. M., 590
McKinney, J. P., 135, 361
McKinney, M. H., 539
McKitrick, L. A., 453
McLanahan, S. S., 567, 568, 570
McLaughlin, C. S., 353
McLaughlin, M. W., 407
McLellan, J. A., 325
McLeod, I., 310
McLeod, J. D., 605
McLloyd, V. C., 271
McLoyd, V., 255, 344
McLoyd, V. C., 48, 52, 255, 344, 535
McMahon, R. J., 412
McMurray, R. G., 587
McNamara, C. C., 360
McNamee, G., 285
McNeal, R. B., 382
McNew, S., 99
McPartland, J., 343
McPartland, J. M., 330
McQuarrie, E. F., 362
McVie, R., 309
McWilliam, R. A., 527
Meaney, M. J., 116, 118, 121, 127
Means, B., 203, 204
Mechanic, D., 355, 356
Medhamurthy, R., 299
Medina, J. J., 446, 603
Medrich, E. A., 244, 245
Meece, J. L., 337, 338, 339, 340, 341
Meeks, C. B., 602
Meers, D. R., 156
Meeus, W., 400
Meeus, W. H. J., 356
Mehler, J., 176
Meilahn, E. N., 425, 434, 608
Meinecke, D., 114
Meinke, J., 303
Meinz, E. J., 605
Meisels, S. J., 515, 516, 527
Meltzer, H., 301
Meltzoff, A., 201
Meltzoff, A. N., 196
Memon, A., 560
Memorandum of Good Practice, 563
Menard, S., 405
Mendes de Leon, 491, 498, 499, 500
Mendez, O., 543, 544
Mercer, G. W., 377
Mercer, M. E., 72
Meredith, L. S., 430
Mergendoller, J. R., 331
Merleau-Ponty, M., 32, 33
Merluzzi, T. V., 580, 589, 590, 591
Mermelstein, R., 491
Mero, R. P., 433, 491–492, 580, 581
Merrill, S. S., 589
Merriman, W. E., 184
Mervielde, I., 357
Mervis, C., 181
Mervis, C. B., 80, 181
Meschke, L. L., 312, 313, 374, 375
Meseck-Bushey, S., 259
Messner, S., 428, 430
Metcalf, D., 121
Metter, E. J., 176
Mettetal, G., 256
Metz, W. P., 128
Metzler, C. W., 304, 401
Meudell, P. R., 451
Meyer, K., 299
Meyer, W. J., III, 309
Meyers, C. E., 523
Mezey, M. D., 426
Michael, Y. L., 490
Michaels, S., 280, 281
Michel, M. K., 213, 216, 225, 352, 353, 354, 355

646
Author Index
Michela, J. L., 496
Middleton, D., 451
Midgley, C. M., 332
Midgley, C., 330, 331, 332, 333, 338, 340, 341,
536, 540, 546, 547, 549
Milbrath, C., 200
Miletic, G., 247
Milgram, J. I., 494, 606
Miller, C., 330, 340
Miller, C. L., 332
Miller, D. C., 328, 329
Miller, E., 518
Miller, G. A., 617
Miller, J. F., 521
Miller, J. G., 28, 54, 137, 268, 270, 272, 273,
274, 276, 278, 285, 537, 539
Miller, J. Y., 376, 377, 381
Miller, J. Z., 300
Miller, K. E., 326
Miller, P., 3, 268, 270, 273, 274
Miller, P. C., 102
Miller, P. H., 195, 196
Miller, P. J., 275
Miller, S. A., 247
Miller, S. J., 494
Mills, D., 176
Mills, D. L., 176
Millsap, R., 463, 465
Millsap, R. E., 464, 465, 466
Millstein, S. G., 305, 314, 374, 375, 582, 587
Milne, R., 560
Milofsky, E., 468, 469, 471
Minami, M., 184, 280, 281, 282
Miner, S., 494
Mink, I. T., 398, 523
Minkler, M., 492, 615
Minton, H., 524
Minton, H. L., 515
Minuchin, P. P., 523
Miranda, S. B., 81, 82
Mirowsky, J., 593
Mischel, W., 216, 542, 617
Mishra, R. C., 269, 282, 284
Mistry, J., 48, 96, 105, 273, 274, 280, 281, 283,
284, 285, 331, 355
Mitchell, D. W., 83
Mitchell, S., 565, 566
Mitchell, S. K., 520
Mitchell, V., 472, 473, 474
Mitman, A. L., 331
Mittelmark, M. B., 424, 429, 433, 436
Miyake, K., 97
Miyamoto, S. T., 361
Mnookin, R. H., 568, 570
Moal, M. L., 120
Moane, G., 471, 472, 473, 474
Moen, P., 589, 591
Mofﬁtt, T. E., 147, 154, 305, 306, 310, 355,
356, 357, 358, 406
Mohanty, A. K., 279
Mohs, R., 491
Molenaar, P., 206
Molina, B. S., 401
Molitor, N., 151
Mononen, T., 527
Montague, L., 188
Montañez, M., 152, 153, 154
Montano, D. E., 581
Montemayor, R., 353
Monti, D., 428
Mood, A., 343
Moody, H. R., 592
Moore, C., 353, 356, 400
Moore, G., 102, 223
Moore, K. A., 374, 375
Moorman, P. G., 309
Moos, R. H., 332
Moran, G., 98
Morelli, G., 97
Morelli, G. A., 96, 137, 150
Moreno, M., 254
Morgan, D., 490
Morgan, J., 188, 562
Morgan, L. A., 492
Morison, V., 71, 74, 75
Moritz, D. J., 496
Morley, J. E., 425
Morrell, R. W., 452
Morresi, R., 428
Morris, L., 312
Morris, L. W., 496
Morris, N., 152
Morris, N. M., 296, 304, 312, 313
Morris, P., 139
Morris, P. A., 3, 541
Morris, R. G., 496
Morrison, F. J., 538
Morrison, J. A., 309
Mortimer, J. T., 334, 379, 382
Morton, J., 78
Moscovitch, M., 452
Moses, H. D., 383
Moses, L. J., 99
Moshman, D., 327, 328
Mosier, C., 274, 281, 285
Moskowitz, J. T., 119
Moskowitz, R. W., 607
Moss, M. S., 500
Moss, S. Z., 500
Mossey, J. M., 431, 432
Moston, S., 562
Motta, L., 428
Motta, M., 428
Moulin, C. J. A., 450
Mounts, N., 396, 398, 399, 404, 408
Mounts, N. S., 399, 405, 406, 408
Mroczek, D. K., 480
Mueller, E., 95
Mueller, U., 36
Muelmeester, J. F., 307
Muhlbaier, L. H., 430
Muir, D. W., 78
Mukamal, K., 479
Mulder, E. J. H., 120
Mulhern, R. K., Jr., 398
Mullally, P. R., 276, 277, 278
Muller, J., 299
Mülunpalo, S., 431, 432
Mumme, D. L., 17, 98, 99, 243, 249, 250, 251,
352, 353, 362
Mun, E.-Y., 138, 148, 154
Munakata, Y., 20, 70, 77, 202
Mundy, P., 520
Munholland, K. A., 102
Muñoz, R. F., 352, 355
Munroe, R. H., 150
Munroe, R. L., 150
Murowchick, E., 302
Murphy, B. C., 222, 247, 248, 363
Murphy, B. P., 120
Murphy, R., 581
Murphy, S. L., 424
Murray, C. L. G., 424
Murray, F., 198
Murray, J. P., 44, 45, 55, 535, 536, 537
Murray, K., 100, 225
Murray, K. T., 125
Murray, L., 98, 360, 365
Murrell, S. A., 500
Mussen, P., 198
Mussen, P. H., 3, 538
Mutter, J. D., 271
Myers, J. E. B., 562
Myers, L., 149
Myles-Worsley, M., 561
Nachmias, M., 100, 128, 219
Nagel, E., 16
Nagel, R., 526
Nagell, K., 99, 174, 182, 183
Nagy, T. R., 586
Nahemow, L., 609
Nahulu, L. B., 361
Naigles, L., 175, 181, 183, 184, 188
Naigles, L. R., 188
Nail, P. R., 408
Nairn, R. C., 580, 589, 590, 591
Nakagawa, K., 343
Nañez, J. E., 75
Narasimham, G., 327, 329
Nardi, R., 302
Nash, A., 95
Nass, T. E., 299
Nathanson, R., 561
National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention
and Health Promotion, Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention,
581–582, 587
National Center for Education Statistics, 329,
330, 336
National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development Early Child Care Research
Network, 49, 102, 139, 140, 149
National Institute on Aging and Genetic
Epidemiology Working Group, 426
National Research Council, 377, 379, 380,
381, 382
National Research Council and Institute of
Medicine, 148, 160
Neal, M. B., 493
Needham, A., 75, 76
Neely, A. S., 453
Neiderhiser, J. M., 398
Neisser, U., 197, 278
Nelson, C. B., 355

Author Index
647
Nelson, C. E., 105
Nelson, D. A., 177
Nelson, J., 301
Nelson, K., 181, 561
Nelson, K. E., 187
Nemeroff, C. B., 115
Nesbit, R., 401
Ness, R., 309
Nesse, R. M., 118, 500
Nesselroade, J. R., 435, 463, 592
Neugarten, B. L., 425, 431, 466, 475, 615
Neugarten, B. T., 463, 464, 471, 472, 473, 474
Neville, B., 249, 250, 253, 254
Neville, H., 176
Neville, H. J., 176
Nevis, S., 78
Nevitt, J., 362
New, R., 96
Newcomb, A. F., 257, 402
Newcomb, M. D., 374, 376, 377, 383
Newcombe, P. A., 563
Newman, A., 424, 429, 433, 436
Newman, B., 309
Newman, D., 310
Newman, D. L., 147, 355
Newman, S., 497
Newport, E., 196
Newport, E. L., 1, 23, 183, 185, 187, 188
Newson, E., 245
Newson, J., 245
Nicholls, J. G., 333
Nichols, P. C., 280
Nickols, S. Y., 47
Nicol, J. L., 176
Nicolaides, K. H., 120
Nieminen, M., 602
Nihira, K., 398, 523
Nikolaus, T., 434
Nilsson, L. G., 448, 449, 458
Nilsson, L.-G., 452
Nimetz, S. L., 156, 157
Ninio, A., 184
Nisan, M., 247
Nisbett, R. E., 449
Nishimura, S. T., 361
Nitz, K., 359
Nitz, K. A., 375, 377
Nixon, S., 398
Noack, P., 404, 406
Noam, G. G., 50
Noble, C. A., 428, 430
Noell, J., 401
Noell, J. W., 304
Nolen-Hoeksema, S., 301, 343, 355, 356
Nomura, C., 406
Noom, M. J., 356
Noonan, J. J., 299
Nord, C. W., 154, 568
Norman, D. A., 206
Norman, K. A., 448
Norris, F. H., 500
Nottelmann, E. D., 296, 298, 302, 303, 304, 306,
307, 310, 311
Novacek, J., 481
Novikoff, A. B., 1, 4
Nowlin, J. B., 424
Nsamenang, B. A., 277
Nuerchterlein, D. H., 559
Nugent, K., 231
Nuland, S. B., 436
Nunno, M., 566
Nurius, P., 478
Nurmi, J. E., 353
Nyberg, L., 448, 449, 458
Nye, F. I., 401
Oakes, L. M., 79, 80
Oates, K., 561, 562
Oberﬁeld, S. E., 307
Oberklaid, F., 94, 359
O’Brien, A. T., 495
O’Brien, K., 245
O’Brien, K. M., 341
O’Brien, M., 538
O’Brien, R. W., 582, 583, 584
Obrosky, D. S., 588
Ochs, E., 172, 279
Ochsner, J. E., 562
O’Connor, C. M., 434
O’Connor, K. M., 178
O’Connor, M. J., 154
O’Connor, T. G., 353
Oetting, E. R., 404
Offer, D., 355
Ofﬁce of Educational Research and Improvement,
329, 330
Ofﬁce of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency
Prevention, 378
Offord, D. R., 406
Ogbu, J. G., 344
Ogbu, J. U., 241, 251, 253, 255, 344
Ogden, T. H., 37
Ogino, M., 96
Ogrocki, P., 496
Ohannessian, C. M., 356, 359
O’Hearn, H. G., 225
Oh-Hwang, Y., 361
Oitzl, M. S., 115, 116
Oja, P., 431, 432
Okamoto, Y., 205
O’Keeffe, B., 307
Okun, M. A., 490
Oldehinkel, T., 434
Oldham, H. N., 430
Olds, D. L., 144, 146
O’Leary, A., 591, 593
Olguin, R., 174
Oliker, S. J., 495
Oliver, B., 175
Olivieri, F., 428
Oller, D. K., 188
Olsen, M. K., 431
Olweus, D., 302, 405
O’Malley, P. M., 364, 376, 377
Omaye, S. T., 527
O’Neil, R., 215
Ong, A., 362
Ong, K. K., 300
Opitz, J. M., 527
Oppenheim, D., 95, 96, 144
Oppenheimer, E., 309
Opper, S., 198, 199, 200, 201, 202
O’Rand, A. M., 492
Orbach, Y., 560, 561, 563, 564, 565, 566
Orbuch, T. L., 491–492
Ordway, L., 434
Ordy, J. M., 67
Ormel, J., 434, 605
Ormond, C., 328
Ornstein, P. A., 45, 561, 562
Orr, D. P., 306, 375, 382, 588
Orr, R. R., 522
Orsmond, G. I., 524, 525
Orwoll, L., 604
Osgood, W. D., 337, 340
Osofsky, J. D., 138
Ostendorf, F., 357
Ostrom, C. W., 539, 585, 586
Ostrov, E., 355
Ouslander, J. G., 426
Overmier, J. B., 408
Overton, B. J., 553
Overton, W., 204, 537, 538
Overton, W. F., 1, 2, 3, 7, 13, 14, 16, 18, 19, 21, 29,
32, 36, 38, 91, 92, 327, 328, 514, 516, 518
Owen, M. J., 115
Owen, M. T., 226
Owens, J. F., 425, 434
Oxford, M., 362
Oxman, T. C., 491
Oyama, S., 202
Ozer, E. M., 314, 375, 377
Padilla-Walker, L., 148, 149
Paffenbarger, R. S., 428
Paffenbarger, R. S., Jr., 309
Pagani, L., 406
Paikoff, R. L., 352
Painter, K. M., 188
Pakiz, B., 378, 379
Palacios, J., 254
Palermiti, A.-L., 308
Paley, B., 226
Palkovits, M., 115, 117
Palkovitz, M., 219
Pallas, D. M., 138, 154
Palmer, J. L., 156
Palmonari, A., 403
Palmore, E., 605
Palmore, E. B., 610
Pan, B., 152, 154
Panagiotides, H., 124, 125
Panak, W. F., 248, 257
Pandey, J., 268
Panksepp, J., 124
Papp, L. M., 227, 228
Paris, S. G., 282
Parisi, D., 20, 70, 197
Park, D., 269, 272
Park, D. C., 444, 449, 452, 453
Park, K., 152
Park, Y. S., 269, 272
Parke, R. D., 45, 95, 103, 153, 213, 215, 221, 222,
227, 228, 229, 243, 245, 249, 250, 252,
253, 254, 255, 259

648
Author Index
Parker, J. G., 243, 251, 254, 256, 257, 402,
403, 405
Parker, R. G., 309
Parker, S., 105
Parker, S. T., 296
Parkerson, G. R., Jr., 431
Parks, R., 522
Parmelee, A. H., 81
Parritz, R., 128
Parritz, R. H., 100, 124, 219
Parrott, T. M., 493
Parsons, E., 97, 103
Parsons, J. E., 339
Pasanen, M., 431, 432
Passeri, G., 428
Passman, R. H., 398
Pasternack, J., 247, 257
Paterson, J., 353
Patrick, D., 430
Patrick, M. M. H., 498
Patrick-Miller, L., 425
Pattee, L., 257
Patterson, G., 259
Patterson, G. R., 223, 259, 401, 403, 404, 405,
406, 411
Patterson, J. M., 521, 522, 584, 587
Paulesu, E., 176
Paulsell, D., 142
Pavgi, S., 304
Pawletko, T., 259
Pearlin, L., 374
Pearlin, L. I., 51, 52
Pearson, B. Z., 188
Pedersen, F. A., 123, 144, 157
Pedersen, J., 95
Pedersen, N. L., 499
Pederson, L. M., 497
Pederson, N. L., 429
Pedlow, R., 359
Peeples, D. R., 72
Pelham, W. E., 231
Pellegrini, D. S., 52
Pender, N. J., 587
Peng, Y., 590
Penny, G. N., 579
Penson, P. L., 361
Pepler, D., 524, 525
Pepper, S. C., 537
Perani, D., 176
Perez, C., 280
Perfect, T. J., 450
Perkins, D. F., 375, 383, 388, 389
Perkins, H. W., 499
Perksy, H. R., 326
Perlman, M., 253, 258
Perlmutter, M., 282, 283, 444, 447, 452, 454
Perloff, R., 197
Perls, T., 425
Perls, T. T., 428
Perregaux, C., 279
Perry, C. L., 374, 375, 376, 377, 378, 379, 380,
381, 382, 383, 388
Perry, L. A., 120, 298
Perry, N. W., 47, 560, 564
Perry, N. W., Jr., 45
Perry-Jenkins, M., 401
Persson, I. R., 309, 313
Perusse, D., 302
Pes, G. M., 428
Pescovitz, O. H., 298, 308
Peters, D. P., 562
Peters, E., 434
Peters, E. J., 309
Peters, H. E., 568
Petersen, A. C., 296, 301, 305, 306, 333, 353,
355, 356, 540, 586, 588
Petersen, R. C., 451
Petersen, S. E., 125
Peterson, B. L., 432
Peterson, C., 184, 280, 408, 562, 612
Peterson, D. M., 406
Peterson, J., 433, 499, 500, 606
Peterson, J. A., 614
Peterson, J. L., 568
Peterson, L., 579, 592
Peterson, P. G., 614
Peto, J., 406
Petrill, S. A., 175
Pettit, G. S., 49, 257, 310
Phelps, R., 247
Philliber, S., 406
Phillips, D., 91, 93, 105
Phillips, D. A., 149, 155
Phillips, M., 343
Phinney, J. S., 362
Piaget, J., 30, 68, 69, 73, 74, 75, 136, 195, 197,
199, 200, 201, 202, 204, 242, 246, 247,
256, 325, 464
Pianta, P. C., 156, 157
Piattelli-Palarini, M., 196, 197, 199, 202
Piazza, P. V., 120
Pick, H. L., 45
Piedmont, R. L., 357
Pieper, B., 425
Pieper, C. F., 434
Pierce, C. S., 31
Pierce, G. R., 53
Pierce, S., 127
Pilgrim, C., 404, 405
Pillow, D. R., 401
Pimley, S., 481
Pine, J., 182, 183
Pini, G., 428
Pini, S., 434
Pinker, S., 175, 177, 179, 185
Pinquart, M., 489
Pinto, B. M., 590
Pipe, M.-E., 562
Pipher, Mary, 335
Pipp, S., 102, 197, 201, 202
Pipp-Siegel, S., 102
Pirie, D., 521
Pitkanen, A., 121
Pittinsky, T., 384
Pittman, K., 50, 536
Pitts, J. S., 496
Plant, T. M., 299
Plaut, D., 186
Plaut, D. C., 185
Pleck, E. H., 154
Pleck, J. H., 154, 567
Plomin, R., 1, 2, 93, 175, 217, 219, 257, 259, 358,
398, 538
Plotsky, P. M., 115, 116, 121, 127
Plumert, J. M., 45
Plunkett, K., 20, 70, 186, 197
Pohl, C. R., 299
Poirer, C. R., 77
Poirier, L. M., 590
Polak, J. F., 424, 429, 433, 436
Polloway, E. A., 514
Pombeni, M. L., 403
Pomerleau, A., 96
Pong, S. L., 382
Ponton, L. E., 328
Poole, D. A., 560, 562, 563, 566
Poon, L. W., 426, 428, 429, 430
Poorman, M. O., 356
Poortinga, Y., 268, 269, 272, 274
Poortinga, Y. H., 268, 269, 273, 274, 275, 282
Pope-Davis, D. B., 362
Popkin, B. M., 587
Popper, K., 32
Porges, S. W., 92, 116, 117, 119, 121, 122,
123, 127
Port, L. K., 562
Porter, F., 121
Posada, G., 102
Posluszny, D. M., 425
Posner, J. K., 245
Posner, M. I., 100, 114, 118, 119, 122, 125
Potau, N., 309
Pott, M., 97
Potter, L. B., 379, 380
Poulin, F., 411
Poulin, R., 125, 216
Poulin-Dubois, D., 80
Powell, D., 48, 49, 228
Powell-Cope, G. M., 380, 381, 382
Power, F. C., 538
Power, T., 216
Power, T. G., 153
Powers, S. I., 359, 360
Powlishta, K. K., 247
Prado, L., 562
Prasada, S., 188
Premack, D., 174
Prenda, K., 479
Pressley, M., 48, 282
Pressman, E. K., 120
Preussler, W., 604
Prewitt, L., 593
Prewitt, L. M., 593
Pribram, K.-H., 617
Price, J. L., 118
Price, J. M., 257, 402, 403
Price, R. A., 309
Price, T. S., 175
Prigatano, G. P., 450
Prince, M. J., 309
Prior, M., 94, 359
Prohaska, T. R., 580, 581, 595
Prosch, H., 18
Pruchno, R., 424
Pruchno, R. A., 498, 500

Author Index
649
Pryor, D. B., 430, 432
Pryor, J., 353
Pucca, A., 425
Pugh, M. D., 404
Pulkkinen, L., 396, 612
Pullen, S. M., 604
Purcell, S., 175
Puschel, S. M., 518
Putallaz, M., 257
Putnam, H., 18, 32
Puttler, L. I., 138, 147, 148, 154
Quadrel, M. J., 588
Quas, J. A., 127
Quiggle, N. L., 248
Quigley, K. S., 119, 127
Quine, W. V., 32
Quinn, D. M., 339, 341
Quinn, P. C., 66, 79, 80, 81
Quintana, S. M., 247, 362
Quinton, D., 229
Quittner, A. L., 425, 434
Rabinovich, B. A., 150
Radke-Yarrow, M., 104, 225, 227, 232
Radloff, L. S., 429
Raganato, P., 608
Ragozin, A. S., 526
Ragozin, A. Z., 155
Raichle, M. E., 118
Raikes, H., 141, 142, 144, 152, 154, 157
Räikkönen, K., 359
Raine, A., 304
Rainey, W. E., 298
Rait, D., 497
Raj, M. H., 296, 304
Rajapakse, J. C., 301
Rakison, D. H., 80
Ramanujam, A. K., 269, 278, 279
Ramanujam, B. K., 277
Ramee, S. L., 315
Ramey, C., 124
Ramey, C. T., 48, 49, 146, 157
Ramey, S. L., 48, 49, 146, 156, 157
Ramos, E., 183
Ramsay, D. S., 122
Ramsey, E., 223, 405
Randall, J. H., 19
Rankin, D. B., 256
Rankin, J. H., 401
Rankin, J. S., 430
Rapisarda, R., 428
Rapoport, J. L., 301
Rascher, W., 299
Raskin, D., 563
Raskin, D. C., 564
Rathbun, L., 562
Rathunde, K., 3, 406, 539
Ratner, H., 182
Ratner, H. H., 99
Rau, M. T., 581, 587
Rauch, S. P., 375
Raz, N., 444, 446, 449
Read, S. J., 401
Rebok, G. W., 44, 535, 536, 537
Redford, M. A., 77
Redlich, A., 564
Reed, R. B., 518
Reed, R. S., 561, 563
Rees, K., 309
Reese, C. M., 326
Reese, E., 184
Reese, H. W., 16, 271, 435, 516, 592
Reﬁor, S. K., 138, 154
Reich, A., 299
Reich, P. A., 560
Reichard, S., 614
Reicher, S., 380
Reid, J., 425
Reid, J. B., 259, 405
Reid, M. K., 156
Reider, J., 315
Reilly, J., 176
Reinhardt, J. P., 498
Reinhart, M., 562
Reinhart, T., 179
Reinherz, H. Z., 378, 379
Reinila, M., 309
Reinisch, J. M., 311
Reis, A., 593
Reischies, F. M., 604, 605
Reiser, J. J., 45
Reiser, M., 363
Reisman, J. M., 403
Reiss, D., 358, 398
Reiss, S., 514
Reister, T. K., 300
Reiter, E. O., 299, 301, 309
Relkin, N. R., 176
Renick, A., 563
Renner, G., 481, 613, 615, 618, 619, 620, 621
Renninger, K. A., 45, 48
Repucci, N. D., 339
Resch, N., 500
Resch, R. C., 521
Resnick, B., 593
Resnick, L. B., 451
Resnick, M., 206
Resnick, M. D., 377
Resnick, S., 101
Retzlaff, B. M., 491
Reuman, D., 330, 331, 332, 338, 340, 536, 546
Reuman, D. A., 332
Reumann, D. A., 546
Reuter, J. M., 586, 588
Reuter-Lorenz, P. A., 449
Revenson, T. A., 495, 496, 497
Reymonds, K. D., 586
Reyna, V. F., 562, 563
Reynolds, C. A., 429
Reynolds, M., 328
Reynolds, S., 424, 436
Reznick, J. S., 94, 175, 218, 219
Ricardo, I., 401
Ricardo, I. B., 358
Rice, K. M., 339
Rich, M. W., 434
Richards, F., 200, 202
Richards, G. E., 309
Richards, M. H., 306, 351, 352
Richardson, S. L., 452
Richman, A., 270
Richters, J. E., 48, 50, 102
Ricoeur, P., 20, 21
Ridge, B., 220
Riediger, M., 424, 454, 457
Ries, A. L., 593
Rigatuso, J., 121, 122
Riggs, B., 435
Riley, M. W., 494, 594, 611
Rimer, B. K., 425
Riniolo, T. C., 122
Riordan, K., 101
Risley, T., 174–175
Ritchie, K. L., 226
Ritter, L., 497, 399, 408
Ritter, P. L., 306
Rizzoli, R., 300
Roach, M. A., 521, 524
Robbins, J. A., 424, 429, 433, 436
Robbins, M. A., 427, 500
Roberto, K. A., 498
Roberts, B. W., 463, 464, 465, 466, 471, 472,
473, 477
Roberts, D., 344
Roberts, K. P., 560
Roberts, M., 353
Roberts, M. C., 579, 582, 583, 584
Roberts, R. E. L., 493
Roberts, W. L., 492
Robine, J.-M., 429
Robins, R. W., 357, 358
Robinson, H. B., 155
Robinson, J., 566
Robinson, J. L., 143, 153
Robinson, N. M., 155, 526
Robinson, N. S., 356
Robinson, T. N., 306
Robitaille, C., 425
Rocca, W., 605
Rocher-Schudlich, T. D., 93, 94
Rockhill, B., 309
Roderick, M., 330, 380
Rodgers, J. L., 259
Rodgers, W. L., 609
Rodin, J., 408, 479, 593
Rodino, A., 280
Rodkin, P. C., 296
Rodning, C., 149
Roe, A., 445
Roebers, C. E. M., 563, 566
Roede, M. J., 307
Roehlkepartain, E. C., 375
Roelien, J., 307
Roemmich, J. N., 299, 300, 301, 305
Roeser, R. W., 217, 334, 338, 341, 342, 356, 362,
546, 547
Roff, M., 257
Rogers, R. W., 580
Rogers, W. H. I., 434
Roggman, L., 152
Rogoff, B., 3, 96, 201, 202, 203, 204, 254,
270, 272, 273, 274, 275, 281, 282, 283,
284, 285
Rogol, A. D., 299, 300, 301, 305

650
Author Index
Rogosch, F. A., 527
Rohde, P., 355, 356
Rohner, R. P., 154
Roizen, J. A., 244, 245
Rokeach, M., 340
Rolf, J., 559
Rolland, J. S., 495
Rollins, H., 198
Romer, D., 401
Romney, D. M., 248, 398
Ronis, D. L., 587
Rook, K. S., 490, 591
Rosati, R. A., 432
Rosch, E., 80
Rosch, R., 206
Roscher, B., 526
Rose, D., 71
Rose, S. A., 81, 82, 83
Rose-Krasnor, L., 241, 251
Rosen, J. B., 117, 118
Rosen, S., 179
Rosenbaum, J., 424
Rosenbaum, J. E., 330
Rosenberg, B. G., 259
Rosenbloom, C. A., 595
Rosenblum, L. A., 398
Rosenfeld, R. G., 300
Rosenﬁeld, R. L., 308
Rosenholtz, S. J., 333
Rosenkrantz, S. L., 79
Rosenthal, C. J., 500
Rosenthal, D. A., 361
Rosenthal, S. L., 307
Rosicky, J., 122
Rosner, T. T., 497
Rosow, I., 614
Ross, A., 380
Ross, D. F., 563, 566
Ross, H., 253, 258
Ross, H. G., 606
Ross, H. R., 494
Ross, S., 98
Rossman, B. B. R., 352
Rostosky, S. S., 359, 360
Rotenberg, K. J., 248
Rotenstein, D., 298, 300, 307, 308, 309
Roter, D. L., 593
Roth, J., 360, 365
Rothbart, M., 114, 118, 119, 122, 125
Rothbart, M. K., 93, 94, 100, 217, 351, 357,
358, 359, 362
Rothbaum, F., 48, 97, 541
Rothermund, K., 619, 620
Rounds, T. S., 331
Rousseau, J. J., 464
Roux, M., 174
Rovee-Collier, C. K., 98
Rovine, M., 128, 224, 226
Rowden, L., 257
Rowe, D., 296, 538, 540
Rowe, D. C., 1, 2, 259, 305, 358
Rowe, J., 526
Rowe, J. W., 424, 480, 491, 603, 611, 614
Rowland, C., 182, 183
Rozeboom, W. W., 31
Rubenstein, J. L., 144, 155, 157
Rubin, K. H., 125, 126, 243, 251, 254, 256,
257, 361, 362, 398, 402, 403
Rubin, R., 592
Rubin, V., 244, 245
Rubin, W. W., 123
Rubinstein, R., 500
Ruble, D. N., 246, 338, 339, 398, 341
Rudberg, M. A., 607
Rudy, L., 562, 563
Rueter, M. A., 404, 405
Ruetsch, C., 354
Rule, B., 452
Rumberger, R. W., 380, 381, 382
Rumelhart, D. E., 280
Rush, J., 516
Rushton, J. P., 1, 2, 538, 540
Ruskin, E., 521
Russell, A., 252
Russell, D. W., 489
Russell, G., 252
Russell, J., 31, 35
Russell, N. K., 593
Russo, 425
Russo, J., 496
Rutter, M., 48, 50, 51, 135, 136, 150, 229, 230,
382, 385, 385, 386, 388, 567
Ryan, E. B., 448
Ryan, J. A. M., 375, 376, 377
Ryan, R. M., 340
Ryan, S. A., 314
Ryan, S. M., 124
Ryff, C., 539
Ryff, C. D., 463, 467, 475, 480, 493, 610, 611
Rys, G. S., 412
Saarni, C., 17, 98, 99, 100, 243, 249, 250, 251
Sabatier, C., 96
Sabini, J., 25
Sacchitelle, C., 154
Sachs, J., 280
Sadker, D., 336
Sadker, M., 336
Saebel, J., 252
Saenger, P., 302, 308, 309
Saffran, J. R., 185, 188
Safran, C., 434
Safran, D. B., 434
Safyer, A. W., 353
Sagi, A., 95, 97, 144, 229, 272
Saini, J., 434
Saito, R. N., 550
Saito, Y., 607, 608
Sakin, J., 102
Salapatek, P., 71, 78
Sallis, J. F., 591, 592
Salmi, M., 136, 137
Salmivalli, C., 364
Salovey, P., 215
Salthouse, T., 444
Salthouse, T. A., 443, 449, 452, 456, 457,
604, 605
Sameroff, A., 113
Sameroff, A. J., 2, 3, 7, 52, 92, 101, 137, 138,
271, 356, 362, 518, 519, 520, 546, 547
Sampson, E. E., 37
Sampson, R. J., 401
Sanchez, M. M., 115
Sandefur, G., 567, 568
Sander, L. W., 93
Sanders, B., 308
Sanders, S. A., 311
Sandler, H. M., 146
Sandler, I., 353
Sandler, I. N., 363, 364
Sandman, C. A., 120
Sanford, E. C., 445
Sanson, A., 94, 351, 357, 358, 359
Sanson, A. V., 359
Sansoni, P., 428
Santelli, J., 312
Santiago, J. V., 588, 589
Santostefano, S., 37
Saper, C. B., 116
Sapolsky, R. M., 302
Sarason, B. R., 53
Sarason, I. G., 53
Sarason, S. B., 330, 339
Saraswathi, T. S., 96, 267, 268, 272, 273
Sarnecki, J., 404
Sartoni, G., 428
Sarty, M., 78
Sasano, I. I., 298
Sattler, J., 563
Saudino, K. J., 175, 358
Saugstad, L. F., 309, 310
Saults, J. S., 604
Saunders, W. B., 430
Savage, M. O., 298
Savage, M. V., 425, 433, 434
Savander, V., 121
Savinetti-Rose, B., 584
Sawin, D. B., 153
Saxe, G., 203
Saxe, G. B., 38
Saywitz, K. J., 561, 562
Scales, P., 48, 50, 536, 550, 551, 552
Scales, P. C., 50, 361, 536, 550, 551, 552
Scanlan, J. M., 425, 433, 434
Scaramella, L. V., 356
Scarr, S., 48, 49, 91, 93, 135, 148, 254
Sceery, A., 400
Schaal, B., 297, 302, 310
Schacter, D. L., 448, 449, 451
Schaefer, W. D., 328, 329
Schafer, G., 70
Schafer, R. B., 492
Schaie, K. W., 435, 445, 446, 447, 452, 464, 476,
477, 481, 604, 607
Schalling, D., 302
Schalock, R. L., 514
Scharff, D. P., 590, 591
Scharlach, A. E., 500
Scheer, S. D., 377
Scheerenberger, R. C., 514, 515
Scheier, M. F., 613, 617
Schieche, M., 127, 128
Schiefelbein, V. L., 352, 364
Schiefele, U., 330, 333, 339, 341, 343
Schieffelin, B. B., 172, 279

Author Index
651
Schiller, M., 101
Schilling, T. H., 77
Schleifer, S., 434
Schliemann, A., 48
Schliemann, A. D., 203
Schmidt, E., 231
Schmidt, L. A., 94, 125, 126
Schmitz, U., 620
Schmutte, P. S., 493
Schneider, B., 345
Schneider, E., 491
Schneider, W., 282, 283, 561
Schneiderman, N., 47
Schneider-Rosen, K., 100, 102
Schneirla, T. C., 1, 4, 23, 384, 538, 541
Schnell, R. R., 518
Schnierla, T. C., 100
Schoenbaum, M., 581
Schoff, K., 50
Scholmerich, A., 96
Scholnick, E. K., 16
Schon, D., 47
Schooler, C., 471, 473, 477
Schopler, E., 425, 524
Schore, A. N., 92, 118
Schorr, L. B., 374, 382, 535, 553
Schraeder, B. D., 545
Schulenberg, J., 360, 364, 579, 580, 585, 586
Schuler, R., 306
Schulkin, J., 117, 118, 126
Schultz, A., 353
Schulz, R., 425, 434, 479, 481, 495, 580, 581,
587, 592, 609, 613, 615, 618, 619, 621
Schulze, P. A., 96
Schütze, Y., 605, 606
Schwab, J., 302, 303, 312, 313
Schwartz, C. E., 432
Schwartz, J. E., 466, 476, 605
Schwartz, R., 559
Schwartz-Kenney, B., 562, 563
Schwartzman, A., 445, 476, 477
Schwarz, N., 444, 611
Schwarzer, R., 605
Schwebel, D. C., 45
Scolton, K. L., 103
Scott, B. S., 524
Scott, J. P., 494, 498, 606
Scribner, K. A., 115
Scribner, S., 202, 203, 283, 284
Seal, J., 251, 257
Sealand, N., 382
Searle, J., 18, 22
Sears, H. A., 364
Sears, R. R., 45, 571
Seay, R. C., 362
Seccombe, K., 491, 492
Seelbach, W. C., 493
Seeley, J. R., 306, 355, 356
Seeman, T., 424, 436, 491
Seeman, T. E., 491, 498, 605
Segal, K. R., 309
Segall, M. H., 268, 269, 273, 275, 282
Seifer, R., 101, 120
Seligman, M., 525
Seligman, M. E. P., 396, 408, 612
Sells, B. B., 257
Selman, R., 247
Selman, R. L., 246, 250, 256, 326
Seltzer, M., 175, 188
Seltzer, M. M., 498, 525
Selye, H., 114
Senghas, A., 174
Senior, A. M., 344
Sepulveda, W., 120
Sereika, S., 300
Serpell, R., 269, 284
Sessa, F. M., 396
Settersten, R. A., Jr., 610
Shahinfar, A., 94
Shahtahmasebi, S., 490
Shamir, H., 226, 229
Shanas, E., 495
Shaner, J. L., 444
Shank, R., 561
Shanon, B., 35
Shapiro, E., 431, 432
Sharma, A., 536, 550, 552
Sharma, S., 116, 121, 127
Sharp, D., 203, 283
Sharp, D. W., 269, 272, 282, 283
Shatz, M., 174, 183, 184, 187
Shaughnessy, E., 198
Shaver, P. R., 100, 223, 356, 400, 401
Shaw, D. S., 100
Shaw, J. S., 563
Shaw, S., 154
Shears, J., 153
Sheeber, L., 226, 356
Sheets-Johnstone, M., 37
Shehan, C., 491, 492
Sheibe, R., 564
Shek, D. T. L., 361
Sheldon, K. M., 617
Shell, R., 247, 257
Shelton, K., 228
Shepard, L., 380
Shepard, S. A., 247, 248, 363
Sherbourne, C., 430
Sherbourne, C. D., 434
Sherins, R. J., 298
Sherman, A. M., 488
Sherman, M. D., 353
Sherman, T., 232
Sherrod, K. B., 521
Sherrod, L. R., 51, 535, 553
Sherwood, L., 300
Shew, M., 377
Shi, C. R., 313
Shields, A., 353
Shifﬂett, P. A., 496
Shifﬂett-Simpson, K., 225
Shifren, K., 425
Shiner, R. L., 351, 357, 358
Shinn, M., 149
Shinskey, J. L., 77
Shonkoff, J., 91, 93, 105
Shonkoff, J. P., 515, 516, 519, 521, 522, 524,
526, 527
Shope, J. T., 353
Shore, R., 527
Shouldice, A., 125, 126
Showers, C. J., 343
Shrimpton, S., 561, 562
Shrum, W., 256
Shuchter, S. R., 499
Shultz, T. R., 70
Shupe, A. K., 120
Shure, M. B., 48
Shure, M. D., 315
Shurin, C. S., 584
Shuttleworth, E., 496
Shweder, R., 202, 203, 204
Shweder, R. A., 3, 268, 270, 273, 274, 276,
277, 278
Siegal, M., 563
Siegel, A. W., 45
Siegel, J. M., 306
Siegel, S., 309
Siegel, S. F., 309
Siegler, I. C., 424, 425, 426, 428, 429, 430, 431,
432, 433, 434, 435, 436, 603
Siegler, R., 200
Siegler, R. S., 16, 19, 20, 70, 77, 196, 197,
201, 202
Siepmann, M., 25
Sieving, R. E., 377
Sigel, I., 44, 45, 55, 535, 536, 537
Sigel, I. E., 43, 45, 48, 538
Sigman, M., 81, 82, 521
Sigman, M. D., 71, 83, 520
Siiteri, P. K., 304
Silbereisen, R. K., 306, 404, 405, 406, 586
Silbershatz, H., 427
Sillen, J., 543, 544
Silva, J. M., 47
Silva, P. A., 147, 154, 217, 218, 305, 310, 355,
356, 359
Silver, M. H., 428
Sim, T. N., 361
Simmons, R., 306
Simmons, R. G., 306, 330, 331, 333, 334, 373,
380, 381, 382
Simões, A., 357
Simon, J., 489
Simon, L. A. K., 537
Simonoff, E., 175
Simons, R. L., 305, 356
Simonton, D. K., 455
Simpson, C., 333
Sinclair, H., 199
Singer, J. D., 137
Singer, T., 604
Singh, M. A. F., 581, 582
Singh, S., 312
Sinha, C., 197
Sinha, D., 269, 274, 279
Sinha, J. B. P., 279
Siperstein, G. N., 514
Siqueland, E. R., 68
Siskind, J. M., 186, 188
Siumons, R. G., 546
Skager, E., 374, 376, 377, 383
Skakkebaek, M. L., 299
Skala, J., 434
Skeels, H. M., 150

652
Author Index
Skinner, B. F., 516
Skinner, E., 249, 250
Sklar, F., 501
Slack, W. V., 434
Slagter, H. A., 119
Slater, A. M., 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 83
Slater, R., 490
Slaughter-Defoe, D. T., 343
Slemeda, C. W., 300
Slobin, D. I., 172, 279
Sloper, K. M., 527
Slora, E. J., 298, 307, 308, 315
Slosman, D., 300
Slovic, P., 434
Small, B. J., 445, 447, 448, 449
Small, M., 96
Small, S., 375
Small, S. A., 375, 376, 381, 383, 545
Smart, D., 94
Smetana, J. G., 247
Smider, N. A., 217
Smith, A. B., 403, 405
Smith, A. D., 447
Smith, C. C., 126
Smith, D. A., 231
Smith, D. A. F., 496, 497
Smith, E., 563
Smith, E. D., 425
Smith, E. P., 362
Smith, E. R., 304, 309
Smith, E. W., 149
Smith, G. E., 451
Smith, H. L., 609, 610, 612
Smith, J. B., 334
Smith, J., 454, 455, 458, 476, 477, 604, 605, 610
Smith, K., 144, 151
Smith, L., 202, 205, 206
Smith, L. B., 2, 3, 7, 69, 90, 137, 271, 517
Smith, M., 115
Smith, M. C., 222
Smith, M. S., 380
Smith, P. K., 248, 308
Smith, R., 374, 378, 383, 384, 385, 386
Smith, R. S., 518
Smith, T. W., 476, 481
Smolak, L., 313
Smolkowski, K., 304, 401
Smyer, M. A., 535, 536, 537
Smythe, W. E., 35
Snarey, J. R., 247
Snell, M. E., 514
Snidman, N., 94, 219
Snow, C. E., 176, 184, 280, 281, 282
Snyder, H., 378
Snyder, L., 561, 562
Snyder, M., 542
Snyder, S. S., 202
Soares, M. P., 308
Sodowsky, G. R., 362
Sokolov, E. N., 66
Soldo, B. J., 425, 491, 493, 496
Solnit, A., 568
Soloman, J., 101
Somerﬁeld, M. R., 522
Somers, M., 75
Sonnega, J., 500
Sorensen, E., 356
Sorensen, E. S., 52
Sorensen, S., 489
Sørenson, A. B., 354
Sostek, A. M., 44, 535, 536, 537
Soussignan, B., 297, 302, 310
Soussignan, R., 302
Sowarka, D., 604
Sowers, M. F. R., 425
Spangler, G., 127, 128
Spanier, G., 499
Spanier, G. B., 553
Sparks, E. S., 535
Spazzafumo, L., 428
Speers, M., 47
Speicher, C., 496
Spelke, E., 196, 197
Spelke, E. S., 1, 23, 69, 70, 75, 76, 77
Spellman, M., 152
Spencer, M. B., 44, 247, 344, 345, 362, 535,
536, 537
Spencer, M. S., 362
Spencer, S. J., 339, 341
Spetter, D., 588, 589
Spicer, P., 154
Spieker, S. J., 520
Spinrad, T. L., 216, 236
Spiro, R., 592
Spitalnik, D. M., 514
Spitz, A. M., 312
Spitz, R., 136, 150, 151
Spitz, R. A., 568
Spitze, G., 493
Spizzirri, C. C., 122
Spracklen, K. M., 401, 411
Spradlin, J. E., 516
Sprangers, M. A., 432
Sprecher, D. L., 309
Springer, A., 176
Srinivasan, S. R., 307
Sroufe, A., 124
Sroufe, L. A., 46, 48, 50, 101, 102, 103, 124,
127, 224, 225, 230, 231, 232, 254,
400, 520
Stace, W. T., 24
Stadfeld, J. A., 566
Stallard, E., 426, 607
Stallings, M., 493
Standiford, D. A., 584
Staneck, C. H., 561
Stanger, C., 212, 213
Stanhope, L., 524, 525
Stanley-Hagan, M. M., 567, 568, 569
Stansbury, K., 125, 127, 219
Stanton, B., 358, 401
Stanton, B. A., 491
Stanton, W. R., 355
Stark, J. A., 514
Stark, R., 379
Starrels, M. E., 493
Stattin, H., 3, 21, 27, 34, 48, 296, 304, 305, 306,
364, 375, 379, 380, 402, 405, 406, 407,
408, 409, 410, 411, 412
Staudinger, U., 454, 455, 475, 476
Staudinger, U. M., 2–3, 47, 271, 328, 451, 455,
457, 463, 464, 465, 471, 476, 477, 539,
579, 580, 602, 604, 607, 609, 610, 615,
616, 617
Stecconi, R., 428
Stechuchak, K. M., 432
Steckler, T., 115, 118
Steele, C. M., 339, 341, 344
Steele, H., 101
Steele, M., 101
Steffens, D., 434
Stein, J., 25
Stein, M. A., 231
Stein, N., 496
Stein, N. L., 280
Steinberg, L., 48, 49, 222, 253, 254, 310, 311,
344, 345, 361, 363, 364, 382, 396, 397,
398, 399, 401, 404, 405, 406, 408, 412
Steinberg, L. D., 151, 296, 310, 380, 381, 382
Steiner, I. D., 451
Steinhagen-Thiessen, E., 603, 607, 609
Steinman, K., 580
Stemberger, J. P., 178
Stemmler, M., 353, 355, 356
Stenberg, C. R., 99
Stephenson, G. M., 562, 563
Stern, D., 97, 104
Stern, K., 311
Stern, P. C., 424
Stern, W., 4
Sternberg, E. M., 126
Sternberg, K. J., 560, 561, 563, 564, 565, 566, 569
Sternberg, R., 197, 204
Sternberg, R. J., 16, 454, 603
Stevenson, H. W., 245, 253, 338, 343, 344, 345
Stevenson, J., 175
Stevenson-Hinde, J., 125, 126, 128
Steward, D. S., 562
Steward, M. S., 561, 562
Stewart, M. A., 398
Stice, E., 398
Stifter, C. A., 100, 122
Stiles, J., 176
Stillars, A. L., 362
Stipek, D., 99, 104
Stocker, C., 259
Stoff, D. M., 301
Stokols, D., 52
Stolz, H. R., 305
Stolz, L. M., 305
Stoneman, Z., 226, 257, 259, 524, 525, 526
Stormshak, E., 526
Stouthamer-Loeber, M., 48, 357, 358, 401
Stovall, K. C., 101
Strack, A. M., 115
Strack, F., 611
Strahm, S., 444
Stratakis, C. A., 311
Strauss, A., 516
Strauss, A. L., 497
Strauss, C., 273
Strauss, J., 583, 588
Strauss, L. T., 312
Strauss, M. S., 54, 79
Strauss, S., 48, 204

Author Index
653
Street, M. E., 309
Streeten, D. H. P., 427
Strelau, J., 148
Stroebe, M. S., 499, 606
Stroebe, W., 499
Strommen, E. A., 135
Stromswold, K., 175
Strough, J., 451
Stuart, C. A., 309
Stuck, A. E., 434
Stucky-Ropp, R. C., 581, 582, 584
Sturges, J. W., 580
Style, C. B., 491
Styne, D. M., 298, 307
Su, Y., 549
Subotnik, R. F., 337
Suchindran, C., 312, 313
Suess, P. E., 125
Suh, E. K., 609, 610, 612
Sullivan, H. S., 241, 256, 260, 400, 403
Sullivan, M., 212, 213, 214
Sullivan, R., 500
Sullivan, R. M., 119
Sum, A., 380
Summers, C. R., 522
Summers, J. A., 154
Summers, M., 522
Sunshine, N., 564
Super, C., 270, 275
Super, C. M., 253, 273, 545
Surbey, M. K., 310
Susman, A., 245, 252, 254
Susman, E. J., 296, 297, 298, 301, 302, 303, 304,
306, 307, 310, 311, 312, 313, 352, 364
Susman-Stillman, A., 401
Suter, J., 353
Suter, K. J., 299
Sutherland, E. H., 404
Sutton, J., 248
Sutton-Smith, B., 259
Sutton-Tyrell, K., 425
Suwalsky, J. T. D., 150
Swank, P. R., 521
Swanson, H. L., 327
Swarr, A. E., 306
Swensen, C. H., 495, 497
Swettenham, J., 248
Swicegood, C. G., 314
Syme, S. L., 53, 490
Symons, D. K., 98
Sytova, V. H., 66
Szatrowski, T. P., 433
Szinovacz, M., 492, 493
Szymanski, L. S., 514, 515, 522
Tableman, B., 144, 145
Tabor, J., 377
Taddio, A., 122
Takahashi, L. K., 123
Takanishi, R., 343
Tal, J., 96
Talajic, M., 434
Talbert, L. M., 296, 304
Talbott, E., 309
Talwar, R., 359
Talwar Soni, R., 359
Tamis-LeMonda, C., 152
Tamis-LeMonda, C. S., 96, 153, 154, 183
Tammer, T. J., 335
Tamplin, A., 304
Tangalos, E. G., 451
Tangney, J. P., 104
Tannenbaum, B., 116, 121, 127
Tannenbaum, J., 155
Tanner, J., 198, 540
Tanner, J. M., 300, 301, 307, 311
Taplin, S. H., 581
Tardif, T., 175
Target, M., 46
Tarrant, A., 561
Tarrullo, L., 152
Tatelbaum, R., 144, 146
Taub, E. P., 562
Taylor, B., 305
Taylor, C., 19, 33, 36
Taylor, C. B., 306
Taylor, D., 75
Taylor, D. G., 224
Taylor, L., 48
Taylor, M., 247
Taylor, M. F., 340
Taylor, R. D., 344
Teasley, S. D., 451
Teitler, J., 567, 568, 570
Teixeira, J., 120
Telama, R., 582
Telfer, K., 562
Teller, D. Y., 72
Tennen, H., 526
Tennes, K., 121
Tennstedt, S. L., 495
Tenover, J. L., 425
Teri, L., 425
Terry, E., 375
Terry, P. A., 539
Terry, R., 257
Tersawa, E., 299
Terzi, C., 309
Teti, D. M., 102, 566, 568
Teti, L. O., 213, 216, 225, 352, 353, 354, 355
teVelde, A., 434
Thal, D., 176, 177, 197, 204
Tharp, R., 275, 276
Theakston, A., 182, 183
Theintz, G., 300
Thelen, E., 2, 3, 7, 29, 38, 69, 137, 205, 206,
271, 517
Thierry, K. L., 571
Thijssen, J. H. H., 304
Thivierge, J., 148
Thoits, P. A., 491
Thomae, H. E., 609, 611, 615
Thomas, A., 93, 94, 148, 217, 358, 359, 536, 540,
541, 542, 543, 544, 545, 547
Thomas, M., 566
Thomas, S. L., 382
Thomasgard, M., 128
Thompson, A., 492
Thompson, C. P., 362
Thompson, E., 206
Thompson, L., 207, 553
Thompson, L. W., 499, 500, 606
Thompson, M. G., 489
Thompson, R., 148, 149, 272
Thompson, R. A., 93, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103, 104,
105, 125, 212, 215, 217, 218, 223, 225,
249, 250, 251, 352, 353, 361, 401, 559,
567, 568, 569
Thompson, R. J., 583, 584
Thompson, S. C., 496
Thompson, W. C., 563
Thomson, E., 570
Thornberg, K. R., 148
Thornberry, R., 593
Thorndike, E. L., 195
Thorne, B., 256
Tienda, M., 343, 345
Tikunoff, W. J., 331
Tilton-Weaver, L. C., 354, 364, 365
Timmer, S. G., 245
Tinetti, M. E., 491
Tinker, E., 35
Tinsley, B. J., 95
Tjossem, T. D., 82
Tobach, E., 1, 36, 92, 100
Tobin, M., 301
Tobin, S. S., 466, 475, 615
Toda, S., 96
Todd, J., 183
Todd, M. J., 489
Toglia, M. P., 563, 566
Tolan, P., 378, 379, 380
Tomasello, M., 99, 174, 180, 181, 182, 183, 204
Tomes, H., 47
Tomich, P. L., 352, 363
Tomlinson-Keasey, C., 466, 476
Tomlinson-Keasy, C., 466
Tommasini, N. R., 220
Toobert, D. J., 582, 592, 594
Toporek, R. L., 362
Törestad, B., 364
Torquati, J., 401
Toth, S. L., 48, 50
Toulmin, S., 17, 20
Tout, K., 127, 219
Tower, R. B., 496, 497
Townsend, A. L., 495, 496
Townsend, M. A., 247
Trabasso, T., 198
Trapani, C., 231
Trauner, D., 176
Treiman, R., 48
Tremblay, R., 297, 302, 310
Tremblay, R. E., 154, 302, 310, 311, 406
Trevarthen, C., 98
Triandis, H. C., 96, 268, 275, 276, 277
Trickett, E., 54, 553
Trickett, E. J., 537
Trief, P. M., 496
Tripathi, R. C., 279
Trivette, C. M., 526
Troiano, L., 428
Troll, L. E., 491, 494
Tronick, E. Z., 96, 97, 98, 150
Trost, K., 409

654
Author Index
Troughton, E., 398
Troyer, D., 219
Troyer, L., 397, 399, 408
Tryon, W. W., 55
Tsai, J. L., 361, 610
Tsay, J. C., 545
Tschann, J., 570
Tschann, J. M., 305, 587
Tse, C. J., 431
Tseng, V., 362
Tubman, J. G., 358
Tucker, C. J., 245, 253, 258, 259
Tucker, J. S., 466, 476, 481, 605
Tulviste, P., 270, 283
Turbin, M. S., 50, 374
Turiel, E., 104, 202, 247
Turk-Charles, S., 480
Turken, A. U., 119
Turner, A. M., 584
Turner, B. F., 491
Turner, P. K., 360, 545
Turner, R. A., 305
Turpeinen, O., 602
Twohey, J., 353
Tylor, E. B., 268
Uchino, B. N., 491
Udelf, M. S., 67
Udry, J. R., 296, 304, 308, 312, 313, 376, 377
Uhlenberg, P., 493, 494
Umberson, D., 491, 493, 499, 500
Underwood, M. K., 352, 353, 358, 363
Unger, J. B., 491
United Nations, 602, 603
United States Department of Education,
National Center for Education Statistics,
380–381, 382
United States Department of Health and Human
Services, 432, 436
Updegraff, K. A., 258, 341
Upshur, C. C., 519, 522, 524, 526
Urban, M. D., 309
Urberg, K. A., 404, 405
Urbina, S., 197
Urponen, H., 431, 432
Usher, B. A., 127
Ustun, T. B., 434
Uttal, D. H., 26, 338, 343, 344, 444, 452
Vaccarino, V., 426
Vaccarino, V. V., 436
Vaccaro, D., 358, 363
Vachon, R., 327, 328
Vaillant, G. E., 464, 466, 468, 469, 471, 479
Vaituzis, A. C., 301
Valanis, B. G., 497
Valensin, S., 428
Valentiner, D., 356
Valian, V., 180
Valsiner, J., 13, 16, 28, 270, 537
van Breukelen, G. J. P., 405
Van Buuren, S., 307
Van Cleave, E., 306
Vandell, D. B., 95
Vandell, D. L., 48, 217, 245
van den Boom, D. C., 101
van der Does, J. V. S., 497
van der Maas, H, 206
Vandermaas, M., 562
van der Maas, P. J., 428
Vander Wal, J. S., 581, 582, 584
van de Vijver, F. J. R., 228
Van Egeren, L. A., 356
van Engeland, H., 304
Van Eqeren, L. A., 161
van Geert, P., 205, 206
Van Goozen, S. H. M., 304
van IJzendoom, M. H., 97, 101, 149, 224, 229,
272, 567
Van Leeuwen, M. D., 408
van Lieshout, C. F. M., 351, 357
van Linden van den Heuvell, C.-M., 605
van Sonderen, E., 605
van Zonneveld, R. J., 428
Varaday, A., 306
Varady, A., 306
Varela, F., 206
Varela, F. J., 37
Varni, J. W., 52
Vartanian, L. R., 247
Vaughan, H. G., 82
Vaughn, B. E., 102, 104, 120, 151
Vaupel, J., 602
Vaupel, J. W., 435
Vaupel, M. M., 436
Vazquez, D. M., 115, 122
Vazsonyi, A. T., 401
Vear, D., 183
Verbrugge, L. M., 589, 607
Verhaegen, P., 604
Verhaeghen, P., 451, 453
Verhoef, H., 137
Verloove-Vanhorick, S. P., 307
Verma, S., 244, 245
Verschueren, K., 103
Viau, V., 118
Vicens-Calvet, E., 309
Vida, M., 338, 344
Vietze, P. M., 82
Vieyra, M., 50
Vigne, J. L., 304
Vihko, R. K., 309
Viikari, J., 582
Viitanen, M., 451
Vijayan, S., 185
Vikho, R., 309
Villarruel, F. A., 375
Vinick, B. H., 492, 493
Virdis, R., 309
Vishton, P. M., 185
Visser, G. H. A., 120
Vitaliano, P. P., 425, 426, 431, 433, 434, 496
Vitaro, F., 406
Viticchi, C., 428
Vittinghoff, E., 435
Vitunski, E. T., 354
Volling, B., 226
Volpato, S., 426
Volpe, J. J., 527
von Bertalanffy, L., 1, 4, 538
Von Dras, D. D., 425
von Eye, A., 148, 154, 356, 361
von Wright, G. H., 29
Vondra, J. I., 100
VonKorff, M., 434
Vreugdenhil, E., 115, 116
Vuori, I., 431, 432
Vygotsky, L., 198, 203, 204
Vygotsky, L. S., 2, 3, 4, 270, 275, 285, 517
Wachtel, G. A., 180, 181
Wacker, M. E. E., 401
Wadhwa, P. D., 120
Wadsworth, K. N., 364
Wagner, D., 282, 283, 284
Wagner, E., 256, 257
Wagner, M., 605, 606
Wagner, M. G., 156
Wagner, M. M., 156
Wagner, W. G., 360, 361
Wahlin, A., 447, 448, 458
Wahlsten, D., 1, 2, 113
Waidman, T., 581
Wake, W., 196, 197, 202
Walberg, H. J., 380, 382, 386, 388
Walden, C. E., 491
Walden, T. A., 520
Waldman, I., 401
Waldstein, S. R., 424, 449
Walen, H., 475, 476
Walk, R. D., 69
Walker, A. G., 560
Walker, L., 362, 526
Walker, N., 560, 564
Walker, T., 147
Wall, S., 100, 101, 136, 217, 223, 224, 253,
400, 567
Wallace, I. F., 83
Wallace, K. A., 593
Wallace, R. B., 424, 436
Wallander, J. L., 52
Wallerstein, J. S., 495
Walls, T., 536, 541
Walsh, F., 523
Walsh, M. E., 580, 583
Walthert, J. M., 434
Wang, H., 499
Wang, H.-X., 427
Wang, J., 380, 381, 382
Wang, M. C., 380, 382, 386, 388
Wångby, M., 355
Wapner, S., 3
Ward, B. A., 331
Ward, D., 357
Ward, R., 493
Ward, S. L., 327, 328
Warden, D., 562
Ware, J. E., 430
Ware, J. E., Jr., 430, 431
Warﬁeld, M. E., 519, 521, 522, 524, 526
Warren, A. R., 561, 562, 564, 566
Warren, M. P., 296, 298, 302, 303, 304–305,
306, 310
Warshak, R. A., 569
Wasserman, A., 257

Author Index
655
Wasserman, R. C., 298, 307, 308, 315
Wasserman, S., 69, 77
Waterman, A. S., 467, 468, 471
Waters, E., 100, 101, 102, 124, 127, 136, 217,
223, 224, 229, 253, 400, 567
Watkins, D., 361
Watson, J., 124
Watson, J. B., 4, 195
Watson, J. S., 98
Watson, K., 280
Watson, P. C., 450, 457
Watt, N. F., 48, 315
Wattigney, W. A., 307
Waxman, S. R., 81
Weaver, S. L., 451, 463, 479
Weber, A., 298
Weber-Fox, C. M., 176
Webster, P. S., 491–492
Webster-Stratton, C., 49
Wegner, D. M., 617
Weigel, C., 52, 53
Weimer, B. L., 352, 363
Weimer, K., 309
Weinberg, R. A., 4, 44, 45, 54, 55, 105, 360,
361, 535, 537
Weinberger, D. A., 358
Weinert, F. E., 282
Weinfeld, F. D., 343
Weinfurt, K. P., 404
Weinger, S., 526
Weinstein, R. S., 361
Weinstock, M., 120
Weintraub, K. J., 401
Weintraub, S., 559
Weisenburg, T., 445
Weiskopf, S., 72
Weisner, T., 523
Weisner, T. S., 243, 244, 245, 252, 253, 258,
259, 260, 519, 522, 523
Weiss, G., 231
Weiss, J. G., 408
Weiss, L., 495
Weiss, M., 212, 213
Weiss, R., 488, 489
Weissberg, R. P., 48, 50
Weisz, J., 97
Welker, J., 562
Wellborn, J., 249, 250
Wellman, B., 491, 494
Wellman, H., 562
Wellman, H. M., 283
Wells, K. C., 363, 364
Wells, L. E., 401
Welsh, D. P., 359, 360
Welsh, J. D., 127
Weltman, A., 299
Wenger, G. C., 490
Wentura, D., 457, 615, 616, 619, 620
Wentzel, K. R., 360
Wenz, H., 121
Werker, J. F., 81, 100
Werner, E., 374, 378, 383, 384, 385, 386, 518
Werner, E. E., 136, 245
Werner, H., 30, 516, 517, 527
Wertlieb, D., 48, 50, 535, 536, 537
Wertlieb, D. L., 45, 47, 48, 50, 52, 53, 54
Wertsch, J., 201
Wertsch, J. V., 2, 3, 4, 28, 270, 275, 276, 
283, 285
Wessler, R., 470
West, D. J., 378, 383
West, M. J., 114
West, S. G., 48, 315, 363, 364
Westbrook, F. D., 362
Westby, S., 562
Westcott, H. L., 560, 564
Wethington, E., 589, 591
Wexler, K., 179
Weylman, S. T., 176
Whalen, S., 406
Whitbeck, L., 493
Whitbourne, S. K., 463, 467, 468, 469, 471, 478,
481, 603
White, B. P., 122
White, E., 309
White, H. D., 309
White, L. T., 562
White, M. J., 401
White, S., 45, 46, 47
White, S. H., 45
Whitebook, M., 149, 155
Whitesell, N. R., 353
Whiting, B. B., 269, 270, 284
Whiting, J. W., 269, 270
Whittemore, A. S., 309
Whittington, F. J., 595
Wichstrom, L., 306
Widing, M., 448, 458
Wiener, S. G., 127
Wierson, M., 310
Wiese, B. S., 615
Wigﬁeld, A., 94, 330, 331, 332, 333, 337,
338, 339, 340, 341, 343, 353, 536,
545, 546, 549
Wikler, L., 522
Wilbrandt, M. L., 375
Wilcox, B., 44, 535, 536, 537
Wilcox, T., 75, 76
Wilcox, V. L., 491
Wilensky, U., 206
Wilkie, F. W., 436
Willcutt, E., 231
Williams, A. F., 499
Williams, E. M., 38
Williams, J. M., 305
Williams, P., 605
Williams, R. B., 426, 430, 431, 432, 434
Williams, R. B., Jr., 434
Willis, S. L., 425, 453, 604, 607
Wills, T. A., 52, 358, 363
Wilms, H.-U., 607, 608
Wilska, M., 514, 515, 522
Wilson, B. A., 450, 457
Wilson, B. J., 119
Wilson, C., 564
Wilson, C. J., 524–525
Wilson, D. B., 135, 137
Wilson, D. M., 306
Wilson, E. O., 1
Wilson, J., 229
Wilson, L., 255
Wilson, M. E., 563
Wilson, P. W., 427
Wilson, R. S., 426, 427
Wilson, W., 593
Winblad, B., 427, 448, 451, 458
Windle, M., 148, 358
Winett, R. A., 47
Wing, A. L., 428
Wing, R. R., 425, 434, 608
Wingard, D. L., 466, 476
Wingard, J. R., 425
Wink, P., 474
Winn, S., 96, 150
Winnicott, D. W., 37
Winsborough, H. H., 500
Winship, A. E., 515
Winston, C., 344
Winter, M., 400
Wisenbaker, J., 340
Wishart, J. G., 514
Wister, A. V., 494
Wit, J. M., 307
Witherington, D., 98, 99, 104, 122, 124, 125
Wittgenstein, L., 24, 38
Wolchik, S. A., 363, 364
Wolf, A., 137
Wolf, C., 121
Wolf, D. A., 493
Wolf, K. M., 151
Wolf, M., 48
Wolf, P. A., 424, 427
Wolfe, C. T., 477
Wolinsky, F. D., 432
Wong, M., 406
Wong, M. M., 95, 147
Wood, C., 310
Wood, J. M., 563
Wood, P., 490
Wood, S., 520, 521
Woodall, C. E., 564, 566
Woodruff, D. S., 475
Woodruff-Pak, D. S., 444
Woodward, A. L., 180, 188
Woodworth, S., 104
World Health Organization, 602
Worrall, B., 302
Worsley, A., 301
Worthman, C., 302–303, 306
Wortley, S., 491, 494
Wortman, C., 500
Wortman, C. B., 499
Wozniak, R. H., 271, 285
Wright, C. M., 155
Wright, J. C., 48
Wright, J. H., 121
Wright, L., 579, 582, 583, 584
Wright, L. K., 429, 496
Wright, P. H., 491
Wrightsman, L. S., 560
Wrosch, C., 479, 619
Wu, P. Y. K., 78
Wyer, N., 104
Wyshak, G., 307
Wysocki, T., 592

656
Author Index
Xia, Y., 361
Xu, F., 75
Yalcinkaya, T. M., 304
Yancey, A. K., 306
Yang, H.-Y., 138
Yang, X., 582
Yarrow, L. J., 144, 157, 567
Yashin, A. I., 435, 602
Yates, M., 325, 549
Yates, W., 398
Ybarra, V. C., 247, 362
Yee, D., 330, 338, 340
Yeh, Y., 361
Yehuda, R., 118
Ying, Y., 361
Yirmiya, N., 520
Yogman, M. W., 153
Yoon, K. S., 340
York, R. L., 343
Yoshikawa, H., 157
Young, H., 425, 434
Young, H. M., 425
Young, K. R., 159
Young, L. J., 115
Young, R., 78
Young, R. B., 309
Young, S. N., 121
Youngblade, L., 226, 227
Youngblade, L. M., 243
Younger, B. A., 71, 72, 78, 79, 80
Youngstrom, E., 50
Youniss, J., 325, 403, 538, 549
Ysseldyke, J. E., 47
Yu, A. C., 96
Yudilevitch, L., 561, 564
Yuille, J., 563
Yuille, J. C., 560, 563
Zabora, J. R., 425
Zahn-Waxler, C., 45, 127, 214, 225, 227, 248
Zaia, A. F., 257
Zakin, D. F., 306
Zald, D. H., 327
Zampolli, M., 309
Zaragoza, M. S., 562
Zarbatany, L., 256
Zarit, S. H., 605, 606
Zaslow, M. J., 150, 156
Zelazo, P. D., 36
Zelazo, P. R., 155
Zelinski, E. M., 424, 436, 451
Zelizer, V. A., 245
Zeller, D., 137
Zeng, Y., 602
Zentall, S. R., 374, 375
Zetlin, A. G., 524–525
Zhang, J., 433
Zhang, J. P., 425, 434
Zhao, S., 355
Zhou, H., 361
Zhou, Y., 381
Ziff, M. A., 592
Zigler, E., 4, 43, 44, 47, 50, 52, 159, 232, 527,
539, 540
Zigler, E. F., 48, 49
Zijdenbos, P. T., 301
Zill, N., 154, 568
Zimiles, H., 207
Zimmerman, B. J., 580
Zimmerman, L., 95
Zimmerman, M. A., 353, 385, 386
Zimmermann, P., 400
Zirpoli, T. J., 521
Zisook, S., 499
Zohar, A., 19, 329
Zucker, R. A., 138, 147, 148, 154, 383, 580
Zuckerman, B., 105
Zukow-Goldring, P., 135
Zumbahlen, M. R., 98, 99
Zuschlag, M. K., 467, 468, 471
Zuzanek, J., 490
Zweig, J. M., 312, 313

ABCX model, 522
Abduction, 31–32
Abstraction, reﬂective, 30–31
Abuse. See Sexual abuse, child
Accommodation, 619
Action:
vs. behavior, 35
perspective, 22
theory, 21
Activities of daily living (ADL), 497, 607
Activity theory, 475, 614
Adaptation, 30
Administration for Children, Youth, and Families (ACYF), 139,
141–146, 147
Adrenal androgens, 304–305
Adrenarche, 298, 309
Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), 115, 298, 302, 311
Advantage index, 552
Affective errors, 103
Afﬁrmation, 24
Affordances, 69, 200
Age and Achievement, 455
Aggression:
adolescence and
cognitive development, 343
hormonal levels, 352
parental style, 364
peer relationships, 405
personality structure, 357–358
puberty, 301, 302, 303, 304
middle childhood and, 248–249
peer rejection, 257
sibling relationships, 259
Aging, 423–424
characteristics of, 601–609
overview, 620–621
successful, 609–613, 620
factors related to, 613–620
in the twenty-ﬁrst century, 424–426
usual, 611
See also Health, aging and
AIDS, 374
Ainsworth, Mary, 223, 224
Alameda County Study, 428
Alcoholism. See Substance abuse
Allostasis, 114
Altruism, 360
Alzheimer’s Centers programs, 426
Alzheimer’s disease (AD), 424, 425, 426–428, 435, 444
American Academy of Pediatrics, 314
American Association on Mental Retardation (AAMR), 514, 515
American Institutions for the Feeble Minded, 515
American Psychological Association:
ADS and, 44, 46, 55–56
Division of Developmental Psychology, 45
mental retardation and, 514
Analytic attitude, 19
Androgens, 312
Androstenedione (4-A), 298, 301, 304, 309, 312
Animal models, infant cognition and, 70
Anomalous instances, 32
Antisocial behavior:
adolescence and, 377–380, 406–407
peer relationships and, 405
See also Prosocial behavior
Antithesis, 24, 30
Aphasia, 176, 177
Apolipoprotein E (APOE), 426
Applied Developmental Science, 44, 48
Applied developmental science (ADS):
history, elements of the, 45–47
inquiry and action in, 47–54
methods and ethical imperatives of, 54–56
overview, 43–45, 56
of positive human development, 535–538, 552–553
developmental systems theories and, 538–540
person-context relation, models of, 540–552
Arnett Caregiver Interaction Scale, 156
Artiﬁcial intelligence, 197, 198, 205
Ashramadharma theory, 279
Asset and Health Dynamics Among the Oldest Old (AHEAD) study, 424
Assets theory, developmental, 50
Assimilation, 619
Assimiliation-accommodation, 30
Association of University Women (AAUW), 335
Atlantic Monthly, 335
Atomism:
explanation of, 18, 19
relational metatheory and, 22, 23, 27
synthesis and split reductionism, 28–29
Attachment behavioral system, 35
Attachment theory:
adolescence and
emotion regulation, 353
parenting styles model and, 396
relationships with peers, 399–401
infancy/early childhood and
developmental aspects of, 100–101, 567–568, 569
individual differences, 101
multiple relationships, 101–102
nonparental child care, 136, 149–152, 154
stability and continuity, issues of, 102–103
stress and, 128
temperament and, 149
middle childhood and
emotion/personality development and, 212, 223–225, 229
social development/relationships and, 254
Attention, joint, 521
Subject Index
657

658
Subject Index
Attention deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder, 231
Attribution error, fundamental, 25
Autism, 516, 521
Autonomic nervous system (ANS), 116
Baldwin, James Mark, 4, 27
Baltimore Longitudinal Study of Aging, 465
Basket, 35
Bates, Elizabeth, 204
Berkeley Guidance Study, 472
Berlin Aging Study, 424, 458, 610, 617–618
Berlin Youth Longitudinal Study, 406
Bernstein, Richard, 20
Big Five, 357, 465, 466
Binet, Alfred, 46
Bioecological theory, 47, 50, 51
Biological-comparative psychology, 1
Biological development, health and, 580
adolescence, 586
infant/childhood, 582–583
midlife, 589–590
older adulthood, 592–593
Biology-culture debate, 23
Birth order, language development and, 175
Blob theory, 72
Bloomington Longitudinal Study, 220
Boesch, Ernest E., 28, 37
Bonn Longitudinal Study (BOLSA), 615
Bowlby, John, 27, 223, 224
Breast cancer, 309
Bruner, Jerome, 198, 201, 203
Cairns, Robert, 242
California Q-Set, 465
California Test of Personality, 475
Cameroon, development of self and, 277
Canada, children’s narratives in, 282
Cardiovascular Health Study, 429, 433
Cardiovascular heart disease (CHD), 309, 426
Caregiver. See Child care, early
Carmichael’s Manual of Child Psychology, 198
Carnegie Foundation, 334
Carolina Abecedarian Project, 146, 147
Case, Robbie, 205
Categorization, infant, 79
content of, 80
current research trends, 80–81
earliest age for, 79–80
information-processing changes, 80
Cattell, Raymond, 445
Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences, 51
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), 312
Cerebral palsy, 82
Change, developmental, 14–17
expressive-constitutive function, 17
instrumental function, 17
Child Behavior Checklist (CBCL), 303
Child care, early, 48–49, 50–56
attachment and infants, 100–103
cultural context of infancy and, 95–97
distress-relief sequences in infants and, 98
emotion regulation in infants and, 99–100
infant temperament and, 94
mothers/fathers and, 136–137, 140–141, 144–147, 148–152,
153, 154–155, 157
nonparental
assurance, 157–160
cost, 155
factors inﬂuencing outcomes in research, 147–155
future of, 160–161
overview, 135–137
quality, 155–157
studies of child development and, 139–147
systems theory, 137–139
See also Community, positive youth development and
psychological organization and, 93
social context of infancy and, 95
social referencing in infants and, 99
stress and, 128
Child Development, 44, 396
Childhood Behavior Questionnaire, 217
Childhood development, cultural context of:
integrative conceptual framework, 274–276
major approaches to, 268–274
narratives, development of, 279–282
overview, 267–268, 285–286
remembering, development of, 282–285
self, development of, 276–279
Child psychology, 45–46
Children’s Defense Fund 2000 Yearbook, 155
Children’s Health, Belief Model (CHBM), 583
Children’s Services Social Policy, Research and
Practice, 48
China, emotional/personality development in, 361, 362
Chum, 241–242
Clark University, 46
Clinicalism, scientism vs., 45
Clinical method, 201
Clinical psychology, 47
Cognitive development:
adolescence and
achievement and, 329–335
gender, 329, 335–343
racial/ethnic group differences, 329, 343–345
functional aspects, 327–329
health and, 586–588
overview, 325–326, 345
structural aspects, 326–327
adulthood and
health and
in midlife, 590–591
in older adults, 593–594, 603–605
intelligence, 444–447
memory, 447–452
overview, 443–444, 458
potential, 452–457
childhood and
current trends, 204–206
future directions, 206–207
health, 583–584
historical bases of, 195–198
overview, 195
Piagetian system and, 197–201
obstacles, 201–204
infant perception and
categorization, 79–81
differences in, individual, 81–84
history, 66
objects and, properties/understanding of, 71–79
overview, 65–66, 84–85

Subject Index
659
techniques for assessing, 66–68
theory, 68–71
Colic, 122
Collectivism, socioemotional development in infants and, 96
Color perception, infants and, 72–73
Columbia University Center for Children and Families, 142
Commission, errors of, 561
Committee on Integrating the Science of Early Childhood
Development, 105
Communication, embodied development and, 35
Community, positive youth development and, 548–552. See also Child
care, early
Community psychology, 47
Compensating for Psychological Deﬁcits and Declines: Managing Losses
and Promoting Gains, 454
Compensation, 456–457, 617–618
Conceptual knowledge, 326
Conceptual structures, central, 205
CONLERN, 78
Connecticut Tumor Registry, 433
Connectionism:
language development and, 186
modeling, 70
infant information processing and, 71
Consciousness, embodied development and, 36
CONSPEC, 78
Constructive play, emotion/personality development and, 222
Constructivism, 200–201
Contextualism, developmental, 47, 50, 51, 103, 273, 296–297
Continuity Hypothesis, 179
Contradiction, law of, 24–26
Control:
health and, 580
locus of, 338
sense of, 479–480
See also Optimization in primary and secondary control (OPS model)
Conventionalism, 20
Coping:
adolescence and, 356
adulthood and, 480–481
middle childhood and, 215–216, 250
Core knowledge, infants and, 70, 76–78
Coronary artery disease (CAD), 431
Corticosterone (CORT), 115–116, 118, 119–123, 127–128
Corticotropin releasing hormone (CRH), 115, 116, 118, 120, 127,
302, 311
Cortisol:
antisocial behavior and, 302
temperament and, 219
Covering law, 20
Creativity, 455–456
Creole, 173–174
Cross-cultural psychology, 268–269, 270, 272
children’s narratives and, 276, 280
vs. cultural psychology, 273, 274
development of self, 276–279
remembering and, 283
Cultural learning, 182
Cultural psychology, 28, 269–270, 272
children’s narratives and, 280
vs. cross-cultural psychology, 273, 274
development of self, 276–279
Cultural relativism, 269–270, 273
Cumulation model, 139
Czechoslovakia, child care programs in, 155–156
Damasio, Antonio, 27, 37
Darwin, Charles, 515
Declarative knowledge, 326
Deduction, 20
Defectology, 517
Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA), 298, 301, 304, 309, 312
Dehydroepiandrosterone sulphate (DHEAS), 298, 301, 309, 312
Delinquency. See Antisocial behavior, adolescence and
Depression:
children of parents suffering with, 231
chronic sorrow vs., 522
coronary heart disease and, 434
hormonal levels in adolescence and, 352
major depressive disorder (MDD), 355, 356, 434
myocardial infarction (MI), 434
parent relationships and, 409
peer group rejection and, 257
puberty and, 301, 302, 304, 315
temperament integration, 363
widowhood and, 499–500
Descartes, René, 18
Development, levels of integration in, 1–2
Developmental Psychology, 396
Developmental psychology, 13–17, 28–32, 271–272
children’s narratives and, 280
embodied development, 32–38
history of, 17–22
metatheory, relational, 22–28
overview, 1–7
remembering and, 282–283
self, development of, 276, 277–279
See also Applied developmental science (ADS)
Developmental psychopathology, 49–54
Deviancy training hypothesis, 405–406
Dewey, John, 46
Diabetes, 52, 582
adolescence and, 586, 588–589
adulthood and, 590, 591, 592, 594, 595
infancy/early childhood and, 583, 584, 585
puberty and, 309
SRH and, 434
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders–Fourth Edition,
302, 514
Dialectic, 24
Differential emotions theory (DET), 213–214
Difﬁcult studies, 412
Digit Symbol Substitution, 429
Disability, developmental:
attitudes, history of, 514–516
contextually based studies, 519–521
deﬁnitional dilemmas, 514
developmental contextualist perspective, 517
families of children with, 521–526
future directions, 527–528
longitudinal studies, 518–519
mechanistic perspective, 516
organismic perspective, 516–517
overview, 513–514
Discontinuity, 16
Disease. See Health and under speciﬁc types
Disease, global burden of, 424
Disengagement theory, 475, 614
Distress, infant, 98
Divorce, 499, 567–570, 571–572
Down’s syndrome, 82, 401, 518, 519, 520, 521, 522, 524

660
Subject Index
Drawing Hands, 24–25, 26–27, 31
Duke Longitudinal Study, 610
Duke University Medical Center, 430
Dutch Longitudinal Study, 428
Dynamic systems model, 14, 19, 69, 71, 198
Early Childhood Environment Rating Scale (ECERS), 156
Early Intervention Collaborative Study, 519, 524
Early Intervention for Infants and Toddlers, 158
Early-maturation hypothesis, 305, 306
Early Start, 158
EAS model, 358
Eccles, Jacquelynne, 535
Eckensberger, Lutz, 28
Ecological niche, 243
Ecological theory, 69
The Ecology of Human Development, 243
Edelman, Gerald, 27, 37
Educational psychology, 47
Education for All Handicapped Children Act Amendments
of 1986, 516
Ego, 35
integrity vs. ego despair, 467
Egocentrism, 583, 587
Electroencephalograph (EEG):
infants and
cognition and, 70
social/emotional development and, 94
studies and stress, 121, 126
temperament and personality development, 218, 219
Elementarism, 19
Embeddedness, 296
Embodiment, 32–38
Emotional availability, 97–98
Emotional development:
adolescence and, 351–353
adjustment and temperament, 362–364
cultural variations, 361–362
dysregulation, indicators of, 354–356
optimal development, 360–361
person approaches, 364–365
regulation, indicators of, 353–354, 365
childhood personality development and
health issues, impact on later, 476
individual development, 212, 213–221
normal and abnormal development, 213, 229–233
overview, 211–212, 233
relational inﬂuences on, 212–213, 221–229
infant social development and
applications and imperatives, 105–106
cultural context of, 95–97
emotions and sociability, developing, 97–100
overview, 91–92
psychological context of, 92–94
relational context, 94–95
relationships and, 100–105
stress and, 113–129
Emotional security hypothesis, 228
Emotion regulation:
adolescence and, 352–354
dysregulation, 354–356
emotion/personality development and, 215, 222, 224–225
in infants, 99–100
Empiricism, 18, 23, 78
Employment, child care and maternal, 151–152
Encyclopedia of Aging, 426
Endurance model, 139
Epidemologic Study Depression Scale (CES-D), 429
Equiﬁnality, 230, 527
Equilibration, 30
Equilibrium, 30
Erikson, Erik H., 16, 30, 198, 241, 466–468
Escher, M. C., 24–25, 26–27, 31
Estrogen, 298, 299, 300, 301, 303–304, 313
Even Start, 158
Event related potential (ERP), infant cognition and, 70
Excluded middle, law of the, 24
Executive function, 35, 118
Exercise, 581–582
adolescence and, 587
adulthood and, 590–592
older adulthood and, 593–594
Explanation, 19
inference to the best, 31
Face perception, infants and, 78–79
Fade model, 139
Falsiﬁcation, deductive, 32
Federal Bureau of Investigation, 377
Feminine Social Clock (FSC), 473, 474
Finland, child care in, 136–137
Fisher, Celia B., 535
Fit, goodness of, 94, 220, 536
person-context relations in families, model of, 542
temperament, model of, 359–360, 542–546
Flavell, John, 197, 198
Form perception, infants and, 71–72
Foundationalism, 18
relational metatheory and, 22
Fragile X syndrome, 525–526
Framingham Study, 427
French Centenarian Study, 429
Freud, Sigmund, 46
From Neurons to Neighborhoods: The Science of Early Childhood
Development, 105
Functionalism, 20
Galilei, Galileo, 18
Galton, Frances, 515
Gavagai problem, 180
Gender:
achievement and, 335
academic, 335–336
Eccles’ Expectancy-Value Model, 336–342
self-esteem, 342–343
aging and, 424–426
antisocial behavior, 378
centenarians and, 428–429
cognitive development, 329, 330
coping strategies, 250
daily activities of children and, 245
diabetes and, 590
emotion
dysregulation and, 355–356
personality development and, 214
families of children with developmental disabilities and , 525
friendship and, 255–256, 403, 495, 496
health and, 586, 590, 595
life expectancy and, 606, 607–608
loss of a parent and, 500

Subject Index
661
marriage issues and, 491–492, 496, 499
parent-child relationships and, 494, 497–498
parenting styles and, 254–255
personality development in, 469, 470, 472–474
prosocial cognition in middle childhood and, 247–248
puberty and
emotional/behavioral change, 302–303
physical change, 298, 299, 300
programs, 314–315
sexuality, 312, 375–376
timing, 305, 308, 311, 312
sibling relationships and, 494, 498
socialization, 253–254
underachievement, school, 380–381
social relationships and, 490–491
widowhood and, 500
Gender-role crossover hypothesis, 474
Generalizations, empirical, 20
Genetic epistemology, theory of, 136
Genetics, behavioral, 218–219
Georgia Centenarian Study, 428, 429
Germany, child care programs in East, 155–156
Gerontological Society of America, 44
Gerontology. See Health, aging and
Gibson’s ecological theory. See Ecological theory
Girls at Puberty, 296
Goldin-Meadow, Susan, 204
Gonadarche, 298–299
Gonadotropin releasing hormone (GnRH), 296
Gossip, peer groups and, 256
Goteborg Child Care Study, 139, 147
Gottlieb, Gilbert, 2
Grant Foundation study, 468–469, 471
Grief, hidden, 501
Growth hormone (GH), 300, 309
Growth hormone releasing hormone (GHRH), 300
Habituation, infant, 67–68
predictive validity of measures, 83
Haiku, 281
Hall, G. Stanley, 46, 352
Handbook of Child Psychology, 198, 243, 538
Hanson, N. R., 20, 31
Harvard College Alumni Study, 428
Harvard University, 468
Hassles, 52
Hazard score, 432
Head Start (HS), 47, 141, 144, 151, 158
Early Head Start (EHS), 139, 141–142, 147, 148, 152
cost, 155
evaluation of, 142–143
father involvement in, 152, 154
and home visiting, 142, 143–146
quality of care, 157
regulatory policies, 158–159
Health:
aging and
caregivers, as a threat to health, 434
centenarians, 428–429
genetics, 429–430
health-related quality of life (HRQoL), 430–431
medical comorbidity, 433–434
overview, 423–426, 436–437
period effects, 435
personality development and, 476
psychiatric comorbidity, 434
selection effects, 435–436
self-rated health (SRH), 431–433
human development and
adolescence, 585–589
future research, 595–596
infancy, 582–585
midlife, 589–592
old age, 592–595
overview, 579–582
Health, United States, 436
Health and Retirement Study, 436
Health Belief Model (HBM), 580, 583
Health Care Financing Administration, 429
Health Education and Behavior, 592
Health Education Quarterly, 592
Health Education Research: Theory and Practice, 592
Health Psychology, 592
Health-related quality of life (HRQoL). See under Health, aging and
Healthy Start, 158
Heart rate, emotion/personality development and, 219
Hegel, G. W. F., 24
Heritability, 1, 94–95
aging and, 429–430
language development and, 175
Hobbes, Thomas, 18
Home visiting, 142, 143–146
Hormone replacement therapy (HRT), 434, 435
Horn, John, 445–446
Hospitalism, 150
Houston Parent-Child Development Center, 147
Human Genome Project, 316
Hungary, child care programs in, 155–156
Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenocortical system (HPA), 299, 302, 311
emotion/personality development and, 219
Hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal (HPG) axis, 298, 299, 305, 311
Identity process theory, 478
India, Hindu, 277, 278, 279
Individualism, socioemotional development in infants and, 96
Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA), 516
Induction, 20
Industry, sense of, 241
Infants and Young Children, 48
Infant-Toddler Environment Rating Scale (ITERS), 156
Institutionalization, 46
Instrumental activities of daily living (IADL), 497, 607
Instrumentalism, 20, 21
Insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM), 53, 582.
See also Diabetes
Insulin-like growth factor (IGF1), 309
Intelligence:
crystallized, 445–446, 580
ﬂuid, 445–446, 580
psychometric, 444–445
See also Wisdom
Interactionism, dynamic, 296
Intercoordination of embodied action, 38
Intergenerational stake, 493
International Society for Infant Studies, 44
Interpretation, 21
Intrinsic value, 340
Invariant sequence, 199
Invisible displacements, 75
Invitations, 564

662
Subject Index
Israel:
children’s narratives in, 282
forensic interviews and enhancing informativeness, 564–565
James, William, 464
Japan, children’s narratives in, 280, 281
Johns Hopkins University, 46
Journal of Adolescent Research, 407
Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology, 43, 48
Journal of Gerontology: Psychological Sciences, 424
Journal of the American Medical Association, 435
Juvenile era, 241
Kansas City Study of Adult Lives, 474
Karuta, 281
Kauai, adolescent resiliency, 386
Kipsigis, 545
Knowledge, declarative, 454–455
Kuhn, Thomas, 20
Laing, R. D., 37
Lakatos, Imre, 20
Language Acquisition Device (LAD), 172
as a biological entity, 173, 175
social-pragmatic view and, 181
Language development, childhood:
biological process, 173–178
children’s narratives and, 279
domain-general learning and, 185–189
linguistic process, 178–181
overview, 171–173, 189
social process, 181–185
Language organ, 175–176
Lanham Act, 135
Late Life Potential, 454
Latour, Bruno, 20, 22
Laudan, Larry, 20
Launching event, direct, 77
Learnability approach to language, 173
Lebensform, 33
LeDoux, Joseph, 37
Legal issues. See Divorce; Sexual abuse, child
Leptin, 299–300
Lerner, Richard M., 535
Levinson, Daniel, 469–470
Lewin, Kurt, 28
Life expectancy, active/inactive, 607–608
Linguistics. See under Language development, childhood
Loevinger, Jane, 470–471
Luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH), 299, 311
Magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), functional, 70
Major depressive disorder (MDD). See Depression, major depressive
disorder (MDD)
Manic-depressive psychosis, 309–310
Maori, childhood education among, 158
Masai, 544
Masculine Occupational Clock (MOC), 473
Materialism, 18
Mathematical Policy Research, 142
Maturational deviance hypothesis, 305, 306
Maturity, psychosocial, 354
temperament integration and adolescence, 363
Mechanical explanation, 18–21, 28–29, 30
Medical Outcomes Study (MOS), 430
Memory, 561–562. See also Childhood development, cultural context of;
Cognitive development
Memory systems perspective, 448
episodic memory, 448
primary memory, 449
procedural memory, 448–449
semantic memory, 448
Menarche, 298, 307, 308, 309
Menopause, 589–590
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice, 32
Metamemory, 449–451
auxiliary, 285
Metamethod, 13–14
Verstehen as, 22
Metatheory, impact of, 19
function of, 13–14
postmodernism, 21
relational, 22–28, 32, 33
Methodology, 13
Michigan State University Longitudinal Study, 383
Midlife crisis, 469, 477
Midlife in the United States (MIDUS), 465–466, 477, 479, 480
Mills Longitudinal Study, 472–473, 474
Mini Mental Status Examination (MMSE), 427
Miracles, 20
Modernism, ADS and, 47
Monitoring the Future Study, 376
Moral justice, 247
Morocco, middle childhood and remembering, 284
Multiﬁnality, 230, 527
Mussen, Paul, 3
Mutual exclusivity principle, 181
Myocardial infarction, 434
Mysticism, 20
National Academy of Science Committee, 424
on Integrating the Science of Early Childhood Development, 91
National Assessments of Educational Progress (NAEPs), 326, 329
National Black Child Development Institute, 44
National Child Care Stafﬁng Study, 156
National Child Care Survey, 155
National Council on Family Relations, 44
National Educational Longitudinal Study, 330
National Health Interview Survey, 593
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD), 565
Early Child Care Research Network, 140
Investigative Interview Protocol, 571
Study of Early Child Care, 139–141, 143, 144, 147, 148
National Institute of Health, 54
National Institute on Aging (NIA), 426
National Longitudinal Study (NLS), 382
National Survey of Families and Households, 498–499
National Task Force on Applied Development Science, 44, 537
National Youth Survey, 314
Nativism, 23
infants and, 69–70
face perception, 78
information processing, 71
language development and, 186
neonativism, 198
Natural science perspective, 22
Nature-nuture debate, 23, 538
Neither Social Clock (NSC), 473, 474
NEO Personality Inventory, 465, 475
Neopositivism, 20, 21

Subject Index
663
New Haven Epidemiologic Catchment Study, 433
New York Longitudinal Study (NYLS), 216–217, 542–544, 545
New Zealand:
adolescence and
continuity in temperament, 359–360
psychiatric disorders, 355
childhood education in, 158
Nicaraguan Sign Language (NSL), 174, 177
Non–insulin-dependent diabetes (NIDDM), 582
Nonuniversal theory, 205–206
Novelty, emergence of, 15–16
Novelty preference, infant, 67–68, 81
predicative validity of measures and, 83
Nutrition:
osteoporosis and, 300
puberty and, 299
Oakland Growth and Guidance studies, 465
Obesity, 309
Object individuation, infant cognition and, 75–76
Objectivism, 18, 19
Object permanence, infant cognition and, 74–75
Object relations theory, 27
Object unity, infant cognition and, 75
Occupation, ability and, 341–342
Ogden, Thomas, 37
Operations, 35
Oppositional deﬁance disorder, 231
Optimality theory, 178
Optimization, 616–617, 618
theory of, 491
Optimization in primary and secondary control (OPS model), 618–619.
See also Control
Oregon Adolescent Depression Project, 355
Orienting reﬂex, 66
Osteoporosis, 300, 425
Outreach scholarship, 54, 537
Parasympathetic nervous system (PNS), 116, 219
Parent-child development center (PCDC), 139, 146–147
Parenting style, 222–223
authoritarian, 254–255, 396
authoritative, 254, 396
indulgent/permissive, 254–255, 396
model of, 396–399
neglectful/uninvolved, 255
Pedagogical Seminary, 46
Pediatric psychology, 47
Perceptual constancy, infant, 73
Period effect. See under Health, aging and
Personality development:
adolescence and, 351–353, 356–357, 365
adjustment and temperament, 362–364
cultural variations, 361–362
optimal development, 360–361
origins of, 358
person approaches, 364–365
structure, 357–358
temperament and, 358–360
adulthood/old age and
contextual models, 471–475
control, sense of, 479–480
emotions and coping, 480–481
history, 464
identity, 478–479
overview, 463–464, 481
as predictor of later life outcomes, 476–477
stage theories, 466–471
subjective changes, 475–476
trait theories, 464–466
well-being, 480
infancy and (see Emotional development, infant social development and)
Personality disorders, conceptualizing as processes, 230–231
Person-Environment Fit, 474–475
Phenomenological variant of ecological systems theory (PVEST), 362
Piaget, Jean, 27, 272
cognitive development model, 583
developmental disabilities and, 517
social cognition/competence in middle childhood and, 246, 247
theory, 68–69, 197–204, 242
Pidgin, 173–174
Pierce, Charles Sanders, 31
Pinel, Philipe, 515
“A Place of Value for Applied and Policy Studies,” 43–44
Plasticity, 2, 536, 539
adult experience and, 453–454
puberty and, 296–297
stress and, 113
Plausibility, 20
Politics, 514
Polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS), 309
Polyvagal theory, 117, 123
Positive youth development, 50
Positivism, ADS and, 47
Positron-emission tomography (PET), infant cognition and, 70
Postmodernism, 21–22
absolute relativism and, 26
Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), 118
Preadolescent era, 241
Prenatal Early Infancy Project (PEIP), 144
Primary Mental Abilities (PMA), 446
Primitive Culture, 268
Principles and parameter theory, 178, 179
Principles of Geriatric Medicine and Gerontology, 426
Procedural knowledge, 326
Promoting Successful and Productive Aging, 454
Prosocial behavior:
adolescence and, 360–361
childhood and, 222 
See also Antisocial behavior
Prostate-speciﬁc antigen (PSA), 435
Psyche, 34
Psychoanalysis, ADS and, 46
Psychoanalytic theory, child care and, 136
Psychology and Aging, 426
Psychosocial competence, 361
Puberty, 295
behavior, changes in, 301–305
controlling, mechanisms, 298–300
growth at, 300–301
health and
adolescent, 308–309
adult, 309–310
secular changes in timing of puberty, 307–308
sexuality and, 312–314
stress and timing of puberty, 310–312
language development and, 176
phases of, 298
research, 314, 315–316
social policy, 314–315

664
Subject Index
Puberty (Continued)
theories and models of, 295–296
developmental contextualism, 296–297
holistic interactionism, 297–298
timing of, 305–307
Qualitative change, 16
Race:
achievement motivation and, 343
peer groups and, 256
Reasoning, logical, 200
Reductionism, 19
relational metatheory and, 27
synthesis and split reductionism, 28–29
Reﬂexion, 31
Rejection, social, 405
Relational knowing, implicit, 98
Relationships:
convoys of, 488
friendship, 255–257, 395, 494–495, 498–499, 501
connections to adjustment and parents, 408–412
different effects of, 489–490
models, 402–408
functional decline and mortality, reducing the risk of, 491
future research, 501–502
health and, 491–495
illness and disability, 495–499
loss of, 499–501
marital, 491–493, 495–497, 499–500
emotion/personality development and, 212, 225–226
personality development in adulthood/old age and, 477
overview, 241–243, 260, 487
parental/familial, 221–224, 252–255, 493–494, 497–498, 500
connections to adjustment and peers, 408–412
different effects of, 489–490
emotional, social, and personality development, 226–228
models, 395–402, 407–408
puberty, stress and, 310
sibling, 95, 257–259, 313, 398–399, 494, 498, 500
positive and negative effects, 490
self-regulation and self-control in, 249–251
social cognition/competence, 246–249
social ecology of, 243–246
socioemotional selectivity theory, 488
Weiss’s theory of social provisions, 488–489
well-being, quality of social support and, 490–491
See also Emotional development
Relativism, absolute, 21–22, 26
REM sleep, infants and, 121
Resilience, 231–233
adolescence and, 382–385
protective factors of, 385–388
disruption, 522
Respiratory sinus arrhythmia (RSA), 219
Response shift, 432
Retardation, mental. See Disability, developmental
Rethinking Innateness, 70
Retroduction. See Abduction
Ricoeur, Paul, 21–22
Risk behavior, adolescence and, 373–374, 388–389
co-occurrence of, 382–383. 
See also Antisocial behavior; Sexuality; 
Substance abuse
Role-playing, 246–247
Roosevelt, Franklin Delano, 135
Sanyas, 279
Schemes, 35
Schizophrenia, 309–310, 498
Scholastic Achievement Test (SAT), 329
School psychology, 47
Scientist-practitioner, 47
Scope, 31
Searle, John, 22
Seattle Longitudinal Study, 446–447, 458, 476
Second-wind phenomenon, 455–456
Secure base behavior, 100–101
Selection, elective/loss-based, 616, 618
Selection, optimization, and compensation (SOC) theory, 328, 615–618
Self-concept, emotion regulation and, 353–354
Self-consciousness, emotion/personality development and, 213–214
Self-efﬁcacy, 479, 580
Self-esteem:
adolescence and, parent relationships, 408, 409
antisocial behavior and, 379
cognitive development, 334
emotion/personality development and, 222, 231–233
emotion regulation, 353–354
gender and, 342–343
temperament integration and adolescence, 363
Self-rated health (SRH). See Health, self-rated health (SRH)
Self-system, emotion regulation in adolescence and, 353–354
Sensation seeking, adolescence and personality structure, 357–358
Sensitivity, 101
Sensorimotor period, 69
Sentence Completion Test (SCT), 470
Sexual abuse, child:
enhancing, 564–566
informativeness
factors inﬂuencing children’s
language development, 560–561
memory, 561–562
practice, implications for, 563
suggestibility, 562–563
interviews, investigative, 564
overview, 559–560, 566, 571–572
Sexuality:
chronic illness in adulthood/old age, 496, 497
teenage, 374–376, 383
See also under Puberty, health and
Sexually transmitted diseases (STDs), 308, 374, 375
Shape constancy, infant perception and, 73–74
Sherrod, Lonnie R., 535
Short-Form Health Survey (SF-36), 430
Siblings. See under Relationships, parental/familial
Simon, T. H., 197
Size constancy, infant perception and, 66, 73, 80
Skin conductance, emotion/personality development and, 219
Sleep arrhythmicity, 543–545
Sleeper model, 139
Social clock. 473–474
Social cognitive theory (SCT), 580, 581
Social contracts, reduced, 614
Social convoys, 488, 605
Social development, health and, 581
adolescence, 588–589
infant/childhood, 584–585

Subject Index
665
midlife, 591–592
older adulthood, 594–595
Social exchange theory, 1
Social ﬁeld theory, 28
Social information-processing (SIP), 248–249
Socialization, evolutionary theory of, 311
Social modeling theory, 313
Social psychology, 25
Social referencing, 99
Society for Research in Child Development (SRCD), 44
Society for Research on Adolescence, 44, 412
Society of Adolescent Medicine, 314
Socioeconomic status (SES):
ADS and, 53
antisocial behavior, 380
Carolina Abecedarian Project and, 146
child care and, 138, 140–141 (see also Head Start)
child development research and, 243
cognitive development in adolescence and, 330
culture, child development and, 274–275
emotion/personality development and, 228
ethnic group differences in achievement motivation, 343
health, 433, 436, 580, 581, 587
infant perception/cognition and, 82
language development and, 175
life expectancy and, 607, 608
peer relationships, 256, 403
sexuality, 375
underachievement, school, 380, 381, 382
Socioemotional selectivity theory (SST), 480, 614–615.
See also Relationships
Soviet Union, child care programs in, 155–156
Spermarche, 298, 308
Spina biﬁda, 82
Split foundationism, 23, 27, 28
Splitting, 18
relational metatheory and, 22–23
Sports. See Community, positive youth development and
Stage-environment ﬁt, 546–548
Stake hypothesis, developmental, 493
Stanford-Binet Intelligence Scale, 146
PCDC children and, 147
Stern, William, 27
Stimulus barrier, 121
Storm and stress hypothesis, 352
Strange Situation, 136, 223–224
Stress:
antisocial behavior and, 385
autonomic regulation, 116–117
developmental disabilities, families of children with, 522–526
emotion/personality development and, 215
frontal regulation, 118–119
limbic-hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenocortical (L-HPA) system, 114,
115–116
limbic regulation, 117–118
puberty, timing of, 305, 310–312
studies in children, 113–114, 119–120
individual differences, 125–128
reactivity and regulation, periods of, 120–125
Stress, Coping, and Development in Children, 51
Stress, Risk, and Resilience in Children and Adolescents, 51
Stress and coping paradigm, 50, 51–54
Stressors, 52–54
Success by Six, 158
Successful Aging, 454
Sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS), 582
Suggestibility. See under Sexual abuse, child
Sullivan, Harry Stack, 27, 241
Support, social. See Relationships
Sustance abuse:
adolescence and, 376–377, 383, 586
child care and, 138
impact on early childhood temperament, 148
Swedish Betula Project, 458
Swedish Centenarian Study, 428
Sympathetic-adrenomedullary (SAM) system, 114–115, 116, 117, 122
norepinephrine SAM (NE-SAM), 114, 117–118
Sympathetic nervous system (SNS), 116
Syntactical Structures, 196
Synthesis, 24, 26
Systems theory, general, 137–139
Takanishi, Ruby, 535
Taxonomic principle, 180–181
Temperament:
adolescent personality development and
continuity in temperament and, 358–359
and goodness-of-ﬁt model of, 359–360
origins of, 358
ADS of positive human development and, 542–546
child care and, 148–149
childhood emotion/personality development and, 212, 249–250
behavioral adjustment, 220
conscience and, 220
deﬁnition, 216–217
early temperament and later personality, 218, 220
peer status, 221
psychobiological connections to, 218–219
structure, 217–218
infant
construct of, 93–94
stress and, 125–127
Terman Life Cycle Study of Children with High Ability, 466, 476
Testosterone, 298, 299, 300, 301–303, 304, 312, 313
Thermodynamics, 19
Thesis, 24, 30
Thickness, 98
Thought and Language, 203
Time, 307
Tomasello, Michael, 204
Toulmin, Stephen, 20
Trait, personality, 464–465
Transcendental argument, 31
Transformational change, 15–16, 19
Transitional behavior, 215
Transitional family status, 499
Transitions, 199–200
Twins:
ADS and, 541
heritability of language and, 175
Tylor, E. B., 268
U.S. Department of Defense (DOD), child care programs and, 159–160
U.S. Department of Education, 326
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 140
Advisory Committee on Services for Families With Infants and
Toddlers, 141
U.S. National Comorbidity Study, 355

666
Subject Index
Underachievement, school, 377, 379, 380–382
Universal Grammar (UG), 178–180, 187
Universalism, 269
Universals, cognitive development and, 198–199
University of Georgia, 428
University of North Carolina Alumni Heart Study, 432
University of Rochester, 468
University of Southern California, 493
Utility value, 340
Utterances, 564
Vagal break, 117
Vaillant, George, 468–469
Valsiner, Jaan, 28
Vanavas, 279
Variation, 30
Variational change, 16
Verstehen, 21, 22
Victoria Longitudinal Study, 458
Violent Crime Index, 378
Visual preference, infant, 66–67
von Bertalanffy, Ludwig, 16
Vulnerability/risk and resiliency/protective factors model, 50
Vygotsky, Lev, 203
War on Poverty, 47
Weathering hypothesis, 581
Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale (WAIS), 429
Weight, 299–300
Weinberg, Richard A., 535
Werner, Heinz, 27, 30, 516–517
Whole object principle, 180, 181
Winnicott, Donald, 27, 37
Wisdom, 454–455, 477, 580
Witmer, Lightner, 4
Wittgenstein, Ludwig, 24
Women Health Initiative Study, 435
Works Progress Administration, 135
Worldview, 14
Wundt, Wilhelm, 1
Yugoslavia, child care programs in, 155–156

