
How to Analyze People
Proven Techniques to Analyze People on Sight and Read Anyone Like
a Book; Simple Tricks to Understand the Human Mind and Master
Human Psychology
By: Allan Goldman

Legal notice
This book is copyright (c) 2017 by Allan Goldman. All rights are reserved. This
book may not be duplicated or copied, either in whole or in part, via any means
including any electronic form of duplication such as recording or transcription.
The contents of this book may not be transmitted, stored in any retrieval system,
or copied in any other manner regardless of whether use is public or private
without express prior permission of the publisher.
This book provides information only. The author does not offer any specific
advice, including medical advice, nor does the author suggest the reader or any
other person engage in any particular course of conduct in any specific situation.
This book is not intended to be used as a substitute for any professional advice,
medical or of any other variety. The reader accepts sole responsibility for how he
or she uses the information contained in this book. Under no circumstances will
the publisher or the author be held liable for damages of any kind arising either
directly or indirectly from any information contained in this book.

Table of Contents
Introduction
Chapter 1 – Learn Yourself to Learn About Others
Knowing Yourself
You will become self-aware
You will appear more considerate
You will become more empathetic
You will appear more intelligent
You will always be prepared
You will find more success, wherever you look
Analyzing Yourself
Finding your strengths and weaknesses
A guide to self-analysis basics
Other ways of analyzing yourself
Use five words to describe yourself
Write down your core values
Consider your most memorable childhood experiences
Write your story
Effectively Analyzing Others
People You Don’t Know Versus Those That You Do
The Three Fundamental Factors of Practical Psychology
Applying This Knowledge in Your Own Life
Chapter 2 — Using Our Bodies to Communicate
The Significance of Body Language in Determining Someone’s Emotions
Elements that Impact Body Language
Restrictions
Proxemics
Oculesics
Stance and Carriage
What Your Upper Body Is Communicating
What the Arms and Hands Are Telling You
What the Legs and Feet Are Saying
To What Extent Can We Control or Fake Our Body Language?
Aspects of the Face
Obvious and Subtle Expressions
Review
Answers

Chapter 3 – Outward Personality Characterization Aspects
Analyzing versus Judging
What You See
What You Hear
What They Listen To
Habitual Behaviors
Who They Interact With
Proximity
Chapter 4: Understanding Verbal Communication
Pitch
Speech Patterns
Fillers and Pronouns
The Significance of Swears
Summary
Chapter 5 — The Six Basic Human Needs
The Six Basic Human Needs
The Four Primal Needs
The Two Spiritual Needs
How are the Needs Prioritized?
Exercise
Worked Example
Scenario One
Scenario Two
Stranger or Friend
When People Use Negative Methods
What is a Needs Addiction?
Chapter 6  — Values, Beliefs, and Attitudes
Beliefs
Values
Attitudes
Beliefs, Attitudes, Values and the Relation to Six Human Needs
Applying your Beliefs, Attitudes, Values, and Needs
Bottom Lines
Followthrough & Practical Use
Chapter 7  — Transactional Analysis, the Three Ego- States, and the Stroke Economy
Transactional Analysis
Parent
Child
Adult

Berne and Freud
Identifying the States
Assessing the States in Action
Situations Explained
Complementary vs. Crossed Transactional Situations
Situational Examples
Example One
Example Two
Example Three
Example Four
Real Life Application
Putting Theory to Use
The Importance of Scripts
Case Stud y  — Claire
The Stroke Economy
The 5 Rules That Will Make You Miserable
Stroke Economy in Action
An Alternative Way
Real World Use
Situation One
Situation Two
Situation Three
Situation Four
A Man Under a Microscope
Case stud y  — Billy
Chapter 8: What Is the Drama Triangle?
How the Concept Came to Be
So, What Use Does It Have?
The Persecutor
The Victim
The Rescuer
The Persecutor
The Victim
The Rescuer
How the Drama Triangle Looks Like in Practice
What Do We Gather from This Discussion?
Try This Yourself!
What Is the Winner’s Triangle?
Assertive

Vulnerable
Caring
What Do We Gain Out of This?
How the Winner’s Triangle Looks Like in Practice
Sarah
Nigel
Brenda
Chapter 9 Evaluating individuals in the workplace
Images and perceptions
Smiles and good cheer
Ready acknowledgement
The group mentality
Ostracized by coworkers
Personal or professional
Refusal to make eye contact
Speaking to an audience
Evaluate the person you work for
Characteristics of a boss
The capabilities of your boss
What motivates your boss
The focus is on you
The interview is structured
Composure and warmth
Full attention on you
Negative or positive remarks
Impressive environment
Summing up
Chapter 10 Assessing romantic links
Examining the beginning
Read and analyze the signs
How do they treat others?
How do they respond to challenges?
How is their annoyance expressed?
Do they talk or listen?
Summing up
Chapter 11 — Cutting-Edge Techniques
Tiny and Inconspicuous Signs
Minute but Important
The Importance of Words

Easy Way to Assess Personality Type
To Sum Up
To Conclude

Introduction
Do you find it difficult to understand why people do the things that they do? Is it
impossible to understand what makes your kids tick? Do you want to have more
success at work? Do your people skills need some work? Are you in need of
some help when it comes to romance? Whatever reason has made you search
you for some extra knowledge, this book is here to help you!
The key to success in this world is communication and in order to be good at
communicating you need to have good comprehension. In this book, we will
make understanding people easy by looking at a range of theories that will help
you decode what people are really saying. You’ll be able to better understand
people, the reasons behind their behavior, and how to get along better with
people.
However, we have a word of warning about the knowledge in this book: you will
understand yourself even better once you have finished reading this book.
The principles that will be covered in this book apply to any type of relationship,
but we will begin with analyzing people that you’ve just met or just started
meeting regularly. As you learn more about body languages, we will work our
way through different relationships and how to understand subtle cues that
people have.
At the end of this, you will be able to analyze someone from their tastes, habits,
and appearance. You will also go through the six human needs, beliefs, and
values. To round out this experience, you will also get to learn some common
theories from psychology and psychotherapy. These theories will help you better
understand what drives the people around you.
This book is set up so every chapter is a nice bit of information with an ‘Exercise
and Practical Application’ following each topic. This little section will help you
understand the topic with exercises, actions, or something to think about. It will
help you find a way to apply what you’ve learned in your real life. You’re on
track towards a future where you’ll be able to successfully read anyone you run
into!

Chapter 1 – Learn Yourself to Learn About Others
In this chapter, we will be covering the following topics:
1. Understanding yourself so that you can understand those around you
2. Outlining what we can use to understand people around us
3. How different approaches can be used depending on how well you know a
person.
4. The three elements of practical psychology.
Knowing Yourself
If you want to be able to really understand others, then you have to start by
understanding yourself. This better understanding of yourself will allow you to
understand how internal processes work for yourself and for others.
Understanding that some insecurities will change the way we behave will help us
realize that this is true of others. You will be better able to understand the way
that an insecurity shows itself through self-effacing body language and lack of
eye contact. All body language is an expression of an underlying self-belief.
The material in this book will be applicable to you on an introspective level as
much as it will be about understanding others better. If you find that you are
struggling to understand other’s behaviors, then you may just have problems
understanding your own internal processes. Learning to see these processes’
outward expressions will allow you to start really understanding yourself. You
will have to be able to come to terms with some of your own fears, insecurities,
and prejudices if you really want to understand others.
If you don’t try to see your own actions, then anything you see about other
peoples will come through the lens of your fears, insecurities, and prejudices
without any conscious thought on your part. This will be a false image and will
make understanding others even more difficult.
Being able to understand yourself will also allow you to see the effect (direct or
indirect) you have on those around you. Understanding what kind of effect you
are having will depend on how well you can see yourself. It will also depend on
your significance to that person, how you communicate, and how you present
yourself. All these things will change how the people you interact with behave.
For example, if you act stern, formal and in a disciplined manner, then those

around you will adjust their communication style to suit how you act. If you
behave happily and with a lot of laughter, this will change how everyone else
acts in a different way.
Getting a handle on analytical skills will benefit every part of your life; it won’t
matter if you’re using those skills at work or in your romantic relationship. It
will take a lot of work, especially for those that are not naturally analytical, but it
can improve so much that it’s worth it. You will be able to alter how you look at
yourself and improve how you connect with others. But there are many other
reasons why analyzing people will be a benefit in the end.
You will become self-aware
An analytical person (we’ll abbreviate this to “AP” for the rest of the book)
doesn’t mean that you only take the time to analyze other people. In the
beginning, you will be analyzing yourself. This self-analysis will allow you to be
more aware of your own emotions and less confused about the way you feel.
This may make some of your actions more explainable to you.
Those that are self-aware find that it’s less of a challenge to turn negative
thoughts into positive thoughts, to adjust how they view themselves, to accept
themselves, and to live honestly. Getting to know yourself will allow you to truly
live genuinely and happily with others.
You will appear more considerate
An AP will use a lot of time energy understanding the people around them. Most
APs are motivated by a desire to be at peace with those around them. This
motivation and the outcome are appreciated by the people around them.
Because an AP will be taking that time to understand what others are feeling and
responding in an appropriate way, they’ll look even more considerate. The AP
could be a boss that is understanding when an employee needs a mental health
day. The AP could also be a friend that will sit on the phone for a long time to
work through a tough situation. An AP will be someone that others will know
they can rely on.
You will become more empathetic
During your analyzing of emotions and personality, you will probably start
considering why people are feeling and behaving this way. An AP will look at all
the reasons why someone is upset or withdrawn or uncomfortable.
Understanding the motivations behind the mood changes is the key to empathy.

An AP will be able to put themselves in other people’s shoes to really understand
why people are feeling what they feel. Empathy is an extremely important
personality trait. It’s especially useful in professional and personal settings.
You will appear more intelligent
Typically, the more analytical a person, the smarter they are. An AP is observant
and remembers many of the people and things that they see in their environment.
This observant nature makes them appear intelligent during a conversation, even
if it’s not necessarily an intellectual conversation. An AP will be able to recall
information from previous conversations and ask questions that will make an AP
appear as if they are educated about the profession. Analytical students
remember lectures and conversations with teachers easily. This observance is
often met with better grades and better impressions.
You will always be prepared
APs are the kind of people that hate being unprepared. If they are late or miss
deadlines, they might feel anxious because they know how these things will
affect others. APs are typically early to meetings, finish their work ahead of
schedule, and they take the time to plan fun dates out in advance. Being prepared
for what the world might hand them makes an AP feel like life is slightly less
stressful.
You will find more success, wherever you look
Perhaps the biggest benefit of being an AP is how you will succeed when it
comes to things like school, work, and relationships. The ability to analyze
makes you more empathetic, considerate, and dependable. Those traits are great
for every relationship. You’ll be easy to like for people that just run into you on
the street. Being able to remember so much and being prepared for so much will
help you keep a handle on things in work and school. You will be viewed as a
reliable and intelligent member of the team. People will want you to be working
with them.
Analyzing Yourself
Before you even try analyzing other people, you will find it helpful to analyze
yourself. Trying to analyze yourself will be much easier than trying to analyze
others in the beginning. You won’t have to guess about your thoughts and
feelings. Those are readily available to you.
The biggest stumbling block when it comes to analyzing yourself is being able to

understand and figure out why you are feeling and thinking the way that you are.
The honesty that it will take to get you to really analyze yourself might even be
painful. However, once you are able to analyze yourself, you’ll be able to see
your strengths, your weaknesses, and the roots of your emotions.
Finding your strengths and weaknesses
Beginning self-analysis may seem daunting, but it will be simplest to start with
thinking about your strengths and weaknesses. Your strengths are anything
you’re ‘good’ at, anything that comes naturally, anything you like about yourself,
and anything others like about you.
The corporate world, in particular, fell in love with strengths. It’s quite easy now
to find quizzes and other methods for discovering what your strengths might be.
Among these traits are things like ‘adaptability,’ being able to easily accept
change and live in the moment, and ‘harmony,’ trying to keep the peace by
finding common ground or compromising. These kinds of terms will not fully
describe a person, but if you’re beginning, then they’re a perfect place to start.
When it comes to weaknesses, you might actually find this easier to figure out.
There are almost always things about ourselves that we dislike. A weakness is
something that we struggle with. It could be that you’re not the best listener or
that you often talk over people or offer advice that isn’t needed. It could be that
you’re forgetful and disorganized. Regardless of what your weaknesses actually
are, you need to make sure that you aren’t too hard on yourself. Reflecting on
your weaknesses is a very tough and vulnerable experience. Your weaknesses
don’t have to stop you from living the life that you want. In this part of self-
analysis, you need to be open and honest with yourself but remain hopeful about
the future.
A guide to self-analysis basics
The analytical process will look different for some people. Some people will
require a journal or notebook during the process. Writing things down helps
people remember their list, but it also helps people process information.
Recording emotions and responses will allow you to take a step back and look at
the larger view of your life.
When it comes to this part, you will want a notebook or journal that you really
like as well as a reliable pen. The best way to do this is to write a little before
going to bed. This step allows you to process the events of the day. Then you
will take the next step of paying attention to your thoughts and really committing

to that. Thoughts are often automatic and even more often out of your control.
When you experience or see something, then you will think about it.
Instead of letting the thoughts leave your head unnoticed, you will need to really
consider them. There will be events and things that trigger positive thoughts, and
others that trigger negative thoughts. Anything you discover about yourself
should be written down in your journal.
The next step is to consider how you perceive others. This isn’t about analyzing
people quite yet, but about how you respond to the people around you. You’ll be
looking at how you react when people are late and then reflecting on it. Perhaps
you’ll discover that you perceive lateness as a lack of caring. Those people that
are late may make you upset. You’ll be looking to dig down deep and try to
figure out why you think that. Perhaps it was a lesson from your parents or a
symptom of low self-esteem.
Going the step deeper will help you discover the roots of your emotions, but it
doesn’t have to be only about the negatives. You might try to analyze events like
receiving flowers. If you’re truly joyful about it, then perhaps your love
language is gifts. This tells you that you receive gifts from people, you feel more
appreciated than if they were to do other things for you. This knowledge might
help you with your relationships.
There’s a final step in this guide to self-analysis. You have to also respect your
body and the physical responses you have to the environment. Your body might
react to things before your mind does, such as in the case of panic attacks where
you will have an increased heartbeat, sweating, and a myriad of other symptoms.
You might feel the physical sensations before realizing that an attack is
happening. Identify what triggers your physical reactions and try to figure out
those responses as well, even if they take you into the past.
Other ways of analyzing yourself
There are even more ways of looking at yourself. You might try any of the
following.
Use five words to describe yourself
This relatively quick exercise will force you to think about key adjectives. You’ll
find that words like “ambitious” and “compassionate” are full of meaning and
might help you find a path to understanding yourself better. Remember to try to
stay positive.

Write down your core values
Your core values are the code by which you live your life. These traits will be
what you strive to be and what you admire in others like integrity, intelligence,
honesty, etc. Knowing your values will help you understand why and how you
react the way you do, as well as what motivates you.
Consider your most memorable childhood experiences
Our childhoods are extremely influential on our adult selves. Getting to the root
of yourself will often involve looking into our childhood. Use your journal to jot
down your experiences (positive or negative) and consider how they still affect
you.
If you had a strict parent and was severely punished for breaking rules, then you
might still be afraid of breaking rules as an adult.
Write your story
This somewhat vague exercise can take time, but that’s just fine. This exercise is
particularly good if you prefer written communication. Your story is the essence
of who you are. It will consist of all the experiences that define you. You can
write down these experiences chronologically, or even just write what comes to
mind first. This exercise doesn’t have a ‘right way’ to be done. Don’t even worry
about the writing being perfect, just write down what you need to write.
If you struggle with coming up with ideas, then here’s a list of suggested topics:
Parents
Relationships with siblings
High school experiences
College experiences
First job
First love
How you and your best friend met
Favorite books
Your bucket list
Your greatest fears

Your perfect day
Effectively Analyzing Others 
It is important to be able to note the differences in how you act and communicate
with the different people in your life to recognize how your actions and
mannerisms affect those people. Some notable people in your life may be any of
those of the following:
Your significant other
If applicable, your children
Your boss
A teacher that you maybe struggled with the most
Your parents
A person that you may not click with
Your closest friends
You should notice and contemplate how the varying behavior of all of these
different people affects how you make yourself appear to them through your own
actions. A good way to practice this is to think about how others may consider
you in their lives and how that causes them to behave around you, perhaps in a
different way than around other people.
People You Don’t Know Versus Those That You Do
It is probably obvious that how well you know someone (or how well you want
to get to know them) greatly affects how you see and behave towards them. Your
distance from or closeness with someone relationship-wise will define what you
have to consider when observing both their and your behavior when interacting
with them. This will also eventually help you determine how you will use these
insights to better interpret what they are communicating to you. To better
elaborate on this concept, four examples are explained below:
1.) Upon initially meeting someone, you wonder if they are attracted to
you. You are interested in them, but wish to get to know them better before
you express this to them. Your interpersonal relationship with them at this
time is recent and superficial. Additionally, you want to be sure that you
are correctly interpreting their signals before you express your feelings in
the case that the feeling is not mutual. With your first encounters with this
person, you’ll be paying attention to how they carry themselves around

you, their body language, how they speak, and even their preferences. You
probably won’t get information at first such as their previous history with
relationships, but it is possible to be able to subtly acquire details in your
first few conversations that you can use later on to determine if and how
you’ll act. 
2.) You have an innovation for a business idea and are thinking about
expressing this to a coworker. Your relationship with this person is
medium-term and relatively superficial. Your reason for wanting to
observe their behavior prior to expressing your idea is to see if they would
be a suitable business partner and if you two are compatible to work
together, and you want to use this information to determine how you
should come to them to evoke the best response. Things you need to
observe about them are their body language, preferences, impulses, how
they verbally communicate, and some minor insight to their personal life
and past experiences. Also, defining their drive and points of
concentration is very useful information in this case. 
3.) You and your significant other have been in a relationship for a year. It
is getting serious and you are thinking about asking them to move in
together. This relationship is medium-term and intimate. You first want to
consider if moving in with them would be a smart choice. You want to
determine how they’re likely to respond when you bring it up in
conversation. Important factors that you’ll be considering are their body
language, preferences, impulses, how they speak to you, and extensive
information about their personal life and past experiences. In addition,
their drive, points of concentration, and how they go about fulfilling their
needs are vital points to consider. It can be helpful to consult friends and
family to acquire more insight. 
4.) Your relationship with your mother is a bit unstable. The relationship
between you two is long-term and intensely involved. Your goal is to
mend your relationship with her and try to figure out the origin of the
complications between you two. Things to consider are her body language,
preferences, impulses, the way she speaks to you, extensive information
about her personal life, her points of concentration, and how she fulfills
her needs. The most enigmatic factor that you need to determine is her
motivation. 
In all of the above examples, the three main factors to be considered are the
extent of your relationship with that person, their motivation, and what

information and insight you have about them as a person. These three things
will define how you can put the acquired information to use, which will be
elaborated on later in the book.
A good way to put this into practice is to think of three people in your life that
understanding them better would be advantageous. Consider the type of
relationship that you have with each of these people, why you want to gain
more insight about these specific relationships, and how these points will
influence the information that you already have in order to properly analyze
these people.
The Three Fundamental Factors of Practical
Psychology 
Decades ago, a business and life tactician by the name of Anthony Robbins
started to compose books and give full-day seminars that have assisted millions
of people worldwide realize and attain what they want out of life. The principles
that he expresses to people are instinctively logical, and millions of people have
been able to improve their lives from his teachings. We will be referencing some
of his concepts and philosophies to aid us in comprehension of the motivation of
both ourselves and others. Psychology is a very broad and complex arena with
too much information and specificities to cover in detail in this book, but we will
be covering the essential psychological tactics that will help you enhance your
analytical and conceptual abilities. There are three main components of practical
psychology that are enormously accommodating in regards to deciphering how
people’s minds work.
1.) Fear is the most prevalent factor that holds us back, and is one of the
most important emotions that we are capable of. Although it mostly has a
negative connotation, fear has actually had an enormous evolutionary
benefit; without it, humans would never have been able to arrive where we
are today. If humans were fearless, we would never have protected
ourselves from factors that could prove deadly, such as predators or
natural disasters. Thanks to this evolution, however, fear is no longer a
vital component that contributes to our continued existence. Nevertheless,
it is still present and has been instinctually engrained into our minds, and
can cause a wide range of emotions from slight trepidation to intense
terror. Understanding fear itself is a key component to understanding
people. There are two main versions of fear that most commonly affect the

world’s population today: the fear that we are inadequate, and the fear of
not being loved. These are fears that have been present since humans were
first around and that have evolved along with us. Back in primitive times,
there was the fear that we would not be quick enough to catch an animal to
provide for our families; this has now evolved into fearing that we will not
optimally perform at work, we will get fired, and likewise not be able to
support our families. Whereas earlier we would fear being shunned or
outcast from our village and left to fend for ourselves in the wilderness,
we now fear the people around us shutting us out and thus feeling rejected
and isolated. These fears may seem unreasonable, yet they are still present
and the majority of people struggle fighting and overcoming them.
However, while trying to fight or distance oneself from the fearful
situation is the common instinct, it is actually much more effective to just
roll with it. For example, imagine a man and a woman are ballroom
dancing, with the man representing fear, the woman representing you, and
the dance itself representing life, which must continue until the music
ends. Until the end point, you must remain present and face-to-face with
your fear, which is intended to lead and control the dance. The more you
try to pull away or fight it, the more disorganized and unsmooth the dance
will go. However, if you just follow the fear’s lead and cooperate with it to
reach the end of the dance in the smoothest way possible, you don’t exert
excess energy dragging it out and advancing the negativity, but calmly
approach the end with a more positive resolution. Usually, facing our fears
and working with them instead of fighting against them is the most
effective way to overcome them. Once this is achieved, we can really start
living our lives to their full potential. 
2.) The significance and emotions that we connect with certain events
greatly steers and decides the quality of our lives. There are three factors
that define the values that we assign to specific events, the first being the
physical impulses that are instigated by an event. These impulses can
occur either deliberately or unintentionally, such as keeping our gaze
downward or holding a bad posture. Low-energy physical actions link
low-energy (negative) feelings to an event, which is immediately evident
to others around you. The second factor is the verbal things that we say to
ourselves, either out loud or in our heads. These can either be negative or
positive things, like self-pitying remarks versus self-empowering ones.
You can either tell yourself that there is no hope, or you can ask yourself

how you can use what you learned to improve in the future. What you tell
yourself about a certain event can either bring you farther down or help
you develop. The third factor that determines how we assign meaning to
events is that of our focus and what elements that we emphasize in certain
situations. If we concentrate on a negative point in a situation, that is
where all of our energy goes and we thus correlate the situation with
negativity. However, if we can pinpoint a positive element in the situation
and focus on that, we can conversely channel our energy into associating
the event with positivity. People experiencing depression and general
unhappiness tend to constantly pick out the negatives in their lives and
focus on them, such as feelings of void, unsuccessfulness, and non-
fulfillment, whereas more optimistic and generally more cheerful people
focus on bright prospects or things that they are appreciative of. Keeping
these three factors in mind when analyzing others can help us achieve a
more innate comprehension of how they see and react to situations and
scenarios in their lives.
3.) There are six basic needs that humans possess, all of which determine
how we react to the world around us. Understanding these six
requirements is necessary in order to properly understand another person’s
views and behaviors. These needs will be further elaborated on later in this
book, but in the meantime, the list of human needs are certainty,
uncertainty, significance, connection/love, influence, and development.
Applying This Knowledge in Your Own Life 
Define your fears and how they affect your behavior towards others, and also
how they have been withholding you from positive things in life. Do this also
with someone who you are close with. Consider what you think they fear the
most, and how this fear may have influenced their behavior, both in the past and
in the present. Conversely, think about a scenario that you find yourself in
regularly that usually brings you feelings of happiness, satisfaction, amusement,
or any other positive emotion. Also bring to mind a scenario which generally
brings you feelings of sadness, anger, anxiety, boredom, or other negative
emotions. Consider both of these scenarios and the three factors that define the
significance you associate with these events:
Ask yourself what your body language and physical tendencies in these
situations are.
Ask yourself how your verbal expressions are altered, either to yourself or

to others.
Realize what your focus points in these scenarios are. Is your mind racing,
or are you having trouble thinking? Are you concentrating on what is
lacking in the situation or what is in front of you?

Chapter 2 — Using Our Bodies to Communicate 
Aside from verbal communication, we all do a tremendous amount of
communicating through our body language. Body language isn’t the same as
common specific hand gestures, such as a thumbs-up, or sign language, as these
are actually in a way a form of straightforward, verbal communication. Body
language more refers to subtle ways in which we alter our body position, facial
expressions, or small actions that can greatly influence the way that a person
means something or how they are feeling. For example, even a thumbs-up can be
taken in different ways depending on one’s facial expressions or how they are
carrying themselves. Even some aspects of verbal communication is closely
regarded to body language, because the words that come out of our mouth can
have a completely different meaning when accompanied by certain actions or
tones of voice. There are some grey lines, however, where certain gestures can
cross over. Take pointing your finger, for instance. This is generally a
straightforward and clear form of communication, but can also be done
unconsciously, and remaining aware of what our hands are doing is vital in order
to effectively control one’s body language. There are many factors to consider
when interpreting body language, including eye movements, stance, facial
expressions, and body movements. All of these things can communicate things
that we do not say verbally, and can give an insight as to what we are actually
thinking and how we are feeling.
It is a common question as to whether body language is performed consciously
or unconsciously. It is often difficult to simultaneously contemplate both the
content of the conversation and what is happening around us. Most of the time,
we respond physically in instinctive or automatic ways, and it often occurs that
we look back and realize that we communicated something through our bodies
that we did not intend to relay. In instances like these, it is common to dwell or
reflect on the situation, in hindsight taking apart our thoughts and the other
factors around us to try and work out what exactly we were thinking at that point
in time. Body language is actually so seemingly instinctive and unintentional
that it doesn’t require a lot of thinking, which raises the topic of the conscious
and subconscious minds. Many motivational speakers refer to this partition when
giving seminars. Body language has the power to be both incredibly subtle and
incredibly intense. Our subconscious mind can move our bodies in ways to
communicate things that we keep hidden within ourselves, such as secret
longings or feelings. In the past, this phenomenon has been observed with hints

of Freudian psychology, but those ideas presently are mostly obsolete.
To better understand this concept in the simplest of ways, basically the mind
focuses on the small pieces of information or environmental factors that are
directly in our minds, but aside from those small pieces, there is a vast amount of
information running in the background. However, it is possible to go through all
of this background information and focus on important parts within it, and even
control and rework them. Although body language does for in part work with our
conscious minds (so is performed intentionally), an even larger part is controlled
by our unconscious minds and occurs naturally, outside of our control. It is
commonly said that the majority of the information that we communicate is done
so through body language rather than verbally; one well-known researcher in
particular claims that only 7% of our communication is relayed verbally. Some
research claims that 55% of our communication is channeled through
movements in our faces, most specifically around the nose and eyes. Even
though many sources produce different percentage numbers in regards to how
much of our communication is physical rather than verbal, one thing is for sure:
a good majority of all of our relayed information is impossible without non-
verbal communication.
Besides physical communication, non-verbal communication is also evident in
the use of modern technology when communicating with others. Communicating
through text, especially through social media and text messaging on our
telephones, can be interpreted in significantly more ways without hearing the
voice and seeing the body language that would normally go along with it when
speaking with somebody in person. For this reason, the use of emoticons has
become increasingly popular as a way to artificially include body language while
communicating through writing to avoid misinterpretation. For example, you
could be asking someone via text message, “Are you coming to the party?”
Although this is a simple and innocent question in context, without the use of a
smiley face next to it, it could be misinterpreted as snappy or judgmental.
Similarly, saying something as simple as “thank you” via text could mean
countless things depending on the physicality or facial expressions that
accompany it. Someone could take it as sarcastic, genuine, insincere, and even
very deep, such as when accompanied by tears.
Although it is commonly believed that the most accurate way to determine how
a person is feeling or thinking is readable in their facial expressions (besides
their actual words), recent studies propose that this in actually untrue. This

research states that people are not infallible in reading understated emotions
through reading someone’s face, and solely observing facial expressions is not
enough to fully determine the strength of an emotion or feeling. A study done at
Princeton that was based on reading facial expressions only through photographs
of faces proved that people were only 50% accurate in determining their
emotions without being able to observe the rest of the body language. The
increasing amount of information that we are discovering about body language is
eye-opening to how complex and incredibly significant it really is.
The Significance of Body Language in Determining
Someone’s Emotions
Body language is a vital factor to consider when acquiring information in order
to analyze a specific person. Emotions are expressed through numerous means,
but body language can be the most organic and inadvertent way of expressing
oneself. Eye movements, hand gestures, and body movements for a large part are
performed automatically without premeditation, and can be a great tool when
analyzing someone and evaluating their true feelings and thoughts that may
contradict the words that they are saying. In addition to using this knowledge to
observe those around you, it’s also useful to use it to analyze your own behavior
and how your body unconsciously communicates when you’re talking, and see if
there is an accurate connection with how you are thinking or feeling at the time.
It could very well end up that you discover that you tend to send mixed signals
without even knowing it.
The use of body language evaluation can prove especially useful when feeling
out somebody that you have been newly introduced to. Even if you have not yet
had a conversation, you can immediately gather information about them just by
noticing how they carry themselves, how they look at you and those around
them, their face, and how much physical distance they keep between themselves
and others. Body language analysis can also work in better understanding people
that you are more familiar with, whether they are just acquaintances or people
you have more intimate relationships with. For example, if you notice that a
friend or coworker holds a certain stance or makes certain gestures or
movements when they are nervous or insecure, you can better help them by
intervening as soon as you notice it. You can use these new observations
alongside what you already know about them to understand them even better,
and can take note of repetitive actions or gestures that they do and the emotions

associated with them.
Elements that Impact Body Language 
There is no set, universal definition that states that certain movements mean
certain things. Just as different people have different ways of physically
expressing themselves, whether intentionally or not, there are also very many
cultural influences that affect how people physically communicate. Social
standards differ from country to country. For example, in some cultures breaking
eye contact is a sign of disrespect, where in another culture it could mean exactly
the opposite. For a more specific example, in Finland, eye contact is a sociable
and approachable gesture, whereas in Japan, direct eye contact is generally seen
as expressing anger or hostility.
Restrictions 
Although there is much more that goes into evaluating a person other than body
language alone, it is an essential basis for it. There are numerous other factors
that are discussed throughout the book that you can use in combination with
body language analysis to get a full idea of what is going on inside of a person
and what makes them who they are. It is something that you will find very useful
and will benefit from looking out for it when you interact with people in the
future, and you will become more knowledgeable and accurate in deciphering a
person’s body language, no matter how delicate. In addition, you can also use
these observational tactics on yourself to determine and better control how you
physical react when communicating with other people to make sure that your
body is relaying the same message as your words.
Proxemics 
Proxemics, a term first described in the 1960s by the anthropologist Edward
Hall, is described as how much distance people hold between themselves and
others, and can be an accurate depiction of the standing of the relationships
between them. Aside from that, it can also portray what a person is nonverbally
communicating to the other person, either intentionally or unintentionally. Hall
composed a list of distances that he associated with different relationship levels,
which is as follows:
Intimate/deep relationships: 1.5 feet
Close friends and family: 1.5 – 24 feet
Acquaintances or casual relationships: 4 – 12 feet

Public speaking: 12 – 25+ feet
These of course are estimated measurements to get a basic idea of how to
determine people’s relationships by how closely they stand to each other. One
would assume that if two people have an extremely close proximity to each other
(such as a few inches), they are most likely intimately involved; however, it is
also possible even for people in a romantic relationship to talk to each other with
ten feet between them. As is the same with all body language evaluations, the list
is relative and needs to be considered alongside the context of the scenario in
order to correctly assess the situation.
Oculesics 
Oculesics is defined as the observation of a person’s eye movements and way of
looking at people, and is another significant factor to consider when evaluating a
person’s non-verbal communication. Oculesics is a factor that has two main
subdivisions that can be observed in order to decipher a person’s eye movements
in regards to their feelings and thoughts:
1.) The first subdivision under oculesics is that of a person’s pupil size and
how they dilate and contract during interpersonal communication. This is
a very subtle factor and often hard to notice, and is a little tricky given the
fact that environmental factors can also influence pupil size (such as light
or focus). Another reason that a person’s pupils can be affected by outside
factors is if they are intoxicated, which is why police flash lights into
people’s eyes upon confronting them if they are suspicious. Obviously, in
order to really observe one’s pupils, you need to be within a relatively
close proximity to the person’s face. One of the most notable changes in
pupil size that you can notice is that there is a connection between pupil
dilation and fear, nervousness, arousal, longing, or hostility. The reason for
this is that when the fight-of-flight instinct kicks in, there is a rush of
adrenaline into the bloodstream, which ensures that the pupils are at a
sensitive peak in order to give the person the best chance to save
themselves in a dangerous situation. 
2.) Eye contact itself has a variety of subdivisions that communicate many
different things, which are as follows:
Looking downwards: This can mean two completely different things
across different cultures. In some countries looking downwards is a sign of
respect or reverence, while in some other countries it can express fear or

guilt.
Looking upwards: This is an eye movement that can have a number of
meanings that varies from person to person. Looking upwards can be an
unintentional expression of boredom, or it could also be that the person is
trying to recall something. On the other side, if a person is gazing up with
their head facing slightly downwards, this could be sending a message of
flirtation or arousal.
Side-to-side movements of the eyes : This is also an eye movement that
can have many different interpretations. Moving the eyes quickly away to
the side can suggest that a person is not being truthful, but it is important
to keep in mind before accusing anyone that this is not always entirely the
case. Looking to the side can also insinuate that a person is distracted
(either by their own thoughts or environmental factors), or perhaps they
have lost interest in the conversation and are losing focus. It could also be
that a person is experiencing an auditory memory; if they look to the left,
they could be trying to remember it, and if looking to the right, they are
hearing the sound in their mind.
Gazing: Not the same as a stare, a gaze is holding prolonged eye contact
with something or someone. A gaze generally expresses interest, and
depending on the scenario, can also indicate arousal or desire. When a
person is gazing, they usually don’t realize that they have been holding
eye contact for an extended amount of time.
Staring: Staring is another form of persistent eye contact, but generally is
accompanied with the eyes being widened and usually insinuates hostility
or dishonesty. However, a stare can also exhibit fondness or interest. One
of the most notable differences between gazing and staring is that staring
is generally deliberately maintained, even if the person or other subject
returns eye contact.
Glancing: Glancing generally indicates that a person has a secret or hidden
longing for whatever or whomever they are glancing at. Some common
examples are glancing at someone’s lips while talking to them, which
could mean that they want to kiss the other person, or glancing at the
refrigerator if a person is hungry. This eye movement in particular can
prove especially helpful when analyzing someone’s body language when
interacting with them, especially towards the end of your contact with
them. When people are reaching the point where they are ready to leave,
they will often glance at their phones or watches to see the time, or

perhaps they will move their eyes to other environmental factors.
Closing the eyes: Oftentimes, when a person closes their eyes, they are
cutting off their vision of the outside world in order to better concentrate
or focus on something that they are thinking about. Conversely, closing
one’s eyes can also insinuate guilt, dissatisfaction, or impatience, usually
exhibited as a sustained blink.
Following a person or object with the eyes: Keeping one’s eyes on a
moving subject expresses interest, which could either be positive or
negative. Negative reasons that a person may be tracking someone’s
movements with their eyes could be mistrust or suspicion.
Squinting: Although squinting can simply mean that a person is trying to
physically focus on something better, it can also have a mental
implication. Usually if a person is squinting during interaction with
another person, this insinuates cynicism or that they are skeptical about
what they are hearing, especially when accompanied by a frown.
Winking: Winking is most generally used to express humor or light-
heartedness. They could either be subtly hinting at something, such as
arousal, or could simply be using at as a friendly greeting gesture.
Blinking: Although blinking is of course always occurring, blinking that is
quicker than normal can indicate confusion or nervousness. In other
scenarios, it can insinuate disdain. A lack of blinking is the main feature
that defines a stare.
Stance and Carriage 
In addition to proxemics and oculesics, the way a person carries themselves or
positions their body also tends to be a very accurate gauge of a person’s opinion
or outlook of a scenario or person. The most notable and common positions to
look out for are as follows:
Standing: When a person is standing in a given scenario, this is generally
signifies authority or control. A good example of this is a teacher standing
in front of their seated students. Especially in situations where a teacher
wants to exhibit their authority, they will take a stance that is physically
higher than those in front of them.
Sitting: On the other hand, sitting can express the opposite of what
standing generally does. A person in a seated position could be expressing
submission, insecurity, or inferiority. However, this isn’t always true, as it
is also completely normal for friends and acquaintances to sit or stand

around one another without feeling the need to express their status.
Slumped: If a person is sitting or standing with rounded shoulders and
slightly bent over in their torso (not standing or sitting up straight), this
could insinuate either insecurity, boredom, or passivity.
Open stance: As opposed to a slumped posture, a person who stands or
sits completely upright with a puffed out chest and forward stance, this
generally expresses confidence and assurance. The main component of
this is the exhibition and accentuation of the chest.
Hand and Arm Motions: Large or excessive manual gestures also signify
self-assurance and authority. People who communicate a lot with their
hands may also tend to be more physically touchy in conversation.
Handshakes: The way a person shakes another’s hand can express a
person’s views. A firm handshake with a palm on top of another person’s
is generally a sign of high self-assurance and dominance, whereas a weak
handshake could signify insecurity or a tendency to be submissive.
Positioning: Very confident and authoritarian people will tend to place
themselves at the front of a group, whereas more passive or insecure
people will try to stay in the background.
Crossed Limbs: Crossing one’s arms or legs can have a variety of
meanings, but most generally it is taken as a negative sign. Crossed arms
or legs can signify insecurity, defensiveness, resentment, anger, or
disagreement. Although this is true, it is also important to remember not to
always assume that crossing the limbs automatically holds a negative
connotation, as it could simply be that the person finds it more
comfortable to sit or stand that way.
Hints of Sexual Interest: It is common for men who hold a sexual interest
for another person to face his chest toward the other person and lean
forward, whereas women tend to turn their chests away from the other
person and lean back, with their feet facing the other person.
Fidgeting: Restless legs or feet, or any expression of struggling to remain
still, are generally signs of nervousness, anticipation, or eagerness.
Fidgeting can also be a sign of boredom, so the context and means of
restlessness need to be considered. Similarly to some of the previously
mentioned actions, fidgeting is one of those that really needs to be taken
with a grain of salt, since many people do repetitive, small motions or
have “ticks” that they do out of habit, often without even noticing it.
Because of this, it is important to observe if there are any consistencies in

these fidgeting motions throughout numerous separate meetings with the
person that you are analyzing.
Considering all of the above physical movements and their various
interpretations, there are a select few that generally always provide consistent
readings. The following three in particular are great to begin your analyses of
people and work your way to totally understanding the full scope of body
language:
Crossed Limbs: As previously stated, this stance most generally expresses
uneasiness or apprehension of a person or situation. This is a kind of
instinctual “protection,” as the person is physically guarding themselves
from whatever is making them uncomfortable.
Mirroring: If a person is replicating another person’s motions and stance,
this expresses interest and a sense of connection which they want to make
known to the other person. Mirroring is commonly seen in mediators and
business negotiators, as well as in people who are romantically interested
in each other.
Carriage: The way a person carries themselves and holds their posture can
be very informative about them. If a person has a tendency to stand and sit
straight up, with their chest out and their head held high, that is very
indicative of a confident and authoritative person, whereas a slumped,
limp posture often radiates insecurity or diffidence.
The different sections of the body send different messages, with each group
generally relaying a certain message. Although this is true, it is important to
always keep in mind that every person is different, and their body language
coincides with that. Extroverted people may physically may make more
grandiose gestures or make themselves more visible in a group, but that doesn’t
necessarily mean that their introvert counterparts are completely insecure and
always anxious. Although fidgeting is often a telltale sign of awkwardness or
nervousness in a person, many people simply fidget or do small repetitive
movements out of habit. This is why it is important to analyze a specific person’s
behavior over an extended period of time after a few meetings in different
scenarios to properly gauge their body language and avoid incorrect analyses.
What Your Upper Body Is Communicating 
The trunk of our body contains all of our vital organs, and our bodies
instinctually perform movements to protect our heart, lungs, and other organs in

reaction to our environment. For example, if you ask a stranger on the street for
directions but they do not turn their torso towards you when replying, then they
most likely feel uncertain about you. Conversely, if you come across someone
you know on the street and say hello, they will most likely greet you with their
torso facing you as a sign of trust and assurance.
The height at which one holds themselves from their upper body is also
significant. A straight torso with upright shoulders gives off an air of confidence,
whereas a slouched posture with slumped shoulders indicates boredom or self-
doubt. Upper body analysis is especially useful in dating scenarios. If the other
person keeps their torso pointed towards you, this indicates that they feel safe
around you. If they bring themselves even closer to you, this certainly indicates
comfort, as from a primal standpoint, they are exposing the carriage of their vital
organs directly to you. Conversely, if you find the other person on a date to be
sitting at a distance from you, with their torso angled away, or with crossed arms,
this signifies a feeling of not being entirely secure and keeping their torsos
protected. This upper body analysis can be applied in a variety of social
situations not limited to dating, but this type of scenario is a very good example.
What the Arms and Hands Are Telling You
The arms and hands can communicate a great deal about a person. Some people
use excessive amounts of hand and arms gestures, while others hardly use any at
all. Generally speaking, when someone uses a lot of hand motions when
speaking, they are perceived as more approachable and spirited. Opposite to
high-energy gestures, more understated gestures such as crossing the arms are
generally associated with being standoffish, antisocial, scared, or upset. As with
all body language components, however, the context also needs to be considered
when making judgments based on these analyses. It is common for some people
to cross their arms or do other low-energy hand and arm gestures when in
unfamiliar situations which may provide an inaccurate depiction of them. In
order to correctly interpret their movements, it is important to combine arm and
hand gesture analysis with observation of their other actions as well.
Also important to keep in mind is people who are restless and fiddle with their
hands and arms. Fidgeting is most generally a sign of anxiety and discomfort,
and commonly manifests in people touching their own faces, heads, and other
body parts. Aside from this, fiddling with one’s hands and arms can also indicate
boredom, such as with tapping the fingers.

It is a universal thing to nonverbally communicate with our hands and arms, and
a lot of the time it is done unconsciously and actually discloses more than we
would prefer to let on about how we are feeling. Luckily, it is possible to train
oneself to be able to better conceal certain emotions or thoughts by controlling
one’s hand and arm movements. A good example of this is the news anchors that
you see on television. In order to hide nervousness or anxiety that usually
manifests through fidgeting or shaking, keep your hands folded on a table or in
your lap to keep them still. It is important not to clench them tightly together, as
this can communicate the same emotions as fidgeting, but just to let them rest
calmly on each other. If you are in a standing position, you can let your arms fall
naturally at your sides. It is generally more difficult to find a comfortable
position that feels natural when you are consciously thinking about it, so when
you see someone who has mastered it, you can be sure that they have put a lot of
practice into it.
Although in most situations there won’t be a lot of touching involved upon first
meeting someone, it is common in many cultures to greet people for the first
time with a handshake. Handshakes have come to be associated with the
confidence of a person (or lack thereof), but this is not necessarily accurate. It is
commonly believed that strong, firm handshakes are a sign of self-assurance,
and that weak handshakes are a sign of just that: weakness. Because of this, a lot
of people tend to overdo the “firm” handshake because of the meaning
associated with it. Additionally, handshakes are not a universal social greeting
around the world, so if you greet a person from a culture that isn’t accustomed to
using handshakes, they may have a less strong one, which doesn’t necessarily
mean that they are insecure. In short, it’s not the most accurate tactic of
gathering information about a person based on the strength of their handshake.
What the Legs and Feet Are Saying
Probably because they are not usually directly in sight, the legs and feet are often
disregarded when it comes to reading a person’s body language. However, there
has been research that shows that the legs can be one of the most honestly
expressive parts of our bodies. Because people put a lot of effort into controlling
their facial expressions and the movements of their arms and hands, the legs and
feet can often reveal things that people have trained their faces and other body
parts to hide. When analyzing someone’s body language, observe their feet and
where they are pointed. Usually a person’s feet will be pointed in the direction

that they most want to be, so if they are pointed towards you, this is a sign of
comfort and security. However, if they are pointed away, this is another organic
method of protection to be able to readily flee if a person is feeling
uncomfortable.
Besides the direction that their feet are pointing in, fidgety legs and feet can also
indicate insecurity or discomfort, similarly to fidgety arms and hands. Also alike,
repetitive foot and leg motions can signify anxiety or boredom. The difference is
that from a biological standpoint, keeping the feet and legs in motion better
enables the person to get up and run if need be. Observing a person’s foot and
leg moving habits can give you a lot of insight to their concentration capacity.
Also similar to how crossing the arms signifies a person protecting themselves,
crossing the legs can do the same. Women tend to cross their legs or hold their
legs close together when wearing dresses or skirts, but this doesn’t always have
to mean that the scenario is making them feel insecure. On the other side, men
tend to do the opposite and actually spread their legs excessively widely while
sitting down. This takes up a lot of space, and these types of moves most
generally indicate a feeling of authority or overconfidence. When someone
partakes in one of these space-claiming moves such as spreading the legs very
far apart while seated, it can be assumed that they are trying to express
confidence or superiority, whether they realize it or not.
The way a person carries themselves while walking is also a great indicator of
their inner workings. A person who walks in wide strides and a confident manner
exhibits poise and ability, and dragging feet with a slouched posture while
walking can indicate a lack of confidence.
To What Extent Can We Control or Fake Our Body
Language?
It has been said that if you know how to properly alter and control your body
language to seem more self-assured, that it will actually sink in and cause you to
become more confident. One study in particular was done by Amy Cuddy to test
this theory. The subjects partook in “high-power” and “low-power” poses and
the variances were observed. High-power poses include those that take up space,
like leaning back in a chair with your hands folded behind your neck and your
feet propped up, or standing with your hands on your hips. Low-power poses
included things like slouching or sitting in a chair with crossed arms and legs.

The results showed that when the people were executing the high-power
positions, their testosterone levels were raised and their stress hormones
(cortisol) were decreased, and the exact opposite occurred when doing the low-
power positions. The conclusive result was that you can actually alter the
chemical and hormone levels in your body by consciously taking part in a pose,
regardless of whether or not that really reflects what you were actually thinking
at the time. As an AP, you can refer back to this when observing people in the
future. If you have thoughts that the person actually inherently lacks confidence
but are compensating with high-power poses, those positions can actually be
providing them with the confidence that they are otherwise missing.
Aspects of the Face
With all the muscles in the face and its ability to display thoughts and emotions,
reading facial expressions can be a difficult task. However, there are a few basic
principles of facial movements that can be used to determine simple emotions.
Positivity or Happiness: In western cultures a smile is generally accepted
as a sign of happiness, but it is only genuine happiness if the muscles
around the eyes are engaged in the expression. This will be evident by the
crow’s feet or wrinkles near the corners of the eyes. Another sign of
muscle engagement is the eyes becoming more horizontally narrow as the
cheek muscles rise and the smile widens. Without these notable
characteristics of a smile, an ingenuine smile may come across as sarcasm
or general courtesy, but not true joyousness. In Eastern cultures a smile
may be interpreted as a sign of agreement and not necessarily a sign of
happiness.
Negativity or Sadness: The signs of sadness are visible on the eyes and
mouth. The inner points of the eyebrows will be drawn inward and
upward. The corners of the mouth may be pointed downward, as well as
the bottom lip slightly protruding with both lips pressed together. Research
points out that sadness is the hardest expression to fake.
Hate or Contempt: The expression of hate or contempt can be marked by a
look also referred to as a sneer, in which the mouth resembles a half smile
but one corner of the mouth is drawn up higher than the other. The eyes
may be narrowed with the eyebrows drawn toward one another and the
cheek muscles protruding as they are raised.
Distaste or Disgust: The cheeks will be raised and the eyebrows drawn
together and downward. The nose will also be scrunched up and the upper

lip curled exposing clenched teeth.
Shock or Surprise: The eyes will be opened wide which causes the
eyebrows to raise significantly. The bottom jaw may also drop open
slightly or widely.
Fear: Fear will cause the eyebrows to raise and wrinkle and the bottom
eyelids will be drawn upward. Sometimes, the upper eyelids will also rise,
exposing whites in the eyes above the irises. The lips may also be slightly
parted.
Anger: The eyes will be narrowed with the eyebrows drawn inwards and
down. The lips may be pressed together if the person is not speaking, also
clenching the jaw muscles and the lower jaw slightly protruding. If the
person is speaking, the tone of voice will likely be raised.
Obvious and Subtle Expressions
Macro (obvious) expressions manifest when a person is around others with
whom they’re comfortable or when they are in a situation in which they don’t
need to censor their emotions. These expressions will last for half a second to
five seconds. Micro (subtle) expressions last for fractions of seconds making
them difficult to recognize. They usually only appear when someone is
attempting to hide their true emotions in a situation. The person is also generally
unaware they are making micro expressions so it’s a good way to determine a
person’s true emotions when they are not openly expressing their feelings.
When learning skills to become an AP, the face will be a big focus of attention.
The many muscles of the face around the eyes and eyebrows and the mouth can
divulge the secrets of a person’s intentions and emotions. Before exploring
specific facial expressions, we will learn the concept of universal expressions of
the face. Are there expressions that are evident around the world throughout the
many cultures that exist? Is it necessary to reevaluate what you understand about
facial expressions when you cross borders? The answer may lie in the
discoveries of Charles Darwin.
Inborn Expressions
Charles Darwin published The Expressions of the Emotions of Man and Animals
in 1872 and explained that every human on earth can only share six basic
expressions because of their genes. These expressions are happiness and sadness,
fear and surprise, and anger and disgust. Just as evolution has been a
controversial theory, so too was Darwin’s theory about facial expressions,

causing unrest for decades among scientists who argued its validity.
In the 1960s, facial expression expert and psychiatrist Paul Ekman decided to
put the theory to test. Ekman along with his partners traveled all over the world
into parts untouched by western influence. He discovered that, although having
been secluded from much of the world, people were able to display and
recognize the same facial expressions as people from most other parts of the
world. His conclusion was that no matter where or how a person was raised,
every person shares an understanding of the six basic facial expressions. Ekman
also added a seventh expression – contempt.
Scientists around the world since Ekman’s work have challenged his findings,
stating that it is not solely a result of genetic influence, but that it is a
combination of genetics and culture. While there are variations among different
cultures, the prominent seven remain strong. A human’s ability to recognize a
facial expression happens almost subconsciously, to the point that our brains find
human-like faces in non-human objects, projecting human emotion on
emotionless objects. The seven main emotions manifest mainly within the eyes
and the mouth.
Eyebrows
The eyebrows are one of the most expressive features of a human face. Even for
someone who is generally adept at hiding their emotions, the eyebrows will
almost always give them away. Lowered eyebrows are intended to hide the eyes,
thereby hiding emotion. People with naturally frowny faces are regarded as
sneaky or unfriendly. Humans are naturally drawn to others with open
expressions, so a face that appears frowny can make someone suspicious or
uneasy. However, it is not wise to assume that someone with lowered eyebrows
is unfriendly. Sometimes in deep concentration a person may unconsciously
lower their eyebrows; other times it may be an expression of annoyance or anger.
Having a scrunched nose with lowered eyebrows is a sign of disgust.
Conversely, raised eyebrows can demonstrate fear, worry, or surprise and the
difference in these emotions can be obvious. Raised eyebrows that are slightly
curved may show signs of fear, while raised eyebrows in an arch shape will
indicate surprise. There will be other indicators that will decipher the person’s
true emotion.
Eyes

It has been said that the eyes are the windows to the soul and most people can
determine another’s emotion by looking into their eyes. We are so programmed
to read the eyes of others that we can tell when someone is looking at us from up
to one hundred feet away. We can also differentiate between someone blankly
staring at us or if they are directly looking at us. Some people are better at
decoding eye and eyebrow interactions than others so becoming a good AP will
require the ability to learn what movements are associated with what emotions.
We generally view the inability of someone to hold eye contact with another as a
sign of lying because they don’t want their face to reveal the truth. However,
well-seasoned liars will hold eye contact aggressively in a way that implies they
are challenging you to call them out on the lie. If the direct and aggressive eye
contact makes you uncomfortable, there’s a good chance they are manipulating
the truth. Other times aggressive eye contact can mean a lack of social skills and
the person with the unending gaze may not realize they are making you
uncomfortable.
Have you ever noticed someone who laughs or smiles and their eyes seem to
show no expression? It can be a little creepy and cause you to feel suspicious
about their genuine feelings about the situation. A genuine smile will cause the
muscles in the corners of the eyes to contract, causing wrinkles or laugh lines. If
you are aware of laugh lines when trying to make a good impression on
someone, rest assured you are coming across as genuine.
Mouth
The mouth has many muscles which cause a variety of movements that relate to
emotions. The movement of the lips can give away many subtle expressions.
This is an advantage when it comes to being an AP because the mouth is also
very hard to control and might reveal feelings that someone might be trying to
hide. We’ve previously mentioned that a fake smile is evident by movement of
only the mouth, with no movement of the cheeks or eyes. A person who is
smiling to be courteous or when they don’t really want to smile will only raise
the corners of their mouth while the rest of their face is generally unaffected. A
mouth that is turned downward may imply sadness, but some people have
naturally downturned lips and always appear to be sad.
If someone lifts only one corner of their mouth, it generally displays as
contempt, a facial expression known as a sneer. The disdainful half-smile is most
likely a remnant of animalistic tendencies from our past when bearing one’s

teeth was a sign of hatred or hostility. Almost every other species of animal will
bear its teeth to display anger, not happiness.
Tightly clenching one’s teeth is another expression to watch for. This usually
indicates a level of unrest or being uncomfortable with the situation and they
may be unsure of what to say. This face is evident when someone is caught in a
lie or when revealing an awkward truth. Sometimes anger can cause a person to
purse their lips as if they are trying to keep the words from exploding out of their
mouth. Clenching the lips may be a way of keeping quiet while they work out
the wording of how they want to say something. Biting the lips can also be a
sign of contemplative thought or an attempt to stay quiet. Jaw clenching reveals
discomfort as well. An AP can infer that someone who clenches or grinds their
teeth might suffer from anxiety or they might be distracted and they are unaware
they are doing it.
Conversely, puckered lips can indicate openness or desire. If someone is
puckering their lips while talking to someone, chances are that they are sexually
attracted to the other person. When the lips are not drawn in any direction or
shape, generally the person is comfortable and relaxed.
Conclusion
You might feel that you’ve ingested a lot of information about reading a person’s
face and the many variations that expressions can reveal about emotion. On the
positive side, the eyebrows and eyes tend to work in tandem, so recognizing one
movement will inform the other. Fear, surprise, and worry are notablely driven
by the eyebrows raising and the eyes widening. The subtle differences, such as a
curve in the eyebrow, will delineate fear. Lowered eyebrows tend to reveal a
person is annoyed, angry, or deep in thought.
The eyes themselves have the ability to reveal other emotions. In western
cultures, steady eye contact can display confidence but if taken too far can show
aggression. In other cultures, however, steady eye contact is considered rude, so
it is wise to be mindful of cultural backgrounds and customs. Sometimes a
person will avoid eye contact when they are lying, while some may try to
distract the person they’re lying to by holding eye contact too firmly in an
attempt to compensate. Because the eyes can be very revealing, it’s important as
an AP to pay close attention to the eyes and the expression they emote when
analyzing a person.
To determine if someone is displaying a genuine smile, the eyes and the mouth

will be involved. Laugh lines in the corners of the eyes will be evident, whereas
a fake smile will only involve the mouth. The mouth can also display other
emotions – downturned lips might mean sadness, one corner of the mouth lifted
is contempt, pursed lips display anger or discomfort, and puckered lips show
desire.
When combining all aspects of a person’s facial expression, you get a complete
view of their emotional state at any moment and, depending on when those
expressions manifest, can reveal a lot about a person in general. While there are
differences among countries or regions of the world, there are generally accepted
expressions of some emotions across different cultures – perhaps more reliable
than body language. There are also micro expressions that will be covered in
depth elsewhere in this book. For now, rest assured that being able to reliably
read a person’s face is a critical skill to becoming an AP.
Review
Here are three scenarios of expression through body language. Try to understand
what is being expressed, then compare your answers to the ones listed below.
Example One: This person sits far away from others with slumped shoulders and
arms crossed. Legs are crossed with one foot twitching. Eyebrows are drawn
together and lips pressed tightly together.
Example Two: This person makes gestures as they speak at a volume that can be
clearly heard by everyone they are addressing. They sit upright with their
shoulders drawn back. Sometimes they will lightly touch the person next to them
as they are talking. Eyebrows are relaxed and they maintain eye contact with the
person they are speaking to. They smile when it’s appropriate to do so and their
smile affects their entire face and narrows their eyes.
Example Three: This person maintains consistent eye contact as they stand with
their feet apart, arms crossed as they are speaking. They occasionally smile but it
doesn’t engage their eyes. They may show a micro expression intermittently in
which the eyebrows pull upward creating wrinkles between them, their eyes
widen, and their lips press together. They maintain a considerable distance
between themselves and others.
Answers
Example One: This person likely feels insecure or anxious, or is uncomfortable
with the people around them. They are not open to being approached by others

and probably lacks self-confidence.
Example Two: This person is comfortable in their own skin and doesn’t fear
judgement from others. They don’t feel the need to exert dominance, but rather,
they exude a natural high status. Their confidence allows them to connect with
others.
Example Three: This is an example of someone who is attempting to hide their
true feelings by making it appear as if they are feeling a different way. They are
attempting to project dominance and confidence, when in fact they are feeling
annoyed, nervous, or fearful. They overcompensate these feelings by trying to
look intimidating.

Chapter 3 – Outward Personality Characterization
Aspects
This chapter will explore five facets of a person’s lifestyle that will help you to
better understand aspects of their personality:
1. Looking at someone’s habits and tastes to understand them
2. How someone’s appearance and clothing are used as a form of expression
3. Analyzing how a person uses language
4. Correlations between taste in music and personality traits
5. Examining a person’s peer group to understand them
There are many aspects of a person’s personality that you don’t know when you
first meet them. However, there are aspects about them that they project whether
they know it or not, such as their clothing choice or personal hygiene. By
analyzing their belongings, clothing, use of language, and overall appearance
you can gain an insight into who they are. You may also learn about them
through the people they choose to interact with, observing their habits and taking
note of their tastes in entertainment or social activities.
Analyzing versus Judging
When you use external factors to evaluate someone, it’s important that you take
an objective perspective and use caution not to judge a person. What you see on
the outside are mere indications about their internal qualities. You should use
what you can see as pieces of the whole puzzle of who they are. For instance,
many celebrities portray themselves one way to further their careers in the
spotlight. In their personal lives, however, this may not be an accurate portrait of
how they act “behind closed doors” so to speak. They only portray themselves in
a certain manner to benefit their work life.
What You See
Important indicators about a person will leak out via their outward appearance.
Their hair styles, the clothes they wear, the choice to wear a certain perfume or
cologne, or other personal grooming habits can be used to gain perspective about
a person. Many people use these methods of personal style to express
themselves. Keep in mind, though, they may be dressing a certain way to create
an appearance or impression that may not be aligned with their true internal self.
Take the example of a young female headed to a job interview in an office with a

mostly male population. She may choose to wear a dark-colored pant suit and a
blouse just low-cut enough to show a bit of cleavage. She may truly feel
intimidated, but she wants to project that she is confident. Some studies suggest
that women who choose to hide their feminine assets (i.e. breasts or hips) are
subconsciously expressing an insecurity in their femininity. On the other hand,
women who are unafraid to show a little cleavage or wear tight-fitting clothing
are expressing the fact that they don’t feel undermined by their gender.
This is one example that demonstrates how difficult it can be to determine
personality traits about a person based solely on their attire. Other grooming
habits may give a clearer and perhaps more accurate view of their internal
aspects. For the most part, someone who has taken the time to appear clean and
presentable and who wears appropriate fitting clothing demonstrates a certain
level of self-confidence. The other side of that is when someone appears
unkempt with unwashed hair and wears baggy or raggedy clothes probably has
low self-esteem or lacks social awareness.
Because these types of observations are only visible, there are many other cues
about a person to consider in conjunction with their appearance – for instance,
body language or verbal communication. From the previous example of the well-
groomed, well-dressed person, it may be that they are highly insecure and they
have spent much time and effort in creating their ideal appearance. Conversely,
the person who appears to be messy or unkempt may have high self-confidence
but rejects the notion of accepting social cues about expectations and believe
their appearance is not who they is as a person. Yet another possibility exists – if
a person appears unkempt but displays other aspects of having high self-esteem,
it is possible that they ran out of the house in a hurry or that appearing this way
is an ironic form of fashion-focused self-expression.
What You Hear
How a person’s voice projects can also be indicative of their internal personality.
If a person speaks in a medium volume with rhythmic or steady intonation and
the words seem to fall out of their mouth with ease, chances are that they are
comfortable and confident. If someone stutters through their words and their
voice is shaky this may demonstrate their lack of belief in what they’re telling
you or that they are uncomfortable. Sometimes if a person is speaking very
rapidly, it may show signs of anxiousness. It may also mean that they tend to
turn their thoughts inward as they are ineffective communicators and pay little

attention to the words leaving their mouth.
You may also be able to draw conclusions about a person based on how much
they say or their amount of participation in a conversation. Some people spend a
lot of time talking and very little time listening or allowing others to speak. This
can indicate one of two traits – the person is overconfident and believes
whatever they are saying is the most important, or it manifests as an expression
of insecurity that makes them feel they need to overcompensate for their lack of
internal prowess.
Interestingly, some studies have concluded that people who talk more and tend to
have extroversive characteristics appear to others to be more intelligent than they
actually are. That only lasts until they make a remark that is absurd or makes no
sense at all. Someone that allows others time to speak generally show
consideration for others – although again, it shouldn’t be assumed that their
outward projections are direct reflections of their internal thought processes. You
must also consider their body language and eye movements, as well as other
factors, when paying attention to their verbal interaction with others.
What They Listen To
There is a multitude of studies that have been conducted about a person’s
musical preference in relation to their personality. As you may have noticed by
now, there is no “one size fits all” rule when it comes to determining
characteristics of someone’s personality. Below is a summary of a study
conducted at Heriot-Watt University of 36,000 participants from all over the
world:
Rap/Hip-Hop: Correlates with being outgoing and having high self-
esteem; despite stereotypes, there seemed to be no links to aggression or
violence
Rock/Heavy Metal: Another category that defied stereotypes, there seems
to be no connection to violence or aggression with this musical preference.
Listeners tend to be creative, introverted, gentle, and have low self-esteem
Indie: Connections to creativity and intellect; also, linked to low self-
esteem, passivity, and anxiety
Pop: Fans of this genre tend to be honest, conventional, and extroverted
with high self-esteem; some occurrences of less creativity
Country/Western: Correlates to conventional and outgoing personalities
that are emotionally stable and hard-working

Classical: Although listeners tend to be introverted, they have high self-
esteem and are emotionally stable and comfortable in their own skin
Dance: Connected with outgoing and assertive personalities
Jazz/Blues: Fans have high self-esteem and are extroverted, intelligent,
and creative
Habitual Behaviors
Sow a thought, reap an action;
sow an action, reap a habit;
sow a habit, reap a character;
sow a character, reap a destiny.
- Stephen R. Covey
A person’s habits will also reveal a great deal about their personality.
Volunteering may indicate that they are empathetic and generous. Having pets
could show they enjoy caring for others or that they don’t interact well with
people or they are lonely. If they are heavily influenced by following a strict
schedule, it could be an indicator of the desire to maintain control and may be
caused by a lack of self-assurance. If someone prefers to spend most of their
time socializing and prefers not to be alone they may feel the desire to self-
validate. Someone who spends very little time with others may lack self-
confidence or feel uncomfortable in the presence of others.
Also, consider the kinds of entertainment a person finds enjoyable: television
shows, video games, websites, articles or books, blogs, or movies. Consider the
end result of the consumption of these sources of entertainment or how they
might influence a person who regularly consumes media from various sources.
The way a person views outcomes of their choices – whether positive or
negative – can give insight into their perspectives.
Now combine their media consumption choices with their disposition. Check out
their Twitter or Facebook, who they follow, what they post, who their friends
are, etc. Many times, people will mirror their internal sentiments on an outward
platform, especially if they spend an excessive amount of unconstructive time on
these social media sites. Maybe they are more comfortable with the illusion of
anonymity these sites provide and are uncomfortable in face-to-face interactions
because of low self-confidence. Perhaps the reassurance of constant interaction
with others soothes an internal need for contact.

Every little piece of information can be used to gather a whole image of a
person. Any of these aspects can be considered a habit if they expose themselves
to it on a regular basis. Participation in these activities can influence and form
the thought processes a person may knowingly or unknowingly construct.
Who They Interact With
Perhaps one of the most definitive factors of a person’s internal characteristic is
who they choose to associate with, influencing how they view themselves. Just
to reiterate, this is not an exact science – you would have to analyze each person
in their social circle to draw more solid conclusions. However, a person’s friends
will be yet more pieces of the puzzle of a person. A peer group can influence
how a person makes decisions for themselves, as well as influence how others
make their own decisions.
Consider a group of friends who regularly party and binge drink on the
weekends – it is highly unlikely you will find someone in that group who is
concerned with their health. Studies have shown that how a person chooses their
social circles is a highly complex interaction of many variables. There does seem
to be four main contributing factors:
1. Convenience: How often people interact and physical proximity can be
very influencing when associating with a group. It’s easier to be friends
with someone just a few minutes up the road than someone who lives
several hours away. It’s also easier to form a social bond with someone
you see on a daily basis rather than every few weeks.
2. Reciprocal Altruism: This consideration lies in what two people (or a
group) can do for one another and how often it is reciprocated. It can be as
simple as offering companionship or a friendship based on person one
offering a higher social status association to person two, while person two
offers kindness and generosity. It usually isn’t this basic, but
understanding reciprocated altruism can determine what a person feels
they lack and how they seek out those traits in others.
3. Similarities: Generally, people become friends because of similar innate
and existing characteristics, despite the fact they may have many other
differences. There will always need to a common ground on which two
people begin to interact and can establish a positive relationship.
4. Reinforcing Perceptions: Many times, a person forms a social bond with
another person because that person will reinforce their perceptions of the

world. For example, friends may share certain morals or values or
mindsets, and will often befriend someone who confirms their self-
evaluation of their value as a person. This may be a subconscious
attraction – people who are confident will seek those who support their
confidence; conversely, someone who lacks self-value may be drawn to
others who reinforce their lack of value. For instance, this is evident
among women who are victims of domestic violence. They will continue
to endure repeated abuse, feeling unable to leave the relationship because
they have perhaps (subconsciously) validated their lack of self-worth and
believe they deserve terrible treatment.
Proximity
When analyzing someone, the closer they are to a person they are in a
relationship with can tell you about that person. Consider Joe, Susie, and Brian.
If Joe and Susie are close friends, you can learn a lot about Joe from Susie.
However, if Brian is Joe’s distant cousin whom Joe only sees every few years,
Brian will offer little in the way of understanding Joe. This not only applies to
the amount of contact between two people, but also a matter of influence. Joe
may be highly influenced by Susie, but it also amounts to the strength of Susie’s
influence on Joe.

Chapter 4 – Understanding Verbal Communication
We’ve already talked about the non-verbal ways that people communicate, but
we can also learn a lot from their verbal communications and how they talk.
However, this doesn’t mean that they need to tell you their deep dark secrets.
You can learn a lot about a person just by listening to their speed, rhythm, and
tone. Part of being an AP is recognizing that you have to overcome certain biases
when you listen to somebody, because these can get between you and the truth.
Now we’re going to talk about misconceptions you might develop about
somebody based solely on their voice. We’re also going to learn about how word
choice can tell you about some aspects of an individual’s personality - you need
to know this as an AP so that you can look beyond your first impressions.
Pitch
The pitch of a person’s voice can determine what others think of them. People
generally believe men with higher-pitched voices and women with lower pitches.
People are more easily calmed by lower voices, and they’re more relaxing to
listen to. This why places such as emergency call centers, hospitals, and
customer service locations prefer to hire individuals who have nice low voices.
This might be a sexist issue: people associate lower voices with testosterone, a
hormone found in men. This puts women at a disadvantage because their voices
are naturally higher, which makes it more difficult for them to be taken seriously.
Many struggle to make their voices sound lower, which will make them seem
more powerful in the business world. Also, high pitches are associated with
children, which can make it difficult for high-pitched people to be taken
seriously. As an AP, you need to be aware of this so that you can give everyone
the consideration and attention they deserve. Don’t let a high-pitched voice mix
you up.
People can control the pitch of their voice from four different places: the nose,
the mouth, the chest, and the diaphragm. When people speak from their nose
they sound high-pitched and whiny. When people speak from their mouth, it’s
less nasally but it’s still not the best. A mouth speaker likely feels unseen or
unappreciated, and even though they try to be heard, nobody listens.
Most people speak from their chest, and this makes sure that they are heard.
However, it can be tiring and sooner or later the speaker will become hoarse. The

best way to talk is from the diaphragm - it is strong, full, and generally requires
training to be effective. Diaphragm speakers have likely put time and effort into
it, and they are probably successful and used to their speeches and comments
being heard.
Speech Patterns
The way someone speaks is referred to as their speech pattern. This can refer to
the speed of the speech and any pauses they take. It’s possible that how quickly
somebody talks has a bigger impression on somebody than their tone. This is
because tone can only be partially controlled, but speaking patterns can be
changed entirely if the speaker wishes.
First, let’s discuss fast talkers. Speaking too quickly can make you seem
rushed and anxious. It makes you look like you’re just saying whatever comes to
mind without bothering to think about it first, and it can make the listener
nervous. As an AP, you need to notice these fast talkers. If they always speak
quickly, they’re probably always anxious. If they slow down during times when
the situation is calmer and there aren’t as many people around, their anxiety
might stem from crowded situations and stressful social environments.
Slow talkers, on the other hand, tend to seem more authoritative, friendly, and
calm. They’re clearly taking their time to think about what they’re going to say.
However, this can be tricky - if you speak too slowly, you might appear tired or
distracted, and your listener might get bored. As an AP, you need to notice these
very slow talkers. They might need more time than most because it takes them
time to put their thoughts together. If they pause often, this is probably the case.
Fillers and Pronouns
Besides the speed of their speech, a person’s choice of words can also be helpful
when it comes to analyzing them. It may sound difficult to try and see the
meaning of every single world, but there are a few specific parts you can focus
on instead. For example, fillers and pronouns.
Fillers are words that break up normal speech and don’t add any meaning to it.
For example, there’s “uh”, “like”, “er”, “um”, and more. They’ve gotten a bad
reputation recently, and many individuals giving speeches or individuals in
positions of power have been trying to get rid of fillers entirely. However,
linguists have proven that fillers are actually pretty important.
Filler give the speaker a chance to think, which results in better conversations.

For, example, if somebody uses “um” a lot, it might look like they are anxious or
insecure. In reality, research has shown that they’re just collecting their thoughts.
They’re remembering something, searching for the right word, or correcting a
statement they’ve already made. “Like” is used the same way, although it is
often viewed negatively and associated with “valley girl”s and people with lower
intelligence. The filler a person choose depends on their age, gender, and region.
For example, women tend to say “um” and older people tend to say “er”.
Pronouns include “we”, “I”, and “you”. As an AP, you need to be aware of the
fact that a pronoun can offer insights into an individual. Research has shown that
when people are talking to somebody in a position of power or somebody who
they feel intimidated by, they use “I”. This is because they are feeling self-
conscious and think they need to assert themselves. Somebody who uses “I”
constantly and is always bringing the conversation back to themselves probably
feels insecure. They are intimidated by everybody, and this strange combination
of insecurity and arrogance is definitely something that an AP should notice.
The pronoun “you” and other words like that (“yourself”, “your”) aren’t always
positive. They tend to be used more in arguments, when people are putting
blame on each other. However, “you” words can also be positive, and knowing
which way it goes requires an understanding of the context of the situation.
Let’s consider “we”. This pronoun can tell you about how somebody is doing in
their romantic relationships. If couples generally use “we” rather than singular
pronouns such as “I”, they see themselves as partners and they are in sync. The
same can go for groups - when people feel like they belong, they use “we”.
Research also shows us that a traumatic event can lead groups of people to use
“we” more. For example, Americans after 9/11, when patriotism was high.
The Significance of Swears
Historically, swearing was seen as vulgar, a sign of a lack of education. The
media portrayed these people as inferior, and people were judged harshly if they
used obscenities. More recently, however, curses are being looked at in terms of
personality analysis. Current research indicates that people who swear more are
seen as being more trustworthy, extroverted, and persuasive than others. It shows
fearlessness, honesty when it comes to expressing intense emotions, and a lack
of concern about what others might think.
Summary
Overall, it is important as an AP to remember that how a person speaks

can tell a lot about them. True, their tone might not reflect their personality, but
you can still draw some conclusions about how others see them. Keep in mind
that whether or not they have taken the time to train their pitch is also important.
The speed of speech is essential as well, as it can give insights into whether they
are a more thoughtful or more anxious person.
Finally, we covered the significance of certain words, such as fillers, pronouns,
and swear words. As an AP, you can’t assume that fillers are negative, or that
somebody who uses “I” often is self-centered. “You” can be positive or negative
depending on the context, but “we” is nearly always positive. People who swear
often are likely intense and honest.

Chapter 5 — The Six Basic Human Needs
This chapter covers the six basic human needs, how the ordering of those needs
impacts a person’s behavior, the ways each of us control our needs, and how
behaviors can become addictive.
The Six Basic Human Needs
Before we can analyze somebody’s behavior, we need to understand what their
needs are, which can also be phrased as what their goals in life are. Food, water,
shelter, and other necessities are included here, and the things that people need to
be happy can be split into six categories. The first four are primal needs, which
are necessary for survival. The last two are spiritual needs, which are necessary
for fulfillment and involve something greater than the self.
Humans need all of the following to be met in the right amounts and with the
right method. If people are receiving something that feels necessary for their
survival, they may end up pursuing goals that don't necessarily help themselves
or others.
The Four Primal Needs
1. Certainty: Every person needs a level of certainty in their lives. How much
they need depends on the person, but generally it requires the ability to
avoid pain and stress and find comfort. Overall, people need some amount
of control over the world around them. People who have an overdeveloped
need for certainty can sometimes become what we call “control freaks”, or
people who are obsessed with eliminating all uncertainty and controlling
everything about their surroundings. 
Generally this need is easy to meet - speaking in primal terms, people just
need food, water, and somewhere safe to come home to every night.
Sometimes meeting this need is as simple as watching a movie you
enjoyed when you were younger.
2. Uncertainty: Given the need for certainty, this may seem strange.
However, without some uncertainty, life becomes monotonous, with little
variety or change. All people need some stimuli in order to stay engaged,
and all people want some variety in their lives. 
However, the amount of variety is different from person to person. Some
individuals are perfectly content at one job forever, and their variety is

trying a new food or movie or running route every week. On the other
hand, some individuals need the excitement that comes from seeing new
places and meeting new people. The need for uncertainty can grow to the
point where people show a lack of commitment, and the need for basic
physiological things such as food and shelter can go neglected.
3. Significance: Everybody needs to feel significant somehow, because it
helps them feel important, unique, valued, and special. This is tied closely
into the feedback we get from the rest of the world - it can validate our
existence. It comes in a variety of forms - a mother might feel significant
when she cares for her baby, a coworker might feel significant when you
go out of your way to thank them, and a murderer might feel significant
when they hold a gun to their victim’s head. 
This need is the most complex out of all of them, and characteristics such
as attention seeking, self-righteousness, competitiveness, and insecurity
can all arise thanks to this.
4. Love and connection: Everybody needs some form of love and connection
in their lives, but it doesn’t necessarily have to come from a significant
other. People can be emotionally intimate with a community, a friend, or a
family member as well. 
This need is connected to compassion and empathy, which are both very
important when it comes to maintaining relationships with others. If this
need becomes excessive it can lead to an over-dependence on others. If
this need is not strong enough, people can become isolated, which can
create issues with accountability or conscience in the way they act.
The Two Spiritual Needs
1. Growth: The need for growth runs alongside the need for uncertainty,
because both deal with change. Uncertainty doesn’t lead in any particular
direction, it’s a simple change in circumstances. Growth is very different.
This is a person’s deliberate progress towards an ideal, a goal, or an
outcome. Material growth encompasses activities such as improving your
physical state or circumstance or working on a project - for example,
maybe you take on a home improvement project or work towards a
promotion. 
It can also come in the form of personal development, which is generally
internal and can include gaining a better understanding of yourself or
learning to be more generous. Overall, growth can apply to every area of

your life, and it will have a huge impact on the people who you are closest
to.
2. Contribution: In order for people to feel truly fulfilled, they need to feel as
though they’ve impacted a cause which goes beyond just themselves. This
comes from our basic characteristic of being highly social animals. We
used to survive in groups, but in our modern society that instinct has
turned into the need to give back and help others or to serve some cause
greater than ourselves.
How are the Needs Prioritized?
Different people prioritize their needs in different ways, and understanding why
they choose some over others will help us gain a deeper understanding of who
they are. The way people meet their needs is also important when it comes to
analyzing somebody’s behavior.
Exercise
If you had to order your needs from most important to least important, what
would your list look like? What does this indicate about your priorities in life,
and how has that impacted your past actions and choices? Think about a close
friend or family member - how do you think they rank their needs? How do they
fulfil these needs? We all do it differently, so take a moment to look back at your
own list. Next to each need, list three negative and three positive ways that you
fulfill it. Next, do the same for the close friend or family member.
Next, take a look at how you’ve behaved in a recent situation, and consider your
typical acts and responses. Can you explain it by looking at how you prioritize
and fulfill your needs? Try doing the same for the other person. Keep in mind
that the way we view and list our needs can change as we go through life.
Worked Example
It’s easier to internalize a theory with a worked example. In the real world you
would encounter a person and their behavior and then work backwards in order
to analyze their actions and figure out what needs motivated them. Let’s get
started with some brief background about our example scenario: Bobby and
Sally are four years into a relationship together. Lisa’s mother, who lives in a
different state, has become seriously sick.
Scenario One

Action: Sally wants to move to be closer to her mother. Bobby tries to convince
her to stay, and when she decides to leave, he gets angry and leaves the house. 
Analysis: Sally values love and connection over all else, and is willing to leave
certainty and growth behind to go take care of her mother. Bobby values
significance and certainty, and since Lisa isn’t meeting that need, he storms out
in anger.
Scenario Two
Action: Sally doesn’t move, and she keeps her current job. Bobby thinks they
should move closer to her mother, and they argue. 
Analysis: Sally values growth and certainty above all else, and decides to stay
put and focus on her job so she can progress there. Bobby values love and
connection, so he thinks they should move closer to her mother.
However, these scenarios are extremely simplified. In reality, there would be a
complex and subtle contribution from needs, actions, thoughts, and emotions.
However, by constantly looking at people’s needs and figuring out why they do
what they do, we can get a better understanding of the human processes and
improve our ability to analyze other people as well as ourselves.
Stranger or Friend
This method can come in handy in a variety of scenarios, but it’s most useful
when you are familiar with the way someone behaves. However, you can still
use it with people you aren’t acquainted with. All it takes is some simple
observations of how a person behaves in a couple of different scenarios to figure
out what their most valued needs are and how they fulfill them.
When People Use Negative Methods
You might be reading this book to try and understand the irrational and
potentially harmful behavior of somebody you know. For example, think back to
our previous example of a criminal who feels significant when they threaten and
terrify their victim. People will do anything to fulfill their needs, and if they
can’t or simply don’t want to do it through positive methods, they will turn to
negative ones.
For example, if you were dying of thirst you would drink any water you could
find, even if it was dirty and might make you sick. A child who does not receive
enough attention and is lacking in significant, love, connection, and growth

might act out to get some self-validation, despite the fact that it will be negative.
We’ll talk more about this later when we discuss the “stroke economy”.
What is a Needs Addiction?
Our desire to fulfill our needs is so intense that when we find a behavior that
works for us, we might become addicted to it. Generally, if a behavior fulfill
three or more needs over and over again, we will keep seeking it out, and
sometimes become addicted to it. This will eventually form psychological habits,
and they can form for positive and negative thoughts and behaviors.
If a child performs an act of generosity and is given contribution, love,
significance, and growth in return, they will learn to associate that generosity
with a good thing, and they will perform similar acts again and again. On the
other hand, if somebody never had those needs fulfilled as a child, they might
threaten somebody with a gun, get that fulfillment, and be tempted to repeat the
action. It doesn't matter that their action fulfilled the need in a negative way - it
still met the need.There are other factors like conscience and morals in this
situation, but we will talk about those later on.

Chapter 6 — Values, Beliefs, and Attitudes
This chapter will explain the following: 1 Defining values, beliefs, and attitudes
:1 How they coincide with Anthony Robbin’s six Fundamental human needs :1
Essentially, somebody’s values, attitudes, and beliefs play a major role in
understanding behavior. In order to fully understand another person, it is
essential first understand their belief system, values and attitudes. This will help
explain their behavior and give you a better idea of their perspective.
Beliefs
Beliefs are the fundamental framework of a person’s actions. A belief is a
person’s understanding of what something means. Some beliefs may be as
concrete as factual evidence, like science or math but other beliefs may be more
spiritual like religion or ideas based on past experiences. Some prime examples
of beliefs are Mary is the mother of Jesus, that there is an afterlife or maybe
there isn’t an afterlife, that women and men should be treated as equals, or that
people are born pure-hearted. Many beliefs are formed in the early stages of life
and based on the beliefs of those around you (i.e. your parents and
grandparents). Most beliefs are formed by the religion you grow up in, the
education you receive as a child. The beliefs are formed before you even fully
understand them. How can a six year old rationalize to somebody why they
believe God exists? They simply understand their beliefs based on where they
are and who they are around. In addition to family and religion, beliefs are
formed in school, from TV and newspapers, from their friends and friends’
families. Many of these beliefs will follow us through from childhood to
adulthood and will mainly be formed by what our parents have taught us.
Values
A value is an emotional state that you believe is important to uphold or not
uphold. Values are the behaviors associated with your belief system. They
determine the things you find important in life and the standards you give
yourself. So a belief may be that God lived a life of peace and love, he helped
the poor and women and children alike. The value associated with that may be
that you should always be mindful of the poor, you should volunteer and help
others. The value associated with the belief tells you how you should live your
life and how to act. Many of the most basic life values that people are trying to
uphold are happiness, devotion, honesty, education, spirituality, and equality.

Some of the values people are trying to escape are anger, hate, prejudice,
sadness, frustration, and dishonesty. For each value a person holds, there is a
belief system for how these values will be carried out.
Attitudes
An attitude is the mental state that links your personal values and the behaviors
associated with them. Attitudes play an important role, as they are not as firmly
grounded as your belief and value systems, and can also be impacted by other
influence in your life (stress, politics, those around you). Essentially, attitude is a
form of belief that is flexible and depend on the situation you find yourself in.
Beliefs, Attitudes, Values and the Relation to Six Human Needs
All people require the same basic six human needs. However, every person’s
beliefs, attitudes, and values are unique and different. The two groups feed off of
each other and influence your everyday life. It is a complex dance between your
needs and the attitudes, values, and beliefs you hold.
Applying your Beliefs, Attitudes, Values, and Needs
Sit down and make a list of the values you wish to uphold (positive values) and
the values you wish to avoid (negative values). Once you have your two lists,
organize them starting with most important to least important. Highlight the top
three values in each category. You are going to work the most on these.
The next step is to take your top six values and write down your belief about
how you can meet these values. For example, if you value charity and helping
others, your belief may be that you donate all of your excess time and money to
help those less fortunate than you. Or, you may believe that you should volunteer
at least once a month to a charitable organization. Whatever you decide is
acceptable for your life, write down your expectations.
Compare your list to the list of needs. How do these two lists connect? Now to
think critically. Analyze a situation in your left that you made a big decision
about. How did this decision connect to your beliefs, values, attitudes, and
needs? Let’s use an example to explain how all of these factors are related. Your
belief is that all people are created equal. You value equality in all situations.
Your needs, in order are; Significance, contribution, growth, uncertainty, love
and connection, and certainty. Your current situation: You graduate from medical
school and need to find a job. Let’s assume school was mostly paid for through
scholarships. You have two possible job opportunities. The first is to start a

practice in your city, you know the business and feel confident that the outlook
for business is good. You can quickly make a lot of money and buy a great house
and continue your future. The second option is to work in Haiti for a few years
and help vaccinate children in need. The job will not pay very much at all, you
will be away from your family for a few years, but when you return, you can still
open that practice. Chances are, you’d pick the position abroad. This is because
it aligns with your core beliefs, values, and attitudes. If you truly believe that all
are created equal, and you have the time and resources to devote, you should go
help others who are less fortunate. All six needs are met with working abroad.
You will feel significant by taking an honorable route. You will have
contribution in being able to help others. You fulfill your belief that all people
are equal. You will grow as a person from this experience as you meet many
people, different communities, and life experiences. Whereas, the option of
staying in your city and opening a practice may also fulfill some of the six needs,
it will not contribute to your values and beliefs regarding equality.
You have seen this practice in an example, now apply it to somebody that you
know. You may not be able to fill in every need, as you cannot always think in
the way that that person might, but do your best. Come up with the best analysis
you can and use the insights you have been given. You will be able to create a
decent analysis of the situation, and why that person chose the path they did.
Take your time while doing this, as understanding how all of these aspects
connects, will benefit you in your future decision making. Many people do not
take the time to think about why they do things the way they do. This practice
will allow you to see the interconnectedness of things.
Bottom Lines
A bottom line refers to a value that is hard-wired, something you learned when
you were young and holds value still. These beliefs effect every value, behavior,
and attitude you have as your life continues. These bottom lines are a result of
how your parents, guardians, etc. treated you. To understand another person, it is
important to understand what their bottom line is. For example, one bottom line
may be that a child is important and valued. This child grew up with their
parents always allowing them to come first. The child’s needs are first and
foremost and will always be taken care of. Wether it’s clothing, attention, or
money, the child will always come first. As that child grows up, they become an
adult who feels like valued and important. They want their issues to be addressed
and their needs met. They will not settle for less and they feel very confident in

their assertions. Those who interact with this adult will have more success if they
understand this bottom line. Another example is a child who was raised with
many siblings. They didn’t receive as much parental attention, however they
worked with their siblings to make sure that all the kids received the attention
they needed. All kids worked together to make sure the others were successful.
This person’s bottom line is that people work together, they never give up on
another. As this person becomes an adult, they give of their resources and time to
those they love. They won’t ever let people down. Even when significant others
aren’t necessarily pulling their weight, or need more attention, this person will
give. It may appear that they are being a pushover, or overextending their
resources, but that is not the case. This person was raised to help and love the
ones around them and they will not give up. Many factors are involved in a
person’s emotional development, but one thing that will not change, is their
bottom line. This will remain the same throughout their life unless they make an
active decision to change it and work diligently towards it.
Followthrough & Practical Use
Do you know your bottom lines? If you are having troubles pinpointing your
bottom line, it may help if you write down a few situations where you had a
strong reaction to something. Work backwards, starting with your
physical/emotional reaction and working towards the belief you have that may
be the factor driving your decisions. Now do this for somebody that you have a
close relationship to. It is important to note that finding your bottom line can
take time and is not necessarily an easy process. Be patient in this process, and it
will be worth it. There may be uncomfortable feelings associated with this type
of mental digging, but don’t be dismayed, just ask for help from others if you are
having trouble.

Chapter 7 — Transactional Analysis, the Three Ego-
States, and the Stroke Economy
This chapter will cover the three egos, how they interact, and the types of
interactions they have. It will also cover the stroke economy and an alternative
way.
Transactional Analysis
In 1957, psychiatrist Eric Berne developed the theory of Transactional Analysis.
His theory describes how people can understand their personality and
psychology for grown and change. This chapter will describe some of the basic
principles of his theory, enough for our purposes. Transactional Analysis is the
study of how people interact with others. A transaction between people involves
two or more people meeting and exchanging information (whether verbal or
physical). He refers to the transactional stimulus as the moment when one person
acknowledges the other. The transactional response is the other person’s
acknowledgement of the stimulus. For example; Mary and Dave are in line at the
DMV. Mary looks at Dave and smiles. He smile was the stimulus. His response
of, “hello” was the response. Berne then suggests that people respond to others
in one of the three ego-states. The ego states are parent, child, and adult. It is
important to note that one’s ego state will differ from situation to situation and
are not fixed states. All people have the capacity to act in any state, so we are
now going to describe each state.
Parent
The parent ego is derived from the learned behaviors and rules a child receives,
often from a parent. These rules and observations are formed in the early years
of an individual. These observations often come from a parent but can also be
from any adult that has impact on the child. It is important to note that these
observations are not analyzed by the child, not understood on a deeper level.
They are face-value ideas and rules that a person learns to live by. A prime
example would be ‘wash your hands before dinner’ or maybe ‘don’t play with
fire.’ The child doesn’t fully understand the purpose of said rules, however they
know to remember them and follow them.
Ego-state characteristics: Individuals in the parent state will unknowingly act
like the adults that were of importance in their early years. They will take on the
learned behaviors of their parents from childhood. A good example is a person

yelling at another person for doing something wrong, because that is how their
own parents responded to others.
Child
The personality characteristics of the child-ego are comprised of the emotional
responses a person had during their early years. In simplest terms, the child state
can be thought of as the feeling state. This is a person who has an internal
response to a given situation. Examples of child state emotions are ‘The dark is
scary’ or ‘It’s funny to be tickled.’
Ego-state characteristics: An individual in the child state will respond to
situations the way a child does— instant emotional responses with no reasoning.
Somebody in this state might sulk because they are unhappy, or act gleeful
because they are happy.
Adult
The personality characteristics of the adult state are actually combinations of the
other two ego states. The adult combines the parent and child state and builds a
bridge between them. Where the parent told the child what to do, and the child
listened; the adult listens as the child, but builds the understanding as to WHY.
For an example from our previous states, ‘It’s scary when it’s dark’ the adult
would view this as ‘It’s scary when it’s dark because you can’t see what’s
happening and crime is more prevalent at night.’
Ego-state characteristics: Individuals in the adult state are able to use reason to
figure out a situation and logic to form a conclusion. A person in the adult state
is able to calmly and rationally think through a situation, analyzing different
solutions to truly understand what’s going on. The adult uses their experiences in
the child state to negotiate feelings.
An important aspect of Transactional Analysis is the fact that many people
cannot access recorded memories in the brain that actually trigger emotions. The
emotions are still there and influence your life, but you may not understand why.
An example of this would be an individual that is afraid of water. They have no
recollection of unfortunate events involving water, but they just can’t seem to get
past this fear. Maybe this adult had an incident when they were a small child,
and do not remember the incident clearly, however, the incident is recorded in
the brain and the fear emotion is linked to it. Whenever the individual is around
water, that recorded emotion of fear resurfaces like the original situation

happened all over again.
Berne and Freud
Berne’s theory of the Child, Parent, and Adult have many similarities to Freud’s
Id, Ego, and Superego. However, it is important to note the main difference
between the two men’s theories. Freud believed that if you dug enough into your
past, you can uncover those memories and recall the situations that trigger your
emotions. Berne believed that you can get a similar understanding by watching
the experiences of others. Berne’s ego states are roles that appear during
interaction with others, whereas Freud’s Id, Ego, and Superego are fixed within
the individuals.
Identifying the States
It is not a simple task to determine which emotional state a person is it, however,
it is possible. Here is a list of observations that can be used to determine where a
person lies. It is not necessary to show all of the signs, and sometimes people
will have signs in multiple categories. There is no simple category to describe
any person, but this list will help you get started.
Signs for a Parent: lecturing, being overly critical, acting superior, a dominant
stance, shaking your finger, staring somebody down, overly voicing your
opinions and pushing them onto others, nagging.
Signs for a Child: head hanging down, avoiding eye contact, fidgeting, slumped
posture, tapping feet or swimming legs, pouting, a high-pitched voice or whine,
being overly quiet, low self-confidence, nervousness, being frightened, yelling,
crying dramatically.
Signs for an Adult: Accepting alternative views, relaxed posture/body language,
confident tone of voice with assertive volume, talking through emotions, sharing
perspective openly, able to correlate emotions with the reasons for them, takes
responsibility for things.
Assessing the States in Action
When individuals interact with each other they will each subscribe to one
emotional state. The states are not determined by age and are not fixed, meaning
they can change situation to situation. All individuals will primarily fall into one
state the most often. It would be ideal for adults to remain in the adult state, with
the ability to analyze and understand the others around us in a non-biased
manner. It is an advantage to be able to determine another person’s emotional

state while interacting with them. Emotional states determine how a person
responds to a specific situation. If you can pinpoint their most common
emotional state, you will be more successful at interacting and communicating
with them. Understanding a person’s background will help determine their
emotional state. For example, if Sally grew up taking care of her siblings, she
might be prone to the Parent state.
In addition to the benefits of understanding somebody’s emotional state,
understanding how emotional states interact can prove helpful in analyzing
situations. Emotional states are often played off of each other. For example, if
one person begins to take on the Parent role, the person they are interacting with
may resort to the Child role. If the second person is strong enough to withstand
the Parent person, they may be able to take on the Adult role and handle it
smoothly.
Situations Explained
Parent to Child example: One person is standing tall with a snarl on their face.
They have their hands resting on their hips and they say, “You’re doing it all
wrong.”The second person is standing in front of the first, hands held together,
with their head hanging low as they say, “Oops, I messed it all up.” This is a
typical parent child communication that does not need to occur within the
bounds of parent and child. This interaction could take place between coworkers,
friends, adults, or two children.
Adult to Adult example: One adult standing relaxed, but assertive says, “It hurt
my feelings when you were joking around with me yesterday. I thought you
should know how I felt so we don’t have to have this experience in the future.”
The other person is sitting relaxed with an understanding and slightly concerned
face as they say “I’m sorry I hurt your feelings. I thought it was okay to joke like
that, but I’ll make sure not to do it in the future.”
Complementary vs. Crossed Transactional Situations
All transactional situations will begin with a stimulus, or one person
acknowledging or talking to another. The stimulus will almost always be
followed by a response, the other person acknowledging the first. Each
combination of transactional states will result in a different, individualized
dynamic. There are two main categories for transactional situations. They can
either be ‘crossed’ or ‘complementary.’ A crossed interaction refers to a situation
where two individuals are responding in different states. The stimulus doesn’t

get the proper response and this ends with a lack in communication, conflict, or
confusion. The second type of transactional situation is complementary. In a
complementary interaction refers to both people having the same state and the
stimulus prompts an appropriate response for that state. In other words, they are
both coming at a situation from the same emotional stance, and are able to
effectively communicate.
Situational Examples
Example One
Tom: ‘Have you walked the dog?’ Sarah: ‘Yes. I took her out earlier.’ To analyze;
both Tom and Sarah are in the same emotional state of the Adult. Tom asks a
firm question and Sarah responds positively and with the information he needed.
This was a successful transaction
Example Two
Tom: ‘Have you walked the dog?’
Sarah: ‘No! It’s not my job to always take her out. Don’t blame me for it not
getting done. It’s all your fault!’ To analyze; Tom asked Sarah a question in the
Adult state. Sarah responded in the Child state and it started a conflict. The
combination of these two states can result in miscommunications or sidetrack the
main question.
Example Three
Tom: ‘Hey sweetie, did you take the dog out earlier? You know she loves when
you do!’ Sarah: Smiling, ‘Yes, and I did a great job too!’ To analyze; Tom asked
a question while maintaining the parent state. He expected Sarah to respond in
the Child state. When Sarah responded in the Child state, their communication
was effective. In this situation, Tom was actually an adult and Sarah was actually
a child.
Example Four
Tom: ‘Babe, did you take the dog out? She loves when you do, you’re do good at
it!’ Sarah: ‘No, and you’re not going to persuade me to do it by talking to me
like that. Nice try. But next time just ask me to do it.’ To analyze; Tom spoke to
Sarah in a manner that is more appropriate for Parent to Child. Since Sarah is an
adult in this situation, she was offended by the way he spoke, but she managed to
keep her composure in the Adult state.

Real Life Application
Can you determine the state you spend the most time in? Think of a recent
situation you had that lasted at least a few minutes and try to figure out what
emotional state you were in and what state the other people involved were in.
Putting Theory to Use
Understanding your emotional state, and the states of others around you can
have a profound impact on the communications you have. With your recent
situation in mind, try and think about the patterns in your communication. Is it
clear that you seem to fall into one state more than another? Does the other
person seem to fall into one state as well? What states are they? How do they
interact? It is preferable to spend most of our communications in the Adult state,
as it is easier to communicate effectively and politely. If you have found that you
are involved in a great deal of conflict, analyze the state you are in during these
conflicts. Could it be that you tens to resort to the Parent stage while talking to
other adults? Or do you easily have problems effectively communicating with
others because you fall into the Child state and can’t convey your thoughts and
emotions well? If you seem to have crossed transactions, dissect those situations
and try to adjust your state for the next time you communicate with another
person. By learning the states, you can learn how you should communicate with
others. It may not always be easy, you may have to adjust your inner emotions
and really structure your conversation, but it will result in more effective
communication.
If you have found that another person seems to have a difficult time with
conversation or conflict, and you are close to this person, it may be worth your
time to explain transactional analysis to them and how it works. When doing
this, it is crucial to avoid falling into the Parent state. Remain in the Adult state
and calmly rationalize how the other person’s state may be interfering with
cohesive communication. Remember to take responsibility for your behavior in
the communication as well. Explain this theory as curious or new information,
something interesting.
Understanding transactional analysis can have a tremendous effect on your
communication at work as well. In these situations it will probably not benefit
you to explain the theory to others, but it will benefit you to understand what
states people fall into and how to communicate effectively in those states. You
may find that you often speak in the Parent state and that others have a hard time

with the way you treat them. You may want to adjust this so your coworkers or
employees don’t take it as you treating them like a Child. Being perceptive
towards transactional analysis will help you get your point across in a clear,
concise, polite manner.
The Importance of Scripts
Transactional analysis is closely related to the formation of our ego states as a
child. Essentially, when we are young we develop patterns that are presented in
our social interactions. As we grow up, many of these patterns stick with us and
form our communication patterns. It’s almost as if we are taught how to act in
situations from a young age and stick with it throughout our lives. Some of our
patterns will be positive and help us grow and communicate, and some will
hinder us from succeeding in communication. If you find a problem and wish to
change your script, you must first analyze yourself and your actions. You can
mold a new path with your ego states, but it takes time and effort.
Case Study — Claire
Claire was born into a struggling family. She had many siblings and her parents
were mostly absent. She helped to raise her siblings and took on many parent
responsibilities. When she was 10, she and her siblings were all taken into state
custody and raised in separate foster homes. In order to survive, Claire had to act
as an Adult in many situations. When she needed something or had to take care
of herself, she was able to. She was often seen as rude to her friends when she
talked about her life and all the responsibilities she had. She spoke to them from
a Parent-Child perspective, belittling her friends. It was hard to socialize and
interact with peers because of the disrupt in her childhood ego states. She was
forced to take on this role when she was too young and often carried it over into
her social interactions. Unfortunately, her lack of attention as a kid led her to
disruptive behaviors at school. She was often displaying attention-seeking
behaviors in class and acting like a class clown. Her need for attention displayed
itself in a Child ego. She often found herself in trouble at school and felt like an
outsider.
As she got older, Claire wanted to form better relationships and hopefully score a
job. She knew that her behavior would have to change in order for her to be
successful. She rented books from the library about transactional analysis and
ego-states, and set forth on a mission to better herself. When she recognized that
her Adult state was unable to properly form because of her Parent-Child

disruptions, she read about how individuals act in the Adult state. She took steps
towards correcting her behavior and found ways to adjust her communication
style. After working towards her goal, she was able to successfully land a job. In
addition to the job, she found herself relating to her peers on an appropriate
level, and even making some friends. Her efforts were successful.
The Stroke Economy
In the 1960s, Claude Steiner developed his theory of the Stroke Economy. His
theory was based on Transactional Analysis and Robbin’s theory of the six basic
needs. The Stroke Economy is efficient when it comes to understanding
interactions between people and their reactions. Claude’s theory focuses one of
Robbin’s needs; love. Claude believed that all people are essentially seeking to
be loved and to love. We fear not being loved by others and strive to find it.
Berne focused on a ‘stroke’ in his conclusions as well. He referred to the stroke
as being recognized. Everybody wants to be recognized, whether a smile, a nod,
or a sweet ‘Hello.’ It is important to understand that not all strokes are positive.
Being recognized for something is not always affirmative. People can easily be
recognized for poor things, like bad behavior. Claude theorized that all people
need strokes to feel successful, and if we can’t gain positive strokes, negative
ones will suffice. The stroke economy aligns itself well with the ‘bottom line’
theory of understanding and Robbin’s six needs; significance. Claude Steiner
saw many people acting in a particular way and came up with the Stroke
Economy as an explanation for said actions.
The 5 Rules That Will Make You Miserable
Steiner’s Stroke Economy is comprised of five rules that he believed we should
avoid. He found that the five rules will leave you feeling guilty, shameful, not
worthy, and disapproved of in social situations. These rules must be controlled
by the Parent ego. Steiner found that people who live by these rules tend to have
low self-esteem. His rules are as follows; 1) Do not give strokes that you would
like to give. If you see a stranger and think that they are gorgeous, but you don’t
want to be seen as a creep for saying such, don’t. 20 Do not ask for strokes that
you want to get. If you are feeling frumpy and would like to hear that you look
good, don’t go asking for a compliment. 3) Do not accept strokes that you want
to hear. If somebody tells you that you are looking nice, do not simply nod and
agree, it comes off as looking snotty. 40 Do not reject the strokes that you don’t
want. If somebody tells you that you’re having a bad hair day, don’t deny it. Just

accept. 5) Do not give yourself strokes. Don’t tell yourself that you are valuable,
gorgeous, worthy, and loved. IF you don’t celebrate your accomplishes, you will
just be hard on yourself.
Stroke Economy in Action
Let’s begin by making a list of strokes that you’ve gotten today and the ones you
have given. Are you following along with the stroke economy? Think about an
important relationship in your life. Could this relationship be better if you
weren’t as impacted by the rules in the stroke economy? Does the other person
subscribe to the stroke economy? Did you learn anything about this person?
An Alternative Way
Here is the alternative to following the miserable rules: 1) Give all the strokes
you would like to give. Do not be turned away because the idea of giving
positive strokes would make you vulnerable. Go ahead, tell the stranger she is
pretty and tell the person you love, ‘I love you.’ 2) Ask for strokes that you
desire. You can’t always spend your time hoping to hear something nice, tell
somebody you care about that you’re feeling down and want to hear something
positive. Ask for help and support, they’ll give it. 3) Accept negative strokes. We
don’t all hear the things we want to hear, but accepting it will be good for you.
People are telling you these things for a reason, so listen. 4) Go ahead and reject
strokes that you don’t like. If a stranger slaps your butt, go ahead and tell them
that they are gross. Don’t hold it in. Be bold and let people know that some
things aren’t going to fly with you. Bear in mind that keeping your composure
will benefit you. Don’t lose your cool. 5) Give yourself the strokes you want.
You are aware of the things you need and want, telling yourself that you’re great
will make you feel good. You need to support yourself first and foremost.
Thinking positively will help you act positively. If you want people to
understand you and help you, go ahead and follow these rules. They will help
build healthy relationships as you express your desires, needs, and emotions. By
being positive and open, you will help the others around you have this same
attitude. If you’re having a hard time figuring somebody else out, be honest.
Whether strangers or those close to us, following this stroke economy will help
you understand people. It does not take a lot of experience to see whether
somebody is abiding by the stroke economy or the alternative way.
Real World Use
Now to use made up scenarios to explain the stroke economy and the alternative

way. Try to determine which method each person is using. If you are having a
difficult time, go back over the rules. Don’t cheat! Don’t look at the analysis
until you’ve made your decision.
Situation One
Tom: A smile on his face, ‘You’re looking nice today! Did you get a new outfit?’
Sarah: Avoiding eye contact, ‘Um, yeah, it’s new…’ Analysis: Tom has used the
alternative way by giving Sarah a positive stroke. Sarah is subscribing to the
stroke economy as she is not able to accept his compliment.
Situation Two
Tom: Smiles and holds the door open for Sarah. Sarah: Accepts Tom’s gesture
and walks through the door saying, ‘Thanks!’ Analysis: Tom and Sarah are
subscribing to the alternative way. Tom gave her a positive stroke and Sarah
accepted the positive stroke.
Situation Three
In this situation Tom is Sarah’s boss. Tom: Sees that Sarah has been doing a fine
job but won’t praise her as it might make him appear weak. Sarah: She believe’s
she’s been working really hard and doing a great job. She asks Tom, ‘Can I have
a little feedback about how I’ve been doing? I want to know if I’m being
successful. Analysis: Tom is adhering to the stroke economy by not positively
praising Sarah. Sarah is subscribing to the alternative way, as she sees that a
positive stroke can help her be successful emotionally and at work. She knows
how to get her needs met, so she’s going to ask for her stroke.
Situation Four
Sarah is Tom’s mom. Sarah: ‘You have been acting like a nice boy lately. I want
you to know that you’re working very hard and I love you so much.’ Tom says,
‘Thanks mom! I love you too!’ Analysis: Sarah and Tom are adhering to the
alternative way by giving strokes and accepting strokes.
Try to follow the alternative way for a while. She what happens. Do people
respond positively to you? Does it help you? How do others act when you use
this method? Are you able to draw any conclusions about these people?
A Man Under a Microscope
The stroke economy is a powerful tool towards self-actualization and analysis of
those around you. Next we will look at a true story of a man who adhered to the

stroke economy and eventually decided to change his ways and choose the
alternative way.
Case study — Billy
Billy was one of many children. His family did not have a lot of money and he
grew up not wanting many of the material possessions that many had. His
clothes may have been secondhand and his toys were few, but he didn’t want
more. His family was unable to give him the attention he needed, as both parents
worked long hours and didn’t have a lot of free time. Billy’s sisters took care of
him most of the time, but they were busy doing their own things. Billy did not
receive many positive strokes, and often acted out at school. He got the attention
he desired by acting out. It may have been negative attention, but it was
something. As Billy got older, he realized that his negative behavior wasn’t
going to get him anywhere. If he wanted to succeed, he had to stop seeking
negative strokes. He realized he had to work hard towards changing his ways,
but that the payout could be massive. When his behavior started to change, he
still wasn’t receiving positive strokes, as people were criticizing him and tell him
he should have always acted like this. This left Billy unsure of what to do. He
was on longer trying to get negative strokes, but didn’t know how to ask for
positive ones.
Robert began to fall into a depression, as he wasn’t sure how to be happy. He
stopped giving others positive strokes because he was jealous that he wasn’t
getting any. He was angry and vulnerable, just wanting to connect to others.
When he was nearly 30 years old, he fell into a bad depression. He quit working,
stopped visiting the family, and lost all hope for life. When his friends and
family finally noticed his need for help, they sent him to rehab and therapy. After
three months in a community of love and compassion, he realized the source of
his depression. It took a long time, but eventually he was able to realize his
needs and learned how to meet said needs in a positive way. Now Billy is fully
aware of the stroke economy and the alternative way. He has decided to live his
life by the alternative way. He is not able to ask for the help he needs and
receives the positive strokes he desires.

Chapter 8 – What Is the Drama Triangle?
The best way to really “get” someone, to understand them on a deeper level, is to
notice their interactions with other people.
For example, if you notice an intense argument between two people try to study
how they act with each other. You will notice some hints of how each participant
sees themselves in relation to “the other.”
From that, you can gather how they might act in the same scenario, but with
other dialogue participants.
That is what the drama triangle is. It’s basically a way to understand these social
interactions and why they happen.
How the Concept Came to Be
If you’ve heard about PTSD (Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder) this will be easier
to understand. After World War 2, many veterans had to manage their post-war
trauma.
As such, they went to therapy sessions before they even got back to their
families. Now, some of those therapy sessions were successful and they adjusted
back to family life. Others weren’t as lucky, unfortunately.
Thus, family therapy was created. Therapists felt that treating people in a social
setting would yield much better results than dealing with them by themselves, as
individuals
They felt that focusing on communication as a therapeutic method would be
more in line with the true human psyche.
Eric Berne elaborated on the findings of those therapists 10 years or so later. He
furthered the understanding of inter-relational psychology to his contemporaries
and brought more complex explanations to existing data.
Stephen Karpman was the one who came up with the “Karpman Triangle” in
1968. He was one of Berne’s students and managed to use his teacher’s
information and help to publish his own article.
The Karpman Triangle is a template in which one could define what role a
certain person plays in social interactions. Especially in intensely emotional ones
(as it was explained before).

Karpman’s article was inspired from research on family therapy, as well as ideas
used in transactional therapy. It also elaborated on the importance of group
interactions in the whole scheme of things.
So, What Use Does It Have?
The Karpman (or drama) triangle is an excellent technique to know when you’re
watching a social interaction unfold. Or, why not, when you’re actually
participating in one – that is why it’s important to apply it in your own case as
well.
It’s useful for deciphering the social signals others might be sending you.
Similarly, it’s helpful if you want to understand why people respond to your
signals the way they do.
First off, we’re going to talk a bit about the three roles you will find in the drama
triangle. Here they are, along with their character traits:
The Persecutor
As the name implies, The Persecutor is the aggressive one in the whole equation.
They are usually angry or blaming someone for something or other.
The defining characteristic of The Persecutor is the air of superiority they take.
They never compromise, and like to boss people around.
The Victim
These people, on the other hand, always feel like they are being oppressed, with
no power to fight back. It’s very hard for them to find any positivity in anything,
and can never express themselves properly.
Ultimately, they feel like they are helpless and without hope for the future –
always in a state of victimization.
The Rescuer
You guessed it – The Rescuer saves the previous character from the first. Though
selfless and altruistic, his habits are sometimes detrimental to The Victim.
This is because he acts as an enabler of The Victim’s constant feeling of
victimization. Not only that, but The Rescuer can also push The Persecutor to act
in the same bossy, “superior” way.
So these are the three roles a person may take on in an intense, emotional social
interaction.

Of course, interactions that end with an amicable disagreement have a different
triangle to them. It is called the Winner’s Triangle and will be discussed later.
In the meantime, let’s return to our persecutor, victim, and rescuer, shall we?
Any person will normally be one of these three types in almost any argument.
But, that doesn’t mean we can’t take on different roles at other times. The Victim
can always become The Persecutor or vice versa.
Stressful situations can have us cycle through all three roles in one go. That also
depends on others in the conversation and by how we tend to interact with them.
Now, while we can shift through these roles at times, the dominant role will be
decided during our formation years. Our families, early social interactions, and
experiences will define who we are later in life.
There are some questions that arise from the above:
Is it healthy to be in any of the three positions? Not really, as the
motivation behind taking on the mantle of Persecutor, Victim, or Rescuer
is implicitly unhealthy.
They don’t lead to any sort of achievements – so why do we keep acting
like one of these three archetypes?
It all comes down to human nature, really. Not every parent will properly raise
their child to assert themselves in a healthy manner. Nor will they be able to
teach them good ways of getting what they want without some destructive
impulses getting in the way.
As such, when we do get into a situation where we want to achieve something –
we shift into one of those three roles. We feel emboldened by becoming one of
the archetypes, but in doing so we’re actually doing more damage than good.
Transactional theory also deals with this concept. People can take on three
possible roles: Parent, Adult, or Child. These roles are, of course, chosen
according to how we were brought up to interact with others.
They also relate to our experiences, and are a way of affirming ourselves in the
world. The question remains as to whether these methods are healthy or not.
In any case, let’s get back to our three primary characters. By taking on the role
of persecutor, victim, or rescuer, there are certain “rewards” people receive:
Superficial – the reason one would choose that role in the first place, a

short-term benefit;
Profound – a long-term benefit if they were to take on that role for most of
their waking hours;
These rewards will be detailed for each persona, respectively.
The Persecutor
When it comes to the superficial rewards of the Persecutor, it all comes down to
how they deal with their self-esteem.
Most of the time, the Persecutor has low self-esteem, so they emanate an air of
importance to others. That, in turn, will make them feel noticed and significant
(even though they might not be).
It all gives them a sense of control that they cannot get through other ways –
because they have not been raised to properly deal with such situations.
It’s an “easy way out” of having to actually deal with the underlying feelings of
abandonment and hurt. Plus, it’s their way of punishing themselves for their
behavior; a way to reinforce their own belief that they’re bad people at heart.
In the long term (or, the profound “reward”) the Persecutor realizes that they’re
actually bad for acting the way they are. Simply put, they are unpleasant to be
around, and people will want to avoid their persecutor behavior.
One usual habit of this archetype is to lure people who are constantly in the role
of The Victim. They end up in a constant back-and-forth, and the process repeats
itself when The Victim has had enough of the former’s shenanigans.
In the end, The Persecutor realizes that they will never get the recognition or
fulfillment they’re so desperately seeking.
The Victim
On the other end of the triangle, we have the victim with about the same internal
issues. They require care and love, so they will eternally play victim for people
to notice them. The attention is their superficial, short-term reward.
The worst part is that they feel they shouldn’t have any of the blame for their
actions. Yes, that means always shifting responsibility onto someone or
something else.
What may result from that is someone who acts however they want, because
they will always get their “fix” of attention. Whether it’s negative (from the

Persecutor), or positive (from the Rescuer) is of little importance.
In the long run, the Victims realize that they must take responsibility for their
actions if people are to stop avoiding them.
That means trying to cope with their pessimistic world-view, and attempting
some positivity for a change.
Unfortunately, the Victim almost never feels in control of their own destiny but
will never take steps to change that – preferring instead to live in constant self-
loathing.
They will also act as enablers for the persecutors and rescuers.
The Rescuer
Superficially, this archetype is still looking for feelings of appreciation and love
from others. As such, they will concentrate all their attention on others.
That means they never consider their own needs and problems, which is still a
negative trait. Unlike the Persecutor, these characters become “assertive” by
being extremely altruistic.
They can also unleash their deep-seated anger in the name of the Victim because
they feel they shouldn’t be too hard on their own selves. That will possibly
lessen their feelings of rejection.
Still, the Rescuer will be so occupied with other Victims that they will never find
time for their own needs – just for the short-term goal of being seen as a selfless
person.
In the long run, the Rescuer will just end up feeling neglected, and will end up
hating the Victims for it. Since “selfless” people always care for others and never
ask for anything in return, their needs are overlooked.
It comes as no surprise that this will reinforce their thoughts of insignificance.
Just as the Victim, the Rescuer never acts for themselves.
Instead, they act as an enabler for Victims and Persecutors. Also, they will end
up burning out by not paying any attention to their own feelings – and having to
“be there” for everybody.
How the Drama Triangle Looks Like in Practice
Let’s look at an example of how a Drama Triangle would work out. Our

characters are named Terry, Alice, and Jane.
Terry didn’t take the dog out as he promised so many times. Alice ends up doing
it herself, and has become sick of it. Jane is a friend who happens to visit every
once in a while.
Alice: ‘You haven’t walked the dog like I asked you to do. How many times do I
have to repeat it before you do it?’
Terry: ‘I’m sorry, honey! Don’t get so angry over nothing.’
Alice: ‘Nothing? You never take out the dog! Maybe I’d like to have time to
myself sometimes, you know?’
Jane: ‘Now, now, Alice. You know Terry isn’t doing it intentionally. He’s just
been busy at the office and the boss asked him to do some extra work at home.
No need to shout.’
What Do We Gather from This Discussion?
Alice, the Persecutor, is annoyed that she has no time for herself. She feels it’s
all the fault of the Victim, Terry.
He, on the other hand, doesn’t feel responsible for his actions and lets out an
inappropriate response for this case. As a consequence, Alice goes even further
into Persecutor mode.
Jane acts as the Rescuer in the whole ordeal. She excuses Terry for not walking
the dog as he said he’d do. Terry will end up “cleared of responsibility” because
the Rescuer has taken his side.
Alice will inevitably get angrier because she feels they’re putting the blame on
her. As such, Jane acts as an enabler for Terry the Victim and Alice the
Persecutor.
Try This Yourself!
You too can create a Drama Triangle and explore how your interactions with
others work. Do the following:
Think of three recent arguments or conflicts you participated in;
Write them down similarly to the example above – no need to
overcomplicate them;
Make sure to be honest objective in your analysis – if you put in your own
interpretation, the analysis will be flawed;

Try to figure out who filled the role of Victim, Persecutor, and Rescuer;
In the end, you will try to determine which role you fill in most of the time. Are
you always Persecuting everyone? Playing the eternal Victim?
Now, try to think of the reason why that happens. Also, consider how your
behavior affects you and those around you. Do the same for the other parties
involved in the conflict(s).
All things considered, this all sounds mildly depressing, unhealthy, and filled
with conflict. Is there a way of dealing with conflict that’s healthy at the same
time? Well, that’s why we have the Winner’s Triangle.
What Is the Winner’s Triangle?
Acey Choy created this model at the beginning of the 90s. What is its relation to
the Drama Triangle?
Well, using the exercise we provided in the previous section, you can gain a bit
of insight into your reactions.
By studying those, you can understand when you’re taking on a “Drama” role,
and work towards healthier ones. Namely, the ones in the Winner’s Triangle.
Here are the three roles we will be discussing:
Assertive
The assertive person has no trouble expressing themselves clearly. Their
thoughts will not sound passive or aggressive, and they do not care for any
possible rejection or disapproval.
Instead, an Assertive will voice their opinion with calm, and will try not to feed
the fires of conflict. This helps others understand where you’re coming from.
Unlike the Persecutor, people will not hate you for simply telling everyone
they’re wrong about you. If you communicate your thoughts clearly, you can
avoid some headaches well in advance.
Vulnerable
A Vulnerable is basically a Victim but without the constant victim complex.
They communicate their negative feelings, but will assume responsibility when
that is the case.
Furthermore, they always try to think how they got in their current predicament,
but will find ways to deal with it and move on.

Caring
A Caring person will not forget about their own needs while they act as a
“Rescuer” for others. In essence, they’re very balanced when it comes to social
interactions:
They help when they feel their contribution will make a positive
difference;
Will allow others to assume responsibility for their own actions;
Never promote unhealthy roles such as those in the Drama Triangle;
What Do We Gain Out of This?
In combination with the Drama Triangle exercise, you can do a more in-depth
analysis of someone. Do they shift from a healthy to an unhealthy role a lot of
times?
Of course, nobody can be a “winner” all the time, but “causing drama” in 70%
of cases is not great either.
This is where you can really see if the person you’re analyzing has any deep-
rooted childhood issues left over. It can also tell you how hard their working to
resolve them in their current stage.
Children, on the other hand, are an entirely different case. The young ones are
just in their formative stage and could switch from one role to another. The older
ones are possibly just starting to make that decision.
They are very susceptible to role models in their formative years, so the best
thing to do is lead by example. Become the role model they seek by training to
step off the Drama Triangle and onto the Winner side.
We’ll be honest with you: it won’t be easy. But it will definitely be worth the
effort. You just need to be honest about what you’re trying to do with those
around you.
If you find someone dear to you on the Drama side of things, it would be best to
have a basis on which you can explain these theories. Just be careful to explain it
to them while there is an unresolved conflict taking place.
Again, some people might find your explanation insulting – but some tough
truths need to be told sometimes.
To help you out in your quest of educating people, you can do one simple thing.

Start by telling them your position on the triangles and how you’re striving to
improve yourself.
They will understand where you’re coming from if you do it in a compassionate
manner. Of course, it might take them a few days to process all the information.
Patience is key.
How the Winner’s Triangle Looks Like in Practice
Now, the theory sounds nice and all. Except we all know that practice makes
perfect, and is the best way to learn about anything.
As such, we will present you with three real cases of people shifting triangles –
so to speak – and becoming winners themselves. Use their examples wisely in
order to improve your own status.
Sarah
Because Sarah grew up in a lower income family, both her parents needed to
work to make ends meet. Her mother wasn’t around much, so she was raised by
nannies.
She didn’t get the necessary motherly affection as a child so her self-esteem had
to suffer. Not only that, but she ended up being angry with her parents, and
struggling with abandonment issues.
Naturally, she couldn’t communicate her feelings properly because of those
problems. Her mother would return tired from work and couldn’t give her the
affection she needed. This made Sarah feel unworthy.
Her mother was often a Persecutor, leaving her father to play the role of Victim.
Sarah would sometimes end up in the Rescuer’s role.
Since the mother was the only consistent feminine role model she had, she
turned Persecutor herself. This was especially clear when she interacted with
other children in her class.
As a young woman, Sarah would be enabled as a Persecutor by her sister, who
often played victim. It only ended up hurting her ability to get close to people.
The fear of abandonment was too strong.
She felt “in control” with her bossy and superior attitude, and the feeling that
people were acknowledging her existence. But really, she ended up with no
meaningful friendships.

After all, who would want to be friends with someone so overly critical of every
little thing? Still, all she wanted was affection and some understanding. She was
just too afraid of communicating that fact, and showing others her kind and
gentle side.
Luckily, Sarah met someone in her late twenties that would change that for her.
Instead of enabling her as a Persecutor, this person made her understand what
she was doing wrong.
It ended up being an eye-opening experience for Sarah, and she started
struggling towards fixing those abandonment issues.
Through care and understanding, Sarah toned down her bossy nature and began
defying the Persecutor role she had gained in her childhood.
She began to be an Assertive instead, which benefited her relationships greatly.
No longer did she respond with anger when she wasn’t being noticed. Instead,
she just communicated her feelings in a calm manner and people finally
understood where she came from.
Ultimately, that helped her understand others just as well – helping them become
Winners as she had managed to do.
Nigel
Unlike Sarah, Nigel got plenty of affection from his parents. In fact, you could
say it was too much affection. They were not responsible enough to set some
boundaries and instill some discipline.
If he started crying, he knew that his mother would act as a Rescuer even if he
did something wrong. Naturally, he was going to suffer through grade school
because he was not accustomed to negative reactions from anybody.
He would just become upset and difficult to communicate with. Even as he grew
older, he felt like a sad outcast. Ever the Victim, he still gained enough attention
from Rescuers in his life.
But, this meant he would have no opportunity to grow as a person. Sure, he
could go to college and find a job, but those are simply materialistic goals.
Inside, he felt just as sad and lonely as always.
He could not recognize his shortcomings, and neither could he see how others
viewed him as a person. In the end, he got tired of the constant melancholy and
the lack of friends.

He started studying psychology and self-improvement techniques. It helped him
understand how he got into his situation and what steps were necessary for
change.
Realizing that being a Victim all the time would not help, he worked on
becoming more Assertive. That meant learning how to express his sorrows in a
more constructive way than just whining about it.
Sure, it was a difficult change to make, but his social interactions had definitely
improved because of his effort.
His parents could not believe this shift in character from Nigel. And yet, it was
probably nice seeing him make true friends and claim some responsibility once
in a while.
He managed to learn how to communicate his feelings in a healthy manner,
despite fears of rejection or the thought of discomfort.
It was much easier to communicate with him, as a result. He would not simply
“shut down” as he did in grade school. Ultimately, this made him think of a
brighter future.
Brenda
Brenda’s father left the family before she and her brothers and sisters even
turned 8. Her mother eventually married someone else, and had two more
children.
As such, Brenda was the oldest of 5 children. It wasn’t a happy life for Brenda,
as her mother struggled with alcoholism for the rest of her life.
She would pick up the slack and take care of her siblings when her mother
couldn’t. The new husband was abusive to the family.
Now, while Brenda didn’t receive much attention from her parents, she still felt
the affection of her siblings. She needed to act as a Rescuer for them when
things got tough around the house.
But, if you remembered what we discussed about Rescuers, you would know
that Brenda was neglecting her own needs.
Her frustration was thus exteriorized by defending others. While she was kind,
she couldn’t form any meaningful relationships with others her age.
This made her feel very alone. As her brothers and sisters grew up alongside her,

she couldn’t fill the role of Rescuer for them anymore.
Instead, she found new ways to do it. This only exacerbated her feelings of
insignificance and neglect – which lead her down the path of alcoholism just like
her mother before her.
At thirty years old, Brenda ended up in a psychiatrist’s office to deal with her
internalized anger.
He helped her realize that in order for her to enact change, she would need to
learn how to open up to others. With time, she learned how to do it, and
managed to quit her addiction and unhealthy Drama Triangle role.
Now, you might believe that these stories are too extreme to apply to everyone.
But, when you look at the facts:
We all deal with our feelings according to how our parents raised us;
Similarly, the way we interacted with others during childhood has a strong
effect;
Parents deal with their own problems and can’t always prevent ours;
Sure, Sarah, Nigel, and Rachel probably had it harder than most of us (not to
detract from those who went through such difficulties.)
But their stories are a great illustration of how childhood experiences can affect
us later in life. Everyone is different, however, so these examples are not always
applicable.
They’re still a nice way to understand why a person behaves a certain way. By
analyzing the hopes, dreams, and fears of others, we can end up discovering
something within ourselves as well.
In the end, we all have something to gain from such experiences: how to create
meaningful relationships, how to meet our own needs, and more.

Chapter 9 – Evaluating individuals in the workplace
Average adults now spend around thirty percent of their lives working. This
means one third of our waking hours is spent on the job at the workplace. The
office becomes a home away from home. Relationships with coworkers are
formed since so much of our time is spent interacting with them. Friendships
develop and in many cases, our colleagues become almost a second family. It is
important to understand and get along each other in order to have a well-
functioning, productive team. This congeniality may be more difficult to apply in
practice since each one of us has individual characteristics. Being able to
recognize and analyze the personality traits of coworkers will go a long way in
maintaining harmony and remaining upwardly mobile without causing any
friction. How well do you know your colleagues, including your boss? How do
they respond to your instructions, speeches or presentations? The answers to
these questions are important in a competitive job market where your actions and
intentions are scrutinized continuously. This chapter examines these issues so
that the time and energy you expend at the workplace is maximized in terms of
opportunities and relationships.
Images and perceptions
It is essential to know how you appear to fellow workers since your professional
image really does matters to your superiors, colleagues, and subordinates.
Conflict makes it difficult to function and life at the workplace can become
unbearable and unproductive if you’re disliked. Under such stress you may begin
to doubt your aptitude for the job. It is equally important to manage impressions
in order to coexist and deliver advantageous outcomes for you, the team, and
organization. This can be done by recognizing and managing any of the
following destructive and constructive behaviors.
Smiles and good cheer
Do people smile around you? Do their faces light up when you enter the room?
Do they approach you and greet you warmly? If there is a cheerful, natural,
spontaneous reaction your presence it means you are accepted. They may in turn
have determined that you are competent, or helpful, or outgoing, and generally
liked. Coworkers may also smile at you because they want you to like them or
approve their work processes. It will be up to you to investigate the motive
behind your acceptance or lack thereof.

Ready acknowledgement
Being readily acknowledged by a word, smile, or a friendly gesture such as a
wave or a handshake, shows a camaraderie between you and your coworkers.
They welcome and recognize you as a valued member of the team. This is
definitely an advantageous position to be in. Being ignored is never a good
indicator of what your coworkers think of you. If they don’t greet you because
they don’t wish to acknowledge you, that’s a problem. If they can’t be bothered
to say hello, or simply don’t notice your presence, that doesn’t bode well for
your success in the organization.
The group mentality
Groups develop at work because of mutual interests, compatible natures, or
closeness in occupational situations. It could be a positive outcome because
joining forces can get the work done faster and better. A group can have the
power to push for benefits or stop bad practices. On the other hand cliques may
work against coworkers by spreading rumors and lies, and bullying and
intimidating them.in order to prevent their optimal performance. Gossip spreads
fast in the workplace and you would know where you stand soon enough. Better
not to align oneself with any group but do lend support for a good cause.
Ostracized by coworkers
You know all’s not well at work when coworkers avoid any contact with you. If
they turn their backs when they see you coming or answer your questions with
perfunctory replies only when they have to, there is a reason why coworkers do
not wish to interact with you and the problem needs to be addressed. Getting the
cold shoulder may be a bullying tactic or else you may have personality traits
that don’t appeal to your coworkers. Do you talk too much or are you a
pessimist? Are you the silent type or do you brag? Negative habits can and
should be reversed for better workplace interaction and communication.
Personal or professional
A professional relationship with workmates is all well and good but spending so
much time together does create personal associations too. If your opinion is
never asked and you’re not included in shared jokes or invited to after work
social get-together’s it would be safe to say your workplace relationships are
non-existent. Colleagues are either ignoring you purposely because they don’t

like you, or you have not impressed them enough to be noticed. It’s frustrating to
be ignored and distanced. Time to start asking questions of yourself and any
empathetic coworker to remedy the situation.
Refusal to make eye contact
Eye contact is a powerful, instinctive response that connects us to others. When
people look at us when we speak we feel we have their attention and interest.
When a colleague looks away or focuses their gaze elsewhere while you speak,
you realize they have stopped listening. People avoid making eye contact for
varied reasons. They may be going through a hard time and don’t want their
expressions to reveal this. Or else they may be shy, embarrassed, or lack
confidence. It could be that coworkers avoid your gaze because they don’t
respect, trust or like you, in which case you must make behavior improvement to
engage them.
Speaking to an audience
Most office jobs entail making presentations and speeches to coworkers. We may
be introducing new strategies or thanking or honoring a colleague, or saying
goodbye to them after years of service to the company. Whatever the occasion,
our words and delivery must be distinct, measured, and meaningful. Public
speaking is not for the faint hearted or those who suffer from stage fright, though
there are times when making a report or presentation can’t be avoided. Luckily,
it is the office orators that are usually chosen for the task of making a speech, but
they have to be on top of their game to successfully get their message across.
The speech or presentation contains a core message and the aim of the speaker is
to deliver this statement to the audience. Once there is an understanding of the
simplicity of making a good speech or presentation, even the most unwilling
speakers will feel capable of facing an audience. There is a lot of advice from
professional speakers about how an orator’s performance can be improved and
perfected. None of the do and don’ts matter if the speaker fails to provide what
the audience requires.
Knowing your audience is vital. Finding out information about age, education,
work areas, and interests which will help you choose relevant material for your
speech. Younger workers will relate to today’s technology and will find jokes
about their smart phones and the latest trends amusing, whereas an older group
will be more in tune with more familiar processes and stories of yesteryear. No
point in talking about market crashes to firefighters, or making jokes about the

sixties to people who were born decades later. Checking background details will
reveal the educational levels of your audience. If you are speaking to an
assembly line crew, you will not use the technical jargon you would use on
scientists. That does not mean talking down to your listeners. Respect your
audience level and design the content of your speech specifically for their
consumption.
Language has to suit the audience and words used must be easily understood by
them. For instance, if one is addressing a group of retirees, you will not apply the
language used by the newest employees. Your references and anecdotes must
also match your listeners. Focus on structure and keep on simplifying your
message and delivery. Edit out anything that isn’t relevant. If a line is confusing
or contradictory, toss it out. Your audience knows what you are going to speak
about and are interested in the topic and want to find out more about it. They
wants to hear what you have to tell them. Speak of things that will engross,
inform, entertain, and be remembered. They want more information and
provided your speech engages them, the audience will be pleased that they
came.to listen to you.
Understanding the culture of your audience members is very important when
speaking at home and overseas. It should never be the intention to give offence
and yet this could be easily done with one inappropriate sentence just because
the speaker was unaware of cultural differences. A background check will let
you know the social origins of the listeners and a bit of research will enable you
to find out their areas of interest and what type of humor appeals to them. One
audience may be open and unfazed by certain remarks while another can be
conservative and insulted by the same comments. An eastern audience will not
be able to identify with the concerns of a western audience. Your speech must
meet expectations so find the right tone by ensuring the message fits the
occasion. Inform, motivate, and challenge your audience, and most of all, keep it
real.
In some cases you may not know much about the people you will be speaking to,
though you will know the size of your audience and whether the gathering is a
compulsory company affair or not. A larger audience requires a more
commanding speaker who will address the crowd with passion and authority,
while a smaller group will do better with a conservative speaker. A prescribed
audience needs to be engaged right from the start. A touch of humor goes a long
way in holding an audience as does engaging them through questions and calling
them to interact onstage. Audiences that have chosen to attend will be discerning

and want to feel that their time at the speech wasn’t wasted. Use statistics to
make a point and surprise them. Try not to repeat yourself. Be authentic and let
the people know you are there for them because you are as passionate as they are
about the subject you are going to share.
Evaluate the person you work for
Workplace analysis doesn’t stop with employees and their abilities or orators and
their speeches. The main person at the office is the boss but he shouldn’t be
above scrutiny. This is important because your livelihood depends on his
judgement and since you spend so many hours working for the boss it’s
important that the office is a pleasant place. The man you answer to may not be
ultra-perceptive or have more experience than you do, but he’s still the boss and
he does have supremacy over the people he manages. Knowing his habits will
make for a better workplace relationship. It allows you to be proactive and
anticipate his next move.
Knowing the traits of the person you work for will creating more effective
operations and harmony in the workplace, so analyzing this individual is
important. Bosses give a lot of themselves to the job and expect the same in
return from their team. A good boss will show you how to do this while a bad
boss will not work with you and hinder your process. A good boss will organize,
motivate, and inspire his employees to build a congruent, productive
organization. Key factors of the boss’s personality that need to be evaluated are
temperament, capabilities, and drive. Since a person’s disposition guides their
actions, it’s important to recognize the type of person your livelihood depends
on.
Characteristics of a boss
All we human beings have diverse characteristics and bosses are no different,
after all they are human too - at least most of the time. Typically, a boss has
certain particular characteristics that subordinates must be aware of in order to
manage situations. After all, success or failure at the office usually depends on
how well you manage your boss. Certain personality traits can make the
workplace heaven or hell so look out for these types of bosses.
The reliable boss. Reliability is a good trait for a boss to have. It means he or she
is systematic, dependable and responsible. These types have an excellent
understanding of key aspects of their department and can be counted on for
direction and consistency. Reliable bosses are leaders in charge of their teams

and keep them connected and focused. They accept responsibility and expect
their people to be accountable too. If they require high standards from their
employees, their own standards are higher. If you have a reliable boss, consider
yourself lucky. Work with a reliable boss is structured, efficient and productive,
but mind you hold up your end of business because reliability is expected of you
as well.
The bully boss. These sorts of people manage to find themselves in leadership
positions by aggressively presenting themselves as tough, go-getters. Bully
bosses don’t care how others are trampled in their race to the top. They
humiliate, abuse, criticize, and threaten their workers. They know how to misuse
employees to get ahead in the workplace and staff are usually too intimidated by
bullying tactics to challenge such behavior. Bullies will blame their workers for
problems and question their commitment. Some bosses listen to your calls and
read your mail. Constant abusive exploitation that continually degrades will
ultimately break an employee down. A bully is one of the worst bosses you can
ever have the misfortune to work for. The solution is simple. Look for a new job
since a bully boss enjoys his behavior and has no intention of changing his
atrocious habits.
The sociable boss. These ones are friendly, energetic and interested in their
surroundings. They are cognizant of company aims and know what is required to
achieve them. This sort of boss has no problem socializing structural objectives
to generate a better understanding and awareness of organizational direction.
Such bosses recognize the abilities of their team and encourage and assist
whenever necessary. They create valuable relationships with other departments
enabling better communication between teams. They support and promote
advancement in their employees and know that they are responsible for
continued development in themselves. Sociable bosses expend a huge amount of
energy and it is sometimes hard for their employees to keep up with them.
The micromanaging boss. They are driven by an obsessive need to control
everything and everybody around them. They strive for perfection and create
obstacles in the way of smooth operations by insisting on involving themselves
in every aspect of business. They find it impossible to delegate since they don’t
trust others to do the job to their satisfaction even when it is well done. This type
of boss is a nightmare to work with. These highly controlling micromanagers
wipe out any shred of innovation and creativity in an employee. They don’t
mean to hinder operations in the workplace but their insecurities do not allow
them to let go. Instead they constantly breathe down the necks of their

employees. Better to stay clear of such types because sooner or later they will
wear you out and drive away.
The empathetic boss. Empathy is a significant characteristic for anyone to
possess. In a boss this is an excellent trait. As a leader of a team, a boss must
have the emotional intelligence to understand people in order to improve
performance and effectiveness. An empathetic boss cares about how others feel
and considers the effects of business procedures on his workforces. Personnel
are able to approach such a boss and are not afraid to ask for answers or
assistance. Taking into account personal experiences or perspectives of
employees creates a wider understanding for maximized productivity. By being
empathetic a boss can solve problems, manage conflict, drive innovation, and
increase the potential of job success for everyone.
The honest boss. Honesty is a constructive leadership trait. An honest boss is
more personally engaged with employees, solving problems, and bringing
people together. Employees interact with this boss while perspectives and
opinions are openly shared. Assets are recognized by such a boss who will
assign people to areas they are suited to. A transparent boss actually strengthens
his leadership as his workers trust him. If the boss lies to you about your
prospects in the company, you will be frustrated and annoyed when you are not
promoted and discover there is no room for your growth and advancement. Or he
could let you do all the work and take credit for it. No one wants to work for a
dishonest person. A good leader does not allow power to get in the way of
honesty, openness and authenticity.
The workaholic boss. These are driven, hyperactive bosses who are usually
indifferent and dismissive towards those who work at a different pace. Working
for a workaholic can be difficult since they expect you to follow their addiction
to work and don’t recognize you have a life outside the office. Keeping up with
this type of boss will burn you out as you can never hope to keep up to their
stringent standards. Try to communicate your requirements and do not enable
such a boss by giving in to unnecessary work demands. If you have done a good
job it doesn’t matter how much time was involved. This is not a bad sort of
person but this kind of boss is bad for you since you will end up stressed and
burnt out. Don’t compromise your talent and reliability and move on to a more
suitable work environment.
The paranoid boss. This is an insecure person who is suspicious and does not
trust anyone. They are usually hyper sensitive and imagine the world is against
them. They are jealous of others success and can be quite malicious at times. A

paranoid boss blames his mistakes on others and will embarrass and demoralize
employees to feel secure. This person does not encourage cooperation and
instead turns employees against each other, and encourages personnel to spy or
inform on each other. They use manipulation to hold back vital information so
that colleagues cannot operate effectively. This person may not even realize he
has a problem. Anyway, the problem is always the fault of someone else. A
paranoid boss has too many issues going on in his head and isn’t likely to make
any behavioral changes. You can make a change by moving on to a more
conducive workplace.
The capabilities of your boss
This section determines the competences of your boss to figure out his or her
intelligence so that you have a better understanding of this person. A boss with
high mental capacity can speak and write well and has an ability to learn and
understand, and cope with situations. He can peruse documents and evaluate
information easily, and logically find solutions to problems. A highly intelligent
boss may get impatient with workers who don’t have the mental agility that he
does, so a worker will have to step up their skills in order to please him.
However this boss is a progressive type of person who readily accepts new
concepts and transformation. Bosses with low intelligence may be aware of their
lack of brainpower and react to smarter people by being antagonistic towards
them. They will definitely have poor language skills and be resistant to change.
They may have a hard time reading and comprehending information. To get into
their good graces, an employee will have to adopt a helpful attitude that is not
intimidating but reflects a sense of security.
What motivates your boss
It’s all very well to work hard within the framework of an organization’s
objectives in order to get ahead, but that’s not going to do it. Career success
depends on how well you understand your boss and how well you manage his
needs. Do you know what motivates him? Is he driven by power or money?
Does he really care about his employees? These and many other questions will
have to be answered in order to know what makes the person you work for tick.
One concept about the temperament of bosses theorizes that there are basically
three motives that drive business. These causes are power, affiliation, and
achievement.
Power bosses must have things done their way. Their way is their religion and

their team must be devoted followers. They are puffed up with their own
importance and want to make their mark on the world. This type of boss is
difficult to work with since they are not at all impressed by those who oppose
them. Nothing short of a yes-man will satisfy the power driven boss.
Affiliation driven bosses want to be liked and popular. They put relationships
first but supporting incompetent employees is not good for business. Working
for this person means plowing through a bunch of sycophants to get to him. It
will be next to impossible to edit out the bad advice his cronies have given him
but you’ve got to give it a try, to save the company. Your job depends on being
sociable, and helping to manage minion interactions. You need emotional
intelligence to cope with an affiliation boss.
Achievement motivated bosses are competitive individuals who like a challenge
but hate to lose. They delight in showing off all their cups and shields. These
bosses love to be the center of attention and won’t be left out of any event, be it a
little office party or a grand award ceremony. Bosses motivated by achievement
need to be included in everything. Working for this person means stroking their
ego and making sure they gets their information before anyone else does.
What your interview reveals about the boss
You will most likely meet your boss when you interview for a job. Since you
could become a part of their team, he or she will no doubt want to know if you
will be suitable or not. In the same way you should not only be concerned with
getting the job but also scrutinize your prospective boss to see if they will be
compatible with you. Ask questions. Interview the boss too. How he responds
will tell you all you need to know about his personality and work ethic. If you
have a good sense of people you will be quick to pick up positives or negatives
right there and then. If not, you will fortunately or unfortunately get to know this
person on the job through trial and error. These suggestions may prove to be
helpful during that first interview with your prospective boss.
The focus is on you
If the interview questions center around you and your ambitions, and you are
allow to express yourself without being interrupted, this boss is interested in the
person you are. If you are able to ask questions and they are answered honestly,
you are being checked out for where your talent can be best applied. This type of
boss is insightful and supportive, and will work with you but expect you grasp
tasks and run with them.

The interview is structured
If the interview and the interviewer are well prepared, you can be sure that this
boss is organized and runs a tight ship. He likes to manage his team and ensure
they work at full capacity. He can be impatient though if you ask questions that
have already been answered, though at times he may help you along grudgingly.
Expect rigid routines and a boss who is mainly interested in getting the job done
well.
Composure and warmth
The atmosphere is relaxed and the interviewer puts you at ease with a friendly,
calm attitude. This boss is interested in creating amiability in the workplace but
have no doubt that he is observing the real you in spite of your answers to his
questions. He is good to work with and likes to interact with his team. While this
boss prefers a relaxed work environment there will be no letup in productivity
and quality.
Full attention on you
Is your future boss asking you questions and seem interested in your responses?
Does he look you in the eye and take the time to answer you seriously. Do you
feel he is not only listening but hearing what you say? Is he transparent about
company details that effect you, such as salary, bonuses, and other benefits? If
all the answers are positive, this is a good, well-informed boss who is aware of
any snags on the job and is quick to sort out problems. He keeps his team
connected and production flowing smoothly.
Negative or positive remarks
The way in which a boss speaks about his team says a lot about his character and
how you will be treated by him. If he refers to his employees in a positive
manner, identifying them and mentioning their skills, you know this person
recognizes his people and respects his relationships with them. This is the sort of
boss who will appreciate you. If he speaks about workers in a derogatory way
you can be sure this is not a person you want to work with.
Impressive environment
As you grab a cup of coffee in the cafeteria and walk through the office to your
interview you can’t help notice your surroundings. Is what you see indicative of
a modern, streamlined, productive organization or not? As you sit in the waiting

area, you observe the employees and their work spaces. Are both cheery and
efficient. Do you notice fear when an employee enters the boss’s office or is he
or she relaxed and smiling. Read these obvious signals to know if this is an
environment you want to work in.
Summing up
Much analysis of the professional environment has been covered in this chapter.
What is, and is not satisfactory in the workplace has been detailed. Acceptable
and unacceptable behaviors have been outlined. Office relationships and
employee habits have been scrutinized with suggestions made for a more
conducive atmospheres. How one presents himself or herself when giving a
speech has also been explained along with do’s and don’ts for subject relevance,
optimum projection, and audience appreciation. Emphasis has been given to the
types of bosses that head a company or team. How characteristics drive a boss’s
behavior and actions and the impact an employee are spelled out. What to look
out for in bosses, and how to recognize their characteristics during that first
interview is described.
It is imperative to have a professional working environment in which a culture of
shared trust and respect is the norm. Employees thrive when they work in a well-
organized, efficient company with a well-meaning, smart boss. Good
management practice demands there must be transparency and fairness in
dealings. A free flow of information and directives channel perspectives and
energy towards productive outcomes. Toxic individuals and processes will
adversely affect the overall health of the whole organization so it is important to
know what you are working with.

Chapter 10 – Assessing romantic links
Romance features in our lives at one time or another and this chapter analyzes
this subject in connection to romantic partners. By assessing a prospective or
current romantic partner we get a clear picture of who they really are and where
this relationship is likely to end up. The information you uncover will make you
realize things about your partner that you never saw before. These discoveries
could lead to understandings that alleviate conflict and create a more harmonious
and loving partnership. On the other hand what you learn could confirm what
you’ve been thinking for a while now - this person isn’t right for you after all.
There are particular mannerisms used to communicate with dates or partners.
Body language, facial movements, and the way we speak, can determine a
partner’s attitude and intention. Let’s see if what we find out can help us move in
the right direction.
Examining the beginning
Everything is so exciting during the early days of a romance. The person you
have begun to date is fascinating and mysterious. You may have known this
individual before but since romance has crept into the picture, he or she is a
whole other person and getting to know him or her brings a new, thrilling
beginning to the relationship. A questioning mind will ask - is this person
interested in you in a romantic way? Secondly - do you really want to spend time
with this person? In your enthusiasm you can misread the signals and mistake
friendliness and affection for romantic attachment. You enjoy the date so much
you image you can spend many joyous hours together. Step out of your romantic
haze for a moment and read the signs that are being sent out loud and clear.
It may be hard to tell where you stand after that first date. Is it an awkward
meeting? Do you have to do all the talking? Does your date’s body language
express a desire to have a romantic connection with you? Does he or she keep
their body turned to face you? A person is meant to like you if they keep their
belly button facing you. Are you being touched? Touching means the person is
reaching out in an effort to get closer to you, to get to know you better. Facial
expressions will tell you whether your date is feeling it or not. Do his eyes say
you’re the one? Does he smile when he looks at you? Folded arms could either
mean you’re being shut out or your date is anxious and doesn’t want to show any
nervousness. Can you tell the difference?
You’ve decided you want to continue seeing this person because you got along
famously at that first date. The chemistry was amazing and the body language

said it all. But what do you really know about this person? What about character
and beliefs? Has conversation revealed whether this person is outgoing, or
stressed? What was discussed and how detailed was the conversation? How did
he or she react to your questions? Does this person like to talk about themselves
or like to gossip? What levels of respect do you notice, for you, for others, and
themselves? You are not overthinking the process - you are just being smart
about your own future. When you start dating a person you want to know that
there are shared values and common interests that will lead to a romantic
relationship and hopefully, bright prospects.
Read and analyze the signs
There’s always something new to discover about a person and your analytical
skills should be applied however long you’ve been in a romantic relationship.
Just because you’ve been together for ages, there’s no need to be careless about
your interaction with your partner. Actions have consequences and you don’t
want to be negatively affected by any untoward behavior. A partner doesn’t
change overnight from an outgoing, positive individual into a negative, cynical,
nasty person. The signs were there all along - you just ignored them. Analyzing
behavior clarifies relationship issues and gives you insights to work with for
positive outcomes. There’s no need to become compulsive and second guess
every move your romantic partner makes. If you don’t know when analysis is
important, just answer these questions from observing your partner’s physical
and verbal responses to relative situations.
How do they treat others?
The question here is how does your romantic partner treat others? Does this
person have respect for others or is she critical, defensive, or show contempt.
How are family, friends, colleagues, and strangers treated? The way your partner
treats others reflects how they feel about themselves, though they may not admit
it. If they respond positively to others, they will do the same with all issues they
have to deal with. If your date treats the server with contempt that is a red flag
not to be ignored. While he or she tries to show contempt for someone they
deems inferior and undeserving of respect it should be obvious to you that this
person has some major problems with their internal dialogue.
How do they respond to challenges?
People show their true colors when they are under stress. Ask yourself how your

partner responds when faced with challenging situations. Do they have the
ability to remain calm or take things personally? Are things fine as long as they
get their way? Do they become defensive or belligerent when they are at a
disadvantage, or fly off the handle at the slightest provocation? Do they allow
emotions to get in the way of dealing with situations effectively, and justify their
negative thought processes and harmful responses? Most importantly, ask
yourself if your partner understands the meaning of the word ‘no’? People can
alter behavior through motivation and guidance but there are no guarantees that
this leopard will ever change his or her spots.
How is their annoyance expressed?
Ask yourself how your partner shows anger. Do they erupt loudly and break
things to demonstrate their rage? Do they feel it’s okay to take out their anger on
others? Are they constantly frustrated and annoyed and take every opportunity to
erupt verbally or even physically? Is destructive behavior displayed in the heat
of the moment? This person is not simply letting off steam. There’s a problem
with self-control here and this individual lacks the maturity to express issues
calmly and logically. Such behavior, if left unchecked, will erode the quality of
your lives. Don’t make excuses for being in an abusive relationship. Deal with it
or get out.
Do they talk or listen?
Talking and listening are important for knowing how your partner feels, showing
your feelings, and solving any difficulties that may arise within a relationship.
For these significant reasons you must ask yourself if your partner does all the
talking and none of the listening. Such behavior shows a lack of consideration
for your opinions and no way are your feelings going to be a priority in this
relationship. Perhaps your partner listens but does not respond. It could mean
he’s not the talkative type, or he is thinking carefully about a reply, or maybe you
intimidate him or her into silence. Feeling consistently unheard is extremely
frustrating and blocks progress. Communication is vital for a good relationship
so ask your partner what the problem is and work through it. 
Are they jealous?
Is your partner possessive about you? This may be sweet in the early stages of
your relationship but this behavior will soon wear thin when he is constantly
suspicious of anyone you speak to. A jealous person is uncomfortable when your

attention is shared with other people. A jealous partner has a problem with
trusting others. Does he follow you and watch your interactions in social settings
and later accuse you of all manner of indiscretions? Any independent action by
you makes this person feel they are losing their grip on you. Jealousy is a sign of
insecurity. Your partner may also display possessive behavior to control or
dominate. Make sure you know the difference between loving and controlling
and don’t be intimidated by a jealous partner.
Summing up
By examining and evaluating a partner, significant facts about this person will
come to light. You will find out what type of person your partner is, and whether
there is the right chemistry between you both. There’s no need to make it
obvious that you are studying your romantic partner. If he or she knows they are
being observed for a reason, they will feel awkward and will not respond
naturally. Ask questions casually in conversation.
If you bring up likes and dislikes you can always say, “I like to work out every
day and read before I sleep…what are your favorite things to do?” Or, “My
parents are the most important people in my life…who is the most important
person in your life?” Check out dislikes. Ask for opinions and preferences.
Inquire about family and friends. Hopefully your partner will respond openly
and there will be a lot of revealing messages in these answers.
If there are any red flags, they should pop up during the analysis. This
information could make or break the relationship. It could strengthen your bond
and bring you closer together. Who knows - you both might even fall in love
with each other. Or else the feedback you get may expose the cold, callous
person your partner really is. Remember, forewarned is forearmed. Whatever the
outcome, getting an accurate analysis of your romantic partner is a sensible thing
to do and worth the outcome, whatever it may be.

Chapter 11 — Cutting-Edge Techniques
So far, we’ve looked at the basic foundations of analyzing people, such as
gestures and mannerisms, countenance based clues, and words that are used.
We’ve also looked at ways of reading people in corporate environments as well
as those in personal relationships with you. There are still some more things we
need to have a look at though, as it’s not always easy to analyze people, and you
need to be able to find the subtle little clues that will give you more details.
In this next chapter, we’ll be looking at those tiny bodily messages that people
send unconsciously, and at subtle facial expressions that can give you hints about
what the person is thinking. Certain ways of talking and special words people
use can also tell you a lot about them. We’ll end off by telling you about a
method of assessing someone’s personality type quickly and easily.
Tiny and Inconspicuous Signs
Some movements that people make are very tiny and very quick, and if you’re
not looking carefully you’ll miss them. Only a very observant person will pick
them up. For example, people who want to assert their authority, or who are very
dominant characters, will slowly move nearer and nearer to the other person,
until they begin to feel as if they should take a step backwards. The authoritative
person may also lean forwards, thus invading the other person’s sense of space.
Moving close can also mean that they like the other person, but it is usually
fairly easy to tell the difference. So, when you come across a person who tends
to always stand to close to others, you can safely conclude that they want
everyone to understand that they’re the one in control.
The opposite type of personality- timid, insecure people, may subtly keep
fidgeting with their clothes. People who think they’re overweight tend to pull at
their clothing, pulling it away from the parts of their body that they don’t want it
clinging to, lest people see it clinging and notice how fat they are. They usually
do this very fast and inconspicuously.
We’ve spoken in a previous chapter about how to know when you’re out on a
date whether a person likes you or not, but how about in a group setting? How
do you tell if they like you if they aren’t sitting nearby? In this case, you won’t
be able to read the usual body signs like leaning close and so on. Well, you can
watch what they do when someone else makes a joke. If they like you, they’ll

normally look your way, watching to see if you’re laughing before they do, as
they want to see first if it’s acceptable to you if they laugh. They subconsciously
will want to say, “We have the same sense of humor.”
Minute but Important
Micro expressions are subtle, tiny expressions of the face that people have very
little control over. Professionals, such as interrogators, watch these expressions
to try to read what someone is thinking and feeling. Micro expressions are
largely involuntary, so are extremely difficult to control or manipulate. They
often appear for just a millisecond. It’s been concluded that there are about seven
basic feelings that can be shown by them: shock, repugnance, dread, rage, grief,
joy, and hatred.
-Shock/ Surprise
The eyes open wide, showing the whites of the eyes all round. The brows rise
and cause the forehead to wrinkle up. The jaw may even drop open.
-Repugnance
Disgust or distaste is usually shown by the nose crinkling up, causing the top lip
to curl upwards. The person will look as though they have smelled a terrible
odor.
-Dread
Fear or dread are normally shown by the person’s eyebrows drawing together in
a straight line. The whites of the eyes show at the top of the eyes, not the bottom.
The mouth opens and the lips become rigid.
-Rage
Anger causes the brow to lower and the eyebrows to come together in a frown.
The eyes become fiery, and may even protrude slightly. The mouth tightens into
a straight line, or turns downwards. The jaw thrusts forward and tightens up. The
nose flares out.
-Grief
Sadness turns down the corners of the mouth, and the lower lip may protrude
slightly. The inner edges of the brows pull in and are slightly raised. The eyes
compress from below.

-Joy
Happiness will cause the outer corners of the eyes to crinkle up, especially when
the mouth smiles. The lips turn up in a way that also lifts the cheeks.
-Hatred
Contempt is usually a swifter facial expression, often quickly hidden. Sometimes
it shows by one side of the mouth lifting in a sneer, or may be subtler, almost
like a smile.
The Importance of Words
As a person speaks, you can learn a lot about them just from the type of words
they say. For instance, it’s possible to estimate a person’s age by noting the ratio
of positive to negative words they speak. The older a person is; the more
positively emotive words they normally use. Older people also tend to use more
verbs in the future tense. There are many other things you can pick up from a
person’s words:
-Whether they’re being honest or not
When a person is being truthful, they’ll tend to use more first-person singular
words, such as “he” or “I”. They’ll also tend to use words that present both sides
of the story, such as “perhaps” and “maybe”. The use of these nuanced words
also hints at a higher intelligence level than those who use absolutes. People who
are not being honest will tend to use more definite, absolute words, such as “he
definitely” and “absolutely”.
-Whether or not they’re depressed
Self-centered, inward-looking people who say a lot of first-person singular
words like “I” and “me” have a tendency towards depression. The use of these
words all the time reveals feelings of isolation and loneliness.
Easy Way to Assess Personality Type
How quickly can you decide what personality type someone has? If you know
what to look for and are alert to the tiny signs, you can get a reasonably accurate
idea pretty quickly.
Firstly, you need to decide if they’re an introvert or an extrovert. Notice carefully
how long it takes them to answer when they are questioned. Introverts tend not
to answer immediately, and will usually hesitate and give the question some

thought. Extroverts tend to answer at once, almost seeming to think aloud as
they do so.
Secondly, you need to look at if they’re a future based or present based
individual. That is, if they live in the now and are largely focused on the present
moment, they can be considered a “sensing” type of person. They’ll be attuned,
with all their senses, to the sights, sounds, and action going on around them.
They’ll tend to be more observant and will notice small details that others miss.
An “intuition” type of personality, however, will be more focused on the future,
planning their next move, thinking ahead, and trying to assess what’s going to
happen next.
Thirdly, you can look at how the person copes when plans get changed. If they
are ok with change, and fit in, going along with the new plans, then this is
another sign that they are more present-based, and not easily shaken up when
change happens. People who struggle with change tend to be future-based
individuals who plan and schedule ahead, and like things to be organized ahead
of time. They’ll become easily irritated by people who don’t think ahead and are
more impulsive.
An interesting method of learning more about what kind of person someone is, is
to find out what type of music they enjoy. Intelligent and emotionally balanced
types have a tendency to prefer classical music, or jazz. Those who like heavy
metal and rock tend to be intelligent and honest. Lighthearted music such as pop,
country, or gospel tends to appeal to outwardly friendly, easygoing types of
people, who are fairly conservative. Really open, friendly extroverts usually go
with rap and hip-hop.
Social media give a big window into people’s personalities. Just by looking at
someone’s Facebook pages you’ll see what their views are on religion, politics,
and travel. It’ll tell you how family-oriented they are, whether they’re a private
sort of person or not, and if they’re an introvert or extrovert.
To Sum Up
These advanced techniques for personality analysis are extremely useful for
those who work with a lot of people. Learning to read body language and the
faint expressions that flicker across people’s faces can be a very valuable skill,
giving you a great deal of insight. It’s a useful skill in careers such as sales,
marketing, psychiatry, and law.

Remember that emotions never stay inward- they always have an outward
manifestation, no matter how tiny. Just by careful observation, you’ll be able to
tell how comfortable someone is, and whether they’re telling the truth or not.
You’ll be able to look at tiny details like how someone moves their eyes or
crosses their legs, and it will be meaningful to you. Do keep in mind though that
everyone is a unique individual, and try not to take a “one size fits all” approach.
There are many advantages to being able to analyze people well. Namely, so that
you can better relate to work colleagues and be more empathetic towards them.
It can also help you to keep your supervisors happy, and understand how they
cope with stress and deadlines. This knowledge should help you in social
situations as well, as you begin to pick up on the subtle things that people leave
unsaid. Hopefully it helps in dating situations, to help you make better
relationship decisions.
When you understand someone’s personality type and why they react in certain
ways, it can go a long way to minimizing misunderstandings and confusion
about motives, leading to more peaceful interactions all round.
To Conclude
Thanks for making it to the end of the book. Hopefully you worked through the
exercises and have come away with some practical ways of learning more about
those around you. You should also have new insight into yourself and your own
personality. These techniques can be used to improve the lives of those around
you, as well as your own. It’s so important now that you apply your new skills in
everyday situations, as the more you practice, the better you’ll become at it. It’s
also vital to remember that none of these methods is a way of totally knowing
someone- they need to be used all together and built on to form a complete
picture.
As with most things, it’s a good idea to begin with knowing yourself- which is a
lifelong procedure, but totally worth it. Watch how you react in various settings,
see what emotions arise and fade at various times, and note how your voice
changes in certain scenarios. As you become more self-aware, it will help you to
become more sensitive to others.

