LIONS 
OR LAMBS
HOW DEANS LEAD 
AND MANAGE 
THEIR FACULTIES 
AT INDONESIAN 
UNIVERSITIES
JENNY NGO

LIONS OR LAMBS? 
HOW DEANS LEAD AND MANAGE THEIR FACULTIES 
AT INDONESIAN UNIVERSITIES 
 
 
 
 
JENNY NGO 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ISBN: 978-90-365-3466-6  
DOI: 10.3990/1.9789036534666 
 
 
Copyright © 2013. Jenny Ngo 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a 
retrieval system of any nature, or transmitted in any form or by any means, 
electronic, 
mechanical, 
now 
known 
or 
hereafter 
invented, 
including 
photocopying or recording, without prior written permission of the author. 
 
 
PhD Thesis, University of Twente, the Netherlands 
Cover design by Lucy Bruggink, WeCre8, Enschede, the Netherlands 
Printed by Ipskamp Drukkers, Enschede, the Netherlands 
Published by CHEPS/UT, P.O. Box 217, 7500 AE Enschede, the Netherlands, 
Cheps-Secretariaat@mb.utwente.nl 
 

LIONS OR LAMBS? 
HOW DEANS LEAD AND MANAGE THEIR FACULTIES 
AT INDONESIAN UNIVERSITIES 
DISSERTATION 
to obtain 
the degree of doctor at the University of Twente, 
on the authority of the rector magnificus, 
prof. dr. H. Brinksma, 
on account of the decision of the graduation committee, 
to be publicly defended 
on Friday 18 January 2013 at 16:45 hrs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
by 
 
 
 
Jenny Ngo 
 
 

This dissertation has been approved by the promoters: 
Prof. dr. J. Enders 
Dr. H. F. de Boer 
 
 

The graduation committee: 
Chairman and secretary: 
Prof. dr. R. A. Wessel  
University of Twente, the Netherlands 
 
Members: 
Prof. dr. L. Meek  
University of Melbourne, Australia 
Prof. dr. B. Stensaker 
University of Oslo, Norway 
Prof. dr. S. A. H. Denters 
University of Twente, the Netherlands 
Prof. dr. A. Need 
University of Twente, the Netherlands 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To all my family, especially to my mother, whose loving-kindness and courage 
are phenomenal; and to my late father, whose wisdom and patience continue to 
inspire me to this day.  
 

 

Acknowledgements 
 
ix 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
I can imagine how some may have smiled or even scratched their heads when 
they read ‘lions or lambs’ as metaphors for the leadership qualities in the 
Indonesian deanship styles. In a leadership context, leaders’ lion-like qualities 
symbolise strength, aggressiveness, competitiveness, and clear direction in terms 
of planning and goal-setting. In contrast, leaders’ lamb-like qualities symbolise 
humility, family-likeness, group orientation, and consensus.  
For this dissertation, ‘lions’ and ‘lambs’ are the secret codes for the completion of 
my PhD journey. In the process of writing of this dissertation, I faced difficult and 
challenging experiences that forced me to act as a lion. In wintry and turbulent 
times, I had to be strong, courageous, and highly motivated to persevere, write, 
and complete the dissertation. At the same time, I needed to have a heart full of 
compassion and to be as patient as a lamb to accomplish my academic goals. By 
writing the dissertation, I learned how to make my overwhelming challenges part 
of my glorious life. 
It has taken a long time to write this dissertation. The realisation of this PhD 
thesis would not have been possible without the supervision, encouragement, 
and support of many individuals and organisations. Therefore, I ask in advance 
for forgiveness if I miss to acknowledge some people or organisations. I owe you 
nonetheless.  
First, I would like to express my deep appreciation to my promoter Prof. dr. 
Jürgen Enders and my supervisor Dr. Harry de Boer for their constructive 
criticisms, fruitful feedbacks, and scholarly guidance. I would like to 
acknowledge Harry’s invaluable advice, unflinching encouragement, and 
ceaseless support given me throughout the entire years of my PhD journey. I 
would forever remain grateful for your great contributions. I would like to thank 
Jürgen, particularly in the final years of my PhD, for bringing more ‘spices’ to 
balancing and blending ‘flavours’ in my dissertation.  
It is equally important to extend my gratefulness to all other members of CHEPS 
who showed me a warm welcome and generous hospitality as part of a big 
CHEPS family that made me feel like I was home. I thank each and every one of 
you without exception!  
 

x 
 
Acknowledgements 
I would like to thank Andrea Kottmann with whom I have learnt how to be 
aware of the unexpected results in data analysis. I owe profound gratitude to Dr. 
Harry van der Kaap whose patience and constructive discussions enabled me to 
learn and increase my knowledge in statistics. Scuba duba doo! I am able to 
‘swim’ and ‘dive’ in the pool of numbers. 
I am also thankful for my PhD classmates, especially Irena Kuzmanoska and 
James Otieno Jowi for the great moments we shared at the CHEPS residential 
schools. Unforgettable experiences! Thanks to all my officemates, Marwine van 
der Molen, Aleksandra Kovač, Antigoni Papadimitriou, Dominik Antonowicz, 
Mulu Nega, Grit Laudel, Fisseha Mamo and others who shared an office with me.  
Some of my gratitude extends to institutions; without their academic and 
financial support this study may not have succeeded. I am deeply thankful to 
NFP-NUFFIC for the fellowship that helped and enabled me to finish my 
research. I am also grateful to all staff members of the International Office and 
PA&O, University of Twente for their support. Moreover, I am very honoured 
and deeply thankful to DIKTI for the research support fund. I acknowledge 
Sekolah Tinggi Teknik Surabaya for giving me support to commence this PhD 
study. I am also grateful to the respondents, the deans at Indonesian universities. 
Living in Enschede during my PhD study was an unforgettable life experience. I 
am particularly grateful to Ben and Elvira Jongbloed for their many kindnesses. I 
thank many friends from ITC Fellowship, RSK Ariëns, PPI-Enschede, and 
Zumba-UT for painting my Enschede life even more colourfully. In particular, I 
thank Kim, Susanne and Tjeerd, Catherine, Father Andre, Aryo, Silja, and Esther 
for their support, encouragement, and laughter. Thank you for just being ‘there’ 
for me.  
The last but not the least gratitude goes to my mother, brother and all family 
members in Denpasar, Indonesia. I am grateful to my mother, whose love is 
phenomenal. Although she does not really know and understand what my 
research is about, she has always encouraged, motivated and believed in me. 
Special thanks go to my brother, whose help and support continue until this day.  
Last and foremost, my sincerest thanks go to the Almighty God for His strength, 
and protection that sustained me through the entire PhD journey. I cannot fully 
express my feelings but can only give thanks and honour Him. 
Jenny Ngo 
Enschede, December 2012 
The Netherlands 

Contents 
xi 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Acknowledgements 
ix 
Contents 
xi 
List of Figures 
xv 
List of Tables 
xvii 
List of Equations and Box 
xxi 
List of Abbreviations 
xxiii 
1 
Introduction 
1 
1.1 
Research Questions  
1 
1.2 
Theoretical Perspective and Conceptual Frameworks 
4 
1.3 
Research Design and Methodology 
6 
1.4 
Outline of the Dissertation 
8 
1.5 
Conceptual Terms and Definitions 
10 
2 
Theory of Reasoned Action  
11 
2.1 
The Theory of Reasoned Action (TRA): A Model of Volitional        
Behaviour  
12 
2.1.1 
Importance of the TRA 
18 
2.1.2 
Criticisms of the TRA 
23 
2.2 
The Theory of Planned Behaviour and Reasoned Action Approach:             
A Model of Non-Volitional Behaviour 
26 
2.2.1 
Perceived Behavioral Control (PBC) 
28 
2.2.2 
Empirical Studies of Perceived Behavioral Control 
29 
2.3 
The Behavioural Models of the Study 
33 
2.4 
Summary and Conclusions 
35 
3 
Leadership and Management 
37 
3.1 
Leadership: Definitions and Concepts 
38 
3.1.1 
Leadership and Management 
41 
3.2 
Leadership Theories 
43 

xii 
Contents 
3.3 
Leadership Styles 
47 
3.3.1 
Studies of Leadership Styles 
51 
3.4 
The Competing Values Framework (CVF) 
56 
3.4.1 
The CVF Framework 
57 
3.4.2 
Aspects and Roles within the CVF 
58 
3.4.3 
Strengths of the CVF 
61 
3.4.4 
Plausibility of the CVF 
64 
3.5 
Summary and Conclusions 
66 
4 
Design and Operationalization of the Study  
69 
4.1 
Design and Methodology of the Study 
69 
4.2 
Data Collection and Sampling of the Study 
77 
4.3 
Operationalization of the Study 
80 
4.4 
Data Analysis 
94 
4.5 
Summary and Conclusions 
101 
5 
Indonesian Higher Education 
105 
5.1 
A Short Introduction to Indonesia 
106 
5.2 
The Indonesian Higher Education System 
107 
5.3 
Reforming the Indonesian Higher Education System 
111 
5.4 
The Internal Governance of Indonesian Universities 
114 
5.5 
Deans at Indonesian Universities 
117 
5.6 
Summary 
119 
 
6 
The Managerial Leadership Styles of Deans at       
Indonesian Universities 
121 
6.1 
The Managerial Behaviours of Deans 
122 
6.2 
The Managerial Leadership Roles of Deans 
123 
6.3 
The Managerial Leadership Styles of Deans 
128 
6.4 
Summary and Conclusions 
139 
7 
Descriptive Analysis of Attitudes, Subjective Norms, 
Perceived Behavioural Control, and Background Factors 141 
7.1 
Descriptive Analysis of the Attitudes, Subjective Norms and          
Perceived Behavioural Control of Deans 
142 
7.1.1 
Attitudes of Deans 
142 
7.1.2 
Subjective Norms of Deans 
143 
7.1.3 
Perceived Behavioural Control of Deans 
145 
7.2 
Descriptive Analysis of Background Factors 
146 
7.2.1 
Faculty Culture 
146 

Contents 
xiii 
7.2.2 
Management Skills 
148 
7.2.3 
Demographic Factors 
149 
7.3 
Summary 
150 
8 
Understanding the Managerial Leadership Styles of      
Deans 
153 
8.1 
The Volitional Behavioural Model of the Study: Influences of Attitudes  
and Subjective Norms on the Managerial Leadership Styles of Deans  
154 
8.1.1 
Preliminary Analysis 
155 
8.1.2 
Main Analysis 
156 
8.2 
The Non-Volitional Behavioural Model of the Study: Influences of 
Attitudes, Subjective Norms, and Perceived Behavioural Control on         
the Managerial Leadership Styles of Deans  
162 
8.2.1 
Preliminary Analysis 
163 
8.2.2 
Main Analysis 
166 
8.3 
Influences of Background Factors on the Attitudes, Subjective Norms, 
Environmental Controls, Internal Controls and Practical Controls  
 
of Deans 
170 
8.4 
Summary and Conclusions 
176 
9 
Summary, Conclusions and Reflections 
179 
9.1 
The Study in a Nutshell 
180 
9.1.1 
Context and Problem Statement 
180 
9.1.2 
Theoretical Background of the Study 
181 
9.1.3 
The Sample 
184 
9.1.4 
Findings and Conclusions 
185 
 
9.1.4.1 Managerial Leadership Behaviours, Roles and Styles          
of Indonesian Deans 
185 
 
9.1.4.2 Understanding the Managerial Leadership Styles of 
Indonesian Deans From Their Attitudes, Subjective   
Norms and Perceived Behavioural Control 
188 
 
9.1.4.3 Background Factors in the Two Behavioural  
 
 
Models 
190 
 
9.1.4.4 Conclusions of the Overall Findings 
191 
9.2 
Discussion and Reflection 
192 
9.2.1 
The Managerial Leadership Styles of Deans at Indonesian 
Universities 
192 
9.2.2 
Reflections on the Theories and Methodology Used 
196 
9.2.3 
Ideas for Further Research 
200 

xiv 
Contents 
Nederlandstalige samenvatting 
203 
References 
213 
Appendix A 
Questionnaires 
229 
Appendix B  
Results of Factor Analysis for Chapter 4 
261 
Appendix C  
Results of Data Analysis for Chapter 6 
263 
Appendix D  
Results of Data Analysis for Chapter 7 
271 
Appendix E  
 Comparative Result Between SmartPLS and 
Statistics 
275 
 

Figures 
 
xv 
LIST OF FIGURES  
FIGURES 
1.1 A Basic Representation of the Research Model for this Study 
 
6 
1.2 An Outline Visualisation of this Dissertation 
 
 
 
9 
2.1 A Representation of the TRA 
 
 
 
 
             13 
2.2 A Representation of the TPB and RAA 
 
 
 
             27 
2.3 A Representation of the Behavioural Models for this Study  
             34 
3.1 The Competing Values Framework 
 
 
 
             58 
4.1 The Two Behavioural Models of the Study and the CVF Eight  
Leadership Roles  
 
 
 
 
 
             82 
4.2 Four-Step Analyses of the Research Model   
 
 
             95 
4.3 An Outline Representation of the Data Analyses for This Study 
           103 
5.1 A General Structure of the University Governance in Indonesia 
           116 
5.2 A General Structure of the Faculty Governance at Indonesian  
Universities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           117 
6.1 Managerial Leadership Styles of Deans based on the Competing  
Values Framework (CVF)  
 
 
 
 
           122 
6.2 A Comparison of the Mean Scores of the Roles from the Two  
Leadership Instruments 
 
 
 
 
 
           127 
6.3 The Master Style 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           128 
6.4 The Competitive Consultant Style  
 
 
 
           132 
6.5 The Focused Team Captain Style 
 
 
 
 
           133 
6.6 The Consensual Goal-Setter Style  
 
 
 
           134 
6.7 The Informed Trust-Builder Style  
 
 
 
           135 
7.1 Factors Influencing Deans’ Managerial Leadership Styles  
           142 
8.1 Influences of Attitudes and Subjective Norms on the Managerial  
Leadership Styles of Deans  
 
 
 
 
           154 
8.2 The Empirical Model of the Managerial Leadership Styles of Deans  
at Indonesian Universities Based on Ajzen and Fishbein’s (1980)  
Volitional Behaviour Model 
 
 
 
 
           159 
8.3 Influences of Attitudes, Subjective Norms, Environmental Controls,  
Internal Controls, and Practical Controls on the Managerial Leadership 
Styles of Deans 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           162 
8.4 The Empirical Model of the Managerial Leadership Styles of Deans  
at Indonesian Universities based on Ajzen’s (1985) and Fishbein and  
Ajzen’s (2010) Non-Volitional Behaviour Model 
 
 
           170 

xvi 
 
Figures 
8.5 Influences of Background Factors on the Deans’ Attitudes, Subjective  
Norms, Environmental Controls, Internal Controls, and Practical  
Controls 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           171 
8.6 The Influence of Faculty Cultures and Management Skills  
on the Deans’ Attitudes and Their Subjective Norms 
 
           176 
9.1 The Two behavioural Models of the Study and the CVF Eight  
 
Leadership Roles  
 
 
 
 
 
           183 
9.2 The General Picture of the Deanship in Indonesian Universities 
           186 
9.3 The Four Specific Managerial Leadership Styles of Deans in  
 
Indonesian Universities 
 
 
 
 
 
           187 
9.4 The Empirical Behavioural Models of the Managerial Leadership  
 
Styles of Deans at Indonesian Universities based on the Volitional  
 
(Ajzen and Fishbein 1980) and the Non-Volitional Behavioural  
 
Models (Ajzen 1985; Fishbein and Ajzen 2010) 
 
 
           192 

Tables 
 
xvii 
LIST OF TABLES 
TABLES 
1.1 An Overview of the Major Conceptual Terms and Definitions 
             10 
2.1 Determining a Woman’s Attitude about Using Birth Control Pills              16 
2.2 Determining a Woman’s Subjective Norm about Having an Abortion          18 
2.3 Empirical Studies Showing Good Relations Between Intention and  
Behaviour, Between Attitude, Subjective Norm and Intention 
             20 
2.4 Empirical Studies Showing Weak Relations Between Intention and  
Behaviour, Between Attitude, Subjective Norm and Intention 
             21 
2.5 Criticisms of the Theory of Reasoned Action (TRA)  
 
             25 
2.6 Empirical Studies of Perceived Behavioural Control 
 
             31 
3.1 Some Representative Definitions of Leadership from  
the Past 100 Years  
 
 
 
 
 
             38 
3.2 A Comparison of the Eight Role Categories with Other  
Approaches 
 
 
 
 
 
 
             63 
4.1 Dissemination of and Response to the Questionnaire 
 
             80 
4.2 A Classification of Behaviours with respect to the Eight  
Managerial Leadership Roles Based on the CVF 
 
 
             83 
4.3 A Description of the Eight Managerial Leadership Roles Based on  
the CVF 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
             85 
4.4 A Classification of Behavioural Beliefs with respect to the Eight  
Managerial Leadership Roles Based on the CVF 
 
 
             86 
4.5 A Classification of Evaluation of Outcome with respect to the Eight  
Managerial Leadership Roles Based on the CVF                                                87 
4.6 A Classification of Normative Beliefs with respect to the Four  
Leadership Aspects Based on the CVF 
 
 
 
             88 
4.7 A Classification of Motivation to Comply with Important Referents              88 
4.8 A Classification of Perceived Behavioural Control  
 
             89 
4.9 A Classification of the Four Aspects of Faculty Culture Based on  
the CVF 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
             91 
4.10 A Classification of the Four Aspects of Management Skills Based on  
the CVF 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
             93 
4.11 The Variables in the Second Step Analysis  
 
 
             97 
4.12 The Variables in the Third Step Analysis 
 
 
 
             98 
4.13 The Variables in the Fourth Step Analysis  
 
 
             99 
4.14 A Summary of the Model Constructs and their Assessments 
           102 

xviii 
Tables 
5.1 Numbers of Indonesian Higher Education Institutions in 2007/2008            108 
6.1 Percentages of Deans in the Study that Report ‘Always’ on the 32  
Behaviours Based on the CVF 
 
 
 
 
           123 
6.2 Managerial Leadership Role of Deans at Indonesian Universities 
           125 
6.3 Personal Descriptions of Deans Based on the Eight Managerial  
Leadership Roles from the CVF 
 
 
 
 
           126 
6.4 Percentages of Deans that Have a Specific Managerial Leadership  
Style 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           131 
6.5 Distributions of the Specific Managerial Leadership Styles of Deans by 
Gender 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           136 
6.6 Distributions of the Specific Managerial Leadership Styles of Deans by  
Age 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           137 
6.7 Distributions of the Specific Managerial Leadership Styles of Deans  
by Term-of-Office  
 
 
 
 
 
           137 
6.8 Distributions of the Specific Managerial Leadership Styles of Deans by 
Academic Discipline 
 
 
 
 
 
           138 
7.1 Attitudes of Deans towards the Eight Managerial Leadership Roles  
Based on the CVF  
 
 
 
 
 
           143 
7.2 Subjective Norms of Deans for the Four Aspects of Faculty Leadership  
Based on the CVF  
 
 
 
 
 
           144 
7.3 Perceived Behavioural Control of Deans 
 
 
 
           146 
7.4 Four Aspects of Faculty Culture at Indonesian Universities  
           147 
7.5 Deans’ Perceptions of the Four Aspects of Management Skills  
Based on the CVF  
 
 
 
 
 
           149 
7.6 Demographic Characteristics of Deans at Indonesian Universities            149 
8.1 Influences of Attitudes on the Managerial Leadership Styles of Deans        155 
8.2 Influences of Subjective Norms on the Managerial Leadership Styles  
of Deans 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           156 
8.3 Influences of Attitudes and Subjective Norms on the Managerial  
Leadership Styles of Deans  
 
 
 
 
           157 
8.4 Multicollinearity Analysis for the Volitional Behaviour Model 
           158 
8.5 Zoom-in Analysis of the Styles from Attitudes 
 
 
           160 
8.6 Influences of Attitude on the Managerial Leadership Styles of Deans         164 
8.7 Influences of Subjective Norms on the Managerial Leadership Styles  
of Deans 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           164 
8.8 Influences of Environmental Controls, Internal Controls and Practical 
Controls on the Managerial Leadership Styles of Deans 
 
           165 
8.9 Multicollinearity Analysis for the Non-Volitional Behaviour Model           166 
8.10 Influences of Attitudes, Subjective Norms, Environmental Controls,  
Internal Controls and Practical Controls on the Managerial Leadership  
Styles of Deans 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           167 

Tables 
 
xix 
8.11 Influences of Attitudes and Subjective Norms on the Managerial  
 
Leadership Styles of Deans  
 
 
 
 
           168 
8.12 Influences of Each Background Factor on the Attitudes and Subjective  
 
Norms of Deans 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           172 
8.13 Influences of Each Background Factor on Environmental, Internal,  
and Practical Controls of Deans 
 
 
 
 
           175 
 
APPENDIX TABLES 
Appendix B Result of Factor Analysis for Chapter 4 
Table 1 
Three dimensions of perceived controls: Result of Factor analysis:  
 
Extraction Method: Principal Component Analysis. Rotation Method: 
 
Varimax with Kaiser Normalization (presented value ≥ 0.5) 
           261 
 
Appendix C Results of Data Analysis for Chapter 6 
Table 1 
Deans’ self-reported behaviours on the 32 items of the CVF  
 (N = 218, means, standard deviations, frequencies in %) 
           263 
Table 2 
Factor analysis of the eight managerial leadership roles based on  
 
 
the CVF (value ≥ 0.3, p < 0.05)  
 
 
                         264 
Table 3 
Factor analysis of the four dimensions based on the CVF  
 
 
(value ≥ 0.3, p < 0.05)  
 
 
 
 
           266 
Table 4 
Factor analysis of the two leadership roles within the clan quadrant  
 
 
of CVF (value ≥ 0.5, p < 0.05)  
 
 
 
           267 
Table 5 
Factor analysis of the two leadership roles within the adhocracy  
 
 
quadrant of CVF (value ≥ 0.5, p < 0.05)  
 
 
           267 
Table 6 
Factor analysis of the two leadership roles within the market  
 
 
quadrant of CVF (value ≥ 0.5, p < 0.05)  
 
 
           268 
Table 7 
Factor analysis of the two leadership roles within the hierarchy  
 
 
quadrant of CVF (value ≥ 0.5, p < 0.05)  
 
                         268 
Table 8 
Classification of deans who have similar patterns of emphasis on  
 
 
the eight leadership roles of the CVF: Reports of two step cluster  
 
 
analysis (N = 218, Distance likelihood, number of cluster auto,  
 
 
15 BIC) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           269 
Table 9 
Classification of deans who have similar patterns of emphasis on  
 
 
the eight leadership roles of the CVF: Reports of two step cluster  
 
 
analysis (N = 218, Distance likelihood, number of cluster fixed 8)        269 
Table 10 Classification of deans who have similar patterns of emphasis on  
 
 
the eight leadership roles of the CVF: Reports of two step cluster  
 
 
analysis (N = 218, Distance likelihood, number of cluster fixed 4)        270 

xx 
Tables 
Appendix D Results of Data Analysis for Chapter 7 
Table 1 
Dean’s behavioural beliefs with respect to the eight managerial 
leadership roles: Reports of descriptive statistics  
 
[N = 218, means, standard deviations (SD)] 
 
 
           271 
Table 2 
Deans’ evaluation of outcome with respect to the eight managerial 
leadership roles: Reports of descriptive statistics  
 
[means, standard deviations (SD)] 
 
 
 
           271 
Table 3 
Deans’ normative beliefs: Reports of descriptive statistics  
 
[N = 216, means, standard deviations (SD)] 
 
 
           272 
Table 4 
The dean’s motivation to comply: Reports of descriptive statistics  
 
(N = 216, Mean, SD, in %) 
 
 
 
 
           272 
 
Appendix E Comparative Result between SmartPLS and Statistics 
Table 1 
Comparison between SmartPLS and Multiple Regression  
(N = 215) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           275 

Equations and Box 
 
xxi 
LIST OF EQUATIONS and BOX 
EQUATIONS 
4.1 Managerial Leadership Roles Based on the CVF 
 
 
             84 
4.2 Attitudes towards a Managerial Leadership Role Based on the CVF              87 
4.3 Subjective Norms with respect to the Four Leadership Aspects Based  
on the CVF 
 
 
 
 
 
 
             88 
4.4 Factor Analysis of Perceived Behavioural Control  
 
             90 
4.5 Faculty Culture 
 
 
 
 
 
 
             92 
4.6 Management Skills  
 
 
 
 
 
             94 
4.7 A Model for Explaining the Influence of Attitude and Subjective  
Norm on the Managerial Leadership Styles of Deans 
 
             97 
4.8 A Model for Explaining the Zoom-in Analysis of the Styles from  
Attitude and/or Subjective Norm  
 
 
 
             98 
4.9 A Model for Explaining the Influence of Attitude, Subjective  
Norm and Perceived Behavioural Control on the Managerial  
Leadership Styles of Deans  
 
 
 
 
             99 
4.10 A Model for Explaining the Influence of Background Factors  
on Deans’ Attitude, Subjective Norm and Perceived Behavioural  
Control 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           100 
 
BOX 
4.1 The Steps to Investigating Specific Managerial Leadership Styles of  
 
Deans 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
             96 

xxii 
 

Abbreviations 
 
xxiii 
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 
APBN 
State Budget (Anggaran Pendapatan Belanja Negara) 
BAN-PT 
National Accreditation Board for Higher Education (Badan Akreditasi 
Nasional) 
BHMN 
State-Owned Legal Entity (Badan Hukum Milik Negara) 
CVF 
Competing Values Framework 
DGHE  
Directorate General of Higher Education (Direktorat Jenderal 
Pendidikan Tinggi (DIKTI)) 
GDP 
Gross Domestic Product 
HEI 
Higher Education Institutions  
HELTS 
Higher Education Long-Term Strategy 
IMF 
International Monetary Fund 
IPB 
Bogor Institute of Agriculture (Institut Pertanian Bogor) 
ITB 
Bandung Institute of Technology (Institut Teknologi Bandung) 
KOPERTIS 
Coordination for private HEIs (Koordinasi Perguruan Tinggi Swasta) 
MONE 
Ministry of National Education 
MPR 
People’s Consultative Assembly (Majelis Permusyawaratan Rakyat) 
MSAI 
Management Skills Assessment Instrument 
NPM 
New Public Management 
OCAI 
Organizational Culture Assessment Instrument 
RAA 
Reasoned Action Approach 
SNMPTN 
National Entrance Examination for public HEIs (Seleksi Nasional 
Masuk Perguruan Tinggi Negeri)  
PASW 
Predictive Analytics SoftWare (Statistical Analysis) 
TRA 
Theory of Reasoned Action 
TPB 
Theory of Planned Behaviour 

xxiv 
 
Abbreviations 
 
UGM 
Gajah Mada University (Universitas Gajah Mada) 
UI 
University of Indonesia (Universitas Indonesia) 
UNAIR 
Airlangga University (Universitas Airlangga) 
UMPTN 
Entrance Examination for Public Higher Education (Ujian Masuk 
Perguruan Tinggi Negeri) 
UPI 
Indonesia University of Education (Universitas Pendidikan Indonesia) 
USU 
University of North Sumatera (Universitas Sumatera Utara) 
 

1 
C H A P T E R
 
Introduction 
“It is easier to go down a hill than up, but the view is from the top.”  
Arnold Bennet (1867-1931)  
This study focuses on how deans at Indonesian universities lead and manage 
their faculties in the dynamic and challenging context of the Indonesian higher 
education system and its recent reforms. In this chapter, the purpose, focus, and 
context of the study are described. First, the research questions, theoretical 
perspectives and conceptual frameworks, and methodology are introduced. Then 
a visualisation of the dissertation is presented. The chapter ends with an 
overview of the conceptual terms and definitions used in the study. 
1.1 
RESEARCH QUESTIONS 
Indonesian higher education has experienced significant changes over the last 
decade. In particular, the Asian financial crisis in the middle of 1997 and the fall 
of the Suharto government in 1998 have had an impact on higher education. 
During those periods, it became clear that the government’s centralised approach 
was outdated and needed serious revision. In 1999, the government published an 

2 
Chapter 1 
overall strategy for decentralisation and enhancement of local autonomy in many 
sectors, including (higher) education. In line with these new policies, the Ministry 
of National Education (MoNE) issued two new regulations: one related to the 
changes in the administration of higher education institutions (HEIs) and the 
other to establish public universities as legal entities called Badan Hukum Milik 
Negara (BHMN). As a result of these new regulations, from 2000 onwards seven 
public HEIs have become autonomous universities1, and these HEIs are expected 
to become more entrepreneurial and innovative. To deal with the globalisation of 
higher education, the MoNE and the Directorate General of Higher Education 
(DGHE) produced the Higher Education Long Term Strategy (HELTS) IV for the 
period 2003-2010. This strategy focuses on higher education issues such as quality 
and relevance, access and equity, and autonomy and is likely to leave a lasting 
imprint on Indonesian institutions. 
 
Indonesian higher education institutions need to shift their role from 
conventional learning institutions to entrepreneurial research-based institutions 
(De Boer and Goedegebuure 2009). In such a complex and dynamic context, the 
autonomous universities are encouraged to establish corporate-style governance 
structures. They are supposed to create new fund-raising systems and to improve 
their services in order to successfully compete in education markets. Autonomous 
universities have also become responsible for the appointment of their Rector and 
personnel. They are also supposed to be more accountable to the public at large.  
 
Private universities have also had to improve their university management 
(DGHE 2008) in order to compete in higher education markets. These universities 
have had to work more intensively to find external funding sources and to 
diversify their existing income streams. In terms of university management, 
private universities are run as business institutions, although they are subject to 
government regulation and policy. The reforms encouraged private universities 
to improve their university governance by strengthening their strategic planning 
capacity (e.g. increasing the number of undergraduate and graduate 
programmes) and their human resources (e.g. recruiting qualified academics and 
skilled non-academic staff).  
 
In short, Indonesian higher education reform has forced both autonomous and 
private universities to restructure their internal university governance to become 
                                                           
1 Autonomous university status means that a university is given the right of self-
governance as the Indonesian government increasingly withdraws its public financial 
support and, in some respects, exits from regulating the internal management and 
governance of the university (see Chapter 5 for more details). 

Introduction 
3 
more entrepreneurial. These new types of internal university governance are 
likely to affect the institutions’ leadership and management. 
 
In line with the new governance of Indonesian universities, faculties are also 
likely to move in a more entrepreneurial direction. This suggests that, as the head 
of a faculty, deans are now expected to provide administrative as well as 
academic leadership, including management of finance, personnel, services and 
facilities. In contemporary Indonesian universities, deans now have a 
comprehensive work portfolio in which traditional and new responsibilities are 
combined. This development has been described in the international literature as 
a move from being the housekeeper of the faculty to being an executive manager 
(Wolverton et al. 2001; DiFronzo 2002; De Boer and Goedegebuure 2009; Thomas 
and Fragueiro 2011). Their new role includes responsibility for: 
 identifying new sources of revenue (due to less state support), attracting 
(more) external funds and, consequently, more collaboration with 
multinationals, national, and private corporations (Ahmad 2008; Wimbarti 
2008); 
 developing research programmes (Warsa 2003; Ahmad 2008);  
 developing and implementing (new) academic teaching programmes; 
 cultivating opportunities for research and student learning (Warsa 2003; 
Ahmad 2008); 
 attracting more students in the global market place as one of the sources of 
funding (e.g. student tuition fees) and competing with other faculties 
within and/or outside the university to win block grants (Verheul 2002; 
Welch 2007); 
 facilitating 
the 
development 
of 
human 
capital 
(academic 
and 
administrative staff) and physical facilities; and 
 engaging in institution-wide decision-making (as part of a university 
management team).  
 
From this list of responsibilities, deans play a vital role in the university and their 
functioning impacts on both the faculty and the institution. However, not much is 
known about how these important players manage their responsibilities or how 
they run their faculties. This will be the focus of our study. Our objective is, 
therefore, to investigate and better understand managerial leadership styles of 
deans at Indonesian universities. 
 

4 
Chapter 1 
Based on this research objective, the main research question of this study is 
defined as: 
What kind of managerial leadership styles do deans at Indonesian 
universities exhibit? How can these styles be explained?  
 
To answer this main research question, five sub-questions are defined as follows: 
1. How do we understand human behaviour?  
2. What does leadership and management mean, and which theoretical 
concept is useful for exploring the management and leadership styles of 
deans? 
3. How do we measure and operationalise the study's conceptual 
frameworks for empirical analyses? 
4. What are the managerial leadership styles of deans at Indonesian 
universities? 
5. Which factors explain the managerial leadership styles of deans at 
Indonesian universities?  
1.2 
THEORETICAL PERSPECTIVES AND CONCEPTUAL 
FRAMEWORKS 
To analyse the main research question in more detail, we first need to find the 
driving forces behind a dean’s managerial leadership style. A style is the way in 
which something is done, said, or performed. In this study, we see a style as a set 
of behaviours. The first step is, therefore, understanding human behaviour. What 
drives a person to act in a particular way?  
 
To explore behaviour and, consequently, managerial leadership style, we use the 
Theory of Reasoned Action (TRA) (Ajzen and Fishbein 1980), the Theory of 
Planned Behaviour (TPB) (Ajzen 1985, 1991), and the Reasoned Action Approach 
(Fishbein and Ajzen 2010). TRA is known as a volitional behavioural model. 
Theoretically, volitional behaviours refer to behaviours that people perform 
because they intend to perform them (Ajzen and Fishbein 1980). The volitional 
behavioural model assumes that individuals intend to perform a certain 
behaviour when they have a positive attitude towards this behaviour and when 
they believe that salient others think they should engage in such behaviour. 
However, not all behaviours are wholly under volitional control. Having a 
positive attitude and positive subjective norms may not be sufficient reasons to 
drive a behaviour. Information, skills, opportunities, and other resources are 
required to perform the behaviour in question. Considering these additional 
reasons, we also use TPB and RAA to introduce the construct of perceived 

Introduction 
5 
behavioural control in addition to the two other constructs: attitudes and 
subjective norms. These two theories of TPB and RAA assume that individuals 
intend to perform a behaviour when they have a positive attitude towards the 
behaviour, positive subjective norms for the behaviour, and strong perceived 
behavioural control over the behaviour. We present and discuss these theoretical 
models in Chapter 2.  
 
The next step is to look at management and leadership approaches. What is 
leadership? What is management? These and related questions are addressed 
through a literature review of leadership and management publications. Based on 
this review, we conclude that, for this study, we need not sharply distinguish 
between management and leadership. Deans both lead and manage. An 
analytical distinction between the two would not add value and would make our 
analysis unnecessarily complicated. For this reason, we use the term ‘managerial 
leadership styles’. In the literature, an evolving series of leadership theories exist 
including great man and trait theories, behavioural theories, situational and 
contingency theories, and transactional and transformational theories. In Chapter 
3, we review these theories and address a variety of management and leadership 
styles. We argue that, for the purposes of this study, Quinn’s (1988) Competing 
Values Framework (CVF), which classifies eight managerial leadership roles, is 
the best fit. The CVF is based on two axes: a vertical axis from flexibility to control 
and a horizontal axis reflecting internal to external focus. These axes create four 
quadrants, each representing a primary orientation of an organisation (clan, 
adhocracy, market, and hierarchy). Each quadrant has two managerial leadership 
roles. The advantage of this framework is that it is comprehensive, widely 
applied and tested, and seen as one of the major frameworks in the field (Quinn 
and Cameron 1983; Quinn and Rohrbaugh 1983; Quinn 1988; ten Have et al. 2003 
in Cameron et al. 2006).  
 
This CVF is used to operationalise the general behavioural models presented in 
Chapter 2, and forms the basis of the theoretical framework of this study. The 
basic representation of this theoretical framework is shown in Figure 1.1. 
 

6 
Chapter 1 
Background factors
The determinants of 
behaviour
Behaviour 
Adhocracy 
Clan
Market 
Hierarchy 
Flexibility
Control
External 
focus
Internal focus
 
Note: Dotted arrow indicates the possible influence of background factors on the determinants of the 
behaviour. Solid arrow indicates the direction of influence of the determinants of the behaviour on the 
behaviour itself. 
Figure 1.1 
A Basic Representation of the Research Model for this Study  
1.3 
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODOLOGY 
This study combines a number of different methodologies including descriptive, 
exploratory, and explanatory research techniques. We begin by exploring and 
describing managerial leadership styles of deans in Indonesian universities and 
then investigate why deans have a particular style. To collect our data, we 
developed a written survey to be completed by Indonesian deans, our unit of 
analysis. This research approach measures managerial leadership behaviour 
through self-reporting.2 Although we realise that this way of measuring 
behaviour may have pitfalls, we argue in Chapter 4 that these pitfalls do not 
necessarily apply to this study (because, for one reason, the alternative 360 degree 
approach faces similar problems).  
 
The written questionnaire comprises the key variables of our theoretical 
framework (such as behaviours, attitudes and subjective norms). Instead of a 
limited number of in-depth case studies, we chose a widely disseminated 
questionnaire to generalise our findings and provide a general picture of deans’ 
behaviour. Written questionnaires were sent via post to 443 deans selected via a 
stratified and simple random sampling technique from an estimated population 
of 960 deans from 120 accredited universities.3 A total of 218 completed 
                                                           
2 A method which asks respondents to report their own behaviour, feeling, attitude or 
belief. 
3 See Chapter 4, section 4.2 for more detailed information. 

Introduction 
7 
questionnaires were received. This represents 49% of our sample and 23% of the 
total population. A follow-up questionnaire, consisting of questions about 
perceived behavioural control, was sent via fax to all 218 respondents. A total of 
75 completed follow-up questionnaires were received, representing 34% of the 
respondents from the first questionnaire. Based on the statistical analysis for both 
surveys, we conclude that we have a representative sample of the geographical 
spread in Indonesia.4 
 
This study aims to identify managerial leadership styles of deans at Indonesian 
universities. To achieve this, the operationalization of variables in the research 
model starts from investigating management behaviours based on the CVF. Based 
on the set of behavioural items, eight managerial leadership roles were classified 
and measured. As a result from the classification of these roles, managerial 
leadership styles of deans were identified. Consequently, deans were asked to 
respond to a set of items that measure management behaviours derived from the 
CVF. These processes are defined as a 3-1 concept (see Chapters 3 and 4).  
 
This study also focuses on factors that explain the deans’ styles. Therefore, the 
next step is to measure the determinants of styles. According to the theoretical 
model used for the study, the determinants are attitudes, subjective norms, and 
perceived behavioural control. To measure attitudes, deans were asked to 
respond to a set of items that measure behavioural beliefs and evaluation of 
outcomes. To measure subjective norms, deans were asked to respond to a set of 
items that measure normative beliefs and motivations to comply. To measure 
perceived behavioural control, deans were asked to respond to a set of items that 
measure control beliefs.  
 
Since other factors may influence attitudes, subjective norms, and perceived 
behavioural control, in our study, organisational culture, management skills, and 
demographic factors were selected as background factors. In addition, we used 
the CVF-related instruments to measure organisational culture and management 
skills. The operationalization of the study is presented and explained in more 
detail in Chapter 4, section 4.3. 
 
This study employs statistical analysis (PASW 18) for describing and measuring 
the data. Descriptive and cluster analyses were used to explore and identify the 
patterns of managerial leadership styles of deans at Indonesian universities. 
Correlation and multivariate analysis, including bivariate and multiple linear 
regression techniques, were used to investigate the relationships between 
                                                           
4 Ibid. and see also Table 4.1 for the dissemination of and response to the questionnaires. 

8 
Chapter 1 
variables in the model. Based on Ajzen and Fishbein’s (1980) volitional 
behavioural model, the relationship between styles, attitudes and subjective 
norms was examined. Based on the non-volitional behavioural model (Ajzen 
1985; Fishbein and Ajzen 2010), the perceived behavioural control variable was 
added to our analysis. A more detailed description of our data analysis appears in 
Chapter 4, section 4.4. 
1.4 
OUTLINE OF THE DISSERTATION 
This dissertation has nine chapters (see Figure 1.2). The first two chapters of the 
dissertation, after this introductory chapter, provide the theoretical perspectives 
and conceptual frameworks for the study. Chapter 4 outlines the research design 
of the study, how the data is collected and analysed, and describes how the key 
concepts of this study have been operationalised. Chapter 5 provides an 
introduction to the empirical findings. It presents the context—higher education 
in Indonesia—within which deans have to function. The next three ‘empirical’ 
chapters deal with the findings of this study. In Chapter 6, we describe the 
behaviours, roles, and styles of deans at Indonesian universities. Descriptive 
analysis of attitudes, subjective norms, perceived behavioural control, and 
background factors appears in Chapter 7. Chapter 8 explores, to what extent, the 
styles presented in Chapter 6 can be explained. Chapter 9 summarises and 
concludes the findings of this study as well as discusses and interprets the 
findings of the study from various angles. 

Introduction 
9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.2 
An Outline Visualisation of this Dissertation 
 
Introduction
Chapter
1
Theory of Reasoned 
Action
Chapter
2
Leadership and  
Management 
Chapter
3
Conceptual frameworks
Design and
Operationalisation of
the Study
Chapter
4
Indonesian Higher 
Education
Chapter
5
Managerial Leadership 
Styles of Deans at Indonesian 
Universities         
Chapter
6
Descriptive Analysis of
Attitudes, Subjective Norms, 
Perceived Behavioural 
Control and Background 
Factors
Chapter
7
Understanding the 
Managerial Leadership
Styles of Deans
Chapter
8
Empirical analyses, answering the research questions of the study
Summary, Conclusions,
and Reflections
Chapter
9
Research context

10 
Chapter 1 
1.5 
CONCEPTUAL TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 
Several conceptual terms are used in this study. An overview of the major 
conceptual terms and definitions are presented in Table 1.1. 
Table 1.1 
An Overview of the Major Conceptual Terms and Definitions  
Concept 
Definition 
Academic dean 
leadership  
An integration of organisational roles which covers various aspects of 
leading and managing in simultaneous harmony and tension. 
Behaviours 
Observable events. 
Managerial 
leadership role  
A set of behaviours reflecting one set of managing roles based on the 
CVF. 
Managerial 
leadership style 
A configuration of the eight managerial leadership roles based on the 
CVF. 
Volitional 
behaviours 
Behaviours that people perform because they intend to perform them. 
Non-volitional 
behaviours 
Behaviours that people perform when they have positive attitudes 
towards them and positive subjective norms for them and when they 
believe that they do have control over them. 
Attitude 
towards the 
behaviour 
The person’s judgement that performing the behaviour is good or bad, 
that guides the person to be in favour of or against performing the 
behaviour.  
Subjective 
norms 
The person’s perception of the social pressures to perform or not 
perform the behaviour in question. 
Perceived 
behavioural 
control 
The extent to which people believe that they are capable of performing 
a given behaviour and that they have control over its performance. 
 

2 
C H A P T E R
 
Theory of Reasoned Action 
“Generally speaking, individuals will intend to perform a behaviour when they evaluate it 
positively and when they believe that important others think they should perform it.” 
Ajzen and Fishbein (Understanding Attitudes and Predicting Social Behaviour, 1980, p. 6) 
The theory of reasoned action (TRA), outlined by Ajzen and Fishbein in 1980, is 
a well-known and widely-used theoretical framework for predicting and 
explaining social human behaviour. As we explain in this chapter, it also appears 
promising for investigating how deans lead and manage their faculties. This 
chapter starts with Section 2.1 which presents and discusses the TRA in greater 
detail. Next, Section 2.2 presents and discusses the theory of planned behaviour 
(TPB) (Ajzen 1985) and the ‘latest version’ of the reasoned action approach 
(RAA) (Fishbein and Ajzen 2010). Section 2.3 describes and explains the 
behavioural models of this study. The last section 2.4 summarises and concludes 
this chapter.  

12 
Chapter 2 
2.1 
THE THEORY OF REASONED ACTION (TRA): A 
MODEL OF VOLITIONAL BEHAVIOUR 
In the 1970s, Martin Fishbein and Icek Ajzen developed a theoretical framework 
in which human behaviour is explained by the intention to act in a particular 
way. In proposing that behaviour is under the control of intentions, this model 
limits itself to volitional behaviours, that is, behaviours that people perform 
because they intend to perform them (Ajzen and Fishbein 1980). Behavioural 
intentions are regarded as ‚the indications of a person’s readiness to perform a 
behaviour‛ (Fishbein and Ajzen 2010, p. 39). Behavioural intentions are, 
according to the TRA, greatly influenced by attitudes towards personally 
performing the behaviour and subjective norms towards the behaviour as the 
proximal cause of the behaviour itself. Ajzen and Fishbein (1980, p. 6) argue that 
‚a person’s intention is a function of two basic determinants, one personal in 
nature and the other reflecting social influence.‛ Theoretically, attitudes and 
subjective norms influence behaviour by their influence on intentions.  
 
The theory assumes that the relative importance of these determinants, attitudes 
and subjective norms, differs between people and situations. This means that for 
some people in some situations, attitudes are more important in explaining 
behavioural intentions, while for others subjective norms are the most important 
factor. In some cases, behavioural intentions are mainly based on attitudes with 
subjective norms having hardly any effect. In other cases, the opposite might be 
true. There are no general guidelines for the distribution of the weightings.  
 
As depicted in Figure 2.1, the TRA model assumes that (a) volitional behaviour is 
determined by (behavioural) intention to engage in the behaviour; (b) 
(behavioural) intention is determined by attitudes towards the behaviour and 
subjective norms; (c) attitudes towards the behaviour are determined by 
behavioural beliefs and evaluation of salient outcomes; and (d) subjective norms 
are determined by normative beliefs and motivation to comply with important 
referents. 

Theory of Reasoned Action 
13 
Attitude towards the 
behaviour
Subjective norm
Intention
Behaviour
Behavioural beliefs
Normative beliefs
Background factors
Demographic variables:
Age, sex
Occupation
Socioeconomic status
Religion
Education
Attitudes toward 
targets:
Attitude toward people
Attitudes toward 
institutions
Personality traits:
Introversion-
Extraversion
Neuroticism
Autoritarianism
Dominance
 
Note: the dotted arrows represent possible explanations for observed relations between 
background actors and behavioural and normative beliefs.  
Figure 2.1 A Representation of the TRA (adapted from Ajzen and Fishbein 1980, 
Figure 7.1, p. 84) 
 
The TRA is a model of the immediately proximal causes of volitional behaviour 
that is inherently a reasonable (causal-link) model (Eagly and Chaiken 1993, p. 
172). It is known as a model of cognitive processes in which ‚people form their 
intentions by thinking about their attitudes and subjective norms, form their 
attitudes by thinking about the consequences (positive or negative) of their 
behaviour, and form their subjective norms by thinking about significant others’ 
approval or disapproval of their behaviour‛ (Eagly and Chaiken 1993, p. 173). 
The factors mentioned above—beliefs, attitudes, subjective norms, intentions and 
behaviours—are the key factors in the TRA. Ajzen and Fishbein (1980) argue that, 
background factors only indirectly affect behaviour. The beliefs people have and 
how they are evaluated could be influenced by background factors (Fishbein and 
Ajzen 2010, p. 224). Thus, while acknowledging that background factors could 
potentially influence an individual’s beliefs, the TRA does not address the origins 
of these beliefs (Fishbein and Ajzen 2010, p. 25). If one wished to investigate the 
sources that influence beliefs, then such background factors should be taken into 
account. In the remainder of this section we will address the four main 
components of the TRA: behaviour, (behavioural) intentions, attitudes, and 
subjective norms. 
 
Behaviour. The first step in understanding behaviour is to identify the behaviour. 
But what is behaviour? This simple, but not easily answered, question is 
important 
because 
the 
identification 
of 
behaviour 
influences 
the 
conceptualisations and measurements of the other components of the explanatory 
model.  

14 
Chapter 2 
Behaviours are observable events (Fishbein and Ajzen 2010, p. 29). The key 
element is action. Conceptually, a behaviour can be defined as either a single act 
(a specific behaviour performed by a person) or a behavioural category (a set of 
actions). ‚A behavioural category differs from a specific behaviour in that its 
action element is generalised to include an array of different behaviours that 
comprise or define the behavioural category in question‛ (Fishbein and Ajzen 
2010, p. 324). Single actions can be directly observed, whereas ‚behavioural 
categories cannot be directly observed. Instead, they are inferred from single 
actions assumed to be instances of the general behavioural category. Dieting (a 
behavioural category), for instance, must be inferred from such behaviours as 
eating, drinking, or taking diet pills‛ (Ajzen and Fishbein 1980, p. 31). To identify 
an action more precisely, Fishbein and Ajzen also argue that it is useful to 
distinguish three other elements with respect to behaviour: target, context and 
time. In our study, for instance, a dean negotiates (action) a contract (target) with 
the university’s executive board (context) in the last month of the year (time). This 
refers to a single action of a dean which can be directly observed, while brokering 
refers to a behavioural category in which one of the actions is negotiating.  
 
In defining a behaviour, Fishbein and Ajzen (2010, p. 30) also suggest that ‚each 
of a behaviour’s four elements—action, target, context and time—can be defined 
at various levels of generality or specificity.‛ As mentioned earlier, theoretically 
behaviours can be defined at the most specific level as a single action. Behaviours 
can also be defined at the most general level as a behavioural category, for 
example ‘brokering’ (action) and ‚it is possible to generalise target and context to 
the point where these elements are left unspecified, and the time element can also 
be left unspecified by considering, for example, whether a person ever performed 
the action under consideration‛ (Fishbein and Ajzen 2010, p. 38). Regarding 
brokering as a behavioural category, we can broaden the target (e.g. other kinds 
of brokering tasks), the context (e.g. with university or company’s board) and the 
time (e.g. years of deanship service).  
 
‚No matter how broadly or narrowly a behaviour is defined in terms of its target, 
action, context and time, the most fundamental question we are trying to answer 
is why people do or do not perform the behaviour of interest‛ (Fishbein and 
Ajzen 2010, p. 34). To answer this question, Fishbein and Ajzen (2010) suggest 
taking into account the varieties of behavioural criteria (dichotomies, frequencies 
and magnitudes) that may help obtain a suitable measure of a behaviour. For 
example, we could assess whether a dean did or did not fix a contract with the 
university’s executive board last month (dichotomous criterion); how often a 
dean fixed a contract (frequency criterion) and how many contracts a dean fixed 
within a given period of time (magnitude criterion). From this, we can determine 

Theory of Reasoned Action 
15 
that ‚a behavioural criterion always involves an action‛ (Fishbein and Ajzen 2010, 
p. 38). This stipulation is needed as ‚people sometimes fail to distinguish between 
behaviours and occurrences that may be the outcomes of those behaviours‛ 
(Ajzen and Fishbein 1980, p. 29). For example, ‚losing weight is not a behaviour 
but a goal that can perhaps be achieved by performing behaviours associated 
with dieting or exercising‛ (Fishbein and Ajzen 2010, p. 38). Moreover, ‚goal 
attainment depends not only on the behaviours performed by an individual but 
also on other factors that may not be under the individual’s volitional control‛ 
(Fishbein and Ajzen 2010, p. 323). In our example, the dean’s negotiation 
(behaviour) could lead to a signed contract with the executive broad (outcome), 
but this also depends on the behaviours of the negotiating partners. At the same 
time, signing a contract is also a behaviour that leads to an outcome (the signed 
contract). In the next chapter, we describe in detail what kind of behaviour we 
have investigated in this study. 
 
(Behavioural) Intention. Intentions are indications of a person’s readiness to 
perform a behaviour (Fishbein and Ajzen 2010, p. 39). It refers to something that 
people try, plan or are willing to do. Although Fishbein and Ajzen, as well as 
several other researchers, convincingly demonstrate a high correlation between 
behavioural intention and actual behaviour, the intention-behaviour relationship 
is not perfect—otherwise it would not make any sense to separate them. We will 
discuss this issue in the next section. 
 
Attitudes towards the behaviour. Attitudes towards the behaviour refers to the 
person’s judgement that performing the behaviour is good or bad …‛ (Ajzen and 
Fishbein 1980, p. 6) that guides the person to be in favour of or against 
performing the behaviour. In the example of our negotiating dean, the dean has 
an idea of the potential effects (costs and benefits) of fixing the contract, weighted 
by his personal beliefs. He may believe, for instance, that the contract will boost 
his prestige, will financially benefit the faculty, will cause academic resistance in 
the faculty or will mean a lot of work for him. Some of these effects will be 
perceived as bad or good, important or unimportant, pleasant or unpleasant. 
Evaluated together they lead to his attitudes towards negotiating with the 
executive board. 
 
The TRA quantifies attitudes by multiplying the expected outcomes of the 
behaviour times the evaluation of these outcomes. Attitudes towards the 
behaviour in terms of expected outcomes and their evaluations can be expressed 
in the following equation: 
A = ∑biei 
 

16 
Chapter 2 
Where A is the attitude towards the behaviour; bi is the behavioural belief i; ei is 
the evaluation of outcome i. 
 
To explain this equation in detail, we use one of Ajzen and Fishbein’s (1980) 
examples as follows. Table 2.1 illustrates a woman’s salient beliefs about using 
birth control pills measured on 7-point scales ranging from -3 to +3. The woman 
has five expected consequences of using the birth control pills. ‘Using birth 
control pills causes me to gain weight, is convenient, enables me to regulate the 
size of my family, gives me guilt feelings and regulates my menstrual cycle.’ If the 
woman is extremely certain (+3) that using the birth control pills causes her to 
gain weight and gaining weight makes her feel quite bad (-2), then this belief has 
a strength of -6. Based on the results (-6), the woman has a negative belief about 
using birth control pills causing her to gain weight.  
 
It can be seen from Table 2.1 that the woman’s belief is slightly certain (+1) that 
using the birth control pills regulates her menstrual cycle; however, she sees 
regulating her menstrual cycle is extremely positive (+3). The result of the 
multiplication of her belief (+1) and her evaluation (+3) is +3. This means that the 
woman has a positive belief about using birth control pills and regulating her 
menstrual cycle. This is calculated for each salient belief and then the outcomes 
are summed to assess the overall beliefs (positive versus negative) of her attitudes 
towards using birth control pills. In this example, the woman has a positive 
attitude towards using birth control pills (with a total of +2). 
Table 2.1 Determining a Woman’s Attitude about Using Birth Control Pills 
My using birth control pills 
Outcome Evaluations 
Belief strength 
Products 
1. causes me to gain weight. 
-2 
+3 
-6 
2. is convenient. 
+1 
+3 
+3 
3. enables me to regulate the size of my 
    family. 
 
+2 
 
+2 
 
+4 
4. gives me guilt feelings. 
-1 
+2 
-2 
5. regulates my menstrual cycle. 
+3 
+1 
+3 
 
 
Total 
+2 
Source: Ajzen and Fishbein 1980, Table 6.2, p. 66 
 
Subjective Norms. Subjective norms refers to the person’s perception of the social 
pressures … to perform or not perform the behaviour in question (Ajzen and 
Fishbein 1980, p. 6). For example, the dean negotiating a contract with the 
university executive board might believe that the academics of his faculty will 
strongly disagree with the contract and will not want him to sign. He may also 

Theory of Reasoned Action 
17 
believe that deans from other faculties do not want him to sign the contract too, 
while most of the students, he believes, would be in favour of signing the 
contract. The effect of the dean’s perception of the views of others depends on his 
motivation to comply with these others, as well as his perception of their views. 
In forming subjective norms, a person takes into account the normative 
expectations of others who are important to him and not every possible referent 
will be regarded as relevant or important. What is regarded as salient varies 
between people, situations and behaviour. For some kinds of behaviour 
colleagues may be perceived as relevant, while for some other behaviours these 
referents may be seen as irrelevant. 
 
The TRA weights subjective norms by multiplying the person’s perceived 
opinions of the important referents about performing or not performing the 
behaviour with the person’s motivation to comply with the opinions of the 
referents. Finally, the product of each normative belief and the subject’s 
corresponding motivation to comply are summed. The relationship between 
subjective norms and normative beliefs can be shown in the following equation:  
 
SN = ∑njmj 
 
Where SN is the subjective norm; nj is the normative belief that some important 
referent j thinks one should perform the behaviour; mj is the motivation to 
comply with important referent j.  
 
To explain this equation in detail, we use an example from Ajzen and Fishbein 
(1980). Table 2.2 illustrates a woman’s normative beliefs about having an abortion 
measured on 7-point scales ranging from -3 to +3. With respect to having an 
abortion, the woman could be asked to list referents in response to the following 
question: If you considered having an abortion, are there any individuals or 
groups who, according to your view, think you should or should not perform this 
behaviour?  
 
Table 2.2 shows the woman’s normative beliefs for five salient referents. If she 
believes that her husband feels very strongly (+3) that she should have an 
abortion and she is strongly (+3) motivated to comply with her husband, then the 
belief as perceived by the woman will contribute significantly to her perceived 
subjective norms. This is indicated through a high positive score (+9). Based on 
her perception of her husband’s opinion, the woman has a positive ’push’ 
towards having an abortion. With respect to another referent, her church, she 
believes that the church holds the opinion that she should not (-3) have an 
abortion. She is slightly motivated to comply with the church’s opinion on this 

18 
Chapter 2 
matter (+1). For this referent, her normative belief is -3. This means that for this 
referent, she has a negative normative belief about having an abortion. It can be 
seen from Table 2.2 that she is not at all motivated to comply with her brother 
and it seems that she does not know what her brother’s beliefs are regarding her 
having an abortion (so this will not impact her intentions). After measuring the 
perceived beliefs and motivations to comply for all referents, the products are 
summed to assess the overall normative beliefs or perceived subjective norms. In 
this example the woman has positive perceived subjective norms about having an 
abortion (with a total of +3). 
Table 2.2 Determining a Woman’s Subjective Norms about Having an Abortion 
Referents 
Normative belief 
Motivation to comply 
Products 
My husband 
+3 
+3 
+9 
My mother 
-1 
+1 
-1 
My church 
-3 
+1 
-3 
My brother 
0 
0 
0 
My doctor 
-1 
+2 
-2 
 
 
Total 
+3 
Source: Ajzen and Fishbein 1980, Table 6.6, p. 74 
2.1.1 
Importance of the TRA  
Based on their research in the 1960s and 1970s (e.g. Fishbein 1963, 1967), Fishbein 
and Ajzen (1975) published a book: Belief, Attitude, Intention, and Behaviour: An 
Introduction to Theory and Research. In 1980, Ajzen and Fishbein comprehensively 
presented and advocated their reasoned action approach in a book titled 
Understanding Attitudes and Predicting Social Behaviour. Since their publication, the 
reasoned action approach ‚has stimulated a great deal of empirical research; at 
last count, well over 1,000 empirical papers based on the reasoned action 
approach have appeared in professional journals‛ (Fishbein and Ajzen 2010, p. 
xvii). The approach has been used in a wide variety of disciplinary fields, 
including social psychology of health and safety, environment, consumer 
behaviour, social behaviour and personality, marketing, education and health 
care studies.  
 
Furthermore, the TRA has also been used to investigate, among other things, 
behaviours with respect to attitudes toward food (Sparks 1994), household 
recycling and compositing intentions (Taylor and Todd 1995), brand loyalty (Ha 
1998), condom use (Sneed and Morisky 1998), hotel marketing strategy (Buttle 
and Bok 1996), distance education courses (Becker and Gibson 1998), students’ 
intentions to study or not to study science (Stead 1985), business schools’ 

Theory of Reasoned Action 
19 
intentions to offer e-commerce degree programs (Dodor et al. 2007), attitude 
research in science education (Crawley and Koballa 1994), elementary teachers’ 
beliefs about joining a professional science teachers’ organisation (Meadows and 
Koballa 1993), dental hygiene (Fried et al. 2001), contraceptive behaviour (Doll 
and Orth 1993), tobacco chewing (Gerber et al. 1988), testicular cancer self-
examination (McClenahan et al. 2007), blood donation (Giles et al. 2004), seat-belt 
use (Thuen and Rise 1994), and voting behaviour (Singh et al. 1995).  
 
Undeniably, Ajzen and Fishbein’s (1980) model for understanding and predicting 
a human behaviour has gained credence. It has been widely applied in many 
fields. Nevertheless, the various components of the model deserve further 
attention. The model has also been subject to criticism. In the next subsection, we 
will address the various components in greater detail. First, we address the 
relationship between intention and behaviour. Does intention really explain 
behaviour as the theory suggests? Second, we take a closer look at the effects of 
attitudes and subjective norms upon intentions (and indirectly upon behaviour).  
 
Intention and Behaviour Relations 
The relation between intention and behaviour, a key relationship in the TRA, has 
been widely investigated . Considerable evidence in support of the good relation 
between intention and behaviour has accumulated in a variety of empirical 
studies (see Table 2.3). Ajzen and Fishbein (1973) reviewed 10 empirical tests, 
finding that the correlation between behavioural intention and behaviour ranged 
from 0.211 to 0.970 (based on Table 1, p. 45). Sheppard et al. (1988) examined the  

20 
Chapter 2 
Table 2.3 
Empirical Studies Showing Good Relations Between Intention and 
Behaviour, Between Attitude, Subjective Norm and Intention 
Empirical Meta-Evaluation and single Studies Showing Good Relations
Researcher
Topic of study
Intention-behaviour relations
Attitude + subjective norm-intention 
relations
Ajzen and 
Fishbein (1973)
A detailed review 
of 10 empirical tests 
of the theory. 
The correlation between 
behavioural intention and 
behaviour ranges from 0.211 -
0.970, p < 0.01 (based on the 
data presented in Table 1, 
p. 45).
‚The multiple correlation of 
attitude toward the act, and 
normative component, on 
behavioural intentions in these 10 
studies was 0.808. It is obvious 
therefore, that the theory 
provides highly accurate 
predictions of behavioural 
intentions‛ (p. 49).
Sheppard et al. 
(1988)
The theory of 
reasoned action: A 
meta-analysis of 87 
past research 
studies.
‚Based on the data presented 
in Table 1 (p. 332), a frequency-
weighted average correlation 
for the I-B relationship was 
0.53. This correlation is based 
on 87 separate studies with a 
total sample of 11,566 and is 
significant at the 0.01 level‛ 
(p. 336).
‚Based on the data presented in 
Table2 (p. 334), a frequency-
weighted average correlation for 
A+SN-I relationship was 0.66. 
This correlation is based on 87 
separate studies with a total 
sample 12,624 and is significant 
at the 0.001 level‛ (p. 336).
Van de Putte
(1991) (in Eagly
and Chaiken
1993, p. 176)
A meta-analysis 
based on 113 
articles.
‚His mean r for predicting 
behaviour from intention was 
0.62.‛ 
‚His mean R for predicting 
intention from attitude and 
subjective norm was 0.68.‛ 
Albarracin et al. 
(2001)
A meta-analysis of 
condom use.
‚The weighted mean 
correlation between intention 
and future behaviour was 
0.45‛ (p. 156).
‚In the current meta-analysis, the 
multiple correlation coefficient 
when regressing intentions on 
attitudes and norms was 0.70‛ 
(p. 157).
Pomazal and 
Jaccard (1976)
Testing blood-
donating 
behaviour.
The intention-behaviour 
correlation was 0.59 (based on 
the data presented in Table 1, 
p. 322).
‚The multiple correlation of 
attitude toward the act and social 
norm with behavioural intention 
was also highly significant 
(R = 0.53, p < 0.01)‛ (p. 322).
Fishbein and 
Stasson (1990) 
Predicting training 
session attendance.
The motivation (intention) to 
attend training was predicted 
accurately from attitudes and 
subjective norms (R = 0.76, 
p < 0.001).
Bagozzi et al. 
(1992) 
Predicting 
consumer’s coupon 
usage.
‚The direct effect of I on B was 
positive and significant 
(= 0.47, t = 5.80) which is 
consistent with the theory of 
reasoned action‛ 
(p. 513).
‚The standardized coefficient is 
positive and significant for the 
A-I (= 0.48, t = 5.58)‛ (p. 512). 
‚Furthermore, the direct effect of 
A on B was also positive and 
significant (= 0.22, t = 2.41)‛ 
(p. 513).
De Boer (2003)
Predicting 
behaviour of 
academics.
A strong causal positive 
relationship between intention 
and behaviour 
(R2 = 0.59).
Intentional behaviour explained 
by attitude and a ‘third, research 
specific variable’, and to a lesser 
extent by perceived subjective 
norms. 
 

Theory of Reasoned Action 
21 
effectiveness of the behavioural models by a meta-analysis in which they looked 
at 87 studies. The outcomes of their meta-analysis support the contention that 
intentions are strong predictors of behaviour. Other studies on the TRA also 
confirm this intention-behaviour relation (e.g. Albarracin et al. 2001; Van den 
Putte 1991 in Eagly and Chaiken 1993; De Boer 2003; Bagozzi et al. 1992; Fishbein 
and Stasson 1990; Pomazal and Jaccard 1976). 
 
While many studies demonstrate a strong link between intention and behaviour, 
other research projects suggest that the relation between intention and behaviour 
is (very) weak (see Table 2.4). Based on several studies in the field, Wickler (1969, 
cited in Eagly and Chaiken 1993, p. 156) concluded that at best a weak relation 
exists between intention and behaviour. Others, such as McQuarrie and 
Langmeyer (1987) and Gooding (1994), drew the same conclusion: if there is a 
relationship there is only a weak link between intention and behaviour. In their 
study of predicting consumer spending on home computers, McQuarrie and 
Langmeyer (1987, p. 157) concluded that ‚intentions are incapable of serving as 
proxies for future behaviour.‛ Gooding (1994, p. 276) also pointed out that the 
relation between consumers’ hospital choice intentions and actual choice 
behaviour is weak.  
Table 2.4 
Empirical Studies Showing Weak Relations Between the Intention and 
Behaviour, Between the Attitude, Subjective Norm and Intention 
 
 
 
Empirical Meta-Evaluation and Single Studies Showing Weak Relations 
Researcher
Topic of study
Intention-behaviour relations
Attitude + subjective norm-
intention relations
Wicker (1969), 
(in Eagly and 
Chaiken 1993, 
p. 156)
A review of 42 
experimental 
studies of attitudes 
and behaviours.
‚…the correlation between 
attitude and behaviour was as 
high as 0.30. The average 
correlation appeared to be 
about 0.15.‛
McQuarrie and 
Langmeyer
(1987) 
Predicting 
consumer 
spending on home 
computers.
‚The conclusion of this study 
is that verbally expressed 
intentions are of limited 
usefulness in predicting 
subsequent behaviour at the 
individual level. Certainly 
they are incapable of serving 
as proxies for future 
behaviour‛ (p. 157).
Gooding (1994) Predicting hospital 
choice behaviour.
‚… and their expressed 
intentions regarding future 
hospital choice for that same 
level of treatment indicates 
the weakness of the link 
between intentions and actual 
behaviour‛ (p. 276).

22 
Chapter 2 
There are some explanations for the occasional weak relation between intention 
and behaviour. First, time, or timing, can play a role, for example, intentions may 
change before they have led to the intended behaviour. This means that the time 
period between intention and behaviour needs to be as short as possible. Second, 
the strength depends on the correspondence between intention and behaviour 
and stability of the intention. If there is no or hardly any correspondence (e.g. 
specific intentions predicting general behaviour) the link between the two can be 
insignificant. Finally, particular barriers may prevent the transformation from 
intention into behaviour. We will address this last issue when we present the 
extended model of the TRA. 
 
To summarise, without downplaying the outcomes of studies that question the 
correlation between intentions and behaviours, we believe that a large number of 
evaluations and empirical studies demonstrate convincing support for the 
assumption that intention predicts behaviour well, particularly if we take 
disturbing factors such as time, correspondence, and barriers into account. 
 
Attitudes, Subjective Norms and Intention (Behaviour) Relations 
Do attitudes and subjective norms affect intentions? Many studies in various 
fields have been conducted to measure the relation between attitudes, subjective 
norms and intentions (see Table 2.3). Sheppard et al. (1988) evaluated the 
relations between attitudes, subjective norms and intentions, looking at 87 
studies. The results of this meta-evaluation show a significant relationship 
between attitudes, subjective norms and intention. Ajzen and Fishbein (1973, p. 
49) reported on a review of 10 empirical tests that attitudes and subjective norms 
are good predictors of intentions (R = 0.808). Albarracin et al. (2001, p. 157) 
conducted a meta-analysis on condom use and the results indicated that there is a 
significant relationship between attitudes, subjective norms and intentions (R = 
0.70). Another evaluation study by Van den Putte (1991, in Eagly and Chaiken 
1993, p. 176), based on 113 TRA-articles, also indicated that attitudes and 
subjective norms predict intentions (R = 0.68). Other studies by De Boer (2003), 
Bagozzi et al. (1992), Fishbein and Stasson (1990), and Pomazal and Jaccard (1976) 
also support the suggestion that attitudes and subjective norms are good 
predictors of intentions.  
 
Much more research on the attitude, subjective norm-intention relation has been 
conducted within the TRA, for example, research on condom use among Filipina 
commercial sex workers (Sneed and Morisky 1998); on brand loyalty (Ha 1998); 
on cheating behaviour in college (De Vries and Ajzen 1971); on ethical decision 
making and computer use (Loch and Conger 1996); on moral behaviour 
(Vallerand et al. 1992); and on union formation intentions (Billari and Philipov 

Theory of Reasoned Action 
23 
2005). The findings are supportive of the theory indicating that attitudes and 
subjective norms predict intentions.  
 
Since nothing is perfect, there are also some studies that contest the validity and 
consistency of the relationship between the two predictors (attitudes and 
subjective norms) and behaviour. La Pierre’s classic study (1934 in Eagly and 
Chaiken 1993) investigated the relationship between attitudes and behaviour. La 
Pierre and his two Chinese students visited 251 hotels and restaurants and asked 
for service. In only one case they were refused service. Six months later, he sent a 
questionnaire asking ‚will you accept members of the Chinese race as guests in 
your hotels and restaurants?‛ From 128 replies, 92 per cent of the restaurants and 
91 per cent of the hotels answered negatively. The study indicates that people’s 
verbal report of their attitudes might not be a very good predictor of their actual 
behaviour. A meta-analysis study conducted by Wicker (1969) reviewed 42 
experimental studies that assessed attitudes and then included an observation of 
related behaviours (see Table 2.4). Wicker (1969 cited in Eagly and Chaiken 1993, 
p. 156) found that ‚the average correlation between attitude and behaviour 
appeared to be about 0.15 (low or weak).‛  
 
Taking these notions into account, most of the studies mentioned in this 
subsection support the claim of the TRA that attitudes and subjective norms are 
good explanatory variables for behavioural intentions. However, the TRA has 
attracted other criticisms over the years. In the next section, we will deal with 
these criticisms. 
2.1.2 
Criticisms of the TRA 
There are two categories of criticism of the TRA. First, there are general critical 
comments. Second, there are criticisms of the completeness of the TRA, which 
suggest that other variables should be taken into account to explain intentions 
and behaviours. 
 
We will first deal with the general criticisms. The underlying behavioural 
assumptions of the TRA have been questioned. The TRA presumes that people 
are able to cope with lots of information. It suggests a calculative mode of human 
operation. But there are often limits to people’s capacity for information handling. 
People do not establish attitudes based on complete information, but rather on a 
limited number of relevant factors. Ajzen and Fishbein (1980) agree with the 
concept of limited information capacity and argue that people establish their 
attitudes based on their most important beliefs (salient beliefs) and that this does 
not undermine the logic of the TRA. Another general criticism is of self-reported 

24 
Chapter 2 
behaviour. Obviously self-reported behaviour may be different from actual 
behaviour, particularly when reporting socially sensitive behaviours. If the 
behaviour is not socially sensitive, there are no obvious reasons to assume there 
will be a discrepancy between self-reported and actual behaviour. We think that 
leadership and management of faculties is not a sensitive issue, although self-
assessment of one’s performance is likely to differ from peer-review of that 
performance (see Chapter 4).  
 
Besides these general critical remarks on the TRA, there have been many attempts 
to expand the theory by adding variables. Table 2.5 lists some of the criticisms of 
the TRA, many of which question the limited number of variables used. Each of 
these criticisms will be discussed.  
 
Schwartz and Tessler (1972) argued that perceived moral obligation, representing 
people’s personal beliefs about right and wrong, should be included in the model. 
They assumed that measuring personal moral obligation along with attitudes and 
subjective norms can improve the prediction of behaviours. Instead of having two 
determinants, they propose using these three determinants to explain behaviour. 
Gorsuch and Ortberg (1983, p. 1025) also argued that it makes sense to 
incorporate moral obligations as a separate explanatory factor in the TRA. It is 
because moral obligations are more highly correlated with intention than 
attitudes and social norms. ‚Originally, Fishbein included a moral value 
component (measured as a ‚perceived moral obligation‛ to behave in a certain 
way) along with attitudes and social norms to predict intentions (Fishbein 1967). 
Subsequently, this component was dropped from the model because it was 
supposedly only an alternative measure of intention (Ajzen and Fishbein 1970)‛ 
(Ortberg et al. 2001, p. 490).  
 
Other researchers suggested that self-identity should also be used as a variable 
for explaining or predicting intention (Biddle et al. 1987; Charng et al. 1988; 
Granberg and Holmberg 1990). Bentler and Speckart (1979) indicated that past 
behaviour can directly explain future behaviour and should also be an 
explanatory variable. Triandis (1977, 1980) suggested that habits and behavioural 
intention explain behaviour. Liska (1984) also challenged the volitional nature of 
the behavioural model by arguing that the TRA limits its model to simple actions 
like voting, church attendance and so on. She believes the TRA has difficulties in 
predicting behaviours that require resources, cooperation or skills. As discussed 
earlier, Sheppard et al.’s (1988) meta-analysis of 87 studies proved that intentions, 
attitudes and subjective norms are good predictors of behaviour. They, however, 
found that the predictive ability of the theory of reasoned action is limited if the 
behaviour is not under full volitional control. 
 

Theory of Reasoned Action 
25 
Table 2.5 Criticisms of The Theory of Reasoned Action (TRA) 
Criticisms of TRA
Researcher
Proposals of 
additional 
variable(s) in the 
TRA model
Description
Schwartz 
and Tessler
(1972) 
Personal beliefs.
‚…that it is a mistake to drop personal normative beliefs 
from the model, … The performance of the model as a 
mediator of external variables in the current study did little 
to support its sufficiency‛ (p. 235).
Gorsuch 
and 
Ortberg 
(1983) 
Moral 
obligation.
‚… the moral obligation component significantly predicted 
behavioural intentions‛ (p. 1026). Based on the data 
presented in Table 1 (p. 1027), the correlation of moral and 
intention on tax refund is 0.20 (p < 0.001) and on Sunday 
service is 0.07 (p < 0.001).
Biddle et al. 
(1987)
Self-identity.
‚… it does seem clear that for some issues, samples and 
types of behaviour, both understanding and predicting of 
behaviours will be improved by models that take account of 
preferences, own norms, self-identities and intentions‛ 
(p. 336).
Granberg 
and 
Holmberg 
(1990) 
Self-identity and 
prior behaviour.
‚Given our results, we feel confident that self-identity and 
prior behaviour do not only exert an effect on behavioural 
intention but also affect behaviour directly‛ (p. 52)
Bentler and 
Speckart
(1979, 1981) 
Past behaviour. 
‚It is clear that attitudes and past behaviour account for a 
highly significant degree of variability in drug consumption 
behaviour of young adults …‛ (1979, p. 461).
Triandis 
(1977, 1980) 
Habits.
‚In Triandis’s model, behaviour is a joint outcome of 
behavioural intention and habit‛ (in Eagly and Chaiken
1993, p. 180). 
Liska (1984) Restriction of 
the model to 
volitional 
behaviour.
The model excludes behaviours that require ‚skills, abilities, 
opportunities and the cooperation of others‛ (p. 63). ‚… 
research suggests that intention is not a necessary and 
sufficient cause of behaviour. People frequently do not do 
what they intend to do, but are constrained by a lack of 
resources and opportunities‛ (p. 71)
Sheppard et 
al. (1988) 
Limitation of the 
model to 
volitional 
behaviour.
‚Therefore, actions that are at least in part determined by 
factors beyond individuals’ voluntary control fall outside 
the boundary conditions established for the model. 
Whenever the performance of some action requires 
knowledge, skills, resources, or others’ cooperation, or 
necessitates overcoming environmental obstacles, the 
conditions of the model cannot be met. In such cases, the 
person may not be able to perform the action, even if the 
intention to do so is strong‛ 
(p. 326).
 
 
 

26 
Chapter 2 
Experiences, previous behaviours, and habits are likely to have an impact on 
behaviour. Fishbein and Azjen (1975, p. 15) agreed on this, but argued that such 
experiences have an impact on peoples’ cognitive maps (learning). Knowledge is 
(partially) based on experience. They, therefore, play a role in a person’s belief 
system and are already part of the TRA. They are embedded in a person’s views, 
beliefs and evaluations. Based on this argument, they see no reason to add a 
variable such as previous behaviour or habits to the TRA. 
 
We also believe that there is no reason to have moral obligations as a separate 
variable. We would argue that such obligations are part and parcel of a person’s 
attitudes and subjective norms. In the evaluation of beliefs, for instance, a person 
is likely to use his moral views and judgments. If we were investigating a moral 
situation (Gorsuch and Ortberg 1983), it might be useful as a variable. Since we 
believe this is not the case in our study, we will not use moral obligations as a 
separate variable. 
 
Finally, we agree with the suggestion that the TRA is not complete as long as it 
focuses just on behaviour under volitional control. It seems right to assume that 
resources are required to convert intentions into actual behaviour or that barriers 
may prevent such a conversion. The capacity to convert intention into behaviour 
depends basically on two things: the competency of the person and the barriers in 
the person’s environment. To question the idea of behaviour being under 
volitional control, Ajzen (1985) and Fishbein and Ajzen (2010) have developed an 
extended model of the TRA. This model will be described in the following 
section.  
2.2 
THE 
THEORY 
OF 
PLANNED 
BEHAVIOUR 
AND 
REASONED ACTION APPROACH: A MODEL OF NON-
VOLITIONAL BEHAVIOUR 
In the previous TRA section, we discussed the two major determinants of 
intentions and behaviours: attitudes towards the behaviour and perceived 
subjective norms. However, these two determinants may not sufficiently explain 
people’s intentions to perform a specific behaviour where the behaviour is not 
under complete volitional control. Ajzen (1985) proposed adding one 
determinant, perceived behavioural control, to attitudes and subjective norms. 
This approach is called the theory of planned behaviour (TPB) which 
substantially extends the Ajzen-Fishbein model of TRA. The TPB model is, 
therefore, known as a model of non-volitional behaviour. That is, behaviours that 
people perform when they have positive attitudes towards them and positive 

Theory of Reasoned Action 
27 
subjective norms for them and when they believe that they do have control over 
them. Lately, Fishbein and Ajzen (2010) have reconciled their different models 
and published their third joint book entitled Predicting and Changing Behaviour: the 
Reasoned Action Approach long after their 1980 book, Understanding Attitudes and 
Predicting Social Behaviour. In their new book, they describe the current status of 
their theoretical approach which comprises three main determinants: attitudes 
towards the behaviour, perceived subjective norms and perceived behavioural 
control to explain behaviours of interest. In addition to attitudes and perceived 
subjective norms, they have an extra major determinant: perceived behavioural 
control. They call their new approach reasoned action approach (RAA). 
 
Both TPB and RAA assume that ‚once attitudes, perceived norms, and perceived 
behavioural control have been formed they are directly accessible and available to 
guide intentions and behaviour‛ (Fishbein and Ajzen 2010, p. 21). The following 
Figure 2.2 illustrates the TPB and RAA. 
 
Behavioral beliefs
Normative beliefs
Control beliefs
Perceived 
behavioral control
Perceived norm
Attitude towards the 
behaviour
Intention
Behaviour
Background 
factors:
Individual
  Personality
  Mood, emotion
  Values, stereotypes
  General attitudes
  Perceived risk
  Past behavior
Social
  Education
  Age, gender
  Income
  Religion
  Race, ethnicity
  Culture
Information
  Knowledge
  Media
  Intervention
Actual control
Skills/abilities
Environmental factors
 
Figure 2.2 A Representation of the TPB and RAA (Fishbein and Ajzen 2010, 
Figure 1.1, p. 22) 
 
In a slight change from the conceptual model of the TRA, the TPB and RAA 
suggest that ‚intention is the best single predictor of behaviour but it is also 
important to take skills and abilities as well as environmental factors (i.e. 
behavioural control) into account‛ (Fishbein and Ajzen 2010, p. 21). People are 
assumed to perform a behaviour because they have positive intentions to do so, 
they have the skills and ability to perform the behaviour and they face no 
environmental constraints that prevent them from carrying out their intentions. 
Figure 2.2 indicates that people will intend to perform a behaviour (and thus 
perform it) if they have positive attitudes towards the behaviour, they perceive 

28 
Chapter 2 
social pressure to engage in the behaviour and they believe that they have control 
over performing the behaviour. The TPB and RAA also acknowledge the 
potential importance of background factors that may or may not influence 
behavioural, normative, and control beliefs. Whether particular background 
factors do or do not affect a given belief is an empirical question. However, the 
theories suggest that by identifying the origins of these beliefs, we can 
conceptually deepen our understanding of a behaviour’s determinants. In the 
previous section, we have already discussed the two predictors of intention and 
behaviour: attitudes and subjective norms. Therefore, in the following subsection 
we will explain the third determinant, perceived behavioural control, and its role 
in the model in more detail. 
2.2.1 
Perceived Behavioural Control (PBC) 
Perceived behavioural control (PBC) is defined as ‚the extent to which people 
believe that they are capable of performing a given behaviour, that they have 
control over its performance‛ (Fishbein and Ajzen 2010, pp. 154-155). It is 
theoretically explained by control beliefs which have to do with the perceived 
presence of factors that may facilitate or impede performance of a behaviour 
(Ajzen 1985; Fishbein and Ajzen 2010). ‚These control beliefs may be based in 
part on past experience with the behaviour, but they will usually be influenced by 
second-hand information about the behaviour, by the experiences of 
acquaintances and friends, and by other factors that increase or reduce the 
perceived difficulty of performing the behaviour in question‛ (Ajzen 1991, p. 
196). According to the theories, ‚perceived behavioural control is assumed to take 
into account the availability of information, skills, opportunities, and other 
resources required to perform the behaviour as well as possible barriers or 
obstacles that may have to be overcome‛ (Fishbein and Ajzen 2010, p. 155). 
Conceptually, ‚the more resources and opportunities individuals believe they 
possess, and the fewer obstacles or impediments they anticipate, the greater 
should be their perceived control over the behaviour‛ (Ajzen 1991, p. 196). 
Theoretically, this construct of perceived behavioural control is similar to 
Bandura’s concept of self-efficacy. Bandura’s (1997, p. 3 cited in Fishbein and 
Ajzen 2010, p. 155) ‚perceived self-efficacy refers to beliefs in one’s capabilities to 
organize and execute the courses of action required to produce given 
attainments.‛  
 
The framework proposes that perceived behavioural control may influence 
behaviour in two ways (see Figure 2.2). First, perceived behavioural control 
influences behavioural intention to perform the behaviour of interest (shown by 
the solid arrow in Figure 2.2). The model assumes that ‚people intend to engage 

Theory of Reasoned Action 
29 
in behaviours to the extent that they believe that they have control over them, that 
is, to the extent they have confidence in their ability to perform the behaviour‛ 
(Eagly and Chaiken 1993, p. 187). Second, perceived behavioural control may also 
have a direct impact on the behaviour (shown in the dotted arrow in Figure 2.2). 
‚Concerning the direct link between control and behaviour, Ajzen maintained 
that it is actual control, not perceived control, that is most relevant. Actual 
control, which encompasses factors such as availability of opportunities and 
resources that are prerequisites for engaging in the behaviour, is distinguishable 
from perceived control because an individual’s perceptions of control may not be 
entirely accurate‛ (Eagly and Chaiken 1993, p. 187). For example, a dean may 
perceive a good deal of control over the signing of a new contract but he may be 
unable to perform the behaviour because of the disapproval of the executive 
board. The disapproval is seen as the actual control.  
 
Since it is very difficult to assess actual control over the behaviour of interest or 
what constitutes it, Ajzen (1985) and Fishbein and Ajzen (2010) use perceived 
behavioural control as ‚a proxy for actual control‛ and argue that ‚it is possible 
that people’s perceptions of their control over a behaviour accurately reflect their 
actual control‛ (Fishbein and Ajzen 2010, p. 64). Furthermore, Fishbein and Ajzen 
(2010, p. 65) suggest that ‚when people lack control (i.e. when they are incapable 
of performing the behaviour), it is unlikely that the behaviour will be carried out. 
However, knowing that individuals have a high level of control by itself does not 
tell us whether the behaviour will or will not be performed.‛ 
 
Perceived behavioural control is measured by multiplying each control belief (c) 
by the perceived power (p) and the resulting products are summed as shown in 
the following equation: 
PBC = ∑ckpk 
 
Where PBC is the perceived behavioural control; ck is the beliefs that control 
factor k will be present; pk is the power of factor k to facilitate or impede 
performance of the behaviour and the sum is over the number of salient control 
belief.  
2.2.2 
Empirical Studies of Perceived Behavioural Control 
Many empirical studies have been conducted on perceived behavioural control as 
an additional predictor of intentions and behaviour. Table 2.6 lists some of the 
studies that define perceived behavioural control and describe the important 
relations between attitudes, subjective norms, and perceived behavioural control 
on the one hand and intentions or behaviours on the other hand. 

30 
Chapter 2 
Schiffter and Ajzen (1985), for example, examined the relations in their study on 
predicting weight reduction. The result of the study shows a statistically 
significant relation between intention and perceived behavioural control with a 
regression coefficient 0.30 (p < 0.01). Further, ‚perceived control was found to 
have a partly independent effect on weight loss that was not mediated by 
intention‛ (Schiffter and Ajzen 1985, p. 850). The previously mentioned meta-
evaluation study of condom use by Albarracin et al. (2001) demonstrates a strong 
relation between intentions and perceived behavioural control with a mean 
correlation of 0.45. Ajzen and Madden (1986) in their two experimental studies on 
attending college lectures and getting an A in a college course concluded that the 
additive component of perceived behavioural control greatly improves the 
prediction of intention of attending class (R = 0.68), and also of getting an A grade 
(R = 0.65 for the wave 1 period and R = 0.64 for the wave 2 period). Moreover, the 
regression coefficient of perceived behavioural control to intentions of attending 
class and of getting an A grade are higher. Kraft et al. (2005) also indicated that 
perceived behavioural control is a strong predictor of intention of recycling ( = 
0.54, p < 0.001) and of exercise ( = 0.65, p < 0.001). Hrubes et al. (2001) in their 
study on predicting hunting behaviour concluded that perceived behavioural 
control accounts for predicting hunting intention ( = 0.07, p < 0.05).  
 
In contrast, some empirical studies indicate that perceived behavioural control 
does not explain behaviour. Ajzen and Madden (1986) found that there is little 
evidence for a direct link between perceived behavioural control and class 
attendance (β = 0.11, p > 0.01). They also found that there is no relation between 
perceived behavioural control and behaviour of getting an A grade (wave 1, r = 
0.11, p > 0.01). In their meta-analysis on condom use, Albarracin et al. (2001) 
reported that perceived behavioural control correlates with condom use 
(weighted mean correlation = 0.25, p < 0.0001) but its impact is very small (β = 
0.05). Further, Hrubes et al. (2001) found out that perceived behavioural control 
fails to predict hunting behaviour ( = 0.05, p > 0.05).  
 
 

Theory of Reasoned Action 
31 
Table 2.6 Empirical Studies of Perceived Behavioural Control  
 
 
 
 
 
Researcher
Topic
Definition of 
perceived 
behavioural control 
(PBC)
Additive effect of 
PBC on 
intentions
(A+SN+PBC-
Intention)
Perceived 
control –
Intention 
relationship
Perceived control –
behaviour 
relationship
Schifter & 
Ajzen (1985) 
Predicting 
weight 
reduction
‚… the 
respondent’s belief 
in her ability to 
reduce weight over 
the 6-week period‛ 
(p. 850).
‚… intention to 
lose weight 
correlated 
significantly with 
attitude, 
subjective norm, 
and perceived 
behavioural 
control (…), and 
the multiple 
correlation was 
0.74 (p. 846)
PBC afforded 
fairly accurate 
prediction of 
weight loss 
intention (the 
regression 
coefficient for 
perceived 
control was 0.30, 
p < .01. 
(p. 846)
‚Perceived control 
was found to have 
a partly 
independent effect 
on weight loss that 
was not mediated 
by intention‛ 
(p. 850) (regression 
weight = 0.20, 
p< 0.10, p. 847)
Ajzen & 
Madden 
(1986) 
Attending 
college lectures 
‚… factors that 
could prevent 
college students 
from attending 
their classes.‛ 
(p. 462)
‚… the addition 
of perceived 
behavioural 
control greatly 
improved the 
model’s predictive 
power (F(3, 165) = 
46.16, p < 0.01). 
(…) the multiple 
correlation 
increased from 
0.55 to 0.68, 
p < 0.01‛ (p.463)
‚Perceived 
behavioural 
control had a 
strong effect on 
intentions to 
attend class‛ 
(p. 465) 
(r = 0.57, 
p < 0.01, based 
on Table 1, 
p. 464)
‚Regression 
coefficient of 
perceived 
behavioural 
control on 
behaviour was not 
significant (0.11, p 
< 0.01) (…) there 
was little evidence 
for a direct link 
between perceived 
behavioural 
control and actual 
class attendance…‛ 
(p. 465)*
Ajzen & 
Madden 
(1986) 
Getting an ‚A‛ 
in a college 
course: Wave 1 
(beginning of 
semester)
‚… the factors that 
might help or 
prevent  college 
students from 
getting an A in the 
course.‛ (p. 466)
‚… introduction 
of perceived 
behavioural 
control on the 
second step 
improved the 
prediction of 
intentions from 
0.48 to 0.65 
(p < 0.01)‛ 
(p. 468).
‚Moreover, 
perceived 
behavioural 
control was 
found to have a 
significant effect 
on intention‛ 
(p. 468), based 
on Table 2, 
r = 0.44, p < 0.01 
(p. 469)
‚In terms of 
predicting attained 
grades, however, 
perceived 
behavioural 
control was of no 
value‛ (p. 468) 
based on data in 
Table 2, r = 0.11, 
p < 0.01 (p. 469)*
Ajzen & 
Madden 
(1986) 
Getting an ‚A‛ 
in a college 
course: Wave 2 
(end of 
semester)
‚… the factors that 
might help or 
prevent  college 
students from 
getting an A in the 
course.‛ (p. 466)
‚… and the 
increased 
predictability of 
intentions (from 
0.49 to 0.64) due 
to perceived 
behavioural 
control was 
highly 
significant‛ 
(p. 471)
Based on data in 
Table 4 
(p. 470), 
perceived 
behavioural 
control predicts 
intention 
(r = 0.45, 
p < 0.01)
Based on data in 
Table 4 (p. 470), 
perceived 
behavioural 
control predicts 
behaviour 
(r = 0.38, p < 0.01)

32 
Chapter 2 
Albarracin et 
al. (2001)
A meta-
analysis of 
condom use
‚a) participants 
can use condoms 
if they want to do 
so, b) using 
condom is up to 
them, and/or c) 
using condom is 
easy or difficult.‛ 
(p. 145)
Perceived 
behavioural 
control 
predicted 
intentions on 
condom use 
(r. = 0.45, 
p < 0.0001)‛ 
( p. 146)
‚Pbc did not 
contribute 
significantly to 
condom use 
(r. = 0.25, 
p < 0.0001)‛ 
(p. 142)*
Hrubes and 
Ajzen (2001) 
Predicting 
hunting 
behaviour
‚… the difficulty 
of engaging in 
hunting…‛ (p. 5)
Attitudes, 
subjective norms 
and perceived 
behavioural 
control were 
significant 
determinants of 
intentions 
(R= 0.93, 
p < 0.01, based 
on data in 
Table 3, p. 19)
Perceived 
behavioural 
control 
predicted 
intention on 
hunting 
(b= 0.07, 
p < 0.05, based 
on data in 
Table 3, p. 19)
Perceived 
behavioural 
control failed to 
predict behaviour 
(b= 0.05, p > 0.05 
based on data in 
Table 3, p. 19)*
Kraft et al. 
(2005) 
Undertaking 
regular 
exercise and 
recycling 
drinking 
cartons
‚… pbc could be 
conceived of as 
consisting of two 
separate but 
interrelated 
constructs, 
namely self-
efficacy and 
controllability‛ 
(p. 493)
‚Pbc was a 
strong 
predictor of 
intention, both 
recycling 
(= 0.54) and 
exercise 
(= 0.65)‛ 
(p. 489)
Billari and 
Philipov
(2005) 
Predicting 
fertility 
intentions
‚The perception 
of constraints and 
on the ability to 
overcome them 
influences the 
decision to 
perform a certain 
behaviour‛ ( to 
have (another) 
child (p. 5)
‚… attitudes, 
subjective norms 
and perceived 
behavioural 
control are 
significant 
determinants of 
fertility 
intentions‛ 
(p. 10)
‚The only 
exception is 
perceived 
behavioural 
control, which 
has no 
significant 
effect for both 
genders on the 
transition to 
first birth 
(female (1.04; 
male 1.07, 
p > 0.05, based 
on data in 
Table 2, p. 15)**
 
* No significant relation between PBC and behaviour 
** No significant relation between PBC and intention 
 
 

Theory of Reasoned Action 
33 
In the preliminary study of Billari and Philipov (2005, p. 15) on predicting fertility 
intentions, ‚perceived behavioural control does not seem to be relevant as it has 
no effect on the intentions of either gender to have a first child‛ (based on data in 
Table 2, female ( = 1.04, p > 0.05) and male ( = 1.07, p > 0.05). Billari and Philipov 
(2005, p. 7) assumed that ‚young and childless adults may care less about the role 
of control than people who are already parents.‛ Eagly and Chaiken (1993, p. 189) 
questioned the causal link between perceived behavioural control and intention 
because ‚it suggests that people intend to engage in actions or to attain goals 
merely because they have control over them.‛ They argued that controllability 
does not influence intention to engage in a negatively evaluated behaviour. 
Students, for example, have fully control over shouting loudly in school libraries 
but their controllability would not encourage them to do so (negatively evaluated 
behaviour). Perhaps they would shout loudly in the libraries if controllability was 
combined with their desire to do so. The sufficiency of the TPB model is, 
therefore, questioned.  
 
In addition to the lack of support from some studies for the explanatory power of 
perceived behavioural control, more questions have been raised. These questions 
are similar to the questions raised with respect to the TRA (previous behaviour 
and moral obligations). As we have already discussed these issues in the previous 
section, we will leave them aside here. The outcomes of the previous studies 
provide us with a mixed picture. Perceived behavioural control can be an 
important explanatory factor for intention, but this is not necessarily the case. 
However, we do not see sufficient grounds to exclude perceived behavioural 
control from our theoretical reasoning. We will, therefore, use the concepts of the 
TRA with a modified construct to explain the deans’ styles.  
2.3 
THE BEHAVIOURAL MODELS OF THE STUDY  
The Behavioural models used for this study are presented in Figure 2.3. The 
volitional behavioural model (shown in the blue box) is based on the TRA (Ajzen 
and Fishbein 1980). The non-volitional behavioural model (shown in the red box) 
is based on the TPB (Ajzen 1985) and RAA (Fishbein and Ajzen 2010). The key 
variables used in our research are styles, attitudes towards the styles, subjective 
norms, and perceived behavioural control. The relationships between these key 
variables are represented by the solid arrows in Figure 2.3, indicating the direct 
influence of attitudes, subjective norms, and perceived behavioural control to 
styles. The relative weights of these determinants may vary from one person to 
another. The dotted arrows in Figure 2.3 indicate the possible explanations for 
observed relations between the background factors and the attitudes, subjective 

34 
Chapter 2 
norms, and perceived behavioural control. From the theoretical point of view, the 
background factors will have an effect on the styles only to the extent that they 
influence the determinants of the styles.  
 
Note: The dotted arrows indicate the possible explanations for observed relations between 
background factors and determinants of managerial leadership styles of deans. The solid arrows 
indicate the direct influence of attitudes, subjective norms, and perceived behavioural control to 
managerial leadership styles of deans. 
Figure 2.3 A Representation of the Behavioural Models for this Study  
In the remainder of this section, we briefly outline some decisions we have made 
with respect to our research models. First, in our research models, the dependent 
variable is a ‘style’. Given our research question, we are interested in the way 
deans manage their faculty. We assume that sets of managing behaviours 
(according to the theories, they refer to behavioural categories) represents a 
particular style. In Chapter 4, where we operationalise our research models, we 
will explain that deans’ managing behaviours (or actions) will be measured by 
means of a survey and that this in turn will provide us with information on the 
styles deans have (see also Chapter 6 where the results are presented). We 
measure the managing behaviours of deans and later combine them in our 
empirical analyses into a set of managing behaviours representing a managerial 
role that we call a managerial leadership style of deans. 
 
Second, in both research models, intentional behaviour (or intention to exhibit a 
style) is left out. The main reason is that previous research using theories of 
reasoned action and planned behaviour suggests a strong relationship between 
intention and behaviour and, therefore, leaving out intentions will not harm the 
outcomes of this study and will ‘simplify’ its execution. Most studies that 
question the relationship between intention and behaviour point to additional 
factors that may have an effect, such as behavioural control variables. This is 
Background factors:
Faculty culture
Management skills
Demographic factors:
Gender
Age
Term of office
Academic Discipline
Attitudes towards the 
managerial leadership 
styles of deans
Managerial leadership 
styles of deans
Subjective norms
                              
                                VOLITIONAL BEHAVIOURAL MODEL       
Perceived behavioural 
control 
  
    
NON-VOLITIONAL BEHAVIOURAL MODEL

Theory of Reasoned Action 
35 
precisely why we have decided to use both the volitional and the non-volitional 
models; in the latter behavioural control variables are taken into account. 
Perceived behavioural control is regarded as a proxy for ‘actual control’, a factor 
that has been mentioned as being important in explaining behaviour. ‚Because 
the determination of actual control by environmental events makes it very 
difficult to assess, Ajzen used perceived control as a proxy for actual control and 
argued that ordinarily people’s beliefs about their degree of control are at least 
moderately accurate‛ (Eagly and Chaiken 1993, p. 188). 
 
Third, our research models follow the reasoning of Azjen and Fishbein that 
background factors do not have a direct impact on behaviour. Therefore, since we 
are interested in describing and explaining behaviour, there is no decisive reason 
to include background factors in our research. However, Fishbein and Azjen 
(2010) argue that background factors are likely to colour norms and beliefs. 
Hence, we have included organisational culture, management skills, and 
demographic factors (i.e. gender, age, term of office and academic discipline) as 
background factors in the study. We assume that these background factors may 
influence people’s beliefs manifested in their attitudes (behavioural beliefs), 
subjective norms (normative beliefs), and perceived behavioural control (control 
beliefs).  
2.4 
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 
In this chapter, we have discussed the key theories to understand the deanship 
styles at Indonesian universities. We discussed Ajzen and Fishbein’s (1980) theory 
of reasoned action (TRA), which is known as a model of volitional behaviour and 
a model of cognitive processes. The TRA suggests that behaviour is explained by 
intentions to act in a particular way. According to this model, intentions to 
engage in the behaviour are greatly influenced by attitudes towards the 
behaviour and subjective norms as the proximal cause of the volitional behaviour 
itself. This model also assumes that people form their attitude towards a 
behaviour by having a positive or negative evaluation of the behaviour and form 
their subjective norms for a behaviour by thinking about significant others’ 
perceptions (approval or disapproval) of their behaviour.  
 
The TRA’s conceptual framework has stimulated many empirical studies in 
various fields. Despite its plausibility, the TRA has also attracted some criticisms, 
particularly of volitional behaviour. Ajzen (1985) enlarged the model by adding 
perceived behavioural control to attitudes and subjective norms. He referred to 
his extended model as the theory of planned behaviour (TPB), which takes into 

36 
Chapter 2 
account non-volitional behaviour. Maintaining the TRA’s model, this extended 
model assumes that people also form control beliefs that facilitate or impede their 
intention to carry out the behaviour. Conceptually, once attitudes, subjective 
norms, and perceived behavioural control have been formed, they are directly 
accessible as predictors of intentions and behaviours of interest. This extended 
model has also been empirically tested through many studies in different fields.  
 
However, the TPB has been criticised for relying on actual control, when it is 
unclear what it is and how to evaluate it. Recently, Fishbein and Ajzen (2010) 
have outlined the reasoned action approach (RAA). The model comprises three 
major components: attitudes towards the behaviour, subjective norms and 
perceived behavioural control. In combination, the three components form a 
behavioural intention to perform or not to perform the behaviour in question. 
Conceptually, this new approach is the same as the TPB’s approach. Importantly, 
in their new book, they reaffirm that their framework does not assume rationality, 
but assumes a reasonable, consistent, and automatic process from beliefs about 
engaging in the behaviour of interest.  
 
For our study, we use models that are slightly different from the existing theories 
(see Figure 2.3). In our behavioural models, first, we use both the volitional model 
and non-volitional behavioural model. Second, we use perceived behavioural 
control as a proxy for actual control, as the theories suggest. Third, we measure 
managing behaviours of Indonesian deans. Fourth, we do not include 
(behavioural) intention.  
 
In conclusion, the volitional behavioural model, adapted from the TRA model, is 
used to investigate the relationship of attitudes and subjective norms to 
managerial leadership styles of deans. We expect that when deans have a positive 
or favourable attitude towards a style and believe that their important others 
think they should demonstrate this style, they will be more likely to demonstrate 
this style. The non-volitional behavioural model, adapted from the TPB and RAA 
models, is used to investigate the relationship of attitudes, subjective norms, and 
perceived behavioural control to managerial leadership styles of deans. We 
expect that the more favourable the deans’ attitudes towards a style, the more 
positive their perceived subjective norms for the style, and the greater the deans’ 
perceived behavioural control, the more the deans will demonstrate this style. 
Further, we expect that deans who come from different backgrounds may have 
different attitudes, subjective norms, and perceived behavioural control.  
 

3 
C H A P T E R
 
Leadership and Management 
“We want our organisations to be adaptable and flexible, but we also want them to be 
stable and controlled. We want growth, resource acquisition, and external support, but we 
also want tight information management and formal communication. We want an 
emphasis on the value of human resources, but we also want an emphasis on planning 
and goal setting.” 
Robert E. Quinn (Beyond Rational Management, 1988, p. 49) 
This chapter deals with the highly contested concepts of leadership and 
management. We all have a perception of what leadership means, but there is 
hardly any agreement on what it is or should be. Without intending to solve this 
problem, we will clarify what we mean by leadership and management in this 
study. First, we address definitions and concepts of leadership in general and in 
higher education such as academic deanship in particular. Then we discuss 
leadership and management theories followed by leadership styles. Next, we 
extensively discuss leadership and management behaviours based on Quinn’s 
Competing Values Framework (1988) as the heart of our leadership model. The 
final section summarises and concludes the chapter. 

38 
Chapter 3 
3.1 
LEADERSHIP: DEFINITIONS AND CONCEPTS 
Leadership is a phenomenon that we know when we see it but which is still 
difficult to describe (Bennis 1989). ‚It is such a mysterious process, as well as one 
that touches everyone’s life‛ (Yukl 2009, p.19). People often perceive leadership as 
a critical factor in ensuring successful change (McRoy and Gibbs 2009). For 
example, people describe the ‘inspiring’ leadership of Gandhi, the ‘great’ emperor 
Julius Caesar, the ‘iron lady’ Margaret Thatcher, the ‘charismatic’ leadership of 
Obama. Leadership is ‚essential in order to create vision, communicate policy 
and deploy strategy‛ (Davies et al. 2001, p. 1026).  
 
In scientific research, huge numbers of books, articles, reports, and research 
papers have been written on the subject of leadership. Military strategists, 
behavioural scientists, administrators, politicians, sociologists, economists, 
biologists, and educationalists, to name a few, have discussed the subject in 
various forms and defined the term ‘leadership’ from their own perspective. Over 
7,000 books, articles, or presentations on leadership were published in 1990 
(Hogan et al. 1994) and over 350 definitions of leadership have been produced 
(Bennis and Nanus 1997). Obviously, researchers are still struggling with the 
question of what leadership is. A fully agreed definition is not available. As a first 
step in our understanding of leadership, we present and discuss some 
representative definitions of leadership from the past 100 years (see Table 3.1). 
Although it is an impressive list, the overview is just an attempt to summarise 
some of the major commentary on this issue.  
Table 3.1 Some Representative Definitions of Leadership from the Past 100 Years 
Researcher 
Definition of leadership 
Mumford (1906, p. 218)  
‚A universal function of association.‛ 
Moore (1927, p. 124 
cited in Bass 1990, p. 
12) 
‛The ability to impress the will of the leader on those led and 
induce obedience, respect, loyalty and cooperation.‛ 
Bogardus (1934, p. 3) 
‚The personality in action under group conditions. (<). It is 
interaction between specific traits of one person and other traits 
of the many, in such a way that the course of action of the many 
is changed by the one.‛ 
Tead (1935, p. 20)  
‚The activity of influencing people to cooperation toward some 
goal which they come to find desirable.‛ 
Davis (1942, p.27 cited 
in Rost 1991, p. 49)  
‚The principal dynamic force that motivates and coordinates the 
organisation in the accomplishment of its objectives.‛ 
Cartwright and Zander 
(1953, p. 538) 
‚The performance of those acts which help the group achieve its 
objective.‛ 

Leadership and Management 
39 
 
Hemphill & Coons 
(1957, p. 5)  
‚The behaviour of an individual when he is directing the 
activities of a group toward a shared goal.‛ 
Tannenbaum et al. 
(1961, p. 24)  
‚Interpersonal influence exercised in a situation and directed, 
through the communication process, toward the attainment of a 
specialised goal or goals.‛ 
Fiedler (1967, p. 36)  
‚By leadership behaviour we generally mean the particular acts 
in which a leader engages in the course of directing  and 
coordinating the work of his group members.‛ 
Stogdill (1974, p. 15)  
‚Leadership is the initiation and maintenance of structure in 
expectation and interaction.‛ 
Filley (1978, p. 52 cited 
in Rost 1991, p. 59)  
‚The ability of an individual to establish and maintain 
acceptable levels of satisfaction and job-related performance so 
that organisation needs are met as well.‛ 
Holander (1978a, p. 1)  
‚A process of influence between a leader and those who are 
followers.‛ 
Katz and Kahn (1978, 
p. 528)  
‚An influential increment over and above compliance with the 
routine directives of the organisation.‛ 
Hopper (2009, in 
speech, Washington, D. 
C., February 1987)  
‛Leadership is a two-way street, loyalty up and loyalty down. 
Respect for one’s superiors; care for one’s crew.‛ 
Hersey and Blanchard 
(1988, p. 86) 
‚Leadership is the process of influencing the activities of an 
individual or a group in efforts toward goal achievement in a 
given situation.‛ 
Bennis (1989, p. 139)  
‚Leadership revolves around vision, ideas, direction, and has 
more to do with inspiring people as to direction and goals than 
with day-to-day implementation.‛ 
Bass (1990, p. 19)  
‚The interaction between two or more members of a group that 
often involves a structuring or restructuring of the situation and 
of the perceptions and expectations of the members.‛ 
Zaleznik (1992, p. 126)  
‚Leadership requires using power to influence the thoughts and 
actions of other people.‛ 
Conger (1992, p. 18)  
‚Leaders are individuals who establish direction for a working 
group of individuals who gain commitment from these group 
members to this direction and who then motivate these 
members to achieve the direction's outcomes.‛ 
Schein (1992, p. 2)  
‚The ability to step outside the culture < to start evolutionary 
change processes that are more adaptive.‛ 
Rost (1991, p. 102)  
‚Leadership is an influence relationship among leaders and 
followers who intend real changes that reflect their mutual 
purposes.‛ 
Bolman and Deal 
‚The essence of leadership is not giving things or even 

40 
Chapter 3 
(1995, p. 102) 
providing visions. It is offering oneself and one's spirit.‛ 
Kouzes and Posner 
(1995, p.30 cited in 
Haman 2000, p. 1) 
‚The art of mobilising others to want to struggle for shared 
aspirations.‛ 
Bass (2000, p. 21)  
‚Move followers to go beyond their own self-interests for the 
good of their group, organisation or community, country or 
society as a whole.‛ 
House (2004, p. 15)  
‚The ability of an individual to influence, motivate, and enable 
others to contribute toward the effectiveness and success of the 
organisations of which they are members.‛ 
Maxwell (2007, p. xviii)  
‚Leadership is influence-nothing more, nothing less.‛ 
Yukl (2009, p. 30) 
‚Leadership is the process of influencing others to understand 
and agree about what needs to be done and how to do it, and 
the process of facilitating individual and collective effects to 
accomplish shared objectives.‛ 
 
Over the past 100 years most definitions of leadership have suggested that 
leadership can be actual or potential. Actual leadership refers to giving guidance 
or direction, whereas potential refers to the capacity or ability to lead. Some 
definitions refer to a process (‘how to lead’) where others point to leadership 
characteristics (‘what makes a good leader’). A number of definitions see 
leadership as relational, as in the relationship between leader and followers. 
Interaction and communication are important aspects here. In such relationships, 
leaders have the potential to influence followers, for instance, through persuading 
and motivating others. Such influence is, according to some of the definitions, 
exerted to reach a common goal. Effectiveness and coherence are important in 
these processes of goal setting and achievement. Some definitions mention 
particular characteristics that distinguish between leaders and non-leaders such 
as ‘having a vision’ or having the ‘ability to build trust’. There are many other 
characteristics that supposedly define a ‘good leader’. ‚Some definitions are more 
useful than others, but there is no single ‘correct’ definition that captures the 
essence of leadership‛(Yukl 2009, p. 26). Nevertheless, from the listed definitions, 
we can define leadership as ‚the focus of group processes, as a matter of 
personality, as a matter of inducing compliance, as the exercise of influence, as 
particular behaviours, as a form of persuasion, as a power relation, as an 
instrument to achieve goals, as an effect of interaction, as a differentiated role, as 
initiation of structure, and as many combinations of these definitions‛ (Bass 1990, 
p. 11).  
 
At its core, leadership ‚involves a process whereby intentional influence is 
exerted over other people to guide, structure, and facilitate activities and 

Leadership and Management 
41 
 
relationships in a group or organisation‛ (Yukl 2009, p. 21). We, therefore, believe 
that wherever leadership is found—in academic settings (e.g. in this study), in 
business environments, in non-profit organisations, in community, or even in 
family, it will fall within these core processes.  
3.1.1 
Leadership and Management 
‚There is a continuing controversy about the difference between leadership and 
management‛ (Yukl 2009, p. 24). Are leaders managers, are managers leaders? 
Some argue that leadership and management are two different concepts (Hoy 
and Miskel 2008; Sadler 2003). For example, in the literature, some scholars (e.g. 
Mintzberg 1973; Bass 1990; Kotter 1990; Rost 1991) view the concepts of 
leadership and management as distinct processes or roles (Yulk 2009).  
 
Mann (1965 cited in Bass 1990, p. 383) proposes that ‚leaders facilitate 
interpersonal interaction and positive working relations; they promote 
structuring of the task and the work to be accomplished. They plan, organise, and 
evaluate the work that is done.‛ Hoy and Miskel (2008, p. 420) state that 
‚administrators emphasise stability and efficiency, whereas leaders stress 
adaptive change and getting people to agree about what needs to be 
accomplished. Mahoney, Jerdee and Carroll (1965 cited in Bass 1990, p. 383) 
propose that ‚managers plan, investigate, coordinate, evaluate, supervise staff, 
negotiate, and represent.‛ Kotter (1990 cited in Hoy and Miskel 2008, p. 420) 
proposes that ‚administrators plan and budget, organise and staff, and control 
and solve problems; leaders establish direction, align people, and motivate and 
inspire.‛ For Zaleznik (1977 cited in Bass 1990, p. 386), ‚leaders, but not 
managers, are charismatic, they attract strong feelings of wanting to be identified 
with them and intense interpersonal relations. Leaders send out clear signals of 
their purpose and mission; managers tend to be more ambiguous or silent about 
their purpose.‛  
 
In the words of Drucker (1955) and Bennis and Nanus (1985), leadership is ‘doing 
the right things’ and management is ‘doing things right’. The differences between 
leadership and management can also be defined by means of the well-known 
distinctions of transformational and transactional behaviour (Spreitzer and Quinn 
1996). Leadership is transformational, based on change, while management is 
transactional, based on reward and punishment. Transformational leadership is 
concerned with bringing followers to their full potential (Bass and Avolio 1990), 
while transactional leadership is concerned with satisfying basic follower needs 
through rewards for performance (Bass 1985). Kotter (1990) defines leadership as 

42 
Chapter 3 
coping with change and envisioning the future and management as coping with 
complexity, planning, and budgeting. For Zaleznik (1977), ‚leaders, who are more 
concerned with ideas, relate in more intuitive and empathetic ways‛ (cited in 
McCrimmon 2006, p. 2). Maccoby (2000) notices that leadership is a relationship 
and management is a function. The word ‘lead’ means ‘to go from’, while the 
word ‘manage’ means ‘to handle’.  
 
The overall impression we get from these descriptions of leadership and 
management is that they differ from each other, at least analytically. Leading is 
related to influencing, motivating, communicating, inspiring and directing 
followers. Managing concerns planning, budgeting, evaluating, organising, and 
controlling. Leadership generates changes in the long term, while management 
produces short-term results. This suggests a sharp distinction between leadership 
and management.  
 
However, others, such as Grove (1986) reject such distinctions, stating that ‚the 
effective manager must have the clarity of purpose and motivation of the effective 
leader‛ (cited in Bass 1990, p. 386). Gardner (1986b) also disagrees with the 
distinction. Gardner (1986b) states that  
 
Every time I encounter an utterly first-class manager he turns out to 
have quite a lot of leader in him < even the most visionary leader will 
be faced on occasion with decisions that every manager faces: when to 
take a short-term loss to achieve a long term gain, how to allocate scarce 
resources among important goals, whom to trust with a delicate 
assignment (p. 7 cited in Bass 1990, p. 386).  
 
For classical management theorists like R. C. Davis (1942), Urwick (1952), and 
Fayol (1916), as cited in Bass (1990, p. 384), ‚the functions of manager-leader in a 
formal organisation were orderly planning, organising and controlling.‛ 
Furthermore, K. Davis (1951 cited in Bass 1990, p. 384), the prescription for 
business leaders was the same as for managers—to plan, organise, and control an 
organisation’s activities.‛ This implies that in practice the differences between the 
two concepts are not always easily observed. As concluded by Leithwood and 
Duke (1999 cited in Hoy and Miskel 2008, p. 420), ‚justifying a conceptual 
distinction between leadership and management is difficult.‛  
 
In conclusion, some theorists believe that leaders and managers are different; 
other theorists believe that they have the same function in an organisation. The 
terms seem to be intertwined. They are sometimes used as synonyms, sometimes 
as distinct entities As suggested by Yukl (2009, p. 24), ‚nobody has proposed that 

Leadership and Management 
43 
 
managing and leading are equivalent, but the degree of overlap is a point of 
sharp disagreement.‛  
 
Definition of Academic Dean Leadership for the study 
For this study, we acknowledge the analytical differences between leadership and 
management. Leaders play different roles than managers. Leaders lead with 
‘power-with’ to get compliance from their followers to do the right things. 
Managers use ‘power-over’ to get their followers to do things right. Rather than 
argue about the amount of overlap between leadership and management, we will 
use both terms to refer to deans who lead and manage faculties in which they are 
expected to exert leadership to meet the expectations of employees and 
organisations (Quinn 1988). As suggested by Yukl (2009, p. 26), ‚success as a 
manager or administrator in modern organisations also involves leading.‛ 
 
The purpose of our study is to investigate managerial leadership styles at the 
faculty level of Indonesian universities. In the literature, research on academic 
leadership is still limited (De Boer and Goedegebuure 2009). However, leadership 
in institutions of higher education has begun to attract interest from researchers 
(e.g. Wolverton et al. 2001; Gmelch and Wolverton 2002; Meek, Goedegebuure 
and De Boer 2010). In their study on dean leadership, Gmelch and Wolverton 
(2002, p. 5) state that ‚academic leadership is the act of building a community of 
scholars to set direction and achieve common purposes through the 
empowerment of faculty and staff.‛  
 
In our study, we define academic dean leadership as an integration of 
organisational roles which covers various aspects of leading and managing in 
harmony and tension. A comprehensive leadership approach, integrating the two 
concepts of leading and managing, is required to achieve this definition of 
leadership.  
3.2 
LEADERSHIP THEORIES 
The various definitions of leadership and management presented in the previous 
section are forerunners of a range of leadership and management theories. These 
different theories can be categorised into a number of major types. Van Seters and 
Field (1990) present an overview of the phases through which leadership theory 
has evolved (see also Sadler 2003). Early leadership theories focused on qualities 
distinguishing leaders from followers. The second phase is referred to as the 
‘influence era’ and recognised that leadership is a relational process. In this stage, 

44 
Chapter 3 
the emphasis was on power relations and persuasion. The third phase emphasises 
behaviour patterns and differences between leaders in what they actually do. The 
‘situation era’ was the fourth phase and stressed the context in which leadership 
is practised. The next phase was the ‘contingency era’, which argued that effective 
leadership was dependent on behaviour, personal and situational factors. The 
other phases mentioned by Van Seters and Field (1990) are the ‘transactional era’ 
(stressing role differentiation and social interaction), the ‘role development era’ 
(arguing leadership resides sometimes in the subordinate rather than the leader), 
the ‘culture era’ (leadership should focus on creating and changing cultures), and 
the ‘transformational era’ (change management and visionary aspects are 
regarded as crucial aspects of leadership). The following paragraphs briefly 
discuss the theories that exemplify these stages.  
 
Great Man theories assume that great leaders are born and not made. According 
to these theories, ‚leaders are exceptional people, born with innate qualities, 
destined to lead‛ (Bolden et al. 2003). For example, Winston Churchill is 
considered to be a great man who led Britain to victory in 1945 (Bass 1990; Hoy 
and Miskel 2008). The great man theories explained ‚leadership on the basis of 
inheritance‛ (Bass 1990, p. 38). The concept of great man leadership was linked 
with breeding in which ‚the survival of the fittest and intermarriage among them 
produces an aristocratic class that differs biologically from the lower classes‛ 
(Bass 1990, p. 38). Great man leaders often came from ‚the aristocracy, as few 
from lower classes had the opportunity to lead‛ (Changingminds, Online).  
 
Trait theories are a set of theories related to the Great Man theories. The basic 
concept of the trait theories is that a leader is born with inherited traits. Traits are 
seen as ‚general personal characteristics‛ (see Kohs and Irle 1920; Bernard 1926; 
Bingham 1927; Tead 1929; Page 1935; and Kilbourne 1935 as cited in Bass 1990, p. 
38). Research suggests that many traits are related to effective leadership. 
Guilford (1959), for instance, states that every person has a unique personality, a 
particular configuration of characteristics, which makes him different. Bird (1940 
in Bass 1990) listed 79 types of trait based on 20 psychologically oriented studies. 
Stodgill (1974 in Bolden et al. 2003) identified more than 10 types of the main 
leadership traits characterising great leaders. 
 
According to Kirkpatrick and Locke (1991), the key leadership traits are drive, 
motivation, honesty and integrity, self-confidence, cognitive ability, and 
knowledge of the business. Such traits will help the leader to be successful in 
developing visions, realising organisational ambitions, and implementing 
strategies. However, many researchers, such as Stogdill (1948), argued that such 
traits are not universal in effective leadership and that the context and situation 

Leadership and Management 
45 
 
within which leaders are leading matters as well. One might, therefore, argue that 
trait theories may be, not wrong, but at least limited in their approach. The main 
problem is that they tend to solely focus on leadership characteristics while 
ignoring context. For instance, the relationship between leaders and subordinates 
may have an impact on the leader’s effectiveness as well.  
 
Other organisational factors are also likely to play a role (e.g. Yang and Shao 
1996). As Kirkpatrick and Locke (1991, p. 48) argue, some research offers evidence 
that ‚effective leaders are different from other people in key aspects, while at the 
same time other research shows that certain traits alone do not guarantee good 
leadership performance.‛ We agree with Kirkpatrick and Locke (1991, p. 59) that, 
given the ‚unrelenting job with enormous pressures and grave responsibilities‛ 
most leaders have, ‚it would be a profound disservice to leaders to suggest that 
they are ordinary people < Maybe the place matters, but it takes a special kind of 
person to master the challenges of opportunity.‛ This does not necessarily mean 
that leaders are born that way. 
 
Behavioural theories received great attention after the publication of The Human 
Side of Enterprise by Douglas McGregor in 1960 (Bolden et al. 2003). His great 
leadership work, concerning Theory X and Theory Y managers, influenced all 
behavioural theories. In contrast to the Great Man and Trait theories, Behavioural 
theories focus on what leaders actually do instead of on what qualities they have 
(Sadler 2003). The basic assumption of behavioural leadership theories is that 
leaders can be made. People can also learn to be successful leaders 
(Changingminds, Online). This theory centres on how leaders act. It focuses on 
two elements of behaviour, ‚the structural element of the job‛ and behaviour 
concerning ‚the needs of employees‛ (Bogardus 2007, p. 38). This theory has 
attracted most attention from practitioners (managers) and has become very 
popular.  
 
The related Situational and Contingency theories are the next major types of 
leadership theories. Situational theories argue that effective leadership is 
dependent on the situation in which it is exercised. Different situations call for 
different forms of leadership. This rejects the notion, often relied on in trait and 
behavioural theories of leadership, that there is one best way of leading. In some 
situations, leaders may require an autocratic style, in other situations, they may 
require a participative style. These situational assumptions were criticised for 
‚being two dimensional and not allowing for the multifaceted situations that 
occur in the real world of business‛ (Bogardus 2007, p. 40).  
 

46 
Chapter 3 
Contingency theories refine the situational approach and argue that effective 
leadership varies according to context. They try to identify the situational 
variables which best predict effective leadership styles in a particular situation. 
They argue that ‚leaders should play different roles and change their styles to fit 
a given situation‛ (Yang and Shao 1996, p. 523). This implies that leaders who 
‚are very effective at one place and time may become unsuccessful either 
transplanted to another situation or when the factors around them change‛ 
(Changingminds, Online). The notion is that successful leadership traits are 
context-dependent. This makes contingency theory different from situational 
theory. 
 
Finally, transactional and transformational theories of leadership, which have 
behavioural aspects. Transactional theories emphasise ‚the importance of the 
relationship between leader and followers, focusing on the mutual benefits 
derived from a form of ‘contract’ through which the leader delivers such things as 
rewards or recognition in return for the commitment or loyalty of the followers‛ 
(Bolden et al. 2003, p. 6). They are based on the principle of a fair social exchange 
in which leaders provide their followers with a sense of direction and recognise 
their needs and efforts. In exchange, through mutual regard and two-way 
influence, followers provide the leader with responsiveness to their efforts 
(Changingminds, Online).  
 
According to Bass (1985), a transactional leader considers the relationship 
between him and his subordinates as a transaction in which followers’ needs are 
met if their performance meets the explicit or implicit contract with the leader. 
Bass recognises the objectives of his organisation and knows what actions must be 
taken by the subordinates to achieve those objectives. He clarifies the role and 
task requirements to the subordinates so that they are confident in their roles. He 
also recognises the subordinates’ needs and wants, but makes it clear to them that 
the satisfaction of these is dependent upon the effort they make to achieve the 
organisation’s objectives. Although it has critics, this type of leadership is still 
popular among managers. Much research highlights its limitations—it assumes 
that people are highly motivated and driven by money (or other kinds of reward) 
and ignores emotional factors and social values (Changingminds, Online).  
 
In 1978, James MacGregor Burns (cited in Bolden et al. 2003, p. 14) published his 
book ‘Leadership’ which developed the concept of ‘transforming leadership’, ‚a 
relationship of mutual stimulation and elevation that converts followers into 
leaders and may convert leaders into moral agents.‛ Burns (1978 cited in Bass 
1990, p. 53) ‚presented the new paradigm of the transformational as opposed to 
the transactional leader.‛ 

Leadership and Management 
47 
 
Transformational theories are strongly focused on change and the role that 
leadership plays, or should play, in envisioning and implementing the 
transformation of organisational performance (Bolden et al. 2003). ‘Leading to 
change’ is the credo (Bass 1990). Transformational leaders are those who create a 
new vision of an institution’s future. Because of their personal charisma, they 
induce followers to higher levels of performance and motivate them to support 
changes desired by the leader (Bass 1990). A transformational leader is more 
likely to acquire the image of being charismatic. Burns’ transformational 
leadership (1978 in Bass 1990) assumes that a leader who is associated with a 
higher moral position will motivate and lead people to follow him. A leader with 
this leadership style prefers working collaboratively to working individually. To 
Burns (1978 cited in Bass 1990, p. 53), leaders can be ‚either transformational or 
transactional, but the paradigm was modified by Bass (1985a, 1985b), who 
proposed that transformational leadership augments the effects of transactional 
leadership on the efforts, satisfaction, and effectiveness of subordinates.‛ 
Transformational leaders take actions to ‚optimise development, not just 
performance‛ (Bolden et al. 2003, p. 16).  
3.3 
LEADERSHIP STYLES 
Each of the theories above provides a different perspective on leadership styles. 
Those theories become the basis for many different analyses of the interactions 
between leaders and followers, which may provide a deeper understanding of the 
way in which managers and leaders are able to influence the employees through 
their styles. 
 
What is style? According to Bass (1990, p. 27), styles are ‚the alternative ways that 
leaders pattern their interactive behaviour to fulfil their roles as leader.‛ Further, 
Guirdham (1999 cited in Guirdham 2002, p. 541) asserts that style is ‚the 
consistent pattern of behaviour that you exhibit when you attempt to influence 
other people.‛ The classic theory identifies three styles: autocratic (authoritarian), 
democratic (participative) and laissez-faire. Leaders with an autocratic style 
usually dictate to their followers without consultation. Leaders with a democratic 
style normally involve their followers in decision-making. Leaders with a laissez-
faire style commonly ‚abdicate their leadership role, participating in decision-
making on the same level as their followers‛ (Guirdham 2002, p. 541). That is, the 
leaders allow their followers to make decisions.  
 

48 
Chapter 3 
Bogardus (1918 in Bass 1990), distinguishes four types of organisational and 
institutional leaders, that is, the autocratic type, the democratic type, the 
executive type, and the reflective intellectual type. Weber (1947 in Bass 1990) 
classifies three types of leaders: bureaucratic leaders, patrimonial leaders, and 
charismatic leaders. Tannenbaum and Schmidt (1958 cited in Bass 1990, p. 28) 
define managerial styles along an authoritarian-democratic continuum: ‚the 
leader who announces the decision, the leader who sells the decision, the leader 
who consults before deciding, the leader whose decisions are shared, and the 
leader who delegates the decision-making.‛  
 
McGregor’s (1960 cited in Quinn 1988, p. 80) Theory X assumes that people must 
be ‚coerced, controlled, directed, or threatened with punishment‛ and Theory Y 
assumes that ‚people are willing to exercise self-direction and self-control in the 
pursuit of goals to which they are committed and for which they are rewarded.‛ 
Based on the dichotomies of the Theory X and Theory Y Managers, others 
identified many dichotomous management styles, for example ‚democratic-
autocratic, 
participative-directive, 
relations 
oriented-task 
oriented, 
and 
consideration-initiating structure‛ (Quinn 1988, p. 81).  
 
Blake and Mouton (1964 in Bass 1990; Sadler 2003) develop a Managerial Grid 
model, one of the most popular explanations of management styles. This grid 
explains the characteristics of different leadership styles based on two aspects of 
leadership: concern for people and concern for production (task). The nine-level 
grid generates five main leadership styles: 9,1—Tough-minded, no nonsense 
production-prodder (minimum relationship and maximum task orientation), 
1,9—Country-club leader (maximum relationship and minimum task orientation), 
1,1—Laissez-faire, abdicator of responsibility (minimum either relationship or 
task orientation), 5,5—compromiser (moderate relationship and moderate task 
orientation), and 9,9—Integrator of task accomplishment with trust and 
commitment from followers (maximum relationship and task orientation).  
 
Fiedler’s Least Preferred Co-worker theory (1967) offers a continuum ranging 
from task-focused to people-focused leadership. Fiedler (1967 in Bogardus 2007), 
suggests that the degree of influence a leader has is situational, dependent on the 
quality of relationship between the leaders and members of the workgroup 
(leader member relations), the degree of task structure and the degree of leaders’ 
power position. For Fiedler (1967 cited in Bass 1990, p. 46), ‚the effectiveness of a 
task-oriented and relations-oriented leader is contingent on the demands 
imposed by the situation.‛ The Hersey and Blanchard Model of Leadership (1968 
cited in Bogardus 2007, pp. 39-40) describes leadership in terms of ‚the maturity 
level of the followers‛ and describes ‚four styles of leadership in different 

Leadership and Management 
49 
 
circumstances: telling, selling, participating, and delegating.‛ Zaleznik (1974 as in 
Bass 1990), classifies two types of leader, that is, charismatic leaders and 
consensus leaders.  
 
James MacGregor Burns (1978 cited in Quinn 1988, p. 82) ‚clearly differentiated 
transactional leadership from transformational leadership.‛ For Burns, as cited in 
Quinn (1988, p. 8), transactional leaders are ‚instrumentally oriented‛ while 
transformational leaders ‚inspire people to transcend their self-interests for the 
sake of the larger collectivity, and they stimulate the higher-level needs that 
people might have.‛ According to Bass and Avolio (1994 cited in Bolden et al. 
2003, p. 16), transformational leaders perform five styles: ‚idealized behaviours 
(living one’s ideals), inspirational motivation (inspiring others), intellectual 
stimulation (stimulating others), individualised consideration (coaching and 
development), and idealised attributes (respect, trust, and faith).‛ 
 
Leavitt (1986 cited in Bass 1990, p. 28) groups managers according to their stylistic 
emphasis: ‚pathfinders (creative and visionary), problem solvers (analytic, 
quantitative and oriented towards management controls), and implementers 
(political and stress consensus, teamwork and good interpersonal relationships).‛ 
Eight effective managers are defined by Cribbin (1981 cited in Bass 1990, p. 28): 
‚the 
entrepreneur, 
corporateur, 
developer, 
craftsman, 
integrator, 
and 
gamesman.‛ Yulk (1989 cited in Bass 1990, p. 33) classifies leaders based on their 
functions: ‚networking, supporting, managing conflict and team building, 
motivating, recognising and rewarding, planning and organising, problem 
solving, consulting and delegating, monitoring, informing and clarifying.‛ 
Mintzberg (1973) classifies managerial behaviours according to their roles: 
interpersonal (the figurehead, leader and liaison), informational (the monitor, 
disseminator and spokesman), and decisional (the entrepreneur, disturbance 
handler, resource allocator, and negotiator). Luthans and Lockwood (1984 in 
Quinn 1988) identify categories of managerial activities. The categories are 
planning/coordination; 
decision 
making/ 
problem 
solving; 
disciplining/ 
punishing; processing paper work; monitoring/ controlling performance; 
exchanging information; managing conflict; motivating/ reinforcing; training/ 
developing; staffing; interacting with outsiders; and socialising/ politicking (cited 
in Quinn 1988, p. 89; also in Luthans et al. 1988, Table 1, pp. 152-153).  
 
In an empirical study reported in The Harvard Business Review, Goleman (2000, 
pp. 82-87) identifies six leadership styles; namely, the coercive style (‚do what I 
tell you‛), the authoritative style (‚come with me‛), the affiliate style (‚people 
come first‛), the democratic style (‚what do you think?‛), the pacesetting style 

50 
Chapter 3 
(‚do as I do, now‛), and the coaching style (‚I believe in you, I’m investing in 
you, and I expect your best efforts‛). 
 
From the discussion above, it is clear that each leadership theory produces its 
typologies of leaders based on their functions, roles, and behaviours. However, 
‚it is possible to encapsulate many of these typologies into the autocratic versus 
democratic dichotomy. The autocratic type correlates with the directive type and 
the democratic type correlates with the participative or considerate type‛ (Bass 
1990, p. 33). It can also be seen that a leader having an autocratic style would be 
task-oriented, whereas one having a democratic style would be people-oriented.  
 
We assert that in the real world, organisations or companies ‚face the problem of 
needing to both manage and lead, to be both people and task focused, to meet the 
assumptions on both sides of the above differentiations‛ (Quinn 1988, p. 81). 
Dichotomies in leadership styles can make people think that autocratic leaders 
are more important for leading organisations than democratic leaders or vice 
versa and that people-oriented managers are more important than task-oriented 
managers or vice versa. ‚We accept the need for management and reject the need 
for leadership or vice versa‛ (Quinn 1988, p. 81). There is also controversy over 
whether there is one ideal set of traits for leadership or whether effective leaders 
should be able to perform different roles at the same time.  
 
We also assert that in leading, mutually exclusive but complementary traits can 
be distinguished. As Yang and Shao (1996, p. 523) argue, such a broad concept of 
leadership presents ‚conflicting expectations that managers should meet in 
different circumstances, and it shows how these different leadership roles can 
coexist < to maximise < performance.‛ Therefore, in a real organisation, a 
leadership approach that ‚simultaneously conceives of both orientations as 
positive and desirable‛ (Quinn 1988, p. 81) is required. In leadership and 
management theories, Quinn’s (1988) Competing Values Framework (CVF) is 
known for its integrated framework that describes four perspectives on and 
defines eight managerial leadership roles in organising. We consider that the CVF 
approach best fits the study. This CVF approach will be presented in detail in 
Section 3.4.  
 
In a wide-ranging review of leadership and management literature, we conclude 
that there are two classic and universal concepts of leadership and management: 
task- and people-orientations. With respect to these two orientations, a huge 
number of studies have investigated and found that a multitude of control 
variables could potentially influence leadership styles. The following subsections 
will discuss empirical studies that have investigated the impact of some control 

Leadership and Management 
51 
 
variables on leadership styles. These studies are used as our supporting and 
guiding theories to investigate the possible indirect links between the control 
variables (used in our study) and managerial leadership styles (see Chapter 2).  
3.3.1 
Studies of Leadership Style 
Cultural differences and leadership style 
‚Leadership exists in all societies and is essential to the functioning of 
organisations within societies‛(Ardichvili and Kuchinke 2002, p. 102). However, 
Den Hartog et al. (1999 as cited in Ardichvili and Kuchinke 2002, p. 102) argue 
that ‚the attributes that are seen as characteristic of leaders may vary across 
cultures.‛ Reviewing the cross-cultural research by Chen (2001), El Kahal (2001), 
and Hofstede (1980, 1991), Lok and Crawford (2004, p. 323) acknowledged that 
‚there are significant differences in national culture characteristics between 
eastern and western cultures.‛ Hofstede (Online) supports this view, indicating 
that, for example, America is an individualist society and Indonesia is a 
collectivist society. Furthermore, Hofstede (Online) suggested that the sort of 
leadership valued in the Netherlands is, for example, seen as a weakness in the 
United States, where feminine leadership is seen as a strength. Thus, differences 
in leadership styles are found not only between the East and the West (for 
instance, between Indonesia and the US) but also between individual countries 
within the West (for instance, between the US and the Netherlands). These three 
countries were selected as country references reported in this study because they 
reflect different cultural traditions. 
 
This is apparent in Hofstede’s (Online) research where, in power distance, 
Indonesia scores 78, while the US and the Netherlands score 40 and 38, 
respectively. This indicates that Indonesian leaders prefer hierarchy and are 
‚directive, management controls and delegates‛ (Hosftede, Online, Power 
Distance-Indonesia, para. 2). In contrast, American and Dutch leaders prefer a 
direct communication and a participative approach of interaction and decision-
making. 
 
On the individualism index, Indonesia scores 14, the US scores 91, and the 
Netherlands scores 80. Indonesia, with a score of 14, is a collectivist society. ‚In 
Collectivist societies people belong to ‘in groups’ that take care of them in 
exchange for loyalty‛ (Hosftede, Online, Individualism-Indonesia, para. 1). On 
the other hand, the US and the Netherlands, with a high score on this dimension, 
belong to Individualist societies. American and Dutch managers are highly 

52 
Chapter 3 
independent of their workplace, preferring freedom, autonomy and individual 
time.  
 
On the masculinity/ femininity index, Indonesia scores 46, the US scores 62, and 
the Netherlands scores 14. The Netherlands, with a low score of 14, is a feminine 
society. Dutch managers strive for consensus and conflicts are resolved by 
compromise and negotiation. On the other hand, Americans, with score of 62, are 
masculine societies which are driven by competitions, achievement and success. 
Indonesia is in between and considered a ‚low masculine society‛. In Indonesia, 
status and visible symbols of success are important but it is not always material 
gain that brings motivation. Often it is the position that a person holds which is 
more important to them<‛ (Hosftede, Online, Masculinity/ Femininity-
Indonesia, para. 2). 
 
On the uncertainty index, Indonesia scores 48, the US scores 46, and the 
Netherlands scores 53. Based on the score, the US is described as uncertainty 
accepting, meaning that American society ‚tends to be more tolerant of ideas or 
opinions from anyone and allows freedom of expression‛ (Hosftede, Online, 
Uncertainty Avoidance-US, para. 2). Indonesia has a medium low preference for 
‚avoiding uncertainty‛ (score of 48). This suggests that Indonesian society ‚tends 
to permit the exchange of views without loss of face<‛ (Hosftede, Online, 
Uncertainty Avoidance-Indonesia, para. 2). ‚The Netherlands scores 53 on this 
dimension and thus exhibits a preference for avoiding uncertainty‛ (Hosftede, 
Online, Uncertainty Avoidance-Netherlands, para. 2). Different from Indonesians, 
Dutch societies ‚have an inner urge to be busy and work hard, precision and 
punctuality are the norm, innovation may be resisted, security is an important 
element in individual motivation‛ (Hosftede, Online, Uncertainty Avoidance-
Netherlands, para. 2). 
 
Another extensive study of leadership across cultures is the Global Leadership 
and Organisational Behaviour Effectiveness (GLOBE) study. It is probably the 
most extensive study, involving over 150 researchers from 62 countries (Dickson 
et al. 2003). Dorfman et al. (in press) as in Dickson et al. (2003) analyse the GLOBE 
dataset which contains responses from 17,000 middle managers from 
approximately 825 organisations in 62 nations. The GLOBE study indicates that 
there is a relationship between culture and leadership styles. It shows that: 
 
< in relative terms, the Anglo, Germanic and Nordic clusters score 
particularly high on the endorsement of Charismatic/Value-Based 
leader attributes < Southern Asian, Confucian Asian and Latin 
American clusters find team-oriented leadership to be particularly 

Leadership and Management 
53 
 
critical for effective leadership < The Germanic, Anglo and Nordic 
clusters were particularly supportive of participative leadership‛ 
(cited in Dickson et al. 2003, p. 753). 
Management skills and leadership style 
Unlike (organisational) culture, ‚the relationship between leadership style and 
management skills has received little attention in the literature‛ (Burke and 
Collins 2001, p. 246). Davis et al. (1996 cited in Burke and Collins, 2001, p. 246) 
found that ‚a manager should be able to develop and coach subordinates, 
communicate clearly, resolve conflicts, analyse problems, and make sound 
decisions. A manager must also be able to respond to work challenges in a 
positive way, use time efficiently, and delegate work.‛  
 
A study by Tracey and Hinkin (1998 cited in Burke and Collins, 2001, p. 246) 
found that ‚transformational leadership was correlated with the following 
management practices: clarifying, inspiring, supporting, and team building.‛ In a 
recent study by Temel et al. (2011, p. 11233) ‚a high correlation was found 
between leadership behaviour and communication skills.‛ Andersen Consulting 
(now Accenture) (1999 cited in Sadler 2003, p. 133), identified three competencies 
for effective global leaders: ‚personal mastery, providing organisational 
leadership by creating internal and external networks of influence, including 
alliances and partnerships as well as formal acquisitions and mergers, building 
organisational and individual competence by seeking and using differences of 
thought, style, and culture around the globe.‛ These studies lead us to our 
assumption that management skills may lead Indonesian deans to form different 
beliefs about the demonstration of their leadership style.  
Gender differences and leadership style 
A large number of studies have investigated the relationship between leadership 
styles and gender. Some studies conclude that there are no gender differences in 
leadership styles. For example, in their study of the careers of 78 of the most 
senior women in corporate America, Morrison, White, and Van Velsor (1987 cited 
in Sadler 2003, p. 137) ‚did not find any significant differences between men’s 
and women’s styles.‛ Dobbins and Platz (1986, p. 118 cited in Hooijberg and 
DiTomaso 1996, p. 6), in a meta-analysis of 17 studies on gender differences, 
found that ‚male and female leaders exhibit equal amounts of initiating structure 
and consideration and have equally satisfied subordinates.‚ Further, ‚the 
differences between the sexes blur if one contrasts women and men who already 
have achieved status as leaders. Once they are legitimated as leaders, the 

54 
Chapter 3 
preponderance of research suggests that women actually do not behave 
differently from men in the same kind of positions‛ (Bass 1990, p. 725).  
 
Some studies do find evidence of gender difference in leadership styles: a 
feminine style of leadership, ‚characterised by greater willingness to listen, and 
being more empathetic and people oriented‛ versus a masculine style of 
leadership, characterised by being more aggressive ‚in the pursuit of goals‛ 
(Sadler 2003, p. 137). ‘Ways Women Lead’ by Rosener (1990) points out that: 
 
The men are more likely than the women to describe themselves in 
ways that characterise what some management experts call 
‚transactional‛ leadership < The men are also more likely to use 
power that comes from their organisational position and formal 
authority. The women respondents, on the other hand, described 
themselves in ways that characterise ‚transformational‛ leadership‛ 
(p. 120). <Women are more likely than men to say they make people 
feel important, included, and energised (p. 122).  
 
In a study by Eagly and Johnson (1990 cited in Hooijberg and DiTomaso 1996, p. 
6) ‚women were found to use a more participative, democratic leadership style 
and men a more autocratic, directive style.‛ In another study conducted by Eagly, 
Karau, and Makhijami (1995 cited in Hooijberg and DiTomaso 1996, p. 6) ‚men 
were found to be more effective when the roles were defined as masculine, while 
women were found to be more effective in less masculine roles.‛ Book (2000), 
Helgesen (1990) and Rosener (1995), as cited in Eagy and Johannesen-Schmidt 
(2001, p. 4), have claimed that ‚the leadership styles of women and men are 
different, mainly along the lines of women being less hierarchical, more 
cooperative and collaborative, and more oriented to enhancing others’ self-
worth.‛ 
 
Burke and Collins (2001, p. 250) report that ‚female managers are more likely 
than male managers to report practising transformational behaviour, the most 
effective leadership style. Female managers are also more likely to state that they 
use contingent reward behaviour, the second most effective leadership style. 
Finally, female managers are less likely than male managers to report practicing 
management-by-exception, the least effective management style.‛ 
Age differences and leadership styles 
Some researchers have investigated the relationship between leadership styles 
and age. Vroom and Pahl (1971 cited in Moore and Ruud 2006, p. 8) suggested 
that ‚older managers in an organisation may have a greater commitment to 

Leadership and Management 
55 
 
maintaining the status quo than younger managers and less favourable attitudes 
towards taking risks.‛ Kabacoff and Stoffey (2001, p. 9) investigate age differences 
in organisational leadership and find that ‚compared with younger leaders, older 
leaders are more likely to study problems in light of past practices in order to 
ensure predictability, and minimize risk.‛ Furthermore, Kabacoff and Stoffey 
(2001, p. 9) argue that ‚older leaders were described as accommodating more to 
the needs and interest of others and being willing to defer performance on their 
own objects to assist colleagues with theirs. They were described as 
demonstrating more of an active concern for other people and their needs by 
forming close and supportive relationships with others. Finally, older leaders 
were described as showing loyalty to their organization and respecting the 
opinions of others in authority to a greater degree than their younger 
counterparts.‛  
 
Work by Oshagbemi (2004, p. 14) indicates that ‚younger and older managers 
have different profiles in their consultative and participative leadership styles. 
Older managers consulted more widely and favour more participation in 
comparison with younger managers.‛ Further, he points out that ‚the two groups 
of managers both practice directive and delegative leadership styles at about the 
same degree. On the leadership behaviour, only idealised influence shows a 
significant F-test between younger and older managers while the other measures 
show remarkable similarities between the two age groups.‛ A similar study by Le 
Hang Nguyen and Thi Luu Nguyen (2012, Abstract, para. 1), indicates that the 
‚older manager is more autocratic in decision-making process, more consultative 
in employees’ opinion and more participative in employees’ performance in 
comparison with the younger manager.‛ 
Terms (tenure) of office and leadership styles 
Several studies have also examined the relationship between term of office 
(tenure) and leadership styles. Moore and Rudd (2006, p. 14) determined that 
tenure in Extension leadership position(s) was one of the predictors of 
transformational (‚collectively explained 13% of the variance‛) and transactional 
leadership (‚collectively explained 28% of the variance‛) styles. In their study of 
upper echelons perspective, Hambrick and Mason (1984 cited in Moore and Ruud 
2006, p. 8) proposed that ‚the more tenure the leaders of an organization have, 
the more likely they are to have a greater commitment to maintaining the status 
quo.‛ Similarly, in their study of top management and innovations in banking, 
Bantel and Jackson (1989, p. 120) found that team tenure was ‚significantly 
correlated with innovation,‛ while CEO tenure was not significantly correlated 
with innovation. Their findings, as cited in Moore and Ruud (2006, p. 8), suggest 

56 
Chapter 3 
that ‚the more tenure of the top management team within the independent 
financial institutions they studied had, the more likely they were to resist 
innovation and organizational change.‛  
 
In contrast, Spotanski and Carter (1993 cited in Moore and Ruud 2006, p. 8) 
reported ‚no significant difference in leadership styles of agricultural education 
department executive officers when grouped by years of experience in the 
leadership position.‛ In a study conducted with community college presidents, 
Wen (1999 cited in Greiman et al. 2007, p. 96) found that ‚there was no 
relationship between leadership style and number of years at their present 
position.‛ 
Academic disciplines and leadership styles 
Since there are still few studies on academic leadership, studies that investigate 
the impacts of academic discipline on leadership styles are also limited. Del 
Favero (2006) investigates the relationship between academic discipline and 
cognitive complexity in administrative behaviour. She (2006, p. 281) indicates that 
‚the effects of discipline cannot be discounted in framing studies of 
administrators’ perceptions of their leadership context and the behaviour which 
necessarily flows from those perceptions.‛ More specifically, she identifies that 
deans in applied and low consensus fields exert more socially-oriented 
administrative behaviours than those in pure and high consensus fields. In her 
thesis, Way (2010, p. 98) points out that ‚deans trained in disciplines that are 
classified as low-consensus applied fields are more likely to favour a Collegial 
style approach, <‛ 
3.4 
THE COMPETING VALUES FRAMEWORK (CVF) 
Quinn and Hall (1983 cited in Bass 1990, p. 49) construct ‚an integrated theory of 
leadership on the basis of perceptual and cognitive dimensions as the flexibility 
versus the control of leaders and the internal versus the external focus of leaders.‛ 
This theory is known as the Competing Values Framework (CVF). The CVF 
developed by Quinn and associates (Quinn and Cameron 1983; Quinn and 
Rohrbaugh 1983) is intended to deal with the complex and paradoxical roles of 
leaders and managers. Leaders must focus on goal attainment and be task-
oriented and at the same time, they must have concern for employees and be 
people-oriented. Such orientations are potentially in conflict with each other. 

Leadership and Management 
57 
 
These competing orientations are one of the strengths of the conceptual 
framework of the CVF.5 
 
Due to its conceptual strengths, the framework has been widely used to study 
leadership roles or styles of executives and to investigate organisational 
effectiveness (Quinn and Rohrbaugh 1983; Quinn and Cameron 1988). Since the 
1980s, ‚the CVF has been applied to a wide range of organisational research 
including the investigation of organisational culture, leadership styles and 
effectiveness, organisational development, human resource development, and 
quality of life‛ (Cameron and Freeman 1991; DiPadova and Faerman 1993; Quinn 
and Kimberly 1984; Quinn and MacGrath 1985; Quinn and Spreitzer 1991; 
Zammuto and Krakower 1991 cited in Kalliath et al. 1999, p. 144). Cameron et al. 
(2006, p. 5) confirm that the CVF has been studied and tested in organisations for 
‚more than 25 years by a group of thought leaders from leading business schools 
and corporations.‛ Moreover, ten Have et al. (2003 cited in Cameron et al. 2006, p. 
5) note that the CVF ‚has been named as one of the 40 most important 
frameworks in the history of business.‛ The CVF has, therefore, empirically 
proven its capability to analyse ‚a broad array of human and organisational 
phenomena‛ (Cameron et al. 2006, p. 5). Identifying ‚the underlying dimensions 
of organisation that exist in almost all human and organisational activity is one of 
the key functions of the Competing Values Framework‛ (Cameron et al. 2006, p. 
7). In the remainder of this chapter we will discuss the CVF in detail. 
3.4.1 
The CVF Framework 
The Competing Values Framework is so named because ‚the criteria within the 
four models (quadrants) seem at first to carry conflicting messages‛ (O’Neill and 
Quinn 1993, p. 5). The CVF, as shown in Figure 3.1, is constructed around two 
axes or dimensions that ‚express the tensions or ‘competing values’ that exist in 
all organisations. Graphically, one dimension can be drawn vertically and the 
other drawn horizontally—resulting in a two-by-two figure with four quadrants‛ 
(Cameron et al. 2006, p. 8). The vertical axis reflects the degree of flexibility and 
ranges from full flexibility and adaptability to full control and stability. The 
horizontal axis concerns organisational focus which ranges from internal focus to 
external focus. Combined, these two axes form four quadrants representing four 
major aspects of the framework. Each aspect contains two leadership roles. The 
aspects and roles are the Clan aspect containing facilitator and mentor roles, the 
Adhocracy aspect containing innovator and broker roles, the Market aspect 
                                                           
5 The conceptual strengths of the CVF will be explained in Section 3.4.3. 

58 
Chapter 3 
containing producer and director roles, and the Hierarchy aspect containing 
monitor and coordinator roles. The CVF does not exclude any of the theoretical 
approaches but takes them all on board. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.1 The Competing Values Framework  
 
Each aspect and role has a polar opposite. Any point of one side of the aspect or 
role is in perpetual tension with any point opposite to the aspect or role. The 
aspects and roles within the quadrant are not opposites, but on a continuum. 
Empirically, it is not impossible to perform behaviours at two opposite points in 
the framework. This means that leaders may play innovator and coordinator roles 
at the same time. These aspects and roles within the CVF are described and 
explained in the following subsection. 
3.4.2 
Aspects and Roles Within the CVF 
The Clan aspect sits in the upper-left quadrant, representing a flexible and 
internally focused organisation. The Clan (or Human Relations) is based on 
cohesion and morale with an emphasis on human resources and training. In this 
aspect, cohesion and morale are viewed as a means of increasing the value of 
human resources. The overall orientation of this aspect is to collaborate or do 
things together (Cameron et al. 2006). People are not seen as isolated individuals, 
but as cooperating members of a common social system. Organisational 
Flexibility
Control
External 
focus
Internal 
focus
ADHOCRACY 
(Create)
CLAN 
(Collaborate)
MARKET 
(Compete)
HIERARCHY 
(Control)
INNOVATOR
BROKER
PRODUCER
DIRECTOR
COORDINATOR
MONITOR
FACILITATOR
MENTOR

Leadership and Management 
59 
 
leadership should motivate its employees by providing good facilities and an 
enjoyable working environment. People are motivated by job satisfaction and 
social environment. The assumption is that satisfied employees are committed 
and dedicated which is presumed to result in better job performance.  
 
There are two types of leadership role that fit this human relations aspect: the 
facilitator and the mentor. The facilitator emphasises morale and cohesion. 
Facilitators value interpersonal skills and strive to achieve organisational goals 
through process. They are supposed to be experts on mediation and problem 
solving. They facilitate interaction by being process-oriented and are expected to 
build cohesion and team work as well as to manage interpersonal conflict. The 
mentor emphasises sensitivity and consideration. Mentors value the development 
of individuals and try to achieve organisational goals by being open and fair. 
They are supposed to be good at skill building and human resources 
development. They show consideration by being caring and empathetic. In 
summary, leaders who are strong in the Clan quadrant might be seen as ‚patient, 
caring, selfless, authentic, sensitive, and principled‛ (Cameron et al. 2006, p. 64).  
 
Opposite to the Clan is the Market aspect (or Rational Goal), located in the lower-
right quadrant where control and external focus are the key dimensions. The 
overall orientation of this aspect is to compete or do things fast. The model is 
famous for labelling this the Firm mode, emphasising market-orientation. Its 
mode of organising stresses profit and rational action. It assumes that people are 
motivated by financial rewards. Planning and goal setting are viewed as a means 
of achieving productivity and efficiency. When tasks are clarified and objectives 
are set by an organisation, its employees are ready to take action. The 
organisation’s effectiveness depends on being successful competitors and being 
customer-oriented. 
 
The leadership types that fit this aspect are producer and director. The producer 
emphasises focus and accomplishment. Producers value motivation and 
productivity and strive to achieve organisational goals through stimulating 
workers to accomplish tasks. As producers, leaders are expected to motivate their 
subordinates to raise production and to achieve the organisation’s goals. 
Producers value responsibility and completing assignments. In other words, they 
initiate action by being task-oriented and work-focused. The director emphasises 
direction and planning. Instrumental rationality is important. Directors value 
goal clarification and decisiveness and attempt to achieve organisational goals 
through establishing objectives and defining clear roles and tasks. They are 
skilled at giving instructions. Directors provide structure by being decisive and 

60 
Chapter 3 
directive. In summary, leaders who are strong in the Market quadrant might be 
seen as ‚powerful, bold, challenging, assertive, connected, and task-oriented‛ 
(Cameron et al. 2006, p. 65). 
 
The Adhocracy aspect (or Open Systems) is placed in the upper-right quadrant, 
stressing flexibility and an external focus. It focuses on adaptability and 
readiness, growth, resource acquisition and external support. The overall 
orientation is to create or do things first. In this aspect, people are not controlled 
but inspired. People, together with their organisations, must interact with their 
external environment for survival. They have to adapt through innovation. They 
also have to be ready to grow by gaining resources and being creative. In short, 
this aspect focuses on the effects that environment has on the organisation and its 
performance. The organisation’s effectiveness rests on innovation and capacity to 
change.  
 
With respect to leadership, two types fit the adhocracy aspect: the innovator and 
the broker. The innovator emphasises expansion and adaptation. As innovators, 
they value imagination and innovation and attempt to reach organisational goals 
through creativity and vision. They are supposed to be good at facilitating change 
and transformation. They envision change by being creative and clever. Brokers 
emphasise organisational growth and resource acquisition. Brokers value image 
and reputation and strive to achieve organisational goals through influence and 
persuasiveness. As brokers, they are expected to be a good representative or 
spokesperson for the organisation. They are good at negotiations and 
presentations. They obtain resources by being resource-oriented and politically 
astute. In summary, leaders who are strong in the Adhocracy quadrant might be 
‚visionary, optimistic, and enthusiastic. Because of an emphasis on discovery, 
these people might be adaptive, receptive, and willing to explore and learn‛ 
(Cameron et al. 2006, p. 65). 
 
Opposite to the Adhocracy aspect is the Hierarchy aspect (or Internal Process), 
situated in the lower-left quadrant where control and internal focus are the key 
dimensions. The overall orientation of these hierarchies is to control or do things 
right. This aspect stresses measurement, documentation, and information 
management. It defines an effective organisation as a healthy organisation when 
information flows smoothly and conflicts are reduced. These processes will bring 
stability and control for the organisation, which will enhance efficiency and 
effectiveness. This aspect functions well when the tasks to be done are clearly 
understood by people and when time is not the most important factor to 
accomplish these tasks.  
 

Leadership and Management 
61 
 
Again two types of leadership fit the aspect, the monitor and the coordinator. 
Monitors value measurement and documentation and strive to achieve 
organisational goals through rational and technical analysis. As monitors, leaders 
are expected to be sensitive to what is going on in the unit, to monitor 
subordinates, and to check rule and procedural compliance. Monitors are 
supposedly good at problem solving and information management. They are 
technical experts in collecting and analysing information. Coordinators highlight 
structure and stability. Coordinators value reliability and continuity, and try to 
achieve the goals of the organisation by control and evaluation. They value 
maintaining the organisational structure, coordinating staff schedules, and 
handling technical and logistical matters. Coordinators are good at administrative 
duties. They maintain structure by being dependable and reliable. In summary, 
leaders who are strong in the Hierarchy quadrant might be seen as ‚logical, 
realistic, and practical. These reliable and dependable people might be described 
as secure, assured, and consistent‛ (Cameron et al. 2006, p. 65).  
3.4.3 
Strengths of the CVF  
The CVF offers both conceptual and practical advantages for thinking about and 
practising managerial leadership in organisations. In this subsection, we discuss 
its conceptual advantages, then its practical advantages.  
 
The CVF has several conceptual advantages. First, the CVF makes perceptual 
biases clear. As described earlier, most leadership and management theories 
differentiate between social behaviours, for example, autocratic and democratic 
leaders, people-oriented and task-oriented management styles, transformational 
and transactional leadership (see Chapter 3, section 3.3). As a consequence, most 
leaders or managers tend ‚to hold one set of values to be positive and uplifting 
while the opposite is defined as negative and diminishing‛ (Cameron et al. 2006, 
p. 64). The CVF ‚makes clear that there are perceptual biases that influence how 
we see social action. These are reflected in the oppositional nature of the 
framework‛ (Quinn 1988, p. 85). ‚The competing values framework reminds us 
that even though diagonal quadrants are competing or conflicting, both values 
are desirable and both create positive values‛ (Cameron et al. 2006, p. 65). The 
oppositional natures of the models and roles in the framework ‚are not opposites 
in a mutually exclusive sense like short and tall. Empirically it is possible to 
engage in behaviours at two opposite points in the framework‛ (Quinn 1988, p. 
85). Thus, the CVF does not treat one model or one role ‚as desirable and the 
other as not, or we (the CVF) concentrate on one and ignore the other entirely‛ 
(Quinn 1988, p. 87). 

62 
Chapter 3 
Second, the CVF makes values explicit. ‚Leadership prescriptions often suggest 
only one aspect of a more complex set of paradoxical leadership attributes—i.e. 
leaders should be caring (not confrontational), visionary (not pragmatic), 
confident (not humble), engaging (not autonomous)‛ (Cameron et al. 2006, p. 82). 
In contrast, the CVF has ‚no assumed right answer, no one best way to manage‛ 
(Quinn 1988, p. 88). The CVF (Quinn 1988, pp. 87-88) ‚does not impose values‛ 
but it makes values explicit. The juxtaposition of each element with its opposite in 
the framework makes its meaning ‚even clearer than it usually would be and the 
values surrounding both elements are made more explicit.‛ Consequently, these 
explicit values will help leaders and managers ‚carry around implicitly and 
ensure that other values are also considered in a positive way.‛ The CVF ‚extends 
beyond seeing only tension in opposing perspectives by guiding the integration 
of positive opposites‛ (Cameron et al. 2006, p. 65). ‚These positive opposites are 
brought to mind by highlighting the tensions inherent in the diagonal quadrants 
of the framework‛ (Cameron et al. 2006, p. 82). 
 
Third, the CVF provides a dynamic focus. The explicit values which are 
competing in a cognitive sense allow for dynamic tension in the CVF. As we 
know that, in the real world, ‚organisations are usually not without tension, 
neither are managers‛, therefore, ‚many diverse kinds of behaviours are 
expected, and these are, at minimum, distant, at maximum, competing‛ (Quinn 
1988, p. 88). This dynamic tension allows for the fact that ‚a manager may engage 
in a set of behaviours reflecting one set of values at one point and in an entirely 
different set of values at another point‛ (Quinn 1988, p. 88). The CVF creates 
‚continua with each end labelled by an opposing or contradictory value‛ 
(Cameron et al. 2006, p. 65). 
 
Finally, the CVF provides consistent categories. The CVF is consistent and 
dynamic. It is consistent because ‚the CVF helps identify a set of guidelines that 
can enable leaders to diagnose and manage the interrelationships, congruencies, 
and contradictions among these different aspects of organisations‛ (Cameron et 
al. 2006, p. 6).  
 
When we look at Table 3.2, comparing the three other major theories of 
managerial leadership roles of Quinn (1988), Luthans and Lockwood (1984), and 
Yukl (1981), we see that ‚a maximum of two entries are provided for each role 
from each author‛ (Quinn 1988, p. 88). Luthans and Lockwood see the broker role 
from Quinn as interacting with outsiders and socialising/politicking; and Yukl 
describes this role as representation and external monitoring. The producer role 
does not exist in the theories of Luthans and Lockwood.  

Leadership and Management 
63 
 
Table 3.2 A Comparison of the Eight Role Categories with Other Approaches 
Quinn (1988) 
Luthans & Lockwood (1984) 
Yukl (1981) 
1. Producer  
- 
-Performance emphasis 
-Inspiration 
2. Director  
-Planning/Coordination 
-Goal setting 
-Role clarification 
3.Coordinator  
-Decision making/ problem solving 
-Disciplining/ punishing 
-Coordinating 
-Problem solving 
4. Monitor  
-Processing paper work 
-Monitoring/ controlling performance 
-Exchanging information 
-Information dissemination 
-Internal monitoring 
5. Facilitator  
-Managing conflict 
-Interaction facilitation 
-Conflict management 
6. Mentor  
-Motivating/reinforcing 
-Training/developing 
-Staffing 
-Consideration 
-Praise recognition 
7. Innovator  
- 
- 
8. Broker  
-Interacting with outsiders 
-Socialising/politicking 
-Representation 
-External monitoring 
Source: Quinn (1988, Table 2, p. 89), Beyond Rational Management (Jossey–Bass Publishers, San 
Francisco, London). 
 
Compared to Mintzberg’s ten executive roles, the CVF is more consistent in the 
distinctions between categories. For example, in their study, McCall and Segrist 
(1980 cited in Bass 1990, pp. 399-400) found that ‚managers performance in six of 
the roles correlated with the managers’ rate of promotion, they obtained too 
much overlap in the activities among Mintzberg’s roles, which were supposed to 
be distinct.‛ Thus, ‚the framework (CVF) is consistent with existing categories in 
the literature‛ (Quinn 1988, p. 88).  
 
These conceptual advantages of the CVF lead hundreds of firms around the 
world to use it as an assessment model (or tool) to study managerial leadership 
roles and effective organisational performance (Quinn 1988; O’Neill and Quinn 
1993; Cameron et al. 2006). It seems that the CVF ‚was developed in response to 
the need for a broadly applicable model that would foster successful leadership, 
improve organisational effectiveness, and promote value creation‛ (Cameron et 
al. 2006, p. 6). In relation to promoting value creation in organisations, the CVF is 
seen as the applicable tool as it ‚advocates an integrated and comprehensive 
approach to value creation which uncovers many alternatives to traditional 
financial measures of value‛ (Cameron et al. 2006, p. 25). The CVF really ‚helps 

64 
Chapter 3 
uncover the underlying relationships that reside in organisations, leadership, 
learning, culture, motivation, decision making, cognitive processing, creativity, 
and so on‛ (Cameron et al. 2006, pp. 7-8). These create the practical advantages of 
the CVF. In the next section, we will discuss some of the many empirical studies 
which have successfully used the CVF. 
3.4.4 
Plausibility of the CVF 
Zafft, Adams, and Matkin (2009) measure leadership in self-managed teams using 
the CVF. They (2009, p. 278) propose that ‚teams who use three or four of the 
leadership profiles of the CVF will perform better (in terms of grades) than teams 
who use two or less throughout the teaming experience.‛  
 
Hooijberg and Petrock (1993) describe how the CVF is one of the best 
organisational models available to help the Plant Leadership Team AT&T 
Interconnection Technologies diagnose their existing and desired cultures and 
execute strategies for major cultural change. Hooijberg and Petrock (1993) show 
that: 
 
The AT&T leadership team wants to increase the clan and adhocracy 
cultures and decrease the hierarchy and market cultures < The 
benefits they expected to accrue from an increased morale, 
commitment, productivity, and number of people included in 
decision making and decreased unproductive discussion. The 
benefits for the company they listed from decreasing the emphasis 
on the Market culture included less bureaucracy, dictatorship and 
wasted energy and more freedom‛ (pp. 36-37).  
 
In the case of AT&T, Hooijberg and Petrock (1993, p. 46) find an additional 
strength of the CVF, that is, ‚the CVF can portray an overall culture change for 
the entire organisation of 2000 people and at the same time allow different 
cultures to develop at the Internal Business Units (IBU) or departmental level.‛  
 
Cooper and Quinn (1993) use the CVF to develop a framework of Management 
Information Systems (MIS) effectiveness which links MIS characteristics to 
organisational effectiveness via management activity support. They (1993, p. 181) 
use the combination of the two MIS characteristics—technical and capability—to 
‚determine the helpfulness of MIS for management in pursuit of organisational 
effectiveness.‛ Then, they map the capability and technical characteristics to the 
CVF. Cooper and Quinn (1993, p. 187) find ‚the similarity between the theoretical 
mapping and the experts’ cognitive structure supports the notion that the MIS 

Leadership and Management 
65 
 
effectiveness framework properly reflects the theoretical MIS effectiveness 
construct.‛  
 
DiPadova and Faerman (1993) explore the use of the CVF of Organisational 
Effectiveness and of Managerial Leadership as a tool for helping organisation 
members better understand the similarities and differences in managerial 
leadership roles at various levels of hierarchy. They conducted a series of 
interviews at three hierarchical levels: first level managers, mid-level managers, 
and upper level managers. DiPadova and Faerman (1993) show that: 
 
Managers at each level were able to identify with all eight roles of the 
CVF < Managers at all levels have vision, deal with people outside 
the organisation, and are concerned with detail and monitoring 
work. While there are differences in the way the levels experience 
their roles, it is clear that all levels perform in all four quadrants of 
the CVF‛ (p. 147). 
 
DiPadova and Faerman (1993, p. 162) also reported that the CVF is also a good 
tool to examine ‚the transition from one managerial level to the next, managers 
can better understand how their expected behaviours differ across levels of 
hierarchy; they can see how the roles manifest themselves in different ways in 
different contexts.‛ Clearly, ‚the CVF ameliorates the separateness‛ across the 
hierarchy and ‚it is an ideal tool to support vertical team building‛ (DiPadova 
and Faerman 1993, pp. 168-169). 
 
A study by Belasen et al. (1996, p. 109) proves that the CVF is useful in ‚helping 
managers describe how the importance of those roles and tasks changed during 
organizational transformation, and the clarity of the importance of those roles 
changed as well.‛ Belasen et al. (1996) confirm that: 
 
For all roles but Monitor, significant numbers of managers perceived 
the roles to have increased in importance. All but Monitor are 
statistically significant at > .001. In the case of the Monitor role, the 
change in distribution is not reflected in an overall increase or 
decrease in importance, but rather in a shift to a bimodal 
distribution. (p. 99) < On average 22% more managers reported that 
the importance of transformational roles was clearer now than before 
(48% to 25%), while about 7% more managers reported that the 
importance of transactional roles was clearer now that before (about 
38% to 31%) (p. 104). 
 

66 
Chapter 3 
In conclusion, these studies reported in this study have tested the validity of the 
applicability of the CVF in many respects and in many different fields. The 
studies show that ‚the CVF serves as a map, an organising mechanism, a sense-
making device, a source of new ideas and a learning system‛ (Cameron et al. 
2006, p. 6). How do we see the CVF in our study? How does it help us investigate 
managerial leadership styles of deans at Indonesian universities?  
The use of the CVF for this study 
For our study, we assume that the CVF is a suitable conceptual framework to 
explore and investigate managerial leadership styles of deans at Indonesian 
universities. The reasons for this are, firstly, the CVF is a leadership model that 
integrates leading and managing activities. Its integrated concept is in line with 
the definition of (dean) leadership posed in this study. Secondly, the CVF offers 
conceptual advantages that make perceptual biases clear, make values explicit, 
and provide a dynamic focus (mentioned earlier in subsection 3.4.3).  
 
We use the CVF model as a frame for investigating managerial leadership styles 
of deans. For this purpose, we follow the conceptual steps of the CVF assessment: 
behaviours—roles—styles. We call them a 3-1 concept. First, we investigate 
behaviours of deans by using Quinn’s (1988) Competing Values Leadership 
Instrument based on the CVF. This leadership instrument describes and lists 32 
management behaviours that a manager might employ when they lead and 
manage an organisation. Second, we classify these 32 behaviours into eight 
managerial leadership roles based on the CVF. Each role consists of four 
management behaviours. From this point, we come to the third step, styles. We 
use the eight managerial roles from the CVF as a configuration to explore and 
identify managerial leadership styles of deans. In other words, the eight 
managerial leadership roles performed by deans serve as a configuration that 
pattern their managerial leadership styles. Thus, in this study, a managerial 
leadership style is a configuration of the eight managerial leadership roles based on the 
CVF.  
3.5 
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 
Leadership is a universal phenomenon. People may see it as someone’s ability to 
lead. Some scholars may define it as the activity of influencing other people. 
Other practitioners may describe it as the ability of leaders to motivate, inspire 
and direct other people. So, is there any standard definition of leadership? No.  
 

Leadership and Management 
67 
 
In this chapter, we have discussed the two major contested concepts of leadership 
and management. Some scholars claim that they are different. Leaders are 
inspiring, motivating, mentoring, or coaching their followers. Managers focus on 
controlling, task orientation, financing, and planning. Some other researchers 
claim that leaders, in doing their job, have the same function as managers.  
 
This chapter also described and discussed management and leadership theories, 
including leadership styles. Early leadership theories suggested that people are 
born as great leaders. This notion is rejected by behavioural theorists. The 
behaviourists argue that leadership does not focus on mental qualities but on the 
actions of leaders, which can be learnt. Situational theorists then argue that 
leaders choose the best course of action based upon situational variables. Others, 
such as Contingency theorists, contest that leadership is not only a matter of 
situational factors but also a matter of leaders’ capabilities and the behaviour of 
followers. Transactional and transformational theories emphasise the importance 
of the leader’s relationship with their followers.  
 
One of the main controversies that emerges from the variety of leadership 
theories concerns the extent to which effective leadership is dependent on 
personal qualities and style, irrespective of whether they are born or made, and 
the impact of situation and context (‘does context matter and how does it 
matter’?). Another issue that emerges from most of the theories is the 
dichotomous concept of leadership styles. For example, we have Theory X and 
Theory Y managers; autocratic versus democratic leadership; task- versus people-
oriented management style; transactional versus transformational leadership. 
These dichotomies lead to a belief that one type of leader or management style is 
better than the other.  
 
In conducting this study, we are aware of the difference between leadership and 
management. At the same time, we acknowledge the blurred boundaries between 
them. We realise that in any real organisation, people and task orientations are 
both necessary; we also want our organisations to have both flexibility and 
control. In practice, both good leadership and strong management are needed. 
We perceive them as an integrated framework that embraces the two concepts of 
leading and managing. We, therefore, believe that people (e.g. deans) who occupy 
positions can simultaneously employ both managerial and leadership behaviours 
to meet the expectations of subordinates and the goals of an organisation. 
 
Given the key question of our study, we will take a behavioural approach, i.e. we 
want to investigate how deans run their faculties. However, taking the limitations 

68 
Chapter 3 
of such an approach into account, we acknowledge that leadership actions and 
the effects of those actions are context-dependent. This means that we would 
argue that, for instance, a dean who is running a small science faculty facing 
declining student numbers may act differently from a dean leading an expanding 
social science faculty with large numbers of students. At the same time, two 
deans, each running a small science faculty with decreasing student numbers, 
may lead differently because they have different traits and values. What is 
needed is a framework which can portray all leaders’ behaviours within the 
complex and dynamic environment in organisations. The Competing Values 
Framework (CVF) seems to meet this purpose well.  
 
The CVF is an integrated leadership approach reflecting two dimensions which 
exist in all organisations. One dimension represents a vertical axis ranging from 
flexibility to control and the other dimension represents a horizontal axis ranging 
from an internal to an external focus. These dimensions create four aspects. Each 
aspect has a polar opposite and contains two leadership roles which could 
empirically be placed at the two ends of a continuum. These patterns offer 
conceptual advantages: clarifying perceptual bias, making values explicit, 
dynamic focus, and consistent categories. 
 
Empirically, the CVF has been tested in many fields including in education. The 
strengths and applicability of CVF lead us to use the framework to investigate 
managerial leadership styles of Indonesian deans. We use the 3-1 concept based 
on the CVF. Firstly, we investigate the behaviours of deans as they lead and 
manage a faculty (32 management behaviours from the CVF). Secondly, we 
classify these behaviours into eight managerial roles based on the CVF. Finally, 
we use these eight roles as a configuration to investigate and pattern a style of 
deanship. This investigation is of an exploratory nature.  
 

 
4 
C H A P T E R
 
Design and Operationalisation of 
the Study 
“Quantitative research consists of those studies in which the data concerned can be analysed 
in terms of numbers ... Research can also be qualitative, that is, it can describe events, persons 
and so forth scientifically without the use of numerical data ... Both types of research are 
valid and useful.” 
Best and Khan (Research in Education, 1989, pp. 89-90) 
This chapter focuses on the methodology and operationalisation of the study. 
Section 4.1 describes the research design and methodology. Next, Section 4.2 
portrays the data collection and sampling of the study. Section 4.3 explains the 
operationalisation of the study. Section 4.4 illustrates the steps of analysing the 
data. The last Section 4.5 summarises and concludes this chapter.  
4.1 
DESIGN AND METHODOLOGY OF THE STUDY 
A research design is a master plan that specifies the methods and procedures for 
the gathering and analysis of information to answer the research questions. It is a 

70 
Chapter 4 
crucial step in the process from framing the question to analysing data and 
reporting outcomes. There are a huge variety of research designs. However, in 
social science research, three types of research are usually used to answer the two 
basic questions: what is going on and why are these things going on? These three 
research types are: descriptive, exploratory, and explanatory research design 
(Babbie 2010).  
 
The selection of a research design depends on several factors, one of them being 
the purpose of the research (Babbie 2010). The purpose of our study is, firstly, to 
explore and describe the managerial leadership styles of Indonesian deans and, 
secondly, to explain why Indonesian deans manage their faculty in a particular 
way. The most suitable research design for our study is a combination of 
descriptive, exploratory and explanatory research designs. It is explorative since 
we investigate the managerial leadership styles of Indonesian deans, which is still 
a relatively new and under studied subject. A body of knowledge about how and 
why deans run their faculties in particular ways does not exist. At the same time, 
it is descriptive because we describe the characteristics of managerial leadership 
styles in Indonesian faculties and the characteristics of Indonesian deans 
performing these styles. It is also explanatory because we examine our human 
behavioural theory-based assumed relationships.  
 
After designing our study, we started to select the most suitable methods to 
collect our data. There are different methods in social science research: 
qualitative, quantitative or a mix of the two. The distinction between quantitative 
and qualitative research is: 
 
… Quantitative research consists of those studies in which the data 
concerned can be analysed in terms of numbers ... Research can also 
be qualitative, that is, it can describe events, persons and so forth 
scientifically without the use of numerical data ... Quantitative 
research is based more directly on its original plans and its results 
are more readily analysed and interpreted. Qualitative research is 
more open and responsive to its subject. (Best and Khan 1989, pp. 89-
90).  
 
Quantitative‖ research‖ aims‖ to‖ ‚make‖ valid‖ and‖ objective description on 
phenomena‖…‖Attempts‖are‖made‖to‖discover‖principles‖and‖laws‖which can be 
generated to the larger population‛‖(Taylor‖2005,‖p.‖91).‖ Qualitative research is 
‚multimethod‖ in‖ focus,‖ involving‖ an‖ interpretive,‖ naturalistic‖ approach‖ to‖ its 
subject matter. This means that qualitative researchers study things in their 

Design and Operationalisation of the Study 
71 
natural settings, attempting to make sense of, or interpret, and phenomena in 
terms‖of‖the‖meanings‖people‖bring‖to‖them‛‖(Trumbull‖2005,‖p.‖101).‖ 
 
‚Both‖ qualitative‖ and‖ quantitative methods are useful and legitimate in social 
research‛‖(Babbie‖2010,‖p.‖25).‖‚They are not mutually exclusive. It is possible for 
a single investigation to use both methods‛‖(Trumbull 2005, p. 90). However,‖‚in‖
choosing one approach over another, the issue should be to assess which 
approach‖serve‖the‖research‖under‖investigation‛‖(Trumbull 2005, p. 105). ‚Some‖
research situations and topics are amenable to qualitative examination, others to 
quantification‛‖(Babbie‖2010,‖p.‖25). 
 
For our study, the advantage of a qualitative approach would be to gather in-
depth insights into the way deans run their faculties. On the other hand, a 
quantitative approach would provide the opportunity to present‖ ‘the‖ general‖
picture’‖and‖offer‖good‖opportunities‖to‖explain why deans run their faculties in a 
particular way. Furthermore, the standard methods with the theory of reasoned 
action‖ and‖ its‖ extended‖ models‖ (TPB‖ and‖ RAA)‖ are‖ ‚largely‖ quantitative‖ in‖
nature‛‖ (Ajzen,‖ Online, Frequently Asked Questions, point 27). Therefore, we 
have selected a quantitative method as the approach that best serves the purposes 
of our study. 
 
To explore and describe managerial leadership styles of deans in Indonesia, we 
believe that, among the various quantitative methods available, ‚survey‖research‖
is probably the best method available to the social researcher who is interested in 
collecting‖original‖data‖for‖describing‖a‖population‖too‖large‖to‖observe‖directly‛ 
(Babbie 2010, p. 254). Given the size of the country and its huge number of higher 
education institutions, direct observation or face-to-face interviews would 
severely limit the number of case studies, as well as being both costly and time-
consuming. From the options of doing a telephone, mail or online survey, we 
decided to develop a postal questionnaire; this fits the Indonesian context best. 
An online questionnaire is not suitable, because internet access in various parts of 
Indonesia is limited, which would have negative effects on the response rate.  
 
A traditional postal questionnaire is considered to be the most appropriate survey 
technique to reach a large number of deans in Indonesia. Fowler (2009, p. 82) 
suggests that a postal mail survey provides access‖to‖‚widely‖dispersed‖samples‖
and samples that for other reasons are difficult to reach by telephone or in 
person.‛‖ Moreover,‖ Fowler (p. 82) states that it‖ can‖ be‖ ‚accomplished‖ with‖
minimal staff and facilities, therefore, unit costs are relatively low.‛‖It‖also‖gives‖
respondents time to provide thoughtful responses as respondents can complete 
the questionnaire at a convenient place and time (Fowler 2009). It also means that, 

72 
Chapter 4 
after phrasing the questions, the researcher is not able to influence the answers; in 
this respect there is no interviewer bias (e.g. Fagence 1974, p. 300). The downsides 
of this technique are that there is no opportunity for follow-up questions or 
correction of misunderstandings and response rates are potentially low. Low 
response rates can have a negative impact on generalising the results.  
 
The written questionnaire that we have developed is based on the TRA and the 
extended‖models‖of‖the‖TRA‖(i.e.‖the‖TPB‖and‖the‖RAA)‖and‖Quinn’s‖CVF.‖ We 
used Quinn’s‖Competing‖ Values‖ Leadership Instrument based on the CVF and 
Cameron‖and‖Quinn’s‖Management‖Skills Profile Instrument within the CVF to 
measure the behaviours of deans (see the next section of this chapter). The 
questions about attitudes, subjective norms, perceived behavioural control, and 
background factors are formulated to be compatible with the behaviours and are 
clearly defined in terms of actions and language used.  
 
The questionnaire is translated from English to Bahasa Indonesia. Without 
underrating the English proficiency of deans in Indonesia, the reasons for the use 
Bahasa Indonesia are: (1) to make the messages clearer and more explicit 
(Harkness and Schoua-Glusberg 1998); (2) to‖‚field items originally conducted in 
another language‛‖ (Harkness and Schoua-Glusberg 1998, p. 88); and (3) ‚to 
produce instruments that maintain equivalence of measurement across 
languages/dialects … Only in this way will it be possible to achieve results that 
are comparable cross-nationally‛‖(Loeb 2011, WG-11 Presentation, slide 2). 
 
In terms of the translation process, there is no substantial difficulty with the 
content. This is because the leadership instruments used for the study contain 
general questions relating to regular managerial activities. Thus, the content of 
the questionnaire in Bahasa Indonesia remains the same as the original 
instruments in English (see Appendix A1). 
 
The questionnaire relies on self-reporting. We used self-report‖ because‖ ‚self-
report is often used to aid behavioural prediction …‛‖ and‖ ‚self-report is often 
equal or superior to alternative assessment approaches in predicting discrete 
behavioural outcome‛‖ since‖ ‚self-report items are targeted at the particular 
information‖ needed‛‖ (Baker and Brandon 1990, pp. 34-37). However, self-
reporting is not a flawless method, the advantages and limitations will be 
discussed below.  
 
Self-reports of behaviour can have certain advantages over direct observation 
(Ajzen and Fishbein 1980; Fishbein and Ajzen 2010; Baker and Brandon 1990). 
First, Ajzen and Fishbein (1980, pp. 33-38) argue that many behaviours are not 

Design and Operationalisation of the Study 
73 
directly accessible to an observer and for this reason it may be necessary to rely 
on‖ the‖ actor’s‖ self-report. Self-reports are believed‖ to‖ be‖ ‚one‖ of‖ the‖ primary 
means of obtaining information about a person …‛ (Smyth et al., n.d., p. 1) in 
which‖‚researchers‖rely‖on‖the‖answers that research participants provide to learn 
about‖individuals’‖thoughts,‖feelings,‖and‖behaviours …‛ (Schwarz 1999, p. 93). 
 
Further, Gordon Allport (1942 cited in Baker and Brandon 1990, p. 37 and in 
Osberg and Shrauger 1986, p. 1044)‖recommended‖that‖‚if‖we‖want‖to‖know‖how‖
people feel: what they experience and what they remember, what their emotions 
and‖motives‖are‖like,‖and‖the‖reasons‖for‖acting‖as‖they‖do―why‖not‖ask‖them?‛‖
Self-reports of behaviour can, therefore, provide relevant information which 
yields the accurate self-predictions needed by investigators (Osberg and Shrauger 
1986). Budd (1987 cited in Fishbein and Ajzen 2010, p. 310), however, argues that 
‚self-presentational concerns may lead participants to strive to create a degree of 
consistency‖among‖the‖theory’s‖components‖that‖did‖not‖exist‖prior‖to‖completing‖
the questionnaire.‛ 
 
Regarding techniques for increasing the accuracy of answers in self-reports, 
Fishbein and Ajzen (2010,‖p.‖37)‖suggest‖that‖‚we‖can‖assure‖them (respondents) 
of confidentiality or anonymity, we can ask them to sign a declaration or contract 
that they will tell the truth, we can try to impress them with the importance of 
providing accurate data for scientific purposes, or we can convince them that the 
accuracy of self-reports can be verified (e.g. by checking with others 
knowledgeable about their behaviour)‛‖(see‖also‖Baker‖and Brandon 1990, pp. 46-
47).  
 
Second,‖ it‖ is‖ an‖ efficient‖ way‖ of‖ gathering‖ information‖ because‖ ‚as‖ opposed‖ to‖
direct behavioural observation, it is unnecessary to follow the client into the 
extra-laboratory world in order for the client to predict his or her future 
behaviour or‖for‖the‖client‖to‖label‖his‖or‖her‖current‖mood‛‖(Baker‖and Brandon 
1990, p. 37). Therefore, self-reports of behaviour do not require much effort, time, 
or money (Ajzen and Fishbein 1980; Baker and Brandon 1990; Teddlie and 
Tashakkori 2009). In our case, it would be problematic, or even unrealistic, to 
observe what deans actually do in running their faculties, particularly if we want 
to study a large number of deans. Deans would have to be‖‘under‖surveillance’‖
for many hours a day.  
 
Third, Ajzen and Fishbein (1980, p. 38) argue that behaviour measured through 
self-reporting‖ is‖ ‚especially‖ convenient when we want to observe a given 
behaviour repeatedly or when we are interested in a general behavioural 

74 
Chapter 4 
category.‛‖For‖example,‖it‖is‖easier to obtain data by asking deans to indicate how 
often they attend meetings in a week than by counting how often they do this.  
 
Fourth,‖‚they (self-reports) provide an easy means of defining each of the four 
elements‖(the‖action,‖target,‖context‖and‖time)‖at‖any‖level‖of‖generality‛‖(Ajzen 
and Fishbein 1980, p. 39). For example, a dean can be asked to indicate whether 
he or she performed a specific behaviour (e.g. negotiating) in the past month. 
‚Such‖behavioural criteria are very difficult to observe but are easily measured by 
means of self-reports‛‖(Ajzen and Fishbein 1980, p. 38). ‚Self-report is valuable to 
the extent that it is useful in predicting and explaining important events or 
behaviour‛‖(Baker and Brandon 1990, p. 38).  
 
Self-reporting also has limitations. In our theory section, we acknowledge that 
there is an issue related to the potential effects of assessing beliefs, attitudes, and 
perceived norms on correlations with the‖theory‖of‖reasoned‖action’s‖components‖
(Fishbein and Ajzen 2010). This issue underlies an assumption that the 
questionnaire may encourage a certain kind of response bias, that‖ is,‖ ‚the‖
discrepancy between what managers say they do in response to questionnaire 
and‖ what‖ they‖ actually‖ do‖ is‖ to‖ be‖ expected‛‖ (Bass‖ 1990,‖ p.‖ 390). For several 
reasons, self-reported behaviour can deviate from actual behaviour (Wagner and 
Rabkin 2000 cited in Fishbein and Ajzen 2010, p. 37). Its accuracy, reliability and 
validity can, therefore, be questioned. People may also be unable to accurately 
recall how they behaved. The timing can play a role in this—behaviours from a 
long time ago are more difficult to recall than recently performed behaviours. 
People may also choose not to report their behaviour accurately due to issues of 
self-presentation or self-protection. Questions on behaviour that is regarded as 
socially sensitive are particularly prone to this bias. For example, people tend to 
underreport drug use (Lapham,‖C’de‖Baca,‖Chang,‖Hunt,‖and‖Berger,‖2002‖cited‖
in Fishbein and Ajzen 2010, p. 37).  
 
The frequency of behaviour can also affect the ability to recall the behaviour. 
‚Frequently‖ occurring events (behaviours) are familiar to us and thus easy to 
recall. Familiar events often are more easily recalled than less frequent events 
(behaviours)‛‖ (Stroh et al. 2002, p. 95). Things may be different for infrequent 
behaviours, although such behaviours ‚especially‖ if‖ they‖ are‖ of‖ personal‖
significance, are well recalled even after an extended period of time (Schwarz, 
Groves, and Schuman, 1998 cited in Fishbein and Ajzen 2010, p. 37). Regarding 
methodological implications, Schwarz (1999, p. 98) states‖ that‖ ‚when‖ the‖
behaviour is rare and important, and hence well-represented in memory, or when 
the respondents engage in the behaviour with‖ high‖ regularity‖ (e.g.‖ ‚every‖

Design and Operationalisation of the Study 
75 
Sunday‛),‖the‖ impact‖of‖response‖alternatives‖is‖small‖because‖ no‖estimation‖is‖
required …‛ 
 
Without downplaying the potential disadvantages of self-reporting, we would 
argue that if there are no reasons to believe that we are investigating sensitive 
areas, the likelihood that self-reporting behaviours will differ from actual 
behaviours is low. In this, we support Ajzen (1988) that: 
 
…‖when the behaviour of interest is not particularly sensitive, self-
reports tend to be quite accurate … The percentage of accurate 
reporting in … different domains varied from 60% to 98%. In 
conclusion, when investigating a sensitive domain, respondents 
may—knowingly or unknowingly—misreport their behaviour, but 
with 
respect 
to 
relatively 
insensitive 
behaviours, 
there 
is 
considerable consistency between self-reports and more objective 
measures (p. 103).  
 
Fowler (2009, p. 74) goes a step further when he argues that, with respect to 
sensitive issues, ‚self-administered procedures are thought to be best because the 
respondent does not have to admit directly to an interviewer a socially 
undesirable or negatively‖valued‖characteristic‖or‖behaviour.‛ For our study, we 
would argue that the way a dean runs a faculty, answered anonymously, 
concerns non-sensitive behaviour. We acknowledge that opinions may differ. 
However, this assumption will not be tested as we believe that the risk of 
receiving biased answers as the result of measuring behaviour through self-
reporting is limited. However, this does not guarantee accurate descriptions of a 
dean’s‖behaviour.‖ 
 
Regarding the validity of self-reports, many researchers support it. In their study 
of‖the‖ validity‖of‖individual’s‖self-assessments, Shrauger and Osberg (1981, pp. 
340-341)‖ indicate‖ that‖ ‚the‖ self-assessment measures were significantly more 
accurate predictors of the criterion (z =‖2.9,‖p‖<‖0.01).‛‖Furthermore, Shrauger and 
Osberg (1981, cited in Osberg and Shrauger 1986, p. 1045) concluded‖ that‖ ‚in‖
many important areas, such as the prediction of vocational choice, academic 
achievement, job performance, peer ratings, reactions to psychotherapy, and 
adjustment following psychiatric hospitalisation, self-assessments are at least as 
predictive‖ as‖ traditional‖ assessment‖ methods,‖ if‖ not‖ more.‛‖ In reviewing a 
tremendous amount of data attesting to the validity of self-report across a wide 
range of assessment tasks, Osberg and Shrauger (1986), Shrauger and Osberg 
(1981), and others (e.g. Mischel 1977), as cited in Baker and Brandon (1990, p. 37), 

76 
Chapter 4 
conclude‖ that‖ ‚self-report is often equal or superior to alternative assessment 
approaches in predicting discrete behavioural outcome.‛ 
 
Lykins, Pavlik, and Andrykowski (2007, p. 490) concluded that ‚the validity of 
self-reports of TVS (transvaginal sonography) screening for ovarian cancer is very 
high and may even exceed the validity of self-reports of participation in breast, 
cervical, and colorectal cancer screening over similar recall‖periods.‛ According to 
Aitken et al. (1995), Kerber and Slattery (1997), and Ziogas and Anton-Culver 
(2003), as cited in Smyth et al. (n.d., p. 10), self-report‖appears‖to‖‚provide‖valid‖
information for first-degree relatives and common cancers.‛‖ 
 
Furthermore, Patrick and colleagues (1994, p. 1091) suggest that the overall 
validity of smoking self-reports is high, ‚with sensitivity of self-report was 87%, 
and‖ the‖ specificity‖ was‖ 89%.‛‖ The validity of self-reported smoking is also 
supported by Kentala, Utriainen, Pahkala, and Mattila 2004; Wills and Cleary 
1997. They (cited in Smyth et al., n.d., p. 6) support that‖‚self-reports of cigarette 
smoking also appear to be valid among adolescents across racial/ethnic groups.‛  
 
A study of body mass index (BMI) conducted by Palta, Prineas, Berman, and 
Hannan (1982 cited in Smyth et al., n.d., p. 10)‖indicates‖that‖‚there‖is‖evidence‖for‖
the validity of BMI self-reports.‛‖Another‖similar‖study‖also‖supports‖this‖finding.‖
A study of body mass index (BMI) and waist circumference (WC) in a Dutch 
overweight working population conducted by Dekkers et al. (2008, Conclusion 
section, para. 1)‖ concludes‖ that‖ ‚self-reported BMI and WC are satisfactorily 
accurate for the assessment of the prevalence of overweight or obesity and of 
increased WC in an overweight working population.‛‖ Moreover, Weaver and 
colleagues (1996 cited in Smyth et al., n.d., p. 10) found that ‚Waist-to-Hip Ratio 
(WHR) can be measured accurately by self-report …‛‖ 
 
All these empirical findings suggest that self-reports of behaviour are valid and 
accurate for collecting personal information. However, self-assessments have 
been questioned. Research indicates that outcomes of self-reported and peer-
reported behaviours differ, that is, the scores of self-reports are usually higher 
than those of peer-reports (De Boer, and Goedegebuure 2009). Some studies have 
compared self-assessments and peer-assessments. Hase and Goldberg (1967 cited 
in Shrauger and Osberg 1981, p. 338) found‖ that‖ ‚individuals’‖ self-ratings on 
specific traits to be comparable or better predictors of peer ratings than were 
more‖ complex‖ scales‖ for‖ measuring‖ the‖ same‖ dimensions.‛‖ Scott and Johnson 
(1972 cited in Shrauger and Osberg 1981, Table 6, p. 339), conducting three 
studies in which they compared direct self-reports‖and‖friends’‖(or‖peers’)‖ratings‖
of attitudes and motives, reported that direct self-report measures showed better 

Design and Operationalisation of the Study 
77 
predictions than the indirect measures. Wallace and Sechrest (1963 cited in 
Shrauger and Osberg 1981, p. 340), comparing self-descriptions with projective 
test‖ and‖ peer‖ ratings,‖ concluded‖ that‖ ‚self-report measures were clearly better 
predictors‖of‖peer‖ratings.‛ 
 
In a study of self-appraisals of 11 different personality traits conducted by 
Zuckerman et al. (1988 cited in Baker and Brandon 1990, p. 44), the results 
indicate that‖ ‚the‖ extent‖ to‖ which‖ relevance,‖ consistency,‖ and‖ observability‖
ratings moderated the prediction of peer ratings varied greatly from one trait to 
another. These results suggest that self-reports of traits will generalize across 
broad situations if subjects view the trait as an important determinant of their 
behaviour, as influencing their behaviour across diverse circumstances, and as 
influencing their behaviour in observable, salient ways.‛‖ 
 
If it is likely that self-reporting‖is‖more‖‘optimistic’‖than‖peer-based reporting (or 
peer assessment of behaviour), this should be taken into account when we are 
drawing our conclusions on the behaviours of deans. The obvious solution to this 
‘problem’ would be to ask both the deans and others such as colleagues, 
academics, or students about the way a dean runs a faculty. This research strategy 
is, however, not followed in this study mainly for pragmatic reasons. First, it 
would have raised the sensitivity of the study, thus increasing the likelihood of 
biased answers, and would probably have lowered the response rates. Second, 
resources were not available for such a large expansion of the study. The 
alternative was to decrease the number of case studies, an option which would 
not have provided ‘the‖general‖picture’‖of‖managerial‖leadership‖styles of deans 
in Indonesia. 
4.2 
DATA COLLECTION AND SAMPLING OF THE STUDY 
Data Collection, Population and Sample 
The study makes use of questionnaires as the main tool to collect the data. We 
carried out two surveys. In the first survey, we aimed‖ to‖ measure‖ the‖ deans’‖
managerial leadership styles from their attitudes and their subjective norms 
based on the theory of reasoned action (Ajzen and Fishbein 1980). We carried out 
the second survey after we decided to extend the model from a volitional to a 
non-volitional one, which required adding perceived behavioural controls as one 
of the determinants of attitudes and subjective norms (based on the theory of 
planned behaviour (Ajzen 1985) and the reasoned action approach (Fishbein and 
Ajzen 2010). The second survey, which only addressed perceived behavioural 

78 
Chapter 4 
controls, was a follow-up sent to all respondents to the first survey (see Appendix 
A2). 
Before conducting the first survey, we sent the questionnaire to 10 deans as a 
pilot. The aim of this pilot was to ensure that the questions were clear and 
understood by the deans (Babbie 2010). The results indicated that the deans 
understood the questions well. The first survey was conducted by post and the 
follow-up survey by fax.  
Determining the targeted population for the survey was a challenge because no 
data on the total number of deans in Indonesian universities was available. Data 
on higher education for the year 2006-2007 indicates that there are 419 
universities in Indonesia, spreading from Sumatera to Papua. The number of 
faculties at each of the 419 universities varies. If we assume that the average 
university has six faculties, we have 2,514 deans as the total dean population of 
Indonesia. It would be preferable to have more than 2,500 deans participating in 
our research but for pragmatic reasons, this was considered unfeasible (due to 
limitations of data accessibility, time and cost). To have good and useful data, we 
decided to use the list of 120 accredited universities on the Website of the 
Indonesian Directorate General of Higher Education (DGHE 2008). These 
accredited universities include private and public, small and large, and suburban 
and urban universities. The number of faculties per university again varies in this 
group of universities. We estimate that the average university in this group has 
eight faculties. If this estimate is correct, then the population of Indonesian deans 
is 960.6 Due to time and budget limitations, we decided not to include the whole 
population of nearly a thousand deans, but to select half as our sample of deans 
for the research. The process of selection was as follows. 
 
To obtain a representative sample, we applied a stratified random sample by 
dividing the Indonesian Archipelago into two subgroups: Western Indonesia and 
Eastern‖ Indonesia.‖ ‚Stratifying‖ in‖ advance‖ ensures‖ that‖ the‖ sample‖ will‖ have‖
exactly the same proportions in each class (for our study, in each part of 
Indonesia) as‖the‖whole‖population‛‖(Fowler‖2009,‖p.‖26).‖Due‖to‖the‖fact‖that‖the‖
development of Western Indonesia is more advanced than that of Eastern 
Indonesia, including in education [based on State Policy Guidelines Garis-garis 
Besar Haluan Negara (GBHN) 1993], more universities are found in Western 
Indonesia. As a result, the proportional sampling is dominated by universities 
from Western Indonesia. Within the subgroups, a simple random sample is 
employed to ensure that each university in our population has an equal chance of 
                                                           
6 From the information that we received from the deans participating in this study this 
average of eight faculties per university seems about right. 

Design and Operationalisation of the Study 
79 
being chosen (Fowler 2009). This technique was also ‚a‖ way‖to‖remove‖ bias‖in‖
sample‖ selection‛‖ (Learner, Online). Thus, 60 universities were selected, 
representing universities from Western Indonesia (Java, Sumatera, Kalimantan, 
and Bali) to Eastern Indonesia [Sulawesi, Papua, Nusa Tenggara Barat (NTB) and 
Nusa Tenggara Timur (NTT)]. In the process of distributing the questionnaire, we 
found that it was difficult to find faculty contacts in some selected universities. In 
the end, we identified 443 deans to serve as the sample of deans for the study. 
Dissemination and Response 
In the last week of March 2008, the first questionnaire was sent to 443 deans, 
together with an official letter asking for participation, offering the results of the 
study in return for completion and promising that answers would be treated 
confidentially. To increase the response rate, a stamped, self-addressed envelope 
to return the questionnaire was also enclosed. A reminder was sent in the last 
week of April 2008. Finally, a follow-up telephone call was made a week after the 
requested date of return. By the end of May 2008, we had received a total of 218 
completed questionnaires out of 443 questionnaires sent (49%), which we 
consider a satisfactory response rate. In relation to the estimated population of 
960 deans in Indonesia, this response rate equals 23%.  
 
At the beginning of December 2008, the second questionnaire was sent to all 
respondents to the first survey. This one-page questionnaire addressing questions 
on perceived behavioural control was sent via fax due to time limitations. At the 
beginning of January 2009, we had received 75 returned questionnaires (out of 
218 participating respondents). These 75 respondents covered the geographical 
spread from Sumatera to Papua, with a response rate of 34% from the follow-up 
survey.  
 
Furthermore, we also statistically compared the questionnaires actually returned 
with the questionnaire disseminated from each region. The results indicated that 
there is no difference found [Chi-square (7, N = 218) = 4.31, p = 0.74 for the first 
survey, Chi-square (7, N = 75) = 5.69, p = 0.58 for the second survey; both p values 
are significant at 0.05 level]. For both surveys, the response appears to be 
representative in terms of geographical spread (see Table 4.1). 
 
 

80 
Chapter 4 
Table 4.1 Dissemination of and Response to the Questionnaire  
First survey 
 
Western Indonesia 
Eastern Indonesia 
 
Java 
Sumatera 
Kalimantan 
Bali 
Sulawesi 
NTB 
NTT 
Papua 
Total 
Questionnaires 
disseminated  
281 
53 
23 
31 
28 
6 
8 
13 
443 
Questionnaires 
returned  
144 
25 
7 
19 
11 
4 
3 
5 
218 
Return rate  
51% 
47% 
30% 
61% 
39% 
67% 
38% 
39% 
49% 
Second survey 
 
Western Indonesia 
Eastern Indonesia 
 
Java 
Sumatera 
Kalimantan 
Bali 
Sulawesi 
NTB 
NTT 
Papua 
Total 
Questionnaires 
disseminated  
144 
25 
7 
19 
11 
4 
3 
5 
218 
Questionnaires 
returned  
44 
12 
2 
8 
4 
2 
2 
1 
75 
Return rate 
31% 
48% 
29% 
42% 
36% 
50% 
67% 
20% 
34% 
 
Deans gave several reasons for non-participation (via text messages, calls, and 
emails). Several deans were reluctant to be evaluated. Some deans said they were 
too busy and some deans were on duty abroad. Some deans reported a lack of 
permission to participate from central management. Some deans thought that 
they could not make a useful contribution to the research as their faculty was only 
recently established. Finally, some deans indicated a lack of interest in the 
research topic.  
4.3 
OPERATIONALISATION OF THE STUDY 
According to Baker and Brandon (1990), one of the characteristics of self-reports is 
that they can be developed quickly. Further, they argue that it is frequently easy 
to develop self-report items that are targeted at the particular information 
needed. Once the dependent and independent variables to be examined have 
been specified, the operationalization of the research model can be measured 
(Shrauger and Osberg 1981).  
 
Figure 4.1 presents the integration of the two behavioural models and the eight 
leadership roles of the Competing Values Framework (CVF). The first 
behavioural model is a volitional behavioural model (in the blue-line box as 
shown in Figure 4.1). It summarises a model of the theory of reasoned action 
(TRA) (Ajzen and Fishbein 1980). It assumes that managerial leadership styles are 
determined by attitudes towards the styles and subjective norms. The second 
behavioural model is the non-volitional behavioural model (in the red-line box as 
shown in Figure 4.1). It represents the extended model of the TRA, that is, the 

Design and Operationalisation of the Study 
81 
theory of planned behaviour (TPB) (Ajzen 1985) and the reasoned action 
approach (RAA) (Fishbein and Ajzen 2010). The non-volitional behaviour model 
assumes that managerial leadership styles are determined by attitudes towards 
the styles, subjective norms, and perceived behavioural control.  
 
Both of our behavioural models recognise the potential importance of 
background factors. Theoretically, they may influence behavioural, normative, 
and control beliefs. By identifying them, we can deepen our understanding of 
attitudes, subjective norms and perceived behavioural control (Fishbein and 
Ajzen 2010, p. 25).  
 
The theoretical framework in this study has five latent variables, namely, 
managerial leadership styles of deans, attitudes towards the styles, subjective 
norms, perceived behavioural control and background factors. 
 
 
 

82 
Chapter 4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Background factors:
Organizational culture
Management skills
Demographic factors:
Gender
Age
Term of office
Discipline
Attitudes towards the 
managerial leadership 
styles 
Managerial leadership 
styles of deans
Subjective norms
Perceived behavioural 
control 
Flexibility
Control
External 
focus
Internal 
focus
ADHOCRACY 
(Create)
CLAN 
(Collaborate)
MARKET 
(Compete)
HIERARCHY 
(Control)
INNOVATOR
BROKER
PRODUCER
DIRECTOR
COORDINATOR
MONITOR
FACILITATOR
MENTOR
                                                                                                                      VOLITIONAL BEHAVIOURAL MODEL
                                                                                                            NON-VOLITIONAL BEHAVIOURAL MODEL
Note: The dotted red arrows indicate the possible explanations for observed relations between Background factors and 
attitudes, subjective norms and perceived behavioural control. The solid red arrows indicate the direct influence of 
attitudes, subjective norms and perceived behavioural control on a dean managerial leadership style. 
Figure 4.1   The Two Behavioural Models of the Study and the CVF Eight Leadership Roles

Design and Operationalisation of the Study 
83 
1) Managerial leadership styles of deans. For our study, we are interested in 
investigating managerial leadership styles of Indonesian deans. We would like to 
know how frequently deans actually perform a behaviour within their day-to-day 
management and leadership of a faculty in Indonesian universities. For this 
purpose, we measured behaviours of deans in two ways. We used the questions 
from the Managerial Leadership of Competing Values Instruments (Quinn 1988) 
and Management Skills Profile (Cameron and Quinn 2006).  
Deans were asked to indicate how often they perform behaviours that are derived 
from the Managerial Leadership Competing Values Instruments. For the 
behavioural items, we adapted the wording of the behaviour to the context of 
higher education (but the meaning remained the same). For the frequency, we 
used a seven-point Likert scale ranging from (1) ‘never’ to (7)‖ ‘always’. In the 
questionnaire, the items in Table 4.2 were randomly presented. 
Table 4.2 A Classification of Behaviours with respect to the Eight Managerial 
Leadership Roles Based on the CVF 
Q: How often do you as a dean actually…(from (1) ‘never’ to (7) ‘always’) 
Managerial 
leadership role 
Behaviour 
Innovator 
 
Come up with new inventive ideas regarding teaching, research 
and management matters in the faculty; 
 
Experiment with new concepts and procedures; 
 
Solve faculty problems in a creative and unconventional way; 
 
Search for innovations and potential improvements and 
encourage others to generate new ideas; 
Broker 
 
Exert upward influence in the university to influence strategic 
decision making; 
 
Influence decisions made at higher levels in the university; 
 
Approach and consult people at the higher levels of the 
university; 
 
Persuasively sell new ideas to the central management of the 
university; 
Producer 
 
Focus on results and performance of academic staff and foster a 
sense of faculty competitiveness to perform better than others; 
 
See that the faculty delivers on stated goals; 
 
Insist on intense hard work and high productivity and sincerely 
push the academic staff to meet the faculty objectives; 
 
Emphasise‖the‖faculty’s‖achievement of stated purposes; 
Director 
 
Define areas of responsibility for academic staff; 
 
Make sure everyone in the faculty knows where the faculty is 
going in terms of objectives and goals; 
 
Set clear objectives for the faculty and restate and reinforce your 
vision‖of‖the‖faculty’s‖future; 

84 
Chapter 4 
 
Clarify faculty policy priorities and future direction; 
Coordinator 
 
Protect‖continuity‖in‖the‖faculty’s‖day-to-day operations; 
 
Minimise disruptions in daily practices to have an untroubled 
faculty; 
 
Keep a close track of what goes on in the faculty (using control 
and monitoring systems); 
 
Bring a sense of order to the faculty; 
Monitor 
 
Carefully review detailed reports and crosscheck information in 
detail; 
 
Carefully compare records, files and reports to detect 
discrepancies; 
 
Work with technical information; 
 
Analyse written plans and schedules; 
Facilitator 
 
Facilitate‖consensus‖building‖in‖the‖faculty’s‖decision‖making; 
 
Encourage participative decision making in the faculty; 
 
Encourage academic staff members to share ideas with you and 
with others; 
 
Build teamwork among the academic staff members; 
Mentor 
 
Listen to the personal problems of academic staff members and 
make an effort to help them; 
 
Show empathy and concern in dealing with academic staff 
members; 
 
Treat every faculty member in a sensitive and caring way; 
 
Show concern for the needs of academic staff members; 
 
The eight managerial leadership roles, each based on the four items have been 
calculated as follows: 
Equation 4.1 
Managerial Leadership Roles Based on the CVF 
      ∑  
 
 
   
                 
     is the managerial leadership roles. The    represents each managerial leadership role in 
which it consists of four items.  
 
In the questionnaire, deans were also asked to indicate to what extent their 
behaviour is similar to a description of eight leadership roles which stems from 
Management Skills Profile (Cameron and Quinn 2006, p. 128). We slightly 
modified the wording of the descriptions to suit the context of higher education 
(the modified wording did not change the meaning). We used a seven point 
Likert scale ranging from (1)‖ ‘absolutely not similar’ to (7)‖ ‘perfect match’. A 
description of eight managerial leadership roles based on the CVF is presented in 
Table 4.3. 

Design and Operationalisation of the Study 
85 
Table 4.3 A Description of the Eight Managerial Leadership Roles Based on the CVF 
Q: To what extent is the following description similar to the way in which you run your 
faculty in practice? (from (1) ‘absolutely not similar’ to (7) ‘perfect match’) 
Managerial 
leadership role 
Behaviour description 
Innovator 
I am unconventional and creative. I envisage change. My influence is 
based on anticipation of a better future for the faculty and I generate hope 
in the faculty. I actively pursue innovation and adaptation. 
Broker 
I am future-oriented in my thinking. My focus is on where the faculty is 
going and I emphasise possibilities as well as probabilities. I spend a lot 
of time on strategic direction and continuous improvement of faculty 
activities. 
Producer 
I am task-oriented and work-focused. I get things done through hard 
work. My influence is based on intensity and rational arguments around 
accomplishing things. I actively pursue productivity in the faculty. 
Director 
I am aggressive and decisive. I am energised by competitive situations. 
Winning is my dominant objective and I have a focus on external 
competitors‖and‖the‖faculty’s‖market‖position.‖I‖actively‖pursue the goals 
and targets of the faculty. 
Coordinator 
I am dependable and reliable. I maintain structure and the flow of work. 
My influence is based on managing schedules and giving assignments. I 
actively pursue stability and control in the faculty. 
Monitor 
I am a technical expert and well-informed. I keep track of all details and 
contribute expertise. My influence is based on information control. I 
actively pursue documentation and information management systems. 
Facilitator 
I am people- and process-oriented. I manage conflicts and seek consensus. 
My influence is based on getting people involved in strategic decision 
making and problem solving. I actively pursue staff participation and 
openness in faculty decision making. 
Mentor 
I am caring and empathetic. I am aware of the needs of my staff and take 
care of them. My influence is based on mutual respect and trust. I actively 
pursue high staff morale and commitment.  
 
2) Attitudes toward the managerial leadership styles of deans. Theoretically, 
attitudes towards the managerial leadership styles (A) are determined by 
behavioural belief (b) and evaluation of outcome (e). A behavioural belief is the 
subjective probability that the behaviour will produce a given outcome. In 
constructing a questionnaire, Ajzen and Fishbein (1980, p. 71)‖suggest‖that‖‚the‖
statements have to be phrased such that the beliefs correspond to the attitude 
toward the behaviour.‛‖We measured behavioural beliefs of deans by providing a 
question consisting of 16 items which create their attitudes towards the eight 
managerial leadership roles in the CVF.‖ The‖ 16‖ items‖ represented‖ the‖ deans’‖
perceived consequences of the behaviours, which were measured on a seven-
point Likert scale ranging from (1)‖ ‘not important at all’ to (7)‖ ‘extremely 

86 
Chapter 4 
important’. To assess the behavioural beliefs of deans, we calculated the means. 
Table 4.4 below shows a classification of behavioural beliefs with respect to eight 
managerial leadership roles based on the CVF. In the questionnaire, these items 
were randomly presented. 
Table 4.4 A Classification of Behavioural Beliefs with respect to the Eight Managerial 
Leadership Roles Based on the CVF 
Q: In running my faculty, I think that…(from (1) ‘not important at all’ to (7) ‘extremely 
important’) 
Managerial 
leadership role 
Behavioural belief 
Innovator 
 
Creative policy making, having guts and being enterprising 
without fearing the consequences of failure; 
 
On-going encouragement of change and innovation in the 
faculty, for instance by creating sufficient space and time for 
brainstorming; 
Broker 
 
A good policy network inside and outside the university; 
 
Active engagement in formal and informal decision making at 
the central level of the university; 
Producer 
 
Pushing academic staff to achieve ambitious, highly competitive 
faculty goals; 
 
Scanning of and marketing in higher education and research 
markets; 
Director 
 
Having clear and undisputed faculty objectives; 
 
Academic staff members knowing and accepting the strategic 
direction and priorities of the faculty; 
Coordinator 
 
Standardisation of work processes to establish coherence and 
predictability; 
 
Statistics, 
elaborate 
documentation 
and 
management 
information systems; 
Monitor 
 
Formal rules and policies hold the faculty together and taking 
formal rules very seriously and doing things by book; 
 
Detailed monitoring and quality control systems for teaching 
and/or research; 
Facilitator 
 
A strong sense of community, with staff feeling at home and 
sharing objectives; 
 
High staff commitment through consensus-based decision 
making; 
Mentor 
 
Having concern for the personal needs of academic staff 
members; 
 
Explicit attention for the individual staff members of the faculty, 
his or her personal development and competence. 
 
The other determinant of attitudes are evaluations of outcomes. Deans were 
asked to evaluate their behavioural beliefs which led to the outcome (either 

Design and Operationalisation of the Study 
87 
positive‖ or‖ negative).‖ For‖ this,‖ we‖ provided‖ eight‖ items‖ that‖ weight‖ the‖ deans’‖
behavioural beliefs as shown in Table 4.5. These were measured on a seven-point 
Likert scale ranging from (1)‖‘not important at all’ to (7)‖‘extremely important’.  
Table 4.5 A Classification of Evaluation of Outcome with respect to the Eight 
Managerial Leadership Roles Based on the CVF 
Q: In running my faculty, … (from (1) ‘not important at all’ to (7) ‘extremely important’) 
Managerial leadership 
role 
Weight belief 
Innovator 
Promoting change within the faculty. 
Broker 
Developing plans with original, new ideas and concepts. 
Producer 
Stimulating staff productivity (more/better output). 
Director 
Having explicit policy goals that must be met. 
Coordinator 
Being organised in the most efficient way. 
Monitor 
Compliance with rules and procedures. 
Facilitator 
Having high levels of staff participation in strategic decision 
making. 
Mentor 
Contributing to personal development of staff. 
 
The aggregated result of the weighted expected consequences gave us attitudes 
towards a managerial leadership role (embedded in their behaviours) shown in 
this equation:  
Equation 4.2 
Attitudes towards a Managerial Leadership Role Based on the 
CVF 
    ∑  
   
 
   
                 
   is attitude toward a managerial leadership role.    is the behavioural beliefs leading to some 
consequences i.   is the evaluation of outcome j. 
 
3) Subjective norms. Theoretically, subjective norms are determined by 
normative beliefs (n) and motivation to comply (m). A normative belief is the 
perceived behavioural expectations of important referents. In the study, three 
important social referents are considered: academics, fellow deans, and central 
university management. In the questionnaire, deans were asked to assess how 
they feel about what‖others‖think‖about‖a‖dean’s‖behaviour.‖Four normative belief 
items, each of them representing one of the four aspects of the CVF, were 
presented (see Table 4.6). These normative beliefs were measured on a seven-
point Likert scale ranging from (-3)‖‘very negative’ to (+3)‖‘very positive’.  

88 
Chapter 4 
Table 4.6 A Classification of Normative Beliefs with respect to the Four Leadership 
Aspects Based on the CVF 
Q: I think that academics, other deans, central university management like to see… (from (-3) 
‘very negative’ to (+3) ‘very positive’) 
Four leadership 
aspects of the CVF 
Normative belief 
Hierarchy 
Strong coordination and detailed organisation of teaching and 
research from faculty leadership.  
Market 
Faculty leadership that encourages market-driven and results-
oriented behaviour of academics. 
Clan 
Faculty leadership actively creating a sense of collectivity with 
consensual decision making and much personal attention. 
Adhocracy 
Faculty leadership having a clear vision that embraces innovation and 
change. 
 
The other determinant of subjective norms is motivation to comply with the 
important referents. Deans were asked to weight their normative beliefs with 
compliance motivation for the three important referents. For this, we provided 
one item weighting the importance of their perceived referents. Deans’‖
compliance was measured on a seven-point Likert scale ranging from (1)‖ ‘not 
important at all’ to (7)‖‘extremely important’ (see Table 4.7).  
Table 4.7 
A Classification of Motivation to Comply with Important Referents 
Q: To what extent are the views and opinions of… (from (1) ‘not important at all’ to (7) 
‘extremely important’) 
The academics of your faculty important to you for the way in which you run your faculty? 
The other deans of your faculty important to you for the way in which you run your faculty? 
The central management of your faculty important to you for the way in which you run your 
faculty? 
 
The aggregated result of the weighted expected opinions of important referents 
led us to subjective norms as shown in this equation:  
Equation 4.3 
Subjective Norms with respect to the Four Leadership Aspects 
Based on the CVF 
     ∑  
 
   
                   
    is the (perceived) subjective norm.    is the normative belief that referent j thinks one should 
or should not engage in the behaviour.    is the motivation to comply with referent i. 
 

Design and Operationalisation of the Study 
89 
4) Perceived behavioural control. We carried out a follow-up questionnaire 
which was distributed to the 218 participating deans. This one-page questionnaire 
(see Appendix A2) focused on‖ the‖ deans’‖ views‖ on‖ the‖ perceived presence of 
factors that may facilitate or impede the performance of their leadership style (see 
Chapter 2, section 2.2). The deans were asked to evaluate 11 items which listed 
some constraints that they might face in managing and leading the faculty. The 
items were measured on a six-point Likert scale ranging from (1)‖‘not at all’ to (6) 
‘very high extent’.  
 
For the calculation, these 11 items of control beliefs were reverse coded. For 
example, the‖ deans‖ were‖ asked‖ ‘within your day to day work as a dean, your 
faculty’s‖ information‖ systems‖ are‖ not‖ well‖ developed’.‖ On‖ the‖ questionnaire,‖
when the deans answered (1)‖‘not at all’,‖this‖meant‖that‖the‖faculty’s‖information‖
systems were well developed, therefore, we recoded the‖ deans’‖ answer‖ to‖ (6) 
‘very high extent’.7  
 
Then, we carried out a factor analysis which revealed three distinct dimensions of 
control beliefs (see Appendix B, Table 1 for the results). We name them 
environmental controls, internal controls, and practical controls. The three 
perceived‖controls‖have‖relatively‖good‖Cronbach’s‖Alpha‖values,‖ranging‖from‖
0.70 to 0.80 in a respective order. This suggests that the consistency of the items in 
each control are reliable (Nunnally 1978). A classification of perceived 
behavioural control is presented in Table 4.8.  
Table 4.8 A Classification of Perceived Behavioural Control 
Q: Within my day to day work as a dean, I face the following issues… (from (1) ‘not at all’ to 
(6) ‘very high extent’) 
Perceived behavioural 
control (Cronbach’s‖
Alpha) 
Item 
Environmental controls 
(0.7) 
 
Faculty’s‖information‖systems‖are‖not‖well‖developed.‖ 
 
Academic values in my faculty are very strong and are 
obstructing change. 
 
There are limited possibilities for me as a dean to make 
strategic decision at higher management levels. 
 
My 
administrative 
support 
staff 
has 
insufficient 
capacity. 
 
Support and resources from central management are 
sufficient. 
                                                           
7 For question numbers 1 to 10, a reverse coded score was applied: from (1)‖‘not at all’ to (6) 
‘very high extent’. For question number 11, the given answers already represented the 
correct score. 

90 
Chapter 4 
Internal controls (0.7) 
 
The faculty culture is at odds with my values and views 
of how to run a faculty. 
 
I do not possess all the skills it takes. 
 
Authorities 
within 
the 
faculty 
are 
unclear 
and 
fragmented. 
 
Commitment and engagement of the faculty academics 
is low in the sense that they primarily focus on 
disciplinary rather than faculty matters. 
Practical controls (0.8) 
 
Of the size and complexity of my faculty. 
 
My workload is too high. 
 
The equation for the factor analysis of perceived behavioural control is shown in 
equation 4.4: 
Equation 4.4 
Factor Analysis of Perceived Behavioural Control  
                              
                
     is the perceived behavioural control referring to the number of factorial dimension 
generated. F is the factorial dimension for     .  
 
5) Background factors. The background factors may or may not influence the 
attitudes, subjective norms, and perceived behavioural control. They consist of 
organisational culture, management skills, and demographic factors. We will start 
explaining organisational culture (referring to faculty culture) in the study.  
 
Faculty culture: To assess the faculty culture, deans were given a list of questions 
relating 
to 
the 
faculty’s‖
dominant 
characteristics, 
organisational 
glue, 
organisational leadership, management of employees, strategic emphasis, and 
success criteria. They were asked to indicate to what extent these six items 
reflected their own faculty culture. Each item had four questions. These questions 
were derived directly from the Organisational Culture Assessment Instrument 
(OCAI) (Cameron and Quinn 2006, pp. 26-28). The OCAI is based on the CVF, so 
each aspect of faculty culture fits into each aspect of the CVF. We slightly 
modified the wording of the items for the context of our study (the meaning 
remains unchanged). The OCAI items were measured on a seven-point Likert 
scale ranging from (1)‖‘absolutely not’ to (7)‖‘completely’. In the questionnaire, the 
items with respect to the four aspects of faculty culture were randomly presented. 
Table 4.9 below shows a classification of the four aspects of faculty culture based 
on the CVF.  
 

Design and Operationalisation of the Study 
91 
Table 4.9 A Classification of the Four Aspects of Faculty Culture Based on the CVF 
Q: To what extent do these statements match with your faculty? (from (1) ‘absolutely not’ to 
(7) ‘completely’) 
Four aspects of 
faculty culture 
Items 
Clan 
 
My faculty is a very personal place. It is like an extended family. 
Academic staff seems to share a lot of themselves. 
 
The organisational glue that holds my faculty together is loyalty 
and mutual trust. Commitment to the faculty runs high. 
 
The leadership and management in my faculty are in general 
considered to emphasise mentoring, facilitating or nurturing. 
 
The management style in my faculty is in general characterised by 
teamwork, consensus and participation. 
 
My faculty emphasises human development. High levels of trust, 
openness and participation exist. 
 
Success in my faculty is defined on the basis of the development 
of human resources, teamwork, employee commitment and 
concern for people. 
Adhocracy 
 
My faculty is a very dynamic and entrepreneurial place. Academic 
staff are willing to stick their necks out and take risks. 
 
The organisational glue that holds my faculty together is 
commitment to innovation and development. There is an 
emphasis on being on the cutting edge. 
 
The leadership and management in my faculty are in general 
considered to emphasise entrepreneurship, innovation or risk-
taking. 
 
The management style in my faculty is in general characterised by 
individual risk-taking, innovation, freedom and uniqueness. 
 
My faculty emphasises acquiring new resources and creating new 
challenges. Trying new things and prospecting for opportunities 
are valued. 
 
Success is in my faculty is defined on the basis of having the most 
unique or newest products. It is a product leader and innovator. 
Market 
 
My faculty is very results-oriented. A major concern is getting the 
job done. Academic staff are very competitive and achievement-
oriented. 
 
The organisational glue that holds my faculty together is emphasis 
on achievement and goal accomplishment. 
 
The leadership and management in my faculty are in general 
considered to emphasise a no-nonsense, aggressive, results-
oriented focus. 
 
The management style in my faculty is in general characterised by 
hard-driving competitiveness, high demands and achievement. 
 
My faculty emphasises competitive actions and achievement. 
Hitting stretching targets and winning in the market place are 
dominant. 
 
Success in my faculty is defined on the basis of winning in the 

92 
Chapter 4 
market place and outpacing the competition. Competitive market 
leadership is most important.  
Hierarchy 
 
My faculty is a very control-oriented and structured place. Formal 
procedures generally govern what academic staff do. 
 
The organisational glue that holds my faculty together is formal 
rules and policies. Maintaining a smooth-running faculty is 
important. 
 
The leadership and management in my faculty are in general 
considered to emphasise coordinating, organising or smooth-
running efficiency. 
 
The management style in my faculty is in general characterised by 
security of employment, conformity, predictability and stability in 
relationships. 
 
My faculty emphasises performance (permanence) and stability. 
Efficiency, control and smooth operations are important. 
 
Success in my faculty is defined on the basis of efficiency. 
Dependable delivery, smooth scheduling and low-cost production 
are critical. 
 
To measure the four aspects of faculty culture, each culture is calculated as 
follows:  
Equation 4.5 
Faculty Culture  
     ∑  
 
 
   
                 
    is the faculty culture.    is the six items for each dimension of the faculty culture. 
 
Management skills: To assess management skills, a list of 12 management skills 
was composed, derived from the 12 competency categories (Cameron and Quinn 
2006, pp. 120-121). The deans were asked to indicate how important each of the 
management skills are to succeeding in their current position as a dean. These 12 
competency items fit into the four aspects of the CVF; three categories fall in each 
aspect (see Table 4.10). We slightly modified the wording to fit the context of our 
study (the meaning did not change). The 12 management skills were measured on 
a seven-point Likert scale ranging from (1)‖‘not important at all’ to (7)‖‘critically 
important’. Table 4.10 shows a classification of the four aspects of management 
skills based on the CVF. 
 
 

Design and Operationalisation of the Study 
93 
Table 4.10 A Classification of the Four Aspects of Management Skills Based on the CVF 
Q: In order to succeed in your current position as a dean, how important is each of the 
following skills? (from (1) ‘not important at all’ to (7) ‘critically important’) 
Four aspects of 
management skills  
Item 
Clan 
 
Managing teams in the faculty (building effective, cohesive, 
smooth-functioning teams); 
 
Managing interpersonal relationships in the faculty (listening to 
and providing supportive feedback to others); 
 
Managing the development of human capital in the faculty 
(helping others improve their performance and obtain personal 
development opportunities); 
Adhocracy 
 
Fostering innovation in the faculty (encouraging others to 
innovate and to generate new ideas); 
 
Managing‖the‖faculty’s‖future‖(communicating‖a‖clear‖vision‖of‖
the future and facilitating its accomplishment); 
 
Managing improvement and change in the faculty (fostering an 
orientation toward continuous improvement among academic 
staff members in everything they do); 
Market 
 
Managing competitiveness of the faculty (fostering an 
orientation toward beating the competition); 
 
Managing results of the faculty (motivating and energising 
others to put in extra effort and to outperform the competition); 
 
Managing customer service (fostering a focus on service and 
involvement with students and industry); 
Hierarchy 
 
Managing information clarity in the faculty (helping others 
become clear about expectations, goals and policies and their 
place in the faculty); 
 
Managing‖ the‖ faculty’s‖ control‖ system‖ (having‖ measurement‖
and monitoring systems in place to keep close track of 
processes and performance); 
 
Managing coordination (sharing information across functional 
boundaries and fostering coordination with other faculty units). 
 
 
 

94 
Chapter 4 
In order to measure the four aspects of management skills, each aspect is 
calculated as follows:  
Equation 4.6 
Management Skills 
     ∑  
                 
 
   
 
    is the management skills.    is the three items for each dimension of management skills. 
 
Demographic factors: Finally, deans were asked to fill out demographic information 
covering personal (e.g. gender, age, term-of-office, and academic discipline) and 
institutional background (size of faculty and university in terms of students and 
staff). For the analysis, we took gender, age, term-of-office, and academic 
discipline that may or may not influence attitudes, subjective norms, and 
perceived behavioural control (see Chapter 2). We decided to classify the faculties 
into two categories: technical and non-technical faculty. Technical faculty groups 
are Agriculture, Engineering, Sciences and Marine Sciences. Non-technical faculty 
groups are Education, Health and Welfare, Humanities and Arts, Social Sciences, 
Business and Economics and Law. The complete questionnaire can be found in 
Appendix A1 and A2.  
4.4 
DATA ANALYSIS 
We conducted a quantitative data analysis, with the four steps presented in 
Figure 4.2. In the first step, we investigate and explore the managerial leadership 
styles of deans. From the second to the fourth steps, we examine the path 
relationship of the models of the study. In the second step, we examine the 
volitional behavioural model of the study, that is, the influence of attitudes and 
subjective norms on the managerial leadership styles of deans. In the third step, 
we examine the non-volitional behavioural model of the study, that is, the 
influence of attitudes, subjective norms, and perceived behavioural control on the 
managerial leadership styles of deans. In the final step, we examine the influence 
of background factors on attitudes, subjective norms, and perceived behavioural 
control. Each step taken is described and explained in the following paragraphs. 
 

Design and Operationalisation of the Study 
95 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Background factors:
Faculty culture
Management skills
Demographic factors:
Gender
Age
Term of office
Academic discipline
Attitudes towards the 
managerial leadership 
styles
Managerial leadership styles 
of deans
Subjective norms
                              
                              Step 2                                
Perceived behavioural 
control 
                                                                                        Step 3
Flexibility
Control
External 
focus
Internal 
focus
ADHOCRACY 
(Create)
CLAN 
(Collaborate)
MARKET 
(Compete)
HIERARCHY 
(Control)
INNOVATOR
BROKER
PRODUCER
DIRECTOR
COORDINATOR
MONITOR
FACILITATOR
MENTOR
Step 4
Step 1
Note: The dotted red arrows indicate the possible explanations for observed relations between background factors and attitudes, subjective 
norms and perceived behavioural control. The solid red arrows indicate the direct influence of attitudes, subjective norms and perceived 
behavioural control on  managerial leadership styles of deans.
Figure 4.2     Four-step Analyses of the Research Model 
 

96 
Chapter 4 
First step analysis: Managerial leadership styles of deans 
To investigate and describe the managerial leadership styles of Indonesian deans, 
we used the 3-1 concept of assessment based on the CVF: behaviours—roles—
styles (see Chapter 3). In this part of the analysis, descriptive statistics (e.g. means, 
standard deviations, frequencies, and‖ Cronbach’s‖ Alphas) are mainly used to 
measure‖the‖deans’‖behaviours‖and‖their‖roles. Then, a cluster analysis is used to 
classify and identify Indonesian deans who have similar patterns of managerial 
leadership style based on the eight roles from the CVF. The steps taken are 
presented in the box below. 
Box 4.1 The Steps to Investigating Specific Managerial Leadership Styles of Deans 
1) 
For each respondent the sum of the scores on the 32 behaviour items were 
calculated (leading in principle to scores ranging from a minimum of 32 to a 
maximum of 224). 
2) 
For each of the eight managerial leadership roles the total scores per 
respondent were calculated (leading in principle to scores ranging from a 
minimum of 4 to a maximum of 28). 
3) 
Next, for each respondent the relative importance of each managerial 
leadership role was calculated (the managerial leadership role as a percentage of 
the total sum score). 
4) 
To prepare for a two-step cluster analysis, the eight managerial 
leadership roles were categorised in a dummy variable, indicating whether a 
managerial leadership role was‖more‖(‘value‖1’)‖or‖less‖(‘value‖0’)‖important‖in‖the‖
dean’s‖managerial leadership style‖(‘configuration’).‖If‖all‖eight‖roles‖were equally 
important, each of them would represent 12.5% of the‖ dean’s‖ managerial 
leadership style. A managerial leadership role measuring equal to or more than 
12.5%‖ means‖ that‖ this‖ role‖ is‖ relatively‖ important‖ in‖ a‖ dean’s‖ managerial 
leadership style; the opposite is true for percentages below 12.5%. 
5) 
A two-step cluster analysis was executed, using the dummy variables, to 
determine a limited number of managerial leadership styles and for each dean a 
cluster membership was determined. 
 
 
 

Design and Operationalisation of the Study 
97 
Second step analysis: Volitional behaviour: Influence of attitudes and subjective 
norms on the managerial leadership styles of deans 
The theory suggests that individuals will perform a behaviour of interest when 
they evaluate it positively (attitudinal considerations) and when they believe that 
important others think they should perform it (normative considerations). Table 
4.11 presents the variables used in the analysis. 
Table 4.11 The Variables in the Second Step Analysis 
Latent variable 
Manifest (reflective) variables 
Number of 
indicators 
Measurement scale  
(Likert scale) 
STEP 2: Volitional behaviour 
Dependent 
variable 
 
 
 
Managerial 
leadership style of 
deans (MLSD) 
R_Innovator, R_Broker, 
R_Producer, R_Director, 
R_Coordinator, R_Monitor, 
R_Facilitator, and R_ Mentor 
8 indicators 
Never (1) to always 
(7) 
Independent 
variables 
 
 
 
Attitude (A) 
A_Innovator, A_Broker, 
A_Producer, A_Director, 
A_Coordinator, A_Monitor, 
A_Facilitator, and A_ Mentor 
8 indicators 
Not important at all 
(1) to extremely 
important (7) 
Subjective norm 
(SN) 
SN_ Adhocracy, SN_Market, 
SN_Hierarchy, and SN_Clan 
4 indicators 
Very negative (-3) to 
very positive (+3) 
 
To examine the influence of attitudes and subjective norms on the managerial 
leadership styles, a multiple linear regression method is used (equation 4.7).  
Equation 4.7 
A Model for Explaining the Influence of Attitude and Subjective 
Norm on the Managerial Leadership Styles of Deans  
           ̅  ̅      
̅̅̅̅   
̅̅̅̅     
 
Where MLSD is the managerial leadership style of deans as the dependent variable.  ̅ is the 
mean of the attitude and   
̅̅̅̅ is the mean of subjective norm; both serve as independent variables. 
  is the regression coefficient and   is the residual. 
 
The theory also suggests that the more favourable the attitudes towards a 
behaviour and the more positive the subjective norms, the more likely people will 
engage in the behaviour. In line with this assumption, we conducted a further 
investigation. That is, which dimensions of attitude and which dimensions of 

98 
Chapter 4 
subjective norm influence the managerial leadership styles of deans? To examine 
this, a multiple regression method is used to investigate whether a managerial 
leadership style is influenced by the favourable dimensions of attitude towards 
this style and/ or the favourable dimensions of subjective norm for this style. The 
model for explaining the relationships of these variables is shown in equation 4.8.  
Equation 4.8 
A model for Explaining the Zoom-in Analysis of the Styles from 
Attitude and/or Subjective Norm 
         ∑
      ∑
     
  
  
  
  
   ,  
k represents innovator, broker, producer, director, coordinator, monitor, facilitator, and mentor.  
l represents adhocracy, firm, hierarchy, and clan. 
 
Where MLSD is the managerial leadership style of deans as dependent variable.    and     are 
the attitude (referring to k) and the subjective norm (referring to l); both serve as independent 
variables.   ,    are the corresponding regression coefficients.  is the residual. 
Third step analysis: Non-volitional behaviour: Influence of attitudes, subjective 
norms, and perceived behavioural control on the managerial leadership styles of deans 
The theory assumes that once attitudes, subjective norms, and perceived 
behavioural control have been formed, they are directly accessible to explain the 
behaviour of interest. Table 4.12 presents the variables used in the analysis. 
Table 4.12 The Variables in the Third Step Analysis 
Latent variable 
Manifest (reflective) variables 
Number of 
indicators 
Measurement scale  
(Likert scale) 
STEP 3: Non-volitional behaviour 
Dependent 
variable 
 
 
 
Managerial 
leadership style of 
deans (MLSD) 
R_Innovator, R_Broker, 
R_Producer, R_Director, 
R_Coordinator, R_Monitor, 
R_Facilitator, and R_ Mentor 
8 indicators 
Never (1) to always 
(7) 
Independent 
variables 
 
 
 
Attitude (A) 
A_Innovator, A_Broker, 
A_Producer, A_Director, 
A_Coordinator, A_Monitor, 
A_Facilitator, and A_ Mentor 
8 indicators 
Not important at all 
(1) to extremely 
important (7) 
Subjective norm 
(SN) 
SN_ Adhocracy, SN_Market, 
SN_Hierarchy, and SN_Clan 
4 indicators 
Very negative (-3) to 
very positive (+3) 

Design and Operationalisation of the Study 
99 
Environmental 
control (EC) 
 
5 indicators 
Not at all (1) to very 
high extent (6) 
Internal control 
(IC) 
 
4 indicators 
Idem 
Practical control 
(PC) 
 
2 indicators 
Idem 
 
To examine this, a multiple regression method is used as shown in equation 4.9. 
Equation 4.9 
A Model for Explaining the Influence of Attitude, Subjective 
norm, and Perceived Behavioural Control on the Managerial 
Leadership Styles of Deans 
             ̅        
̅̅̅̅        
̅̅̅̅        ̅       
̅̅̅̅    
 
Where      is the managerial leadership style of deans (endogenous) construct variable ( ).  ̅ 
is the mean attitude and   
̅̅̅̅ is the mean subjective norm in which both of them are exogenous 
(independent) variables   . and    .   
̅̅̅̅ is the mean environmental control,   ̅  is the mean 
internal control, and   
̅̅̅̅ is the mean practical control in which they are exogenous variables    , 
   , and    .   is the constant,  β1,‖…,‖β5 denote the regression coefficients and   denotes the 
residual. 
 
Fourth step analysis: Influence of the background factors on attitudes, subjective 
norms, and perceived behavioural control 
Our theories acknowledge the potential importance of relevant background 
factors that may or may not influence the three determinants of behaviour under 
investigation. We have examined the relationship of these background factors to 
attitudes, subjective norms, and perceived behavioural control. A bivariate and 
multiple regression method are used. Table 4.13 presents the variables used in the 
analysis. 
Table 4.13 The Variables in the Fourth Step Analysis 
Latent variable 
Manifest (reflective) variables 
Number of 
indicators 
Measurement scale  
(Likert scale) 
STEP 4 
Dependent 
variables 
 
 
 
Attitude (A) 
A_Innovator, A_Broker, 
A_Producer, A_Director, 
A_Coordinator, A_Monitor, 
A_Facilitator, and A_ Mentor 
8 indicators 
Not important at all 
(1) to extremely 
important (7) 

100 
Chapter 4 
Subjective norm 
(SN) 
SN_ Adhocracy, SN_Market, 
SN_Hierarchy, and SN_Clan 
4 indicators 
Very negative (-3) to 
very positive (+3) 
Environmental 
control (EC) 
 
5 indicators 
Not at all (1) to very 
high extent (6) 
Internal control 
(IC) 
 
4 indicators 
Idem 
Practical control 
(PC) 
 
2 indicators 
Idem 
Independent 
variables 
 
 
 
Faculty culture 
(FC) 
FC_Adhocrachy, FC_Market, 
FC_Hierarchy, and FC_Clan 
4 indicators 
Absolutely not (1) to 
completely (7) 
Management skill 
(MS) 
MS_Adhocrachy, MS_Market, 
MS_Hierarchy, and MS_Clan 
4 indicators 
Not important at all 
(1) to extremely 
important (7) 
Gender 
 
1 indicator 
 
Age 
 
1 indicator 
 
Term-of-office 
 
1 indicator 
 
Academic 
discipline 
 
1 indicator 
 
 
We conducted a regression analysis for each determinant with regard to the six 
background factors in our model as shown in equation 4.10.  
Equation 4.10 
A Model for Explaining the Influence of Background Factors on 
Deans’‖ Attitude, Subjective Norm, and Perceived Behavioural 
Control 
Predictor  
Equation 
Faculty culture 
(FC) 
                                                              
                     
 
Where Yn is the dependent variable (referring to the attitude, subjective 
norm, environmental control, internal control and practical control). FC 
refers to the faculty culture consisting of four types of culture: clan, 
adhocracy, market, and hierarchy for Yn.‖ βnFCClan,‖ …,‖ βnFCHie are the 
corresponding regression coefficients and      is the corresponding 
residual. 
 
Management 
skills (MS) 
                                                               
                    
 
Where Yn is the dependent variable (referring to the attitude, subjective 
norm, environmental control, internal control and practical control). MS 
refers to the management skills consisting of four skills: clan, adhocracy, 
market, and hierarchy for Yn.‖ βnMSClan,‖ …,‖ βnMSHie are the corresponding 
regression coefficients and      is the corresponding residual. 

Design and Operationalisation of the Study 
101 
Gender, Age, 
Term-of-Office, 
Academic 
discipline (X) 
                    , for X represents gender, age, term of office or 
academic discipline. 
Where Yn is the dependent variable (referring to the attitude, subjective 
norm, environmental control, internal control and practical control).   is the 
explanatory variable for Yn.     is the corresponding regression coefficient 
and the    is the corresponding residual.  
4.5 
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 
The study makes use of three types of research design: descriptive, exploratory, 
and explanatory. Through surveys, in the form of self-reporting questionnaires, 
we collected data. The data obtained reflects the subjective self-reported 
behaviour of deans in their day-to-day management activity. Although self-
reporting has its limitations, we assume that, in our study, these limitations are 
kept within reasonable bounds. Pragmatic reasons, such as resources available, 
prevented a more sophisticated approach (such as extending the study to peer 
assessments). 
 
For the surveys, it was difficult to define the targeted population as there was no 
information on the numbers of deans in Indonesia. However, based on the 120 
accredited universities provided online by the Indonesian Directorate General of 
Higher Education, 960 deans were estimated as the population of deans for the 
study. Through stratified and simple random samples, a total of 443 deans were 
selected to be the sample for the study. A total of 218 completed questionnaires 
was obtained, representing 49% of the research sample (443 deans) and 23% of the 
research population (960 deans). For the follow-up survey which was sent to all 
respondents to the first survey, addressing perceived behavioural control, a total 
of 75 questionnaires were completed. This is 34% of the follow-up sample. Based 
on the statistical analysis of the dispersion of sample for the study, the results 
suggest that we have a representative sample of regions.  
 
Regarding the operationalisation of our research, the main theoretical constructs 
derived from the volitional behavioural model and non-volitional behavioural 
model of Fishbein and Ajzen and the competing values framework of Quinn have 
been addressed. As a summary, Table 4.14 depicts the model constructs and how 
they were assessed in the study. 
 
 

102 
Chapter 4 
Table 4.14 A Summary of the Model Constructs and their Assessments 
Variable 
Question item 
Response 
format (Likert-
scale) 
Equation 
Construct 
measured 
Managerial 
leadership style 
of deans (MLSD) 
32 items (adapted 
from Competing 
Values 
Instrument) 
Never (1) to 
always (7) 
    
  ∑  
 
 
   
       
          
The eight 
managerial 
leadership roles 
based on the CVF. 
8 items of 
leadership 
descriptions 
(adapted from 
management 
skills profile) 
Absolutely not 
similar (1) to 
perfect match (7) 
 
The description of 
eight leadership 
roles based on the 
CVF. 
Attitude 
towards a 
managerial 
leadership style 
of deans (A) 
16 items of 
behavioural 
beliefs 
8 items of 
evaluation of 
outcome 
Not important 
at all (1) to 
extremely 
important (7) 
    ∑  
   
 
   
   
               
Attitude towards 
the eight 
managerial roles 
based on the CVF. 
Subjective norm 
(SN) 
4 items of 
normative beliefs 
for each relevant 
referents 
Very negative  
(-3) to very 
positive (+3) 
    ∑  
 
   
     
               
Subjective norm 
for the four 
aspects of faculty 
leadership based 
on the CVF. 
3 items of 
motivation to 
comply 
Not important 
at all (1) to 
extremely 
important (7) 
Perceived 
behavioural 
control (PBC) 
11 items of control 
beliefs 
Not at all (1) to 
very high extent 
(6) 
    
              
            
                
 
The three 
dimensions of 
PBC: the 
environmental, 
internal, and 
practical controls. 
Faculty culture 
(FC) 
6 items for each 
faculty culture 
Absolutely not 
(1) to 
completely(7) 
     ∑  
 
 
   
       
          
The four aspects 
of faculty culture: 
clan, adhocracy, 
market, and 
hierarchy. 
Management 
skills (MS) 
 
3 items of skills 
for each model in 
an organisation 
Not important 
at all (1) to 
critically 
important (7) 
   
  ∑  
        
 
   
          
The four aspects 
of management 
skills: clan, 
adhocracy, 
market, and 
hierarchy. 
 
 
 

Design and Operationalisation of the Study 
103 
Figure 4.3 shows a representation of the data analyses of the study. Chapter Six 
will contain an explorative and descriptive analysis of the managerial leadership 
styles of deans at Indonesian universities. Chapter Seven will provide a detailed 
description of attitudes, subjective norms, perceived behavioural control, and 
background factors. The final empirical chapter, Chapter Eight, will deepen our 
understanding of the managerial leadership styles of deans. In this chapter, the 
explanatory path of the volitional and non-volitional behavioural models will be 
investigated. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.3 An Outline Representation of the Data Analyses for This Study 
Data Analyses
Explorative & Descriptive 
Analysis
Chapter 6: The Managerial 
Leadership Styles of Deans at 
Indonesian Universities
Descriptive Analysis
Chapter 7: Descriptive Analysis of 
Attitudes, Subjective Norms, 
Perceived Behavioural Control, 
and Background Factors
Step 1: Exploration of managerial 
leadership styles.
 
Descriptive statistics (means, 
standard deviations, 
frequencies, and‖Cronbach’s‖‖
alphas): to describe the 
deans’‖behaviours, and their 
managerial leadership roles 
 
Cluster analysis: to identify 
the similar patterns of 
managerial leadership styles 
performed by deans.
 
Descriptive statistics (means, 
standard deviations, 
frequencies, and‖Cronbach’s‖‖
alphas): to describe each 
construct in the model.
Explanatory Analysis
Chapter 8: Understanding the  
Managerial Leadership Styles of 
Deans
Correlation analysis, Bivariate, and 
Multiple regression for
 
Step 2: Influences of attitudes 
and subjective norms on the 
managerial leadership styles of 
deans.
 
Step 3: Influences of attitudes, 
subjective norms, and 
perceived behavioural control 
on the managerial leadership 
styles of deans.
 
Step 4: Influences of 
background factors on the 
attitudes, subjective norms, 
and perceived behavioural 
control of deans.

104 
 
 

5 
C H A P T E R
 
Indonesian Higher Education 
“Ing ngarso sung tulodo, ing madyo mangun karso, tut wuri handayani.”8 
Ki Hadjar Dewantara (1889-1959),  
the first Indonesian minister of education and culture . 
This chapter aims to set the context of the study and to provide information about 
the Indonesian higher education system. In this chapter, a short introduction to 
Indonesia and a description of the Indonesian higher education system are given. 
Next, the reforms of the Indonesian higher education system are outlined, which 
provide the context of this study. This is followed by a description of the internal 
governance of Indonesian universities. Deanship, in the current context of a new 
university governance, is then discussed as the key focus of this study. 
                                                           
8 Translation: in Indonesian: Di depan memberi contoh, di tengah memberi semangat, di 
belakang memberi dorongan. In English: We are leading by example, by encouragement, 
and by support. In Dutch: Leidinggeven door het geven van het goede voorbeeld, 
aanmoediging en ondersteuning. 

 
Chapter 5 
106
5.1 
A SHORT INTRODUCTION TO INDONESIA 
The name Indonesia originates from the Latin word for India (Indus) and the Greek 
word for Island (Nesos). Immediately after World War II, on the 17th August of 
1945, independence was proclaimed, marking the beginning of the end of Dutch 
colonial rule in Indonesia. The Republic of Indonesia is the largest archipelago in 
the world (more than 17,000 islands) and is the fourth most populous country in 
the world (about 248 million inhabits in 2011, Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), 
Online). This population comprises about 3,000 ethnic groups, of which Javanese is 
the largest (41%). It has the world’s largest Muslim population (Muslim 86%). In 
terms of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) per capita, Indonesia falls between low-
income and lower-middle-income countries (rank 154 with US$ 4,700 in 2011, CIA, 
Online). The main sectors are industry (46%), services (39%), and agriculture (15%). 
Its main export commodities are oil and gas, electrical appliances, plywood, 
textiles, and rubber.  
 
Since its first constitution in 1945, the Republic has had a centralised governance 
structure (unitary state) trying to unify the many ethnic, religious and cultural 
backgrounds. The highest political institution in the country is the elected People’s 
Consultative Assembly [Majelis Permusyawaratan Rakyat (MPR)] that decides on 
guidelines of state policies, promulgates the constitution and until 2004 appointed 
the President and the Vice-President. The President—head of state and head of 
government—is the executive and is accountable to the MPR. Since 2004, the 
President and Vice-President have been directly elected. Traditionally, power has 
been concentrated in the hands of the President, although recent changes are 
leading to a greater role for the legislature. Other important bodies are the 
Supreme Advisory Council (advising the President), the State Audit Board 
(exercising financial oversight), and the Supreme Court.  
 
The national education system is divided into four levels of education: pre-school, 
basic education, secondary education, and higher education. Pre-school education 
is intended to stimulate the physical and mental growth of pupils outside of the 
family circle before entering primary education. Basic education is a general 
education lasting nine years. It consists of six years of primary school and three 
years of junior secondary school. Secondary education is available to graduates 
from basic education. It aims (1) to increase students’ knowledge to continue their 
studies to higher levels of education; (2) to develop them in line with the 
development of science, technology and arts; and (3) to expand their ability as 
members of the community to interact and mingle with their social, cultural, and 
natural environment. The types of secondary education include general secondary 
school, vocational secondary school, and religious secondary school. In 2005, the 

Indonesian Higher Education 
107 
net enrolment rate at senior secondary level was ‚41.6%‛ (World Bank education 
sector review 2005 cited in Del Granado et al. 2007, Table 1, p. 2). Higher 
education, an extension of secondary education, consists of academic and 
professional education. In 2007, the gross enrolment rate for tertiary education was 
17% [Directorate General of Higher Education (DGHE) 2008].  
 
Law no. 20, 2003 on the National Education System states that the government 
should allocate a minimum of 20% of its state budget to education (excluding 
salary of educators). The majority of the allocated public education expenditure 
goes to the nine-year compulsory basic education. Based on Figures for 2009, about 
40% of the educational budget is still for basic education and about 30% of the 
educational budget goes to higher education (DGHE 2009). For tertiary educational 
budget, this is a significant increase since 2005, when it was 12% (Del Granado et 
al. 2007, p. 7). 
5.2 
THE INDONESIAN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEM 
Higher education in Indonesia has a relatively short history. It started in the end of 
the 19th century when a medical school (Dokter Java School) was established for 
indigenous doctors. At that time, the number of students was around 200 (Nizam, 
n.d.). Before WW II, a number of post-secondary schools were founded, with the 
main purpose of training skilled personnel and professional manpower for the 
support of the Dutch colonial administration and the development of business 
enterprises in the Netherlands East Indies (Buchori and Malik 2004). STOVIA 
(School tot Opleiding van Inlandsche Artsen—medical school), established in 1902, 
is regarded as the first higher education institution founded by the Dutch colonial 
government (with teaching in Dutch). In the following years, more medical schools 
were established at different locations. Institutions in other disciplines 
(engineering, agriculture, and law) were also established (see for instance Singgih 
Tri Sulistiyono 2007). In the first half of the 20th century, the number of students 
grew slowly. Between 1920 and 1941, there were no more than seven hundred 
indigenous students, the majority of students were Dutch and the others were 
European.  
 
After proclaiming independence from colonial rule, the number of Higher 
Education Institutions (HEIs) and students started to grow. This expansion started 
directly after WW II. ‚By 1950, there were 10 institutions of higher learning, with a 
total of some 6,500 students‛ (Azra 2008, p. 142). By the 1960s, each Indonesian 
province had at least one public university. ‚No less than 23 new universities, 
institutes, and teacher training colleges were established during that period, which 

 
Chapter 5 
108
more or less covered the 26 provinces of Indonesia‛ (Nizam 2006, p. 36). By the 
1970s, there were 450 HEIs and about 237,000 students. In the next three decades, 
the higher education system experienced rapid growth. By 1990, there were 900 
HEIs with nearly 1,5 million students (Azra 2008) and by 2007 there were nearly 
2,700 higher education institutions with 4.3 million students, accounting for 
approximately 17% of the core age group (19-24 years) (Jalal 2010).  
 
The mission of the HEIs encompasses learning, research, and community services 
(Tri Dharma Perguruan Tinggi). As Table 5.1 shows, nearly all HEIs are private 
(97%). This bias towards private institutions grew because ‚the state budget was 
manifestly insufficient to respond to spiralling demand, across Indonesia’s 
scattered archipelago‛ (Welch 2007, p. 671). The Government initiated ‚the Laws of 
the 1950s and early 1960s that gave legal expression to private higher education‛ 
(Welch 2007, p. 671) in order to ‚accommodate the increasing demand for higher 
education‛ (Verheul 2002, p. 189). Since the 1970s, the number of private 
institutions has grown spectacularly, from less than 400 in 1975 and 1,449 in 1999 
(Welch 2007) to 2,598 now (National Education Statistics 2007/2008, MoNE 2007). 
 
Of the 4.3 million students enrolled in higher education, approximately a third 
study at public institutions. There is not a significant gender gap in tertiary 
education as the number of female and male students is almost equal (Wicaksono 
and Friawan 2008). 
Table 5.1 
Numbers of Indonesian Higher Education Institutions in 2007/2008 
Types 
Public 
Private 
University 
48 
375 
Institute 
6 
37 
College 
2 
1,186 
Academy 
0 
884 
Polytechnic 
26 
116 
Total 
82 
2,598 
Source: National Education Statistics 2007/2008, MoNE 2007 
The higher education system comprises universities, institutes, colleges, 
polytechnics, and academies (see Table 5.1). Universities are regarded as the 
highest level and consist of faculties conducting academic and professional 
education in technology and the arts. An institute consists of faculties conducting 
academic and professional education in professional disciplines. A college 
conducts academic and professional education in one particular discipline. A 
polytechnic delivers applied science education in several fields. An academy 

Indonesian Higher Education 
109 
delivers applied science education in one or part of a discipline in technology or 
the arts.  
 
Based on Law no. 20, 2003, academic programmes are only offered by universities, 
institutes, and colleges. These academic programmes are a four to five year 
Undergraduate degree (Sarjana-S1), a two or three- year Master’s degree (Magister-
S2), and a three-year Doctoral degree (Doktor-S3). All five higher education 
institution types can offer professional programmes, consisting of diplomas (non-
degree) and specialised-degrees. Non-degree programmes vary from one-year 
diplomas to four-year diplomas. Specialised-degree programmes include 
specialised 1 (equal to a Master’s Degree, taking two to three years) and specialised 
2 programmes (equal to a Doctoral Degree, taking three to four years). The move 
from ‚an agrarian to a more industrialized society‛ (Nizam 2006, p. 45) has driven 
diversification of study programmes. Consequently, there has been a rapid growth 
in the number of professional and academic study programmes offered. Nizam 
(n.d., p. 10) reports that ‚currently there are more than 16,000 study programmes 
…‛ offered by Indonesian higher education institutions and more than 14,000 
study programmes have been accredited (BAN-PT, Online). All study programmes 
delivered by private higher education institutions are ‚co-determined by the 
Ministry of Education and are accredited by the National Accreditation Board (or 
Badan Akreditasi Nasional, BAN)‛ (Verheul 2002, p. 189).  
 
The National Accreditation Board (MoNe 2005, PP Nomor 19 2005) is an 
independent body which reports to the Directorate General of Higher Education 
(DGHE). The duties of national accreditation cover 1) evaluating the quality of 
study programmes of HEIs periodically; 2) giving recommendations to the 
Ministry through the Directorate; and 3) helping HEIs in quality assurance 
processes. Due to limited capacity, rapid growth in demand and limited public 
support, some private institutions face problems in meeting the accreditation and 
quality assurance requirements. 
 
The Government officially allocates 20% of the total state budget [Anggaran 
Pendapatan dan Belanja Negara (APBN)] for funding national education (Indonesia 
2003; DGHE 2008). In 2009, the government allocated around Rp. 207 trillion9 (20%) 
from the state budget (around Rp. 1,037 trillion) (Saad 2011). In 2012, the 
government has allocated around Rp. 286 trillion10 (20.2%) from the state budget 
(around Rp. 1,400 trillion) (Presiden Republik Indonesia 2011). Since 2009, the 
funding allocation for national education has been slightly increased. 
                                                           
9 The exchange rate in 2009 was US$1 is approximately Rp. 10,000. 
10 The exchange rate in 2012 is US$1 is approximately Rp. 12,000. 

 
Chapter 5 
110
 
‚The 2009 Government budget for higher education is around 18.5 trillion Rupiah, 
or US$1.8 billion. Around 85% of the budget supports tertiary education 
institutions: 69% is allocated to 76 non-autonomous public higher education 
institutions, 11% to seven autonomous institutions, and the other 6% subsidises 
private institutions‛ (World Bank 2010, p. ix). Around 15% supports the 
directorates (World Bank 2010, p. 17). This indicates that a large amount of the 
higher education budget goes to public institutions.  
 
Before the millennium, public HEIs received nearly 100% of their income from the 
government (Beerkens 2002). ‚In the 2009 APBN, about Rp. 4.7 trillion,11 or US$470 
million is from the own revenues of the 76 public institutions, which is quite 
significant considering that it is nearly a quarter of the total higher education 
APBN‛ (World Bank 2010, p. 16). Autonomous universities currently only receive 
around 20% of their income from the government (Wicaksono and Friawan 2008). 
For example, based on share of HEI revenues by source 2009, as cited in the World 
Bank 2010 (p. 12), nearly 60% of University of Indonesia’s income is from student 
fees and 20% is self-generated, including ‚consulting services and other campus-
based businesses such as parking, cafeteria, bookstore, etc.‛ 21% of its income is 
from the government budget (DGHE budget and audit report for autonomous 
universities, 2009 cited in World Bank 2010, p. 12).  
 
Public higher education institutions have had a direct hierarchical relationship 
with the government. As a government service unit, public institutions had very 
limited institutional autonomy; they had to comply with strict government 
regulations in the areas of financial management, internal university management 
(i.e. personnel management (civil service) and appointment of the Rector), and 
academic matters (i.e. curriculum design and the establishment of new study 
programmes) (Brodjonegoro, n.d.; Verheul 2002). In terms of student enrolment, 
public HEIs recruited potential students through the National Entrance 
Examination [Seleksi Nasional Masuk Perguruan Tinggi Negeri (SNMPTN)]12 and 
Achievement and Learning Equity [Prestasi dan Pemeratan Kesempatan Belajar 
(PPKB)]. Within these admission systems, they did not have to compete for 
students. In the last decade, the relationship between the government and the HEIs 
has substantially changed. The HEIs have, at least on paper, been granted more 
institutional autonomy. This will be elaborated upon in the next section of this 
chapter. 
                                                           
11 The own revenues of autonomous universities are not included in the state budget 
(APBN). 
12 SNMPTN used to be Ujian Masuk Perguruan Tinggi Negeri (UMPTN). 

Indonesian Higher Education 
111 
 
Private institutions receive only a small subsidy from the Government. They rely 
directly on student fees. From this perspective, it is not surprising that tuition fees 
at private institutions are approximately 2 to 5 times higher than at public ones 
(Wicaksono and Friawan 2008). Private institutions are not hierarchically 
controlled by the government, meaning that they have control over recruiting their 
Rectors, academic and non-academic staff. Private institutions are accountable for 
all their activities to their stakeholders. Private HEIs are, however, still subject to 
government regulations in various ways. The Directorate General of Higher 
Education (DGHE) has established 12 provincial offices, called Coordination of 
Private HEIs [or Koordinasi Perguruan Tinggi Swasta (Kopertis)], ‚to ensure that 
private HEIs conform to relevant acts and regulations from the government‛ 
(Welch 2007, p. 671). Private HEIs recruit potential students through institutional 
entrance exams. To maximise student recruitment, many private HEIs do not have 
very strict student selection processes. Admission is considered to be less 
competitive than to public HEIs.  
5.3 
REFORMING THE INDONESIAN HIGHER EDUCATION 
SYSTEM 
In the 1990s, a number of events created the momentum for change in Indonesian 
higher education system. First, in its national planning document, the government 
launched a different vision for its Higher Education Long Term Strategy (HELTS) 
III, 1996-2005 (DGHE 1996). It focused on ‚implementation of the new paradigm in 
higher education management, in which improvements in relevance and quality, 
and geographical and social equity‛ are key (Fahmi 2007, p. 3). The new paradigm 
consisted of five pillars: quality, autonomy, accountability, accreditation, and 
evaluation (DGHE 1996; Verhuel 2002, p. 191).  
 
Second, before the HELTS III programmes could be fully implemented, the 
operating environment of Indonesian higher education changed dramatically. 
Indonesia faced the Asian financial crisis and the economy contracted. The system 
became politically instable after the fall of Suharto Regime in 1998. Indonesia then 
entered a period of reform. These developments encouraged the government to 
issue important higher education laws: the PP60/1999 and PP61/1999 (explained 
later in this section). These two government laws are seen as the embryo of the 
higher education reforms of 2000-2010.  
 
To stimulate the Indonesian economy after the severe East Asian economic crisis in 
1997, ‚the World Bank and IMF provide economic aid and have induced public 

 
Chapter 5 
112
sector reforms‛ which put major emphasis on ‚the devolution of decision-making 
power and financial autonomy to the regional governments‛ (Verhuel 2002, p. 
191). For developing countries such as India, Bangladesh, Zimbabwe, and 
Indonesia, the World Bank and IMF are believed to be the strongest driving force 
for the implementation of New Public Management (NPM) approaches (Borins 
1998; Sulistiyono 2007). These approaches were aimed at substantially 
restructuring the public sector, including higher education. One of the 
consequences, as inserted by Santiago et al. (2008 cited in De Boer and 
Goedegebuure 2009, p. 350), was ‚the enhancement of institutional autonomy, 
accompanied by a decrease in direct governmental control and an increase in 
accountability.‛ 
 
Institutional autonomy, accountability and transparency became the key strategic 
issues for higher education (e.g. Verhuel 2002; Sulistiyono 2007). In July 1999, the 
government enacted the Government Regulation 60/1999 which ‚covers the 
changes in the administration of higher education institutions‛ and the 
Government Regulation 61/1999 which ‚relates to the establishment of (public) 
universities as legal entities‛13 and which transforms public universities into 
autonomous universities (Beerkens 2002, p. 24). This transformation was intended 
to drive improvement in the accountability, capacity, and managerial development 
of Higher Education Institutions. These two regulations were followed by 
regulations that provided an independent legal status for the University of 
Indonesia (UI) in Jakarta, Gadjah Mada University (UGM) in Yogyakarta, Bogor 
Institute of Agriculture (IPB) in Bogor, and Bandung Institute of Technology (ITB) 
in Bandung (Government Regulation No. 152/2000, 153/2000, 154/2000, and 
155/2000). These four elite public universities were selected by the government ‚to 
function as ‘guides’ in Indonesia’s move toward greater academic and financial 
autonomy‛ (Beerkens 2002, p. 24). They were given a five-year transition period to 
become fully autonomous universities. Other public universities soon followed.14 
 
In 2003, the government published a new long term strategic plan for its higher 
education system: HELTS IV (for 2003-2010). HELTS IV focuses on the nation’s 
competitiveness, decentralisation and institutional autonomy and improvement of 
organisational health through better internal management (DGHE 2003). It sets out 
a reform agenda that pursues institutional autonomy through devolving authority 
from the national level, a new public funding regime that stresses more 
                                                           
13 A legal entity university means an autonomous university.  
14 For example the University of Sumatera Utara (USU) in North Sumatera, the Indonesia 
University of Education (UPI) in Jakarta, and the University of Airlangga (UNAIR) in 
Surabaya in the years 2003, 2004, and 2006. 

Indonesian Higher Education 
113 
competitive and performance-based grants, and, consequently, a restructuring of 
the internal university governance structures.  
 
The spread of the NPM ideology, the promulgation of the legal entity Law, and the 
publication of HELTS IV have encouraged, or even ‘forced’ Indonesian universities 
to move towards a situation of greater financial and managerial autonomy. Greater 
financial autonomy basically means budget cuts (Beerkens 2007), which, in 
Indonesia and elsewhere, is ironic—‚as the demand for educational services grew 
over the past two decades and operating costs rose, public support for higher 
education flattened and then declined‛ (Duderstadt 1993, p. 3 cited in DiFronzo 
2002, p. 5). Cutbacks have forced public universities to manage more effectively. 
The government also changed the public funding mechanism from line item 
budgeting to lump sum funding. The new funding mechanism puts more 
emphasis on outputs and performance, intending to stimulate greater competition 
and market-orientation (e.g. Nizam 2006, p. 41).  
 
The changes in the public funding regime also challenged public universities to 
become more entrepreneurial. Several measures were used (Susanto and Nizam 
2004 cited in Nizam 2006, p. 52; Welch 2007, p. 680):  
 
cost-saving measures such as a freeze on staff recruitment; 
 
cost-sharing measures where a university can set its own tuition fees but at 
the same time ensure equal access through cross-subsidies; 
 
resource mobilising strategies that include setting up programmes on a 
full-cost recovery basis, undertaking contract research (e.g. collaborative 
research with industry and special projects often with foreign universities), 
consultancies and other various income-generating activities (e.g. selling 
staff members’ services, publishing textbooks or student guides);  
 
efficiency enhancing measures such as changing resource allocation 
policies, emphasising accountability, evaluation procedures for assessment 
of performance; and  
 
‘special’ fees beyond regular tuition fees. 
 
Greater managerial autonomy for universities implies a loosening of direct 
hierarchical control from the government (DGHE 2003; Verhuel 2002; Nizam 2006) 
to make the financial reform successful. The traditional centralised mode of 
governance was believed to have ‚created a system characterised by inefficiency 
and poor initiative‛ (Moeliodihardjo et al. 2000 cited in Nizam 2006, p. 37). 
Managerial autonomy entails, for example, no state control over personnel 
management and no state involvement in internal university governance. 
Autonomous universities can hire and fire their staff, set salaries and labour 

 
Chapter 5 
114
conditions,15 and select their own Rector through internal election. Autonomous 
universities have been forced to make major institutional adjustments in 
‚organisational structure and democratisation of the universities‛ (Beerkens 2002, 
p. 24).  
 
For the first time in the history of Indonesian higher education, Rectors of 
autonomous universities are not directly appointed by the government but chosen 
by the university. The candidates for a Rector position are proposed by the 
Academic Senate to the Board of Trustees. Though substantial progress has been 
made in the move towards university autonomy, the government still has an input. 
It has 30% of the total vote in Rector appointments through its representation on 
the Board of Trustees (Beerkens 2002; Nizam 2006).  
5.4 
THE 
INTERNAL 
GOVERNANCE 
OF 
INDONESIAN 
UNIVERSITIES 
The organisational structures of private and autonomous public universities vary, 
but there are some similarities. The general, stylised structure of internal university 
governance in Indonesia is depicted in Figure 5.1. In this section, we discuss the 
main governing bodies at the top level of Indonesian universities, respectively the 
Board of Trustees, the Board of Auditors, the University Senate, and the executive 
(Rector and Vice-Rectors). 
 
The highest governing body is a Board of Trustees for autonomous universities and 
a Board of Foundation for private universities. The Board of Trustees represents the 
stakeholders of the university (based on the Government Regulation 61/1999 
chapter VI section 7). It consists of representatives from the Ministry of Education, 
the University Academic Senate, the Rector, members of the community, 
university employees, and students. As the general legislative board of the 
university, the Board exists (1) to set up general policies in non-academic fields, for 
example, human resources, finance, and general administration affairs; (2) to 
appoint and to dismiss university top leaders (Rector and Vice Rectors), and to 
evaluate their work and performance; (3) to approve and legalise strategic plans, 
working plans, and annual budgets; (4) to supervise and control management; (5) 
                                                           
15 The hiring and firing system and the salary system and labour conditions apply for new 
staff recruitment. Older university staff (including academic staff and Professors) who serve 
as civil servants still serve under the GOVERNMENT staffing, salary system and labour 
conditions. In the centralised system dismissing staff is difficult because of the civil service 
system. 

Indonesian Higher Education 
115 
together with university top leaders to arrange and deliver the annual reports to 
the Ministry; (6) to give opinions and suggestions to the Ministry about the 
management of the universities. All members of the Board of Trustees except 
student representatives are appointed by the Ministry for a period of five years. 
Student representatives are appointed by the Ministry for a period of one year. The 
Board of Foundation has representatives from its founding organisation, and other 
stakeholders appointed by its founding organisation (Nizam 2006).  
 
The Board of Auditors is an independent body that evaluates the results of internal 
and external audit. At autonomous universities, this Board reports to the Board of 
Trustees; all members are appointed for a five-year term and can be dismissed by 
the Trustees. Private universities usually hire an external auditing firm that acts in 
accordance with a contract set by the Trustees. This body receives and audits the 
budget. The budget is then distributed to faculties through the Rector. In return, 
each faculty leader, the dean, has to produce a financial report each semester for 
the Rector and the Rector compiles the budget monitoring to be sent to the trustees 
via the Board of Auditors. The duties of the Board of Auditors are (1) to set up the 
internal audit policies; (2) to evaluate the financial results of audit; and (3) to make 
decisions on finance and to give suggestions to the Trustees.  
 
The University Senate is the legislative board on academic matters at the university 
level. It is made up of the university’s top leaders, deans, professors, 
representatives of lecturers, and the head of the library. Before the millennium, 
professors were members ex officio. These days the members, including professors, 
are elected by the university community. Each faculty nominates a maximum of 
two professors. The Senate Chair is elected from the members for a period of two 
years and can be re-elected twice. The duties of the Senate are (1) to set up 
academic procedures; (2) to set up norms of education; (3) to set up rules of 
academic freedom and scientific autonomy; (4) to supervise and control academic 
quality; (5) to set up rules of ethics and discipline for campus life; (6) to set up the 
evaluation or judgment of academic achievement, capabilities and characteristics 
of Civitas Academica; (7) to give suggestions to the trustees about the work of 
university top leaders in the academic field; and (8) to give suggestions to 
university top leaders in arranging strategic plans, working plans, and budgets. At 
autonomous universities, the Senate also (9) gives suggestions to the Ministry 
about the work of the Trustees.  
 

 
Chapter 5 
116
Board of Trustees
 or 
Board of Foundation
Rector
 
Vice Rectors
 
Administrative 
Bureau
 
University IT 
Support
 
Academic 
Bureau
 
Other Support 
Unit
 
Student Affair 
Bureau
 
University 
Library
 
Faculties
 
Departments
 
Research 
Centers
 
University Senate
 
Board of Auditors
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.1  A General Structure of the University Governance in Indonesia 
(adapted from Nizam 2006, Figure 5, p. 54) 
 
Top executive university leaders consist of a Rector and several Vice-Rectors (there are 
usually three Vice-Rectors, but this depends on the size of the university). These 
top executives are in charge of academic affairs, administrative and personnel 
affairs, student affairs and alumni, and research and development. The Rector of 
an autonomous university is elected by the Trustees. Vice-Rectors are selected by 
the Trustees after consulting the Rector. The term of office is five years, with a 
maximum of two terms. The Rectors of private universities are also usually elected 
by the Trustees.  
 
The responsibilities of university top leaders are (1) to set up strategic plans 
defining the missions and visions of the university; (2) to set up the working plans 
and annual budgets of the university; (3) to implement policies concerning 
education, research, and community service; (4) to manage the wealth and 
properties of the university; (5) to guide and develop both academic staff and non-
academic staff of the university; (6) to maintain and develop relationships with 
alumni, university association, and society more widely; (7) to organise the 

Indonesian Higher Education 
117 
 
 
DEAN
 
 
Vice Dean II
(Finance, Personnel & 
Administrative Affairs)
 
 
Vice Dean III
(Student & Alumni Affairs)
 
 
Vice Dean I
(Academic Affairs)
 
Faculty Senate
 
Head of Department
 
Head of Administration
 
Head of Laboratory
 
Academic Staff
 
Non Academic Staff
 
Lab-Staff
 
university’s accounts; and (8) to report on the improvement and development of 
the university to the Trustees. At autonomous universities the executives, together 
with the Trustees, compile the annual reports for the Ministry.  
5.5 
DEANS AT INDONESIAN UNIVERSITIES 
In the formal governance structure of a faculty at an Indonesian university, the 
main actors are a dean, vice-deans, Faculty Senate, professors and other academics, 
heads of department, head of administration and head of laboratory (see Figure 
5.2). The two main governing bodies at the top level of the faculty are the Senate 
and the dean. This section focus on deans, the key subjects in our study. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 represents the instructive relationship 
--- represents the coordinative relationship 
Figure 5.2 A General Structure of the Faculty Governance at Indonesian 
Universities (generated from faculty structure of several faculties from 
both public and private universities) 
 

 
Chapter 5 
118
The dean is the top executive of a faculty and a middle manager within a university. 
He or she has responsibility for the faculty’s education, research, and community 
services. The dean is accountable to the Rector for all his or her activities, including 
the faculty’s finances. As the chair of the Faculty Senate, the dean is also 
accountable to the university trustees through the Academic Senate. The dean is 
appointed and dismissed by the Rector after consultation with and approval from 
the Faculty Senate (this issue will be elaborated upon later in this section).  
 
In managing the faculty, the dean is usually assisted by several vice-deans 
(depending on faculty size). Typically, the vice-deans have particular portfolios 
such as academic affairs, finance, personnel and administrative affairs, and student 
and alumni affairs. The vice-deans are accountable to the dean for their daily 
activities and tasks. They are appointed and dismissed by the Rector, in 
consultation with the dean. In running a faculty, the dean and the vice-deans: 
 
define the strategy and policy of the faculty about education, research and 
community service, student affairs and academic facilities; 
 
give direction to and guidance in implementing faculty strategies and 
policies in the areas mentioned above; 
 
synergize the development of science and learning to fulfil the needs of 
continuing education; 
 
define education, research and community service in line with the aims of 
the faculty to develop and improve the competency of its academics; 
 
formulate and manage annual programmes for education, research and 
community service as well as learning standardisation; 
 
facilitate collegiality and professionalism in every aspect of the 
organisation; 
 
develop and control all units in the faculty to ensure the achievement of 
the faculty’s plans; 
 
have responsibility for physical facilities in the faculty (e.g. internal library, 
IT-based facilities, learning environment, laboratories); 
 
help the Rector to maintain and develop collaboration with strategic allies 
(e.g. companies, industries, research centres, other universities) in line with 
the three basic principles of higher education; and 
 
report results to the Rector every semester. 
 
Besides the vice-deans, the dean also has a close relationship with the other main 
governing body in the faculty: the Faculty Senate. The Faculty Senate holds the top 
legislative position at faculty level. It consists of the dean (as chair), vice-deans, 
professors, and heads of department, as well as representatives of academic staff. 
The Faculty Senate is responsible for setting general policies and regulations for 
the faculty on academic matters, quality assurance, and norms and ethics. They 

Indonesian Higher Education 
119 
assess deans and vice-deans, and recommend future deans to university 
leadership. Through the University Senate, the Faculty Senate reports the academic 
activities of the faculty to the Board of Trustees (or Board of Foundation in private 
universities).  
 
The criteria and selection processes for dean candidates at autonomous and private 
universities are fairly similar. To become a dean, several conditions must be met. A 
prospective candidate must be a regular academic staff member of the university 
with a Doctoral Degree, or at minimum a Master’s Degree, preferably with an 
expertise in the faculty subject. Next, they must have high levels of competency, 
integrity, and commitment to deliver the vision and mission of the faculty and the 
university. They also should have strong leadership and management skills. They 
cannot be older than 60 years and must not have a criminal record. They must be 
mentally and physically healthy (with proof from a general practitioner). 
 
The selection process for a dean starts with a faculty (mono programme) and its 
departments (multi programmes) proposing some potential candidates to the 
Faculty Senate via a selection committee. Then, the Faculty Senate recommends a 
minimum of two prospective candidates who are eligible to compete in the next 
round: public presentation. At this stage, a candidate publicly presents and 
explains his or her mission, visions and strategic plans for the future development 
of the faculty. Usually, two or three candidates are proposed to the Rector by the 
Faculty Senate. Finally, the Rector appoints one of the candidates. The new dean, 
will then propose two (or more) people to become his or her vice-deans, who are 
then appointed by the Rector. Both the dean and the vice-deans hold their position 
for a period of four years.  
5.6 
SUMMARY 
Indonesia has recently faced many changes and this has been reflected in higher 
education. The Asian monetary crisis, the political fall of the Suharto regime, and 
globalisation are major factors that led to reforms in Indonesian higher education. 
The most important aim of these reforms is the enhancement of financial and 
managerial autonomy of public universities, which largely aligns with the 
principles of New Public Management (NPM). Through granting (some) public 
universities legal entity status, universities have become more autonomous in both 
financial matters and internal management.  
At face value, this has affected the nature of Indonesian public universities. Once 
part of the state bureaucracy, nowadays they are supposed to act as innovative, 

 
Chapter 5 
120
independent, and self-financing organisations. In this dynamic context, the 
organisation of the universities has undergone change.  
One of the results is a shift in responsibilities from the state to the universities and, 
within the universities, from the central university level to the faculties. The result 
of the changing nature of universities is that faculties have become more 
important. This has consequences for the top executives in the faculties, the deans. 
While we know that the position and role of the deans have undergone change, we 
do not know how exactly deans in Indonesia lead and manage their faculties in 
this dynamic context. One might argue that, in contemporary Indonesian 
universities, deans should increasingly act as corporate managers to meet changing 
expectations. At the same time universities remain peculiar organisations in which, 
for instance, academic reputation appears to be an important condition for 
leadership, and therefore pure executive managers who deny a university’s special 
character, will not survive. It is, therefore, important and interesting to explore 
how deans run their faculties and why they do this in a particular way. These 
questions will be answered in the next chapters. 

6 
C H A P T E R
 
The Managerial Leadership Styles 
of Deans at Indonesian 
Universities 
“John is too soft-hearted; he is running this place like a country club. 
Sue is a pigheaded dictator; she runs this place like a prison camp.”  
Robert E. Quinn (1989, p. 45)  
In this chapter, we present the findings of our survey that address the research 
question: what kind of managerial leadership styles do deans at Indonesian 
universities exhibit? The chapter is structured as follows. Section 6.1 describes 
the self-reported managerial behaviours of deans. Next, Section 6.2 investigates 
the managerial leadership roles of deans. Section 6.3 explores and identifies the 
managerial leadership styles of deans. The last Section 6.4 summaries and 
concludes this chapter. 

122 
Chapter 6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.1 
Managerial Leadership Styles of Deans based on the Competing 
Values Framework (CVF) 
6.1 
THE MANAGERIAL BEHAVIOURS OF DEANS  
In this section, we present and discuss the managerial behaviours of deans at 
Indonesian universities. Quinn (1988, pp. 175-176) has developed the Competing 
Values Managerial Skills Instrument which lists 32 managerial behaviours. Based 
on this instrument, we asked the deans to indicate, on a seven-point Likert scale, 
how often they perform a certain behaviour (see also Chapter 4, Table 4.2). The 
first outcome of this survey indicated that the deans perform all the listed 
behaviours frequently. However, some behaviours are more prevalent than 
others (see Appendix C, Table 1). The four most frequent behaviours of the deans 
are below along with their mean value: 
 
protecting continuity in the day-to-day operations of the faculty (6.3); 
 
seeing that the faculty delivers on stated goals (6.3); 
 
facilitating consensus-building in the faculty’s decision-making (6.3); and 
 
building teamwork among academic staff (6.3). 
The four least frequent behaviours of the deans are: 
 
persuasively selling new ideas to central management (5.2); 
 
exerting upward influence in the university (5.2); 
 
influencing decisions at higher levels in the university (5.2); and 
 
experimenting with new concepts and procedures (5.0).  
These findings are significant in that they show the deans of this study are not 
opposed to engaging in certain managerial behaviours and are open to some level 
of engagement in all the behaviours.  
Managerial leadership 
styles of deans
Flexibility
Control
External 
focus
Internal 
focus
ADHOCRACY 
(Create)
CLAN 
(Collaborate)
MARKET 
(Compete)
HIERARCHY 
(Control)
INNOVATOR
BROKER
PRODUCER
DIRECTOR
COORDINATOR
MONITOR
FACILITATOR
MENTOR

The Managerial Leadership Styles of Deans at Indonesian Universities 
123 
 
Although the deans reported that they execute all 32 behaviours, some differences 
in frequency can be observed (see Appendix C, Table 1). Firstly, the vast majority 
of the deans (i.e. more than 75%) reported that they always facilitate consensus 
building in faculty decision making; encourage participative decision making in 
the faculty; protect the continuity in faculty’s day-to-day operations; see to it that 
the faculty delivers on stated goals; and build team work among academic staff 
members. Secondly, the majority of the deans (i.e. more than 50%) reported that 
they sometimes or rather often solve faculty problems in a creative and 
unconventional way; carefully compare records, files, and reports; persuasively 
sell new ideas to the central university management; influence decisions at higher 
levels in the university and experiment with new concepts and procedures. Very 
few deans reported that they never behave any of the 32 behaviours. For example, 
only 7% of the deans say that they never exert upward influence in the university. 
Similarly, 7% of the deans indicated that they never influence decisions made at 
the higher levels in the university. 
Table 6.1 Percentages of Deans in the Study that Report ‘Always’ on the 32 Behaviours 
Based on the CVF (N = 218, in %) 
Percentage of the 32 behaviours always* performed 
Percentage of deans 
≤ 25% (less than 9 different behaviours) 
13 
26 – 50% (between 9 and 16 different behaviours) 
24 
51 – 75% (between 17 and 24 different behaviours) 
26 
> 75% (more than 24 different behaviours) 
37 
* ‘always’ refers to scores 6 (almost always) and 7 (always)  
 
Table 6.1 presents the percentages of deans in the study that reported ‘always’ on 
the 32 behaviours of the CVF. A total of 37% of the deans reported that they are 
multi-behavioural, i.e. they always perform in line with more than 75% of the 32 
behaviours. Another 37% reported that they always perform less than 50% of the 
behaviours. The deans who belong to the multi-behavioural group are, in their 
own eyes, able to cope with the competing values that underlie these behaviours.  
6.2 
THE MANAGERIAL LEADERSHIP ROLES OF DEANS 
This section presents and discusses the managerial leadership roles of deans at 
Indonesian universities. The CVF has two axes: the vertical axis represents 
flexibility and control and the horizontal axis represents internal to external focus 
(see Figure 6.1, also Chapter 3 for more details). These two axes form four 

124 
Chapter 6 
 
quadrants16 in which each quadrant defines two leadership roles. The CVF is the 
repertoire of managerial leadership roles manifested in the behaviours of 
managers (Belasen 1998). The CVF asserts that these eight different managerial 
leadership roles can be defined based on 32 managerial behaviours.  
 
To find out to what extent this applies to the roles of the deans, we first carried 
out a factor analysis to see if the theoretically assumed managerial leadership 
roles could also be found in our data. In a first factor analysis, we found no clear 
distinction among the eight managerial leadership roles (see Appendix C, Table 
2). A second factor analysis was executed. The CVF notes that the two axes of the 
framework create four aspects. Therefore, we extracted the data into four 
dimensions. The result again indicated no clear distinction between the four 
aspects (see Appendix C, Table 3).  
 
As a next step, we extracted the data within each aspect into two dimensions (the 
CVF suggests that each aspect defines two types of leadership roles, see Chapter 
3, Figure 3.1). For example, in the adhocracy aspect, there are eight behaviours in 
which four behaviours define the innovator role and four the broker role. This 
third step gave interesting results. In the clan aspect, the result indicates a clear 
distinction between the facilitator and the mentor role (see Appendix C, Table 4). 
There is also a clear distinction between the innovator and the broker role in the 
adhocracy aspect (see Appendix C, Table 5). However, a different result exists for 
the market aspect and the hierarchy aspect. In the market aspect, some 
behaviours within the two roles (director and producer) are distinct but others are 
not (see Appendix C, Table 6). There is a similar finding with respect to the 
hierarchy aspect (see Appendix C, Table 7).  
 
Although we could not distinguish the eight leadership roles of the CVF in our 
data, we believe that the CVF framework is a useful and suitable typology to 
explore managerial leadership styles of deans at Indonesian universities by 
investigating their behaviours and roles. Firstly, the CVF is an integrated 
leadership model that offers distinct theoretical advantages (see Chapter 3, 
subsection 3.3.3). Its integrated model supports the (dean) leadership definition of 
the study. Secondly, the CVF ‚has been used in more than a thousand 
organizations …, and it has been found to predict organisational performance‛ 
(Cameron and Quinn 2006, p. 23). This supports that the validity and reliability of 
the CVF framework. 
 
                                                           
16 Later in the analysis, the term ‘aspect’ refers to quadrant. 

The Managerial Leadership Styles of Deans at Indonesian Universities 
125 
 
As explained earlier, each role consists of four-item managerial behaviours scaled 
from never (1) to always (7). We computed the mean score of each role by 
applying a simple statistical mean expression (see Chapter 4, Table 4.2, Equation 
4.1). The results are depicted in Table 6.2.  
Table 6.2 Managerial Leadership Roles of Deans at Indonesian Universities (N=218, in 
%)  
Managerial 
leadership role 
Never 
Sometimes 
Always 
Mean 
SD 
Cronbach’s 
Alpha (4)* 
Facilitator 
- 
30 
70 
6.2 
0.61 
0.68 
Producer 
1 
38 
61 
6.0 
0.74 
0.81 
Director 
1 
39 
60 
6.0 
0.73 
0.78 
Coordinator 
- 
47 
53 
5.9 
0.75 
0.72 
Mentor 
1 
49 
50 
5.9 
0.80 
0.76 
Monitor 
1 
57 
42 
5.7 
0.81 
0.79 
Innovator 
1 
69 
30 
5.5 
0.74 
0.74 
Broker 
5 
68 
27 
5.3 
0.94 
0.80 
Groups are defined on the basis of average score on four items, where for ‘never’ x< 4; 
‘sometimes’ 4 ≤ x ≤ 5.99; ‘always’ 6 ≤ x ≤ 7; *the number in brackets  indicates numbers of items. 
 
Table 6.2 shows that the alpha coefficient, for the four items in each role, ranges 
from 0.68 to 0.81, suggesting that the items have relatively high internal 
consistency. All 32 managerial behaviours are performed by the deans (see 
Section 6.1), this is expected, as Table 6.2 indicates that all eight managerial 
leadership roles are found to some degree in Indonesian middle management. In 
other words, the deans self-reported that they frequently perform the eight 
leadership roles based on the CVF when they lead and manage their faculties.  
 
Although all the eight managerial leadership roles are performed frequently by 
the deans, some roles are performed more often than others. The deans reported 
that they very often play the roles of facilitator, producer, and director. A total of 
70% of the 218 deans see themselves definitely functioning as a facilitator. This 
finding is consistent with the previous finding, which showed that the deans very 
often perform facilitating behaviours. Around 60% of the deans see themselves as 
a producer and director. These results suggest that in their day-to-day actions, the 
deans very frequently facilitate consensus building in the faculty’s decision 
making; encourage participative decision making in the faculty; build teamwork 
among the academic staff members; and encourage participative decision making 
in the faculty. At the same time, deans often focus on results and performance of 
academic staff; insist on intense hard work and high productivity; set clear 
objectives for the faculty; and clarify faculty policy priorities and future direction.  

126 
Chapter 6 
 
Furthermore, the deans of the study reported that they sometimes play an 
innovator (69%) and a broker role (68%) in managing their faculty. These findings 
are in line with the previous finding, indicating that the deans occasionally 
perform the innovating and brokering behaviours. This implies that, in their daily 
actions, the deans seldom approach and consult people at the higher levels of the 
university; persuasively sell new ideas to central university management; exert 
upward influence in the university; or influence decisions at higher levels in the 
university.  
 
To further investigate the distribution of the eight roles in the middle 
management of Indonesian universities, we used another leadership instrument 
in our study—the Management Skills Profile Instrument based on a description of 
eight managerial leadership roles developed by Cameron and Quinn (2006, p. 
128). Based on this instrument, the deans were asked to indicate, on a seven-point 
scale ranging from (1) ‘absolutely not similar’ to (7) ‘perfect match’ just how 
similar the description of eight managerial leadership roles were to how they run 
their faculties (see Chapter 4, Table 4.3). The results are presented in Table 6.3.  
Table 6.3 Personal Descriptions of Deans Based on the Eight Managerial Leadership 
Roles from the CVF (in %) 
Managerial leadership role 
Absolutely 
not similar 
Similar to 
some 
extent 
Perfect 
match 
Mean 
SD 
N 
Mentor 
- 
23 
77 
6.1 
1.0 
217 
Producer 
4 
21 
75 
6.0 
1.1 
216 
Broker 
1 
27 
72 
6.0 
1.1 
217 
Facilitator 
2 
24 
74 
5.9 
1.1 
218 
Innovator 
1 
27 
72 
5.9 
1.1 
216 
Director 
6 
39 
55 
5.4 
1.3 
216 
Coordinator 
6 
41 
53 
5.4 
1.3 
217 
Monitor 
12 
53 
35 
4.9 
1.3 
217 
 
The results displayed in Table 6.3 show that more than 70% of the deans see 
themselves as a mentor, producer, broker, facilitator or innovator. The deans tend 
to mostly see themselves as a mentor. Only 35% of them see themselves as a 
monitor. 
 
The results displayed in Figure 6.2 allow us to compare the mean scores of the 
roles in Table 6.2 (based on the managerial behaviour instrument) and those of 
the roles in Table 6.3 (based on the description of role instrument). There are 
relatively few mean score differences with respect to the eight roles. Figure 6.1 

The Managerial Leadership Styles of Deans at Indonesian Universities 
127 
 
shows the similarity between them which supports the validity of the leadership 
instruments used for this study.  
 
Based on this comparison, we decided to use the data obtained from the 
managerial behaviour instrument, presented in Table 6.2, to explore and 
investigate the managerial leadership styles of deans at Indonesian universities 
and for the rest of the analyses in this study. The reasons for this are: firstly, the 
statistical results indicate that the differences between the two instruments are 
marginal. Secondly, the managerial behaviour instrument best fits the concept of 
behaviour (Ajzen and Fishbein 1980; Fishbein and Ajzen 2010), which can be 
defined as either a single act or a set of actions (or a behavioural category) (see 
Chapter 2).  
 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Innovator
Broker
Producer
Director
Coordinator
Monitor
Facilitator
Mentor
A Comparison of the mean scores of roles from the 
two leadership instruments 
Leadership instrument based on managerial leadership behaviours
Leadership instrument based on a description of eight managerial leadership roles
 
Figure 6.2 A Comparison of the Mean Scores of the Roles from the Two 
Leadership Instruments 
 

128 
Chapter 6 
 
6.3 
THE MANAGERIAL LEADERSHIP STYLES OF DEANS 
Based on the mean scores of the eight roles performed by all deans as shown in 
Table 6.2, we are able to identify the major managerial leadership style of deans at 
Indonesian universities. The style embraces, to a large extent, all eight of the CVF 
leadership roles. Quinn suggests that a manager who is able to engage in a 
variety of different or even contradictory styles of leading and managing is 
‘Becoming a master manager’. Following Quinn’s logic, we have called this style 
of deanship the ‘Master’ style (see Figure 6.3). This is the predominant managerial 
leadership style of deans at Indonesian universities.  
 
Note: The mean (M) and standard deviation (SD) of the eight scores are shown in the 
Figure. 
Figure 6.3 The Master Style 
As shown in Figure 6.3, the Master style is a combination of the eight different 
roles of leading and managing. This Master style defines the deans’ many 
different managerial behaviours manifested in their roles as leaders and 
managers of faculties (see Sections 6.1 and 6.2). Theoretically, this outcome is not 
M = 5.5 
(SD = 0.74)
M = 5.3 
(SD = 0.94)
M = 6 
(SD = 0.74)
M = 6 
(SD = 0.73)
M = 5.9 
(SD = 0.75)
M = 5.7 
(SD = 0.81)
M = 6.2 
(SD = 0.61)
M = 5.9 
(SD = 0.80)
Innovator
Broker
Producer
Director
Coordinator
Monitor
Facilitator
Mentor
Master Style

The Managerial Leadership Styles of Deans at Indonesian Universities 
129 
 
at odds with the CVF since the framework itself suggests that managers are, or 
should be, able to act in different ways to achieve balance. Based on Quinn’s 
(1988) concept of mastery of management, the Master style indicates that the 
deans engage in a variety of different managerial leadership roles. This suggests 
that the deans have the ability to transcend their roles to see problems in different 
ways as well as pursue and to use alternative approaches in leading and 
managing (Quinn 1988).  
 
Based on the empirical findings and the conceptual framework of the CVF, we 
assume that the Master style may depict an ideal leadership style which 
embraces, to a larger extent, all eight CVF roles. This might suggest that conflict 
statements like ‚John is too soft hearted, he is running this place like a country 
club‛ and ‚Sue is a pigheaded dictator, she runs this place like a prison camp‛ 
(Quinn 1988, p. 45) may not be articulated in organisations. In our perspective, 
the Master style does not reflect the extreme metaphor of a lamb-like or a lion-like 
character of leadership as Quinn illustrates. In fact, it shows a balanced approach 
to leadership. The Master-style deans embrace lion-like characteristics when they 
clarify tasks, set objectives, and take actions. Goal clarification is defined by rules 
which subordinates are expected to follow. The deans, as lions, show themselves 
to be a directive and strong authority figure. At the same time, the Master-style 
deans embrace the lamb-like characteristics when they engage in social activities 
like teamwork and motivating others. The deans, as lambs, are cooperative, 
participative, and approachable leaders. 
 
Does this outcome—deans reporting to have the Master style—mean that they are 
effective? According to Quinn (1988, p. 106), ‚effectiveness is the result of 
maintaining a creative tension between contrasting demands in a social system‛. 
Belasen (1998, p. 4) states that ‚despite the fact that in playing the role of Director, 
the manager is assumed to have a task orientation, some aspects of facilitation or 
even mentoring (involving the two roles at the polar opposite in the CVF) must 
also be manifested in the behaviour of the manager to achieve effective 
managerial leadership‛. Ineffectiveness is seen as the result of being out of 
balance. ‚Managers cannot achieve effectiveness by emphasising two or three 
roles *manifested in their behaviours+ while ignoring the others‛ (Quinn 1988, p. 
106). Furthermore, Quinn (1988) argues that: 
 
… one does not have to emphasise all the roles in order to be seen as 
effective … one can put average or even below-average emphasis on 
one or two roles and still be seen as effective [but one needs to] 

130 
Chapter 6 
 
maintain enough balance and creative tension to be seen as effective 
(p. 107). 
 
The finding of the Master style in our study suggests that deans at Indonesian 
universities can be effective leaders. To what extent they actually are effective, 
however, needs further investigation. 
 
Exploring Specific Managerial Leadership Styles of Deans  
In managing their faculties, the deans perform some roles more frequently than 
others. In other words, some roles are perceived by the deans as more important 
than others, and, for our study, we wished to identify those roles perceived as 
having more value. We have, therefore, determined the relative importance of 
roles. If all eight roles were perceived as equally important, each would represent 
12.5% in this analysis. Therefore, a role equal to or larger than 12.5% can be 
considered to be perceived as more important. A two-step cluster analysis is then 
used to identify particular managerial leadership styles. The detailed steps taken 
to determine which roles were perceived more important are presented in 
Chapter 4 section 4.4.  
 
Following this procedure, the two-step cluster automatically generated 14 
clusters. These clusters show only marginal differences (see Appendix C, Table 8). 
A meaningful interpretation is, therefore, not possible. We then explored the 
number of clusters randomly (e.g. 12, 10, 6, and 5) but the results again showed 
no meaningful differences. We continued our investigation and set the number of 
clusters based on the eight managerial leadership roles within the four aspects of 
the CVF. The results again showed no clear distinctions, indicating that no useful 
interpretation can be made (see Appendix C, Table 9). 
 
We then set the number of clusters to four, reflecting the four aspects of the CVF. 
The results showed a meaningful distinction between the four clusters (see 
Appendix C, Table 10). These four clusters allow us to identify, both theoretically 
and statistically, four specific managerial leadership styles of deans at Indonesian 
universities as shown in Table 6.4. 

The Managerial Leadership Styles of Deans at Indonesian Universities 
131 
 
Table 6.4 Percentages of Deans that Have a Specific Managerial Leadership Style (total 
N = 218, in %) 
Specific managerial leadership style 
Percentage of deans 
N 
Competitive Consultant  
37 
81 
Focused Team Captain  
20 
44 
Consensual Goal-Setter  
24 
53 
Informed Trust-Builder  
18 
40 
Total 
100* 
218 
Note: *sum of percentages is not 100% due to the rounding of decimals  
 
The four specific managerial leadership styles are distinct configurations of role 
importance, indicating that each style is distinct. We have, therefore, called these 
four specific styles: the Competitive Consultant, the Consensual Goal-Setter, the 
Focused Team Captain, and the Informed Trust-Builder. A description of each 
style is depicted in Figures 6.4 through 6.7. 

132 
Chapter 6 
 
1. The Competitive Consultant  
 
Note: The numbers in brackets represent the percentages of deans with this style who 
perceived each role as more important. 
Figure 6.4 The Competitive Consultant Style 
A total of 37% of deans in this study have the Competitive Consultant style. This 
style is ‘comprehensive’ in the sense that none of the roles are absent. It looks 
similar to the Master style, but with elements of the mentor and coordinator roles 
less prominent. This style emphasises the director, producer, and facilitator roles. 
Within their day-to-day actions, the deans with this style very frequently focus on 
setting faculty goals and objectives, defining areas of responsibility of faculty 
members, and clarifying faculty policies and future direction. These deans are 
interested in fostering a productive work environment and focus on intense hard 
work and productivity. They very often facilitate consensus building in the 
faculty’s decision making, build teamwork among the academic staff members, 
encourage participative decision making in the faculty, and encourage academic 
staff members to share ideas.  
 
(53%)
(37%)
(95%)
(100%)
(51%)
(52%)
(84%)
(40%)
Innovator
Broker
Producer
Director
Coordinator
Monitor
Facilitator
Mentor
Competitive Consultant Style

The Managerial Leadership Styles of Deans at Indonesian Universities 
133 
 
2. The Focused Team Captain 
 
Note: The numbers in brackets represent the percentages of deans with this style who 
perceived each role as more important. 
Figure 6.5 The Focused Team Captain Style 
A total of 20% of the deans have the Focused Team Captain style. In contrast to 
the Competitive Consultant style, the Focused Team Captain dominant roles are 
facilitator, producer and, to a lesser extent, coordinator. In this style, the director 
role is less obviously present. This style emphasises behaviours such as team 
building; encouraging participative, consensus-oriented decision making; and 
encouraging academic staff members to share ideas. It also stresses behaviours in 
relation to achievements, results and performances, hard work, and high 
productivity. To some extent this style focuses on day-to-day operations, 
managing projects and minimising disruptions in daily practices. 
(30%)
(36%)
(82%)
(0%)
(59%)
(30%)
(91%)
(46%)
Innovator
Broker
Producer
Director
Coordinator
Monitor
Facilitator
Mentor
Focused Team Captain Style

134 
Chapter 6 
 
3. The Consensual Goal-Setter 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note: The numbers in brackets represent the percentages of deans with this style who 
perceived each role as more important. 
Figure 6.6 The Consensual Goal-Setter Style 
A total of 24% of the deans have the Consensual Goal-Setter style. This style 
emphasises the facilitator and director roles. The broker, monitor and, 
particularly, innovator roles are, by and large, absent. The deans who 
demonstrate this style have a strong focus on behaviours such as encouraging 
participative, consensus-oriented decision making; team building; and internal 
idea sharing. They, however, show minimal mentoring behaviours. These deans 
also claim to demonstrate behaviours such as setting clear faculty goals and 
objectives, defining areas of responsibility for faculty members, and clarifying 
faculty policies and future direction.  
(0%)
(13%)
(59%)
(100%)
(68%)
(9%)
(100%)
(60%)
Innovator
Broker
Producer
Director
Coordinator
Monitor
Facilitator
Mentor
Consensual Goal-Setter Style

The Managerial Leadership Styles of Deans at Indonesian Universities 
135 
 
4. The Informed Trust-Builder 
 
Note: The numbers in brackets represent the percentages of deans with this style who 
perceived each role as more important. 
Figure 6.7 The Informed Trust-Builder Style 
A total of 18% of the deans have the Informed Trust-Builder style. Like the 
Competitive Consultant, this style is comprehensive. It stresses the mentor, 
producer, coordinator, and monitor roles. Within their day-to-day actions, deans 
with this style very often listen to personal problems and show empathy and 
concern. They also frequently focus on control (e.g. reviewing detailed reports, 
files and records; working with technical data; and analysing written plans and 
schedules). These deans establish a productive work environment and value hard 
work and productivity.  
 
The Four Specific Managerial Leadership Styles and the CVF 
With respect to the four specific managerial leadership styles of deans, none of 
the styles can clearly identify one of the four aspects of the CVF (i.e. the clan, the 
adhocracy, the market, or the hierarchy). In fact, each style is a configuration of 
different aspects of the CVF, defining the competing (opposing) roles of leading 
and managing. The Competitive Consultant style, for instance, combines a greater 
(0%)
(3%)
(80%)
(68%)
(80%)
(80%)
(60%)
(100%)
Innovator
Broker
Producer
Director
Coordinator
Monitor
Facilitator
Mentor
Informed Trust-Builder Style

136 
Chapter 6 
 
focus on the market-oriented aspect (the director and producer roles) with the 
facilitator role. The Focused Team Captain style combines the facilitator and 
producer roles, and the Consensual Goal-Setter style combines the facilitator and 
director roles. The Informed Trust-Builder style combines the mentor, producer, 
coordinator, and monitor roles. These findings indicate that the roles of facilitator, 
director, and producer are the more important roles perceived by the majority of 
deans. This is consistent with the previous findings, showing that the deans very 
often play the roles of facilitator, director, and producer (see section 6.2).  
6.3.1 
Demographic Factors and the Four Specific Managerial Leadership Styles 
This subsection reports the distributions of the specific managerial leadership 
styles of deans by demographic factors.  
Table 6.5 Distributions of the Specific Managerial Leadership Styles of Deans by 
Gender (N = 218, in %) 
Specific managerial leadership style 
Gender 
MALE 
FEMALE 
Total* 
Competitive Consultant  
Focused Team Captain  
Consensual Goal-Setter  
Informed Trust-Builder  
37% 
39% 
37% 
22% 
13% 
20% 
24% 
26% 
24% 
17% 
23% 
18% 
Total* 
100% 
100% 
100% 
Note: *the sum of the columns may not be 100%, due to the rounding of decimals.  
Table 6.5 shows the gender distribution of the specific managerial leadership 
styles of deans. The findings indicated that there are some gender differences. For 
example, 22% of male deans have the Focused Team Captain style, emphasising 
the facilitator and producer roles, and 23% of female deans have the Informed 
Trust-Builder style, emphasising the mentor role. The findings showed that there 
is a very slight difference between the percentage of male and female deans 
having the Competitive Consultant style. This also holds true for the Consensual 
Goal-Setter style. These findings are, to some extent, in line with other studies of 
male and female leadership styles (e.g. Rosener 1990; Eagly and Johnson 1990; 
Burke and Collins 2001), indicating that female deanship is more characterised by 
showing more empathy and concern, being more people-oriented, and a 
willingness to listen (see Chapter 3). 

The Managerial Leadership Styles of Deans at Indonesian Universities 
137 
 
Table 6.6 Distributions of the Specific Managerial Leadership Styles of Deans by Age  
 
(N = 218, in %) 
Specific managerial leadership style 
Age (years old) 
<40 
40-50 
51-60 
>60 
Total 
Competitive Consultant  
Focused Team Captain  
Consensual Goal-Setter  
Informed Trust-Builder  
52% 
38% 
33% 
36% 
37% 
29% 
22% 
17% 
18% 
20% 
14% 
21% 
28% 
32% 
24% 
5% 
20% 
22% 
14% 
18% 
Total 
100% 
100% 
100% 
100% 
100% 
Note: *the sum of the columns may not be 100%, due to the rounding of decimals. 
Table 6.6 presents the age distribution of the specific managerial leadership styles 
of deans. The Competitive Consultant style is the style most frequently exhibited 
across all age groups. However, only amongst the under 40s is this style exhibited 
by a majority of deans. In contrast, only 5% of deans under 40 have the Informed 
Trust-Builder style. Deans aged 51-60 and 60+ are more likely to demonstrate the 
Consensual Goal-Setter style, focusing on facilitating and directing. The findings 
of this study are supported by other studies (e.g. Vroom and Pahl 1971; Kabacoff 
and Stoffey 2001; Oshagbemi 2004; Le and Thi 2012), indicating that young 
managers are more likely to show a style which defines roles and tasks and 
maintains high productivity, while older managers are more likely to prefer a 
style which is more participative and consultative and shows greater commitment 
to solving problems through consensus (see Chapter 3).  
Table 6.7 Distributions of the Specific Managerial Leadership Styles of Deans by Term-
of-Office (N = 218, in %) 
Specific managerial leadership style 
Term of Office (years) 
< 2 
3-4  
5-6 
>7 
Total* 
Competitive Consultant  
Focused Team Captain  
Consensual Goal-Setter Style 
Informed Trust-Builder  
37% 
33% 
56% 
29% 
37% 
22% 
19% 
11% 
26% 
20% 
18% 
36% 
22% 
26% 
24% 
24% 
12% 
11% 
19% 
18% 
Total* 
100% 
100% 
100% 
100% 
100% 
Note: *the sum of the columns may not be 100%, due to the rounding of decimals. 

138 
Chapter 6 
 
Table 6.7 shows the term-of-office distribution of the specific managerial 
leadership styles of deans. The Competitive Consultant style is the most 
frequently exhibited across all terms of office. However, 56% of the deans in the 5-
6 years term of office group have this style and deans in this group are less likely 
to demonstrate the Focused Team Captain or the Informed Trust-Builder styles 
(11% for each). This implies that the longer the deans serve, the more likely they 
are to put greater emphasis on the directing behaviours manifested in the 
Competitive Consultant style. This may reflect the fact that the deans with longer 
service would have been appointed under the old organisational systems and 
were likely to be still serving under civil service terms and conditions. They may, 
therefore, be more likely to maintain their traditional ways of managing through 
firm rules and authority. In other words, maintaining the status quo is important 
for the more tenured deans. This is consistent with other studies (e.g. Hambrick 
and Mason 1984; Bantel and Jackson 1989; Moore and Ruud 2006) that have found 
that leaders and managers with longer service are likely to resist change (see 
Chapter 3).  
Table 6.8 Distributions of the Specific Managerial Leadership Styles of Deans by 
Academic Discipline (N = 218, in %) 
Specific managerial leadership style 
Academic discipline 
Non-Technical 
Technical 
Total* 
Competitive Consultant  
Focused Team Captain  
Consensual Goal-Setter  
Informed Trust-Builder  
37% 
38% 
37% 
17% 
25% 
20% 
27% 
20% 
24% 
19% 
17% 
18% 
Total* 
100% 
100% 
100% 
Note: *the sum of the columns may not be 100%, due to the rounding of decimals. 
Table 6.8 presents the distributions of the specific managerial leadership styles of 
deans across academic disciplines. This indicates that some difference in 
leadership styles exists between academic disciplines. While 25% of deans in the 
technical group have a Focused Team Captain style, 27% of deans in the non-
technical group have a Consensual Goal-Setter style. Moreover, the findings show 
that there is only a marginal difference between the Competitive Consultant style 
and the Informed Trust-Builder style. These findings partially support other 
studies (e.g. Del Favero 2006; Way 2010) that indicated that non-technical deans 
are more oriented to a Collegial style (see Chapter 3). 

The Managerial Leadership Styles of Deans at Indonesian Universities 
139 
 
6.4 
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 
To investigate the managerial leadership styles of deans at Indonesian 
universities, we took several steps. Firstly, we investigated the managerial 
behaviours of deans. Secondly, we examined the managerial leadership roles of 
deans, and finally we explored and identified the managerial leadership styles of 
deans. The main findings can be summarised as follows. 
 
All 32 of the CVF managerial behaviours are performed by the deans. Some 
behaviours are performed more often than others. Within their day-to-day 
managing activities, the deans reported that they very often protect continuity in 
day-to-day operations, see that the faculty delivers on stated goals, and facilitate 
team building and consensus decision making. They reported that they less 
frequently engage in behaviours in relation to influencing decisions at higher 
levels in the university, persuasively selling new ideas to central university 
management, and experimenting with new concepts and procedures. From these 
32 behaviours, eight managerial leadership roles based on the CVF can be 
identified.  
 
All eight managerial leadership roles are played, at least to some extent, by the 
deans. Some roles are played more frequently than others. The facilitator, 
producer, and director roles are played most frequently, while the innovator and 
broker roles are the least frequently played roles. To explore and identify the 
managerial leadership styles of the deans, we used the eight roles as a 
configuration to pattern a style. Based on the mean scores of the eight roles 
performed by all deans in the study, a managerial leadership style was identified 
and named as the Master style. It is a style that reflects some aspects of all eight 
managerial roles. This Master style represents the overall style (or general style) 
of deanship at Indonesian universities. The deans who exhibit this style are 
theoretically able to employ a variety of different perspectives in managing. For 
instance, the deans can perform a facilitator role (focusing on collaboration) and a 
producer role (focusing on competitiveness) at the same time.  
 
In our deeper explorative analysis, we focused on the relative importance of the 
roles, using 12.5% as the expected result if all eight roles were equally important. 
Based on this, a dichotomy of importance was constructed. That is, ≥ 12.5% 
represents more importance and < 12.5% represents less importance. Then, by 
using these dichotomies, we performed a cluster analysis which enabled us to 
identify four particular managerial leadership styles of deans at Indonesian 
universities. Based on the more important roles within each configuration, we 

140 
Chapter 6 
 
named them the Competitive Consultant style, the Focused Team Captain style, 
the Consensual Goal-Setter style, and the Informed Trust-Builder style.  
 
The Competitive Consultant style is mainly characterised by the director, 
producer, and facilitator roles, with other roles also visible. The findings indicated 
that 37% of the deans (81 out of 218) have this style. The Consensual Goal-Setter 
style emphasises the facilitator and director roles. The innovator, monitor, and 
broker roles also feature, with other roles present to some extent. A total of 24% of 
the deans (53 out of 218) were found to demonstrate this style. The next style is 
the Focused Team Captain. This style is mainly characterised by the facilitator 
and producer roles. Other roles, with the exception of the director role, are also 
visible. It was found that 20% of the deans (44 out of 218) exhibited this style. 
Lastly, the Informed Trust-Builder style is characterised by the mentor, producer, 
monitor, and coordinator roles. The director and facilitator roles are also present, 
but the innovator and broker roles are not. A total of 18% of the deans (40 out of 
218) were found to have this style.  
 
Male deans are less likely to exhibit the Informed Trust-Builder style, which is 
primarily characterised by the mentor role. Female deans are less likely to exhibit 
the Focused Team Captain style which is characterised by the facilitator and 
producer roles. Indonesian deans who are under 40 years old are more likely to 
have the Competitive Consultant style and less likely to have the Informed Trust-
Builder style. Deans of non-technical faculties are more likely to demonstrate the 
Consensual Goal-Setter style and deans of technical faculties are more likely to 
demonstrate the Focused Team Captain style. Deans who have been in their 
position for five to six years are more likely to show the Competitive Consultant 
style. However, these same deans are less likely to show the Focused Team 
Captain style or the Informed Trust-Builder style. The findings indicated that the 
Competitive Consultant is the most frequently exhibited style across all 
demographic groups.  
 
The findings of this chapter answer our research question: what kind of 
managerial leadership styles do deans at Indonesian universities exhibit? The 
study indicates one overall style—the Master and the four specific styles—the 
Competitive Consultant, Focused Team Captain, Consensual Goal-Setter, and 
Informed Trust-Builder.  

7 
C H A P T E R  
Descriptive Analysis of Attitudes, 
Subjective Norms, Perceived 
Behavioural Control, and 
Background Factors 
“I’ve come loaded with Statistics, for I’ve noticed that a man can’t prove anything without 
Statistics.” 
Mark Twain (1835-1910) 
In the previous chapter, we discussed the managerial leadership styles 
demonstrated by deans at Indonesian universities. In this chapter, we present a 
descriptive analysis of the attitudes, subjective norms, and perceived behavioural 
control of deans as proximal factors influencing the styles of deanship in Section 
7.1. Next in Section 7.2, we present a descriptive analysis of background factors 
as relevant factors for understanding the deans’ attitudes, subjective norms, and 
perceived behavioural control. Finally, a summary of this chapter is presented in 
7.3. 

142 
 
Chapter 7 
 
7.1 
DESCRIPTIVE 
ANALYSIS 
OF 
THE 
ATTITUDES, 
SUBJECTIVE 
NORMS, 
AND 
PERCEIVED 
BEHAVIOURAL CONTROL OF DEANS  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.1 Factors Influencing Deans’ Managerial Leadership Styles 
7.1.1 
Attitudes of Deans 
An attitude towards a behaviour is the degree to which performance of the 
behaviour is positively or negatively valued (Ajzen and Fishbein 1980, Fishbein 
and Ajzen 2010). It is assumed to have two important components: (1) 
behavioural belief (the subjective probability that the behaviour will produce a 
given outcome) and (2) evaluation of the outcome (favourability or 
unfavourability of the behaviour). Specifically, the attitude is determined by the 
total set of accessible behavioural beliefs (b) which are weighted by the evaluation 
(e) of the outcome. In other words, attitude (A) is the aggregation of behavioural 
beliefs and evaluation of outcome as shown in this equation: A = bi*ei. 
 
For this study, we developed questions about behavioural beliefs (b) and about 
evaluation of outcomes (e) to assess the deans’ attitudes.17 The questions refer to 
the eight managerial leadership roles based on the Competing Values Framework 
(CVF). The results of measuring the deans’ attitudes are depicted in Table 7.1. 
                                                           
17 The results of the descriptive analysis of the deans’ behavioural beliefs and their 
evaluation of outcomes can be found in Appendix D, Tables 1 and 2 respectively.  
Attitudes towards the 
managerial leadership 
styles
Managerial leadership 
styles of deans
Subjective norms
Perceived behavioural 
control

Descriptive Analysis of Attitudes, Subjective Norms, Perceived Behavioural Control  
and Background Factors 
143 
 
Table 7.1 Attitudes of Deans towards the Eight Managerial Leadership Roles Based on 
the CVF 
Deans’ attitudes towards the eight managerial leadership roles 
Mean* 
SD 
N 
Director 
40.5 
7.2 
218 
Facilitator 
40.3 
7.9 
218 
Coordinator 
40.2 
8.3 
218 
Producer 
39.5 
7.9 
218 
Innovator 
39.3 
8.5 
218 
Monitor 
38.3 
8.8 
217 
Broker 
36.7 
9.1 
217 
Mentor 
33.9 
9.4 
218 
Note: *Mean scores range from 1 (not important at all) to 49 (extremely important). See Equation 
4.2 for the calculation. 
 
Table 7.1 shows that, in general, the deans have positive attitudes towards the 
eight managerial leadership roles. However, some managerial leadership roles 
are perceived more positively than others. Table 7.1 shows that the deans 
perceived leadership roles such as the director, facilitator, and coordinator very 
positively. They were less positive about the broker and mentor roles.  
 
This finding suggests that, when leading and managing a faculty, the deans 
believe that it is important for them to emphasise leadership roles such as 
clarifying faculty’s expectations through planning and goal setting, maintaining 
the structure and flow of the faculty, and building cohesion and teamwork. Deans 
believe that they should also have some focus on leadership roles that entail 
results and performance; facilitating adaptation and change; and maintaining 
information management in terms of reviewing records, reports and files. 
Although they believe the broker and mentor roles are less significant, the deans 
still believe that they should engage in leadership roles such as maintaining 
external legitimacy and developing faculty staff members.  
7.1.2 
Subjective Norms of Deans 
A subjective norm is the perceived social pressure to engage or not to engage in a 
behaviour (Ajzen and Fishbein 1980, Fishbein and Ajzen 2010). It is assumed to 
have two important components: (1) normative beliefs (the expectations of the 
important referents) and (2) motivation to comply (the individual’s motivation to 
comply with the different referents). Theoretically, the subjective norm is 

144 
 
Chapter 7 
 
determined by the total set of accessible normative beliefs (n) which are weighted 
by the motivation to comply (m). In other words, subjective norm (SN) is the 
aggregation of normative beliefs and motivation to comply as shown in this 
equation: SN = ni*mi 
 
For this study, we developed questions about normative beliefs (n). The questions 
refer to the four aspects of leadership from the CVF. Concerning the motivation to 
comply with (m),18 we selected faculty academics (FA), fellow deans (FD), and 
central management (CM) as the three important referents. The results of 
measuring the deans’ subjective norms are displayed in Table 7.2.  
Table 7.2 Subjective Norms of Deans for the Four Aspects of Faculty Leadership Based 
on the CVF 
 
Important referents 
 
 
 
FA 
FD 
CM 
 
 
 
Four aspects of faculty leadership 
(with respect to) 
M* 
SD 
M 
SD 
M 
SD 
Total 
mean 
score** 
SD 
N 
Clear vision that embraces 
innovation and change (Adhocracy) 
17 
5.3 
12 
5.5 
15 
5.9 
44 
13.6 
216 
Strong coordination and detailed 
organisation of teaching and 
research (Hierarchy) 
16 
5.9 
12 
5.9 
14 
5.9 
42 
13.8 
216 
Market-driven and results-oriented 
behaviour of academics (Market) 
15 
6.0 
11 
5.6 
14 
5.7 
40 
13.9 
216 
Sense of collectivism with 
consensual decision making and 
much personal attention (Clan) 
15 
6.7 
11 
6.1 
13 
6.5 
39 
13.8 
216 
Note: FA = faculty academics, FD = fellow deans, CM = central management, *all mean scores 
range from -21 (very negative) to +21 (very positive), **Total mean scores = the sum of the mean 
scores of the three important referents with regard to each aspect of faculty leadership. The total 
scores range from -63 (very negative) to +63 (very positive). See Equation 4.3 for the calculation. 
 
Table 7.2 shows that the deans have generally positive subjective norms for the 
four aspects of faculty leadership based on the CVF (see the total mean scores). 
                                                           
18 The results of the descriptive analysis of the deans’ normative beliefs and their 
motivation to comply can be found in Appendix D, Tables 3 and 4 respectively. 

Descriptive Analysis of Attitudes, Subjective Norms, Perceived Behavioural Control  
and Background Factors 
145 
 
This means that deans’ perceive social pressures to perform the four aspects of 
faculty leadership. The deans believe that their academics, their fellow deans, and 
their central management think they should engage in the clan, adhocracy, 
market, and hierarchy aspects of leadership. They believe that their referents 
want them to be adaptable and flexible (adhocracy), but they also want deans to 
be stable and controlled (hierarchy). In addition, there exists social pressure for 
deans to focus on human resources and morale (clan), but also on planning and 
goal setting, productivity and efficiency (market).  
 
The outcomes in Table 7.2 also show that the deans have more positive 
perceptions of the expectations of their faculty academics than those of their 
central management and fellow deans. These findings suggest that the deans are 
more motivated to comply with the views of their faculty academics than with the 
other two groups. Nevertheless, the expectations of central management are also 
important as are the expectations of fellow deans (although to a lesser extent). 
7.1.3 
Perceived Behavioural Control of Deans 
Perceived behavioural control refers to people’s perceptions of their ability to 
perform a given behaviour when they have control over its performance 
(Fishbein and Ajzen 2010). To measure the deans’ perceived behavioural control, 
we asked eleven questions directly related to personal and environmental factors 
that deans at Indonesian universities may face in managing their faculty.19 These 
questions were administered to the 218 deans who responded to the first survey, 
and a total of 75 completed questionnaires were obtained (see Chapter 4). The 
results are shown in Table 7.3. 
                                                           
19 The results of factor analysis classifying the eleven items of control beliefs into three 
distinct dimensions of perceived behavioural control can be seen in Appendix B, Table 2.  

146 
 
Chapter 7 
 
Table 7.3 Perceived Behavioural Control of Deans 
Perceived control 
Mean* 
SD 
N 
Internal controls 
4.3 
1.0 
75 
Environmental controls 
3.8 
0.9 
75 
Practical controls 
3.7 
1.2 
75 
Note: *Mean scores range from 1 (not at all) to 6 (very high extent). Mean scores close to 6 
indicate having more control. 
 
Table 7.3 shows that the deans of the study perceive that the internal, 
environmental, and practical controls are not obstacles when they lead and 
manage a faculty. However, deans are more confident of their abilities when 
faced with internal controls than environmental and practical controls. This 
suggests that the deans believe that they have strong control over internal factors 
such as conflicts between personal values and the faculty culture, lack of skills, 
the existence of unclear and fragmented authorities within the faculty, and a lack 
of interest from faculty academics on faculty matters. Although deans’ 
perceptions of environmental and practical controls are slightly lower than those 
of internal controls, the deans still believe that they have some control over these 
two areas. This suggests that the deans may believe that they have relatively high 
control over faculty information systems, academic values, authority in decision 
making, capacity of administrative staff, and practical factors in relation to the 
size and complexity of their faculty and workload. In other words, the deans do 
not think that any of these factors could prevent them from exhibiting their 
managerial leadership styles.  
7.2 
DESCRIPTIVE ANALYSIS OF BACKGROUND FACTORS 
In this section, we describe our background factors—faculty (organisational) 
culture, managerial skills, and demographic factors like gender, age, term of 
office, and academic discipline—used in the research model. These background 
factors serve as possible influential factors on observed relations to the attitudes, 
subjective norms, and perceived behavioural control of deans.  
7.2.1 
Faculty Culture 
To describe the organisational culture of Indonesian faculty, we employed the 
Organizational Culture Assessment Instrument (OCAI) based on the CVF 

Descriptive Analysis of Attitudes, Subjective Norms, Perceived Behavioural Control  
and Background Factors 
147 
 
(Cameron and Quinn 2006, pp. 26-28). This instrument allows us to assess 
Indonesian faculty culture based on the four aspects of organisational culture—
the clan, adhocracy, hierarchy, and market culture—within the CVF.20 For the 
calculation, we conducted a factor analysis to check whether the theoretically 
assumed four aspects of organisational culture could also be identified from our 
data. The analytical results show no clear distinction between the four aspects of 
culture. This indicates that Indonesian universities are characterised by a mix of 
the four aspects of faculty culture.  
 
Although we could not statistically create a neat four-aspect picture of faculty 
culture based on the OCAI, we decided to keep and use the four aspects of faculty 
culture which the theory suggests. This enabled us to use the four aspects of 
culture based on the OCAI as a configuration to identify a specific or dominant 
aspect of culture in Indonesian faculties. We expected that we could find 
meaningful differences to demonstrate (more) dominant aspects of faculty culture 
at Indonesian universities. For these purposes, an average score was obtained by 
summing the scores of the six items in each aspect of culture and then dividing 
the sum by six. The results are shown in Table 7.4.  
Table 7.4 Four Aspects of Faculty Culture at Indonesian Universities 
Four aspects of faculty culture 
Mean* 
SD 
Cronbach’s Alpha (6)** 
N 
Clan 
6.1 
0.6 
0.6 
215 
Hierarchy 
5.9 
0.7 
0.7 
216 
Market 
5.6 
0.7 
0.7 
215 
Adhocracy 
5.5 
0.8 
0.7 
215 
Note: *Mean scores range from 1 (absolutely not) to 7 (completely). **The number in brackets 
indicates numbers of items. See Equation 4.4 for the calculation. 
 
Table 7.4 shows that the consistency of the items in each aspect of skills is 
relatively satisfactory (Cronbach’s Alpha coefficients are ≥ 0.6) (Nunnally 1978). It 
also shows that the four aspects of faculty culture within the CVF are clearly 
identifiable and a dominant culture is not clearly distinguished. This suggests 
that Indonesian faculties contain a mix of cultural aspects. This finding supports 
the previous finding, highlighting a mixed picture of organisations. Nevertheless, 
we can still see that faculties in Indonesian universities lean more towards the 
clan and hierarchy cultures. 
 
                                                           
20 A classification of the four aspects of faculty culture appears in Chapter 4, Table 4.9. 

148 
 
Chapter 7 
 
Faculties which are dominated by the clan culture are strongly characterised by 
‚a family-type organisation‛ (Cameron and Quinn 2006, p. 41). This indicates that 
these faculties usually place greater importance on shared values and goals, 
cohesion, participation, and a sense of ‘we-ness’. People in these clan-aspect 
faculties regularly focus on teamwork, participation, commitment, loyalty, and 
employee development. Faculties which are dominated by the hierarchy culture 
are characterised by formality and structure. This implies that these faculties are 
usually managed by ‚clear lines of decision-making authority; standardised rules 
and procedures, and control and accountability mechanisms‛ (Cameron and 
Quinn 2006, p. 37). People in these hierarchy-dominated faculties comply with the 
rules and policies that outline what they should do and maintain the smooth 
structure and flow of the system in the faculty.  
 
Interestingly, the findings on the dominant aspect of faculty culture based on the 
OCAI are consistent with the analysis of Indonesian national culture based on 
Hofstede’s four cultural dimensions. In his cross-cultural study across nations, 
Hofstede (Online) finds that Indonesia is a collectivistic and hierarchical society 
(see Chapter 3). From these findings, we assume that faculty cultures are a 
manifestation of the national culture which ‚can influence how people set 
personal and professional goals, perform tasks and administer resources to 
achieve them‛ (Lok and Crawford 2003, p. 323).  
7.2.2 
Management Skills 
To identify the deans’ perceptions of important management skills necessary to 
succeed as deans,21 we used the Management Skills Assessment Instrument 
(MSAI) (Cameron and Quinn 2006, pp. 120-121) which is based on the Competing 
Values Framework (CVF). In completing this analysis, we first carried out a factor 
analysis to check whether the theoretically assumed management skills could be 
identified in our data. As the theory suggests, the results indicated that there is a 
clear distinction between the four aspects of management skills. We then 
conducted a descriptive analysis to identify the deans’ perceptions of the four 
aspects of managerial skills based on the CVF. The results of the analysis are 
displayed in Table 7.5. 
                                                           
21 A classification of the four aspects of managerial skills based on the CVF appears in 
Chapter 4, Table 4.10. 

Descriptive Analysis of Attitudes, Subjective Norms, Perceived Behavioural Control  
and Background Factors 
149 
 
Table 7.5 Deans’ Perceptions of the Four Aspects of Management Skills Based on the 
CVF 
Four aspects of management 
skills 
Mean* 
SD 
Cronbach’s Alpha (3)** 
N 
Clan 
6.6 
0.6 
0.7 
218 
Adhocracy 
6.6 
0.6 
0.8 
218 
Hierarchy 
6.4 
0.7 
0.8 
218 
Market 
6.3 
0.7 
0.8 
218 
Note: *Mean scores range from 1 (not important at all) to 7 (critically important). **The number 
in brackets indicates numbers of items. See Equation 4.5 for the calculation. 
 
Table 7.5 shows that all data measures are robust in terms of their internal 
consistency as demonstrated by their Cronbach’s Alpha (α coefficients are ≥ 0.7) 
(Nunnally 1978). Furthermore, in Table 7.5 we see that there are only marginal 
distinctions in the way the deans perceive different management skills. This 
suggests that the deans believe that the four aspects of management skills are 
important for them to succeed in their roles. Nevertheless, the deans perceive that 
it is most important to be competent in the clan and adhocracy skill areas.  
7.2.3 
Demographic Factors 
A total of 218 deans from Sumatera to Papua participated in the deanship survey. 
The demographic characteristics of deans at Indonesian universities are shown in 
Table 7.6. 
Table 7.6 Demographic Characteristics of Deans at Indonesian Universities (N = 218, 
in %) 
Demographics 
Frequency (n) 
Percentage 
Gender 
 
 
     Male 
179 
82 
     Female 
39 
18 
Age 
 
 
     < 40 
21 
10 
     40-50 
82 
38 
     51-60 
93 
43 
     > 60 
22 
10 
Term in office (years) 
 
 
     ≤ 2 
102 
47 

150 
 
Chapter 7 
 
     3-4 
58 
27 
     5-6 
27 
12 
     > 6 
31 
14 
Academic discipline 
 
 
     Technical 
79 
36 
     Non-technical 
139 
64 
 
Table 7.6 shows that, of the 218 respondents, 82% are male and 18% are female. 
This suggests that the predominance of men amongst deans at Indonesian 
universities is reflected in this study. Deans aged between 51 and 60 (43%) and 
between 40 and 50 (38%) are overrepresented, while those 60+ (10%) and under 40 
(10%) are underrepresented. There is no comparative data to determine whether 
this reflects the general dean population. With respect to term of office, 47% of 
deans report that they have been in their position for less than two years. In 
addition, the deans come from a wide variety of faculties—we have grouped 
these into two major areas—technical and non-technical faculties. While 64% of 
respondents are from non-technical faculties, 36% are from technical faculties.22 
7.3 
SUMMARY 
This chapter provides the descriptive analysis of the factors influencing the 
managerial leadership styles of deans at Indonesian universities. It describes the 
proximal determinants of the styles, that is, attitudes, subjective norms, and 
perceived behavioural control. It also addresses faculty culture, management 
skills, and demographic factors as background factors that may influence the 
determinants of the styles.  
The results of the descriptive analysis indicate that, in general, the deans of the 
study have positive attitudes towards the eight managerial leadership roles 
within the CVF. However, some roles are perceived more positively, while others 
are perceived less positively. The findings show that the deans hold more 
favourable attitudes towards the director, facilitator, and coordinator roles. They 
have less favourable attitudes towards the broker and mentor roles.  
 
With respect to subjective norms, in general, the deans of the study believe that 
their important referents—faculty academics, fellow deans, and central 
management—think they should demonstrate the clan, adhocracy, market, and 
hierarchy leadership within the CVF. In addition, the findings indicate that the 
                                                           
22 See Chapter 4 for the classification of the two groups of faculty. 

Descriptive Analysis of Attitudes, Subjective Norms, Perceived Behavioural Control  
and Background Factors 
151 
 
deans tend to comply more with the expectations of their faculty academics than 
with the expectations of their other two referents. 
 
Regarding perceived behavioural control, the deans in the study generally 
perceive that the specified environmental, internal, and practical factors are not 
barriers that impede their managerial leadership styles. However, the deans 
themselves believe to have more control over internal factors including conflict 
between personal values and faculty culture, lack of skills, having unclear and 
fragmented authorities within the faculty, and dealing with lack of interest from 
faculty academics on faculty matters.  
 
Regarding faculty cultures, the results show that Indonesian universities reflect a 
mix of the four aspects of organisational culture. However, the clan and hierarchy 
aspects are found to be more dominant than the market and adhocracy aspects of 
culture. With respect to management skills, the deans in the study perceive that it 
is more important for them to have the clan and adhocracy skills if they want to 
succeed. In this study, the majority of deans are male (82%). More than 40% of 
them are between 51 and 60 years old. Most deans have held their position for 
less than two years. More than 60% of the deans chair non-technical faculties.  
 

152 
 

8 
C H A P T E R
 
Understanding the Managerial 
Leadership Styles of Deans  
“Look deep into nature, and then you will understand everything better.” 
Albert Einstein (1879-1955) 
In the previous chapter, the variables forming the research models for the study 
were described. In this chapter, the relationships between the variables in our 
behavioural models are examined.23 First, the volitional behavioural model of the 
study is analysed. In this model, the influences of attitudes and subjective norms 
on the managerial leadership styles of deans are examined and explained in 
Section 8.1. Second, the non-volitional behavioural model of the study is 
analysed. In this model, the influences of attitudes, subjective norms, 
environmental controls, internal controls, and practical controls on the 
                                                           
23 We also examined the relation path of the models by using a software application 
SmartPLS version 2.0 M3 (Ringle et al. 2005). The results generated by SmartPLS and by 
Statistics show no substantial difference (see Appendix E, Table 1 for a comparison). 
However, we decided to use Statistics because first, SmartPLS does not provide some of 
the measurements that we needed for an in depth analysis. Second, Statistics provided 
consistent data measurements. 

154 
 
Chapter 8 
managerial leadership styles of deans are investigated and discussed in Section 
8.2. The influences of background factors on the attitudes, subjective norms, 
environmental controls, internal controls, and practical controls of deans are 
examined and presented in Section 8.3. Lastly, Section 8.4 summarises and 
concludes this chapter. 
8.1 
THE VOLITIONAL BEHAVIOURAL MODEL OF THE 
STUDY: 
INFLUENCES 
OF 
ATTITUDES 
AND 
SUBJECTIVE 
NORMS 
ON 
THE 
MANAGERIAL 
LEADERSHIP STYLES OF DEANS 
 
Ajzen and Fishbein’s (1980) volitional behavioural model assumes that individuals will 
perform a behaviour of interest when they have positive attitudes towards this behaviour 
and have positive subjective norms for this behaviour.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note: Arrows indicate the direction of influence. 
Figure 8.1 Influences of Attitudes and Subjective Norms on the Managerial 
Leadership Styles of Deans 
Data were analysed in two stages. First, the correlation between attitudes and 
subjective norms and the managerial leadership styles was analysed. For this 
analysis, a bivariate regression analysis was used. Second, the influences of 
attitudes and subjective norms on the managerial leadership styles of deans were 
analysed. For this analysis, a multiple linear regression analysis was used. It was 
expected that both attitudes and subjective norms would influence the 
managerial leadership styles of deans.  
Attitudes towards the 
managerial leadership 
styles 
Managerial leadership 
styles of deans
Subjective norms
                                                             

Understanding the Managerial Leadership Styles of Deans 
155 
8.1.1 
Preliminary Analysis 
For the calculation, we used the original data (N = 218). In this volitional 
behavioural model, attitude and subjective norms served as the independent 
variables and all the styles (the Master style and the four specific styles) served as 
the dependent variables. Attitude, subjective norm, and the Master style variable 
were calculated on the basis of a composite score of their manifest average scores 
(see Chapter 4, Table 4.11). For the specific styles, all variables were a composite 
score of the average score of the important roles in each style (see Chapter 6, 
Figures 6.3 to 6.6). For example, the Competitive Consultant style variable was a 
composite score of the average score of the director, producer, and facilitator roles 
as they are considered the important roles for this style. The results of the 
bivariate regression analysis are shown in Tables 8.1 and 8.2.  
Table 8.1 Influences of Attitudes on the Managerial Leadership Styles of Deans (N = 
217) 
 
Attitude 
Managerial leadership style 
β* 
R2 
Master  
0.59 
0.34 
Competitive Consultant  
0.57 
0.31 
Focused Team Captain  
0.54 
0.29 
Consensual Goal-Setter  
0.54 
0.29 
Informed Trust-Builder  
0.57 
0.32 
Notes: β = standardized regression coefficient = correlation coefficient, R2 = adjusted coefficient 
of determination, *all β coefficients are significant at p < 0.001. 
 
Table 8.1 shows the influences of attitudes on the managerial leadership styles of 
deans. As we expected, the results indicate that attitudes significantly, positively, 
and strongly influence all the styles. This is indicated by the high beta coefficients 
ranging from 0.54 to 0.59 (p < 0.001). Furthermore, Table 8.1 shows that the deans’ 
attitudes explain approximately 30% of the variance in their managerial 
leadership styles. This suggests that, in this study, attitudes strongly influence the 
managerial leadership styles of deans.  

156 
 
Chapter 8 
Table 8.2 Influences of Subjective Norms on the Managerial Leadership Styles of Deans 
(N = 215) 
 
Subjective norm 
Managerial leadership style 
β* 
R2 
Master  
0.35 
0.11 
Competitive Consultant  
0.32 
0.10 
Focused Team Captain  
0.31 
0.10 
Consensual Goal-Setter  
0.30 
0.09 
Informed Trust-Builder  
0.33 
0.10 
Notes: β = standardized regression coefficient = correlation coefficient, R2 = adjusted coefficient 
of determination, * all β coefficients are significant at p < 0.001. 
 
Table 8.2 shows the influences of subjective norms on the managerial leadership 
styles of deans. The findings indicate that subjective norms significantly, 
positively, and moderately influence all the styles (beta coefficients range from 
0.30 to 0.35, p < 0.001). However, we expected that the regression coefficients 
would be higher than 0.35, reflecting the relative importance of subjective norms 
in influencing the styles. Our expectation was based on the fact that Indonesia is a 
collectivist society in which individuals are integrated into strong cohesive in-
groups (see Chapter 3). Furthermore, the results displayed in Table 8.3 show that 
the deans’ subjective norms only explain approximately 10% of the variance in 
their managerial leadership styles. This suggests that, in this study, subjective 
norms are a weak factor influencing the managerial leadership styles of deans.  
8.1.2 
Main Analysis 
In this subsection, the influences of attitudes and subjective norms on the 
managerial leadership styles of deans are investigated. The results of the multiple 
linear regression analysis are presented in Table 8.3. 

Understanding the Managerial Leadership Styles of Deans 
157 
Table 8.3 Influences of Attitudes and Subjective Norms on the Managerial Leadership 
Styles of Deans (N = 215) 
 
Attitude 
 
Subjective norm 
 
 
Managerial leadership style 
β* 
sig 
 
β 
sig 
R 
R2 
Master  
0.57 
0.00 
 
0.03 
0.66 
0.59 
0.34 
Competitive Consultant  
0.56 
0.00 
 
0.01 
0.89 
0.57 
0.31 
Focused Team Captain  
0.53 
0.00 
 
0.02 
0.76 
0.54 
0.29 
Consensual Goal-Setter  
0.54 
0.00 
 
0.01 
0.93 
0.54 
0.29 
Informed Trust-Builder  
0.57 
0.00 
 
0.02 
0.83 
0.57 
0.32 
Notes: β = standardized regression coefficient, R = multiple correlation coefficient, R2 = adjusted 
coefficient of determination, *all beta coefficients of attitudes are significant at p < 0.001. 
 
Table 8.3 shows the influences of attitudes and subjective norms on the 
managerial leadership styles of deans. When attitudes and subjective norms are 
put together in the equation on the multiple linear regression analysis, only 
attitudes significantly, positively, and strongly influence all the styles. Subjective 
norms show no significant influence on the styles. These findings are intriguing 
compared to the findings of the previous analyses, showing that subjective norms 
influence all the styles with moderate magnitudes (see Table 8.2). Although in the 
previous analyses the relative weights of subjective norms are not as strong as 
those of attitudes, we still would expect subjective norms, to some extent, to 
contribute to the explanation of the styles. Regarding this issue, we assume that 
there might be a correlation between attitudes and subjective norms.  
 
In response to this, we investigated the correlation between attitudes and 
subjective norms. There is a relatively high correlation between them (correlation 
coefficient = 0.55), confirming Fishbein and Ajzen’s (2010, p. 192) statement that 
‚the reason for disparity in the magnitude of correlation and regression 
coefficients is that the predictors are intercorrelated‛. This finding is not unusual. 
As stated by Ajzen: 
 
… attitude (A), subjective norm (SN), and perceived behavioural 
control (PBC) are conceptually independent predictors of 
intentions. However, empirically they are usually found to be 
inter-correlated because the same information can influence 
behavioural, normative, and/or control beliefs, the theoretical 
antecedents of A, SN, and PBC, respectively (Online, Frequently 
Asked Questions, point 16). 

158 
 
Chapter 8 
The inter-correlation between attitudes and subjective norms sometimes results in 
a statistical problem, called multicollinearity, where the two predictors are 
simultaneously entered into a regression equation to explain a behaviour of 
interest (Miniard and Cohen 1981 cited in Eagly and Chaiken 1993, p. 171). For 
this reason, we conducted a multicollinearity analysis. The results are shown in 
Table 8.4. 
Table 8.4 Multicollinearity Analysis for the Volitional Behavioural Model (N= 216) 
Coefficients 
Model: Master 
style 
Unstandardized 
Coefficients 
Standardized 
Coefficients 
t 
Sig. 
Collinearity 
Statistics* 
B 
Std. Error 
Beta 
Tolerance 
VIF 
Attitude 
.028 
.003 
.573 
8.634 .000 
.696 
1.436 
Subjective 
Norm 
.001 
.003 
.029 
.438 .662 
.696 
1.436 
Notes: Tolerance = a measure of collinearity, VIF = Variance Inflation Factor, showing how much 
the variance of the coefficient estimate is being inflated by multicollinearity. *A tolerance close to
0 and a VIF close to 10 (rule of thumb) suggest that multicollinearity may be a threat.  
 
The results displayed in Table 8.4 show that multicollinearity is present but it is 
still within tolerance levels. The tolerance coefficients are relatively high (Tol = 
0.696), and the VIF coefficient is not higher than that of the rule of thumb of 10 
(VIF = 1.436) (Williams 2011, pp. 1, 3). These suggest that ‚while attitudes and 
subjective norms can be, and frequently are, supported by similar and 
interrelated belief systems, contrary to Minard and Cohen (1981), this is not to say 
that they are conceptually indistinct‛ (Liska 1984, p. 68). Based on this result, we 
can empirically treat attitudes and subjective norms as two independent 
determinants of the styles. 
 
The insignificance of subjective norms does not necessarily imply that subjective 
norms are not an important determinant of the styles. Subjective norms can still 
be an important determinant of styles, but because subjective norms share 
information with attitudes, their influence is not reflected in the correlation with 
the styles. In our study, the influences of subjective norms are, to a large extent, 
mediated by attitudes.  
 
Returning to Table 8.3, it can be seen that although subjective norms do not 
influence the styles, the adjusted coefficients of determination (R2) in the last 

Understanding the Managerial Leadership Styles of Deans 
159 
column show that the deans’ attitudes account for approximately 30% of the 
variance in their managerial leadership styles. This suggests that, in this study, 
attitudes are the predominant determinant of the managerial leadership styles of 
deans. This finding is consistent with the previous findings, supporting that 
attitudes are a strong factor influencing the managerial leadership styles of deans. 
 
In conclusion, the empirical model of the managerial leadership styles of deans at 
Indonesian universities based on the volitional behaviour model of the study can 
be presented as follows.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.2 The Empirical Model of the Managerial Leadership Styles of 
Deans at Indonesian Universities based on Ajzen and 
Fishbein’s (1980) Volitional Behaviour Model 
 
Furthermore, the theory of volitional behaviour assumes that the more favourable 
the attitudes towards a behaviour of interest, the stronger the demonstration of 
such behaviour. For this study, the more the deans hold favourable attitudes 
towards a managerial leadership style, the more likely the deans will demonstrate 
this style.  
 
To investigate this assumption, we carried out a ‘zoom-in’ analysis. In the 
calculation, we used the attitudes related to the dominant roles for each style. The 
Competitive Consultant style, for example, is dominated by the producer, 
director, and facilitator roles, so we used the attitudes towards these for our 
calculation. For this zoom-in analysis, a multiple linear regression analysis was 
used. The attitudes towards the dominant roles for each style were the 
independent variables and the managerial leadership styles were the dependent 
variables. The results of the zoom-in analysis are presented in Table 8.5.  
 
 
Subjective norms
Attitudes towards 
the managerial 
leadership styles
Managerial 
leadership styles of 
deans

160 
 
Chapter 8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Managerial leadership style
Role dimensions of Attitudes
innovator
broker
producer
director
coordinator
monitor
facilitator
mentor
r**
β
r**
β
r**
β
r**
β
r**
β
r**
β
r**
β
r**
β
R
R2
N
Master (all of the eight managerial 
roles)
0.47
0.08
0.51
0.23*
0.52
0.12
0.48
0.10
0.42
0.03
0.45
0.18*
0.35
0.01
0.42
0.08
0.62
0.36
215
Competitive Consultant (producer, 
director, facilitator) 
0.49
0.27*
0.49
0.28*
0.37
0.09
0.55
0.29
217
Focused Team Captain (producer, 
facilitator) 
0.48
0.39*
0.37
0.15*
0.49
0.24
215
Consensual Goal-Setter (director, 
facilitator)
0.46
0.37*
0.37
0.20*
0.49
0.23
217
Informed Trust-Builder 
(producer, coordinator, monitor, 
mentor) 
0.49
0.21*
0.46
0.11
0.52
0.29*
0.39
0.12*
0.59
0.34
216
Notes: r = zero-order correlation coefficient, β = standardized regression coefficient, R = multiple correlation coefficient, R2 = adjusted coefficient of determination, the bolded
standardized β coefficients represent the significant dimensions of attitude , *significant at p ≤0.05, **all zero-order correlation coefficients are significant at
p < 0.01.
Table 8.5 Zoom-in Analysis of the Styles from Attitudes

Chapter 8 
161 
The results displayed in Table 8.5 (third row) show that the Focused Team 
Captain style is influenced by attitudes towards the dominant roles in this style, 
that is, the producer and facilitator. Similarly, the Consensual Goal-Setter style 
(fourth row of Table 8.5) is influenced by attitudes towards the dominant roles in 
this style, that is, the director and facilitator. These findings support the theory 
that the deans who have more favourable attitudes towards a style will more 
likely demonstrate such a style.  
 
Furthermore, Table 8.5 (second row) shows that the Competitive Consultant style 
is influenced by attitudes towards the producer and director roles, but not its 
third dominant role, the facilitator. The Informed Trust-Builder style (fifth row of 
Table 8.5) is influenced by attitudes towards three of its dominant roles—the 
producer, monitor, and mentor—but not its fourth dominant role, the 
coordinator. The Master style (first row of Table 8.5) is only influenced by 
attitudes towards two out of the eight roles related to this style, that is, the broker 
and monitor. With respect to these limitations, we assume that there is a 
correlation between one explanatory variable and any of the other explanatory 
variables of the styles. For example, attitude towards the coordinator role may 
still be an important determinant of the Informed Trust-Builder style (fifth row of 
Table 8.5). However, its influence does not appear significantly in the regression 
because it shares information with any of the other determinants of this style. 
 
Although the outcomes did not fully meet our expectations, the findings are still 
largely consistent with the theoretical assumptions.  
 
 

162 
 
Chapter 8 
 
8.2 
THE NON-VOLITIONAL BEHAVIOURAL MODEL OF 
THE STUDY: INFLUENCES OF ATTITUDES, SUBJECTIVE 
NORMS, AND PERCEIVED BEHAVIOURAL CONTROL ON 
THE MANAGERIAL LEADERSHIP STYLES OF DEANS  
 
Fishbein and Ajzen’s (2010) non-volitional behavioural model assumes that individuals 
will perform a behaviour of interest when they have positive attitudes towards this 
behaviour, when they have positive subjective norms for this behaviour and when they 
believe that they have control over the performance of this behaviour. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note: Arrows indicate the direction of influence. This empirical model includes the three 
dimensions of perceived behavioural control as additional determinants of managerial 
leadership styles of deans. This is the only difference between the volitional model 
(Section 8.1) and the non-volitional model (this section).  
Figure 8.3 
Influences of Attitudes, Subjective Norms, Environmental Controls, 
Internal Controls, and Practical Controls on the Managerial 
Leadership Styles of Deans 
As mentioned in Chapter 4, we carried out a follow-up survey addressing 
perceived behavioural control. For this, we received a total of 75 completed 
questionnaires which we used to analyse the non-volitional behavioural model. 
Based on factor analysis, we were able to distinguish three dimensions of 
perceived behavioural control: environmental, internal, and practical controls (see 
Chapter 4, Table 4.8). The internal consistency of the items within each control is 
Attitudes towards the 
managerial leadership 
styles
Managerial leadership 
styles of deans
Subjective norms
Environmental controls
Internal controls
Practical controls

Chapter 8 
163 
good (Cronbach’s Alpha coefficients range from 0.7 to 0.8). Environmental 
controls include factors relating to undeveloped information systems, strong 
academic values, limited authority in decision making and insufficient capacity of 
administrative staff. Internal controls include factors relating to conflicts between 
personal values and the faculty culture, lack of skills, having unclear and 
fragmented authorities within the faculty and dealing with a lack of interest from 
faculty academics on faculty matters. Practical controls include factors relating to 
size and complexity of the faculty and high workload.  
 
The data was analysed in two stages. First, we conducted a preliminary analysis 
of a correlation between attitudes, subjective norms, environmental, internal, and 
practical controls and the managerial leadership styles of deans. For this analysis, 
a bivariate regression analysis was used. Second, we conducted the main analysis 
of the influences of attitudes, subjective norms, environmental, internal, and 
practical controls on the managerial leadership styles of deans. For this analysis, a 
multiple linear regression analysis was used. It was expected that these five 
independent variables would influence the managerial leadership styles of deans.  
8.2.1 
Preliminary Analysis 
For the calculation, we used the original data (N = 75). In this non-volitional 
behavioural model, attitudes, subjective norms, environmental controls, internal 
controls, and practical controls served as the independent variables (see Chapter 
4, Table 4.12). All the styles (the Master style and the four specific styles) served 
as the dependent variables. All variables in the model were calculated on the 
basis of composite scores of their manifest average scores.  
 
Tables 8.6, 8.7, and 8.8 display the results of the bivariate regression analysis of 
attitudes, subjective norms, environmental controls, internal controls, and 
practical controls to the styles.  

164 
 
Chapter 8 
 
Table 8.6 Influences of Attitudes on the Managerial Leadership Styles of Deans          
(N = 74) 
 
Attitude 
Managerial leadership style 
β* 
R2 
Master  
0.56 
0.30 
Competitive Consultant  
0.55 
0.29 
Focused Team Captain  
0.55 
0.29 
Consensual Goal-Setter  
0.53 
0.27 
Informed Trust-Builder  
0.52 
0.26 
Notes: β = standardized regression coefficient, R2 = adjusted coefficient of determination, *all β 
coefficients are significant at p < 0.001. 
 
Table 8.6 shows the influences of attitudes to the managerial leadership styles of 
deans. Significant, positive, and strong influences are found between the attitudes 
and the styles. Attitudes explain between 26% and 30% of the variance in the 
styles. This suggests that the deans’ attitudes are a strong factor influencing their 
managerial leadership styles. This finding is consistent with the findings of the 
previous analyses (see Table 8.1) and also confirms the consistency of the models 
used for this study. The same holds true for subjective norms. 
Table 8.7 Influences of Subjective Norms on the Managerial Leadership Styles of Deans 
(N = 73) 
 
Subjective norm 
Managerial leadership style 
β* 
R2 
Master  
0.38 
0.13 
Competitive Consultant  
0.37 
0.12 
Focused Team Captain  
0.38 
0.13 
Consensual Goal-Setter  
0.34 
0.11 
Informed Trust-Builder  
0.37 
0.13 
Notes: β = standardized regression coefficient, R2 = adjusted coefficient of determination, *all β 
coefficients are significant at p < 0.001. 
 
Table 8.7 presents the influences of subjective norms on the managerial 
leadership styles of deans. It shows that significant, positive and moderate 
relationships are found between these two variables. Furthermore, the results 
displayed in Table 8.7 show that subjective norms explain between 11% and 13% 
of the variance in the styles. This indicates that the deans’ subjective norms are a 

Chapter 8 
165 
relatively weak factor that influences their managerial leadership styles. This 
finding is consistent with the findings of the previous analyses, supporting that, 
in this study, subjective norms are a weak determinant of the managerial 
leadership styles of deans. (see Table 8.2). 
Table 8.8 Influences of Environmental Controls, Internal Controls, and Practical 
Controls on the Managerial Leadership Styles of Deans (N = 73) 
 
Environmental 
control 
 
Internal control 
 
Practical control 
Managerial 
leadership style 
β 
sig 
R2 
 
β 
sig 
R2 
 
β 
sig 
R2 
Master  
0.12 
0.31 
0.00 
 
0.09 
0.47 
0.00 
 
-0.33* 
0.04 
0.10 
Competitive 
Consultant  
0.15 
0.20 
0.01 
 
0.18 
0.13 
0.02 
 
-0.24* 
0.04 
0.05 
Focused Team 
Captain  
0.16 
0.18 
0.01 
 
0.17 
0.15 
0.02 
 
-0.26* 
0.02 
0.06 
Consensual Goal-
Setter  
0.12 
0.29 
0.00 
 
0.15 
0.20 
0.01 
 
-0.22* 
0.03 
0.03 
Informed Trust-
Builder 
0.09 
0.43 
0.00 
 
0.07 
0.55 
0.00 
 
-0.28* 
0.01 
0.07 
Notes: β = standardized regression coefficient, R2 = adjusted coefficient of determination, *beta 
coefficients are significant at p < 0.05.  
 
Table 8.8 presents the influences of environmental, internal, and practical controls 
on the managerial leadership styles of deans. The results show that practical 
controls moderately, significantly, and negatively influence all the styles. Here, 
the negative relationship between the two variables means: (1) the greater the 
practical obstacles (i.e. size and complexity of the faculty and high workloads), 
the less likely the deans in the study will demonstrate their managerial leadership 
styles; and (2) the less the practical obstacles, the more likely the deans in the 
study will demonstrate their managerial leadership styles.  
 
The results displayed in Table 8.8 show that there is no significant influence by 
environmental controls or internal controls on any of the styles. Nevertheless, 
practical controls account for between 3% and 10% of the variance in the styles. 
This suggests that, in this study, practical controls seem to be a very weak factor 
influencing the managerial leadership styles of deans. 

166 
 
Chapter 8 
 
8.2.2 
Main Analysis 
In this subsection, the influences of attitudes, subjective norms, environmental 
controls, internal controls, and practical controls on the managerial leadership 
styles are examined. Based on our first analytical experience in 8.1.2, an initial 
analysis of multicollinearity in the data was carried out. The results, as shown in 
Table 8.9, indicate that multicollinearity exists but within tolerance. Fairly high 
tolerance coefficients, ranging from 0.572 to 0.757 and low VIF coefficients, 
ranging from 1.321 to 1.747 were obtained (Williams 2011). This means that 
attitudes, subjective norms, environmental controls, internal controls, and 
practical controls can be treated as independent variables.  
Table 8.9 Multicollinearity Analysis for the Non-Volitional Behavioural Model  
 
(N = 73) 
Coefficients 
Model:  
Master style 
Unstandardized 
Coefficients 
Standardized 
Coefficients 
t 
Sig. 
Collinearity 
Statistics* 
B 
Std. Error 
Beta 
Tolerance 
VIF 
Attitude 
Subjective norm 
Environmental 
control 
Internal control 
Practical control 
.026 
.006 
.526 
4.295 
.000 
.597 
1.676 
-.003 
.014 
-.028 
-.228 
.821 
.572 
1.747 
-.102 
.712 
-.018 
-.143 
.887 
.576 
1.737 
.671 
.650 
.126 
1.032 
.306 
.603 
1.658 
-1.333 
.470 
-.309 
-2.835 .006 
.757 
1.321 
Notes: Tolerance = a measure of collinearity, VIF = Variance Inflation Factor, showing how 
much the variance of the coefficient estimate is being inflated by multicollinearity. *A tolerance 
close to 0 and a VIF close to 10 (rule of thumb) suggest that multicollinearity may be a threat.  
 
Table 8.10 shows the influences of attitudes, subjective norms, environmental 
controls, internal controls, and practical controls on the managerial leadership 
styles of deans. The results indicate that attitudes and practical controls strongly 
and significantly influence all the styles. However, attitudes have a stronger 
influence on the styles than practical controls do. As a general rule, these 
variations in regression coefficients can be interpreted ‚as reflective of differences 
in the relative importance‛ of these determinants of the styles (Fishbein and 
Ajzen 2010, p. 197). In this study, attitudes are, therefore, more important than 
practical controls.  
 

Chapter 8 
167 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Attitude
Subjective norm
Environmental control
Internal control
Practical control
Managerial leadership 
style
β
Sig
β
Sig
β
Sig
β
Sig
β
Sig
R
R2
Master
0.53*
0.00
-0.03
0.82
-0.02
0.89
0.13
0.31
-0.31*
0.01
0.63
0.35
Competitive Consultant
0.55*
0.00
-0.05
0.73
-0.07
0.59
0.23*
0.04
-0.24*
0.04
0.61
0.33
Focused Team Captain
0.52*
0.00
-0.02
0.87
-0.04
0.78
0.20
0.10
-0.26*
0.02
0.61
0.33
Consensual Goal-Setter
0.55*
0.00
-0.06
0.67
-0.10
0.47
0.21*
0.05
-0.20*
0.04
0.58
0.29
Informed Trust-Builder
0.48*
0.00
0.03
0.85
-0.04
0.78
0.09
0.48
-0.24*
0.04
0.57
0.27
Notes: β = standardized regression coefficient, R = multiple correlation coefficient, R2 = adjusted coefficient of determination, *bolded beta coefficients are
significant at p ≤0.05.
Table 8.10 Influences of Attitudes, Subjective Norms, Environmental Controls, Internal Controls, and Practical Controls 
on the Managerial Leadership Styles of Deans ( N = 73)

168 
 
Chapter 8 
 
Furthermore, the results displayed in Table 8.10 show that internal controls, 
together with attitudes and practical controls, make a significant contribution to 
some of the styles. Subjective norms and environmental controls do not 
significantly influence any of the styles. The insignificance of subjective norms in 
the non-volitional model is consistent with that displayed in the volitional model 
(see Table 8.3). There is also a strong relationship between subjective norms and 
attitudes (correlation coefficient = 0.56, p < 0.01, N = 74). This suggests that 
subjective norms indirectly influence the styles through attitudes since their the 
influence of subjective norm is not directly reflected in the correlation with the 
styles. In conclusion, based on the non-volitional behavioural model of the study, 
attitudes, practical controls, and internal controls are determinants of the styles. 
They explain between 27% and 35% of the variance in the styles. This suggests 
that, in this study, they are relatively strong determinants of the managerial 
leadership styles of deans.  
 
Furthermore, Table 8.10 shows interesting results, that is, the regression 
coefficients of attitudes increase when practical and internal controls are in the 
equation. For one comparison, see beta coefficients of attitude in Table 8.10 which 
presents the non-volitional model and those in Table 8.11 which presents the 
volitional model. This finding suggests that the deans will have a more positive 
attitude towards a style when they know that they have control over 
demonstration of this style.  
Table 8.11 Influences of Attitudes and Subjective Norms on the Managerial Leadership 
Styles of Deans (N = 73) 
 
Attitude 
 
Subjective norm 
 
 
Managerial leadership style 
β 
sig 
 
β 
sig 
R 
R2 
Master  
0.50* 
0.00 
 
0.10 
0.40 
0.56 
0.30 
Competitive Consultant  
0.50* 
0.00 
 
0.09 
0.46 
0.56 
0.29 
Focused Team Captain  
0.49* 
0.00 
 
0.11 
0.35 
0.56 
0.29 
Consensual Goal-Setter  
0.50* 
0.00 
 
0.07 
0.59 
0.58 
0.29 
Informed Trust-Builder  
0.45* 
0.00 
 
0.13 
0.31 
0.53 
0.26 
Notes: β = standardized regression coefficient, R = multiple correlation coefficient, R2 = adjusted 
coefficient of determination, *beta coefficients are significant at p < 0.001. 
 
We further investigated whether the addition of the three perceived controls in 
the non-volitional behavioural model improves the explanation of the styles. For 
this, we used a hierarchical multiple regression analysis (N = 75). The results 
indicate that when only attitudes and subjective norms are used as predictors, the 

Chapter 8 
169 
R coefficient between these two predictors and the Competitive Consultant style, 
for example, is 0.56 with an adjusted R2 value of 0.29, meaning that attitudes and 
subjective norms account for 29% of the variation in the Competitive Consultant 
style (see Table 8.11). However, when the three perceived controls are included as 
well, the adjusted R2 value of the Competitive Consultant style increases to 0.33, 
meaning that all predictors account for 33% of the variance in this style (see Table 
8.10). So, the inclusion of the new predictors has explained 4% of the variation in 
the style [R2 Change24 = 0.04, F-change25 (3, 68) = 2.17, p ≤ 0.05].  
 
We did the analyses for all the styles. The results indicate that the three additional 
predictors of perceived control do improve the explanation of the Master style, 
the Competitive Consultant style, and the Focused Team Captain style, but they 
do not improve the explanation of the Consensual Goal-Setter style and the 
Informed Trust-Builder style. These findings suggest that the non-volitional 
behavioural model seems to be a better model to explain some of the styles than 
the volitional behavioural model. 
 
In conclusion, the empirical model of the managerial leadership styles of deans at 
Indonesian universities based on the non-volitional behaviour model of the study 
is presented in Figure 8.4. 
                                                           
24 R2 Change is the improvement in R2 when the additional predictor is added. 
25 A significant F-change means that the variable(s) added in the step significantly improve 
the explanation (or prediction). 

170 
 
Chapter 8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.4 The Empirical Model of the Managerial Leadership Styles of 
Deans at Indonesian Universities based on Ajzen’s (1985) and 
Fishbein and Ajzen’s (2010) Non-Volitional Behaviour Model 
8.3 
INFLUENCES 
OF 
BACKGROUND 
FACTORS 
ON 
THE 
ATTITUDES, 
SUBJECTIVE 
NORMS, 
ENVIRONMENTAL 
CONTROLS, INTERNAL CONTROLS, AND PRACTICAL 
CONTROLS OF DEANS  
 
Ajzen and Fishbein’s theoretical models assume that people who come from different 
backgrounds may form different attitudes (behavioural beliefs), subjective norms 
(normative beliefs), and perceived behavioural control (control beliefs). Although it is not 
one of the key questions of this study, it is interesting to find out to what extent this 
assumption holds as it would further enrich our understanding of deans’ attitudes, 
subjective norms, and perceived behavioural control.  
Subjective norms
Attitudes towards 
the managerial 
leadership styles
Managerial 
leadership styles of 
deans
Practical controls
Internal controls

Chapter 8 
171 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note: Dotted arrows indicate the possible direction of influence.  
Figure 8.5 Influences of Background Factors on the Deans’ Attitudes, Subjective 
Norms, Environmental Controls, Internal Controls, and Practical 
Controls 
In this analysis, we used the original survey data (N = 218) for attitudes and 
subjective norms and the follow-up survey data (N = 75) for environmental, 
internal, and practical controls. All these variables served as dependent variables 
in the equation and the six background factors (faculty culture, management 
skills, gender, age, term of office, and academic discipline) served as independent 
variables (see Chapter 4, Table 4.13). For the analysis, multiple linear regression 
and bivariate regression were used. Table 8.12 presents the influences of each 
background factor on the attitudes and subjective norms of deans, and Table 8.13 
presents the influences of each background factor on the environmental, internal, 
and practical controls of deans. 
Attitudes 
Subjective norms
Environmental controls
Internal controls
Practical controls
Background factors:
Faculty culture
Management skills
Demographic factors:
     Gender
     Age
     Term of office
     Academic Discipline

172 
 
Chapter 8 
 
8.12 
Influences of Each Background Factor on the Attitudes and Subjective Norms of 
Deans 
Influences of each background factor on 
the deans’ attitudes (N = 217) 
 
Influences of each background factor on the 
deans’ subjective norms (N = 216) 
Predictor 
r 
β 
R(R2) 
 
Predictor 
r 
β 
R(R2) 
Attitude 
 
 
 
 
Subjective 
norm 
 
 
 
Clan culture 
0.62** 
0.29* 
 
 
Clan culture 
0.43** 
0.25* 
 
Adhocracy 
culture 
0.52** 
0.11* 
 
 
Adhocracy 
culture 
0.33** 
0.03 
 
Market culture 
0.58** 
0.13* 
 
 
Market culture 
0.38** 
0.11 
 
Hierarchy 
culture 
0.66** 
0.41* 
 
 
Hierarchy 
culture 
0.41** 
0.23* 
 
 
 
 
0.77 
(0.58) 
 
 
 
 
0.50 
(0.24) 
Clan skill 
0.53** 
0.09 
 
 
Clan skill 
0.31** 
0.07 
 
Adhocracy 
skill 
0.61** 
0.22* 
 
 
Adhocracy skill 
0.35** 
0.14 
 
Market skill 
0.59** 
0.20* 
 
 
Market skill 
0.31** 
0.04 
 
Hierarchy skill 
0.62** 
0.30* 
 
 
Hierarchy skill 
0.37** 
0.22* 
 
 
 
 
0.70 
(0.48) 
 
 
 
 
0.40 
(0.15) 
Gender 
0.11 
0.11 
0.11! 
(0.01) 
 
Gender 
0.01 
0.01 
0.01! 
(0.01) 
Age (years) 
0.07 
0.07 
0.07! 
(0.00) 
 
Age (years) 
0.03 
0.03 
0.00! 
(0.00) 
Term of office 
(years) 
0.01 
0.01 
0.01! 
(0.00) 
 
Term of office 
(years) 
-0.08 
-0.08 
0.01! 
(0.00) 
Academic 
discipline 
-0.07 
-0.07 
0.07! 
(0.00) 
 
Academic 
discipline 
-0.12 
-0.12 
0.12! 
(0.01) 
Notes: r = zero-order correlation coefficient, β = standardized regression coefficient, R = Multiple 
correlation coefficient, R2 = adjusted coefficient of determination, *β coefficients are significant at 
p < 0.05, **r coefficients are significant at p < 0.01. !R (R2) all these coefficients are not significant 
at p < 0.05. 
 
The left column of Table 8.12 shows the influences of each background factor on 
the deans’ attitudes. The results show that high zero-order correlations are found 
between the four aspects of faculty culture and attitudes. These high zero-order 
correlations usually indicate that the four aspects of culture are likely to have 

Chapter 8 
173 
some influence on attitudes. As expected, the results show that all four aspects of 
culture significantly influence attitudes. The hierarchy aspect of culture has the 
highest regression coefficient (β = 0.41, p < 0.05), followed by the clan aspect (β = 
0.29, p < 0.05), the market aspect (β = 0.13, p < 0.05) and the adhocracy aspect (β = 
0.11, p < 0.05). The results displayed in Table 8.12 show that the multiple 
correlation of these four aspects is high (R = 0.77). This indicates that the faculty 
culture is a strong factor of influence in the deans’ attitudes (R2 = 0.58).  
 
Regarding management skills, the results show that all four aspects of 
management skills are highly correlated with attitudes (zero-order correlation 
coefficients range from 0.53 to 0.62, p < 0.01, see Table 8.12). However, the 
findings indicate that three of the four aspects of management skills significantly 
influence attitudes: the hierarchy aspect (β = 0.30, p < 0.05), adhocracy aspect (β = 
0.22, p < 0.05), and market aspect (β = 0.20, p < 0.05). The clan aspect does not 
significantly influence attitudes (β = 0.09, p > 0.05). This very low regression 
coefficient suggests that the clan aspect of management skills (managing teams, 
managing interpersonal relationship, and managing the development of others) is 
perceived to be unimportant by the deans. It is assumed that these kinds of skills 
do not need to be learnt as they are inherent in the national collectivist culture 
(Suseno 1985; Wirawan and Irawanto 2007). The multiple correlation of 
management skills is quite high (R = 0.70), indicating that management skills are 
relatively strong factors of influence in the deans’ attitudes, despite the absence of 
the clan aspect (R2 = 0.48).  
 
In contrast to faculty cultures and management skills, gender, age, term of office, 
and academic discipline do not influence attitudes. Clearly, the low regression 
coefficients were obtained due to little or no correlation between these 
demographic variables and attitudes (see Table 8.12). These findings suggest that 
demographic factors are not important factors that influence the deans’ attitudes. 
We assume that the lack of influence of these demographic factors in attitudes is 
because attitudes are strongly shaped by culture. Female and male deans, for 
example, will have the same attitude since they have the same underlying 
cultural values with respect to the styles. This finding supports the findings of the 
previous analysis, suggesting that faculty culture is an important factor that 
influences the deans’ attitudes. 
 
The right column of Table 8.12 shows the influences of each background factor on 
the deans’ subjective norms. Regarding faculty culture, although all four aspects 
of faculty culture are moderately correlated with subjective norms (zero-order 
correlation coefficients range from 0.33 to 0.43, p < 0.01), the results indicate that 
only the clan and hierarchy aspects were found to significantly influence 

174 
 
Chapter 8 
 
subjective norms (β = 0.25, β = 0.23, p < 0.05, respectively). The adhocracy and 
market aspects of culture do not make significant contributions (β = 0.03, β = 0.11, 
p > 0.05, respectively). These findings suggest that the deans’ expectations of their 
important referents are influenced by the clan and hierarchy cultures. These two 
aspects of culture explain 24% of the variance in subjective norms. This indicates 
that faculty culture is a moderate factor influencing the deans’ subjective norms. 
 
Regarding the influence of the clan and hierarchy aspects of culture on the deans’ 
subjective norms, we would speculate that it is because of the power-distance and 
collectivistic culture in Indonesia (Hofstede Online; Wirawan and Irawanto 2007). 
The findings are consistent with the findings of the previous analysis, indicating 
that the clan and hierarchy aspects of cultures are stronger factors of influence in 
attitudes.  
 
Furthermore, the results displayed in Table 8.12 shows that only the hierarchy 
aspect of management skills significantly influences subjective norms, although 
moderate correlations are found between all four aspects of management skills 
and subjective norms (zero-order correlation coefficients range from 0.31 to 0.37,  
p < 0.01). This suggests that hierarchy skills strongly influence the deans’ 
behavioural expectations of their referents. The deans experience social pressure 
to display skills in managing information, managing control systems, and 
managing coordination. The hierarchy aspect of management skills explains 15% 
of the variance in subjective norms. This suggests that the hierarchy aspect of 
management skills is an important but weak factor of influence in the deans’ 
subjective norms.  
 
Gender, age, term of office, and academic discipline have no significant influence 
on subjective norms. This is consistent with the findings of the previous analysis 
of attitudes, indicating the insignificance of demographic factors. The same 
arguments hold true for the insignificance of demographic factors on subjective 
norms as for attitudes. 
 
 

Understanding the Managerial Leadership Styles of Deans 
175 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Environmental controls
Internal controls
Practical controls
Predictor
r
β
R(R2)!
r
β
R(R2)!
r
β
R(R2)!
Clan culture
0.19
0.10
0.18
0.18
-0.14
-0.02
Adhocracy culture
0.15
0.03
0.06
-0.04
-0.18
-0.09
Market culture
0.25*
0.21
0.14
0.09
-0.25*
-0.22
Hierarchy culture
0.03
-0.08
-0.01
-0.09
-0.02
0.09
0.27(0.02)
0.21(0.01)
0.27(0.02)
Clan skills
0.18
0.00
0.03
0.02
-0.19
-0.13
Adhocracy skills
0.19
-0.06
-0.00
-0.06
-0.22
-0.26
Market skills
0.32*
0.34
0.00
-0.03
-0.05
0.24
Hierarchy skills
0.18
0.03
0.08
0.12
-0.16
-0.06
0.32(0.10)
0.10(0.04)
0.29(0.03)
Gender
-0.02
-0.02
0.03(0.01)
-0.01
-0.01
0.01(0.01)
0.03
0.03
0.03(0.01)
Age (years)
-0.12
-0.12
0.12(0.00)
-0.11
-0.11
0.11(0.00)
-0.18
-0.18
0.18(0.02)
Term of office (years)
-0.00
-0.00
0.00(0.00)
0.04
0.04
0.04(0.01)
-0.04
-0.04
0.04(0.01)
Academic discipline
-0.08
-0.08
0.08(0.01)
-0.16
-0.16
0.16(0.01)
0.14
0.14
0.14(0.01)
Note: r = zero-order correlation coefficient, β = standardized regression coefficient, R = multiple correlation coefficient, R2 = adjusted coefficient of determination,
*r coefficients are significant at p < 0.01, !R (R2) all these coefficients are not significant at p < 0.05.
Table 8.13
Influences of Each Background Factor on Environmental, Internal, and Practical Controls  of Deans (N = 74)

176 
 
Chapter 8 
 
Table 8.13 shows the influences of each background factor on the environmental, 
internal, and practical controls of deans. The results indicate no significant 
influence between all background factors and environmental, internal, and 
practical controls. This suggests that background factors do not influence the 
deans’ control beliefs. People’s perception of their own ability to perform a given 
behaviour is not related to their working culture, their perceived management 
skills, or their demography. For example, consider two deans who both think that 
they have the financial resources to attend a conference. The deans will have the 
same perception about their ability to attend the conference, regardless of their 
background factors. 
 
Finally, the influence of faculty cultures and management skills on the deans’ 
attitudes and their subjective norms can be depicted as follows.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.6 The Influence of Faculty Cultures and Management Skills on the Deans’ 
Attitudes and their Subjective Norms  
8.4 
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 
This chapter has investigated and described the explanatory paths of the 
behavioural models of this study. In the first section, we examined the 
explanatory paths of the volitional behavioural model of this study which 
included the influences of attitudes and subjective norms on the managerial 
Clan culture
Adhocracy culture
Market culture
Hierarchy culture
Adhocracy skills
Market skills
Hierarchy skills
Attitudes
Subjective 
norms

Understanding the Managerial Leadership Styles of Deans 
177 
 
leadership styles of deans. The findings of this volitional behavioural model 
indicated that the managerial leadership styles of deans at Indonesian universities 
are primarily influenced by their attitudes. Subjective norms were found to have 
no significant influence on the styles. Further analysis indicated that subjective 
norms and attitudes were intercorrelated. However, this correlation was within 
acceptable tolerances. Thus, the results of the study were still reliable.  
 
Regarding the absence of subjective norms in the equation, this does not mean 
that this variable was not an important factor influencing the styles. In fact, its 
contribution was integrated in attitudes. To conclude, based on the volitional 
behavioural model of the study, the managerial leadership styles of deans can be 
explained by their attitudes. 
 
Furthermore, the volitional behavioural model also assumes that the more 
positive the attitude towards a behaviour, the more likely it is that people will 
demonstrate it. To investigate this assumption, a zoom-in analysis of the deans’ 
attitudes towards the dominant roles for each style was carried out. The results 
indicated that some styles were explained by a simultaneous consideration of the 
positive attitudes towards the dominant roles related to the styles, and others 
were not. Although the results were unexpected, these findings were not 
necessarily evidence that the results do not support the theoretical assumptions. 
In fact, it can be concluded that part of the findings were in line with the theory. 
 
In the second section of this chapter, we investigated the explanatory paths of the 
non-volitional behavioural model which included the influences of attitudes, 
subjective norms, and perceived behavioural control (i.e. environmental, internal, 
and practical controls) on the managerial leadership styles of deans. The findings 
of the non-volitional behavioural model indicated that the managerial leadership 
styles of deans are primarily under the influence of attitudes and practical 
controls. Internal controls, together with attitudes and practical controls, were 
found to significantly contribute to some styles. Subjective norms and 
environmental controls did not, however, influence the styles. The results 
confirmed the previous findings on the insignificance of subjective norms.  
 
Interestingly, the deans have a more positive attitude towards a style when they 
believe that they have control over practical factors (in relation to workloads and  
the complexity of the faculty) and internal factors (in relation to conflicts of 
personal values and faculty culture, lack of skills, unclear and fragmented 
authorities within the faculty, and lack of interest from faculty academics on 
faculty matters). To conclude, based on the non-volitional behavioural model of 

178 
 
Chapter 8 
 
the study, the managerial leadership styles of deans can be explained by their 
attitudes and perceived practical controls and internal controls.  
 
In the third section of this chapter, we investigated the explanatory paths of 
background factors (i.e. faculty culture, managerial skills, gender, age, term of 
office, and academic discipline) to the attitudes, subjective norms, environmental 
controls, internal controls, and practical controls of deans. Regarding faculty 
culture, the outcomes showed that the adhocracy, market, hierarchy, and clan 
aspects of faculty culture influenced the deans’ attitudes; only the clan and 
hierarchy aspects of faculty culture influenced the deans’ subjective norms; and 
none of the four aspects of faculty culture (the adhocracy, market, hierarchy, and 
clan) influenced the environmental controls, the internal controls, or the practical 
controls of deans.  
 
Regarding management skills, the results indicated that the adhocracy, market, 
and hierarchy aspects of management skills influenced the deans’ attitudes. Only 
the hierarchy aspect of management skills influenced the deans’ subjective norms. 
And none of the four aspects of management skills (the adhocracy, market, 
hierarchy, and clan) influenced the environmental controls, internal controls, or 
practical controls of deans.  
 
Demographic factors, including gender, age, term of office, and academic 
discipline, 
were 
found 
to 
not 
influence 
attitudes, 
subjective 
norms, 
environmental, internal, or practical controls. In other words, these demographic 
factors did not influence the behavioural, normative, or control beliefs of deans.  
 
Finally, to answer one of the main research questions of this study, we conclude 
that attitude is the primary factor that explains the managerial leadership styles of 
deans at Indonesian universities. From the perspective of our theoretical models, 
both the volitional and non-volitional behavioural models are useful to explain 
and understand the managerial leadership styles of deans. However, the findings 
indicate that the non-volitional behavioural model seems to be the better model 
for this study.  
 

9 
C H A P T E R
 
Summary, Conclusions and 
Reflections 
“There never seems to be enough time to do the things you want to do once you find them.” 
Jim Croce (1943-1973) 
This study investigates the managerial leadership styles of deans at Indonesian 
universities, and aims to better understand the deans’ managerial leadership 
styles as manifested in their behaviours. Based on Fishbein and Ajzen’s theories 
of behaviour and operationalised through Quinn’s competing values framework, 
deans’ behaviours, and, subsequently, their roles and managerial leadership 
styles, are explored by examining attitudes, subjective norms, and perceived 
behavioural control. After studying secondary literature, a large-scale survey 
was conducted to gather information on the deans’ behaviours, attitudes, 
subjective norms, perceived behavioural control, and background factors such as 
faculty culture, management skills, gender, age, term-of-office, and academic 
disciplines. Regression analysis was used to test the theoretical assumptions and 
to explain the managerial leadership styles of deans.  

180 
 
Chapter 9 
This final chapter begins with a summary of the study, followed by its main 
findings and conclusions. In the last sections, we reflect upon our study from 
various angles, discuss some critical issues, and make some recommendations for 
further research.  
9.1 
THE STUDY IN A NUTSHELL 
9.1.1 
Context and Problem Statement 
Leadership and management in general, and in higher education in particular, 
have attracted enormous interest from both academics and practitioners. While 
studies have focussed on various topics and different managerial levels, the 
number of studies that explicitly investigate middle management is limited. 
Leadership studies usually concentrate on those at the top, such as CEOs or 
presidents.  
 
In the sphere of higher education studies, the deanship is an under-investigated 
topic. This is somewhat surprising given the key role deans (can) play in higher 
education institutions: ‚Universities are only as strong as their colleges, and 
colleges reflect the strength of their dean‛ (Wolverton et al. 2001, p. 97). Our 
study intends to contribute to filling this gap by researching the managerial 
leadership styles of deans at Indonesian universities.  
 
An additional reason to investigate the deanship is derived from the current 
changes in Indonesian higher education. The winds of change, caused by, among 
other things, globalisation and the spread of a neo-liberal spirit in re-organising 
the public sector (e.g. the introduction of new public management approaches), 
combined with new political leadership, have affected Indonesian higher 
education and its institutions. Universities have been granted more institutional 
autonomy. It appears likely that Indonesian universities are moving towards 
stronger corporate governance structures. We can, therefore, assume that the 
deanship is also undergoing change. One could argue that in contemporary 
higher education, with universities increasingly seen as enterprises or 
corporations, the deanship is becoming more entrepreneurial and executive-
based (e.g. see De Boer and Goedegebuure 2009). However, the changing 
deanship is not the topic of our study; we want to determine how deans run their 
faculties and the reasons for running them in a particular way. 
 

Summary, Conclusions and Reflections 
 
181 
Deans at Indonesian universities have to fulfil their roles in an environment that 
is characterised by change. Given these dynamics, in combination with the 
pivotal position middle managers such as deans have, it has become vital to the 
success of university organizations to better understand how deans lead and 
manage. A better understanding of university middle management should 
deepen our knowledge of the ‘nature of the academic organisation’ and the way 
these professional organisations function (from an organisational point of view) 
in environments characterised by ‘super complexity’ (e.g. Barnett 2000). The key 
questions of our study are: What kind of managerial leadership styles do deans at 
Indonesian universities exhibit? How can these styles be explained? 
9.1.2 
Theoretical Background of the Study 
Ajzen and Fishbein’s theory of reasoned action (1980) and Fishbein and Ajzen’s 
reasoned action approach (2010) have guided the study’s approach to explain and 
understand deans’ behaviours. The theory of reasoned action (TRA), developed 
by Ajzen and Fishbein in the 1970s and 1980s, is known as a volitional behaviour 
model. This model assumes that intention, leading to performance of a behaviour, 
is a function of two basic determinants: a personal and a social factor, respectively 
labelled as attitudes and subjective norms. In other words, according to this 
theory, a particular behaviour is best explained by the intention to perform this 
particular behaviour, and the intention to perform a behaviour is determined by 
having favourable attitudes (towards this behaviour) and positive subjective 
norms (for such behaviour).  
 
Based on Ajzen’s later research work (1985), Fishbein and Ajzen (2010) suggest 
that people may not form strong behavioural intentions to perform a behaviour of 
interest when they believe that they do not have control over it, even if they hold 
a positive attitude and perceive strong social pressure to do so. Their original 
theory of reasoned action is extended by a third determinant explaining 
behavioural intentions: perceived behavioural control. Ajzen (1985) referred to 
this extended version of TRA as the theory of planned behaviour (TPB). Recently, 
Fishbein and Ajzen (2010) reconcile the differences between their models. They 
outline their theory as the reasoned action approach (RAA) which comprises 
three determinants: attitudes, subjective norms, and perceived behavioural 
control. The extended TRA-models (both TPB and RAA) address non-volitional 
behavioural aspects.  
 
We used the volitional and non-volitional behavioural models to understand and 
explain why deans exhibit a particular leadership style. We have measured the 
deans’ managerial leadership styles, their attitudes, their subjective norms, and 

182 
 
Chapter 9 
their perceived behavioural control. We expected, in line with the theory, to find a 
positive relationship between attitudes, subjective norms and perceived 
behavioural control on the one hand and managerial leadership styles on the 
other. We also gathered information on a number of background factors. 
Theoretically, background factors play only an indirect role in determining 
behaviour. We assume that they may colour personal beliefs that determine 
attitudes but do not directly determine intentions or behaviours.  
 
Over the years, many leadership and management theories have been developed, 
advocated, and researched, stressing and arguing various explanations for 
personal characteristics (as in great man and trait theories) to situational factors 
(as in contingency and situational approaches). In our study, we selected Quinn’s 
Competing Values Framework (CVF) to operationalise the theories of behavioural 
models.  
 
Based on an analysis of a comprehensive list of indicators for organisational 
effectiveness, Quinn and his research colleagues described two major dimensions 
underlying effective organisations (Quinn and Rohrbaugh 1983; Quinn and 
Cameron 1983; Quinn 1988). They noticed that some organisations were effective 
if they were stable, whereas other organisations were successful if they had 
efficient internal processes or were strongly outward looking (market-oriented). 
In other words, there were different ways to be or become effective. The two 
dimensions were used to represent two axes that constitute the rudiments of the 
CVF. The vertical axis ranges from flexibility to control and the horizontal axis 
concerns the organisational focus, from an internal to an external focus (see 
Chapter 3, Figure 3.1 and section 3.4.1 for more detailed information and see also 
Figure 9.1 the CVF part). These two axes form four quadrants, representing four 
different kinds of organisations, including different cultures, leadership roles and 
so on. The four quadrants are: the clan (collaborate, leaders as mentors and 
facilitators), the adhocracy (create, leaders as innovators and brokers), the market 
(compete, leaders as producers and directors), and the hierarchy (control, leaders 
as coordinators and monitors). The four quadrants represent opposite or 
competing assumptions; they are competing on the diagonal, and this diagonal is 
a continuum of the two opposite points. Empirically, it is possible to engage in 
behaviours at two opposite points in the framework, indicating that there is no 
best way to manage. One leadership role, for instance, is not treated as more 
desirable than another role.  
 
The CVF convincingly integrates a number of theoretical traditions such as 
human relations theories, open system theories, rational goal theories and 
internal process theories. It distinguishes a substantial number of leadership and 

Summary, Conclusions and Reflections 
 
183 
managerial behaviours, clustered into eight different leadership roles, which fit 
the purposes of our study very well. As described in more detail in Chapter 3, the 
CVF makes perceptual biases clear, does not advocate one role over another, 
makes multiple values explicit, and provides a dynamic focus as well as 
consistent categories. Moreover, since its development in the early 1980s, CVF has 
successfully been used and tested in many research endeavours (for an overview 
of one example, see the ‚Appendices‛ in Cameron et al. 2006). 
 
In our study, we have used the eight leadership roles and their underlying 
behaviours from the CVF to conceptualise Ajzen and Fishbein’s (1980) volitional 
and Fishbein and Ajzen’s (2010) non-volitional behavioural models (as visualised 
in Figure 9.1). To investigate the managerial leadership styles of deans, we used 
the ‘3-1 concepts of assessment’ based on the CVF: behaviours—roles—styles. 
Quinn’s (1988) Competing Values Leadership Instrument lists 32 behaviours. 
Examples of such behaviours are ‘setting clear objectives for the faculty’, 
‘facilitating consensus building’ or ‘showing empathy and concern’. Eight 
managerial leadership roles are determined by these 32 behaviours. Roles include 
director, facilitator or mentor. Leadership styles are then explored based on 
configurations of the eight managerial leadership roles within the CVF. In our 
study, we define a style as a configuration of the eight managerial leadership 
roles based on the CVF that in turn are based on a set of particular behaviours. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9.1 The Two Behavioural Models of the Study and the CVF Eight 
Leadership Roles 
 
Background factors:
Organizational culture
Management skills
Demographic factors:
Gender
Age
Term of office
Discipline
Attitudes towards the 
managerial leadership 
styles 
Managerial leadership 
styles of deans
Subjective norms
Perceived behavioural 
control 
Flexibility
Control
External 
focus
Internal 
focus
ADHOCRACY 
(Create)
CLAN 
(Collaborate)
MARKET 
(Compete)
HIERARCHY 
(Control)
INNOVATOR
BROKER
PRODUCER
DIRECTOR
COORDINATOR
MONITOR
FACILITATOR
MENTOR
                                                                                                                      VOLITIONAL BEHAVIOURAL MODEL
                                                                                                            NON-VOLITIONAL BEHAVIOURAL MODEL

184 
 
Chapter 9 
We selected a quantitative research approach as the most suitable method to 
explore and identify the managerial leadership styles of deans at Indonesian 
universities. To collect data from a highly dispersed dean population, from 
Sumatera to Papua (or Irian Jaya), a postal questionnaire was developed. A 
questionnaire26 is a useful survey instrument to cope with the size of the country 
and 419 higher education institutions. The questionnaires were sent to deans 
only, therefore, we measured behaviours, attitudes, subjective norms, and 
perceived behavioural control through self-reporting. Aware of the potential 
threats to validity posed by the use of self-reports (for more detail, see Chapter 4), 
we employed methods to maximise the accuracy and reliability of the data. For 
example, we guaranteed participating deans confidentiality in advance, explained 
the importance of accurate data for scientific purposes and offered to share the 
results of the study. Research suggests that self-reporting can be misleading in the 
case of sensitive behaviours (e.g. Fowler 2009), but we would argue that this is 
not the case in our study. Peer reporting can, of course, face similar problems.  
9.1.3 
The Sample  
Two surveys were carried out for the study. The first survey, based on the TRA, 
assessed the deans’ managerial leadership styles from their attitudes and their 
subjective norms. Later, we extended our research model by adding perceived 
behavioural control as an additional determinant of behaviours. The follow-up 
survey was, therefore, based on the theory of planned behaviour (TPB) (Ajzen 
1985) and the reasoned action approach (RAA) (Fishbein and Ajzen 2010). The 
follow-up survey only assessed perceived behavioural control.27  
 
There is no data available on the total population of deans in Indonesia. Of the 
419 Indonesian universities, 120 are accredited (DGHE 2008). These accredited 
universities were the starting point for our sampling. Assuming that universities 
have, on average, eight faculties, there would be a total population of 960 deans. 
A stratified random sample was used to guarantee that universities in Western 
and Eastern Indonesia were represented. Due to time and budget limitations, half 
of the 120 universities were selected via a simple random sampling. We sent a 
written questionnaire to 443 deans in these 60 universities (the sample 
population). A total of 218 deans returned a completed questionnaire; a response 
rate of almost 49%. The second survey, a one-page questionnaire, was sent via fax 
                                                        
26 The (distributed) questionnaire was translated into Bahasa Indonesia (see Appendix A1). 
See Chapter 4 for the construction of the questionnaire in greater detail. 
27 See Appendix A2 for the questionnaire. 

Summary, Conclusions and Reflections 
 
185 
to all 218 deans who had participated in the first survey. A total of 75 
questionnaires were returned, a 34% response rate. We can statistically show that 
we have a representative sample and spread across the regions in the Indonesian 
archipelago (see Chapter 4).  
 
Of the 218 respondents, 82% were male and 18% female. The vast majority of 
respondents were between 40 and 60 years old (80%) and nearly half of the deans 
(47%) had been in office for two years or less. Fifty-eight per cent worked at a 
public university and 42% at a private one. Nearly two-thirds of the deans came 
from non-technical faculties (64%), 18% from health and welfare and 14% from 
humanities and arts. The other 36% came from technical faculties, mostly 
majoring in agriculture (12%) and sciences (11%). The vast majority of the deans 
worked at small- and medium-sized universities (a small-sized university has less 
than 15,000 students and less than 1,500 staff members; medium-sized 
universities are between 15,000 and 35,000 students and between 1,500 and 3,500 
staff members). Faculties were, also for the vast majority of the deans, small- and 
medium-sized (medium-sized means between 1,000 and 5,000 students and 
between 100 and 500 staff members). 
9.1.4 
Findings and Conclusions 
9.1.4.1 Managerial Leadership Behaviours, Roles and Styles of Indonesian Deans 
The deans were asked to indicate how frequently they performed each of the 32 
behaviours derived from the CVF. The deans reported that they generally 
perform all the 32 behaviours when running their faculties. More than a third of 
the deans (37%) reported that they always exhibit more than 24 of the 32 
behaviours. Only 13% of the deans reported that they perform less than nine 
different behaviours. The high mean scores for each of the behaviours confirms 
this performance of a broad range of behaviours (from 6.3 to 5.0 on a 7-point 
scale).  
 
The deans demonstrate a managerial leadership style that embraces all eight 
leadership roles (to some extent) defined in the CVF. To a large extent, the deans 
act as facilitators, producers, directors, coordinators, mentors, monitors and, to a 
lesser extent, innovators and brokers (see also Table 6.2). Paraphrasing Quinn, 
deans at Indonesian universities appear to be masters of management. They 
report being able to cope with competing values and playing various roles, 
exhibiting behaviours that are related to these different roles. We appropriately 

186 
 
Chapter 9 
called their managerial leadership style the Master style, which is the general 
picture of the deanship in Indonesian universities as diagrammed below.  
 
Note: The higher the mean (M) score, the more frequently a role is played in this style. 
Figure 9.2 The General Picture of Deanship in Indonesian Universities 
After this relatively simple analysis, we undertook a more sophisticated cluster 
analysis (for more details, see Chapter 6). Some roles are more important than 
others. The relative importance of each role was determined and the cluster 
analysis identified four clearly distinguished configurations. The specific 
managerial leadership styles of deans in Indonesian universities are: the 
Competitive Consultant, the Focused Team Captain, the Consensual Goal-Setter, 
and the Informed Trust-Builder. These four styles are outlined below in Figure 
9.2. The numbers displayed in the figure represent the percentages of deans with 
this style who perceived each role as important. 
M = 5.5 
(SD = 0.74)
M = 5.3 
(SD = 0.94)
M = 6 
(SD = 0.74)
M = 6 
(SD = 0.73)
M = 5.9 
(SD = 0.75)
M = 5.7 
(SD = 0.81)
M = 6.2 
(SD = 0.61)
M = 5.9 
(SD = 0.80)
Innovator
Broker
Producer
Director
Coordinator
Monitor
Facilitator
Mentor
Master Style

Summary, Conclusions and Reflections 
 
187 
 
A total of 37% of the deans have the 
Competitive Consultant style. This style is the 
managerial leadership style most frequently 
shown by Indonesian deans in this study. Like 
the Master style, it can be seen as a 
comprehensive style as all of the eight 
leadership roles are present. The Competitive 
Consultant is mainly characterised by the 
director and producer roles, followed by the 
facilitator role. 
A total of 24% of the deans exhibit the Consensual 
Goal-Setter style. This style is mostly 
characterised by the facilitator and director roles. 
The coordinator, mentor, and producer roles are 
also present to a lesser extent. The broker, monitor 
and innovator roles are (almost) absent. 
A total of 20% of the participating deans 
exhibit the Focused Team Captain style. This 
style includes the facilitator and producer and, 
to some extent, a coordinator. Other roles 
such as mentor, broker, innovator, and 
monitor are limited, and the director role is 
absent. 
A total of 18% of the deans have the Informed 
Trust-Builder style. This style is also fairly 
comprehensive. Many roles are present, with 
particular emphasis on the mentor role, while the 
roles from the adhocracy quadrant are totally 
absent (innovator and broker). 
Figure 9.3 The Four Specific Managerial Leadership Styles of Deans in 
Indonesian Universities 
(53%)
(37%)
(95%)
(100%)
(51%)
(52%)
(84%)
(40%)
Innovator
Broker
Producer
Director
Coordinator
Monitor
Facilitator
Mentor
Competitive Consultant Style
(0%)
(13%)
(59%)
(100%)
(68%)
(9%)
(100%)
(60%)
Innovator
Broker
Producer
Director
Coordinator
Monitor
Facilitator
Mentor
Consensual Goal-Setter Style
(30%)
(36%)
(82%)
(0%)
(59%)
(30%)
(91%)
(46%)
Innovator
Broker
Producer
Director
Coordinator
Monitor
Facilitator
Mentor
Focused Team Captain Style
(0%)
(3%)
(80%)
(68%)
(80%)
(80%)
(60%)
(100%)
Innovator
Broker
Producer
Director
Coordinator
Monitor
Facilitator
Mentor
Informed Trust-Builder Style

188 
 
Chapter 9 
In summary, answering the key research question, this study has found one 
general, comprehensive managerial leadership style and four specific managerial 
leadership styles of deans at Indonesian universities.  
9.1.4.2 Understanding the Managerial Leadership Styles of Deans From Their 
Attitudes, Subjective Norms, and Perceived Behavioural Control 
The essence to understanding leadership and managing styles is the 
understanding of human behaviours (Wolverton and Poch 2000). For this 
purpose, we used two behavioural models: (1) Ajzen and Fishbein’s (1980) 
volitional behavioural model which assumes that a behaviour of interest is 
explained by attitudes and subjective norms and (2) Fishbein and Ajzen’s (2010) 
non-volitional behavioural model which assumes that a behaviour of interest is 
explained by attitudes, subjective norms, and perceived behavioural control.  
 
The attitudes of Indonesian deans 
The deans were asked to rank the importance of the perceived consequences of 
their behaviours. The results indicate that, in general, the deans have positive 
attitudes towards the eight leadership roles, though some managerial leadership 
roles are evaluated more positively than others (see Chapter 7). The data reveal 
that the deans see the director, facilitator, coordinator and producer roles as their 
most important roles in managing a faculty, followed by the innovator, monitor, 
and broker roles. They perceive the mentor role as the least important when 
managing a faculty.  
 
The subjective norms of Indonesian deans 
The deans were also asked about the perceptions held about faculty leadership by 
important others based on the CVF. The results indicate that, in general, the 
deans believe that their faculty academics, fellow deans and central university 
management think that deans should perform the four aspects (adhocracy, 
hierarchy, market, and clan) of faculty leadership based on the CVF. The 
perceptions held by others were slightly higher in the adhocracy and hierarchy 
aspects of faculty leadership than in the clan and market aspects. 
 
The perceived behavioural control of Indonesian deans 
To determine the deans’ perceived behavioural control, the deans were asked to 
rank the degree of control the deans have over relevant constraints (see Chapter 
7). The results show that, in general, the deans are confident that they have 
control over environmental, internal, and practical factors. They believe that these 
three factors will not impede the demonstration of their managerial leadership 
style.  

Summary, Conclusions and Reflections 
 
189 
The volitional behavioural model of the study 
To determine the impact of attitudes and subjective norms, both bivariate and 
multiple linear regression analyses were used. The results of the bivariate 
regression analysis show that attitudes, as expected, positively influence the 
managerial leadership styles of deans, for the Master style as well as for the four 
specific styles (see Table 8.1). Subjective norms also positively influence 
managerial leadership styles, though not as strongly as attitudes (see Table 8.2).  
 
The results of the multiple linear regression analysis only partially confirms these 
outcomes. The analysis demonstrates that the deans’ attitudes explain their 
managerial leadership styles, but their subjective norms do not (see Table 8.3). 
Attitudes and subjective norms appear to be intercorrelated. However, there is no 
serious multicollinearity. Therefore, our conclusion that attitude determines style 
holds. 
 
In a more detailed analysis, we looked into the assumption that particular 
attitudes explain particular management styles. In these ‘zoom in’ analyses, we 
expected, for instance, attitudes towards the roles dominant in the Informed 
Trust-Builder style to be positively related to this particular style. The results of 
this analysis are presented in Table 8.5. The expectation that particular attitudes 
determine particular styles is largely met, though not in every case. For example, 
we expected the Informed Trust-Builder style to be influenced by attitudes 
towards the producer, monitor, coordinator, and mentor roles, but attitude 
towards the coordinator role does not make a significant contribution to this style.  
 
The non-volitional behavioural model of the study 
To determine the impact of attitudes, subjective norms, and perceived 
behavioural control (i.e. environmental, internal and practical controls), both 
bivariate and multiple linear regression analyses were used. The results of the 
bivariate regression analysis show that attitudes and subjective norms influence 
the managerial leadership styles of deans. Only practical controls (in relation to 
high workloads and complex faculties) negatively influence the managerial 
leadership styles of deans. The negative relationship between practical controls 
and the styles indicates that (1) the greater the constraints related to workloads 
and complexity, the less likely the deans will demonstrate their managerial 
leadership styles, and (2) the less the constraints related to workloads and 
complexity, the more likely the deans in the study will demonstrate their 
managerial leadership styles. This suggests that not exhibiting a certain style is 
partially explained by practical controls.  
 

190 
 
Chapter 9 
The outcomes of the multiple linear regression analysis, displayed in Table 8.10, 
show that the managerial leadership styles are strongly and positively influenced 
by attitudes and moderately and negatively influenced by practical controls. The 
other theoretical explanatory variables have no impact. This holds true for the 
Master style as well as for the Focused Team Captain and the Informed Trust-
Builder styles. The Competitive Consultant style and the Consensual Goal-Setter 
style are influenced by attitudes, practical controls, and internal controls. Thus, 
the non-volitional model suggests that the managerial leadership styles of deans 
are determined, at least to some extent, by the deans’ attitudes and their 
perceived practical controls. With respect to the Competitive Consultant and the 
Consensual Goal-Setter, the deans’ perceived internal controls also play a role.  
 
The outcomes of the two behavioural models largely support each other. 
Attitudes are the most powerful determinants of the styles. Subjective norms 
influence the styles indirectly (through attitudes). Perceived behavioural control 
(i.e. practical and internal controls) has an impact on the styles.  
 
In summary, the managerial leadership styles of deans at Indonesian universities 
are the Master (the general, comprehensive style), the Competitive Consultant, 
the Focused Team Captain, the Consensual Goal-Setter, and the Informed Trust-
Builder. The managerial leadership styles of deans, from the volitional 
behavioural model, are primarily influenced by attitudes towards the styles. The 
deeper analysis of the links between attitudes and the deans’ managerial 
leadership styles shows that some styles are explained by attitudes towards these 
styles. This confirms the theoretical assumption that the more favourable the 
attitude towards the style, the more likely it is to be demonstrated. Findings from 
the non-volitional behavioural model indicate that some styles of deanship are 
influenced by attitudes and practical controls. Other styles are influenced by 
attitudes, practical controls, and internal controls. Overall, the more favourable 
the deans’ attitudes towards a managerial leadership style and the greater their 
perceived behavioural control over this style, the more likely the deans will 
exhibit that particular leadership style.  
9.1.4.3 Background Factors in the Two Behavioural Models 
Both the volitional and the non-volitional behavioural models recognise the 
potential relevance of background factors which can influence one’s attitudes, 
subjective norms, or perceived behavioural control. It is assumed that people in 
different background factors can have different beliefs, ultimately influencing 
their behaviour through attitudes. The background factors in our study include 

Summary, Conclusions and Reflections 
 
191 
the faculty culture, management skills, and demographics (e.g. gender, age, term 
of office, and academic disciplines).  
 
Faculty culture 
The organisational culture assessment instrument (OCAI), developed by 
Cameron and Quinn (2006) and based on the CVF, was used to measure the 
faculty cultures of Indonesian universities. The OCAI defines four aspects of 
faculty culture, namely, the clan, hierarchy, market, and adhocracy (see Chapter 
4, Table 4.9). The results indicate that the four aspects of faculty culture exist in 
Indonesian universities. Some cultural aspects are dominant. The clan and 
hierarchy aspects of faculty culture are found to be the most dominant cultures in 
Indonesian faculties. The results of the regression analysis show that the clan, 
hierarchy, market, and adhocracy aspects of faculty culture influence the deans’ 
attitudes; and only the clan and hierarchy aspects of culture have an impact on 
their subjective norms (see Chapter 8, Table 8.12 for both attitudes and subjective 
norms). None of the cultural aspects influence perceived behavioural control (see 
Chapter 8, Table 8.13). 
 
Management skills 
The management skills assessment instrument (MSAI), developed by Cameron 
and Quinn (2006) and based on the CVF, was used to identify the skills and 
competencies that are supposed to be related to organisational success. This 
MSAI defines four aspects of managerial skills—the clan, adhocracy, market, and 
hierarchy (see Chapter 4, Table 4.10). The results of regression analysis indicate 
that the hierarchy, adhocracy, and market aspects of management skills influence 
the deans’ attitudes; and only the hierarchy-based skills influence the deans’ 
subjective norms (see Chapter 8, Table 8.12 for both attitudes and subjective 
norms). None of the four aspects of managerial skills influence perceived 
behavioural control (see Chapter 8, Table 8.13).  
 
Demographic factors 
The explanatory results of the study indicate that there are no significant effects 
from gender, age, term-of-office or academic disciplines on attitudes, subjective 
norms, environmental, internal, or practical controls. This finding suggests that 
demographic factors do not have an impact on the determinants of the styles. 
9.1.4.4 Conclusions of the Overall Findings 
Based on the overall findings of the study, the empirical behavioural models of 
the managerial leadership styles of deans at Indonesian universities can be 
presented as follows.  

192 
 
Chapter 9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9.4 The Empirical Behavioural Models of the Managerial Leadership 
Styles of Deans at Indonesian Universities based on the Volitional 
(Ajzen and Fishbein 1980) and the Non-Volitional Behavioural Models 
(Ajzen 1985; Fishbein and Ajzen 2010) 
9.2 
DISCUSSION AND REFLECTION  
In this section, we situate the outcomes of this study in the broader context of 
university management. We also reflect upon our theoretical approach and 
methodology and suggest areas for future research. 
9.2.1 
The Managerial Leadership Styles of Deans at Indonesian Universities 
This study has demonstrated that deans in Indonesian universities are engaged in 
the 32 behaviours of management that we derived from Quinn’s Competing 
Values Framework Instrument. These behaviours embrace the eight CVF 
managerial leadership roles. Following the logic of the CVF, the deans can be 
called ‘masters of management’ because they report being able to employ a 
variety of different managerial leadership roles, which have contrasting values 
and require different skills.  
This outcome seems remarkable, and to some extent unlikely, because exhibiting 
an array of behaviours and roles with contrasting underlying values is 
demanding. Arguably the number of people with the skills and resources to 
Subjective norms
Attitudes towards 
the managerial 
leadership styles
Managerial 
leadership styles of 
deans
Practical controls
Internal controls
Clan culture
Adhocracy culture
Market culture
Hierarchy culture
Adhocracy skills
Market skills
Hierarchy skills

Summary, Conclusions and Reflections 
 
193 
perform such a variety of roles is likely to be small. This is exactly why the 
deanship is seen as such a challenging and crucial position in the management of 
universities. One explanation for this outcome could be that the behaviours of the 
deans are measured in this study through self-reporting, which might lead to a 
bias in overestimating one’s capabilities or giving socially desirable answers. 
There could be aspects of wishful thinking (‚This is the way I should run a 
faculty, and, therefore, I will report that I do run the faculty this way‛).  
On the other hand, we have also asked the deans to report on how often they 
actually perform a particular activity. This reveals neither the intensity nor the 
effectiveness of a particular behaviour. The deans report, for instance, that they 
set targets or build consensus, but we have not measured what this actually 
entails. Some behaviours may be executed superficially, in which case it becomes 
easier to perform a range of (contrasting) activities. Although Quinn assumes that 
such multifacetedness contributes to the effectiveness of leadership, measuring 
the effectiveness of leadership has not been part of this study. Whether or not the 
‘masters of management’ from this study are effective leaders remains to be 
determined and requires further research. 
 
Other studies (e.g. Wolverton et al. 2001; De Boer and Goedegebuure 2009; 
Thomas and Fragueiro 2011) on the deanship have observed behaviour that 
substantiates our conclusion that Indonesian deans perform many behaviours 
and roles. As reported in Chapter 5, deans are expected to perform many 
contrasting activities and have many different responsibilities. They are supposed 
to define strategies and polices for primary and secondary processes, to give 
direction in implementing them, and to serve and communicate with different 
audiences (Rector, academics, students). Candidates for deanships are, 
presumably, selected for the job because they are able to perform such 
multitasking roles. In fact, the requirements and selection criteria for deans in 
Indonesia are not very different from elsewhere in the world. Some studies (e.g. 
see Griffiths and McCarty 1980; Reid and Rogers 1981; Twombly 1992) found that 
academic reputation, commitment, personal skills and evidence of administrative 
ability are expected requirements (cited in Wolverton et al. 2001, p. 12). Twombly 
(1992 cited in Wolverton et al. 2001, p. 12) states that deans are expected to have 
‚an excellent reputation as a scholar‛ and to possess ‚strong interpersonal skills 
or an ability to raise funds …‛ It should be no surprise that if universities search 
for people with such abilities to perform deanships, these people would also 
recognize and report that they perform many such leadership and management 
activities.  
 

194 
 
Chapter 9 
The multitudinous activities of deans at Indonesian universities reflect the greater 
responsibilities and multifaceted roles found worldwide (Wolverton et al. 2001; 
DiFronzo 2002; De Boer and Goedegebuure 2009; Thomas and Fragueiro 2011). 
Exhibiting behaviours to deal with markets, clans, hierarchies and adhocracies 
has also been observed in universities in other countries. Deans are ‚directly 
involved with others in strategic planning, budget planning‛ (Fagin 1997, p. 98) 
for ‚identifying new opportunities and developing policy‛ (Scott et al. 2008 cited 
in De Boer and Goedegebuure 2009, p. 357). Deans have ‚finely tuned human 
relation skills‛ (Bragg 2000, p. 75) by guiding their faculty and staff through 
‚team building‛ (Hilosky and Watwood 1997, p. 295) as they remain ‚visible and 
participative, and working toward a collective vision‛ (Wolverton et al. 2001, p. 
18). 
 
One example of similar research into another country’s deanship management 
was conducted by Gmelch and Wolverton’s (2002). Their study consisted of 1,370 
deans and a response rate of 60% from 360 institutions in the United States. 
Gmelch and Wolverton defined three dimensions for deanship: community 
building, setting direction and empowering others. Each dimension has eight 
items. Deans were asked to rate themselves on these 24 items. The mean score on 
each dimension was high and led to Gmelch and Wolverton’s (2002, p. 3) 
definition of academic leadership: ‚the act of building a community of scholars to 
set direction and achieve the empowerment of faculty and staff‛. The 24 items 
that underlie their three dimensions have many similarities to the items that 
constitute the Master style of Indonesian deans. Items referring to ‚caring about 
others‛, ‚communicating priorities‛ or ‚providing information for effectively 
planning and doing work‛ are close to items from the CVF instrument. Though 
there is much communality, we would argue that our CVF-based instrument (32 
behavioural items and the underlying dimensions of clan, hierarchy, market and 
adhocracy) is more comprehensive than the dimensions and items used by 
Gmelch and Wolverton. Nevertheless, the results of the two studies indicating 
that deans are exceptionally ‘busy bees’ point in the same direction.  
 
New government policies in Indonesia, emerging global and competitive student 
markets and new public management doctrines are likely to challenge the 
traditional Indonesian deans. The outcomes of the study suggest that deans 
intend to meet this challenge. They seem to understand that they need to provide 
direction by developing the faculty strategic planning and agenda, strengthen the 
faculty missions, visions and goals, and communicate these new goals and 
strategies to the faculty members and other constituents. The rise of the 
‘executive’ dean or ‘academic manager’ instead of the traditional primus inter 
pares is reported in various countries (e.g. De Boer and Goedegebuure 2009; 

Summary, Conclusions and Reflections 
 
195 
Meek, Goedegebuure and De Boer 2010). Although it has not been the purpose of 
this study to examine the deanship transformation at Indonesian universities, we 
believe that the Master style contains new elements of leading and managing in 
the Indonesian context that would have been less obvious in the past. 
 
Apart from the Master style, this study has revealed the four specific styles of 
deanship at Indonesian universities: the Competitive Consultant, Consensual 
Goal-Setter, Focused Team Captain, and Informed Trust-Builder. With respect to 
these styles, the market and clan aspects seem particularly important, referring to 
director-producer and facilitator-mentor roles. The innovator and broker roles, in 
the adhocracy aspect, are the least important. This implies that the deans are less 
likely to perform activities associated with creativity, innovation, risk, and 
external legitimacy (Quinn 1988; Cameron et al. 2006). Traditional Indonesian 
values of gotong royong (mutual assistance) (Wirawan and Irawanto 2007) and the 
Indonesian culture of collectivism (Hofstede, Online) may prevent deans from 
being pro-active and entrepreneurial change agents. The traditional values seem 
to underline a family culture. 
 
This suggestion of leadership styles strongly focusing on people-oriented 
leadership and teamwork is in line with the findings of House et al.’s (1999) 
leadership study on Global Leadership and Organisational Behaviour 
Effectiveness (GLOBE). GLOBE examined the interrelationships between societal 
culture, organisational culture and practices and organisational leadership in 62 
countries, including Indonesia. They surveyed thousands of middle managers in 
food processing, finance and telecommunications and identified six global 
leadership dimensions. Compared to the overall GLOBE sample, ‚the scores of 
Indonesian middle managers on all the six leadership dimensions are above the 
overall mean for five of the six leadership dimensions‛ (cited in Storey and Kenny 
2004, p. 3). This means that Indonesian middle managers are more likely to 
perform charismatic/value-based, team-oriented, and humane (caring) leadership. 
The Indonesian deans, though leading and managing in a sector that is supposed 
to be in several ways, seem to fit this pattern rather well. 
 
The reason for the deans’ people-oriented leadership is that Indonesia has a 
strong cultural tradition of communal living and collective actions. As stated by 
Bowen (1986 cited in Wirawan and Irawanto 2007, p. 360), ‚Cooperation is 
important to Indonesians as it reflects the traditional values called gotong royong 
(mutual assistance). The idea of gotong royong in Indonesia has been the basis for 
political discourse concerning the nature of authority, the characteristics of village 
society, and the legitimacy of demands for labour by the state.‛ The traditional 
value of gotong royong in Indonesia is also supported by Gani (2004 cited in 

196 
 
Chapter 9 
Wirawan and Irawanto 2007, p. 361), indicating that there is ‚a strong emphasis 
on loyalty and cohesiveness within the family and work units as they take the 
gotong royong philosophy on their everyday life, as well as a shared belief in the 
importance of encouraging practices that reward collective distribution of 
resources.‛ 
 
A cultural study by Hofstede (Online) indicates that Indonesia has one of the 
lowest world scores for individualism (a score of 14), suggesting that Indonesian 
society is collectivist in nature. Dimensions of leadership that represent 
individualism are unpopular styles of leadership in Indonesia. Because of 
Indonesian’s collectivistic culture, leadership that focuses on a sense of ‚we-like‛ 
and of ‚family-like‛ are particularly seen as effective. Where collective culture 
predominates, deans tend to work in and manage through groups/teams and 
involve others in participative and supportive consensual decision making. 
Apparently the macro (national) culture strongly influences such beliefs and 
values as reflected in the deans’ behaviours in leading and managing an 
organisation (see Ensari and Murphy 2003; Raihani 2008; Wirawan and Irawanto 
2007). This finding is also reflected in this study.  
9.2.2 
Reflections on the Theories and Methodology Used 
The outcomes of the study indicate that Indonesian deanship behaviour is 
primarily influenced by attitudes towards faculty leadership and management. 
This is in line with other research that uses the theories of reasoned action and 
planned behaviour and finds a strong relationship between attitudes and 
behaviour (e.g. Albarracin et al. 2001; De Boer 2003). Our outcomes also seem to 
fit the general trend in higher education that, in modern university governance 
structures, authority has cascaded down and empowered the deans (e.g. De Boer 
and Goedegebuure 2009). The outcomes of the study suggest that the empowered 
middle managers use their discretion to run a faculty mainly in accordance with 
their own values and beliefs. De Boer (2003) reaches a similar conclusion when 
investigating the behaviours of professors. Their behaviour was also largely 
explained by their attitudes, from which De Boer concluded that professors are in 
an autonomous position that enables them to follow their own beliefs and norms.  
 
By the same token, this implies that deans at modern universities may not 
necessarily comply with their subjective norms. Although this seems logical, at 
the same time, the insignificance of subjective norms in determining the 
behaviours and roles of university middle managers looks somewhat 
contradictory in the light of the potential impact of Indonesian culture (Suseno 
1985; Wicaksono and Irawanto 2007; Hofstede, Online). Stressing values of 

Summary, Conclusions and Reflections 
 
197 
mutual assistance and the ‚we-feeling‛, it would be expected that subjective 
norms would play a major part in influencing the managerial leadership styles. 
Although the deans comply with their important referents to some extent (see 
Table 7.2 in Chapter 7), subjective norms play a secondary role. In fact, attitudinal 
considerations as causal factors influencing the managerial leadership styles 
outweigh subjective norms. As we argued in Chapter 8, it seems that subjective 
norms are partially intercorrelated with attitudes.  
 
The dominance of attitudes as an explanatory factor is supported by other 
leadership studies. Many researchers believe that leadership is an outcome of 
personality (Hogan et al. 1994; Sadler 2003). Personality, according to Pervin et al. 
(2005, p. 6 cited in Mayer 2007, p. 1), refers to ‚those characteristics of the person 
that account for consistent patterns of feelings, thinking, and behaving.‛ A 
leadership style is strongly linked to a person’s personality (Bass 1990; Sadler 
2003) which represents the person’s beliefs (cognition), feelings (affect), and 
action (behaviour) (Rosenberg and Hovland 1960 cited in Ajzen and Fishbein 
1980, p. 19). Therefore, Ajzen and Fishbein (1980, p. 19) point out that ‚it would 
be difficult to assume anything other than a strong relationship between attitude 
and behaviour‛ (as shown in this study in the managerial leadership styles of 
deans). 
 
In this study, based on the volitional behavioural model, attitudes are the most 
dominant factors influencing the styles (see Chapter 8, Table 8.3). Based on the 
non-volitional behavioural model, attitudes together with perceived behavioural 
control explain the styles (see Chapter 8, Table 8.10). The findings suggest that the 
deans, for example, may not exhibit a certain style, not because they do not have 
positive attitudes towards this style, but rather because they perceive possible 
barriers to demonstrating it. Based on these findings, the non-behavioural model 
appears to be a better model for explaining the managerial leadership styles of 
deans.  
 
According to the theoretical models, background factors play an indirect role in 
explaining behaviour. The background factors are expected to mould beliefs and 
consequently attitudes. For instance, faculty culture, as one of the background 
factors, is found to significantly influence the behavioural beliefs underlying the 
attitudes the deans hold (see Chapter 8, Table 8.11). In this study, the four aspects 
of faculty culture based on the CVF, and in particular clan culture, contribute to 
the deans’ attitudes. This reflects the nature of Indonesian collectivist culture. 
Thus, the national culture could be embedded in the faculty culture, which in 
turn could influence an individual’s attitudes and subjective norms. In contrast, 
faculty culture is not found to significantly influence perceived behavioural 

198 
 
Chapter 9 
control. This suggests that faculty culture does not determine control beliefs 
underlying perceived behavioural control. Thus, the degree to which the deans 
believe that they are capable of performing a given behaviour is not dependant 
on their working culture. 
 
Demographic factors used in the study (such as gender, age, term of office and 
academic discipline) do not have any impact. We would argue that this is due to 
the national culture. Culture encompasses explicit or tacit beliefs, norms, values, 
and underlying assumptions that people share about behaviour (Schein 1992). 
The beliefs that people hold are important as they weigh a particular entity with 
some degree of favour or disfavour (Eagly and Chaiken 1993). ‚If culture is seen 
as an integral part of the organisation, then the thinking, feeling, and responses of 
leaders are moulded by the culture‛ (Schein 1992; Bass and Avolio 1993 cited in 
Ogbonna and Harris 2000, p. 770). If deans in Indonesian universities have a set of 
shared cultural beliefs that underlie leadership styles, the demographic factors of 
this study may not matter. Male or female, old or young, deans share the same 
underlying values with respect to their attitudes. This confirms the findings of the 
previous analysis, indicating that faculty culture affects the deans’ attitudes. 
 
Reflections on the methodology of the study 
Earlier in this chapter, we referred to measuring behaviour through self-
reporting. Many studies support the methodological and practical advantages of 
self-reports of behaviours compared with direct observations of behaviours (see 
also Chapter 4). First, many behaviours are not directly accessible to investigators. 
Second, it can be difficult to assess whether or when a particular behaviour has 
been performed. Third, self-reports provide information that may not be obtained 
during observation. Fourth, self-reports can be obtained free of context, action, or 
time elements. Finally, self-reports require less effort, time, and money.  
 
We are, however, aware of potential shortcomings, such as overrating one’s 
behaviours and capacities or being influenced by socially desirable answers. ‚The 
Indonesian culture discourages individual displays of assertive or confrontational 
behaviour‛ (Wirawan and Irawanto 2007, p. 364). A 360-degree feedback 
approach seems to be an attractive alternative. Feedback that comes from relevant 
individuals, for example academic staff, university boards (Rector or Vice-
Rectors), and administrative staff, could provide more accuracy and reduce the 
halo effect (Tornow and London 1998; Healthfield 2001). Such an approach also 
has downsides. People may inflate ratings to make someone look good or they 
may deflate ratings to make someone look bad (Healthfield 2001). In Indonesian 
culture, people ‚are concerned about the effect of their actions on the feelings of 
others and take care not to upset others‛ (Wirawan and Irawanto 2007, p. 361) 

Summary, Conclusions and Reflections 
 
199 
and, therefore, the 360-degree feedback approach is not a good alternative for this 
study. Moreover, such an approach is likely to face pragmatic problems. Apart 
from low response rates, it would require a huge number of participants. 
Nevertheless, we believe it would be of value to conduct future research to 
determine whether the styles that we have discovered in this study are supported 
by the views of the deans’ relevant others. Questions that remain to be answered 
by a 360-degree feedback approach might include: Do academics, students or 
rectors recognise the ‚Competitive Consultant dean‛ in their faculty? Do they 
confirm that deans are ‚masters of management‛?  
 
To explore and investigate leadership styles of deans in Indonesian universities, 
we adopted Quinn’s (1988) Competing Values Framework leadership instrument 
which was originally developed from research conducted in the United States. 
‚Many American leadership theories dominate management literature‛ 
(Wirawan and Irawanto 2007, p. 365), therefore, ‚the vast majority of studies of 
leadership have originated within American culture‛ (Sadler 2003, p. 127). 
Consequently, many leadership instruments are developed from an American 
perspective. Regarding the leadership instrument used for this study, the context 
of the questions asked in the CVF leadership instrument is significant. In 
Indonesia with its group-oriented culture (collectivism), individuals (in our 
study, deans) might tend to answer questions as if they are addressed to the 
group they belong to. In a highly individualistic culture like in the United States 
of America, the answers will most likely be perceived through the eyes of those 
individuals themselves (Hofstede, Online; see also Chapter 3, section 3.3.1). It 
could be that the highly individualistic American culture in the CVF leadership 
instrument reflects a different set of values and behavioural norms from those of 
highly collectivistic Indonesian culture.  
 
This implies that we have to be aware of and ready for some challenges as a result 
of these cultural biases. First, a factor analysis on the 32 behaviours of the CVF 
did not yield the eight leadership roles based on the CVF. Second, the data show 
that the scores of Indonesian deans on the 32 behaviours of the CVF are more 
clustered in very often (5), almost always (6), and always (7) based on a seven-
point Likert scale. Nevertheless, the distribution of the data is still within the 
range of normal. Third, the results have smaller variability. However, small but 
meaningful variability can be found in our data and generate particular styles of 
deanship at Indonesian universities.  
 
 

200 
 
Chapter 9 
9.2.3 
Ideas for Further Research  
This study is an initial study of the deanship at Indonesian universities. As a 
pioneering study of the deanship in the Indonesian context, we faced some 
challenges in analysing the data. As we discussed above, the limited variance in 
the dependent variable is one of those concerns. The use of the CVF instrument to 
measure behaviour could be a reason for this. Socially desirable answering (for 
example, ‚Of course I come up with new ideas‛ and/or ‚Of course I set the 
direction of the faculty‛) in combination with self-reporting can create bias. 
Moreover, the CVF instrument originates from a different cultural background. 
For future research, a stronger emphasis on adaption of the instrument from a 
cultural point of view could be interesting.  
 
Another topic for further research is the extent to which the deans have changed 
the way they run a faculty. We assume that deans have been responsive to major 
changes in and around their universities. A longitudinal study with an historical 
component should shed more light on this issue. This change, if it is there as we 
would expect, could further add to our understanding of middle management in 
universities.  
 
Another step to better understand the deanship at Indonesian universities is more 
in-depth investigations. This would call for a qualitative approach via case 
studies. The outcomes of this current study could provide a valuable starting 
point. Case studies would enable the researcher to more deeply delve into the 
styles and their effects, for example, by exploring the intensity of behaviour 
(instead of frequency). In particular, a case study approach could investigate the 
effectiveness of particular managerial leadership styles. Possible questions for 
future research might include: Does a particular style matter in terms of 
university or faculty performance? How are the more successful universities or 
faculties governed, taking management styles as one of the key variables?  
 
This study has explored the managerial leadership styles of deans at Indonesian 
universities. The styles are explained by attitudes towards these styles and the 
extent to which deans believe that they have control over these styles. Some 
studies have investigated the reverse direction of causation from behaviour to 
attitude (Olson and Stone 2005). To further understand leadership behaviour in 
(Indonesian) universities it would be interesting in future studies to investigate 
the influence of managerial leadership styles on attitude. 
 
In conclusion, as the context of Indonesian higher education has moved towards 
institutional autonomy, the role of university middle management has gained 

Summary, Conclusions and Reflections 
 
201 
more importance. This study indicates that deans value the pursuit of collectivist 
ideals. We believe that this traditional value will continue to shape the middle 
management of universities in Indonesia. Given the rapid growth and dynamic 
context of Indonesian universities, we believe that future deans will have more 
experience and be better trained in entrepreneurial activities. In the future, being 
successful as a dean will mean being innovative, taking risks, and having a clear 
vision for faculties through collective approaches. The future success of 
universities in Indonesia moving towards being entrepreneurial and research-
based institutions sits squarely on the shoulders of its middle managers, that is, 
their deans.  
 

202 
 

Nederlandstalige samenvatting 
 
203 
Lions or Lambs? How deans lead and manage their faculties at Indonesian 
universities. 
 
Nederlandstalige samenvatting 
Inleiding en probleemstelling 
Leidinggeven en management, in het hoger onderwijs en daarbuiten, heeft zich 
altijd op een grote belangstelling mogen verheugen, zowel van onderzoekers als 
mensen in de praktijk. Een breed scala aan onderzoek  belicht diverse facetten 
van het besturen en beheren van organisaties. Het is opvallend dat er relatief 
weinig aandacht is voor het middenniveau in organisaties. Doorgaans richt het 
onderzoek zich op de bedrijfstop. Ook in het hoger onderwijs trekt leidinggeven 
en management op het middenniveau tamelijk weinig aandacht. Over het 
decanaat is niet veel geschreven. Wat er is verschenen is vaak van Amerikaanse 
origine. De geringe belangstelling voor bestuur en beheer op het middenniveau is 
opmerkelijk omdat het middenniveau van grote invloed kan zijn op het 
functioneren van organisaties. Dit geldt zowel voor hoger onderwijsinstellingen 
als andere publieke en private organisaties. Het doel van deze studie is om een 
bijdrage te leveren aan het vergroten van inzicht in het bestuur en beheer op het 
middenniveau in universiteiten. Het decanaat, in dit geval in het Indonesisch 
hoger onderwijs, staat centraal. 
 
De veranderingen die het hoger onderwijs in Indonesië heeft ondergaan vormen 
een aanvullende reden om het decanaat te onderzoeken. Globalisering van het 
hoger onderwijs, de diffusie van een neo-liberaal gedachtegoed over de inrichting 
van het publieke domein (New Public Management), de financiële crises in Azië 
en de wisselingen in de politieke macht in Indonesië hebben het hoger onderwijs 
en de instellingen aldaar niet ongemoeid gelaten. Zoals in veel landen is een van 
de uitkomsten van deze ontwikkelingen dat de instellingsautonomie is vergroot. 
De gedachte is dat hoger onderwijsinstellingen in Indonesië in meer of mindere 
mate een bedrijfsmatiger karakter moeten krijgen. Het ligt voor de hand dat de 
decanen hierdoor worden beïnvloed. De veronderstelling is dat evenals in veel 
andere landen de decanen in een meer bedrijfsmatige organisatie hun rol en 
functioneren op een andere wijze (moeten of willen) inkleden (De Boer en 
Goedegebuure 2009). De centrale vraagstelling in dit onderzoek is dan ook hoe de 
decanen in Indonesië leidinggeven aan hun faculteiten en welke factoren deze 
wijze van leidinggeven verklaren. Welke leiderschapsstijl wordt gehanteerd en 
door welke factoren kan deze stijl worden verklaard?1 
                                                           
1 In hoofdstuk 3 is ingegaan op de overeenkomsten en verschillen tussen de begrippen 
‘leiderschap’ en ‘management’. Omdat decanen zowel besturen als beheren, is besloten om 

204 
 
Nederlandstalige samenvatting 
Theoretisch kader en uitwerking 
In dit onderzoek is gebruik gemaakt van uit de sociaal-psychologie afkomstige 
gedragsmodellen die zijn ontwikkeld door Fishbein en Ajzen (1980, 1985, 2010). 
In het eerste gedragsmodel, de theorie van beredeneerd gedrag, opgesteld in de 
jaren zeventig van de vorige eeuw, wordt gedrag verklaard door de intentie om 
een bepaald gedrag te vertonen. Deze intentie wordt op zijn beurt bepaald door 
enerzijds een persoonlijke en anderzijds een sociale factor. De persoonlijke factor 
is de attitude van een actor jegens een bepaald gedrag. De sociale factor – 
aangeduid als subjectieve norm – weerspiegelt de opvattingen uit de directe 
omgeving die er met betrekking tot een bepaald gedrag in de ogen van een actor 
toe doen. Het gedrag van een actor kan met andere woorden het beste worden 
verklaard door vast te stellen of een actor voornemens is het gedrag in kwestie te 
vertonen. Een dergelijk voornemen is het resultaat van enerzijds een positieve 
attitude en anderzijds een positief gepercipieerde subjectieve norm. Dit 
basismodel is in zeer veel onderzoek gebruikt en heeft daarbij naast veel 
waardering ook veel kritiek gekregen, vaak gericht op de robuustheid en 
eenvoud van het gedragsmodel. Enerzijds wordt deze robuustheid als een kracht 
ervaren, anderzijds is het verwijt dat dit een te eenvoudige voorstelling van zaken 
is. Er wordt vaak voorgesteld het model uit te breiden met nieuwe variabelen (zie 
hoofdstuk 2). In de jaren tachtig heeft Ajzen (1985) dit gedaan door toevoeging 
van 
gepercipieerde 
gedragsbeheersing 
als 
verklarende 
variabele 
voor 
gedragsintentie. Voorgenomen gedrag is volgens dit model niet alleen een vraag 
van ‘willen’ maar ook van ‘kunnen’: er kunnen gedragsbeperkende of –
stimulerende factoren van invloed zijn op de gedragsintentie. Dit uitgebreide 
gedragsmodel is in eerste instantie aangeduid als het model van gepland gedrag, 
later door Ajzen en Fishbein de beredeneerde actiebenadering genoemd. 
 
In ons onderzoek hebben wij zowel het basismodel als het uitgebreide 
gedragsmodel gebruikt om leiderschapsstijlen te bepalen en te verklaren. In de 
uitwerking van de gedragsmodellen voor deze studie is een aanpassing gemaakt. 
Omdat uit eerder onderzoek blijkt dat er een zeer hoge samenhang bestaat tussen 
gedrag en gedragsintentie is besloten gedragsintentie niet op te nemen. Dit 
betekent dat wij de volgende kernvariabelen uit de twee gedragsmodellen hebben 
geoperationaliseerd: leiderschapsstijl, attitude jegens een leiderschapsstijl, 
subjectieve 
norm 
over 
een 
leiderschapsstijl 
en 
de 
gepercipieerde 
gedragsbeheersing. Een attitude kan worden gemeten door de opvattingen over 
                                                                                                                                                 
de begrippen in deze studie als synoniemen te gebruiken. Er wordt gesproken van 
‘managerial leadership styles’. In deze samenvatting spreken wij gemakshalve van 
‘leiderschapsstijlen’.  

Nederlandstalige samenvatting 
 
205 
en te verwachten effecten van een bepaald gedrag te achterhalen. Een subjectieve 
norm wordt bepaald door de opvattingen van belangrijke derden (door de ogen 
van een actor), gecombineerd met de geneigdheid tot navolging hiervan.  
 
In de gedragsmodellen van Ajzen en Fishbein spelen achtergrondfactoren op 
indirecte wijze een rol. Deze variabelen verklaren volgens hen niet het gedrag 
zelf. De context wordt geïnternaliseerd in de normen en waarden van een actor. 
Zij zijn bijvoorbeeld van invloed op de inschatting en waardering van de effecten 
van bepaald gedrag en zijn zo van invloed op de attitude. De achtergrondfactoren 
die op deze wijze in het onderzoek zijn meegenomen betreffen onder meer 
leeftijd, zittingstermijn, type en omvang van de faculteit en faculteitscultuur. 
Bij de uitwerking van de gedragsmodellen voor het beschrijven en verklaren van 
de leiderschapsstijlen van decanen uit Indonesië is gebruikt gemaakt van het 
concurrerende waarden model (Competing Values Framework - CVF) dat 
voornamelijk is ontwikkeld door Quinn (1988). Het CVF is een van de vele kaders 
die in de leiderschaps- en managementliteratuur is ontwikkeld (hoofdstuk 3 biedt 
een overzicht van deze literatuur en de verschillende conceptualisaties van 
leiderschapsstijlen). Het voordeel van het CVF is dat het verschillende 
wetenschappelijke invalshoeken weet te combineren (zoals de human relations, 
open system, rational goals en internal process benaderingen). Bovendien is het 
CVF veel gebruikt in diverse onderzoeken en is de validiteit en betrouwbaarheid 
van de bijbehorende instrumenten uitvoerig getest (Cameron 2006). 
 
In de jaren zeventig en tachtig kwamen Quinn en Rohrbugh (1981) tot de 
conclusie dat de effectiviteit van organisaties, en hun leiderschap, door 
verschillende, en soms tegenstrijdige factoren wordt bepaald. Twee dimensies 
worden onderscheiden: de eerste dimensie betreft de mate van flexibiliteit, de 
tweede de focus van de organisatie. Op basis van deze twee dimensies zijn vier 
kwadranten 
gevormd: 
de 
clan, 
de 
adhocratie, 
de 
hiërarchie 
en 
de 
marktorganisatie. Bij ieder type passen andere leiderschapsrollen. Er worden acht 
verschillende leidersrollen gedefinieerd: mentor, facilitator, innovator, makelaar, 
producent, directeur, coördinator en monitor.  Elk van deze rollen kunnen van 
waarde zijn; de ene rol is niet per se beter of effectiever dan de andere. Een 
effectieve leider is in de ogen van het CVF in staat om verschillende rollen te 
spelen. Aangezien de onderliggende waarden conflicterend of concurrerend zijn 
is goed leiderschap geen sinecure. 
 
Bij de operationalisatie van de kernvariabelen uit de gedragsmodellen heeft het 
CVF als leidraad gediend voor het door ons gehanteerde ‘3-1 concept’: van 
gedrag via rol naar stijl. Quinn’s (1988)  Competing Values Leadership 
Instrument gaat uit van 32 gedragingen, waaronder bijvoorbeeld ‚het bepalen 

206 
 
Nederlandstalige samenvatting 
van de doelstellingen‛, ‚het bevorderen van consensusvorming‛ of ‚het tonen 
van betrokkenheid‛. Voor iedere leiderschapsrol zijn vier gedragingen 
gedefinieerd, die gezamenlijk een van de acht leiderschapsrollen weerspiegelen. 
Vervolgens wordt een stijl gezien als een bepaalde configuratie van bepaalde 
rollen (waarover later meer). 
 
In plaats van een beperkt aantal casestudies die in detail het gedrag van decanen 
zou kunnen beschrijven en analyseren is gekozen om een beeld in de breedte te 
creëren. Om gedrag, attitudes, subjectieve normen en gedragsbeheersing van 
decanen in kaart te brengen is, gezien de omvang van het land, de spreiding van 
het grote aantal instellingen en het grote aantal decanen, gekozen voor het 
uitzetten van een schriftelijke vragenlijst. Dit beperkt weliswaar de diepgang 
maar bevordert de omvang en de mogelijkheden om de resultaten te 
generaliseren. De vragenlijsten zijn gestuurd naar de decanen en niet naar andere 
betrokkenen. Dit betekent dat gedrag (en andere kernvariabelen) wordt gemeten 
op basis van zelfrapportages. Van zelfrapportages is bekend dat zij vertekenend 
kunnen zijn, zeker als sprake is van gedrag dat gevoelig ligt. Dit lijkt ons in onze 
studie niet het geval, zij het dat het aannemelijk is dat de decanen hun gedrag 
rooskleuriger kunnen voorstellen dan dat het in werkelijkheid is. Een 360-graden 
benadering lost dit probleem echter niet op omdat dan een vergelijkbare 
vertekening (bijvoorbeeld in de andere richting) mogelijk is. 
 
De onderzoekspopulatie 
In het onderzoek zijn twee vragenlijsten uitgezet. De eerste vragenlijst is 
gebaseerd op het basismodel van beredeneerd gedrag. In een later stadium is 
besloten om ook gedragsbeheersing als verklarende variabele voor gedrag mee te 
nemen, wat heeft geleid tot het verzenden van een tweede vragenlijst. Beide 
schriftelijke vragenlijsten zijn in het Indonesisch opgesteld en de gebruikelijke 
eisen van zorgvuldigheid en anonimiteit zijn in acht genomen. 
 
De totale populatie van decanen in Indonesië is niet bekend. Wij zijn in eerste 
instantie uitgegaan van 120 hoger onderwijsinstellingen die zijn geaccrediteerd 
(van de in totaal 419 instellingen). Op basis van de veronderstelling dat een 
instelling gemiddeld acht faculteiten heeft wordt de totale populatie geschat op 
960 decanen. Op basis van een gestratificeerde steekproef onder de instellingen is 
beoogd recht te doen aan de geografische spreiding van de instellingen. Omwille 
van tijd en geld is besloten om random de helft van de 120 instellingen te nemen. 
De aldus verkregen nominale steekproef kent 443 decanen. Hiervan hebben 218 
decanen de eerste vragenlijst ingevuld geretourneerd (de feitelijke steekproef; 
49% van de nominale steekproef). De tweede vragenlijst, uitsluitend geadresseerd 

Nederlandstalige samenvatting 
 
207 
aan de respondenten uit de feitelijke steekproef, is door 75 decanen ingevuld 
teruggestuurd. Van de 218 decanen is 82% man en 18% vrouw. Het overgrote 
deel is tussen de 40 en 60 jaar oud (80%). Bijna de helft van de decanen is minder 
dan twee jaar decaan op het moment van invullen van de vragenlijst. 58% is 
decaan aan een publieke instelling, de overige 42% aan een private instelling. 
Bijna twee derde van de decanen bestuurt een niet-technische faculteit, de 
anderen een technische. De ruime meerderheid van de decanen leidt een kleine 
tot middelgrote faculteit (dat wil zeggen tussen de 1.000 en 5.000 studenten met 
100 tot 500 medewerkers). 
 
De uitkomsten van de studie 
De decanen geven te kennen dat zij in het algemeen alle 32 gedragsactiviteiten 
ontplooien. Dit blijkt onder andere uit de hoge gemiddelde scores op de 32 
gedragsactiviteiten. Meer dan een derde van de decanen geeft aan dat zij meer 
dan 24 van de 32 activiteiten ‘altijd’ uitvoeren. Slechts 13% van decanen zegt dat 
zij minder dan negen verschillende gedragsactiviteiten uitvoeren (dat wil zeggen 
minder frequent uitvoeren). Dit betekent logischerwijs dat de decanen ook alle 
leiderschapsrollen zoals gedefinieerd in het CVF vervullen. Alleen de rol van 
innovator en makelaar, beide uit het adhocratie-kwadant, komen iets minder 
frequent voor. Deze uitkomst impliceert dat de Indonesische decanen naar eigen 
zeggen in het leidinggeven aan hun faculteit alle rollen in sterke mate vervullen. 
In Quinn’s terminologie zou dit duiden op een kwalificatie ‘master managers’. De 
decanen suggereren in staat te zijn om te kunnen gaan met de concurrerende 
waarden die aan de verschillende rollen ten grondslag liggen. Wij duiden deze 
algemene stijl dan ook aan als de masterstijl. 
 
We hebben deze algemene masterstijl verder verfijnd. Hoewel alle rollen frequent 
voorkomen, komen bepaalde rollen vaker voor dan andere. Via een two-step 
cluster analyse (zei hoofdstuk 6 voor details) is het relatieve belang van een rol 
vastgesteld op basis waarvan vier specifieke configuraties van leiderschapsstijlen 
zijn geïdentificeerd; de concurrerende consultant, de gefocuste teamcaptain, de 
consensus-georiënteerde 
doeleindenbepaler 
en 
de 
geïnformeerde 
vertrouwensman. In figuur 6.4 tot en met 6.7 zijn de vier specifieke 
leiderschapsstijlen van Indonesische decanen weergegeven. 
 
Het door ons opgestelde basismodel van beredeneerd gedrag geeft aan dat de 
gevonden leiderschapsstijlen worden verklaard door de attitudes van de decanen 
en door de door hen gepercipieerde subjectieve normen. Dit verklaringsmodel is 
getest door middel van bivariate en multivariate regressieanalyses. De bivariate 
regressieanalyses laten zien dat de attitudes de leiderschapsstijl verklaren, zowel 

208 
 
Nederlandstalige samenvatting 
wat betreft de algemene masterstijl als de vier specifieke stijlen. Ook de 
subjectieve norm verklaart de leiderschapsstijl, zij het in minder sterke mate. 
Deze uitkomsten worden ten dele ondersteund door de multivariate 
regressieanalyse. De subjectieve norm valt in deze regressies weg als verklarende 
factor, omdat deze norm correleert met de attitude. Omdat er geen sprake is van 
sterke multicollineariteit is de conclusie gerechtvaardigd dat de leiderschapsstijl 
wordt verklaard door de attitude van de decanen jegens een leiderschapsstijl. 
Voorts is bezien of specifieke leiderschapsstijlen worden verklaard door de 
specifieke attitudes die er aan ten grondslag liggen. Dit is bij de meeste specifieke 
leiderschapsstijlen het geval, maar niet bij alle. 
 
In het uitgebreide gedragsmodel (de beredeneerde actiebenadering) is het 
basismodel uitgebreid met de gepercipieerde gedragsbeheersing (ziet een decaan 
factoren die een bepaalde leiderschapsstijl in de weg staan?). Er zijn drie soorten 
gedragsbeheersing onderscheiden: omgevingsgerelateerde, interne en praktische; 
zie hoofdstuk 4). Ook hier zijn bivariate en multivariate regressieanalyses 
uitgevoerd. Alleen de praktische gedragsbeheersing (hoge werkdruk en 
complexiteit van de faculteit) blijkt van negatieve invloed op de leiderschapsstijl 
van de decaan. Hoe groter de beperkingen (in werkdruk en complexiteit), des te 
minder waarschijnlijk het is dat een bepaalde leiderschapsstijl wordt gehanteerd. 
Dit betekent dat de leiderschapsstijl van Indonesische decanen (positief) wordt 
verklaard door hun attitudes en (negatief) door praktische gedragsbeperkingen. 
Dit geldt voor bijna alle leiderschapsstijlen die in deze studie zijn geïdentificeerd. 
Bij twee specifieke leiderschapsstijlen (de concurrerende consultant en de 
consensus-gerichte doeleindebepaler) speelt ook interne gedragsbeheersing een 
verklarende rol. 
 
Discussie en reflectie 
Een van de uitkomsten van het onderzoek is dat decanen in Indonesië veel 
verschillende handelingen verrichten en daarmee ook praktisch alle acht 
leiderschapsrollen vervullen. Daaraan is het predicaat ‘master stijl’ verbonden. 
Dit is een opmerkelijke, en wellicht verdachte uitkomst, omdat het vervullen van 
verschillende rollen met tegenstrijdige onderliggende waarden op zijn minst een 
lastige opgave is die maar voor weinig mensen is weggelegd. Een verklaring voor 
deze uitkomst kan zijn gelegen in de wijze waarop de gegevens zijn verkregen. 
Het meten van gedrag door middel van zelfrapportages kan zoals eerder 
aangegeven leiden tot misplaatste overwaardering. De wens kan de vader van de 
gedachte zijn: dit zijn de rollen die een decaan zou moeten vervullen en dus geeft 
hij te kennen dit ook daadwerkelijk te doen. Wij merken hierbij op dat wij in deze 
studie gevraagd hebben hoe vaak een bepaald gedrag wordt vertoond. Dit zegt 

Nederlandstalige samenvatting 
 
209 
op zich zelf niets over de wijze waarop en de intensiteit waarmee dit gebeurt. Het 
kan zijn dat bepaalde handelingen slechts oppervlakkig worden uitgevoerd wat 
het in beginsel makkelijker maakt om veel verschillende handelingen te 
verrichten. Dit zou kunnen verklaren waarom de decanen in deze studie zich zelf 
beschouwen als ‘masters’.  
 
Een andere reden waarom wantrouwen over de masterstijl kan worden 
getemperd is gebaseerd op de uitkomsten van andere studies (onder anderen 
Wolverton et al. 2001; Gmelch en Wolverton 2002). Zoals in hoofdstuk 9 is 
beschreven concluderen andere studies dat van decanen wordt verwacht dat zij 
veel 
verschillende 
activiteiten 
ontplooien 
en 
veel 
verschillende 
verantwoordelijkheden hebben. De verscheidenheid aan handelingen van 
Indonesische decanen reflecteren de vele verantwoordelijkheden en taken zoals 
die ook elders aan het decanaat worden verbonden (onder anderen de Boer en 
Goedegebuure 2009; Thomas en Fragueiro 2011). De decanen worden met het oog 
hierop geselecteerd. De vereisten en selectiecriteria voor decanen in Indonesië 
zijn niet wezenlijk anders dan elders. Vanuit dit perspectief  is het wellicht 
minder vreemd dat deze personen vervolgens ook aangeven over dergelijke 
capaciteiten te beschikken en verschillende rollen te spelen. 
 
De omgeving waarin Indonesische universiteiten opereren is het laatste 
decennium sterk veranderd met als gevolg dat de universiteiten aan verandering 
onderhevig zijn. Dit laat waarschijnlijk uiteindelijk ook het decanaat niet 
onberoerd. De uitkomsten van de studie suggereren dat de decanen van plan zijn 
hun bijdrage te leveren. Zij geven bijvoorbeeld aan dat richting geven, 
strategische planning en interne communicatie van belang zijn. Evenals in andere 
landen (onder anderen Meek, Goedegebuure en De Boer 2010) is de ‘executive 
dean’ in opkomst ten faveure van de ‘primus inter pares’. Hoewel de verandering 
van leidinggeven aan de faculteit niet het doel van deze studie is, lijkt het er op 
dat de masterstijl elementen bevat die in het verleden veel minder aanwezig 
waren. 
 
Naast deze masterstijl zijn in deze studie vier specifieke stijlen van leidinggeven 
naar voren gekomen. Vooral de leiderschapsrollen gerelateerd aan interne focus 
en flexibiliteit (clan) en externe focus en stabiliteit (markt) zijn belangrijk; 
leidinggeven gericht op bevorderen van participatie en samenwerking enerzijds 
en doelgericht en externe concurrentie anderzijds. Leidinggeven gericht op het 
bevorderen van creativiteit, innovatie, risico en externe legitimiteit treden minder 
op de voorgrond. De gedachte dat leidinggeven aan faculteiten in Indonesische 
universiteiten zich sterk richt op samenwerking strookt met traditionele 
Indonesische waarden die (familie)banden van groot belang achten. In ander 

210 
 
Nederlandstalige samenvatting 
onderzoek naar management op het middenniveau van organisaties in 62 landen 
(House et al. 1999) wordt voor Indonesische bedrijven in de private sector een 
vergelijkbare conclusie 
getrokken: 
‘team-oriented’ en ‘humane (caring)’ 
leiderschap scoort bij Indonesische middenamangers  in vergelijking met andere 
landen hoog. In dit verband zijn de uitkomsten van onze studie niet vreemd. Het 
collectief, loyaliteit en wederzijdse samenwerking liggen stevig verankerd in de 
Indonesische samenleving (onder anderen Wirawan en Irawanto 2007) en komt 
klaarblijkelijk ook tot uitdrukking in facultair leiderschap. 
 
De gevonden leiderschapsstijlen worden voor een groot deel verklaard door de 
attitudes van de decanen. Dit strookt met eerder onderzoek in het hoger 
onderwijs waar eenzelfde verklaringsmodel is gehanteerd (de Boer 2003). Ook 
andere leiderschapsstudies (buiten het hoger onderwijs) wijzen op het belang van 
attitudes als verklarende variabele. Het past ook goed bij de algemene trend in 
het hoger onderwijs dat als gevolg van veranderingen in de bestuursorganisatie 
van universiteiten de positie van de decanen met meer bevoegdheden is omkleed. 
Het is aannemelijk dat decanen hiervan gebruik maken door hun eigen waarden 
en normen zwaar te laten wegen in de wijze waarop zij leiding geven aan hun 
faculteit. Dit zou ook kunnen verklaren waarom de subjectieve norm (de 
opvattingen van anderen) minder belangrijk is. Dit laatste verhoudt zich echter 
slecht met eerdere opmerkingen over het mogelijke belang van de Indonesische 
cultuur die vooral het collectief benadrukt. 
 
Het gebruik van het concurrerende waarden model (CVF) in een ‘nieuwe setting’ 
vraagt om enige bezinning. Op basis van eerder onderzoek (bijvoorbeeld 
Cameron 2006) hebben wij aangenomen dat de instrumenten die in het kader van 
het CVF zijn ontwikkeld betrouwbaar en valide zijn. Echter zoals veel 
leiderschaps- en managementliteratuur is dit model opgesteld in een 
Amerikaanse context. Bovendien komt het uit de private sector. Wat betekent het 
dat het CVF wordt gebruikt in het hoger onderwijs in een niet-westerse context? 
Hoewel wij deze vraag hier niet kunnen beantwoorden, merken wij op dat de 
groepsgeoriënteerde cultuur in Indonesië kan inhouden dat decanen de vragen 
door de ogen van de groep beantwoorden. In individualistische culturen zoals de 
Amerikaanse is het wellicht duidelijker dat de decaan als individu de adressant 
is. Het is aanbevelingswaardig de gevolgen van dergelijke verschillen te 
betrekken in onderzoek over de validiteit en betrouwbaarheid van het CVF-
instrumentarium.  
 
Een andere interessante vraag betreft de causaliteit in de gehanteerde 
gedragsmodellen. Deze studie geeft aan dat een leiderschapsstijl wordt verklaard 
door een decaan’s attitude en zijn gepercipieerde gedragsbeheersing. Er is echter 

Nederlandstalige samenvatting 
 
211 
ook onderzoek dat deze causaliteit omdraait, namelijk dat gedrag bepalend is 
voor iemands attitude (vergelijk Olsen en Stone 2005). Ook dit zou een 
interessante invalshoek zijn voor toekomstig onderzoek. 
 
Deze studie heeft deels een pionierskarakter zoals ook blijkt uit de vorige alinea’s. 
Het is duidelijk dat de geringe variantie in de afhankelijke variabele voldoende 
reden is om bij vervolgonderzoek nog eens stil te staan bij de wijze waarop 
gedrag wordt gemeten. Een alternatief of verfijning van het instrumentarium om 
sociaal wenselijke antwoorden in combinatie met zelfrapportage (‚het spreekt 
toch voor zich dat ik duidelijke doeleinden formuleer voor de faculteit‛) te 
voorkomen, is wenselijk voor toekomstig onderzoek. Ook zou toekomstig 
onderzoek zich kunnen toespitsen op de veranderingen in leidinggeven aan 
faculteiten (en universiteiten) door de tijd. Deze studie is een momentopname; 
longitudinaal onderzoek zou onze kennis verder doen toenemen. Een andere 
goede mogelijkheid tot kennisvermeerdering is om, nadat wij hier ‚in de breedte‛ 
zijn gegaan, de diepte in te gaan door middel van casestudies. Daar zou 
bijvoorbeeld niet de frequentie van gedrag maar de intensiteit en effectiviteit van 
dat gedrag nader kunnen worden onderzocht. Het is überhaupt wenselijk om 
meer aandacht te schenken aan de relatie tussen de wijze van besturen en 
effectiviteit (“does governance matter and how?”). Daar is nog een wereld te winnen. 
 

212 
 

References 
 
213 
REFERENCES 
Ahmad, I. (2008). The Entrepreneurial Faculty – the Case of Bandung Institute of 
Technology. Presentation at EU-Asia Higher Education Platform in Hanoi. 
Retrieved 
14 
October 
2009, 
from 
www.eahep.org/web/images/Hanoi/working%20group%20e_%20intan%
20ahmad.pdf 
Ajzen, I. (1985). From Intentions to Actions: A theory of Planned Behavior. In J. K. 
J. Beckmann (Ed.), Action-control: From Cognition to Behavior, (pp. 11-39). 
Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag. 
Ajzen, I. (1988). Attitudes, Personality, and Behavior. Milton Keynes, England: Open 
University Press. 
Ajzen, I. (1991). The Theory of Planned Behavior. Organizational Behavior and 
Human Decision Processes, 50, 179-211. 
Ajzen, 
I. 
(Online). 
Frequently 
Asked 
Questions. 
Retrieved 
from 
http://people.umass.edu/aizen/faq.html 
Ajzen, I., & Fishbein, M. (1973). Attitudinal and Normative Variables as 
Predictors of Specific Behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
27(1), 41-57. 
Ajzen, I., & Fishbein, M. (1980). Understanding Attitude and Predicting Social 
Behavior. New Jersey: Prentice-Hall. 
Ajzen, I., & Madden, T. J. (1986). Prediction of Goal-Directed Behavior: Attitudes, 
Intentions, and Perceived Behavioral Control. Journal of Experimental 
Social Psychology, 22, 453-474. 
Albarracin, D., Johnson, B. T., Fishbein, M., & Muellerleile, P. A. (2001). Theories 
of Reasoned Action and Planned Behavior as Models of Condom Use: A 
Meta-Analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 127(1), 142-161. DOI: 10.1037/0033-
2909.127.1.142 
Ardichvili, A., & Kuchinke, K. P. (2002). Leadership Style and Cultural Values 
Among Managers and Subordinates: A Comparative Study of Four 
Countries of the Former Soviet Union, Germany, and the US. Human 
Resource 
Development 
International, 
5(1), 
99-177. 
DOI: 
10.1080/13678860110046225 
Azra, A. (2008). Indonesian Higher Education: From Public Good to Privatization. 
Journal 
of 
Asian 
Public 
Policy, 
1(2), 
139-147. 
DOI: 
10.1080/17516230802094411 
Babbie, E. (2010). The Practice of Social Research. 12th Edition. Belmont: Wadsworth. 

214 
 
References 
 
BAN-PT. (Online). Direktori Akreditasi Program Study. Retrieved 10 October 2012, 
from http://ban-pt.kemdiknas.go.id/direktori.php 
Bagozzi, R. P., Baumgartner, H., & Yi, Youjae. (1992). State versus Action 
Orientation and the Theory of Reasoned Action: An Application to 
Coupon Usage. Journal of Consumer Research, 18(4), 505-518. Article Stable 
URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2489262 
Baker, T.B., & Brandon, T.H. (1990). Validity of Self-reports in Basic Research. 
Behavioural Assessment, 12(1), 33-51. 
Bantel, K. A., & Jackson, S. E. (1989). Top Management and Innovations in 
Banking: Does the Composition of the Top Team Make a Difference? 
Strategic Management Journal, 10(s1), 107-124. DOI: 10.1002/smj.4250100709 
Barnett, R. (2000). Realizing the University in an Age of Supercomplexity. 
Buckingham: Society for Research into Higher Education and Open 
University Press. 
Bass, B. (1985). Leadership and Performance Beyond Expectations. New York: The Free 
Press. 
Bass, B. M. (1990). Bass and Stogdill’s Handbook of Leadership. New York: The Free 
Press. 
Bass, B. M. (2000). The Future of Leadership in Learning Organizations. Journal of 
Leadership Studies, 7(3), 18-40. DOI: 10.1177/107179190000700302 
Bass, B. M., & Avolio, B. J. (1990). The Implications of Transactional and 
Transformational Leadership for Individual, Team, and Organizational 
Development. In W. Pasmore & R.W. Woodman (Eds.). Research in 
organizational change and development, (Vol. 4, pp. 231-272). Greenwich, CT: 
JAI Press.  
Becker, A. E., & Gibson, C. C. (1998). Fishbein and Ajzen's Theory of Reasoned 
Action: Accurate Prediction of Behavioral Intentions for Enrolling in 
Distance Education Courses. Adult Education Quarterly, 49(1), 43-55. 
Beerkens, E. (2002). Moving toward Autonomy in Indonesian Higher Education. 
International Higher Education, 29, 24-25. 
Beerkens, E. (2007, June 30th). Higher Education Funding in Indonesia. Retrieved 
26 
April 
2009. 
Message 
posted 
to 
http://blog.beerkens.info/index.php/2007/06/higher-education-funding-
in-indonesia/ 
Belasen, A. T. (1998). Paradoxes and Leadership Roles: Assessing and Developing 
Managerial 
Competencies. 
Management 
Development 
Forum, 
1(2). 
Retrieved 
12 
March 
2010, 
from 
http://www8.esc.edu/ESConline/Across_ESC/Forumjournal.nsf/3cc42a422
514347a8525671d0049f395/8ceda4fd8dbf9952852567ca0066523e?OpenDoc
ument 

References 
 
215 
Belasen, A. T., Benke, M., DiPadova, L. N., & Fortunato, M. V. (1996). Downsizing 
and Hyper-effective Manager: The Shifting Importance of Managerial 
Roles 
during 
Organizational 
Transformation. 
Human 
Resource 
Management, 35(1), 87-117. DOI: 10.1002/(SICI)1099-050X(199621)35:1 
Bennis, W. G. (1989). On Becoming a Leader. MA: Addison-Wesley Publishing. 
Bennis, W. G., & Nanus, B. (1985). Leaders: The Strategies for Taking Charge. New 
York: Harper and Row. 
Bennis, W. G., & Nanus, B. (1997). Leaders: The Strategies for Taking Charge (2nd ed.): 
Harper Business. 
Bentler, P. M., & Speckart, G. (1979). Models of Attitude-Behavior Relations. 
Psychological Review, 86, 452-464. 
Best, J and Khan, J. (1989). Research in Education. Englewood Cliffs (NJ), Prentice 
Hall. 
Biddle, B. J., Bank, B. J., & Slavings, R. L. (1987). Norms, Preferences, Identities 
and Retention Decisions. Social Psychology Quarterly, 50(4), 322-337. 
Article Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2786817 
Billari, F. C., & Philipov, D. (2005). The Influence of Attitudes, Subjective Norms 
and Perceived Behavioural Control on Union Formation Intentions. 
International Union for the Scientific Study of Population XXV International 
Population Conference. Tours, France, July 18-23, 2005. Stable URL: 
http://iussp2005.princeton.edu/papers/51668 
Bogardus, A. M. (2007). PHR/SPHR: Professional in Human Resources Certification 
Study Guide. Indiana Polis, Indiana: John Willey & Sons. 
Bogardus, E. S. (1934). Leaders and Leadership. Appleton-Century Company, 
Incorporated. 
Bolden, R., Gosling, J., Marturano, A., & Dennison, P. (2003). A Review of 
Leadership Theory and Competency Frameworks. Centre for Leadership 
Studies. 
Retrieved 
March 
12 
2010, 
from 
http://centres.exeter.ac.uk/cls/documents/mgmt_standards.pdf 
Bolman, L. G., & Deal, T. (1995). Leading with Soul: An Uncommon Journey of Spirit. 
San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass. 
Borins, S. (1998). Lessons From the New Public Management in Commonwealth 
Nations. International Public Management Journal, 1(1), 37-58. DOI: 
10.1016/S1096-7494(99)80085-3 
Bragg, D. D. (2000). Preparing Community College Deans to Lead Change. In D. 
Robillard (Ed.). New Directions for Community Colleges, 109, 75-85. San 
Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass. 
Brodjonegoro, S. S. (n.d.). Higher Education Reform in Indonesia. Higher 
Education in Developing Countries: Peril and Promise. Retrieved 22 April 
2009, from www.tfhe.net/resources/satryo_soemantri_brodjonegoro2.htm 

216 
 
References 
 
Buchori, M., & Malik, A. (2004). The Evolution of Higher Education in Indonesia. 
In P. G. Altbach & T. Umakoshi (Eds.). Asian Universities: Historical 
Perspectives and Contemporary Challenges, (pp. 249-278). Baltimore: The 
Johns Hopkins University Press. 
Burke, S., & Collins, K. M. (2001). Gender differences in leadership styles and 
management skills. Women in Management Review, 16(5), 244-256. DOI: 
10.1108/09649420110395728 
Buttle, F., & Bok, B. (1996). Hotel Marketing Strategy and the Theory of Reasoned 
Action. International Journal of Contemporary Hospitality Management, 8(3), 
5-10. DOI: 10.1108/09596119610115943 
Cameron, K., & Quinn, R. (2006). Diagnosing and Changing Organizational Culture: 
based on the Competing Values Framework. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-
Bass. 
Cameron, K., Quinn, R. E., Degraff, J., & Thakor, A. V. (2006). Competing Values 
Leadership: Creating Value in Organizations. UK: Edward Elgar Publishing 
Limited. 
Cartwright, D., & Zander, A. F. (1953). Group Dynamics. Evanston, IL: Harper and 
Row. 
Changingminds. (Online). Leadership Theories. Retrieved 3 September 2009, from 
changingminds.org/disciplines/leadership/styles/leadership_styles.htm 
Charng, H., Piliavin, J. A., & Callero, P. L. (1988). Role Identity and Reasoned 
Action in the Prediction of Repeated Behavior. Social Psychology Quarterly, 
51(4), 303-317. 
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA). (Online). The World Factbook. Retrieved 10 
January 
2012, 
from 
www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-
factbook/geos/id.html 
Conger, J. A. (1992). Learning to Lead. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass. 
Cooper, R. B., & Quinn, R. E. (1993). Implication of the Competing Values 
Framework for Management Information Systems. Human Resource 
Management, 32(1), 175-202. 
Crawley, F. E., & Koballa, T. R., Jr. (1994). Attitude Research in Science Education: 
Contemporary Models and Methods. Science Education, 78(1), 35-55. DOI: 
10.1002/sce.3730780103 
Davies, J., Hides, M. T., Casey, S. (2001). Leadership in Higher Education. Total 
Quality Management, 12(7), 1025-1030. 
De Boer, H. (2003). Institutionele verandering en professionele autonomie. Proefschrift 
(PhD Thesis). Universiteit Twente. 
De Boer, H., & Goedegebuure, L. (2009). The Changing Nature of the Academic 
Deanship. Leadership, 5(3), 347-364. DOI: 10.1177/1742715009337765 

References 
 
217 
De Vries, D., & Ajzen, I. (1971). The Relationship of Attitudes and Normative 
Beliefs to Cheating in College. Journal of Social Psychology, 83(2), 199-207. 
Dekkers, J.C., van Wier, M. F., Hendriksen, I. JM., Twisk, J. WR., & van Mechelen, 
W. (2008). Accuracy of self-reported body weight, height and waist 
circumference in a Dutch overweight working population. BMC Medical 
Research Methodology, 8 (69). DOI: 10.1186/1471-2288-8-69. 
Del Favero, M. (2006). An examination of the relationship between academic 
discipline and cognitive complexity in academic deans' administrative 
behavior. 
Research 
in 
Higher 
Education, 
47(3), 
281-315. 
DOI: 
10.1007/s11162-005-9389-x 
Del Granado, F. JA., Fengler, W., Ragatz, A., & Yavuz, E. (2007). Investing in 
Indonesian’s Education: Allocation, equity, and efficiency of public 
expenditures (No. WPS4329). The World Bank, Power Reduction and 
Economic Management and Human Development of the East Asia and Pacific 
Region. 
DGHE. (1996). Higher Education Long Term Strategy 1996-2005 (HELTS III). Jakarta: 
Directorate General of Higher Education, Ministry of National Higher 
Education.  
DGHE. (2003). Higher Education Long Term Strategy 2003-2010 (HELTS IV). Jakarta: 
Directorate General of Higher Education, Ministry of National Higher 
Education.  
DGHE. 
(2008). 
Universitas. 
Retrieved 
15 
January 
2008, 
from 
http://dikti.org/?q=node/2 
DGHE. (2009). Indonesian Higher Education and Agenda for Cooperation with 
European Union. Presentation by Fasli Jalal in Asia-Link Symposium. 
Retrieved 
14 
October 
2009, 
from 
www.ehef-
jakarta.org/web/images/ALSpresentations/P3_Fasli_Jalal.pdf 
Dickson, M. W., Den Hartog, D. W., Mitchelson, J. K. (2003). Research on 
leadership in a cross-cultural context: Making progress, and raising new 
questions. 
The 
Leadership 
Quarterly, 
14, 
729-768. 
DOI: 
10.1016/j.lequa.2003.09.002 
DiFronzo, N. C. (2002). The Academic Dean. Retrieved 5 April 2012, from 
www.newfoundations.com/OrgTheory/DiFronzo721b.html 
DiPadova, L., & Faerman, S. (1993). Using the Competing Values Framework to 
Facilitate Managerial Understanding Across Levels of Organizational 
Hierarchy. 
Human 
Resource 
Management, 
32(1), 
143-174. 
DOI: 
10.1002/hrm.3930320108 
Dodor, J. B. K., Rana, D. S., & Thiagarajan, P. (2007). Investigating Business 
Schools’ Intentions to Offer E-Commerce Degree-Programs. Paper 
presented at the Southwest Decision Sciences Institute, 148-154. Paper Stable 
URL: http://www.swdsi.org/swdsi07/2007_proceedings/papers/148.pdf 

218 
 
References 
 
Doll, J., & Orth, B. (1993). The Fishbein and Ajzen Theory of Reasoned Action 
Applied to Contraceptive Behavior: Model Variants and Meaningfulness. 
Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 23(5), 395-415. DOI: 10.1111/j.1559-
1816.1993.tb01095.x 
Drucker, P. F. (1955). The Practice of Management. Elsevier Ltd. Publisher. 
Eagly, A. H., & Chaiken, S. (1993). The Psychology of Attitudes. Orlando, Florida: 
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich College Publishing. 
Eagly, A. H., & Johannesen-Schmidt, M. C. (2001, In press). The Leadership Styles 
of Women and Men. Journal of Social Issues. Retrieved 6 February 2012, 
from 
http://genderinscience.eu/downloads/Consensus_Report_references/Eagl
y%20and%20Johannesen-Schmidt%202001.pdf 
Ensari, N., & Murphy, S. E. (2003). Cross-cultural variations in leadership 
perceptions and attribution of charisma to the leader. Organizational 
Behaviour and Human Decision Process, 92(1-2), 52-66. DOI: 10.1016/S0749-
5978(03)00066-9 
Fagence, M. T. (1974). The Design and Use of Questionnaires for Participation 
Practices in Town Planning-Lessons from the United States and Britain. 
Policy Sciences, 5, 297-308. DOI: 10.1007/BF00144287 
Fagin, C. M. (1997). The Leadership Role of a Dean. New Directions for Higher 
Education, 1997(98), 95-99. DOI: 10.1002/he.9809. 
Fahmi, M. (2007). Indonesian Higher Education: the Chronicle, Recent Development 
and the New Legal Entity Universities (No. 200710). Bandung: Padjadjaran 
University, Department of Economics. 
Fiedler, F. (1967). A Theory of Leadership Effectiveness. New York: McGraw-Hill. 
Fishbein, M. (1963). An Investigation of the Relationship between Beliefs about an 
Object and the Attitude toward that Object. Human Relations, 16(3), 233-
239. 
Fishbein, M. (1967). Readings in Attitude Theory and Measurement. Oxford, England: 
John Wiley and Sons. 
Fishbein, M., & Ajzen, I. (1975). Belief Attitude, Intention, and Behavior: An 
Introduction to Theory and Research. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley. 
Fishbein, M., & Ajzen, I. (2010). Predicting and Changing Behavior: The Reasoned 
Action Approach. New York: Psychology Press, Taylor & Francis Group. 
Fishbein, M., & Stasson, M. (1990). The Role of Desires, Self-Predictions, and 
Perceived Control in the Prediction of Training Session Attendance. 
Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 20, 173-198. DOI: 10.1111/j.1559-
1816.1990.tb00406.x 
Fowler, F. J. (1993). Survey Research Methods (2 ed.). Newbury Park, CA: Sage 
Publisher. 

References 
 
219 
Fried, J. L., DeVore, L., & Dailey, J. (2001). A Study of Maryland Dental 
Hygienists' Perceptions Regarding Self-assessment. Journal of Dental 
Hygiene, 75(2), 121-129. PMID: 11475757 [PubMed - indexed for 
MEDLINE]. 
Gerber, R. W., Newman, I. M., & Martin, G. L. (1988). Applying the Theory of 
Reasoned Action to Early Adolescent Tobacco Chewing. Journal of School 
Health, 58(10), 410-413. DOI: 10.1111/j.1746-1561.1988.tb05816.x 
Giles, M., McClenahan, C., Cairns, E., & Mallet, J. (2004). An application of the 
Theory of Planned Behaviour to blood donation: the importance of self-
efficacy. Health Education Research, 19(4), 380-391. DOI: 10.1093/her/cyg063 
Gmelch, W. H., & Wolverton, M. (2002). An Investigation of Dean Leadership. 
Paper presented at The Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research 
Association.  
Goleman, D. (2000). Leadership that Gets Results. Harvard Business Review, 78-90. 
Article 
Stable 
URL: 
http://academy.clevelandclinic.org/Portals/40/HBRLeadershipGetsResults
.pdf 
Gooding, S. (1994). Hospital Outshopping and Perceptions of quality: 
Implications for public policy. Journal of Public Policy and Marketing, 13(2), 
271-280. 
Article 
Stable 
URL: 
http://www.marketingpower.com/ResourceLibrary/Publications/Journalo
fPublicPolicyandMarketing/1994/13/2/9412274678.pdf 
Gorsuch, R. L., & Ortberg, J. (1983). Moral Obligation and Attitudes: Their 
Relation to Behavioural Intentions. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 44(5), 1025-1028. 
Granberg, D., & Holmberg, S. (1990). The Intention-Behavior Relationship among 
U.S. and Swedish Voters. Social Psychology Quarterly, 53(1), 44-54. Article 
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2786868 
Greiman, B. C., Addington, L. S., Larson, T. G., and Olander, K. R. (2007). 
Preferred Leadership Styles of Agricultural Education Teachers: An 
Expression 
of 
Epistemological 
Beliefs 
About 
Youth 
Leadership 
Development. Journal of Agricultural Education, 48(4), 93-105. DOI: 
0.5032/jae.2007.04093 
Guirdham, M. (2002). Interactive Behavior at Work. Essex: Pearson Education 
Limited. 
Ha, C. L. (1998). The Theory of Reasoned Action Applied to Brand Loyalty. 
Journal 
of 
Product 
and 
Brand 
Management, 
7(1), 
51-61. 
DOI:10.1108/10610429810209737 
Haman, G. (2000). Book Review: The leadership Challenge. Retrieved 9 September 
2011, 
from 

220 
 
References 
 
http://www.usq.edu.au/extrafiles/business/journals/HRMJournal/BookRe
views/HamanKouses&PosnerLeadershipChallenge.pdf 
Harkness, J. A., & Schoua-Glusberg, A. (1998). Questionnaires in Translation. 
ZUMA-Nachrichten Spezial, 87-126. Retrieved 10 October 2012, from 
http://isites.harvard.edu/fs/docs/icb.topic506406.files/znspez3_04_Harkne
ss_Glusberg.pdf 
Heathfield, S. (2001). 360 Degree Feedback: The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly. 
Retrieved 
6 
February 
2012, 
from 
http://humanresources.about.com/od/360feedback/a/360feedback.htm 
Hemphill, J. K., & Coons, A. E. (1957). Development of the Leader Behavior 
Description Questionnaire. In R. M. Stogdill & A. E. Coons (Eds.), Leader 
behavior: Its description and measurement. Columbus: Ohio State University: 
Bureau of Business Research. 
Hersey, P., & Blanchard, K. (1988). Management of Organizational Behavior. 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall. 
Hilosky, A., & Watwood, B. (1997). Transformational leadership in a changing 
world: A survival guide for new chairs and deans. Proceedings of the 
Annual International Conference of the Chair Academy (6th, Reno, NV, 
February 12-15, 1997).  
Hofstede, G. (Online). Cultural Dimensions. Retrieved 8 January, 2010, from 
www.geert-hofstede.com/hofstede_indonesia.shtml 
Hogan, R., Curphy, G. J., & Hogan, J. (1994). What We Know about Leadership: 
Effectiveness and Personality. American Psychologist, 49(6), 493-504. DOI: 
10.1037/0003-066X.49.6.493 
Hollander, E. P. (1978a). Leadership Dynamics: A Practical Guide to Effective 
Relationships. New York: The Free Press. 
Hooijberg, R., & DiTomaso, N. (1996). Leadership in and of demographically 
diverse organizations. The Leadership Quarterly, 7(1), 1-19. DOI: 
10.1016/S1048-9843(96)90032-6 
Hooijberg, R., & Petrock, F. (1993). On Cultural Change: Using the Competing 
Values Framework to Help Leaders Execute a Transformational Strategy. 
Human Resource Management, 32(1), 29-50. DOI: 10.1002/hrm.3930320103 
Hopper, G. (2009). Remembering Grace Murray Hopper: A Legend in Her Own Time. 
Retrieved 
9 
February, 
2009, 
from 
www.chips.navy.mil/links/grace_hopper/file2.htm 
House, R. J. (2004). Culture, Leadership and Organizations. Pennsylvania: SAGE. 
House, R. J., Hanges, P. J., Ruiz-Quintanilla, S. A., Dorfman, P. W., Falkus, S. A. 
and Ashkanasy, N. M. (1999). Cultural influences on leadership and 
organizations: Project Globe. In W. H. Mobley, M. J. Gessner and V. 

References 
 
221 
Arnold (Ed.), Advances in Global Leadership (2 ed., pp. 171-233). Bingley, 
UK: Emerald Group Publishing Ltd. 
Hoy, W.K., & Miskel, C.G. (2008). Educational administration: Theory, research, and 
practice (8th ed.). Boston : McGraw-Hill. 
Hrubes, D., Ajzen, I., & Daigle, J. (2001). Predicting Hunting Intentions and 
Behavior: An Application of the Theory of Planned Behavior. Leisure 
Sciences, 23(3), 165-178. 
Jalal, F. (2010). Towards Asean Community 2020. Retrieved 15 January 2011, from 
http://akademik.dikti.go.id/data/aqan/Vice%20Ministry%20DGHE%20of
%20Indonesia.ppt 
Kabacoff, R. I., & Stoffey, R. W. (2001). Age Differences in Organizational 
Leadership. Paper presented at the 16th Annual Conference of the Society for 
Industrial and Organizational Psychology. Retrieved 10 July 2012, from 
http://www.mrg.com/uploads/PDFs/age_and_leadership_2012.pdf 
Kalliath, T. J., Bluedorn, A. C., & Gillespie, D. F. (1999). A Confirmatory Factor 
Analysis of the Competing Values Instrument. Educational and 
Psychological Measurement, 59(1), 143-158. DOI: 10.1177/0013164499591010 
Katz, D., & Kahn, R. L. (1978). The Social Psychology of Organizations. New York: 
John Wiley. 
Kirkpatrick, S. A., & Locke, E. A. (1991). Leadership: Do traits matter? Academy of 
Management 
Executive, 
5(2), 
48-60. 
Article 
Stable 
URL: 
http://sbuweb.tcu.edu/jmathis/org_mgmt_materials/leadership%20-
%20do%20traits%20matgter.pdf 
Kotter, J. (1990). What Leaders Really Do? Harvard Business Review, 103-110. 
Kraft, P., Rise, J., Sutton, S., & Røysamb, E. (2005). Perceived Difficulty in the 
Theory of Planned Behaviour: Perceived Behavioural Control or Affective 
Attitude? 
British 
Journal 
of 
Social 
Psychology, 
44, 
479-496. 
DOI:10.1348/014466604X17533 
Le, H. N., & Thi, L. N. (2012). Relationship between Leadership Styles and Ages. 
Retrieved 
9 
July 
2012, 
from 
http://www.oppapers.com/essays/Relationship-Between-Leadership-
Styles-And-Ages/895008 
Learner. (Online). Bias in Sampling. Retrieved 8 February 2010, from 
www.learner.org/courses/learningmath/data/session1/part_d/index.html 
Liska, A. E. (1984). A Critical Examination of the Causal Structure of the 
Fishbein/Ajzen Attitude-Behavior Model. Social Psychology Quarterly, 
47(1), 61-74. Article Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/3033889 
Loch, K., & Conger, S. (1996). Evaluating Ethical Decision Making and Computer 
Use. Communications of the ACM, 39(7), 74-83. DOI: 10.1145/233977.233999 
Loeb, M. (2011). Issues in Questionnaire Translation. Presentation at National 
Center for Health Statistics/ Washington Group on Disability Statistics. WG-11 

222 
 
References 
 
Southampton, 
Bermuda. 
Retrieved 
12 
March 
2012, 
from 
www.cdc.gov/.../WG11_Session2_2_Loeb.pdf 
Lok, P., & Crawford, J. (2004). The effect of organizational culture and leadership 
style on job satisfaction and organizational commitment. The Journal of 
Management Development, 23(4), 321-338. DOI: 10.1108/02621710410529785 
Luthans, F., Welsh, D. H. B., & Taylor, L. (1988). A Descriptive Model of 
Managerial Effectiveness. Group Organization Studies, 13(2), 148-162. 
Lykins, E.L., Pavlik, E.L., & Andrykowski, M. A. (2007). Validity of self-reports of 
return for routine repeat screening in an ovarian cancer screening 
program. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev, 16(3), 490-493. DOI: 
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-06-0433 
Maccoby, M. (2000). Understanding the Difference Between Management and 
Leadership. Research Technology Management, 43(1), 57-59. 
Maxwell, J. C. (2007). The 21 Irrefutable Laws of Leadership. Nashville, Tennessee: 
Thomas Nelson, Inc. 
Mayer, J. D. (2007). Asserting the Definition of Personality. The Online Newsletter 
for 
Personality 
Science 
Retrieved 
11 
August 
2012, 
from 
http://www.thepersonalitysystem.org/PFAAssets/Miscellaneous/Assertin
g%20the%20definition%20of%20personality.pdf 
McClenahan, C., Shevlin, M., Adamson, G., Bennett, C., and O'Neill, B. (2007). 
Testicular self-examination: a test of the health belief model and the 
theory of planned behaviour. Health Education Research, 22(2), 272-284. 
DOI: 10.1093/her/cyl076. 
McCrimmon, M. (2006). Zaleznik and Kotter on Leadership. Retrieved 3 September 
2009, 
from 
www.leadersdirect.com/Zaleznik%20and%20Kotter%20on%20Leadershi
p.pdf 
McRoy, I & Gibbs, P. (2009). Leading Change in Higher Education. Educational 
Management 
Administration 
and 
Leadership, 
37(5), 
687–704. 
DOI: 
10.1177/1741143209339655 
McQuarrie, E., & Langmeyer, D. (1987). Planned and Actual Spending Among 
Owners of Home Computers. Journal of Economic Psychology, 8(2), 141-160. 
DOI: 10.1016/0167-4870(87)90017-1 
Meadows, L., & Koballa, T. R., Jr. (1993). Elementary Teachers’ Beliefs about 
Joining a Professional Science Teachers Organization. Journal of Science 
Teacher Education, 4(4), 115-120. DOI: 10.1007/BF02614564 
Meek, V. L., Goedegebuure, L., & De Boer, H. (2010). The Changing Role of 
Academic Leadership in Australia and the Netherlands: Who is the 
modern dean? In V. L. Meek, L. Goedegebuure, R. Santiago & T. Carvalho 

References 
 
223 
(Eds.), The Changing Dynamics of Higher Education Middle Management 
(Vol. 33, pp. 31-54): Springer. DOI: 10.10007/978-90-481-9163-5. 
Mintberg, H. (1973). The Nature of Managerial Work. New York: Harper Row. 
MoNE. (2005). Badan Akreditasi Nasional Perguruan Tinggi. Peraturan Menteri 
Pendidikan Nasional Republik Indonesia Nomor 28 Tahun 2005. Jakarta: 
Directorate General of Higher Education, Ministry of National Education. 
Retrieved 
15 
March 
2009, 
from 
http://www.dikti.go.id/files/atur/Permen28-2005BAN-PT.pdf 
MoNE. (2007). Overview of Higher Education by Status year 2007/2008. Jakarta: 
Ministry 
of 
National 
Education. 
Retrieved 
20 
August 
2009: 
www.depdiknas.go.id/statistik/0708/pt_0708/tbl_01.pdf 
Moore, L. L., & Ruud, R. D. (2006). Leadership styles of current extension leaders. 
Journal of Agricultural Education, 47(1), 6-16. Article Stable URL: 
http://pubs.aged.tamu.edu/jae/pdf/Vol47/47-01-006.pdf 
Mumford, E. (1906). The Origins of Leadership. American Journal of Sociology, 
12(2), 216-240. Article Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2762385 
Nizam. (n.d.). Higher Education Quality Assurance System in Indonesia. Retrieved 15 
May 
2010, 
from 
http://www.rihed.seameo.org/mambo/qa2009/indonesia_report.pdf 
Nizam. (2006). The Need for Higher Education Reforms. In Higher Education in 
East-Asia, 35–68. Asia-Pacific Programme of Educational Innovation for 
Development, United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural 
Organization. Bangkok: UNESCO Bangkok, 2006.  
Nunnally, J. C. (1978). Pshychometric Theory (2nd ed.). NY: McGraw-Hill. 
O'Neill, R. M., & Quinn, R. E. (1993). Editors' note: Applications of the competing 
values framework. Human Resource Management, 32(1), 1–7. DOI: 
10.1002/hrm.3930320101 
Ogbonna, E., & Harris, L. C. (2000). Leadership style, organizational culture and 
performance: empirical evidence from UK companies. International Journal 
of 
Human 
Resource 
Management, 
11(4), 
766-788. 
DOI: 
10.1080/09585190050075114 
Olson, J. M., & Stone, J. (2005). The Influence of Behaviour on Attitudes. In D. 
Albarracin, B. T. Johnson & M. P. Zanna (Eds.), The Handbook of Attitudes. 
Mahwah, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
Ortberg, J. C., Gorsuch, R. L. & Kim, G. J. (2001). Changing Attitude and Moral 
Obligation: Their Independent Effects on Behavior. Journal for the Scientific 
Study of Religion, 40: 489–496. DOI:10.1111/0021-8294.00072 
Osberg, T. M., & Shrauger, J. S. (1996). Self-Prediction: Exploring the Parameters 
of Accuracy. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 51(5), 1044-1057. 

224 
 
References 
 
Oshagbemi, T. (2004). Age influences on the leadership styles and behaviour of 
managers. 
Employee 
Relations, 
26(1), 
14-29. 
DOI: 
10.1108/01425450410506878 
Patrick, D. L., Chesdle, A., Thompson, D. C., Diehr, P., Koepsell, T., & Kinne, S. 
(1994). The validity of self-reported smoking: a review and meta-analysis. 
American Journal of Public Health, 84(7), 1086-1093. Article Stable URL: 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1614767/pdf/amjph00458-
0032.pdf 
Peraturan Pemerintah (PP) Nomor 60 (Government Regulation No. 60). (1999). 
Pendidikan Tinggi. Jakarta: Directorate General of Higher Education, 
Ministry of National Education. Retrieved 15 March 2009, from 
http://www.dikti.go.id/files/atur/PP60-1999.docx 
PP Nomor 61 (Government Regulation No. 61). (1999). Penetapan Perguruan Tinggi 
Negeri Sebagai Badan Hukum. Jakarta: Directorate General of Higher 
Education, Ministry of National Education. Retrieved 15 March 2009, 
from http://www.dikti.go.id/files/atur/PP61-1999.docx 
PP Nomor 19 (Government Regulation No. 19). (2005). Standar Nasional 
Pendidikan. Jakarta: Directorate General of Higher Education, Ministry of 
National 
Education. 
Retrieved 
15 
March 
2009, 
from 
http://www.dikti.go.id/files/atur/PP19-2005SNP.pdf 
Pomazal, R. J., & Jaccard, J. J. (1976). An Informational Approach to Altruistic 
Behaviour. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 33, 317-326. DOI: 
10.1037/0022-3514.33.3.317 
Presiden Republik Indonesia (2011). Tahun 2012, Pemerintah Utamakan Alokasi 
Anggaran 
Pendidikan. 
Retrieved 
July 
16 
2012, 
from 
http://www.presidenri.go.id/index.php/fokus/2011/08/16/7125.html 
Quinn, R. E. (1988). Beyond Rational Management: Mastering the Paradoxes and 
Competing Demands of High Performance. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 
Quinn, R. E., & Cameron, K. (1983). Organizational Life Cycles and Shifting 
Criteria of Effectiveness: Some Preliminary Evidence. Management Science, 
29, 35-51. DOI: 10.1287/mnsc.29.1.33 
Quinn, R. E., & Cameron, K. (1988). Paradox and Transformation: Toward a theory of 
change in organization and management. Ballinger Pub. Co. 
Quinn, R. E., & Rohrbaugh, J. (1983). A Spatial Model of Effectiveness Criteria: 
Toward a Competing Value Approach to Organizational Analysis. 
Management Science, 29(3), 363-377. DOI: 10.1287/mnsc.29.3.363 
Raihani. (2008). An Indonesian model of successful school leadership. Journal of 
Educational 
Administration, 
46(4), 
481–496. 
DOI: 
10.1108/09578230810882018 
Rosener, J. B. (1990). Ways women lead. Harvard Business Review, 68, 119-125. 

References 
 
225 
Rost, J. C. (1991). Leadership for the Twenty-First Century. Westport, CT: Praeger. 
Saad, S. (2011). Anggaran Pendidikan 20%, untuk Siapa..? Retrieved July 16, 2012, 
from 
http://edukasi.kompasiana.com/2011/03/16/anggaran-pendidikan-
20-untuk-siapa/ 
Sadler, P. (2003). Leadership (2nd ed.). Kogan Page Limited. 
Schein, E. H. (1992). Organizational Culture and Leadership. San Francisco, CA: 
Jossey-Bass. 
Schiffter, D. E., & Ajzen, I. (1985). Intention, Perceived Control, and Weight Loss: 
An Application of the Theory of Planned Behavior. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 49(3), 843-851. 
Schwartz, S. H., & Tessler, R. C. (1972). A Test of a Model for Reducing Measured 
Attitude-Behavior Discrepancies. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 24(2), 225-236. DOI: 10.1037/h0033365 
Schwarz, N. (1999). Self-reports: How the questions shape the answers. American 
Psychologist, 54(2), 93-105. DOI: 10.1037/0003-066X.54.2.93 
Sheppard, B. H., Hartwick, J., & Warshaw, P. R. (1988). The Theory of Reasoned 
Action: A Meta-Analysis of Past Research with Recommendations for 
Modifications and Future Research. Journal of Consumer Research, 15(3), 
325-343. Article Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2489467 
Shrauger, J. S., & Osberg, T. M. (1981). The Relative Accuracy of Self-Predictions 
and Judgements by Others in Psychological Assessment. Psychological 
Bulletin, 90(2), 322-351.  
Singh, K., Leong, S. M., Tan, C. T., & Wong, C. (1995). A theory of reasoned action 
perspective of voting behavior: Model and empirical test. Psychology and 
Marketing, 12(1), 37-51. DOI: 10.1002/mar.4220120104 
Smyth, J. M., Webb, M. S., & Oikawa, M. (n.d). Self-report of Cancer-Related 
Behaviours. 
Retrieved 
May 
6, 
2010, 
from 
http://dccps.cancer.gov/brp/constructs/self-report/self-report.pdf 
Sneed, C. D., & Morisky, D. E. (1998). Applying the Theory of Reasoned Action to 
condom use among sex workers. Social Behavior and Personality, 26(4), 317-
327. 
Sparks, P. (1994). Attitudes Toward Food: Applying, Assessing and Extending the 
Theory of Planned Behavior. In D. R. R. L. Quine (Ed.), The Social 
Psychology of Health and Safety: European Perspectives. Aldershot, England: 
Avebury. 
Spreitzer, G., & Quinn, R., E. (1996). Empowering Middle Managers to be 
Transformational Leaders. Journal of Applied Behavioural Sciences, 32, 237-
261. DOI: 10.1177/0021886396323001 
Stead, K. (1985). An Exploration, Using Ajzen and Fishbein's Theory of Reasoned 
Action, of Students' Intentions to Study or not to Study Science. Research 
in Science Education, 15(1), 76-85. DOI: 10.1007/BF02356528 

226 
 
References 
 
Stogdill, R. M. (1948). Personal Factors Associated with Leadership: A Survey of 
the Literature. The Journal of Psychology, 25(1), 35-71. 
Stogdill, R. M. (1974). Handbook of Leadership: A Survey of Theory and Research. New 
York: The Free Press. 
Storey, J. D., & Kenney, L. C. (2004). Cultural Perceptions of Community 
Leadership and Participation in Health Improvement Efforts in 
Indonesia. Paper presented to the Intercultural/Development Communication 
and Health Communication Divisions of the International Communication 
Association 54th Annual Conference New Orleans, LA. Stable URL: http://itp-
bkkbn.org/pulin/004-
population_data_information/004_Cross_cultural_perception.pdf  
Stroh, L. K., Northcraft, G. B., Neale, M. A. (2002). Organizational Behavior: A 
Management Challenge (3rd ed.). Taylor & Francis Group. 
Sulistiyono, S. T. (2007). Higher Education Reform in Indonesia at Crossroad. 
Retrieved 
March 
21, 
2012, 
from 
http://www.dikti.go.id/files/atur/bhp/HEReform-Singgih.doc  
Suseno, F. M. (1985). Etika Jawa: Sebuah Analisis Falsafi Tentang Kebijaksanaan Hidup 
Jawa. Jakarta: Gramedia. 
Tannenbaum, R., Weschler, I. R., & Massarik, F. (1961). Leadership and 
Organization: A Behavioral Science Approach. New York: McGraw-Hill. 
Taylor, G. R. (2005). Quantitative Research Methods. In G. R. Taylor (Ed.), 
Integrating Quantitative and Qualitative Methods in Research, 91-100. 
Maryland: Press of America 
Taylor, S., & Todd, P. (1995). An Integrated Model of Waste Management 
Behavior: A Test of Household Recycling and Composting Intentions. 
Environmental Behavior, 27(5), 603-630. DOI: 10.1177/0013916595275001 
Tead, O. (1935). The Art of Leadership. New York: McGraw-Hill. 
Teddlie, C., & Tashakkori, A. (2009). Foundations of Mixed Methods Research. 
California: SAGE Publications, Inc. 
Temel, V., Ulukan, M., Sahan, H., Bay, M., & Sahin, A. (2011). An Investigation of 
Relation Between the School Administrators' Leadership Style and 
Communication Skill. African Journal of Business Management, 5(27), 11231-
11235. DOI: 10.5897/AJBM11.2122 
Thomas, H., & Fragueiro, F. (2011). The Dean's Many Roles. Retrieved 5 April 2012, 
from 
www.aacsb.edu/publications/Archives/MayJun11/54-
59DeansManyRoles.pdf 
Thuen, F., & Rise, J. (1994). Young Adolescents' Intention to Use Seat Belts: the 
Role of Attitudinal and Normative Beliefs. Health Education Research, 9(2), 
215-223. PMID: 10150445 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]. 

References 
 
227 
Tornow, W., London, M. (1998). Maximizing the Value of 360-degree Feedback. San 
Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass Inc. 
Triandis, H. C. (1977). Interpersonal Behaviour. Montreal, CA: Brooks/Cole. 
Triandis, H. C. (1980). Values, Attitudes, and Interpersonal Behaviour. In J. M. M. 
P. H. E. Howe (Ed.), Nebraska Symposium on Motivation. Lincoln: 
University of Nebraska Press. 
Trumbull, M. (2005). Qualitative Research Methods. In G. R. Taylor (Ed.), 
Integrating Quantitative and Qualitative Methods in Research, (pp. 101-126). 
Maryland: Press of America. 
Undang Undang Nomor 20 (Law No. 20). (2003). Sistem Pendidikan Nasional 
(National Education System). Jakarta: Directorate General of Higher 
Education, Ministry of National Education. Retrieved 15 March 2009, 
from http://www.dikti.go.id/files/atur/UU20-2003Sisdiknas.pdf 
Vallerand, R. J., Cuerrier, J. P and Deshaies, P., Pelletier, L. G., & Mongeau, C. 
(1992). Ajzen and Fishbein's Theory of Reasoned Action as Applied to 
Moral Behavior: A Confirmatory Analysis. Journal of Psychology, 62(1), 98-
109. 
Stable 
URL: 
http://www.er.uqam.ca/nobel/r26710/LRCS/papers/56.pdf 
Van Seters, D. A., & Field, R. H. G. (1990). The Evolution of Leadership Theory. 
Journal 
of 
Organizational 
Change 
Management, 
3(3), 
29-45. 
DOI: 
10.1108/09534819010142139 
Verheul, H. (2002). Higher Education Reform in Indonesia. In M. Jong, K. Lalenis 
& V. Mamadouh (Eds.), The Theory and Practice of Institutional 
Transplantation, 74, 185-198. Springer Netherlands. 
Warsa, U. C. (2003). The Changes of Higher Education toward Globalization. Retrieved 
24 
April 
2009, 
from 
conf.ncku.edu.tw/satu/event/2003/file/Presentation/Usman%20Chatib%20
Warsa,%20Rector%20of%20University%20of%20Indonesia.doc 
Way, L. J. (2010). The Impact of Disciplinarity on the Organizational Leadership Styles 
of Academic Deans. PhD Thesis. University of Massachusetts, Amherst. 
Welch, A. R. (2007). Blurred Vision?: Public and Private Higher Education in 
Indonesia. Higher Education, 54(5), 665-687. DOI: 10.1007/s10734-006-9017-
5 
Wicaksono, T. Y., & Friawan, D. (2008). Recent Developments of Higher Education in 
Indonesia: Issues and Challenges. (Eaber Working Paper Series No. 45). 
Australia: 
The 
Australian 
National 
University. 
Stable 
URL: 
http://www.eaber.org/sites/default/files/documents/WPS_DPU_2008_45.p
df 
Williams, R. (2011). Graduate Statistics II. Retrieved 7 September 2011, from 
http://www.nd.edu/~rwilliam/stats2/l11.pdf 

228 
 
References 
 
Wimbarti, S. (2008). Capacity Building for Asian Deans – Asian and European 
Institutions Working Together. Presentation at EU-Asia Higher Education 
Platform 
in 
Hanoi. 
Retrieved 
14 
October 
2009, 
from 
www.eahep.org/web/images/Hanoi/working%20group%20f_supra%20wi
mbarti.pdf 
Wirawan, D., & Irawanto. (2007). National Culture and Leadership: Lesson from 
Indonesia. 
Jurnal 
Eksekutif, 
4(3). 
Indonesia. 
Stable 
URL: 
http://jurnal.pdii.lipi.go.id/admin/jurnal/4307359367.pdf 
Wolverton, M., & Poch, S. (2000). The Nexus between Academic Deans and 
Corporate CEOs: An Opportunity in the Making. Journal of Leadership and 
Organizational Studies, 7(3), 122-132. DOI: 10.1177/107179190000700309 
Wolverton, M., Gmelch., W. H., Montez., J., & Nies., C. T. (2001). The Changing 
Nature of Academic Deanship. ASHE-ERIC Higher Education Research 
Report, Volume 28, Number 1. California: Jossey-Bass. 
World Bank (2010). Indonesia: Higher Education Financing. Human Development 
East Asia and Pacific Region. 
Yang, O., & Shao, Y. E. (1996). Shared Leadership in Self-Managed Teams: A 
Competing Values Approach. Total Quality Management, 7(5), 521-534. 
Yukl, G. (2009). Leadership in Organizations (Global edition of the 7th revised ed.). 
New Jersey: Pearson Education. 
Zafft, C. R., Adams, S. G., & Matkin, G. S. (2009). Measuring Leadership in Self-
Managed Teams Using the Competing Values Framework. Journal of 
Engineering 
Education, 
July 
2009, 
273-282. 
Article 
Stable 
URL: 
http://jee.org/2009/july/6.pdf 
Zaleznik, A. (1992). Managers and leaders: Are they different? Harvard Business 
Review, 
70(2), 
126-135. 
Article 
Stable 
URL: 
http://www.columbia.edu/itc/hs/pubhealth/isett/Session%2004/Zaleznik%
201992%20Leadership.pdf 
 

Appendix A 
 
229 
APPENDIX A1 
A questionnaire in English 
 
 
 
University middle management Of Indonesian Universities.  
 
PhD research project 
Jenny Ngo 
Center for Higher Education Policy Studies (CHEPS) 
School of Management & Governance 
University of Twente, The Netherlands 
 
 
 
The Center for Higher Education Policy Studies (CHEPS) is a research institute of the School of Management 
and Governance, University of Twente, The Netherlands. It has an international reputation for its cutting-
edge research and consultancy in the field of higher education, research and innovation studies. The PhD study 
by Jenny Ngo is part of one of the key themes of CHEPS’ research programme “The transformation of higher 
education in the knowledge society”. This PhD study is supervised by Prof. dr. Jürgen Enders and dr. Harry 
de Boer both of CHEPS. For further information please consult our website: http://www.utwente.nl/cheps. 

230 
 
Appendix A 
 
Instructions 
 
This questionnaire has only closed questions. You are kindly to asked to tick the boxes in the 
following way:  
 
 
     
 
If you want to correct your answer, shade in completely the wrong box and thereafter mark the 
correct box:  
 
 
    
  
 
If you cannot state something, please leave the box unmarked.  
 
 
 
Your reference number: __________________ 
 
This reference number will only be used to identify who has completed the questionnaire in order to send you 
the research outcomes in due time. After I have received your completed questionnaire, this page will be 
eliminated. Herewith I confirm once more that your answer will be dealt with confidentially: they will no be 
made available to any other person or organization and in my dissertation outcomes will nowhere be linked to 
particular persons (anonymity). 
 
If you have questions about my PhD research project or about this questionnaire please do not 
hesitate to contact me, Jenny Ngo, mobile number: 0815 531 09736 or email: jenngo051@yahoo.com 
 
Along with this questionnaire, you will find a pen, a return envelope with a stamp and return 
address on it. To return your completed questionnaire you can use the provided envelope. Once, we 
thank you very much for your participation in our research.  

Appendix A 
 
231 
 
Below you find alternative statements about your faculty. Please indicate to what extent these statements apply to 
your faculty (range from 1 = absolutely not to 7 = completely).  
 
To what extent do the following characteristics match with the 
faculty you are running? 
Absolutely not 
 
 
To some 
extent 
 
 
Completely 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
 My faculty is a very personal place. It is like an extended family. 
Faculty staff seems to share a lot of itself. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My faculty is a very dynamic and entrepreneurial place. Faculty 
staff is willing to stick their necks out and take risks. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My faculty is very results-oriented. A major concern is with getting 
the job done. Faculty staff is very competitive and achievement-
oriented. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My faculty is very control-oriented and a structured place. Formal 
procedures generally govern what faculty staff does. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The organizational glue that holds my faculty together is / are: 
Absolutely 
not 
 
 
To some 
extent 
 
 
Completely 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
 commitment to innovation and development. There is an emphasis 
on being on the cutting edge. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 formal rules and policies. Maintaining a smooth-running faculty is 
important. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 the emphasis on achievement and goal accomplishment. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 loyalty and mutual trust. Commitment to the faculty runs high 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

232 
 
Appendix A 
 
In the next question some behaviors that a dean might employ are listed. Please indicate how frequent you actually 
do these things (range from 1 = never to 7 = always).  
 
How often do you as a dean actually: 
never 
very seldom 
seldom 
occasionally 
frequently 
very frequently 
always 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
- come up with new inventive ideas regarding teaching, research 
and management matters in the faculty 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- protect continuity in the faculty’s day-to-day operations 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- exert upward influence in the university to influence strategic 
decision making 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- carefully review detailed reports and crosscheck information in 
detail 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- focus on results and performances of faculty staff and foster a 
sense of faculty competitiveness to perform better than others 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- facilitate consensus building in the faculty’s decision making 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- define areas of responsibility for faculty staff 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- listen to the personal problems of faculty staff members and 
make an effort to help them 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- minimize the disruptions in daily practices to have an untroubled 
faculty 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- experiment with new concepts and procedures 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- encourage participative decision-making in the faculty 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- make sure everyone in the faculty knows where the faculty is 
going in terms of objectives and goals 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- influence decisions made at higher levels in the university 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- carefully compare records, files and reports to detect 
discrepancies 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- see that the faculty delivers on stated goals 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- show empathy and concern in dealing with faculty staff members 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- work with technical data en information  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- approach and consult people at the higher levels of the university 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendix A 
 
233 
 
- set clear objectives for the faculty and restate en reinforce your 
vision of the faculty’s future 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- treat every faculty member in a sensitive and caring way 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- keep a close track of what goes on in the faculty (using control 
and monitor systems) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- solve faculty problems in a creative and unconventional way 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- insist on intense hard work and high productivity and sincerely 
push the faculty staff to meet the faculty objectives 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- encourage faculty staff members to share ideas with you and with 
the others 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- search for innovations and potential improvements and 
encourage others to generate new ideas 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- clarify faculty policy priorities and future direction 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- persuasively sell new ideas to the central management of the 
university 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- bring a sense of order to the faculty 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- show concern for the needs of faculty staff members 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- emphasize the faculty’s achievements of stated purposes  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- build teamwork among the faculty staff members 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- analyze written plans and schedules 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In the next question we would like to get your assessment on the style of leadership and management in your faculty 
in general. By faculty leadership and management we mean deans, vice-deans, head of schools, head of departments, 
and so on. Please indicate to what extent these statements apply to your faculty (range from 1 = absolutely to 7 = 
completely). 
 
The leadership and management of my faculty is in general 
considered to emphasize: 
Absolutely 
not 
 
 
To some 
extent 
 
 
Completely 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
 a no-nonsense, aggressive, result-oriented focus. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 mentoring, facilitating, or nurturing. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 coordinating, organizing, or smooth-running efficiency. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 entrepreneurship, innovation, or risk-taking. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

234 
 
Appendix A 
 
 
 
The management style in my faculty is in general characterized by: 
Absolutely 
not 
 
 
To some 
extent 
 
 
Completely 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
 hard-driven competitiveness, high demands, and achievement. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 security of employment, conformity, predictability, and stability 
in relationships. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 teamwork, consensus, and participation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 individual risk-taking, innovation, freedom, and uniqueness. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In running my faculty, I think that  
Not important at 
all 
 
 
Important to 
some extent 
 
 
Extremely 
important 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
- a good policy network inside and outside the university is … 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- to the extent possible the standardization of work processes to 
establish coherence and predictability is … 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- a strong sense of community, with staff feeling at home and 
sharing objectives is … 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- having clear and undisputed faculty objectives is … 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- having concern for the personal needs of faculty staff members is 
… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- statistical figures, elaborate documentation and management 
information systems are … 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- creative policy making, having guts and being enterprising 
without fearing too much the consequences in case of ‘failure’ is 
… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- faculty staff members knowing and accepting the strategic 
direction and priorities of the faculty is …. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- pushing faculty staff to achieve ambitious, highly competitive 
faculty goals is … 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- formal rules and policies hold the faculty together and that taking 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendix A 
 
235 
 
formal rules very seriously and doing things by the book is … 
- explicit attention for the individual staff members of the faculty, 
his or her personal development and competences is … 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- detailed monitoring and quality control systems for teaching 
and/or research is …. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- active engagement in formal and informal decision-making at the 
central level of the university is …. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- an ongoing encouragement for change and innovation in the 
faculty, for instance by creating sufficient space and time for 
brainstorming, is … 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- scanning of and marketing in higher education and research 
markets is … 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- high staff commitment through consensus-based decision-making 
is … 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To what extent are the views and opinions of … 
Not important at 
all 
 
 
Important to 
some extent 
 
 
Extremely 
important 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
 the academics of your faculty important to you for the way in 
which you run your faculty? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 the other deans of your university important to you for the way 
in which you run your faculty? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 the central management of your university important to you for 
the way in which you run your faculty? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

236 
 
Appendix A 
 
Below you find two statements about your faculty. Please indicate to what extent these statements apply to 
your faculty (range from 1 = absolutely to 7 = completely). 
 
 
My faculty emphasizes: 
Absolutely 
not 
 
 
To some 
extent 
 
 
Completely 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
 acquiring new resources and creating new challenges. Trying 
new things and prospecting for opportunities are valued. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 human development. High trust, openness, and participation 
persist. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 performance and stability. Efficiency, control, and smooth 
operations are important. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 competitive actions and achievement. Hitting stretch targets and 
winning in the marketplace are dominant. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Success is in my faculty defined on the basis of: 
Absolutely 
not 
 
 
To some 
extent 
 
 
Completely 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
 having the most unique or newest products. It is a product leader 
and innovator. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 the development of human resources, teamwork, employee 
commitment, and concern for people 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 winning in the market place and outpacing the competition. 
Competitive market leadership is the most important. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 efficiency. Dependable delivery, smooth scheduling, and low-
cost production are critical. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendix A 
 
237 
 
 
How important are the following aspects for you in running the faculty? (range from 1 = not important at all to 7 = 
extremely important).  
In running my faculty, the importance of … 
Extremely low 
 
 
Important to 
some extent 
 
 
Extremely high 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
Being organized in the most efficient way is … 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Compliance with rules and procedures is … 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Having high levels of staff participation in strategic decision 
making is … 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contributing to personal development of staff (alternative: Having 
loyal and committed staff) is … 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Developing plans with original, new ideas and concepts is … 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Promoting change within the faculty is … 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Stimulating the staff’s productivity (more/better output) is … 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Having explicit policy goals that must be met is …. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In the next questions we would like to know what your assessment is of the beliefs of academics, other deans of your 
university and central university management. What do you think how they would like to see faculty leadership? 
(range from -3 = very negative to +3 = very positive). 
I think that the academics of my faculty like to see … 
Very negative 
Neutral 
Very positive 
 
-3 
-2 
-1 
0 
1 
2 
3 
 strong coordination and detailed organization of teaching and 
research from faculty leadership as …… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 faculty leadership that encourages market-driven and results-
oriented behavior of academics as ……  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 faculty leadership actively creating a sense of collectivity with 
consensual decision-making and much personal attention as 
… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

238 
 
Appendix A 
 
 faculty leadership having clear visions that embraces 
innovation and change as …… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I think that the other deans of my faculty like to see … 
Very negative 
 
 
Neutral 
 
 
Very positive 
 
-3 
-2 
-1 
0 
1 
2 
3 
 strong coordination and detailed organization of teaching and 
research from faculty leadership as …… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 faculty leadership that encourages market-driven and results-
oriented behavior of academics as ……  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 faculty leadership actively creating a sense of collectivity with 
consensual decision-making and much personal attention as 
…… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 faculty leadership having clear visions that embraces 
innovation and change as …… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I think that central university management like to see … 
Very negative 
 
 
Neutral 
 
 
Very positive 
 
-3 
-2 
-1 
0 
1 
2 
3 
 strong coordination and detailed organization of teaching and 
research from faculty leadership as …… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 faculty leadership that encourages market-driven and results-
oriented behavior of academics as ……  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 faculty leadership actively creating a sense of collectivity with 
consensual decision-making and much personal attention as 
…… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 faculty leadership having clear visions that embraces 
innovation and change as …… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendix A 
 
239 
 
In order to succeed in your current position as a dean, how important 
is each of the following skills?  
Not important at 
all 
 
 
Moderately 
Important 
 
 
Critically 
important 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
- managing teams in the faculty (building effective, cohesive, smooth-
functioning teams) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- managing interpersonal relationships in the faculty (listening to 
and providing supportive feedback to others) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- managing the development of human capital in the faculty 
(helping others improve their performance and obtain personal 
development opportunities) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- fostering innovation in the faculty (encouraging others to innovate 
and to generate new ideas) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- managing the faculty’s future (communicating a clear vision of the 
future and facilitating its accomplishment) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- managing improvement and change in the faculty (fostering an 
orientation toward continuous improvement among faculty staff 
members in everything they do) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- managing competitiveness of the faculty (fostering an orientation 
toward beating the competition) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- managing results of the faculty (motivating and energizing  others to 
put forth extra effort and to exceed the competition) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- managing customers service (fostering a focus on service and 
involvement with students and industry) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- managing of information clarity in the faculty (helping others 
become clear about expectations, goals and policies and their place in the 
faculty) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- managing the faculty’s control system (having measurement and 
monitoring systems in place to keep close track of processes and 
performance) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- managing coordination (sharing information across functional 
boundaries and fostering coordination with other faculty units) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

240 
 
Appendix A 
 
Below you find eight descriptions of a leadership role. Please indicate on a scale from 1 to 10 to what extent a 
particular role is similar to the way in which you run your faculty in practice (range from 1 = absolutely not similar 
to 7 = perfect match) 
In order to succeed in your current position as a dean, how important 
is each of the following skills?  
Not important at 
all 
 
 
Moderately 
Important 
 
 
Critically 
important 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
I am people- and process-oriented. I manage conflicts and seek 
consensus. My influence is based on getting people involved in 
strategic decision making and problem solving. I pursue actively staff 
participation and openness in faculty decision making. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I am caring and empathic. I am aware of the needs of my staff and take 
care of them. My influence is based on mutual respect and trust. I 
actively pursue high staff moral and commitment. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I am unconventional and creative. I envisage change. My influence is 
based on anticipation of a better future for the faculty and I generate 
hope in the faculty. I actively pursue innovation and adaptation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I am future-oriented in my thinking. My focus is on where the faculty 
is going and I emphasize possibilities as well as probabilities. I spend a 
lot of time on strategic direction and continuous improvement of 
faculty activities. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I am a technical expert and well-informed. I keep track of all details 
and contribute expertise. My influence is based on information 
control. I actively pursue documentation and information 
management systems. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I am dependable and reliable. I maintain structure and the flow of 
work. My influence is based on managing schedules and giving 
assignments. I actively pursue stability and control in the faculty. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I am aggressive and decisive. I am energized by competitive 
situations. Winning is my dominant objective and have a focus on 
external competitors and the faculty’s market position. I actively 
pursue goals and targets of the faculty. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I am task-oriented and work-focused. I get things done through hard 
work. My influence is based on intensity and rational arguments 
around accomplishing things. I actively pursue productivity in the 
faculty. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendix A 
 
241 
 
Personal background 
 
Name of the university: 
 
______________________________________________________ 
Name of the faculty: 
 
______________________________________________________ 
Postal address: 
 
______________________________________________________ 
City: 
 
______________________________________________________ 
Are you: 
 male or  female 
What is your year of birth? 
__________ (year) 
Since when have you been in office as a dean? 
__________ (year) 
 
In which of the following fields have you earned your highest degree (academic background) 
 
Agriculture 
Education 
Engineering 
Health & 
welfare 
Humanities 
& arts 
Sciences 
Social 
sciences 
Business 
and law 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Institutional background 
 
How many students are enrolled at your university? 
 
< 
1.00
0 
1.000
-
5.000 
5.000
-
10.00
0 
10.000
-
15.000 
15.000
-
20.000 
20.000
-
25.000 
25.000
-
30.000 
30.000
-
35.000 
35.000
-
40.000 
40.000
-
45.000 
45.000
-
50.000 
> 
50.00
0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
How many staff is employed at your university? 
 
< 100 
100-
500 
500-
1000 
1000-
1500 
1500-
2000 
2000-
2500 
2500-
3000 
3000-
3500 
3500-
4000 
4000-
4500 
4500-
5000 
> 
5000 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
How many faculties does your university have? 
 
< 5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
> 15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

242 
 
Appendix A 
 
 
How many students are enrolled at your faculty? 
 
< 
1.00
0 
1.000
-
5.000 
5.000
-
10.00
0 
10.000
-
15.000 
15.000
-
20.000 
20.000
-
25.000 
25.000
-
30.000 
30.000
-
35.000 
35.000
-
40.000 
40.000
-
45.000 
45.000
-
50.000 
> 
50.00
0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
How many staff is employed at your faculty? 
 
< 100 
100-
500 
500-
1000 
1000-
1500 
1500-
2000 
2000-
2500 
2500-
3000 
3000-
3500 
3500-
4000 
4000-
4500 
4500-
5000 
> 
5000 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Thank you very much for completing this questionnaire! 

Appendix A 
 
243 
 
A questionnaire in Bahasa Indonesia 
 
 
University middle management of Indonesian Universities 
 
Kuesioner 
 
Penelitian untuk program Doktor (S3) 
(PhD research project) 
 
Jenny Ngo 
 
The Center for Higher Education Policy Studies (CHEPS) adalah sebuah lembaga penelitian dbawah naungan 
fakultas manajemen dan pemerintahan di Universitas Twente, di Belanda. CHEPS menpunyai reputasi 
tingkat dunia untuk penelitian dan  konsultasi di bidang pendidikan tinggi, penelitian dan terobosan terbaru 
dibidang pengajaran. Program Doktor dari Jenny Ngo merupakan salah satu proyek penelitian CHEPS yang 
bertemakan “The transformation of higher education in the knowledge society”. Program Doktor ini dibimbing 
oleh prof. dr. Jürgen Enders and dr. Harry de Boer. Untuk informasi lebih lanjut tentang CHEPS, silakan 
membuka website kami: http://www.utwente.nl/cheps. 

244 
 
Appendix A 
 
Petunjuk pengisian kuesioner 
 
Berikan tanda x (silang) di dalam kotak jawaban yang tersedia.  
 
 
 
     
 
Jika Anda ingin mengkoreksi atau mengubah jawaban, arsir jawaban yang salah dan kemudian beri 
tanda (x) silang pada jawaban yang benar.  
 
 
    
  
 
Jika Anda tidak dapat memberikan jawaban, biarkan kotak jawaban dalam keadaan kosong. 
 
Nomor surat: __________________ 
 
Nomor surat ini hanya sebagai nomor identitas responden yang telah mengisi angket secara lengkap. Nomor 
surat ini akan memudahkan kami untuk mengirimkan hasil penelitian ini ke Anda. Angket ini akan langsung 
kami musnahkan setelah kami analisa. Bersama ini, kami juga akan mengkonfirmasikan lagi bahwa jawaban 
angket Anda akan kami rahasiakan: tidak ada seorangpun atau organisasi manapun yang bisa mengakses 
jawaban angket Anda. Kami juga tidak akan mencantumkan nama Anda di dalam disertasi kami nanti 
(anonymity). 
 
Jika Anda ingin mendapatkan informasi lebih lanjut tentang penelitian dan angket ini, Anda bisa 
langsung menghubungi saya, Jenny Ngo, di nomor: 0815 531 09736 atau mengirim email ke: 
jenngo051@yahoo.com 
 
Masukkan angket yang telah Anda isi ke dalam amplop yang telah berisi alamat kami dan 
berperangko. Sebelumnya kami mengucapkan terima kasih atas kesediaan Anda untuk berpatisipasi 
dalam penelitian ini. 

Appendix A 
 
245 
 
A. 
Di bawah ini terdapat beberapa pernyataan alternatif mengenai fakultas Anda. Sejauh mana pernyataan 
tersebut mengambarkan fakultas Anda. 
 
 
Sejauh mana karakteristik berikut ini sesuai dengan fakultas 
Anda? 
 
 
Tidak sama 
sekali 
 
 
Dalam 
beberapa hal 
 
 
Setuju 
sepenuhnya 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
 Fakultas saya adalah tempat yang sangat personal. Semua 
seperti satu keluarga. Staf akademik sepertinya selalu berbagi 
satu dengan lain. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fakultas saya adalah tempat yang sangat dinamis dan penuh 
tantangan. Staf akademik bersedia untuk berkorban dan 
mengambil resiko. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fakultas saya sangat berorientasi pada hasil. Hal yang terpenting 
adalah menyelesaikan pekerjaan. Staf akademik sangat 
kompetitif dan berorientasi pada pencapaian akhir. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fakultas saya sangat berorientasi pada aturan dan merupakan 
tempat yang terstruktur (birokratis). Prosedur-prosedur formal 
biasanya mengatur apa yang dilakukan oleh staf akademik. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hal yang mempersatukan fakultas saya adalah: 
 
 
Tidak sama 
sekali 
 
 
Dalam 
beberapa hal 
 
 
Setuju 
sepenuhnya 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
 komitmen terhadap inovasi dan pengembangan. Ada penekanan 
untuk selalu berada pada garis terdepan.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 aturan formal dan kebijakan. Mengatur fakultas agar berjalan 
lancar adalah hal yang penting.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 penekanan pada penyelesaian pencapaian dan tujuan kerja.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 kesetiaan dan rasa saling percaya. Komitmen yang tinggi 
terhadap fakultas.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

246 
 
Appendix A 
 
 
B. 
Dalam pertanyaan berikut ini tercantum beberapa sikap yang mungkin dimiliki oleh dekan.  
 
 
Seberapa sering Anda sebagai dekan benar-benar: 
 
Tidak pernah 
Sangat jarang 
Jarang 
Terkadang 
Sering 
Sangat sering 
Selalu 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
- mempunyai ide baru mengenai pengajaran, penelitian dan 
manajemen di dalam fakultas  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- melindungi kelanjutan operasional fakultas sehari-hari  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- menggunakan pengaruh dalam universitas untuk 
mempengaruhi pengambilan keputusan strategis  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- melihat laporan secara teliti dan mencari tahu atau mengecek 
ulang informasi secara detail  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- fokus terhadap hasil dan performa dari staf akademik dan 
meningkatkan rasa kompetitif fakultas untuk dapat melakukan 
sesuatu lebih baik dari yang lainnya  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- mendukung adanya konsensus dalam pengambilan keputusan 
fakultas  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- memberitahukan tanggung jawab staf akademik  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- mendengarkan permasalahan pribadi anggota staf akademik 
dan berusaha untuk membantu mereka  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- memperkecil gangguan sehari-hari untuk menghasilkan fakultas 
yang bebas masalah  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- eksperimen dengan konsep dan prosedur baru  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- mendukung pengambilan keputusan yang bersifat partisipatif 
dalam fakultas  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- memastikan setiap orang dalam fakultas tahu visi dan misi serta 
tujuan fakultas  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- mempengaruhi keputusan yang diambil dalam tingkat yang 
lebih tinggi di dalam universitas  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- secara teliti membandingkan data, file dan laporan untuk 
mencari ketidakseimbangan  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- mengawasi fakultas untuk mencapai tujuan yang ditetapkan  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendix A 
 
247 
 
- menunjukkan empati dan perhatian saat berurusan dengan 
anggota staf akademik  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- bekerja dengan data dan informasi teknis work with technical 
data en information  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- mendekati dan berkonsultasi dengan orang-orang yang 
mempunyai jabatan yang lebih tinggi di universitas  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- membuat tujuan yang jelas untuk fakultas dan menetapkan serta 
memastikan ulang visi Anda terhadap masa depan fakultas  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- memperlakukan setiap anggota fakultas dengan cara yang 
sensitif dan penuh perhatian  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- mengawasi dengan cermat apa yang terjadi di dalam fakultas 
(dengan menggunakan sistem kendali dan monitor) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- memecahkan masalah fakultas dengan cara kreatif dan lain dari 
biasanya  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- bersikeras dalam bekerja keras dan produktivitas yang tinggi 
dan secara gamblang mendorong staf akademik untuk 
memenuhi visi dan misi serta tujuan fakultas  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- mendorong anggota staf akademik untuk berbagi ide dengan 
Anda dan yang lainnya  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- mencari inovasi dan pengembangan potensial serta mendorong 
yang lain untuk menciptakan ide baru  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- mengklarifikasi kebijakan utama fakultas dan arah masa depan 
fakultas  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- secara persuasif memberikan ide baru kepada manajemen pusat 
universitas  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- memberikan keteraturan dan kedisiplinan dalam fakultas  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- menunjukkan perhatian terhadap kebutuhan anggota staf 
akademik show concern for the needs of academic staff members  
 
 
 
 
 
 
- menekankan pada pencapaian fakultas terhadap tujuan yang 
ditetapkan  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- membangun kerjasama tim diantara anggota staf akademik  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- menganalisa rencana dan jadwal tertulis  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

248 
 
Appendix A 
 
C. 
Dalam pertanyaan berikut ini, kami ingin mengetahui penilaian Anda tentang cara kepemimpinan dan 
manajemen fakultas Anda secara umum. Yang dimaksud dengan kepemimpinan dan manajemen fakultas 
adalah dekan, wakil dekan, ketua jurusan, dan sebagainya. Sejauh mana pernyataan tersebut 
mengambarkan fakultas Anda.  
 
 
 
Kepemimpinan dan manajemen fakultas saya secara umum 
ditekankan kepada: 
 
 
Tidak sama 
sekali 
 
 
Dalam 
beberapa hal 
 
 
Setuju 
sepenuhnya 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
 fokus yang masuk akal, agresif, berorientasi pada hasil. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 mengajar, memfasilitasi, atau membimbing. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 mengkoordinasi, mengorganisir, atau efisiensi dalam 
menjalankan tugas  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 tantangan, inovasi, atau pengambilan resiko. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bentuk manajemen dalam fakultas saya secara umum ditandai 
dengan: 
 
 
Tidak sama 
sekali 
 
 
Dalam 
beberapa hal 
 
 
Setuju 
sepenuhnya 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
 kompetisi yang sengit, permintaan yang tinggi, dan pencapaian. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 keamanan pekerjaan, sesuai standar yang berlaku, mudah 
dilihat, dan stabilitas dalam hubungan pekerjaan. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 kerja tim, konsensus, dan partisipasi.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 pengambilan resiko, inovasi, kebebasan, dan keunikan 
individual. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendix A 
 
249 
 
 
D. 
Sejauh mana Anda mempertimbangkan beberapa aspek penting dalam menjalankan fakultas.  
 
 
Dalam menjalankan fakultas, saya berpikir bahwa: 
 
 
Tidak penting sama 
sekali 
 
 
Penting untuk 
beberapa hal 
 
 
Sangat penting 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
- sistem kebijakan yang baik di dalam dan di luar universitas 
adalah… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- pada batas tertentu stardarisasi proses kerja untuk menghasilkan 
kesinambungan dan mudah dilihat adalah… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- perasaan komunitas yang kuat, dengan staf merasa seperti di 
rumah dan mempunyai tujuan yang sama adalah… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- memiliki tujuan fakultas yang jelas dan tidak dapat diganggu 
gugat adalah… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- memiliki perhatian terhadap kebutuhan pribadi anggota staf 
akademik adalah… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- figur statistik, dokumentasi yang lengkap dan sistem informasi 
manajemen adalah… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- pengambilan kebijakan yang kreatif, memiliki keberanian dan 
mengambil tantangan tanpa terlalu takut terhadap konsekuensi 
kalau terjadi ‘kegagalan’ adalah… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- anggota staf akademik mengetahui dan menerima arahan 
strategis dan prioritas fakultas adalah… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- mendorong staf akademik untuk mencapai tujuan fakultas yang 
sangat kompetitif dan ambisius adalah… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- aturan dan kebijakan formal menyokong fakultas dan 
menjalankan aturan formal secara sangat serius serta melakukan 
sesuai dengan aturan yang berlaku adalah… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- perhatian khusus terhadap anggota staf secara individu, 
pengembangan pribadi dan kompetensi staf tersebut adalah… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- mengawasi secara cermat kualitas pengajaran dan/atau penelitian 
adalah… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- berperan aktif dalam pengambilan keputusan formal dan 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

250 
 
Appendix A 
 
informal dalam tingkat pusat universitas adalah… 
- dukungan senantiasa untuk perubahan dan inovasi dalam 
fakultas, seperti mengadakan tempat dan waktu yang cukup 
untuk berpikir, adalah… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- memgumpulkan data tentang dan berperan dalam pasar 
pendidikan dan penelitian yang lebih tinggi… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- komitmen staf yang tinggi melalui pengambilan keputusan yang 
berdasarkan konsensus adalah… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sejauh apa pentingnya pandangan dan pendapat dari… 
 
 
Tidak penting 
sama sekali 
 
 
Penting untuk 
beberapa hal 
 
 
Sangat penting 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
 staf akademik di fakultas bagi Anda dalam menjalankan 
fakultas? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 dekan lain di universitas bagi Anda dalam menjalankan fakultas? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 manajemen pusat universitas bagi Anda dalam menjalankan 
fakultas? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E. 
Di bawah ini terdapat dua pernyataan mengenai fakultas Anda. Sejauh mana pernyataan tersebut relevan 
dengan fakultas Anda. 
  
 
 
 
Fakultas saya menekankan pada: 
 
 
Tidak sama 
sekali 
 
 
Dalam 
beberapa hal 
 
 
Setuju 
sepenuhnya 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
 mendapatkan sumber daya dan membuat tantangan baru. 
Mencoba hal baru dan melihat kesempatan adalah hal yang 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendix A 
 
251 
 
diutamakan. 
 perkembangan manusia. Kepercayaan yang tinggi, keterbukaan, 
dan partisipasi adalah hal yang mutlak. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 performa dan stabilitas. Efisiensi, kontrol, dan operasi yang baik 
adalah penting. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 tindakan dan pencapaian yang kompetitif. Mencapai target yang 
sulit dan memenangkan pasar adalah hal yang dominan. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sukses dalam fakultas saya adalah berdasarkan pada: 
 
 
Tidak sama 
sekali 
 
 
Dalam 
beberapa hal 
 
 
Setuju 
sepenuhnya 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
 produk paling unik atau terbaru. Fakultas saya merupakan 
pemimpin dan penemu produk baru. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 pengembangan sumber daya manusia, kerja tim, karyawan, 
komitmen, dan hal yang menyangkut orang banyak. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 memenangkan pasar dan melewati kompetisi. Kepemimpinan 
pasar yang kompetitif adalah hal yang sangat penting. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 efisiensi. Pengiriman yang dapat diandalkan, jadwal yang 
lancar, dan biaya produksi yang rendah adalah hal yang kritis. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
F. 
Seberapa penting bagi Anda aspek-aspek berikut ini dalam menjalankan fakultas? 
 
 
 
Dalam menjalankan fakultas, kepentingan untuk… 
 
 
Tidak penting sama 
sekali 
 
 
Penting dalam 
beberapa hal 
 
 
Sangat penting 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
Terorganisir secara sangat efisien adalah… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sesuai aturan dan prosedur adalah… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Memiliki partisipasi staf yang tinggi dalam pengambilan keputusan 
strategis… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

252 
 
Appendix A 
 
Turut terhadap pengembangan pribadi staf (alternatif: memiliki staf 
yang setia dan berkomitmen) adalah… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mengembangkan rencana dengan ide dan konsep yang baru dan 
orisinil adalah… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mendukung adanya perubahan dalam fakultas adalah… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Merangsang produktivitas staf (hasil yang lebih baik/banyak) 
adalah… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Memiliki tujuan kebijakan yang jelas yang harus dipenuhi adalah… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
G. 
Dalam pertanyaan berikut ini, kami ingin mengetahui penilaian Anda mengenai pendapat dan sikap 
akademik, dekan lain dalam universitas Anda, dan manajemen pusat universitas. Menurut Anda, 
bagaimana cara pandang mereka terhadap kepemimpinan dalam sebuah fakultas? 
 
Menurut saya, staf akademik di fakultas saya mengangap 
… 
 
Hal sangat 
negarif 
 
 
Netral 
 
 
Hal sangat 
positif 
 
-3 
-2 
-1 
0 
1 
2 
3 
 koordinasi yang kuat dan keteraturan organisasi 
pengajaran serta penelitian dari kepemimpinan fakultas 
sebagai… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 kepemimpinan fakultas yang mendukung sikap 
akademisi yang terarah pada pangsa pasar dan 
berorientasi pada hasil… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 kepemimpinan fakultas yang secara aktif memberikan 
rasa kebersamaan dengan pengambilan keputusan 
secara konsensus dan perhatian secara perorangan 
sebagai… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 kepemimpinan fakultas yang memiliki visi yang jelas 
yang mengarah kepada inovasi dan perubahan 
sebagai… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendix A 
 
253 
 
 
 
Menurut saya,  dekan lain dalam universitas saya 
mengangap … 
 
Hal sangat 
negatif 
 
 
Netral 
 
 
Hal sangat 
positif 
 
-3 
-2 
-1 
0 
1 
2 
3 
 koordinasi yang kuat dan keteraturan organisasi 
pengajaran serta penelitian dari kepemimpinan fakultas 
sebagai… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 kepemimpinan fakultas yang mendukung sikap 
akademisi yang terarah pada pangsa pasar dan 
berorientasi pada hasil… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 kepemimpinan fakultas yang secara aktif memberikan 
rasa kebersamaan dengan pengambilan keputusan 
secara konsensus dan perhatian secara perorangan 
sebagai… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 kepemimpinan fakultas yang memiliki visi yang jelas 
yang mengarah kepada inovasi dan perubahan 
sebagai… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Menurut saya manajemen pusat universitas saya 
mengangap … 
 
Hal sangat 
negatif 
 
 
Netral 
 
 
Hal sangat 
positif 
 
-3 
-2 
-1 
0 
1 
2 
3 
 koordinasi yang kuat dan keteraturan organisasi 
pengajaran serta penelitian dari kepemimpinan fakultas 
sebagai… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 kepemimpinan fakultas yang mendukung sikap 
akademisi yang terarah pada pangsa pasar dan 
berorientasi pada hasil…  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 kepemimpinan fakultas yang secara aktif memberikan 
rasa kebersamaan dengan pengambilan keputusan 
secara konsensus dan perhatian secara perorangan 
sebagai… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 kepemimpinan fakultas yang memiliki visi yang jelas 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

254 
 
Appendix A 
 
yang mengarah kepada inovasi dan perubahan 
sebagai… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Untuk dapat berhasil dalam posisi Anda sekarang sebagai dekan, 
seberapa pentingkah setiap kemampuan berikut ini? 
 
 
Tidak penting sama 
sekali 
 
 
Cukup penting 
 
 
Sangat penting 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
- menangani tim dalam fakultas (membangun tim yang efektif, 
berkesinambungan dan berfungsi dengan baik) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- menangani hubungan antar sesame dalam fakultas (mendengarkan 
dan memberikan bantuan terhadap orang lain) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- menangani pengembangan sumber daya manusia dalam fakultas 
(membantu mengembangkan performa dan mendapatkan kesempatan 
untuk pengembangan diri bagi orang lain) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- mendukung inovasi dalam fakultas (mendukung orang lain untuk 
menginovasi dan menciptakan ide baru) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- menangani masa depan fakultas (memberikan visi masa depan yang 
jelas dan memfasilitasi pencapaiannya) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- menangani pengembangan dan perubahan dalam fakultas 
(memberikan orientasi terhadap pengembangan terus-menerus anggota 
staf fakultas dalam segala yang mereka lakukan) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- menangani sisi kompetitif dari fakultas (memberikan orientasi 
terhadap memenangkan kompetisi) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- menangani hasil dari fakultas (memberikan motivasi dan semangat 
kepada yang lain untuk memberikan usaha lebih dan untuk 
memenangkan kompetisi)managing results of the faculty  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- menangani bagian pelayanan (memberikan fokus terhadap pelayanan 
dan keikutsertaan terhadap murid dan industri)managing customers 
service  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- menangani kejelasan informasi dalam fakultas (membantu yang 
lain untuk mengerti standar, tujuan dan kebijakan serta posisi mereka 
dalam fakultas) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- menangani sistem kendali fakultas (memiliki sistem pengawasan 
dan penilaian untuk mencatat proses dan kinerja) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendix A 
 
255 
 
- menangani koordinasi (berbagi informasi dan memberikan koordinasi 
terhadap unit fakultas lainnya) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
H. 
Di bawah ini tercantum delapan deskripsi kepemimpinan. Sejauh mana deskripsi tersebut menyerupai/ 
mengambarkan cara Anda menjalankan fakultas Anda. 
 
 
Sejauh mana deskripsi berikut ini mendekati mode/gaya 
kepemimpinan Anda dalam menjalankan fakultas sehari-hari? 
 
Tidak mirip sama 
sekali 
 
 
Mirip dalam 
beberapa hal 
 
 
Benar-benar mirip 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
Saya adalah orang yang berorientasi pada orang lain dan proses. 
Saya menangani konflik dan mencari konsensus. Pengaruh yang 
saya berikan adalah dengan cara mengikutsertakan orang lain 
dalam pengambilan keputusan strategis dan pemecahan 
masalah.Saya secara aktif mengejar partisipasi dari staf dan 
keterbukaan dalam pengambilan keputusan. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Saya adalah orang yang perhatian dan berempati. Saya tahu akan 
kebutuhan staf saya dan mengurus mereka. Pengaruh saya adalah 
berdasarkan rasa hormat satu dengan lain dan kepercayaan. Saya 
secara aktif mengejar moral dan komitmen yang tinggi dari staf. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Saya adalah orang yang tidak biasa dan kreatif. Saya menyetujui 
perubahan. Pengaruh saya adalah berdasarkan langkah untuk 
mencapai masa depan fakultas yang lebih baik dan memberikan 
harapan dalam fakultas. Saya secara aktif mengejar inovasi dan 
adaptasi. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Saya berpikir dengan berorientasi terhadap masa depan. Fokus saya 
adalah terhadap arah fakultas dan saya menekankan terhadap 
segala kemungkinan yang mungkin terjadi. Saya menghabiskan 
banyak waktu untuk pengarahan strategis dan pengembangan 
terus-menerus terhadap aktifitas staf fakultas. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Saya ahli dalam bidang teknis dan memiliki banyak pengetahuan. 
Saya mencatat setiap detail dan memberikan keahlian saya. 
Pengaruh saya adalah berdasarkan informasi yang saya miliki. Saya 
secara aktif mengejar dokumentasi dan sistem manajemen 
informasi. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

256 
 
Appendix A 
 
 
Saya dapat diandalkan. Saya menangani struktur dan aliran 
pekerjaan. Pengaruh saya adalah berdasarkan pengaturan jadwal 
dan pemberian tugas. Saya secara aktif mengejar stabilitas dan 
kendali dalam fakultas. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Saya adalah orang yang agresif dan penuh pertimbangan. Saya 
merasa tertantang terhadap situasi yang kompetitif. Memenangkan 
sesuatu adalah tujuan utama saya dan saya memiliki fokus 
terhadap pesaing luar dan posisi fakultas dalam pasar. Saya secara 
aktif mengejar tujuan dan target dari fakultas. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Saya adalah orang yang berorientasi pada tugas dan pekerjaan. 
Saya menyelesaikan segala pekerjaan dengan bekerja keras. 
Pengaruh saya adalah berdasarkan intensitas pekerjaan dan 
pendapat mengenai penyelesaian pekerjaan. Saya secara aktif 
mengejar produktivitas dalam fakultas. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Latar belakang pribadi 
 
Nama universitas:  
______________________________________ 
Nama fakultas: 
______________________________________ 
Alamat surat: 
______________________________________ 
Kota: 
______________________________________ 
Apakah Anda: 
 pria atau  wanita 
Tahun berapa Anda lahir? 
__________ (tahun) 
Sejak kapan Anda menjabat sebagai 
dekan? 
__________ (tahun) 
 
Anda mendapatkan gelar akademis tertinggi dalam bidang (latar belakang akademis) 
 
Pertanian 
Pendidikan 
Teknik 
Kesehatan 
Seni & 
kemasyarakatan 
Ilmu 
Pengetahuan 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ilmu 
sosial 
Bisnis  
Hukum 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendix A 
 
257 
 
Latar belakang institusi 
 
Berapa banyak mahasiswa yang terdaftar dalam universitas Anda? 
 
< 1.000 
1.000-
5.000 
5.000-
10.000 
10.000-
15.000 
15.000-
20.000 
20.000-
25.000 
25.000-
30.000 
30.000-
35.000 
35.000-
40.000 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40.000-45.000 
45.000-50.000 
> 50.000 
 
 
 
 
Berapa banyak staf yang bekerja pada universitas Anda? 
 
< 100 
100-
500 
500-
1000 
1000-
1500 
1500-
2000 
2000-
2500 
2500-
3000 
3000-
3500 
3500-
4000 
4000-
4500 
4500-
5000 
> 
5000 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Berapa banyak fakultas yang ada di universitas Anda? 
 
< 5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
> 15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Berapa banyak mahasiswa yang terdaftar dalam fakultas Anda? 
 
< 
1.000 
1.000-
5.000 
5.000-
10.000 
10.000-
15.000 
15.000-
20.000 
20.000-
25.000 
25.000-
30.000 
30.000-
35.000 
35.000-
40.000 
40.000-
45.000 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45.000-50.000 
> 50.000 
 
 
 
Berapa banyak staf yang bekerja pada fakultas Anda? 
 
< 
100 
100-
500 
500-
1000 
1000-
1500 
1500-
2000 
2000-
2500 
2500-
3000 
3000-
3500 
3500-
4000 
4000-
4500 
4500-
5000 
> 
5000 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Terima kasih banyak atas kesediaan dan waktu Anda untuk mengisi kuesioner ini! 
 

258 
 
Appendix A 
 
APPENDIX A2 
A follow-up questionnaire on perceived control in English 
 
In the next question we listed some constraints that a dean might face in running a faculty. Please indicate 
to what extent you agree with the statements range from ‘not at all’ (1) to ‘very high extent’ (6). Please 
kindly tick the box to indicate your answer. 
 
Within my day to day work as a dean, I face the following issues:  
Not at all 
 
 
 
 
Very high 
extent 
 
1 
2 
3 4 
5 
6 
 Faculty’s information systems are not well developed 
      
 Academic values (traditions) in my faculty are very strong and are 
obstructing change 
      
 I have limited possibilities for being engaged in strategic decision making at 
the central management level 
      
 The faculty culture is at odds with my values and views how to run a faculty 
      
 My administrative support staff has insufficient capacity 
      
 I feel bad when I lack skills to push work forward for better performance 
      
 Authorities within the faculty are unclear and fragmented 
      
 The size and complexity of my faculty 
      
 My workload is too high. 
      
 The academics of my faculty foremost focus on disciplinary rather than a 
faculty matters  
      
 support and resources from central management are sufficient 
      
 

Appendix A 
 
259 
 
A follow-up questionnaire on perceived control in Bahasa Indonesia 
 
 
Berikut ini kami tampilkan beberapa kendala yang mungkin Anda hadapi dalam menjalankan fakultas 
Anda. Berikan pendapat Anda terhadap pernyataan-pernyataan dibawah ini dengan memilih angka 1 
untuk pendapat ‚tidak sama sekali‛ sampai dengan angka 6 untuk pendapat ‚sangat sering‛. Berilah 
tanda x (silang) di dalam kotak jawaban yang tersedia. 
Dalam menjalankan fakultas sebagai dekan, saya menghadapi beberapa hal 
seperti berikut ini:  
Tidak sama 
sekali 
 
 
 
 
Sangat 
sering 
 
1 
2 
3 4 
5 
6 
 Sistem Informasi di dalam fakultas (seperti pengumpulan data dll) tidak 
terorganisir dengan baik. 
      
 Tradisi di dalam fakultas saya sangat kuat dan hal itulah yang menyebabkan 
sulitnya membangun perubahan. 
      
 Saya hanya mempunyai sedikit kesempatan (terbatas) berpartisipasi di 
dalam membuat keputusan strategis di manajemen pusat. 
      
 Kultur dari fakultas sangat bertolak belakang dengan pandangan dan nilai-
nilai saya dalam menjalankan fakultas. 
      
 Staf penunjang administrative tidak mempunyai kapasitas yang memadai. 
      
 Saya merasa kecewa ketika saya kurang mumpuni dalam memimpin dan 
mengelola fakultas untuk menampilkan performa yang baik. 
      
 Kekuasaan di dalam fakultas tidak jelas dan terpecahbelah. 
      
 Fakultas yang saya pimpin sangat besar dan kompleks. 
      
 Saya mempunyai beban kerja yang sangat besar dan banyak. 
      
 Akademik staf di fakultas lebih mengutamakan disipliner daripada hal-hal 
yang menyangkut pengembangan fakultas.  
      
 Bantuan (dana) dan dukungan dari manajemen pusat cukup memadai. 
      
 

260 
 
 

Appendix B 
 
261 
APPENDIX B 
Result of Factor Analysis for Chapter 4 
Table 1 Three dimensions of perceived controls: Result of Factor analysis: 
Extraction Method: Principal Component Analysis. Rotation Method: Varimax 
with Kaiser Normalization (presented value ≥ 0.5) 
 
Component 
1 
(Environmental 
control) 
2 
(Internal 
control) 
3 
(Practical 
control) 
Faculty’s information systems are not well 
developed. 
,578   
,518 
Academic values in my faculty are very strong 
and are obstructing change. 
,613 
   
There are limited possibilities for me as a dean to 
make strategic decision at higher management 
levels. 
,532   
 
My administrative support staff has insufficient 
capacity. 
,628 
   
Support and resources from central management 
are sufficient. 
,755   
 
The faculty culture is at odds with my values and 
views how to run a faculty. 
 
,667   
I do not possess all the skills it takes. 
 
,642   
Authorities within the faculty are unclear and 
fragmented. 
  
,867   
Commitment and engagement of the faculty 
academics is low in the sense that they foremost 
focus on disciplinary rather than faculty matters. 
  
,593   
Of the size and complexity of my faculty. 
  
  
,875 
My workload is too high. 
  
  
,744 
 

262 
 
 
 

Appendix C 
 
263 
APPENDIX C 
Results of Data Analysis for Chapter 6 
Table 1 Deans’ self-reported behaviours on the 32 items of the CVF (N = 218, 
means, standard deviations, frequencies in %) 
How frequent do you as a dean actually: 
Behaviour (role) 
Never 
Some-
times 
Always 
Mean 
SD 
Protect continuity in faculty’s day-to-day operations 
(C) 
 
20 
80 
6,3 
0,8 
See that the faculty delivers on stated goals (P) 
1 
23 
76 
6,3 
0,9 
Facilitate consensus building in decision making (F) 
1 
18 
82 
6,3 
0,9 
Build team work among the academic staff members 
(F) 
 
19 
81 
6,3 
0,8 
Encourage participative decision making in the 
faculty (F) 
1 
21 
79 
6,2 
0,9 
Show empathy and concern in dealing with staff 
(ME) 
1 
30 
70 
6,1 
1 
Emphasize the faculty’s achievements for stated 
purposes (P) 
1 
25 
73 
6,1 
0,9 
Set clear objectives for the faculty and restate and 
reinforce your vision of the faculty’s future (D) 
1 
24 
75 
6,1 
1 
Define areas of responsibility for academic staff (D) 
1 
30 
70 
6,1 
0,9 
Make sure everyone in the faculty knows where the 
faculty is going (D) 
1 
33 
67 
6,0 
1 
Encourage staff to share ideas with you and others 
(F) 
 
30 
70 
6,0 
0,9 
Search for innovations and potential improvements 
and encourage others to generate new ideas (I) 
1 
38 
62 
5,9 
1 
Work with technical data and information (MO) 
1 
36 
63 
5,9 
0,9 
Bring a sense of order to the faculty (C) 
1 
34 
65 
5,9 
1 
Focus on results and performance of academic staff 
(P) 
1 
32 
67 
5,9 
0,9 
Insist on intense hard work and high productivity 
and sincerely push staff to meet faculty objectives (P) 
1 
36 
63 
5,9 
1 
Clarify faculty policy priorities and future direction 
(D) 
1 
34 
65 
5,9 
0,9 
Review detailed reports and cross check information 
1 
43 
57 
5,8 
1 

264 
 
Appendix C 
in detail (MO) 
Show concern for the needs of academic staff (ME) 
1 
36 
63 
5,8 
0,9 
Treat every staff member in a sensitive and caring 
way (ME) 
2 
36 
61 
5,8 
1 
Analyse written plans and schedules (MO) 
1 
43 
56 
5,7 
1 
Listen to personal problems of staff and make efforts 
to help them (ME) 
3 
44 
54 
5,7 
1,2 
Minimize the disruption in daily practices (C) 
1 
45 
55 
5,7 
1,1 
Come up with inventive ideas regarding teaching, 
research and management matters (I) 
1 
47 
53 
5,6 
0,9 
Keep a close tack of what goes on in the faculty (C) 
4 
44 
52 
5,6 
1,1 
Approach and consult people at the higher levels of 
the university (B) 
2 
47 
50 
5,5 
1,1 
Solve 
faculty 
problems 
in 
a 
creative 
and 
unconventional way (I) 
3 
51 
46 
5,4 
1,1 
Carefully compare records, files and reports (MO) 
6 
52 
43 
5,3 
1,1 
Persuasively sell new ideas to central university 
management (B) 
5 
56 
39 
5,2 
1,1 
Exert upward influence in the university (B) 
7 
49 
44 
5,2 
1,2 
Influence decisions at higher levels in the university 
(B) 
7 
53 
40 
5,2 
1,2 
Experiment with new concepts and procedures (I) 
6 
64 
30 
5,0 
1,1 
Note: scores derived from seven point scale; ‘never’ refers to the score 1, 2 or 3 (never, hardly ever, seldom), 
‘sometimes’ refers to scores 4 and 5 (sometimes, often) and ‘always’ refers to scores 6 and 7 (almost always, 
always). Roles: I (innovator), B (broker), P (producer), D (director), C (coordinator), MO (monitor), F 
(facilitator), ME (mentor). 
 
Table 2 Factor analysis of the eight managerial leadership roles based on the CVF 
(value ≥ 0.3, p < 0.05) 
Behaviour 
Component 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
INNOVATOR 01 NEW IDEAS 
,305 ,559 ,367
 
 
INNOVATOR 02  NEW CONCEPTS & PROCEDURES 
,324 ,518 ,388 
 
 
INNOVATOR 03 CREATIVE & UNCONVENTIONAL WAY 
,413 ,563 
 
 
INNOVATOR 04 INNOVATION & GENERATE IDEAS 
,647 
 
,440 
BROKER 01 UPWARD INFLUENCE 
,785
 
 
 
BROKER 02 DECISON MAKING AT HIGHER LEVEL 
,855
 
 
 
BROKER 03 CONSULT PEOPLE AT HIGHER LEVEL 
,464
 
,364 ,435
 
BROKER 04 SELL NEW IDEAS TO CENTRAL 
MANAGEMENT 
,701
 
 
 
PRODUCER 01 FOCUS ON RESULTS 
,404
,463 
 
 ,302
PRODUCER 02 FACULTY STATED GOALS 
,436
 ,620
 
 

Appendix C 
 
265 
PRODUCER 03 INTENSE HARDWORK & HIGH 
PRODUCTIVITY 
,457 ,379
 
 
PRODUCER 04 FACULTY'S ACHIEVEMENT OF STATED 
GOALS 
,336
,503 ,479
 
 
DIRECTOR 01 AREAS OF RESPONSIBILITY 
,310
 
,398 
 ,507
DIRECTOR 02 OBJECTIVES & GOALS 
 
 ,652
 
DIRECTOR 03 CLEAR OBJECTIVE FOR FACULTY 
 ,326
 ,666
 
DIRECTOR 04 CLARIFY FACULTY POLICY 
,519 
 ,416
 
COORDINATOR 01 CONTINUITY 
 ,695
 
 
COORDINATOR 02 MINIMIZE DISRUPTION 
,411
 
,397 
,487 
COORDINATOR 03 CONTROL & MONITOR SYSTEMS 
,598
 
,338 
 
COORDINATOR 04 SENSE OF ORDER 
,586
 
 
 
MONITOR 01 REVIEW DETAIELD REPORTS 
,718
 
 
 
MONITOR 02 COMPARE RECORDS, FILES & REPORTS 
,696 ,404
 
 
 
MONITOR 03 TECHNICAL DATA & INFORMATION 
,478
 
,320 ,349
 
MONITOR 04 WRITTEN PLANS & SCHEDULES 
,608
 
 
 
FACILITATOR 01 CONSENSUS BUILDING 
 
 
 ,859
FACILITATOR 02 PARTICIPATIVE DECISION MAKING 
,350
 ,424
 
,559 
FACILITATOR 03 SHARE IDEAS 
,402 
 
,694 
FACILITATOR 04 TEAMWORK 
 ,629
 
 
MENTOR 01 LISTEN TO PERSONAL PROBLEMS 
 
,756 
 
MENTOR 02 EMPHATY & CONCERN 
 
,595 
 
MENTOR 03 SENSITIVE & CARING WAY 
 
,633 ,387
 
MENTOR 04 CONCERN FOR THE NEEDS OF ACADEMICS 
,451 ,348 ,530 
 
Extraction Method: Principal Component Analysis.  
Rotation Method: Varimax with Kaiser Normalization. 
a. Rotation converged in 21 iterations. 
Note: Theoretically, the four items of the innovator role (in bold) should be in one 
component. 

266 
 
Appendix C 
Table 3 Factor analysis of the four dimensions based on the CVF (value ≥ 0.3,       
p < 0.05) 
 
Behaviour 
Component 
1 
2 
3 
4 
INNOVATOR 01 NEW IDEAS 
  
,595   
  
INNOVATOR 02 NEW CONCEPTS & PROCEDURES 
  
,374   
,559 
INNOVATOR 03 CREATIVE & UNCONVENTIONAL WAY 
  
,436 
,305 
,421 
INNOVATOR 04 INNOVATION & GENERATE IDEAS 
  
,730   
  
BROKER 01 UPWARD INFLUENCE 
  
  
  
,762 
BROKER 02 DECISON MAKING AT HIGHER LEVEL 
  
  
  
,855 
BROKER 03 CONSULT PEOPLE AT HIGHER LEVEL 
  
  
,434 
,515 
BROKER 04 SELL NEW IDEAS TO CENTRAL MANAGEMENT 
  
  
  
,719 
PRODUCER 01 FOCUS ON RESULTS 
,479 
,442   
  
PRODUCER 02 FACULTY STATED GOALS 
,685   
  
  
PRODUCER 03 INTENSE HARDWORK & HIGH PRODUCTIVITY 
,371 
,582   
  
PRODUCER 04 FACULTY'S ACHIEVEMENT OF STATED GOALS 
,559 
,511   
  
DIRECTOR 01 AREAS OF RESPONSIBILITY 
,467   
,540   
DIRECTOR 02 OBJECTIVES & GOALS 
,403   
,362   
DIRECTOR 03 CLEAR OBJECTIVE FOR FACULTY 
,478 
,371   
  
DIRECTOR 04 CLARIFY FACULTY POLICY 
,440 
,533   
  
COORDINATOR 01 CONTINUITY 
,549   
  
  
COORDINATOR 02 MINIMIZE DISRUPTION 
,314   
,428 
,317 
COORDINATOR 03 CONTROL & MONITOR SYSTEMS 
,542   
  
  
COORDINATOR 04 SENSE OF ORDER 
,660   
,321   
MONITOR 01 REVIEW DETAIELD REPORTS 
,706   
  
  
MONITOR 02 COMPARE RECORDS, FILES & REPORTS 
,673   
  
,451 
MONITOR 03 TECHNICAL DATA & INFORMATION 
,590   
,397   
MONITOR 04 WRITTEN PLANS & SCHEDULES 
,677   
  
  
FACILITATOR 01 CONSENSUS BUILDING 
  
  
,341   
FACILITATOR 02 PARTICIPATIVE DECISION MAKING 
  
,322   
,341 
FACILITATOR 03 SHARE IDEAS 
  
,672   
  
FACILITATOR 04 TEAMWORK 
,558 
,423   
  
MENTOR 01 LISTEN TO PERSONAL PROBLEMS 
  
  
,730   
MENTOR 02 EMPHATY & CONCERN 
,303   
,635   
MENTOR 03 SENSITIVE & CARING WAY 
  
  
,667   
MENTOR 04 CONCERN FOR THE NEEDS OF ACADEMICS 
,361 
,424 
,505   
Extraction Method: Principal Component Analysis.  
Rotation Method: Varimax with Kaiser Normalization. 
a. Rotation converged in 7 iterations. 
 
Note: Theoretically, the four items of the innovator role and the broker role (in 
bold) should be in one component. 

Appendix C 
 
267 
Table 4 Factor analysis of the two leadership roles within the clan quadrant of 
CVF (value ≥ 0.5, p < 0.05) 
 
Clan quadrant (upper-left) 
Behaviour 
Component 
1 
2 
FACILITATOR 01 CONSENSUS BUILDING 
  
,525 
MENTOR 01 LISTEN TO PERSONAL PROBLEMS 
,808   
FACILITATOR 02 PARTICIPATIVE DECISION MAKING 
  
,768 
MENTOR 02 EMPHATY & CONCERN 
,670 
 
FACILITATOR 03 SHARE IDEAS 
  
,774 
MENTOR 04 CONCERN FOR THE NEEDS OF ACADEMICS 
,703 
 
FACILITATOR 04 TEAMWORK 
 
,596 
MENTOR 03 SENSITIVE & CARING WAY 
,725   
Extraction Method: Principal Component Analysis.  
 Rotation Method: Varimax with Kaiser Normalization. 
a. Rotation converged in 3 iterations. 
 
Table 5 Factor analysis of the two leadership roles within the adhocracy quadrant 
of CVF (value ≥ 0.5, p < 0.05) 
 
Adhocracy quadrant (upper-right) 
Behaviour 
Component 
1 
2 
INNOVATOR 01 NEW IDEAS 
  
,734 
BROKER 01 UPWARD INFLUENCE 
,812   
INNOVATOR 02  NEW CONCEPTS & PROCEDURES 
 
,641 
BROKER 02 DECISON MAKING AT HIGHER LEVEL 
,811   
BROKER 03 CONSULT PEOPLE AT HIGHER LEVEL 
,626   
INNOVATOR 03 CREATIVE & UNCONVENTIONAL WAY 
, 
,643 
INNOVATOR 04 INNOVATION & GENERATE IDEAS 
  
,803 
BROKER 04 SELL NEW IDEAS TO CENTRAL MANAGEMENT 
,761 
 
Extraction Method: Principal Component Analysis.  
 Rotation Method: Varimax with Kaiser Normalization. 
a. Rotation converged in 3 iterations. 
 
 

268 
 
Appendix C 
Table 6 Factor analysis of the two leadership roles within the market quadrant of 
CVF (value ≥ 0.5, p < 0.05) 
 
Market quadrant (lower-right) 
Behaviour 
Component 
1 
2 
PRODUCER 01 FOCUS ON RESULTS 
,676   
DIRECTOR 01 AREAS OF RESPONSIBILITY 
  
,874 
DIRECTOR 02 OBJECTIVES & GOALS 
 
,747 
PRODUCER 02 FACULTY STATED GOALS 
,538 
,520 
DIRECTOR 03 CLEAR OBJECTIVE FOR FACULTY 
,678 
 
PRODUCER 03 INTENSE HARDWORK & HIGH PRODUCTIVITY 
,813   
DIRECTOR 04 CLARIFY FACULTY POLICY 
,728   
PRODUCER 04 FACULTY'S ACHIEVEMENT OF STATED GOALS 
,773   
Extraction Method: Principal Component Analysis.  
 Rotation Method: Varimax with Kaiser Normalization. 
a. Rotation converged in 3 iterations. 
 
Table 7 Factor analysis of the two leadership roles within the hierarchy quadrant 
of CVF (value ≥ 0.5, p < 0.05) 
 
Hierarchy quadrant (lower-left) 
Behaviour 
Component 
1 
2 
COORDINATOR 01 CONTINUITY 
  
,854 
MONITOR 01 REVIEW DETAIELD REPORTS 
,760   
COORDINATOR 02 MINIMIZE DISRUPTION 
,597   
MONITOR 02 COMPARE RECORDS, FILES & REPORTS 
,799   
COORDINATOR 03 CONTROL & MONITOR SYSTEMS 
,697   
COORDINATOR 04 SENSE OF ORDER 
,632 
 
MONITOR 04 WRITTEN PLANS & SCHEDULES 
 
,650 
MONITOR 03 TECHNICAL DATA & INFORMATION 
 
,606 
Extraction Method: Principal Component Analysis.  
 Rotation Method: Varimax with Kaiser Normalization. 
a. Rotation converged in 3 iterations. 
 

Appendix C 
 
269 
Table 8 Classification of deans who have similar patterns of emphasis on the 
eight leadership roles of the CVF: Reports of two step cluster analysis (N = 218, 
Distance likelihood, number of cluster auto, 15 BIC) 
Cluster 
Frequency 
Percent 
Valid Percent 
Cumulative Percent 
Valid 
1 
21 
9.6 
9.6 
9.6 
2 
23 
10.6 
10.6 
20.2 
3 
14 
6.4 
6.4 
26.6 
4 
13 
6.0 
6.0 
32.6 
5 
8 
3.7 
3.7 
36.2 
6 
13 
6.0 
6.0 
42.2 
7 
11 
5.0 
5.0 
47.2 
8 
11 
5.0 
5.0 
52.3 
9 
28 
12.8 
12.8 
65.1 
10 
22 
10.1 
10.1 
75.2 
11 
14 
6.4 
6.4 
81.7 
12 
13 
6.0 
6.0 
87.6 
13 
11 
5.0 
5.0 
92.7 
14 
16 
7.3 
7.3 
100.0 
Total 
218 
100.0 
100.0 
 
 
Table 9 Classification of deans who have similar patterns of emphasis on the 
eight leadership roles of the CVF: Reports of two step cluster analysis (N = 218, 
Distance likelihood, number of cluster fixed 8) 
 
Frequency 
Percent 
Valid Percent 
Cumulative Percent 
Valid 
1 
38 
17.4 
17.4 
17.4 
2 
23 
10.6 
10.6 
28.0 
3 
21 
9.6 
9.6 
37.6 
4 
29 
13.3 
13.3 
50.9 
5 
30 
13.8 
13.8 
64.7 
6 
28 
12.8 
12.8 
77.5 
7 
35 
16.1 
16.1 
93.6 
8 
14 
6.4 
6.4 
100.0 
Total 
218 
100.0 
100.0 
 
 
 

270 
 
Appendix C 
Table 10 Classification of deans who have similar patterns of emphasis on the 
eight leadership roles of the CVF: Reports of two step cluster analysis (N = 218, 
Distance likelihood, number of cluster fixed 4) 
Cluster 
Frequency 
Percent 
Valid Percent 
Cumulative Percent 
Valid 
1 
81 
37.2 
37.2 
37.2 
2 
44 
20.2 
20.2 
57.3 
3 
53 
24.3 
24.3 
81.7 
4 
40 
18.3 
18.3 
100.0 
Total 
218 
100.0 
100.0 
 
 

Appendix D 
 
271 
 
APPENDIX D 
Results of Data Analysis for Chapter 7 
Table 1 Dean’s behavioural beliefs with respect to the eight managerial 
leadership roles: Reports of descriptive statistics [N = 218, means, standard 
deviation (SD)] 
Behavioural beliefs with respect to  
Mean* 
SD 
Facilitator role 
6.36 
0.69 
Coordinator role 
6.22 
0.78 
Director role 
6.20 
0.68 
Innovator role 
6.18 
0.82 
Monitor role 
6.05 
0.79 
Producer role 
6.03 
0.80 
Broker role 
5.99 
0.85 
Mentor role 
5.59 
0.98 
Note: *Mean scores range from (1) ‘not important at all’ to (7) ‘extremely important’. 
 
Table 1 indicates that the deans hold positive behavioural beliefs on the eight 
managerial leadership roles (the mean values were ranging from 5.59 to 6.36). The 
deans, to a large extent, believe that facilitator role is more important than other 
roles. 
 
Table 2 Deans’ evaluation of outcome with respect to the eight managerial 
leadership roles: Reports of descriptive statistics [means, standard deviations 
(SD)] 
Evaluation of outcome (with respect to)  
Mean* 
SD 
N 
Stimulating staff’s productivity (producer role) 
6.51 
0.74 
218 
Having clear objectives (director role) 
6.50 
0.70 
218 
Being organized in the most efficient way (coordinator role) 
6.41 
0.81 
218 
Promoting change (innovator role) 
6.33 
0.83 
218 
Having high level of staff participation in strategic decision making 
(facilitator role) 
6.30 
0.84 
218 

272 
 
Appendix D 
 
Compliance with rules and procedures (monitor role) 
6.27 
0.86 
217 
Developing new ideas & concepts (broker role) 
6.08 
0.97 
217 
Contributing to staff’s development (mentor role) 
6.00 
1.01 
218 
Note: *Mean scores range from (1) ‘not important at all’ to (7) ‘extremely important’. 
 
Table 2 shows that the deans evaluate importantly all the eight managerial 
leadership roles, indicated by the mean values which are greater than or equal to 
6.00 (out of 7.00). However, the deans are extremely certain that stimulating 
staff’s productivity is very important for them to manage a faculty. 
Table 3 Deans’ normative beliefs: Reports of descriptive statistics [N = 216, 
means, standard deviations (SD)] 
Q: I think that the academics of my faculty / the other deans of my university / the central management like to 
see …  
Important 
referents 
Four aspects of faculty leadership 
 
Clear visions 
that embraces 
innovation and 
change 
Market-driven 
and results-
oriented 
behavior of 
academics 
Strong coordination 
and detailed 
organization of 
teaching and 
research 
Sense of collectivity 
with consensual 
decision-making 
and much personal 
attention 
 
M* 
SD 
M* 
SD 
M* 
SD 
M* 
SD 
Faculty 
academics 
2.65 
0.7 
2.32 
0.86 
2.46 
0.81 
2.35 
0.95 
Central 
management 
2.50 
0.83 
2.37 
0.84 
2.41 
0.87 
2.19 
0.98 
Fellow-deans 
2.43 
0.80 
2.19 
0.91 
2.34 
0.92 
2.20 
0.98 
Note: *Mean scores range from (-3) ‘very negative’ to (+3) ‘very positive’. 
 
Table 3 shows that Indonesian deans believe that all the three important referents 
think that having clear visions that embraces innovation and changes (adhocracy) 
is the most positive aspect of faculty leadership. 
Table 4 The dean’s motivation to comply: Reports of descriptive statistics (N = 
216, Mean, SD, in %) 
Q: To what extent are the views and opinions of faculty academics, central management and fellow deans 
important to you for the way in which you run your faculty? 
Important referents 
Important to 
limited extent 
Important to 
some extent 
Extremely 
important 
Mean* 
SD 

Appendix D 
 
273 
 
Faculty academics 
- 
21.3 
78.7 
6.24 
0.92 
Central 
management 
1.4 
41.5 
67.1 
5.82 
1.09 
Other deans 
5.5 
60.6 
33.8 
4.95 
1.22 
Note: *Mean scores range from (1) ‘never’ to (7) ‘extremely important’. Groups are defined on 
the basis of average score, ‘not important to limited extent’ refers to the Likert scale (never, 
hardly ever, seldom); ‘important to some extent’ refers to the Likert scale (to some extent, to a 
large extent), and ‘extremely important’ refers to the Likert scale (mostly, extremely important). 
 
Table 4 shows that the beliefs and opinions of the academics for the way in which 
the faculty is run matter the most to the deans, followed by the central 
management, and the fellow deans. 
 

274 
 
 

Appendix E 
 
275 
APPENDIX E 
Comparative Result Between SmartPLS and Statistics. 
Table 1 Comparison between SmartPLS and Multiple Regression (N = 215) 
Effects of attitude (A) and subjective norm (SN) 
upon the master style: Reports of SmartPLS (N 
= 215; 1,000 resamples; t-value ≥ 1.96, p ≤ 0.05). 
 
Effects of attitude (A) and subjective norm (SN) 
upon the master style: Reports of multiple 
linear regression (N = 215, p < 0.05). 
Relationship 
Beta 
t-
Value 
R 
R2 
 
Relationship 
Beta 
t-
Value 
R 
R2 
A -> Master 
style 
+0.60* 
7.17 
 
 
 
A -> Master 
style 
+0.57* 
8.63 
 
 
SN -> Master 
style 
+0.02 
0.30 
 
 
 
SN -> Master 
style 
+0.03 
0.44 
 
 
 
 
 
0.60 
0.36 
 
 
 
 
0.59 
0.34 
 
Table 1 shows that there is a difference in the results, however, the difference is 
only slight.  

