How to Write
Better Essays
Bryan Greetham

How to Write Better Essays

Palgrave Study Guides
A Handbook of Writing for Engineers
Joan van Emden
Effective Communication for Science and Technology
Joan van Emden
How to Write Better Essays
Bryan Greetham
Key Concepts in Politics
Andrew Heywood
Linguistic Terms and Concepts
Geoffrey Finch
Literary Terms and Criticism (second edition)
John Peck and Martin Coyle
The Mature Student’s Guide to Writing
Jean Rose
The Postgraduate Research Handbook
Gina Wisker
Practical Criticism
John Peck and Martin Coyle
Research Using IT
Hilary Coombes
The Student’s Guide to Writing
John Peck and Martin Coyle
The Study Skills Handbook
Stella Cottrell
Studying Economics
Brian Atkinson and Susan Johns
Studying History (second edition)
Jeremy Black and Donald M. MacRaild
Studying Mathematics and its Applications
Peter Kahn
Studying Psychology
Andrew Stevenson
Teaching Study Skills and Supporting Learning
Stella Cottrell
How to Begin Studying English Literature (second edition)
Nicholas Marsh
How to Study a Jane Austen Novel (second edition)
Vivien Jones
How to Study Chaucer (second edition)
Rob Pope
How to Study Foreign Languages
Marilyn Lewis
How to Study an E. M. Forster Novel
Nigel Messenger
How to Study a Thomas Hardy Novel
John Peck
How to Study James Joyce
John Blades
How to Study Linguistics
Geoffrey Finch
How to Study Modern Poetry
Tony Curtis
How to Study a Novel (second edition)
John Peck
How to Study a Poet (second edition)
John Peck
How to Study a Renaissance Play
Chris Coles
How to Study Romantic Poetry (second edition)
Paul O’Flinn
How to Study a Shakespeare Play (second edition)
John Peck and Martin Coyle
How to Study Television
Keith Selby and Ron Cowdery
www.palgravestudyguides.com

How to Write
Better Essays
Bryan Greetham

© Bryan Greetham 2001
No paragraph of this publication may be reproduced, copied or 
transmitted save with written permission or in accordance with 
the provisions of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988,
or under the terms of any licence permitting limited copying 
issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency, 90 Tottenham Court 
Road, London W1T 4LP.
All rights reserved. No reproduction, copy or transmission of 
this publication may be made without written permission.
Any person who does any unauthorised act in relation to this 
publication may be liable to criminal prosecution and civil 
claims for damages.
The author has asserted his right to be identiﬁed 
as the author of this work in accordance with the 
Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
First published 2001 by
PALGRAVE
Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire RG21 6XS and 
175 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10010
Companies and representatives throughout the world
PALGRAVE is the new global academic imprint of 
St. Martin’s Press LLC Scholarly and Reference Division and 
Palgrave Publishers Ltd (formerly Macmillan Press Ltd).
ISBN 0–333–94715–0
This book is printed on paper suitable for recycling and 
made from fully managed and sustained forest sources.
A catalogue record for this book is available 
from the British Library.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Greetham, Bryan, 1946–
How to write better essays/Bryan Greetham.
p.
cm. – (Palgrave study guides)
Includes bibliographical references (p.
) and index.
ISBN 0–333–94715–0
1. English language – Rhetoric.
2. Exposition (Rhetoric)
3. Essay – 
Authorship.
4. Academic writing.
I. Title.
II. Series.
PE1429 .G74 2001
808¢.042 – dc21
2001032790
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
10
09
08
07
06
05
04
03
02
01
Printed and bound in Great Britain by 
Creative Print and Design (Wales), Ebbw Vale

For Pat, without whom nothing is possible, and two great
men – my father, Robert Greetham, and Harry Rowe,
whose rich and interesting life is still an inspiration.

This page intentionally left blank 

Contents
Introduction
ix
The Stages
1
Stage 1
Interpretation of the Question
5
Introduction
7
1
Revealing the structure
9
2
A practical example
15
3
Learning to analyse
22
4
The three-step technique – Steps 1 and 2
27
5
Step 3 – Test your concept
36
6
Brainstorming
42
7
Flexibility
51
8
Using the right ability
56
9
The range of abilities
61
10
Changing our pattern of study
66
Stage 2
Research
73
Introduction
75
11
Reading purposefully
78
12
Processing the ideas
83
13
Note-taking for analysis and structure
94
14
Remembering your notes
101
15
Note-taking for criticism and evaluation
108
16
Organising your retrieval system
118
17
Organising your time
124
18
Your own personal timetable
132
vii

Stage 3
Planning
139
Introduction
141
19
Planning that makes a difference
143
20
Editing and ordering your material
151
21
Planning for the exam
160
22
Revising for the exam
166
Stage 4
Writing
171
Introduction
173
23
Getting your own ideas down
176
24
Introductions
182
25
Paragraphs
187
26
Conclusions
197
27
Style – Simplicity
203
28
Style – Economy
215
29
Working with evidence
225
30
Plagiarism
233
31
Referencing and bibliographies
240
Stage 5
Revision
253
Introduction
255
32
Preserving your best ideas
258
33
Revising the structure
262
34
Revising the content
267
Conclusion
278
Bibliography
280
Index
281
viii
Contents

Introduction
 About this book
By the time we reach university a surprising number of us are con-
vinced that we should know all we need to know about researching
and writing essays. We’re inclined to argue that if we’ve got this far 
we should know how to analyse the implications of questions, read
efﬁciently, take notes, plan and structure arguments, use evidence, and
write light and interesting prose. Indeed these skills are the very thing
that has got us this far in the ﬁrst place, so to admit that we could be
better at essay writing seems to be an admission that we’re lucky to
have got this far.
Instead of seeking help, then, to improve our skills, we settle for the
strategy of just learning by our mistakes, or by example in those rare
moments when we might see our tutor think through and analyse a
difﬁcult concept, or pull ideas together from different sources and syn-
thesise them into a new way of looking at a problem. If we recognise
the signiﬁcance of the moment, and most of us don’t, then we might
be lucky enough to retain a small inkling of what went on in the hope
that we, too, might be able to do the same.
But it need not be like this. The two types of skills that we all need
to be successful in our courses – study skills (reading, note-taking,
writing, organisation, and revision) and thinking skills (analysis, syn-
thesis, discussion, argument, and use of evidence) – can be taught.
There is nothing mysterious about them. They need not be the exclu-
sive preserve of a few. And there is nothing particularly difﬁcult about
them either. Indeed, most of us have the abilities to succeed, if only we
can unlock and use them by learning these simple skills.
 Learning the skills
In this book you will learn not just the study skills, but the thinking
skills too. What’s more, you won’t do this alone. At every step of the
ix

way a tutor will be by your side, showing you clear and simple ways
of overcoming the most difﬁcult problems. And you choose the essay
you want to work on, drawn from the courses you’re taking at your
school, college or university.
You will be taken carefully through each stage of writing the essay
from interpreting the question to the research, planning, writing and
revision. In each of these you will be given practice exercises to work
on, along with their answers, with an assignment at the end of each
section. As you work through each stage you will get practical help
right up until the essay has been completed. In this way not only will
your work improve, but you’ll develop those skills necessary to tackle
successfully all your future writing assignments.
All of this means this book is signiﬁcantly different from any other
writing or study-skills book you may have read before:
•
It’s an integrated approach
It doesn’t deal with writing skills in isolation from the thinking
skills and the other study skills involved, like note-taking, reading
and organisation. If you’ve taken study-skills courses before, you’ll
know that dealing with any skill in isolation results in us just
tacking on this new skill to our existing pattern of study. It’s not
integrated within it. As a result, after a short time we come to realise
it’s not relevant to the way we use our other skills and we quietly
abandon it.
•
It’s a purposeful approach
Because it’s directed at a speciﬁc goal of producing a certain essay
that you have chosen yourself, it has a clear purpose that’s relevant
to what you’re studying. Unlike more general books and courses,
you’re not working in a vacuum. In effect you have your own per-
sonal writing tutor, who will be by your side to help you with the
problems you confront at each stage in the production of an essay
that you have to complete for one of your courses.
•
The book takes account of the syllabus objectives of your
courses
Unlike most books on this subject, this one will help you develop
the skills you need to meet the syllabus objectives of the courses
you’re taking at school, college or university. You will develop the
skills and techniques that allow you to explore more effectively in
your writing those abilities your syllabuses set out to develop. As
x
Introduction

many of us know from our experience with other books and
courses, any book that doesn’t do this we are likely to abandon,
realising it doesn’t address our needs, because it’s divorced from
the abilities we are expected to use and develop in the courses we
are studying.
•
The book is a comprehensive essay writing guide
After you’ve read the book and completed the course you’re left
with an invaluable guide that you can use to diagnose and deal with
any problem you might have in your writing in the future. As it’s
broken up into stages it’s easy to identify where the problem is and
what you need to do to tackle it. To help you in this, the index can
be used to diagnose a problem you might be experiencing, so that
you can easily locate the relevant section of the guide.
With these unique characteristics this is a book that will ensure you
develop the skills and techniques to unlock your abilities and your
potential.
Introduction
xi

This page intentionally left blank 

The Stages
This book is not just about the actual writing of essays; it’s also about
the various stages you need to go through to produce a good essay,
and about the ways in which this can improve your learning. Once
you’ve worked your way through it, you’ll ﬁnd you have an invaluable
guide that you can keep by your side as you write your essays, to give
you answers to problems as they arise.
 Why write essays?
If you understand the value of doing something, you normally ﬁnd
you’re more conﬁdent and positive about tackling it. So, what are the
reasons for writing essays?
•
It forces you to organise your thinking and develop your
ideas on the issues
In one sense writing is the crucial step in the process of learning 
a subject, in that it helps you to get to grips with the new ideas.
Without this it’s difﬁcult, if not impossible, to know clearly just how
well you’ve understood the subject.
•
Feedback
In the same way, it also provides you with the opportunity to get
feedback from your tutor, not just on how well you’ve understood
the subject, but on how well you’ve communicated this, and where
your strengths and weaknesses are, so you can concentrate your
energies more effectively.
•
Revision material
If you’ve planned the essay well, so that it’s got a clear structure,
you’ll ﬁnd, when it comes to preparing for the ﬁnal exam, that the
plan itself is just about the most important revision material you
have. It shows you how you’ve come to understand the topic, and
how you’ve organised the ideas. As such, it is the one thing that
1

you will be able to recall and use most effectively under timed con-
ditions. In fact many students who plan well use just these clearly
organised thought patterns as their only revision material.
Writing an essay, then, is a valuable opportunity for learning, which
ought to be approached positively. If you hide behind the text, just 
paraphrasing or copying what you’ve read, without processing those
ideas and making them your own, your tutor will rarely see you, your
abilities, or your problems, and you will never glimpse the extent of
your abilities, or just how much you understand.
 The ﬁve stages
For any essay to achieve high marks it’s essential to go through ﬁve
distinct stages:
1
Interpretation of the question
2
Research
3
Planning
4
Writing
5
Revision
If you omit any of these or just rush them, certain familiar problems
will emerge in your writing: irrelevance, weak structure, insufﬁcient
evidence and examples to support your arguments, lack of ﬂuency
between paragraphs, inconsistent arguments, and many others.
It’s also as important to separate each stage, so that you leave, say,
at least a day between each of them. Of course, it may not always be
possible for you to do this. You may have a number of competing obli-
gations that leave you only a few days to complete the essay. On these
occasions the skills you’ll learn in this book to manage your time will
help you cope more effectively. They will also help you organise your
time so that with most pieces of work you can in fact ﬁnd sufﬁcient
time between each stage. Not only does this allow you to return to your
ideas fresh, so that you’re able to see which of them needs to be edited
out, but you will also ﬁnd that your ideas and arguments have devel-
oped in the meantime.
Ideas are organic. Hardly ever are they the complete and ﬁnished
article the moment you grasp them, like products on a supermarket
shelf. They grow and develop over time. So, for example, returning to
2
How to Write Better Essays

your plan after a day or two, you will almost inevitably discover new
ideas, new evidence and new ways of developing your arguments.
You’re also likely to see a more sensible and logical way of ordering
your ideas.
And the same goes for all the other stages. Each time you return to
your work after leaving it to lie unattended for a while, you will ﬁnd
your subconscious has worked on the ideas, restructuring them,
answering questions that you weren’t sure of, and critically evaluating
the arguments you’ve read in your texts.
But, be reassured, this is not an endless, confusing process, in 
which your ideas are thrown up in the air each time you return to your
work. Within a short time, after revising your plan a couple of times,
you will realise that it’s ready and you can begin writing. The same is
true of your interpretation of the question, your research and the 
revision of your work. You will know when enough is enough. It may
take three or four essays before you feel conﬁdent about your judge-
ment, and during these you will have to rely on your tutor’s judgement,
but it will come.
The Stages
3

This page intentionally left blank 

Stage 1
Interpretation of 
the Question

This page intentionally left blank 

INTRODUCTION
Often, and for the best of motives, our problems in essay writing begin
the very moment we are given the question. Anxious to get on with the
work and not fall behind, we skip the interpretation stage and launch
straight into our research. As a result, we read sources and take notes
without a clear idea of what’s relevant, beyond some very general idea
of the subject of the essay. Then ﬁnally, after hours of toil, tired and
frustrated, and no clearer about what we’re doing, we’re left with a pile
of irrelevant, unusable notes.
Yet, just an hour or two interpreting the question would not only
have saved us this wasted time, but would have given us a clear idea
of what the question is getting at and a better understanding of what
the examiner is looking for in our work. And even more, it would have
given us the opportunity to get our own ideas and insights involved at
an early stage. Without this our work can seem routine and predictable:
at best just the re-cycling of the ideas that dominate the subject.
So, what should you be looking for when you interpret a question?
All essay questions tell you two things: the structure your essay should
adopt for you to deal relevantly with all the issues it raises; and the
range of abilities the examiner is expecting to see you use in answer-
ing the question.
 Structure
Take the ﬁrst of these: the structure. In the following chapters you will
learn how to unwrap the meaning and implications of the question, so
that, before you go off to do your research, you will have prepared for
yourself a clear structure of the issues that the question raises, so you
know what you’re looking for. In many questions this will develop out
of your analysis of the key concepts in the question. Most of us strug-
gle to do this well, but the skills involved can be easily learnt. You will
be shown a simple three-step technique for analysing the most difﬁ-
cult concepts.
Once this has been done you will be shown how to brainstorm the
question. Again, this is not a time-consuming task, but it will help you
to use more of your own ideas and avoid wasting time in your research.
Once you’ve learnt to do this, you will be able to make two important
things clear to yourself before you start your research: what you know
about the issues the essay question raises, and the questions you want
7

your sources to answer. Without this the authors of the texts you read
are likely to dictate to you and you’ll ﬁnd it difﬁcult to distinguish
between what’s relevant and what’s not.
 Range of abilities
Then, once you’ve brainstormed your ideas and know what questions
you want your sources to answer, there’s just one more thing you need
to be sure about before you begin your research. You must be clear
about the range of abilities the examiner wants to see you use. Other-
wise you may ﬁnd yourself tackling the essay in a way that doesn’t
answer the question, and noting information that is irrelevant.
8
Interpretation of the Question

9
1 Revealing the Structure
In this chapter you will learn:
•
how to avoid irrelevance in your essay by carefully interpreting the
meaning and implications of the question;
•
how to reveal from the question the structure your essay should
adopt;
•
how to make sure your essay qualiﬁes for the highest marks on offer.
Obviously it’s important to realise that you’re not embarking on a piece
of open-ended research. You’re answering a particular question that
raises particular sharply focused issues. You must, therefore, be rigor-
ously selective in collecting your material in the research stage, and in
planning and writing the essay. You should use only material that is
relevant to answering this question.
There are times in the research of every essay when you ﬁnd your-
self collecting material that is interesting and so closely argued that
you ﬁnd it difﬁcult not to take notes from all of it, particularly when
it’s relevant to the wider implications of the topic. But if it’s not rel-
evant to the problems raised in this essay, ditch it! File it away for other
essays, by all means, but don’t let it tempt you in this essay. Otherwise
it will lose focus and the reader will fail to understand what you’re
doing and why.
 Analyse the key concepts
With these warnings in mind it’s essential to pin down two things: how
many parts there are to the question and what weight you will need to
give to each part. With many questions these structural problems can
be solved by analysing the key concepts used in the question. Indeed,

in most, if you fail to do this, the examiners will deduct marks: they
will expect to see you show that you can analyse difﬁcult abstract 
concepts and allow this to inﬂuence, if not determine, the structure of
the essay.
For example, markers for the University of London are told to award
the highest marks (70–100%) to those students who ‘note subtlety,
complexity and possible disagreements, [which they] . . . will discuss’,
while only average marks (40–60%) are to be awarded to the student
who adopts a ‘More relaxed application’ of the question, and who
‘follows [an] obvious line . . . [and] uncritically accepts the terms of the
question’.1
Similarly, in the Department of Sociology at the University of Harvard
students are told:
Papers will be graded on the basis of the completeness and clarity of 
your analysis and the persuasiveness of your recommendations. As
always, we will be appreciative of well-organised and well-written
papers.2
The same emphasis can be found at the University of Oxford, where
examiners look for a good analytical ability, to distinguish ﬁrst class
and upper second class scripts from the rest. In the marking criteria
it’s only in these two grades that any mention is made of analytical
ability, with those failing to display it more likely to end up with lower
seconds and below. A ﬁrst class script should show:
analytical and argumentative power, a good command of facts, 
evidence or arguments relevant to the questions, and an ability to organ-
ise the answer with clarity, insight and sensitivity.3
An upper second class script also displays these qualities, but ‘less 
consistently’ or ‘to a lesser degree’ than a ﬁrst class script.
 Questions
To give you an idea of what this means in terms of actual questions,
listed below is a selection of essay questions from different depart-
ments at different universities around the world. You will see that the
answer to each of them hinges upon the same ‘clarity, insight and sen-
10
Interpretation of the Question

sitivity’ that we can bring to the analysis of the key concepts in the
question.
•
Do the narrators of Pride and Prejudice and Great Expec-
tations speak with the same kind of irony?
(The English Novel, University of Harvard)
•
Are there any good reasons for supposing that historical ex-
planation is, in principle, different from scientiﬁc explanation?
(History, University of Kent at Canterbury)
•
Did the years 1603–4 witness a crisis in the history of English
Protestantism?
(History, University of Kent at Canterbury)
•
Consider Duncan Kennedy’s claim that people who favour casting
the law in the form of rules are individualists while people 
who favour the use of standards are altruists. Do you agree 
that the debate between rules and standards reﬂects that sort of 
deep difference in general moral outlook?
(Law, University of Cornell)
•
Hobbes insists that covenants extorted by force oblige. (Sovereignty
by acquisition is a good example.) Is his argument consistent with
his theory? What problems does his insistence pose for his theory?
In your answer, be sure to address Hobbes’s account of obligation,
in particular the obligation to obey the sovereign.
(Philosophy, University of Harvard)
•
‘Mill has made as naïve and artless a use of the naturalistic fallacy
as anybody could desire. “Good,” he tells us, means “desirable”,
and you can only ﬁnd out what is desirable by seeking to ﬁnd out
what is actually desired . . . The fact is that “desirable” does not
mean “able to be desired” as “visible” means “able to be seen”.’ 
G. E. Moore. Discuss.
(Philosophy, University of Kent at Canterbury)
•
‘Authority amounts to no more than the possession of power.’
Discuss.
(Philosophy, University of Maryland)
•
Is there any important sense in which all men are equal? If so, what
is it?
(Politics, University of Maryland)
Revealing the Structure
11

•
Is democracy always compatible with individual freedom?
(Politics, University of York)
•
Are concepts of anomie and subculture still of value in the expla-
nation of criminality?
(Sociology, University of Oxford)
•
What considerations determine the efﬁcient levels of (a) smoking,
(b) immunisation against infectious diseases? Is it practical to
achieve these?
(Economics, University of Oxford)
•
‘Free Trade leads to a Paretian Optimum.’ ‘Free Trade leads to 
unacceptable inequalities.’ Discuss.
(Economics, University of Oxford)
 Key concepts
As you can see, no matter what the subject, the analysis of the 
important concepts is the main focus when we come to interpret ques-
tions like these. They may be couched subtly in everyday language, 
like ‘unacceptable inequalities’, ‘oblige’, or ‘efﬁcient levels’, or they 
may stand out like beacons warning the unwary not to ignore them,
like ‘Paretian Optimum’, and ‘anomie and subculture’. Historians, for
example, are fond of using concepts like ‘revolution’ and ‘crisis’: 
seemingly inoffensive and untroubling words. But then, look at the
British Industrial Revolution and you ﬁnd yourself wondering, was this
a revolution or just accelerated evolution? Indeed, what is a revol-
ution? Is it all a question of the speed of change? In which case, the
Industrial Revolution was more an evolution than a revolution, spread
as it was over seventy to a hundred years. Or is it more to do with 
the scale of change? If this is the case, then there’s little doubt that 
it was a revolution, what with the mechanisation of labour, factory 
production, the growth of cities and the development of mechanised
transport.
Much the same could be argued for a concept like ‘crisis’. Again it
appears to be inoffensive and untroubling; that is until you ask your-
self, what do we really mean by the word? It comes from the Greek,
Krisis, meaning a decisive moment or turning point. So are we really
justiﬁed in arguing that the years 1603–4 were not only a time of
serious challenge to Protestantism, but also a decisive turning point in
12
Interpretation of the Question

its history? Whatever your answer, you now have a structure emerging:
on the one hand you can argue that it was a time of serious challenge
to Protestantism, but on the other you might question whether it really
was a genuine turning point in its history.
The same analysis of concepts and arguments can be found in just
about every subject. In politics there are concepts like freedom, 
ideology, equality, authority, power, political obligation, inﬂuence,
legitimacy, democracy and many more. Do we really harbour not a
single fear of ambiguity when we use such a large and important
concept like freedom, or was Donovan Leitch right when he admitted
in the sixties that, ‘Freedom is a word I rarely use without thinking’?
What do we mean by legitimacy and how does it differ from legality?
And when we use the word ‘democracy’ do we mean direct or indirect
democracy, representative or responsible, totalitarian or liberal, third
world or communist?
In literature what do we mean by concepts like tragedy, comedy,
irony, and satire? Indeed, it’s not unusual to ﬁnd universities devoting
complete courses to unravelling the implications of these and others
like them: concepts like class, political obligation, punishment, revol-
ution, authority and so on. In the following course outline, the con-
cepts of punishment and obligation, and the distinction between law
and morality, are central concerns that run throughout the course.
Entitled ‘Moral Reasoning – Reasoning In and About the Law’, it is part
of the programme at the University of Harvard:
How is law related to morality? How is it distinct? Do we have an oblig-
ation to obey the law? What, if anything, justiﬁes the imposition of legal
punishment? These issues, and related issues dealing with the analysis
and justiﬁcation of legal practices, will be examined using the writings of
philosophers, judges, and legal theorists.4
Take just about any course at any university and you will see the same:
that many of the challenges we face are questions about concepts. For
example, the Philosophy Department of the University of Southampton
describes its Philosophy of Science course in the following terms:
This course examines concepts of evidence, justiﬁcation, probability and
truth, in relation to scientiﬁc explanation, causality, laws of nature, theory
and fact; the distinctions between science and pseudo-science, as well as
between science and metaphor, are among the topics explored. Examples
Revealing the Structure
13

illustrating the philosophical argument will be drawn from the histories
of the physical, biological and social sciences.5
 Qualifying for the highest marks on offer
Syllabuses like these indicate the importance of key concepts both in
the courses you’re studying, and in the essays you’re expected to write.
By analysing them you not only give your essay a relevant structure,
but, equally important, you qualify for the highest marks on offer.
If, at this stage, you don’t acknowledge the signiﬁcance of these con-
cepts by analysing their implications, you will almost certainly fail to
analyse them in your essay. This will indicate not only that you haven’t
seen the point of the question, but, more seriously, that you haven’t
yet developed that thoughtful, reﬂective ability to question some of the
most important assumptions we make when we use language. It is 
as if you’re saying to the examiner that you can see no reason why
these concepts should raise any particular problem and, therefore, they
deserve no special treatment.
 In the next chapter
In the next chapter we’ll look at a particular concept and show how
you can prise it open to reveal its implications. In so doing you’ll see
how you can capture more of your own ideas and insights.
Notes
1 General Marking Instructions (London: University of London, 1987).
2 Peter V. Marsden, Sociology, 25: Introduction to the Sociology of Organiza-
tions (Cambridge, Mass.: University of Harvard, 2000).
3 Greats Handbook (Oxford: University of Oxford, 2000), p. 46.
4 Michael Blake, Moral Reasoning, 62: Reasoning in and about the Law
(Cambridge, Mass.: University of Harvard, 2000).
5 What is Philosophy? (Southampton: Department of Philosophy, University of
Southampton, 1986), p. 16.
14
Interpretation of the Question

15
2 A Practical Example
In this chapter you will learn:
•
the difference between closed and open concepts: those that can be
left to a dictionary, and those that need to be analysed;
•
how to prise open the structure of a concept by looking at the way
we use it in everyday language and examples;
•
how to capture your ideas and follow your train of thoughts in a clear
structure of notes, while you analyse a concept.
Despite what we said in the previous chapter, there will still be those
who ask, ‘But why can’t we just look up the meaning of these words
in a dictionary, rather than go through the process of analysis?’ And,
of course, they’re right: with some words this is all you need to do.
 Open and closed concepts
What you might describe as ‘closed concepts’ usually have an unchang-
ing, unambiguous meaning. Words like ‘bicycle’, ‘bachelor’ and ‘trian-
gle’ each have a structure to their meaning, which is bound by logical
necessity. We all agree to abide by certain conventions that rule the
meaning of these words. So, if you were to say ‘this is a bicycle with
one wheel’, or ‘this triangle has four sides’, no-one would be in any
doubt that you had made a logical mistake. When we use these words
according to their conventions we are, in effect, allowing our under-
standing of the world to be structured in a particular way.
But with ‘open concepts’ it tends to be the reverse: our experience of
the world shapes our concepts. As a result, such words cannot be pinned
down just by looking them up in a dictionary. Their meaning responds
to and reﬂects our changing experience: they change through time and

from one culture to another. A dictionary deﬁnition, then, can only ever
be a single snapshot taken in a constantly moving reel of images.1
If you take concepts like ‘aunt’ and ‘democracy’, you can see that in
some societies and at some times they have a fairly unambiguous,
unchanging meaning. The concept of ‘aunt’, for example, in some soci-
eties, has a narrow deﬁnition exclusively grounded in relations by blood
and marriage. But in other societies it is more open, encompassing not
just relatives in the strict sense, but also older, long-standing friends
of the family. This is likely to be a reﬂection of the social practices
prevalent in different societies and at different stages in their develop-
ment. A predominantly rural society with limited social mobility might
use ‘aunt’ in the narrow sense. In contrast, in a society undergoing
rapid industrialisation, with greater social mobility and less permanent
communities, the concept is likely to be applied more loosely to close
friends of the parents of a child. A young couple, having recently moved
to a city some distance from their parents’ homes, may seek to recon-
struct the security of an extended family by including close friends as
aunts and uncles to their children.
Much the same can be said for a concept like ‘democracy’. We might
all agree that it implies government in accordance with the popular
will, but beyond this principle everything is open. Western liberal
democracies, believing that democracy implies one-man-one-vote,
regular elections, secret ballots, multi-party politics and freedom of
expression, are just one adaptation of the principle, serving the needs
of a particular type of society: a liberal society with its emphasis on 
the importance of individualism, competition, free trade and consumer
sovereignty.
In other societies, under different cultural inﬂuences, democracy has
taken on different forms where accountability, participation, multi-party
politics, even regular elections and voter sovereignty, are much less
important. More signiﬁcant is the progress that is being made towards
achieving democratic goals, like the eradication of epidemic diseases,
alleviation of poverty, improvement in literacy, even industrialisation.
The achievement of these goals, rather than voter approval at elections,
is seen as evidence of the democratic nature of government.
 Start with the way we use them
As you can see from this, if any of the concepts in essay questions are
up for grabs in this way, if there is any doubt about the way we use
16
Interpretation of the Question

them, then we need to analyse them. In most cases this means we start
with words we use in everyday speech, in some cases sharpening and
tightening them, in others just unpacking their ambiguities. In the
process, this will more often than not give us the structure of our essay,
in terms of the arguments we need to explore and develop.
So, start by asking yourself, ‘How do I use the concept – do I use 
it in more than one way?’ Take the concept of freedom. We tend to 
talk about being free from things, like repression, constraints, and
restrictions of one form or another. I might say with some relief that I
am ﬁnally free from pain having taken tablets for pain relief, or that a
political prisoner has at last been freed from imprisonment. In both
cases we’re using the word in a negative way, in that something is being
taken away, the pain or the imprisonment.
In contrast, we also tend to use the word in what we might describe
as a positive way. In this sense the preposition changes from being free
from something to being free to do something. We may say that,
because a friend has unexpectedly won a large amount of money, she
is now free to do what she has always wanted to do – to go back to
college, or to buy her own home. Governments, too, use the concept
in this way, arguing that the money they are investing in education will
free more people to get better, more satisfying jobs and to fulﬁl more
of their dreams.
Try it for yourself. Take the following question, which uses the 
concepts of authority and power. As you tackle the exercise below, think
about how you use a concept like authority. If you ﬁnd you use it in
more than one way, then you have a structure emerging: each way in
which you use it needs to be explored and its implications unwrapped.
Consider the question below and complete the exercise that follows
‘Authority amounts to no more than the possession of power.’
Discuss.
A Practical Example
17
Practice exercise
1
Interpreting the question
Underline what you consider to be the key concepts and then analyse
what you think are the main implications of the question. 

This can be done in the form of sentences, but a more useful way is a
short structure of notes that allows you to capture your ideas effec-
tively and follow your train of thoughts quickly. Something like the
structure shown on p.19 would be a useful way of outlining the central
implications of the question, which you can then follow up in your
research and, later, in the essay. If you ﬁnd any of the abbreviations 
in these notes mystifying, you can ﬁnd the meaning of them in 
Chapter 14.
Answer
Clearly in this question the key concepts that have to be examined are
‘power’ and ‘authority’, and the relationship between them. Start, then,
by asking yourself how you use these words. For this you need to
summon up a few examples of situations in which both of these con-
cepts might come up. These might involve ﬁgures of authority, 
like police ofﬁcers, teachers, parents and other people who have the
power and inﬂuence to get you to do what you might not otherwise
want to do.
From these examples you might conclude that the most obvious 
way in which we use the word ‘power’ is to describe somebody as
having force, the capacity to compel us to do something against our
wishes. A police ofﬁcer has this sort of power, or a mugger, if he 
possesses a weapon with which to threaten us. But we also use it 
in the phrase ‘the power of persuasion’, in which the force involved is
the force of an argument or the ability to persuade us to do something
we would not otherwise do, by giving us good and persuasive reasons
for doing it.
If the concept of power breaks down in this sort of way, then that of
authority probably does too. We talk about somebody being in author-
ity, somebody like a police ofﬁcer or a judge. In this case we might 
not respect the person or the reasons they may give us for doing as
they demand, but we might respect the institution they represent, or
we might just comply with their orders because we fear the conse-
quences of not doing so. Police ofﬁcers have powers at their disposal
that can seriously affect us, even denying us our liberty.
And, of course, there are others, like a mugger or a local gang leader,
who can also compel us to do things, through force or threats of force,
but who have no authority, although they still have this sort of power.
This leads us to the conclusion that authority doesn’t simply amount
to the possession of power alone: the gang leader has no authority, 
in the usual sense, to command us to do anything, unlike the police
18
Interpretation of the Question

‘‘Authority amounts to no more
than the possession of power.’
Discuss.
‘in’
authority
obedience
out of
respect
for the
institution
of authority
e.g. police
given
rather
than
earned
fear of
consequences
individual
=
obliged to
obey
π
obligation
to obey
doesn’t confer
right to obedience
Reason for
complying
=
prudent to
do so
to avoid harmful
consequences
compelled
π freewill
=
Power to take action against those who disobey
obedience secured thro threats/force – to make
things worse for people
official authority
Institutional power
e.g. police/judge
fear of consequences
– harm
respect for
institution
Unofficial
e.g. mugger/local gang
leader
might
= right
fear of
consequences
no right
to compliance
‘an’
authority
Power alone π authority
Power alone w/o auth π legitimate
ability to
secure
voluntary
compliance
w/o force
earned
rather
than
given
depends
on who
you are
v
membership
of institution
Reasons
for
complying
=
moral
uncompelled
freewill
Power = power of persuasion
legitimate
influence
knowledge
e.g.
experienced
art collector
experience/
wisdom
e.g.
elderly
consent
e.g.
elected
representative
personal
qualities
charisma
integrity
fairness/
impartiality
right to
direct +
command
others
A Practical Example
19

ofﬁcer, who has been appointed by representatives in parliament or 
the local council, whom we have elected. In this sense, then, the rep-
resentatives and, in turn, their ofﬁcially appointed ofﬁcers are said to
have democratic legitimacy.
This seems to suggest that the word ‘authority’ has an alternative
meaning; something similar to the sense we mean when we describe
somebody as being an authority. It may be that someone is an experi-
enced art collector, so we are right to be persuaded by the arguments
she presents because she knows what she’s talking about. No force or
compulsion is needed here, beyond, that is, the force of her arguments,
her power of persuasion. She has the ability to secure voluntary com-
pliance to her way of seeing things without the use of threats or force,
because she has earned her authority.
We could say she has a ‘right’ to her authority, although it’s a dif-
ferent sense of ‘right’ from that exercised by the police ofﬁcer; it’s the
right that has been earned rather than given. It’s also different from
the authority of the elected representative, although they can both be
described as being ‘an’ authority. The difference is that the art collec-
tor’s authority has been earned as a result of her study and devotion
to her work, whereas the elected representative’s authority has been
earned as a result of putting himself up for election and campaigning
for votes. Both have authority and exercise legitimate inﬂuence because
of the respect they have earned.
Of course, others ﬁt into this category of legitimate inﬂuence, too,
even though they have earned their authority in different ways. The
elderly in our communities have earned respect as a result of their
years of experience and the wisdom this has brought. Others have
certain personal qualities that have given them a reputation for
integrity and honesty; people we might go to for advice and support.
We could say that we have good ‘moral’ reasons for complying with
this sort of authority: that is we have reasons that convince us to act
in this way as a matter of our own free will; whereas when we comply
with orders of those who are in authority we do so not necessarily
because we have any moral reason, that we respect them as indi-
viduals, but because we know that it would be prudent to do so. 
Otherwise we might suffer in one way or another as a result of the
sanctions they can bring upon us. This threat is likely to force us,
against our will, to comply with their orders.
In this sense we may be ‘obliged’ to obey, if the local gang leader or
the mugger is threatening to harm us, but we have no ‘obligation’ to
obey, because such threats are not backed by any right to make such
20
Interpretation of the Question

orders. Whereas the art collector has earned the right through many
years of study, and police ofﬁcers, while not having earned the same
respect for themselves as a person, have been given the ‘rightful’, 
legitimate authority by our elected representatives.
 In the next chapter
Some people ﬁnd this sort of exercise easy to do. If, however, you’ve
found it particularly difﬁcult, don’t despair. It is a lot simpler than it
appears. Over the next three chapters you will learn a simple three-
step technique for analysing the most difﬁcult concept.
Note
1 Those who want to read more about open and closed concepts should 
read Leon J. Goldstein’s paper ‘Reﬂections on Conceptual Openness and
Conceptual Tension’, in F. D’Agustino and I. C. Jarvie (eds), Freedom and
Rationality: Essays in Honour of John Watkins (London: Kluwer Academic,
1989), pp. 87–110.
A Practical Example
21

22
3 Learning to Analyse
In this chapter you will learn:
•
that of all the thinking skills, analysis is probably the most useful in
opening up rich sources of ideas for you to use in an essay;
•
how to free yourself from your own preconceptions, so that you can
think more freely and see more of the implications of questions;
•
how techniques similar to the three-step technique have been the
source of some of the most important intellectual achievements.
Of course, not all the questions you tackle will offer up their concepts
so easily as the authority/power question. In many of them the concept
will hide, lurking behind the most innocent word. And in some ques-
tions it will be difﬁcult to decide whether it’s worth analysing the
concept at all – it may not be central to the issues the question raises,
taking you in a direction that’s irrelevant. In these cases you just have
to take the concept and analyse it carefully to see what’s there. In most
questions you’ll ﬁnd that by doing this you will open up a treasure of
all sorts of ideas you can use. The question just seems to unfold before
your eyes and you know exactly the arguments to pursue and the
research you need to do.
But, obviously, the key to this is to learn to analyse the concepts well.
Of all the thinking skills we use this is the most neglected, even though
it’s probably the most useful. Without it we have no means of seeing
a problem clearly, so that we can use our creative abilities to fashion
a solution. Similarly, we have no means of seeing what it is about an
argument that we dislike, so we can go on to criticise and improve it.
In fact almost every intellectual activity begins with some form of
analysis to make it clear what we’re trying to tackle. It gives direction
and purpose to our work. Without it we’re likely to be at a complete
loss as to how to set about the question.

Learning to Analyse
23
Unfortunately, we all seem to assume that everyone knows how to
do it, so there’s no need to teach it. This, however, is far from the case.
Most of us do it poorly because, rather than it being a natural thing to
do, something we do almost by second nature, it seems to most of 
us to be the most unnatural thing. We have to force ourselves to ask
the most deliberate questions about things that appear obvious. This
seems to be unwarranted: it seems forced and unnecessary. I often 
ask students that most annoying and awkward of all questions, 
which begins, ‘But what do you mean by . . . ?’ Usually their response
is to gasp in amazement that anyone, particularly one bearing the heavy
responsibility for their education, could have any difﬁculty under-
standing a concept or the meaning of a word they use everyday of their
lives. Their usual response is, ‘But everyone knows what that means!’
But then, once they’ve begun thinking about the word and arguing
what they all understand by it, they begin to realise that there is any-
thing but consensus over its meaning. And, to their delight, as they
analyse the implications of the concept they uncover for themselves
rich sources of ideas they never knew they had, and the most percep-
tive observations that surprise even themselves.
 Blinded by preconceptions
In fact, the more awkward and deliberate this process feels the better
the results are likely to be. In this lies the strength of the analytical
method. We all carry around with us patterns of ideas through which
we’re able to structure unfamiliar experience and give it meaning. But,
while this can be useful in giving us emotional safety, particularly in
times of rapid change, it can be quite deceptive: we see what we want
to see, even when it’s perfectly obvious that we’ve got it wrong.
We’ve all heard police ofﬁcers explain that, if they have, say, twelve
eyewitnesses to a crime, they will more than likely have twelve differ-
ent accounts of what happened. We all carry certain preconceptions
that prepare our minds to see what they want to see. For example, read
the phrases in each of the triangles below.
PARIS
IN THE
THE SPRING
ONCE
IN A
A LIFETIME
BIRD
IN THE
THE HAND

Most people read them as ‘Paris in the spring’, ‘Once in a lifetime’, ‘Bird
in the hand’. But when they’re urged to look a little closer, sooner or
later they see the extra words, which their minds have selectively
ignored because they were already prepared to see the familiar expres-
sions. There are other examples, too, illustrating the same point: our
preconceptions prepare our minds to see what they want to see.
 Progress through analysis
It should come as no surprise, then, that analysing those concepts and
explanations that we’ve become accustomed to accept almost without
thinking, has been the source of the most remarkable breakthroughs
in almost all areas of thought. Indeed, the ruling paradigms that 
structure our thinking in many areas do so even when it’s clear they’re
no longer effective in explaining what we see.
In 1847, if Ignaz Semmelweis had allowed his thinking to be ruled
by the prevailing paradigm of his time, he would have agreed with his
colleagues that the high death-rate from puerperal, or childbed, fever
among women in labour in the General Hospital in Vienna was due to
the prevailing miasma that hung over the hospital. This was the con-
ventional wisdom accepted by all the medical authorities, even though
it failed to explain why there were ﬁve times more deaths in the doctors’
division of the hospital than there were in the midwives’ division. So,
he wondered, how could a miasma settling over the whole hospital
have such a strong differentiated effect?
Divesting himself of all the assumptions handed down by previous
generations, he set about analysing the facts he had gathered by com-
paring the evidence in the two divisions. Unblinkered by any precon-
ceptions, eventually he came to realise that the fever was a blood
disorder made worse in the doctors’ division by him and his students
coming straight from the autopsy room to examine women in labour.
Without disinfecting themselves they were transferring into the blood-
stream of their female patients infections they had picked up from
examining the ‘cadaveric matter’ in the autopsy room.
His refusal to accept the conventional wisdom of his day was to 
cost Semmelweis his job, his career and the respect of his peers, but
it became the inspiration for the work of Louis Pasteur and the great
advances in bacteriology that were to come. Without his courage the
development of this ﬁeld, considered by many to be the greatest single
advance in the history of medicine, might never have occurred.
24
Interpretation of the Question

Learning to Analyse
25
 A simple technique
In fact, looking at the way Semmelweis set about analysing the problem
is very useful in learning how to do it ourselves. Most of us can do 
this just as well: we have the abilities, if only we can develop the skills
to use them. What follows is a simple technique that you can learn
quickly. But ﬁrst:
Consider the question below and complete the exercise that follows
‘Advertisers seek only to ensure consumers make informed choices.’
Discuss.
Practice exercise
2
Interpreting the question
Do what you did with the previous practice exercise and underline what
you consider to be the key words. Then write a statement about the
meaning and implications of the question.
Most students underline words like ‘informed’ and ‘choices’. Some
underline ‘consumers’, even ‘advertisers’. But only those who feel con-
ﬁdent about their analytical skills underline the word ‘only’. Yet it not
only alerts the reader to the suspicion that this may be a question
largely about concepts, it also reveals the structure of the question.
Without it the statement is much weaker and the questions that are
raised are much less contentious. The claim that advertisers try to
inform the public is one that most of us would concede, albeit with
certain reservations. But to claim that this is all they do is far more
contentious and throws light on what we mean by the concept of
‘advertisement’. Without it we might have been willing to accept the
concept as if it raised no particular problem. Of course, it still might
raise no particular problem, but you have to be sure.
 In the next chapter
Given this, then, we have to work our way deliberately through three
simple steps to analyse the concept. Once you’ve done this a few times

and begin to feel conﬁdent about what you’re doing, you’ll be surprised
at just how quickly you develop your skills. You’ll be able to identify
subtle distinctions and shades of meaning, and you’ll bring to your
analysis the sort of perceptive insight that you might never have 
suspected you possessed.
26
Interpretation of the Question

27
4 The Three-Step
Technique – Steps 
1 and 2
In this chapter you will learn:
•
how we create our own concepts, even when we start out knowing
nothing about the subject;
•
how to start with your own examples and identify the common
pattern of characteristics that underlies each one;
•
how to analyse concepts into their essential characteristics.
The three-step technique for analysing concepts begins at the 
same point where Semmelweis began. In Step 1 we gather the evidence:
the examples of the concept we want to analyse. Then, in Step 2, we
analyse these examples to extract a common pattern of characteristics.
 Step 1:
Gather your typical examples
First, like Semmelweis, spend some time gathering the evidence. With
the idea of ‘advertisement’ clearly in your mind, list what you think
might be ﬁve or six of the most typical examples. Try to make them as
different as possible. Avoid those for the same type of product or
service, the same producer, and the same medium through which they
are advertised. In this way you’ll be able to strip away their differences
to reveal more clearly their essential similarities.
 Step 2:
Analyse your examples
Now, using these examples, create your concept. In other words, analyse
the common characteristics in each of your examples, isolating them so

that you can then put them together to form the concept. This is one of
those things we all know how to do, but most of us would be hard
pressed to explain just how we do it. In effect it’s simple pattern recog-
nition. By recognising the common pattern of characteristics that each
example possesses, we visualise what the concept might look like that
underlies all the examples.
It’s always surprising how many people are willing to argue that they
don’t know how to do this, and they’ve never done it in their lives, even
though it’s something they do every day, almost without thinking. When
it comes to the advertising question there are always a sizeable number
of students who claim they know nothing about advertising – certainly
not enough to analyse the concept into its essential characteristics.
But we all know much more than we let on. Even with the briefest
of acquaintances with a concept, after confronting just four or ﬁve
examples of it for the ﬁrst time, most people are quite clear about its
core characteristics. Indeed, they can be surprisingly dogmatic in a dis-
cussion with others as to what is and what is not an example of it just
minutes after declaring they knew nothing about it and had no idea
how to analyse it.
For example, in the following case the concept is represented by 
a number of unfamiliar abstract patterns. As a result we’re freed from
all those preconceptions that might otherwise have forced our think-
ing down pre-programmed routes. Nothing has been said about the
concept to lead us to believe that those who are authorities in these
sorts of matters think the concept has certain deﬁnite characteristics.
The concept is ours to form without assistance from anyone else.
28
Interpretation of the Question
Practice exercise
3
Analysing the concept
Examine in turn each of the ﬁgures on pp. 29–30. As you do this you will
see a concept emerge. For want of a better name, let’s call it an ‘Olic’.
Not all of the ﬁgures are olics, so you will have to form your idea of the
concept and then use it to distinguish between the olics and the non-olics.
Once you’ve looked at all the ﬁgures, answer the following:
1. Which of the ﬁgures are olics?
2. Analyse the concept of an olic and list three of the essential char-
acteristics common to all.

The Three-Step Technique – Steps 1 and 2
29
1
2
3
4
5
6

30
Interpretation of the Question
7
8
9
10
11
12

Answers
1.
1, 4, 5, 7, 10, 11.
2.
You could have chosen your three characteristics from any of the
following:
2.1
long rectangular base
2.2
a circle at the centre
2.3
a triangle surrounding the circle
2.4
a rectangle surrounding the circle and intersecting the 
triangle
As you can see from this, even though you haven’t come across 
an olic before, the concept emerges, leaving you in no doubt about 
its essential characteristics. Now consider the advertising question
again.
Question
‘Advertisers seek only to ensure consumers make informed choices.’
Discuss.
Go through the ﬁrst two steps, one at a time, deliberately and carefully.
Don’t rush them; they’re important. If you need to, look back at the
way we analysed the concepts of authority and power: you’re doing
exactly the same. It also helps if you can use a note-taking strategy,
like the pattern notes we used with the authority/power question. This
will allow you to capture your ideas effectively and follow your train of
thoughts quickly.
Step 1:
Gather your typical examples
First choose, say, ﬁve or six examples of advertisements, that you may
have seen on the television or in magazines.
Step 2:
Analyse your examples
Now do the same, with the concept of advertising, as you’ve just done
with the concept of olic. Using the question as your guide, ask your-
self if there are certain essential characteristics that are always pre-
sent, without which it would be wrong to describe something as an
advertisement.
From your examples it will no doubt be clear that they are all 
trying to persuade you in various ways. Yet, at the same time, it 
The Three-Step Technique – Steps 1 and 2
31

might be just as reasonable to conclude that they are also trying to
inform you. In some cases this might not amount to much, but in 
most advertisements it’s likely to be more than just the name of the
product.
In the light of this and the implications of the question that 
you revealed earlier, you should be asking yourself if an advertise-
ment is always persuasive, or can it be just informative without
attempting to get you to choose or act in one way or another? You
might conclude that almost all advertisements are informative, but
that’s not all they do. This analysis suggests there are two kinds of
advertisement: those that seem largely preoccupied with passing on
information, yet in fact are covertly manipulative; and those that are
overtly manipulative, in that their intention is obvious – to persuade
us as consumers to buy their product. Now you have a simple 
structure for the concept, which you can develop in the light of your 
examples in the same way we did for the olic and for the authority/
power question.
As you have no doubt already discovered, there are a number of ways
in which you can develop your analysis of ideas from this point. One
of the most useful is to organise your ideas into their logical opposites,
so that you create a continuum or a spectrum with opposites at either
end. The analysis into overt and covert manipulation is an example of
this. Although in terms of our examples they may not be exact logical
opposites, they work just as well in mapping out the territory. Then,
within this, you could use another method of organising your ideas by
thinking about the types into which your ideas break down. Of course
the number of types will depend on how many you can reasonably
think of.
As we have a spectrum of opposites in this question, ﬁrst take 
one side, then the other. You could begin with those advertisem-
ents which appear to be covertly persuasive. Some, like those con-
cerned with public information, say about a new tax or changes in 
regulations, or government health warnings about smoking or the use
of ﬁre alarms, seem to be entirely concerned with informing us.
However, that’s not to say there isn’t a message hidden in the infor-
mation. The government no doubt would like to persuade you not to
continue to smoke, or to organise yourself so that you pay your taxes
promptly.
Others clearly are intent on promoting the sales of their products.
But, nevertheless, they do this through a strategy of promoting aware-
ness about new products, new designs and new technology. New 
32
Interpretation of the Question

The Three-Step Technique – Steps 1 and 2
33
computer games, mobile phones, and new types of household goods
are all promoted, at least in the initial stages, by advertisements that
are designed to inform and to promote awareness of the new type of
product or design that’s on the market.
In the same way, at the other end of the spectrum, the overtly 
manipulative advertisements can similarly be broken down into their
types. At the very least they attempt to manipulate the consumer by
using information selectively to emphasise what’s good about their
product and to omit what’s bad. Others will use comments and infor-
mation taken out of context to promote their product, even though
these may be taken from reports and reviews that are highly critical of
it. An unfavourable report from a consumer association might contain
just a single sentence of praise, but it will be this that ﬁnds its way into
the advertisement.
Equally effective are advertisers who appeal to a convincing, 
though distorted, picture of what is taken for common-sense or
accepted values in our societies. Archetypal characters and scenarios
are created to evoke predictable responses that advertisers believe 
we will all share. Those promoting slimming products try to convince
us that everyone wants to be slim, that it’s associated with success,
and that if you’re overweight this is a sign of social failure and self-
indulgence.
But perhaps the most common strategy is for advertisers to sell 
their products by associating them with our strongest feelings, desires
and prejudices. In this way they can by-pass our reason, thereby short-
circuiting our ability to make conscious choices. As our understanding
of the psychology of the individual has grown, so too has the adver-
tiser’s capacity to tap into our deepest motivations and develop more
effective means of manipulation by exploiting the sex, status and 
prejudices of the consumer. Indeed, the most effective means of 
doing this, subliminal advertising, is now banned or regulated by 
many governments.
Answer
Once you’ve done this, look at the analysis in the structure on p. 34.
It’s unlikely that yours will be a lot different. You may use different
examples and you may have seen things that I haven’t, but the ﬁnal
structure is likely to be quite similar.
If you think you haven’t gone far enough in your analysis, or you
haven’t seen enough, don’t worry too much. You will get better at this
with practice. And you’ve still got Step 3 to come.

34
Interpretation of the Question
All but a few
=
informative
All = persuasive/
Some = only
concerned with
giving info.
Public
info.
e.g.
changes
in rates,
& regulations
re. taxes
Govt.
health
warnings
Smoking
Use of
domestic
fire alarms
manipulative 
Covertly
Overtly
Others give info. while
promoting their products
Info. about
New products
& technology
New designs
fashions/
clothes
House-
hold
goods
Computer
tech. &
Software
Telecoms
e.g.
mobile phones
Entertainment/
hobbies
Digital
technology
Music
systems
Video
recorders
TV
Cameras
Overtly
manipulative
Selective
use of info.
Salesman
emphasises
what’s good
about his
product but
omits the
bad
e.g. that
new car
accelerates
0–60 in 6 secs
but
not that it
has
a record of
rusting in
5yrs
Distorts
Takes
it out
of context
Association
associates
info. with
feelings &
desires
Sex
Prejudices
Status
Subliminal
manip.
through
association


Advertising

 In the next chapter
Now that you’ve mapped out the concept, the next step is to test it in
much the same way you did when you compared an olic with a non-
olic. In this way you will sharpen and tighten up the concept, and in
the process you will begin to see the best way of tackling the essay in
terms of the structure you should adopt.
The Three-Step Technique – Steps 1 and 2
35

36
5 Step 3 – Test your
Concept
In this chapter you will learn:
•
how to distinguish between those characteristics that are essential
to the concept and those that are merely accidental;
•
how to create a clear structure for the concept, which you can then
use to catch the relevant ideas and evidence as you research the
topic;
•
how to test and reﬁne your original analysis of the concept to uncover
subtle distinctions and shades of meaning, for which you will earn
high marks.
Now that you have your concept clearly analysed in a structure, it’s
time to test it. Like Semmelweis with his hypothesis, you may have the
overall structure broadly right, but there may be details that are wrong,
or subtle distinctions you haven’t seen. When Semmelweis formulated
his hypothesis he thought he and his students should disinfect their
hands by washing them in a solution of chlorinated lime each time they
came out of the autopsy room. In fact he was right about this, but it’s
quite possible he might have discovered, after testing it, that this was
ineffective and another solution was needed.
In much the same way, by testing your concept you will shake out
those characteristics that are essential and ditch those that are only
accidental to it. In the process you will have sharpened up your under-
standing of the core characteristics. As a result you’ll have a fairly well
deﬁned structure to catch the relevant ideas and evidence as you
research the topic, and in most questions you’ll probably ﬁnd that you
already have the broad structure on which you’ll be able to build the
plan of your essay.

To test it in this way you need only take some simple, but quite 
deliberate steps.1
 1
Borderline cases
First, with your structure in front of you try to think of a borderline
case, an example of advertising that doesn’t ﬁt comfortably within your
structure. Then analyse its characteristics to see if, in fact, it does ﬁt
after all. You may ﬁnd there’s more to this form of advertising than you
ﬁrst thought and it does, in fact, ﬁt within the structure. Alternatively,
after thinking through all the possibilities it may become clear that it
doesn’t ﬁt and you will have to adjust your structure to take account
of it.
For example, take a form of advertising that appears to be wholly
informative, say a bus or railway timetable. This is just a list of routes
with times for arrivals and departures. There may be no enticing
message at the top inducing you to ‘Come to sunny Bognor, children
travel free!’ There may be no catchy jingles encouraging you to ‘Let the
train take the strain!’ It might be just a simple notice containing travel
information, erected in a prominent position in a bus or train station.
So, the question we have to ask is, does this suggest that advertise-
ments can be just informative after all, or are we right in assuming that
behind all of this information lies the covert message that we ought to
travel by train or bus because it’s more convenient and easier, and
therefore less stressful than the alternatives? We could argue that in
putting out this sort of information, the intentions of the managers of
the bus and train companies are not just to give us information, but to
so impress us with their efﬁciency and convenience, that we will travel
this way more frequently.
 2
Contrasting cases
If this is the conclusion you come to, move to the second stage and
test your analysis again, this time by imagining an example that is the
complete contrast to this – one that is composed of nothing but factual
information, where the intention of the advertiser seems to amount to
nothing more than to inform the public.
For example, you might be travelling through the countryside one
summer afternoon, and you come into a small village. At the centre of
Step 3 – Test your Concept
37

the village is a small green, dominated by a huge tree. On this tree
someone has attached a small hand-written notice with the words:
August 31st.
The Annual Village Fête.
On the Village Green.
Starting 3pm.
There is no enticing message with promises of gifts and untold wealth
for the lucky person who wins the fête rafﬂe, not even the simple appeal
‘Come to the village fete!’ There is nothing but information.
In this case, if we are still to assume that it is the intentions of those
who put out the information, that deﬁne a notice as an advertisement,
then they are more deeply hidden here than those of the people who
framed the bus and railway timetables. Nevertheless, we might still be
justiﬁed in arguing that the writer of the village fête notice had one
unmistakable intention in putting up the notice: to encourage more
people to attend and participate. This would no doubt mean more
money for the local appeal to restore the church bells or to build an
extension to the old people’s day centre.
 3
Doubtful cases
If this is the case, we’ve now reached a stage where we seem to have
shaken out a core characteristic of advertising that was not sufﬁciently
clear in our original analysis. We seem to be saying that even though
an announcement is concerned with imparting information, with
advertisements this is only surface appearance. What matters above all
is the intentions of those who frame the notice. In an advertisement
they are suggesting or attempting to persuade us to adopt a certain
course of action. Whereas with a simple statement of information there
are no ulterior motives: they are just presenting information and
leaving it there.
Given this, we must move to the next stage and test the conse-
quences of adopting this distinction. We need to imagine cases in which
it would be difﬁcult for us to accept these consequences. Clearly, if
we’re right in thinking this way, then any announcement or statement
of fact that suggests a possible course of action is an advertisement.
For example, a factual statement made in a television programme that
smoking cigarettes is responsible for over 80 per cent of cases of lung
cancer, or a report by a health authority that a diet containing large
38
Interpretation of the Question

Step 3 – Test your Concept
39
quantities of salt is likely to lead to high blood pressure, are both sug-
gestive of a course of action. But it would be odd to describe either of
these two statements as an advertisement.
If this is right, then we have reached a point where we can reﬁne
another of the distinctions that was in our original analysis. Each time
we do this we inject more subtle shades of meaning for which we will
earn high marks from an examiner who reads the arguments we’ve
developed so far. You might consider arguing that these are not adver-
tisements in the normal sense, by virtue of their subject matter. They
are concerned with contentious political and social issues, not com-
mercial products and services that businesses or local communities are
trying to sell.
Indeed, those who suspect the intentions of the people making this
type of statement might describe it as propaganda. This might include
tobacco companies, who at one stage might have criticised govern-
ments for warning people about the dangers of smoking cigarettes. If
this is right, we might conclude that advertising and propaganda, in so
far as they share the same intention of trying to get people to choose
and act in a particular way, are of the same family, only distinguish-
able by their different subject matter.
As you can see, as we have worked our way through each of these
stages we have deliberately asked awkward questions to test and reﬁne
the distinctions we made in our original analysis. By doing so we’ve
not only revealed some important subtle shades of meaning, for which
the examiner will award us high marks, but in effect we have rehearsed
some of the more complex arguments we’ll develop when we come to
write the essay.
Assignment
1
Analysing concepts
•
Choose an essay question from one of the subjects you are studying.
As you’ve already done in the practice exercises, underline the 
keywords and write a short statement outlining the meaning and
implications of the question. This will help you clarify the key concept
in the question, which you will need to analyse.
•
Now analyse the concept deliberately, step by step. First, think up
three or four typical examples that reﬂect the way the concept is
Continued

40
Interpretation of the Question
Now that you’ve analysed the concepts and unwrapped the impli-
cations of the question, you’re in a better position to research the
essay. You should have a clear structure of the key issues raised. In a
great many questions these will develop out of your analysis of the 
key concepts in the question. In others they will come from your 
initial attempt to describe what you believe to be its meaning and 
implications. Either way, you cannot begin your research without
arming yourself with a clear idea of what the question is getting at 
and what you should be looking for when you begin to read and take
notes.
 In the next chapter
In the next chapter we will look at the best way of getting your own
ideas down, so that when you begin your research you know what
used in the question. Then analyse the core characteristics, those
that are common to each of your examples. This will take a little
thought, but remember the ‘olic’: your mind will have a fairly clear
idea of the concept. You’ve just got to bring it in front of your mind’s
eye so that you can list the core characteristics. You may only come
up with three or four, but that’s ﬁne.
•
Then, test it. Think up a borderline case, one that doesn’t easily
ﬁt. This will lead you to reﬁne your original concept. Other charac-
teristics may appear that are far more important, or you may adjust
one or two of those you’ve listed. Once this is done, test your new
reﬁned concept by imagining a contrasting case that seems to con-
ﬂict with it. This might lead you to adjust your concept again – either
that or you will realise that there’s more to your example and it does
ﬁt within your concept after all. Either way, after you’ve done this you
will no doubt feel that you’ve mapped out the concept: you’ve got all
the core characteristics sharply in focus.
•
Armed with this you can now go back and reveal more of the impli-
cations of the question by imagining a doubtful case. This will
throw a sharper light on the consequences of using the concept in
the way it was used in the question. At the end of this, as a result of
your careful analysis, you’re quite likely to have in front of you in
your notes the structure that will form the basis of the ﬁnal essay.

questions you want answered and you’re less likely to be dictated to
by the texts you read.
Note
1 A similar approach was ﬁrst used by John Wilson in Thinking with Concepts
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1963), which provided the initial
idea for this method.
Step 3 – Test your Concept
41

42
6 Brainstorming
In this chapter you will learn:
•
how to use more of your own ideas through effective brainstorming;
•
why it is important to separate analysis from brainstorming;
•
how to get clear answers from the texts you use;
•
how to avoid being dictated to by the authors you read.
Over the last ﬁve chapters we have seen how important it is to inter-
pret carefully the meaning and implications of questions. Learning to
do this well means we’re better able to see the structure our essays
should adopt in order to produce a full and relevant answer to the
question. What’s more, we’re less likely to overlook the signiﬁcant,
though subtle, issues that might be hidden in the question. Almost
inevitably, when we overlook the importance of doing this well, we end
up with essays that not only are confusing and poorly organised, but
miss the point.
In this lies the importance of the three-step technique. It develops
those skills you need in order to use your analytical abilities effectively.
Once you’ve used it two or three times, you’ll be conﬁdent that you
can interpret any question whose meaning and implications depend
upon a perceptive analysis of its concepts. But, as we saw, there are
other reasons why these skills and abilities are so important. If we
overlook them we’re likely to disqualify ourselves from the highest
marks on offer. Examiners are likely to assume that we simply haven’t
developed that thoughtful, reﬂective ability to question the assump-
tions we make when we use language.

 Analysis and brainstorming: 
two different things
What all of this amounts to is the importance of ‘staking your claim’ as
early as possible, indeed as soon as you get the question. This involves
two things: ﬁrst, as we’ve seen, thinking through your analysis of the
concepts and implications of the question, and second, writing down
your own ideas on the question. It’s now time to turn to the second of
these: brainstorming your own ideas. This means that you empty your
mind on the subject, without the aid of books. As quickly as possible
you track the ﬂow of your ideas as you note what you know about the
subject and what you think might be relevant to the question.
You might be tempted to think this sounds strikingly similar to what
we’ve just done; so much so that you’re tempted to assume that brain-
storming is just a part of the process of analysis. After all, they both
involve your own ideas, which you get down on paper as quickly as
you can without the aid of books. But they are, in fact, quite different,
and if you allow yourself to merge the two, skimping on one, you will
almost certainly have problems.
In analysis you’re unwrapping what’s already there. It may be buried
deep, but by a process of introspection, through which you examine
the different ways you use a concept such as authority or advertise-
ment, you come to see more clearly the contours of the concept, its
essential characteristics.
In contrast, with brainstorming you are going beyond the concept:
this is synthesis, rather than analysis. You are pulling together ideas,
arguments and evidence that you think may have a bearing on the
question’s implications that you have already revealed through your
analysis. So, whereas analysis is a convergent activity, brainstorming
is divergent, synthesising material from different sources. If you like,
one activity is centripetal, the other centrifugal. Confuse the two and
you’ll do neither well.
 The importance of brainstorming
If you overlook this distinction and merge the two activities, you’re
likely to struggle with two problems. First, if you abandon analysis 
too soon and embark on brainstorming, your focus will shift away 
from the implications of the question and the concepts it contains.
Consequently, you’re likely to ﬁnd that you don’t have the guidelines
Brainstorming
43

to direct your brainstorming into proﬁtable areas. You will ﬁnd a lot
less material and much of what you do unearth you will no doubt dis-
cover later that you cannot use, because it’s irrelevant.
On the other hand, if you analyse without brainstorming you’ll fail
to arm yourself with your ideas and what you know about the topic. As
a result, almost certainly two things will happen:
1
The authors you read for your research will dictate to you
Without your own ideas to protect you, it will be difﬁcult, at times
impossible, for you to resist the pull of their ideas and the persua-
siveness of their arguments. As a result you’ll ﬁnd yourself accept-
ing the case they develop and the judgements they make without
evaluating them sufﬁciently, even copying large sections of the text
into your own notes.
2
And, equally serious, you will ﬁnd it difﬁcult to avoid
including a great mass of material that is quite irrelevant
to your purposes
All of this material may have been relevant to the author’s purposes
when he or she wrote the book, but their purposes are rarely ident-
ical with yours. Nevertheless, having spent days amassing this large
quantity of notes, it’s most unlikely that you’re going to ﬁnd the
detachment somewhere to decide that most of these notes are irrel-
evant to your essay and you’ve got to ditch them. You’re more likely
to convince yourself that they can ‘be made’ relevant, and you end
up including them in a long, discursive, shapeless essay, in which
the examiner frequently feels lost in a mass of irrelevant material.
So, brainstorming should be seen as distinct from analysis. It needs to
be done straight after you’ve completed your analysis, which in turn
needs to be done as soon as you have decided upon the question you’re
going to tackle. This will give your subconscious time to go away and
rifﬂe through your data banks for what it needs before you begin to set
about your research.
44
Interpretation of the Question
If you don’t make clear your own ideas and your interpretation of the
implications of the question, your thinking is likely to be hijacked by the
author and his or her intentions. If you don’t ask your author clear 
questions you are not likely to get the clear, relevant answers you want.

 Empty your mind
Now that you’ve analysed the implications, use this to empty your 
mind on the question. Most of us are all too eager to convince our-
selves that we know nothing about a subject and, therefore, we have
no choice but to skip this stage and go straight into the books. But no
matter what the subject, I have never found a group of students, despite
all their declarations of ignorance and all their howls of protest, who
were not able to put together a useful structure of ideas that would
help them to decide as they read what’s relevant to the essay and
what’s not.
Once we tap into our own knowledge and experience, we can all
come up with ideas and a standard by which to judge the author’s point
of view, which will liberate us from being poor helpless victims of what
we read. We all have ideas and experience that allow us to negotiate
with texts, evaluating the author’s opinions, while we select what we
want to use and discard the rest.
Throughout this stage, although you’re constantly checking your
ideas for relevance, don’t worry if your mind ﬂows to unexpected areas
and topics as the ideas come tumbling out. The important point is to
get the ideas onto the page and to let the mind’s natural creativity and
self-organisation run its course, until you’ve emptied your mind. Later
you can edit the ideas, discarding those that are not strictly relevant to
the question.
Brainstorming
45
Practice exercise
4
Empty your mind
Taking the advertising question, empty your mind on the subject, using the
analysis you’ve already created as your basic structure, but not restricting
yourself to that if you think there are other ideas that are connected.
The most important point to remember is not to put unnecessary brakes
on your mind; allow it to run freely over the issues, making connections,
analysing issues and arguments, and pulling ideas and evidence together.
Therefore, don’t worry too much about relevance at this stage.
Although it is bound to be different, the structure that results from
brainstorming is likely to be similar to the structure outlined on 

46
Interpretation of the Question
‘Advertisers seek only to ensure
that consumers make informed
choices.’ Discuss
Concept of advertisement
Just informative
e.g. Railway t/table
Æ
but intention
No
catchy
jingles
No persuasive
messages
Just
info.
Routes
Times
Platform
numbers
depts/arrivals
to demonstrate
it’s more convenient,
efficient
& less stressful to
travel by train
e.g.
10 ¥ more
dangerous to
travel by car
e.g.
Fête
notice
=
nothing
but info.
but
intention =
to encourage
people to attend
– in order to
raise funds for
local causes

Information
=
surface appearance
What matters = intention
To suggest/persuade us to
adopt certain course of action
but
Not all such attempts =
adv. – depends on subj.
matter
Some are
prop’da
partic. when involves
pol. & soc. issues
e.g.
health warning about
cig. smoking
cigarette comps at one time
accusing govts of prop’da
Advertising
=
Commercial
prods & services
of comps &
local comms.
➀

‘Advertisers seek only to ensure
that consumers make informed
choices.’ Discuss
Covert v. Overt.
manipulation
All but a few =
informative
Some only
concerned
with giving
information
Public
info.
Govt. health
warnings
Smoking
use of
domestic
fire alarms
At times more than implied e.g. Govt.
aim = to shock re. dangers of smoking
& drink driving
implied suggestion =
we sh/change our behaviour
Changes in
regulations
& rates of
taxation
Others give info. while
covertly promoting
their products
But
not the “only”
thing they do
Re ➂
New products
& technology
Computer
tech./software
Telecoms
e.g.
mobile phone
technology
Entertainment
Hobbies
Digital
tech.
Videos
Music
systems
TV
Cameras
But rarely just information
Suggestion = we can’t afford
not to keep up with progress
New designs
Fashions
Clothes
H/hold
equip.
e.g. washing
machs
microwaves
Suggestion =
can’t afford to
allow o/selves
to fall behind
friends + neighbours
Conspicuous
consumption
You are what
you own
➁
Brainstorming
47

‘Advertisers seek only to ensure
that consumers make informed
choices.’ Discuss.
But not the ‘only’ thing they do
Overt manipulation
Selective use of info.
Distorts
re. ➃
Tells you what’s good
about the product
but
omits the bad
e.g.
car accelerates
0–60 in 6 secs.
but
not that it has
a record of rusting
in 5yrs.
e.g. latest
printer can
do more
than any
other printer
on the market
but
printer cartridge
costs 5 ¥ as
much as any
other printer
Takes info. out
of context
e.g.
consumer
report
e.g. reviews
by art, theatre
& literary critics
promoters use only
the complimentary
passages to promote
their products
Association
Associates info. with feelings & desires
Sex
assoc. product
with sexual
desires e.g.
car/perfume/
clothes
Prejudices
Racial
Sexual
stereotypes
Class
accents
Weight
Status
Respect for auth.
e.g.
Prestige of
science
Popular/respected
pub. figures
e.g. Sports/
TV
personalities
Subliminal
manip. thro’ assoc’n
Reduce
shoplifting
‘I will not steal’
‘I will be honest’
Ø by 30%
Dangers
=
Pol. & Soc.
manipulation
re.
A. Huxley
Brave New W’ld Revisited
Prom.
comm
interests
➂
48
Interpretation of the Question

‘Advertisers seek only to ensure
that consumers make informed
choices.’ Discuss
But not the ‘only’ thing they do
Overt manipulation
Distorts
Archetypal characters
& scenarios
To evoke predictable responses
Slim
o/weight
assoc. with
social failure
& self-indulgence
=
Effective
On average thin
people in better
paid jobs with
better career
prospects
To find
dishes
unclean
when they
come out
of dishwasher
=
major life
crisis
neighbour
& unclean
kitchen
floor
Induces
us to feel
bad about
ourselves
Discontent fuels
consumerism
Appeals to some
imagined social
consensus
‘basic’ or ‘shared’
values
We all
want to
drive fast
cars
All desperate
to keep up
with neighbours
Fashion
conscious
fear of
being
seen as
out of
date
Myths created
& sustained by
media to sell
products
e.g.
that ‘housewives’
paranoid about
whiteness of their
wash & cleanliness
of their kitchens
Prob. = antibacterial
prods = less effective
 bacteria adapts
+
Childn’s immune
systems = vulnerable
to bacteria they
haven’t confronted
e.g. ≠in asthma
Brainstorming
49
➃

pp. 46–9. You might use different examples, different evidence, and you
might have thought of different points, but the overall structure, based
on the principal issues the question raises, will be broadly the same.
Of course, not everything in these notes will ﬁnd its way into your
ﬁnal essay: they simply may not be strictly relevant. Brainstorming
depends upon your ability to follow your ideas and record them quickly
without close attention to relevance. Your internal editor will exert his
or her inﬂuence later. For now, the key is to allow your mind to make
all the connections, contrasts and extensions of ideas without slowing
it up with concerns about relevance.
 In the next chapter
In the next chapter you will learn how greater ﬂexibility in your
approach to note-taking will help you catch more of these ideas and
use more of your mind’s potential.
50
Interpretation of the Question

51
7 Flexibility
In this chapter you will learn:
•
how to use your skills more ﬂexibly to get the best out of your 
abilities;
•
how to capture more of your most creative ideas;
•
how to make better use of your mind’s potential in your essays.
At this point it’s worth making the ﬁrst of a number of concerted
appeals for ﬂexibility in your pattern of study.
We’re all concerned with getting the best out of our abilities. Indeed
most of us have abilities we haven’t even used before. In order to get
at these, you’ve probably experimented with different ways of planning
your essays to ﬁnd a method that suits you. But the key to it is to be
ﬂexible. Choose note-taking, planning and reading strategies that are
appropriate for the job you have to do. This way you will ﬁnd the right
key that will unlock your abilities. Don’t just stick to one strategy that
you’ve always used even though you know it isn’t always as much help
as you would like it to be.
For example, if you were on holiday and your car broke down in an
unfamiliar region of the country, and you decided to look in the Yellow
Pages for the phone number of a local mechanic, it would not be the
most effective reading strategy to begin at page one and read word-
for-word through the rest of the book. Obviously, you would scan the
pages for the right information. This is sensible, but when we tackle
similar tasks in our studies we tend to stick to the familiar, reliable
method of word-for-word reading, that we’ve always used for every
task we’re set.

 Pattern notes
The same applies to our note-taking and planning techniques. One of
the most effective methods for the brainstorming stage is the method
known as ‘pattern notes’, as shown in the examples so far. Rather than
starting at the top of the page and working down in a linear form in
sentences or lists, you start from the centre with the title of the essay
and branch out with your analysis of concepts or other ideas as they
form in your mind.
The advantage of this method is that it allows you to be much more
creative, because it leaves the mind as free as possible to analyse 
concepts, make connections and contrasts, and to pursue trains of
thought. As you’re restricted to using just single words or simple
phrases, you’re not trapped in the unnecessary task of constructing
complete sentences. Most of us are familiar with the frustration of
trying to catch the wealth of ideas the mind throws up, while at the
same time struggling to write down the sentences they’re entangled in.
As a result we see exciting ideas come and go without ever being able
to record them quickly enough.
The point is that the mind can work so much faster than we can write,
so we need a system that can catch all the ideas it can throw up, and
give us the freedom to put them into whatever order or form appears
to be right. The conventional linear strategy of taking notes restricts us
in both of these ways. Not only does it tie us down to constructing com-
plete sentences, or at least meaningful phrases, which means we lose
the ideas as we struggle to ﬁnd the words, but even more important,
we’re forced to deal with the ideas in sequence, in one particular order,
so that if any ideas come to us out of that sequence, we must discard
them and hope we can pick them up later. Sadly, that hope is more often
forlorn: when we try to recall the ideas, we just can’t.
The same is true when we take linear notes from the books we read.
Most of us ﬁnd that once we’ve taken the notes we’re trapped within
the order in which the author has dealt with the ideas and we’ve noted
them. It’s not impossible, but it’s difﬁcult to escape from this. By 
contrast, pattern notes give us complete freedom over the ﬁnal order
of our ideas.
It’s probably best explained by comparing it to the instructions you
might get from somebody if you were to ask them the way to a partic-
ular road. They would give you a linear list of instructions (e.g. ‘First,
go to the end of the road, then turn right. When you get to the trafﬁc
lights, etc.’). This forces you to follow identically the route they would
52
Interpretation of the Question

take themselves. If you don’t, you’re lost. By contrast, pattern notes
are like a copy of a map or the A to Z of a large city: you can see clearly
the various routes you can take, so you can make your own choices.
Freeing the mind to work more imaginatively
Indeed, those who advocate pattern notes argue that the brain just
doesn’t work in a linear manner and that conventional ways of plan-
ning and taking notes are, therefore, not the most useful. They force
the mind to operate in artiﬁcial ways, thereby releasing only a small
fraction of its potential. If the brain works best within the clusters 
of key concepts in an interlinked and integrated manner in the way
we’ve already seen, it makes sense to structure our notes and our word
relations in the same way, rather than in the traditional linear manner.
This is borne out by those students who’ve adopted the method as
an integral part of their pattern of study. Some of my most exciting and
rewarding experiences as a tutor have come from seeing students use
this method. For most of them this is the ﬁrst time they realise that
education can be an exciting business in which they have a valuable
and signiﬁcant role to play in producing their own insights and per-
ceptions seen only by them in their own unique way.
By leaving them as free as possible to write down their own ideas as
they come to them, it injects more creativity into their work. It also
gives their own ideas greater prominence, so that when they come to
research them they’re better prepared to evaluate and select from what
they read.
Indeed the ﬂexibility of this strategy is almost unlimited. You can go
on adding connections and new ideas as and when they occur to you.
So, unlike many other systems, rather than stunting your abilities, 
it gives the mind the freedom to work more imaginatively, creating 
new analyses, seeing unexpected connections and contrasts, and 
synthesising ideas from different sources.
Better for unstructured situations
It’s particularly useful when we have to work in unstructured situ-
ations, unlike linear notes, which work well in the structured tasks like
taking notes from a book. For example, pattern notes are useful when
we’re trying to make notes from recall and the ideas come tumbling
out thick and fast. The same is true of taking notes during a class dis-
cussion, where ideas might be thrown about quite rapidly and, unlike
those in a book, you have no control over them. You can’t go back to
get something down you may have missed, as you can in your book by
Flexibility
53

re-reading a difﬁcult passage. Therefore you need a note-taking 
strategy that is fast and ﬂexible.
But perhaps its most notable advantage over the traditional methods
of note-taking lies in tackling the more creative tasks, like interpreting
questions and planning essays. Not only does it allow you to keep up
with the ideas as they come at you rapidly from all angles without any
apparent predictability, but it also enables you to work on several lines
of discussion simultaneously. Then, once the pattern is completed, 
all the ideas are readily available and all you need to do is to make a
decision as to the ﬁnal order in which to develop the arguments.
In one study, undergraduates at Oxford University, who began to use
these techniques, were able to complete their essays in a third of the
time they usually took, while at the same time receiving higher marks.
 Brainstorming and ﬂexibility
This appeal for greater ﬂexibility to get the most out of our abilities
applies just as much to brainstorming as it does to the note-taking
strategy we use to catch our ideas. Of all the things we need to do to
produce an essay that will earn the highest marks, this is probably the
one we are most likely to dispense with as we rush forward, impatient
to get on with our reading.
But ideas come from many different sources, and they only come to
the mind that is prepared to receive them. Almost everyone has had
the experience of looking up an unfamiliar word in a dictionary, and
then, in the days and weeks that follow, seeing and hearing the word
everywhere – on advertising hoardings, in newspapers and magazines,
on the radio and television, even from friends. But this is not because
it is simply being used more frequently by people, it’s just that we’ve
prepared our minds to notice it.
The same applies to ideas: once we have prepared our minds we
begin to pick up, from a range of different sources, ideas and evidence
that we can then use in our writing. This explains why it’s so import-
ant to carry a notebook with you, so you can record the ideas 
whenever they come, from whatever source, rather than allow them to
disappear into the ether.
In this context it’s worth re-emphasising that ideas are organic: they
grow and develop through time. If at an early stage you have allowed
these ideas to come tumbling out onto the page, the subconscious will
go away to rifﬂe through your data banks for more ideas and evidence,
54
Interpretation of the Question

making connections and analysing your arguments and concepts in
ways that you just hadn’t suspected when you set out to think about
the issues. As a result, when you next come to look at your ideas, you’ll
be surprised by just how far they have developed.
And each time you work on them you set the mind a new set of prob-
lems to go away and solve, which develops your ideas still further. Con-
sequently, by the time you’ve ﬁnished your interpretation, research and
planning, and you begin to write the ﬁrst draft, you have come a very
long way indeed. Your ideas are more developed, subtler and far better
supported by evidence, than they were when you ﬁrst started out.
Flexibility
55
Assignment
2
Brainstorming a question
Take the question you worked on in the ﬁrst assignment. You’ve already
underlined the key words and concepts in the question and you’ve
analysed what you think are its main implications. Now brainstorm the
question, getting all your ideas down as quickly as possible in pattern-
note form.
Give yourself a time limit, say 30 minutes, to get it all down. Then put
it aside. After a day or so, come back to it and add any ideas you’ve come
up with since. Some ideas may push themselves into your conscious
mind before that, so note them, don’t lose them.
Now that you’ve brainstormed the question you’ve not only tapped
into ideas that are genuinely your own, but by clarifying what you know
and what questions you want your books and articles to answer, you
are less likely to waste time taking mounds of irrelevant, unusable
notes. But the success of this depends upon using the appropriate skills
for the job, rather than tying yourself inﬂexibly to a way of working
that prevents you from using your mind’s potential to process your
ideas imaginatively.
 In the next chapter
Nevertheless, there is still one last thing you need to be sure about
before you launch into your research. You must be clear about the
range of abilities the examiner wants to see you use.

56
8 Using the Right Ability
In this chapter you will learn:
•
how to make sure we answer the question using the abilities the
examiner wants to assess;
•
how to interpret accurately the ‘instructional verbs’ in questions.
So far we have seen how important it is to interpret the question 
carefully, because it tells us the structure our essay should adopt for
us to deal relevantly with all the issues it raises. With this clear in our
mind we can avoid taking masses of irrelevant notes, which are likely
to ﬁnd their way into our essays, making them irrelevant, shapeless
and confusing.
But we also made it clear at the beginning that there is one other 
thing that the question tells us: the range of abilities the examiner 
wants to see us use. This is normally made clear through what is 
known as ‘instructional verbs’. Given below is a list of short deﬁnitions
of those most frequently found in questions, which should help you
avoid the common problems that arise when you overlook or misinter-
pret them.
 Instructional verbs
Analyse
Separate an argument, a theory, or a claim into its
elements or component parts; to trace the causes 
of a particular event; to reveal the general principles
underlying phenomena.

Compare
Look for similarities and differences between two 
or more things, problems or arguments. Perhaps,
although not always, reach a conclusion about which
you think is preferable.
Contrast
Set in opposition to each other two or more things,
problems or arguments in order to identify clearly
their differences and their individual characteristics.
Criticise
Identify the weaknesses of certain theories, opinions
or claims, and give your judgement about their merit.
Support your judgements with a discussion of the 
evidence and the reasoning involved.
Deﬁne
Outline the precise meaning of a word or phrase. 
In some cases it may be necessary or desirable to
examine different possible, or often used, deﬁnitions.
Describe
Give a detailed or graphic account, keeping to the
facts or to the impressions that an event had 
upon you. In history this entails giving a narrative
account of the events in the time sequence they
occurred.
Discuss
Investigate or examine by argument; sift through the
arguments and the evidence used to support them,
giving reasons for and against both sides; examine
the implications. It means playing devil’s advocate by
arguing not just for the side of the argument that you
support, but for the side with which you may have
little sympathy.
Evaluate
Make an appraisal of the worth of something, an
argument or a set of beliefs, in the light of their truth
or usefulness. This does involve making your own
value judgements, but not just naked opinion: they
must be backed up by argument and justiﬁcation.
Explain
Make plain; interpret and account for the occurrence
of a particular event by giving the causes. Unlike 
the verb ‘to describe’, this does not mean that it is
Using the Right Ability
57

58
Interpretation of the Question
sufﬁcient to describe what happened by giving a nar-
rative of the events. To explain an event is to give the
reasons why it occurred, usually involving an analy-
sis of the causes.
Illustrate
Explain or clarify something by the use of diagrams,
ﬁgures or concrete examples.
Interpret
Reveal what you believe to be the meaning or signif-
icance of something; to make sense of something that
might otherwise be unclear, or about which there may
be more than one opinion. So usually this involves
giving your own judgement.
Justify
Show adequate grounds for a decision or a conclu-
sion by supporting it with sufﬁcient evidence and
argument; answer the main objections that are likely
to be made to it.
Outline
Give the main features or the general principles of a
subject, omitting minor details and emphasising its
structure and arrangement.
Relate
This usually means one of two things. In some ques-
tions it means narrate a sequence of events – outline
the story of a particular incident. Alternatively, it can
mean show how certain things are connected or
affect each other, or show to what extent they are
alike.
Review
Examine closely a subject or a case that has been put
forward for a certain proposal or argument. Usually,
although not always, this means concluding with
your own judgement as to the strength of the case.
However, if it involves examining just a subject or a
topic, and not an argument or a proposal, it will mean
just examining in some detail all the aspects of the
topic.
State
Outline brieﬂy and clearly the facts of the situation or
a side of an argument. This doesn’t call for argument

Using the Right Ability
59
 In the next chapter
On the face of it this should be the end of a simple story: get the
instructional verbs right and we won’t make the mistake of answering
the question in the wrong way. However, although this is right, it
doesn’t go far enough. Unless we acknowledge the difference in the
assumptions about the nature of education at this level, in sharp con-
trast with what has gone before, we’re unlikely to change the way we
work. Instead, we’ll just tack a few new techniques and skills onto our
Practice exercise
5
Instructional verbs
Gather together as many past examination papers for your course as you
can, at least enough to give you a representative sample.
For each paper, list the questions in three columns: those that ask for a
descriptive and factual answer (the ‘what’, ‘how’ and ‘describe’ type of
question); those that ask for an analytical answer (the ‘outline’, ‘analyse’,
‘compare’ and ‘contrast’ type of question); and those that ask you for a
discussion of the issues (the ‘criticise’, ‘evaluate’ and ‘discuss’ type of
question).
Once you’ve done this, calculate the percentage of each type of question
on each paper.
or discussion, just the presentation of the facts or the
arguments. Equally it doesn’t call for a judgement
from you, just reportage.
Summarise
Give a clear and concise account of the principal
points of a problem or an argument, omitting the
details, evidence and examples that may have been
given to support the argument or illustrate the
problem.
Trace
Outline the stages in the development of a particular
issue or the history of a topic.

existing pattern of study and then quietly abandon them when we
realise they don’t ﬁt within the way we work. In turn, this will deprive
us of those skills we need to access and develop the abilities that are
assessed at this level.
60
Interpretation of the Question

61
9 The Range of Abilities
In this chapter you will learn:
•
that university education is less preoccupied with learning and 
recalling the facts, than with developing the skills and abilities that
are crucial to your subject;
•
the importance of adjusting to a different style of learning at university;
•
about the range of abilities the essay is designed to assess.
It’s at this point that most of our problems in studying begin. Although
we will talk about this again later when we come to the writing stage,
it’s worth confronting it twice, so important is the problem.
Most students at university are handicapped in one form or another
by the restricted notion of education they bring with them. Unfortu-
nately, we spend most of our time in schools believing that education
is largely about ‘knowing things’, that a clever person is one who can
remember a vast number of isolated facts. If you spend, say, 13 years
in compulsory education from the age of 5 to 18, during at least 11 of
these you come to believe that education is largely, if not solely, con-
cerned with learning the facts of every subject you study, dispensed by
the authorities of education, the teachers and the textbooks.
This perception of education is reinforced not just by the syllabuses
we study, the examinations we take and the teaching styles of some of
our teachers, but by a whole range of social and cultural conventions,
not least the ever popular TV quiz show, in which contestants are asked
to recall isolated items of information.
 A passive style of learning
The result is that we all assume a passive style of learning. We sit
silently in class absorbing the truths, the right answers that we come

to believe should be our paramount concern. The teacher dictates while
we silently note. The best student, then, is one who is quiet, who
patiently and uncritically records word-for-word all that the teacher
says. He or she is not there to question, to discuss or to challenge, but
to absorb the teacher’s statements, to imitate authority and to repro-
duce it accurately without alteration. They know success in the exam-
ination depends upon how effectively they can trade the facts for
marks. And that’s all there is to it.
But if that were the case the last thing we would be setting as a form
of assessment would be essays, because they are notoriously unre-
liable. They assess a wide range of abilities – to analyse, to criticise, to
discuss, to synthesise ideas, to construct consistent arguments, to use
evidence, to evaluate, as well as to remember the facts. However, the
more abilities you try to assess, the less reliable that form of assess-
ment is for any one ability alone. And, despite all our attempts to reduce
the subjective element in marking, most markers would acknowledge
that it’s impossible to remove it entirely from essay marking. 
Other forms of assessment that target just one ability, however, have
a much better record. For example, the most reliable form of assess-
ment, the multiple choice question paper, boasts 100 per cent reliabil-
ity. Using this we are guaranteed that each student’s paper will be
assessed with absolute objectivity and all will be judged on exactly the
same criteria. Indeed, for marking purposes the human element can be
removed entirely with computerised answer sheets.
It follows, then, that if we were really assessing our ability to recall
the facts, as so many of us have come to believe, the essay would be
the very last form of assessment we would use. Far better to use the
reliable, though restricted, multiple choice question paper. Here we
know we have absolute objectivity, albeit at the cost of assessing only
a restricted range of abilities.
 Challenging authority
However, as most of us come to realise, we’re not just assessing our
ability to recall what we’ve heard in class or read in our books. After
years of compulsory education in which we believe that our main task
as students is to learn the facts and reproduce uncritically what the
authorities say in each subject, we reach university and we’re suddenly
expected to challenge the opinions we hear, to analyse, discuss, and
have opinions of our own.
62
Interpretation of the Question

Not surprisingly, most students ﬁnd it difﬁcult to make sense of 
this. They have learnt that if they use their study skills in a particular
way it will bring success. After all, that’s exactly what has happened 
so far in their education. Therefore, understandably, they continue 
to back what they believe to be a winner: they continue to take notes
in the same way, to read in the same way and to write essays in the
same way.
However, they face different examinations, with different assump-
tions about the nature of learning, requiring a different pattern of study.
Unless this is explained to them, they will continue to get poor marks
for their essays. And they will have no idea why, when all they’re doing
is just what they’ve done successfully in all their work before. Con-
fused and dispirited, many will go through the whole course believing
that while they might have been up to taking the examinations at
school, they’re just not up to these at university. Whereas, in fact, it is
not that they lack the abilities, or the motivation, or even the capacity
to understand, but just that they lack the right skills to unlock their
potential.
 The cognitive domains
It should be clear, then, that by setting essays as a mode of assess-
ment, particularly in university courses, our aim is not just to assess
the limited ability to understand and recall, but to assess a much
broader range of abilities. All syllabuses are written in the context of
six ‘cognitive domains’ – six intellectual abilities. Listing them from the
simplest to the most complex they are as follows:
1
Recall
2
Comprehension
3
Application
4
Analysis
5
Synthesis
6
Evaluation
While many of us ﬁnd it difﬁcult to shake off the belief that exam-
inations are set exclusively to assess our recall and understanding
(abilities 1 and 2), most syllabuses at universities are designed largely
to assess abilities 4, 5 and 6. The questions set use instructional 
verbs like ‘Discuss’, ‘Criticise’, ‘Analyse’ and ‘Evaluate’, to assess our
The Range of Abilities
63

abilities to analyse difﬁcult concepts and arguments, to synthesise
ideas and evidence drawn from a range of different sources, to con-
struct consistent arguments, and to discuss and evaluate the ideas and
arguments of others.
These are not the ‘What’, ‘How’ and ‘Describe’ questions that would
be more appropriate for assessing our ability to recall information. This
would assume that there are right answers, whereas in fact there are
none at this level. As one tutor at the University of Oxford makes clear
in the guidance he gives to his students:
It is never a question of coming to the ‘right’ answer (though you can
expect a tutor to defend his or her position if it differs from yours) but
rather of demonstrating that you understand what the issue is about and
that you can produce a well-reasoned, balanced and critical argument
concerning it.1
64
Interpretation of the Question
Practice exercise
6
Syllabus objectives
Get a copy of the syllabus for each of the courses you’re taking. Then,
underline the passages that describe the syllabus objectives. For this
exercise ignore the description of the course content, the topics the
course will be covering. You’re interested just in the abilities that the
course sets out to develop, which will be assessed in the examination.
See if you can assess what proportion of the marks in the examina-
tion will be awarded for the recall of knowledge and for the other abil-
ities. Some syllabuses will give the actual percentages, others are not so
helpful. If this is the case, then ask your tutor. Ultimately, of course, the
best guide is the type of question that’s set on the examination paper.
So, again, look at past papers.
Even so, we still have to show that we understand and can recall the
facts, the core knowledge at the heart of the subject. But for most 
syllabuses that employ essays as a mode of assessment this comprises
as little as 30–40 per cent of the mark. Examiners want to see us use
our abilities, so even though we may come to a conclusion that the
examiner disagrees with, this should not affect our mark, because we’re
not working with a syllabus that assumes there are indisputable right

answers that have to be traded for marks. Examiners should be more
concerned with the way we have analysed the issues, discussed them,
played devil’s advocate, used evidence to support our arguments, and
come to a measured evaluation that’s backed up by our discussion.
In the Sociology Department at the University of Harvard, students
on one ﬁrst year course are left in no doubt that the course’s main
objective is to develop a particular range of abilities and skills that are
central to sociology as a discipline:
This course is intended to help students to develop an understanding of
and ability to do social science analysis – to appreciate what a research
problem is, how to pose it, what alternative answers might be, how to
evaluate relevant evidence, and generally to understand the logic of estab-
lishing knowledge about how society works. . . . The emphasis in the
course is on developing writing skills, the ability to formulate and design
research projects, and the ability to critically evaluate empirical work in
the social sciences.2
As this shows, most university departments now realise that you don’t
learn how to think like a scientist or a historian by simply learning 
scientiﬁc or historical facts. In literature courses, recognition of this
has led universities to allow students to take their set texts into the
examination room. This has largely done away with that horrifying, yet
futile, annual spectacle of thousands of candidates frantically memo-
rising huge tracts of text for the exam, all of which they will certainly
forget within three weeks of taking it.
 In the next chapter
With this in mind, we have to create a new pattern of study in line with
these changed assumptions. In the next chapter we will look at the
importance of this and what we can do to bring it about.
Notes
1 Eric Eve, A Guide for Perplexed Students, 4: Tutorial Essays (Oxford:
University of Oxford, 2000), pp. 3–4.
Available at: http://www.hmc.ox.ac.uk/
2 Mary Waters, Sociology, 128: Paradigms of Social Inquiry (Cambridge, Mass.:
University of Harvard, 2000).
The Range of Abilities
65

66
10 Changing our Pattern
of Study
In this chapter you will learn:
•
about the causes of many of our most common study skills 
problems;
•
about the need to change our pattern of study.
In the light of these changed assumptions about the purpose of learn-
ing tasks like essay writing, it should be obvious that we now need 
a new pattern of study – we need to use our study skills differently,
more appropriately for the tasks we’re set. If we don’t, if we retain the
assumption that education is exclusively about ‘knowing things’, then
certain things will follow. We will be cursed with the sort of problems
of which most of us are all too aware.
 Common problems
Note-taking
In our note-taking we will continue to argue, quite reasonably on 
these misplaced assumptions, that when we take notes in tutorials,
seminars and lectures, or from the source material we use for research,
we cannot leave anything out, because these are the facts, the right
answers, and if we omit them we will not have all the facts we need 
to pass the examination. As a result we take vast quantities of 
verbatim notes. Even worse, they’re unstructured, because all we’re
doing is recording them accurately – we’re not processing them in any
way for fear of getting them wrong.
Consequently, we’re left with masses of unusable notes, most of
them irrelevant to the questions we’re going to have to answer in the
examination. This presents us with the most daunting of problems,

which leaves even the most resourceful student dispirited when it
comes to revising from them for the examination. In effect, those stu-
dents with a will of steel will revise by starting from page 1 and con-
tinuing until they have gone through them all. In the end their grasp
of the subject is likely to be confused, with little structure and organ-
isation. But this is only the fate of a few. The more reckless majority
will decide to ditch half their notes, gambling that what they’ve covered
will come up in the exam.
Reading
But now consider the impact of these assumptions on other areas of
our pattern of study. Quite reasonably we will argue that when we come
to read books and articles we cannot exercise any ﬂexibility by adopt-
ing different, more appropriate reading strategies, like skimming and
scanning, for the different types of passages and texts we have to read.
We argue that the text must be read word-for-word, otherwise we might
miss something vital.
Remember, under these assumptions we believe that these are 
the facts in the passage before us. If we fail to read it carefully we are
likely to miss a vital fact that we will need to trade for marks in the
exam. Reading, then, becomes a slow, time-consuming activity. 
Along with note-taking it takes up nearly all of our study time. Con-
sequently, we never have sufﬁcient time to read around our subject, to
make comparisons with what others are saying, and to explore our
understanding.
Writing
Much the same goes for our essay writing. No matter how many times
we might be told by our tutor that we must try to put things in our own
words, this makes no sense if we accept the assumption that education
is dominated by authorities, and our job is just to understand and recall
the facts.
We argue, again quite reasonably, that here is the text, the author-
ity, the source of right answers, so if we were to spend time putting it
into our own words, rather than copy passages from it accurately, we
would be changing what is already right. We would be making it less
right, in effect we would be getting it wrong. So, far better to plagia-
rise the text and put large chunks directly into our own work. And no
matter how many times students are told not to plagiarise, because
this is literary theft, a form of cheating that constitutes just about the
most serious offence in academic writing, they still continue to do it,
Changing our Pattern of Study
67

because they’re convinced that these are the facts and their role is to
trade them for marks, if they’re to succeed.
 Plagiarism
In fact plagiarism illustrates the point we’ve been making in this
chapter perfectly. As we’ve seen, one of the causes of it is this belief
that exams are passed as a result of giving right answers. But unfor-
tunately all too often the solution to plagiarism reﬂects the same
assumption, thereby compounding the original problem. We argue that
the only way to avoid plagiarism is to give a reference for every idea
quoted, paraphrased or borrowed in any way. In other words, students
come to realise that to get good marks they must continue to trade for
marks as many right answers as possible, only now in the form of 
references.
Worse still, they are given the impression that there is nothing new
in education. It reduces academic work to the far less signiﬁcant exer-
cise of just recycling received opinion. There is no room for original-
ity, or at least you are not required to produce it. All that’s asked is that
you show evidence of hard work by breaking up every paragraph with
ﬁve or six references to works from which you have derived your ideas.
The only challenge this presents for most students is how they can
throw as many references in as possible at minimum cost. Inevitably
they gather the impression that education is more concerned with what
they think than how they think.
One mature student explains the problem in his student magazine,
In my opinion the most important purpose of higher education is to 
teach the student how to think in a sophisticated manner. Sadly . . .
universities . . . cannot resist the temptation to teach the student what to
think as well – not the best way to produce enquiring and innovative
minds.
There seems to be a tradition . . . that an opinion is somehow more valid
if someone has said it before: I can see a justiﬁcation for this, in that if
an opinion has been in the public domain it has been subject to public
scrutiny, but I suspect that the motivation has more to do with the ‘hero-
innovator’ notion: if the person who has said it is important enough it
must be right.
When I write essays I am required not only to give facts and ideas, but
to quote exactly where I found them: if I simply thought of them myself
68
Interpretation of the Question

does that mean they are not valid? Generally, I feel a strong pressure to
reﬂect back the opinions and prejudices of the course team: maybe this
is not justiﬁed, but that’s how it feels. I am reminded of what Henry
Beeching wrote in the 19th century concerning the Master of Balliol:
‘I am Master of this College: What I don’t know isn’t knowledge.’1
Of course, most students know that they should be eschewing this
assumption that their paramount concern is to impress the examiner
by exchanging facts, in the form of references, for marks. But plagia-
rism seems vague and all-encompassing: like the medieval crime of
witchcraft, just about anything seems to qualify. Inevitably, then, they
play it safe and give a reference for anything that might seem to deserve
it: out of fear they are driven into this regressive, primitive form of
learning. In Chapter 30 we will look at the problem of plagiarism and
how you can avoid it without just becoming a recycler of what others
have said.
 Creating a new pattern of study
In the next chapter we will set about creating a new, more ﬂexible
pattern of study that will equip you to tackle the different chal-
lenges presented by essay writing at university. But the success of this
will depend upon how much you’re willing to accept the need to
change.
We only ever really learn when we have a genuine need. If we retain
the assumption that education is exclusively about knowing things,
there will be no need to change. The new ﬂexibility and skills in reading,
note-taking and writing will only be tacked on to our present pattern
of study as we go about studying in the way we’ve always studied. And
in time, of course, they will be silently dropped, because in the light of
our unchanged assumptions, they are irrelevant.
It’s worth reminding ourselves that the real joy and challenge of 
education lies not in how much we can remember, but in what we 
learn to do with our minds. Out of this come students who can gen-
uinely think for themselves, capable of real innovation that pushes
back the frontiers of knowledge. As B. F. Skinner describes it, edu-
cation is that which ‘survives when what has been learnt has been 
forgotten’.2
Changing our Pattern of Study
69

70
Interpretation of the Question
 The next stage
Now you should be clearer about what the question is getting at and
what you want from the texts you’re about to read. You will also know
the range of abilities the examiner wants to see you use when you come
to answer the question. As you move into the research stage this should
be reﬂected in your pattern of study – in the way you use your skills,
like reading and note-taking.
In the next stage you will learn how to use these skills to ensure you
do more than just recall what you’ve read and imitate your authors.
You will be shown how to use your skills to process ideas in more
Assignment
3
Planning your research
When you were given the essay question you are working on you were
no doubt also given a reading list by your tutor, composed of books and
journal articles. You won’t have to read every text on the list, so before
you begin your research you will need to prioritise them. First, categorise
them into those whose approach is general and those that are speciﬁc.
Then consider, in each of these categories, which appears to be the most
useful. Some may appear too general, others too speciﬁc. In some cases
you will need to skim and scan the texts before you’re sure. In the next
stage you will be shown how to do this.
However, now that you know the meaning and implications of the
question, you will know what you’re looking for. Generally tutors try to
indicate the pages you will ﬁnd most helpful, but this is not always pos-
sible. For most questions it helps to begin with the more general text
and move to the speciﬁc, but this will depend upon your prior knowl-
edge of the topic. Either way, you will still have to narrow down the spe-
ciﬁc sections you need to read. In the next stage you will be shown ways
of doing this.
The same applies to the journal articles. Your interpretation and brain-
storming of the question will have given you a much clearer idea of the
speciﬁc issues raised and where you need to devote more of your time.
In most cases, of course, we’re not lucky enough to ﬁnd that the author
of an article is examining exactly the issue we need to think about. So,
again, you will have to prioritise and be selective about the sections that
are most useful.

complex and sophisticated ways. You will learn how to analyse 
a passage and extract the structure from what you read, and how to
criticise and discuss the ideas and opinions of authors, rather than just
reproduce them accurately. As a result you will be better equipped to
produce ideas that are genuinely your own.
Notes
1 Lem Ibbotson, ‘Teach us how, not what, to think’, Sesame, August/
September 2000 (The Open University).
2 B. F. Skinner, ‘Education in 1984’, New Scientist, 21 May 1964, p. 484.
Changing our Pattern of Study
71

This page intentionally left blank 

Stage 2
Research

This page intentionally left blank 

INTRODUCTION
We have now reached the point where we can conﬁdently set about our
research. We’ve interpreted the meaning and implications of the ques-
tion, in the course of which we’ve analysed the key concepts involved.
From there we’ve brainstormed the question using our interpretation
as our key structure. As a result, we now know two things: what ques-
tions we want answered from our research; and what we already know
about the topic. The latter is important if we are to graft the ideas we
come across onto our own understanding and make them our own.
Only in this way will we be able to use these ideas skilfully and per-
suasively when we come to write.
Lastly, we’ve identiﬁed clearly the range of abilities the examiner
wants to see us use. Otherwise, as we saw, there is a danger that we
will assume the question is largely about demonstrating that we under-
stand and can recall the facts about the topic in the question, rather
than showing we can use the higher cognitive skills to analyse its impli-
cations, synthesise arguments and evidence from different sources,
discuss and argue consistently, and criticise and evaluate the ideas 
we use.
This means that we must reorganise our pattern of study. Otherwise
we will continue to use our skills, like note-taking and reading, in the
way we have always used them: to meet the demands of questions that
test the simpler cognitive skills. In effect, if we don’t reorganise it, we
will be preparing ourselves for the wrong exams: for those we have
already taken, rather than for those we are about to take. In this stage,
therefore, we will examine the three key skills in research (reading,
note-taking and organisation), showing how we can reorganise our
pattern of study to meet the newer demands of the higher cognitive
skills.
 Reading
To use these skills effectively in our reading we will see that it’s import-
ant to read purposefully: to be clear about why we’re reading a par-
ticular passage so that we can select the most appropriate reading
strategy. Many of us get into the habit of reading every passage 
word-for-word, regardless of our purpose in reading it, when in fact it
might be more efﬁcient to skim or scan it. Adopting a more ﬂexible
approach to our reading in this way frees up more of our time, so that
75

we can read around our subject and take on board more ideas and
information.
It also gives us more time to process the ideas. We will see how
important this is if we are to avoid becoming just ‘surface-level proces-
sors’, reading passively without analysing and structuring what we
read, or criticising and evaluating the arguments presented. We will
examine the techniques involved in analysing a passage to extract its
structure, so that we can recall the arguments, ideas and evidence more
effectively. We will also learn the different ways we can improve our
ability to criticise and evaluate the arguments we read. In this way we
can become ‘deep-level processors’, actively processing what we read
and generating more of our own ideas.
 Note-taking
Many of the same issues resurface when we consider note-taking. 
As with reading, we will see that it’s important not to tie ourselves 
to one strategy of note-taking irrespective of the job we have to do. 
We will see that for different forms of processing there are the most
appropriate strategies of note-taking: linear notes for analysis and
structure, and pattern notes for criticism and evaluation. Cultivating
ﬂexibility in our pattern of study helps us choose the most effec-
tive strategy and, as a result, get the most out of our intellectual 
abilities.
But our problems in note-taking don’t end there. The best notes help
us structure our own thoughts, so we can recall and use them quickly
and accurately, particularly under timed conditions. In this lie many of
the most common problems in note-taking, particularly the habit 
of taking too many notes that obscure the structure, making it difﬁcult
to recall. We will exam ways of avoiding this by creating clear unclut-
tered notes that help us recall even the most complex structures accu-
rately. Given this, and the simple techniques of consolidating notes, we
will see how revision for the exam can become a more manageable,
less daunting task.
Finally, if our notes are going to help us recall the ideas, arguments
and evidence we read, as well as help us to criticise and evaluate an
author’s arguments, they must be a reﬂection of our own thinking. We
will examine the reasons why many students ﬁnd it difﬁcult to have
ideas of their own, when they read and take notes from their sources,
and how this affects their concentration while they work.
76
Research

 Organisation
Needless to say, if we are to make all these changes successfully, we
will have to make sure we organise our work in the most effective way.
In the ﬁnal chapters of this stage we will look at how to reorganise our
retrieval system to tap into our own ideas and to pick up material wher-
ever and whenever it appears. We will also examine the way we organ-
ise our time and the problems that can arise if we fail to do it effectively.
Indeed, if we ignore either of these, we make it difﬁcult for ourselves
to get the most out of our abilities and to process our ideas well. Even
though most of us routinely ignore it, organisation is the one aspect
of our pattern of study that can produce almost immediate improve-
ments in our work.
Introduction to the Second Stage
77

78
11 Reading Purposefully
In this chapter you will learn:
•
how to use your time more effectively by reading only what you need
to read;
•
about the importance of being clear about your purpose in reading
the text in order to select the right reading strategy;
•
how to read more efﬁciently with more ﬂexible techniques.
Having got our own ideas down on paper, the concepts analysed, and
a clear idea of what we’re looking for, we are now in a position to 
begin our research, conﬁdent that we can identify what’s relevant and
what’s not.
 Knowing what you’re looking for
But before you hit the books, a warning! It’s all too easy to pick up a
pile of books that appear vaguely useful and browse among them. This
might be enjoyable, and you might learn something, but it will hardly
help you get your essay written. Now that you’ve interpreted the 
question and you’ve brainstormed the issues, you have a number of
questions and topics you want to pursue. You are now in a position to
ask clear questions as you read the books and the other materials
you’ve decided to use in your research.
Nevertheless, before you begin you need to pin down exactly the 
sections of each book that are relevant to your research. Very few of
the books you use will you read from cover to cover. With this in 
mind, you need to consult the contents and index pages in order to
locate those pages that deal with the questions and issues you’re 
interested in.

For most books this is all you will need to do. However, there are
those books that have very misleading chapter titles, which tell you
very little about the content of each chapter. The same books may also
have a short and unhelpful index. In this case you’ll ﬁnd it helpful to
read the ﬁrst paragraph of each chapter, where the authors explain
what they will be doing in this chapter, and then the last paragraph,
where they explain how they’ve done it.
Failing this, and this will be rare indeed, you can skim each
page, picking up a general impression of the contents of each chapter.
Alternatively, if you know the speciﬁc problem you want the book 
to address, you can scan each page swiftly, looking for those key-
words through which you can ﬁnd the answers. It’s surprising just 
how effective both of these strategies can be, but they will only work
well if you’ve already pinned down the issues clearly in the inter-
pretation stage.
Reading Purposefully
79
In a nutshell
Check:
•
the contents page;
•
the index;
•
chapter headings;
•
the ﬁrst and last chapters;
•
summaries at the end of the chapters and at the end of the book;
•
the ﬁrst and last paragraphs in each chapter.
•
Skim the text for a general impression of the contents, key ideas and
structure.
•
Scan for keywords.
Through this process you should be able to answer a number of import-
ant questions which will determine exactly how you use the text:
1
Is it relevant?
2
If so, what sections?
3
What approach does it take?
•
Is it too difﬁcult?
•
Or too technical?

Practice exercise
7
Reading purposefully
Faced with the following situations, decide which reading strategy would
best suit your purpose.
1
You’re given a 50-page report the night before a conference you’re
attending. Do you skim, scan, or read word-for-word?
2
You’re attending a press conference held by the head of state of a
country which has a very poor record on human rights. To prepare
yourself you refer to a detailed report on the country’s judicial system
compiled by Amnesty International. In particular you want to know
how many political prisoners are at present detained without trial and
the length of time they’ve been in custody. Do you skim, scan, or read
word-for-word?
This underlines again the importance of ﬂexibility in the way we
approach our work. We have three different reading strategies to
choose from, each one appropriate to a different type of job.
1
We can read carefully word-for-word when we’re reading a text
or a passage we know is of central importance to our work, from
which we want to extract in our notes the detailed structure of the
main points and subsections.
2
In contrast, when we just want to pick up the general impression
of the contents, the key ideas and the broad structure of a text or
an article, then we would do better to skim it.
3
And, if we’re just looking for an answer to a speciﬁc question, say
a date, a name, a set of ﬁgures, or what the writer says about a
certain subject, then we need to scan it.
The key is ﬂexibility and, in turn, the key to this is to read with 
a clear purpose in mind, so you can choose the most appropriate 
strategy.
80
Research
Continued

Answers
1
Skim to get the general impression of the contents.
2
Scan to see what Amnesty says about political prisoners and their
detention.
3
Skim to identify those things that were discussed at the last meeting
and were to be raised again at this meeting.
4
Not wanting to miss anything, you read word-for-word.
5
You read them carefully word-for-word, like you would a legal docu-
ment, until you are completely clear one way or the other whether
you qualify.
 In the next chapter
We can all see the common-sense of scanning the Yellow Pages in
search of the telephone number for a mechanic when our car has
broken down; but in our academic work it seems much more difﬁcult
to use the same common-sense judgement. With many of us, as we’ve
already seen, the most likely reason is that we still harbour the belief
that to pass an exam we must accumulate as many right answers as
Reading Purposefully
81
3
You’ve been asked to take over the job of secretary at your local
cricket club, because of the sudden illness of the current secretary.
You’ve got to compile an agenda for the next meeting by reading the
minutes of the last meeting. Do you skim, scan, or read word-for-
word?
4
After ordering it some months ago you receive a copy of the latest
novel by your favourite author. You start reading it on the train going
to work. Do you skim, scan, or read word-for-word?
5
You’re studying at a university on a scholarship grant. But the terms
of the grant are changing next year, which might mean you no longer
qualify. You’ve just received a copy of the new regulations. Do you
skim, scan, or read word-for-word?
Now compare your answers with those below.

possible, and the only way of doing this is to use just one reading strat-
egy: read every passage word-for-word. This, in turn, affects the quality
and depth at which we process the ideas we read, as we’ll see in the
next chapter.
82
Research

83
12 Processing the Ideas
In this chapter you will learn:
•
how to improve your recall of what you read;
•
how to read analytically, to take the structure out of a passage;
•
how to read critically.
Ultimately, the quality of the work we produce will depend upon 
the quality of our internal processing of the ideas we read. There are
‘surface-level processors’, who read passively, that is without actively
analysing and structuring what they read, and without criticising 
and evaluating the arguments, evidence and ideas the author pre-
sents. In most cases this sort of student will have poor recall of what 
they read, and in general they will be restricted to just ‘describing’ 
the ideas.
If the question asks them to ‘evaluate’, or ‘assess critically’ a certain
claim, they will, more often than not, ﬁnd themselves answering the
question inappropriately, employing the lower ability range, in which
they merely ‘describe’ an argument, or ‘outline’ a particular case. As
we have seen, this is a mistake that derives from overlooking the
importance of the instructional verbs. But more often than not it has
its origin in a reading habit that drives students into the lower ability
range, when they least want to be there.
 Multiple readings
To avoid this problem, and to ensure that you’re able to do ‘deep-level
processing’, it may be necessary to accept that you need to do two or
three readings of the text, particularly if it is technical and closely
argued.

Reading for comprehension
In your ﬁrst reading you might aim just for the lower ability range, for
comprehension, just to understand the author’s arguments. It may be
a subject you’ve never read about before, or it may include a number
of unfamiliar technical terms that you need to think about carefully
each time they are used.
Reading for analysis and structure
In the next reading you should be able to analyse the passage into 
sections and subsections, so that you can see how you’re going to
organise it in your notes. If the text is not too difﬁcult you may be 
able to accomplish both of these tasks (comprehension and analysis)
in one reading, but always err on the cautious side, don’t rush it.
Remember, now that you’ve identiﬁed just those few pages that you
have to read, rather than the whole book, you can spend more time
processing the ideas well.
Reading for criticism and evaluation
The third reading involves criticising and evaluating your authors’
arguments. It’s clear that in this and the second reading our process-
ing is a lot more active. While in the second we’re analysing the passage
to take out the structure, in this, the third, we’re maintaining a 
dialogue with the authors, through which we’re able to criticise and
evaluate their arguments. To help you in this, keep the following 
sorts of questions in mind as you read.
•
Are the arguments consistent or are they contradictory?
•
Are they relevant (i.e. do the authors use arguments they know
you’ll agree with, but which are not relevant to the point they’re
making)?
•
Do they use the same words to mean different things at 
different stages of the argument (what’s known as the fallacy 
of equivocation)?
•
Are there underlying assumptions that they haven’t justiﬁed?
•
Can you detect bias in the argument?
•
Do they favour one side of the argument, giving little attention to
the side for which they seem to have least sympathy? For example,
do they give only those reasons that support their case, omitting
those that don’t (the fallacy of special pleading)?
•
Is the evidence they use relevant?
84
Research

•
Is it strong enough to support their arguments?
•
Do they use untypical examples, which they know you will have to
agree with, in order to support a difﬁcult or extreme case (what’s
known as the fallacy of the straw man)?
•
Do they draw conclusions from statistics and examples which can’t
adequately support them?
This sounds like a lot to remember, and it is, so don’t try to carry
this list along with you as you read. Just remind yourself of it before
you begin to criticise and evaluate the text. Having done this two or
three times you will ﬁnd more and more of it sticks and you won’t need
reminding. Then, after you’ve ﬁnished the passage, go through the list
again and check with what you can recall of the text. These are the sort
of questions you will be asking in Stage 5 (Revision) about your own
essay before you hand it in. So it’s a good idea to develop your skills
by practising on somebody else ﬁrst.
One last caution – don’t rush into this. You will have to give your-
self some breathing space between the second reading and this ﬁnal
evaluative reading. Your mind will need sufﬁcient time to process all
the material, preferably overnight, in order for you to see the issues
clearly and objectively. If you were to attempt to criticise and evaluate
the author’s ideas straight after reading them for the structure, your
own ideas would be so assimilated into the author’s, that you would
be left with no room to criticise and assess them. You would probably
ﬁnd very little to disagree with the author about.
Processing the Ideas
85
Assignment
4
Reading for analysis and structure
Read the following passage, ﬁrst for comprehension, and then for analy-
sis and structure. Leave it for a few hours, even a day or so, then go back
to it to take out the structure in normal linear notes. If you’re unsure
about how to do this, read the ﬁrst part of Chapter 13.
But remember, your aim is to take out the hierarchy of points, the main
sections and the way they break down into subsections. Cut out as much
unnecessary detail as you can. Where there are examples or explana-
tions, and you think you might need reminding of them, brieﬂy note them
in one or two words to act as a trigger for your memory, and nothing
Continued

Passage
Understanding Totalitarianism
In the 1930s writers and historians struggled to come to terms with
a system of government that seemed to have no precedent in history.
Unlike liberal democracies, totalitarianism appeared to have no ﬁxed
characteristics, everything was in ﬂux. The most one could say about
the regimes in the Soviet Union and Nazi Germany was that they 
possessed certain ‘contours’,1 to use Leonard Schapiro’s description.
Three of these are worth examining.
The most obvious one to observers in the 1930s was the leader,
who appeared to dominate everything. Although he was the leader
of a state composed of the usual institutions of government, he 
successfully subjugated these to his own personal will. Aware that
those who wielded power through these institutions could pose a
real threat to his authority, he side-stepped them, setting up an alter-
native structure staffed by his own supporters who owed their posi-
tion to his patronage. With their future prospects in his pocket their
loyalty was beyond question.
The same strategy was used to inﬂuence the relationship between
the leader and his party. On the face of it the leader owed everything
to the party, after all it had brought him to power. But it also posed
a serious challenge to his authority. It was respected by its members
as the guardian of the ideology to which the leader was ultimately
accountable. Therefore, like the state, the party had to be subjugated
86
Research
more. Choose words or succinct phrases that you know will make the
connections to the information you want.
Keep in mind that the most important part of this exercise is to have
a clear, uncluttered model of the passage. You will not achieve this if you
allow yourself to be tempted into noting unnecessary detail. Your mind
will have self-organised in the interval between reading and noting, pro-
ducing a very clear structure of the passage in your subconscious, so you
must develop the skills to tap into this to get an accurate picture of it
clearly and simply on paper.
You won’t do this if you continually tell yourself that you must note
this and this and this, otherwise you’re bound to forget them. Don’t make
it difﬁcult for your mind by doubting its capacity to remember details that
don’t need to be noted.

to the will of the leader, until the ideology became whatever the
leader said it was.
But to achieve both of these the leader had to appeal over the
heads of the party and the state to the people directly. For this he
needed to generate a charismatic authority built on the power of his
own personality. In an age of mass communication this offered a
source of authority that far exceeded the more usual sources that lay
in tradition or in the institutions of government. But it needed a vast
propaganda machine that would project the leader not only as the
benevolent father of his people, but as an infallible leader whose
judgement could not be challenged, what Koestler describes in Dark-
ness at Noon as the ‘infallible pointsman’.2
What’s more, the leader had to demonstrate to his people that 
he was virtually omnipotent, omniscient, and omnipresent – all-
powerful, all-knowing and ever-present, respectively. In the Soviet
Union the economic and industrial progress achieved in each suc-
cessive ﬁve-year plan suggested that anything was possible under
his leadership. He seemed to be not only benevolent, but inﬁnitely
wise and knowledgeable on just about any subject – history, art, lit-
erature, architecture, philosophy, military theory, any subject on
which people could have an opinion. He also appeared to be ever-
present, using air travel to be in two or three places on the same day.
His picture was always there on massive hoardings and in every 
government ofﬁce.
Yet perhaps the most important source of his charismatic author-
ity and the most convincing evidence of his infallibility lay in the fact
that he had survived the internecine struggles for power within his
own party, outmanoeuvring his opponents, who could also lay claim
to being the rightful guardians of the ideology. Indeed, at times the
ruthlessness with which he dispatched his opponents seemed to be
evidence in itself of his charismatic infallibility. In one night on 30
June 1934 Hitler removed Ernst Röhm, his most dangerous rival, and
his followers in the SA, and with it earned the respect not just of big
business and the army, but, one suspects, of the people too. In the
same ruthless manner Stalin removed the threats of Trotsky,
Kamenev, Zinoviev and ﬁnally Bukharin.
Nevertheless, for the leader to maintain his monopoly of power 
in the long term, more was needed than just respect for his 
personality. Control had to be exerted not just over people’s poli-
tical convictions, but over their private moral beliefs and opinions 
too. Intolerant of all dissent, a moral consensus was created and 
Processing the Ideas
87

artiﬁcially imposed on the people, claiming to sum up all the values
it believed were valid. No values were irrelevant or beyond its total
grasp. In this way, unlike in liberal democracies, the distinction
between public and private was effectively destroyed. What was gen-
erally regarded as private and moral was also public and political.
Censorship and intimidation penetrated the most personal
recesses of private life, effectively destroying the distinction between
public and private. One of the most popular jokes in Moscow in the
1930s concerned a hostess who had invited ten of her closest friends
for a dinner party. Aware of her moral and political obligations to the
state, she submitted the names to the secret police for their approval,
fully expecting the list to be returned with two names added – the
secret police needed their observers to be present to record who said
what to whom. But to her dismay the list was returned unamended
– there was no need to add two of their own. Unknown to her they
were already there, among her own trusted friends.
Propaganda assailed individuals on the streets, from the radio, and
in their newspapers, while indoctrination shaped the values of the
future generation in schools, with the leader dictating the books that
could be read, the content of lessons and the teachers who would
teach them. Likewise, all independent institutions, like the church or
professional bodies, capable of throwing doubt on the consensus,
were suppressed.
The only writing and artistic expression that was allowed had 
to conform to the ofﬁcially approved form. In the Soviet Union 
many of those who were the most creative inﬂuences in the 1920s,
responding to the challenge of revolutionary art by developing 
new styles and artistic forms, rapidly became enemies of the people,
perishing in the Gulag or falling silent. In their place emerged 
new controls on the form that literature and the arts could take. 
A. A. Zhdarnov, in his famous speech at the First Soviet Writers’ 
Congress in 1934, outlined the task facing writers in the new 
revolutionary state and the method of ‘socialist realism’3 that all
writers were to adopt.
Nevertheless, this sort of control over the private moral side of
people’s lives could only be maintained by keeping everything
around them moving – by creating an atmosphere in which people
were uncertain, fearful and suspicious of everyone else. This is 
the third ‘contour’, that of mass mobilisation. Unlike liberal democ-
racies, where, during times of emergencies like wars, there is a 
temporary mass mobilisation of effort to achieve the ultimate 
88
Research

goal of defending the nation successfully, in totalitarian regimes 
this is permanent, what Hannah Arendt describes as ‘permanent
impermanence’.4
She argues that totalitarian leaders were driven by ‘perpetual
motion mania’ to keep everything around them in a process of con-
stant change and uncertainty to secure and enhance their power. In
this way the leader could guarantee uncritical acceptance of his poli-
cies and the sacriﬁces he demanded from his people, particularly 
in terms of their lost individual rights – their right to free speech, to
information, freedom of the press, freedom of movement, and their
freedom from arbitrary arrest.
To achieve this, two types of ultimate goal were used as the justi-
ﬁcation for mass mobilisation. The ﬁrst, the achievement of certain
ideal goals, like social equality or rapid industrialisation, was used
to justify the worsening economic and social conditions. The leader
argued that if there were to be jobs for all, free education and health
care, and improvements in living standards, sacriﬁces had to be
made – present consumption had to be cut to invest in the future.
With everyone working to achieve such noble ideals, uncritical
acceptance of the leader’s policies was virtually guaranteed.
But probably the most popular pretext was national defence. This
could take two forms: against the external and the internal aggres-
sor. The external aggressor in turn could be defensive or expan-
sionist. In either case it was frequently ﬁctitious. The nation, it was
argued, faced a serious threat to its survival from a foreign power,
although this could change with the most bewildering about-turns,
as occurred in 1939 when Soviet Russia signed the non-aggression
pact with Nazi Germany.
However, this one example illustrates equally well the expansion-
ist ambitions that lie behind such pretexts, in that the 1939 pact also
divided Poland between the two totalitarian regimes. The justiﬁca-
tion here was the supposed international plot to weaken the nation
by creating internal pressures that would ultimately lead to its break-
up. The only effective remedy, it was argued, was an expansionist
policy.
For example, the Nazi Government in Germany in the 1930s fre-
quently used the Treaty of Versailles as evidence of an international
conspiracy to contain Germany, when the rapidly rising German
population needed more, not less, territory in which to expand. This
was the policy of ‘Lebensraum’, which provided the pretext for mass
mobilisation and the series of diplomatic and military initiatives 
Processing the Ideas
89

to push back the frontiers of Germany – the demilitarisation of 
the Rhineland in 1936, the annexation of Austria in 1938, the 
Sudetenland in 1938, the rest of Czechoslovakia (Bohemia and
Moravia) in 1939, and ﬁnally Poland in 1939.
Like that of the external aggressor, the pretext of the internal
aggressor could be equally ﬁctitious. People were constantly
reminded that the nation was under continual threat from the ruth-
less activities of counter-revolutionaries within the state, who were
dedicated to forcing them into slavery, into the servitude of other
nations. Their agents were supposed to be everywhere – working on
the next bench in the factory, sitting next to you in the works’
canteen, or living in the apartment opposite.
With these three contours the totalitarian leader could keep every-
thing around him moving, in a state of constant uncertainty, leaving
people more willing to depend blindly on the leader’s supposed
infallibility. In this way he could avoid being trapped within the ﬁxed
rules and systems of accountability of institutional government
which would have ensured the regular use of power and authority.
Consequently, under these conditions, to talk about the state is fun-
damentally misleading: there was no state. As Schapiro says about
the term ‘totalitarian state’, this is a contradiction in terms. Indeed,
given these three contours it’s doubtful whether we are justiﬁed in
describing this as a ‘system’ of government at all.
Answer
Understanding Totalitarianism
3 contours – everything in ﬂux
A
The Leader
1.
Leader & the state
Leader subjugates the state
(a)
posed a real threat to his authority
(b)
alternative structure – his own supporters
90
Research

2.
Leader & the party
Subjugated the party – ideology = whatever the leader says 
it is
(a)
owed his rise to power to the party
(b)
party = guardian of the ideology
3.
Charismatic authority
(a)
vast propaganda machine
–
‘infallible pointsman’ (Koestler)
(b)
omnipotent, omniscient, omnipresent
(i)
all-powerful
e.g.
ﬁve-year plans
(ii)
all-knowing – on any subject
(iii)
ever-present
e.g.
air travel & hoardings
(c)
outmanoeuvred opponents
e.g.
Hitler v. Ernst Röhm
Stalin v. Trotsky, Kamenev, Zinoviev & Bukharin
B
Control over private morality
No distinction between public & private – what is private & moral
= public & political.
e.g.
Moscow joke, 1930s
1.
propaganda
–
on streets/radio/newspapers
2.
Indoctrination in schools
–
textbooks/lessons/teachers
3.
Suppression of independent institutions
e.g.
churches/professional bodies
4.
Writing/artistic expression = in the approved form
e.g.
Zhdarnov – First Soviet Writers’ Congress 1934 –
‘socialist realism’
Processing the Ideas
91

C
Mass mobilisation
Atmosphere of uncertainty & suspicion – ‘permanent imper-
manence’ (Hannah Arendt)
Therefore, uncritical acceptance of leader’s policies + sacriﬁces he 
demanded.
2 types of ultimate goal:
1.
Ideal goals
e.g.
social equality, rapid industrialisation
2.
National defence – frequently ﬁctitious
(a)
external:
(i)
defensive
e.g.
1939 Nazi/Soviet non-aggression pact
(ii)
expansionist
–
international plot to weaken the nation through
internal pressure
e.g.
Treaty of Versailles & ‘Lebensraum’ –
German expansion in 1930s
(b)
internal:
–
supposed threat from counter-revolutionaries who
were thought to be everywhere
D
Result =
1.
No ﬁxed rules & systems of accountability
2.
No state – Totalitarian state = contradiction in terms
3.
No ‘system’ of government at all
Your notes may not contain as much detail as there is in these, but you
shouldn’t be discouraged by that. Your primary aim in this exercise was
to create notes that reﬂect your understanding of the main structure
of the passage as clearly as possible. Therefore, if you’ve been able to
extract the three ‘contours’ along with some of the hierarchy of 
sub-points, then you’ve done well.
92
Research

As you know now, this is not an easy exercise. It will take a few 
more attempts at different passages to get it right, but you will see 
quite dramatic improvements in a short time as long as you remain
clear about what you’re trying to achieve. While you were reading 
the passage your mind self-organised to produce a structure out 
of what you read. Your main goal, then, is to reproduce this in your
notes.
 In the next chapter
Having done this, you should then be able to recall the structure accu-
rately as long as the main points are triggered off by memorable key
words. In the next chapter we will examine ways to improve this and
other aspects of our note-taking.
Notes
1 Leonard Schapiro, Totalitarianism (New York: Praeger Press, 1972).
2 Arthur Koestler, Darkness at Noon (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1947).
3 A. A. Zhdarnov, On Literature, Music and Philosophy (London: Lawrence &
Wishart, 1950).
4 Hannah Arendt, The Origins of Totalitarianism (London: Allen and Unwin,
1966).
Processing the Ideas
93

94
13 Note-taking for
Analysis and Structure
In this chapter you will learn:
•
how to increase your ﬂexibility in note-taking to make better use of
all your intellectual abilities;
•
how to choose the most appropriate strategy for the different levels
at which we process ideas: comprehension, analysis and criticism;
•
how to use linear notes to produce clear, uncluttered structures of
the passages you read.
 Choosing the right note-taking strategy
By now, no doubt, you will have realised that for each of these differ-
ent levels of processing (analysis/structure, and criticism/evaluation)
there is the most appropriate note-taking strategy.
Of course, this should come as no surprise. It endorses what we’ve
said a number of times already, that ﬂexibility and choosing the most
appropriate strategy is the key to effective essay writing. For example,
we have already found in the interpretation stage that pattern notes are
the most effective strategy for generating and recording the ﬂow of ideas,
when we brainstorm a question. And the same is true here: pattern and
linear notes are each appropriate for different types of processing.
Nevertheless, there will always be a text or an article which we’re
using that seems to fall between two strategies, neither of which alone
seems to do the job we want to do. On these occasions I ﬁnd myself
taking the highly structured linear notes ﬁrst, and then creating a set
of pattern notes to give me a broad overview of the issues involved. In
this way you can get around the problem of seeing nothing but detail;
of not being able to see the wood for the trees.

But for most of the jobs we have to do, the choice is clear: linear
notes for analysis and structure; and pattern notes for criticism and
evaluation.
 Note-taking for analysis and structure
As we’ve already discovered, our aim here is to identify and extract the
hierarchy of ideas, a process which involves selecting and rejecting
material according to its relevance and importance.
Although by now this sounds obvious, it’s surprising how many 
students neglect it or just do it badly. As with most study skills, 
few of us are ever shown how best to structure our thoughts on 
paper. Yet there are simple systems we can all learn. Some students
never get beyond the list of isolated points, devoid of all structure. 
Or, worse still, they rely on the endless sequence of descriptive 
paragraphs, in which a structure hides buried beneath a plethora of
words.
This makes it difﬁcult to process ideas even at the simplest level.
Without clear structures we struggle just to recall much more than
unrelated scraps of information. As a result students do less well in
exams than they could have expected, all because they haven’t learnt
the skills involved in organising and structuring their understanding.
They sit down to revision with a near hopeless task facing them –
mounds of notes, without a structure in sight, beyond the loose list of
points.
This could be described as the parable of two mental ﬁling systems.
One student uses a large brown box, into which she throws all her
scraps of paper without any systematic order. Then, when she’s con-
fronted with a question in the exam, she plunges her hand deep into
the box in the despairing hope that she might ﬁnd something useful.
Sadly, all that she’s likely to come up with is something that’s, at best,
trivial or marginally relevant, but which she’s forced to make the most
of, because it’s all she’s got.
On the other hand there is the student who ﬁles all of her ideas sys-
tematically into a mental ﬁling cabinet, knowing that, when she’s pre-
sented with a question, she can retrieve from her mind a structure of
interlinked relevant arguments backed by quotations and evidence,
from which she can develop her ideas conﬁdently. And most of us are
quite capable of doing this with considerable skill, if only we know how
to do it.
Note-taking for Analysis and Structure
95

 Linear notes
This is, perhaps, the most familiar and widely used note-taking strat-
egy, because it adapts well to most needs. As we’ve already seen, at uni-
versity the exams we prepare ourselves for are designed to assess more
than just our comprehension, so notes in the form of a series of short
descriptive paragraphs, and even the list, are of little real value. Exams
at this level are concerned with a wider range of abilities, including our
abilities to discuss, criticise and synthesise arguments and ideas from
a variety of sources, to draw connections and contrasts, to evaluate and
so on. To do all this requires a much more sophisticated and adaptable
strategy that responds well to each new demand. It should promote our
abilities, not stunt them by trapping us within a straitjacket.
Linear notes are particularly good at analytical tasks, recording the
structure of arguments and passages. As you develop the structure,
with each step or indentation you indicate a further breakdown of the
argument into subsections. These in turn can be broken down into
further subsections. In this way you can represent even the most
complex argument in a structure that’s quite easy to understand.
Equally important, with clearly deﬁned keywords, highlighted in capital
letters or in different colours, it’s easy to recall the clusters of ideas
and information that these keywords trigger of.
In most cases it looks something like the following:
A
Heading
1.
Sub-heading
(a)
(b)
(c)
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
e.g.
(d)
2.
Sub-heading
(a)
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
96
Research

(b)
(c)
B
Heading
1.
Sub-heading
(a)
(b)
(i)
(ii)
(c)
(i)
(ii)
e.g.
(d)
2.
Sub-heading
3.
Sub-heading
(a)
(b)
(c)
The set of linear notes below is taken from a course that examines the
rise of the dictators in Europe in the 1920s and 1930s.
Factors Promoting the Rise of Nazism
A
Humiliation of Germany
1.
The Treaty of Versailles betrayed Wilson’s ideals
2.
Allies wanted:
(a)
to weaken Germany – so it wouldn’t threaten peace again
(b)
revenge – punish Germany – reparations:
•
humiliation extended with incidents in 1920s:
(i)
Dec. 1922 Non-payment – French & Belgian 
troops cross into Ruhr
(ii)
1924 Dawes Plan – reparations renegotiated
(iii)
1929 Young Plan – reps renegotiated, payments  
to continue until 1988
Note-taking for Analysis and Structure
97

B
Economy in Ruins
1.
Broken by War
2.
Damaged by reparations
3.
Economic slump in Europe
•
inﬂation in Germany reached its height when Govt 
printed money to pay strikers resisting French occupation
of Ruhr 
Effects:
(a)
Middle-class savings wiped out – sold possessions 
at low prices
(b)
Young, old & sick suffered most
e.g.
Berlin
–
31% of children with diseases 
related to malnutrition
–
8.2% had rickets
(c)
Discontented ﬂocked to Nazism – re. Hitler’s 
conﬁdence in staging the Munich Putsch in 1923
C
Weakness of Weimar Republic
•
didn’t appear to be working, therefore Hitler’s propaganda 
all the more effective & appeared that only effective govt =
autocratic govt
•
no party could get a majority:
1.
Proportional representation:
(a)
extreme parties survived – gave representation to all 
parties, even the smallest
(b)
large number of parties – therefore difﬁcult for one to 
obtain overall majority
e.g.
even Hitler in July 1932 landslide only obtained
little more than third of the seats
98
Research

(c)
coalitions – every govt had to be a coalition:
(i)
survival depended less on vigorous policies, than on 
readiness of coalition members to agree
(ii)
average life of a cabinet under Weimar = less 8mths
(d)
rule by second-rate politicians:
(i)
rare for govts to be defeated outright
•
in most cases reshufﬂed because ministers of
one member party disagreed with rest & walked
out
(ii)
party leaders gen. preferred not to compromise
themselves by accepting ofﬁce – unless Chan-
cellor or key ministries – therefore most port-
folios taken by second-rate politicians
(e)
same politicians remained at centre of politics despite
reshufﬂes & shifts in public opinion:
(i)
had each cabinet change included complete
turnover no minister wld have time to get to
know the job
(ii)
regular practice for new Chancellor to persuade
some ministers to stay on – therefore tempted
to appoint technocrats, rather than statesmen
(f)
compromise rather than policies:
(i)
difference between cabinets = little
(ii)
leadership largely with Centre Party – little precon-
ceived policy, exc. trad. defence of catholic &
federalist interest
(iii)
most observers concluded it had little real value to
offer country
(g)
Weimar pols = constant change in govts – little change in
policies:
(i)
policy = whatever minimum policy members of
coaltn wld accept – therefore unlikely to inspire
loyalty
(ii)
real test = Depression – failed – few were prepared
to defend it
Note-taking for Analysis and Structure
99

2.
Article 48:
•
Constn gave President powers to rule by decree – therefore
democracy abandoned from 1930 in preference for presi-
dential rule by decree
As you can see, the structure is clear and concise. At a moment’s
glance you can pick out the main points and their supporting argu-
ments and evidence, commit them to memory and then test yourself
that you can recall the structure.
 In the next chapter
In the next chapter we will look at ways of organising your notes, so
that you can make this structure as clear as possible and retrieve your
ideas accurately and quickly whenever you need them.
100
Research

101
14 Remembering your
Notes
In this chapter you will learn:
•
the techniques for producing clear notes that you can recall 
accurately;
•
how to avoid the most common problems in note-taking;
•
how to organise and consolidate your notes.
The key to good note-taking is to make the structure clear. The mind
remembers structures, not lists nor paragraphs of continuous prose.
So, keep it free and uncluttered. Don’t convince yourself that unless
you include this one fact you’ll never remember it. You will. The struc-
ture will act as a net bringing to the surface of your mind more than
you ever thought you could remember. But it has to be a good net –
well constructed, with clear logical connections and free of all unnec-
essary material.
 Creating a clear structure
Here are a number of things you can do to make sure your structure
works:
1
Keywords
Choose sharp, memorable words to key off the points
in your structure. In the notes on the Rise of Nazism the three main
points are not difﬁcult to remember, particularly with keywords, like
‘Humiliation’, ‘Ruins’ and the alliteration of ‘Weakness of Weimar’.
But you need other words to key off the subsections, although you
don’t need them for every step and every subsection in the notes.

Keying off the main points and the principal subsections will trigger
off the rest. Don’t doubt yourself on this, it will – try it.
So just choose sharp, memorable words for the principal 
subsections, words like ‘Treaty of Versailles’, ‘Allies’, ‘Weaken
Germany’, ‘Revenge’, ‘Reparations’, ‘Economic slump’, ‘Middle
class’, ‘Discontented’ and so on. They don’t have to be snappy and
bright, just memorable.
2
Capitalisation
Having chosen your keywords they must stand
out, so you can see at a glance the structure of your notes. It’s 
no good having a structure if it can’t be seen beneath the under-
growth of words. Some people choose to put all their keywords into
capitals.
3
Colour
If you don’t think this is sufﬁciently prominent, put your
keywords in different colours. This doesn’t have to be too fussy –
you’re not creating a piece of modern art – but it’s not too much
of a bureaucratic task to get into the habit of working with two pens
of different colours, one for picking out the keywords and the other
for the rest. You will be surprised just how well this works. It’s not
unusual to come across people who can still visualise accurately in
their mind’s eye pages of notes they took when they were studying
for their school-leaving exams many years ago.
4
Gaps
If the structure is to stand out, your notes must not appear
too crowded. To avoid this, leave plenty of gaps between your
points. This also gives you the opportunity to add other related
things as you come across them in your reading, although you need
to do this in such a way as to avoid overcrowding.
5
Abbreviations
Most of us use these, indeed we all tend to create
our own personalised abbreviations for those words we seem to
use most often. Even so, it’s still surprising how many students 
look with open-mouthed astonishment when you list the standard
abbreviations, like the following:
Therefore

Because

Leads to
Æ
Increase/decrease
≠Ø
Greater than/smaller then
><
102
Research

Would/should
wld/shld
Would be, should be
w/be, sh/be
Equivalent
=
Not
π
Parallel
llel
Nevertheless, as your tutors have no doubt told you, although these
abbreviations are indispensable in compiling clear, concise notes, they
shouldn’t ﬁnd their way into the ﬁnal draft of your essay.
 Being brief
If you’ve left sufﬁcient time between reading the text the ﬁrst time for
comprehension, and then reading it for structure, you’re more likely to
have a clear, uncluttered set of notes free from all unnecessary ma-
terial. You’ll certainly be free of that most time-consuming of activities,
taking notes on notes, which many of us are forced to do because our
notes are not concise enough in the ﬁrst place.
Unfortunately, there are many students, even at university, who con-
vince themselves that this is a valuable thing to do; that it’s a way of
learning their notes if they rewrite them more concisely. They seem to
believe that by committing their notes to paper, they’re committing
them to their minds, whereas, in fact, they’re doing anything but that.
Taking notes can be a pleasant substitute for thinking. It’s something
we can do on auto-pilot. In fact it can be one of the most relaxing parts
of our pattern of study. While we are placing few demands on our mind,
it can go off to consider more pleasant things, like the plans for the
weekend, or reminiscences about last year’s holiday.
This underlines the main problem in note-taking: most of us ﬁnd it
difﬁcult to be brief. While we have our minds on auto-pilot we’re able
to convince ourselves that almost every point, however insigniﬁcant,
is vitally important to our future understanding. Not surprisingly then,
we end up omitting very little, obscuring the structure so that when we
come to revision we have to start taking notes on our own notes.
 Notes must be a record of our understanding
But there’s another reason that’s more difﬁcult to tackle. Most of us,
at times, doubt our ability to remember details, so we allow ourselves
Remembering your Notes
103

Practice exercise
8
Note-taking for analysis and structure
Take a chapter from one of the books you’re using for the essay you’re
working on in the assignments. Read it through, ﬁrst, for comprehen-
sion. Then, a day or so later, read it again, this time for analysis and
structure. Leave it a few hours for your mind to self-organise. Then, take
a blank sheet of paper and try writing the broad structure of what you
can recall of the main points that interest you from the chapter.
Don’t be tempted to go back to the text, even if it’s just to check up
on an isolated fact. And give yourself up to an hour trying to recall the
structure. Normally you won’t need this amount of time, but for this exer-
cise give yourself plenty of time to do it thoroughly.
You will be pleasantly surprised by the complex structure of intercon-
nected points you’ve been able to produce unaided. You will never again
to be seduced into recording things that ‘might’ be useful in the future.
Inevitably, this results in masses of notes that obscure the main 
structure, which, as we’ve seen, is the only means by which we can
recall them in the ﬁrst place.
To avoid this we need to remind ourselves constantly of two things:
ﬁrst, that almost certainly we have better memories than we think; and
secondly, that we’re not producing encyclopaedic accounts of the
subject, in which we record every known fact. To be of any use, notes
should be an accurate record of our understanding, of our thinking,
not someone else’s.
We can easily lose sight of this when we try to take notes while we’re
reading the text for the ﬁrst time or straight after we’ve read it. We lose
our objectivity: all we can see is the author’s ideas and opinions, not
our own. We need to give our minds time to digest the ideas and self-
organise. You will ﬁnd that if you leave time between reading and
noting, your mind will have created its own structures out of the ideas
it has taken from the text.
Then, after we’ve allowed our minds sufﬁcient time to do this, we
need to organise ourselves to tap into it, to get our own understand-
ing down on paper, without using the text. Otherwise the author 
will hijack our thinking and we’ll simply copy from the text 
without thought. Remember, you can always go back to check on
details afterwards.
104
Research
Continued

 Reading an author’s structure
In most passages it’s quite easy to see the author’s plan, the structure
he or she has created, but not in all. In the most difﬁcult cases you will
need to interpret and translate what the author says into terms and
structures that make sense for you. In effect, you will need to give the
passage the sort of structure that will help you recall the points. Here
we’re reminded of the familiar advice from all our tutors, ‘Put it into
your own words.’ And, of course, this is exactly what you need to do
with this sort of text.
But more important is to go a little further and graft it onto your 
own thinking: make the ideas your own. At this point the ideas become
universal; they are yours as well as the author’s, leaving you in 
no danger of plagiarism. Just take the essence of the idea, stripped 
of all the phrases and sentences that are distinctive of the author. 
Put it into your own words; but don’t worry if the author has found 
a crisp, memorable word that you know you’ll never forget. Use it.
Remember, ideas are universal, they’re the currency of learning; it’s 
the way we explain and develop those ideas in the passages we write
that isn’t.
However, even the most difﬁcult and poorly organised author is likely
to leave you a trail of literal symbols that indicate the structure he or
she is following. We’re all familiar with these, although we don’t always
pay as much heed to them as we should. The introductory and con-
cluding sentences often indicate the main points of the passage. Here
you’re likely to ﬁnd the memorable keyword that will trigger off in your
mind a whole cluster of ideas.
Once you get into the body of the text, words like ‘ﬁrst’ and ‘ﬁnally’
act as pointers to the structure, indicating the number of points that
are to be, or have been, made. Others, that introduce illustrative 
Remembering your Notes
105
be entirely convinced when you try to tell yourself that you cannot trust
your memory. You’ll ﬁnd that what your mind has given you is a clear,
uncluttered structure around which you can build a fuller set of notes, if
you need to.
But if you do decide to ﬁll this out with more detail, always remind
yourself not to clutter and obstruct your view of the structure with
unnecessary detail. Remember, notes are of little use if they’re not a
record of your understanding of the subject.

material, like ‘for example’ and ‘for instance’, indicate that you need
not take close and detailed notes from what’s to come. A word, a brief
phrase or sentence, should be enough to remind you of the example
when you want it.
 Consolidating your notes
All of this means you’re better able to take out a clear structure from
what you read. But, if structure is one of the main features of good
note-taking, then, as we’ve said a number of times already, ﬂexibility
is the other.
There are few things worse during revision than ﬁnding your notes
on a particular topic are spread throughout your ﬁle in different places,
because each time you’ve taken notes your organisation hasn’t allowed
you to change or to add to those you already have. As a result you have
different packets of notes on the same subject spread throughout your
ﬁle, none of them related, and all of them taking a slightly different
approach to the subject.
Few things can be more confusing and frustrating. At just that
moment when you want to get down to some organised revision 
for the exam, you realise you’ve got to re-organise your notes. You 
have to take notes on all the notes you have, so that you end up with
the one integrated package of notes you should have had in the ﬁrst
place.
It’s worth reminding yourself that notes are only the raw material,
they’re not ﬁxed in stone as soon as they’re written. You add to them,
adapt and reshape them, as your ideas change, and as you read and
see more. They must be able to adapt continually to the changes in
your understanding of the subject. You must, then, have a note-taking
strategy that is ﬂexible enough to record these changes, while leaving
you with one coherent set of notes.
To create this ﬂexibility in your note-taking use a loose-leaf ﬁle, so
you can slip into your notes at the appropriate place new notes that
expand or adapt what you already have. Use an index-card system,
broken up into the topics on your course, to record isolated quotations,
statistics and examples (see below, Chapter 16). Spread your notes out
on the page, leaving enough space between each section, so you can
add new material as it arises. And, for the same reason, write just on
one side of the paper, so you always have a blank sheet opposite your
notes on which you can enter new information.
106
Research

 In the next chapter
With these techniques and the ﬂexibility they bring to your study you
can, with more conﬁdence, note your own responses to the ideas and
arguments you read, as we’ll see in the next chapter.
Remembering your Notes
107

108
15 Note-taking for
Criticism and
Evaluation
In this chapter you will learn:
•
a four-step technique for criticising and evaluating arguments;
•
how to take notes that allow you to record your own criticisms and
evaluations of the passage;
•
how to improve your concentration.
Obviously, our ability to discuss and criticise the implications of argu-
ments depends ﬁrst on the skills needed to lay bare their structure: to
isolate clearly the points for and against, so that we can enter into the
discussion more conﬁdently. But we also need a note-taking strategy
that will allow us to go one step further and record our own arguments
and criticisms in the body of the notes.
Unfortunately, many of us never get to the stage of being able to 
criticise and evaluate an author’s arguments, because we’re handi-
capped by note-taking skills which condemn us to many hours of
patient toil, taking irrelevant, verbatim notes. A large part of the reason
for this lies in our willingness to omit the interpretation stage, and the
pattern notes we should have made there in response to two questions:
•
What issues does the question raise that need to be researched and
examined in the essay?
•
What do I know and think about the issues raised?
In effect, by ignoring these questions we’ve failed to preview any
passage we’re likely to read when we undertake our research. As a
result we’re going in blind. We have little idea of the important issues

raised by the question and, consequently, we don’t really know what
we’re looking for.
 No standard by which to judge the 
author’s ideas
Equally important, because we haven’t declared what we know and
think about the issues, we have no way of grafting onto our own under-
standing the ideas we’re about to read and consider. Not surprisingly,
then, they will always appear to be somebody else’s. And, because of
this, the most we’ll be able to recall are mere scraps of what we’ve 
read without any consistent organisation to them. However, perhaps
the most serious consequence is that we’ll have nothing to judge 
the author’s ideas against. We’ll be in no position to criticise and 
evaluate the arguments.
Having read the passage we’re likely to be so thoroughly convinced
by the author’s arguments that we ﬁnd little to criticise. Then, when
we go on to read another text by another author, who presents views
conﬂicting with the ﬁrst, we’re likely to ﬁnd we’re equally convinced by
these arguments. Lost between the two, we ﬁnd it almost impossible
to discuss the merits of either. Having failed to establish where we
stand, we have nothing to argue with. Consequently, we’re left just to
imitate and reproduce uncritically what we read.
 Poor concentration
This also goes a long way towards explaining why many of us ﬁnd it
so difﬁcult to concentrate on our work for all but relatively short
periods. Because we’re asking the mind to do relatively simple things,
just translating the words on the page and copying them into our notes,
it’s under-utilised, so it looks around for more interesting pursuits. It
looks forward to the party at the weekend or back at last summer’s
holiday. It can do all this and still cope with the trivial tasks we set it.
The only problem is that when we get to the bottom of the page, or
after we’ve spent two hours taking notes, we struggle to recall a word
of it. We’ve read it, but we haven’t processed it beyond copying the
words.
There are, therefore, very good reasons why we should, at all 
times, attempt to escape this tendency towards passive, surface-level
Note-taking for Criticism and Evaluation
109

processing. Splitting up our reading and note-taking into the three
levels of processing helps, but so does a more ﬂexible note-taking strat-
egy that will allow us to inject more of our own ideas and criticisms
into the structure of the notes.
Therefore experiment, particularly with your pattern notes. If you still
feel that linear notes are more appropriate for a particular piece of
work, set time aside later to sit down with a blank sheet of paper and
tap into your own ideas and criticisms, which will have been self-
organising in your own mind since you ﬁnished reading. As you know,
it won’t take long. The ideas will come tumbling out and you will be
surprised at just how good they are and how much you have to say
about it.
 Playing devil’s advocate
Even so, there are many students who still believe they don’t see as
much to criticise in a passage as other students do. If this is your
problem, the following four-step technique will help you think more
critically about what you read.
An argument may be weak or fallacious for one of three reasons: 
that the authors have misstated the facts (material fallacies); that 
they have wrongly used words (verbal fallacies); or that they have
drawn the wrong inferences (logical fallacies). In Chapter 12, I listed
ten of the most common fallacies, to guide you in what to look for. 
To help you use these more systematically, try working through the 
following steps:
Step 1: Are there exceptions?
When authors make claims that are important to their arguments, even
though you might agree with them, play devil’s advocate: ask yourself,
are there exceptions to these?
For example, an author might argue that ‘All criminals come from
socially deprived backgrounds.’ However, you can probably think of
convicted criminals that you’ve read about in the newspapers, who, on
the contrary, come from quite privileged backgrounds.
Step 2: If there are exceptions, are they general or speciﬁc?
2.1
Speciﬁc exceptions
If they are speciﬁc, then while an author
can still retain his or her claim, you’ve found sufﬁcient grounds to
110
Research

justify qualifying the claim in order to take account of the special cases
you’ve uncovered.
To return to our example, if the exceptions were just limited to one
or two individuals from privileged backgrounds, the author would have
to qualify the original claim.
2.2
General exceptions
However, if you have found a general 
category of exceptions, then you will have to move on to Steps 3 
and 4.
Say you’ve discovered that most white-collar and computer crime is,
in fact, committed by criminals with university degrees. In this case the
objection cannot be dealt with so easily: you will have to ask the fol-
lowing questions.
Step 3: Is the claim too strong?
If you have found a general category of exceptions you must ﬁrst ask
yourself, does this make the original claim too strong: more than the
evidence can support? If it does, then your author cannot maintain his
or her claim. They must either reign it in, qualifying it in general terms,
or abandon it altogether.
In our case the evidence can’t support the claim, so, if the author
wants to maintain it, she must qualify it by excluding all white-collar
and computer crime. However, this might weaken and restrict it so
much that it might be wiser to abandon it altogether, particularly when
it leads you to suspect that you could probably ﬁnd other groups, too,
if you looked hard enough.
Step 4: Does it account for only part of the case?
Alternatively, if it can’t be qualiﬁed, and there is sufﬁcient merit in the
argument to warrant not abandoning it, then the only thing you can
do is to extend the claim to cover the general category of cases that is
currently excluded. However, if this is possible, it is quite likely to lead
to conclusions your authors either didn’t see in the ﬁrst place, or
wouldn’t agree with on the basis of their argument so far.
You might, for example, agree with the claim our author has 
made, although you question the notion that it is the ‘socially’ deprived
that is the source of crime. You might argue that there are others
responsible for crime, who are deprived in different ways. They 
may never have been socially deprived, but they may not have had a
stable father-ﬁgure in their lives: there may have been a family 
breakdown, or they may have been moved from one boarding school
Note-taking for Criticism and Evaluation
111

to another without ever being able to establish long-lasting paternal
relations.
So, in this case the claim may be worth holding on to, but only in
the extended form to cover this new category of deprivation. However,
this may lead the author either to conclusions she didn’t foresee, or in
a direction which doesn’t serve the main purpose of her argument,
which may have been to establish the claim that all crime can be iden-
tiﬁed with a particular social class.
Whichever is the outcome, whether you step off at Steps 2, 3 or 4,
you will have discovered for yourself that you have well thought out
reasons for criticising and discussing the authors’ arguments. Try it in
the following exercise.
112
Research
Practice exercise
9
Note-taking for criticism and evaluation
Read the following passage carefully for comprehension. Then, after
you’ve read it a second time, take the structure out of it in pattern notes.
Now go through each of the steps above, asking yourself the questions
about the principal claims made in the passage. You may not come up
with much at this stage, but at  least you’ve set your subconscious mind
thinking about the issues. Then leave it for a day or two.
When you come back to it, go through the steps again, critically
assessing the author’s arguments. Your aim is to map out your reactions
in pattern notes. So allow your mind to range free and fast over the
issues. Remember, you’re trying to tap into your mind’s self-organised
structures, so ﬂuency and quick responses, as the ideas come ﬂowing
out, are important to get it all down in a structured form without losing
any of it.
After you’ve completed this, compare it with the answer given below.
Passage
A Carnivore’s Credo
This may be the age of enlightened sympathy for all animals, but
certain facts are unassailable. We are at the end of a long evolu-
tionary process that has produced a human society for whom meat-
eating is natural. Indeed man’s superiority is built on exploiting

inferior species, who lack our intellectual and moral capabilities:
they cannot think, make decisions, or communicate.
The loudest and most successful critic of this view over recent
years has been Peter Singer, whose book, Animal Liberation, has
achieved cult status since its publication in 1975. Singer criticises
meat-eating because he claims it is based on the arbitrary moral dis-
tinction of species: whereas we wouldn’t condone eating humans,
we do accept eating non-human animals. This, he argues, ranks
alongside other arbitrary moral distinctions which we are only too
ready to condemn, like sex or race. These, we believe, are irrelevant
to moral judgements. We condemn racism and sexism, and any other
form of discrimination not based on relevant moral distinctions, like
the practice of treating people differently because they have lower
intelligence.
The only non-arbitrary moral distinction, he argues, is sentience,
the capacity to suffer. This is a prerequisite for having interests. While
there is no moral responsibility if we kick a stone, there is if we kick
a mouse. So, anything that can suffer, that can experience enjoy-
ment and happiness, has interests in avoiding pain and, therefore,
deserves moral consideration.
However, as R. G. Frey points out in his article ‘Pains, Interests,
and Vegetarianism’,1 it is not the case that the capacity to suffer is a
prerequisite of having interests – it is not, as this suggests, a neces-
sary condition. In fact, he argues, we still speak of people having
interests even when they can feel no pain at all.
His ﬁrst example is of a soldier friend, who suffered extensive
spinal, head and nervous injuries while serving in Vietnam. He is
conscious, but cannot feel pain, yet still he has interests. Indeed his
interests in being cared for are now greater because of his injuries.
What’s more he has interests in the care of his wife and children,
and in protecting his good name. These interests continue to exist
even though he can feel no pain and even though he may not know
his good name might be harmed.
His second example is that of Karen Quinlan, a comatose patient,
who cannot feel pain, yet who, again, clearly has interests. For
example, as Frey points out, if a photographer entered her room and
photographed her, her interests in maintaining her privacy would
have been invaded; whereas Singer would argue, because she can
feel no pain, she has no interests. In fact, as individuals we all seem
to have interests, like privacy, that have nothing to do with our capac-
ity to feel pain.
Note-taking for Criticism and Evaluation
113

114
Research
Given these arguments, it would seem that humans are distinct
from animals in non-arbitrary ways, that may be difﬁcult to pin
down, but are no less real.
Answer
In this passage most, if not all, the criticisms relate to verbal, rather
than material and logical, fallacies. We’re entitled to ask, ‘Is this what
we mean when we use this concept, or do we mean more than this, or
less?’ Take Frey’s criticism of Singer’s argument and the cases that he
raises to make his point.
Step 1: Are there exceptions?
When Frey uses the concept of ‘pain’, are there exceptions to this; types
of pain that he doesn’t include within his concept? In other words, is
there just more to it than this? In the case of his friend, the Vietnam
soldier, he appears to use ‘pain’ in a narrow sense, meaning just 
physical pain. Yet his friend is, of course, also capable of feeling emo-
tional pain, anguish, insecurity, fear, for himself, his family and his good
name. So, according to Singer’s principle, he does have interests,
because he can feel pain of this type.
Step 2: If there are exceptions, are they general or speciﬁc?
In this case they are general, not speciﬁc, so we cannot qualify Frey’s
case to acknowledge special cases. We are driven, then, to consider
Steps 3 or 4.
Step 4: Does it account for only part of the case?
It’s not that the claim is too strong and can be reigned in (as in Step
3), but that it’s too narrow: it only accounts for a limited range of types
of pain. If you were then to extend Frey’s claim to cover the general
category of cases that is currently excluded, this would amount to con-
ceding the argument to Singer.
By the same process you can arrive at all the other criticisms in the
answer below. As you gain conﬁdence with this technique you will be
able to adapt it to your needs and apply it to every question that asks
you to criticise, discuss and evaluate arguments. For example, select
one of the books you prioritised on your reading list for the essay
you’ve chosen to write in these assignments, and complete the fol-
lowing assignment.

A Carnivore’s Credo
Natural/Evol.
justification
but
Is what’s natural
necessarily moral?
exceptions
Natural
for man to
be aggressive
& violent
Natural
to discriminate
against people
not of his kind
but
we condemn such behaviour
as immoral
Conditioned to
eat meat
but
Can conditioned
behaviour be moral?
exception
Morality involves
free choices & respons.
No free choice or
responsib. if your
actions are
conditioned
responses.
Animals
=
different from
humans
unable
to
think
to
Communicate
to
make
decisions
but
are these morally
relevant distinctions?
exceptions
What about those
humans who don’t
possess these?
Child’n/disabled/
sick/injured
We still have moral
respons. for those who
don’t possess these
things
Frey
Pain a necessary
condition – a prerequisite
for having ints accordg
to Singer
but
need it be a
necessary
condition?
Is it a sufficient
condition
rather than a
necessary
condition?
exception
e.g.
moral
respons.
to protect
environmt.
exception
i.e.
pain necessarily
involves moral
respons. – but
we still have
moral resp. for
things that
don’t involve
pain
e.g. moral resp.
not to drop
litter – to
obey the law
 pain = a sufficient
π a necessary condu.
Note-taking for Criticism and Evaluation
115

A Carnivore’s Credo
Frey
Vietnam friend
pain
Does this involve
a narrow defin.
of pain i.e. just
physical?
exceptions
He’s quite capable
of experiencing
emotional pain
– anxiety, stress,
insecurity

pain π just
physical
Does he, in himself, really
have interests as Frey claims? 
exception
When others take over responsib.
of protecting your ints for you
w/o you having direct interests
in yourself – friends/relatives
take on your ints by proxy
We only have ints in the
sense that we are hurt
when we discover what
people unfairly say about us

We have ints when we don’t
know what’s happening only
to the extent that it’s the
moral concern of friends/rels
to correct it just in case we
get to know
What you don’t
know can’t hurt you
exception
your damaged reputat’n
might still mean you’re
hurt by others having
nothing to do with you 
= respons. of friends/relats
to protect your interests

Frey wrong in arguing he does have interests
in himself – interests = proxy
Karen Quinlan
Same qn: does she possess ints in
herself?
exception
Her interests are protected by proxy
e.g. parents – courts who become
legal guardians – someone who
thinks for the patient – as the patient
w’ld herself
llel = environment & our respons.
to protect it
it cannot
‘Know’
cannot
feel pain
i.e.
pain = sufficient to
have interests
but
π a necessary condition
of having them
116
Research

 In the next chapter
You should be pleasantly surprised by the number of interesting ideas,
criticisms, and examples that you were able to produce from your own
resources. This will make your essay not only more interesting, but also
more ﬂuent and persuasive, because these are genuinely your own
ideas. In the next chapter we will look at ways of organising your work,
so that you can generate more of your own ideas and insights, and use
them more effectively.
Note
1 R. G. Frey, ‘Pain, Interests, and Vegetarianism’, in his Interests and Rights:
The Case Against Animals (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1980), ch. XI.
Note-taking for Criticism and Evaluation
117
Assignment
5
Note-taking for criticism and evaluation
In this assignment select a chapter that you plan to read for your 
essay. Read it through ﬁrst for comprehension. Then, after a day or so,
take a blank sheet of paper and try to recall the broad structure of the
chapter.
After you’ve done this, go over each point in the structure, critically
assessing the argument in the way we have in this chapter. Map out your
reactions in pattern notes, allowing yourself to explore quite freely your
reactions to the arguments the author has made. If you appear to be
going off the point at times, don’t worry. Try to exhaust your ideas on
an issue before you move on to another. But if an idea comes up out of
place, note it, don’t rely on picking it up later. Give yourself licence to
analyse points thoroughly, to make contrasts, and to bring in other evi-
dence you’ve come across elsewhere, that you think has a bearing on
the issues raised.
Remember you are trying to get your mind’s natural self-organisation
down on paper. It’s there, if only you can tap into it. To do that, you 
must allow it to pick up top speed. At this point it’s more likely to 
make connections, to draw contrasts and comparisons, and to use items
of information, evidence and examples, that you might never have
thought of.

118
16 Organising your
Retrieval System
In this chapter you will learn:
•
how to create an effective retrieval system to catch more of your own
ideas and insights;
•
the importance of using a journal and a notebook;
•
how to gather material by using a card-index and a project box.
If we are to generate and use more of our own ideas and insights, we
will have to spend some time organising an effective research strategy.
The key to this is to have a retrieval system that is sufﬁciently adaptable
to catch the material whenever and wherever it shows itself, and then
provide us with a means of accessing it easily whenever we want it.
To create such a system isn’t difﬁcult, but it means going beyond the
normal loose-leaf folder, a few wallet ﬁles and a reliable source of A4
paper. It calls for a thoughtful approach, a little imagination and, above
all, ﬂexibility. As we’ve already seen with our reading and note-taking,
inﬂexibility in the way we use our skills can trap us within the conﬁnes
of low-level work. We’re forced into surface-level processing, depen-
dent on the ideas that our tutors and texts can give us.
The same goes for our retrieval system too. Unless we choose and
organise its various components thoughtfully, we’re likely to lose most
of our best ideas, and produce work that is predictable and imitative
of the ideas we’ve been given. To put it simply, our system should
promote, not frustrate the quality of our work. This is not an unim-
portant part of our pattern of study, and its inﬂuence is never neutral.
Get it right and we can ﬁnd ourselves with an abundance of insightful
ideas that are genuinely our own. Get it wrong and our work struggles
to rise above the mundane and imitative.

 The usual sources
Most of us are used to using the obvious sources of material, like the
booklists and references provided by the tutors of courses. But you can
go further than this and uncover texts and articles of your own by
checking the bibliographies of the recommended texts. Certain texts
will be common throughout each bibliography, which is often a good
indication of those that are the most useful and respected in the ﬁeld.
But check the date of the publication. If you’re looking at a text pub-
lished in 1964 and its bibliography is recommending another text 
published in 1944, you might ﬁnd that other texts have been published
since, that have superseded it. However, don’t be surprised if this is not
the case: there are still the classic, highly respected, indispensable texts
in most subject areas.
Beyond bibliographies, probably the most under-used resources are
libraries and their staff. The local library, and particularly college and
university libraries, are more than just a source of books: they collect
and classify information from a wide range of sources. Most take an
impressive range of journals, newspapers and periodicals, along with
government reports on a range of topics. Of course, in addition, most
have computer terminals that can give you access to the Internet and
to other information stored on disk. You can ﬁnd a number of ency-
clopaedias on disk, along with thesauruses and dictionaries such as
Chambers. Many libraries also have large stocks of video recordings of
educational material.
 The richest source is found in your own mind
For most of us this just about covers the range of sources available 
to us. But it ignores one of the richest sources of ideas and evi-
dence, mainly because we’re not accustomed to recognise it as 
such. Each day we talk to friends and acquaintances, we listen to 
the radio and watch TV, or we just sit thinking as we drive home in our
cars, or on a bus or train. On all of these occasions our minds are
taking in ideas and processing them into complex, self-organised 
structures. This is rich material, that we ignore at our own cost. 
Just because it doesn’t come from an authoritative book or article, or
from a knowledgeable tutor, doesn’t mean it’s not full of insights that
the mind will feed on to produce interesting and useful structures of
ideas.
Organising your Retrieval System
119

Take those moments in the day when we’re alone with our thoughts
without any interruptions from friends, the TV, the radio, or a book 
we ought to read. It’s just us and our ideas in the car as we drive 
home, or in a bus, or on a train. On most of these occasions it’s 
difﬁcult in retrospect to recall exactly what we were thinking at the
time. This in itself is not always a bad thing. Such moments of 
reverie are the time when the mind can process the material it’s 
taken in during the day, and organise it into structures for us to use if
we have the will to access it.
But on other occasions, rather than whiling away this valuable 
time with just empty static in your head, it’s useful just to set your-
self a topic to think about and sort out as you sit there – in fact 
more useful than most students ever imagine. It’s the time when 
you can do some serious thinking for yourself, not in response to
someone else, a book or a tutor, but responding to your own ideas 
and your own original insights. You will be surprised at the results,
maybe not immediately, although that’s quite likely to occur, but 
certainly a few days later when all sorts of ideas, insights and struc-
tures will appear in your mind and you’ll wonder where you picked
them up from.
Some students, who have deliberately set about adopting this 
strategy whenever they’re alone, tell me they plan whole essays in 
their head. Others describe how they’ve given themselves a difﬁcult
problem to sort out or a complicated argument that they’ve never really
understood before. And, without the usual distractions around them,
such as their books and other sources of reference they’ve come to
rely on whenever they want to solve a problem, they’ve sorted it out
on their own terms. Or, failing that, they’ve at least discovered for the
ﬁrst time what the problem was.
But it’s not just these quiet moments that are a rich source of 
material and insights. When we discuss topics with friends we ﬁnd 
ourselves using what we’ve read in books and articles, in the 
course of which we produce interesting ideas and arguments 
without any conscious prompting. Each day as we read the news-
papers we are quite likely to come across new evidence for some-
thing we’ve been studying, or interesting quotations that would
support an argument we’re planning to use in an essay. And, of 
course, there are those really special moments when we have a 
sudden dramatic insight, when we suddenly see something that’s 
been troubling us for some time, clear and in sharp focus for the ﬁrst
time.
120
Research

 Carry a notebook
On all of these occasions we need to have our retrieval system well
worked out. In particular, we need to have with us at all times a small
notebook in which we can note our sudden insights, or just work out
our arguments and plans on paper. This represents the internal mono-
logue we have with ourselves on the subjects we’re studying. You may
say, of course, ‘Well, as soon as I leave the classroom I don’t think
about the subject again, until the next lesson, or until I have to do work
on it.’ But not only is this unwise for obvious reasons, it’s also most
unlikely. This internal monologue may be buried deep, but it’s still
there. Although for some it’s louder than for others, we all need to cul-
tivate a system for tapping into it, so we can make the best use of its
insights and then switch it off so we can get on with other things.
The point is that the most thoughtful and creative insights come to
us not in the customary learning situations, such as lessons or as we
work at our essays, but when we’re off guard. And if we fail to live with
this internal monologue and organise ourselves to use it, we’ll lose a
wealth of ideas and insights, which are essentially ours. You can always
follow these up later with further research, but if you fail to record them
the moment they occur, you will almost certainly forget them. Even if
you’re able to recover a small fragment of them sometime later, the
most valuable part, the insight, the form that the idea took in the ﬁrst
place that forced it to the surface, will be lost to you forever. And it’s
this that made it vivid and clear for you and will, in turn, make it vivid
and clear for others too.
 Keeping a journal
Nevertheless, this is not the only way in which you can tap into more
of your own thoughts. Probably the most useful method is to set up
your own journal, either manually or in a computer ﬁle, in which you
give yourself the opportunity of writing, say, two or three times each
week for at least half an hour each time.
Unlike a conventional diary where you describe the events that have
occurred in your life, a journal gives you the opportunity of writing
exclusively about your ideas and their development. For most of us,
opportunities to write in this free, unconstrained manner are rare:
we’re usually working with books, or with our notes, so the ideas 
that are genuinely ours, untainted by what we’re reading or referring
Organising your Retrieval System
121

to, rarely reach the surface of our consciousness, although they’re
always there.
 Index-card systems
To make the system complete, back up the notebook and the journal
with an index-card system divided into sections for each topic on the
syllabus. Whenever we come across an interesting idea, an isolated sta-
tistic, or a useful quotation, it’s very difﬁcult to know exactly what to
do with it. Do you write it up on a sheet of paper? But if you do, where
are you going to ﬁle it? And it’s all too easy to lose just one sheet. To
cope with this we need a simple, ﬂexible system that we can use to
catch all those isolated items that we would otherwise lose or not know
what to do with. The card system fulﬁls this role perfectly.
Using just one card for each item (a quotation, an idea, an argument,
or a set of ﬁgures), you have a retrieval system that makes it very easy
to ﬁnd what you want whenever you want it, particularly when you
come to revise for an examination, or set about the research for an
essay. Once you’ve worked with a card system for a few months, you’ll
wonder how you ever lived without one.
Equally important, most students ﬁnd a card system frees them from
the authors they read when they come to write the essay. First, because
they are restricted, by the limited space, to noting only the ideas they
need, they avoid getting trapped within the complex web of the
author’s arguments. And secondly, because they can sort and shufﬂe
the cards, they can take each idea in the order they want to, and not
in the order their authors presented them.
You will also ﬁnd a good card system will help you avoid the temp-
tation to plagiarise. Not only is this unacceptable, because, in effect,
it’s ‘literary theft’, but it will unbalance your writing. It will break up
the ﬂow of your words and ideas, and make it increasingly difﬁcult for
you to keep control of your structure and, therefore, the relevance of
your arguments. Even more important, it will make it difﬁcult for you
to develop your own ideas. Once you’ve accepted an author’s state-
ment as the undisputed authority, you’re left with no good reason to
discuss or challenge it.
A card system gives you the opportunity to record your sources accu-
rately at the top of each card, and with the limited space it forces you
to put the ideas into your own words. If the phrase or section in the
text is so telling that no summary in your own words will capture the
122
Research

idea, then you’re restricted to recording only short quotations of a sen-
tence or two, which must be chosen with much greater care.
 The project box
Finally, you might borrow an idea from professional writers. It’s not
unusual for writers to use a project box or ﬁle for the job they’re
working on. Into this they will put anything that comes to hand which
might be useful in the future when they get around to organising the
piece they’ve planned to write. You can do the same. Take a ﬁle, or even
an actual box, that you can use for the essay you’re going to have to
write, or the topic you’re about to study, and whenever you come
across something that might be useful, drop it in. It may be an article
taken from a newspaper or magazine; it may be notes taken from a TV
programme; it may be anything that just stimulates an idea that you
might otherwise forget.
This has all sorts of advantages. On a practical level, the very fact of
having a box or ﬁle of this kind will in itself generate material that we
would not otherwise have noticed. Knowing that we have something
into which we can throw material of all different kinds is all the encour-
agement most of us need to set about noticing and collecting it wher-
ever we can ﬁnd it.
But equally important, it prepares the mind not just to recognise
material when we see it, but to work on the ideas continuously; to see
the essay as a developing project to be worked on even when we’re not
consciously thinking about it. We learn to regard our work as more like
open-ended, ongoing projects, that we can’t just switch off as soon as
we leave the seminar or tutorial, or put down a book. It encourages us
to develop our ideas over time and beyond the normal conﬁnes of
study.
 In the next chapter
Nevertheless, if this retrieval system is to work, we will have to organ-
ise our time more effectively. In the next chapter we will examine the
simple things we can do to make sure we have enough time not just
to catch our own ideas and develop our thinking and writing skills, but
also to relax.
Organising your Retrieval System
123

124
17 Organising your Time
In this chapter you will learn:
•
how to minimise the stress of studying;
•
how to organise your time to make better use of your thinking and
writing skills;
•
how to get more done in less time;
•
about the importance of planning to relax as well as to work.
Although our new retrieval system means that we will have to organ-
ise our time more effectively, it doesn’t necessarily mean that we 
will have to ﬁnd more time. It’s just that we will need to work in a 
more predictable, routine way, so that we can ﬁnd regular time slots in
our week to do these things that will so improve our thinking and
writing.
 Why plan?
‘Why’, you might ask, ‘do I need to plan my time, when I always get
my work done on time anyway?’ It’s a good question that we ought
not to dismiss cheaply. The simple answer is that, although we might
believe we don’t plan and don’t really need to, the fact is we all do it
anyway, one way or another. We might not sit down, draw up a piece
of paper and write down the times we plan to do things, but we 
still do it in our minds. We have a rough idea what work we’re 
supposed to be doing at various times throughout the week. You 
might even be a list maker: someone who sits down once a week to
compile a comprehensive list of those things that need to be done in
the following week and then sets about to work their way through it
as best they can.

For some people this works perfectly well, but for most of us it
doesn’t. Under this system we ﬁnd ourselves leaving tasks to the last
minute, giving ourselves insufﬁcient time to do the jobs we have to do,
or just doing things at the most inappropriate times, when we don’t do
that sort of work very well. What’s more, without a timetable we have
to remind and constantly nag ourselves to get on and do things that
have to be done. This is tiring, it saps energy, and for many it can be
quite depressing, taking all the joy out of learning. Indeed it can even
result in seriously harmful stress.
Nevertheless, we all seem to accept this as a normal part of study,
even though it’s quite avoidable. If we were to plan our work, so that
we did things in a repetitive, regular manner, it would become merely
routine, relieving us of the responsibility of nagging ourselves con-
stantly to do things. We could set aside the same time each week to
tackle certain tasks, and the nagging stress, that makes study an in-
tolerable burden for many, would largely disappear.
 The right time for the right task
Avoiding stress is not the only gain that comes from planning. Equally
signiﬁcant, we learn more about ourselves as learners, particularly
about the times when we work best. We all have some idea of when
we seem to have most concentration and when we’re most productive.
Some people prefer to work late, into the early hours of the morning,
when there are no distractions. Others prefer an early start, so they can
get a couple of hours work in before breakfast. It’s quiet, they argue,
and the normal cares and concerns of the day haven’t yet asserted
themselves and hijacked their thinking.
These might seem to be just personal preferences, but they will 
affect the quality of our work. They are decisions we have to think
about carefully as we plan how best to use our time. There are some
tasks, such as reading, that call for the highest levels of concentration.
At one time or another most of us have found ourselves sitting in a
library after a heavy lunch, trying to read a chapter of a book. After
struggling for an hour or two we realise we can’t remember a thing
we’ve read. Either that, or the effort of trying to force ourselves to do
something at the worst possible time, leaves us slumped over the book
in a deep sleep.
A few years ago one British university decided to conduct research
on this: what’s known as the ‘post-lunch dip’. They found it to be so
Organising your Time
125

debilitating that it compares with heavy drinking, with its effects lasting
as long as a few days as the body recovers. Under these circumstances
business people probably should not be making important decisions
that affect the lives of others, nor should people be operating danger-
ous equipment. But, by the same token, we should not be attempting
to read, or do other things that call for the highest levels of concen-
tration. After a heavy lunch the body has to divert energy into diges-
tion, leaving less for other functions. And, as our body temperature
rises, we begin to feel sleepy, so we ﬁnd it almost impossible to con-
centrate on what we’re doing.
Other tasks, particularly the more creative, demand just as much
concentration. Analysing, brainstorming and planning questions all
involve synthesising ideas and evidence from a range of sources. 
They call for tightly focused thinking to bring to the surface of our
minds our ideas and the linkages between them. This is active deep-
level processing, best done at those times when we know that our
resources are not depleted, and there are few distractions to sabotage
our thinking.
It’s not difﬁcult to see, then, that if we are to get the best out of 
our abilities we must ﬁnd the right time for the right task. If we 
know that each week we have a certain amount of reading to do, it
might be best to plot this in our weekly timetable on two or three morn-
ings. The same might go for analysing, brainstorming and planning an
essay. There are other times too when we know our concentration is
likely to be unimpaired: late in the afternoon, in the evening, or late at
night. Alternatively, some people try to postpone lunch as long as 
possible to give themselves four to ﬁve hours of good quality work in
the morning.
Immanuel Kant, the great eighteenth-century German philosopher,
preferred not to work at all in the afternoons. Of course, most of us
are not so fortunate as to be able to give ourselves every afternoon 
off. But if we’ve plotted sessions in our timetable in which we can 
tackle the work that demands high levels of concentration, we can
afford to use our afternoons for other, less demanding work. You might
choose to tackle bureaucratic tasks like sorting out your notes, or
writing up notes you may have taken in a lecture or seminar, which
need to be rewritten. You might read the papers, or do your weekly
survey of the magazines that tend to be useful, or go through the
current journals in your subjects for articles that you should read later.
You might even set aside an hour two or three times a week for writing
your journal.
126
Research

 Finding more time
Organising your time in this deliberate and careful way has one, almost
unexpected, bonus. We’re all inclined to believe that we already organ-
ise our time effectively and that we can’t really get any more out of
ourselves. We seem to work long hours, we make sacriﬁces to get the
work done, and we never seem to have enough time to relax or to do
those things that we enjoy most. So to ask us to plan more efﬁciently
seems absurd: it cannot be done.
But once we settle down to write out our plan and force our-
selves to design the best way of working, we are likely to ﬁnd that there
is more time to do things than we ever expected. It might be that
without a clear, well designed plan in front of us, each time we get
down to work we’re more relaxed about what we have to do and the
pace we need to work at. We have only a vague notion of how long a
task should take, and we don’t have a clear idea of what we’ve got to
do after this, or what we’re expecting to get done before the end of the
day. Consequently, we tend to spend more time on the task than we
need to.
This is one of the better illustrations of Parkinson’s Law. The British
historian, writer and political analyst Cecil Northcote Parkinson
famously argued that, ‘Work expands so as to ﬁll the time available for
its completion.’1 In setting about our work, if we fail to make clear to
ourselves what we want to achieve in a given time, we’re likely to fall
victims to this. Indeed, like a computer virus, it’s likely to invade every
activity in our pattern of study. And most students who are affected
have no idea that they are.
What’s more, those students who tend to be severely affected 
turn out to be the most hardworking and motivated. They will work
prodigious hours, often getting exhausted, run-down and, in the 
end, extremely frustrated and depressed. It seems that no matter how
much they put in there is never enough time just to do the work set,
let alone read around the subject. They know they should do this, 
if they are to develop a comprehensive grasp of the issues, and not 
just a straight imitation of a major text, but despite all their good 
intentions, they just cannot ﬁnd the time. Parents worry, under-
standably, that they seem to do nothing else but study and get run-
down as a result.
And yet, as if to compound the problem, even with all their hard work
they seem to do no better. Working such long unstructured hours they
are rarely able to see the ideas objectively. They are simply too close
Organising your Time
127

to them. As a result they never successfully make them their own, or
feel conﬁdent that they have any control over them. In class they strug-
gle to explain the ideas they’ve read, whereas someone else who’s
done only a fraction of the work can bring reason and common sense
to them. They can see the obvious questions to ask about them, they
can identify the weaknesses in the author’s arguments, and they can
recall the organisational structure behind the passages they’ve read,
all much better than the student who has spent hours reading the text
and taking careful notes from it.
Of course it seems unfair that someone who has spent far fewer
hours at work should get better marks. Our faith in the Protestant work
ethic leads us to assume that those who work hardest get the highest
rewards. Sadly this is more often not the case. It’s the student who
works hard within a well organised and effective timetable, who is most
likely to get the best marks.
 Working hard means relaxing hard
There are, in fact, obvious reasons for this. Those who have worked
without an organised timetable will know these all too well. As you sit
down to work, time stretches ahead of you unstructured and without
end. You don’t know how long the task will take or what you will do
afterwards. All you know is that the job’s got to be done and you’re
there to do it until it’s completed. This can depress even the most moti-
vated student.
Faced with this daunting prospect we struggle to get down to 
work. We search for things to do, to lighten the burden and take 
our minds off our work. We suddenly ﬁnd pencils that urgently 
need to be sharpened, or books which have been in the same position
for years that urgently need to be rearranged. It can be anything 
just as long as it gives us some respite from our work. Even when 
we’ve got down to work, we still see time stretch out ahead with-
out structure. So we search relentlessly for any distraction just to 
give us a break. Trivial things easily take hold of our concentration. 
We go missing from our work for ﬁve or ten minutes at a time. 
Obviously these are the breaks we should have planned. Without a
plan, they come more frequently, taking up more time than we can
afford.
In contrast, by planning not just our work but the times for 
relaxation too, we give ourselves clear goals and expectations. We 
128
Research

Organising your Time
129
have a certain amount of time in which to complete the work, after
which we give ourselves a reward for hard work. We might arrange to
have a coffee break with friends, or a session down at the gym or in
the swimming pool. And, of course, at the same time we are free of
that nagging conscience each time we have a break, telling us that we
shouldn’t be here, we should be back at work. With a well planned
timetable we know that our time has been pre-planned, our relaxation
as well as our work, and we have no need to worry because it’s all
under control.
Practice exercise
10
The personal weekly timetable
Before you organise your timetable it helps to have a clear idea of how
you use your time at present. We need to know how well we do this and
where we can make improvements.
Take a normal week and work in your usual way. On the timetable 
on p. 130 record accurately what you do in every hour. If you’re 
working, record the subject and the activity – note-taking, reading, 
planning, and so on. If you’re relaxing, record what you were doing.
Record enough detail to give you an accurate picture of how you use
your time.
At the end of the week, analyse the information you’ve recorded by
counting up the hours you’ve devoted to studying, relaxation, social
activities, travelling, sleep, meals and any other activity you may have
recorded. It will also help if you break down the time spent studying into
the subjects you study and into the activities of study, like note-taking
and reading.
This will give you an accurate account of how you use your time. It
will make clear to you where the problems are and what you need to do
to solve them. Most students are shocked that they devote much less
time to their work than they thought they did. They realise that there are
demands on their time that cannot all be met if they are to complete
their studies successfully. They also come to realise that the way they
manage these competing demands at present is not the best way. They
tend to go with the demand that is most pressing at that particular time,
which in the long run may not work out to be the best way to apportion
their time.

130
Research
MON.
TUES.
WED.
THURS.
FRI.
SAT.
SUN.
24.00–1.00
1.00–2.00
2.00–3.00
3.00–4.00
4.00–5.00
5.00–6.00 
6.00–7.00
7.00–8.00
8.00–9.00
9.00–10.00
10.00–11.00
11.00–12.00
12.00–13.00
13.00–14.00
14.00–15.00
15.00–16.00
16.00–17.00
17.00–18.00
18.00–19.00
19.00–20.00
20.00–21.00
21.00–22.00
22.00–23.00
23.00–24.00

 In the next chapter
Once you’ve completed this you’re in a better position to organise a
timetable that gets the most out of your abilities and time. In the next
chapter you will be taken step-by-step through the process of pre-
paring such a timetable.
Note
1 Northcote C. Parkinson, Parkinson’s Law (London: Helicon, 1958), p. 4.
Organising your Time
131

132
18 Your Own Personal
Timetable
In this chapter you will learn:
•
how to plan your own personal timetable step by step;
•
about the importance of giving your mind time to process the 
material you’ve read and develop ideas of your own;
•
how to ensure you do the right job at the right time.
Now that you’ve got a clear idea of the way you use your time, you’re
more aware of the sort of adjustments you need to make. With this in
mind you can now take another copy of the personal weekly timetable
and this time compile what you believe is likely to be the best use of
your time, which will ensure you get the most out of your abilities. You
will need to keep in mind the points we’ve already made as you work
your way through the following steps:
Step 1: Regular activities
The ﬁrst step is to enter onto the timetable all the normal routine things
you do each week – things like family commitments, meal times, the
hours of sleep you normally need, regular social activities, the time you
spend travelling each day, and so on. You can also enter your regular
class times: the lectures, seminars and tutorials that you have to attend
each week.
Step 2: How much study time?
Next you should ask yourself how many hours each day you’re going
to study. At present this might seem like asking you how long is a piece
of string: you study as long as you have to. And there will be times
when you have to go over your timetabled limit. But you do need to

set yourself boundaries, otherwise Parkinson’s Law will take over and
there will be no limits to the time you work. You’ll use your time waste-
fully and experience all the frustration and stress we’ve already talked
about.
As a general rule, set yourself around six hours of private study 
a day. On some days, when you have no classes, you might feel 
you’re able to do more than this, say eight hours. But be careful: 
any more than six or eight hours and you’ll ﬁnd it difﬁcult to recover
for the next day. This doesn’t just mean that you’ll feel tired and 
jaded the next day, which, of course, is more than likely; but, equally
important, your mind may not have been able to process success-
fully everything you gave it to do the day before. As a result, when 
you come to access it, you’re likely to ﬁnd a jumble of ideas, poorly
organised, that you can’t quite remember with the accuracy that you’d
like to.
Step 3: Relaxation
For this reason relaxation needs to be planned just as carefully as 
work. Choose the times in the week when you will relax and the 
times when you will study. Remember that you’re trying to create the
right balance between work and relaxation, otherwise, as we’ve 
just seen, you won’t leave your mind sufﬁcient time to process every-
thing. With this in mind, choose one day a week to have off from 
work, when you can have a complete break. You probably need to 
plan this day almost as much as you need to plan the rest of your
timetable. You’re working much harder, so you need to relax much
harder too.
The same applies to rest periods throughout the week. If you can see
that you have a long and tiring day, try to plan to do something in the
evening that you’ll ﬁnd relaxing. You might belong to a club that you
attend at that time each week, or you may have a regular date with a
friend to go to the cinema or go out for dinner. This may be the time
to plan the exercise that you might otherwise ﬁnd difﬁcult to squeeze
in, perhaps at the local gym or swimming pool. But, like your day off,
don’t leave this unplanned: decide now what you’re going to do at
these times.
Step 4: Plotting the times
With all your other activities plotted onto your timetable you can now
plot the times for your private study. The ﬁrst step is to decide when
Your Own Personal Timetable
133

you work best and at these times plot the work that calls for the highest
levels of concentration – reading, analysing and brainstorming ques-
tions, planning, and writing the essay. As you do this, keep in mind the
two most important reasons for planning your timetable: ﬁrst, to plot
each stage of essay writing so that you have sufﬁcient time to develop
the skills involved in each of these stages; and second, to allow your
subconscious mind the time to process the material you’ve read, and
develop ideas of your own.
Therefore, you will need a timetable that makes certain you’ll be
working on all ﬁve stages at the most suitable times, week in, week
out. It must get you to work in a routine, predictable way. It might be
that you are regularly set an essay every Friday to be handed in on the
following Friday. Given this, you would plot on Saturday morning, say,
an hour when you can interpret and brainstorm the question. With
Sunday off, this gives your subconscious time to process the ideas and
throw up new insights for you to pursue on Monday, when you get back
to work. Monday and Tuesday, then, would be devoted to research. On
Wednesday you could plan your essay, leaving it overnight so that you
can add new ideas the following day before you start to write. On
Thursday you write the essay, and then, on Friday you revise it and
print it off to be handed in.
If you’re set an essay every week, you will only need to work on 
one copy of the timetable. But you may be working on a two- or 
three-week cycle, in which case you’ll need to be plotting your 
work on two or three copies. Either way, as long as this is a routine
and settled way of working, you can plot each stage over your cycle
and always know what you should be doing and when, conﬁdent that
you’re working at the best time and getting the most out of your 
abilities.
After you’ve done this, you will be ready to plot the other work you’ve
got to do, bearing in mind that most of us are helped by having some
variety in our working day. Taking notes, reading or writing for long
periods can be very tiring. We need rest periods and changes of activ-
ity to maintain our efﬁciency levels. The same applies if you’re working
on just one of the subjects you’re studying. It helps if you can create
variety by working on more than one of your subjects each day. In this
way you’re better able to return to each subject with your ideas fully
processed and a level of detachment that helps you see things more
clearly.
Nevertheless, too much variety and too many changes of activ-
ities, can be confusing. It splinters and fragments our work, making it 
134
Research

difﬁcult to see all the contrasts and connections, and to develop 
the depth of understanding that comes from sustained work. So you 
will need to create the right balance between the activities and between
the subjects you’re studying to make each day both interesting and
productive.
For the same reasons, try to give yourself sufﬁcient time to process
the ideas between each session on a particular subject or activity, so
you can use the ideas convincingly. In effect you’re timetabling not just
to make sure you do everything you have to, but, more important, to
ensure that you develop the best understanding of your subjects. This
is a cumulative process, in which we build on what we’ve already
achieved until we understand a topic well, and can recall and control
the ideas conﬁdently. It’s likely to take a number of sessions of reading,
note-taking and thinking until we’re sure we have the ideas under our
control.
In view of the importance of giving ourselves time to digest and
process the ideas, try to divide up each study session into manageable
periods of, say, two hours, with relaxation in between. This might be
just a thirty-minute break while you have coffee with friends, but it will
give your mind time to process and organise the ideas, helping you to
see them with greater clarity and objectivity. As a result, you’ll ﬁnd that
you’re now able to criticise, discuss and evaluate the ideas you’ve read,
rather than just absorb them uncritically. However, the break should
not be too long, otherwise you’ll waste time by having to go through
the warming up stage again, as you re-read passages to get back into
the ideas.
 Be speciﬁc
Finally, as you construct your timetable be as speciﬁc as possible. The
timetables that work least well are those that are vague, that lack 
speciﬁc detail. If we are unsure about the time a task should take,
Parkinson’s Law will take over and we’ll ﬁnd we’re working too long,
having insufﬁcient breaks and getting done only a fraction of what we
could have done.
To avoid these problems be as speciﬁc as you can: about the number
of hours you will work each week and each day; about the length of
each session, so that you always work at your peak efﬁciency and you
have enough breaks; and about the time each task should take you.
Make sure you’re clear about the subject you’re going to be studying,
Your Own Personal Timetable
135

136
Research
and the activity of each study period – reading, note-taking, planning,
writing and so on.
And, equally important, try to be speciﬁc about your relaxation. 
Don’t underestimate the importance of giving yourself a clear goal to
work to: a treat to enjoy at the end of your work as a reward for the
hard work you’ve done. You’ll be less likely to search for any diversion
that will take you away from your studies to relieve the burden of
unstructured hours of work. You will ﬁnd yourself wasting less time
urgently sharpening pencils or strolling along your bookshelves allow-
ing your attention to be grabbed by just about anything that might be
there.
What’s more, plan to do something that marks a clear contrast with
your work. If you’ve been reading for two hours, it may not be the best
form of relaxation to give yourself an hour off to read a novel you’re
half way through, even though it might be thoroughly engrossing. It
might be better to do some exercise, go for a run, or a swim, or just
go for a walk. Or you might do something creative, like playing music,
sketching, or painting. You might work on your car, or start building a
bookcase in your study. The point is if you’re working harder, you must
play harder; and if this means that you plan your work, then you must
plan your play too.
In a nutshell
•
Decide how many hours each day you’re going to study.
•
Plan your relaxation – the right balance between work and relaxation.
•
Decide when you work best – plot work that calls for the highest
levels of concentration.
•
Plot each of the ﬁve stages of essay writing.
•
Make sure you have enough variety between the subjects and activ-
ities in each day – but don’t fragment your work too much.
•
Give yourself time between each session to process the ideas so you
can use them convincingly.
•
Divide each session into manageable periods of, say, two hours, with
breaks in between.
•
Be speciﬁc – about the time for study each day/week, the length of
each session, the time a task should take, the subject and activity of
each session, and relaxation.

Your Own Personal Timetable
137
Assignment
6
Plan your personal timetable
In this assignment take a copy of the personal timetable, or two or three
copies, if you’re working on a two- or three-week cycle. Work your way
carefully through each of the four stages above, taking particular care to
be as speciﬁc as you can about times and activities. When you’ve com-
pleted this, check it against the eight-point checklist above.
Then work with it, say for a month or two. You will ﬁnd that some
things won’t work immediately, because you’re having to adjust to
working this way. Other things you will have to ﬁne tune, because some
jobs may be done better on other days or at different times. But don’t
make too many changes too soon. You will have to give it enough time
for you to see a pattern emerging before you can think about the adjust-
ments you might need to make.
Remember, in the long run the only reliable indicators of whether this
is working are: 
•
whether you’re getting your work done on time;
•
whether you’re getting better grades;
•
whether you are able to use more of your own ideas and your 
abilities;
•
and whether you’re less stressed about your work.
 The next stage
Re-organising your pattern of study in the ways I’ve suggested in this
stage can noticeably improve your work within a short time. The most
immediate impact will be on your ability to process ideas actively and
to access your own ideas, rather than simply reproducing those you
ﬁnd in your sources. Moreover, with a more sophisticated retrieval
system you will ﬁnd you have at your ﬁngertips a wealth of interesting
material for your essays. This, and a well-organised timetable, will give
you more opportunity to develop those abilities that your syllabuses
set out to assess.
As we’ve seen, a key element in this has been our organisation. 
And this is no less true of the next stage of essay writing: planning.
Examiners regularly report that students lose marks not because they
don’t understand the subject, nor because they lack the ability, but

because their poor organisation has resulted in essays that are irrele-
vant and confusing. And, like the organisation of our retrieval system
and our time, the results of well organised planning can be almost
immediate. Students accustomed to getting just average marks for their
essays ﬁnd themselves regularly getting marks that are two or three
grades higher.
138
Research

Stage 3
Planning

This page intentionally left blank 

INTRODUCTION
As a result of what we did in the last stage, you should now have a
wealth of material to work with. Moreover, you should feel more con-
ﬁdent not just that you understand it well, but that you’ve success-
fully integrated it with your own ideas and made it your own. You’ve
processed it thoroughly at all levels: for comprehension; for analysis
and structure; and for criticism and evaluation. This should have left
you with clearly structured notes taken from what you’ve read, which
also record your own responses to the ideas in the form of criticism
and evaluation.
What’s more, you’ve now organised your retrieval system and your
time to ensure that you catch the best material, including your own
ideas, wherever and whenever it presents itself. You are, then, in a
much better position to meet the demands of an essay that asks you
to use the higher cognitive skills: to criticise, discuss and evaluate a
claim or an argument. Given this, you can now move on to plan your
essay; a stage that many regard as the most important, yet the most
neglected. In this stage we will look not just at planning the essay, but
at how this can improve your memory, your revision for the exam, and
your exam technique.
 Planning the essay
Without a plan you will always struggle to produce your best work. The
plan gives your essay a clear structure for examiners to follow as they
navigate their way through ideas and arguments that are unfamiliar to
them. Without this you’re likely to lose them, and if they can’t see why
your arguments are relevant, or they can’t see what you’re doing and
why, they cannot give you marks, no matter how good your work might
be. Even your weakest arguments gain strength from planning. A 
carefully planned structure, which is clear, logical and relevant to the
question, lends support to an argument that, on its own, might not 
be completely convincing.
In this stage we will look at the beneﬁts of rehearsing your argu-
ments in detail before you write, by planning an essay we inter-
preted and brainstormed in the ﬁrst stage. In this way we are able 
to make sure that all of our arguments are relevant, that they are 
clearly and consistently argued, and that we have sufﬁcient evi-
dence to support them. It also reduces the risk of omitting some really
141

important section or argument that is central to the issues raised by
the essay.
What’s more, by rehearsing your arguments in detail you will avoid
the problem of trying to do the two most difﬁcult things in writing, at
the same time: pinning down your ideas clearly, and then summoning
up the words and phrases that will convey them accurately.
To do this effectively we have to work through two stages: editing,
and ordering the ideas. We will see that if the essay is to succeed we
have to learn to be ruthless in cutting out irrelevant material that we
may have worked hard to collect. Otherwise we will pass on problems
to later stages and, if they’re not dealt with there, they will seriously
weaken the clarity and logical structure of our essay. They will cloud
the structure with unnecessary distractions that weaken our argu-
ments, and break up the logical sequence we’ve worked hard to create.
The same applies to ordering our ideas, if we are to create logical
coherence and give our essay more persuasive force.
 Planning for the examination
However, the value of planning stretches beyond this. The plans we
produce for our essays provide the core of our revision material,
making it much easier for us to recall the arguments and evidence we
need to use in the exam. We will look at the ways in which we can
improve our exam technique and our revision by planning the typical
questions that are set on the topics on the syllabus; and we will look
at how the memory works and what we can do to improve it.
142
Planning

143
19 Planning that Makes 
a Difference
In this chapter you will learn:
•
how you can avoid losing the reader by planning carefully;
•
how to strengthen your weakest arguments through planning;
•
how to rehearse your arguments in detail before you write.
After completing the ﬁrst two stages (interpretation and research), the
plan of the essay should now be taking shape within your mind. In
many cases it may not be very different from the original pattern notes
you generated in the brainstorming session prior to the research.
 The importance of planning
Nevertheless, careful thoughtful planning, in which you rehearse your
arguments in as much detail as you can muster, is vital. It will not only
improve the structure of your essay, making it more coherent and
logical, but it will make the business of writing a lot easier. Indeed, it
is always possible to tell the difference between an essay that has been
planned and one that hasn’t.
Avoid losing your reader
Reading somebody else’s work is like entering an unfamiliar city: you
can get lost easily, you’re dependent upon others to give you direc-
tions, and even worse, you really don’t know why you’re there in the
ﬁrst place, unless somebody else tells you. The plan of the essay, 
therefore, represents the city map, and the introduction and the ‘topic
sentence’ at the beginning of each paragraph (Stage 4) are the writer’s

attempt to let readers know where they are being taken, which turn-
ings they will be taking along the way, and why.
Without the plan and its clear development in the body of the 
essay, you will most certainly lose the examiners reading your 
work, and if they are lost they cannot give you marks, no matter 
how well argued your point is, or how skilfully it is supported by 
evidence. If they cannot see why a passage is relevant, they must 
ignore it. They are not expected to make great efforts on your behalf
to try to make sense of your work, to ﬁll in the gaps that you’ve left.
They must accept it on face value, otherwise they could ﬁnd them-
selves spending more time on your essay – making more allowances
for what they thought you meant to say – than on the work of other
students.
Examiners regularly report that students fail examinations, or just
do badly, not because they don’t know the subject, not because they
haven’t got the abilities, nor even because they lack the knowledge,
but because they lose the reader, who is unable to discover why their
work is relevant to the question. Almost always this comes down to
the lack of planning.
The comments of one professor at Harvard are not untypical:
One common problem is the meandering paper, one that wanders from
one thinker to another, from summaries of concepts to counterarguments
to restatements of the paper topic, without a clear plan or logical pro-
gression.1
Planning strengthens weaker points
In fact the beneﬁts of this go even further. By providing your readers
with a sequence of obvious logical steps, so they can follow your train
of thought, you give yourself an invaluable safety net. In many cases a
weak or poorly deﬁned point will gain strength and precision from
being a step in a clear logical argument.
We all experience this when we come across an unfamiliar word: in
most cases we can deduce its meaning from the context in which it’s
used. Examiners are no different. When they read your essay and come
across a set of phrases or explanations that seem unclear, if they are
part of a set of arguments and points thoughtfully planned in a logical
sequence, your meaning will probably be all too obvious. Your argu-
ments will gain strength and clarity from the clear, well planned context
in which they are developed.
144
Planning

Rehearsing the detail before you write
But it’s not just a clear logical sequence that’s created in planning:
we’re also able to sort out the main ideas and the important details we
need in order to explain, illustrate and develop them. Doing so reduces
the risk of omitting an important section or argument that is central
to the issues raised by the essay.
Even so, it would be unwise to be so rigid that you cannot move
away from your plan. Some new idea or relationship may occur to you
and you might need to re-organise your material to include it. But be
careful that this is really useful material for your argument, and not
just irrelevant padding. Ultimately, the test of good planning comes
when you rehearse your arguments in detailed note form before you
write. At this point you make sure you’ve predicted what you need and
you’ve rehearsed how you’re going to use it, so there should be no
last-minute changes.
Nevertheless, beyond the need to get high marks for your essay, plan-
ning has a still more important role to play: it’s indispensable if you’re
to understand the subject. This is the opportunity to rehearse your argu-
ments in note form so you can see how well you’ve understood the ideas.
It always surprises me to ﬁnd how many students still choose not to
plan, and therefore force themselves to do the two most difﬁcult things
in writing, both at the same time: that is, to summon up the ideas and
plan the order in which they ought to be developed, and at the same
time to search for the right words to convey them with just the right
strength and nuance, in order to develop the argument in the direction
they’ve chosen. This is a task that is virtually impossible for all but the
most familiar subjects that we’ve written about many times before.
 Rehearsing your arguments in linear form
Rehearsing our ideas in the plan calls for different skills and techniques
from those used in the brainstorming stage. As a result, some students
feel more comfortable rehearsing their ideas in linear form, rather than
the pattern-note form they used in the interpretation stage. Even so,
in all the seminars I’ve run, in general, students appear to be equally
divided between linear and pattern notes for the planning stage.
Nevertheless, there are clear differences between the two stages.
Rehearsing ideas is a deliberate step-by-step process, unlike the
imaginative ﬂow of ideas in brainstorming, so if you feel more 
Planning that Makes a Difference
145

comfortable converting your pattern notes into the linear form prior 
to writing, this might make sense. But remember the importance of
ﬂexibility. Some assignments lend themselves more easily to pattern
notes throughout, while others call for a combination of the two.
In the examination under timed conditions, when you want to
capture the ideas quickly as they come tumbling out, pattern notes are
clearly the most useful. But outside of that, when you’re writing an
essay on a subject for the ﬁrst time and you’re not pressed for time,
you’ll ﬁnd the step-by-step patient rehearsal of your arguments in
linear form gives you more control.
146
Planning
Practice exercise
11
Rehearsing your arguments in linear form
Question
‘Advertisers seek only to ensure that consumers make informed
choices.’ Discuss.
In the interpretation stage you brainstormed this question in pattern-
note form. With those notes in front of you convert them into linear
notes, rehearsing your arguments in the sort of detail you would need
if you were to write the essay.
Then compare your notes with those below. Your notes may not be
quite so detailed, but it will give you a clear idea of the level of detail
you need to aim for in order to answer most of the problems you’re likely
to face when you come to write.
Answer: linear plan – rehearsing the arguments
‘Advertisers seek only to ensure that consumers make informed
choices.’ Discuss.
A
Advertisement
1.
Just informative:
e.g.
railway timetable
(a)
no catchy jingles – ‘Let the train take the strain’

(b)
no persuasive messages – ‘Children travel free’
(c)
just information:
(i)
routes
(ii)
times – departures and arrivals
(iii)
platform numbers
But intention = crucial characteristic:
(i)
to demonstrate it’s more convenient, efﬁcient, and
less stressful to travel by train
(ii)
e.g.
fête notice – nothing but information – but
intention = to encourage people to attend, in
order to raise funds for local causes
2.
therefore, information = surface appearance
•
what matters = intention – to suggest/persuade us to adopt 
certain course of action
B
Informative
•
all but a few = informative
1.
Some only concerned with giving information:
e.g.
public information – changes in regulations & rates of 
taxation
government warnings – smoking, use of domestic ﬁre 
alarms
2.
Others give information while covertly promoting their 
products:
•
information about:
(a)
New products & technology:
(i)
computer tech. & software
(ii)
telecommunications, e.g. mobile phones
(iii)
entertainment/hobbies:
Planning that Makes a Difference
147

•
digital tech. – TVs, cameras
•
music systems
•
video recorders
But rarely just information:
suggestion = we can’t afford not to keep up with progress
(b)
New designs:
e.g.
fashions/clothes
household equipment – washing machines, 
dishwashers, microwaves
Suggestion = we can’t afford to allow o/selves to fall behind
our friends & neighbours – comparisons/envy/
conspicuous consumption – you are what you
own
C
But not the ‘only’ thing they do:
•
overt manipulation
1.
Selective use of information:
•
says what’s good about the product, but omits the bad
e.g.
car accelerates 0–60 in 6 secs – but omits to tell you
that it has a record of rusting in 5 years
e.g.
the latest printer that can do more than any other
printer on the market – but omits to tell you that
the print cartridge costs 5 times as much as any
other printer
2.
Uses information out of context:
•
uses only those comments that appear to be in favour of
the product in a report that is critical of it
e.g.
a critical report by a consumer association
e.g.
unfavourable comments of an art, literary or
theatre critic ignored by promoters who comb
through the article for isolated expressions of
approval
148
Planning

3.
Association:
•
associates information about the product with strong 
feelings and desires
(a)
Sex – associates product with sexual desires
e.g.
cars – clothes – perfume – alcohol
(b)
Status – respect for authority
e.g.
prestige of science – laboratory coats worn by
those promoting washing powders, vacuum
cleaners, dishwashers, detergents
(c)
Popular/respected public ﬁgures
e.g.
sports-men & -women/TV personalities selling
mobile phones, health drinks, clothes, deodor-
ants, shampoos
(d)
Prejudices:
(i)
sexual stereotypes
(ii)
class – accents
(iii)
weight/size
(iv)
race
(e)
Subliminal manipulation through association:
(i)
to reduce shoplifting – messages like ‘I will not
steal,’ ‘I will be honest.’ 
1970s experiment = 30% reduction in shoplifting
(ii)
Dangers:
a)
political & social manipulation
re. Aldous Huxley, Brave New World Revisited
b)
promoting commercial interests
subconscious manipulation to buy unwanted
products
4.
Distorts:
(a)
archetypal characters & scenarios created to evoke pre-
dictable responses:
(i)
that we all want to be slim – that large people are
associated with social failure & self-indulgence
(ii)
that we all believe that to ﬁnd the dishes aren’t clean
when they come out of the dishwasher is a major
life crisis
(iii)
that we all believe if our neighbour were to discover
that our kitchen ﬂoor was not spotless this would
Planning that Makes a Difference
149

be a disgrace we would have to carry through the
rest of our lives
(iv)
induces us to feel bad about ourselves – discontent
fuels consumerism
(b)
appeals made to some imagined social consensus – to
‘basic’ or ‘shared’ values:
(i)
that we all want the fastest car on the road
(ii)
that we all want to keep up with the neighbours
(iii)
that we all worry endlessly about being seen out in
last year’s fashions
(c)
myths created and sustained by the media to sell products
e.g.
that housewives are paranoid about the whiteness
of their wash and the cleanliness of their ﬂoors
 In the next chapter
Now that you’ve done this you will be aware not only of the 
importance of working on your ideas in this sort of detail, but of the
problems it presents in ﬁrst editing your ideas and then ordering them.
In the next chapter we will tackle these two problems in more detail.
Note
1 Michael Sandel, Writing in Moral Reasoning, 22: Justice (Cambridge, Mass.: 
University of Harvard, 2000).
150
Planning

151
20 Editing and Ordering
your Material
In this chapter you will learn:
•
how to edit your material to create a structure in your essay that is
clear and logical;
•
how to order your ideas to develop arguments that are consistent
and persuasive;
•
how to make sure the examiners are left with the right impression of
your work.
Planning your essays in this way involves routinely working through
two quite distinct stages: editing, and ordering your material. Neither
of them can be rushed: you must work through them carefully and
deliberately.
Both call for what you might describe as the personality proﬁle of a
military planner: inexhaustible supplies of quiet patience matched by
cool ruthlessness. There will be ideas, arguments and evidence with
which you have developed a strong emotional bond, but you may have
to cut them out and abandon them without a tear, if the essay is to
succeed. However painful it is to realise that some of the material
you’ve worked hard to collect is irrelevant to this essay, you cannot
shirk the responsibility. If you do, you will pass on problems to later
stages and, if they’re not dealt with there, they will seriously weaken
the clarity and logical structure of your essay.
 Editing
Unless you’ve spent enough time interpreting the question, editing the
material you’ve collected can be a tortuous nightmare. We are all quite

naturally reluctant to give up material that we’ve struggled hard to
uncover and record, especially if it includes particularly interesting
points that we know will impress our reader. It’s not surprising, then,
that without a clear criterion by which you can decide what’s relevant
and what’s not, you will ﬁnd it difﬁcult, if not impossible, to resist using
material that’s not relevant.
This will have the effect of clouding the structure of your essay 
with unnecessary distractions that weaken your arguments, and break
up the logical sequence you’ve worked hard to create. On the other
hand, however, with a clear interpretation of the implications of the
question, it is so much easier to be uncompromisingly ruthless with
your material.
 Ordering
Although you don’t have the same heart-wrenching problems of 
ditching material you’ve become attached to, you still need an iron 
will in ordering your ideas, if you’re to avoid the same problem of 
being dictated to by your sources. It can simply be very difﬁcult to
abandon the order in which we recorded the notes in the ﬁrst 
place.
Some people ﬁnd that keeping their notes on index cards helps in
sorting out and selecting their material: they can change the order of
the cards, and their ideas, much more easily than if they are recorded
on continuous sheets of paper in the order the notes were taken from
the texts. Others use just one side of the paper and then cut the papers
up and organise them. Both methods give you more control over your
material. They free you from the sense of being dictated to by your
sources.
In general it makes sense to arrange your ideas in ascending 
order: from the simplest to the most complex. Logically this makes
sense, particularly if the clarity of your most complex arguments
depends upon how convincingly you’ve used your simpler, more
obvious arguments to build a basis for them. But it also makes 
psychological sense in that in dealing with the most subtle and 
impressive arguments at the end of the essay you leave your exam-
iners with the impression that the whole of your essay was of 
that quality. Hopefully, you will have left them with a well developed,
interesting argument to think over as they consider what mark to
award you.
152
Planning

The notes
1
Outline the main types of law – common law – judicial precedent
– statute law – conventions
2
Refusal justiﬁed when:
(a)
Government has no popular legitimacy – lacks majority
support – authoritarian governments
e.g.
South Africa/apartheid
(b)
Government is legitimate, but the majority tyrannises a
minority
e.g.
Germany – Nazi Government – 1935 Nuremberg 
Laws
e.g.
USA – 1960s Civil Rights – segregation – M. L. 
King
(c)
Government extends its powers too far – restricting the 
liberties of the individual unnecessarily.
Editing and Ordering your Material
153
Practice exercise
12
Editing and ordering your material
Question
Are there any circumstances where the individual is justiﬁed in 
refusing to obey a law?
Interpret the question above as you did in the ﬁrst stage: write a state-
ment outlining as fully as you can the meaning and implications of the
question. For this exercise you don’t need to brainstorm the question as
you are given, below, a set of notes to edit and then order into a plan
for the essay; but your interpretation should give you a clear idea of what
you expect to see as relevant to the question.
Once you’ve done this, go through the notes below, deciding what 
you think is relevant and what needs to be cut. Then, order what’s left into
a plan in linear-note form, indicating how you would tackle this essay.
After you’ve completed it, compare your plan with the one given below.

(d)
There is a conﬂict between the legal and moral obligations of
the individual. Question: Which takes precedence?
e.g.
moral obligation to help a friend by not turning him
over to the police, who believe he has committed an
offence
3
Give the reasons why Mahatma Gandhi deliberately broke the law
in non-violent direct action to bring about the peaceful withdrawal
of British power from India.
4
Problem = when government is legitimate and the law conﬂicts
with individual conscience and principles, such as paciﬁsm
e.g.
Quakers refusing to pay that proportion of their taxes that
is spent on nuclear weapons
5
Danger = social breakdown – it allows individuals to pick and
choose the laws they will obey and those they won’t.
6
Describe the campaign of civil disobedience launched by the suf-
fragettes in 1906 to get the vote for women.
7
Note the arguments put forward by A. V. Dicey for the importance
of the Rule of Law in ensuring regular, non-arbitrary government.
8
The government should only restrict the freedom of individuals
when their actions are likely to cause harm to others (John Stuart
Mill):
(a)
If you shout offensive racial remarks at people in public the
government should intervene to restrict your doing this.
(b)
You have freedom of speech but the government should
restrict this freedom if you publish pornographic material
that can be shown to cause people harm, e.g. rape, child
abuse, etc.
(c)
The government should intervene to prevent employers
sacking staff for no reason at all without any hearing or 
compensation.
(d)
The government is justiﬁed in restricting your freedom when
your actions cause physical harm to others, e.g. passive
smoking.
154
Planning

9
But should the government be free to intervene and restrict your
freedom when your actions cause harm to yourself only, e.g.
smoking, wearing crash helmets?
10
Give an account of the ideas of those who have made important
contributions to the debate:
Socrates
Henry Thoreau
Peter Kropotkin
Martin Luther King
John Rawls
The plan
Question
Are there any circumstances where the individual is justiﬁed in refus-
ing to obey a law?
1
Problem: Government encroachment on our freedoms v. the danger
of social breakdown if individuals are allowed to pick and choose
the laws they will obey and those they won’t
2
Government with no popular legitimacy – lacks majority support:
Refusing to obey the law = justiﬁed
•
authoritarian governments, e.g. South Africa/apartheid
3
Government is legitimate:
(a)
But the majority tyrannises a minority:
Refusing to obey the law = justiﬁed
e.g.
Germany – Nazi Government – 1935 Nuremberg Laws
e.g.
USA – 1960s Civil Rights – segregation – M. L. King.
(b)
Problem = when government is legitimate and the law conﬂicts
with individual conscience and principles
e.g.
Quakers refusing to pay that proportion of their taxes
that is spent on nuclear weapons, because of paciﬁst
principles
Editing and Ordering your Material
155

4
Conscience/principles: Problem = Government extends its powers
too far – restricting the liberties of the individual unnecessarily.
(a)
Extent of power ‘harm’ – Governments should only restrict the
freedom of individuals when their actions are likely to cause
harm to others (John Stuart Mill):
(i)
But should governments be free to intervene and restrict
your freedom when your actions cause harm to yourself
only, e.g. smoking, wearing crash helmets?
(ii)
Governments are justiﬁed in restricting your freedom
when your actions cause physical harm to others, e.g.
passive smoking.
(iii)
Justiﬁed if you cause psychological harm?
e.g.
If you shout offensive racial remarks at people in
public?
(iv)
Moral harm? You have freedom of speech but the gov-
ernment is justiﬁed in restricting this if you publish
pornographic material that can be shown to cause
people harm, e.g. rape, child abuse.
(v)
Economic harm? The government is justiﬁed in re-
stricting the freedom of employers to sack staff for no
reason without any hearing or compensation.
(b)
Precedence – Question: Where there is a conﬂict between the
legal and moral obligations of the individual, which takes
precedence?
e.g.
moral obligation to help a friend by not turning him
over to the police, who believe he has committed an
offence
Editing
Of course, as you haven’t made these notes yourself, you can only take
them on face value: you cannot go beyond what’s given, in the belief
that if you search you may ﬁnd something that’s relevant. In fact, not
being able to do this makes it easier for you to decide what’s relevant
and what’s not.
We can all appreciate how difﬁcult it might be for someone who has
done the research, to dump material like that contained in items 3, 6
and 10. If you have slowly worked your way through passages that are
very closely argued, taking out a lot of material that you thought might
be useful, it will be hard to ditch it. It’s not that it’s irrelevant, but it
156
Planning

has to be used with more discrimination than is proposed here, which
appears to be a straightforward description of the material. Far better
would be to select from the material, quotations and evidence that
would support the arguments you want to make elsewhere in the essay.
In fact the same can be said for items 1 and 7, both of which again
appear to be descriptions for the sake of description. It might be useful
to know the different types of law and Dicey’s arguments for the impor-
tance of regular, rather than arbitrary law, but you will have to make
this case out: you will have to justify why you think this is relevant. For
example, there may be different implications for the question depend-
ing on the type of law involved, although on the face of it this appears
unlikely.
Ordering
Having edited the material, you are now left to order your ideas from
the simple to the complex and, as in this case, from the peripheral
issues to those that are central. It seems that the best strategy is to
work from those situations in which there appears least doubt and very
limited discussion as to whether disobedience is justiﬁed, to those
cases where there is real doubt. In this way you will ensure that your
essay delivers you at the point that gives you the opportunity to discuss
all the important issues.
The obvious starting point, then, is with those governments who
pass unjust laws or laws that lack the legitimacy of popular support.
Few of us would not see some justiﬁcation in the actions of those, like
Steve Biko and Nelson Mandela, who refused to comply with laws
passed as part of the apartheid policies of the South African govern-
ment, which was supported by only a minority white population.
The more difﬁcult case is that of a democratically legitimate gov-
ernment such as that in Germany during the Third Reich, which passed
policies aimed at the minority Jewish population, denying them rights
as citizens to practise their profession and to marry non-Jewish
persons. Yet, again, few of us would have much difﬁculty in com-
mending those who bravely refused to comply with the law, and
rescued Jews who otherwise would have been sent to extermination
camps.
So, perhaps the most difﬁcult case that raises the issues we all have
to consider is that of a legitimate government that is not tyrannising a
minority, yet is passing laws that conﬂict with what we consider to be
our moral obligations. In short, what should we do when our moral
obligations conﬂict with our legal obligations?
Editing and Ordering your Material
157

This, in turn, appears to raise two distinct issues. The ﬁrst can be
described as the extent of government – the claim that a government
can only rightfully restrict the freedoms of individuals when their
actions do harm to others. Of course, this part of your discussion will
turn on the various interpretations of the concept of ‘harm’: physical,
psychological, moral, economic, etc. The second problem is that of
precedence: when there is a conﬂict, which should take precedence,
our moral or our legal obligations?
158
Planning
Assignment
7
Editing, ordering and rehearsing 
your arguments
First, edit your material, cutting out any ideas you think are irrelevant
to the question. Be ruthless. Even though you may like some of the argu-
ments, because you know they will impress the reader, or because they
have the sort of impact you want, cut them out if they are not strictly
relevant to the issues raised by the question.
Then, order your ideas, paying particular attention to ascendancy 
and ﬂuency. Start with the weakest or the simplest argument, and move
to the strongest. Try to envisage how you will move from one idea to 
the next. Think about the types of transition you will use to create ﬂuency
between paragraphs.
Once you’ve got the overall structure clear, move to the content of the
essay. Your aim is to see clearly how you will develop your arguments:
how you will analyse points and concepts, make contrasts and compari-
sons, synthesise ideas from different sources, extend arguments consis-
tently, and illustrate and support your points with evidence. So, as you
go through the plan try to get an accurate measure of each argument,
the links between them, and the logical ﬂow of the whole essay. You’re
trying to put yourself in the position of writing the essay without actu-
ally writing it. In this way you will confront all the problems now before
you write – there will be no nasty surprises.
Finally, when you’ve ﬁnished, check that you’ve left nothing out: 
that you’ve answered the question relevantly and completely; that you
haven’t overlooked a major section or issue raised by the question; and
that you haven’t left important points vulnerable without sufﬁcient 
evidence.

Now that you’ve completed two practice exercises, on editing and
ordering your material, and on rehearsing your ideas in detail, it’s time
to do the same with the question you originally chose from one of your
courses. You’ve interpreted this question and completed the research
on it. In the following assignment, you are creating the plan from which
you will write the essay.
 In the next chapter
In this assignment we’ve gone as close as we can to writing the essay
without actually doing so. There are very few essays that don’t beneﬁt
from this. If we fail to do it, there will always be unforeseen problems
that slow down our writing and break up the ﬂow of our words. Even
more important, as we will see in the next two chapters, having
rehearsed our arguments we will be left, for each question, with plans
that will be invaluable in the exam, when we have to reproduce the
arguments under timed conditions.
Editing and Ordering your Material
159

160
21 Planning for the Exam
In this chapter you will learn:
•
about the importance of planning in the exam;
•
how to prepare for the examination;
•
how to structure your ideas to improve your memory;
•
how mnemonics can help your recall.
 The importance of planning in the exam
If planning is vital for the writing of an essay you complete in your 
own time, it is even more important for your performance under timed
conditions.
Some students claim they simply haven’t got sufﬁcient time in the
exam to plan for ﬁve to ten minutes for each essay. Yet if you observe
their behaviour during the exam it becomes clear they still have to plan,
but in the least effective way. They will head straight into the essay
without much deliberation, then they will stop at the end of the ﬁrst
paragraph to think about what they will do in the next paragraph. One
to two minutes might pass before they head off again into their work,
only to stop again for more thought to decide what they will do next.
This happens, say, seven or eight times for each essay, amounting to
twelve to ﬁfteen minutes of planning on the run.
As a result they have, in fact, planned the essay, probably spend-
ing more time than they would have done if they had planned at the
start. And, of course, they’ve planned in the worst possible way.
Without much doubt, ideas will have come to them out of sequence,
making little logical sense to the examiner. In turn this will have dis-
sipated any ﬂuency they might have created. In contrast, if they had
planned at the start this would have left them free to write con-

tinuously and ﬂuently, without interruption, until they had completed
the question.
It’s not difﬁcult to see, therefore, that planning in the exam is vital
to produce a well written and ﬂuently argued piece of work. Only by
preparing a plan can you maintain control over your material and
present your ideas in a logical, concise and coherent manner, with
support from well chosen, relevant evidence.
 Improving your memory for the exam
The advantages don’t stop there. Not only does planning improve the
quality of your writing and your discussion in the exam, but in terms
of  simple recall a plan is vital. As you probably know from your own
experience, the mind only works in structures. Think how difﬁcult it is
to remember isolated items, like those things you’ve got to do through-
out the day, or a quotation, or a few lines from a play. Presented with
this sort of task, the mind attempts to create a structure, either out of
the thing itself, like a telephone number you remember because you
can see a descending or ascending structure within it, or by relating it
to other structured information you already have.
Remembering telephone numbers
Descending
444332
99877
Ascending
22344
6788
Groups
553377
881144
Bookends
683368
532453
Arithmetic progressions:
Even numbers
02468
Odd numbers
13579
Geometric progressions
24816
Mirror images
341143
Repeats
651651
934934
Planning for the Exam
161

Signiﬁcant dates
1945
1066
1666
1789
Sandwiches
650465
91891
This explains why it is that those with the most active minds, those
people who are genuinely interested in a subject, can remember a sur-
prising amount of detail, over a wide range of topics. We all know
friends who don’t seem particularly bright in class, but who, if you get
them on a subject they ﬁnd really interesting, like baseball, cricket or
football, can recall a staggering amount of detail: batting averages of
players, how many times a particular team has won a particular trophy,
who scored most goals or made the most runs in a season, and so on.
They can even analyse the most complex abstract concept, like a
googly or a ﬂipper in cricket – concepts that are as difﬁcult to picture
in your mind’s eye and then analyse, as any scientiﬁc or academic
concept, like a black hole or the conditions likely to bring about an
economic recession. For example, Chambers Dictionary describes the
googly as ‘. . . an off-breaking ball with an apparent leg-break action
on the part of a right-arm bowler to a right-handed batsman, or con-
versely for a left-arm bowler’.
 Needs are the secret to learning 
and remembering
The point is that we only learn when we have a need to. It’s easy to
see, then, that those people who appear to know and remember a great
deal are just good at creating needs. Our friend who might not do well
in his college work, can show all the intellectual skills when it comes
to cricket or baseball, because he’s interested in these subjects and,
therefore, he’s better at creating needs in them. Once we’ve created
these we become active, not passive, processors of ideas and infor-
mation, and we begin to create structures out of what we know. Our
minds then take over and begin to self-organise, generating more
structures, which attach to those we ﬁrst created. And before we 
know it we can recall a vast amount of material, that we never thought
possible.
162
Planning

Just watch your friends’ or your parents’ faces when, in the middle
of a discussion, you reproduce a structure of ideas you’ve created. Not
only will you show that you can analyse the most difﬁcult argument or
concept, but you will demonstrate that you can remember a range of
material from different sources, all of it relevant to a thoughtful, well
constructed argument. And it will happen, almost without you realis-
ing, as a result of knowing just two things: how to create structures,
and the need to create them.
To illustrate the point, take the following simple task.
Planning for the Exam
163
Practice exercise
13
Remembering through structures
Here is a list of ten items you’ve got to purchase at the local super-
market. Look at them for about thirty seconds, committing them to
memory. Then cover them and try to recall them.
carrots
yoghurt
tomatoes
beans
wine
butter
milk
gin
cheese
potatoes
Most students are able to recall six to eight items, but only those 
used to the most active form of processing get all ten. What most of
these do is to process the list into a structure, something like the 
following:
1
Vegetables:
(a)
carrots
(b)
tomatoes
(c)
beans
(d)
potatoes

2
Dairy products:
(a)
yoghurt
(b)
butter
(c)
milk
(d)
cheese
3
Drinks:
(a)
wine
(b)
gin
With this, the mind has a much simpler job: instead of having to
remember ten items it only has to remember three, knowing that once
these have been recalled the rest will come without a problem. In fact
this is no different from what you would have done normally if you
were, indeed, shopping for these items. It would make obvious sense
to group the items in this way so you could reduce the number of times
you had to move between sections of the supermarket. You would know
there were four things you needed to buy at the vegetable section,
before you moved on to the next, and so on.
 Using mnemonics
The only alternative to this is to resort to some form of mnemonics, a
deliberately created device to help you remember. Most of these consist
of phrases created from the ﬁrst letter of each word you want to
remember. Some children are taught to remember the seven colours 
of the rainbow by learning the meaningless phrase: ‘Richard of York
gained battles in vain’ – red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo and
violet. But the better mnemonics are built on a rhyming or rhythmical
phrase, particularly if this is well-known: a hymn, a popular song, an
advertising jingle, or a well-known poem.
Nevertheless, this is just another way of structuring what you know
– only, rather than create your own structure you borrow one. The least
effective are those that create meaningless sentences, and therefore
have no purchase on your own experience. If you’ve never studied
English medieval history, a phrase concerning Richard of York ﬁghting
battles might be difﬁcult for you to remember. In these cases you’re
forced to commit them to memory by repeating them to yourself over
and over again. This is not only tedious, to say the least, but it also
ignores the way the mind works naturally and effectively.
164
Planning

Memory is ‘integrative’: we remember things best if we can ﬁt them
into what we already know. We remember wholes, rather than isolated
parts, so, if we’re going to remember something, it must make sense
in terms of what we already know. It must ﬁt within the structures
we’ve already created for ourselves, or within those that have already
been created for us, as in advertising jingles or traditional songs.
Although this may seem, at times, trivial and contrived, there’s no
doubt that there are occasions, when we’re presented with an unstruc-
tured list that cannot be broken down into its own categories. In these
circumstances a mnemonic may be the only answer.
But no matter what way you choose to help your memory, just
remember: what we store in our mind is not isolated facts, but complex
clusters of information and ideas, centred on some familiar keyword
or concept. We may create these ourselves, or we may be forced to ﬁnd
them in a familiar jingle. But when we hear, read or recall them they
trigger off the whole cluster. This explains why the structured note-
taking techniques like pattern and linear notes are so effective. But if
you can’t generate your own structure, be prepared to use the rhyming
jingle or a familiar line from a poem. They will certainly work better
than a mere list or an unstructured summary.
 In the next chapter
Planning in this way makes our revision and the exams themselves 
so much simpler. In the next chapter we will look at what you can do
to make sure that you’re able to reproduce the same quality of essay
within the exam as you can outside.
Planning for the Exam
165

166
22 Revising for the Exam
In this chapter you will learn:
•
how to use plans as your core revision material;
•
how to take much of the stress out of revision and exams;
•
how to plan in the exam.
 Planning the typical exam questions
Given what we said in the last chapter, that the mind only works in
structures, it makes sense to prepare for the examination by planning
all the typical questions that are set on each of the topics on the 
syllabus. Once you’ve done this, when revision comes around, all 
you need to do is commit them to memory, and test yourself to see if
you can recall them within ten minutes under timed conditions as you
will have to do in the exam.
The most well-organised tutors will give their students a course
outline of all the topics on the course and then get them to list 
under each topic all the questions that have been set on each one. 
This will mean going back a number of years over past papers. In 
fact, it’s more than likely that those tutors who teach a course year 
in, year out will have already done this for students. Each year all 
they will need to do is to bring the list up to date with the most recent
questions.
When you analyse these lists into distinct types of question you will
ﬁnd that for each topic there are usually four or ﬁve typical questions
that regularly appear. It’s these that you need to plan. Your tutors will
have their own plans for these and they will no doubt give you a copy
when you’ve done yours, so that you can compare them and make
adjustments if you need to.

 The plans become your core revision material
Once this is done you will ﬁnd these plans represent the core 
material for your revision. In my revision classes we timetable 
well in advance the topics we will be revising on any given day in 
the run-up to the exam, so that everybody comes prepared with 
their revision done and their plans stored in their memories. Then 
we produce our lists of typical questions for that topic, from which 
I select a question and give the students ten minutes to produce a 
plan, in the same way they will have to in the exam. We all then take
a blank sheet of paper and try to produce our pattern or linear note
structures, whichever we’ve chosen as the right format for that 
question. Having completed that, we compare our results. Then we 
go through all the remaining typical questions on our lists in the 
same way.
As a result, revision takes on a far less daunting, less forebod-
ing presence. In effect the students know that if there are, say, six 
topics that they know will come up on the paper, and there are four
typical questions on each topic, then they have just 24 essay plans to
commit to memory and recall under timed conditions. Most of them
cope with this without any problem. Certainly it is much more 
manageable than the heaps of unstructured notes they might face 
otherwise.
To make revision even easier, throughout the year we have regular
sessions of this. As we complete each topic on our syllabus, time will
be set aside so that students can do timed essays and timed plans. As
a result, by the end of the course they will have written or planned
every typical essay question, under timed conditions. Most students
will know them well, and have very little trouble recalling and writing
them in the exam.
Even if you don’t get in the exam exactly the question you’ve revised,
your structured plans will enable you to recall all the material you need
to answer the question. It may be that you get a hybrid question that
calls upon you to select from more than one structure and then
combine the relevant parts into a new plan. It’s probably true to say
that at least 80 per cent of success in any exam is due to organisation,
and the major component of this is the structured plans you create
throughout the course, and then commit to memory, so you can recall
them in the exam.
Revising for the Exam
167

 Planning in the exam
Once you’re in the exam the same principles apply: spend the ﬁrst ﬁve
to ten minutes writing down your plan. Don’t get panicked into writing
too soon, before you have exhausted all of your ideas and got them
organised into a coherent, well structured plan, that answers the ques-
tion with strict relevance.
Indeed, there are strong reasons for going even further than this. It
makes very good sense to plan all the questions you have to do, before
you pick up your pen to write the ﬁrst one. Each time you plan an essay
you set your subconscious mind tasks to undertake and questions to
answer. Except in the strongest of questions, which you know exactly
how you’re going to answer, there are always arguments, points, evi-
dence and examples that you can’t remember exactly.
This is understandable: you’re trying to brainstorm, to get the ideas
down as quickly as possible as they come tumbling out. Therefore,
unless it’s a central issue that will shape the whole essay, you don’t
want to stop the ﬂow just to make sure you’ve got every detail on one
168
Planning
Practice exercise
14
Typical questions
Take just one topic on your syllabus, preferably one that you’ve already
covered, with which you’re fairly familiar.
You’ve already collected some past papers. Usually, around ten is suf-
ﬁcient to identify the major issues and approaches to the topic, that form
the basis for questions.
List all the questions that have appeared on the topic you’ve chosen,
recording the date on which they appeared. You should now be able to
see recurring types. Some may appear every year, others once every two
years. But it should be clear that there are only a limited number of types
of questions, say four or ﬁve.
If you ﬁnd that you have many more than this, it may be because you
don’t realise that a question differently phrased is in fact the same as
another. This is often the case. Sometimes it’s not until you try to plan
it that you realise it’s taking the same pattern as another. Therefore, if
in doubt, try planning those you’re not sure of.

particular issue exactly right; you can always come back to that after
the ﬂow of ideas has stopped. But at that point you may ﬁnd you can’t
recall all the details you wanted to use. Nevertheless, by identifying the
problem in the planning stage you will have alerted your subconscious
and, while you’re writing another question, it will be busy unearthing
what you need.
Let’s say you’re taking a three-hour exam in which you have 
to answer four essay questions, and you plan all four questions 
before you begin to write the ﬁrst one. This will mean you will spend
the ﬁrst forty minutes of the exam planning. Then, if you write your
strongest question ﬁrst and your weakest last, it will mean that your
mind will have 2 hours 25 minutes to rifﬂe through your data banks
and come up with those ideas, arguments and evidence that you
weren’t able to remember when you planned the weakest of your ques-
tions. Even with your strongest question your mind has 30 minutes,
while you’re planning the other questions, to ﬁnd the few items that
you couldn’t recall.
The common-sense of this approach is clear to most of us who 
have ever taken exams. We’ve probably all had the experience of coming
out of the examination centre with a friend, comparing what each of
us did. As we go over it, all sorts of things suddenly spring into our
minds, that we should have included but didn’t. In this situation 
what’s happening is that either we haven’t planned at all, or we’ve
planned each question just moments before we’ve written it. As a
result, the mind has been set tasks to accomplish and questions to
answer, but it has needed time for this, more than we have given it in
the exam.
The sad irony is that over the next hour or so, as the mind comes up
with what we asked it for, we’ll recall a rich assortment of ideas, argu-
ments and evidence, and we’ll curse our luck for not being able to use
it in the exam. But luck, in fact, had only a minor part to play in this
familiar drama; the major part was played by organisation, or the lack
of it.
One ﬁnal point to remember about planning under timed conditions
is that, in most systems, examiners will give you credit for a plan, if the
essay is unﬁnished. In most examinations you cannot lose marks for
a plan, however scrappy and indecipherable it may be. You can only
gain marks. Therefore, if you run out of time half way through a ques-
tion, a clearly structured plan of what you would have done will earn
good marks.
Revising for the Exam
169

 The next stage
As we’ll see in the next stage, by planning in this way you can begin to
write introductions, conclusions and paragraphs with complete conﬁ-
dence. It is impossible to write a good introduction to an essay if you
don’t know what you’re introducing. The same can be said for devel-
oping your arguments from one paragraph to another. Without a clear
idea of the structure of your arguments and how you plan to move con-
sistently from one idea to another, you will be forced to do this at the
very same time that you’re searching for just the right word or expres-
sion to convey your ideas with complete accuracy. As a result you’re
likely to do neither very well.
170
Planning
Assignment
8
Revising and recalling plans
Now that you’ve planned your essay, the best test of whether it works,
in so far as it’s relevant, clearly structured and answers the question
completely, is to try to recall it under timed conditions, as you will have
to in the exam.
Spend ﬁfteen minutes committing your plan to memory. Concentrate
on the main structure. If you can recall the key points that make up this
structure, you will be able to recall the detail within it, if your arguments
are organised in a clear, logical manner, and they’re relevant to the 
question.
After you’ve done this, put it aside for a day or so, but decide before-
hand at what time you will come back to test yourself. Then, when you
come back, take out a blank sheet of paper and give yourself ten minutes
to reproduce the plan.
If the plan works, you will be able to recall, maybe not all of it, but at
least the main structure. If you can’t recall much at all, it may be due to
technical reasons: the keywords that trigger off your arguments aren’t
crisp and sufﬁciently memorable, or perhaps the structure is buried
beneath too much detail. Make the necessary changes and try again.
You will know when you’ve got it right: you will be able to recall with
complete accuracy all of the structure and most of the detail. Having
done this once successfully, you will know what will work in future.

Stage 4
Writing

This page intentionally left blank 

INTRODUCTION
As you’ve seen already, by breaking down essay writing into its stages
we have been able to isolate problems as they arise in each stage and
concentrate our efforts on tackling them. In this stage you will see the
same principle applied to breaking down the actual writing of the essay
into the framework and content of essays.
 The framework
There are few of us who could conﬁdently claim that we have never
had problems with the structural features of essays: introductions,
paragraphs and conclusions. At least part of the problem is a lack of
planning, which leaves us with no clear idea of the structure and
content of the essay. It’s impossible to write a good introduction, if you
don’t know what you’re introducing, and much the same can be said
for paragraphs and conclusions.
Nevertheless, even with a good plan, most of us still have problems,
because we’re unsure what we’re trying to achieve when we write
introductions, paragraphs and conclusions. To cope with this, you will
be shown a simple formula for each, which you can use as a model
each time you write them.
With introductions you will be shown how to use your interpretation
of the implications of the question and how to outline a map of the
essay, to make sure you don’t lose your readers as they try to follow
your arguments and ideas. With paragraphs you’ll be shown how to tie
them into the introduction with clear topic sentences and transitions
to create a taut, cohesive and tightly reasoned essay. You will also be
shown how to develop your arguments in the body of the paragraph
and support them with evidence. Similarly, with conclusions you’ll be
shown various ways of creating cohesion in your work by tying the
conclusion to the introduction.
 The content
In the second half of this stage we will examine the problems we all
experience with our style. These can be difﬁcult to pin down, particu-
larly when they’re bound up with the other problems we’ve examined
in previous stages. First we will look at the importance of simplicity, in
173

particular the ways we can simplify our use of sentences and words,
and what we can do to improve our writing skills to convey our ideas
clearly and unambiguously.
You will be shown ways of avoiding heavy, unreadable prose and how
to make your writing as light as your subject allows, more like talk in
print. This is likely to result in not only a more enjoyable experience
for the reader, but a memorable, effective piece of writing. By simpli-
fying your writing in this way, you will also be less likely to lose your
reader.
With sentences this calls for two things: keeping sentences rela-
tively short, and, wherever it needs it, using a logical indicator to 
make clear what you’re doing. We will see that the problem here is not
just that we fail to use these indicators, believing that the reader can
follow our train of thought without difﬁculty, but that they get lost in
our sentences. You will also be shown ways of experimenting, using
the rhythm of your words and punctuation to convey meaning. This
helps to create a rhythm that is nearer to the spoken word, and the
nearer we approach this the easier it is to understand what we’ve
written.
With our use of words, similar problems tend to reappear. We’re
inclined to overcomplicate, using complex, even abstruse, language.
This can give rise to all sorts of problems, not least the use of jargon
and other words that are empty of real meaning. Ultimately, clear and
effective writing depends upon thinking clearly. Language is the vehicle
for ideas. If these are muddled and confused, then so too will be our
language and style.
In addition to simplicity, we will also examine the other element of
style, economy. We will look at the various ways we can improve our
style, giving our writing greater clarity through a more economical use
of language. We will also see how our use of evidence not only sup-
ports and illustrates our arguments, but makes our work more inter-
esting and persuasive. All of this will be brought together in a practical
way in the form of seven useful rules that we can use, day by day, to
improve our style.
 Referencing and bibliographies
Finally, you will be shown how to avoid the danger of plagiarism by
referencing the material you borrow. We will look at that most difﬁcult
of questions for most students: when do we need to cite sources and
174
Writing

when don’t we? You will be shown simple solutions that will help you
avoid all the headaches this can entail. You will also be shown differ-
ent methods of referencing and how to create a bibliography that is
useful to both you and your reader.
Introduction to the Fourth Stage
175

176
23 Getting your Own 
Ideas Down
In this chapter you will learn:
•
how to organise your work to allow yourself to write as freely as 
possible;
•
about the importance of hanging a question over what you write;
•
how to cope with thesis statements.
At last we have reached the stage at which many students think the
process of producing essays begins. Writing the essay should be much
easier now that you have completed the earlier stages. Because of this
you’re spared the nightmare we spoke of earlier – that of trying to do
the two most difﬁcult things in writing both at the same time. In other
words, you no longer have to summon up your ideas and arrange them
in a logical sequence and, at the same time, search for the right words
that will convey the arguments accurately, at the right strength and with
every subtle nuance accommodated.
 Write freely
However, you will still ﬁnd there are advantages to be gained from split-
ting the actual writing into the two last stages: writing and revision.
This helps you inject ﬂuency into your writing, that may not otherwise
be there. To do this you must keep your inner editor at bay. We all have
one; some are more persistent than others. They will try to intervene
whenever they can, but particularly when you start your work, or when
you complete a signiﬁcant section and sit back to bask in the glow of
your achievement. At moments like these you will be tempted to read
it all through to allow your editor to give his or her approval. Editors

are persistent and, if you allow them to come in too early, they will
overpower the artist.
To avoid this unwelcome intrusion allow yourself to write freely
without too much concern for style. You need to tell yourself that it
doesn’t matter if you don’t get the wording exactly right on the ﬁrst
attempt. The emphasis should be on allowing your thoughts to ﬂow
freely, while you follow your plan and develop your ideas. The key to
success here is to remind yourself that the best writing reads as though
it is talk in print. To help yourself, imagine you’re talking to a group of
friends who know about your subject, but have never seen it in exactly
the way you do.
After this, when you move into the revision stage, you can clean up
your work. Ideally, you should leave your ﬁrst draft a few days. If you
revise it straightaway, you may miss things that need to be changed.
You may be so delighted to have got it out of the way, that your powers
of self-criticism may have become blunted.
 Hang a question over what you write
Equally important, as you set about to write, it’s worth reminding your-
self that while you ought to have a point of view, you should avoid
telling your readers what to think. Try to hang a question mark over it
all. This way you allow your readers to think for themselves – to dis-
cover for themselves the points and arguments you’re making. As a
result they will feel more involved, ﬁnding themselves just as commit-
ted to the arguments you’ve made and the insights you’ve exposed as
you are. You will have written an essay that not only avoids passivity
in the reader, but is interesting and thought provoking.
 The thesis statement
However, advising students to hang a question over what they write
can be confusing, particularly if their departments insist they write
thesis statements. While most universities have a fairly broad and
complex understanding of what they mean by a thesis statement, some
insist on a more restricted interpretation, imposing a narrow range of
expectations on students, who are told they must have a point of view,
which must be stated in the introduction and then defended through-
out the essay. As one university department puts it, ‘form your own
Getting your Own Ideas Down
177

viewpoint and convince the reader that your viewpoint or perspective
is credible’.1 This doesn’t appear to be a strategy designed to produce
imaginative thinkers with minds capable of suspending judgement as
they think beyond their own biases and preconceptions, so why adopt
such a restricted and defensive strategy to essay writing?
As we’ve already seen, one answer, which makes this approach more
understandable, is that many students come to university bringing with
them a submissive attitude to authority, which encourages them to
believe that to get good grades they must trade facts for marks and
write the descriptive essay, even though they are asked to discuss and
explore issues that have no right answers. At Harvard, students are
warned, ‘When you write an essay or research paper, you are never
simply transferring information from one place to another, or showing
that you have mastered a certain amount of material.’2
Therefore, to overcome this, students are told they must have an
opinion of their own, which they must defend in their essays. However,
this is just one side of academic work. The analogy of a hill will serve
to make the point. One side, the more difﬁcult inductive part, involves
climbing the hill – analysing the problems and concepts involved, syn-
thesising and discussing evidence and arguments from a range of
sources, and ﬁnally, after careful measured thought, coming to your
evaluation. The other side, the deductive part, going downhill, is far
easier, because it is less open. Here you merely have to defend your
view, drawing only upon the material you need to prove it. This is
simpler, convergent, less imaginative. It uses a more limited range of
abilities.
Predictably, then, when we emphasise just this one side, more often
than not, opinion becomes the crude substitute for evaluation. We side-
step the careful process of analysis, synthesis and discussion done in
a context in which judgement is suspended. We merely declare an
opinion, which we then set about to defend.
 A debate is not a discussion
In effect we abandon discussion in favour of the narrow intellectual
demands of a debate. A discussion calls for an open, not a closed, mind.
We suspend judgement, hanging a question over everything as we
analyse the concepts and problems involved, explore the full weight of
the evidence, empathise with others, synthesise ideas and evidence
from different sources, and discuss conﬂicting arguments. In short, we
178
Writing

play devil’s advocate. As a tutor at Oxford makes plain, ‘a good essay
should always consider more than one point of view’.3
But as soon as we declare our opinion, the search for truth is ended.
There is no need to play devil’s advocate and no need to use this wide
range of cognitive skills. It becomes a debate, in which we merely set
out to defend our own opinion: a convergent, not a divergent, activity.
Witness how one university department describes an essay: ‘an essay
has: an introduction which introduces your viewpoint (thesis or posi-
tion), a body which develops and supports this viewpoint, and a 
conclusion which draws together the main lines of the argument 
to conclude that your viewpoint is correct’.4 Everything is contained
within the narrow conﬁnes of a simple objective: to convince the reader
of a preconceived opinion.
 The courtroom analogy
Some departments even compare it to the adversarial process of a
courtroom, telling their students to think like a lawyer presenting a case
– decide on your opinion and then set about defending it. They are
advised that everything in their essay should be directed towards estab-
lishing its validity. Time is spent spelling out the ‘tactics’ you should use
to ‘disarm’ your opponent. If you come across something that conﬂicts
with your case, you have no obligation to mention it. To do so would
only weaken your case and strengthen your opponent’s. And it’s no
business of yours to make your opponents’ case for them.
Aware of how inconsistent this one-sided courtroom analogy is with
academic work, some departments step back, arguing that the inclu-
sion of opposing ideas actually strengthens your case. Yet, it’s difﬁcult
to see how this could possibly be the case. A defence lawyer knows
only too well that he or she would be foolish to mention something
that conﬂicts with the defence they and their client have agreed upon,
unless, that is, they can dismiss it convincingly in court and thereby
inﬂuence the jury to their advantage. But then this amounts to no more
than a rhetorical device: a deception achieved using the fallacy of the
straw man (Chapter 12), which might work in a courtroom, but rarely
in an academic essay.
The fact is that academic work is not adversarial in this sense of com-
bative one-sided advocacy. It’s a more open endeavour aimed not at
winning a case, but at approximating to the truth by suspending your
judgement and exploring all the issues and evidence available. It does
Getting your Own Ideas Down
179

not set out to win its case by withholding information that might
damage it, nor by using rhetorical devices to manipulate the reader as
a lawyer might seek to inﬂuence a jury. After all, as the Greats Hand-
book at Oxford advises, ‘Examiners will notice if you try to fudge issues
or sweep difﬁculties aside; it is much better to be candid about them,
and to show that you appreciate the force of counter-arguments.’5
 How to cope with thesis statements
Nevertheless, not all universities adopt this narrow interpretation 
of thesis statements, and in this may lie a solution. Those who advo-
cate them often maintain they are necessary, because this is the 
only way to give your essay a structure in which to develop a 
coherent argument. If this is all we are after, there might be less of a
problem.
As we’ve already seen in Stages 1 and 3, you can come to a clear
interpretation of the implications of the question, from which you
develop a clearly structured plan of the essay, without that entailing a
viewpoint that you must defend. Indeed, two students can have an
identical structure and plan, yet come to quite different conclusions.
Structure does not depend on having a preconceived opinion, just an
interpretation of the implications of the question and a plan to go with
it. In turn, as this means we have no need to set out to defend opin-
ions which we have stated at the outset, we are free to suspend our
judgement, on which all our higher cognitive skills depend. We need
to be clear about this – unless we suspend our judgement as we write,
we cannot and need not use these higher cognitive skills.
Take the following example of a thesis statement from the Writing
Center at Harvard:
Further analysis of Memorial Hall, and of the archival sources that
describe the process of building it, suggests that the past may 
not be the central subject of the hall but only a medium. What message,
then, does the building convey, and why are the fallen soldiers of such
importance to the alumni who built it? Part of the answer, it seems, is that
Memorial Hall is an educational tool, an attempt by the Harvard com-
munity of the 1870s to inﬂuence the future by shaping our memory of
their times. The commemoration of those students and graduates who
died for the Union during the Civil War is one aspect of this alumni
message to the future, but it may not be the central idea.6
180
Writing

It gives structure, yet it suspends judgement and is not driven to prove
one preconceived viewpoint. A question is hung over each sentence,
with words like ‘suggests’, ‘may not be’ and ‘it seems’. As this suggests,
essays are far more complex than just the defending of a preconceived
opinion, like a defence lawyer attempting to persuade a jury. Genuine
discussion, and the higher cognitive skills that go with it, depend upon
suspending judgement. As one tutor at the Writing Center at Harvard
argues, ‘An effective thesis cannot be answered with a simple “yes” or
“no.” A thesis is not a topic; nor is it a fact; nor is it an opinion.’7
So, if your department does require you to write thesis statements,
just clarify for yourself: does this mean I am expected to announce my
opinion and defend it in the essay; or am I expected just to give a clear
indication of the map of my essay, while I suspend judgement and hang
a question over the issues involved?
 In the next chapter
Structure, then, does not depend upon you announcing your opinion
in the introduction. In the next chapter you will see that the most 
effective introductions do two things: analyse the implications of the
question, and outline the map of the essay structure drawn from 
your plan.
Notes
1 Jan Regan, Essay and Report Writing: What is Expected of You? (Lismore:
Southern Cross University, 2000), p. 1.
2 Kathy Dufﬁn, Overview of the Academic Essay (Cambridge, Mass.: Writing
Center at Harvard University, 1998), p. 1.
3 Eric Eve, A Guide for Perplexed Students, 4: Tutorial Essays (Oxford:
University of Oxford, 2000), p. 3.
Available at: http://www.hmc.ox.ac.uk/
4 Regan, Essay and Report Writing, p. 1.
5 Greats Handbook (Oxford: University of Oxford, 2000), p. 39.
6 Patricia Kain, Beginning the Academic Essay (Cambridge, Mass.: Writing
Center at Harvard University, 1999), pp. 2–3.
7 Maxine Rodburg, Developing a Thesis (Cambridge, Mass.: Writing Center at
Harvard University, 1999), p. 1.
Getting your Own Ideas Down
181

182
24 Introductions
In this chapter you will learn:
•
why so many of us struggle to write good introductions;
•
how to write introductions that leave the examiners with no doubts
about what you’re doing and why;
•
a simple formula for a good introduction.
There are very few students who wouldn’t list introductions as one of
the most difﬁcult aspects of writing an essay. Much of this is due to
the fact that most of us are unsure about what we should be doing 
in the introduction. If we don’t know why we’re doing something, what
we’re trying to achieve, we shouldn’t be too surprised to ﬁnd that we’re
not particularly good at it. But there’s another reason why most of us
are not good at writing introductions: we neglect stages 1 and 3 (inter-
pretation and planning). If we have very little idea what we’re going to
be writing, it’s difﬁcult to do a good job of introducing it.
However, even with a clear interpretation of the question and a well
structured plan it can be a problem, unless you set simple and clear
objectives that you want your introduction to fulﬁl. These should
include two things:
•
the interpretation of the question (what is it getting at?); and
•
the structure of your answer, the map the reader is going to follow.
 The interpretation of the question
The ﬁrst question examiners are going to ask themselves as soon as
they begin to read your essay, before they even consider anything else,
is ‘Has the writer seen the point of the question?’ In two or three sen-
tences you need to outline the main issues raised by the question,

which you will have uncovered in the interpretation stage. This may
involve identifying the main problem or set of problems at the heart of
the question, or it may involve pointing to the central importance of
one or two concepts, which need to be analysed. But this does not
involve discussing these problems nor analysing the concepts in the
introduction; it merely means you show the examiners that you have
the ability to see the implications of the question and point them in
the direction you intend to take them.
For example, in the question we discussed in Chapter 2 you might
begin with the following introduction:
Question
‘Authority amounts to no more than the possession of power.’ Discuss.
Most of us would no doubt agree that in the cases of police ofﬁcers
and government ofﬁcials this claim is largely true: their authority
does seem to derive exclusively from the power they have been given.
Indeed, we acknowledge their authority because we are all too aware
of the consequences of not doing so. But to accept that every case
of authority amounts to no more than the claim that might is always
right, threatens the very existence of modern democracy along with
its goal of balancing order with accountability and justice. Either
way, whatever we’re prepared to believe depends upon our under-
standing of the two central concepts, power and authority.
By identifying the major issues in the ﬁrst few sentences you establish
the relevance of these, and the relevance of your essay in tackling them.
This is what writers describe as the ‘hot spot’: the ﬁrst sentence or two
in which you sell the subject, making it clear that you’ve seen the
problem the question is getting at, and you’re aware of its importance.
 The structure of your answer
Having done this you then need to outline in the broadest of details
the structure of your answer, the plan you’re working from. You don’t
need to do this in the authority/power question, because you’ve already
done it by pointing to the central importance of the analysis of the two
concepts. Again this need not be in any great detail, but it must provide
a map so that your examiners are at no time unsure which way you’re
going and where you’re taking them. At Harvard students are told:
Introductions
183

A good introduction is successful because it allows readers to prepare
themselves mentally for the journey they will undergo as they follow your
argument through the paper. Like a travel guide, it enables them to rec-
ognize and understand the major points of interest in your argument as
they go by.1
Remember, lose the examiners and you lose marks, it’s as simple as
that. Your introduction should point them in the right direction, giving
them a clear idea of what is to follow.
184
Writing
Practice exercise
15
Write an introduction
Take the advertising question we considered earlier:
‘Advertisers seek only to ensure that consumers make informed
choices.’ Discuss.
Write an introduction that interprets the implications of the question and
then outlines the map of your answer. When you’ve ﬁnished, compare
your answer with the introduction below.
In this question our map might look something like the following:
Most advertising executives are willing to defend their profession by
arguing that all they are doing is informing the public and in doing
so protecting the democratic freedoms of individuals, in particular
their freedom of choice. To a certain extent, of course, this is true:
without advertising we would be less informed about new develop-
ments in technology, in fashion and in medical advances. Even gov-
ernment warnings about the dangers at work and in the home
depend upon advertisements. But the key to this is the claim that
this is the ‘only’ thing they do, when most of the public suspect their
paramount concern is to manipulate consumers into buying prod-
ucts that they may not want or need.
This indicates what the reader should expect as the structure in the
essay. One part will develop the view that advertisers are concerned

with informing consumers. Then the structure will turn on the word
‘only’, leaving the writer, in the second half of the essay, to examine
the way advertisers use information selectively and employ other
devices to manipulate the consumer through appeals to sex, status and
prejudices.
 A simple formula for introductions
The real value of writing introductions in this way lies in the fact that
most of us beneﬁt from having a simple structure, a formula, like this
to work from. As a result we’re likely to feel more conﬁdent about what
we’re doing when we write introductions. They’ll present fewer prob-
lems and they’ll focus the reader’s attention on the issues we believe
are the most relevant.
Nevertheless, you may ﬁnd as your conﬁdence grows that you want
to do more with introductions. You may want to set the problem in the
context of recent history, or you may want to endorse your analysis of
the problem by quoting a respected authority.
For example, in the following question, which asks you to consider
the inevitability of progress, you could begin with this:
Question
‘You can’t stop progress.’ Discuss critically with reference to one
major technology.
Looking back at the early years of the industrial revolution in Britain
it’s tempting to view opponents of progress, like the Luddites who
smashed the machines they believed were threatening their way of
life, as naïve and short-sighted. But in this we ought to be cautious;
after all, theirs might not have been opposition to progress as such,
but to just one account of it. It’s worth wondering what makes our
view of progress, with all its alienation at work, dissipated com-
munities, rising crime, social disaffection and persistently high levels
of poverty and homelessness, any better than that of the Luddites.
Today the problem is the same. Developing countries in the Third
World can claim to have learnt from the mistakes of western indus-
trialised countries. As a result their account of progress is quite dif-
ferent. So, while we might agree that ‘you can’t stop progress’, there
is no reason why we should accept the implication of this, that 
Introductions
185

we have lost our freedom to choose. We may not be able to stop
progress, but we can still choose the type of progress we want.
Doing more with introductions in this way carries with it the danger of
obscuring the original intentions: to reveal the implications of the
question and outline the map of your answer. In this case it was wise
to split the introduction into two paragraphs to give us a chance of
making the structure clearer in the second paragraph. But there are no
hard and fast rules to this. Just keep in mind the simple structure on
which you are weaving these improvisations and avoid allowing the
introduction to become so long and complex that it obscures the simple
intent that lies behind it.
 In the next chapter
The same advice applies equally to paragraphs. As we will see in the
next chapter, they, too, have a simple formula.
Note
1 Julie Lynch and Jennifer Ritterhouse, Writing at Harvard (Cambridge, Mass.:
Writing Center at Harvard University, 2000), Ch. 2, pp. 2–3.
186
Writing

187
25 Paragraphs
In this chapter you will learn:
•
how to write paragraphs to produce a taut, well-argued essay;
•
a simple formula for writing paragraphs;
•
how to use ‘topic sentences’ and ‘transitions’;
•
how to develop your arguments in paragraphs and support them with
evidence.
 The main body of the essay
Having outlined in the introduction the broad map of what is to follow,
as you write each paragraph you can now develop in your essay 
the tautness of a well planned, coherent piece of reasoning. Often
essays fail because they read like a loose list of isolated points each
dependent upon itself, and not supported by the context in which it is
developed.
To avoid this, tie your paragraphs in with the major issues you 
identiﬁed in your introduction as being central to the question. You will
be picking these issues up anyway as you follow the structure of your
plan, but as you do so, make it clear to the reader that you are 
following the map you outlined in your introduction. In this way you
not only maintain relevance throughout, but by tying each paragraph
in with the introduction you create a cohesive piece of work. Its struc-
ture will be taut, giving the essay the feel of being well organised and
tightly reasoned.
Of course, this doesn’t mean you should announce clumsily that this
is what you’re doing, repeatedly making the same sort of reference to
your introduction at the beginning of each paragraph. This would be
tedious and the reader would begin to suspect that your concern was

more for form than content. It can be done more subtly than this, as
we’ll see. But whichever way you do it, remember that in the ﬁrst sen-
tence of each paragraph, the ‘topic sentence’, the examiner needs to
be informed about what you’re doing in that paragraph, and why it’s
relevant to the issues you identiﬁed in your introduction.
Nevertheless, there is a qualiﬁcation to this we need to mention. Not
every paragraph needs to be tied in with the map in your introduction.
Some of the major issues in the essay will take a number of paragraphs
to develop. Therefore, in this case, you only need to tie in with the
introduction the ﬁrst paragraph of each major section. The paragraphs
that follow will then have to be tied in with this paragraph to create
ﬂuency and cohesion.
This raises an important issue, as we’ll see. In order to create a taut,
coherent piece of work, each paragraph has to have a clear connection
with the one that preceded it. To make sure of this you will need to
have effective ‘transitions’ at the beginning of each paragraph to indi-
cate to the examiners the course of your argument. From this they
should be able to see that this is an extension of the previous para-
graph, or that you’re making a comparison, or that you’re illustrating
the point you’ve already made, and so on. In some paragraphs it will
be obvious what you’re doing and there will be no need to announce
it, but if in doubt use a transition.
 A simple formula for paragraphs
As we’ve already seen with introductions, we do most things much
more effectively if we know what we’re doing and why. But for many
students paragraphs are a complete mystery.
This shows up in their concern over the length of paragraphs. Some
suspect that theirs are either too short or too long, while others 
confess that they decide to end one paragraph and begin another 
on a mere whim. In fact, although this may not appear too helpful, 
the best advice is simply to vary their length. It will make the essay
more interesting to read and you’ll be less inclined to send your readers
off into a deep sleep as they follow the predictable rhythms of your
writing.
Of course, ultimately the key to the length of paragraphs lies in the
logic of the essay as a whole. In other words, keep to your structure
and at all costs let the examiners see that, as they move from one para-
graph to another, they’re moving from one section within the structure
188
Writing

to another. For the same reason, avoid long, ambling paragraphs that
obscure the structure. In fact, this is not as difﬁcult to avoid as it might
seem. Long paragraphs, in which you lose the thread of what the
writer’s doing, are like the long, ambling essay: the product of writing
without structure.
You can build this structure into each paragraph by keeping a simple
formula for paragraphs in your mind. Although it would be arrogant to
lay down the law on the structure of paragraphs, as it would be with
introductions, it helps to have a simple formula, particularly when
you’re unsure of what you’re doing. As for introductions, you can
always use the formula as the basis for improvisation once you’ve
grown in conﬁdence using it.
Three parts
For this purpose remind yourself that there are three parts to a para-
graph: the topic sentence; the development; and the evidence. This
structure may not always be appropriate, you may need to adapt it, but
if you remind yourself of each part, you will always be aware of the
weaknesses you’re allowing to appear in your essay when you omit
one part. You’ll be reminding yourself that if you do decide to leave one
part out, you will have to address the problem later in the essay.
 1
The topic sentence
The topic sentence, as its name implies, introduces the topic of the
paragraph. But even more important, it establishes the topic’s rele-
vance by tying it in with one of the major issues in your plan, that you
mapped out in your introduction. As we’ve already pointed out, by tying
all the components tightly together in this way you create both rele-
vance and tight cohesion within the essay.
For example, the paragraph after the introduction in the advertising
essay might begin:
As this suggests, at least part of the advertiser’s role is to provide
consumers and the public with information.
And, later in the essay, after you have examined the way advertisers
manipulate through the selective use of information, you may go on to
examine the other forms of manipulation by introducing it with the
topic sentence:
Paragraphs
189

However, advertisers have developed still more effective forms of
manipulation, particularly in their exploitation of the sex, status and
prejudices of the consumer.
As this illustrates, the topic sentence is important to establish the 
relevance of the paragraph you are about to write in the context of the
paragraphs that have already been completed, and to indicate to your
examiners which way you’re now going to take them. To do this you
need a ‘transition’ at the beginning of the sentence. This can be a short
phrase, like ‘As a result’, or a single word, like ‘Nevertheless’. In the
examples above, we used ‘As this suggests’ and ‘However’.
In effect these work as ‘logical indicators’: they indicate what you
will be doing in the paragraph. You might be striking a contrast with
what you’ve just done in the previous paragraph (‘In contrast’,
‘However’). You may simply be extending the argument you’ve already
developed in a slightly different way (‘Moreover’, ‘Therefore’). Or you
may want to strengthen your argument by developing a point that rein-
forces it from a different angle (‘Similarly’, ‘Likewise’).
In view of their importance, make sure your transitions do what you
want them to do. Occasionally we ﬁnd ourselves using weak transi-
tions, which create only weak links and a weak essay structure. The
worst are those we use for a list of points, words and phrases like ‘Also’,
‘Another point is’ and ‘In addition’. These have their counterparts in
subjects, like history, where we resort to time to order our ideas, which
we introduce with transitions like ‘After’, ‘Then’ and ‘The next’. When
you ﬁnd yourself using this sort of transition, just check to see what’s
happening in your essay. More often than not they will indicate that
you’re no longer discussing issues by developing a critical analysis.
Instead, you’ve slipped into a description of the issues or into a nar-
rative of the events.
The same warning about transitions doing real work applies to all
those times when we’ve found ourselves pressing a transition into
service to create ﬂuency that simply isn’t there in the ﬁrst place. If we
haven’t planned carefully enough, establishing clear intellectual links
between paragraphs, examiners will not be fooled if we try to paper
over the disjointed paragraphs with carefully chosen transitions. It will
always sound false and manufactured.
However, if your essay is clearly planned, not all of your paragraphs
will need transitions. There are going to be some that are set in the
context of a clearly sign-posted argument or analysis, and it’s all too
obvious what you’re doing. Nevertheless, don’t forget these are import-
190
Writing

ant directions for the examiners, who need to know which way you will
be taking them as they try to navigate the unfamiliar terrain of your
thinking. To take the city analogy again, they need to know at each
intersection and every turning, which way you intend to go, otherwise
you will leave them mystiﬁed and confused as to what you’re doing,
and they will be unable to award you marks, even though your work
may be good. So, if in doubt use one.
Paragraphs
191
Practice exercise
16
Write the topic sentence
Question
‘Authority amounts to no more than the possession of power.’ 
Discuss.
Look at the introduction we wrote for this question in the last chapter
and our interpretation of it in Chapter 2. It’s clear from the introduction
that we are going to start by arguing that the proposition is true, if 
we take the concept of authority to imply someone ‘in’ authority. This
section of the essay could be represented by the notes below.
As you can see, we could probably write this in two paragraphs. The
ﬁrst paragraph would deal with ‘ofﬁcial authority’, the sort given to
people like the police and government ofﬁcials. Taking this as our ﬁrst
paragraph after the introduction, write a topic sentence for it.
Once you’ve done this, compare your topic sentence with the one below.
The notes
Question
‘Authority amounts to no more than the possession of power.’
Discuss.
1.
Proposition = True if authority is taken to mean ‘in’ authority:
= authority amounts to the power to make things worse – to
oblige people to comply with orders

(a)
Ofﬁcial authority – institutional power
e.g.
the police
We accept this sort of power as authority, maybe because of
(i)
our respect for the institution
or, when this fails, e.g. an inner-city ethnic community
feels unfairly targeted by the police,
(ii)
because of our fear of the consequences
(b)
Unofﬁcial authority – ‘Might is Right’
e.g.
the local gang leader
Their inﬂuence over the local community may be due to
(i)
respect for individual leaders
or
(ii)
more likely it’s due to fear of the consequences of going
against their will, e.g. protection rackets
Answer
As this suggests, one way in which we understand the concept of
authority is represented by the institutional power of ofﬁcials like
police ofﬁcers, whose authority lies largely in their power to make
things worse for us if we don’t comply with their orders.
 2
The development
Once you’ve established in the topic sentence the relevance of the 
topic you’re going to be dealing with in the paragraph, the examiner
can get down to assessing the quality of your work. It is here in the
development that you show the examiner you are capable of the sort
of intellectual processing that was called for in the question by 
the ‘instructional verb’ (see Chapter 8).
At this point it’s worth reminding ourselves of the issues we raised
when we ﬁrst examined this. You’ll remember we pointed out that all
syllabuses are written in the context of six ‘cognitive domains’ – six
intellectual abilities, ranging from the simplest, ‘recall’, to the more
complex abilities, such as analysis, synthesis and evaluation.
Again, as we pointed out then, most of our problems, both in 
writing and in our study skills, begin here. We wrongly assume that
education is exclusively concerned with the possession of knowl-
192
Writing

edge, so we aim to produce evidence in our writing that we know a
great deal, that we have good recall, the simplest cognitive domain.
Whereas we should be exercising the more complex abilities to ana-
lyse, to criticise, to synthesise ideas and evidence, and to evaluate 
arguments.
All too often, even though the question might ask us to discuss,
analyse or criticise, we assume the examiner merely wants evidence
that we can understand the subject. With this in mind, as we set about
researching the essay, we begin to take vast quantities of irrelevant,
unstructured notes from texts, arguing that we cannot possibly leave
any material out, because these are the facts and we are required to
show evidence that we can recall them all. As a result, we lose sight of
the implications of the question and our need to address them rele-
vantly, preferring instead to put everything into our essays as long as
they are facts. We assume the more facts we put in, relevant or not, the
more marks we will earn.
Similarly, although we’re told to put arguments in our own words,
it’s difﬁcult to shake off the belief that, as the texts we use are the
source of right answers, of indisputable facts, we can do nothing else
but copy them with complete accuracy and without alteration, because
to change anything would be to make it less than right. So we copy
into our notes large chunks of them that we have neither structured
nor processed in any way. As a result our notes assume the structure
the author gives us, which might be quite inappropriate for our pur-
poses in preparing to write this particular essay.
Passive surface-level processing
In other words we become passive ‘surface-level processors’: we
neither exercise any judgement as to the relevance of the material, nor
to the credibility of what is being said. We’ve ignored the instructions
to operate in the higher cognitive domains, to evaluate the ideas criti-
cally, and instead we’ve settled for the simpler task of copying, repro-
ducing and imitating what we’ve allowed ourselves to assume is the
unquestioned authority, the source of right answers. Not surprisingly,
then, in our writing we’re inclined to plagiarise large sections, believ-
ing that to alter anything would be to make what is otherwise a right
answer, less than right.
However, in universities the examinations we prepare ourselves for
are not concerned with demonstrating recall or with reproducing faith-
fully what our authorities say. They’re aimed at assessing the higher
cognitive domains, where we synthesise ideas and analyse arguments
Paragraphs
193

critically. Rather than accept that there are authorities that are beyond
question, this asks us to criticise and evaluate received ideas and opin-
ions – to accept nothing on trust.
In this stage of essay writing, then, as we develop our arguments 
in the paragraph, it’s important to remind ourselves that those 
who assess our essays are not concerned so much with right 
answers as they are with the abilities we use to reach our answer. Two
essays can both receive the same high mark, even though they come
to completely different answers. And, conversely, even though two
essays may come to exactly the same conclusion, this doesn’t mean
they will be awarded the same mark: one might receive the lowest mark
awarded, while the other the highest. And, of course, it’s equally true
that even though an examiner might agree with your conclusion, he or
she may still award you low marks. It’s not the conclusion you reach
that matters so much as the way in which you reach it: the way you
travel.
Travelling well
Given this, it should now be clear that in the development of the para-
graph, examiners want to see you use these higher cognitive domains.
They will want to see how well you travel from the simple description
of the case, to an analysis of its implications, to the criticism of each
one of these implications, to the evidence to support your view, and
ﬁnally to your evaluation. In such a sequence you will have travelled
far, and for this you will earn high marks.
Description Æ Analysis Æ Criticism Æ Evidence Æ Evaluation
Of course, it may not be possible to do all of this in one paragraph.
After the analysis you may want to take up each implication as the
subject for each subsequent paragraph.
194
Writing
Æ
Implication
Æ
Criticism
Æ
Evidence
Æ
Implication
Æ
Criticism
Æ
Evidence
Implication
Æ
Criticism
Æ
Evidence
Analysis
Æ
In this case, in one paragraph you would describe the implication, 
criticise it and show evidence for your view, before moving to the next
implication in the next paragraph, where you would do the same, and
so on. Then your evaluation may come two or three paragraphs later

at the end of this section of your essay, when you’ve dealt with all the
implications. Alternatively, it may come at the end of the essay, if this
is more appropriate. As we will see when we examine the role of the
conclusion, this is often the most appropriate stage in which to bring
the various strands together and reach a measured evaluation based
on the strength of the arguments and evidence you’ve considered in
the essay as a whole.
 3
The evidence
Given what we have just said about the development, the evidence
should present few problems. Obviously, if the development of our
argument is clear, the relevance of our evidence should be equally clear.
We will have a much better idea of the sort of evidence we need, to
support and illustrate our arguments in the paragraph.
The problems come when we revert to the assumptions that 
tell us the only thing worth anything in education is knowledge 
and facts. Then we can become obsessed with impressing the exam-
iners with our knowledge by presenting a wealth of facts irre-
spective of whether they’re relevant or not. The paragraph becomes
overloaded, the facts are out of proportion with what they ought to 
be to support and illustrate our argument, and examiners become 
confused about what we’re trying to do. They will assume that either
they have missed something, or the structure of our essay has broken
down.
Nevertheless, in virtue there can also be vice. There are some stu-
dents who, realising that they should not be taking authorities on trust,
that they should be analysing, criticising and evaluating them, jump
from a statement of the problem in the topic sentence to evaluation,
without any attempt to analyse and discuss the issues. As a result,
because there has been no development, the evaluation is usually
neither measured nor thoughtfully considered.
In effect they’ve convinced themselves that the only thing of any
value is opinion – their opinion. As a result they ﬁll up each paragraph
with a series of unsupported claims, for which they provide neither
analysis, nor argument, nor, in our present context, any evidence. In
most examiners’ minds this extreme of unsubstantiated opinion is
probably worse than the other: blind acceptance and description of so-
called right answers.
Paragraphs
195

Answer
Even so, stability in any society depends on there being a large pro-
portion of the community willing to obey these orders because they
have respect for ofﬁcial institutions, like the police. When this fails
we may be left with a very volatile situation in which people feel
obliged to obey, simply out of fear for the consequences. For
example, if an ethnic community in an inner-city area feels that the
police are unfairly targeting them, in time they are likely to lose
respect for the institution and for the individual police ofﬁcer, whose
only recourse thereafter is to implement the law by threats of force,
rather than by appeals to reason and justice.
 In the next chapter
If a large part of paragraph writing is about travelling well, conclusions
are about arriving in style. As we’ll see in the next chapter, there are a
number of simple ways to ensure that your conclusion ties in with your
introduction, producing an essay that is cohesive, tightly argued and a
joy to read.
196
Writing
Practice exercise
17
Write the development and the evidence
Question
‘Authority amounts to no more than the possession of power.’ 
Discuss.
Having written the topic sentence for the ﬁrst paragraph after the intro-
duction in the last practice exercise, now, with your topic sentence and
the notes for the plan in front of you, write the development and the evi-
dence of the paragraph.
Once you’ve done this, compare it with the answer below.

197
26 Conclusions
In this chapter you will learn:
•
the most effective ways of writing thought-provoking conclusions;
•
how to use conclusions to tie up your arguments into a cohesive, rel-
evant essay;
•
how to leave your readers with a sense of discovery, that they have
read something worthwhile.
It’s surprising how many people believe that the conclusion is for 
them the most difﬁcult part of writing an essay, whereas it should be
the easiest of the three parts. Having got your readers safely to this
point without losing them or confusing them as to the relevance of
your arguments, there is little you can do now to weaken your work.
However, there are still one or two problems that catch the unwary.
Some students are convinced they must ﬁnish on an upbeat note, with
a clear, ﬁrm declaration of their opinion. If the question asks for your
opinion, they argue, you must give it. The problem with this is that 
such a declaration of opinion may just come completely out of the blue.
The essay may be full of the most skilful analysis and discussion of the
problems, leaving you with no clear grounds for absolute certainty one
way or the other. Therefore, to make a clear statement of your opinion,
showing no doubt or uncertainty, would be inappropriate.
The opinions you express in the conclusion must reﬂect the strength
and balance of the arguments that have preceded them in the body of
the essay. They must be carefully measured to match the discussion
you have developed, and this may not allow for a ﬁrm declaration 
of certainty one way or the other. If you’ve genuinely discussed the
issues and not just given a one-sided defence of your opinion, your
conclusion might be pitched anywhere on a spectrum ranging from
unqualiﬁed opposition to the proposition in the question, to qualiﬁed

acceptance or denial, to outright support with no qualiﬁcations. In a
genuine discussion it’s all up for grabs.
It’s well worth reminding yourself that ﬁrm, clear opinions have no
particular value in themselves. Anyone can express their opinions, and
almost everyone does. Down at your local bar you can ﬁnd people with
opinions on just about everything from the reasons why your local
football team is doing badly this season to the ethical implications of
human cloning. But you’re not going to earn marks for your opinions.
Marks are earned by developing your analysis and discussion of the
issues, and then supporting them with relevant, well chosen evidence.
Most of us down at the local bar are rarely so scrupulous in our atten-
tion to the quality of our arguments.
Of course, if you do want to make clear your own opinions and, on
balance, they reﬂect the preceding discussion, then do so. Failing that,
if you are genuinely undecided, give a tentative conclusion couched in
the appropriate qualiﬁcations.
Pick up the theme raised in the introduction
Alternatively, you can summarise the main points in the essay, coming
to a measured judgement of what you believe to be the most impor-
tant issues the essay has raised. Or you could pick up the theme you
raised in your introduction, reﬂecting on this in the light of what you’ve
discussed since. Tying up the introduction with the conclusion in this
way lends greater cohesion to your work – it is satisfying to the reader
to know that you have come full circle and everything has found its
appropriate place.
For example, the essay that examined the possibility of stopping
progress began in the introduction by referring to the activities of the
Luddites in the nineteenth century during the British industrial revo-
lution. It suggested that in hindsight they might be viewed as naïve and
short-sighted. Given this, you could conclude the essay by picking up
this theme again. You might suggest that in the light of the discussion
in the essay, rather than the Luddites, it might be more appropriate to
accuse our own generation of naivety and short-sightedness in how
we deﬁne and measure progress.
The wider implications or future trends
As this suggests, the best conclusion is one that is as thought-
provoking as possible. As we’ve already seen, there are a number of 
ways of doing this. You could just re-state the theme of the essay, or you
could summarise the main points of the arguments you’ve developed.
198
Writing

Alternatively, you may want to suggest the wider implications, or
what you believe to be the future trends: you may want to tell the reader
what you believe has to be done to solve the problems you’ve dis-
cussed, or predict what might happen if the problems are left unre-
solved. This might pick up on the broader issues that go beyond the
limits of the essay, but which you have suggested in the introduction
might become our ultimate concern.
Say, for example, you were writing an essay on the ethical implica-
tions involved in human cloning. In the introduction you might have
pointed to the broader, long-term fears that we might be encouraging
the development of a world in which children can be manufactured by
parents according to their own ideal blueprints, rather like going along
to a genetic supermarket to select the characteristics you most want
in your children. In the conclusion, after your discussion, you may have
decided that this really is a problem that needs to be faced now before
it is too late, or you may want to conclude that the problem has 
been overstated. Either way, both would be appropriate as long as they
don’t go beyond the strength of the arguments and evidence you have
presented.
Similarly, if you were discussing a literary text, you might suggest that
the implications of the issues you’ve raised go beyond the scope of your
essay. For example, if you were answering the question, ‘How can the
description of the need for distance at the beginning of chapter 19 
of Adam Bede square with the novel’s more general emphasis on novel-
istic sympathy?’ (Harvard), you might suggest that a study of George
Eliot’s other novels, like Silas Marner and Middlemarch, would be inter-
esting to see if this apparent contradiction runs throughout her work.
Conclusions
199
In a nutshell
You can do any of the following:
•
give your opinions as long as they match the strength of your 
arguments;
•
summarise the main points;
•
pick up the theme of the introduction;
•
suggest wider implications;
•
predict future trends.

Example
The following example of an introduction and conclusion employs all
of these devices in some measure. It is taken from a paper on organ
donation and the effects that modern medical practices are having 
in discouraging potential donors from pledging their organs. The ﬁrst
two paragraphs present two contrasting anecdotes, while the third and
fourth outline the theme of the paper, the problem it sets out to
examine.
Introduction
On a cold, frosty morning, as the sun begins to rise above the lin-
gering fog of night, a Chinese prisoner awaits his execution in a dark,
damp cell that echoes with the reverberations of his own faltering
heartbeat. Blindfolded, with his hands and legs bound as he kneels
with bent head, he feels the cold steel of the gun at the back of his
neck. The shot is ﬁred and he loses consciousness, but he is not
dead. He is rushed to the hospital ward, not to save his life, but to
have his organs ‘harvested’.
In another hospital, a world away in a small children’s ward 
in South London, two parents clutching each other, worn down 
by years of struggle and tension, look anxiously on as their ﬁve-
year-old son, Nicholas, is connected to a now-familiar machine 
that will do for him what his own kidneys cannot. Despairingly, 
they know he cannot struggle on indeﬁnitely without a new 
kidney.
These horrifying scenes portray two sides of a problem that 
deﬁes easy solution. Despite the shortage of donated organs and 
the despair of those who wait, most of us, out of fear and mis-
trust it seems, choose to have our bodies and all their life-
saving organs either incinerated or buried to decompose beneath 
the ground. In Britain, a country with a population of 59 million, 
the number of donors fell to just 981 in 1995, and in Europe as a
whole there were 15% fewer hearts and 14% fewer kidneys avail-
able to the Eurotransplant Foundation, that co-ordinates organ 
collection.
As a result the death toll of those who could wait no longer grows
day by day. In the US each year over 3,000 patients die for the lack
of organs, that is eight to ten a day, one every three hours. And all
this tragic waste of life could be avoided. More than enough organs
200
Writing

could be retrieved each year under the right conditions to satisfy the
demand, if only we could ﬁnd an effective and morally acceptable
way to do it.
Conclusion
None of us like to think of our bodies as just collections of spare-
parts, like old discarded automobiles. And we all probably realise that
for each of us who refuses to carry a donor card, someone, some-
where, pays the price. It may be the prisoner in his dark, damp cell,
or ﬁve-year-old Nicholas, who can wait no longer. But as long as a
doctor is free to omit treatment that might save our lives, to give up
on us after only two minutes of resuscitation, and as long as the def-
inition of death creeps under pressure for more organs, sadly this
tragic death toll seems set to continue.
If you do nothing more in a conclusion, always try to achieve at least
one thing: to wrap up the essay leaving your readers satisﬁed that they
have read something worthwhile – leave them with a sense of discov-
ery. Whether you use an idea that pulls everything together or extends
it, or whether you tie up the essay by picking up an anecdote you’ve
already used, let your readers participate, so that they feel they’ve been
able to come to their own conclusion and have discovered something
thought-provoking and interesting.
Conclusions
201
Assignment
9
The framework – introductions, conclusions
and paragraphs
We’ve now reached the point where we’re ready to write the essay. In
the last stage you completed the plan of the essay you have chosen to
work on. Now, with this in front of you, write the introduction to the
essay, the conclusion and the two paragraphs that follow the introduc-
tion. Once you’ve ﬁnished writing the whole essay, at the end of the
book, you may ﬁnd that you think a little differently about the issues and
you want to change the conclusion, but for this exercise write it now,
you can always change it later if you want to.

 In the next chapter
In this assignment you will have seen how much simpler essay writing
can be if you have a clearly structured plan from which to write, and
if you understand how the structural features of the essay work – intro-
ductions, paragraphs and conclusions. We can now turn, in the next
two chapters, to all those problems that arise when we begin to develop
the content of the essay.
202
Writing

27 Style – Simplicity
In this chapter you will learn:
•
the three guiding principles for a better style;
•
how to avoid heavy, unreadable prose;
•
how to write sentences that avoid the danger of losing your 
reader;
•
how to use the length of sentences and punctuation to create the
rhythm in your prose that is nearer to talk in print;
•
how to use words to convey your meaning accurately.
When some students reach this stage, all too often they’re ready 
just to shrug their shoulders and give up on their writing, dismissing
it despairingly with the words, ‘I just haven’t got a very good style,
that’s all!’, as if this was somehow God-given, encoded into our DNA.
It probably comes from our early schooling when children were given
prizes for their compositions, and from that moment on we came to
believe the world is somehow divided between those who have writing
talent and those who have not – and there’s not a thing we can do
about it.
But this is just not so. There is much we can do to improve our style.
The simplest thing is just to read more: the more literature we read,
the better our style. Like a process of photosynthesis it ﬁlters down
through our consciousness, enriching our thought processes and
sharpening our use of words without us being aware that anything 
signiﬁcant is happening. Get into the habit of reading well-written
novels, so that you’re always in the middle of reading one. Just ﬁfteen
to twenty minutes a night before you go to sleep will in time have 
a marked impact on your writing.
203

 Writing lightly – the guiding principles
Nevertheless, for some people this might seem a far too mysterious
process, reaching fruition only for those who have spent a lifetime
dedicated to unravelling the arcane secrets of writing. Although this is
far from being the case, there are still other practical steps we can take.
But ﬁrst, to do this we need to establish certain guiding principles, de-
ﬁnite markers, that we can use when we choose our words and phrases.
After applying them in two or three pieces of work, you should be
seeing quite noticeable improvements in your writing.
Each of these guiding principles is focused on one pre-eminent goal:
to avoid all heavy, unreadable prose. Make your writing as light as your
subject allows. The result is likely to be a more enjoyable experience
for the reader and a memorable, effective piece of writing. Keep in mind
the three main guiding principles, which can be summed up in just
three words:
•
logic
•
interest
•
brevity
The ﬁrst of these you’ve already met if you’ve planned well and written
an introduction that lays out the logical map that you will be follow-
ing throughout the essay. As we’ve said, as you pick up each topic in
this map in the ﬁrst sentence of each paragraph, indicating with tran-
sitions what you will be doing in the paragraph, the reader can follow
you, step by step, without fear of being lost.
As to the second, interest, we shall discuss this in Chapter 29 when
we look at the type of evidence you might use. For now, our concern
is with brevity – saying what you want to say in the fewest possible
words. Here lies what most of us mean when we think of style. It means
simplicity and economy in the use of language.
 Simplicity
The key to writing lightly is not to overcomplicate things; to remind
yourself constantly that writing is nothing more than talk in print.
Some of the best writing we’ve ever read seems to glide across the page
as if it’s just someone talking to you in the same room, even though
the writer may be grappling with the most complex ideas and the
204
Writing

deepest of emotions. When you read it, it seems the simplest thing in
the world to do. But like most things that are done well, its simplicity
disguises the hard work that’s been invested: in this case in trying to
overcome the difference between written and spoken communication.
 Written v. spoken
We’re all aware of the problems this difference creates for a student
writing an essay. As we’re not sitting next to our readers, we’re not able
to tell them what we really meant to say each time they stop to strug-
gle with one of our more difﬁcult expressions. This is made even more
difﬁcult if our work is being marked by an external examiner, who won’t
have the same familiarity with and sympathy for our ideas as our tutor
does.
But perhaps the most elusive aspect of normal speech, that’s difﬁ-
cult to capture in our written work, is any emphasis we might express
through tone or gesture. This has to be conveyed through our choice
of words and phrases, and through sentence rhythm and punctuation.
And, of course, unlike the oral explanations we might give in answer
to a question, in our written work readers can go at their own pace;
they can even go back and re-read one of our arguments. All of which
makes writing a much more concentrated form of communication than
speech.
Given these problems you couldn’t be blamed for putting your 
hands up in the air in despair; it seems a frighteningly difﬁcult task.
But the truth is, it’s a lot simpler than we allow ourselves to think. 
If, when we come to write, we have convinced ourselves that it is a
difﬁcult task, this is exactly what we will ﬁnd. We’ll tend to complicate
the task unnecessarily, making it virtually impossible to do a good 
job. This is what Matthew Arnold says about style and the business of
writing:
People think that I can teach them style. What stuff it all is! Have some-
thing to say, and say it as clearly as you can. That is the only secret of
style.1
 Sentences
Most students ﬁnd writing difﬁcult because they’re convinced that 
it’s much more complicated than Matthew Arnold describes it. And it
Style – Simplicity
205

always appears that way, when anyone explains what you should do
and what you should try to avoid. But this is all part of an effort to 
get back to what will eventually come easily, if not naturally, which 
is to produce writing that is talk in print. This may seem difﬁcult to
start with, but it will get easier as you apply these basic guiding 
principles.
For most of us the problems seem to start when we graduate from
one level of learning to another. We convince ourselves that, as this
involves understanding more complex ideas and arguments, we must
therefore use long and complicated sentence structures, and difﬁcult
and unusual words to convey them. In reading students’ work I regu-
larly come across mammoth sentences of more than 200 words, replete
with a confusing array of multiple clauses and phrases that come 
tumbling out on top of each other. Reading this, examiners are likely
to be confused and lost amidst this jungle of words.
But, equally serious, they will probably walk away from this kind of
essay convinced of three things: ﬁrst, that students who produce this
sort of work are not clear about what they want to say; second, that
they haven’t planned their ideas with any care; and third, that they
didn’t think through the ideas in the planning stage before they wrote
them. In fact it would be reasonable for examiners to conclude that
they are only now working through these ideas for the ﬁrst time as they
write.
It should be obvious, then, that the key to writing sentences, as it 
is to writing paragraphs, is not to lose your reader. A complex sen-
tence full of multiple clauses is a difﬁcult and perilous terrain for exam-
iners to negotiate. Not only are you likely to lose them as they pick
their way gingerly through this difﬁcult terrain, but by the time they
have reached the end of the sentence they will have forgotten your 
original point. To prevent this, try to do two things: keep sentences 
relatively short and, wherever it needs it, use a logical indicator (‘but’,
‘if’, ‘however’, ‘therefore’, ‘moreover’, ‘similarly’, etc.) to indicate what
you’re doing.
Length
Take the ﬁrst of these points – length. Wherever possible make your
sentences short and their structure clear. For example, read the fol-
lowing sentence:
It’s possible to argue that almost all advertisements, with the 
exception of a few, are informative, indeed, as we have already seen,
206
Writing

some appear to be wholly concerned with this, although gov-
ernment bodies releasing warnings about smoking or the use of
domestic ﬁre alarms are clearly intent on changing our behaviour
they are still concerned to give the public what they believe is vital 
information.
It’s not difﬁcult to see that it would beneﬁt, ﬁrst, by being broken up
into three shorter sentences, and then, by punctuating the last of these
to make its structure clearer:
It’s possible to argue that almost all advertisements are informative.
Indeed, as we have already seen, some appear to be wholly con-
cerned with this. Although government bodies, releasing warnings
about smoking or the use of domestic ﬁre alarms, are clearly intent
on changing our behaviour, they are still concerned to give the public
what they believe is vital information.
Of course, sometimes this just isn’t possible: occasionally, to develop
a complex argument you can’t avoid using a complex sentence struc-
ture. But if this is the case, beware of the dangers and do all you can
to make sure the sentence can be negotiated easily, without any danger
of confusion, by using logical indicators and the signposts of punctu-
ation to indicate the structure. Indeed, as you grow in conﬁdence you
will probably want to achieve more than this with your punctuation –
it will certainly pay dividends. Experiment using the rhythm of your
words and punctuation to convey the meaning. The ‘white space’ you
create through your use of dashes, colons, semicolons, full-stops
(periods) and commas helps to create a rhythm that is nearer to the
spoken word. And the nearer you approach this the easier it is to under-
stand what you’ve written.
In much the same way you can experiment using different lengths
for your sentences to achieve different effects. Although shorter sen-
tences are easier to follow, it’s not necessary to make every sentence
the same length. If your ideas are well thought out and organised 
logically – which they will be if you’ve planned your essay – your sen-
tences will have a rhythm of their own. But remember, longer sentences
tend to be soothing, whereas shorter sentences tend to be abrupt. So,
if you want to get your point across in a way that makes the reader
really think about it carefully, use a shorter sentence, particularly after
developing an argument with a series of longer sentences. But don’t
overdo it – it easily devalues.
Style – Simplicity
207

Logical indicators
As to the second point – the importance of logical indicators – the
problem is not just that we fail to use them, believing that the reader
can follow our train of thought without difﬁculty, but that they get lost
in our sentences. When you read your work through, check that the
logic is clear. If it isn’t, try moving your logical indicator to a more
important position in the sentence, say to the beginning. In the revi-
sion stage, if you ﬁnd it still doesn’t read logically and smoothly, read
it out aloud, record it and play it back to yourself, or get someone else
to read it to you. You’ll soon recognise the abrupt transitions, the lost
or missing words, and all the other problems that keep your writing
from being talk in print.
208
Writing
In a nutshell
•
Aim to create writing that is talk in print.
•
Don’t lose the reader in long sentences.
•
Wherever possible use short sentences with clear structures.
•
Experiment with your punctuation, words and sentence length to
create the rhythm of talk in print.
•
Make sure your logical indicators don’t go missing.
•
Read it aloud to make sure it reads logically and smoothly.
Practice exercise
18
Sentences
Read the following passage. At times you will ﬁnd it difﬁcult to under-
stand its meaning exactly. Sentences tend to be long and confused, the
punctuation is not as helpful as it could be, and logical indicators tend
to go missing.
Without actually rewriting the passage, by just attending to the sen-
tence length, punctuation and logical indicators, make the passage more
readable, more like talk in print.
When you’ve completed this, compare your version with the answer
given below.

Passage
Peeling the Onion – Art in Western Liberal Democracies
The problem for liberal democracies is that they have an inveterate
habit of dissipating the social context that seems so important if art
is to ﬂourish. They break down the interpersonal, isolating each indi-
vidual both from one another and from society. In such societies art
must out of necessity turn away from public themes towards private
pursuits and preoccupations the exploration of emotions, the glori-
ﬁcation of sex, even the invocation of death.
In these individualised cultures talk of uncovering our essential
selves has become the orthodoxy of the age our struggle for self-
fulﬁlment has led us to believe in a form of essentialism that there
lies a hard core of reality within all of us if we can only strip away
the successive layers of misleading appearance and reveal it. 
Psychoanalysts seem to regard the self as an entity that is always
striving for self-realisation and fulﬁlment – an essential nature 
bursting to get out.
Our easy acceptance of these assumptions conceals two serious
problems. Talk about revealing our essential selves might in fact be
quite meaningless like stripping away each successive layer of an
onion, we might ﬁnd at the end we’re left with nothing at all. If this
turns out to be the case, we will then be forced to accept the chal-
lenge that we are only what we make ourselves in the world as we
ﬁnd it.
The second problem, however, is even more worrying it strikes at
the very viability of art in these individualised cultures. We talk of
self-realisation as if it is the common-sense rationalisation of every
artist struggling for self-expression. In effect, it leaves the artist cow-
ering from the real world, sheltered within the safe, though barren
conﬁnes of solipsism. If we believe that all we can ever really know
is our inner personal states, then the outside world can only ever be
a product of our own consciousness. This is incompatible with a lan-
guage to express it, whether in music, painting or literature.
In effect it can only be expressed through a private language, the
terms of which are deﬁned by reference to our private sensations and
whose meaning can only be known to us. As Wittgenstein points out
in Philosophical Investigations, such a language is not logically pos-
sible, because a language is designed to communicate with others,
and this requires commonly accepted rules. In a private language,
Style – Simplicity
209

where whatever seems right can only be decided by referring to the
exclusive personal states of the user, there can be no such rules.
Despite its internal coherence any art built upon exclusively per-
sonal experience is in danger of having no anchor in a common
shared reality its ﬂotilla of symbols adrift with no charts. The modern
liberal artist is left with the problem of trying to communicate what
being alive is like without the assurance of a common social frame
of reference without an identity etched in the complex interactions
of social relations of family, friends and acquaintances, he is left with
just his abstract humanity known only to himself.
Answer
Peeling the Onion – Art in Western Liberal Democracies
The problem for liberal democracies is that they have an inveter-
ate habit of dissipating the social context that seems so important 
if art is to ﬂourish. They break down the interpersonal, isolating 
each individual both from one another and from society. Conse-
quently, in such societies art must, out of necessity, turn away from
public themes towards private pursuits and preoccupations: the
exploration of emotions, the gloriﬁcation of sex, even the invocation
of death.
As a result, in these individualised cultures talk of uncovering our
essential selves has become the orthodoxy of the age. Our struggle
for self-fulﬁlment has led us to believe in a form of essentialism, that
there lies a hard core of reality within all of us, if we can only strip
away the successive layers of misleading appearance and reveal it.
Psychoanalysts seem to regard the self as an entity that is always
striving for self-realisation and fulﬁlment – an essential nature 
bursting to get out.
But our easy acceptance of these assumptions conceals two
serious problems. First, talk about revealing our essential selves
might in fact be quite meaningless. Like stripping away each suc-
cessive layer of an onion, we might ﬁnd at the end we’re left with
nothing at all. If this turns out to be the case, we will then be forced
to accept the challenge that we are only what we make ourselves in
the world as we ﬁnd it.
The second problem, however, is even more worrying: it strikes at
the very viability of art in these individualised cultures. We talk of
self-realisation as if it is the common-sense rationalisation of every
210
Writing

artist struggling for self-expression. Yet, in effect, it leaves the artist
cowering from the real world, sheltered within the safe, though
barren conﬁnes of solipsism. If we believe that all we can ever really
know is our inner personal states, then the outside world can only
ever be a product of our own consciousness. But this is incom-
patible with a language to express it, whether in music, painting 
or literature.
In effect it can only be expressed through a private language, the
terms of which are deﬁned by reference to our private sensations 
and whose meaning, therefore, can only be known to us. But, as
Wittgenstein points out in Philosophical Investigations, such a lan-
guage is not logically possible, because a language is designed to
communicate with others, and this requires commonly accepted
rules. In a private language, where whatever seems right can only be
decided by referring to the exclusive personal states of the user, there
can be no such rules.
Despite its internal coherence any art built upon exclusively per-
sonal experience is in danger of having no anchor in a common
shared reality, its ﬂotilla of symbols adrift with no charts. The modern
liberal artist is left with the problem of trying to communicate what
being alive is like without the assurance of a common social frame
of reference. Without an identity etched in the complex interactions
of social relations of family, friends and acquaintances, he is left with
just his abstract humanity known only to himself.
 Words
The same problems that make sentences difﬁcult reappear in our use
of words. We believe that as we advance to higher levels of learning
we will need to use more complex, even abstruse, language. And it’s
true that as we graduate from one level to another we will be expected
to use and explore more complex ideas and concepts, and these will
demand a more subtle use of language and a more careful and delib-
erate choice of words and phrases. Clearly, words like ‘nice’, ‘good’ and
‘bad’ are inadequate vehicles for conveying subtle distinctions and for
all but the crudest of meanings. But this doesn’t mean that we’re driven
to using a plethora of multi-syllabled words or the most convoluted
sentences that conceal more than they reveal.
This can give rise to all sorts of problems, not least the use of 
jargon and other words that are empty of real meaning. The following
Style – Simplicity
211

sentences illustrate this. The ﬁrst is taken from a student’s essay, and
the second, ironically, is drawn from material for a course on talking
and writing.
Negative feedback brings about an opposite action as a consequence of
having sampled the output through the feedback loop.
Concepts and the language that infuses and implements them give power
and strategy to cognitive activity.
You can probably glean some sense from these sentences, but there
will be few of us who don’t have some problem unwrapping their
meaning. They both suffer from the use of jargon, which has been sub-
stituted for genuine, explicable thought. In fact in most cases when
we’re confronted by jargon it’s not surprising we fail to see the meaning
clearly, because the truth is it’s not there to start with.
And, even when there is meaning, the jargon only serves to ob-
scure it. In these sentences, phrases such as ‘negative feedback’ and
‘feedback loop’, and words that are used vaguely, such as ‘infuses’,
‘power’ and ‘strategy’, are all substitutes for genuine thought. The
authors have evaded the responsibility to think clearly about the
subject, choosing instead to rely upon jargon to convey what meaning
there is.
This underlines what we’ve emphasised in previous sections, that
clear and effective writing depends upon clear and effective thinking.
Language is the vehicle for your ideas: if your ideas themselves are
muddled and confused, then so too will be your language and style.
This brings us back to the interpretation and planning of the essay.
Now that you’ve done these successfully, you’re better placed to make
clearer demands upon your style, and this is more likely to result in
clarity and precision in your use of language.
Choosing the right words
Nevertheless, that’s still only half of the problem. Now that you’ve got
the inside clear, your ideas, you need to be clear about the outside,
your words. As you search for the right word, don’t settle for some-
thing that doesn’t capture your speciﬁc idea accurately. Of course, you
don’t want to interrupt your ﬂow of ideas and words, and you can leave
much of this tidying up to the revision stage, but you will need to get
close enough to your idea to recall exactly what you were trying to say,
when you come to revise.
212
Writing

So, when you ﬁnd yourself using the familiar generality that approxi-
mates roughly to what you want to say, stop and search for a word that
is more accurate and speciﬁc. Otherwise your readers will conclude
that you simply haven’t got the intellectual determination to pin your
ideas down precisely or, worse still, that you have few interesting ideas
of your own. Either way, they’re likely to assume that the vague sweep-
ing generalities you’ve used mean one thing, when you really mean
another.
If you were to claim, for example, that ‘Modern business methods
are destroying communities and exploiting the poor’, this could mean
a number of different things to different people. To pin down exactly
what you want to say you would have to be more speciﬁc. What
methods in particular? In what way are they destroying communities?
And what speciﬁc groups are being exploited? Without this your readers
might broadly agree with you, but place little signiﬁcance in what
you’re saying.
Clichés
And, what’s more, the beneﬁts of striving for greater clarity and preci-
sion in your use of language don’t end there. The more you force your-
self to search for a word that is the perfect vehicle for your idea, the
more you will have to draw on in the future. As a result, you’ll be less
likely to fall back on the familiar, reassuring, although empty, cliché.
Like jargon, clichés are often a sign that you haven’t pinned your idea
down accurately, or that you haven’t searched thoroughly for the exact
word that will carry your idea perfectly.
Yet, as most of us know, it’s not always easy to avoid clichés. Indeed,
it may not always be wise to. Cutting out all the clichés in your writing
can often make your prose sound stiff and cumbersome. A familiar
cliché conveying just the right emphasis and meaning will help you
produce prose that is nearer to talk in print, with a natural rhythm
that’s not strained and difﬁcult to read.
Unfortunately, all too often the impact is quite the reverse. An empty
cliché, that does no real work beyond sounding cosy and familiar, can
sap our writing of its life and vigour. If you want your ideas to have
impact and your readers to appreciate that you really do have inter-
esting and original ideas, then avoid any word or phrase that doesn’t
do justice to your ideas, and this includes clichés.
So ask yourself, when a cliché comes to you in the middle of a
passage, does this convey what I want it to, or is this familiar phrase
encouraging me to adopt a thought structure that I didn’t want? And,
Style – Simplicity
213

of equal importance, will it lead my readers gently down a familiar path
which I didn’t really want them to go down? Like everything else in
your writing, if you use a cliché, mean to do it: have a clear reason, a
purpose, for doing so.
214
Writing
Assignment
10
Style
In the last assignment you wrote the introduction, the conclusion and
the ﬁrst two paragraphs that followed the introduction to the essay
you’ve chosen to work on. In this assignment write the next three para-
graphs, that follow on from the two you wrote for the last assignment.
Make sure that the structures of your sentences are clear and your
words convey your meaning accurately.
After it’s written, read it over to yourself aloud or get someone else to
read it to you. As you listen to it search for two things: ﬁrst, any passage
where the rhythm is clumsy and it’s not possible to read it ﬂuently; 
and secondly, where logical indicators go missing, making it difﬁcult to
decipher your meaning.
 In the next chapter
Once you’ve completed this assignment you will be more aware of just
how effective these techniques can be in making your writing lighter,
more like talk in print. Writing lightly often means catching the rhythms
of speech and, at times, this can be done just by shortening a sentence,
or moving a logical indicator, or using your punctuation to make more
white space.
In the next chapter we will consider the other element of style,
economy. We will examine the various ways we can improve our style,
giving our writing greater clarity through a more economical use of
language.
Note
1 Matthew Arnold, quoted in G. W. E. Russell, Collections and Recollections
(London, 1903), ch. 13.

28 Style – Economy
In this chapter you will learn:
•
how to make sure your arguments are not obscured by superﬂuous
words and phrases;
•
a simple practical guide to improve your style;
•
how to use the active voice wherever possible;
•
how to avoid watering down your prose with too many adverbs,
adjectives and prepositions.
 Improving the readability and impact of 
your writing
In the last section we examined the importance of simplicity in our
writing, the ﬁrst of the two elements of style. This brings us to the need
for economy. Once you’ve thought your ideas through and planned
them carefully, your major concern thereafter should be to express
them clearly, concisely, with an economical use of words. In this lies
the essence of what most of us understand by ‘style’ – what the 
Reverend Samuel Wesley once described as, ‘the dress of thought; a
modest dress, neat, but not gaudy’.1
Even so, many students still ﬁnd it difﬁcult to abandon the belief that
somehow a good style is full of superﬂuous ﬂourishes and ﬁligrees of
‘tasteful’ affectation. Nothing could be further from the truth. As the
Reverend Wesley rightly points out, a good writing style is elegant, but
not ostentatious. Each component of a sentence should have a reason
for being there: it should have a clearly deﬁned function. There should
be no wasted effort: no unnecessary words or phrases that obscure the
meaning of the sentence. Otherwise the clarity of your thought will be
lost, leaving the reader wondering what it all means.
215

Understandably, in the discussions we have with people in our
normal lives we all use superﬂuous words and phrases that cloud and
obscure the issues. This is often necessary to give us the thinking time
we need to summon up our thoughts while we speak. Modern politi-
cians, confronted by a throng of probing TV microphones and a posse
of journalists, have long learnt how to buy themselves extra thinking
time with wordy phrases, like ‘this moment in time’. Now even sports
people, pop stars, and managers of football teams have discovered how
useful this can be. But at least they have some excuse in that they need
to buy time to gather their thoughts. For the rest of us who can enjoy
the luxury of careful, time-consuming thought as we write our essays,
there is no excuse for phrases like ‘most importantly of all’ and ‘in
modern America of today’.
Knowing what to leave out
Along with simplicity, then, economy should be our paramount concern
as we write. A. N. Whitehead described style as the ultimate morality of
the mind. By this he implied that the mind should adjudicate rigorously
on our use of words and our choice of phrases to ensure that each phrase
has a well-deﬁned function, that sentence structures are direct, and that
words are chosen for their absolute economy of expression.
Indeed, knowing what to leave out is as important as knowing what
to include. In effect, Whitehead’s ultimate morality of the mind is the
art of knowing what not to do. Therefore, if clauses and phrases can be
summed up in a word, replace them. You’ll be surprised by the effect.
It’s worth having a sign on your computer screen or a notice pinned
over your desk reminding you constantly that the readability of your
work increases in proportion to the unnecessary words you eliminate.
But this is not the only bonus that comes from economising. Equally
important, the really signiﬁcant words will no longer be smothered,
and your points and arguments will no longer be obscured by unnec-
essary words and phrases. They’ll stand out more, and they’ll have
impact to make the reader think and wonder. Take the following 
sentences, remove the unnecessary phrases and see the impact. The
resulting sentences are sharper and more direct.
Advertisers will tell you, if you’re thinking of making a purchase,
what’s good about their product, but omit the weaknesses.
Advertisers will tell you what’s good about their product, but omit
the weaknesses.
216
Writing

A report from a consumer association might heavily criticise a
product for one reason or another, but if it contains just a single 
sentence of praise, this is likely to ﬁnd its way into promotional 
literature.
A report from a consumer association might heavily criticise a
product, but if it contains just a single sentence of praise, this is likely
to ﬁnd its way into promotional literature.
All this means that as you write you should constantly censor your-
self and monitor your choice of words, asking yourself, ‘Is this word
or phrase necessary and does it convey my meaning exactly?’ Although
this is difﬁcult at ﬁrst, it will get easier. And you’ve always got the 
revision stage to come when you can clean up your work.
 Style in practical terms – the dos and don’ts
All of this makes sense in general terms – it gives us a clear idea 
of what we need to do throughout our work to avoid heavy, unread-
able prose. But it still helps to have some simple practical rules by 
our side to help us produce work that is light, concise and interesting;
work that grabs the reader’s attention and keeps it to the end of the
essay.
To help you do this, try using the following as a simple practical
guide. It may not be possible to apply each rule all at once – you might
need to concentrate on two or three of them, until they become estab-
lished. Then you can move on to the others, until you’re applying all
of them in every piece of work. But you must try to keep your inner
editor at bay as you write, so you can release your creativity. If you ﬁnd
the ﬂuency of your writing begins to break up as you check on these
things, remind yourself that you’ve still got the safety net of the 
revision stage.
 1
Choose the short simple word over the
long obscure one
If the short simple word carries the same meaning as the long obscure
one, use it, otherwise you’re in danger of producing prose that sounds
unnecessarily pompous. But whatever word you choose, your primary
Style – Economy
217

concern should be to ensure the meaning is clear – avoid words that
are vague, whether short, simple, long or obscure.
 2
Use the active voice
Wherever possible use the active, rather than the passive voice. All too
often the passive voice produces passive readers, who sleepwalk their
way through your prose. The active voice is almost always clearer and
more direct, so there’s no need, as many students writing academic
essays tend to believe, to convert every sentence into the passive form.
In the active form it’s the doer of the action who is the subject of
the sentence, rather than the receiver of the action, or the action itself,
as in the passive form. For example,
Passive:
The party was made more enjoyable by Rita’s outrageous
stories.
Active:
Rita’s outrageous stories made the party more enjoyable.
Passive:
The blue getaway car was described by the bank clerk.
Active:
The bank clerk described the blue getaway car.
Passive:
An atmosphere of deep gloom is created by the novelist in
the last paragraph of the chapter.
Active:
The novelist creates an atmosphere of deep gloom in the
last paragraph of the chapter.
Notice how the passive form is almost always less direct, positive and
concise. For example, you might say,
My ﬁrst car will never be forgotten by me.
But when you convert this into the active voice with the doer of the
action the subject of the sentence, by being more direct it is more
concise, and also more positive:
I will never forget my ﬁrst car.
But that’s not to say that the passive voice should never be used.
There are times when what is done is more important than who did it.
For example, the statement,
218
Writing

Professor Jenkins and Doctor Taylor of University College, London,
last month achieved the most signiﬁcant breakthrough yet in the
treatment of colon cancer
would be better in the passive voice:
The most signiﬁcant breakthrough yet in the treatment of colon
cancer was achieved last month by Professor Jenkins and Doctor
Taylor of University College, London
because the most important fact in the statement, what has been
achieved, has been placed at the front of the sentence, and the doers
at the back.
Style – Economy
219
Practice exercise
19
Passive or Active?
Listed below you will ﬁnd three pairs of statements. Rewrite each pair
into a single sentence in either the active or the passive form. Choose
which you think is the most appropriate in each case and then brieﬂy
give your reasons for your choices.
Once you’ve ﬁnished, compare your choices and the reasons you’ve
given with those in the answer below.
Statements
1
Nigel Brown scored the goal.
The decisive goal was scored in the last minute of the game.
2
Chief Justice Taylor was driving home.
He was stopped by the police and found to be driving under the
inﬂuence of alcohol.
3
John Douglas was stopped on his way home and robbed at knife
point.
He was robbed by a gang of eleven-year-olds.

Answers
1
Passive sentence:
The decisive goal was scored in the last minute
of the game by Nigel Brown.
Reason:
The most interesting fact in these two statements 
is that the goal was scored in the last minute of the 
game.
2
Active sentence:
While he was driving home Chief Justice Taylor
was stopped by the police and found to be
driving under the inﬂuence of alcohol.
Reason:
The most interesting fact is not that someone was caught
driving under the inﬂuence of alcohol, but that it was a
prominent member of the judiciary.
3
Active sentence:
A gang of eleven-year-olds stopped John Douglas
on his way home and robbed him at knife point.
Reason:
That he was robbed by a gang of eleven-year-olds is more
interesting than the fact that he was robbed at knife
point.
 3
Rely on nouns and verbs to carry 
your meaning
Verbs
Wherever you can, try to build sentences around verbs that are 
speciﬁc and active. Weak verbs have to be shored up by adverbs and
adverbial phrases, that can water down the image. But beware of your
choice of verb: don’t overstate the case by choosing one that is too
strong.
In the following sentences, by replacing the weak verb and its adverb
with a stronger verb, the sentence is made sharper and its meaning
clearer.
Yet we still might be right in thinking suspiciously that behind all this
information lies a covert message.
Yet we still might be right in suspecting that behind all this infor-
mation lies a covert message.
220
Writing

Our desire for status and our respect for authority has given adver-
tisers an effective way of deceptively taking advantage of our 
feelings to promote all manner of products.
Our desire for status and our respect for authority has given adver-
tisers an effective way of exploiting our feelings to promote all
manner of products.
Nouns
In the same way, make sure the nouns you use are speciﬁc and 
deﬁnite, not general. They must produce a clear image. Like the use 
of adverbs, if you have to use adjectives to shore up your noun, 
modifying or qualifying it, you’ve probably chosen the wrong one in
the ﬁrst place. The danger is your meaning will lose impact, or will be
difﬁcult to see, beneath the camouﬂage of adjectives and adjectival
phrases.
In the following sentences, by replacing the noun and its adjective
with a single noun that is more speciﬁc, a clearer image is produced,
one which carries much more meaning.
By appealing to their strong tastes advertisers successfully by-pass
the consumer’s capacity to make rational choices.
By appealing to their passions advertisers successfully by-pass the
consumer’s capacity to make rational choices.
It’s not just tastes that you’re discussing, but passions – a particular
type of taste which is much stronger than all the rest, at times even
irresistible.
They may give us information on the latest technology, but they are
also covertly suggesting that we can’t afford not to keep up with the
latest developments.
They may give us information on the latest technology, but they are
also covertly suggesting that we can’t afford not to keep up with
progress.
It’s not just the latest developments, but the whole idea of progress
and whether this is necessarily a good thing.
Style – Economy
221

 4
Replace prepositional phrases 
with prepositions
Like adverbs and adjectives, too many prepositional phrases water
down your prose and obscure your meaning. Many of these we use in
our normal speech simply because they give us more thinking time.
But if you use them in your writing they will clutter up your prose and
give the reader a bumpy, uncomfortable ride through your arguments
and explanations. This will make it difﬁcult for your reader to under-
stand your meaning.
Therefore, wherever possible replace the prepositional phrase with
a simple preposition. For example,
replace
‘with regard to’ with ‘about’,
‘for the simple reason’ with ‘because’, and
‘on the part of’ with ‘by’.
This is not to say that such phrases are always inappropriate, but you
should pose yourself the question, ‘Can I replace these with a simpler
preposition without any loss of meaning?’ If you can, do it!
You will also ﬁnd, particularly in the revision stage, that it helps 
to collect prepositional phrases in your notebook. When we’re asked
to produce them, most of us are hard pressed to think of one. It 
helps, then, to list them in your notebook as you come across them in
your reading, so you know what you’re looking for when you come to
revise.
 5
Create ﬂuency through transitions
In Stage 3 (Planning) we discussed the importance of transitions 
in creating ﬂuency between paragraphs, thereby giving your essay 
the coherence and continuity it must have to achieve a high grade. 
They are also important as a means of giving your readers the literal
signposts they need to negotiate your essay successfully without
getting lost.
As you come across transitions in your reading, note how 
other writers link their paragraphs, perhaps even keeping a record 
in your notebook so you can use them yourself. Below is a list of 
the most common linking words and phrases that are useful as 
transitions:
222
Writing

But, However, On the other hand, Yet . . .
indicating contrast
For example, That is . . .
indicating illustration
Similarly, Moreover, Furthermore, 
In addition, By extension, What is more . . .
indicating extension
Therefore, Consequently, 
As a result, Thus . . .
indicating conclusion
Then, After that, It follows . . .
indicating the next step
Others you’ll ﬁnd useful include ‘likewise’, ‘correspondingly’, ‘hence’,
‘accordingly’, ‘nevertheless’, ‘incidentally’, ‘otherwise’, ‘nonetheless’,
‘obviously’.
Compound transitions
The more you look for transitions to record in your notebook the 
more compound transitions you will come across. As the name 
implies, they are made up from one or more words or transitions. 
There is, therefore, almost an inexhaustible variety of them, indeed 
you can make up your own as easily as you can collect them. Their
value lies in giving you a much wider range of transitions to choose
from, allowing you to navigate exactly the right passage through 
your arguments with just the right changes in emphasis and direction
to reﬂect all the subtleties of your arguments. The list below is 
broken up into the more obvious changes you’re likely to use in your
arguments.
Conjunction
And, moreover, – And although – And in one 
respect – And once – And so – And while some – And
as it is
Extension
So, even though – It follows then – In this way – From
that angle – By the same token – On that account –
Given this
Endorsement
Not surprisingly – Of course – And moreover – Most
important of all – Even more – In particular
Contrast
But instead – But at the same time – And yet – But 
even – But then again – But perhaps – Yet still – But
while
Narrative
Following this – And after that – But then – So began –
But so far – More recently
Style – Economy
223

 In the next chapter
The ﬁnal two rules in our practical guide concern our use of evidence.
In the next chapter you will learn how to use evidence to change the
pace of your writing and engage your readers in your arguments. You
will see how your use of evidence not only supports and illustrates your
arguments, but makes your work more interesting and persuasive.
Note
1 Revd Samuel Wesley, An Epistle to a Friend concerning Poetry (London,
1700).
224
Writing

225
29 Working with Evidence
In this chapter you will learn:
•
how to use the different types of evidence to support your arguments
effectively;
•
how to make your work more readable by varying the type of 
evidence you use;
•
how to make the seven practical rules part of your writing strategy.
The last two of our seven practical rules for improving our style are
concerned with the way we use evidence. Without doubt this is one of
the most neglected aspects of our writing. We tend to assume that all
we have to do is select our evidence and then insert it into our essay
when our arguments need support.
Yet the evidence we use serves to do much more than just support
and illustrate our arguments. Used thoughtfully, it can help us change
the pace of our writing, making our essay more readable. And there is
no other component of our essays that can so effectively engage our
readers’ empathetic responses. You will ﬁnd, then, that by looking care-
fully at the way you use evidence not only can you make your work
more interesting, but you can give it real impact.
 6
Don’t overstate or understate: match your
words to the strength of the evidence
Choose your words consciously and deliberately to convey accurately
the strength of your ideas and the evidence that supports them. Often,
when we fail to think through our ideas with sufﬁcient care, we’re
inclined to see issues in the form of simple absolutes: all/nothing,
right/wrong, yes/no. But rarely is there sufﬁcient evidence to support
such claims.

There are, of course, categories of sentences in which you can use
words like ‘all’, but they’re more restricted than we generally acknowl-
edge. Either they’re sentences describing a particular known group of
things: ‘all of my friends’, or ‘all of the coins in my pocket’, or they’re
trivially true, that is they’re true a priori, by virtue of the meaning of
their constituent parts.
For example, it would be quite correct to say that ‘All bachelors are
unmarried men, ’ or that ‘All cats are animals,’ or that ‘All bicycles have
two wheels,’ because this is what we mean by these terms. These sen-
tences are true by virtue of what we agree to put into them in the ﬁrst
place. The fact that we agree the word ‘bachelor’ shall mean ‘male’ and
‘unmarried’, makes the sentence true. In the same way, when we
unwrap the meaning of other words like ‘cat’ or ‘bicycle’, we ﬁnd that
their meaning too links two or more characteristics in ‘all’ cases.
Beyond these ‘analytic’ truths, we’re faced with the problem of using
simple absolutes, like ‘all’, in empirical propositions, that is prop-
ositions that go beyond the meaning of the terms they use, to make
statements about the real world. As we’ve already seen, it’s safe to 
use words like ‘all’ in sentences that make a claim about a particular
known group of things, like your friends or the coins in your pocket.
So you could safely say that ‘All the people in this room are male’, 
or ‘All the members of the party voted for Mr X as their candidate’,
because the evidence for these claims is easy to verify.
But most of the claims we make are not like this: they involve an
element of judgement on our part; they cannot be veriﬁed either by
demonstrable fact or by analysis of the meaning of their constituent
parts. They’re claims like ‘Nobody believes it’s right to kill dolphins,’
‘Everybody agrees that terrorists should receive capital punishment,’
or ‘At no time over the last seventy years has anybody seriously doubted
the value of the automobile.’ Each of these claims is too strong for the
evidence we have, or even could have. You need ﬁnd only one person
who believes dolphins should be killed, or that terrorists should be sen-
tenced to life imprisonment, or that the automobile has damaged the
quality of our lives, to have disproved them.
Another sign worth sticking to your computer screen or pinning
above your desk might read:
226
Writing
The more difﬁcult I make it for the examiner to
dismiss my arguments, the higher my marks.

Clearly, then, you must make every effort to match the strength of
your statements to the strength of your evidence, using words like
‘much’, ‘many’, ‘some’, ‘frequently’. In this way you avoid the risk of
overstatement, which will weaken your arguments and lead the exam-
iner to dismiss them for lack of sufﬁcient evidence.
You can do this in three ways in descending order of evidential
strength.
6.1
Hard evidence
This is the strongest form of evidence, which includes statistics, exam-
ples, quotations, even anecdotes. Obviously, wherever possible use this
form of evidence to support your arguments. Although readers can
challenge your judgements and the interpretation you place on this evi-
dence, they cannot criticise you for dispensing mere opinion. The hard
evidence you use shows that there are serious grounds for someone
to consider the arguments and points you’ve developed.
6.2
Explication
However, often it’s simply not possible to support an argument with
the sort of hard evidence it needs. Nevertheless, you may still believe
it’s a valuable argument to develop, one that most people will accept
for good reasons. It may not even be possible to gather any evidence
of any kind to support it: it’s just that most of us accept that it’s 
reasonable to believe that this is the case. Of course, common opinion
is not always common-sense, but in these cases it is more a question
of what makes reasonable sense.
For example, you might claim that most people believe that tobacco
companies should not target their products at children. Now there may
be no hard evidence for this claim: there may have been no surveys
ever done, or government statistics issued about what people believe.
Yet it’s obvious you’re probably right. All you can do, therefore, is to
reveal the reasonableness of this claim through careful explication 
of your argument. In this way you show that your assumptions are 
reasonable, that they’re based on common-sense, and there are no
ﬂaws in your arguments.
In our claim about tobacco companies, for example, we might argue
that most people are aware of the long-term health problems that
smoking creates; that children are not in a position to evaluate all the
information and make a free and informed choice; and that once
hooked at an early age most smokers ﬁnd it difﬁcult to quit and, there-
fore, end up suffering from these health problems, some of which may
Working with Evidence
227

be terminal. Given all this, it now seems a reasonable claim to make.
It’s founded on a common-sense understanding that you share with
others, including the reader, and you’ve demonstrated that the case is
argued consistently.
6.3
Report
However, if you lack hard evidence, or you’re in a timed exam and you
can’t remember any, and you don’t feel conﬁdent enough to argue for
the reasonableness of your case, then you’re left with only one alter-
native: shift the weight of responsibility from your shoulders onto
someone else’s. You do this by attributing the view to some named
authority or, if you can’t remember who advocated the view, to some
impersonal authority, like ‘many believe. . . .’, ‘some people claim. . . .’,
‘it is argued. . . .’ and so on.
Clearly this is the weakest form of support for your argument and,
although it can be useful under timed conditions, you must be aware
of the degree to which it weakens your argument. Hard evidence and
explication will earn higher marks, because, as you take on the respon-
sibility of defending the argument as your own, you are obliged to use
the abilities in the higher cognitive domains to argue and justify it with
evidence of the appropriate quality and strength.
In contrast, by shifting the responsibility to others you merely exer-
cise abilities in the lower cognitive domains: you’re merely recalling
and describing a case developed by somebody else. Nevertheless,
without this, without any attempt to support your argument, it will be
dismissed as merely a statement of opinions, of no particular value,
beyond the fact that you can remember it. And, as we said before,
anyone can express opinions.
228
Writing
Practice exercise
20
Explication
Listed below you will see three statements. Give three or four reasons
why you think these might be reasonable statements to make. Most of
us believe these statements are reasonable, but, if you don’t, set aside
your doubts and give the sort of justiﬁcation that you think someone
would give who does in fact believe them.
Compare your reasons with those listed in the answer that follows.

Statements
1
Most people believe we’re right to try to protect the environment.
2
Most of us are opposed to the systematic use of very young 
children in the labour force.
3
Most of us accept that we should not be cruel to animals.
Reasons
1
The environment.
Because of:
1.1
the increasing levels of pollution;
1.2
the rise in the incidence of health problems related to 
environmental pollution, e.g. asthma;
1.3
the depletion of resources, like rainforests;
1.4
the damage to the ozone layer and the related increase in 
skin cancer;
1.5
the effect of changes in the ecological system, e.g. the changes
in weather patterns supposedly as a result of the ‘greenhouse
effect’;
1.6
endangered species whose habitats are disappearing.
2
Child labour.
Because:
2.1
children should be in education;
2.2
children are easily exploited;
2.3
they should have a childhood, rather than be forced into the
adult world too early;
2.4
they are likely to work in dangerous and unhealthy conditions;
2.5
in some circumstances they will take work away from adult
workers who need it to support their families.
3
Animals.
Because:
3.1
we believe we have a moral responsibility to try to maximise
the well-being of all, not just promote our own self-interests;
3.2
this involves the moral obligation to minimise all unnecessary
suffering;
Working with Evidence
229

3.3
all sentient beings – including animals – have a capacity to
suffer as a result of physical pain, and emotional and psycho-
logical distress.
 7
Know how much evidence to use
In view of what we’ve just said, the standard advice to novelists applies
equally to those of us who write essays – wherever possible show,
rather than tell. Don’t just state something is the case, demonstrate it
with evidence. It’s worth reminding yourself that you’re not just
describing an event, just explaining what happened; you’re explaining
why it happened – you’re giving reasons that will, hopefully, convince
the reader that you’re right.
Equally important, this has a signiﬁcant bearing on the second of
our guiding principles – interest. Quotations, statistics, anecdotes, all
make your work more readable. Not only do they break it up with
changes of pace and content, but they allow the subjects to speak for
themselves. Your readers can then respond empathetically, and with
their emotions and feelings engaged in your work this can lend untold
support to your arguments.
But make sure the evidence you use has a point: that it is related to
and reinforces your arguments. Any quotations, statistics or anecdotes
you use must do real work. You may like a quotation for the impact
you know it will have on the reader, or an anecdote for its pathos or
poignancy, but if it doesn’t reinforce a point or advance your argument,
drop it. You’ll always ﬁnd a use for it later.
And don’t overdo it with evidence. There’s always the danger that
you just might bury your readers under information, making it impos-
sible for them to take on board everything you want them to, thereby
wasting a lot of the good evidence you’ve dug up. If you pile one unre-
lated piece of information on another, your readers will have no means
of dealing with it successfully. They will lose themselves and, in turn,
you will lose marks. Whereas if you strip out all the unnecessary infor-
mation, what remains will stand out and will have more impact.
As we’ve seen a number of times already, the key to this is structure.
If your readers are clear what part the information plays in the overall
scheme of things, they can process it successfully and put it in its
appropriate place. But if the structure’s weak, they’ll have to re-read 
it to make sure they’ve understood it, or, if they’re not so scrupulous,
they’ll just miss much of what you’re saying. The key to this, then, is
to create a clear structure within which you use only those facts, quo-
230
Writing

tations and statistics that do real work, and write them out as suc-
cinctly as possible.
Working with Evidence
231
In a nutshell
•
Show rather than tell.
•
Make your work more readable by varying the type of evidence 
you use.
•
Make sure your evidence does real work.
•
Try not to bury your reader under an avalanche of information.
•
Create a clear structure for your evidence so your reader knows how
to process it.
 Using the seven practical rules
All of this is a great deal to remember, particularly while you’re writing.
So don’t, if it interrupts your creative ﬂow. Just start by reminding your-
self of two or three of the rules as you write. Eventually, with these well
under your control, you can move on to the rest. And you’ve always
got the revision stage after this to clean up your work. Indeed, you’ll
ﬁnd as you revise one essay after another, all seven rules will grad-
ually ﬁlter through into your writing. This is not to say you shouldn’t
bother to remind yourself that the active voice is better than the
passive, or that nouns should be speciﬁc and deﬁnite, not general. If
you can do this without interrupting your ﬂow, then do it.
Assignment
11
Style
In this assignment ﬁnish writing the remaining paragraphs of the essay
you’ve chosen to work on. Before you start, remind yourself of the seven
practical rules we’ve outlined in this section. However, write as freely as
possible: don’t let your editor in to disrupt the ﬂow of your ideas.
Once you’ve ﬁnished, put them aside for a day or so, then read them
through to check how well you’ve done with the seven practical rules.
For this exercise you’re not actually revising them, but you should go
through each rule to see if you could have done better.

 In the next chapter
Now that you’ve ﬁnished writing your essay, before you put it aside
until you’re ready for revision, you need to deal with all the material
that you’ve borrowed from the texts you’ve used. In the next chapter
you will be shown how to avoid the problems of plagiarism and how
to decide when you need to cite your sources.
232
Writing

233
30 Plagiarism
In this chapter you will learn:
•
about the dangers of plagiarism and how to avoid them;
•
how to decide when you need to cite sources and when you don’t
need to – the six-point code;
•
how to organise yourself to lessen the chances of plagiarism.
By deﬁnition the research we undertake to write an essay involves us
in borrowing material in one form or another. So, before we pack away
our notes, relieved that we’ve done most of the hard work, we need to
remind ourselves that we have certain ethical responsibilities to meet.
We have an obligation to acknowledge all those who have helped us
by giving us material in the form of ideas, quotations, ﬁgures and anec-
dotes. Failure to do this will mean we have committed just about the
worst form of academic dishonesty.
 What is plagiarism exactly?
There can’t be many students at universities who are unaware of the
meaning of this. But still there are things we do that we don’t always
recognise as plagiarism.1 Therefore, we ought to have a clear idea of
the various activities this includes. In its simplest form it is the attempt
to present someone else’s ideas or arguments as your own. This might
be using an idea you’ve read in one of your sources without acknowl-
edging it, copying paragraphs directly into your own work without 
quotation marks or a reference, or just quoting from a paper without
quotation marks, even though you may have cited the paper appropri-
ately elsewhere. In effect it involves any activity which amounts to you
taking credit for work that is someone else’s.

Fortunately, most examples of plagiarism are not deliberate. Some
students are just unaware of the rules of acknowledgement. Others fail
to organise their work well enough, so that when they come to research
their essays, they take their notes in a rushed and careless manner. As
a result they blend their own ideas with those they take from the texts
they use. They fail to put these ideas into their own words, so that the
paraphrases and summaries that ﬁnd their way into their essay are not
sufﬁciently different from the original.
The problem is, as we saw in Chapter 10, that the solution can 
be almost as harmful in its impact on a student’s work as plagiarism
itself. In other words, we come to believe that the only way to avoid
plagiarism is to give a reference for every idea not only quoted or para-
phrased, but borrowed in any possible way. This gives us the im-
pression that there is nothing new in education and our role is 
just to recycle received opinion. In this way, by demonstrating that 
our ideas are not original, we hope to make them invulnerable: as they
have been thought by others, their authority gives our arguments the
protection we cannot. Education, then, appears to be more concerned
with what we think, than with how we think.
Even so, there are other sources of advice, more tolerant of our own
ideas, and in this we begin to see the depth and complexity of the
problem. The Greats Handbook at Oxford advises students: ‘The exam-
iners are looking for your own ideas and convictions, and you mustn’t
be shy of presenting them as your own: whether you are conscious of
having inherited them from somebody else doesn’t matter one way or
the other.’2
 So, where should you draw the line?
It’s simply not enough to tell students, as one university does, that 
they must use references whenever ‘the knowledge you are expres-
sing is not your own original thought’.3 This would mean that you are 
left giving references for just about all the ideas you will ever use.
You’ve probably used words like ‘gravity’ or ‘ideology’ many times
before, but they are not your original thoughts. Does this mean you
must provide a reference from Newton’s Principia or Marx’s The
German Ideology, respectively, each time you use them? You may know
that the distance from London to Edinburgh is 378 miles or that Jupiter
has 16 moons, but you have never measured or counted them your-
self, so should you give the reference to the person who has, each time
234
Writing

you use this information? Of course not. So where should you draw
the line?
With speciﬁc information or data, in the form of facts, statistics,
tables and diagrams, it’s easier to decide. You will have found them in
a speciﬁc publication, which you will need to cite, so your reader will
know who gathered the information and where to ﬁnd it. The same
applies to any information, or set of ideas, that have been organised
in a distinctive way. The information may have been known to you, but
you have never seen it presented in this form or argued in this way.
And in this lies the crucial principle:
Plagiarism
235
Whenever the author has given something distinctive to the
information or its organisation, cite the source.
In citing the source you are acknowledging the author’s distinctive
contribution. By the same token, this applies to a phrase or passage
that you use verbatim. It has its own distinctive form that you must
acknowledge. This is true even of a single word, if this is distinctive to
the author’s argument.
 Common knowledge
But with most ideas and thoughts the situation isn’t so clear cut. 
There may be nothing distinctive about them or their organisa-
tion. So you may believe quite reasonably that, although you got 
the ideas from a source you’ve read, you can use them without 
acknowledgement.
One justiﬁcation for this is that all knowledge in the public domain,
all ‘common knowledge’, need not be referenced. But this seems to do
little more than give the problem a different name. So, what is ‘common
knowledge’? This brings us back to our original distinction. Common
knowledge is all those facts, ideas and opinions that are not dis-
tinctive of a particular author or a matter of interpretation. They 
may be familiar ideas or just easily found in a number of common 
reference works, like dictionaries, basic textbooks, encyclopaedias, or 
yearbooks.

For example, you need not give a reference for the fact that the
French Revolution began in July 1789, but you would have to for a 
particular historian’s account of the causes of it. You might not need a
reference if you were to explain that the Wannsee Conference in
January 1942 cleared the last obstacles for the application of the Nazis’
Final Solution to the whole of Europe, but you would need evidence
and references if you were to make the unfamiliar claim that Hitler
knew nothing about it.
It wouldn’t even be necessary to give a reference for a distinctive
contribution made by someone in a particular discipline, if this is well-
known within that discipline. In politics or sociology, for example, it
wouldn’t be necessary to give a reference for Marx’s concept of ‘alien-
ation’, or in philosophy for Kant’s ‘categorical imperative’, but if you
were to refer to an author’s particular interpretation of either, this
would need a reference.
Take the word ‘paradigm’, meaning a dominant theory in an area of
study, which sets the conceptual framework within which a science is
taught and scientists conduct research. It was ﬁrst used in this sense
by T. S. Kuhn in his seminal work, The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolu-
tions (1962). Today the term has spread throughout the social sciences
and philosophy. But in none of these areas would you be expected to
cite the reference to Kuhn, if you were to use the term; so common has
it become within each of these disciplines.
Other types of common knowledge come in the form of common 
or familiar opinion. It may seem to you undeniable that the vast 
majority of your fellow citizens are in favour of staging the next
Olympic Games or the World Cup in your country, but no survey 
may ever have been done or referendum held. Similarly, it might 
generally be held that the elderly should receive special treatment, like
free bus passes and medical help. In appealing to such common 
knowledge you would have to judge how familiar it was. The rule is,
‘if in doubt, cite’.
 The six-point code
To make it easier for you to decide exactly when you need to cite, use
the following simple six-point code. This is another of those notes
worth sticking to the side of your computer screen or pinning to the
notice-board above your desk. Wherever you keep it, make sure it’s just
a glance away.
236
Writing

When to cite
1
Distinctive ideas
Whenever the ideas or opinions are distinc-
tive to one particular source.
2
Distinctive structure or organising strategy
Even though
you may have put it into your own words, if the author has
adopted a particular method of approaching a problem, or 
there is a distinctive intellectual structure to what’s written, for
example to an argument or to the analysis of a concept, then 
you must cite the source.
3
Information or data from a particular source
If you’ve 
gathered information from a source in the form of facts, statis-
tics, tables and diagrams, you will need to cite the source, so 
your readers will know who gathered the information and where
to ﬁnd it.
4
Verbatim phrase or passage
Even a single word, if it is dis-
tinctive to your author’s argument. You must use quotation
marks and cite the source.
5
If it’s not common knowledge
Whenever you mention some
aspect of another person’s work, unless the information or
opinion is widely known, you must cite the source, so your
readers can follow it up.
6
Whenever in doubt, cite it!
It will do no harm, as long as you’re
not citing just to impress the examiner in the mistaken belief 
that getting good grades depends upon trading facts, in this case
references, for marks.
 Minimising the chance of an oversight
Nevertheless, even with this simple code and every good intention,
there is always the possibility that you just might overlook the need 
to cite a source. Most examples of plagiarism are probably accidental
oversights of this kind. The solution, for the most part, can be found
in what we’ve said in previous chapters.
Plagiarism
237

It’s more than likely that most of these oversights come about
through poor organisation. If we start working on our essay just days
before it is due to be handed in, we’re likely to cut corners as we take
notes and gather our material. At this point it’s all too easy to blend
the author’s ideas in with our own, thereby overlooking the need to
cite the source. Organising our time, as we did in Chapters 17 and 18,
is the most effective way of minimising this danger.
But there are other things we can do, too. In Chapter 12 we exam-
ined the importance of actively processing the ideas we read and note,
not only taking out structures, but criticising and evaluating the ideas
we read. This, too, can minimise the chances of an oversight. Not only
does it reduce the amount you’re likely to borrow, but more important,
you will integrate the ideas into your own thinking, imposing your own
distinctive organisation and structure on them.
However, as we saw in Stage 1, this, in turn, depends upon inter-
preting the question in the ﬁrst place. Having analysed the implications
of the question and revealed not only what you know, but the ques-
tions you want answered in the texts, you can avoid being dictated to
by your authors. Armed with your own ideas, you’re less likely to adopt
their ideas wholesale.
Even so, as you note down material from your sources, you can still
take simple, practical steps to avoid oversights. The most important of
these is just to mark out clearly in your notes the ideas you borrow, to
distinguish them from your own. For example, it will help if you can
put the material you borrow from your sources in a different colour, if
not on different sheets of paper, or even in different computer ﬁles.
For similar reasons, and to save you time when you come to search
for the details of a reference, record at the top of the page the title of
the text, the author’s name, the page numbers and the date of publi-
cation. This will not only save you the nightmarish stress that comes
from trying to track down a single reference to a quotation, or an idea,
that you took down hastily, but it will also serve to remind you that
you are working with a source. This is often all we need to take more
care to separate our ideas from those of our source, and to record accu-
rately what we borrow.
 In the next chapter
Now that you know how to avoid plagiarism and how to decide which
of your sources you need to cite, you can turn to the techniques
238
Writing

involved in citing your sources and compiling a bibliography and a 
reference list, both of which should enhance your essay for you and
your reader.
Notes
1 One of the most useful and comprehensive accounts of referencing and 
plagiarism is Gordon Harvey, Writing with Sources: A Guide for Harvard 
Students (Cambridge, Mass., 1995). I am indebted to this for the more per-
ceptive distinctions that follow.
You can ﬁnd it at: http//www.fas.harvard.edu/~expos/sources
2 Greats Handbook (Oxford: University of Oxford, 2000), p. 42.
3 Jan Regan, Essay and Report Writing: What is Expected of You (Lismore:
Southern Cross University, 2000), p. 9.
Plagiarism
239

240
31 Referencing and
Bibliographies
In this chapter you will learn:
•
the various ways of citing sources;
•
how to create reference lists and useful bibliographies;
•
how to acknowledge uncited sources.
Now that we’ve dealt with the most difﬁcult judgements that we 
need to make in managing our sources, we’re left with the simpler
problems of how we cite each reference and list the details of each text
we use.
 The different systems for citing1
There are a number of systems governing the way we cite references.
All seem to insist on their own conventions with the strength of reli-
gious fervour. Some insist a comma be used in places where others use
a semicolon. Many expect the date of publication to appear at differ-
ent points and would be scandalised if it appeared elsewhere. So, check
with your department to see if they have certain expectations, a system
they would like you to use. You might refer to your course guide, or its
equivalent. Failing that, ask your tutor.
Most tutors won’t mind what system you use as long as it meets
three cardinal objectives: it must be clear, accurate and consistent.
Remind yourself why you’re doing this: ﬁrst, to give credit to the 
author for the original ideas; and secondly, to give your readers 
clear and sufﬁcient detail for them to locate the exact reference for
themselves.

 Footnote or endnote system
This is probably the most well-known system, certainly the most
elegant. Each reference is cited in the text by a number, which refers
to either a footnote at the bottom of the page, or a list of references at
the end of your essay. Its main advantage, beyond its simplicity, is that
it doesn’t disrupt the text as much as other systems that enter the
details of the reference in the actual text itself. These tend to clutter 
up the text, breaking the ﬂow of ideas as you read. What’s more, 
the footnote or endnote system has the advantage that most word-
processing programs create and position footnotes or endnotes auto-
matically for you.
Footnotes
When you write a footnote, it’s usual to abbreviate authors and titles.
In doing this you can choose from two alternative styles, but the same
advice follows as before: choose one and stick to it – be consistent.
You can either cite the full title on the ﬁrst occasion you cite the work
and then cite the abbreviated title each time after that, or you can adopt
what’s known as the Harvard, or the ‘name–date’, system. Using this,
you cite in the note the author’s name, the date of publication, and the
relevant page. In both cases the full details of all the titles referred to
would appear in the reference list and bibliography.
Abbreviation system
In this system the ﬁrst reference to a book would appear as:
P. Rowe, The Craft of the Sub-editor (Cambridge, 1997), p. 37.
Later references to the same book could be abbreviated to:
Rowe, The Craft, pp. 102–3.
A reference to a journal article would appear as:
Brian T. Trainor, ‘The State, Marriage and Divorce’, Journal of Applied
Philosophy, vol. 9, no. 2 (1992), p. 145.
A later reference to the same article could be abbreviated to:
Trainor, ‘The State’, JAP, pp. 138–9.
Referencing and Bibliographies
241

The Harvard system
Under this system the same references would appear as:
Rowe, 1997, p. 37.
Rowe, 1997, pp. 102–3.
Trainor, 1992, p. 145.
Trainor, 1992, pp. 138–9.
Endnotes
This is by far the simplest of the three systems. The numbers inserted
into the text refer to a numbered reference list at the back of the essay.
As with the footnotes system, repeated references to a text can be
abbreviated, but in this case you use three well-known Latin abbrevia-
tions. When you ﬁrst meet these they can seem arcane and forbidding,
but use them once or twice and you will see how much time and effort
they can save.
Say your ﬁrst reference was as follows:
1.
P. Rowe, The Craft of the Sub-editor (Cambridge, 1997), p. 37.
A number of references later you may want to refer to this text 
again. In this case you would use the Latin abbreviation ‘op. cit.’,
meaning ‘in the work cited’, instead of repeating the detailed descrip-
tion of the text, which you’ve already given. Let’s say it was the ﬁfth
reference on your list:
5.
Rowe, op. cit., pp. 102–3.
If, in the next reference, you wanted to refer to the same text again,
this time you would use another Latin reference, ‘ibid.’, meaning ‘in
the same place’:
6.
Ibid., p. 84.
If, then, in the next reference, you wanted to refer again to the same
page of the same text, after ‘ibid.’ you would use the Latin abbrevia-
tion ‘loc. cit.’, meaning ‘in the passage just quoted’:
7.
Ibid., loc. cit.
242
Writing

 In-text citing
Like the second form of footnotes, in-text citing uses the Harvard
system, but puts the name of the author, the year of publication, and
the page number in the actual text itself in parentheses, after the 
material you’ve borrowed. Then a list of these references appears at
the end of the essay, where the full details of the texts to which these
abbreviations refer, can be found.
On some occasions you may decide that the author’s name will
appear in the actual text with only the year of publication and the page
number in brackets. The following examples illustrate the various ways
this can be done.
Perhaps artists need to feel politically motivated against oppressive
regimes in order to etch their identity clearly against a social and
political reality they deplore. In the words of Theodore Roethke, ‘In
a dark time, the eye begins to see’ (1966, p. 239).
Perhaps artists need to feel politically motivated against oppressive
regimes in order to etch their identity clearly against a social and
political reality they deplore. After all, ‘In a dark time, the eye begins
to see’ (Roethke, 1966, p. 239).
As Roethke (1966) points out, perhaps artists need to feel politically
motivated against oppressive regimes in order to etch their identity
clearly against a social and political reality they deplore. After all, ‘In
a dark time, the eye begins to see’ (p. 239).
Paraphrasing
When you paraphrase an author’s words, only the author and the year
need to be included. For example:
Certain diets that reduce the levels of serotonin in the brain appear
to produce higher levels of aggression. Historically, periods of
famine, and carbohydrate and protein malnutrition, have been asso-
ciated with signiﬁcant increases in crime and violence (Valzelli,
1981).
Valzelli (1981) argues that those diets responsible for reducing the
levels of serotonin in the brain appear to produce higher levels of
Referencing and Bibliographies
243

aggression. Historically, periods of famine, and carbohydrate and
protein malnutrition, have been associated with signiﬁcant increases
in crime and violence.
If your material comes from more than one source 
by the same author
In this case arrange your sources chronologically, separated by a
comma.
Homelessness was shown to have increased as a result of the 
change in legislation and with the tighter monetary policy that
doubled interest rates over a period of two years (Williams, 1991,
1994).
If the author has published more than one work in a single year, then
cite them using a lower-case letter after the year of publication.
Williams (1994a, 1994b) has shown that higher interest rates, while
doing little to arrest the decline in value of the currency, have seri-
ously damaged companies engaged in exports and increased the
levels of home repossessions.
When a reference has more than one author
When it has two or three authors, give all the surnames, separated by
commas with the last one separated by the word ‘and’.
Recent evidence has shown that cinema attendance in the 1950s
declined less as a result of the impact of television, than through
increasing afﬂuence and mobility (Brown, Rowe and Woodward,
1996).
Computer analysis has shown that the hundred most used words 
in the English language are all of Anglo-Saxon origin, even the ﬁrst
words spoken when man set foot on the moon in 1969 (Lacey and
Danziger, 1999).
If there are more than three, cite them all the ﬁrst time – for example:
(Brown, Kirby, Rowe and Woodward, 1991) – but when you cite them
again, use just the ﬁrst name followed by ‘et al.’ (and all the others) –
for example: (Brown et al., 1991).
244
Writing

When an author cites another author
In this case, if you want to use the comments of the cited author, then
you acknowledge both authors, but only the author of the text in which
you found the comments is listed in the reference list.
In describing recent studies that tended to show that men become
dangerous when their personal aggressiveness is unnaturally con-
tained, Masters (1997, p. 37) cites a comment by Anthony Storr, who
says, ‘Aggression is liable to turn into dangerous violence when it is
repressed or disowned.’
Anthony Storr (cited in Masters, 1997, p. 37) argues that, ‘The man
who is able to assert himself in a socially acceptable fashion is
seldom vicious; it is the weak who are most likely to stab one in the
back.’
When a number of authors present the same idea
In this case arrange the authors in alphabetical order, separated by
semi-colons.
If a child does not receive love from its parents in the early years it
will neither integrate their standards within its behaviour, nor
develop any sense of moral conscience (Berkowitz, 1962; Farrington,
1978; Rutter, 1981; Storr, 1972).
 Acknowledging uncited sources
Before we ﬁnish with referencing, consider just one more source that
might need acknowledging. At times some of our best ideas come from
discussions we have with friends, colleagues and tutors. Many of these
may just be informal occasions when an idea might ﬁre your imagina-
tion, or you might try out an idea on a tutor, who shows you how to
develop it further and in ways you hadn’t even thought of. Alternatively,
an idea might come from one isolated comment in a lecture, or an
example that opens up possibilities you hadn’t seen before. Or you may
just get inspiration from a novel you may have read, or an article you
might idly skim while you wait for someone.
All of these sources can play an important part in generating your
ideas and giving them shape. So, if they have played a signiﬁcant role,
think about whether you need to acknowledge this. If the help is of a
Referencing and Bibliographies
245

general nature, say the original insight that motivated your thinking 
in the ﬁrst place, or an idea that revealed for you the way to tackle the
problem raised by the essay, then you can place a reference number
after the title or when you state the main idea. You can then pick this
up at the bottom of the page or at the top of the list of endnotes with
a few words acknowledging your debt. Alternatively, you may just be
acknowledging the source of a particular point, one of many in your
essay. In this case the note will appear in the middle of the sequence
of footnotes or endnotes.
The following are examples of the sort of comments you might 
make, although there is almost no limit to the sort of help you might
acknowledge.
I am particularly indebted to Dr David Dockrill for many of the ideas
on transubstantiation in this section.
My understanding of intentionality is largely inﬂuenced by discus-
sions I have had with Dr Joe Mintoff.
I have beneﬁted from Dr John Wright’s criticisms of the ﬁrst draft of
this passage.
I owe this example of the Prisoners’ Dilemma to Prof. C. A. Hooker,
who used it in his lectures on Commercial Values at the University
of Newcastle in the ﬁrst semester 2000.
 Bibliographies and reference lists
At the end of your essay it’s usual to give both a bibliography and a
reference list, although in some pieces of work you may just be asked
for a reference list alone. This contains only those authors and works
you’ve referred to in the essay, while a bibliography is a list of all the
material you’ve consulted as background for the topic.
The latter can be very useful both to you and to your readers. Later
you might want to check back on certain points or expand and develop
some of your ideas. The aim of the bibliography is to tell your readers
in the clearest possible way what you’ve used, so don’t pad it out with
items to impress them. Nevertheless, it will no doubt help you in 
your future assignments if you make it as comprehensive as possible.
If it’s appropriate, divide it into primary and secondary material.
246
Writing

Primary material includes government reports and statistics, research
material, historic documents, and original texts, while secondary 
material includes books, articles and academic papers, which 
usually discuss or throw light on the primary material.
If you’ve been systematic from the start, the bibliography is quite
easy to compile. But if you haven’t recorded your sources carefully,
then it can be quite a nightmare. You will ﬁnd that the habit of record-
ing the details of your sources at the top of the page before you take
notes, or better still, using a section in your card-index system to
compile a bibliography, will make the job much more straightforward.
Use just one card for each source, with all the details you need. You
will even ﬁnd that recording your own impressions of the usefulness
of the text in one or two sentences will help you when you come to
research other assignments, for which this source might be useful.
These impressions will be lost to you within a short time, so by record-
ing them as soon as you ﬁnish with the text you will know exactly how
useful it is and what you can use it for in the future.
Listing the sources
Whether you’re compiling a reference list or a bibliography, as we said
before, the key is to be consistent. There are different conventions 
governing the way you list the texts, but as long as you follow a regular
sequence for citation, there should be no problem. Below you will see
one of the most common methods of citation. As you list them, arrange
your references alphabetically, and where there is more than one book
by the same author, arrange these chronologically under the author’s
name.
•
For books or other free-standing publications: ﬁrst names or initials
of the author, the author’s surname, full title of the work (in italics
or underlined), place of publication, name of the publisher, and date
(in brackets).
Where you’re using a later edition than the ﬁrst, indicate the date
of the ﬁrst publication.
•
For periodical articles: ﬁrst names or initials of the author, the
author’s surname, the name of the article (in quotation marks), the
title of the periodical (in italics or underlined), volume number of
the periodical (if published in volumes), the year of publication (in
brackets unless no volume number is given), the page numbers of
the article.
Referencing and Bibliographies
247

i.e.
N. Author, Title of Book (place of publication: publisher, and date).
N. Author, ‘Title of Chapter’, in Title of Book, ed. X. Editor and Y.
Editor (place of publication: publisher, and date), pp. ••–••.
N. Author, ‘Title of Article’, Title of Periodical, vol. 2, no. 1 (date), 
pp. ••–••.
Of course, if you are compiling a reference list and you’re using end-
notes, you will also have to include the page reference to locate the
passage or quotation you have used.
248
Writing
Practice exercise
21
Compiling a reference list
Arrange the following list of sources into a reference list, using the
method of citation we have just outlined.
Once you’ve completed it, compare your list with the answer given
below.
List of sources
1
Author:
R. E. Robinson and J. Gallagher
Title:
Africa and the Victorians: The Ofﬁcial Mind of British 
Imperialism
Publisher:
Macmillan
Date and place of publication:
1962, London
2
Author:
Peter Singer, ed.
Title:
Ethics
Publisher:
OUP
Date and place of publication:
1994, Oxford
3
Author:
Charles Darwin
Title:
The Origin of Species
Publisher:
John Murray
Date and place of publication:
1859, London

4
Author:
Leo Alexander
Title of the article:
Medical Science under Dictatorship
Title of the periodical:
New England Journal of Medicine
Volume number:
241
Year of publication:
1949
The page numbers of the article:
39–47
5
Author:
Peter Singer
Title:
The Expanding Circle
Publisher:
OUP
Date and place of publication:
1981, Oxford
6
Author:
Allen Wood
Title:
Marx against Morality, in A Companion to Ethics, ed. Peter
Singer, pp. 511–24
Publisher:
Blackwell
Date and place of publication:
1994, Oxford
7
Author:
Peter Curwen
Title of the article:
High-Deﬁnition Television: A Case Study of
Industrial Policy versus the Market
Title of the periodical:
European Business Review
Volume number:
vol. 94, no. 1
Year of publication:
1994
The page numbers of the article:
17–23
8
Author:
John C. Ford
Title of the article:
The Morality of Obliteration Bombing
Title of the periodical:
Theological Studies
Year of publication in the periodical:
1944
Title of volume of essays in which reprinted:
War and Morality
Editor:
Richard A. Wasserstrom
Date and place of publication:
1970, Belmont
The page numbers of the article:
1–18
9
Author:
Peter Singer
Title:
Practical Ethics
Publisher:
CUP
Date and place of publication:
1979, Cambridge
Referencing and Bibliographies
249

10
Author:
Geoffrey Parker
Title of the article:
Mutiny and Discontent in the Spanish Army
of Flanders, 1572–1607
Title of the periodical:
Past & Present
Volume number:
vol. 58
Year of publication:
1973
The page numbers of the article:
38–52
Answer
1
Leo Alexander, ‘Medical Science under Dictatorship’, New England
Journal of Medicine, vol. 241 (1949), pp. 39–47.
2
Peter Curwen, ‘High-Deﬁnition Television: A Case Study of Indus-
trial Policy versus the Market’, European Business Review,
vol. 94, no. 1 (1994), pp. 17–23.
3
Charles Darwin, The Origin of Species (London: John Murray,
1859).
4
John C. Ford, ‘The Morality of Obliteration Bombing’, Theological
Studies (1944); reprinted in Richard A. Wasserstrom (ed.), War
and Morality (Belmont, 1970), pp. 1–18.
5
Geoffrey Parker, ‘Mutiny and Discontent in the Spanish Army 
of Flanders, 1572–1607’, Past and Present, vol. 58 (1973), 
pp. 38–52.
6
R. E. Robinson and J. Gallagher, Africa and the Victorians: The 
Ofﬁcial Mind of British Imperialism (London: Macmillan, 1962).
7
Peter Singer, Practical Ethics (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1979).
8
Peter Singer, The Expanding Circle (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1981).
9
Peter Singer (ed.), Ethics (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1994).
10
Allen Wood, ‘Marx against Morality’, in A Companion to Ethics, ed.
Peter Singer (Oxford: Blackwell, 1994), pp. 511–24.
250
Writing

 The next stage
With your essay completed, along with the reference list and bibliog-
raphy, it’s time to put it aside for a day or two, so that you can come
back with a fresh mind to revise it.
In the next stage you will learn how to revise your essay without
killing off your most creative ideas and without breaking up the ﬂuency
of your prose. Indeed, you will see how effective revision can be in
giving your work the sort of polish that elevates your essay from being
just a good piece of work into one that is interesting and thought 
provoking.
Note
1 For the most detailed account of many of the systems used, refer to Gordon
Harvey, Writing with Sources: A Guide for Harvard Students (Cambridge,
Mass., 1995).
Available at: http//www.fas.harvard.edu/~expos/sources
Referencing and Bibliographies
251
Assignment
12
Reference list and bibliography
Now that you’ve completed this exercise, compile your reference list 
and a bibliography for the essay you’ve chosen to work on in these
assignments.

This page intentionally left blank 

Stage 5
Revision

This page intentionally left blank 

INTRODUCTION
Now that you’ve written your essay you will realise that one of the most
difﬁcult problems is to remind yourself of all those things we’ve talked
about to improve your style, while at the same time writing as freely
as possible. The key to doing this successfully is to separate the writer
from the editor.
 The writer v. the editor
In this stage you will learn to use these two distinctly different sets of
skills without fearing that one is getting in the way of the other. This
reinforces, again, the importance of breaking up essay writing into its
distinct stages. Separating the writing and revision stages frees our
hand, allowing us to write without the burden of having to produce the
ﬁnal polished version all in one go. Knowing that we can polish up our
prose later, we can be more creative. It allows our ideas to ﬂow and
our minds to explore all the contrasts and connections between our
ideas, that give our writing impact.
But to do this effectively we have to learn to shift the focus from 
the writer to the editor without endangering our best ideas. The rich
insights we saw in our ideas, which engaged our interest and com-
mitment when we ﬁrst began to plan and write them, are likely to
engage our readers too. Therefore, we have to learn to edit our work
without killing the very thing that’s likely to grab our readers and make
them think.
To help you in this, and to make revision simpler and more man-
ageable, you will learn to revise with a purpose: with a clear strategy
of those things you want to work on in each revision, rather than
attempting to revise everything at the same time. To make this easier,
you will be shown the ﬁve-stage revision strategy, the ﬁrst two revi-
sions of which deal with the structural features of the essay, while the
last three deal with the content.
 Structure
In the ﬁrst revision you will be shown how to identify those passages
where our talk in print breaks down and it’s difﬁcult to continue to
read ﬂuently with the right emphasis and rhythm. Once this is done
255

you will move on to the second revision, in which you learn how to
revise the structural features of your essays, like the introduction, the
conclusion, the logical structure of the essay, and the relevance of your
arguments and evidence.
With these two revisions completed you will be keenly aware of the
impact the types of changes you’ve made can have on your essay. By
tying in paragraphs to the introduction with clear topic sentences and
transitions, an essay which might have been just a loose list of points,
becomes a taut, cohesive piece of work, in which readers are never in
danger of getting lost and every argument counts for marks. Similarly,
if you have wrapped the structure up in a conclusion that completes
the circle by coming back to issues ﬁrst raised in the introduction, you
will leave readers not only convinced that you have kept your promises,
but with the satisfaction that everything has found its appropriate
place.
You will also be shown how to revise your evidence, so that you use
it to the best effect. If it’s relevant and varied you will have made your
work more interesting by breaking it up with changes in pace and
content. And if you use evidence that allows people to speak for them-
selves, your readers are likely to be more involved in your work. They
can respond empathetically, with their emotions and feelings engaged,
which can lend untold support to your arguments. Nevertheless, you
have to be sure your evidence does real work and you don’t bury your
readers beneath too much.
 Content
In the ﬁnal three revisions our main concern is to remove all unnec-
essary words and phrases that are likely to obscure the meaning of our
sentences. If we fail to remove all of this, the clarity of our thinking
will be lost, and our readers will be left wondering what it all means.
With it removed, those words we use to carry the greatest signiﬁcance
in our work will no longer be smothered. They will stand out more and
have sufﬁcient impact to make our readers think.
As we saw in the last stage, knowing what to leave out is as im-
portant as knowing what to include. The readability of our work 
will increase in proportion to the number of unnecessary words 
we eliminate. Therefore, in this revision our aim is to ensure that our
meaning is being carried by strong nouns and verbs, rather than
shoring it up with too many adverbs, adjectives and prepositions.
256
Revision

Removing these, replacing long words and sentences with shorter
ones, and identifying all those sentences that would be better in the
active voice, we can make our writing not only clearer and more
concise, but more direct.
Introduction to the Fifth Stage
257

32 Preserving your 
Best Ideas
In this chapter you will learn:
•
about the importance of revision in allowing you to be more creative;
•
how to shift the focus from the writer to the editor without 
endangering your best ideas;
•
how the ﬁve-stage revision strategy makes revision easier and more
effective.
 Using your mind more effectively
A surprising number of students still seem quite unaware of just how
much the writing stage depends for its success on the revision stage.
As we thump the page with our last emphatic full stop there are those
of us who breathe a deep sigh of relief that the essay’s ﬁnally done,
without a thought for revision, beyond a cursory check to see the
spelling is all right.
But, if nothing else, revision has the effect of freeing your hand,
allowing you to write without the burden of knowing you have to
produce the ﬁnal polished version all in one go. Knowing that you can
polish up your prose later, you can be more creative, allowing your
ideas to ﬂow and your mind to make the logical connections and com-
parisons that give your writing impact.
In this lies an interesting parallel with the invention of the 
word processor. Before the modern home computer and the word-
processing packages we now use, you were condemned to write with
pen and ink, or on a manual or electric typewriter. Either way you went
into the task of writing knowing that unless you were prepared to go
through the whole process of typing your essay out again, what you
258

were producing was your ﬁnal draft. It not only had to be right the ﬁrst
time, it also had to be presentable. This meant that as soon as you’d
made a mistake, your ﬂow of ideas had to stop while you got out the
tip-ex to correct the error. Your creative ﬂow was constantly interrupted
both for the correction of errors and to give you time to ﬁnd exactly
the word you wanted, along with its correct spelling.
Now, with the word processor, it’s possible to divide up the task one
step further than we’ve already done with our stages of writing. By
having a planning stage, distinct from the writing stage, we’ve already
separated the two most difﬁcult things in writing: on the one hand,
summoning up our ideas and putting them in a logical order, and on
the other, choosing the right words, phrases and sentence structures
to convey them accurately. But now we can go even further: we can
separate the ideas entirely from the choice of words and their correct
spelling. You don’t even have to worry too much about the sentence
structure and punctuation, because these too can be cleaned up later.
 Freeing your ideas and creativity
If you think about this carefully, you’ll see that the whole process of
dividing writing into the ﬁve distinct stages of this book (interpreta-
tion, research, planning, writing, and revision), along with all the
advantages that a word processor gives you, is designed to free 
you from responsibilities at each stage. As a result you can be more
creative and use more of your own ideas, many of which, you’ll no
doubt be surprised to ﬁnd, like most students when they ﬁrst do this,
are full of insight and intelligence.
We’ve all had the experience of writing the old way with pen and
paper or with a manual typewriter. All too frequently the words would
get hopelessly tangled up with the ideas as they began to ﬂow like a
torrent. Your mind would make connections, analyse issues, synthesise
arguments and evidence, and draw all sorts of interesting contrasts, all
of which you would struggle desperately to retain and use. But as fast
as you fought to ﬁnd the right words and their correct spelling in order
to capture these ideas, they would be gone and others, equally evanes-
cent, would replace them.
The mind simply moves much faster than our inadequate techniques
will allow us to record. Breaking the essay up into stages, and using 
a word processor, both gives us the same advantages as using pat-
tern notes in the interpretation stage, rather than linear notes: it’s a 
Preserving your Best Ideas
259

more effective way of keeping up with the mind and using more of its 
creativity.
The same can be said for revision. The importance of this stage lies
in the fact that it allows you the freedom to focus more of your atten-
tion on the ideas in the writing stage and on your creative use of lan-
guage. If you make mistakes with your grammar, your spelling, or your
sentence structures, don’t worry, you can pick them up and sort them
out in the revision stage.
 Cooling off
The shift from the writer in you to the editor, then, involves a shift of
focus from the creative activity of converting your ideas into language
to a more self-conscious focus on the way you’ve used words, phrases
and structures. The editor inside you should be asking, how does it
sound, is it ﬂuent, does it move logically from one stage in the argu-
ment to another, are there sections that need more evidence, or more
development?
With this in mind, you’ve got to allow yourself to undergo a conver-
sion from the writer to the editor, from the artist to the craftsman. To
do this, the ﬁrst thing is to put your essay aside. Allow yourself a
cooling off period of at least a day, so your editor can surface. It’s 
not that you’re trying to create objectivity between yourself and what
you’ve written. This would endanger those rich insights you saw in
your ideas when you ﬁrst began to plan and write them. It’s these that
ﬁrst engaged your interest and commitment, and they’re likely to
engage your readers’ too. So, if you were to revise in an objective, dis-
passionate frame of mind, you might kill the very thing that’s likely to
grab your readers and make them think.
Nevertheless, aware of these dangers, try to approach your work as
you believe the examiner or any reader will approach it. Allow yourself
to feel the impact of your original insights as you expect the reader to
be affected too.
 Revise with a purpose
However, once you begin to revise you will soon ﬁnd your most difﬁ-
cult problem is that there are so many things to check – so many ques-
tions to ask of your work. The only effective way of making this simpler
260
Revision

and manageable is to revise a number of times, each time checking on
a different range of things.
This may seem a lot of work, but it will certainly pay dividends: each
extra revision always improves your work. The effortless feel of talk in
print that ﬂows across the page in light elegant prose only comes from
multiple revisions undertaken with a clear purpose in mind each time.
But that’s not to say that this is an endless process. As your writing
improves you’ll know when it’s time to stop and put it aside – you’ll
know when it’s ﬁnished.
 In the next chapter
What follows is a strategy of ﬁve revisions, each one looking for dif-
ferent things. You may ﬁnd you want to do more than ﬁve, because you
can see there are still improvements coming through each time, but
you should regard ﬁve as the minimum. In the next chapter we will
tackle the ﬁrst two revisions, which deal with the structural features of
the essay.
Preserving your Best Ideas
261

262
33 Revising the Structure
In this chapter you will learn:
•
about the importance of listening to your essay being read aloud, to
identify those passages you will need to work on;
•
how to revise the structural features of your essay, like the intro-
duction, the conclusion, and the logical structure of the essay;
•
how to make sure your arguments and evidence are relevant and
effective.
 First revision – revising for reassurance
This is the lightest of all revisions. After we’ve ﬁnished writing an essay
most of us are keen to read it through to see how it sounds. We like to
be reassured that it reads well, so we can give ourselves a mental pat
on the back. This may sound like aimless self-indulgence, that we
should train ourselves to do without, but, in fact, this sort of revision
and the reassurance it brings does have a valuable point to it.
It allows us to set down a marker: not only are we reassured that it
reads well and it’s interesting, but we’re also clearer about those areas
we need to work on to improve it. More often than not these may just
involve a clumsy word or passage that needs tidying up, but they can
be more serious.
They may indicate that you haven’t thought through your arguments
clearly enough, or your ideas have developed further since you wrote
the passage, and you now see the issues differently. This revision is not
just about making sure what you’ve written is clear from the outside,
but also about ensuring that your writing expresses clearly the ideas
on the inside. If you were not entirely clear about them when you wrote
the passage, then your writing is likely to be unclear, too. Either way,

at this stage you just need to mark the passage so that you can come
back to it later.
After the cooling off period, then, read it through for reassurance.
But as you read through, tolerate your mistakes. Don’t stop and start
working on them. Just jot down notes on mistakes and weak areas that
you must look at later.
Revising the Structure
263
Practice exercise
22
First revision
Take the essay you completed in the last assignment. First, read it
through to yourself, then get a friend to read it to you. As he or she reads
it, note those passages where your talk in print breaks down, where it’s
difﬁcult to continue to read ﬂuently with the right emphasis and rhythm.
Remember, your ear can often pick up awkward passages much more
effectively than your eye.
Although you’ll pick up other problems as you go through each sub-
sequent revision, this lays down clear markers that these are problem
passages and you will have to look at them.
 Second revision – the larger questions
In the second revision your main concern is with the larger structural
features of your essay – the introduction, the conclusion, the logical
structure of the essay, the relevance of your arguments and the 
evidence you use.
With this in mind, as you work through your essay concern yourself
just with the following things.
Introduction
Check that you’ve interpreted the implications of the question clearly
and haven’t missed anything. Your examiners will want to assure them-
selves that you have thought this through thoroughly and that you
haven’t begged questions, taking some things for granted that you
shouldn’t have. Then, having done this, check that you’ve outlined the
structure, the map of the essay, clearly, so the reader knows not just
what you’re going to do, but why.

A clear logical structure
Now, as you move on to read the body of the essay, you’re checking
that you’ve delivered on all these promises. You must be sure that
you’ve led the reader clearly through the essay. Of course, this is helped
if you’ve organised the material in a clear, logical sequence that the
reader can follow. But it also depends on the direction signs you erect
in your essay to make sure the reader is never lost.
Keeping this at the front of your mind, in addition to checking that
there is a logical sequence in your arguments, a clear pattern to your
essay, also check your transitions and topic sentences. If your struc-
ture is clear, you won’t need transitions for every paragraph, but if in
doubt use them. They help the reader follow the route you’re taking
without getting derailed and side-tracked. The same can be said of
topic sentences – they allow the reader to see clearly what the follow-
ing paragraph is going to be about. But check that everything else in
the paragraph supports it.
Your arguments
Having checked that you have made clear the relevance of what 
you’re doing through the overall structure of your essay, now look 
at the content of each paragraph. Read the arguments contained 
in each paragraph checking two things. First, make sure that all 
the arguments bear directly on the map of the essay outlined in the 
introduction. If they don’t, it will dilute the overall approach of the
essay and it will tend to confuse the reader. Secondly, check that 
you have developed each argument sufﬁciently and that they are 
clear. If there are difﬁcult passages that could be clearer, rewrite them.
This will include most of those you identiﬁed as a problem in the ﬁrst
revision.
Your evidence
As you read these arguments you should also be concerned that you’ve
supported them with enough evidence. But make sure you haven’t used
too much – remember, pruning all unnecessary detail means that what
remains stands out. It’s the art of knowing what not to say. For similar
reasons, make sure you haven’t given the reader irrelevant informa-
tion. This will blur the focus of your arguments and weaken the struc-
ture of your essay.
Now, make sure your evidence is speciﬁc. If you’re developing argu-
ments that employ generalisations, perhaps involving fairly abstract
concepts, your examples should be as speciﬁc as possible, so that they
264
Revision

pin your arguments down. Not only have your examples got to support
your arguments, but they must illustrate them vividly. This will make
them more believable and interesting – they will grab and hold your
reader’s attention.
Finally, check that, wherever possible, your arguments have shown
your readers what you mean, rather than simply told them. For 
this, make sure you’ve used enough quotations and anecdotes. They 
will make your writing more readable, but they must make the point
you want them to make. Therefore, make certain they all do real
work. And remember, like other forms of evidence, too many are as bad
as too few.
Your conclusion
Having checked all of this, when it comes to your conclusion it should
be plain sailing. The key thing you must be certain of is that the intro-
duction and conclusion relate to each other, giving your essay a tight
cohesion. If you haven’t achieved this, then rewrite it so that you come
back to the issues you raised, and the anecdote you may have used, in
the introduction. But avoid raising any new issues that weren’t raised
in the body of the essay. The key to conclusions is to let your 
readers know that you have delivered on all the promises you made 
in the introduction.
 Checklist
1
Have I interpreted the implications of the question thoroughly?
Have I missed anything?
2
Does the introduction analyse the implications clearly and give the
reader a clear indication of the structure of my answer?
3
Have I arranged the material logically?
4
Does the essay move ﬂuently from one section to the next, from
paragraph to paragraph?
5
Does each topic sentence introduce the subject of each paragraph
clearly?
6
Have I developed each argument sufﬁciently?
7
Have I made my arguments clear, or are there difﬁcult passages
that would beneﬁt from being rewritten?
8
Do I support each argument with sufﬁcient evidence and examples?
9
Do all my examples and evidence do real work?
10
Have I shown, rather than told, the reader wherever possible?
Revising the Structure
265

11
Have I answered this particular question relevantly?
12
Have I dealt with all the implications of the question that I 
identiﬁed in the interpretation stage?
13
Have I covered these in enough depth?
14
Have I spent too much time on less signiﬁcant issues, while only
dealing superﬁcially with any of the major issues?
15
Have I presented a convincing case which I could justify conﬁ-
dently in a discussion?
16
In the conclusion, have I avoided introducing new ideas that
haven’t been dealt with in the body of the essay?
17
Have I tied my conclusion in with my introduction?
266
Revision
Assignment
13
Revision – the structure
Now revise your essay carefully again. This time go through each of the
stages outlined here.
Start with the introduction, checking all those things we’ve talked
about. Once you’ve done this, tick off the items on the checklist. Then
move on to the logical structure, checking the logical sequencing of the
arguments, the topic sentences and the transitions. Tick them off on the
checklist and then move on to consider the arguments, evidence and
conclusion, ticking these off on the checklist too.
 In the next chapter
With this done you should feel more conﬁdent that all your ideas,
what’s on the inside, are now clearly and logically developed in your
essay. You can now turn to the outside, the language and style through
which you’ve expressed these ideas.

267
34 Revising the Content
In this chapter you will learn:
•
about the importance of checking factual accuracy, spelling and
grammar;
•
how to make the revision of your style simple and straightforward,
yet comprehensive;
•
how to make your writing more vivid;
•
how to use the checklists to make sure you haven’t overlooked 
anything;
•
about the importance of the appearance of your essay to the ﬁnal
mark.
In the next two revisions your attention shifts to the smaller questions,
like factual accuracy, grammar, and the use of words. Although this
means you’ll be focusing on fewer things, this is a more meticulous
and slower read.
 Third revision – checking the details
In the third revision your concern is for the accuracy of your facts and
quotations. Particular care needs to be taken in checking these. If you
lose your readers’ trust over these details it may infect all of your work.
They may conclude that they must be cautious about everything you say.
In addition, you will also be checking your spelling and grammar.
You must be sure that if you break the rules of grammar, it’s deliber-
ate – that you’re doing it for reasons of style, to produce a certain effect
– and it’s not the result of a lack of knowledge. But whether you keep
to the rules or decide to break them, the key is clarity: it must be the
best way of making your meaning clear.

Checklist
1
Is the content accurate?
2
Are the grammar, punctuation and spelling correct?
3
Have I distinguished clearly between my own ideas and those of
others?
4
Have I acknowledged all sources and references?
5
Have I omitted any text from my bibliography?
 Fourth revision – style
For most of us this is the most difﬁcult and confusing of all revisions.
There’s just so much we need to focus on. To make it easier, just work
from a simple list of things you’re looking for. Eventually, you may want
to include other things that you come to realise are signiﬁcant prob-
lems in your writing. But at this stage just conﬁne yourself to the 
following simple list of the most important things that you need to 
pay attention to – they will have an immediate impact on your 
writing, making it light, interesting and easy to read.
It’s worth reminding yourself that the more you take out at this stage,
the more readable your work becomes. What remains becomes more
vivid, grabbing and keeping the interest of your reader. In view of this
you will almost certainly need a number of revisions of this type. I ﬁnd
the more of these revisions I can do the better it becomes, until I reach
a stage when I realise all too clearly that I need do no more.
Unnecessary material
As you go through your work, keep asking yourself if there are any
unnecessary words, phrases, sentences, or even paragraphs, that 
ought to be removed. Again, remind yourself that the readability 
of your work will improve in proportion to the unnecessary material
you eliminate.
In the advertising essay you might have a sentence like the 
following:
A small sign nailed to a village tree announcing where and when the
local village fête will take place might be giving just information, but
beneath it lies a covert message, an appeal to people, who might be
reading it, to come along and support local causes in their fund-
raising activities.
268
Revision

By taking out the unnecessary words the meaning is made clearer,
sharper and more direct.
A small sign nailed to a village tree announcing where and when the
local village fête will take place might be giving just information, but
beneath it lies a covert appeal to come along and support local
causes in their fund-raising activities.
Long sentences
With long sentences you run the risk of confusing, even losing, your
readers, who will then be unable to give you marks for your good work.
They may even lose patience with you as they struggle to ﬁnd their way
through the unfamiliar terrain of your thinking. To guard against this,
cut up every long, complex sentence that can be reduced to two or
more shorter sentences.
For example, although it’s not impossible to understand the 
following sentence, its meaning is difﬁcult to track at times. But once
you’ve broken it down into three sentences, it presents no problem 
at all.
Appeals are made to some imagined social consensus, to ‘basic’ or
‘shared’ values, it’s assumed we all want to drive the latest and
fastest car on the road and our lives will be unfulﬁlled unless we have
a ‘multi-valve engine’ and ‘ABS braking’ and to sustain these appeals
myths have to be created by the media.
Appeals are made to some imagined social consensus: to ‘basic’ or
‘shared’ values. It’s assumed we all want to drive the latest and
fastest car on the road and our lives will be unfulﬁlled, unless we
own a ‘multi-valve engine’ and ‘ABS braking’. And to sustain these
appeals, myths have to be created by the media.
Long words
Much the same advice goes for long words, although they have a 
different effect on your writing. They may not confuse your readers
quite as much as long sentences; nevertheless they can leave them
wondering whether you really meant to say what you did, and they will
often make your writing sound unnecessarily pompous. It makes sense,
then, wherever possible to replace long obscure words with short and
simple ones.
Revising the Content
269

The following example presents no problem in understanding what
is meant, but it does sound slightly pompous:
Our constant demand for material possessions and a higher 
standard of living has bestowed on politicians an effective way of
inﬂuencing the way we vote.
It would be simpler and more direct to say:
Our constant demand for material possessions and a higher 
standard of living has given politicians an effective way of inﬂuenc-
ing the way we vote.
This example not only sounds pompous, but leaves you won-
dering whether you are clear about what the writer really meant 
to say:
An advertiser will work to establish a close contiguity between
driving a certain car, or drinking a certain drink, and a full, active
social life.
Once you’ve substituted a more familiar word, the meaning is im-
mediately clearer.
An advertiser will work to establish a close association between
driving a certain car, or drinking a certain drink, and a full, active
social life.
Strong nouns and verbs
Enough has already been said about the importance of writing with
strong nouns and verbs, rather than shoring them up with adjectives
and adverbs. So, check that you have used strong nouns and verbs with
the minimum of modiﬁers. And constantly remind yourself that the
fewer verbs you have to modify with adverbs, and nouns with adjec-
tives, the better your writing will be.
You might argue,
A manufacturer of computer printers will be keen to tell you that
theirs is the most advanced printer on the market, but be really
nervous about revealing that their print cartridges cost on average
ﬁve times as much as any other printer.
270
Revision

But your meaning will be clearer if you argue,
A manufacturer of computer printers will be keen to tell you that
theirs is the most advanced printer on the market, but be reluctant
to reveal that their print cartridges cost on average ﬁve times as
much as any other printer.
‘Nervousness’ manifests itself in many different forms. So, in the ﬁrst
sentence, where you really wanted to identify one particular form that
was relevant to the printer manufacturer, it was too vague to do this.
In fact shoring it up with the word ‘really’ didn’t help much either,
because, although you might be interested in the intensity of nervous-
ness, what you really wanted to convey was the type of nervousness
involved.
In the following sentence there are examples of both weak nouns
and weak verbs. By substituting stronger, more speciﬁc words, see how
the sentence gains in clarity and directness.
Theatre promoters are likely to comb through unfavourable reviews
looking carefully for any isolated expression of a favourable
comment that can be used to promote their plays.
Theatre promoters are likely to comb through unfavourable reviews
in search of any isolated expression of approval that can be used to
promote their plays.
The active voice
The same can be said of the active as opposed to the passive voice –
we have already spent some time stressing the importance of the active
voice in making your points clearer, by making them more concise 
and direct. Therefore, as you revise ask yourself, have you used the
passive voice on only those occasions when what is done is more
important than the doer. Wherever possible make the doer the subject
of the sentence.
In the following example the most important information is what was
actually done, rather than by whom. So, re-forming the sentence in the
passive form makes the point more effectively.
In the 1970s managers in some US supermarkets, in order to reduce
shoplifting, recorded subliminal messages onto the music played
throughout the store.
Revising the Content
271

272
Revision
In the 1970s subliminal messages were recorded onto the music
played throughout some US supermarkets by managers, who wanted
to reduce shoplifting.
Checklist
1
Have I removed all unnecessary words, phrases, sentences and
paragraphs?
2
Have I cut up all the long complex sentences that can be cut up?
3
Have I replaced all long, obscure words with short and simple ones?
4
Have I removed all unnecessary modiﬁers in favour of good strong
nouns and verbs?
5
Have I written in the active voice?
Practice exercise
23
Revising the content
Read the following passage and then revise its content by going through
the stages we’ve outlined above. Wherever you ﬁnd unnecessary 
material, long sentences, long words, weak nouns and verbs, and 
passages that should be in the active or passive voice, revise them. 
Then go through the checklist to see if you’ve covered everything.
When you’ve ﬁnished, check your revised version against the answer
given below.
Revising the content
Cultural change in modern Europe
In the second half of the nineteenth century as labour and informa-
tion moved more rapidly and easily across borders new pressures for
change were generated bringing with them unprecedented social and
cultural fragmentation rarely seen before. Towns grew at inconceiv-
able rates into vast cities drawing workers in from the countryside
to interact with the new foreign migrant labour ﬂooding in from all
over Europe, developing a new urbane, cosmopolitan culture, fuelled
by rising literacy and a popular press with mass readership. Not 

Revising the Content
273
only were traditional social classes changing with movement up 
and down the social structure, but cultures and traditional customs
were being threatened by an exodus away from the rural areas into
cities, and by international, cosmopolitan inﬂuences that ﬂowed
across borders.
The forces for uniformity in tastes, culture and fashion that
touched just about every European society that engaged in trade and
commerce was fuelled by the revolution in communications alone.
Consumers demanded the best of what they bought irrespective of
where it was produced, so architecture, clothes, fashions, even the
ways of solving problems, were discovered to be increasingly the
same and, except where they were consciously prolonged, national
styles slowly faded. Even in the 1930s it was already apparent that
a time was approaching when it would be impossible to tell one
country’s towns and cities from another and, add to this the impact
of dance music, the cinema and the wireless, even the cheap 
recreational literature that more and more drew its inspiration 
from the US, and it became clear to a growing number of people that
their social and cultural identity, once a source of patriotic pride 
and a sense of belonging, was disappearing beneath a uniform, 
cosmopolitan culture, that was constantly changing.
Answer
Cultural change in modern Europe
In the second half of the nineteenth century as labour and informa-
tion swept across borders, new pressures for change were generated,
bringing with them unprecedented social and cultural fragmentation.
Towns grew at inconceivable rates into vast cities drawing workers
in from the countryside to interact with the foreign labour ﬂooding
in from all over Europe. Here a new cosmopolitan culture developed,
fuelled by rising literacy and a popular mass press. Not only were
traditional social classes changing with movement up and down the
social structure, but cultures and customs were being threatened by
movement away from the countryside into cities, and by cosmopoli-
tan inﬂuences that ﬂowed across borders.
The revolution in communications alone was fuelling forces for
uniformity in tastes, culture and fashion that touched just about
every European society that engaged in commerce. Consumers

274
Revision
demanded the best product irrespective of where it was produced.
Architecture, clothes, fashions, even the ways of solving problems,
were increasingly the same. Except where they were consciously 
prolonged, national styles slowly faded. Even in the 1930s it was
already apparent that a time was approaching when it would be
impossible to tell one country’s towns and cities from another. Add
to this the impact of dance music, the cinema and the wireless, even
the cheap recreational literature that more and more drew its inspi-
ration from the US, and it became clear to a growing number that
their social and cultural identity, once a source of patriotic pride and
a sense of belonging, was disappearing beneath a uniform, cos-
mopolitan culture, that was constantly changing.
 Fifth revision – revise by ear
Finally, your last revision! This appears to come back to your ﬁrst,
because you’re reading your work through to see how it sounds. You’re
interested in its ﬂow and rhythm. Hopefully, it should read like talk in
print, with light effortless prose that glides across the page with a pace
and rhythm that holds the reader’s attention.
Unfortunately, most of us get so close to what we write and the
thought patterns our sentences represent, that we ﬁnd it’s difﬁcult to
read it as another person would. If you have this problem, ask a friend
to listen while you read it out aloud or, better still, ask your friend to
read it out aloud to you.
This is the best test of all: if it doesn’t come across ﬂuently to
someone who has never seen or heard it before, then it will need to be
changed. This reading will certainly identify clumsy sentences or where
you might have dealt with your ideas in an illogical order. The other
advantage of this is that, because you’re not reading it yourself, you’ll
be free to note where in your work it was difﬁcult to understand the
meaning of what was written. Failing this, if you haven’t got a com-
passionate friend, or you’re afraid to risk your friendship in this way,
then record it on a cassette and play it back to yourself as if you were
listening to it for the ﬁrst time.
But beyond the question of whether your work can be read and under-
stood easily by someone reading it for the ﬁrst time, think about one
other thing. You may want to change the pace of your work at certain
times in order to make your points more effectively. You may want to
speed up or slow down in some sections by varying the length of sen-

tences. Long sentences are very comforting and reassuring. They may be
best suited to the development of the core elements of your arguments,
which need to be analysed and elaborated carefully. But when you want
to be abrupt, to grab your reader’s attention with a vivid piece of detail,
or an insight that you feel is a key point to get across, use a short sen-
tence – don’t let it get drowned in the words that surround it.
Checklist
1
Does it read well for someone reading it for the ﬁrst time?
2
Is the pace and rhythm right for the arguments I want to make?
 Using the checklists
As we’ve seen in previous stages, it always helps if you have a simple,
clear strategy to work with: even though you may know what you’re
looking for, it helps to have a checklist so you can deliberately ask your-
self questions which you just might overlook. It will also help you to
assess how well you’ve completed each stage of the process, so you
can see where you need to spend more time in the next assignment.
With these advantages in mind, get into the habit of using checklists
and try to answer the questions as you think your examiners might
answer them when they assess your work.
 Appearance
Does your essay have a neat professional appearance?
Amid every other consideration, this last question appears to be the
least signiﬁcant. And, of course, it is, or it should be. But ﬁrst impres-
sions count, however unfair this may seem. Despite every effort made
to ensure that each essay is subjected to the same objective criterion
for assessment, marking still contains an element of subjectivity. Most
people ﬁnd it difﬁcult to shake off their ﬁrst impressions as they read
an essay.
What’s more, there may be an inductive truth here. There are people
who’re convinced that experience shows that a sloppily presented
essay is more than likely to be sloppily argued. It’s likely to lack sufﬁ-
cient attention to detail in terms of accuracy and the evidence used 
to support arguments convincingly. Whether these views have any 
Revising the Content
275

276
Revision
 The ﬁnal step
With this done you will have completed the ﬁve-stage revision on 
your essay. As a result you should be seeing a marked improvement in
your work. The introduction should outline a clear structure for your
readers to follow. Your paragraphs should have transitions and topic
sentences that clearly signpost the direction of your argument and 
its relevance to the question. And your conclusion should tie up the
issues raised in the introduction, producing an essay that has a tight,
convincing structure.
Equally important, your writing should be much lighter. You 
should be able to see that it is getting closer to talk in print. You 
will already notice that with fewer modiﬁers and prepositions it’s 
possible to read your ideas without the bumpy ride you might be used
to. What’s more, knowing how to use your punctuation, and sentences
Assignment
14
Revision – the content
Take the essay you’ve been working on in the assignments and go
through the ﬁnal three stages revising the content.
In your ﬁrst revision look for all the unnecessary words, phrases and
sentences. Check for readability. If sentences are long, cut them up into
shorter, more manageable lengths. Remember the key is to keep your
readers engaged and not to lose them.
On the second revision check for strong nouns and verbs, and where
you ﬁnd too many adjectives and adverbs see if you can think of stronger
nouns and verbs, that would make these unnecessary. The same goes
for the active and passive voices in your writing. Check wherever you’ve
used the passive voice that it is more appropriate than the active voice.
Then, once you’ve completed that, move on to the last revision. Get
someone to read your essay to you, so that you can see how well it
sounds.
credence or not, you can avoid the danger of dropping a grade by
making sure your essay is clearly and neatly presented, with as few
mistakes in it as possible. Your work must look like the work of a 
fastidious person.

of different lengths, you will begin to enjoy more conﬁdence in your
ability to develop your arguments and make your points in a way that
holds your reader’s attention.
In short, you will begin to realise that you can produce an essay 
that not only does justice to your ideas, but leaves your readers
knowing they have read something that is interesting and thought 
provoking.
Revising the Content
277

Conclusion
We started this book by drawing attention to the value of writing essays
both in what you can learn from them and in terms of the abilities and
skills you develop along the way. Now that we’ve worked through each
of the stages, it should be possible to see more clearly the beneﬁts that
can be derived if each of these stages is done well.
In the ﬁrst stage, interpreting the title, you were shown ways of devel-
oping the skills you need to analyse the most difﬁcult concepts. As a
result, you should now feel conﬁdent that you can reveal not just the
key issues involved in any question, but also the sort of insight which
marks your work out as interesting and original. What’s more, you
should now be able to build on this with the brainstorming skills you
learnt in this stage. These will help you mobilise your ideas, arming
you with your own thoughts, so you’re no longer tyrannised into
accepting uncritically the opinions of the authors you read.
In the research and planning stages you were shown how to develop
the sort of intellectual skills that will give you the conﬁdence to tackle
any assignment no matter how difﬁcult. Having researched the topic,
not only will you have learnt a great deal about it and many of the
peripheral issues, but you will have developed the capacity to use your
research skills with more ﬂexibility to meet a wider range of intellec-
tual tasks. Similarly, by planning your essay you created a structure 
of ideas you can draw upon not only in your written work, but in 
discussions and examinations. Around this you can now build 
your own understanding of the subject.
As to your ability to capture your ideas in writing that is clear, ﬂuent
and interesting, now that you’ve worked your way through the writing
and revision stages you will know that by separating the writer from
the editor you can use the skills involved in each much more effec-
tively. Having done this once, you should be able to repeat it in all your
work, producing essays that are clearly structured, logically argued and
written in clear, light prose that holds the reader’s attention. You will
know now, having worked through each of the ﬁve stages of revision,
278

that you can allow yourself to write freely, knowing that you can sig-
niﬁcantly improve your essay later, when you let the editor in.
In the wider context of the courses you’re studying, all of this means
you are now equipped to get the most from each essay you write. Once
your essays have been returned, you can use your tutors’ comments
for further learning. They might, for example, suggest new ideas, fresh
examples or different opinions. All of these need to be considered while
your ideas are still fresh in your mind. There may be simple corrections
of factual or logical mistakes. There may be comments on your writing
style, suggesting how you could express your ideas more clearly. Or
there may be detailed remarks on the structural aspects of your essay.
But, as you realise by now, like most other aspects of learning, you
will get the greatest beneﬁt from these comments if you organise your-
self to respond to them effectively. This might mean nothing more than
noting in your notebook those problems that arise regularly in your
work, like spelling mistakes, transitions, and punctuation. If you then
make a point of consulting your notebook as a matter of routine before
the revision stages of all your essays, you can more easily identify and
correct the problems. Similarly, if your tutors leave you with fresh ideas
to pursue, this might involve further reading, or at least developing
your own response in your journal.
The key to this, as we’ve seen, is to give your thinking the opportu-
nities it needs to grow and develop. Each discrete stage of the writing
process provides fresh opportunities, as do the journal and the note-
book, so that when you come to look back over them you can see just
how far you have come, how much more you understand, and how
much better equipped you are to research and write about those things
that interest you.
And, just one ﬁnal word: remember, you can never do a perfect job.
To do this you would have to wait until all the facts are in – and, of
course, they never will be. All you can do is to add to our understand-
ing of what we do know. Your insights and your interpretation of the
facts add to this understanding: they are just as valuable as anyone
else’s. Therefore, be bold – don’t be cowed by the fear of authority.
Conclusion
279

Bibliography
Dorothea Brande, Becoming a Writer (London: Macmillan, 1984). Even profes-
sional writers admit they are indebted to this book for its help in freeing
their most creative insights.
Tony Buzan, Use Your Head (London: BBC, 1979). One of the ﬁrst to popularise
pattern notes, or ‘mind maps’.
Stuart Chase, Guides to Straight Thinking (New York: Harper, 1956).
Stella Cottrell, The Study Skills Handbook (Basingstoke: Macmillan – now 
Palgrave, 1999).
Edward de Bono, Parallel Thinking (London: Penguin, 1994).
Edward de Bono, Serious Creativity (London: HarperCollins, 1995).
Manya and Eric De Leeuw, Read Better, Read Faster (Harmondsworth: Pelican,
1973).
Jean M. Fredette (ed.), Handbook of Magazine Article Writing (Cincinnati:
Writer’s Digest Books, 1990). Learn from the professionals – this is full of
sound practical advice from professional writers.
Bruno Furst, The Practical Way to a Better Memory (Marple: Heap, 1977). One
of the most renowned books on concentration and memory training.
Harry Maddox, How to Study (London: Pan, 1967).
John Peck, and Martin Coyle, The Student’s Guide to Writing (Basingstoke:
Macmillan – Palgrave, 1999).
William Strunk, and E. B. White, The Elements of Style (New York: Macmillan,
1979). Once known as ‘the little book’, this sold over two million copies in
its ﬁrst edition – learn how to write clearly and concisely.
Robert H. Thouless, Straight and Crooked Thinking (London: Pan, 1958).
John Wilson, Thinking with Concepts (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1963).
280

abilities
range of, 8, 56–9, 61–5, 178–81
unlocking, ix–x, 51–4, 55, 63,
125–6, 132, 177–81, 258–60
see also patterns of study;
thinking skills
active voice, 218–20, 271–2
analysis
getting started, 16–21
need for, 9–14, 22–3, 278
three-step technique, 27–41
appearance, 275–6
authorities
challenging them, 61–3, 278–9
effects of being tied to, 66–8, 
118, 121–3, 177–8, 192–5,
237–8
bibliographies, see referencing
books
using them effectively, 78–81
brainstorming, 42–53
importance of, 43–4, 54–5
clichés, 213–14
see also jargon; words; writing
cognitive skills, 63–4, 178–81,
192–5, 228
see also thinking skills
concentration, 109–10, 125–6,
128–9
concepts
analysis of, 9–14, 22–3, 27–41,
278
forming, 27–35
open and closed, 15–16
testing, 36–41
conclusions
and taut, cohesive essays, 198,
265–6
thought provoking, 197–202,
265–6
conﬁdence, 42
creativity
keeping the editor at bay, 176–7,
255, 258–61
staking your claim, 43
see also brainstorming; ideas;
pattern notes
criticism and evaluation
four-step technique, 110–17
how to, 108–17
devil’s advocate, 110–17, 178–81
discussion
in essays, 177–81, 197–8
in seminars, 53–4, 108–9, 119–20,
127–8, 162–3
economy, 215–24
see also simplicity; style; writing
editing
the essay, see revising the 
essay
the plan, 142, 151–9
essays
irrelevance, see relevance
learning from them, 1–2, 278–9
structure, 9–14, 143–4, 151–2,
182–5, 187–9, 230–1, 263–6,
278
evaluation, see criticism and
evaluation
evidence
improving use of, 195–6, 225–32,
264–5
overstating and understating,
225–8, 230–1, 264–5
and paragraphs, 195–6
relevant and speciﬁc, 264–5
281
Index

282
Index
selective use of, see thesis
statements
showing rather than telling,
230–1, 264–5
too much of, 230–1, 264–5
types, 226–8
see also readers
examinations
assessing abilities, 56–65, 192–5
avoiding panic, 166–70
examination technique, 160–5,
168–70
revision for, 1–2, 66–7, 95, 101–7,
122–3, 160–8
examiners, 144
see also marks
fallacies, 84–5, 110, 114, 179
ﬂexibility, 51–5, 67, 78–80, 94, 106,
118
ﬂuency, 117, 160–1, 176–7, 187–8,
222–4, 255–6, 258–60, 262–3,
274–5
reading aloud, 262–3, 274–5
see also ordering ideas; topic
sentences; transitions
ideas
helping them develop, 2–3, 54–5,
279
using your own, 7, 22–3, 31,
42–55, 108–9, 118–23, 258–60,
278
see also creativity; pattern notes;
thinking skills
imagination, 53, 177–8
see also brainstorming
index card system, 122–3, 152,
246–7
instructional verbs, 56–60
interpretation of questions, see
questions
introductions, 143–4, 176–86, 263
essay structure, 183–5, 263
interpretation of the question,
182–3
simple formula, 182, 185–6
irrelevance, see relevance
jargon, 211–12
see also clichés; words; writing
journal, 121–2, 279
learning
active, 83–4, 125–6, 162–3, 238
importance of needs, 69, 162
passive, 61–2, 66–8, 83, 108–10,
192–4
processing, 83–95, 132–8; deep
level, 76, 83–4, 125–9; surface
level, 76, 83, 109–10, 118,
127–8, 162, 193–4
linear notes, 52–3, 94–100
advantages of, 145–50
examples of, 90–2, 96–9, 146–9,
153–6, 191–2
logical indicators
effective use of, 208, 222–4, 264
losing the reader, 207–8, 189–91
marks
earning the highest, 14, 39, 42,
169, 184, 226–7
memory
improving, 83, 85–6, 96, 99,
101–7, 125–8, 160–70
trusting, 103–4
see also learning – active
mind
helping it self-organise, 85–6, 92,
104, 119–22, 127–8, 133–5,
161–3, 258–60
mnemonics, 164–5
needs, see learning
notebook, 54–5, 121, 222, 279
notes
abbreviations, 102–3
the appropriate strategy, 94–5
clear structures, 66–7, 76, 85,
94–100, 193
consolidating, 106
of criticism and evaluation,
108–17
knowing what to leave out, 7, 55,
66–7, 101–4
recalling them, 76, 94–109
record of your own thinking, 76,
103–4
verbatim, 66–7, 108–9
see also linear notes; pattern
notes
opinion
and conclusions, 197–8

Index
283
substitute for evaluation, 195
suspending judgement, 177–81
too much, 195, 197–8, 225–8
see also evidence
ordering ideas, 142, 152–9
organisation, 77
notes, see notes
retrieval system, see retrieval
system
time, see time; timetable
paragraphs
development, 192–5, 264
evidence, 195–6, 264–5
and introductions, 187–8
see also introductions
length, 188–9
linking, see logical indicators;
topic sentences; transitions
a simple formula, 188–96
passive voice, see active voice
pattern notes, 94–5, 145–6
advantages, 52–4
examples of, 19, 34, 46–9, 115–
16
more creative work, 52–4
see also creativity
patterns of study
developing the right abilities,
61–5
integrating new skills, x, 69
need to change, 51, 59–60, 62–3,
66–71, 118, 124–31
see also ﬂexibility
plagiarism
avoiding, 2, 44, 67–9, 105, 108–9,
122–3, 193, 234–9
causes, 234, 237–8
deﬁnition, 233
recycling opinion, 67–9, 233–4
six-point code, 236–7
planning
for examinations, 142, 160–7
in examinations, 160–1, 168–70
how to, 143–59
importance of, 141–5
rehearsing the arguments, 141–2,
145–50, 158–9
strengthens weaker points, 144
for taut, cohesive essays, 183–5,
187–92, 263–6
see also introductions; logical
indicators; topic sentences;
transitions
processing, see learning
project box, 123
punctuation
creating rhythms of speech,
205–8, 214
questions
incomplete answers, 10–14, 
145
interpreting, 7–8, 108–9, 182–3
see also analysis; brainstorming
range of abilities, see
instructional verbs
structure, 7–8, 9–14, 16–17, 42
typical, 166–8
readability, 215–17, 225, 230,
268–72
reading
an aid to writing, 203
for analysis, 83–5, 94–100
authors hijacking your thinking,
43–4
for comprehension, 84
for criticism, 84–5, 108–17
inefﬁcient reading, 67, 78–82,
105–6, 108–9, 125–9, 133–5
previewing, 7, 43–4, 108–9
purposefully, 75–6, 78–82
scanning, 51, 80–2
skimming, 80–2
slow, 67
readers
empathetic responses, 225, 230
losing their trust, 267
losing them, 9, 42–4, 143–4,
151–2, 160–1, 182–4, 187–8,
205–8, 222–4, 263–5, 269
thinking for themselves, 177, 201,
216, 230
see also evidence
referencing, 240–51
acknowledging uncited sources,
245–6
bibliographies and reference lists,
246–51
endnotes, 242
footnotes, 241–2
impressing the examiner, 68
in-text, 243–5

284
Index
reasons for, 240
systems for citing, 240–51
relaxing, 128–9, 133, 136
relevance, 9, 42–50, 52–3, 78–9,
143–4, 151–2, 182–5, 187–8,
192–6
see also questions
retrieval system
organising it, 54–5, 106, 118–23,
279
and your own insights, 54–5,
118–20
revising the essay
checklists, 265–6, 268, 272, 275
by ear, 262–3, 274–5
ﬁve-stage strategy, 262–77
preserving your best ideas,
258–61
purposeful, 260–1
separating editor and writer,
176–7, 217, 231, 255, 258–61,
278–9
style, 268–75
unnecessary material, 268–9
see also appearance; readability;
sentences; words
revising for the exam, see
examinations
rhythm, see punctuation
right answers, 63–9, 177, 192–5
routines
taking stress out of studying,
124–5, 127–9, 133, 135–6, 
167
working at the right time, 125–6,
133–5
Semmelweis, Ignaz, 24, 27, 36
sentences
clearer, 205–8, 215–22, 267–72,
274–5
long sentences, 205–7, 269
losing the reader, see readers
varying length, 206–7
see also writing
simplicity, 203–14
see also economy; style; writing
stages of essay writing
separating them, 2–3, 133–5, 255,
258–61
stress, see routines
study, how to, see patterns of study
style, 203–32, 268–72, 274–7
and clear thinking, 206, 211–12,
215–17
seven practical rules, 217–32
see also economy; simplicity;
writing
synthesis, 42–50
see also brainstorming; ideas;
thinking skills
thesis statements, 177–81
selective use of evidence, 178–80
suspending your judgement,
177–81
using all your abilities, 177–81
see also thinking skills
thinking skills
creative thinking, 118–23, 177–81
inconsistent arguments, 84–5,
110–17, 189–91, 195
using more of them, 56, 61–71,
124–38
see also learning
time
ﬁnding more, 75–6, 127–8
length of each study session,
135–6
organising, 124–38
Parkinson’s Law, 127–8, 133, 
135
when you work best, 124–6,
132–5
see also ideas; learning; relaxing;
routines; stages of essay
writing
timetable
need for, 124–31, 237–8
planning it, 132–8
separating the stages, 134–5
be speciﬁc, 135–6
variety, 134–5
topic sentences, 143–4, 187–92, 
264
transitions, 187–92, 222–3, 264
understanding, 1–2
universities
compared with schools, 59–65
vocabulary, 211–14, 217–18, 220–2

Index
285
words
choosing the right ones, 211–14,
217–24, 269–71
rely on nouns and verbs, 220–1,
270–1
replace prepositional phrases, 
222
unnecessary words, 215–17,
220–2, 268–72
see also clichés; jargon; writing
writing
adverbs, adjectives, prepositions,
220–2, 270–1
avoiding the passive reader, 177,
188, 201, 216–22, 225, 230–1,
264–5, 268; see also readers
clearer sentences, see sentences
clichés, see clichés
confusing words and phrases,
205–8, 211–14, 216–17, 268–72;
see also economy
more creative writing, 255,
258–60
ﬂuent prose, see ﬂuency; ordering
ideas; topic sentences;
transitions
grammar, 267
heavy unreadable prose, 203–24,
268–72, 274–5; see also
readability
improving style, see style
jargon, see jargon
more interesting prose, 119–23,
177, 198–202, 225, 230–1,
258–60
making it clearer, 145, 151–2,
160–1, 203–8, 211–24, 262–72,
274–5
paragraphs, length, see
paragraphs
plagiarism, see plagiarism
putting it into your own words,
see plagiarism
rhythm and punctuation, see
punctuation
talk in print, 176–7, 204–8,
211–14, 262–3, 274–5
thesis statements, see thesis
statements
unnecessary words, see words
words – choosing the right ones,
see words

