1 
On the Boundary Between Mereology and Topology  
Achille C. Varzi 
Istituto per la Ricerca Scientiﬁca e Tecnologica, I-38100 Trento, Italy 
varzi@irst.it 
 
 
(Final version published in Roberto Casati, Barry Smith, and Graham White (eds.), Philosophy 
and the Cognitive Sciences. Proceedings of the 16th International Wittgenstein Symposium, 
Vienna, Hölder-Pichler-Tempsky, 1994, pp. 423–442.) 
 
 
 
 
1. Introduction 
Much recent work aimed at providing a formal ontology for the common-sense 
world has emphasized the need for a mereological account to be supplemented 
with topological concepts and principles. There are at least two reasons under-
lying this view. The ﬁrst is truly metaphysical and relates to the task of charac-
terizing individual integrity or organic unity: since the notion of connectedness 
runs afoul of plain mereology, a theory of parts and wholes really needs to in-
corporate a topological machinery of some sort. The second reason has been 
stressed mainly in connection with applications to certain areas of artiﬁcial in-
telligence, most notably naive physics and qualitative reasoning about space 
and time: here mereology proves useful to account for certain basic relation-
ships among things or events; but one needs topology to account for the fact 
that, say, two events can be continuous with each other, or that something can 
be inside, outside, abutting, or surrounding something else.  
These motivations (at times combined with others, e.g., semantic transpar-
ency or computational efﬁciency) have led to the development of theories in 
which both mereological and topological notions play a pivotal role. How ex-
actly these notions are related, however, and how the underlying principles 
should interact with one another, is still a rather unexplored issue. One can see 
mereology and topology as two independent chapters; or one may grant priority 
to topology and characterize mereology derivatively, deﬁning parthood in terms 

  
2 
of connection; or, again, one may privilege mereology and explain connection 
in terms of parthood and other predicates or relations. It is also possible, on 
some assumptions, to develop a uniﬁed framework based on a single mereo-
topological primitive of connected parthood. The purpose of this paper is to of-
fer a ﬁrst assessment of these alternative routes, discussing their relative merits 
and examining to what extent their adequacy, and more generally the boundary 
between mereology and topology, depends on the ontological fauna that one is 
willing to countenance. 
The Bounds of Mereology 
Mereology is by deﬁnition concerned with parts—that is, with the relation hold-
ing between two things when one is part of the other. On a weak understanding 
this means that a mereological theory is ﬁrst and foremost an attempt to expli-
cate the meaning of the word ‘part’ and to set out the principles underlying our 
correct use of it (and of kindred notions). For instance, virtually every mereo-
logical theory agrees on treating parthood as a partial ordering, which in a way 
reﬂects some very basic meaning postulates for ‘part’.1 Here, however, I am 
interested in the stronger interpretation, according to which mereology may 
provide a fundamental framework for the task of ontological investigations. It is 
a view that inﬂuenced much Greek and scholastic philosophy, and that made its 
way into modern philosophy via Husserl’s third Logical Investigation.2 Mere-
ology tells us how reality is constituted. In this sense not just any partial order-
ing will qualify as a part-relation, and the question of what additional principles 
are involved becomes a truly philosophical (as opposed to merely terminologi-
cal) question. Modern formal systems of mereology also owe their birth to this 
view, regardless of whether the relation “x is (a) part of y” is taken as a primi-
tive (as in Leśniewski’s Mereology) or deﬁned in terms of cognate relations 
such as, for instance, “x extends over y” (Whitehead’s Enquiry), “x is disjoint 
from y” (Leonard and Goodman’s Calculus of Individuals), or “x overlaps y” 
(Goodman’s Structure of Appearance).3 Sometimes this has been associated 
with a nominalistic stand and mereology has been presented as a parsimonious 
alternative to set theory, dispensing with abstract entities or, better, treating all 
entities as individuals. However there is no necessary internal link between 
mereology and nominalism. Mereology can be credited a fundamental onto-
logical role whether or not we take the entire universe to be describable in terms 
of parthood relationships. I think the recent revival of mereology and its ascent 

  
3 
in artiﬁcial intelligence and other cognitive sciences can be seen in this light.
The question is, rather, how far we can go with it—how much of the universe 
can be grasped and described by means of purely mereological notions.  
It is in this perspective that the limitations mentioned at the beginning be-
come relevant, particularly if our concern is the ontology of the macroscopic, 
common-sense world. Our common-sense picture of reality requires some 
means of distinguishing between things that are all of a piece and things that are 
scattered in space or time, or between things that are continuous and things that 
are not. Yet it is not clear how this can be done mereologically, starting from 
the relational concept of part (or overlapping, disjointness, and the like). In 
spite of the natural tendency to present mereology as a theory of parts and 
wholes, wholeness cannot be explained in terms of parthood, hence of mereolo-
gy, except in the trivial sense that everything qualiﬁes as the complete whole of 
its parts. Moreover, according to classical mereology every class of parts deter-
mines a complete whole (its mereological sum, or fusion), which makes the lat-
ter an utterly ineffective notion.  
This latter point is not in itself undisputed. Avoiding explicit reference to 
classes, the underlying principle is that every satisﬁed property or condition 
picks out a unique entity consisting of all things satisfying that property or con-
dition. It is usually expressed as follows:4
  
(1) 
∃xφx → ∃x∀y(Oyx ⟷ ∃z(φz ∧ Oyz)) 
where ‘O’ stands for the relation of overlapping (i.e., sharing a common part). 
This principle is probably the most commonly criticised feature of classical 
mereology, the usual objection being that it has counter-intuitive instances, i.e., 
“unnatural” sums of widely scattered, disparate, unrelated, or otherwise ill as-
sorted entities, such as the totality of red things, or my eyebrows and your fa-
vorite Chinese restaurant.5 The classical mereologist’s reply is simply that the 
criticism is off target, and I go along with that. If you already have some things, 
allowing for their sum is no further commitment: the sum is those things.6 One 
may feel uncomfortable with treating unheard-of Goodmanian mixtures as indi-
vidual wholes. But it is not a task of mereology to specify which wholes are 
more natural than others. In effect, telling which entities constitute natural 
wholes is presumably not even a metaphysical task, but the concern of empiri-
cal sciences 7 (just as ascertaining which sentences are true is not a semantic 
task but an empirical issue). The real source of difﬁculty, as I see it, is different. 
It is that the question of what constitutes a natural whole cannot even be formu-

  
4 
lated in mereological terms. As soon as we allow for the possibility of scattered 
entities we lose the possibility of discriminating them from integral, connected 
wholes; but of course we cannot just keep the latter without some means of dis-
criminating them from the former.  
Whitehead’s early attempts to characterize his ontology of events (the pri-
mary natural entities of the Enquiry) provide a good exempliﬁcation of this 
mereological dilemma.8 Whitehead’s system does not satisfy (1), for the intend-
ed domain is one which excludes scattered or disconnected entities (events). Of 
course it is not maintained that there are no mereological sums. Rather, the sug-
gestion is that a necessary condition for two events to have a sum is that they be 
“joined” to each other. This relation of joining does not coincide with overlap-
ping (for otherwise no event could be dissected into separated proper parts), and 
it is explicitly considered that two events may be adjoined, i.e., joined without 
sharing any common parts. Joining is thus a more general notion than overlap-
ping: it is intuitively meant to hold whenever two events are continuous with 
each other, be they discrete or not. Whitehead eventually deﬁnes it along the 
following lines: 
(2) 
Jxy =df ∃z(Ozx ∧ Ozy ∧ ∀w(Pwz → Owx ∨ Owy)) 
where ‘P’ indicates parthood. Now, this deﬁnition does indeed say that two 
events are joined just in case their mereological sum exists. But precisely for 
this reason, it is immediately veriﬁed that (2) falls well short of capturing the 
intended notion of topological connectedness or continuity. For there is nothing 
to guarantee that the piece overlaying two joined events be itself connected. 
The pattern reproduced below, with two disconnected discs x and y partially 
overlapping a disconnected piece z, illustrates a simple counter-example.9 
 
These considerations apply mutatis mutandis to other attempts to subsume 
topological connectedness within a bare mereological framework.10 Of course 
one can succeed if the assumption is made that only self-connected entities can 
inhabit the domain of discourse. This would indeed support a restricted concep-
tion of wholeness in which, withholding (1) in its generality, a plurality of enti-
ties can be said to make up an integral whole just in case they have a sum (or at 
x
y
z

  
5 
least an upper bound relative to the part-relation 11). But this is no satisfactory 
way out, for it just is not possible to make the assumption explicit. If the lack of 
any speciﬁc notion of whole is indicative of the neutrality of mereology, and 
hence of its strength and generality,12 it is a fact that this lack is in turn a lack of 
expressiveness, hence a sign of weakness too.  
Nor is this exclusively a metaphysical concern. This deﬁciency of mereol-
ogy has shown up in various ways in recent work in linguistics, knowledge rep-
resentation, and qualitative reasoning in artiﬁcial intelligence.13 In all of these 
contexts mereology is now credited a central role in accounting for certain fun-
damental relationships among the entities in the domain of discourse—be they 
events, spatial regions, physical objects, or what have you. But as I already an-
ticipated, these contexts also tend to conﬁrm the limits of mereology when it 
comes to accounting for relations that entail a step into the territory of topology. 
Mereologically the two situations depicted below involve no difference, though 
of course we may want to keep track of the basic opposition in terms of spatial 
inclusion of the square, x, in the annulus, y. 
 
The same difﬁculty arises when we consider relations among things that are just 
touching each other, or straddling one another, or neighbouring other things. 
All of these—and many others indeed—are relations that any theory concerned 
with spatio-temporal entities should supply and which cannot, however, be 
deﬁned directly in terms of plain mereological primitives. 
Three Ways to Topology 
This need to overcome the bounds of mereology has been handled in the litera-
ture in various ways, but I think three main strategies can be distinguished. The 
ﬁrst is, in a sense, the obvious one: if topology cannot be made to ﬁt merelogy, 
and if its importance is to be fully recognized, then we may just add it to a mer-
eological basis as an independent chapter. From this point of view, mereology 
can be seen as the ground theory on which theories of greater and greater com-
plexity (including topology as well as, say, morphology or kinematics) can be 
built by supplying the necessary notions and principles. The second strategy is 
y
x
y
x

  
6 
more radical: if topology eludes the bounds of mereology, we may try and turn 
things around: start from topology right away and deﬁne mereological notions 
in terms of topological primitives. From this point of view, just as mereology 
can be seen as a generalisation of the even more fundamental theory of identity 
(parthood, overlapping, and even fusion subsuming singular identity as a 
deﬁnable special case), likewise topology can be seen as a generalisation of 
mereology, where the relation of joining or connection takes over overlapping 
and parthood as special cases. Finally, the third strategy is a sort of vindication 
of mereology, building precisely on its formal generality: on this view topology 
is simply a domain-speciﬁc chapter of mereology, connection and kindred no-
tions being accounted for in terms of part-relations among entities of a speciﬁed 
sort. I shall further scrutinize these three strategies in turn. 
First way. The ﬁrst strategy is, as I said, the most obvious and has in effect 
been followed by most authors (sometimes on quite independent grounds). It 
was pioneered by Tarski’s work on the foundations of the geometry of solids 
(where a mereological basis is supplemented with a single primitive predicate 
“x is a sphere” to allow a deﬁnition of solid geometric correlates of all ordinary 
point-geometric notions) and was reproposed by Lejewski in his outline of a 
Leśniewskian theory of time, or Chronology (where a mereological basis is 
supplemented with a primitive relation “x is wholly earlier than y” to account 
for the main topological feature of time structures, viz. precedence).14 The same 
approach underlies Tiles’ analysis of events (where topology is introduced by 
means of the primitive “x lies in the interior of y”) as well as much linguistics-
oriented work on time, tense, and aspect, such as Kamp’s analysis of temporal 
reference and Bach’s or Link’s algebraic semantics for event structures (where 
the relation of overlapping deﬁned on temporal entities is typically paired with 
a strict ordering of total precedence).15 Chisholm’s recent work on spatial conti-
nuity can also be viewed in this light.16 I suppose the basic idea has been ex-
ploited in other areas, though presumably the range of actual implementations 
and choice of primitives is not much wider.17 It is however the mereo-topo-
logical framework recently proposed by Smith that can be regarded as the out-
standing representative of this approach, also because it is effectively much 
more general—and with much more far-reaching foundational ambitions—than 
its special-purpose precursors.18  
Smith uses the same primitives as Tiles, namely the relations of being a 
part and of being an interior part. The former has a standard interpretation, 
while the latter is intuitively meant to hold when an entity is part of another and 

  
7 
does not overlap its boundary. I shall not go into the details of the axiomatiza-
tion: it is rather straightforward and justiﬁes the claim that topology can con-
veniently be grounded on mereology rather than set theory.19 The aim, howev-
er, is “to go further and capture mathematically certain ontological intuitions 
pertaining to ordinary material objects […] to capture, if one will, the mathe-
matical structures characteristic of the common-sense world”.20 Using ‘P’ and 
‘IP’ to indicate parthood and interior parthood, respectively, here is for example 
how such basic notions as boundary (‘B’), connection (‘C’), or self-connected-
ness (‘SC’) are captured within the proposed theory:21 
(3) 
Bxy 
=df ∀z(Pzx → ∀w(IPzw → Owy ∧ ¬Pwy)) 
(4) 
Cxy  
=df Oxy ∨ ∃z(Ozx ∧ Bzy ∨ Ozy ∧ Bzx) 
(5) 
SCx 
=df ∀y∀z(∀w(Owx ⟷ Owy ∨ Owz) → Cyz). 
We need not for the moment discuss the intuitive adequacy of these no-
tions. They do the job, as far as topology goes. Moreover, the resulting frame-
work does allow one to sketch a ﬁrst formulation of some basic ontological in-
tuitions that go well beyond the repertoire of standard topology. For instance, 
Smith suggests a ﬁrst rendering of the Brentanian thesis that boundaries are de-
pendent things, i.e., can only exist as boundaries of something 22 (contrary to the 
set-theoretic conception of boundaries as sets of ordinary, ontologically inde-
pendent points): 
(6) 
∃yBxy → ∃z∃w(Bxz ∧ Pxz ∧ IPwz) 
or, more strictly, that self-connected boundaries are boundaries of self-
connected wholes: 
(7) 
SCx ∧ ∃yBxy → ∃z∃w(SCz ∧ Bxz ∧ Pxz ∧ IPwz). 
On the other hand, one thing to be noticed is that much of this involves a 
conceptual detour that could effectively be avoided. We could just assume as 
primitive the very notion of a boundary (which we are actually to presuppose in 
the intuitive interpretation of interior parthood),23 or the relation of connection, 
or even the property of being self-connected, and then deﬁne interior parts ac-
cordingly—as by the following general equivalences: 
(8) 
IPxy ⟷ Pxy ∧ ∀z(Pzx → ¬Bzy) 
(9) 
IPxy ⟷ Pxy ∧ ∀z(Czx → Ozy) 
(10) 
IPxy ⟷ Pxy ∧ ∀z(∀w(SCw ∧ Owy ∧ ¬Pwy → Owz) → ¬Oxz). 

  
8 
I shall indeed come back to this point, for I think this is where a lesson is to be 
drawn. First, however, I shall move on to considering in greater detail the other 
two strategies mentioned above. 
Second way. The second way to bridge the gap between merelogy and to-
pology exploits the intuition that the latter is truly a more basic and more gen-
eral framework subsuming the former in its entirety, at least relative to certain 
domains. This view can be traced back to De Laguna’s work on solid geometry 
(based on the primitive relation “x connects y to z”) and was taken over by 
Whitehead himself in the ﬁnal version of his theory in Process and Reality 
(where all notions are explained in terms of the single topological primitive “x 
is extensionally connected with y”).24 The approach was fully worked out by 
Clarke in his resourceful reformulation of the calculus of individuals and has 
recently been employed by Randell, Cui and Cohn for work in spatio-temporal 
reasoning and naive physics, and by Aurnague and Vieu for the analysis of spa-
tial prepositions in natural language.25 (To my knowledge, not many other de-
velopments or applications have been put forward, if we exclude the interval 
logics for the representation of time—based on a primitive relation of temporal 
precedence—which have been a very active and yet independent research area 
in artiﬁcial intelligence, particularly under the impact of Allen’s work26). 
In all of these systems, parthood (and consequently the other principal me-
reological relations) is characterized derivatively in terms of topological con-
nection (‘C’) in accordance with the following deﬁnition: 
(11) 
Pxy =df 
∀z(Czx → Czy). 
As is clear, much of the intuitive appeal of this reduction depends on the in-
tended interpretation of the basic topological relation (which is axiomatized as a 
reﬂexive and symmetric relation—I shall again skip the details). If we take ‘C’ 
to mean the same as ‘O’, then (11) converts to a standard mereological equiva-
lence; but things may change radically on different interpretations. Clarke fol-
lows Whitehead and explicitly suggests that one might “interpret the individual 
variables as ranging over spatio-temporal regions and the two-place primitive 
predicate, ‘x is connected with y’, as a rendering of ‘x and y share a common 
point’”.27 This account has been subscribed to by other authors as well. Since 
points are not regions, sharing a point does not imply overlapping, which there-
fore does not coincide with (even though it is included in) connection. This 
means that things may be externally connected: 

  
9 
(12) 
ECxy =df Cxy ∧ ¬Oxy 
But whereas on Smith’s more standard rendering of ‘C’ (4) this would be ex-
plained in terms of overlapping of a common boundary (though not of a com-
mon part, recalling that boundaries need not be parts of the things they bound), 
here the explanation is left open, for boundaries are just not included in the do-
main. Thus, on this account things can be topologically “open” or “closed” 
without there being any corresponding mereological difference—a feature that 
some have found philosophically unpalatable.28  
Only recently, Randell, Cui and Cohn have proposed a modiﬁed version of 
their theory in which ‘x is connected with y’ is taken as a rendering of ‘the 
topological closures of regions x and y share a common point’.29 The reason is 
precisely to do justice to the intuition that “from the naive point of view, the 
distinction between open, semi-open and closed regions is not drawn”, as well 
as to avoid the consequence that “if we map bodies to closed regions (as the 
spaces they occupy), then their complements become open, which is a less 
agreeable result”.30 This shift of interpretation is reﬂected, formally, in the 
abandonment of the quasi-Boolean operation of complementation originally 
used by Clarke 
(13) 
x'  =df ιy∀z(Czy ⟷ ¬Pzx) 
in favor of the following weaker variant: 
(14) 
x'  =df ιy∀z((Czy ⟷ (Pxz ∨ ¬IPzx)) ∧ (Ozy ⟷ ¬Pzx)) 
where ‘IP’ is deﬁned as follows (in contrast to (9) above): 
(15) 
IPxy =df Pxy ∧ ¬∃z(Czx ∧ Czy ∧ ¬Ozx ∧ ¬Ozy)). 
This guarantees that every (non-universal) region be connected with its own 
complement and, more generally, it avoids the above-mentioned feature of 
Clarke’s original formulation: the “remainder principle” of classical mereology: 
(16) 
Pxy ∧ ¬Pyx → ∃z(Pzy ∧ ¬Ozx) 
is in fact a theorem of the modiﬁed theory. However, there are some drawbacks 
as well. For instance, the resulting theory does not support models with atoms 
(regions with no proper parts). For an atom would have the property that every 
region connected with it would be connected with its complement, and by (11) 
that would imply the absurdity that every atom is part of its complement.31 

  
10 
So much for the intuitive modeling. It is apparent that the effective mean-
ing of (11)—and consequently the mereological system that one effectively ob-
tains—can drastically change depending on the particular interpretation that one 
considers. But from our present perspective the interesting question is even 
more fundamental; it concerns the very basic idea of relying on something like 
(11) when ‘C’ is not interpreted mereologically. And it is just here that I have 
reservations. If spatial regions are the only entities of our domain, then the pro-
posed deﬁnition is really all there is to mereology, and the different interpreta-
tions reﬂect neither more nor less than a natural variety of possible implementa-
tions of the same idea (to which there corresponds a variety of more or less 
standard mereologized topologies). In fact both Clarke’s original system and 
the developments that followed prove ﬁt to account for a fair deal of mereo-
topological reasoning. Simulation programs have also been built using which 
one can go as far as to model some rather complicated biological or mechanical 
processes, such as the cycle of operations in a force pump.32 If, however, we are 
to take an open-faced attitude towards other entities than just regions, with or 
without boundaries, then we do not have much choice. Either we insist on the 
idea that things can be mapped to the regions that they occupy, or we maintain 
that the topology of regions is really all we need insofar as the same principles 
apply to the entities of a common-sense ontology as well. Both views seem to 
me rather difﬁcult to defend, except perhaps for special purpose representa-
tions. A shadow does not overlap the wall onto which it is cast. And an object 
can be wholly located inside a hole, hence totally connected with it, without 
actually being part of it. The region that it occupies is part of the region occu-
pied by the hole, but that’s all. Or think of Lewis’s angels dancing forever on 
the head of one pin: “At every moment, each occupies the same place as the 
other. Still they are two distinct proper parts of the total angelic content of their 
shared region”.33 For the purposes of naive mereo-topological reasoning, these 
are all cases of things that are connected but not overlapping. They are, follow-
ing (12), externally connected. But they are not adjacent, which is what the no-
tion of external connection is supposed to account for. The wall is in no sense 
abutting the shadow. And the hole does not squeeze to the side to leave room 
for its guest. Holes are immaterial and can be interpenetrated: if the object is 
inside the hole, then each part of the object is connected with some part of the 
hole and it makes no sense to characterize this as external connection. From 
here intuitions diverge rapidly: the notion of connection that we get by reason-
ing exclusively in terms of regions, no matter which speciﬁc interpretation we 
choose, is just too strong for the general case.  

  
11 
Indeed, from this point of view Smith’s deﬁnition of connection in terms of 
boundaries and overlapping as given in (4) is likewise unacceptable. What is 
required is, rather, a weaker interpretation of connection as co-localization at 
(rather than sharing of) some point in space-time. We could try the following: 
A thing x is connected with a thing y iff either x and the closure of y or y and 
the closure of x are co-localized—but not necessarily overlapping—at some 
point (where the closure is the thing together with its boundaries). This would 
allow one to keep track of the distinction between being part-of and the more 
general relation of being spatially enclosed-in (‘E’), hence between overlapping 
and the relation of spatially intersecting (‘I’), hence, again, among things that 
are connected and things that are superimposed (‘S’) or merely adjacent (‘A’): 
(17) 
Exy =df ∀z (Czx → Czy) 
(18) 
Ixy 
=df ∃z (Ezx ∧ Ezy) 
(19) 
Sxy =df Ixy ∧ ¬Oxy 
(20) 
Axy =df Cxy ∧ ¬Ixy 
These distinctions and the corresponding relations in terms of logical inclusion 
are schematically illustrated in the following diagrams. 
 
But of course this weaker interpretation—or others along these lines—would 
not support (11). If x is a part of y then everything connected with x would be 
connected with y, but the converse implication would fail. In this sense ‘P’ does 
elude ‘C’. Hence the basic assumption of the “second way” falls short, and we 
are back to the ﬁrst way (though with a new notion of connection).34 
Third way. We thus come to the third possibility mentioned above, which 
to my knowledge has only been put forward in very recent work by Eschenbach 
and Heydrich.35 Here the idea is that a topological framework like Clarke’s can 
effectively be regained in a purely mereological setting (rather than vice versa), 
provided that we embed it in a less restrictive domain. The embedding is 
straightforward and exploits the non-mereological domain-speciﬁc concept of a 
region. This was the only ontological category admitted in Clarke’s domains. In 
C + ¬ I + ¬O (= A
C + I + O
¬C + ¬I + ¬O
C +  I + ¬O (= S

  
12 
Eschenbach and Heydrich, however, points and other boundaries are also ad-
mitted. Accordingly, connection is neither more nor less than overlapping of 
regions, and yet the topological idea of external connection is made safe by the 
fact that the common part of two overlapping regions need not itself be a re-
gion. Using ‘R’ to indicate the relevant (primitive) domain-speciﬁc region-
predicate, the following deﬁnitions are all we need in order to reconstruct a 
mereologized topology of the sort discussed above: 
(21) 
Cxy 
=df Oxy ∧ Rx ∧ Ry 
(22) 
ECxy =df Cxy ∧ ∀z(Pzx ∧ Pzy → ¬Rz). 
As is clear, this approach allows one to retain standard mereology holus 
bolus. Some principles (like the “remainder principle” (16)) may not hold un-
restrictedly in the restricted domain of regions; but this simply mirrors the fact 
that such a domain (the extension of the non-universal predicate ‘R’) is de-
prived of some topologically relevant elements, points and boundaries in the 
ﬁrst place. In the comprehensive domain this principle is just as unproblematic 
as any other. In fact, the main point can be put in the form of a general transla-
tion theorem to the effect that the mereology resulting upon restricting the on-
tology to only include spatial regions is exactly the subtheory that can be ob-
tained from the unrestricted mereology by uniformly restricting the range of 
quantiﬁers. Thus, for instance, principle (16) is valid but its restricted variant 
(23) 
Pxy ∧ ¬Pyx → ∃z(Rz ∧ Pzy ∧ ¬Ozx) 
(with ‘R’ interpreted as an ordinary predicate constant) is not.36 
I ﬁnd this illuminating, for it shows that mereology needs very little help in 
order to cope with certain basic topological notions and principles. Formally it 
is only a matter of restricted quantiﬁcation. Moreover, this way of looking at 
things is very general and one may consider exploiting different interpretations 
of ‘R’, or referring to other domain-restricting devices (I shall consider some 
possibilities in a moment). If this amounts to saying that topology is exclusively 
about regions of space and few other region-related entities such as points and 
boundaries (or about whatever selected entities we employ to ﬁll in the exten-
sion of ‘R’), then of course it contrasts the general desiderata expressed above. 
Whether we try to explain mereological relations among things in terms of top-
ological relations among the corresponding regions, or topological relations 
among regions in terms of mereological relations among things of a kind, we 
miss out on something important for the ontology of the everyday world. How-

  
13 
ever, the present approach draws no necessary reduction of parthood to spatial 
connection, and this gives new content to the idea that topological reasoning 
about ordinary things can be inferred from the topology of the regions they oc-
cupy: on this approach we may safely conﬁne ourselves to reasoning about re-
gions and yet keep track of the relevant difference between enclosure and part-
hood, or between intersection and overlapping. Thus, the limitation is not sub-
stantial: the third way is wide enough to support analogues of the general inter-
pretation of connection suggested above. 
The Fourth Way 
There is also a fourth way. I only mention it now because I am not aware of any 
serious proposal in this direction, but the basic idea seems to me simple and at-
tractive. If connection is too strong for the purpose of doing mereology, and 
parthood too weak for doing topology, why not just put the two notions togeth-
er to get the right blend? Why not build a uniﬁed framework based on a single 
mereo-topological primitive covering both territories? An obvious possibility is 
to use as a primitive the ternary relation “x and y are connected parts of z”. In-
dicating this with ‘CPxyz’, we can deﬁne parthood and connection as follows: 
(24) 
Pxy =df 
CPxxy  
(25) 
Cxy =df 
∃zCPxyz. 
From here we can then go on as we wish. For instance, we can deﬁne interior 
parthood using (9) and then proceed as in Smith’s account. Or we can follow 
alternative routes, including an account to the effect that the equivalence corre-
sponding to (11) holds.  
This strategy has in fact one obvious advantage, namely it remains neutral 
with respect to the actual interpretation of the notions deﬁned: ‘part’ and ‘con-
nection’ can be characterized axiomatically (and interpreted intuitively) as if 
they were two independent primitives. The only mutual constraints are that for 
(24) to make good sense, connection must be a reﬂexive relation, whereas (25) 
presupposes that every pair of connected entities have a mereological sum. But 
these are perfectly uncontroversial presuppositions. In particular, the latter is 
not only an obvious consequence of the sum principle of classical extensional 
mereology (1), but also a principle held by the opponents of (1) (sometimes 
with the precise intent of stressing a distinction between admissible and inad-
missible sums). From this point of view, this fourth “way” embodies the same 

  
14 
formal generality as the ﬁrst way, but since it only requires one primitive it also 
enjoys a certain conceptual economy that can be seen as an advantage of the 
second way. 
The Ease of Mereo-Topology 
We have, then, a rather comprehensive taxonomy of possible strategies and 
theories. Each of them reﬂects some way of overcoming the bounds of a plain 
mereology in dealing with topological notions and properties. And each does so 
without requiring a signiﬁcant departure from the general outlook that led to the 
development of modern mereological systems (witness the fact that all theories 
considered above are compatible with a nominalistic stand). 
Now which way is actually to be preferred is not a question that I here in-
tend to address any further. The main strategies have been developed mostly on 
independent grounds and with disparate purposes, and putting them in the same 
sandbox and under the same light is only a ﬁrst step towards a critical appraisal 
of their relative limits and potentialities. What I wish to emphasize, rather, is 
that the difference between the various alternatives is not only a matter of appli-
cative purposes, or formal thoroughness, or computational efﬁciency. Although 
each of these concerns may have played an important role in the development 
of each single theory, I think the difference lies ﬁrst and foremost in the onto-
logical status that certain entities—from boundaries to ordinary things—are ac-
corded. As we have seen, where and how the domains of merology and topolo-
gy are bridged depends heavily on the ontological fauna that one is willing to 
countenance, on the variety of entities that one is ready to allow in the universe 
of discourse. And it is just here that I would like to add some remarks. 
We have a picture that looks like a network connecting two extreme posi-
tions. At one extreme we ﬁnd Whitehead’s early stand as reﬂected in the 
deﬁnition of ‘join’ discussed at the beginning of this paper: If we only allow for 
self-connected entities, then mereology may even subsume topology, though we 
cannot expect it to be quite classical (the sum principle (1) must fail). At the 
other extreme we ﬁnd Clarke’s exploitation of Whitehead’s late approach: If we 
only have regions, then topology alone sufﬁces and mereology can be sub-
sumed easily, though again we cannot expect the outcome to be very classical 
(the remainder principle (16) must be sacriﬁced). In between we have a variety 
of intermediate and perhaps not always directly comparable positions, each ac-
cording greater weight to some entities over others. Now, one thing that is re-

  
15 
markable in this picture is that in spite of the apparent conﬂict the two extreme 
positions can be seen as implementing the very same idea. It is, indeed, a matter 
of restricted quantiﬁcation in the spirit exempliﬁed by Eschenbach and Hey-
drich. Just as Clarke’s account can be viewed as the result of restricting classi-
cal mereology to a domain of regions (‘R’), in the precise sense that every uni-
versal or existential statement amounts to a restricted quantiﬁcation of the form 
‘∀x(Rx → ψ)’ and ‘∃x(Rx ∧ ψ)’ (respectively), so Whitehead’s theory can be 
obtained by restricting quantiﬁed statements using a predicate for self-connect-
edness (‘SC’) i.e., by transforming them into restricted statements of the form 
‘∀x(SCx → ψ)’ and ‘∃x(SCx ∧ ψ)’. Mereology has no “predicate” for self-
connectedness, but nothing prevents us from borrowing it from somewhere 
else, just as we can borrow a region predicate ‘R’. As a matter of fact, if we do 
so then the defective deﬁnition of ‘join’ (2) becomes perfectly adequate: 
(26) 
Jxy =df ∃z(SCz ∧ Ozx ∧ Ozy ∧ ∀w(SCw ∧ Pwz → Owx ∨ Owy)). 
Perhaps this comes as no surprise, as both systems are Whitehead’s after all. It 
is, however, instructive that seemingly opposite positions support essentially 
the same interpretation (modulo speciﬁc differences in the axiomatization).  
We can also see how this relates to the intermediate positions in the net-
work. If, as seems to be the case, topology is to a great extent a matter of do-
main-speciﬁc predicates, then in the end the bounds of mereology—at least the 
ones considered above—do not seem to determine any dramatic conceptual 
limitation. As long as we are capable of specifying what we are talking about, 
the bounds are easily overcome. Now this brings us back to a remark that I left 
open when discussing Smith’s choice of primitives. What I ﬁnd interesting in 
the viability of many possible primitives for a system like Smith’s (but the same 
applies to other systems of the sort) is that there is no prima facie ontological or 
methodological reason for preferring one choice to another—e.g., for preferring 
‘IP’ to ‘B’ or ‘C’. In fact we saw that we can even take as a topological prim-
itive the predicate ‘SC’. Thus, also in this case topology can be viewed as a 
business of simple predication and restricted quantiﬁcation. The difference with 
the extreme positions mentioned above is that in this case the domain’s compo-
sition is left open. No assumption is made concerning the extension of the dis-
tinguishing topological notions—and this supports a non-trivial (hence open-
faced) use of ‘SC’. From this perspective the bounds of mereology are the 
bounds of any fundamental theory. Mereology tells us how the world is consti-
tuted in general, but if we want to talk about certain things as opposed to oth-

  
16 
ers, if we want to pick out certain classes of entities instead of others, we need 
some means of referring to them. Whether we then make this into a theory 
in many chapters (ﬁrst way), a compact monograph (fourth way), or something 
in between (second and third way) is of little importance as long as the choice is 
recognized to be a matter of ontological transparency.  
There remains a question of “what’s next”, to use Lejewski’s phrase.37 I 
have been talking of topology as a necessary next step after mereology, and I 
have done this by concentrating on connection and related notions. However, 
there is of course much more than this to topology. I do not mean to say that we 
still need to do a lot of work to get close to the topology actually used by ma-
tematicians — I am not even sure that that is necessary. Rather, I want to under-
line that there are many important topological notions that cannot be captured 
by any of the systems outlined here and which nevertheless play a very basic 
role in our everyday reasoning about the world. For instance, how can we dis-
tinguish between things with holes and things without — between a sphere and a 
torus? We need, it seems, an additional predicate of “simple connectedness”, or 
some means to distinguish surfaces of different genus. How can we account for 
such basic spatial relations as being inside or outside a given object (or region) 
when this is not a matter of pure topological closure? For instance, how can we 
say whether the ﬂy is inside or outside the glass? We need, some authors have 
suggested, an additional topological operation capturing some notion of “con-
vex hull”, not deﬁnable in terms of “connection” and the like.38 Whether or not 
such additions yield an adequate treatment of the examples mentioned is of 
course a complex matter. It seems, however, that from this point of view one 
can hardly feel satisﬁed with simply expanding a mereological framework with 
a notion of connectedness. One needs much more just to accomplish some very 
basic pieces of topological reasoning. And, more importantly, even when a sat-
isfactory amount of topological reasoning could be regained, we would need to 
move into other provinces to account for equally basic commonsensical intui-
tions concerning, for instance, movement of parts or interactions among wholes. 
After all the bounds of topology are pretty narrow too. The world of topology is 
initially a world of spheres and toruses and little else, and we need to step into 
morphology—the theory of qualitative discontinuities—just to account for cer-
tain basic differences in shape; we need to step into kinematics just to account 
for certain basic differences of behavior.  
My provisional conclusion is thus two-faced. On the one hand, the move 
from mereology to a mereo-topology is an important and yet rather easy matter 
of specialization (comparable to the move from, say, set theory to set-theoret-

  
17 
ical topology). On the other, if we go the way of saying that topology is re-
quired for the purposes of investigating the common-sense world, then we can 
hardly stop there. Many other boundaries have to be crossed—which in effect is 
a way of saying that many more things have to be taken at face value. 
Notes 
 
  I am grateful to Gearge Bealer, Tony Cohn, Nicola Guarino and Barry Smith for helpful discus-
sion and valuable comments on earlier drafts. 
1 There are exceptions. In particular, the transitivity of the part-relation has been disputed 
at least since Rescher 1955. Compare e.g. Cruse 1979, Winston et al. 1987, and the recent plea 
for naive mereology in Sanford 1993.  
2 Husserl 1901. On the role of mereology in ancient and scholastic philosophy, see e.g. 
Burkhardt and Dufour 1991, Henry 1991. 
3 See Leśniewski 1916, Whitehead 1919, Leonard and Goodman 1940, and Goodman 
1951, respectively. For a thorough overview see Simons 1987. 
4 Some classical systems, such as Tarski 1929 or Leonard and Goodman 1940, give a for-
mulation of the principle involving reference to classes of individuals rather than just using 
predicates or open formulas. Here I stick to a class-neutral formulation simply for expository 
convenience. The difference is nonetheless to be noted, since an ordinary ﬁrst-order language 
has a denumerable supply of predicates or formulas, so that at most denumerably many classes 
(in any given universe of discourse) can be speciﬁed. For the nominalist this limitation is of 
course negligible insofar as classes do not exist except as nomina. Compare Eberle 1970, espe-
cially pp. 67f. 
5 See e.g. the early criticisms of Lowe 1953, Rescher 1955, or Chisholm 1976. Of course a 
similar complaint arises in set theory, as discussed in Smith 1991. 
6 The locus classicus is Goodman 1956, 1958. For a recent statement see Lewis 1991, who 
stresses that “it is in virtue of this thesis that mereology is ontologically innocent: it commits us 
only to things that are identical, so to speak, to what we were committed to before” (p. 82); the 
“so to speak” is explained as in Baxter 1988a, 1988b.  
7 This point is made in Simons 1982, p. 149.  
8 Whitehead 1919. The deﬁnition of joining given below is actually from Whitehead 1920, 
but the difference from the earlier account is inessential.  
9 The ﬁgure is adapted from Simons 1987, p. 337, where a similar point is made (compare 
the discussion at pp. 81-86). See also Simons 1991.  
10 Compare e.g. Needham 1981.  
11 Compare e.g. Bostock 1979. 
12 As recently emphasized by Eschenbach and Heydrich, 1993, p. 207. 
13 I shall give some detailed references in the next section. 
14 See Tarski 1929 and Lejewski 1982, respectively. Lejewski also hypothesises that com-
bining Chronology with a cognate theory of space, or Stereology, would yield a favorable 
framework for developing a general Kinematics. Compare Lejewski 1986. 
 

  
18 
 
15 See Tiles 1981, Kamp 1979, Bach 1986, Link 1987, as also van Benthem 1983. 
16 Chisholm 1992/93. 
17 I myself have recently followed this approach in joint work with R. Casati on the meta-
physics of holes and holed things: see Varzi 1993, Casati and Varzi 1994. 
18 Smith 1992, 1993. 
19 Following Menger 1940.  
20 Smith 1993, p. 61. 
21 I deviate slightly—but inessentially—from the original notation and formulation to 
avoid unnecessary intermediate deﬁnitional detours.  
22 Compare Brentano 1976. Of course a full statement of the thesis requires further work, 
as is shown in White 1993. See also Chisholm 1984, 1989 (ch. 8).  
23 Smith himself considers the possibility of using a primitive closure operation. 
24 See De Laguna 1922 and Whitehead 1929, respectively.  
25 See Clarke 1981, 1985; Randell and Cohn 1989, 1992, Randell 1991, Cohn et al. 1993, 
Randell et al. 1992a, 1992b, 1992c; Vieu 1991, Aurnague and Vieu 1993a, 1993b. 
26 See Allen 1981, 1984, Allen and Hayes 1985 (though much can already be found in 
Hamblin 1969, 1971). See Galton 1993 for a uniﬁed theory of space, time and motion. 
27 Clarke 1981, p. 205. Cp. Gerla and Tortora 1992. 
28 Compare Simons 1987: “What we are being asked to believe is that there are two kinds 
of individuals, ‘soft’ (open) ones, which touch nothing, and partly or wholly ‘hard’ ones, which 
touch something. Yet we are not allowed to believe that there are any individuals which make 
up the difference. We can discriminate individuals which differ by as little as a point, but are 
unable to discriminate the point. It is hard to ﬁnd satisfaction in this picture” (p. 98). One is 
remined here of Brentano’s reprehension against the “monstruous doctrine that there would 
exist bodies with and without surfaces, the one class containing just so many as the other, be-
cause contact would be possible only between a body with a surface and another without” 
(Brentano 1976, pp. 146-47; the reference is to Bolzano 1851). A way of recovering the notion 
of a boundary within Clarke’s framework (relative to ﬁnite domains) is indicated in Vieu 1991 
and Aurnague and Vieu 1993.  
29 Randell et al. 1992a, 1992b, Cohn et al. 1993. 
30 Randell et al. 1992a, pp. 394-95. 
31 This is noted in Randell et al. 1992b, p. 173, correcting a mistake of Randell et al. 
1992a. Three alternative ways of dealing with atoms are made available, but they all determine 
some departure from the basic framework. 
32 Compare Randell et al. 1992c.  
33 The story is from Lewis 1991, p. 75. 
34 This is the approach that I followed in Varzi 1993. 
35 Eschenbach and Heydrich 1993.  
36 To be more precise, I believe the point can be put as follows. First, let L be a mereologi-
cal language with ‘P’ as primitive, let Lt be the language obtained from L by replacing ‘P’ with 
‘C’, and let Lr be obtained from L by adding a new predicate symbol ‘R’. Next, for any sen-
tence φ of L, let φt be the sentence of Lt obtained from φ by replacing each atomic component of 
the form ‘Pxy’ with ‘∀z(Czx → Czy)’, and let φr be the sentence of Lr obtained from φ by recur-
 

  
19 
 
sively replacing each quantiﬁed component of the form ‘∀xψ’ or ‘∃xψ’ (with ‘x’ free in ψ) with 
‘∀x(Rx → ψ)’ and ‘∃x(Rx ∧ ψ)’ respectively. Lastly, let M be a mereological system in L and 
let Mt and Mr be corresponding systems in Lt and Lr obtained by replacing each axiom φ of M 
with φt or φr, respectively. Then, for every thesis φ of M, the sentence φt is a thesis of Mt iff φr is 
a thesis of Mr.  
37 From Lejewski 1982. 
38 This is the strategy followed e.g. by Randell, Cui and Cohn in most of the works cited 
above. The ﬂy example is from Vieu 1991 (adapted from Herskovits 1986). 
References 
Allen J. F., 1981, ‘An Interval-Based Representation of Temporal Knowledge’, Proceedings of 
the 7th International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Vancouver: IJCAI [Mor-
gan Kaufmann], Vol. 1, pp. 221-26. 
— 1984, ‘Towards a General Theory of Action and Time’, Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 23, 123-54. 
Allen J. F., Hayes P., 1985, ‘A Common-Sense Theory of Time’, Proceedings of the 9th In-
ternational Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Los Angeles: IJCAI [Morgan 
Kaufmann], Vol. 1, pp. 528-31. 
Aurnague M., Vieu L., 1993a, ‘A Three-Level Approach to the Semantics of Space’, in C. Z. 
Wibbelt (ed.), The Semantics of Prepositions: From Mental Processing to Natural Lan-
guage Processing, Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, pp. 393-439. 
— 1993b, ‘Toward  a Formal Representation of Space in Language: A Commonsense Rea-
soning Approach’, in F. Anger, H. Guesgen and J. van Benthem (eds.), Proceedings of the 
Workshop on Spatial and Temporal Reasoning. 13th International Joint Conference on 
Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Chambéry: IJCAI, pp. 123-58. 
Bach E., 1986, ‘The Algebra of Events’, Linguistics and Philosophy 9, 5-16. 
Baxter D., 1988a, ‘Identity in the Loose and Popular Sense’, Mind 97, 575-82. 
— 1988b, ‘Many-One Identity’, Philosophical Papers 17, 193-216. 
Benthem J. van, 1983, The Logic of Time, Dordrecht: Kluwer (2nd ed. 1991). 
Bolzano B., 1851, Paradoxien des Unendlichen, hrsg. aus dem schriftlichen Nachlasse des Ver-
fassers von F. Přihonský, Leipzig (Eng. ed. by D. A. Steele, Paradoxes of the Inﬁnite, 
London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1950). 
Brentano F., 1976, Philosophische Untersuchungen zu Raum, Zeit und Kontinuum, hrsg. von S. 
Körner and R. Chisholm, Hamburg: Meiner (Eng. trans. by B. Smith, Philosophical Inves-
tigations on Space, Time and the Continuum, London: Croom Helm, 1988). 
Burkhardt H., Dufour C. A., 1991, ‘Part/Whole I: History’, in H. Burkhardt and B. Smith (eds.), 
Handbook of Metaphysics and Ontology, Munich: Philosophia, pp. 663-73.  
Casati R., Varzi A. C., 1994, Holes and Other Superﬁcialities, Cambridge, MA, and London: 
MIT Press/Bradford Books. 
Chisholm R. M., 1976, Person and Object. A Metaphysical Study, London: Allen and Unwin. 
— 1984, ‘Boundaries as Dependent Particulars’, Grazer Philosophische Studien 10, 87-95. 
— 1989, On Metaphysics, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 

  
20 
— 1992/93, ‘Spatial Continuity and the Theory of Part and Whole. A Brentano Study’, Bren-
tano Studien 4, 11-23. 
Clarke B. L., 1981, ‘A Calculus of Individuals Based on “Connection”’, Notre Dame Journal of 
Formal Logic 22, 204-18. 
— 1985, ‘Individuals and Points’, Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic 26, 61-75. 
Cohn A. G., Randell D. A., Cui Z., 1993, ‘A Taxonomy of Logically Deﬁned Qualitative Spa-
tial Regions’, in N. Guarino and R. Poli (eds.), International Workshop on Formal Ontol-
ogy in Conceptual Analysis and Knowledge Representation, Padova: Ladseb-CNR, pp. 
149-58. 
Cruse D. A., 1979, ‘On the Transitivity of the Part-Whole Relation’, Journal of Linguistics 15, 
29-38. 
De Laguna T., 1922, ‘Point, Line, and Surface, as Sets of Solids’, Journal of Philosophy 19, 
449-61. 
Eberle R. A., 1970, Nominalistic Systems, Dordrecht: Reidel. 
Eschenbach C., Heydrich W., 1993, ‘Classical Mereology and Restricted Domains’, in N. Gua-
rino and R. Poli (eds.), International Workshop on Formal Ontology in Conceptual Analy-
sis and Knowledge Representation, Padova: Ladseb-CNR, pp. 205-17. 
Hamblin C., 1969, ‘Starting and Stopping’, The Monist 53, 410-25  
— 1971, ‘Instants and Intervals’, Studium Generale 24, 127-34. 
Galton A. P., 1993, ‘Towards an Integrated Logic of Space, Time, and Motion’, in Proceedings 
of the 13th International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Chambéry: IJCAI 
[Morgan Kaufmann], Vol. 2, pp. 1550-55. 
Gerla G., Tortora R., 1992, ‘La relazione di connessione in A. N. Whitehead: Aspetti ma-
tematici’, Epistemologia 15, 351-64. 
Goodman N., 1951, The Structure of Appearance, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press 
(3rd ed. Dordrecht: Reidel, 1977). 
— 1956, ‘A World of Individuals’, in J. M. Bochenski, A. Church, N. Goodman, The Prob-
lem of Universals. A Symposium, Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press, pp. 13-31. 
— 1958, ‘On Relations that Generate’, Philosophical Studies 9, 65-66. 
Henry D. P., 1991, Medieval Mereology, Amsterdam and Philadelphia: Grüner. 
Herskovits A., 1986, Language and Spatial Cognition. An Interdisciplinary Study of the Prepo-
sitions in English, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Husserl E., 1901, Logische Untersuchungen. Zweiter Band. Untersuchungen zur Phäno-
menologie und Theorie der Erkenntnis, Halle: Niemeyer (2nd ed. 1913; Eng. trans. by J. 
N. Findlay, Logical Investigations, London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1970). 
Kamp H., 1979, ‘Events, Instants, and Temporal Reference’, in R. Bäuerle, U. Egli and A. von 
Stechow (eds.), Semantics from Different Points of View, Berlin and Heidelberg: Springer-
Verlag, pp. 376-417. 
Lejewski C., 1982, ‘Ontology: What’s Next?’, in W. Leinfellner, E. Kraemer and J. Schank 
(eds.), Language and Ontology. Proceedings of the 6th International Wittgenstein Sympo-
sium, Vienna: Hölder-Pichler-Tempsky, pp. 173-85. 
— 1986, ‘Logic, Ontology and Metaphysics’, in S. G. Shanker (ed.), Philosophy in Britain 
Today, London and Sydney: Croom Helm, pp. 171-97. 

  
21 
Leonard H. S., Goodman N., 1940, ‘The Calculus of Individuals and Its Uses’, Journal of Sym-
bolic Logic 5, 45-55. 
Leśniewski S., 1916, Podstawy ogólnej teoryi mnogości. I, Moskow: Prace Polskiego Koła 
Naukowego w Moskwie, Sekcya matematyczno-przyrodnicza (Eng. trans. by D. I. Bar-
nett, ‘Foundations of the General Theory of Sets. I’, in S. Leśniewski, Collected Works, 
ed. by S. J. Surma et al., Dordrecht: Nijhoff, 1992, Vol. 1, pp. 129-73). 
Lewis D. K., 1991, Parts of Classes, Oxford: Basil Blackwell. 
Link G., 1987, ‘Algebraic Semantics for Event Structures’, in J. Groenendijk, M. Stockhof and 
F. Veltman (eds.), Proceedings of the 6th Amsterdam Colloquium, Amsterdam: Institute 
for Language, Logic and Information, pp. 243-62. 
Lowe V., 1953, ‘Professor Goodman’s Concept of an Individual’, Philosophical Review 62, 
117-26. 
Menger K., 1940, ‘Topology Without Points’, Rice Institute Pamphlets 27, 80-107. 
Needham P., 1981, ‘Temporal Intervals and Temporal Order’, Logique et Analyse 24, 49-64. 
Randell D. A., 1991, Analysing the Familiar: Reasoning about Space and Time in the Everyday 
World, University of Warwick: PhD Thesis. 
Randell D. A., Cohn A. G., 1989, ‘Modelling Topological and Metrical Properties in Physical 
Processes’, in R. J. Brachman, H. J. Levesque and R. Reiter (eds.), Principles of Knowl-
edge Representation and Reasoning. Proceedings of the First International Conference, 
Los Altos: Morgan Kaufmann, pp. 357-68. 
— 1992, ‘Exploiting Lattices in a Theory of Space and Time’, Computers and Mathematics 
with Applications 23, 459-76. 
Randell D. A., Cui Z., Cohn A. G., 1992a, ‘An Interval Logic of Space Based on “Con-
nection”’, in B. Neumann (ed.), Proceedings of the 10th European Conference on Ar-
tiﬁcial Intelligence, Chichester: John Wiley & Sons, pp. 394-98. 
— 1992b, ‘A Spatial Logic Based on Regions and Connections’, in B. Nebel, C. Rich and W. 
Swartout (eds.), Principles of Knowledge Representation and Reasoning. Proceedings of 
the Third International Conference, Los Altos: Morgan Kaufmann, pp. 165-76. 
— 1992c, ‘Naive Topology: Modelling the Force Pump’, in B. Faltings and P. Struss (eds.), 
Recent Advances in Qualitative Physics, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 177-92. 
Rescher N., 1955, ‘Axioms for the Part Relation’, Philosophical Studies 6, 8-11. 
Sanford D., 1993, ‘The Problem of the Many, Many Composition Questions, and Naive Mere-
ology’, Noûs 27, 219-228. 
Simons P. M., 1982, ‘The Formalisation of Husserl’s Theory of Wholes and Parts’, in B. Smith 
(ed.), Parts and Moments. Studies in Logic and Formal Ontology, Munich: Philosophia, 
pp. 113-59.  
— 1987, Parts. A Study in Ontology, Oxford: Clarendon.  
— 1991, ‘Whitehead und die Mereologie’, in M. Hampe and H. Maassen (eds.), Die Gifford 
Lectures und ihre Deutung. Materialien zu Whiteheads “Prozess und Realität”, Vol. 2, 
Frankfurt a/M: Suhrkamp, pp. 369-88. 
Smith B., 1991, ‘Relevance, Relatedness and Restricted Set Theory’, in G. Schurz and G. J. W. 
Dorn (eds.), Advances in Scientiﬁc Philosophy. Essays in Honour of Paul Weingartner, 
Amsterdam and Atlanta, GA: Rodopi, pp. 45-56. 

  
22 
— 1992, ‘Topology for Philosophers’, talk presented at the 15th International Wittgenstein 
Symposium. Philosophy of Mathematics, Kirchberg a/W, August 1992. 
— 1993, ‘Ontology and the Logistic Analysis of Reality’, in N. Guarino and R. Poli (eds.), 
International Workshop on Formal Ontology in Conceptual Analysis and Knowledge Rep-
resentation, Padova: Ladseb-CNR, pp. 51-68 (revised version in G. Häﬂiger and P. M. 
Simons (eds.), Analytic Phenomenology, Dordrecht, Boston, and London: Kluwer, 1994, 
pp. 223-245). 
Tarski A., 1929, ‘Les fondements de la géométrie des corps’, Księga Pamiątkowa Pierwszkego 
Polskiego Zjazdu Matematycznego, suppl. to Annales de la Société Polonaise de Mathé-
matique 7, 29-33 (Eng. trans. by J. H. Woodger, ‘Foundations of the Geometry of Solids’, 
in A. Tarski, Logics, Semantics, Metamathematics, Papers from 1923 to 1938, Oxford: 
Clarendon Press, 1956, pp. 24-29). 
Tiles J. E., 1981, Things That Happen, Aberdeen: Aberdeen University Press. 
Varzi A. C., 1993, ‘Spatial Reasoning in a Holey World: A Sketch’, in F. Anger, H. Guesgen 
and J. van Benthem (eds.), Proceedings of the Workshop on Spatial and Temporal Rea-
soning. 13th International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Chambéry: IJCAI, 
pp. 47-59. 
Vieu L., 1991, Sémantique des relations spatiales et inférences spatio-temporelles: Une contri-
bution à l’étude des structures formelles de l’espace en Langage Naturel, Université Paul 
Sabatier de Toulouse: PhD Thesis. 
Winston M., Chafﬁn R., Herrmann D., 1987, ‘A Taxonomy of Part-Whole Relations’, Cogni-
tive Science 11, 417-44. 
White G., 1993, ‘Mereology, Combinatorics, and Categories’, Preliminary Report for the SNF 
Project 11.31211.91, Schaan. 
Whitehead A. N., 1919, An Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge, Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press. 
— 1920, The Concept of Nature, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
— 1929, Process and Reality. An Essay in Cosmologyy, New York: Macmillan. 

