Part-Whole Relations
(Mereology, Meronymy, Partonomies,
Functions, Aggregation & Composites)
v. 2
Kevin Dye
Presentation to the Basic Structural Modeling Interest Group August 6, 2016.

Is-a and Part-of
Foundational Ontologies require two kinds of 
relations - “is a” and “is part of”. 
Both structure semantic  or logical space in a 
hierarchical manner. 
PreuB and Cavegn suggest that these are 
processing differently by humans – the former 
by checking commonalities and the latter 
involves more complex processing of spatio-
temporal and functional correlations. (Gerstl & 
Pribbenow)

Mereology
μέρος (méros, "part")
As Odell notes aggregation or composition of a 
whole from parts reduces complexity by treating 
many objects as one object.11
A collection of formal systems...with variations 
in how they are formulated that is the choice of 
primitives, axioms and logic.12
It is “Topic Neutral”
A replacement for Set Theory?

Part-Whole Disciplinary Views
Mereology – Mathematical Logic
Meronymy – Linguistics, Psycholinguistics
Partonomies – Psychology, Cognitive Science
Sub-Functions – Engineering
Aggregation – Object-Oriented Modeling
Ontologies – Philosophy, Phenomenology, 
Domain Engineering, Conceptual Modeling 
Computer Science
Systems Science

Mereology: Part-Whole Relations
Mathematical Logic Influences
Ontologists
Parthood as a Partial Ordering
Axioms of Core Mereology (M)
Core Property Examples
Proper Parthood as a Strict Partial Order
Supplementation – Minimal Mereology (MM)
Weak Supplementation Principle
Supplementation → Antisymmetry

Mereology: Part-Whole Relations
Strong Supplementation
Strong Supplementation Example
Extensional Mereology (EM)
Extensional Mereology Example
Mereological Theories
(GEM)
Mereology & Boolean Algebra

Mathematical Logic Influences
Achille Varzi
Noam Chomsky
Hilary Putnam
Stanislaw 
Lesniewski
W. V. O. Quine
David Hilbert 
Alfred Tarski
Alfred North 
Whitehead
Nelson Goodman
Rudolf Carnap
William James
Bertrand Russell
Peter Simons
Alonzo Church
Haskell Curry
Alan Turing
Gottlob Frege
Henry S. Leonard
Franz 
Brentano
David K. Lewis
C.I. Lewis
Jerry A. Fodor

Ontologists
https://www.ontology.co/ontologists.htm
Edmund
Husserl

Barry Smith, Annotated Bibliography of Writings on Part-Whole Relations since Brentano 
<http://ontology.buffalo.edu/smith/book/P&M/bibliography.pdf>

Parthood as a Partial Order
A Part-of relationis generally considered to be a 
Partial Order - reflexive, transitive, antisymmetric1.
Everything is part of itself.
Any part of any part of a thing is itself part of 
that thing.
Two distinct things cannot be part of each other.
Simpson Relation #?

Axioms of Ground Mereology (M)
(P.1)
Reflexivity: Pxx
(P.2)
Transitivity: (Pxy 
Pyz) → Pxz
(P.3)
Antisymmetry: (Pxy 
Pyx) → x=y
“Pxy” is read “x is a part of y”, “x” and “y” are “objects”
“∧” is “conjunction” (“and”)
“→” is “implies” (if...then)
Standard first-order language with identity, supplied with a distinguished binary 
predicate constant, ‘P’, to be interpreted as the parthood relation. P is a Binary 
Predicate Constant (Varzi). The parthood relation is often represented by non-
alphabetic symbols supporting infix notation, such as ‘≤’ or ‘<’ (the notation 
used in Leonard and Goodman 1940). Taking the underlying logic to be the 
classical predicate calculus with identity. Simplify notation by dropping all initial 
universal quantifiers. Unless otherwise specified, all formulas are to be 
understood as universally closed.1

Core Property Examples
Reflexivity - Every object of the universe of 
discourse is part of itself. For instance, the 
European Union (EU) is part of the EU.
Transitivity - If x is part of y, and y is part of z, 
then x is part of z. For instance, Madrid is part 
of Spain, and Spain is part of EU, therefore, 
Madrid is part of EU.
Antisymmetry - If an object x is part of y, and y 
is part of x, then x and y are the same object. 
For instance, if the territory T1 is part of the 
territory T2, then the only way for T2 to be part 
of T1 is by being T1 and T2 the same territory.2

Proper Parthood: Strict Partial Order
A predicate by definition1
Proper Parthood: PPxy =df Pxy 
¬x=y
(where “¬” means “not”) or
(Strict) Proper Parthood PPxy =df Pxy 
¬Pyx
PP is irreflexive and asymmetric, and transitive—
so they are strict partial orderings. IAT-[2,2,1] 
Proper part. A proper part is a part that is other 
than the individual itself. For example, Spain is a 
proper part of EU, since Spain is part of EU and 
they are different entities.2

Theories of Mereology
Not every Partial Order qualifies as parthood. 
(Varzi) M is extended with additional principles 
which take us from wholes to parts, or 
decomposition, or from parts to wholes, or 
composition1. 

Weak Supplementation Principle
The decomposition principle of Supplementation* 
adds the intuition that a whole cannot be 
decomposed into a single proper part1.
(P.4)
Supplementation PPxy → z(Pzy 
¬Ozx)
where O is defined as “Overlap”:
Oxy =df z(Pzx 
Pzy)
means “there exists”
Every proper part must be “supplemented” by 
another, disjoint part (the notion of a remainder)
* Also known as “Weak Supplementation”

Weak Supplementation Example
Every object x with a proper part y has another 
part z that is disjoint of y1. 
The domain of territories fulfills this principle. 
For example, given that Spain is a proper part 
of the European Union (EU), then EU has other 
parts that are disjoint of Spain: Portugal, 
France, Italy, etc..2

Minimal Mereology (MM)
Irreflexive
Asymmetric
Transitive
Weak Supplementation1

Supplementation → Antisymmetry
Supplementation turns out to entail 
Antisymmetry so long as parthood is transitive 
and reflexive1.
If x and y were proper parts of each other, 
contrary to (P.3), then every z that is part of one 
would also be part of—hence overlap—the 
other, contrary to (P.4)
(Overlap. The relation overlap is defined as a 
sharing part. That is, x and y overlap if and only 
if there is a z such that z is part of x and part of 
y. ie. Spain and Africa overlap, since Spain has 
territories in Africa (Canaries, Ceuta, Melilla))2

Strong Supplementation
Are there any stronger ways of expressing the 
supplementation intuition besides (P.4)?
(P.5)
Strong Supplementation1
¬Pyx → z(Pzy 
¬Ozx)
If an object fails to include another among its 
parts, then there must be a remainder, something 
that makes up for the difference.
“if an individual has a proper part, it has more 
than one”

Strong Supplementation Example
Strong supplementation. If y is not part of x, 
then there is a part of y that does not overlap 
with x1. 
For example, given that Spain is not part of 
Africa, there is a part of Spain (e.g. Madrid) that 
is not part of Africa.2

Extensional Mereology (EM)
Given M, (P.5) implies (P.4). 
It is a theorem of EM that no composite objects 
with the same proper parts can be distinguished1:
( zPPzx 
zPPzy) → (x=y ↔ z(PPzx ↔ Ppzy))
no two composite wholes can have the same 
proper parts3
“no two distinct objects can share the same proper 
parts”4
“an object is exhaustively defined by its 
constituent parts”4

Extensional Mereology Example
This theory is called ‘extensional’ because a 
theorem that can be demonstrated is
T1) for all x’s and y’s, such that x has proper parts 
or y has proper parts, x and y are identical if and 
only if x and y have the same proper parts, that is, 
for all z’s , z is proper part of x if and only if z is 
part of y. 
For example, the territory of the Community of 
Madrid is the same as that of the province of 
Madrid because both territories are composed of 
the same proper parts, that is, by the same 
municipalities.2

Mereological Theories
Hasse diagram of 
mereological theories 
(from weaker to stronger, 
going uphill)
...but M, MM, and EM 
are not decidable and 
not a boolean algebra 
and can not be a 
substitute for set 
theory
Varzi, A.C. Mereology. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. (Fall 2004 Edition), Zalta, E.N. (ed.). 
<http://stanford.library.sydney.edu.au/archives/fall2008/entries/mereology/>

General Extensional Mereology 
(GEM)
Adding Composition Principles1
CEM=CMM  - “any two objects have a sum”4
GEM – adds theFusion Axiom
“every specifiable non-empty set of entities has a 
sumi”
(P.15) Unrestricted Sum
wφw → 
zSizφw
where φ is any formula in the language
4

Mereological Theories
Giancarlo Guizzardi, Ontological Foundations for Structural Conceptual Models, 
CTIT PhD Thesis Series, No. 05-74, Enschede, The Netherlands, 2005, pg 150. 
doc.utwente.nl/50826/1/thesis_Guizzardi.pdf

Mereology & Boolean Algebra
PROPOSITION 1 (Tarski). Every model of (A)GEM is isomorphic 
to an (atomic) complete quasi-Boolean algebra (= Boolean algebra 
with the zero element removed). A model of A – GEM is given by a 
complete quasi-Boolean algebra on the set of regular open 
subsets of a Euclidean Space.7
“Tarski was the first to point out that Lesniewski’s axioms 
determine a class of structures that strongly resemble complete 
Boolean lattices. More precisely, given any complete Boolean 
algebra, we can turn it into a model of classical mereology by, 
mutatis mutandis, deleting the zero element. And vice versa, any 
model of mereology can be turned into a complete Boolean lattice 
upon adding an element to serve as the zero of the structure.”3
It (GEM) is isomorphic to the inclusion relation restricted to the set 
of all non-empty subsets of a given set, which is to say a complete 
Boolean algebra with the zero element removed—a result traced 
back to Tarski (1935: n. 4) first proved in Grzegorczyk (1955: §4).

Mereology & Set Theory
Calculus of Individuals vs Calculus of Classes
Parthood vs Subsethood
Difference of Part-of relation and 
Set Inclusion
Set Membership

Mereology & Set Theory
The formal study of parthood relations took off 
in the foundations of mathematics, as an 
alternative to set theory. (Varzi) 
Set theory is based on two parthood relations, 
element 
and subset , and a corresponding 
type-theoretic distinction (if α 
β, then α and β 
must be sets; if α 
β, then just β is required to 
be a set). Consequently, set theory 
distinguishes between singleton sets and their 
elements (a ≠ {a}), and assumes an empty set.

Mereology & Set Theory
Mereology was proposed by Leśniewski (1916, 
see Simons 2011) and Leonard & Goodman 
(1940) as a simpler alternative without such 
assumptions. 
It does not distinguish between elementhood 
and subsethood, and 
It does not assume abstract entities like sets. 
Consequently, it does not distinguish between 
singleton sets and their elements, and does not 
entertain the notion of the empty set.
Lucas Champollion & Manfred Krifka, Mereology,  pg. 2. 
ling.auf.net/lingbuzz/002099/v1.pdf

Mereology & Set Theory
Lucas Champollion & Manfred Krifka, Mereology,  pg. 4. 
ling.auf.net/lingbuzz/002099/v1.pdf

Implications for ISM #1,2
Proper Parthood
Never ask “Is A Part-of A”
Asymmetry 
Don't ask B->A if A->B is already confirmed
(But if A & B are synonyms for the same part then it 
will show up as a whole with one part.)
So – don't ask both ways on the diagonal nor on 
the complement across the diagonal.
These are apriori, before inquiry restrictions.

Implications for ISM #3
Supplementation – No wholes with one part
If there is an A with only part B then ask:
Is there another object we did not yet ask about 
which may be Part-of A? 
If not, are A & B identical - just two different names 
for the same object? 
If not can we identify another part? 
If not, then condense the matrix and create 
synonyms for the object and/or leave this inquiry 
open.
This is a post inquiry check which initiates 
another inquiry procedure.

Implications for ISM #4, 5
Extension:
If after inquiry there are two objects which are 
composed of the same parts then see if they can be 
distinguished. Otherwise consider them synonyms.
Also a post inquiry check which initiates another 
inquiry procedure.
Composition/Fusion/Unrestricted Sum
Stopping Rule: Inquiry is not complete until all 
pairwise combinations (sans restrictions on Proper 
Partood/Refexivity & Asymmetry) are asked about.

Implications for ISM #6
Transitivity
If B is part-of (reachable from) A then do not ask if 
A is part-of (reachable from) B.
(Otherwise it violates asymmetry.)
Example: a piston is a part of an engine, and thus a 
part of a car but a car is not part of a piston13. 
(Apriori inquiry restriction.)

Non-Strict Partial Order Mereologies
Non-IAT-[2,2,1] Part-of relations are proposed28
“The Metaphysics of Non-Classical 
Mereologies”25
Mereologies in which transitivity fails26
“non-wellfounded” mereologies obtained by 
dropping the asymmetry postulate27
Note also - different extensionality and 
composition treatments1, 29

Meronymy
Concern with intransitivity motivated the 
linguistic investigation16.
ie.
an arm is part of a musician, and a musician is 
part of an orchestra, but the arm is not part of the 
orchestra
Winston

Meronymy
Primary kinds of semantic relations expressed 
by normal English use of the term “part-of”16:
Component/Integral Object E.g./ handle-cup
Member/Collection E.g. tree-forest
Portion/Mass E.g. slice-pie
Stuff/Object E.g. steel-bike
Feature/Activity E.g. paying-shopping
Place/Area E.g. oasis-desert

Meronymy
Each of these kinds of parthood have different 
semantic properties. According to Winston et al 
there are about “40 such terms which are 
narrower in scope than 'part' but with a fairly 
wide range of application,” and a much larger 
number of specialized terms Roget's 
Theasaurus listing approximately 400 
synonyms of “part”16. 

Semantic Relations
The meronymic view of parthood is sometimes 
confused with similar notions such as 
possession, ownership, attachment, and 
attribution, as well as spatial, temporal, and 
class inclusion16.

Structured vs Unstructured
Katrin Weller and Wolfgang G. Stock, Transitive Meronymy: Automatic Concept-Based 
Query Expansion Using Weighted Transitive Part-Whole Relations, NFD Information-
Wissenschaft und Praxis, 59(2008)3, 165-170. https://www.phil-fak.uni-
duesseldorf.de/fileadmin/Redaktion/Institute/Informationswissenschaft/stock/120937803
9transitive.pdf

Meronymic Semantics
Three key characteristics/properties are used to 
distinguish each type of part-whole relation16.
Configuration: functional roles such as ‘an impeller 
is part-of a pump’, 
Homeomerous: the similarity of the parts with 
respect to the whole such as ‘a molecule of water is 
a part of water,’ and  
Separabiity/Invariance - whether the parts are 
separable from the whole. (Jordan et al)

Meronymic Semantics16

has-a and is-a
“X is a meronym of Y if and only if sentences of 
the form Y has Xs / and an X is a part of Y are 
normal when the noun phrases an X, aY are 
interpreted generically.”17
A wife has a husband. 
? A husband is a part of a wife.
A sound has a pitch and a volume.
? A volume is a part of a sound. 
Changing nappies is part of being a mother.
? Being a mother has changing nappies.
A book has pages. A page is a part of a book.

Partonomies
“These two ways of solving a problem point to 
two major ways the mind organizes information, 
partonomically, by dividing into components, 
and taxonomically, by grouping by kinds (e. g., 
Miller and Johnson-Laird, 1976; Tversky, 1985, 
1990; Tversky and Hemenway, 1984).18”
“Cognitive science has taught that insight into 
abstract concepts and processes can be gained 
from analysis of concrete ones.”

Partonomies
“Good parts are good figures, in the Gestalt 
sense of good.”
“Good parts are also those that have functional 
significance...”
“the connection between appearance and 
action. For people, the appearance of objects 
often suggest or afford the actions appropriate 
for it.”
“This correspondence between appearance and 
function...promotes inferences...”18

Partonomies
Tree Structure (a part can not be part of two 
different wholes).
Three levels
Objects
Scenes
Events

Separation of Concerns
“Let me try to explain to you, what to my taste is characteristic for all 
intelligent thinking. It is, that one is willing to study in depth an aspect of 
one's subject matter in isolation for the sake of its own consistency, all 
the time knowing that one is occupying oneself only with one of the 
aspects. We know that a program must be correct and we can study it 
from that viewpoint only; we also know that it should be efficient and we 
can study its efficiency on another day, so to speak. In another mood we 
may ask ourselves whether, and if so: why, the program is desirable. But 
nothing is gained —on the contrary!— by tackling these various aspects 
simultaneously. It is what I sometimes have called "the separation of 
concerns", which, even if not perfectly possible, is yet the only available 
technique for effective ordering of one's thoughts, that I know of. This is 
what I mean by "focusing one's attention upon some aspect": it does not 
mean ignoring the other aspects, it is just doing justice to the fact that 
from this aspect's point of view, the other is irrelevant. It is being one-
and multiple-track minded simultaneously.”19 (Dijkstra)

Functions
“The functional part-whole relationship 
described above is similarly a part-whole 
relationship directly between functions and not 
a functionally-defined structural part-whole 
relationship between technical systems and 
their structural parts. 
A wall, for instance, may be a functionally-
defined structural part of a house but the wall is 
not a subfunction part of the function of the 
house; rather the function to support is a 
functional part of the function to provide 
shelter.”20

Functions
Systems
Functions
Objects & Processes (Endurants & Perdurants)
In philosophy of science and epistemology 
literature on mechanistic explanations activities 
of mechanisms are analysed in terms of the 
organised objects and activities that make up 
mechanisms20.

Functions
“mereological language is not expressive 
enough to capture functional part-whole 
relationship” 
Organization of sub-functions20
“x is part of y at time t”21

Object-Oriented Systems
Originally modeled as a “has-a” attribute – parts 
were not “first class citizens” - the “belonging 
fallacy” (Wilensky)22
But when it was treated as a first class 
modeling construct this concept remains 
somewhat vague in object modeling due to, in 
particular, the wide range of terms used in the 
literature Aggregation, Composition, Assembly, 
Containment, Membership23

Object-Oriented Systems
But “It turns out that the basic principles of GEM 
are inappropriate when considering real 
domains of application of the theory.”
For example, “In both (the following) cases, 
GEM is not able to account for the subtle 
aspects related to identity principles.”22

Object-Oriented Systems
“Sometimes, the extensionality and sum 
principles are too strong.”22
“How to deal with individuals described not only by 
means of their parts, but also by means of their 
properties?”
“Two individuals may have different identifying properties 
while being made of the same parts”
“...how to deal with individuals which maintain their 
identity while loosing or acquiring some part at 
different times”
“Two individuals may have the same identifying 
properties while being made of different parts” ie. A 
person that has lost hair

Object-Oriented Systems
“GEM appears to be too weak to capture the 
notion of a whole as a one piece entity, as 
opposed to a scattered entity made up of 
several disconnected parts”22
the object composed by Johns' left hand and the 
door of your house does not make any sense
non-extensional and/or topological frameworks
Artale

Object-Oriented Systems
Implicit vs. Explicit Wholes
Reuseability, Understandability, Extendability
Naming Parts
Horizontal & Vertical Relationsips
Integrity
Rigid & Generic Dependency22

Horizontal - the classical 
example of an arch which can be 
considered as a whole made out 
of inter-related parts. For an arch, 
its parts should satisfy the 
following constraints: the lintel is 
supported-by the uprights, and 
each upright is on-the-side-of
and not-connected-with the other.
Vertical: According to Simons, we say that an 
individual is rigidly dependent on another 
individual if the former cannot exist unless the 
latter exists; further, an individual is generically 
dependent on a class if, in order the individual to 
exist, an instance of such class has to exist. As an 
example of rigid dependence (essential, 
inseparable) , consider the relationship between a 
person and its brain: if we change the brain, we 
cannot assume that the person is the same any 
more. On the other hand, we can assume that a 
person is only generically dependent (mandatory) 
on his/her heart, since this can be replaced.22
Implicit
Explicit
Naming

OO – Generic Dependence
The whole is generically dependent on a 
particular class of parts: essential parts.
A part is generically dependent on the whole: in 
this case: dependent parts.
There exists at most one whole containing a 
particular part: such part is in this case 
exclusive for that whole.22

Vertical Dependence of Properties
Properties which the whole inherits from its 
parts: in many cases, for instance, the whole is 
defective if one of its parts is defective.
Properties which the parts inherit from the 
whole: for instance, within a certain granularity, 
certain locative properties (e.g., being on the 
table") of the whole hold also for its parts.
Properties of the parts which are systematically 
related to properties of the whole: for instance, 
the region occupied by a single part is always 
inside the region occupied by the whole...22.

Unified Modeling Language
Shared Aggregation & Composite Aggregation
“composite implies propagation semantics”23, 24

Unified Modeling Language
Saksena, Monika, Maria Larrondo-Petrie, Robert France & Matthew Evett 1998. 
Extendingaggregation constructs in UML. In Jean Bezivin & Pierre-Alain Muller 
(eds.), The Uniﬁed Modeling Language, UML’98 – Beyond the Notation. 
Berlin/Heidelberg: Springer, 273–280.

References
1) Varzi, Achille, "Mereology", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2016 Edition), Edward N. Zalta 
(ed.), URL = <http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2016/entries/mereology/>
2) Mariano Fernández-López, Asunción Gómez-Pérez, and Mari Carmen Suárez-Figueroa. 2008. Selecting and 
Customizing a Mereology Ontology for its Reuse in a Pharmaceutical Product Ontology. In Proceedings of the 2008 
conference on Formal Ontology in Information Systems: Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference (FOIS 
2008), Carola Eschenbach and Michael Grüninger (Eds.). IOS Press, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, The 
Netherlands, 181-194. URL = <http://oa.upm.es/5207/1/FOIS2008-FernandezSuarezGomezFinal.pdf>
3) Rafał Gruszczyński, Achille C. Varzi, Mereology Then and Now, Logic and Logical Philosophy, Volume 24 
(2015), 409–427. URL = <https://www.academia.edu/19678312/Mereology_Then_and_Now>
4) Varzi, Achille, Parts, Wholes, and Part-Whole Relations: The Prospects of Mereotopology, Data and Knowledge 
Engineering 20 (1996), 259–286. URL = <http://www.columbia.edu/~av72/papers/Dke_1996.pdf>
5) Cohnitz, Daniel and Rossberg, Marcus, "Nelson Goodman", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 
2016 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL = <http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2016/entries/goodman/>.
6) Simons, Peter, "Stanisław Leśniewski", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2015 Edition), Edward 
N. Zalta (ed.), URL = <http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2015/entries/lesniewski/>
7) Stanisław Leśniewski, Podstawy ogólnej teorii mnogości I [Foundations of the General Theory of Sets, I] (No 
further parts appeared.) Moscow: Popławski, 1916. (Prace Polskiego Koła Naukowego w Moskwie. Sekcya 
matematyczno-przyrodnicza, No.2.) translated in Leśniewski, Stanisław, 1992. Collected Works. Surma, S.J., 
Srzednicki, J.T., Barnett, D.I., and Rickey, V.F., editors and translators. Kluwer.
8) Tarski A., 1935, ‘Zur Grundlegung der Booleschen Algebra. I’, Fundamenta Mathematicae, 24, 177–98

References
9) Eberle R. A., 1970, Nominalistic Systems, Dordrecht: Reidel.
10) Simons P. M., 1987, Parts. A Study in Ontology, Oxford: Clarendon Press..
11) Martin, J. and J. Odell, Object-Oriented Analysis and Design, Prentice-Hall, 1992 J Odell “Six different kinds of 
composition” Journal of Object-Oriented Programming, (January 1994) http://conradbock.org/compkind.html
12) Andrew Bacon, A primer on formal metaphysics, British Journal of Undergraduate Philosophy, 2(2), July 2007.
13) Barbara Tversky, Parts, Partonomies, and Taxonomies, Developmental Psychology 1989. Vol. 25. Nff. 6, 983-
995.
14) Cruse, D. A.: On the Transitivity of the Part-Whole Relation. Journal of Linguistics 15, 1979, 29-38 
15) Miller, G.;  Johnson-Laird, P., Language and Perception. Cambridge UP: Cambridge, Mass., 1976.
16) Winston M.E.; Chaffin R.; Herrman D. ‘A taxonomy of part-whole relations’, Cognitive Science 11 (1987), 
pp.417-444.
17) Cruse, D. Alan, Lexical Semantics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986.
18) Barbara Tversky, on Exploring Parts and Wholes, In book: Editors: John Gero, Mary Lou Maher, Creativity in 
Design, Chapter: Exploring Parts and Wholes, Publisher: Key Centre for Design, December 2005.  pp.1-16 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/283298123_ON_EXPLORING_PARTS_AND_WHOLES
19) Edsger Wybe Dijkstra, On the role of scientific thought (EWD447).(E.W. Dijkstra Archive, Center for American 
History, University of Texas at Austin) 1974 published as Selected Writings on Computing: A Personal Perspective, 
Springer-Verlag, 1982. https://www.cs.utexas.edu/users/EWD/ewd04xx/EWD447.PDF  

References
20) Pieter Vermaas and Pawel Garbacz, Functional Decomposition and Mereology in Engineering, in Volume 
editor: Anthonie Meijers. General editors: Dov M. Gabbay, Paul Thagard and John Woods, Handbook of the 
Philosophy of Science. Volume 9: Philosophy of Technology and Engineering Sciences, 2009. 
http://pietervermaas.nl/PDF/Pieter_Vermaas_FUNAPP_mereology_in_engineering.pdf
21) P. Simons and C. Dement. Aspects of the mereology of artifacts. In Formal Ontology, Volume 53 of Nijhoff 
International Philosophy Series, R. Poli and P. Simons, eds., pp. 255–276. Kluwer, 1996.
22) Alessandro Artale, Enrico Franconi, Nicola Guarino, Luca Pazzi, Part-Whole Relations in Object-Centered 
Systems: An Overview, Data & Knowledge Engineering { North-Holland, Elsevier. (December 21, 1995). 
http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.44.2766&rep=rep1&type=pdf
23) Franck Barbier, Brian Henderson-Sellers, Annig Le Parc-Lacayrelle, and Jean-Michel Bruel, Formalization of 
the Whole-Part Relationship in the Unified Modeling Language, IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, Vol. 
29, No. 5, May 2003. pgs. 459-470. https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Jean-
Michel_Bruel2/publication/3188327_Formalization_of_the_Whole-
Part_relationship_in_the_Unified_Modeling_Language/links/0deec517e11856f484000000.pdf
24) Franck Barbier, Brian Henderson-Sellers, Andreas L. Opdahl, and Martin Gogolla, The Whole-Part Relationship 
in the Unified Modeling Language: A New Approach, Chapter 12 in Keng Siau, Terry Halpin eds., Unified Modeling 
Language: Systems Analysis, Design and Development Issues, 2001. pgs. 196-210.  
http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.72.43&rep=rep1&type=pdf
25)  Cotnoir, A. J., “Strange parts: The metaphysics of non-classical mereologies”, Philosophy Compass, 8, 9 
(2013): 834–845. DOI: 10.1111/phc3.12061
26) Pietruszczak, A., “A general concept of being a part of a whole”, Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic, 55, 3 
(2014): 359–381. DOI: 10.1215/00294527-2688069 

References
27)  Cotnoir, A. J., and A. Bacon, “Non-wellfounded mereology”, Review of Symbolic Logic, 5, 2 (2012): 187–204. 
DOI: 10.1017/S1755020311000293
28) Rafał Gruszczyński, Achille C. Varzi, Mereology Then and Now, Logic and Logical Philosophy, Volume 24 
(2015), 409–427. DOI: 10.12775/LLP.2015.024 http://www.columbia.edu/~av72/papers/LLP_2015.pdf
29) Simons, P. M., Parts. A Study in Ontology, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1987. DOI: 
10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199241460.001.0001 

