 
1 
Is Mereology a Guide to Conceivability? 
[forthcoming in Mind] 
 
Daniel Giberman 
dgiberman@gmail.com 
 
 
Zombies are unconscious objects with conscious physical micro-duplicates. If zombies are possible then 
physicalism (the thesis that the physical determines the mental) is false. It has been argued that zombies are 
possible if conceivable for an agent with ideal rationality. At any rate, they are possible only if so conceivable. 
This essay uses a mereological constraint to highlight the fine-grained differences between actually conscious 
physical objects and certain of their actually consciousness-incapable proper parts. These mereological 
considerations form the basis of an argument by dilemma that zombies are inconceivable. Either an arbitrary 
actually conscious object might have had simpler consciousness-capable parts (and more complex 
consciousness-incapable parts) than it in fact has, or not. The affirmative horn leads to a version of panpsychism 
that is inconsistent with the ideal conceivability of zombies. The negative horn rules out zombies as incoherent. 
The upshot is a new reason to deny the conceivability of zombies. 
 
 
1. Introduction 
Suppose I have a microphysical twin: his most basic physical parts have the same intrinsic 
properties and stand in the same spatiotemporal relations as mine. But, while he is typing on 
his computer and blinking his eyes just as I am, his mental states wholly lack phenomenal 
character. There is nothing it is like for him to hear the clicking keys or see the text on his 
screen. He is a zombie. If he is a possible object then the thesis that, necessarily, the physical 
facts determine the mental facts (hereafter ‘physicalism’) is false. This kind of thought 
experiment probably has something in common with the back of your hand. You are also 
likely to be familiar with complaints about the claim that conceivability secures possibility, 
upon (a certain version of) which the zombie case turns. (If not, see Yablo 1993, Gendler and 
Hawthorne 2002, and Chalmers 2010a). A less familiar though not unprecedented complaint 
is that zombies are not even conceivable (Van Gulick 1993, Dennett 1995, Kirk 1999 and 
2008, Botterell 2001, Worley 2003, Marcus 2004). There are numerous ways to argue for 
inconceivability. One way is to claim that if we had powers of conception that reflected 
idealized rational ability and empirical knowledge of physical facts at the actual world then 

 
2 
we would find zombies conceptually self-defeating. Call this version of the inconceivability 
objection to zombies ‘ideal inconceivability’. Friends of zombies have replied that there is no 
plausible way to make ideal inconceivability sufficiently precise (Chalmers 2002a, 2010a, 
2012). Whatever information an ideal conceiver may have about physical microstructure, it 
will only ever entail information about structures that are derivable from physics; but 
consciousness facts, the friends of zombies say, are not facts about structures derivable from 
physics; so, for arbitrary physical microstructure X, not even an ideal agent will be able to 
rule out as inconceivable all states of affairs in which an unconscious object instantiates X. 
The present essay provides a new defence of ideal inconceivability by articulating a 
mereological constraint on actual bearers of phenomenal consciousness.1 According to the 
constraint, paradigmatic actually conscious objects are:  
(i) 
mereologically complex, and   
(ii) 
capable of losing some parts while retaining consciousness. 
It will be argued that properly respecting this constraint either renders zombies incoherent or 
leads to a zombie-undermining view of the relationship between consciousness and basic 
physical properties.   
The qualification ‘paradigmatic’ and the ascription of ‘consciousness’ as employed in 
the constraint require clarification. Paradigmatic actually conscious objects are mereologically 
complex macro objects that are ‘maximal’ in the loose but intuitive sense that they are not 
undetached proper parts of ordinary objects. Examples include human beings and other 
conscious animals. Examples of objects outside the class of paradigmatic conscious objects 
include undetached proper parts of human beings. On present usage, ‘conscious’ picks out an 
                                                        
1 Unless otherwise noted, I will use ‘consciousness’ as short for ‘phenomenal consciousness’. 
 

 
3 
intrinsic phenomenal property that may be exemplified equally by many of a given conscious 
object’s proper parts, though perhaps only upon detachment. So, on present usage, the claim 
that some mereologically basic physical object x—a quark, say—is conscious is the claim that 
x has the same general property of being a subject of phenomenal experience that you and I 
enjoy. It is not the claim that x merely has some proto-phenomenal property that would help 
ground full-blown phenomenal experience for some complex whole in the presence of an 
appropriate arrangement of other basic objects; nor is it the claim that x’s physical properties 
are ultimately grounded in some sort of idealism, though it is consistent with this latter claim.2  
Let us use ‘quark’ as an abbreviation for ‘basic element in a spatiotemporal-cum-
mereological physical structure’. And let us assume for the time being that no extracranial or 
particularly small proper parts of paradigmatic conscious objects like arms, cells, and quarks 
are actually conscious. My arms, cells, and individual quarks notwithstanding, I have many 
proper parts that either are conscious or would be if they were to be detached, for example, 
me-minus-an-arm. Call the disjunctive property of being either conscious simpliciter or 
conscious-if-detached ‘consciousness-capability’.3 A question of central importance in what 
follows can now be stated: exactly which objects outside the class of paradigmatic conscious 
objects are consciousness-capable, both actually and possibly? 
                                                        
2 See the discussion of ‘Type-F Monism’/‘panprotopsychism’ in (Chalmers 2002a).  
 
3 The difference between consciousness simpliciter and consciousness-capability is important for undetached 
proper parts whose putative conscious states would be very similar to those of the relevant whole object. For 
humans these are relatively large, brain-inclusive proper parts. For example me-minus-an-arm, if conscious 
while undetached, has conscious states that are extremely similar to my own. This gives rise to a puzzle about 
overpopulation of objects in my vicinity that have identical or near-identical conscious states. The distinction 
between consciousness simpliciter and consciousness-capability circumvents such puzzles. 
 
Since there is no such puzzle for small, brain-exclusive proper parts (for example, quarks), the 
distinction between consciousness simpliciter and consciousness-capability may be allowed to blur in discussion 
of such objects. Moreover, it is far less clear what the criteria for being detached or undetached are in the case of 
increasingly low-level proper parts like quarks than it is for high-level parts like arms. This is another reason to 
let the distinction blur in the low-level cases. Accordingly, consciousness-capability for quarks and similarly 
low-level parts will be understood as consciousness simpliciter in the sequel.  
   

 
4 
For any conscious creature x at arbitrary time t from whose microphysical structure we 
are asked to conceive a zombie, there will be a fine-grained mereological spectrum from the 
(conscious) whole of x at t to its (presumably consciousness-incapable) most basic physical 
proper part(s) at t.4 Take my case as an example. At one pole of the spectrum (the ‘whole 
pole’) will be me and at the other (the ‘simple pole’) will be my most basic physical 
spatiotemporal-cum-mereological unit, a ‘quark’ in present terminology. In between will be 
all my undetached proper parts. This is an expansive and varied lot. It includes the bearers of 
such descriptions as ‘me-minus-a-quark’, ‘me-minus-a-neuron’, ‘me-minus-an-arm’, ‘a fusion 
of the easternmost half of my left ear and three cells in my right big toe’, ‘a fusion of a quark 
in my brain and a quark in my arm’, and the like. Points on the spectrum correspond to quark 
cardinality. So the point on the spectrum adjacent to the whole pole contains all my parts that 
fit the description ‘me-minus-a-quark’; and the point adjacent to the simple pole contains all 
my parts that are two-quark fusions. 
The force of the mereological constraint is that it entails—still assuming that basic 
proper parts are never actually conscious—that somewhere along the mereological spectrum 
of a paradigmatic conscious object is a point containing that object’s mereologically minimal 
consciousness-capable undetached proper parts. This is the collection of parts every member 
x of which is such that:  
(i) if x were to become detached at the actual world, it would be conscious, and 
(ii) if x then lost even a single quark (without subsequent replacement by 
     another), it would fail to be conscious.  
                                                        
4 For simplicity, the relativization of microphysical structures to times will be left implicit hereafter.  
 

 
5 
There must also be a point containing some mereologically maximal consciousness-incapable 
undetached proper parts. This is the collection of parts every member x of which is such that:  
  (i) if x were to become detached at the actual world it would then need to gain as a 
      part only one additional quark (properly placed) in order to be conscious, and 
 
  (ii) no parts that satisfy the condition described in (i) are more complex than x. 
Call the segment on a given object’s mereological spectrum that is bounded by these two 
points its ‘mereological threshold for consciousness’ (MTC) since all the object’s parts that lie 
beyond one end of the threshold are consciousness-capable and all the parts that lie beyond 
the other end are consciousness-incapable.  
An ideal conceiver with ideal knowledge of actual physical facts would know exactly 
which proper parts of me are to be found within, without, and at the boundaries of my MTC. 
The ideal conceiver knows all physical facts because she must be able to fill in arbitrary 
details to check for ideal coherence when imagining a physical duplicate of the actual world. 
Among these facts are, for example, facts about exactly which portions of my brain could be 
removed at the actual world before I no longer exhibit outward signs of being conscious. That 
these outward signs (whether functional, behavioral, or causal) indicate consciousness is 
supported by the required assumption that I am not a zombie. Granted, facts about some such 
portions of my brain are currently available to non-ideal agents like us, but the facts available 
to us are much more coarse-grained than the facts available to the ideal conceiver. The 
importance of this difference in fineness of grain will be emphasized below.  
Notice that the knowledge here attributed to the ideal conceiver is not ideal knowledge 
of what is metaphysically possible for me—which would threaten to trivialize the dialectic of 
ideal conceivability—but merely ideal knowledge of exactly which of my parts are actually 

 
6 
consciousness-capable (on the assumption that I am not a zombie). Indeed, an ideal conceiver 
would know, with respect to any conscious creature x at the actual world, exactly which 
proper parts of x are actually consciousness-capable. That is, the ideal conceiver would know 
down to the finest grain in the spatiotemporal-cum-mereological spectrum which physical 
structures are sufficient for consciousness at the actual world.  
Once it is granted that an ideal conceiver would have knowledge of fine-grained 
differences between consciousness-capable and consciousness-incapable physical 
spatiotemporal-cum-mereological structures at the actual world, clarity is gained on two 
fronts. First, reasons beyond mere appeal to vaguely described ideal knowledge are furnished 
for thinking that facts about consciousness might well be inferable from facts about physical 
structure. There is great variation across actually consciousness-capable objects. Yet, for any 
actually consciousness-capable object x, there is little variation between an arbitrary 
mereologically minimal consciousness-capable undetached proper part of x—call it ‘y’—and 
an arbitrary mereologically maximal consciousness-incapable undetached proper part of y. So 
an ideal conceiver would have knowledge of links between physical structure and 
consciousness that are both applicable across a great variety of structures and highly sensitive 
to fine-grained structural differences. Such breadth and sensitivity of knowledge about how 
structure and consciousness actually relate is evidence (albeit inconclusive) of an ability to 
derive consciousness facts from structure facts across states of affairs that are physically 
similar to the actual world, including non-actual states of affairs that a lesser conceiver might 
believe to contain zombies.  
Second, resources are furnished for explaining why we lesser conceivers are tempted 
to think that the inconceivable is conceivable. Since our powers of conception and our 

 
7 
knowledge of physical structures are comparatively coarse-grained, we are susceptible to 
mistaking a mereologically maximal consciousness-incapable proper part of something for a 
consciousness-capable part when we attempt to imagine zombies. By analogy, suppose Smith 
is ‘eyeballing’ the doorway of a prospective apartment, attempting to conceive that his 
favourite sofa could fit through it. Unfortunately for Smith, the sofa is prohibitively wide by a 
miniscule margin. An ideal conceiver would know the measurements of the doorway and the 
sofa and consequently would rule out the sofa’s fitting as inconceivable, just as she would be 
able to discern me from my mereologically maximal consciousness-incapable proper parts. 
Smith, in contrast, mistakes the doorway in question for a sufficiently wide one in his attempt 
to conceive of the sofa’s fitting through, for he lacks knowledge of the relevant 
measurements. Similarly, we misidentify facts about my mereologically maximal 
consciousness-incapable undetached proper parts—such as the fact that they are 
consciousness-incapable and the fact that they exist detached in many states of affairs that are 
physically near-indiscernible from the actual world—as being facts about a zombie.  
In the next section, a new argument from the above mereological constraint to the 
ideal inconceivability of zombies is presented. The argument proposes a dilemma based on 
the tautology that either an object’s MTC is contingently located on its mereological spectrum 
or it is not. If it is then, for reasons to be explained, it is highly plausible that a version of 
panpsychism that necessitates consciousness for physical structures is possible. Yet if MTC 
location is not contingent then physical duplicates of actually conscious objects must be 
conscious, for they lie on the uniformly consciousness-capable ends of the relevant 
mereological spectra. Either way, zombies come out inconceivable. Section 3 discusses a 
typical zombie thought experiment and diagnoses where the defender of zombies errs in 

 
8 
taking it to be ideally conceivable. The general diagnosis is intimated in the above sofa 
example: we are prone to mistaking certain consciousness-incapable proper parts of conscious 
objects for the objects themselves. Section 4 considers and responds to objections, including 
the arguments against ideal inconceivability presented in (Chalmers 2002a).  
 
2. Parting with zombies 
The most basic zombie argument goes as follows. If zombies are metaphysically possible then 
physicalism is false; zombies are metaphysically possible; so physicalism is false. The second 
premiss is thought to follow from the conceivability of zombies and the thesis that 
conceivability entails metaphysical possibility. The relevant notion of conceivability in the 
most interesting version of the basic argument is ideal, positive conceivability: conceivability 
that respects imaginability and internal coherence upon ideal rational reflection (Chalmers 
2002b).  
 
The more sophisticated zombie argument (Chalmers 2010a) invokes a two-
dimensional modal framework, which distinguishes primary from secondary conceivability 
and possibility, respectively.5 (It is primarily conceivable that water is not H2O because it is 
coherently imaginable that something other than H2O plays the conceptual ‘water role’ of 
being a clear, flavourless liquid that constitutes rivers, etc. But it is not secondarily 
conceivable given that H2O uniquely plays this role at the actual world. A proposition or state 
of affairs is primarily possible if there is a world at which it is true or obtains, as primarily 
conceived.) The sophisticated zombie argument also has a more moderate, disjunctive 
conclusion that takes into account the nuance of recent attempts to characterize physicality. 
                                                        
5 Unless otherwise noted, ‘conceivability’ hereafter picks out ideal primary positive conceivability. 
 

 
9 
Here is the sophisticated version. Zombies are ideally, primarily conceivable; if zombies are 
ideally, primarily conceivable then they are primarily possible; if they are primarily possible 
then either they are secondarily possible or Russellian monism (roughly, the thesis that 
consciousness and physical dispositions are both underwritten by the same intrinsic properties 
of basic objects) is true; if they are secondarily possible then physicalism is false; so either 
physicalism is false or Russellian monism is true (Chalmers 2010a, p. 152). This disjunctive 
conclusion is a serious one for physicalism in so far as Russellian monism—which entails that 
we lack direct empirical access to the intrinsic properties that underwrite physics—deviates 
from empiricism in a way that is uncomfortable to many physicalists. 
 
The sophisticated zombie argument is valid. What is controversial, of course, is 
whether it is sound. The first premiss is the target of the present essay. The second premiss 
and its kin have been the target of many others. The role of the second premiss for present 
purposes will be discussed in the next paragraph. The thought in favour of the third premiss is 
that the most plausible way to separate the primary possibility of zombies from the secondary 
possibility is to trade—as Russellian monism does—on the distinction between the theoretical 
roles of physical properties and the players of those roles at the actual world. To the extent 
that it is plausible that the players play their roles only contingently, primary and secondary 
possibilities involving physical indiscernibility come apart. Finally, given certain plausible 
assumptions about the modal nature of physicalism, the fourth premise follows without much 
controversy from the concept of a zombie. 
Much like the simple version of the zombie argument, the sophisticated version 
invokes a conceivability-possibility linking sub-premiss as the basis for its second premiss: 
 

 
10 
(CP) Ideal, primary conceivability entails primary possibility. 
 
It will be argued presently that (CP) and some plausible observations about the mereological 
constraint articulated in section 1 jointly entail that zombies are not primarily conceivable. So 
the sophisticated argument is unsound.  
To begin to set the stage for the anti-zombie argument, we should note that the ideal 
primary conceivability of zombies requires that what I will call ‘physical panpsychism’ is 
primarily impossible. Physical panpsychism is the thesis that phenomenal consciousness is an 
intrinsic categorical property of mereologically basic particulars, which property plays a 
constitutive, underwriting role in (i) the fundamental properties of ‘final’ physics at the actual 
world and (ii) the exemplification of consciousness by more complex structures. To see that 
the primary conceivability of zombies is inconsistent with the primary possibility of physical 
panpsychism, notice that physical panpsychism has actuality built in: it is a thesis about actual 
final physics. So even the primary possibility of physical panpsychism would entail that 
actual physics presupposes consciousness. Consequently, one cannot coherently conceive of a 
state of affairs that is physically indiscernible from the actual world—as required by the 
primary conceivability of zombies—unless either the physical structures in that state of affairs 
are conscious or physical panpsychism is assumed primarily impossible. This consequence 
holds even if the state of affairs in question is, per primary conceivability, not assumed to 
match a posteriori facts about the actual world, for the very content of physical 
panpsychism—if not rejected as impossible—entails facts about the deep nature of the 
physical at the actual world.  

 
11 
Continuing with the stage setting, we should recall that the mereological constraint 
articulated in section 1 implies the existence of a mereological threshold for consciousness 
(MTC). If we set panpsychism aside, the lower bound of my MTC probably includes some 
middle-sized proper parts of my brain; the lower bound of an octopus’s MTC probably 
includes some middle-sized proper parts of its brain; and traditionally unconscious objects 
like mountains and popsicles do not have MTC’s at all. The question of central importance in 
the sequel is whether a given object’s MTC is only contingently located on that object’s 
mereological spectrum (assuming its mereological spectrum itself to be held fixed across 
worlds). Put differently: could a physical twin of an actually conscious object have simpler 
consciousness-capable proper parts or more-complex consciousness-incapable proper parts 
than the object actually has? The argument will be that this question introduces a detrimental 
dilemma for the proponent of zombies. If the answer is negative then zombies are 
inconceivable for an ideal conceiver. Yet if the answer is affirmative then physical 
panpsychism is possible and, for reasons described in the preceding paragraph, zombies again 
are ideally inconceivable. Here, finally, is the argument in more detail. 
 
1. If zombies are ideally primarily positively conceivable then physical panpsychism is not 
primarily possible. (See two paragraphs up.) 
 
2.1 For arbitrary actually conscious physical structure x, either it is ideally primarily 
positively conceivable that x’s MTC could have been different or it is not. (Tautology) 
 

 
12 
Suppose it is not. Then x’s MTC is guaranteed to have an upper bound (which is less than x 
itself) in every conceivable state of affairs in which x exists. So, since every point on x’s 
mereological spectrum beyond the MTC’s upper bound contains consciousness-capable parts 
of x, it is inconceivable for x itself not to be conscious. Since x is an arbitrary actually 
conscious physical structure, it follows that zombies are inconceivable. For the sake of 
continuing the argument, then, the present supposition is to be rejected. So: 
 
2.2 It is ideally primarily positively conceivable that x’s MTC could have been different. 
 
3. If it is ideally primarily positively conceivable that x’s MTC could have been different then 
it is ideally primarily positively conceivable that physical panpsychism is true. (This premiss 
is defended below.) 
 
4. If it is ideally primarily positively conceivable that physical panpsychism is true then 
physical panpsychism is primarily possible. (CP) 
 
5. Physical panpsychism is primarily possible. (2.2, 3, 4, modus ponens) So: 
 
6. Zombies are not ideally primarily positively conceivable. (1, 5, modus tollens) 
 
Only premiss 3 requires further argument (though one might also object to the idea of 
a precisely bounded MTC, on which more in section 3 below).  

 
13 
Here is the argument for premiss 3. Within the present dialectic, there are no criteria 
other than imaginability and expected coherence upon ideal rational reflection for determining 
where a given object’s MTC could conceivably fall on its mereological spectrum, given that it 
could conceivably fall differently than it actually does. And from the non-committal 
perspective of the antecedent of premiss 3, all physical spatiotemporal-cum-mereological 
structures are equal with respect to being imaginably and coherently consciousness-capable. 
So all physical spatiotemporal-cum-mereological structures are equal with respect to whether 
we presently have reason to believe that an ideal agent would conceive that they are 
consciousness-capable.6 It follows that it is conceivable that the lower bound of an object’s 
MTC could fall anywhere on its mereological spectrum, including the simple pole. Yet once it 
is granted as conceivable that mereologically basic physical items at the simple pole 
exemplify phenomenal consciousness, there is no bar to the conceivability of the rest of 
physical panpsychism. There is no apparent reason to deny that an ideal conceiver would 
allow as coherently imaginable that the basic items’ consciousness (i) underwrites the items’ 
fundamental physical properties and (ii) gives rise to the consciousness of more complex 
objects like brains.  
One might worry that this argument for premiss 3 is too quick. If we consider more 
nuanced conceptions of what it is to be a fundamental physical property, the worry goes, then 
reasons emerge for thinking that an ideal conceiver might well reject the connection between 
conscious basic objects and the underwriting of fundamental physical properties. Following 
(Stoljar 2001), we should distinguish between a conception of physical theories as committed 
to both categorical and dispositional properties, on the one hand, and a conception of physical 
                                                        
6 See (Brown 2010) for a related defense of the parity between the roles played by conceivability in pro- and 
anti-zombie arguments, respectively. 
 

 
14 
theories as committed only to dispositional properties, on the other. The former conception, 
which is concerned in part with categorical properties of objects, is the ‘o-conception’ of the 
physical. The latter, concerned only with the dispositional structure tracked by physical 
theories, is the ‘t-conception’.7 The worry for premiss 3 is that the exemplification of 
categorical consciousness by spatiotemporal-cum-mereologically basic objects may well be 
insufficient for securing the dispositional properties that, according to the t-conception of the 
physical, comprise fundamental physics. This is because, on certain plausible ways of 
understanding the nature of dispositional properties, no specific categorical properties are 
such that their exemplification is sufficient for the exemplification of dispositional properties 
by a basic object in a given state of affairs (even if dispositional properties must be grounded 
in some or other categorical properties). So the basic objects’ consciousness, which is a 
categorical property, cannot ‘underwrite’ or be ‘constitutive of’ dispositions in the sense 
required by the t-conceptual view of physical panpsychism since no categorical properties 
whatsoever are equipped for that task. Rather, the dispositions may be held fixed 
independently of the intrinsic nature of the categorical bases. Accordingly, if the t-conception 
is correct and if disposition distributions are independent of categorical distributions in the 
way described, then an ideal conceiver would reject the leap from the exemplification of 
categorical consciousness by basic objects to any associated underwriting of fundamental 
physical properties, rendering physical panpsychism less than ideally coherent. 
One response to this worry for the coherence of physical panpsychism is to motivate 
the o-conception of the physical, for the o-conception allows a place for categorical 
                                                        
7 Strictly speaking, one’s version of the t-conception turns on one’s particular physical theory. Accordingly, the 
t-conception need not exclude categorical properties, for one might take physics to range over categorical 
properties. However, since categorical-friendly t-conception is uninteresting for present purposes, I simplify 
exposition by building commitment to exclusively dispositional physical theories into the t-conception itself. 
 

 
15 
consciousness among the properties responsible for the physical character of basic objects; 
and this allowance is independent of concerns about dispositions.8 One motivating factor for 
the o-conception is that it meets a plausible criterion of adequacy on any conception of the 
physical, namely, that it must cover all properties exemplified in spacetime, even if it does not 
thereby rule out extra-spatiotemporal entities. The t-conception, by contrast, leaves open the 
possibility that some properties exemplified at spatiotemporal locations are extra-physical. So, 
this first response to the worry for physical panpsychism concludes, the o-conception is 
superior to the t-conception. While this response carries some force, it will be worthwhile to 
consider a second response that treats the t-conception on its own terms, for theorists friendly 
toward or neutral about zombies may hold the t-conception for independent reasons.  
The second response to the worry that the t-conception threatens the coherence of 
physical panpsychism requires an interlude on the metaphysics of properties. The response is 
that the worry turns on an imperspicuous ontology of property exemplification that overlooks 
two distinctions. The first distinction is between properties (which have been understood 
variously to be universals, classes of tropes, sets of objects, meanings of predicates…) and 
property exemplifications (which have been understood variously to be universals-at-
locations, universal-bare particular pairings, tropes, states of affairs…).9 My sweater and the 
sky both exemplify the property blueness, but they do so with distinct exemplifications of 
                                                        
8 See (Stoljar 2001) for more points in favor of the o-conception.  
 
9 Whether understood as tropes, universals-at-locations, or universal-bare-particular pairings, property 
exemplifications are spatiotemporally located (see Campbell 1981 and 1990, Simons 1994, Armstrong 1978, 
1988, 1989, 2004, and 2010). The chief difference between trope theory and universal realism concerns 
numerical identity: the distribution of a multiply-exemplified qualitative property in terms of trope theory 
involves more than one trope; in terms of universals it involves just one universal but more than one location. 
There are myriad theories of how ‘substantial’ objects like tomatoes relate to tropes or universals, respectively 
(see my 2012), but the details are unimportant for present purposes. As is about to be made clear in the text, the 
important point is that—however a given ontology of properties describes property exemplifications—the t-
conception does best to treat the claim that the basic physical items are conscious as saying that spatiotemporal-
cum-mereologically basic disposition exemplifications are conscious. 
 

 
16 
blueness. One way to recognize that the exemplifications are distinct is to recognize that the 
sky’s blueness exemplification takes up much more space than does the sweater’s. The second 
distinction is between a disposition exemplification and a categorical basis for a disposition.10 
The worry about the coherence of physical panpsychism highlights the fact that, on the t-
conception, the physical properties—the dispositions—do not depend on specific categorical 
properties (even if they contingently are grounded by some or other categorical base). 
However, the most basic physical elements in the world’s spatiotemporal-cum-mereological 
structure, on the t-conception, are just really spatially small disposition exemplifications, 
which themselves are neither traditional objects or substances, nor categorical bases (thus talk 
of ‘items’ in the argument for premiss 3). Rather, they are property exemplifications in a 
sense that is neutral with respect to debates in the ontology of properties over tropes, 
universals, bundle theory, and bare particulars. Through the lens of the t-conception, the most 
perspicuous way to understand consciousness-capability for basic physical elements in some 
creature’s spatiotemporal-cum-mereological structure is as entailing that a given disposition 
exemplification—whether a concrete trope or a universal-exemplified-at-a-location or a 
universal-paired-with-a-bare-particular—is itself conscious.11  
For example, consider some maximally specific charge quantity F as understood in 
contemporary physics. Now consider two metaphysically possible mereologically basic 
exemplifications of F, Fx and Fy, where Fx is conscious (there is something it is like to be that 
very disposition exemplification) and Fy is not. Are Fx and Fy physically equivalent? Yes and 
                                                        
10 It is important to recognize that disposition exemplifications are not the same as disposition manifestations. 
Unmanifested dispositions still have exemplifications. 
 
11 Notice that this approach does not render consciousness a polyadic relation. Properties of disposition 
exemplifications need not be polyadic. 
 

 
17 
no. Yes in the sense that both bear the dispositional profile of the relevant charge property. 
But no in the sense that F—despite being a maximally specific charge quantity—turns out 
(given the example’s stipulation that Fx and Fy  are both possible) to have two kinds of 
exemplifications when distributed across metaphysically possible worlds: it can either have 
conscious exemplifications or unconscious exemplifications. Thus, on the assumption that a 
complete physics will account for all possible manner of physical property exemplifications, 
conscious and unconscious F exemplifications are distinct physical elements. Abstracting now 
from charge F to consider any fundamental physical disposition Φ, there will be conscious 
and unconscious exemplifications of Φ distributed across metaphysically possible worlds. The 
physical panpsychist claim that all the basic physical elements are conscious (which, through 
the lens of the t-conception, amounts to the claim that all the basic disposition 
exemplifications are conscious) entails that, for all dispositions Φ involved in the basic 
physical elements, only the conscious exemplifications of Φ obtain. Accordingly, each Φ 
exemplification will exemplify the phenomenal property what it is like to be a Φ 
exemplification. Moreover, the phenomenal property what it is like to be a Φ exemplification 
cannot characterize Ψ exemplifications, for any property Ψ ≠ Φ; it can only characterize Φ 
exemplifications. So the distribution of the categorical phenomenal property what it is like to 
be a Φ exemplification is sufficient to fix the distribution of the disposition Φ. It follows that 
the ascription of consciousness to all the basic physical elements of arbitrary world w 
determines the distribution of all the fundamental physical dispositions at w, even if those 
dispositions are not fixed by any categorical base exemplified by the substantial object in 
question. This consequence vindicates the coherence of physical panpsychism, even while 

 
18 
viewed through the lens of the t-conception and even while suspending endorsement of the 
claim that an object’s categorical properties fix its dispositional profile.12  
The interlude on dispositions is not quite complete, however. Some ontologists may 
reject any numerical distinction between disposition exemplifications and categorical bases. 
For example, David Armstrong (1996) holds that dispositions are contingently identical to 
their categorical bases: disposition F in this world just is its base G (a categorical universal or 
collection of categorical universals); but in other worlds it just is base H (≠G). One problem 
for this view is that it contravenes the rigidity of property names (see Choi and Fara 2012, 
who reference Prior et al. 1982). But I think the view as stated is not quite what the 
Armstrongian should say when it comes to exemplifications of dispositions. The more 
perspicuous thought is that disposition exemplifications are not categorical exemplifications 
simpliciter, but rather categorical exemplifications playing some causal role with respect to 
other categorical exemplifications. In Armstrong’s ontology, this is to say that disposition 
exemplifications are really exemplifications of higher order Armstrongian states of affairs: 
exemplified relations between (or among) first order categorical universals.13 The relatum that 
causes the exemplification of the other relata is the categorical base of the disposition; but the 
disposition exemplification requires the exemplifications of the causally efficacious relatum 
and all the relevantly caused relata (or relata that would-be-caused-upon-manifestation). So 
through the t-conceptual lens of the Armstrongian view, the most basic disposition 
                                                        
12 This second response does not render the t-conception inconsistent with the conceivability of zombies, for it 
may be that only highly mereologically complex exemplifications of dispositions are ever conscious and that 
these are conscious only contingently. What the response commits the t-conception to is the claim that if the most 
mereologically basic physical items are conscious then mereologically basic disposition exemplifications are 
conscious. 
 
13 Armstrong (1996 and 2010, p. 50) approaches the spirit of this suggestion when he emphasizes that manifested 
dispositions are explained by laws of nature, which in his ontology are just a special, causally relevant subset of 
second-order relations between/among universals.  
 

 
19 
exemplifications will involve not just one categorical relatum but rather exemplifications of 
the second order relation of causation between/among two or more exemplifications of 
categorical universals. The most perspicuous way of understanding physical panpsychism via 
this Armstrongian ontological take on the t-conception, then, is as attributing consciousness to 
these exemplifications of causal relations. The relevant panpsychist claim is not that there is 
something it is like to be an electron, but rather that there is something it is like to be an-
electron-causing-others-to-repel, or some such. The point in defence of premiss 3 still goes 
through on this picture. These causal relation exemplifications are the physically basic items, 
and an arbitrary world where all basic items are conscious and have their consciousness 
properties fixed will thereby have its distribution of physical properties fixed. The key 
ontological point remains the distinction between disposition exemplifications and their 
categorical bases, even for theorists who deny that there is anything over and above an 
electron’s categorical properties that determine its causal profile at a given world.  
To the extent that the present defence of premiss 3 is cogent, argument 1-6 provides 
new reason to doubt the conceivability of zombies. 
 
3. Saving the phenomena: a test case 
Why then do many theorists take zombies to be ideally positively conceivable? For the 
purpose of examining a typical zombie thought experiment, let us stipulate temporarily that 
panpsychism is false and that only complex macro objects are capable of phenomenal 
consciousness. Suppose that two whitetail deer are such that their mereologically basic parts 
are physically isomorphic. However, one of them, Bambi, is experiencing the taste of berries 
and the other, Zambi, lacks any phenomenal experience.  

 
20 
Call the state of affairs described in the thought experiment ‘MicroDup’ since it fixes 
Bambi and Zambi as microphysical duplicates. Let us assume that the lower bound of 
Bambi’s MTC is located at the mereological level of some modest proper part of her brain, 
which serves as one of her mereologically minimal consciousness-capable proper parts. Call 
this brain-part ‘Min’ and the microphysically duplicate part of Zambi ‘Z-Min’. Consider now 
a state of affairs exactly like MicroDup except that in it Zambi is missing an important 
collection of quarks. The absence of this collection precludes the existence of Z-min or any 
other duplicates of any of Bambi’s consciousness-capable parts, but yields a consciousness-
incapable near-duplicate of Min that we may call ‘Z-min*’, and thus a consciousness-
incapable near-duplicate of Bambi. Call this second state of affairs that is exactly like 
MicroDup except that in it Zambi has no duplicates of any of Bambi’s consciousness-capable 
parts ‘MicroDupe’.  
The problem for advocates of the original Bambi/Zambi example and its ilk is that it is 
not clear whether the temptation to endorse it as conceivable is due solely to the physical 
similarity between MicroDup and MicroDupe, rather than being linked to any legitimate 
coherence of supervenience-failure. This is a problem because Zambi is not a zombie in 
MicroDupe. She is merely a duplicate of one of Bambi’s mereologically maximal (or near 
maximal) consciousness-incapable undetached proper parts. Those who conclude by 
introspection that zombies are conceivable do so because they mistake states of affairs 
relevantly like MicroDupe for states of affairs relevantly like MicroDup. 
 
Of course, an ideal conceiver would never mistake MicroDupe for MicroDup. But this 
does not show that zombies are conceivable. As we saw in section 1, an ideal conceiver would 
have such broad and sensitive knowledge of the correlation between Bambi’s physical parts 

 
21 
and the actual capability of being conscious (just as we non-ideal conceivers have coarse-
grained knowledge of this correlation) that she might well reject as confused the suggestion 
that Zambi is unconscious in MicroDup. To the extent that we are tempted to think otherwise, 
we betray our ignorance of the fine-grained differences between actually consciousness-
capable physical structures and their mereologically maximal consciousness-incapable 
undetached proper parts.  
 
An important clarification is in order. The present diagnosis of the zombie theorist’s 
error does not require that the boundaries of MTC’s be single points on a given object’s 
mereological spectrum. It may be instead that there is some extended sub-threshold of 
borderline cases between parts that clearly are consciousness-capable and those that clearly 
are not. The diagnosis still goes through. All that is needed is a difficult-to-recognize cut-off 
between the clear cases and the borderline cases. Even if one were to deny that it is plausible 
that a single quark or relatively small collection of quarks could make a difference with 
respect to consciousness at the actual world, one need not deny that such fine-grained 
differences mark borderline from non-borderline cases. And even if one were concerned with 
hierarchies of meta-borderline cases, at some point in the hierarchy the mereological 
differences between distinct states of affairs would be sufficiently fine-grained as to obscure, 
for the non-ideal conceiver, which state of affairs plays which role in a given thought 
experiment. 
 
 
 
 

 
22 
4. Objections and replies 
4.1 T-conception objection redux 
In defence of premiss 3 of argument 1-6, you suggest disposition exemplifications as the most 
perspicuous bearers of consciousness for the t-conceptual treatment of conscious basic 
physical items; and you are neutral as to whether these disposition exemplifications are 
tropes or universals-at-locations (including second order universals-at-locations to 
accommodate Armstrongian ontologies of dispositions). But neither tropes nor universals are 
eligible to be conscious. Ascribing consciousness to them is a category mistake. 
 
Response: The claim made in defence of premiss 3 is conditional in a way that this objection 
understates. The claim is that if the most basic physical elements in a given spatiotemporal-
cum-mereological structure are conscious then the most perspicuous t-conceptual treatment is 
to ascribe consciousness to the most mereologically basic disposition exemplifications. 
Friends of the t-conception who reject this approach and instead ascribe consciousness to the 
objects that exemplify the categorical properties that ground the dispositions fail to ascribe 
consciousness to physical items and thereby fail to respect the antecedent of the conditional 
claim. Ascribing consciousness to the disposition tropes or located universals themselves is 
thus the most promising strategy by default. Those who charge this strategy with making a 
category mistake simply motivate the o-conceptual treatment of the conditional’s antecedent. 
Moreover, given how unfamiliar mereologically basic conscious items are to ordinary 
experience, it is far from clear that they must be traditional substances instead of tropes or 
universals-at-locations. The charge of category mistake is difficult to validate in 
conceivability debates involving consciousness. 

 
23 
 
4.2 The tu quoque objection 
If the bounds of an arbitrary actually conscious object’s MTC can conceivably move 
anywhere along the object’s mereological spectrum, then it is conceivable that the upper 
bound (i.e. the point on the spectrum that contains the mereologically maximal 
consciousness-incapable proper part(s)) contains the object itself: a zombie. So the reasoning 
that leads to premiss 3 of argument 1-6 also leads to the conceivability of zombies. 
 
Response: The first part of the argument for premiss 3 of argument 1-6 is that there is as good 
a conceivability argument for conscious mereologically basic physical items as there is for 
zombies. This is a problem for friends of zombies because conceivability arguments are the 
primary basis for zombie endorsement. This is not the case for physical panpsychism, which 
may be independently defended for its theoretical power, elegance, unity, etc. So, while it is a 
problem for friends of zombies that their conceivability standards lead equally to physical 
panpsychism and zombies, it is not a problem for physical panpsychists. Moreover, 
physicalists in general are free to deny that MTC’s are contingent, in which case the Tu 
Quoque Objection does not apply. Physicalists will be happy to end argument 1-6 by taking 
the latter disjunct of premiss 2.1, precluding the need for premiss 3. 
 
4.3 The NFM objection 
Some theorists (Wilson 2006) will deny the (ideal positive) conceivability of physical 
panpsychism because they hold, through independent argument, a ‘no fundamental mentality’ 
thesis (NFM) according to which any adequate understanding of the physical will preclude 

 
24 
fundamental mental properties. If NFM is true then physical panpsychism is incoherent and 
the consequent of premiss 3 of argument 1-6 is necessarily false.  
 
Response: Either the NFM theorist will be a physicalist or not. If so, she will be happy to end 
argument 1-6 by taking the latter disjunct of premiss 2.1, leaving her dissatisfaction with 
premiss 3 inconsequential. If not, she will allow the conceivability of an idealist panpsychism 
that is parallel to physical panpsychism in all presently relevant respects. According to this 
idealist version, the fundamental properties are strictly mental even though they underwrite all 
properties required by current or ‘final’ physics. Idealist panpsychism works just as well in 
argument 1-6 as does physical panpsychism. The only difference is whether the fundamental 
consciousness properties count as compatible with physicalism or not, but this makes no 
difference with respect to being inconsistent with the possibility of zombies.14 So whether or 
not its proponents are physicalists, NFM has no bearing on the soundness of 1-6. 
 
4.4 The non-zombies objection 
Conceivability arguments against physicalism (Chalmers 2002a, 2010a) do not turn on the 
conceivability of zombies per se, but merely on the conceivability that the physical facts do 
not strictly determine the phenomenal facts. Zombies are one putative counterexample, but 
partial zombies (physical twins who only partially lack consciousness) and inverts (physical 
twins with varied specific phenomenal states) work just as well against physicalism. So even if 
zombies are inconceivable, conceivability arguments from partial zombies and inverts still go 
through against physicalism. 
                                                        
14 Chalmers (2002a) makes this point. 
 

 
25 
 
Response: Argument 1-6 works just as well against partial zombies as it does against full 
zombies. A partial zombie has all the same physical proper parts as its fully conscious 
counterpart, but ex hypothesi it does not have all the same consciousness-capable parts. So it 
is inconsistent with both the necessity of MTC location and physical panpsychism. The case is 
not as straightforward for inverts, but a plausible tweak to argument 1-6 allows it to work 
against them as well. Just as an ideal conceiver’s physical knowledge enables her to fill in 
arbitrary details about consciousness-capability for fine-grained actual physical structures 
(which are assumed not to be zombies), so it enables her to fill in arbitrary details about 
consciousness specificity for fine-grained actual physical structures (which are assumed not to 
be inverts relative to each other). For example, she would be able to deduce exactly which 
structures are sufficient for outward signs (whether functional, behavioural, or causal) of 
specific phenomenal states, giving her extremely fine-grained information linking structure to 
specific phenomenal states. So the ideal agent’s knowledge of MTC location for arbitrary 
actually conscious object x will be augmented with information about the specifics of the 
conscious states of which x’s parts are capable. But once this is granted, argument 1-6 goes 
through just as well when ‘zombies’ in premisses 1 and 6 is replaced with ‘inverts’. Physical 
panpsychism is inconsistent with inverts, and the latter disjunct of premiss 2.1 renders inverts 
incoherent, given that facts about MTC’s now include phenomenal specifics. After all, if 
MTC location and phenomenal specifics are necessary (per the latter disjunct of 2.1), then no 
microphysical duplicate of an actual object in phenomenal state Q could fail to be in Q. 
 
 

 
26 
4.5 The ‘I just can’ objection  
Look, I understand the difference between MicroDup and MicroDupe perfectly well, and I 
know that I can conceive of MicroDup-plus-unconscious-Zambi just by trying.  
 
Response: This objection misses the point of ideal inconceivability. Consider again the sofa 
example from section 1. Smith owns a certain sofa that is barely too big to fit through the 
doorway of a prospective apartment. Call the state of affairs described in the example 
‘SofaBig’, since the sofa is prohibitively big. Consider a second state of affairs, ‘SofaSmall’, 
which is indiscernible from SofaBig except that in it Smith’s sofa is just small enough to fit 
through the doorway. Assume that Smith is ignorant of the precise widths of the sofas and 
doorway in each state of affairs. He is ignorant of the widths, but perfectly able to understand 
what it is for them to be different widths. If we were to teach Smith all the present 
terminology without telling him which state of affairs is actual, he might well mimic the 
proponent of the ‘I just can’ objection: ‘Look, I understand perfectly well what the difference 
is between SofaBig and SofaSmall, namely, a few millimetres in respective sofa length. Still, 
I can conceive of my sofa [where his utterance of ‘my sofa’ is an indexical reference to the 
sofa exactly as it is in SofaBig] fitting through that doorway [demonstrating the doorway in 
SofaBig].’ But Smith is confused. SofaBig-plus-fitting contradicts actual physics. The worry 
for those who endorse the conceivability of zombies is that they are mistaken in a way 
analogous to Smith.  
 
 
 

 
27 
4.6 Chalmers’s type-C objection  
According to David Chalmers (2012), ideal inconceivability presupposes what he calls ‘type-
C materialism’, the view that an ideal understanding of the nature of consciousness would 
close the epistemic gap between the physical and the phenomenal, revealing that zombies are 
inconceivable. But Chalmers (2002a) has already argued as follows that type-C materialism 
is untenable: 
1. Physical truths concern only structure and dynamics. 
2. Only further truths about structure and dynamics are deducible from truths about 
structure and dynamics.  
3. Truths about consciousness are not truths about structure and dynamics. 
So, even for an ideal cognitive agent, truths about consciousness cannot be deduced from 
physical truths.  
 
Response: Chalmers’s (2002a) argument for his premiss 3 is uncompelling. He defends 
premiss 3 in three ways. First, he cites the knowledge argument (Jackson 1982). Mary is 
omniscient with respect to physical facts about colour but ignorant of what it is like to 
experience colour phenomenally; so phenomenal experience outstrips the physical. But it 
would be a significant concession if the conceivability of zombies turned on the 
independently controversial knowledge argument. Moreover, the physicalist who endorses 
ideal inconceivability is unlikely to be moved by the knowledge argument. Just as an ideal 
conceiver would catch a coherence-blocker that we do not when we think we conceive of 
zombies, so she would catch a coherence-blocker that we do not when we think we conceive 
of Mary. For example, such a physicalist will not want to rule out the suggestion that when 

 
28 
one ideally grasps the fundamental microstructure of mental states that feature red qualia (as 
Mary would be able to do), one actually has a corresponding internal experience with a red 
quale. This is far-fetched, perhaps, but it is just one case that the ideal inconceivability-
endorsing physicalist is free to use to flesh out the contention that an ideal conception of the 
Mary thought experiment would betray incoherence. 
 
Chalmers’ second claim in defence of premiss 3 is that for any structural or dynamical 
state, one can conceive of its instantiation sans consciousness. But this is unhelpful since it is 
the very case that the advocate of ideal inconceivability rejects.  
 
Chalmers’ third and final claim in defence of premiss 3 is that  
 
…to resist [premiss 3], an opponent would have to hold that explaining structure and 
dynamics thereby suffices to explain consciousness. The only remotely plausible way 
to do this would be to embrace type-A materialism [according to which there is in fact 
no deep epistemic gap between physics and consciousness]…’ (Chalmers 2002a, p. 
259, italics in original).  
 
Chalmers (2002a) argues at length against type-A materialism. 
 
But Chalmers’s description of his opponent’s commitment here is ambiguous. What 
does it mean to ‘explain consciousness’? If it means to incite a conceptual revolution that 
illuminates some unknown features of the nature of phenomenal consciousness and its 
relation to the physical world, then the quoted claim is plausible. And it may be that 
Chalmers’s type-C materialist is committed to such an epistemically robust explanatory link 
between structure and consciousness. But if so then the present essay is not best construed as 

 
29 
advocating type-C materialism, and Chalmers is too quick in classifying ideal inconceivability 
as a marker of type-C materialism (or perhaps the taxonomy needs some sub-distinctions). If, 
by contrast, the claim to ‘explain consciousness’ via structure and dynamics is construed as 
the claim that ideal knowledge of physical structure will entail knowledge of whether 
consciousness is instantiated by an arbitrary structure, then the sort of knowledge of structure 
ascribed to the ideal conceiver in this essay is capable of ‘explaining consciousness’ 
independently of type-A materialism. The ideal conceiver described here will find zombies 
inconceivable even if she does not fully bridge the epistemic gap. 
 
This is because the sense of explanation for the ideal conceiver described here is 
ontological, not epistemic. It does not purport to close the epistemic gap (though the question 
of whether it might in fact help to close it remains live). Rather, it purports to articulate the 
complete catalogue of exactly those actual physical structures that are sufficient for 
consciousness-capability across all physically resembling states of affairs. We may 
understand this catalogue as containing two lists. The first lists all actually consciousness-
capable physical structures. The second lists all non-actual states of affairs in which the 
structures on the first list are consciousness-capable. If argument 1-6 of section 2 is sound 
then this second list will be attainable from the first and will contain all states of affairs that 
are physical duplicates of the actual world. With possession of this catalogue, one can deduce 
that zombies are incoherent even if one leaves open certain questions about why the catalogue 
contains exactly the items it does. 
 
A final analogy may be helpful. Some United States pennies bear a letter near the date 
marker on the obverse side, denoting the location at which they were minted. Denver (‘D’) is 
the most commonly denoted, though there are also mints in Philadelphia (‘P’) and a few other 

 
30 
locations, none of which have a name that begins with ‘Z’. Consequently, there are no U.S. 
pennies (as of early 2012) that bear a ‘Z’ on the obverse side. At any rate, let us assume as 
much for the sake of this example. Consider now a state of affairs S that is physically 
indiscernible from the actual world at the present moment. Given that no U. S. pennies bear a 
‘Z’ on the obverse side at the present moment, it is inconceivable for an ideal agent that S 
contains a U. S. penny that bears a ‘Z’ on the obverse side. For short, let us say that ‘S-plus-Z-
pennies’ is inconceivable. Now suppose that I know nothing about the system for denoting 
U.S. mint locations on pennies; I simply know that some U.S. pennies have a single letter near 
the date marker on the obverse side. My ignorance affords something of an epistemic gap for 
me between an arbitrary coin’s being a U.S. penny and its bearing a certain letter near the date 
marker on the obverse side. Compare a conceiver who has a complete and accurate catalogue 
of extant U.S. pennies, including facts about which pennies bear which letters, but who is as 
ignorant as I am supposing myself to be of the system for denoting mint location on pennies. I 
may well find S-plus-Z-pennies conceivable even though the conceiver in question would not. 
The conceiver with the complete penny catalogue would have an ontological explanation for 
the inconceivability of S-plus-Z-pennies. But, and here is the point of the analogy, the 
conceiver in question would not be able to close the epistemic gap between an arbitrary coin’s 
being a U.S. penny and its bearing a specific letter on the obverse side, for in order to close 
that gap she would have to know, inter alia, that the letters abbreviate names of U.S. mint 
locations and that no U.S. mint locations have a name beginning with ‘Z’. Knowledge of 
these facts is not entailed by knowledge of the catalogue that provides the ontological 
explanation for the inconceivability of S-plus-Z-pennies.  

 
31 
Similarly, knowledge sufficient to close the epistemic gap between consciousness and 
physical structure may not follow from one’s possession of a complete catalogue of the 
myriad actual physical structures that are sufficient for consciousness-capability across all 
physically resembling worlds, for such a catalogue need not contain explanatory criteria for 
its precise contents. Never the less, any agent in possession of this catalogue will reject 
zombies as inconceivable since all actually conscious physical structures will be listed in it, 
entailing that they have no possible unconscious counterparts in physically duplicate worlds. 
If the arguments above are sound then the ideal agent knows the catalogue well.15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                        
15 Thank you to Alex Skiles, Elanor Taylor, Donovan Wishon, and the editor of this journal for helpful 
comments on ancestors of this essay. 

 
32 
References 
 
Armstrong, David 1978: Universals and Scientific Realism, v. I. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
     Press. 
 
——1988: “Can a Naturalist Believe in Universals?” in Ullmann-Margalit 1988, pp. 103-16. 
 
——1989: Universals: an Opinionated Introduction. Boulder: Westview. 
 
——2004: Truth and Truthmakers. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 
——2010: Sketch For a Systematic Metaphysics. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 
Armstrong, D., Martin, C.B., & Place, U.T. 1996: Dispositions: A Debate. London: Routledge. 
 
Botterell, Andrew 2001: “Conceiving What is Not There” Journal of Consciousness Studies.   
     8: pp. 21-42. 
 
Brown, Richard 2010: “Deprioritizing the A-Priori Arguments Against Physicalism” Journal of     
     Consciousness Studies. 17: pp. 47-69. 
 
Campbell, Keith 1981. “The Metaphysic of Abstract Particulars” in French, Uehling, 
 
And Wettstein 1981: pp. 477-88. 
 
——1990: Abstract Particulars. Oxford: Basil Blackwell. 
 
Choi, Sungho and Fara, Michael 2012: ‘Dispositions’ Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy [online 
     Encyclopedia], Spring 2012 Edition http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2012/entries/dispositions/,  
     accessed March 2012. 
 
Chalmers, David 1996: The Conscious Mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
  
——2002a: “Consciousness and its Place in Nature” in Chalmers 2002c, pp. 247-72. 
 
——2002b “Does Conceivability Entail Possibility?” in Gendler and Hawthorne 2002, pp. 145-200. 
 
——2002c: Philosophy of Mind: Classical and Contemporary Readings. Oxford: Oxford University 
     Press. 
 
——2010a: “The Two-Dimensional Argument Against Materialism” in Chalmers 2010b, pp. 141-205.  
 
——2010b: The Character of Consciousness. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 
——2012: ‘Consc.net’ [website] ‘Responses to Articles on My Work/Sara Worley’   
     http://consc.net/responses.html#worley, accessed March 2012. 
 
Davies, M. and Humphreys, G. (eds.) 1993: Consciousness Philosophical and Psychological Aspects. 
     Oxford: Blackwell. 
 
Dennett, Daniel 1995. “The Unimagined Preposterousness of Zombies” Journal of 
Consciousness Studies. 2: pp. 322-6. 

 
33 
 
French, P., Uehling, T., and Wettstein, H. (eds.) 1981: Midwest Studies in Philosophy, 6. Minneapolis: 
     University of Minnesota Press. 
 
Gendler, Tamar and Hawthorne, John (eds.) 2002: Conceivability and Possibility. Oxford: Oxford  
     University Press.  
 
Giberman, Daniel 2012: “Against Zero-Dimensional Material Objects (and Other Bare Particulars)” 
     Philosophical Studies. 160: pp. 305-21. 
 
Jackson, Frank 1982: “Epiphenomenal Qualia” Philosophical Quarterly. 32: pp. 127-36. 
 
Kirk, Robert 1999: “Why There Couldn’t Be Zombies” Proceedings of the Aristotelian  
 
Society 73: pp. 1-16. 
 
——2008: “The Inconceivability of Zombies” Philosophical Studies. 139: pp. 173-89. 
 
Marcus, Eric 2004: “Why Zombies Are Inconceivable” Australasian Journal of  
 
Philosophy 82: pp. 477-90. 
 
Prior, E., Pargetter, R. & Jackson, F. 1982: “Three Theses about Dispositions” American 
Philosophical Quarterly 19: pp. 251–7. 
 
Simons, Peter 1994: “Particulars in Particular Clothing: Three Trope Theories of 
 
Substance” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 54: pp. 553-75. 
 
Stoljar, Daniel 2001: “Two Conceptions of the Physical” Philosophy and Phenomenological 
Research. 62: pp. 253-81. 
 
Ullmann-Margalit, E. (ed.) 1988: Science in Reflection, v. 3. Dordrecht: Kluwer. 
 
Van Gulick, Robert 1993: “Understanding the Phenomenal Mind: Are We All Just 
     Armadillos?” in Davies, M. and Humphreys, G. (eds.) Consciousness, pp. 137-54. 
 
Wilson, Jessica 2006: “On Characterizing the Physical” Philosophical Studies. 131: pp. 61-99. 
 
Worley, Sara 2003: “Conceivability, Possibility, and Physicalism” Analysis. 63: pp. 15-23. 
 
Yablo, Stephen 1993: “Is Conceivability a Guide to Possibility?” Philosophy and 
Phenomenological Research. 53: pp. 1-42. 
 
 
 
 
 

