INGARDENIANA II 

ANALECTA HUSSERLIANA 
THE YEARBOOK OF PHENOMENOLOGICAL RESEARCH 
VOLUME XXX 
Editor-in-Chief 
ANNA-TERESA TYMIENIECKA 
11Je World Institute for Advanced Phenomenological Research and Learning 
Belmont, Massachusetts 
A Sequel to Volume IV 
INGARDENIANA I 
A SPECTRUM OF SPECIALISED STUDIES ESTABLISHING 
THE FIELD OF RESEARCH 

INGARDENIANA II 
NEW STUDIES IN 
THE PHILOSOPHY OF 
ROMANINGARDEN 
With a New International Ingarden Bibliography 
Edited by 
HANS H. RUDNICK 
Puhlished under the auspices of 
lhc World Ills/illlle/I)" Adl'llllccd /'/zellol7lell%giclll Resellrch lind LCliming 
A-T. Tymicniecka. President 
KLUWER ACADEMIC PUBLISHERS 
DORDRECHT / BOSTON / LONDON 

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Ingardiana II : new studies in the philosophy of Roman Ingarden, with a new international 
Ingarden bibliography / edited by Hans H. Rudnick. 
p. 
cm. - (Analecta Husserliana : v. 30) 
Includes bibliographical references. 
I. Ingarden, Roman, 1893 
-Contributions in phenomenology. 
2. 
Ingarden, Roman, 1893 
-Contributions in aesthetics. 
3. 
Ingarden, Roman, 1893 
-Influence. 
4. 
Phenomenology. 
5. 
Aesthetics, Modem-20th century. 
6. 
Tymieniecka, Anna-Teresa. 
I. Rudnick, Hans H., 1935-
. II. 
Series. 
B3279.H94A129 
vol. 30 
[B4691.1534] 
142'. 7 s-dc20 
[199'.438] 
89-48569 
ISBN-13: 978-94-010-7378-3 
e-ISBN-13: 978-94-009-1964-8 
001: 10.1007/978-94-009-1964-8 
Published by Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
P.O. Box 17.3300 AA Dordrecht. The Nctherlands 
Kluwer Academic Publishers incorporates the publishing programme, 
of D. Reidel. Martinus Nijhoff. Dr W. Junk and MTP Press 
Sold and distributed in the U.S.A. and Canada 
by Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
101 Philip Drive. Norwell. MA 02061. U.S.A. 
In all other countries. sold and distributed 
by Kluwer Academic Publishers Group. 
P.O. Box 322. 3300 AH Dordrecht. The Netherlands. 
I'rillfl'c/ 011 acid~fi-I'I' paper 
All Rights Reserved 
© 1l)l)O by Kluwer Academic Publishers 
Softcover reprint of the hardcover 1st edition 1990 
No part of the material protected by this copyright notice 
may be reproduced or utilized in any form or by any means, electronic 
or mechanical. including photocopying. recording or by any information 
storage and retrieval system. without written permission from 
the copyrigh towner. 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
THE THEME: A-T. TYMIENIECKA ! Roman Ingarden's 
Timeless Contrihution to Philosophy 
EDITOR·S INTRODUCTION 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
PART I 
TYMIENIECKA AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF 
ROMANINGARDEN 
ANNA-TERESA TYMIENIECKA / Roman Ingarden's Philo-
sophical Legacy and My Departure from It: The Creative 
IX 
XV 
XVII 
Freedom of the Possible Worlds 
3 
JADWIGA S. SMITH / A New Phenomenology: Anna-Teresa 
Tymieniecka's Departure from Husser! and Ingarden 
25 
KNUT HANNEBORG / Husserl, Ingarden, and Tymieniecka 
37 
PART II 
INGARDEN AND LITERARY THEORY 
J oz 1.1-
S I V A K ! Reduction phenomenologique et intuition: A 
propos du rapport Husserl-Ingarden 
51 
N A D I A DEL L E SITE / The Aesthetic Theory of Ingarden and 
Its Philosophical Implications 
71 
ZHANG JIN-YAN / The New Criticism and Ingarden's Phe-
nomenological Theory of Literature 
85 
GERALD NYENHUIS! Roman Ingarden's Contribution to the 
Reading and Analysis of the Literary Text 
95 
PART III 
THE APPLICABILITY OF INGARDEN'S THEORY 
WALTER BIEMEL / Kritische Bemerkungen zu Ingardens 
Deutung des Bildes 
107 

VI 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
EUGENE F. KAELIN I The Debate Over Stratification Within 
Aesthetic Objects 
123 
YOU ZHENG LI I Ingarden's "Strata-Layers" Theory and the 
Structural Analysis of the Ancient Chinese Kunqu Opera 
139 
JOSEPH P. STRELKA I Ingarden's "Points of Indeterminate-
ness": A Consideration of Their Practical Application to 
Literary Criticism 
157 
HANS H. RUDNICK I Roman Ingarden and the Venus of Milo 
171 
PART IV 
INGARDEN AND THE NATURE OF THE 
LITERARY WORK OF ART 
JAN WOLENSKI / The Verifiability Principle: Variations on 
Ingarden's Criticism 
183 
WLODZIMIERZ GALEWICZ I The Aesthetic Object and the 
Work of Art: Reflections on Ingarden's Theory of Aesthetic 
Judgment 
193 
JANINA MAKOTA I Roman Ingarden's Idea of Relatively 
Isolated Systems 
211 
PART V 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
HANS H. RUDNICK and JOLANTA W. WAWRZYCKA I 
Roman Ingarden: An International Bibliography (1915-
1989) 
225 
INDEX OF NAMES 
297 

ROMAN INGARDEN 1~93-1970 
By courtesy of Professor Yushiro Takei. Gifu 

ANNA-TERESA TYMIENIECKA 
THE THEME: 
ROMAN INGARDEN'S TIMELESS CONTRIBUTION 
TO PHILOSOPHY 
Philosophical production necessarily occurs within a historical period. 
It is situated at the cross-section of what the philosopher inherits and 
what he proposes de novo. He is himself a product of his cultural 
epoch. It is not only that his philosophical concerns, doubts, and 
aspirations are ingrained with the cultural preoccupations dominant in 
the schools and academies of his youth; even though his personal drive 
to give the issues with which he struggles his very own solution, one 
more adequate than the ones available, and though his striving to 
accomplish this aims at lasting, absolute validity, these efforts are still 
geared to the criteria and demands of his times. His thought is meant 
to enter into the cultural stream at the given monent of historical 
development. 
This new way of approaching and solving given issues may, indeed, 
as intended, enter the present current of thought to answer the 
demands of the spirit of the times and find a favorable reception among 
the leading scholars, or it might need a period in which it is sequestered 
before surfacing and becoming assimilable at a propitious moment. 
However, even on reaching this point where the course of events moves 
favorable ahead, a point at which this statement of things could be 
called on to enter the actual arena and seems poised for proclamation 
abroad within a congenial wave of the spirit, or to be at least a candi-
date for fruitful debate, it might again -
being at the mercy of the 
cultural winds -
either enter ongoing discussions at the right juncture 
or miss its moment and, despite general awareness of its presence and 
of its validity for the most part, fall to the side in the notice of the 
scholarly community. 
This was the fate of Roman lngarden's monumental work. After an 
all too brief period of exposure in European phenomenological life, 
following the publication of his Das literarische Kunstwerk (Halle: 
1931) the Second World War put him in parentheses for a long period. 
And when he was ready after the war to re-emerge with an extensive 
IX 

x 
ANNA-TERESA TYMIENIECKA 
body of thought with a new, alternative treatment of the profound 
philosophical puzzles that preoccupied his onetime master Edmund 
Husser!, debate among phenomenologists had moved ahead of him. 
Transcendental consciousness, and not eidetic ontology, was now at the 
fore. Ingarden's being forgotten was not so much due to Poland's 
politico-geographic seclusion behind the "iron curtain" which fell across 
Europe but, foremostly, to the verdict of the then leading phenome-
nologists that his work fell in the realm of the "naive ontology" of the 
Gottingen period in phenomenology. 
In the due course of time, phenomenological discussion moved 
further, and when, with the progressive publication at Louvain of 
Edmund Husser!'s posthumous work, it could have been expected that 
an inquiry like Ingarden's which continued that of his master making a 
new start from a basically critical standpoint would then surface and 
even come into its own right for its deeper probing into the heart of 
things, then, unexpectedly -
the spirit, like the wind, blows when and 
where it fancies -
there emerged a deeply rooted dissatisfaction with 
and distrust of rationality, transcendental and eidetic alike. Now was 
the hour of the pre-ordained, the pre-constituted, and this with 
reference to the last reflections of Husser! himself. Moreover, criticisms 
of all reason have burst out in all lines of philosophical inquiry; 
denouncing all rationality as a game of reason and all structurizing as its 
artifice, this still raging spirit certainly does not make the present 
climate a propitious one for bringing Ingarden's formalism to the fore. 
To the contrary, it seems that in today's philosophical arena, the ground 
has definitively slipped out from under Ingarden's feet. 
And yet, strange to believe, it appears that interest in Roman 
Ingarden's thought has in recent times increased -
with there being no 
sign of a let up. In 1958, William Earle of Northwestern University 
(then a visiting professor at Yale), on reading the manuscript of my 
book, Phenomenology and Science in Contemporary European Thought 
(New York: Farrar, Straus, and Giroux, 1961), the work in which 
Ingarden's eidetic formalism was for the first time introduced to the 
English speaking public, made the comment to me that my presentation 
"whets the appetite for reading Ingarden, about whom many speak but 
of whom no one knows anything." We could paraphrase Earle's 
comment by saying that, nowadays, everybody talks about Ingarden but 
very few read him. This indicates, in its own way, great progress indeed. 
The fact that one now encounters so often mention of Ingarden in 

THE THEME 
Xl 
philosophical discussions may be due partly to cultural-political 
changes in the international climate. With Poland's new fascination 
following the election of a Polish pope and the rise of the Solidarity 
movement, new students have been drawn to Ingarden. That Cardinal 
Wojtyla was ordinary of Krakow, where Ingarden lived and taught 
phenomenology for a quarter of a century, and that the Cardinal was 
also a philosopher has led many to familiarize themselves with Ingarden 
even though the Cardinal's thought had no relation to Ingarden's 
teaching, having acquired its phenomenological tone through the 
writings of Max Scheler. And now, with the publication of several of 
Ingarden's works in English translation as well as of several studies on 
his thought, it is understandable that more attention is being focused on 
him. The fact that he is still very little read can be accounted for simply 
by the difficult style of his writings and even more by the very nature of 
its strenuous ontological inquiry, a field of investigation which has 
never attracted many minds. 
However, I submit that the steady growth of interest in his thought is 
owing to something essential that perdures the vicissitudes of fashion 
and philosophical taste, namely, to the core significance of his inquiry 
for the philosophy of all times. I submit, in fact, that despite Ingarden's 
failure -
which I discussed in a previous work dedicated to his 
controversy with Husserl (Analecta Husserliana, vol. IV, 1976) -
to 
discover the access to metaphysics he sought as a means for assessing 
the actual existence of the ideal objectivities which he had analyzed in 
their ontological nature as ideal, pure possibles, and despite this 
failure's not allowing him to discover the network of existential links 
among them -
links that would indicate how they do hold together -
consequently leaving us with merely a series of disconnected structural 
skeletons of possible beingnesses, and despite the fact that even these 
ideal structures of works of art, of the human person, or the monad, of 
the real world, etc., as he discovered on the ontological plane, require a 
broader, more completely diversified approach from several perspec-
tives so that their results may -
as Ingarden foresaw himself -
not 
only corroborate each other more but even lead to changes in his views 
on many points, despite all this, I maintain that the core of his analytic 
work remains of lasting value. 
Let us consider just the transformations in Ingarden's view of the 
work of art that is worked by introduction into phenomenology of the 
Imaginatio Creatrix as the decisive factor in human functioning and 

XlI 
ANNA-TERESA TYMIENIECKA 
which shifts attention away from his approach emphasizing the type of 
beingness that the work of art is to its origin within the creative process; 
let us envisage the great shift in our understanding of the nature of the 
human person if we move from the eidetic/intentional perspective of 
lngarden which sees it as a self-enclosed monadic entity to one which 
displays the differentiation of the human person in the open field of the 
streamlike actualization of the Human Condition, as a crystalization of 
just one constructive phase in the process of becoming of the unity-oj-
everything-there-is-alive, which proposed; lastly, what a radically diver-
gent picture of the real world we obtain if we leave the one-sided, 
purely static narrowness of the eidetic ontology which sees the world 
only as a structural domain framing other possibilities and delve into 
the stream of the constructive becoming of life which has the self-
individualization of living beingnesses as its leitmotif, and the human 
being with its endowment of the aesthetic, moral, and intelligible senses 
as the originator and carrier of the societal circuit of Iife.* To just 
mention these three new perspectives which I have unfolded in my own 
phenomenology of life is enough to let us see that the entire framework 
of Ingarden's investigation is turned upside down and its singular 
acquisitions now have to be reviewed in quite different light. And just 
think of all the types of succeeding philosophies which will undoubtedly 
adduce novel points of view to be considered. 
And yet I contend that Ingarden's fragmented inquiry has and will 
continue to have crucial validity throughout present and future devel-
opments and vicissitudes in philosophical progress. I submit that what 
Ingarden has accomplished of lasting significance is to have scrutinized 
with great care, acumen, and penetration the very nature of the prin-
ciples of objectivity as such. 
As a matter of fact as long as there is a being who is asking himself 
to understand the ultimate nature and principles of reality, and as long 
as this reality will be projected creatively by a type of being that is 
endowed with the basic stamina, forces, and constitutive faculties that 
we nowadays distinguish within the human being, with what defines 
him, in fact, as a human being, the question of objectivity in terms, by 
means of, and in the form of which the human being establishes his 
existence on earth and turns its initial endowment into his universe, the 
* Cf. by the present writer. Logos and Life: Creative Experience and the Critique of 
Reason. Analecta Husserliana. vol. XXIV. 1988. Panel II. 

THE THEME 
xiii 
world of and for his life, he will need these rational cornerstones of the 
ideal structuration of objectivity as points of reference, as guidelines for 
charting his paths, and as means enabling him to recognize himself and 
his place within the otherwise all-encompassing chaos. Although we 
may -
as the present writer does -
favor radically different accesses 
and approaches to the real, to man with all of his endeavors, to the 
world and to the ultimate aims of philosophy, and although we may 
otherwise from such or other perspective disqualify some or other 
rational procedures of philosophy as ways to grasp and explain reality, 
it is hard -
if not altogether impossible without falling into absurdity or 
a darkness of mind -
to dismiss, on whatever account, objectivity as a 
modality in which life, the world, and the cosmos manifest themselves 
as the milieu of human existence on earth. It is precisely the principles 
of this modality as the rational intelligible constitution performed by 
the human mind to serve his active orientation in his circumambient 
situation and to lay down an orientation network for his life-enactment 
that it was Ingarden's ultimate aim to discover and plot. 
So much for the timeless significance of Ingarden's enterprise which, 
although it resulted in an abstruse and difficult body of theories, 
attracts and will attract minds which seek clarity and orientation in the 
labyrinths of philosophical query. 
Although The World Phenomenology Institute's research work 
follows quite different paths than those of eidetic phenomenology, we 
always maintain a lively interest in Ingarden's ideas and continue to 
discuss his thought at our conventions, seminars, and symposia. Having 
already offered to the philosophical public an impressive sampling of 
Ingarden studies in Ingardeniana, the fourth volume of Analecta 
Husserliana (1976), we present with joy and pride this second volume. 
The range of the essays included here indicates the spread of interest 
among our collaborators around the world and displays conspicuous 
advances in the formulation of problems and lines of inquiry. 
We are grateful to Professor Hans Rudnick, the guest editor of this 
collection, for his new bibliography of Ingarden's work, one in which 
many hitherto common inaccuracies have been corrected, and for his 
up-to-date bibliography of secondary material, all contributing to the 
constantly growing body of Ingarden studies. 
ANNA-TERESA TYMIENIECKA 

EDITOR'S INTRODUCTION 
This Ingardenia volume is the second in the Analecta Husserliana series 
that is entirely devoted to the phenomenology of Roman Ingarden. The 
first was volume IV (1976). Twenty years after Ingarden's death, this 
volume demonstrates that the Polish phenomenologist's contribution to 
philosophy and literary scholarship has received world-wide attention. 
His ideas have proven especially fruitful for the definition of the 
structure of the literary work of art and the subsequent recognition of 
its characteristic features. Of all the early phenomenologists who were 
students of Husserl, it is Ingarden whose work has faithfully pursued 
the original tenet that language "holds" the essence of the life-world "in 
readiness" (bereit halten). To investigate this premise with the rigor 
of a science, as Husserl had envisioned for phenomenology, was 
Ingarden's life work. 
That Ingarden did not quite reach his ambitious goal does not 
diminish his unquestionable achievement. The understanding of the 
nature of the literary work of art has increased enormously because of 
his analyses and aesthetics. The Polish phenomenologist investigated 
above all the work of art as a structure of necessary components which 
define and determine its nature. That the artistic ingredient was 
shortchanged under those conditions should not be surprising, particu-
larly since Ingarden usually kept a purist's philosophical distance from 
the concrete detail of the material under consideration. He was not 
concerned with individual works of art but with the principle that was 
shared by all of them as the defining feature of their being. Professor 
Tymieniecka reverts her teacher's thinking and goes beyond his 
concern for the work of art itself. Her imaginatio creatrix takes the 
creative process into consideration which leads to the conception and 
generation of the work of art. The formalism of the teacher has now 
been enriched with the inclusion of the creative aspects that make it 
possible. The result is a more comprehensive understanding of the 
work of art that combines Ingarden's formalist, definable principles 
with Tymieniecka's principles and powers of the artist's creative 
imagination. 
xv 

XVI 
EDITOR'S INTRODUCTION 
Ingarden's phenomenological literary theory can be understood as a 
philosophical poetics of the structure of the literary work of art. His 
work reflects to a considerable degree the formal characteristics that 
were major concerns of theorists during his time. This applies as much 
to Husserl's original attention to the nature of linguistic disclosure as 
well as to the strict "New Critical" attention to the formal aspects of the 
literary work of art. 
The applicability of a theory is the touchstone for its quality and 
validity. Critical observation may reveal exceptions, incoherence, or 
contradiction, which should lead to revision and improvement of the 
theory. As far as the testing of Ingarden's theory is concerned, the most 
comprehensive application of Ingarden's theory is Strelka's Literarische 
Textanalyse (Tiibingen: Francke, 1989) which covers all three genres of 
literature and finds, in great detail, that Ingarden's theory does justice to 
the nature of literary art. 
Literary theory as a branch of philosophy involves the forward-
looking element of speculation that drives the axioms toward new 
horizons of insight and overall understanding. At the end of that road 
lies the formulation of a system that allows openness to artistic crea-
tivity and grants verifiability to the formal aspects of art. lngarden has 
led us a considerable distance toward the end of that road. The 
bibliography which concludes this volume should lead scholarship 
further ahead toward this tantalizing goal. 
HANS H. RUDNICK 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The guest editor wishes to express first of all his special gratitude to 
Professor Anna-Teresa Tymieniecka for giving him the opportunity to 
prepare this Ingardenia volume for the Analecta Husserliana series. 
Further thanks go to the contributors to this volume. Their lngarden 
scholarship proves that twenty years after the Polish phenomenologist's 
death the achievement of his philosophy has truly reached international 
recognition. 
For their generous advice, untiring cooperation, and encouragement, 
particular mention goes to Professors Hugh Olmsted of Harvard Uni-
versity and Alan Cohn of Southern Illinois University at Carbondale. 
Without their benevolence, this Ingarden bibliography would not have 
reached completion. Further thanks must go to the staff of the libraries 
of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, of Duke University, 
of the University of Illinois, of North Carolina State University, and the 
University of Virginia at Charlottesville for their professional support 
of this project. Dr. Jolanta Wawrzycka and Dr. Aron Aji deserve 
prominent recognition for bibliographical research performed when 
they were graduate students. Professor Wawrzycka's expertise in the 
Polish language and her considerable devotion to this project over 
the years were the conditio sine qua non that made this Ingarden 
bibliography possible. In addition, thanks for research support are also 
due to the Office of Research Development and Administration of 
Southern Illinois University at Carbondale. Professors Yushiro Takei of 
Gifu University and You Zheng Li of the Chinese Academy of Social 
Sciences have kindly supplied bibliographical data concerning Ingarden 
publications in their respective countries, Japan and China. Bibliog-
raphies published in the World Phenomenology Institute's Phenomeno-
logical Inquiry have also greatly enhanced the international range of 
this bibliography. Last, but not least, special thanks go to my wife, 
Catherine Bird, whose computer expertise and unwaivering support 
have blessed the editing of this volume. 
H. H. R. 
XVll 

PART I 
TYMIENIECKA AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF 
ROMANINGARDEN 

ANNA-TERESA TYMIENIECKA 
ROMAN INGARDEN'S PHILOSOPHICAL LEGACY 
AND MY DEPARTURE FROM IT: THE 
CREATIVE FREEDOM OF THE POSSIBLE WORLDS* 
PART I: THE LEGACY OF ROMAN INGARDEN 
Roman Ingarden, the great scholar and master of some among us, who 
has laid down for his disciples a work-foundation, and who has not only 
inspired us by the absolute faithfulness to the demands of reality but 
who has also maintained for decades our faithful allegiance to this task, 
is no longer among us. This volume is to commemorate the 20th 
anniversary of his death. The scrupulous and indefatigable work, which 
he has accomplished and left behind, has a specific significance for us 
and contains some irreducible factors relevant to all tendencies and 
trends of philosophy. This becomes more evident if we review the 
various stages in which the knowledge of his work has been spreading. 
The path which it took leads from the early book reviews, through the 
period of his total absence from the scene of Western Europe, which 
was dominated since 1945 by an environment uncongenial to his own 
eidetic interpretation of phenomenology, up to his later breakthrough, 
emphasized by an homage paid to him in the For Roman Ingarden, 
Festschrift of 1959,1 which brought attention to his then stilliinguisti-
cally inaccessible work and which culminated in his later international 
successes, manifested by the German edition of his main works and his 
lecturing throughout Europe and the United States. 
Strangely enough, Ingarden's vast range of questions to which he 
devoted his attention despite the grandeur of the very framework he 
outlined for himself as a program appears not to be so difficult to 
encompass in its essential philosophical significance. His extensive and 
minute analyses have elucidated or even answered many of these 
questions. If one decided to delve into the richness of his detailed work 
and attempt to reinterpret it with respect to all the directly treated and 
associated problems presented by the history of philosophy at each of 
its turns, -
Ingarden invoked and alluded to so many minute aspects in 
his postulated philosophical reconstruction -
it would require a life-
time. 
3 
Hans H. Rudnick (ed.), Analecta Husserliana, Vol. XXX, 3-23. 
© 1990 KhlWer Academic Publishers. 

4 
A-T. TYMIENIECKA 
First of all, two things are clear: one, that Ingarden unlike most of 
the great thinkers and scholars such as Leibniz and Husserl, did not 
leave a posthumous work of any major significance which could be 
expected to reveal the development of his thought beyond his published 
work. It may seem as if he had carried out with programmatic precision 
most of the detailed plans reaching as far as his inspiration would carry 
him. In this respect, we are left with a legacy of an accomplished 
philosophical corpus, with nothing still to come that would reveal any 
new elements, except those already known. This does not mean that he 
has accomplished his great program. On the contrary, the great expected 
metaphysics which was meant to bring his other philosophical investi-
gations together remains a fragment. 
Secondly, in his conception of phenomenology, taken chiefly from 
the Husserlian period of Logical Investigations, his emphasis on minute 
analysis of structural elements, carried out at a level that I have termed 
elsewhere "fundamental rationality" -
introducing other levels of ex-
perience for the sake of exemplification only, e.g., "to make the 
phenomenon seen," -
accounts for the fact that the enormous amount 
of analytic work we are left with is distributed among several realms of 
inquiry, namely aesthetics, formal and material ontology, phenomeno-
logy of language, and value-inquiry. Although Ingarden remains faithful 
to his method -
each question indicates and necessitates its proper 
methodological treatment by circumscribing its own field of intercon-
nections which define its domain -
his inquiries are scattered in 
voluminous, only partly correlated fragments of analysis within a com-
mon framework (like, for instance, the analysis of the structure of 
works of art, the modalities of their cognition, or the conception of 
action within the formal structure of some domains of being, and the 
causal network of the empirical world). The crucial parts and links in 
his programmed edifice are missing.2 
Indeed, at this point I cannot refrain from applying Valery's state-
ment on Leonardo da Vinci to Ingarden (which I referred to in my 
letter to Ingarden of September 1953), by saying that his genius 
allowed him only "to accomplish some fragments of a gigantic Game," 
to which Ingarden agreed. Let us now turn to his "Game." 
There is no doubt about the great issue at stake for Ingarden's 
philosophical reconstruction. Already at the time of his disagreement 
with Husserl, as is seen in his poignant letter to his master 3 on the 
status of reality and its reformulation, Ingarden was pursuing the same 

ROMAN INGARDEN'S PHILOSOPHICAL LEGACY 
5 
task as his revered master, but tried to accomplish it in his own way. 
Ingarden, as has been pointed out, was chiefly concerned with the 
Idealism-Realism issue.4 We must ask then: what were his pre-reflective 
assumptions that led him to such and no other framework for ap-
proaching this issue? 
As a matter of fact, Ingarden not only seems to have brought the 
Husserlian interpretation of the irreducible elements of cognition, 
namely eidoi, "essences," ideal structures etc., to the ultimate conse-
quences, but also clarified their understanding. Husserl himself left it in 
vagueness (let it suffice here to mention Ingarden's analysis of idea qua 
idea, the essence and the process of ideation, that he has so masterfully 
developed). On this ontological basis, however, he carried out formal 
analyses of the two great antagonists of philosophical controversy: 
consciousness and world, which he pursued through inquiry into the 
latter's intrinsic concatenation with material ontology. We may say that 
Ingarden took the Idealism-Realism issue inherent in phenomenology 
to its farthest limit. Therefore, Ingarden's success or failure in finding 
the conclusive formulation of the issue concerning the status of the 
world and man's role in it may bring to light in a conclusive manner the 
basic flow of the Cartesian residue as well as help to formulate the 
whole issue at another level and with another assumption. This could 
mean a turning point for phenomenological inquiry and philosophy in 
general.s 
Now, keeping a certain distance from Ingarden's complete work, one 
starts to wonder whether, if we first introduce this perspective and then 
repeatedly insist that his monumental work is chiefly and almost exclu-
sively the foundational approach to the Idealism-Realism controversy, 
we do justice to the hidden and yet most profound springs which 
animate the Ingardenian query. Ingarden himself insists repeatedly that 
other analytic approaches like material ontology or metaphysics which 
are postulated by him as investigating not the possible structural 
rationale of the world and consciousness, but their actual existence, are 
still missing in his program; once unfurled, they might deny validity to 
its various elements. But now, the question arises, even if their modal-
ities of performance were to remain open, whether the two a priori 
assumed antagonists would ever confront each other in an open field. In 
fact, the field of such a confrontation between the domain of the world 
and that of consciousness, which seemed to be foreinstalled above all 
by the structural schemework of possible beings and their possible 

6 
A-T. TYMIENIECKA 
inter-relations, remains incomplete. Ingarden's final confrontation with 
their possible inter-relations at the end of the second volume of his 
Controversy would still have to be completed by the material ontology 
of both and by metaphysics meant to inverse the abstract, rational 
combinatoric into statements of concrete existence. 
The accomplishment of this project, however, as it appears now, has 
failed. We might seek the reason for its failure in the specific points of 
Ingarden's approach, but nevertheless, their criticism will l~ad us to a 
set of his fundamental presuppositions reaching back to his Cartesian 
residue. We see the insufficiency of Ingarden's framework first in his 
attempts to formulate the Idealism-Realism problem and, second, in 
the discrepancy between various levels of analysis that he could not 
overcome. Firstly, for example, all three types of his inquiry -
the 
aesthetic-intentional, formal-ontological and material-ontological -
referred ultimately to the ideal structures which could not account for 
the intricacies of the dynamic progress of the consciousness-world 
process.6 Secondly, his complete ontological scheme was from the very 
beginning conceived as a field of mere possibles, whereas the crucial 
question in the Idealism-Realism issue, within the historical perspective 
in which he framed it, was concerned with the ways and means of the 
statement and ascertainment of actual facts of existence of such or 
another world in actual relation to such or another factor. Thus, within 
his perspective we have remained at a loss with this specific mode of 
cognitive ascertaining postulated as neither eidetic -
because merely 
"possible" -
nor empirical, because unreliable and uncertain. Without 
it, however, the world domain on the one hand, and the realm of 
consciousness on the other, with all the fragmentary, intentional and 
ideal interlocking between them, have to remain ideally ascertained as 
merely possible. Not only did Ingarden not tackle the problem of this 
specific mode of cognition, but he also did not even prepare any 
analytic apparatus to approach it.7 It is also questionable whether he 
could have entered such a field of inquiry with his presuppositions. 
Within his framework of philosophical inquiry metaphysics, conceived 
in his manner, cannot be developed. It seems that such a claim for a 
specific mode of cognition was merely an abstract postulate without 
foundation in his own inquiry. Or, it may be, as we have posed it 
elsewhere, that it is basically erroneous to ask for a specific mode of 
cognition to guarantee or ascertain the actual fact of existence of the 
real world because such an assertion has to come from another source 
than that of a direct cognitive instance. 

ROMAN INGARDEN'S PHILOSOPHICAL LEGACY 
7 
It is this last point which we are tempted to consider as a key to both 
these problems, namely the inadequacy of the outline of this gigantic 
enterprise, its purpose, and the conclusive point it may well have made 
in the history of philosophy concerning the status of the world and 
man. 
Indeed, it is the Cartesian residue in Ingarden's framework of inquiry 
that seems ultimately responsible for his failure. Abstracting human 
consciousness as an autonomous instance from man's congenial in-
grownness, instead of leaving him as real individual in the actual world-
context; g and reducing consciousness to types of conscious acts which 
do not partake any longer intimately in the actual grownness of man in 
the world but rise above it in the lucidity of logical reason, Ingarden, in 
spite of all differences, nevertheless, follows Kant and Husser\. 
There is no need to emphasize the endless efforts of Husserl, the 
Husserlians, and of phenomenologists like Merleau-Ponty to integrate 
the logical, rational apparatus of man's consciousness with the empirical 
one. We can also see that reacting against the attitude taken in this 
antithetic situation by Husserl, and in trying to overcome it -
even if 
he attempted to do so on a new basis of several levels of structures and 
substructures of reality, in spite of the various means of their inter-
locking which he discovered (intentional, ideal and physicalistic) -
Ingarden tried to find the unity of the world ultimately in ideal struc-
tures. Thereby he perpetuated the crucial divorce between man and his 
actual world-context-ingrownness. 
Strangely enough, we can see that, although Ingarden's ontological 
approach was to be considered -
as we read it in his ::omments to 
Husserl's Cartesian Meditations -
as an attempt to abandon altogether 
the Cartesian epistemological approach to reality, his methodological 
demand for an apodictically certain knowledge leads him to the same 
dead-end. 
The wealth of inquiry of man towards which science and philosophy 
of the present give us an enormous opening, make us see what a limited 
and conditioned role knowledge, especially rational knowledge, plays in 
man's interworldly existence. The statement of reality, as I proposed 
before, has to be sought elsewhere. 
Nevertheless, next to the problem of Idealism-Realism, there is 
another bigger issue which merits attention within the context of 
Ingarden's great scheme. 
It seems that the Cartesian emphasis upon cognition has not only 
narrowed the road of philosophy towards reality, but also vitiated the 

8 
A-T. TYMIENIECKA 
most intricate relatedness that holds the human individual in existence. 
Indeed, man, understood chiefly as an intentional subject in all the 
richness of his own unfoldings within the world, still appears as if he 
were caught in the very net he weaves for himself with his limited 
means. As from the net of a spider, there seems to be no way out. In 
this respect Ingarden did not succeed in reaching the solution and 
bringing his two champions to confront each other. He might, in the 
end, have been obliged to change the tools and re-work the ground. In 
my own reflection I proposed a radical shift of emphasis and a new 
point of departure. With it, I proposed the human condition as the 
basic ground for phenomenology preceding Ingarden's distinctions. 
Now, the basic question of man-and-human-condition as it lurks 
from this sketchy criticism of a priori differentiation of mechanism and 
structural setup of the human and the world's cognition appears to be: 
how can we account for that real, unprecedented work that makes 
human experience, active intervention in the world, and free, original 
creativity possible? The quesion of basic freedom is here at stake. 
No doubt, Ingarden's inquiry into the causal network of the real 
world deals with the question of freedom in the sense of physical 
determinism and indeterminism. The question is decided by him in 
favor of the latter. His treatment of this problem on the one hand, as 
well as his interpretation of the acting agent on the other, with respect 
to the objective results of human activity, and, finally, with respect to 
the conditions that need to be fulfilled to ensure the real possibility of 
intervention in the actual world, is carried out in completely abstract 
and mechanistic terms. However, if we want to give an adequate 
treatment of the status of the world and of man, we have to change 
emphasis from cognition to creative activity for which the ontologico-
transcendental scheme leaves no place. 
We propose to devote our attention now to the issue of man-and-
human-condition. From Ingarden's work we have drawn the lesson of 
limitations and the possible extension of the great issue of philosophical 
reconstruction, so that we may now go radically beyond him, picking 
up the odds and ends of his great concern, and simultaneously re-think 
and re-work them into a new texture which then, similar to his own 
dispute with Husserl, will help us to form our own program as a 
counterpart to his project. When we leave aside the dead-end street and 
the vestige of his erroneous epistemological inheritance, we reach the 
open road toward the creative realism of the possible worldsY 

ROMAN INGARDEN'S PHILOSOPHICAL LEGACY 
9 
PART II: THE CREATIVE FREEDOM OF THE POSSIBLE WORLDS 
1. The Four Paradoxes of Freedom 
The antithetic feeling of being constrained, if not submerged, by world, 
life, nature, and humanity on the one hand, and the imperative nostalgia, 
if not urge, to become free from it on the other, lies probably at the 
very root of human life and springs violently forth in various forms in 
every age of humanity. 
There seem to be, in general, four major lines along which this 
antithetics emerges and in which it is interpreted. We will attempt to 
delineate them by showing that in each perspective the interpretation 
carried out to the end involves a paradox. 
1) To begin with, at the crossroads of his development a person as 
individual man becomes aware of being in this development determined 
by others, such as social and cultural forms of life, individual as well as 
personal propensities, and by tendencies of his surroundings, such as 
parents, friends, milieu. And yet, as we see it mirrored in contemporary 
literature, e.g., in Camus, Beckett, Witkiewicz, Mrozek, Vonnegut etc., 
man attempts to despoil himself of all his allegiance to a given culture, 
and to culture as such, through human ties and all types of relatedness 
toward others. The liberation he seemingly gains leaves him not only 
naked and disarmed -
that is, without means to exercise this sup-
posedly acquired "freedom" -
but also without aims and targets to 
enact it. Hence the paradox. 
Man goes further in seeking to set himself free. We see in con-
temporary culture, e.g., in Sartre -
as it has happened often before -
a 
revolt against nature itself, against the endowments each of us receives 
from her (and by which we are predisposed to such or another life), 
against propensities, innate urges, and even against natural instincts 
from which Orestes in The Flies tries ultimately to free himself by 
killing his own mother. But Orestes, set free from all predispositions 
imposed by nature, has annihilated his very life-world, the locus of his 
very own existence. His "liberation" means the loss of the world as the 
field in which he could exercise his "freedom" and enact his newly 
despoiled and life-withdrawn being. The only possibility that remains 
for him to enact in life -
is death. 
2) Secondly, man revolts against the framework of the world in a still 
more specific way. 

10 
A-T. TYMIENIECKA 
Claiming, as it is particularly strongly done nowadays, to draw all the 
consequences from the acceptance of such a primitive condition of a 
despoiled man from the start, he interprets the right of the individual to 
freedom as the right to leave him free in his development, education 
and growth, from the instant he appears as a prospective individual 
within the actual world-context. 
In fact, on the ground of erroneous, empirical and pragmatic theories 
of man, it is assumed that to be "free," man has to preserve the 
possibility to discover things by himself. Consequently, education has to 
remain void of "indoctrination," both in the domain of ideas and ideals 
to be offered him, and with respect to the methods and educational 
devices applied -
which would already mean a selection in developing 
certain talents and virtualities to the neglect of others. Finally, in letting 
man make all decisions concerning him personally instead of switching 
him into a life routine proposed as a frame of reference, man assumes 
to be "free." However, it can be doubted whether these ideas and ideals 
for life, as well as the principles of personal decision, will spring forth 
from the individual left alone to himself. On the contrary, it may be that 
their very discovery, even if it should break with the inculcated ones 
and replace the old frame of action with the new one, depends upon the 
first ones, and the decision for an unprecedented initiative depends 
upon a framework adopted passively at first. 
3) The paradox of social liberalism must also be mentioned which -
in order to guarantee individual freedom -
goes to the extreme by 
letting each individual decide for himself about all his concerns and 
relations with others. But can man by himself really know what is good 
for him and for others in that matter? Can he rely solely on his own 
judgement and the right impulse in a given situation, as well as upon his 
will? In other terms, can man exercise freedom without guidance, 
responsibility and restriction? Or is it the role of the state to provide 
him with a set of rules to guarantee his proper choice of proper 
conduct? 
Thus, as it appears in all these three directions in which man sees the 
possibility of his freedom, we face paradoxical situations. If we analyze 
them more closely, it would appear that the way in which man con-
ceives the possibility of freedom is determined by a specific rational 
standpoint in which he envisages himself. This rational standpoint, 
however, reduces him in fact to a rational mechanism; he proceeds in a 
strictly logical way and functions merely at this level. 

ROMAN INGARDEN'S PHILOSOPHICAL LEGACY 
11 
And yet, the paradoxes surrounding this interpretation seem to vin-
dicate some other dimensions of man that cannot be logically con-
trolled. 
4) The Paradox of Moral Freedom. Ingarden was not unaware of this 
great issue in which all fundamental dimensions of the world -
the 
physical, anthropological and social, as well as the human -
are 
involved. We have already mentioned the physicalistic level of his 
concern with the determinism-indeterminism issue. The crucial point of 
his sketchy reflections on man lies precisely in his conviction that time, 
the very pulp of man's life, and man's intimate freedom to choose for 
himself, make an axis of human existence. We may, however, ask 
whether he really reached to the roots of this conviction. Interpreting 
his views, we may find that he opposes the course of nature to that of 
man's will oriented by values. 
We continue our survival as individuals in the natural flow of time 
along the cyclic process of nature within the texture of the actual world. 
After the unfolding of what is virtually foreinstalled in us by the great, 
anonymous scheme of Nature, in which we play just an insignificant 
role, and after spending all our resources, we vanish into oblivion. 
We may go also against that otherwise irreversible flux of events, 
when through our dedicated and self-denying efforts we choose to play 
a part in human existence. We may thus, indeed, choose to devote our 
natural life to tasks of innermost concerns which we believe in. We 
believe in their intrinsic value that is verified at various levels of our 
personal life as being higher than merely survival and well-being. We 
may put all that is at stake to serve this innermost call from within. By 
these most intimate decisions man is "free" to make determinations 
about, no matter what, his innermost concerns; he reverts thereby, step 
by step, the inexorable flux of change. 
Moving that way against the inexorability of time which works from 
within him, man builds a recluse of moral "freedom" that gives new 
significance to his existence and unbreakable strength to his purpose 
and dedication. This counter-process and moral "freedom," however, 
do not spring out of nothingness! Neither are they pre-installed nor 
pre-given to man or wrought out of themselves. On the contrary, in 
Ingarden's thought they seem to be the fruit of our conquest over 
ourselves in a permanent struggle with our very own nature, with our 
inborn passivity to flow with the flux of life, with our innate turpitude 
lulling us to sleep, and with deep sleep, letting things take their course, 

12 
A-T. TYMIENIECKA 
and letting -
as Heidegger says -
das Man, the common doom, take 
over. Therefore, we have to remain always awake, aware of what there 
is in us. But can we discover it other than in this perpetual immersion in 
das Man of the common doom? Without feeling it down to the marrow 
of our bones, how could we distinguish, distill from the anonymous 
texture of natural life, these uniquely innermost concerns? Without 
being in the midst of the incommensurable and yet anonymous chaos 
of this onrushing flux, how could we sift through our entire system of 
functioning and discover that which truly matters to us -
our own 
unique task and vocation? 
Here lies the vast paradox: even at this point of man's freedom, at 
which he appears to be the master of his own being and his personal 
life-world, against all the other elements of the actual world-context, 
he has to wring out of the complete innerworldly complex -
social, 
cultural, and elemental nature (which carries on the progress and 
threatens his fragile system of functions at every point) -
social con-
flicts and obstacles, cultural conditioning, disease, accidents, cataclysms 
etc. And yet, it is through this system alone that he could wring out his 
"moral freedom." 
In Ingarden's thought there is no articulated delineation of man's 
channels through which his decisions emerge, stimulate his actions, and 
work in the contrary life-course. We are left here at best with isolated 
sets of rational operations at one extreme, and abstract, ideal values at 
the other. 
It appears that in order to grasp this dilemma with more precision, 
we must reach far beyond both frontiers of Ingarden's philosophical 
framework. 
We propose to investigate the paradoxical situation of freedom at the 
level of creative activity which, as a prototype of human action, reaches 
beyond the levels of organized systems and above the sets of funda-
mental rationality of ideas, ideal values and ideal structures. We will, 
therefore, attempt to approach the problem of freedom from the point 
of view of man's creative function. The major problem concerning 
man-and-human-condition in this respect is the problem of the world 
and its origin, as well as man's role and status in it. 
2. Reason vs. Feeling or Logos vs. Eros 
In fact, what appears in this struggle of man to break the hindrances set 

ROMAN INGARDEN'S PHILOSOPHICAL LEGACY 
13 
not only to his will, but also to what he considers the possibilities of his 
very being, namely to feel both free from constraints and also strong 
enough to spread his wings, is a dilemma between reason and feeling or 
logic and genuine experience. All in all, man feels the urge to shake off 
what he does not even have, nor could have, but what he believes to 
have rationally assessed as a straight jacket or order. The order of 
social life, the order of nature, the order of social life, the order of 
nature, the order of his own endowment all appear as an order he tries 
to but cannot overcome. On the other hand, the real meaning of this 
very urge to surpass these orders remains misconstrued. We interpret it 
in terms of the same order we intend to break: "if I had a chance, I 
would have done differently." But the "chance" is in this breaking-wish 
chained to the same type of order. Thus, we would be led from one 
specific situation to another without being able to surpass the frame-
work! 
The question arises whether the urge towards freedom and "libera-
tion" does not contain another meaning, specific and at the same time 
different from this one. As an experience, this urge itself is aimed at 
breaking the status quo of the order within which it occurs. It lifts man 
above his passive course of existence and offers him a new indefinite 
horizon to conquer and to situate himself within. If we analyze it more 
precisely, this horizon appears as man's task clad in his feelings, 
emotions, and nostalgia. It seems to carry him beyond the reach of the 
constraints of the world and to defy its authority. As such it contains 
germs or footholds of a different "logic." We could refer here to 
Pascal's expression, "the logic of the heart." 
In fact, the dilemma between rationality and passion was already 
brought into phenomenology by Max Scheler who in his attempt to 
establish the foundation of values in experience refers to Pascal. 
However, the question arises whether there could be, as Scheler seems 
to assume after Pascal, such a specific relief from the order of the world 
and nature within the realm of affectivity at all. Do affective states, 
emotions, pains, and joys in the first place express anything else but 
manifestations of natural life, and are they not serving their course? 
Maybe, if we properly seek the break from the chains of the pre-
traced course of individual existence in the "logic of the heart," we 
should ask, "How does this logic manifest itself and how does it come 
about?" 
In fact, when we start with the urge man feels to liberate himself 

14 
A-T. TYMIENIECKA 
from the chains of what we call "the constituted world," and from the 
laws and mechanisms of the constitution he carries himself, we might 
discover first: the postulates of the task it proposes to him, and second: 
the approach to the realm of emotions and passions that we shall in 
general call "Eros." In short, man's innermost quest to transcend the 
limited form of his actual constituted world is convertible into a task he 
may undertake to create a new, original one. Thus to approach this 
great issue, we have to reach to the origins of the human world and 
man's role in it. Only within the perspective of not only the cognitive, 
but also, and foremost, the creative function of man, e.g., his par 
excellence active role in the actual world-context, may we attempt to set 
up, step by step, the elements of the adequate formulation of the 
question concerning the status of the world and man's role in it, which 
we will call programmatically man-and-human-condition. 
PART III: THE CREATIVE FREEDOM 
Indeed, every serious philosophical quest reaches sooner or later the 
fundamental question of the origin of the human wor!d and man's role 
in it. 
To recall, the two major and lasting contributions to this effect, as 
well as the two major treatments of the problem of the origin of the 
world have been offered by Kant, in modern times, and by Husserl, in 
the contemporary period. And yet both of them, in spite of the wealth of 
detailed analysis which they left as a lasting heritage for philosophical 
scholarship, seem to have failed in the adequate formulation and 
treatment of this problem. I see the reason for their failure in their main 
assumption which seems to consist, firstly, in a tacit acceptance of the 
Cartesian conviction of the absolute sovereignty of logical reason over 
the dimensions of human functioning, which stretch in gradations of 
intelligibility from organic operations, the impulses through the affective 
and sensory levels and the whole dynamic of "passions," to the highest 
rational operations and transcending elan of the spirit. Secondly, both 
Kant and Husser! have downgraded the structurizing role of the passions 
by relegating them as the "empirical soul" to the brute functioning of 
organism. 
They were, albeit in a different way, caught in (a) the absolute 
correlativity: rational consciousness-human world, and (b) in the 
necessity of equating the actual existing world with the potentialities of 

ROMAN INGARDEN'S PHILOSOPHICAL LEGACY 
15 
constitutive consciousness. They were thus coerced into transcendental 
idealism, saying that the human world, as it is, is absolutely dependent 
for its existence on rational consciousness and that no other world than 
this one is possible (Husserl even insisted that the idea of a different 
world than the actual is absurd). 
But in order to inquire into the factors and sources of the origin of 
the human world, should we not in the first place start with the 
fundamental statements about the nature of both of them? In fact, in an 
unprejudiced analysis not restricted arbitrarily to the prism of conscious 
operations, the world appears as a system of things, beings, and events 
intimately interwoven through the processes they generate; it is a 
relatively stable system caught in a dynamic progression of structural 
unfolding. The cornerstones of this progress appear to be irruptions of 
original and unpredictably novel entities which are fruits of man's 
inventive genius. The human being appears as the major dynamic factor 
within this system not only with respect to the progress onwards, but 
also at the level of introducing the essential and basic level of meaning 
through the structurizing work of his consciousness. In order to account 
for the origin of human world, he has to account for both. 
The basic meaning-giving and structurizing agency of man -
as I 
have shown elsewhere -
which has been called "phenomenological or 
transcendental constitution" as it appears in both Husserlian and post-
Husserlian phenomenological analysis, does not account for original, 
radically novel meaningful structures introduced into the human world 
as the fruit of man's inventive genius. tO But is it, as phenomenology 
claims, the constitutive system of consciousness to be identified with the 
whole extent of man's structurizing virtualities? 
I have proposed elsewhere to deny the constitutive consciousness of 
these universally accepted prerogatives by distinguishing within the 
complete human functional system another structurizing and productive 
function of man, namely creative function, conjoined with, yet auto-
nomous from, the constitutive function. 
Unravelling the ways of its workings, its progress, and its sources, it 
appears that: 
1) the constitutive activity of consciousness is not the one and only 
system of man's functioning but merely one of many possible conscious 
functions; 
2) the creative function, being another, reaches deeper into the 
nature of man's entire functioning. The analysis of its workings brings 

16 
A-T. TYMIENIECKA 
to light: (a) various hidden factors of human functions instrumental in 
the origin of the human world, dispelling the traditional division into 
"faculties;" (b) vindicates the basic role of the impulsive, emotive, and 
affective dimensions of passions; (c) shows the specific type of orches-
tration of human virtualities entering into the creative junction, as well 
as establishes (i) the creative imagination as the agency of the a priori in 
the "creative freedom," and (ii) the plurifunctionality of human con-
sciousness as the source of possible worlds. II 
Thus an opening appears toward phenomenological realism from the 
closed actual-possible human reality toward possible worlds. 
The question arises: "How could the constitutive system pre-deline-
ated by universally implemented rules, regulations, and principles -
the 
implementation of which is automated in ever repeated routine 
operations -
account for the emergence of activities which are novel 
and different from those of routine constitution?" 
It is by contrast with the creative activity of man that the preceding 
denunciation of the hidden presuppositions of constitution comes to 
light. In fact, as I have shown elsewhere, the creative structurizing 
activity in its phenomenologically inspectable stage is set off also by 
perception. Even more, the creative impulse which triggers the spon-
taneity of the creative process starts upon the foundation of the already 
constituted world. However, it starts with a dual attitude towards it: 
first, it assumes synthetically the existence of the constituted world in its 
present state; secondly, it revolts against it. The creative activity 
emerges by denying the validity of the constituted world -
in its given, 
present state -
to be an adequate interpreter of human reality. It is the 
revolt against routine, automatism, and inertly accepted rules of the 
constitutive system that we passively flow with, and the involuntary 
submission to what they call for; they are the target of the revolt of the 
creative impulse which tends to transcend these imposed, involuntary, 
anonymous trends of nature. To do it, revolt must first break the rules, 
and then, after having, within a self-devised entity, structurized a novel 
interpretation of reality, make it disrupt the regular channels of the 
constitutive world-process by making the new intrude upon the consti-
tuted world and take a foothold within it. Thus, the creative process 
stays in a twofold relation to the constitutive: it situates itself between 
the two different temporal phases of the constituted world by stemming 
from it and breaking off from it and then breaking back into it in order 
to transform it. 

ROMAN INGARDEN'S PHILOSOPHICAL LEGACY 
17 
Whether it is in an immanent perceptual vision in the case of poetry, 
science, fiction, or in the transcendent perception in the plastic arts, the 
inherited and passively constructed forms and affective contents of 
experience are repudiated. All of our operational virtualities, partly 
extracted from their chains in the constitutive system, become galvanized 
and set off in an effort towards reconstruction of the "Real." 
However, to show in which sense the "passivity" of constitutive 
automatization is limited in its role and how the creative activity 
establishes itself in a contrasting, voluntary, and free agent, we must 
reach back to their common ground: its genesis as a specific function 
orchestrating anew all the productive operative virtualities of man into 
a framework of the creative context and vindicating the neglected role 
of the impulsive and affective realm of passions (we are speaking here 
about "creativity" in the precise and restrictive sense, when the "creative 
process" terminates in an aimed-at, concrete, and intersubjectively 
accessible "product"). 
The Genesis of the Creative Function: The Creative Context and Its 
Framework 
I. Differentiation of the Two Functions with Re~pect to the Axiological 
Opposites: Voluntary -
Involuntary. In my work, Eros et logos, I have 
shown in the analysis of poetic creativity how the creative impulse 
surging from the rationally unattainable realm of man's dealing with his 
natural strivings, nostalgia, and drives, confronting the limited and 
imposed framework of reality, and tending to break through towards its 
more adequate version, releases all the presently knotted ties and opens 
the way for a new structurizing system to take over. 
However, questions arise. What would be the ways and means of the 
creative impulse? How could it stimulate and bring about a new 
functional system? Furthermore, what would be the specific, radically 
different mode of this new functional agency? How could it break away 
from the routine life-world constitution, free itself from pre-established 
models, and move towards the invention of new patterns and types? 
Finally, we must wonder whether phenomenological analysis may un-
cover these hidden springs of our virtualities and establish rationally the 
distinctive features of their dynamic flux that eludes the structures of 
reason. 
In fact, in order to answer this last but crucial question in the 

18 
A-T. TYMIENIECKA 
affirmative, we propose to outline the analytically established notion of 
the "creative context." Sketching its role, origin, and ways of operation, 
we hope to outline the answer to other questions as well. It will appear 
that a further distinction between the constitutive and creative functions 
lies in the radical divergence of their modalities opposing the creative 
"voluntary" mode of operations to the constitutive "involuntary." 
Indeed, in its progress the creative function is a mechanism of 
discrimination, deliberation, and selection. But so is the passive genesis. 
However, in opposition to the latter, which works with the material of 
rational elements of structurizing and their selective principles, the 
mechanism of choice of the creative function is constantly oriented and 
reoriented in its modalities by fluctuating inclinations, tendencies, 
expectations, aspirations, hidden longings, aversions, and sympathies; 
all of them, whether they are dispositional or acquired within the 
present world (being matters of feeling, taste, belief, etc.), seem to 
escape the authority of our rational powers. The selective mechanism of 
the constitutive function works chiefly at the level of rational structural 
elements, whereas the creative deliberation seems to plunge with its 
roots into the deep well of passions. They are affecting the deliberating 
function by their inner workings within all the elemental forces and 
operational virtualities and at all stages of our functioning. At the 
crucial creative stage, namely that of the incipient impulsive affectivity 
and sensibility, which both enter into an interplay with the universe of 
ideas, this interplay stimulates and galvanizes the creative orchestration 
into which it spreads; in return, entering into the generating scheme of 
its vast and unlimited range of optional associations, it becomes the 
ground of the creative renewal. 
It appears that, first, the mute upsurges of passions, of disquiet, pain, 
fear, anguish, excitement, and the dumb impulses of irritation, anger, 
elation, the impulse to hit, to run, to embrace -
which are hardly 
experiences, because nothing reveals itself in them, nothing is given and 
brought to light -
are the extreme edge of our psyche, registering 
mechanically the processes of nature; at this level the creative function 
lays its roots. 
In the constitutive process, the mute operations of our functional 
endowment appear already as having reached the full extent of the 
structurizing and presentational proficiency in producing a perfectly 
intelligible perceptual object. As Plato already saw, there is an interval 
separating the one from the other; during this interval the instantaneous 

ROMAN INGARDEN'S PHILOSOPHICAL LEGACY 
19 
and dumb reaction travels the long road from the sensory-motor 
operations of the proto-constitution through the primitive forms of 
spaciality and corporality projected in the perspectives of the past to 
the horizon of the possible futurities; it does all that with reference to 
the already established system of the constituted world. There is a 
necessary and spontaneous assimilation of each experience to this 
established whole. Thereby the lived quality of constituted experience 
goes through the filter of structurizing processes and is molded by them 
in such a way, as Leibniz has so well expressed, that "each of them 
mirrors the whole world." 
On the contrary, the creative impulse rejects the pre-established 
pattern and cuts the ties among the functional agencies -
the rules and 
points of reference of the organizing sovereign reason. It is upon the 
inarticulate movements of passions, impulses, moods, and strivings that 
the emphasis falls. The creative functions solicit their dynamism by 
projecting a double quest. Firstly, it seeks after the interpretative points 
of reference for this natural striving operation within us, which is mute 
and yet most significant for the human being. Secondly, it attempts to 
discover or invent the significance which this dynamic upsurge of 
elemental passions may have for the reinterpretation of reality that it is 
originally asking for. 
2. "Imaginatio creatrix" and the Functional Orchestration Within the 
Creative Context: the Regulative Choice in the "Creative" Versus the "A 
Priori" of Ideas in the "Constitutive" Function. As we have attempted 
to show, the conception of imagination as an independent faculty in 
Kant could not fulfill the role which Kant recognized as its own, that is, 
to account for the breaking into the standard progress of the constituted 
world by the work of human creativity, whereas Husserl does not seem 
to have even risen to the occasion. Nevertheless, we expect to have, by 
their succinct appreciation and criticism, sketched the network of issues 
with reference to which we might now outline our proposed new 
approach already prepared by the conception of the creative orchestra-
tion of human functions within the creative context. 
Thus, unlike Husserl's free "play of imagination" which is subservient 
to the constitutive system following its structurizing principle of a priori 
ideas, -
or unlike Sartre's conception of imagination as a completely 
independent specific faculty following its own whims, neither definable 
nor explained -
we find the imaginatio creatrix the decisive factor 
within the creative context. If it is in a position to assure novelty in the 

20 
A-T. TYMIENIECKA 
creative process, It IS not doing so by participating in the system of 
passive genesis and transcendental constitution in its full extent, but by 
generating from within a specific orchestration of functions which 
brings together the mechanisms and forces of the constitutive apparatus 
with those of the complex realm of passions. Husserl and Kant forced 
the latter into the background as the realm of the soul -
as irrational 
and inaccessible to the sovereign reason -
and, once rejected, it could 
not be reintegrated into its proper role. 
There, at the point of interplay between ideas and feelings, intellectual 
intuitions, and affective responses, from their point of fusion along 
unforeseeable lines, emerge new, barely outlined or alluded to qualities 
and feelings, profiles of forms which in turn, intermingling with a vast 
range of variegated elements during the process of deliberation that 
goes on and on without stopping, generate in profusion ever new, 
ephemeral, and soon vanishing -
but not without having generated 
others -
qualities of feelings and emotions in the whole range of their 
modalities and fragments, profiles of forms, shapes, interrelations; both 
quality and form are so intimately fused into an experiential, barely 
sketched unit that a sharp distinction is hardly possible. Their generative 
power going in all directions through associative references to the 
already established, sclerotized, emptified of the fresh pulp, reality 
becomes firstly the reservoir which the creative function in its quest and 
deliberation draws upon. Secondly, they do not appear in the usual 
mode of constitutive experience, as factual givenness, encircled ration-
ally into definite objective datum, but chaotic and incomplete, elusive 
and fluctuating, they surge with a suggestive power as proposing 
themselves straight to one such or another structurizing problem. 
Thirdly, their appearance may be barely suggestive, but it is neverthe-
less effusive and dynamic; that is, it awakens the creative quest to 
venture into indefinite novel channels to seek even more than they 
concretely may offer. Thereby, this dynamic game between the realm of 
impulse and that of the rational and the affective intuition distills a 
force, both posing problems to our quest and also invigorating the will 
to seek an answer. A novel alliance between new intertwinings emerges 
in the form of a new relational pattern among the types of operations, a 
new dimension of qualitative moulds for sensations, emotions, feelings 
-
an infinitely advancing self-generating system with a new suggestive, 
allusive, evocative force, an invigorating will, a prompting spirit: the 
imaginatio creatrix. 
Imagination appears as mediating between two producing levels. One 

ROMAN INGARDEN'S PHILOSOPHICAL LEGACY 
21 
is of the generative forces of passions, and the other is of the scrutiniz-
ing and selecting powers of reason at all their strata, It may thus seem 
that our analysis gives support to Kant's view about the mediating role 
of the imagination, However, he saw it in cognition, especially percep-
tion, whereas we find it in a strikingly different function: in the creative 
function, The role which Kant attributes to imagination in artistic 
creation is, as we have shown, different from our views, To perform the 
role we have just described, it must participate in the operations of 
both, Its very own and distinctively unique mode of operation consists 
in the suggestive, evocative, and invigorating modes of presenting to the 
deliberating agency of the creative function the previously distinguished 
elements, thus uplifting them from the flow of experience -
otherwise 
they would vanish with the progressing stream -
to the level of self-
presentation, These acts of selecting generate new allusive qualities and 
forms, Furthermore, being brought into a spectrum of the already 
present reservoir of the possible, they intergenerate among each other, 
and with each incoming series, the range of diversified possibilities of 
choice expands into ever renewing ones, 
Thus imagination can emerge in this distinctive creative way only 
within the creative context on the basis of its complete setup. It 
operates within the creative orchestration as the chief mediator at all 
levels bridging the virtualities of reason and those of passions toward 
their cooperation. It advances without deciding about anything; it 
merely serves the deliberating agency of the creative function. However, 
in its mediating role, imagination draws conclusions from the progress 
of the creative process, prompting it incessantly with new suggestions 
which this progress itself indicates. Imagination is neither a routine 
agency of constitution, as in Husserl, nor an elemental faculty, Ein-
bildungskraJt, through which Nature would prescribe laws to the inert 
genius, as in Kant, nor an independent transcendental faculty aloof 
from reality and from the constitutive genesis, as in Sartre, but a result 
and an integral factor of a novel orchestration of man's functioning. 
Concluding, let us suggest in the first place that the great question of 
Leibniz: whether our world is the only one possible, which in classic 
and current phenomenology is emphatically answered in the affirmative, 
might have received -
with the distinction of the plurifunctionality of 
man and with the constitutive function appearing just as one of its 
configurations and the creative function as another -
a basis for a new 
perspective. 
In the secund place, we may gather the main points which we have 

22 
A-T. TYMIENIECKA 
proposed towards the solution of the paradoxes that the question of 
freedom demands. 
We have proposed, in fact, to leave the approach of constraint-
freedom behind for the sake of that in which man transcends both: the 
framework of the already constituted and "imposed" world and the very 
mode of his own functioning: in the creative effort which consists of a 
new orchestration of human functions: 
1) man surpasses the narrow rules of rationality of cognition for the 
sake of action par excellence which draws upon all human resources 
expressed through the mode of feeling and passion; 
2) unlike the intentional one, the creative function, instead of reducing 
man to an artificial level of reason, contributes to his enrichment by 
developing the nature of the person above that of the individual; 
3) thereby, through the modes of invention which it triggers off from 
the person's interiority, it is the instrument of a perpetual re-creation of 
one's own self from its own choice and resources; finally, 
4) the creative effort which concretizes itself within a complex 
modality of action which we may call "creative praxis," forming an 
original object and introducing it into the constituted world, transforms 
the world as well. Thus in creativity man finds liberation from within in 
both directions: a liberation of himself and the world. 
World Phenomenology Institute, 
Belmont, MA 
NOTES 
* This paper appeared first in Dialectics and Humanism 2, No.2 (1975): 71-87 with 
great distortions of the original text. My ideas were confused with those of Ingarden to 
a point beyond recognition. This is a corrected version of the original. 
I For Roman lngarden: Nine Essays in Phenomenology, ed. A-T. Tymieniecka, The 
Hague: M. Nijhoff, 1959. 
2 It would be useless now to review the main questions Ingarden investigates himself, 
and which I have been expanding and interpreting over two decades of my scholarly 
work, e.g., his personal clarification of the Husserlian epoche, his attempts to establish 
the double-face character of human reality through presenting the eidetic analysis of 
structures as a counterpart to Husserlian genetic constitution of objects in the activity 
of consciousness, his further attempts to establish the objectivity and intersubjectivity of 
artistic experience in terms of the immanent structure of the intentional work of art 
together with its counterpart in the intentional constitution of the aesthetic object in 
individual experience, etc. Although these trends running through his work are of great 

ROMAN INGARDEN'S PHILOSOPHICAL LEGACY 
23 
philosophical importance, it could be established in the detailed analysis of their 
polarity that his initial project of an ontological foundation for all philosophical inquiry 
went beyond what the Lebenswelt-interpretation of phenomenology would have brand-
marked as "mondiine Ontologie" founded "in transzendental 'naiver' Positivitiit" (ct. E. 
Husser!, Formale und Transzendentale Logik, Halle: 1929, p. 256). 
3 Cf. Ingarden's letter to Husserl in Analecta Husserliana, The Yearbook of Phenome-
nological Research. Vol. II, Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1972, pp. 357-374. 
• Cf. my "Roman Ingarden ou une nouvelle position du probleme Idealisme-Realisme;" 
Actes du onzieme congres international de philosophie. Vol. XIV, Bruxelles, 1953, pp. 
319-321. 
, In my Logos and Life: Creative Experience and The Critique of Reason, Analecta 
Husserliana. Vol. XXIV, Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1988, I hope to have cleared the ground 
of this Cartesian residue. It naturally obliterates the objective of the Ingarden-Husserl 
controversy. However, as I state it in the theme to this volume, Ingarden's analytic work 
remains valid in its own right as an investigation of the foundational-rational level of 
objectivity as such. We cannot dispense with objectivity! 
(, For more detailed criticism of Ingarden's enterprise, cf. my "Beyond Ingarden's 
Idealism/Realism Controversy with Husser!: The New Contextual Phase of Phenomen-
ology." Analecta Husserliana. Vol. IV: Ingardeniana. Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1976, pp. 
241-418. 
7 His analysis of the psycho-physiological theory of knowledge does not do much more 
than show the presuppositions of empiricism and clarify the way of transcendental 
analysis. 
, Cf. my Why Is There Something Rather Than Nothing, Assen: Van Gorcum, 1965. 
Y It is with this novel approach to the issues concerning reality that I conclude my 
treatise: Logos and Life: Creative Experience and the Critique of Reason. 
10 Cf. 'The Eros and Logos of Life" chapter in my pre-cited treatise Logos and Life, 
book I. 
II Cf. "Constitutive versus Creative Perception" section in panel 2 of the pre-cited 
treatise Logos and Life, book I. 

JADWIGA S. SMITH 
A NEW PHENOMENOLOGY: A-T. TYMIENIECKA'S 
DEPARTURE FROM HUSSERL AND INGARDEN 
Though it is well known that Roman Ingarden did not establish a 
school of followers among his students at Cracow, however, one of 
these students, Anna-Teresa Tymieniecka, devoted much of her scho-
larly effort to the studies of her master. She has also succeeded in 
introducing Ingarden to the Western world. l Nevertheless, she did not 
remain an orthodox disciple of Roman Ingarden; rather, her profound 
probing into his philosophical assumptions led her eventually into her 
own philosophy. Consequently, it is not only her critique of Ingarden 
but also her own phenomenological position which ultimately best 
explicates Ingarden's works. 
It is my privilege to include in this discussion of Tymieniecka's 
relationship to Ingarden the most recent and most important of 
Tymieniecka's works, her book Logos and Life. This first volume, 
subtitled Creative Experience and the Critique of Reason, is intended by 
the author to be a definitive answer to the problem which phenomen-
ology promised to solve but has failed so far to do: the problem of the 
basic unity of all types of experience in relation to human cognition. 
Tymieniecka observes in Part One of this new book that: 
access to the basic unity of these experiential perspectives -
eidetic, emotive, aesthetic, 
intentional -
and the corresponding regional ontologies of the social, aesthetic, antic, 
transcendental, etc. realms -
spheres of human expression -
remains extant. Husser! 
sought vainly to bring nature, body, soul, and spirit under the aegis of transcendental 
intentionality; Ingarden left us merely ontologically unintegrated "regional" fragments; 
Maurice Merleau-Ponty did not succeed in bringing together flesh and the world. flesh 
and nature, the infinite logos and human destiny. (p. 4) 
Thus, in Logos and Life, which is the culmination of years of phi-
losophical inquiry, Tymieniecka evaluates Ingarden's contribution to 
classical phenomenology, but this time she does it with an air of finality. 
This finality does not result, however, from any excessive amount of 
space devoted to the discourse on Ingarden or any repetitive insistence 
on distancing herself from her former master. Just the opposite is true 
of Tymieniecka's handling of her relationship to classical phenomen-
ology and its chief contributors. First of all, Ingarden is just one of the 
25 
Hans H. Rudnick (ed.), Analecta Husserliana, Vol. XXX, 25-36. 
© 1990 Kluwer Academic Publishers. 

26 
JADWIGA S. SMITH 
names she acknowledges, while distancing herself from the general 
context of philosophy, and, of course, phenomenology in particular. She 
does not need to wrestle with her Ingardenian past, like Jacob with the 
angel, because her own work speaks not only for her liberated status as 
a former pupil, but also as an independent scholar, who has worked out 
her own philosophical solutions within her own system which has been 
created by her not as an answer to her individual relationship to 
Ingarden, but as a system in its own right, an ultimate philosophy. The 
book Logos and Life speaks for itself, giving testimony that: 
the access to the Archimedean point from which, alone, the unity of all the possible 
perspectives on man's experience can be explained, and the key to the Human Condi-
tion be obtained, lies in the creative act of the human being which makes him "'human" 
-
the creative act of man where the differentiating factors of the macrocosm of life 
differentiate. (p. 6) 
In other words, the strength of Tymieniecka's conviction in the accuracy 
of her philosophical stand makes her refrain from any more manifesta-
tive statements of her independence from her master. Her own work 
provides the necessary evidence of her status as a thinker in her own 
right. Tymieniecka's dealing with her "Ingardenian past" has assumed 
the air of confidence to which she does not need to contribute any 
more statements establishing differences from her master, unless her 
own work requires the mention of the general context of phenomen-
ology in which the name of Ingarden is just one of many who illustrate 
the point in question. We can almost jokingly say that if one wished to 
talk of some visible Ingardenian "track," then one could comment on 
Tymieniecka's immaculate handling of scholarship: a virtuoso organi-
zation of a multiple-layer structure of chapters and an amazing clarity 
in explaining the foundations of her work. 
Thus, to present Tymieniecka's relationship to Ingarden's phenomen-
ology might necessarily assume the character of an historical overview 
in the absence of any evidence of a present relationship. Instead, 
however, this article will assume an almost contemporary perspective 
from which Tymieniecka's phenomenological position will be evaluated 
on the basis of her now fully developed philosophical system. For this 
reason, the article written by Tymieniecka in 1975, entitled "Beyond 
Ingarden's Idealism/Realism Controversy with Husserl," is historically 
crucial in documenting major changes within the phenomenological 
movement as well as the Tymieniecka/Ingarden controversy; but this 

A NEW PHENOMENOLOGY 
27 
article is of secondary importance in the presence of the recent publica-
tion of Logos and Life. Logos and Life is to give us the true dimension 
of the gap between Ingarden and Tymieniecka, and all this without any 
extra emphasis on distancing herself from her master. This distance 
was never before that fully exemplified and elaborated. Of course, 
Tymieniecka had introduced a substantial amount of her philosophical 
findings in numerous other publications, but Logos and Life represents 
a culmination of her scholarly career. It is rare indeed to produce a 
work of such scope in the contemporary philosophical scene. (Volumes 
complementing Logos and Life are forthcoming.) 
We can say then that Tymieniecka has distanced herself not only 
from Ingarden but from much of classic phenomenology. Her formula-
tion of "the Archimedean point" from which the unity of all human 
experience can be grasped, and which she calls the creative act of man, 
is her answer to the "vicious circle in the orbit of phenomenology," the 
circle definitely not broken by Ingarden. She sees clearly the fact that 
phenomenology attempts to escape any biases by approaching "things 
in themselves" when explaining the universe, and human presence in 
the universe is not enough to lead phenomenology to the solution of the 
problem of how to consider the real. In other words, Tymieniecka 
perceives the ever-lasting authentic relationship between cognition and 
reality to be the culprit in this philosophical impasse and baffling 
challenge to generations of philosophers of all times. In Part One of 
Logos and Life, while introducing the idea of "the radical overturn of 
the phenomenological perspective, Tymieniecka observes that Ingarden's 
idea to get out of the vicious circle by a cognitive "insight of genius" 
was never accomplished. He also did not succeed in finding a solution 
to the moral action of man. Tymieniecka explains Ingarden's failure by 
simply asserting that "there cannot be a type of cognitive experience or 
action which is not bound by a restrictive apparatus separating it from 
the whole in an arbitrary way according to the modes of reality it 
yields." (p. 4) 
We have to notice that Tymieniecka at this point does not simply 
observe the failure of Ingarden from the objective point of view of a 
philosopher-critic, but instead she makes her comments as a philosopher 
who is in command of her own, fully elaborated and monumental 
philosophical system. This system does not rely on either cognition or 
human behavior, conduct, or action to provide "an access to the 
essential state or nature of human knowledge, or to man's essential 

28 
JADWIGA S. SMITH 
status and his role within the unity-oJ-everything-there-is-alive, of which 
he constitutes an inextricable segment." (p. 4) Thus, Tymieniecka's task 
as a philosopher is to avoid the pitfalls of classic phenomenology, which 
with its interest in the givenness of the human factor has concentrated 
on "the patterns, forms, principles, and rules according to which given-
ness is constructed," but, at the same time, it has overlooked the fact 
that "all that an individual or any abstractly isolated element of given-
ness may contain is only in its virtual state and is suspended in its 
actualization upon the entire complex in which it is existentially woven." 
(pp.4-5) 
Tymieniecka is convinced that lngarden's ontological theory of 
knowledge, based on the assumption that particular elements of man's 
universe can be studied in isolation "as if they contained within them-
selves -
individually -
the clues to their interconnectedness within the 
whole," has failed because it did not manage to account for this 
interconnectedness. (p. 5) Thus: 
Through this stress upon the autonomy of abstractly isolated structures which seeks the 
ultimate principles of "reality" through a more and more advanced isolation of the 
elements of which it is composed, we accomplish nothing more than the loss of their 
crucial feature: the specific significance which they may assume in their virtual interplay 
with other elements within a cogent complex. To find the clue to the vast, seemingly 
dispersed and yet cogent macrocosm of the human universe in flux, we can rely neither 
on any ever-more-precise scrutiny of the cognitive constructivism -
constitution -, nor 
upon the rational nuclei of ontic structurations of objectivity. (p. 5) 
This lngardenian flaw in classic phenomenology (though, by no means, 
limited only to Ingarden) Tymieniecka resolves by striking at "the heart 
of givenness-in-becoming." 
To support her position she argues that: 
First, the constructivism of the human givenness is foremostly not only that of the 
development of his life-course, but also, and secondly, the human being is not merely 
(as Husserl proposed) a meaning-bestowing agent, the maker of his life-world; what 
comes first is that his very life in itself is the effect of his self-individualization in 
existence through inventive self-interpretation of his most intimate moves of life. Thirdly, 
although the aspect of man's evolution as a living being has already been acknowledged 
by Max Scheler, yet Scheler misses the critical point: he believes that self-constructivism 
through invention and creativity closes life's possibilities. We intend to show, to the 
contrary, that it expands them into possible worlds of life. (pp. 5-6) 
In other words, the cognitive function of man cannot be separated from 
the very enactment of human life. The two meet "in the crucial device 

A NEW PHENOMENOLOGY 
29 
which life-process entails: the prototype of human action which resides 
in the CREATIVE ACT OF MAN." (p. 7) 
Thus, the problem of the givenness of the real world battled by 
phenomenology finds so far its striking solution in Tymieniecka's 
insistence on life itself, or the "poetics of life." In her article, "First 
Principles of the Metaphysics of Life: Charting the Human Condition," 
Tymieniecka, in a way, prepares her audience for her later Logos and 
Life. She opens the article with a statement about the urgency to 
investigate the multiplicity of data produced by human knowledge, 
particularly today. Hence, the problem of metaphysics seems to be of 
primary importance. At this point, Tymieniecka invokes the name of 
Roman Ingarden and comments on his failure to find "the key to 
metaphysics" by the direct investigation of reality. The failure of her 
master, as well as of Husser! himself, Heidegger, or Merleau-Ponty 
does not mean for her, however, that phenomenology has no grasp of 
the first principles. On the contrary, Tymieniecka says simply and 
directly that "no constitutive intentionality but the constructive advances 
of life which carries it may alone reveal to us the first principles of all 
things; not the givenness of the world but the 'poetics of life' ("First 
Principles," p. 3). 
In her call for metaphysics, aware of the enormous progress of 
knowledge in this century, Tymieniecka is confident in the role that 
phenomenology is able to play with its "radicalism and discernment" in 
formulating the first principles of all things. She calls for "a renewed 
attempt at the critique of reason, prompted by this progress of knowl-
edge about the world, cosmos, life, society," but as there is no com-
munication in these various areas, 
so there is no opportunity for today's man to make a synthesis: to reach a holistic view 
of his own existence within the world and life. Overwhelmed by his own powers. the 
human being may consider himself a center of the universe or the "master of nature," to 
use Descartes' words. Yet in fact he has severed the existential links to everything that is 
alive and he thus hangs in the void, having lost his bearings upon earth. ("First 
Principles," p. 7) 
Tymieniecka concludes then that as a result of this existential void, we 
are no longer able to explain the human beings' role within the life-
world in terms of the ideal and empirical order. She urges, instead, to 
redefine this role radically by avoiding "the Leibnizean, Kantian, and 
Husserlian attempts ... at the structure and source of objectivity as it 

30 
JADWIGA S. SMITH 
is given in human experience. ("First Principles," p. 7) Instead, she 
proposes to concentrate on the conditions of life itself. 
It is obvious that such a shift cannot be linked with Ingarden. Even 
his ventures into moral philosophy did not abandon his general tendency 
of building up objective structures. With the transient and dynamic 
dimension of reality then lost, Ingarden is following Husserl's footsteps 
in a faulty interpretation of reality. Whether we consider Husserl's 
transcendental phenomenology or Ingarden's eidetic version, we can 
see both as products of abstract reduction, and as results of, however 
temporarily suspended, concrete relationships of a being in question 
with a transient flow of the life-world. Tymieniecka's formulation of her 
radically different position has a tone of urgency, striking a manifesto-
like note: 
Neither philosophical anthropologies, focusing upon the human being as if he were the 
center of the universe, nor ontologies, stressing tr.e objective structures, which are the 
fruit of the most advanced forms of life, can do justice to this urgent call, issuing from 
the disarray in which human knowledge and man find themselves, for the definitive 
clarification of the sources of rationality. The metaphysical investigation of the Human 
Condition, in which no type of rationale enjoys a privileged position and each finds its 
appropriate role in life's progress, on the one hand, and no arbitrarily chosen platform 
-
be it givenness of nature -
sets the standards of life's accomplishment, on the other, 
offers the final critique of reason .... ("First Principles," p. 7) 
Moreover, Tymieniecka's critique of reason does not stop at "the 
elucidation of the nature of meanings or of linguistic formation," but it 
aims at "the very 'sense of sense' which differentiates through their 
structures ... the origins of the individualizing life". ("First Principles," 
p.7) 
This Husserlian/lngardenian problem with the totality of the Human 
Condition was introduced by Tymieniecka in a most comprehensive 
form in her "Beyond Ingarden's Controversy with Husser\." Of course, 
the very title of this monograph suggests her parting with classical 
phenomenology. She had to abandon it because: 
The investigation of the world and of man was delineated by a quest after the world in 
its cognitively recurring, stereotypic universal forms that are assumed to persist in the 
constitutive genesis of the life-world in Husserl's thought as well as in Ingarden's 
rational substructure of physical reality, which so far in this perspective remained 
inaccessible to a proper philosophical explication. ("Beyond Ingarden's Controversy," 
p.406) 

A NEW PHENOMENOLOGY 
31 
It is interesting to notice that Tymieniecka introduced the word "beyond" 
in the title of yet another, much shorter article published soon after 
Ingarden's death, "Roman Ingarden's Philosophical Legacy and Beyond." 
In this article, she introduces the idea of Ingarden's main achievement 
not as the one of solving his chief concern, i.e. the realism-idealism 
issue, but the one of bringing this issue to its furthest limit within 
phenomenology. Tymieniecka also acknowledges the fact that: 
Ingarden himself insists repeatedly that other types of analytic approach, e.g. material 
ontology or metaphysics investigating not the possible structural rationale of the world 
and consciousness but their actual existence, still missing in his programme, might deny 
the validity of its various elements. ("Roman Ingarden's Philosophical Legacy," p. 73) 
This awareness of the missing element of actual existence on the part of 
Ingarden in a way justifies the presence of "beyond" in the title because 
the article eventually is discussing Tymieniecka's solution to the prob-
lems not solved by her master. She elaborates in Parts II and III on 
the issue of creativity which is directly related to the major flaw in 
Ingarden's thinking, namely the absence of "an adequate treatment of 
the status of the world and man." 
Of course, man is understood by Tymieniecka as "the real individual," 
hence: 
by starting with a focus upon the real individual in his body, changeable, blurred 
contours from which we may nevertheless "conjecture" the outline of his actual exis-
tential process. we avoid with this initial stroke the Ingardenian predicament. (Logos 
and Ufe. p. 20) 
Ingarden has created an eidetic skeleton of the real individual, thus 
attempting "to supply the Husserlian transcendental conception of the 
real individual being with an ideal intrinsic structure." (Logos and Life, 
p. 20) Now, this complex ideal structure does possess an essence 
containing a constitutive nature accounting for existential distinctive-
ness from all the other kinds of beings as well as internal processes 
guaranteeing autonomy and temporal spread of existence. However, 
Tymieniecka observes a fundamental difficulty in Ingarden's concept of 
the real individual, that is, even though this individual is endowed with 
motion, action, and interaction, he still is perceived as remaining in a 
stationary stage. In other words, "in order to maintain his identity in the 
temporal spread of existence, the individual could not enter indiscrimi-
nately into action undergoing haphazard transformations." (Logos and 

32 
JADWIGA S. SMITH 
Life, p. 21) What Ingarden's eidetic analysis does not provide, then, is 
the principle of the individual's intimate development. 
Tymieniecka finds the lack of this principle in Ingarden's ontology to 
be the ultimate reason why Ingarden was not able to establish existen-
tial connections for the objects in his categorizing endeavors, and as a 
result a universal order cannot be founded. That means that "systematic 
progress cannot be grasped; progress and systematic development fade 
away; and the origin and point of extinction of the individual being fail 
to be explained." (Logos and Life, p. 22) Tymieniecka's answer to this 
"Ingardenian predicament" is the entelechial factor of the living individ-
ual. It is a material nucleus of the individual's existential mechanism, 
carrying out the progress of the being's particular identification. In 
other words: 
While containing a whole project of its cyclic development, the entelechial factor 
presides over the overall orchestration of vital processes that allow an individual being 
to unfold, on the one hand, and appropriate ontological structures and the correspond-
ing biologico-psychic "programs," on the other. (Logos and Life, p. 22) 
The consideration of the development of the real individual evokes a 
concern over the existence of something "specifically human." Pheno-
menological thinking, of course, is deeply interested in establishing 
what is "specifically human." In the case of Ingarden, moral conscious-
ness seems to be his final answer, with freedom as an integral factor. 
But once freedom is a factor within intentional configuration, then man 
is restricted within the categorical jurisdiction, and, as a result, "all the 
possible variables of forms would be quickly dried up; as progress 
becomes stifled, all life would be snuffed out." (Logos and Life, p. 24) 
Now Tymieniecka asks the central question: "Could man-in-his-world 
unfold completely through the productive and reproductive functioning 
of intentional constitution alone?" (Logos and Life, p. 24) Before 
answering this important but ignored question, she observes that 
Ingarden did establish some forms of "transcendence" beyond the 
structural forms of beings, but still he did not grasp the unique status of 
the Work of Art in the world. Rather, following Husserl, Ingarden 
"acccepted explicitly the total domination of the categorical system with 
'die oberste Gattung," and insisted that no new and original object 
could be introduced into the world." (Logos and Life, p. 25) 
At this point, the answer to the question posed earlier is the funda-
mental statement in Tymieniecka's phenomenology: 

A NEW PHENOMENOLOGY 
33 
Our first step involves the discovery that the creative function, guided hy its own telos, 
generates lmaginatio Creatrix in man, as the means, par excellence, of specific human 
freedom; that is, freedom to go beyond the framework of the life-world, the freedom of 
man to surpass himself. (Logos and Life, pp. 25-26) 
Tymieniecka's well-known and often repeated statement that "to be 
human means to be creative" gives prominence to the creative act as an 
act of the human being who rebels against the interpretation of the Real 
at the phase of the constituted world given to him in time. Tymieniecka 
is fully aware of her break with classic phenomenology at this point: 
Thus, man's elementary condition -
the same one which Husserl and Ingarden have 
attempted in vain to break through to, by stretching the expanse of his intentional 
bonds as well as by having recourse to prereduced scientific data -
appears to be one 
of blind nature's elements, and yet at the same time, this element shows itself to have 
virtualities for individualization at the vital level and, what is more, for a ~pecifically 
human individualization. (Logos and Life, p. 28) 
Thus, the creative act of the human condition is the key to metaphysics 
in Tymieniecka's phenomenology. By finding this key, she acknowledges 
her affinity to Husserl because her metaphysics fulfills essentially his 
expectations; he "in his last vision saw that "metaphysics' should be the 
science of the ultimate question of rationality, which was excluded by 
modern positivism." ("'First Principles", p. 68) 
Continuing our discussion of the nature of the Ingarden/Tymieniecka 
relationship, we have come to the point when the creative act of the 
human condition triggers whole new areas of philosophical discourse. 
Focusing our attention now on the work of art, particularly the literary 
work of art, leads us to the consideration of the most well-known part 
of Ingarden's work, the use of the ontological structure of the literary 
work of art. Tymieniecka also partakes in the study of the literary work 
of art, and her definition of it reflects her discovery of the "key to 
metaphysics." Unlike the ontological character of Ingarden's approach, 
which concentrates on the literary work itself, her approach accepts the 
literary work as "a specific type of result obtained by the creative 
activity of the human being." ("'Aesthetic Enjoyment," p. 5) Following 
Geiger's aesthetics, she acknowledges the fundamental role of the 
aesthetic enjoyment in approaching the subject of literature. Thus, 
according to Tymieniecka, the literary work is: 
"literary" first, insofar as it is "embodied" in the media of written (and spoken) 

34 
JADWIGA S. SMITH 
language; it is a "literary creative result" insofar as this embodiment concerns the poetic 
sense brought to fruition through the aesthetic enjoyment. ("Aesthetic Enjoyment," p. 5) 
Similarly, going outside the work itself (its ontological structure), 
Tymieniecka states that the emphasis should fall upon its vision and 
message. ("Beyond Ingarden's Controversy," p. 334) 
By stressing the aesthetic enjoyment, vision and message, Tymieniecka 
attempts to avoid what Ingarden did not manage to foresee. She notices 
that: 
Ingarden's formal-ontological investigation which has as its center of interest the 
domain of the real world and that of the monad-soul has, as we have just seen, 
culminated in mapping the territory for the disentangling of the relations between the 
soul and body. It has also narrowed considerably the possible significance of the 
eventual confrontation between real world and pure consciousness. ("Beyond Ingarden's 
Controversy," p. 335) 
Also, the aesthetic enjoyment helps to define the work as aesthetic, 
unlike Ingarden's aesthetic values which fail to do so. In a lucid manner, 
Tymieniecka summarizes Ingarden's position and his resulting inability 
to account for "what makes the literary work aesthetic, or for resolving 
what makes the cognition of the literary work aesthetic. ("Aesthetic 
Enjoyment," p. 6) In other words, because the aesthetic values, accord-
ing to Ingarden, are inherent in the literary work itself (they are 
ontologically founded), we are referred from the cognition (the experi-
ence of the literary work) to the values within the object and conversely. 
Tymieniecka's opinion, dictated by her polarized stand, is clear: 
Neither the origin of supposedly aesthetic values, nor that of the retrieving (or crystal-
lizing) in cognition of aestheticity of these values, is accounted for. If Ingarden is 
brought to the fore in the present argument it is not merely for an historical reason. I 
suggest, in fact, that this predicament is unsolvable in any aesthetic theory that refers 
ultimately to aesthetic values. ("Aesthetic Enjoyment," p. 6) 
The solution of the intrinsic aesthetic values of the literary work, based 
on the theory of aesthetic enjoyment, is also reflected in the shift 
Tymieniecka is making, when switching eventually from the question of 
"What makes poetry poetic?" to "What makes a poem a poem, a novel 
a novel, a tragedy a tragedy?" In other words, Tymieniecka eventually 
moves from the intrinsic content and form toward man's creative act. 
She observes at the same time that: "Roman Ingarden's conception of 

A NEW PHENOMENOLOGY 
35 
the literary work bars the door to this crucial question." (Poetica Nova, 
p. 69) She provides the answer because she is convinced that the issue 
at stake is the correlation between the ontological structure of the 
literary work and the structure of the cognitive process in the text. 
According to Tymieniecka, the whole existential status of the literary 
work depends on this correlation. She criticizes Ingarden for a dispro-
portionate emphasis on the ideal structural ontology in contrast to the 
"fragmentary and scant" study of conscious processes. (Poetica Nova, 
p.70) 
Finally, in conclusion to this discussion of these two strikingly 
different positions within phenomenology, we should remember that 
Tymieniecka's works are not meant to be understood merely as dis-
cursive dialogues with her master. On the contrary, her works give 
testimony to her own sense of value and originality as well as a 
challenge not only to phenomenology but also to philosophy in general. 
For example, when concluding her Poetica Nova, she expresses this 
awareness of the value of her philosophical accomplishment: 
On Ingarden's ontologico-cognitive basis we may certainly answer the question: "What 
makes literature different from other cultural manifestations of man?" But we remain 
incapable of dealing with the basic wonderment: "What makes art, art?"; "Why does the 
human being create works of art?"; "What role do they play in his world and his 
destiny?" ... the scope of the literary work of art does not reside, as Ingarden claims, 
uniquely in the realization of aesthetic values, nor, as Heidegger proposes, in conveying 
the revelation of Being, last, not in the Geneva Critics' conception of communicating 
with the "moi profond" or of the author. In a reverse course I propose that the nature 
of the "critical" or "appreciative" process analyzing the body of the work itself rejoins 
the heart of the creative poetic investigating by elucidating the existential significance of 
art. (Poetica Nova, p. 72) 
The search for the ultimate philosophical answers has not been easy for 
Tymieniecka, who has finally arrived at her own phenomenology by a 
careful reading of the accumulated philosophical findings of classic 
phenomenology and other philosophical orientations, as well as an 
enormous study of literature and the arts, psychology, history of ideas, 
etc. The totality of her philosophical work is astounding, and her search 
for metaphysics has been an enormous task without a contemporary 
rival. In this sense, she follows her predecessors, like Husserl, in her 
erudition, relying on the vast treasure of art and literature. She even 
surprises them by, for example, venturing into such cultures as Chinese 
and Japanese. In all this richness of allusion and reference, however, 

36 
JADWIGA S. SMITH 
she never loses her own philosophical perspective. Moreover, whenever 
the content of her works requires, she does explain the nature of her 
relationship to her primary source of phenomenological thought, that is, 
Husserl and his followers, but she does so out of her feeling of strength 
as a philosopher representing a radically different stand. 
Department of English, 
Bridgewater State College 
Bridgewater, MA 
NOTE 
I See Krystyna Gorniak's article in Analecta Husserliana, XXVII, 1989. 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Tymieniecka, Anna-Teresa. "Aesthetic Enjoyment and Poetic Sense." Analecta Hus-
serliana: The Yearbook of Phenomenological Research. XVIII (1984), Dordrecht: 
Reidel, pp. 3-21. 
Tymieniecka, Anna-Teresa. "Beyond Roman Ingarden's Idealism/Realism Controversy 
with Husserl -
The New Contextual Phase of Phenomenology." Analecta Hus-
serliana. IV (1976), Dordrecht: Reidel, pp. 241-418. 
Tymieniecka, Anna-Teresa. "First Principles of the Metaphysics of Life. Charting the 
Human Condition." Analeela Husserliana. XXI (1986), Dordrecht: Reidel, pp. 
3-73. 
Tymieniecka, Anna-Teresa. Logos lind Life: Creative Experience and the Critique of 
Rellson. Book I. AnaleCl1l Husserlillna. 24 (1988), Dordrecht: Kluwer. 
Tymieniecka, Anna-Teresa. "Poetic a Nova: The Creative Crucibles of Human Existence 
and of Art." Anilleetil Husserlillnll. XIV (1982), Dordrecht: Reidel, pp. 
Tymieniecka, Anna-Teresa. "Roman Ingarden's Philosophical Legacy and Beyond: The 
Creative Freedom of the Possible Worlds." Dialectics and Humanism. II: (1975), pp. 
3-21. 
Gorniak, Krystina. Analecta Husserlillnll. XXVII, 1989. 

KNUT HANNEBORG 
HUSSERL, INGARDEN AND TYMIENIECKA 
Roman Ingarden's systematic and truly analytical mind in conjuction 
with his perseverance in dissecting any subject has resulted in a wealth 
of rigorously differentiated concepts that form a complicated whole for 
us to examine. Ingarden is far more conscientious than Husserl, and 
more patient. Where Husserl leaps ahead, Ingarden proceeds slowly 
and with caution. Typical of his method is a remark like: 'This problem 
seems to be very difficult. I'll try to solve it step by step." Characteristi-
cally, Ingarden constantly blames Husserl for not being sufficiently 
explicit, not pursuing a given analysis far enough and not formulating 
his concepts with sufficient clarity. 
Ingarden himself never seems disposed to avoid explicit qualifications 
of his statements just to make them more readable, and his careful 
examination of all the possible variants of the solutions he finds to his 
problems -
including the less interesting ones -
may to some extent 
explain why so many critical discussions of his work are of limited 
interest. In many cases his critics misunderstand him, not because he 
has failed to make himself clear (for in point of fact he has) but because 
they simply have not read the work in question carefully enough. This 
applies to his major ontological work, Der Streit urn die Existenz der 
Welt and especially to his most widely read book, Das literarische 
Kunstwerk, and to the misunderstandings of some otherwise eminent 
critics. I Particularly in discussions about the ontological status of purely 
intentional objects, philosophers often reveal a striking lack of any 
thorough understanding of Ingarden's aesthetics when considering his 
theory of the literary work of art. 
In Analecta Husserliana IV (1976) Professor Anna-Teresa Tymieni-
ecka has an almost 200-page monograph entitled "Beyond Ingarden's 
Idealism/Realism Controversy with Husser!' The New Contextual 
Phase of Phenomenology."2 It is a pleasure to find no errors whatso-
ever in Professor Tymieniecka's interpretation of Ingarden's theory, and 
furthermore she would appear to be equally familiar with all his 
writings. She is never guilty of misunderstandings or superficial readings, 
and despite the fact that she has had to disappoint him (as she tells us 
37 
Hans If. Rudnick (ed.), Analecta Husserliana, Vol. XXX, 37-47. 
© 1990 Kluwer Academic Publishers. 

38 
KNUT HANNEBORG 
elsewhere, because she did not find it possible to follow him all the 
way), she remains a congenial critic. 
Tymieniecka's treatise deserves attention not only on account of the 
profound knowledge she displays of Ingarden's entire philosophical 
work but also because she has followed the subsequent development of 
phenomenological philosophy particularly well. One of her additional 
qualifications is that she has her own bold visions of the course which 
phenomenological philosophy should take in the future. This, however, 
leads to certain complications. 
Her conception of the new "contextual" phase of phenomenology is 
of great interest in itself, but it seems unreasonable to deal with it here 
on the basis of the work she has devoted to Ingarden seeing that it is 
virtually no more than a program (and an incomplete one at that) and 
of course already superseded by its realization.3 On the other hand her 
approach to Ingarden is determined by her own philosophical project, 
which I am therefore obliged to deal with insofar as I shall raise 
questions concerning her own theory as it emerges in the course of her 
interpretation of Ingarden. At this point I must stress, however, that al-
though my comments thus necessarily imply reference to Tymieniecka's 
whole philosophical enterprise I have no pretensions whatsoever of 
doing justice to it in its vast scope and impressive depths. I shall thus 
refrain from discussing whether her philosophy manages, in Veda 
Cobb-Stevens' words, "to grasp and articulate both the fundamental 
specificity of human nature and the cosmic ground from which it is 
derived."4 I shall confine myself strictly to the work in question and 
deliberately disregard Tymieniecka's many references to other works in 
which the principles of her concept-formation and her basic presup-
positions are to be sought. 
Part One of Tymieniecka's exposition of Ingarden's theory, "Funda-
mental Rationality and the Universal Order", explains his ontological 
theory and its function in his great controversy with Husserl. She traces 
how Ingarden questions the Husserlian primacy of the theory of knowl-
edge in philosophy and proposes his own autonomous, eidetic analysis 
of the contents of ideas as an absolute foundation and thus as an 
alternative to Husserl's analysis of transcendental constitution, noting 
that Ingarden considers the actual existence of beings as a separate 
metaphysical question and works a priori with their intelligible struc-
tures and "the necessary and immutable structures which beings would 
have to assume if they actually existed" (p. 264). 

HUSSERL, INGARDEN, AND TYMIENIECKA 
39 
Ingarden succeeds, says Tymieniecka, in discarding a series of 
possible solutions to the problem of the existence of the real world 
through his illuminating and meticulous analyses. However, she then 
justifiably questions whether Ingarden's strictly rationalistic approach 
renders adequate cognition of reality possible. 
Part Two is entitled "The Universal Sequence of Objects and the 
Problem of Actual Existence." Using the newly forged conceptual tools 
of Ingarden's ontology, Tymieniecka raises critical questions, especially 
concerning the mode of existence of the real world and its relation to 
pure consciousness -
which Ingarden himself also deals with, by the 
way. But Tymieniecka makes a point of criticizing Ingarden because his 
conception of the real world as existentially autonomous precludes 
acceptance of the possibility that new objects can be generated within it. 
This is important, she feels, because free human creativity is then 
excluded from the domain of the real world, which is determined by a 
network of causal relations. 
Tymieniecka goes on to clarify the complex relations existing be-
tween consciousness, ego, person, soul and body as expounded by both 
Husserl and Ingarden. Both conceive of the ego as the necessary 
existential source of the being of conscious acts and as the generator 
of thought. But Ingarden questions HusserI's conception of universal 
consciousness (Bewusstsein iiberhaupt) and focuses his attention on the 
relation of pure consciousness to the individual mind and ultimately to 
the soul and body. Here, Tymieniecka finds that Ingarden challenges 
HusserI on a sensitive point and that this is a promising development, 
but begins to doubt whether Ingarden pursues his analysis of the 
existential-ontological relations between pure consciousness and the 
human monad far enough. She raises the important question whether 
Ingarden's rationalistic, formal ontology is really the most fruitful 
approach to any inquiry into "the possible interconnections between 
the stream of consciousness, the soul and the body as experienced" 
(p.303). 
Tymieniecka then turns to Ingarden's theory of aesthetics, not 
primarily to remind us of its well-known function in Ingarden's dis-
cussion of the idealism/realism controversy, but because the various 
levels of reality and the different modes of cognition involved in our 
dealings with works of art can throw new light on the noesis-noema 
relationship and prove to be a fruitful field for discussion of the vital 
question whether man can transcend his own intentional schema of 

40 
KNUT HANNEBORG 
constituting and reconstituting objectivity". Here Tymieniecka leaves 
what she rightly calls Ingarden's "masterly and careful analysis" (p. 323) 
in order to pass on to the more general philosophical questions that 
interest her, where she finds that the work of art is important as an 
example of an object constituted by several heterogenous strata and 
thus a model for other domains of being. She also goes further than 
Ingarden in her discussion of art as "communication" and of "the 
sources of art". She explains that she finds this necessary if one is to 
account for "the basic significance of Art" and understand its "vision 
and message" (p. 330f.) This leads her on to reasoning about "cosmic 
creation", "the program of the universe" and the determining factors of 
"the real world's intrinsic progress of change and becoming" (p. 340). 
The title of Part Three is "Action as the Key to Actual Existence." 
Before getting on to Ingarden's conception of action she explains his 
theory of the real world as being held together by causal relations 
determined on the basis of formal ontological inquiry. She regards 
Ingarden's openness towards a new conception of the action of the free 
human individual as "promising." "My activity", she says " ... is directed 
towards the transcendent reality of the world ... [lIt is caused by 
transcendent forces of the word" (p. 357). In this connection she makes 
the important observation that for Ingarden the real world remains 
essentially "a physicalistic-empirical conception" and that he "remained 
at the level of the physicalistic universe as a phenomenologically un-
reduced product of scientific and common-sense speculation" (p. 360f.). 
This is a blunt way of expressing it, but not unjustified. In fact I think 
one might add that this prejudice underlies both his aesthetics and his 
semantics, to the detriment of both. And indeed Tymieniecka states 
later on that the prephilosophical conception of the world of Husserl 
and Ingarden seems to underlie classical phenomenological research in 
general (p. 405). I find that Ingarden's rationalism is also apparent in 
his aesthetics. His theory of linguistic meaning and thus also his theory 
of the literary work of art is biased by emphasis on discursive meaning 
in the same way as he is prone to regard statements about the real 
world as paradigmatic. 
Part Three ends with a most useful and clearly formulated recapitu-
lation of the main points of criticism of Ingarden's phenomenological 
system, expounded here most soundly on the basis of Ingarden's own 
premisses. In general, Tymieniecka finds Ingarden's ontological innova-
tion very fruitful in its own right but inadequate as a means of access to 

HUSSERL, INGARDEN, AND TYMIENIECKA 
41 
actual existence. She also finds that Ingarden is locked in his own 
rational schematism, with the result that his work tends to reveal the 
limitations of Husserl's approach to the realism-versus-idealism con-
troversy rather than solve the problem. 
When Tymieniecka repeatedly talks about Ingarden's "failure" or 
"impasse", I think it is only fair to add that Ingarden himself also talks 
explicitly about the failure (Misse1olg) of his ontological investigation 
and attributes it to his absolutization of the Husserlian point of depar-
ture in the immanent analysis of pure consciousness:' 
In Part Four, entitled 'The Contextual Phase of Phenomenology and 
its Program" Tymieniecka transcends this framework in favour of a 
sketch of a radically new approach in phenomenology which "emerges" 
after Husserl and Ingarden, who "have explored the classical phenomen-
ological program to its final possibilities" (p. 377). Under Ingarden's 
scrutiny in particular, she feels, "factors of man's interworldly existence, 
which are alien to and challenge these tight rational work schemes" 
inevitably turn up (p. 376). In the contextual phase of phenomenology 
one is prepared, as Tymieniecka phrases it (p. 379), "to reach deep 
down to their dynamic springs." This more holistic and experiential 
research has not the same pretensions to apodictic certitude or founda-
tion in a presuppositionless point of departure. Actually, Tymieniecka 
finds that some rationalistic cornerstones of classical phenomenology 
are obsolete. But she declares that the rational analysis of intentional-
eidetic correlations "remain instrumental as a centralizing rational 
dimension" (p. 383f.). In fact it is also worth noting that she finds 
classical phenomenological prescriptions a necessary guarantee against 
"the relativistic biases of arbitrary cognitive approaches ... [and] 
against speculation" and "mere rational constructs in which the human 
mind delights" (pp. 390ff). 
Acknowledging what I may perhaps summarily label as the circularity, 
historicity and contingency of philosophy, Tymieniecka outlines a 
program for an approach that widens the scope of phenomenological 
inquiry to encompass "a vaster network of existential interdependencies 
of man and his integral condition" (p. 393). She praises Ingarden for 
bringing to light "the substructure of human rationality" (ibid.) but 
maintains that he does not come to grips with the modalities of "the 
fleeting reality which is in our experience" and that he falls short of 
achieving a satisfactory cosmology and an account of the experiential 
dynamis of man" (p. 399). She criticizes both Husser! and Ingarden for 

42 
KNUT HANNEBORG 
their restrictive prephilosophical conception of the world and for being 
unable to account for the occurrence of new objective types of human 
experience within the constituted world. She claims that the new 
phenomenology radically transcends the limits of objectivity, and 
nothing less than "the architectonic project of the cosmos" becomes the 
object of interest along with "the elemental springs in Nature and the 
subliminal springs in the specifically human condition" (pp. 405-410). 
Thus Tymieniecka's critical examination of Ingarden's philosophy cer-
tainly leads us beyond it, right to the brink of bold speculation. 
An examination of this extensive and thorough study reveals that 
Tymieniecka has not given us a comprehensive assessment of all 
aspects of Ingarden's achievements in all the fields he covers. But then 
she does not claim to do so. However, the more than 200 articles and 
books which Ingarden wrote combine to form a singularly thorough 
treatment of one philosophical issue, namely idealism versus realism, 
and she examines it as such. She deals with Ingarden primarily as 
Husserl's follower, and he did of course consider himself as such. But 
whereas in her exposition of Husserl's doctrine she generally adopts 
perspectives that are current in the history of phenomenological his-
toriography, she sees Ingarden's philosophical project more particularly 
in the light of her own philosophical involvement. Naturally enough, 
since her dispute is primarily with Ingarden, her concretization of 
Ingarden's project is determined by her own philosophical interest. 
When it becomes particularly difficult to follow her critical argument, it 
is thus not primarily on account of linguistic obscurities6 but because 
attitudes to fundamental issues in philosophy are at stake and because 
she conducts the discussion within a framework where key concepts are 
intrinsically bound up with a fundamental reorientation in philosophy. 
These concepts in turn serve Tymieniecka as points of reference for 
"lower order concepts" and are themselves not easily defined as they 
refer for their meaning -
and for the principles of concept formation 
generally -
to other parts of her theory. And Tymieniecka certainly 
makes a daring attempt to reformulate basic philosophical problems, a 
process which in itself implies terminological innovation, but in this 
monograph the innovator seems to pay little attention to the questions 
of philosophical semantics involved. 
Tymieniecka often writes as if her own theory were the only possible 
alternative to the Ingardenian system, and as if her theory contained no 
uncertainties. I doubt whether she will care to admit the truth of either 

HUSSERL, INGARDEN, AND TYMIENIECKA 
43 
of these propositions, and in point of fact she does explicitly concede 
that her theory has moments of uncertainty. This emerges when she 
talks about how to avoid the "pitfalls" of naturalism and Cartesianism 
(pp. 388, 393) and when she says that adherents of the new contextual 
phase of phenomenology should take upon themselves the obligation to 
answer questions like "How can we circumscribe 'phenomenological 
inquiry'?" and "Wherein lies the decision regarding the legitimacy of an 
inquiry as a contrihution to this field?" (p. 379). 
With regard to the first proposition, Tymieniecka seems to suggest 
that phenomenology, with something like objective inevitability, develops 
by itself into the third, contextual phase. Curiously enough what she 
seems to forget here is the creative function of the subject of philoso-
phical inquiry, which she otherwise finds to be of vital importance. And 
the rest of us certainly has no doubts about her own creativity. 
The table of contents of her monograph demonstrates amply that 
this distinguished Ingardenian has a prolific mind. It indicates a will to 
build systems almost equal to that displayed by the two masters. At the 
same time her mode of exposition reveals a divergent philosophical 
style that can be seen as a correlative to a divergent philosophical 
method. And one wonders whether the difference between methods 
within phenomenology can be as great as Richard McKeon finds it to 
be in philosophy in general when he says that methods differ "so 
radically that they completely transform the contents, forms and pur-
poses of philosophy."7 What Tymieniecka sees as two complementary 
features of the existence of the real individual: "relative perdurance and 
change" are indeed predicable of her own philosophy considered as an 
attempt to go beyond Ingarden's controversy with Husser!. 
Both Ingarden and Husserl strive to make philosophy a rigorous 
science, but at the same time both consider philosophy as a matter of 
cardinal importance in their lives. Every philosopher must be religiously 
centred, said Husserl (muss ja religios zentriert sein).K This latter 
attitude seems to be reflected in Tymieniecka's writings too, whereas 
the former approach is not easily discernible in her attempt to bring 
about a radical renewal of phenomenological philosophy. She explains 
how Ingarden sees the problem of the existence of the real world as 
"the pivotal point of all philosophical problems" (p. 254) and how 
confusion reigns at this very point. Here I come to think of Andre 
Darbon, who said that what he missed in Bertrand Russell's philosophy 
was "a good theory of confused thought."Y No philosophy is complete 

44 
KNUT HANNEBORG 
without one, and Tymieniecka takes up new ways of dealing with 
phenomena revealed in spheres of genuine philosophical experience 
which seem to defy rational analysis. 
Ingarden's own typical response in a situation like this would be to 
analyse, dissect and divide, carefully exposing the contents of the ideas 
that enter into the problematic situation. And he would always try to 
conduct the discussion on the basis of strictly formulated and unambi-
guously determined concepts (auf dem Boden streng formulierter Fragen 
und eindeutig bestimmter Begriffe).l0 In the work under discussion here 
Tymieniecka does not quite conform to this standard of scientific 
philosophy, nor does she seem to want to. Her rich, thought-provoking 
exposition can be difficult to follow on account of its methodological 
opacity when she deliberately explores the limits of phenomenological 
philosophy. I I But it is interesting to note that Ingarden himself in his 
later years paved the way towards a "'softer" position regarding the 
conception of philosophy as a rigorous science when he said: "Perhaps I 
am too conceptual (zu begrifflich) to be a genuine phenomenologist." 12 
Ingarden was very reluctant to make general statements about the 
major philosophical problems he discussed. It could be, as Michael 
Hempolinski has suggested, that too strong demands of rationality in 
philosophy impeded Ingarden in giving as much as an outline of the 
metaphysics correlative to his ontology. I} His conceptuality (Begrifflich-
keit) and his analyticism excluded a more holistic approach to the 
philosophical experience, whereas Tymieniecka would appear to be 
more like Merleau-Ponty, who found it necessary to use certain fluid 
concepts such as motivation in order to account for what occurs in 
experience. Her holistic approach to the concrete flow of lived experi-
ence contrasts with Ingarden's ontological differentiation of essentially 
distinctive types of objects conceived as disconnected possibilities. She 
questions the necessity and generality of the results of this kind of 
eidetic analysis. 
Ingarden was perfectly well aware of the circular character of logical 
knowledge and he knew that theoretical foundation in general must 
move in circles (p. 249). This actually affects the validity of his formal 
ontology as well. As Tymieniecka admirably accounts for it, the links 
between the elements of the contents of ideas are not derived from 
formal logic, but the logical laws are derived from them. Here she 
touches on a crucial issue. She opposes Ingarden's presuppositions to 
Husserl's, mentioning Husserl's theory of the origin of logical laws in 

HUSSERL, INGARDEN, AND TYMIENIECKA 
45 
the aprioric laws of constitutive consciousness. She finds, however, a 
fundamental similarity between Husserl's and Ingarden's conceptions, 
without mentioning at this point how Husserl also said that predicative 
evidence is founded in prepredicative evidence and that logical theory 
should accordingly build upon direct experience of the logical pheno-
menon itself.14 
At all events the formal ontological system to which Ingarden gives 
priority is as little self-sustaining as any system of formal logic. On a 
metatheoretical level, the correlate to formal logic to be found in 
transcendental logic should be taken into consideration in the theory of 
formal ontology, and here again the question of the proper ontological 
status of thought is a stumbling block. IS Formal logic may well be the 
exemplary index of all ideality, as Husserl says. Ultimately, however, 
systems of formal ontology rest upon the study of thought as it reveals 
itself in cognitive acts where the world of pure forms is constantly 
transcended and the timeless ideal relations of thoughts are related to 
processes in time. As Maurice Blondel puts it, nothing in the mind is 
purely analytic, and there is an intimate logic underlying and predeter-
mining the purely formally analytical. In the final analysis, he says, there 
is an act, an initiative of the inventing and constructing mind, and it is 
in this logic of the synthetic action of the mind that we should seek the 
la ws that regulate the procedures of formal logic. 16 This brings us very 
close to Tymieniecka's concern about the creative mind, and the word 
"action" evidently represents a key concept in her theory. She claims, 
justifably, that it is an important corrective to Ingarden's rationalistic 
objectivism to take up the creative activity of the subject of philosophi-
cal inquiry. It may appear that phenomenology then returns to its own 
beginnings, at least if we subscribe to the not unfounded opinion that 
Maurice Blondel can properly be labelled the first phenomenologist (Ie 
premier phenamenalague). In many respects this may be a disputable 
statement, but in support of Blondel and in the same tradition in 
French philosophy we find Maine de Biran, and even he was recently 
called -
by Serge Morin -
"a truly budding phenomenologist." 17 At 
all events Blondel is a principal precursor of 20th-century phenomen-
ology.1 H I cannot resist the temptation to draw attention to this all too 
frequently overlooked French philosopher as a true master of the 
philosophical study of action. The title of his epoch-making dissertation 
of 1893 is very aptly "L'Action." And we can note that Tymieniecka 
finds "nothing basically new" in the kind of phenomenology that goes 

46 
KNUT HANNEBORG 
beyond "the rational levels of objectivity" (p. 379). Purity and impurity 
of logic, consciousness and ego is then indeed at stake. 19 Ingarden said 
that for Husserl the pure ego was in a way God. We can perhaps add 
that this "god" is now dead too. At all events Ingarden's partial 
recognition of the contingency and historicity of philosophy -
for 
which Tymieniecka has a keen eye -
certainly takes us a long way from 
the Husserlian point of departure and calls for a new conception of the 
nature and purpose of philosophy. 
The fact that Professor Tymieniecka has elucidated this while at the 
same time giving Ingarden his due in a balanced assessment of his main 
philosophical project must be acknowledged as one of her major 
achievements. 
Roskilde University 
NOTES 
lOne obvious example is Rene Wellek. 
Page references in the present article refer to this work. 
3 For a concise survey see A-T. Tymieniecka's introduction in Analecta Husserliana, 
XlV 0ubilee volume, 1983). 
4 "Contextual Phenomenology and the Problem of Creativity", Analecta Husserliana, 
VII (1978), l63-174p.173. 
5 Der Streit . .. , II, 2, p. 395. 
r, Part of the text is printed in what at times is a questionable translation from the 
author's French original. 
7 In "Philosophy and Method", 1. Philos., XL VIII (1951),653-682, p. 665. 
x According to Ingarden (oral message in 1967) Husser! said this in 1927. Cf. also 
Stephan Strasser, "History, Teleology and God in the Philosophy of Husser!", Analecta 
Husserliana, IX (1979), pp. 317-333. 
Y La phi/osophie des mathematiques; Etude sur la logistique de Russell, Paris 1949, 
p.47. 
10 Der Streit ... , II, 2, p. 273. 
II Donald Kuspit, in a discussion (1972) once stated: "We seem to be reaching a 
barrier, a boundary line of philosophy itself. ... Philosophy becomes much more 
tentative all the time .... What we are really asking for now is poetry." Analecta 
Husserliana, III, 1974, p. 104f. 
12 Oral message, 1967. Cf also Heribert Steinbach, "Ontologie als begriindende 
Wissenschaft ist im Gegensatz zur Phiinomenologie als erkliirender, aufweisender 
Wissenschaft nur in strengster Begrifflichkeit moglich." "1st Ontologie als Phiinomeno-
logie moglich?", Z. Phi/os. Forsch. XXI (1968), 78-100, p. 99. 
13 "Epistemologie und Metaphysik bei Husser! und Ingarden", D. Z. Philos., XXIV 
(1976),1546-1555,p.1554. 

HUSSERL, INGARDEN, AND TYMIENIECKA 
47 
14 Erfahrung und Urteil, Hamburg 1948, pp. 17, 37. See also Aron Gurwitsch, 
"Presuppositions philosophiques de la logique", R. metaph. morale LVI (1951), 395-
405. Cf. Giuseppina Chiara Moneta, 'The Foundation of Predicative Experience and 
the Spontaneity of Consciousness", Life-World and Consciousness, Essays for Aron 
Gurwitsch, Evanston 1972, pp. 171-190. 
I, Cf. Pfiinder's Logik, Halle 1929, introduction. 
10 "Ebauche de logique generale", Rev. metaph. morale, LXIlI (1960), pp. 7-18. 
17 "A Return to Habit or How to Kick the Experience", Analecta Husserliana, V 
(1976),87-97, p. 90. 
IX Cf. Joseph Marechal "Phenomenologie pure, ou philosophie de l'action?", Melanges 
Joseph Marechal, Paris 1950, I, pp. 181-206. 
I~ Cf. A. Poltawski's discussion of pure consciousness as an "abstract epistemological 
idealization" in "Consciousness and Action in Ingarden's Thought", Analecta Hus-
serliana, III, 1977, pp. 124-127, especially p. 127. 

PART II 
INGARDEN AND LITERARY THEORY 

JOZEF SIVAK 
REDUCTION PHENOMENOLOGIQUE ET INTUITION 
A propos du rapport llusserl-Ingarden 
1. INTRODUCTION 
La notion de reduction est rune des notions "operatoires" les plus 
importantes de la phenomenologie de Husserl, pour qui elle repre-
sentait meme la porte d'entree de la philosophie en general. Sa variete 
terminologique en temoigne. A prime abord, nous en avions denombre 
plus d'une vingtaine d'especes et d'appellations, tout en laissant aux 
philosophes informaticiens Ie soin d'en etablir Ie nombre et la fre-
quence exacts. Mais tres souvent il s'agira des synonymes. C'est Ie cas 
des expression telles !!;rroxi) "mise entre parentheses", "suspension du 
jugement", "neutralisation", etc. dont Ie contenu varie, neanmoins, chez 
Husserl selon Ie contexte -
allant d'une attitude neutre voire impartiale 
it une attitude franchement sceptique ou meme nihilisatrice vis-a-vis 
d'une chose. 
II conviendrait donc de s'interroger sur Ie sens et la portee plus 
exacts de cette ou plutot de ces notions controversees pendant long-
temps. II en va de meme des autres notions operatoires ou "athema-
tiques", portant, selon E. Fink, sur des "themes'" et notamment de celie 
de rintuition qui semble les cotoyer constamment. En effet, Ie reduction 
et rintuition sont pour Husserl tres proches rune de rautre. N'a-t-il pas 
detini la phenomenologie en tant que "science intuitive apriorique" et 
rintuition en tant que la forme fondamentale de to utes les methodes 
phenomenologiques particulieres? 2 Ensemble, elles permettront, peut-
etre, non seulement de se faire une idee sur la "technique" phenomenol-
ogique", mais aussi sur la conception husserlienne tout entiere. 
Quant aux textes consacres a ces deux notions, ils sont abondants 3 
de meme que les interpretations. Parmi ces dernieres, notre attention 
sera retenue notamment par celie de R. Ingarden,4 phenomenologue 
eminent connu tant a L'Est qu'a rOuest et a qui nous devons plus d'un 
eclaircissement au cours de notre propre occupation de Husserl. 
Passons donc a rexpose de ces deux notions cle de la technique 
phenomenologique proprement dite en procedant par ordre progressif 
ainsi que Ie suggere la notion meme de methode avec ses etapes 
51 
Hans H. Rudnick (ed.), Analecta Husserliana, Vol. XXX, 5/-69. 
© 1990 Kluwer Academic Publishers. 

52 
JOZEF SIVAK 
correspodant aux niveaux conceptuels de la doctrine husserlienne. Tout 
d'abord, nous interrogerons leur motivation et leur role au niveau 
perceptif, puis, imaginaire et entin, universel ou transcendantal. Ainsi 
nous aurons l'occasion d'essayer de repondre en meme temps aux 
autres questions posees par la reduction, a savoir celle du nombre plus 
exact des etapes en question, d'un cote et celle des domaines d'applica-
tion (physique, psychologique, etc.), de l'autre. 
2. REDUCTION ET INTUITION EIDETIQUES 
Dans ses Recherches logiques deja parlait Husserl de l'edification d'une 
philosophie sans presupposes, fondee sur Ie "principe de l'absence de 
presuppositions" et qui serait susceptible d'etre Ie prototype d'un 
recommencement radical en philosophie. Aussi la future phenomenolo-
gie, presentee a l'origine comme une science eidetique descriptive et 
universelle, ne devra-t-elle aucunement tenir compte des sciences exis-
tantes dont la naissance et la classification posent des problemes. Au 
point de vue methodologique, elle voudre etre la "methode originelle de 
toutes les methodes philosophiques". Et sur Ie plan doctrinal, elle 
pretendra a etre une science rigoureuse, animee, comme on sait, par 
l'ideal "zu den Sachen selbst", vers les choses telles qu'elles se pre-
sentent elles-memes, "en original". La "chose" husserlienne doit evi-
demment etre entendue non pas au sens reel-naturel, mais logique, 
embrassant tout objet reel ou possible de la connaissance. Autrement 
dit, il s'agit donc de tout concept "thematique", de tout ce qui est 
susceptible de devenir un "theme" (philosophique). 
Cette problematique epistemologique et gnoseologique est presente 
non seulement au point de depart de la phenomenologie, mais aussi 
dans son developpement ulterieur. La phenomenologie se situe des Ie 
debut du cote des sciences eidetiques portant sur les "essences", eide, 
presupposant, a la difference des sciences du "fait" au empiriques, a 
I'interieur d'un fait empirique, l'existence d'une "essence" ou d'un 
"Was'" en tant que preuve de sa necessite. Celle-ci peut etre, au mains, 
anticipee, "posee en idee". Une interrogation plus poussee du rapport 
fait-essence alors s'impose. 
C'est que Ie fait est individuel et contingent, autrement dit, ce qui 
pourrait etre ailleurs, autrefois et autrement, tout cela en vertu de sa 
propre essence. Plus concretement encore, un fait est non seulement 
quelque chose d'individuel, mais il est aussi doue d'un caract ere propre, 

REDUCTION PHENOMENOLOGIQUE ET INTUITION 
53 
c'est-a-dire, ses predicats "essentiels", lesquels peuvent, a leur tour, 
appartenir a d'autres faits ou essences encore, avec une essence 
delimitant une "region" au sommet.6 Un fait individuel est, ensuite, la 
don nee d'une vision individuelle (empirique), c'est-a-dire, d'une percep-
tion. Mais, analogiquement, une vision de I'individu pourrait faire objet 
d'une autre vision encore, savoir d'une "vision de I'essence" ou eide-
tique. Or une telle vision convertie, vision a la deuxieme puissance, ne 
peut plus etre consideree comme un acte empirique quoique reel. Ainsi 
la solidarite entre fait et essence se reproduit au niveau des actes de 
la connaissance, entre ces differents types de vision ou d'intuition au 
sens large 7 II y a, chez Husser!, toute une strategie de l'exemple pour 
illustrer cette conversion, qu'il s'agisse de la perception d'une chose 
animee ou inanimee. 
La perception d'un objet, de ce cube-Ia n'est jamais que partielle, 
inadequate, ce qui ne signifie pas qu'elle ne serait pas originaire. II ne 
faut pas confondre l"'originarite" et l"'adequation" comme Ie font 
certains interpretes.8 L'originarite de la saisie d'un objet ou, comme dit 
Husser! aussi, sa donation "en personne", dans son "ipseite" peut 
recevoir precisement autant de degres d'adequation que 1'0n multiplie 
ces perceptions ou determinations successives et sans en privilegier 
aucune. On voit qu'une perception est deja un probleme complexe et 
doit avoir un sens qui reste a expliciter. Mais cette explicitation 9 ne 
peut pas etre non plus l'affaire d'une intuition empirique. C'est que la 
perception et la chose meme ou "objet" vu (sens objectif) ne se 
trouvent pas au meme niveau. 
L'intuition empirique permet, il est vrai, d'approcher ces niveaux 
dans une diversification continue de vues en faisant varier des para-
metres divers (distance, perspective, grandeur etc.) afin d'apporter des 
determinations nouvelles et toujours plus precises. On peut neanmoins 
presupposer au cours d'une telle intuition que parmi les degres 
d'inadequation il y aurait une adequation "optimale", sinon -
quand 
une verification demontrerait que ce n'est pas Ie cas -
on peut toujours 
poursuivre I'experience. Donc non seulement un individu mais aussi 
I'intuition de I'individu possede un cote essentiel. Une science empiri-
que, par exemple, procedant de cette fa<;on arrive a transmettre une 
connaissance plus precise de ses objets. Et une philosophie qui se veut 
scientifique comme la phenomenologie doit, sinon proceder a la 
maniere d'une telle science, au moins, s'inspirer du "sens final" de la 
sCience. 

54 
JOZEF SIVAK 
Mais pourrait-on, dans une intution em pm que percevoir jusqu'a 
I'infini, ce qui est parfaitement concevable, mais irrealisable en fait? De 
meme que cela n'est pas dans les possibilites humaines, il n'en est pas 
moins vrai que la perception n'est pas la seule dimension de I'ame et les 
descriptions faites pour I'intuition de I'individu peuvent etre faites pour 
d'autres actes ou modalites de I'intuition encore, tels Ie souvenir, Ie 
penser, Ie juger, I'imaginer, etc. Inversement, une objectite peut se 
presenter dans to ute une serie d'actes, son intuition y compris. La 
realite de ces actes est a la base de la possibilite reelle d'une intuition 
de I'essence. Ainsi, Husser! arrive a une notion d'experience elargie, 
notion correspondante a I'elargissement de la notion d'objet. Nean-
moins, la perception lui servira non seulement de modele intuitif 
devenant Ie "mode originaire" par rapport aux autres modes con-
scientiels et synonyme de ladite donation "en personne".]() Mais, dans 
I'intuition de I'essence, a la difference de I'intuition empirique, I'individu 
(Eidos) "n'est ni saisi ni aucunement pose comme realite."ll Et pour 
qu'il y ait une intuition eidetique, Husserl donne ceUe double conditio 
sine qua non: (a) la Iibre possibilite de chercher un individu et de 
former une conscience d'exemple (exemplification); (b) (inversement) la 
libre mise en application d'une activite (d"'ideation") pour s'orienter 
vers une essence correspondante precedemment illustree (dans une 
vue). Par cette activite d'ideation ou la "libre variation imaginaire" on 
transforme ainsi un exemplaire (un son, une couleur, un souhait, etc.) 
en une multiplicite de variantes. A I'issue de cette metamorphose de 
I'exemple serait ce qui ne varie plus, un "invariant" libere de sa con-
tingence. Ainsi, un objet spatial deviendrait "objet" spatial en general. 
Lorsque je "pen;:ois" une couleur, je regarde en me me temps un objet 
colore, mais ce n'est pas lui que je vise. Cette technique de variation 
imaginaire ne permet d'obtenir que des eide de contenu, generiques, 
puisque depuis la sensation jusqu'a la signification, c'est Ie meme 
contenu (rouge) qui varie. Les concepts formels de la logique et de la 
mathematique exigent, de leur cote, un outre type d'abstraction, celie 
qui vide de tout contenu, c'est-a-dire la formalisation. 
L'imagination, Ie principal facteur de I'intuition eidetique, est aussi 
1"'eIement vital" de la phenomenologie. C'est encore elle qui permet de 
crever Ie plafond de I'attitude naturelle. Et appelle a prendre des 
distances vis-a-vis d'elle. Et I'intuition au sens stricte qui est desormais 
a distinguer de la perception deviendra tres tot pour Husser!, Ie 
principe sur lequel il fera reposer aussi bien sa methode que sa 

REDUCTION PHENOMENOLOGIQUE ET INTUITION 
55 
doctrine, en Ie considerant meme comme Ie "principe de tous les 
principes"12 Mais, d'un autre cote, l'intuition ainsi comprise differe 
egalement de l'imagination ou phantasie puisqu'il ne s'agit pas d'inven-
ter n'importe quel objet irreel. l1 Aussi, des Ie debut, Husserl insiste sur 
Ie caractere directe, immediat et instantaneel de la saisie intuitive d'une 
essence, meme si, a la lecture de certains textes elle apparait comme 
une affaire d'intervale ou de correlation ou encore de discours.14 
De cette possibilite technique de l'intuition eidetique Husser! tirera 
une regIe qu'il appellera la "reduction eidetique". Elle prescrit au 
phenomenologue de ne s'occuper que de l'essence des choses et de la 
connaissance et marque ainsi Ie passage de l'individualite (diversite) 
phenomenale ala generalite phenomenale (empirique ).15 
Pour R. Ingarden, lui aussi, cette reduction est une norme. En tant 
que renoncement a I'individuel, a la contingence, cette reduction 
possede un aspect negatif, mais dans la formulation de Husserl, elle a 
un aspect positif: elle ne veut pas dire exclusion des, mais au contraire, 
"reduction" aux essences.16 Appliquee a d'autres disciplines philosophi-
ques et scientifiques, elle donnera plusieurs reductions (psychologique, 
physique, etc.) transformant ces disciplines en sciences "eidetiques", 
non experimentales. 1 7 
Husserl pensait, a I'origine, a appliquer la reduction uniquement aux 
faits, aux actes individuels, mais tres tot il s'est apen;u qu'elle devait 
etre universelle, d'un cote, et viser plutot aux grandes theses seulement, 
de l'autre. IH Ce n'est pas tel ou tel fait empirique, mais tout doit etre 
reduit (a l'essence). Ce point de vue est deja present dans les fdeen f, 
par exemple, ou il y a question du "monde de l'apparence dans 
I'ensemble" (gesamte Erscheinungswelt). Mais si ce monde en tant que 
continuation en principe infinie des anticipations met en doute les 
phenomenes individuels, il demeure dans son ensemble et ne saurait 
etre saisi qu'a I'aide d'une "perception totale". Or cette perception 
visant a I"'empirie totale" ne peut plus etre une perception empirique 
laquelle, par definition, est toujours partielle. 19 Traduit en langage 
philosophique plus general, ne sommes-nous pas en presence d'une 
intuition, appliquee, cette fois-ci, a une echelle beau coup plus grande, 
c'est-a-dire a la generalite empirique? Et si la reduction eidetique 
accorde donc Ie droit de cite aux essences, en quoi differe-t-elle au 
juste de l'intuition? La doctrine de Husserl en la matiere merite, en 
effet, d'etre c1arifiee. II semble, a ce stade, que ce n'est pas tant l'objet 
qui les differencie que la maniere de son approche: tandis que la 

56 
JOZEF SIVAK 
reduction est une decision, une operation irreflechie et a effectuer d'un 
seul coup, 1'intuition eidetique est une "reflexion", un processus de 
murissement des essences, en un mot, un acte de "voir". Aussi, en 
phenomenologie, s'agira-t-il, d'abord, de "voir", puis, de "decrire" et 
non pas de construire les rapports entre les choses. Le caractere 
operatoire de l'intuition consiste en ce qu'elle ne peut pas etre detinie, 
mais incitee ou induite seulement. Cependant, une fois induite, ne 
va-t-elle pas droit au coeur des choses et meme du monde brulant ainsi 
tous les feux rouges de la demarche explicative? 
Mais il y a des commentateurs qui insistent sur 1'existence d'une 
etroite parente entre ces deux procedes. L'intuition est reductrice dans 
la mesure ou elle vise a l'essentiel et la reduction eidetique est, selon 
l'expression de H. Dumery, une "reduction intuitive".20 Vne autre 
question qui s'y rapporte et qui avait fait coule egalement pas mal 
d'encre est celle-ci: la reduction (eidetique) suit ou precede-t-elle la 
theorie de 1'eidos? D'apres l'aveu du Husserl lui-meme, rapporte par 
Ingarden,21 Ie chapitre logique des Ideen I aurait deja ete ecrit dans 
l'esprit de la reduction.22 
Or, comme s'il etait porte par l'elan du premier geste reductif, 
Husserl pensait pouvoir mettre en doute non seulement la perception 
empirique, mais aussi cette perception-Ia totale. 
3. REDUCTION ET INTUITION PHENOMENOLOGIQUES 
La reduction eidetique ne suffit pas, comme nous allons Ie voir. Elle 
prefigure, neanmoins, ce que ron connait plus generalement sous 
1'appellation de "reduction ou epoche phenomenologique.23 
En effet, il reste maintenant un obstacle numero deux a franchir, 
obstacle que represente la generalite empirique elle-meme 24 dans la 
mesure ou elle peut etre mise en doute et cela de deux manieres. 
Tout d'abord, dans l'attitude dite "solipsiste", c'est-a-dire dans celle 
du moi-pour-soi. Le moi-pour-soi n'est pas encore Ie moi en general, 
mais un moi concret qui est continuellement au contact avec Ie monde 
environnant.25 Est-il seul? Non, puisqu'il est entoure d'aIter-ego, du 
monde, etc. Est-il solitaire? Cela non plus puisque, pour lui-meme, il 
constitute un tout. Ce point de vue du moi-pour-soi est a sa maniere 
deja une reduction, savoir une "reduction au flux universel de rna 
propre perception du monde"26 (souligne par nous), reduction connue 
egalement sous l'appellation de reduction egologique. 

REDUCTION PHENOMENOLOGIQUE ET INTUITION 
57 
Ensuite, l'empirie totale pourrait etre mise en doute du point de vue 
du sujet anormal (objection de la folie). Mais meme un sujet anormal, 
perd-il ce contact continu avec Ie monde? Qu'il n'en a pas la conscience 
claire? Et les sujets dits normaux l'ont-ils toujourS?27 Husserl recon-
naitra finalement que cette objection dite de la folie ne peut pas servir 
ici d'argument puisqu'il presuppose I'existence du monde.2A 
De son cote Ie monde lui aussi pourrait etre considere en lui-meme, 
dans I'ensemble et enfermant Ie sujet solipsiste meme. Si je ne peux pas 
douter de l'experience de moi-meme, a fortiori je ne Ie peux du monde 
dans son ensemble. Neanmoins, Husserl maintient son hypothese de 
I'inexistence du monde en la considerant sur deux plans: celui de la 
possibilite reelle et celui de la possibilite absolue de cette existence. 
La possibilite reelle du non-etre du monde, basee sur sa presence 
continuelle, a chaque instant, est, d'un cote, liee au caractere contingent 
de ce monde (fait) et de I'autre, a son experimentabilite non con-
tingente. Nous y retrouvons done la generalite empirique ou l'existence 
en general qui decide en dernier ressort, de l'etre ou du non-etre 
effectif d'un fait. 
Reste encore cette possibilite absolue de la destruction du monde. 
Husser! lui-meme dira que cette derniere possibilite aurait pour 
consequence que l'empirie totale a besoin, a son tour, d'etre depassee, 
fondee, et eel a au niveau de l'essence en general. Mais, peut-elle etre 
niee? On repond: dans un tel cas on enleverait Ie fondement a toute 
position, rien ne pouvant alors etre pose, ni dit. La generalite empirique 
dont la destruction est concevable quoique inimaginable se trouve 
finalement confirmee et par la reduction et par la negation qui ne 
sauraient etre que vaines voire hypothetiques. 
Maintenant, ce sont Ie projet de la logique pure et la theorie de 
l'eidos, exposes deja dans les premiers ecrits de Husserl qui viennent 
epauler cette certitude de la generalite empirique. Car I'ideation logique 
va plus loin que I'ideation phenomenologique: elle signifie non seule-
ment Ie passage de I'individualite empirique a la generalite empirique, 
mais aussi Ie passage de celle-ci a la generalite d'essence 2~ savoir a 
l'essence en general. C'est a ce niveau que se situent les idealites 
mathematiques et logiques, en un mot, les eide formels. 
Cette ideation n'etant done pas liee a un contenu quelconque, 
permet d'aller encore au-dela des genres, savoir jusqu' a l"'objet-en-
general" ou Ie quelque chose-en-general, forme de l'objet en general 
precedant aussi bien tout contenu que ses propres specifications 

58 
JOZEF SIVAK 
(syntaxe, "2", etc.).31) Or il n'empeche que ces idealites formelles de 
meme que certaines categories ontologiques, comme I'Etre par exem-
pIe, soient egalement accessibles a une intuition appelee "categoriale".31 
Ce depassement ou "renversement" de la generalite empirique doit, 
conformement a I'exigence d'universalite, s'effectuer egalement sur tous 
les autres fronts, qu'il s'agisse des actes conscientiels, des actions, des 
autres, etc. en un mot, sur tout ce qui constitue I'attitude naturelle et sa 
these generale demeurant, par ailleurs, con stante, a la difference des 
theses particulieres. Selon I'aveu de Husserl lui-meme, cette conception 
de I'attitude naturelle est d'inspiration cartesienne puisqu'il I'appelle 
egalement Ie "cogito".32 L'attitude naturelle qui fait croire a I'existence 
du monde doit etre depassee a cause des tensions entre ces concepts-I a 
thematiques et a-thematiques, certitude et contingence, immanence et 
transcendance, actualite et potentialite, etc. 
Poursuivant Ie chemin de Descartes, Husserl procede alors a 
I"'epoche phenomenologique" qui est une "mise entre parentheses" de 
I'attitude naturelle et du monde, son correlat permanent. Plus exacte-
ment, c'est une suspension du jugement et de la connaissance qui porte 
sur I'existence aussi bien des choses intramondaines que du monde. 
Mais I'auteur precise aussitot qu'il ne s'agit pas d'une negation et cela ni 
au sens logique, ni scepticiste ni encore cartesien.33 Ce Ni-Ni ... 
husserlien a mis dans I'embarras beau coup d'interpretes. Disons 
qu'apres avoir installe Ie sujet philosophant dans une relation inten-
tionnelle entre les deux correlats, epoche prepare la voie a la reduction 
phenomenologique 34 proprement dite, laquelle fera opter finalement 
pour I'un des correlats, savoir la conscience (cogito) contenant I'autre 
correlat (cogitatum) a titre d'objet intentionnel. Si la relation se trouve 
ainsi retablie, en quoi consistera la modification de la these generale 
pourtant affirmee par Husserl? C'est la question que se pose egalement 
Ingarden.35 
C'est que la reduction en quete de I'universalite vise a perdre les 
distances a I'egard des choses existantes et des savoirs constitues, sans 
reflechir encore sur sa propre effectuation. Le phenomenologue comme 
Ie logicien ou Ie mathematicien doit s'effacer devant ses operations 
quitte a demontrer par la suite I'universalite des resultats obtenus. 
L'oubli de tout, c'est la condition de la constitution de cette science 
universelle a laquelle aspire la phenomenologie, science devant etre 
subjective et objective en meme temps. 
Si, une fois la reduction effetuee, ne subsiste que I' ego et ses cogita-

REDUCTION PHENOMENOLOGIQUE ET INTUITION 
59 
tiones (perception, imagination, etc.) et avec elles les cogitata corre-
spondants, tout cela subit une "modification de valeur" en ce sens que 
desormais c'est a regarder dans sa purete, son universalite. Le monde, 
par exemple, devient lui aussi "phenomene pur" au sens d'une totalite 
indivise. A plus forte raison, survit a l'epoche l'ego puis que selon une 
argumentation c1assique il en est et l'auteur et Ie support. Les deux 
correlats etant ainsi sauves il convient d'interroger leur nature plus 
profonde. 
L'epoche apparait donc, d'un cote, com me une abstention et de 
I'autre, comme transpostion de la transcendance, c'est-a-dire de tout ce 
qu'elle a fait "oublier", dans la subjectivite: c'est une "subjectivation".36 
Motivee par la reflexion, elle finira par en faire partie en inaugurant la 
problematique de la constitution. La reduction serait-elle donc de 
I'ordre de la pensee par quoi sa motivation cartesienne se trouverait 
confirmee? 
Ingarden, lui aussi, pense qu'elle soit une sorte de "reservatio 
mentis", une reserve emise par la pensee. Or l'envers d'une telle 
operation est-ce autre chose que l'intuition? Husserl ne dit-il pas que la 
suspension du jugement et de la connaissance scientifique, donc pas 
encore de l'etre du monde, conduit a deux intuitions, "je suis", d'une 
part et "Ie monde est", d'autre part? 
Toujours est-il que Husserl ne va pas si vite puisqu'il considere ce "je 
suis" comme structure, savoir com me compose de cogitationes que l'on 
n'attendrait plus apres la reduction. Ce passage des modes de donation 
du monde au "phenomene" du monde dans l'ensemble n'aurait donc 
pas entraine un changement correspond ant dans Ie cogito qui est 
encore loin d'etre Ie champ "d'experience apodictique recherche". Le 
risque d'une conception anthropomorphique du monde, c'est a dire 
psychologiste demeure. L'experience conscientielle, si elle est adequate, 
n'est pas encore apodictique. Husserl est, cependant, conscient de cette 
inconsequence dans la correlation etant donne qu'il affirme c1airement 
qu'avec la destruction du monde disparaitrait egalement l'ame empiri-
que. Ou s'arrete donc la reduction? 
On peut dire que la reduction, une fois appliquee au monde, a 
l'existence n~elle, doit l'etre ensuite a la vie psychique de l'ego indument 
privilegie. La subjectivite transcendantale s'approcherait alors du cogito 
cartesien. Comme la reduction eidetique, la reduction phenomenolo-
gique est a appliquer a deux niveaux. Husserl lui-meme parle d'une 
"double reduction": la premiere m'eleve au plan d'imagination, de 

60 
JOZEF SIVAK 
l'experience du "comme si", par exemple, Ie souvenir; la deuxieme 
serait une reduction de toute la serie de souvenirs remontant a mon 
passe illimite. Elle me reveIe ainsi mon passe -
une application 
semblable pouvant etre faite a mon avenir -
comme total, autrement 
dit, elle met en suspens Ie flux conscientiel dans la direction du passe. 
Cette notion de reduction, exposee dans un texte plus tardif qU'est la 
3ge conference de Erste Philosophie n'est, cependant pas nouvelle 
puisqu'elle rappelle fort la reduction radicalisee du Zeitbewusstsein, 
texte datant de 1907 ou il est deja question d'une mise hors circuit du 
flux lui-meme afin d'atteindre Ie "nunc stallS" rendant possible la 
reflexion.37 Quelle que soit donc I'importance de I'imagination et de 
l'invention pour la phenomenologie, sa caracteristique "scientifique" liee 
avec I'imperatif de ne se regler que sur I'experience correspondant (a 
l'objet etudie) leur impose des limites. 
Cette radicalisation de la reduction, cette reduction non pas aux mais 
"dans" les presentifications, precise Husser!, conduit a l'horizon uni-
versel de presuppositions, c'est-a-dire a la continuation empirique en 
tant que telle. Et selon Ie schema connu, la reduction doit etre sui vie de 
constitution, c'est-a-dire de la saisie, d'abord statique, puis genetique 38 
du residu. Cette saisie de la continuation (empirique) ne peut plus se 
faire a l'aided'une perception, mais d'une "reflexion phenomenolo-
gique" qui rappelle fort ladite perception totale. 
Les conversions dont il vient d'etre question, pourraient-elles se faire, 
par ailleurs, sans la reduction? Pour qu'elle ne soit pas un decalque 
pur et simple du psychique, la subjectivite transcendantale, savoir Ie 
cogito, doit etre consideree com me etant la, d'emblee.3Y Husser! se rend 
compte, en effet, que pour arriver a la subjectivite transcendantale, il 
n'est pas necessaire de passer par la critique du "cela-va-de-soi" du 
monde nature I , car "Das (Ia subjecitivite transcendantale -
J.S.) kann 
von vornherein gewollt sein".40 La subjectivite transcendantale, on peut 
la vouloir d'avance et sans une prise en consideration de l'univers. 
Seules les philosophes sceptiques ont besoin de douter pour decouvrir 
Ie CogitO.41 Dans les textes de la derniere peri ode de Husser!, Ie Cogito 
parait egalement etre moins separe de monde et en meme temps son 
role est limite a la "Sinngebung", a la donation du sens aux choses qu'il 
n'a pas po sees voire creees. Et toutes ces reductions qui, au fond, ne 
reduisent rien, valaient-elles tant de peine? 
Or ce serait de meconnaitre Husser! et notamment son desir d'aller 
jusqu'au bout de sa pensee et de trouver son "point d'Archimede" 
recherche. Chez celui qui se considerait pratiquement toute sa vie 

REDUCTION PHENOMENOLOGIQUE ET INTUITION 
61 
comme un philosophe commenr;ant, ces moments de sagesse et de 
lucidite ne seront jamais que de courte duree. 
Le monde dans l'ensemble, correIat de la subjectivite transcen-
dan tale et domaine des sciences eidetiques, queUe que soit la certitude 
avec laqueUe celles-ci s'imposent, demeure-t-il vraiment? Et les autres 
etres et sciences aussi universels que Dieu, la mathematique, l'ethique et 
meme Ie phenomenologue, frappes egalement par l'exclusion pheno-
menologique, pourront-ils etre admis finalement dans la sphere pheno-
menologique du jugement? lIs Ie pourront a condition de pouvoir 
resister a cette exclusion. 
4. REDUCTION ET INTUITION TRANSCENDANTALES. 
REDUCTION OU INTUITION~ 
Pourtant, si Husser! se doutait bien que la reduction des sciences 
eidetiques sera "difficile", l'ontologue Ingarden ne pouvait meme pas 
l'admettre et cela malgre l'avis de son ancien maitre, savoir qu'il ne 
pourra comprendre les problemes constitutifs et par la meme devenir 
philosophe qu'a condition de l'effectuer.42 Toujours est-il qu'elle ne 
jouera, chez Ingarden -
comme chez d'autres -
qu'un role secondaire 
voire nul.43 
Les objections contre la reduction se ramenent a ceci que Ie fonde-
ment meme qui la rend possible serait mine et que par consequent on 
ne pourrait plus faire appel aux ontologies, en d'autres termes encore, 
que la verite ontologique n'aurait plus de sens. Avec effectuation de la 
reduction disparaitrait aussi son plus puissant motif, savoir l'opposition: 
monde reel -
conscience.44 Cependant, Husser! qui raisonnait en 
prevoyant toutes les objections possibles, prevoyait egalement celle-ci. 
S'il est vrai, ainsi que nous l'avions deja dit, que pour etre fondee 
l'empirie totale a besoin d'etre depassee, cela ne signifie pas qu'elle 
puisse etre niee.45 L'existence en general participe bien a l'essence sans 
se confondre avec elle. Mais il y a plus. II s'agit de cette possibilite-la 
absolue d'inexistence du monde a laquelle nous avions egalement fait 
allusion et dont la portee a dil echapper a Husserl au moment ou il 
l'avait soulevee. Cette possibilite qui transformerait Ie monde en une 
"apparence transcendantale" est "une possibilite absolument vide que 
contredit J'empirie dans sa totalite de toute la force de sa concordance, 
c'est une hypothese en faveur de laquelle absolument rien ne milite".4!' 
En ce sens, Husserl serait-il pret a assumer les consequences redouta-

62 
JOZEF SIVAK 
bles qui decoulent de cette contradiction maximale entre la plenitude 
du tout de I'empirie et Ie vide absolu comme devait Ie faire, jadis, 
Parmenide? Le neant une fois evoque, peut-il simpiement voisinner 
avec l'empirie totaIe ou l'Etre? Et l'ontologie serait-elle toute la 
philosophie? 
L'intention d'aller plus loin vers ce neant (nihil), au dela aussi bien 
de la subjectivite que du monde, ne manque pas, au moins, chez 
Husser!. Encore faudra-t-il de la realiser jusqu'au bout. Dans un texte, il 
fait appel a une "reduction universelle", susceptible de nihiliser meme Ie 
monde dans l'ensemble.47 En realite, il s'agit ici d'une "vue d'ensemble" 
(= intuition?) de mes vecus ayant pour l'objet la relation intentionnelle 
entre l'ensemble de rna vue et la totalite objective. Vne "conscience 
d'horizon" en resuite, expression qui n'est pas sans rappeler l'''inten-
tionalite d'horizon" (Horizontintentionalitat) dans la Logique formelle 
et transcendantale et qui meriterait un commentaire. Comme cette 
expression est, a l'origine, une alliance de deux mots, savoir intention et 
horizon, il ne peut plus s'agir d'une intention et encore moins d'une 
relation intentionnelle puis que c'est horizon qui domine sur l'autre 
terme et Ie "remplit" de fa\;on immediate. C'est donc une intention qui 
devient horizon. Ne pourrait-on par la meme remedier au dualisme qui 
subsiste dans Ie residu apres la reduction et qui represente un autre 
rep roche, adresse a Husserl par Ingarden? 
Poursuivant la lecture du texte auquel nous venons de nous reterer, 
I'on tombe sur une presision interessante: c'est d'un seul coup (in einem 
Schlage) qu'il faut ensuite inhiber, invalider toute donnee actuelle ou 
potentielle, tout interet a une valeur et meme a un monde dans son 
ensemble, acte d'aneantissement rendu possible grace a ladite prise de 
conscience de l'universalite.48 Or c'est en vain que la conscience 
universe lIe voudrait tout supprimer au nom de l'universalite: plus elle 
veut aneantir, plus Ie mur du residu de cet aneantissement devenu 
l'Idee-limite se reconsitute derriere elle. La mise en doute de l'existence 
du tout du monde est, on Ie cons tate, possible sur Ie plan intentionnel, 
mais irrealisable en fait. Que c'est Ie principe d'identite qui impose 
finalement les limites a la reduction, Husserl en etait conscient: "Was 
immer ich tue, dit-il, bin ich im Sein", quoi que je fasse, je suis toujours 
dans I'Etre.49 La suppression d'une chose individuelle est possible bien 
qu'au profit d'une autre chose. Cependant, la question de savoir s'il y a 
quelque chose plutot que rien, se situe sur un autre plan. Ne pouvant 
pas discuter ici la solution que Husser! donne de ce probleme classique, 

REDUCTION PHENOMENOLOGIQUE ET INTUITION 
63 
rappelons au moins sa these selon laquelle l'impossibilite du non-etre 
serait meme une impossibilite apodictique.50 
Or voici que dans Ie meme ouvrage cette these entre en pleine 
contradiction avec une autre: l'hypothese de l'inexistence du monde 
serait une evidence apodictique.15 Et qui plus est, dans ce demier cas, 
mon experience continuellement vecue de ce monde ne serait nulle-
ment touchee par cette inexistence.52 Qu'en est-il alors de la correla-
tion? 
Et bien qu'ayant donc etabli cette impossibilite de l'aneantissement 
de l'univers, Husserl non seulement maintient son hypothese de la non-
existence de celui-ci, mais, de plus, ilIa radicalise en se demandant 
"qu'en serait-il si absolument rien n'existait?"53 Or si la correlation 
devait etre respectee, face au rieri, Ie Cogito ne deviendrait-il pas rien 
(de Cogito)? Sinon, c'est-a-dire si la subjectivite transcendantale devait 
survivre a cet aneantissement plus radical encore qU'universel, il 
faudrait la considerer comme creatrice non seulement de sens, mais 
aussi d'etre, acte pur "situe" encore au-del a de l'Etre. Une telle concep-
tion de la subjectivite et de la constitution est, en effet, presente tout au 
long de I'oeuvre de Husserl: tous les interpretes sont d'accord la-
dessus.54 Parfois, l'auteur n'est pas loin d'appeller la subjectivite ainsi 
definie par son vrai nom.55 Cette tendance subjectivo-idealiste et des 
affirmations semblables de la toute-puissance de la subjectivite tran-
scendantale meme en matiere du fondement du logique sont presentes 
egalement dans la Logique formelle et transcendantale. Neanmoins, on 
pourrait montrer qu'en realite Ie pre-Iogique husserlien et ses formes 
(empirique, subjective, etc.) ainsi que ce que les logiciens actuels 
appellent Ie "metalogique", tout cela est encore bien "intra-Iogique" et 
par consequent loin du veritable metalogique qui seul meriterait 
I'adjectif transcendantal au sens pregnant. Le transcendantal husserlien 
est tributaire du transcendantal kantien 56 lequel est, a son tour, une 
degradation du transciendantal de la tradition. D'autres on deja dit que 
la force de Husserl ne residait pas en I'histoire de la philosophie. Mais 
plutot que d'une ignorance il faudrait peut-etre parler d'une discretion 
ou pudeur de la part de Husserl a l'egard de ces problemes. 57 Qui avec 
une conscience philosophique aussi aigue que la sienne n'aurait pas 
eprouve une angoisse devant l'abime que ces problemes ouvrent? Mais 
ces debordements constants de la systematique initiale de Husserl, 
attribues a son idealisme subjectif -
terme qu'il rejetait d'ailleurs 58 -
permettraient, peut-etre, de Ie reconcilier avec la tradition. Et toutes ces 

64 
JOZEF SIVAK 
tentatives de fonder la logique ainsi que la notion d'intuition cate-
goriale, ne revelent-elles pas Ie caractere gratuit, injustifie du logique? 
En faut-il une autre preuve? 
Dans la 37e Le<;on de "Erste Philosophie, Husser! annonce encore 
une troisieme reduction, dite "apodictique", mais sans en donner une 
definition precise. Faut-i1 y voir cette reduction-I a radicalisee a la 
pensee pure ou bien s'agit-il de quelque chose de plus, savoir d'un 
passage a un "troisieme" niveau (si ron peut parler ici d'un niveau) 
depassant meme Ie Cogito, qui est, apres tout, mortel? On avait sauvent 
reproche a Husserl d'etre retombe, dans ses oeuvres ulterieures, dans Ie 
psychologisme, qu'il avait pourtant tant combattu dans les Recherches 
logiques. Mais a la lumiere de ce qui precede, la portee d'un tel 
rep roche s'affaiblit. N'est-ce pas justement cette possibilite de recon-
cilier Husser! avec la tradition qui permettrait de realiser I'intention de 
depassement presente dans toute son oeuvre? 
Cette presence du motif veritablement transcendantal peut-etre 
iIIustree notamment par se definition de I'intuition en tant que "principe 
des principes". Si Ie principe fonde un fait empirique inconsistant, ce 
qui fonde ce principe meme, un principe a la deuxieme puissance est-ce 
encore un principe? Si oui, se poserait la question de son principe et 
ainsi de suite. Au lieu que I'intuition pourrait jouer Ie role d'un tel 
"Urprinzip", proto-principe qu'il faudrait appeler plutot "Unprinzip" 
car ce qui est principe de tous les principes n'en est pas un, elle permet 
de I'entrevoir. Serait-ce la I'intuition philosophique, acte semelfactif et 
instantane au sens bergsonien de I'intuitivisme husserlien? 
Resumons cette dialectique reductrice qui semble ne pas prendre fin. 
La reduction husser!ienne, comme naus venons de Ie voir, s'arrete 
tantot a I'imaginaire, tantot a I'universel, savoir au pied de l'Etre 
conformement au principe d'identite. Car touchant, dans ce dernier cas, 
a elle-meme, elle tourne finalement en ouverture, en ouvrant un 
horizon universel qui s'offre alors a la pensee. En ce sens apparait sa 
valeur purement propedeutique, ce dont Husser! etait conscient, me me 
s'il ne I'avait pas dit expressement auquel cas il ne s'en serait pas 
tellement occupe. En philosophie, un discours sur la methode et une 
conception sont inseparables. C'est donc une seule et meme reduction 
qui s'applique a ces deux niveaux pour etre finalement presente dans 
tous les recoins du systeme. Et il ne saurait pas y avoir un troisieme 
niveau methodologique de la reduction, savoir une "troisieme" reduc-
tion.59 

REDUCTION PHENOMENOLOGIQUE ET INTUITION 
65 
Quant a I'intuition, son rapport etroit avec la reduction est indeni-
able et meme, a la lecture de certains passages dans Husserl, on les 
prendrait pour des synonymes. La reduction au sens positif, c'est-a-dire 
la "reduction a ... " differe-t-elle de I'intuition? Si au niveau perceptif, la 
reduction signifie I"'oubli" et I'intuition la "vision", au niveau ontolo-
gique, cette distinction s'efface au profit de la vision, plus exactement, 
de la pensee. Deja Pascal savait qu'il etait impossible de connaitre Ie 
monde et tout I'Univers dans son immensite infinie par une manipula-
tion empirique, lorsqu'il avait dit: "Par I'espace I'univers me comprend 
et m'engloutit comme un point; par la pensee je Ie comprends." Le 
monde, Ie tout contiennent donc, des Ie debut et a chaque instant, aussi 
bien nous tous que notre pensee. Je suis donc d'avance en relation avec 
Ie monde, I'Etre et de quelle fa~on que je m'efforce de rendre rna 
conscience et rna pensee plus subtiles, je ne peux rien changer a cette 
relation, je ne peux m'unir a eux plus que je ne Ie fais au commence-
ment. Cette relation encore ne saurait etre entendue au sens d'une 
distanciation ou meme d'intentionnalite, mais au sens d'une presence 
immediate, sans raisonnement ni discours. 
Seule restee, desormais en competition, !'intuition pourrait, peut-
etre, accomplir ce dont la reduction, cette intuition manquee, est 
incapable, savoir d'aller vers Ie transcendantal veritable au sens de la 
tradition et qui est a la fois inimaginable et incomprehensible. A ce 
transcendantal aucun chemin, qu'il soit positif ou negatif, aucun 
alorithme ne mene. Car ce qui, par definition, est essentiellement 
ouvert, indepassable, ne pourrait-il pas etre depasse, pourtant, ne 
serait-ce qu'un instant, c'est-a-dire intuitivement? Or a I'instant meme 
I'intuition doit rejoindre I'Etre de peur de ne pas etre pour ainsi dire 
"devoree" par I'au-dela. Ainsi, I'intuition semble dialectiquement reunir 
les deux aspects de la reduction: elle est a la fois un acte de perdre en 
"oubliant" et un acte de trouver en faisant voir ou mieux "entre-voir" 
cet oubli maximal qu'est Ie transcendantal. Car si I'intuition de 
I'individu, avions-nous dit, est encore une vision, I'intuition au sens 
stricte ne peut etre qu'une entrevision (du transcendantal). En ce meme 
sens encore, elle pourrait, peut-etre jouer Ie role d'une "intention 
supprimante"60 qui est bien pressente chez Husserl, mais qui, a la 
difference des autres intentions ne serait jamais remplie. 

66 
JOZEF SIVAK 
NOTES 
I Cf. Fink, E., "Les concepts operatoires dans la phenomenologie de Husserl", in 
Cahiers de Royaumont, Philosophie III, Husserl, pp. 214-241. Pour Fink, les concepts 
operatoires ne sont pas uniquement ceux qui ont trait a une methode ou technique, 
mais d'une fa90n generale ceux qui servent de "media de la comprehension" aux 
concepts thematiques et qui temoignent de la presence d'une ombre dans une 
philosophie. En ce sens, non seulement I'epoche ou I'intuition mais aussi Ie phenomene, 
la logique transcendantale pourraient etre consideres com me des concepts operatolres. 
, La citation plus exacte a laquelle nous nous referens et dont Ie sens s'eclaircira par la 
suite, sonne de la maniere suivante: " ... a cote de la reduction phenomenologique, 
I'intuition eidetique est la forme fondamentale de toutes Ies methodes transcendantales 
particulieres ... " (Meditations eartesiennes. Paris. 1966, p. 61) . 
. 1 A cote des Ideen I, des Meditations eartesiennes et bien sur de la Krisis, c'est Erste 
Philosophie qui peut etre consideree comme particulierement instructrice a cet egard, 
puisqu'elle porte en sous-titre: 'Theorie de la reduction phenomenologique". Cest aussi 
un texte qui invite a depasser Ie cadre de la systematique husserlienne dans la mesure 
ou il veut etre "philosophie premiere", secteur fondamental de la philosophie. 
.. Ingarden fut egalement interesse par Ie probleme de I'intuition, chez Bergson d'abord 
(ct. sa these de Doctorat "Intuition und Intellekt bei H. Bergson", in i.P.P.F., Bd. V. 
1921) et chez Husserl en suite (cf. par. exemple "Le prohleme de la constitution et Ie 
sens de la reflexion constitutive chez E. Husserl", in Cahiers de Royaumont, Philoso-
phie, III, Husserl, pp. 242-264. Cf. encore "Probleme der husserlschen Reduktion. 
Vorlesung gehalten an der Universitiit Oslo, Oktober/November 1967", in Analeeta 
Husserliana, vol. IV, pp. 1-71 Itrad. polon. in 
Wst~p do !enomenologiji Husserla, 
Warszawa, 1974, pp. 144-215. 
5 M. Scheler utilisait Ie terme "Washeif'. 
6 Par exemple, chaque son possede une essence qui renvoie au son en general ou 
plutot a I'acoustique en general lequel renvoie, a son tour, a I'essence en general. 
Husserl employait, comme on sait, la notion de "categorie" uniquement en semantique, 
alors que pour designer Ie genre supreme, il se servait du terme "regio". 
7 Cette notion husserlienne de I'intuition est inspiree de Kant, mais tres vite Husserl lui 
donnera une envergure beaucoup plus grande. 
H Par exemple Merleau-Ponty. 
" L'explicitation husserlienne au sens pregnant est I'affaire desactes expressifs, c'est-a-
dire du langage. 
III "Anschauung ist bei Husser! der Titel fur das gemeinsame aller Arten von Selbstge-
bUflg. Es ist ... ein Analogiebegriff, wohei die leitende Bedeutung Anschauung der 
sinnlichen Erfahrung meint." E. Fink, "Das Problem der Phiinomenologie Edmund 
Husser!s", in Rev. into de Phil .. 1939, I. 2, p. 254. Cf. aussi Ideen I, 1950, p. 15. 
II Ibid., §4. Ingarden note a ce sujet que Husser! n'aurait pas precise en quoi consiste 
la difference entre I'intuition eidetique et la perception interne. 
12 Ibid., §24. 
1.1 Le but de I'intuition eidetique ce ne sont pas des objets tels que "cent au res", fees, 
etc. 
14 Apres coup, tout Ie processus abstractif tel qu'il est expose dans les R.L. contient 

REDUCTION PHENOMENOLOGIQUE ET INTUITION 
67 
donc les trois etapes suivantes: I' apprehension d'un objet individuel (perception); 2' 
apprehension d'une marque distinctive (moment rouge); 3' apprehension de l'espece 
(rougeur) (signification), S'il est donc vrai que l'intuition eidetique peut etre "induite" 
par une experience de l'individu, elle n'en derive pas et exige une veritable conversion 
du "regard", 
" Cf. ibid" Introduction. Husserl parle, en realite, d'un passage de la generalite 
"empirique" a la generalite "d'essence", passage qui est l'affaire de l'ideation logique, 
mais non pas de l'ideation phenomenologique s'arretant a l'essence generique seule-
ment. 
II> Cet usage du verbe "reduire" est d'ailleurs conforme, en allemand comme en 
fran<;ais au hon usage grammatical, s'agissant d'un verbe transitif indirect. II s'agit bien 
de "n:'duire a ... " au sens de ramener a ... 
17 En ce sens, la reduction psychologique transformant la psychologie experimentale 
en une psychologie intention nelle, n'est pas encore la reduction dite psychologico-
phenomenologique conferant a la psychologie Ie statut d'une discipline philosophiquc 
veritable. 
" Cf. aussi J. Patocka, "Introduction a la phenomenologie de Husserl", in Filosojick.v 
("asopis, 1966,5, p. 5H I. 
I" La "perception totale" n'est pas une contradictio in adjecto dans la mesure ou c'est 
Ie "total" qui prime. 
~II Cette interpretation intuitive de la reduction est finalement etroitement liee avec la 
notion d'intentionnalite. 
'I Cf. R. Ingarden, o.c., p. 25 . 
.. Dans les M.e. c'est explicite: I'expose de la reduction precede de loin celui de 
I'eidos et de la technique phenomcnologiquc. Et com me Ie precise Ie Suppl. VI des 
I"eelll, la chose cst pour Husserlla structure du monde en general. 
'; R. Ingarden admcttait cgalemcnt que la reduction eidetique ne suffit pas dans la 
mesure ou elle laisse encore subsister la facticite. Mais parlant de l'essence d'une chose 
individuelle, d'une table, par exemple, il se demande si cette essence meme generalisee 
(l'essence de la "table-en-general") peut etre detachee de cette table-la, autrement dit, si 
l'on pouvait attribuait it cette essencc une cxistence propre. S'agissant d'un eidos de 
contcnu, Husserl n'aurait pas admis une telle hypostase. Du point de vue historiquc, 
les origincs du mot "epoche", faut-il Ie rappeller, rem on tent aux Grecs anciens ct 
notamment a Pyrrhon, fondateur du scepticisme, trait caracteristiquc dc toutc la 
philosophie grecque: l'emancipation de l'homme vis-a-vis de la nature exterieurc. Dans 
l'interpretation de Husserl, epoche prescnte plut6t un aspcct negatif ('"reduction de 
... "). 
'. Cf. I"een I, ed. Schuhmann, §§ 13,20. 
'.' En effet. il y a une sorte de cecite pour cette presence continue lie du monde et 
finalement pour I'experience dans l'ensemble. Dans sa critique de la reduction Ingarden 
avance un argument semblable bien que plus simple en parlant d'un flux conscientiel 
continu comme de quelque chose de prohlcmatique dans la mesure ou il peut etre 
interrompu par Ie sommeil. 
2(, Hua VIII, p. 60. 
'7 A propos de l'argument c1assique du sommeil, on peut encorc dire que meme un 
homme cndormi est porteur d'un sens bien qu'il s'annonce inconsciemment, car son 

68 
JOZEF SIVAK 
visage est la est c'est propre au sommeil que de permettre une contre-expenence ou 
une soustraction momentanee. A travers son visage je saisie son sens malgre son 
immobilite relative. Ainsi dans Ie sommeil aussi il y a un acte de presence. 
2" Ibid., p. 65. 
'4 L'ideation husserlienne rappelle de beaucoup I'ideation schelerienne, definie, comme 
on sait, comme une separation de I'essence de I'existence. L'ideation de Husserl, on Ie 
voit. est plus generale. 
111 Plus exact serait, peut-etre dire I'essence-en-general, puisque la "generalite" dans les 
deux expressions veut deja dire essence. La raison pour laquelle Husserl emploie 
I'expression "quelque chose-en-general" en mathematique pourrait s'expliquer par Ie 
fait qu'il considere cette discipline comme une ontologie . 
.11 Cf. RL, T. III, Chap. VI. 
.12 Le "cogito" au sens stricte ne se situe, evidemment, qu'au niveau de la pensee. Mais 
on peut y voir egalement I'influence du "je pense" kantien accompagnant tous les autres 
actes. 
,.1 Cette difference entre Ie doute cartesien et l'epoche husserlienne sera finalement 
. moins grande, peut-etre, que ne Ie veut faire croire Husserl et certains interpretes 
com me par ex. L. Landgrebe (cL Der Weg der l'hdnomenologie, Chap. Vlll, Glitersloh), 
K. Lowit et P. Ricoeur. 
q Si I'epoche est une decision, un acte de nier, la reduction phenomenologique est un 
acte de s'ouvrir a ... 
1j Dois-je perdre pour trouver (dans une prise de conscience plus aigue)? Applique 
a la sante, par exemple, serait-ce uniquement la perte de celle-ci qui revelerait son 
importance pour moi? Ingarden, donne cet exemple emprunte a Mickiewicz qui I'aurait 
applique a la definition de la patrie . 
.16 C'est l'expression d'E. Levinas . 
.17 Ingarden, lui aussi, parle de cette necessaire radicalisation de la reduction en la 
comparant a la "duree pure" de Bergson (cf. R. Ingarden, o.c., p. 58) . 
.1" Nous laisserons ici de ceM Ie probleme de la constitution dite "genetique" . 
.10 Cf. Hua VIII, p. 79. 
411 Ibid., p. 76, n.!. Cette note ajoutee par Husserl plus tard, manque dans la traduction 
fran"aise. 
-II Cf. VI. Jankeh§vitch, Philosophie premiere. Paris, P.U.F .. 1954, p. 68 . 
.12 CL R. [ngarden, o.c., pp. 2[-22 . 
.11 Pour ingarden, la seule decouverte de [a reduction serait Ie passage de la chose a la 
"chose-noeme", ce qui est vrai au niveau de I'objet individuel seulement. 
44 [d., ibid., pp. 35, 38, 61-62. 1\ Y a bien d'autrcs interpretes encore qui pensaient 
que I'ontologie, science de I'essence des choses a priori, n'avait pas besoin de la reduc-
tion tout en admettant qu'une interrogation plus poussee de I'Etre l'exigerait. C'etait, 
par exemple, l'opinion de J. Patotka. 
-IS Cf. supra, p. 9. 
4" Husser!, o.c., p. 67. 
47 "Hier ist ... zu bedenken, dass die Oberschau liber mein Leben und meine 
Erlebniswelt, die ich etwa jetzt vollziehe auch ein Akt ist. Sein Gegenstand ist eben die 
intentionale Beziehung dieses meines gesamten Lehens auf die in ihm zur Setzung 
gekommene und kommende gegenstandliche Allheit." (Id., ibid., pp. 158-9). 

REDUCTION PHENOMENOLOGIQUE ET INTUITION 
69 
4S Cf. id., ibid., p. 162. 
49 Id., ibid., p. 266. 
50 Cf. id., ibid. Suppl. XV. 
51 La 37e Le<;:on s'intitule: "La certitude apodictique de la non-existence possible du 
monde et la mise en valeur de la vie transcendantale de la subjectivite." 
52 Cf. id., ibid., p. 74. 
5.1 rd., ibid., p. 69. 
54 C'est ce qui ressort indirectement d'une affirmation dans un Supp!. (XIII) de Er.we 
Philosophie, selon laquelle seul Ie Createur pourrait revoquer I'apodicticite absolue du 
monde. 
55 Selon E. Fink, par exemple, la notion husserlienne de la constitution oscille entre la 
production de sens et la creation. Ingarden, lui, ne retient que la creation: la reduction 
conduit a I'idealisme, plus exactement, d'apres sa classification des systemes philo-
sophique, exposee dans son ouvrage principal Spor 0 istnienie swiqta, c'est un 
"creationnisme idealiste-dependantiel" dans lequel Ie monde est secondaire, "derive" de 
la conscience. (Ct. aussi o.c., p. 68). 
56 G. Berger donne une precision sur cette legere difference entre Ie transcendantal 
husserlien et celui de Kant en ce sens que Ie deuxieme se detinit par opposition it 
I'empirique alors que Ie premier au "mondain". 
57 On sait que dans ses manuscrits dont I'edition touche it sa tin, Husserl est moins 
disc ret sur cette problematique teleologique et theologique. Les transcendantaux de la 
tradition sont discutes dans certains manuscrits a plusieurs reprises. (Cf. par ex. Ms E 
III 4 de 1930, intitule Teh!ologie). 
5H "Kein subjektiver Idealismus" s'ecriera-t-il meme dans les Ideen (§55). 
50 Pourtant, il y a des commentateurs, comme par exemple, H. Dumery qui Ie pensent 
en parlant de la necessite d'une troisieme reduction dite "henologique" appelee it ouvrir 
l'acces it I'Un transcend an tal (Cf. Critique et religion. Probh'mes de methode en 
philosophie de fa religion, Paris, SD.E.S., 1957). 
AO Nous empruntons cette expression it VI. Jankelevitch (Cf. o.c.). 

NADIA DELLE SITE 
THE AESTHETIC THEORY OF INGARDEN AND ITS 
PHILOSOPHICAL IMPLICATIONS 
Roman Ingarden belongs to the group of Husserl's first pupils, of the 
Gottingen period. His aesthetic considerations, which constitute, as 
we will see, the most considerable and meaningful part of his philoso-
phical work, reflect the spirit and the worries of the first phenomeno-
logical school. 
Independence from Husserl spread in his school and, combined with 
an elaboration of [deen zu einer reinen Phiinomenologie und phiino-
menologischen Philosophie, marked the transcendental turning point of 
his research.' A sign of the lively discussion breaking out after the 
publication of work's first part can be found in Edith Stein and in her 
contribution to the Festschrift for Husserl. In the letter sent to Husserl 
in 1918 Ingarden, in fact, opens the controversy by referring to the 
fourth of the Logische Untersuchungen; he recognizes an inadequacy in 
the outlining of objective and logic categories, which should differentiate 
in an Aristotelian sense a more convincing formulation of the object's 
cognitive problem; Husserl should wonder how the object is really 
grasped, and do more than establish whether the object appearing 
intuitively does agree or not with the notion we already have of it. 
These criticisms introduce, in fact, a whole series of problems having 
as leitmotiv his intellectual relation with Husserl: that is, the objections 
Ingarden raises against transcendental idealism.2 Ingarden, well aware 
that the identification of being with the pure conscience is extraneous to 
Husserl's intention, believes to detect a subtle form of idealism in the 
reduction of the thing to its noematic aspect. With entrance into the 
constitutive consideration this view becomes even more dominating. 
The thing, in fact, becomes equivalent to a "particularly built noema-
consciousness". Ingarden also reveals a surprising continuity of themes 
and adheres to Husserl's thought, especially when he declares that he 
cannot give up the essential heterogeneousness between consciousness 
and reality; he is convinced that external reality is "spatial, mute and 
dark", while consciousness is awareness. This consciousness can never 
be completely missing and must be present as the founding layer in 
every experience (Erlebnis). This deep difference leads him to maintain 
71 
Hans H. Rudnick (ed.), Ana/ecta Husser/iana, Vol. XXX, 71-84. 
© 1990 Kluwer Academic Publishers. 

72 
NADIA DELLE SITE 
that a "real thing can be an intentional object but this does not exhaust 
its essence. Without being perceived, it (thing) can exist".3 
In what sense, then, can his position, at least in his intentions, be 
phenomenological and "realist?" The answer to this question can be 
found in the lecture given at Oslo University in 1967, in which he 
addresses reduction. Taking as his starting point the double reduction 
proposed by Husserl, the eidetic one and the transcendental one, it is 
clear that he accepts only the former. 
With the aesthetic reduction, Husserl has been able to give promin-
ence to the essential moment identified in the second and fourth 
Logische Untersuchungen as "species," that is the result of an "ideation;" 
in Ideen the Wesen or the Eidos can be grasped by the Wesensschau, 
after 1925 "variation" allows to indicate the "invariable" moment.4 Such 
moment is identified by Ingarden with the Aristotelian tode ti. Once 
again, the reference to Aristotele is very meaningful, to understand 
which sense he is following. Accepting the eidetic reduction, in fact, 
justifies the development of his whole thought, directed to the research 
of the "essential" as in Essentiale Fragen. Therefore Ingarden sees in 
the transcendental reduction a procedure that complicates instead of 
clarifies the phenomenological analysis. In the first place, to put in 
parenthesis the existence of world causes to doubt its legitimacy; it can 
even be approached by a "psycoastenic" attitude because it is carried 
out by a "loss of reality's sense".5 The gravest consequence, neverthe-
less, does not seem to be this; rather by the transcendental reduction 
the way to "constitution" is opened according to which "if reality is 
nothing else than the correlative of an infinite multiplicity of perception 
ruled in a determined way or of conceptual operations, then all can be 
already found in pure consciousness analysis as act and correlate".6 Not 
only this, but in "What is New in Husserl's Crisis?", Ingarden even 
more explicitly maintains that Husserl reduced the life-world and the 
physical world to something subjective. 
Ingarden's criticism of Husserl can be better understood if we 
consider that the latter rests more on a mathematical than an onto-
logical basis. The same Husserlian reduction "is not a reduction to 
consciousness sic et simpliciter, but it is originally the same reduction of 
mathematical analysis; that it is an economic exemplification, a techni-
cal, signitive procedure on a rule's basis, perceived in a transcendental 
way as individuation of a moving stream's continous consciousness." 7 
That Ingarden knew that Husserl's following attempts to find "differ-

THE AESTHETIC THEORY OF fNGARDEN 
73 
ent ways" for reduction, whose formality does not coincide with the 
way proposed in the Ideen, more generally considered in the "Cartesian 
way", is proved by a note to the article "Bemerkungen zum Problem 
Idealismus-Realismus" (published in the Husserl Festschrift, 1929). 
Ingarden emphasizes that his controversy is directed at the reduction 
proposed by Husser! in Ideen because its extremely important subse-
quent researches, which were well known to him only during a walk in 
autumn of 1927 with his "hochverehrtem Lehrer." We can notice that 
in 1967 the situation had little changed, but that Ingarden considered 
as fundamental the transcendental reduction of Ideen and at this differ-
ence he directs his criticisms at Husserl even though he had indicated a 
"second" type of reduction. Husserl had extended the reduction to logic 
and formal ontology, he had also reduced the world's formal structure, 
such as it is, in a completely arbitrary way. Not only, therefore, is it 
illegitimate to reduce being, because the question of the real being's 
sense remains, but it is also illegitmate to reduce reality's structure. 
Ingarden together with H. Conrad Martius wants to arrive at Seinsau-
tonomie, while he maintains that Husser! saved the autonomy of ideal 
being in Ideen and reduced even this to "Erlebnisse" in Formale und 
transzendentale Logik.R 
The development of the eidetic reduction has to happen, according 
to Ingarden, by following an ontology giving autonomy both to ideal 
being and to the real. We understand then, why the basic question for 
Ingarden, is the relationship between Idealism and Realism and how he 
wants, through the phenomenological description, to develop the onto-
logical, realistic moment. However, his studies have, as their main 
theme, the work of art; ultimately, when he elaborates on the subject, 
he generally philosophizes and goes too far with this specific theme. 
"As I tried to demonstrate" -
Ingarden maintains explicitly in the 
preface to Das literarische Kunstwerk -
"in my Festschrift for Husser!, 
the conflict, between the so-called Realism and Idealism hides in it 
different groups of very complicated issues, having to be elaborated 
separately, before turning to the main metaphisical issue."Y 
According to Ingarden, there are different ways through which we 
can approach the main problem. The first is linked with the attempt of 
Husserl's so-called transcendental Idealism, of understanding reality 
and its elements as purely intentional objectivity, having their reason of 
being in constituent consciousness. To take a position on these theories, 
elaborated by Husserl with extreme finesse, it is of prime importance 

74 
NADIA DELLE SITE 
for Ingarden to describe the essential structure and the way of being of 
the purely intentional objects and to examine them as to their real 
objectivity, their essence, as having "the same structure and the same 
way of being." For this purpose, Ingarden looked for a subject whose 
real intentionality was beyond any doubt and whose similar structures 
could be studied as revealing the essence and its way of being a purely 
intentional object without being subjected to suggestions deriving from 
the consideration of real objectivity. And here the work of art seemed 
to be an object of appropriate research to this purpose. 
The aesthetic inquiry of Ingarden, as Husserl's first works also, 
moves on the necessity of overcoming the typical psychologism of late 
ninenteenth-century's philosophy. The phenomenological aesthetic must 
elicit an aesthetic "Erlebnis," the structure and the objective value of 
the work, by distinguishing it from the lived experiences or psycho-
logical state of the reader, and also, in another way, from the author's 
biography and psychology. Husserl's doctrine of intentionality offers to 
the theorists of the phenomenological school a philosophical weapon 
claiming the objectivity of the work of art, which, moreover, had to be 
considered of primary importance among different European aesthetics 
and poetics. 
Ingarden's main merit is to have initially pursued the topic from the 
point of view of an abstract philosophical foundation (on which Geiger 
remained), and then progressing to the point of view of investigating a 
single art's study: the result of this effort is: Das literarische Kunstwerk 
and the essays collected under the title Untersuchungen zur Ontologie 
der Kunst; the latter apply the method elaborated for the work of art to 
the study of other arts, from music to the fine arts, and the cinema. 
In Das literarische Kunstwerk, Ingarden distinguishes four strata, as 
constituent of the literary work of art: the one of the sounds and of 
vocal formations, the one of the sense units (meaning of propositions), 
the one of the schematized views, and the one of the represented 
objects. Rene Wellek claims that Ingarden has divided the literary work 
of art into five strata. The fifth stratum is supposed to be the stratum of 
"metaphysical qualities" comprising "the sublime, the tragic, the terrible, 
the holy." However, Ingarden has repeatedly rejected the existence of a 
fifth stratum in his system. The metaphysical qualities do not belong to 
the basic structure of the literary work. They emerge too rarely from 
the world of intentional objects in order to be incorporated into the 
strata system.) () 

THE AESTHETIC THEORY OF INGARDEN 
75 
The work of art is a polyphonic structure resulting from four strata 
(Ingarden follows Husserl when he speaks about the literary work's 
multi-Iayeredness) organized around the axis of meaning units. This last 
one constitutes the structural plot of the whole work, because for its 
essence it requires the others strata, and already it determines some in 
itself, so that, these ones have in it, their foundation of being and 
depend in their content on its qualities. 
Besides, the variety of material and the single strata's functions allow 
that the whole work is not a monotonous formation, but that it has an 
essential polyphonic nature. I I 
The first stratum of the literary work is that of sound. Sounds belong 
integrally to the real, existing world and possess, essentially, two 
aspects: first, we distinguish between the sound units of individual 
words and higher sound formations (sentences and sentence concatena-
tions); second, for their concretion, sounds must be vocalized, a process 
which endows them with properties of their own (for example, sonority, 
rhythm and tempo). Even at this level, however, an important observa-
tion must be made; the particular utterances alone do not make a work 
of art. The individual, material sounds only support the concretion of 
the work. The literary work of art itself, on the contrary, consists of a 
constant, typical sound structure, concretized as the "same" in all 
individual utterances of the text. However, the sound structure needs 
these modulations in order to be concretized, for example, when a 
poem is read. This constant sound structure, that has its ontic founda-
tion in "ideas",12 is responsible for the identity of the work of the art 
opposite to the infinite variations of its performance in perception. For 
Ingarden, there is no other way to save the language of the literary work 
of art from sheer subjectivism. The individual sounds and sound-forma-
tions remain the "same" in spite of the fact that in each concretion (or 
concretization) they differ in tone, accent, modulation, etc. This per-
sistent structure of sounds, although borne by the physical material, 
cannot "exist" individually or be "real" because it could not then 
present and remain the same in different sound occurences. Neither can 
sound structure be ideal (in the sense of a mathematical object).13 It 
comes into being as the product of a creative process, undergoes 
marginal transformations, is bound to the system of physical sounds, 
and as a given sound structure is part of a particular context, remaining 
identical in its concretion. To these structural features of the work 
corresponds a set of intentional experiences which are their counter-

76 
NADIA DELLE SITE 
part. In addition, we have to consider such properties as sonority, 
tempo, rhythm, etc., that appear aesthetically valuable. They carry 
founding elements for value experience in terms of which the work of 
art, on the one hand, and the aesthetic object, on the other hand, are 
constituted. 
The problem becomes even more interesting if we realize that sound 
can convey identical meanings because of the identical natures of the 
specific sound formations. This proposition establishes the second 
stratum of the literary work of art. 
Ingarden proposes, as to the stratum of sense's unities, a new 
conception of the meaning opposing, on the one hand, the identification, 
supported by Husser! in Logische Untersuchungen, of the words' mean-
ings with ideal species that takes consequently to their immutability and 
intemporality, and opposing, on the other hand, the psychological trend 
considering the words' meanings and their propositions as "elements of 
the experience's concrete stream." 
The Polish philosopher maintains, instead, that the sense's unities 
and their propositions have no ontic autonomous sense, that is, as 
regards their being, they have no origin in themselves. They depend on 
subjective operations which form the sense. To avoid psychologistic 
complications, Ingarden clarifies that the meanings, although determined 
by the consciousness' acts, are transcendent to the act. Meaning does 
not vanish with the disappearance of the particular conscious act in 
which it was conceived. The same meaning can be repeatedly concretized 
in new conscious acts. In spite of the alteration a meaning can undergo, 
it does not constitute a substantial part of our psychological acts, nor of 
the stream of experience. The same can be told in a different way and it 
would be ridiculous also to believe that all these treatments of the same 
theme exist as "ideal objectivities since eternity", while it is true that, 
telling a fact, we are conscious that we could have told it in a different 
way. On the other hand, Ingarden does not intent to deny the existence 
of ideal concepts, whose admission makes possible, above all, the 
intersubjective identity of propositions for different conscious subjects, 
and which in the second place, allows a different solution for Husser!. 
The propositions exist as ontically heteronomous objectivities having 
the source of their being in the subject's intentional acts and have 
at the same time their existential foundation in two objectivities: in 
ideal concepts (ontically autonomous objectivities) and in "real verbal 
signs".14 

THE AESTHETIC THEORY OF INGARDEN 
77 
What can produce the sense's forming operation of the subject is the 
direct actualization of the sense's elements of correlative ideal concepts. 
What is still contained in concept forms the potential consistency. Only, 
we have to distinguish the sense's unities from ideal concepts. The 
literary work's stratum formed by words' meanings, propositions and 
propositional connections has no ideal, autonomous existence, but it is 
completely relating to specific subjective operations. 
The purely intentional object formed by an act of consciousness or 
by a whole sequence of them is, as we have already mentioned, tran-
scendent 15 compared to the general acts, because no moment of the act 
is an element of pure intentional objectivity. Nevertheless, they belong 
to the corresponding acts from which they draw their origin and form 
an intentional correlate of these acts. These determinings are used for 
distinguishing the purely intentional objectivities (belonging, actually, to 
the objectivities' stratum) from the ontically autonomous objectivities. 
For these objectivities are entirely a-causal; they are intentioned by an 
act of consciousness. 
To grasp, in a suitable way, the essence of the sense unities and their 
function, we must describe the quasi-judging nature of the propositions 
that appear in the literary work. These propositions have the external 
appearance of the judging propositions, but they are not and they do 
not want to be true judgements in which something is admitted seriously. 
These assertions possess an enchanting strength that allows us, during 
the reading, to immerse ourselves into the represented world and to see 
ourselves in a world entirely of our own, that is not specifically real and 
that appears nevertheless real. This operation of art has .its origins in 
the quasi-qualitative nature of assertions. 
Propositions and their connections perform entirely different tasks in 
literary work. In the first place, they give sense to the sentence in 
"creating" and also in outlining more exactly the other strata of the 
literary work. It performs the intentional "creation" of represented 
objectivities, both as to their nature, in qualitative features, and accord-
ing to their formal and intentional structure. "The situation of fact," 
allowing us to achieve the objectivities and their destinies, offers results 
closely linked to the intentional "formation" of represented objectivities. 
In addition, meanings have properties of their own, they can be 
obscure or clear, simple or complex, light or heavy, and so on. 
First of all, taken individually, they describe a situation in a happy or 
somber manner, creating the climate of moods in which the situation is 

78 
NADIA DELLE SITE 
exhibited; second, in their interplay they not only contribute to the 
quality of the mood but also create style. As Ingarden says, "they are 
aesthetically valuable elements." Thus the literary work as a work of art 
of aesthetic value consists of an array of meanings. Meanings in them-
selves, however, have their own mode of being. 
From the stratum of sense's unities and their connections emerge 
represented objects (people, events, feelings). In a simple reading these 
objects (purely intentional objects) constitute the first thing that affects 
the reader, if he follows the work's significant intention. Reality's 
nature, like that of dream, suffers the typical modification of the quasi 
that has its origin in proposition's modifications (that is, the represented 
objects have only the outward habitus of reality, but they are not 
deep-seated in an autonomous manner in reality). The same modifica-
tion of the quasi is, for Ingarden, a condition to be relatively "free" and 
independent of the real world and not conforming to it. If the repre-
sented objects were formed only under the pressure of real objects, 
then they would be mere duplications or reproductions of reality and 
not a new world poetically formed. Poets want to freely form a new 
fictitious world which only occasionally depicts the real world and 
simulates it. This freedom is, in some way, implicit in the nature of 
purely intentional objects (ontically heteronomous) which do not con-
tain their own being of reality, but only a modification of this sense of 
being.!6 Nevertheless, it does not follow that poets and artists generally, 
who engage in an operation, for example a short story, are completely 
free. The intentional act of consciousness is not creative in the sense 
that it could produce true realizations of ideal concepts in an inten-
tionally obtained object. If it were creative in this sense, it could form 
truly real and ontically autonomous objects.!? 
The represented object, inserted into represented space and time, is 
not, unlike the real object, a "specific individual" complete in all its 
ways and forming an original unity (ontically autonomous), but it is 
only a schematic formation with different imprecise points. This sche-
matic nature of the represented object cannot be eliminated in any 
completed literary work, even though in the completed work a great 
number of imprecise points is subsituted by new features. We could say 
that every literary work is incomplete as far as it concerns the deter-
mination of the objects represented in it and that it needs continuous 
improvement that, naturally, cannot be performed in the text.!8 
The role of the represented objects consists in the fact that they 

THE AESTHETIC THEORY OF INGARDEN 
79 
highlight the metaphysical qualities (essences). These qualities (the 
sublime, the holy, the demonaical) are not objective features of a 
particular psychological condition. Just that what, from the ontologic 
point of view, constitutes a lacuna among the represented objects, so 
the represented objects also have not a real but a heteronomous and 
intentional existence; and in their content they simulate reality's appear-
ance which allows them to achieve the typical way in which the literary 
work reveals its metaphysical qualities. 14 Their heteronomy allows us a 
dispassionate contemplation of the work of art, which real life does not 
allow. Their discovery in the aesthetic attitude does not only fill us with 
joy and pleasure, but it obtains a specific relief by reminding us of the 
Aristotelian "catharsis." Reference to Aristoteles reveals how Stagirita's 
thought is constantly present in Ingarden. Also the study of poetics in a 
prospect favoring the philosophical, or, better, favoring the ontological 
and metaphysical moments, is very meaningful for understanding in 
which direction Ingarden is going. 
In the literary work there is a need for a particular factor which 
prepares the intuitive comprehension of the represented objects. Such a 
factor is formed by the schematized aspects (adumbrations, as Husserl 
says). The importance for a work's quality (aesthetic function) as to 
schematized aspects is revealed, obviously, if we show how the aspects' 
diversity modifies the whole work. For example, there are works in 
which visual aspects predominate in such a way, that the represented 
world is essentially seen; events of acoustic nature may be entirely 
eliminated or determined by the visual point of view. If a work of art 
with predominantly visual aspects was translated in such a way that the 
visual aspects were substituted for the most part by acoustical aspects, 
the general nature of the work will have been modified by this simple 
fact. 20 
These elements show how a certain potentiality in a literary work, 
indicated by Ingarden with the expression "to lie in readiness", is linked 
to the vagueness of the same represented objectivities to which they 
belong. Only in the concretizations process, intuitions, schematized and 
ready by their pure being, quality for the condition of the perceptive (in 
theatrical performance) and the fantastic. 
The literary work proves to be a structural skeleton under a different 
point of view, containing "gaps," features of indetermination and ele-
ments, as the schematized aspects, showing a certain potentiality. But 
the work of art, considered until this moment as an object of its own, 

80 
NADIA DELLE SITE 
does not present, in living contact with the reader, this deep poten-
tiality. In other words, Ingarden distinguishes the literary work from the 
concretizations we want, that form during the reading and determine 
the way of appearing of the work in concreteness. He elaborates on a 
most intimate correlation between the universality of the intentional 
structure of the work of art and its "concretization" in the experience 
of the reader, restablishing, as Tymieniecka maintains, "the intercon-
nectedness between the pure and the empirical consciousness."2! 
Before analysing the concretization's features, Ingarden describes the 
acts and lived experiences which constitute the necessary condition so 
that the literary work can be grasped in one of these concrete contacts; 
nevertheless it is not only the work, but also any of its concretizations, 
which remain distinct from these experiences. Naturally, concretization 
depends on them, but there is no reason to consider them as something 
psychological. Concretizations, even though conditioned by these ex-
periences (Erfebnisse), have their second ontic foundation in the 
literary work. 
The situation we find in the psychological suhject during the reading 
is very complicated. First of all, we are faced with different cognitive 
acts, in which acts of perception with vocal, and verbal signs, acts of 
meaning-comprehension, acts of seeing in the fantasy mode, objectivities 
and represented situations and in some cases metaphysical qualities are 
grasped. Besides this, numerous experiences of aesthetic pleasure in 
which exploitations of the aesthetic nature have their origin are aroused 
in the reader. Finally, in the spectator's soul numerous secondary 
feelings, having a certain effect in the comprehension of literary work, 
are caused. From the multiplicity and complexity of acts and lived 
experiences follows that the ego (self) in the work's comprehension can 
grasp from time to time only some parts and strata. That is, a literary 
work is never grasped in all its elements, but allows only a partial, 
perspectival reduction. These "reductions" change constantly even in a 
same reading because they depend on the conditions in which the 
reading takes place.22 
The richness of subjective operations involved in understanding the 
literary work of art requires also that the understanding subject keeps 
distance from all disturbing experiences. Usually all the psychological 
states and lived experiences, belonging to the reader's life, are thrown 
out and repressed involuntarily, so are actual experiences concerning 
the things and affairs of the surrounding real world. This phenomenon 

THE AESTHETIC THEORY OF INGARDEN 
81 
of quasi-oblivion of our real environment 23 arranges, on the one hand, 
that the objects represented in the work form for us a special world, 
while on the other hand, they allow us to assume the attitude of a pure 
spectator opposite to these objects and to appreciate the qualities of 
aesthetic value that are revealed in them. This distancing is strictly 
connected with a specific aesthetic attitude that allows us to grasp the 
work of art adequately. However, the moment mentioned is not, for 
Ingarden, characteristic of an aesthetic experience, because such an 
insulation, such a seclusion in an actual experiencing, may be evoked 
also by some other strong experiences which carry us beyond the range 
of our daily affairs; e.g., in a very concentrated purely theoretical 
research, when we are absorbed in a vexatious problem, a similar 
insulation of the present occurs. This appears distinctly especially 
where the investigations are concerned with very abstract problems of 
no relation to the surrounding phenomenal real world, as in some 
mathematical or philosophical researches.c4 
These experiences of comprehension are transcendent compared to 
the literary work in itself and its concretizations. The necessity of 
avoiding a psychologistic solution at all cost presses Ingarden to dis-
tinguish the concretization of the literary work, from transcendent 
researches even if the literary work can be grasped only as it assumes 
the form of one of its possible concretizations. Nevertheless we are not, 
directed to the "reconstruction", such as it is, but to the work in itself. 
"The literary work unfolds in its concretizations, but each one of these 
unfoldings goes necessarily beyond them".cs 
The literary work is distinguished, above all from its concretizations 
because the potentialities contained in the work itself (schematized 
aspects, metaphysical qualities) are transformed in reality in these 
"reconstructions." For example, the represented objects (purely inten-
tional objects) have come to an effective manifestation in the concreti-
zation. Furthermore, because the points of indetermination are filled, at 
least in part, with the experiential processes of the reader, spectator 
etc., they become in this sense, co-author. Concretization involves the 
observers in order to fill in the lacunae contained in a literary work of 
art. How to relate the intentional object to the material object is 
predetermined by the artist through the schema which is concretely 
established by the objects represented in the work of art. The artist has 
prearranged a pattern with gaps which may puzzle the observer, but at 
the same time the observer is encouraged to apply his own experience 

82 
NADIA DELLE SITE 
to fill these lacunae. The schema of interpretation has been pointed out; 
the reader, spectator etc., must only be willing to submit themselves to 
the communication with the work of art through the provided schema.2fJ 
This need to make the schematic form of a work of art concrete 
through the individual experience is nothing but its "intentionality". 
This "intentionality" has two sides: objective and subjective, ontological 
and experiential. It explains how various concretions of the same work 
of art can be interpreted, appreciated, and evaluated disparately 
through an identical nucleus of intersubjective elements and values 
which permit people to recognize it as "the same", as well as to 
recognize its inherent historically established valueY This subjective 
process of cognition aims at reconstitution within experience which is 
strictly singular and relative to the readers or critics (as well as to the 
intellectual and cultural climate of the period), to the variants of the 
structural contents of the work as such, and to the evocative effect of 
the work upon the feelings, emotions and sensations of the reader. It 
leads toward the concretion of the universally determined literary 
universe within his strictly and intimately personal life-world.2H This 
does not mean that the reconstruction process occurs in an entirely 
arbitrary way. The reader, in fact, to perform a correct perception of 
art, is compelled, for example, to remain faithful to the semantic layer; 
he must not identify the concretization with the work itself. In spite of 
the gaps it is the outline, as we have seen, of the literary work that 
guides the reader during the concretization process. 
The correlation between the structure of work of art and its concre-
tization by the reader reaches perfection in the formation of a poly-
phonic harmony and in the constitution of an intentional aesthetic 
object that represents "the creative phase of aesthetic experience".2~ 
The formation of the aesthetic object, in particular, passes through the 
recognition of some qualities of aesthetic value, determining the poly-
phonic harmony. In this context we cannot forget that the theory of 
aesthetic values developed by Ingarden as means for the constitution of 
the aesthetic object is nothing else but the original completion of the 
indication already pointed out by Geiger, as regards the aesthetic 
specificity of the work of art. This harmony, even though resulting as 
much from the contents of the single stratum as from their strict con-
nection, can neither be identified with any "underlying" qualities nor 
with the relations between them, nor with the coexistence of many 
different qualities. It is, as Ingarden specifies in "Aesthetic Experience 

THE AESTHETIC THEORY OF INGARDEN 
83 
and Aesthetic Object", the new quality whose appearance depends on 
the coexistence of a number of various qualities that reciprocally modify 
each other. If two tones, c and e, sound together, there appears, besides 
the full qualities of these tones reciprocally modified, a ,~pecific quality 
of the chord, which is here independent of the absolute pitch of the 
tones, depending only on their relative pitch. To the attainment of this 
polyphonic harmony of "aesthetically valuable qualities" is subordinated 
the categorial forming of an aesthetic object.31J But the aesthetic recog-
nition of the work of art, even though conditioned by the process of 
concretization within which the qualities of value and the possible 
metaphysical qualities have revealed themselves, finds its objective 
foundation only in the literary work's strata. Only then, opposite the 
determined aesthetic object, the work assumes objective value. 
We understand why the literary work, in spite of the undeniable fact 
of its being a living experience, cannot be made psychic, that is, it 
cannot be appreciated only as a means to cause subjective feelings. The 
subjectivistic conception of aesthetic values is, for Ingarden, "manifesta-
tion of a lack of culture when one is establishing contact with the work 
of arC.} I 
Besides, the nature of the aesthetic object asks for a critical valuation 
that is "living and concrete fact in contact with the work of art." 32 In 
this sense a theoretical cognition of the work of art cannot be obtained 
without an aesthetic experience, and especially not without its being as 
an aesthetic object. In fact, who begins with purely investigating the 
cognition of a work of art as a real object, instead of constituting this 
object in an aesthetic experience, will never succeed in obtaining for 
himself a knowledge of aesthetic values." Ingarden has reminded us 
that the judgement of value, far from being an abstract and intellectual 
judgement, implies an aesthetic experience, having as its "main function" 
the task of "constituting aesthetic objects and of experiencing harmonies 
of qualities as well as their values in an emotional contemplative way." 
Sari, 
Italy 
NOTES 
I Ales Bello A., "A proposito della polemica Ingarden-Husserl." in Rivista d'ElIropa, 
gennaio-fehhraio I 'In. fascicolo I. p. 43. 

84 
NADIA DELLE SITE 
2 Ibidem. 
J Ingarden, R, "Letter to Husserl," in Analecta Husserliana, IV, p. 425. 
4 Ingarden, R, "Probleme der Husserlschen Reduktion," in Analecta Husserliana, IV, 
p.4. 
5 Ales Bello, A, "A proposito ... ," cit., p. 44. 
6 Ingarden, R, "Probleme der ... ," cit., p. 30. 
7 Scrimieri G., La formazione della fenomenologia de E. Husserl, Ed. Levante, Bari, 
1967, p. 225. 
8 Ales Bello, A, op, cit., p. 44. 
9 Ingarden, R, Das literarische Kunstwerk, Max Niemeyer, Tiibingen (tr.it. di G. 
Brozich Lipizer e Sergio Checconi, Fenomenologia dell'opera letteraria, Silva, Milano 
1968, pp. 4-5 [Quotations were apparently translated from the Italian. The ed.] 
10 Cf. Rudnick, Hans H., "Roman Ingarden's Literary Theory," in Analecta Husserliana, 
v. IV, p. 112. 
II Ingarden, R, Das lit .... , cit, p. 58. 
12 Tymieniecka, A-T., "The Tenets of Roman Ingarden's Aesthetic in a Philosophical 
Perspective," in Analecta Husserliana, Vol. XVII, p. 275. Cf. Ingarden, R, Das Lit . ... , 
cit, p. 630; where Ingarden says: "The intention of choosing some and not other typical 
vocal forms operates on the concretization of ideas' contents corresponding to actually 
pronounced vocal words. This concretization is ontically heteronomous and it has its 
foundation in ideas." 
\J Tymieniecka, A-T., The tenets . .. , cit, p. 275. 
14 Ingarden, R, Das lit .... , cit, p. 62l. 
15 Cf., Ingarden, R, "Letter to Husserl," cit., pp. 429-30. 
16 Cf., Ingarden, R, "What is new in Husserl's Crisis," in Analecta Husserliana, Vol. II, 
1972,p.44. 
17 Cf., Ingarden, R, Das lit . ... , cit, p. 504. 
IX Cf., Ibidem, p. 433. 
19 Cf., Ibidem, p. 509. 
20 Cf., Ibidem, p. 483. 
21 Tymieniecka, A T., "The tenets ... ," cit, p. 272. 
22 Cf., Ingarden, R, Das lit .... , cit, p. 576. 
2J Cf., Ingarden, R, "Aesthetic Experience and Aesthetic Object," Journal for Philoso-
phy and Phenomenological Research, II, March 1961, p. 298. 
24 Ibidem, p. 299. 
25 Ingarden, R., Das lit . ... ,cit, p. 581. 
26 Ct., Rudnick, H., "Roman Ingarden Liter. ... ," cit, p. 116. 
27 Cf., Tymieniecka, A-T., "The tenets ... ," cit, p. 280. 
28 Tymieniecka, A-T., "Poetica Nova: the Creative Crucibles of the Human Condition 
of Art. A Treatise on the Metaphysics of the Human Condition and of Art," in 
Analecta Husserliana, Vol. XII, 1980, p. 70. 
2Y Ingarden, R., "Aesthetic Ex .... ," cit, p. 307. 
30 Cf., Ibidem. 
J I Ingarden, R, Das lit .... , cit, p. 51. 
J2 Eco, U., La deJinizione deU'arte, Garzanti, 1984, p. 60. 
JJ Cf. Ingarden, R., "Aesthetic Ex .... ," cit, p. 310. 

ZHANG J1N-YAN (5R~;=j) 
THE NEW CRITICISM AND INGARDEN'S 
PHENOMENOLOGICAL THEORY OF LITERATURE 
I. INTRODUCTION 
The New Criticism has been the dominant trend in twentieth-century 
Anglo-American literary theory and practical criticism. On the Con-
tinent, Roman Ingarden's phenomenological theory of literature has had 
its most remarkable achievement in phenomenological aesthetics. Rene 
Wellek first introduced Ingarden's theory of literature to the English-
speaking world in the forties.' After that, Anna-Teresa Tymieniecka 
made her own contribution to make Ingarden's aesthetic theory known 
in the United States.2 In 1973, Ingarden's two main works on literary 
theory appeared in English as The Literary Work of Art and The 
Cognition of the Literary Work of Art. Since then Ingarden's theory of 
literature has attracted more and more attention among Anglo-American 
readers. 
Today it seems worth comparing these two important trends of 
literary theory in this century. Considering that they come from entirely 
different philosophical backgrounds, many similar and even shared 
theses between the New Criticism and Ingarden's phenomenological 
theory of literature are indeed very striking. In this paper I want first of 
all to show what similar conclusions have been reached by these two 
different kinds of literary theory. Secondly, I will try to see whether 
these two seemingly conflicting approaches can be reconciled and 
supplement each other. 
II. MAIN TENETS OF THE NEW CRITICISM 
In the first decades of this century, Romanticism in literature was on 
the decline and had nearly exhausted itself. As a result, critical standards 
of Romanticism became untenable and were seriously challenged. T. E. 
Hulme and T. S. Eliot initiated a strong reaction against the Romantic 
conception of literature in British and American literary criticism. 
According to this conception, literature or a literary work, expresses 
only the author's thoughts and feelings. As Wordsworth well put it, 
85 
Hans H. Rudnick (ed.), Analecta Husserliana, Vol. XXX, 85-94. 
© 1990 Kluwer Academic Publishers. 

86 
ZHANG JIN-YAN 
poetry is "emotion recollected in tranquility." For the Romantic critics, 
to understand a literary work of art is to understand or experience the 
thoughts and feelings in the author's mind while he was creating his 
work. T. E. Hulme argues that the business of the poet is not personal 
expression but craft.' This radical shift of emphasis already leads the 
reader's attention away from the author and directly to the work itself. 
Hulme's contention finds a fuller formulation in T. S. Eliot's famous 
impersonal theory of poetry. He simply denies the right of the poet to 
express his "personality" and severely separates the poet's impressions 
and experiences from the poetry in which these impressions and experi-
ences have undergone a qualitative change. Eliot argues that "Poetry 
is not a turning loose of emotion but an escape from emotion; it is 
not the expression of personality, but an escape from personality."4 
Accordingly, Eliot maintains that "Honest criticism and sensitive appre-
ciation are directed not upon the poet but upon the poetry." 5 Both 
Hulme's and Eliot's pioneering work constitutes the first step toward an 
objective view of literature. 
Eliot's impersonal theory of poetry is reinforced by his notion of 
"objective correlative." In Eliot's definition, an "objective correlative" 
is "a set of objects, a situation, a chain of events which shall be the 
formula of that particular emotion; such that when the eternal facts, 
which must terminate in sensory experience, are given, the emotion is 
immediately evoked."6 What Eliot is driving at here is the idea that 
what matters most are not the thoughts and feelings which happened in 
the poet's mind, but the linguistic medium, that is, the work itself, not 
the creative process, but its final product. 
Because the poet's business is no longer to express himself, to pour 
out his personal emotions, the critic can thus focus his attention 
exclusively upon the poetry, not the poet. Hence the concentration 
upon the work itself and the preference for the "intrinsic study" of 
literature among the New Critics. This becomes a basic presupposition 
of the New Criticism as well as a working hypothesis for the New 
Critics. 
However, the decisive step toward the objective view of literature 
was taken by two American literary theorists, W. K. Wimsatt, Jr. and 
Monroe Beardsley in the forties. They espoused the view that literature 
is literature and nothing else, neither the author's feelings nor the 
reader's responses. The aim of their work is to repudiate two prevalent 
fallacies in literary criticism, i.e. the "intentional fallacy" and the "affec-

THE NEW CRITICISM 
87 
tive fallacy" in such a thoroughgoing way as to dispel them out of 
proper literary study. According to these two authors: 
The intentional fallacy is a confusion between the poem and its origins, a special 
case of what is known to philosophers as the OOgenetic fallacy." It begins by trying to 
derive the standard of criticism from the psychological causes of the poem and ends in 
biography and relativism. The affective fallacy is a confusion between the poem and its 
results (what it is and what it does), a special case of epistemological skepticism. It 
begins by trying to derive the standard of criticism from the psychological effects of the 
poem and ends in impressionism and relativism. The outcome of either fallacy, the 
intentional or the affective, is that the poem itself, as an object of specific critical 
judgment, tends to disappear.7 
On the other hand, the works of I. A. Richards constitute another 
cornerstone of the New Criticism. Both in Foundations of Aesthetics 
and Principles of Literary Criticism, Richards is definitely an advocate 
of affective theory. His basic idea about literature is that the function of 
literature is to communicate the author's experiences to the reader. 
More particularly, his critical theory puts a strong emphasis on the 
reader's responses to the literary work. Consequently, the criteria by 
which the critic evaluates a poem lie exclusively in the experiences of 
the reader. According to Richards, good poetry is that kind of poetry 
which can satisfy the greatest possible number of conflicting impulses. 
Quite naturally, Richards chooses synaesthesia both as an ideal state of 
harmony in which competing impulses can be satisfied and as the 
foundation on which his critcial theory rests. As Richard's study of 
Coleridge shows, the notion of synaesthesia is closely related to that of 
semantic analysis.H Hence his insistence on the close reading of poetic 
text. In this respect, Richards does belong to the mainstream of the 
New Criticism. 
Richards has done an indispensable job for a generation of practical 
critics in providing a theoretical framework for close reading. However, 
Richard's project has been carried forward by his pupil, William 
Empson. Empson's Seven Types of Ambiguity gives us a subtle exami-
nation of verbal nuances in poetic language. His ingenious analyses 
show that ambiguity or richness of meaning is the rule rather than 
exception in poetry. Following the footsteps of William Empson, some 
American critics have given their own definitions of poetic language. 
For Cleanth Brooks, it is "irony" and "paradox;" for Allen Tate, it is 
"tension;" and for John Crowe Ransom, it is "texture." 
The impersonal theory of Eliot, the semantic analysis of Richards 

88 
ZHANG JIN-YAN 
and Empson, the refutation of the intentional and affective fallacies by 
Wimsatt and Beardsley, are all attempts to establish an objective 
conception of literature. They are, so to speak, different routes leading 
to the same goal. The development of the New Criticism shows a shift 
of focus from author and reader to the literary work of art itself. In this 
way, New Criticism has made a tremendous change in the literary study 
of English literature. 
III. ROMAN INGARDEN'S PHENOMENOLOGICAL THEORY OF 
LITERATURE 
One of the main tenets of Husserl's phenomenology is anti-psychologism. 
As a faithful pupil of the early Husserl, the Polish philosopher Roman 
Ingarden embraces this axiom as his point of departure in his ontological 
study of the literary work of art. 
As is well-known, the most salient feature of Husserl's philosophical 
method is a faithful description of phenomena. Ingarden adopts this 
method as his only tool in his ontological investigations of the literary 
work of art. This descriptive approach means for Ingarden as well as 
for Husserl an exclusion of causal explanation, whether it is psycho-
logical or sociological. 
Ingarden rejects the then current psychologistic view that a literary 
work is what the author had experienced during its creation. He argues: 
"If this view were correct, it would be impossible to have direct 
intercourse with the work or to know it."9 He also contends that "the 
author's experiences cease to exist the moment the work created by 
him comes into existence." 10 Moreover, Ingarden attacks another psy-
chologistic view that the literary work is nothing but a manifold of 
experiences felt by the reader during his reading. According to his view, 
if this were true, there would then have to be as many Hamlets as there 
are readers. 
In order to give a thorough treatment of the problem about the 
mode of existence of a literary work of art, Ingarden eliminates all the 
factors foreign to it. These extraneous factors include: (1) the author's 
experiences, (2) the reader's experiences, and (3) the whole sphere of 
objects and states of affairs "appearing" in the work. After the elimina-
tion of the three extraneous factors from the literary work, Ingarden 
finds that it is a formation composed of four strata. These strata are 
necessary for every literary work if its internal unity and basic character 
are to be preserved. The four necessary strata are: 

THE NEW CRITICISM 
89 
(1) 
the stratum of word sound and the phonetic formations of 
higher order built on them; 
(2) 
the stratum of meaning units of various orders; 
(3) 
the stratum of manifold schematized aspects and aspect 
continua and series; 
(4) 
the stratum of represented objectivities and their vicissi-
tudes. 12 
Although these four specific strata or layers are heterogeneous, each 
plays its own role in forming an organic structure which is the literary 
work itself. We may say that the first two strata are the substructure 
and the last two strata, the superstructure. From the sound stratum 
upwards, each of the other three strata is determined by and owes its 
existence to the preceding stratum. 
Seen from this perspective, all these strata do not exist one apart 
from the other, but are integrated into an organic whole. Ingarden says: 
"From the material and form of the individual strata results an essen-
tial inner and thus the formal unity of the whole work." 11 
The literary work as a work of art depends on the interaction of 
these strata. Each stratum has its own peculiar artistic qualities and 
such artistic qualities culminate in a "polyphonic harmony" which is 
precisely the aesthetic value of the whole work. 14 
While discussing "metaphysical qualities", Ingarden contends that the 
manifestation of such qualities can be effected by the cooperation, not 
only of the object stratum, but also indirectly by all the remaining strata 
of a literary work of art. This, Ingarden insists, again shows that, despite 
the stratified structure, the literary work of art forms an organic unity.ls 
Ingarden's notions of "polyphonic harmony" and "metaphysical qual-
ities" are strong reasons for supporting his organicist view of the 
literary work of art. 
IV. SOME COMPARISONS BETWEEN THE NEW CRITICISM AND 
INGARDEN'S THEORY OF LITERATURE 
From what we have observed in the foregoing sections it will be seen 
that these two types of literary theory have much more in common than 
is usually supposed. It is quite obvious that in spite of different back-
grounds the New Criticism and Ingarden's theory are similar in general 
tendencies. Each has developed an objective conception of literature; 

90 
ZHANG JIN-YAN 
each holds an anti-psychologistic position; each directs its attention to 
the work itself and nothing else. In a word, they agree on the essential 
nature of the literary work of art. 
In this section I want to show in some detail that these two schools 
of literary theory even coincide in some particular assertions. In order 
to do justice to both schools, I will not ignore their differences while 
indicating their likenesses. To use Wittgenstein's terminology, they have 
"family resemblances." 
As mentiond above, the most important assertion is their common 
withdrawal from author or reader and concentration upon the work 
itself. For the New Criticism, this has been done by anti-romantic critics 
like T. E. Hulme and T. S. Eliot on the grounds of literary practice. 
For Roman Ingarden, it is achieved through his phenomenological 
descriptive method. Likewise, Wimsatt and Beardsley have reached 
independently the same conclusion which Ingarden made in The Literary 
Work of Art nearly twenty years before. Ingarden's ontological analysis 
of the literary work coincides almost literally with the argument put 
forth by Wimsatt and Beardsley. Let us look at the following para-
graphs: 
The poem is not the critic's own and not the author's (it is detached from the author at 
birth and goes about the world beyond his power to intend or control it).'" 
The author, with all his vicissitudes, experiences, and psychic states. remains completely 
outside the literary work. [n particular, however, the experiences of the author during 
the creation of the work do not constitute any part of the created work.'7 
Likewise. the attributes. experiences. or psychic states of the reader do not helong to 
the structure of the work." 
The first paragraph is from Wimsatt's and Beardsley's The Verbal /can, 
while the second and third paragraphs are from Ingarden's The Literary 
Work of Art. Ingarden's distinction between the author's or the reader's 
psychic states and the work itself is based on his recognition of their 
being heterogeneous objects. In contrast, the primary aim of Wimsatt 
and Beardsley is still to pave the way for interpreting the literary work 
itself. For them, to separate completely the literary work from the 
author or the reader makes it possible for the practical critic to 
concentrate on literature itself, not the author's biography or the 
whirligig of taste. 
Another assertion common to the New Criticism and Ingarden's 
phenomenological theory of literature is that literary works are public 

THE NEW CRITICISM 
91 
in nature, that is, they are intersubjectively accessible. As Wimsatt and 
Beardsley put it: 
The poem belongs to the public. It is embodied in language, the peculiar possession of 
the public, and it is about the human being, an object of public knowledge. 14 
This emphasis on the intersubjectivity of the literary work in Wimsatt 
and Beardsley's statement has its counterpart in Ingarden's more 
rigorous argument: 
By virtue of the dual stratum of its language, the work is both intersubjectively acces-
sible and reproducible, so that it becomes an intersubjective intentional object, related 
to a community of readers. As such it is not a psychological phenomenon and is 
transcendent to all experiences of consciousness, those of the author as well as those of 
the reader. ~II 
In contrast to primary purely intentional objects, the objects "created" 
by the units of meaning are derived purely intentional objects, While 
the former are "subjective," in the sense that they are directly accessible 
only to the one conscious subject who effected the act that created 
them, the derived purely intentional objects, as correlates of meaning 
units, are "intersubjective": 
they can be intended by various conscious subjects as identically the same. This is 
based on the fact that words (sentences) and in particular word meanings (meaning 
contents of sentences) are themselves intersubjective.~ I 
Another thesis which is of equal importance is the fictivity of the 
literary work of art. In this connection, Richards' notion of "pseudo-
statement" and Ingarden's idea of "quasi-judgment" are simply two 
versions of one and the same doctrine. 
In order to defend poetry in the modern world, Richards makes a 
distinction between two uses of language. He says: 
A statement may be used for the sake of the reference, true or false .... This is the 
scicn tific use of language. But it may also be used for the sake of the effects in emotion 
and attitude .... This is the emotive use of language.~2 
While declarative sentences in a scientific work are genuine statements, 
those in a literary work are "pseudo-statements." By identifying pseudo-
statements with the emotive uses of language, Richards argues that 
"truth" in a work of art only means "internal necessity." In fact, this 
makes his position appear akin to that of the structuralists, because 

92 
ZHANG JIN-YAN 
"internal necessity" is a concept of coherence in a closed system, not 
corresponding to external reality. 
In Ingarden's stratified theory of the literary work of art, the central 
stratum is that of the meaning units. Just as Richards distinguishes the 
emotive function from the referential function of language, Ingarden 
compares the assertive propositions (Behauptungssiitze) appearing in a 
literary work with those of a scientific work. Ingarden calls judgments 
of a scientific work genuine judgments, they are either true or false. In 
contrast, judgments of a literary work are not pure assertive propositions. 
He calls this kind of judgments quasi-judgments in the sense that they 
are neither true nor false, referring to the independent real world. If we 
mistake quasi-judgments in a literary work as genuine judgments about 
the extraliterary reality, we must fail to distinguish the represented 
world in a literary work from the real world in which we live.23 
V. CONCLUDING REMARKS 
Anna-Teresa Tymieniecka, a pupil of Roman Ingarden, rightly argues 
that Ingarden's phenomenological theory of literature provides a proper 
theoretical foundation for the New Criticism.24 Our comparisons between 
the two main trends of contemporary literary theory only strengthen 
and consolidate her proposal. 
As is well-known, the New Critics are primarily a group of practical 
critics of English literature. In their hands, theory only serves as a guide 
in critical practice. Even Wimsatt's and Beardsley's refutation of the 
intentional and affective fallacies is lacking in philosophical depth. In 
this respect, Ingarden's phenomenological theory of a stratified structure 
of the literary work is precisely what is needed in the New Criticism if 
we want to lay a solid foundation for it. 
Some New Critics, like Cleanth Brooks, contend that in a successful 
work, form and content can not be separated. This is their organicist 
view of literary works of art. But it rests on insights rather than on a 
rigorous analysis. Here again Ingarden's conception of four-layered 
formation gives a more adequate solution of the difficult problem of 
content and form. 
For similar reasons, Eliot's "objective correlative" and Richards' 
"pseudo-statement" can be reformulated in Ingarden's more elaborate 
theory. It seems feasible to assimilate Eliot's "objective correlative" into 
Ingarden's strata of represented objectivities and of schematized 

THE NEW CRITICISM 
93 
aspects. As for Richards' "pseudo-statement," we can name it "quasi-
judgment" to avoid the derogatory sense of the term. 25 Apart from this, 
Ingarden's "quasi-judgment" is better because it belongs to the repre-
sented world of the literary work, not the real world. 
Finally, one important weakness in Ingarden's phenomenological 
aesthetics of literature is that it is too abstruse. So far as I know, few 
literary critics have applied this theory to the study of particular works 
of art. In sharp contrast to the New Criticism, no substantial application 
has yet been made by followers of Ingarden. It is ironical that the most 
influential phenomenological literary critics are not followers of Ingarden 
but of the critics of consciousness of the Geneva school. 
Both the New Critics and Ingarden accept the literary work of art as 
the ultimate objects of investigation. As opposed to structuralists, they 
are not willing to dissect works of art into pure signs devoid of human 
values. In this connection at least, the New Critics and Ingarden's 
followers are allies in defending the integrity of literary works of art. 
Institute of Philosophy, 
Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, 
Beijing 
NOTES 
I Rene Wellek and Austin Warren, Theory of Literature (London, 1985), pp. 151-
152. 
, Anna-Teresa Tymieniecka, Phenomenology and Science in Contemporary European 
Thought (New York, 1961), pp. 22-33. 
J T. E. Hulme, Speculations (New York, 1924), p. 11 H. 
• T. S. Eliot, Selected Essays (New York, 1932), p. 1 (l. 
Ibid.,p.7. 
" Ibid .. pp. 124-25. 
7 W. K. Wimsatt and Monroe C. Beardsley, The Verbal Icon (Kentucky, 1954), p. 21. 
x I. A. Richards, The Principles of Literary Criticism (London, 1924), pp. 242ff. See 
also his Coleridge on Imagination (New York, 1934), pp. xi-xii. 
<) Roman Ingarden, The Literary Work of Art, trans. by George G. Grabowicz (Evan-
ston, 11,1973), p. 13. 
III Ibid., p. 14. 
II Ibid., p. 15. 
I' Ibid .. p. 30. 
IJ Ibid., p. 13. 
I. Ibid., p. 369. 
" Ibid., pp. 296-97. 

94 
ZHANG JIN-YAN 
16 The Verbal/con, p. 5. 
17 The Literary Work of Art, p. 22. 
18 Ibid., p. 23. 
19 The Verbal /can, p. 5. 
20 Roman Ingarden, The Cognition of the Literary Work of Art, trans. by Ruth Ann 
Crowley and Kenneth R. Olson (Evanston, 1973), p. 14. 
21 The Literary Work of Art, p. 126. 
22 The Principles of Literary Criticism, p. 267. 
23 The Literary Work of Art, pp. 167-81. 
24 Phenomenology and Science in Contemporary European Thought, p. 22. 
25 Rene Weliek, Four Critics (Seattle and London, 1981), p. 59. 

GERALD NYENHUIS 
ROMAN INGARDEN'S CONTRIBUTION TO THE 
READING AND ANALYSIS OF THE LITERARY TEXT* 
If someone should ask Roman Ingarden "What is it that I perceive 
when I perceive a literary work of art?", he would affirm that what is 
perceived is a polyphonic harmony, an interpenetration of at least four 
layers or strata that, taken together, make up the literary work of art. l 
Both the question and the answer make the same presupposition: even 
though I see ink spots on paper, what I perceive is something different. 
What I perceive is not entirely identical with what I see. And even 
more, it is understood that I can perceive a literary work of art even 
though it is, in some sense, different from and other than what I see. To 
say the same thing in a different way, I perceive the literary work of art 
in the literary text that is, in a manner of speaking, no more than ink 
spots on paper. The literary work of art is found in the text, in the 
inks pots, but it is not identical with them. The text is "where" I perceive 
the literary work of art. 
The literary text, then, where I encounter the literary work of art, is a 
multi-stratified reality.2 Whatever analysis, therefore, of what I see and 
of what I perceive, and of the relation that might exist between what I 
see and what I perceive, will have to begin with an identification and a 
description of the strata or layers that make up the work of literary art. 
Reading, which obviously is intimately related to seeing and perceiving, 
cannot be defined without reference of these activities in relation to the 
several layers in which the work of literary art exists. 
The first layer, which is the basic one in Ingarden's theory, is the 
layer of the ink spots. We recognize their form and the fact that they 
function as signs, and we call them letters. They differ, one from 
another, so that they can be recognized and identified. The difference 
as difference is not important, what is important is the fact that they are 
different, because each one of them represents a difference in the 
phonic matter (or phonic material). But even though we are able to 
distinguish the letters, each one separately, we do not normally perceive 
them separately, but rather in combination that we usually call words 
(although the linguists are not agreed as to just what a word is). Ingarden 
calls them Wortlaute (word-sounds), emphasizing thus two factors: (1) 
95 
Hans H. Rudnick (ed.), Analecta Husserliana, Vol. XXX, 95-103. 
© 1990 Kluwer Academic Publishers. 

96 
GERALD NYENHUIS 
the letters represent the phonic material (Lautmaterial) and (2) they 
come in units, that is, in combinations of letter/sounds that make sense 
or, to say it another way, that have meaning. Reading, therefore, is not 
only the ability to recognize the sounds that are represented by the 
letters and to be able to reproduce them, but, more importantly, to 
identify the units as units of meaning. When we read, we see the ink 
spots but we see them grouped together, and the groups are units or 
sets. 
The word-sounds, that is, phonic material in meaning units, function 
in relation to greater units, the phrase, for example. But even though 
that is the way it is, for no word has meaning all by itself or by itself 
alone, the units of phonic material themselves are units made up by 
their fusion with meaning. They are, we may say, invested or charged 
with meaning. They are "cathectized", to use a psychoanalytic term. An 
important aspect of reading is to be able to perceive the word sound in 
terms of its meaning-charge. The first level is permeated by the second, 
which is the layer of meaning units. No one layer can function separately, 
by itself, nor exist alone. 
According to Ingarden, the meaning of a word is a potential that 
must be actualized in the sentence. This potential is actualized only in a 
syntactic relation with other word sounds. The sentence makes sense by 
way of the meanings it borrows from the word sounds, where the 
meanings are latent and potential. The possibility of perceiving the 
relation between sense and meaning, between the word sound and the 
sentence, even more than knowing what this or that word means, is the 
indispensable condition for reading a work of literary art. 
The meaning units, from the word sounds to the entire work of 
literary art, are interrelated. The meaning is perceived in units, and the 
units are interdependent, they are combinations in which the minor 
units find their meaning in the major units and lend this meaning to 
them. The result is that it is necessary not only to perceive the meaning 
units, but also the relations that they establish among themselves. 
If we are to read the literary work of art and not just the text, we will 
have to perceive the formation of the major units. We will have to note 
how, in Ingarden's words, one unit "extends itself and reaches out 
toward another." A new combination has formed by this active "reaching 
out", by the one unit "reaching" another, an active interrelation between 
units, and this combination makes new units of meaning, not explicit 
but nevertheless real. If we say, for example, 

READING AND ANALYSIS OF THE LITERARY TEXT 
97 
Don't speak of this to Mary today. 
and 
She fought with her sweetheart last night, 
the two sentences make a new, implicit, meaning unit, that might offer 
difficulty to make explicit, but is none the less real as J unit of meaning. 
Other examples might be: 
Or: 
Also: 
I'm looking for another apartment. 
I can't put up with the traffic anymore. 
I'm thinking about finding another job. 
Inflation shrinks my salary. 
We will have to move our business to another location. 
The water here has a high mineral content. 
The reading of a literary work of art involves the constant and con-
scious perception of these units. If they are not perceived, the reading is 
simply a reading of words and phrases, but not a reading of the literary 
work of art. 
The sentence, which we have already defined as one of the most 
relevant of the meaning units, is not a sentence only for grammatical 
reasons. There are combinations of words that have "grammaticality" 
but not "acceptability", as the generative grammarians have shown us. 
The sentence is sentence, according to Ingarden, because it creates a 
correlate. The correlate that corresponds to the sentence (a syntactical 
unit) is an intentional unit (or an imaginational one). The correlate is a 
Sachverhalt, "state of affairs", a conjunto de circunstancias ("complex of 
circumstances" as the Spanish translator puts it) or "hats-de-chose" 
(according to the French translator). These "states of affairs" also exist 
as intentional realities, and it is not important if they correspond to 
"reality" or not. If someone says, for instance, "the young fairies begin 
to dance in the library when all the librarians have gone", this sentence 
does not depend on its verification in order to communicate. The 
sentence creates a correlate (this fact in turn makes the group of words 
a sentence), and the "state of affairs" exists, although only intentionally. 

98 
GERALD NYENHUIS 
The reader perceives not only, nor even primarily, the grammatical 
unit, but rather the correlate and its "state of affairs". A reading that 
does not perceive at this level is not the reading of a literary work of 
art. 
We return again to consider the word sounds. The phonic material 
cannot by itself generate the intentions of a word; no word can adjust 
itself to intentions nor govern its modifications. It seems obvious that 
the intentionality of the word meanings and the actualizations and/or 
modifications in their meaning that occur in the sentences have to be 
the result of subjective operations, implicit in the creation of correlates. 
The meaning, which is carried by the phonic material concretized into 
word sound, gets its form and reality from its participation in the purely 
intentional correlate, even though at the same time it may be func-
tionally directed to a referential object. The word "pen", for instance, 
realizes its meaning in relation to the correlate that specifies a "state of 
affairs", in which someone's hand moves it over paper, and, in this way, 
it may be functionally directed toward a referential object, that is the 
pen with which these lines are written. Without this correlate the word 
"pen" may carry several various uncertain potential and latent meanings, 
according to the linguistic community, but it may also have one. 
Even though the meaning is realized only in the sentence that creates 
a correlate (and its state of affairs), it does not remain totally open to 
the complete range of possibilities. The meaning of a word is arbitrarily 
given, but we may not affirm that whatever word may have whatever 
meaning. There are limits and indications. The word (rather, the word 
sound) is a unit in itself precisely because to be a unit, it is necessary 
that the phonic material be linked to a meaning. This is what makes it a 
unit; if the word exists, if it functions significantly in a linguistic 
community, the meaning is already there, even though it might be 
present only in a potential sense, because if it were not so the unit 
would not be identified as a word sound; it would be only sound, only 
phonic material. 
The words are "invested" with meaning according to the "intentions" 
of the community; it is the community after all who determines what is 
a word and what is its meaning. The word, because of its relation with 
intention, demonstrates an intentional directional factor. The factor 
is directional because it points toward an object, but this object is 
intentional, that is, in this case, what is in the mind. (For Ingarden 
intentionality describes our acts of consciousness.) What is in the mind 

READING AND ANALYSIS OF THE LITERARY TEXT 
99 
may, of course, correspond to "reality" or it may not, but it is not 
important that it does. When I say the word "goblin", for example, it is 
clear to what I refer even though my use of the word does not make 
any affirmation about the real existence of goblins. (It is important to 
recognize, for Ingarden, that to speak of the intentional directional 
factor, the word-sound refers to "what is in the mind", and not directly 
to the objects.)" 
Even though it "is in the mind" the referent of the word sound is an 
object, although it is not necessarily a real object. It is an intersubjective 
object, because it occupies the attention of two or more people at the 
same time (or, possibly, of the same person on different occasions) 
without having to affirm the existence of this object in the "real" world. 
The capacity of the word-sound to refer to this object, within a given 
linguistic community, is called its directional intentional factor. 
A second factor is its "material content." With this term Ingarden 
refers to the constitutive capacity of the word-sound. By "constitutive" 
is meant that the word-sound cannot refer to a certain object except 
that this object should have certain concrete material characteristics. 
The word itself constitutes the object in this sense: it confers its 
attributes upon it. Owing to the fact that it is impossible to conceive of 
an object that should be completely without attributes, the word-sound 
confers these attributes on the object and, in this sense, the word-sound 
constitutes the object. The material content of the word-sound arises 
from an intention that is, in this case, more than personal, it comes 
from the linguistic community. The reader has to "know" the word as a 
potentiality that can be actualized in the sentence, so that what is latent 
in the material content of the word-sound may be attributed to the 
object. 
Another aspect or factor of this meaning unit (the word-sound which 
is also a "word-sense") is its formal content. By formal content we refer 
to the capacity of this unit to participate in a formal structure. Ingarden 
calls this factor a functional one and speaks of the formative function of 
the word meaning. Each word, precisely because it is a word, is able, 
within a certain structure, to relate to other words and form a new 
structure, or constitute a new structure. The structure exists, in a sense, 
separately from the words, but not without them. 
The ability, not only of words, but also of the higher meaning units, 
to relate to each other and thus to form new and superior units of 
meaning is part of the essential structure of the literary work of art. It is 

100 
GERALD NYENHUIS 
an interrelation of meaning units, from the smallest to the totality of the 
work. Reading that is really reading has to manipulate the techniques 
necessary to the perception of these relations, which are more than 
grammatical relationships or structures, but not entirely unrelated to 
them. 
Another layer in the literary work of art is that of the represented 
objects. Just as there are objects in reality, there are objects in the 
literary work of art. The neighbor's house -
both are real: the neighbor 
and his house -
is not the same in my private life as the neighbor's 
house in a literary work of art. It is obvious that the same house cannot 
occupy two different spaces, one within the literary work and the other 
outside of it. Without a doubt the house that is within the literary work 
is an intentional object and not a "real" one, although we do not 
question its reality within the work of art, nor its existence as a "real" 
intentional object. The neighbor's house in the literary work is a 
represented object and has to be perceived as one if it is to be 
perceived correctly. 
Represented objects are never complete. Ingarden says that they 
have "spots of indeterminacy" or indeterminate points. It is the reader's 
task to finish or complete the work. The work has to be finished in 
accordance with the indications given in the text, because it is the text 
that creates the represented object. But this object gains its reality only 
by the activity of the reader when he "concretizes" it. 
The represented object (if it corresponds to an object in reality or 
not is not a pertinent question) occupies its own space and its own time 
in the literary work of art. The existence of represented objects in the 
literary work, always as intentional objects, demands that there also be 
time and space in the literary work, but there will always be time and 
space in the literary work, a kind of "quasi-time" and "quasi-space," 
functioning in the literary work as if they were real space and time. 
The represented object in the literary work will have to be completed 
by the information that the reader carries with him, gained from his 
own experience. Because of this, some readers cannot realize certain 
kinds of reading: they do not have the necessary experience (or this 
experience is not available) to complete or finish the work. When he 
finishes creating the object, the reader also has to create the space and 
time that this object occupies. Nevertheless, the act of reading is more a 
re-creation than a creation, because the represented objects, as well as 
their time and space, are creations of the author, and they have to be 

READING AND ANAL YSIS OF THE LITERARY TEXT 
101 
concretized by the reader within the limits of their function in the work 
as it has been realized by the author, even though they will be con-
cretized by the reader in accordance with his own perception of time 
and space. They will be perceived as quasi-time and quasi-space 
functioning in the work just as the author meant them to function. The 
reader will attribute the characteristics of real time and space to the 
time and space in the work, remembering constantly that time and 
space in the literary work are not real time and space but representa-
tions, as quasi-time and quasi-space, of real time and space that exist 
only in the literary work. 
The correlates, created by the sentences, are, as we have said above, 
"states of affairs" or "complexes of circumstances." These states of 
affairs are composed of represented objects, along with represented 
time and space. The sentence, or the complex of sentences, that creates 
the correlate is a product of the author but its realization, its concre-
tization, carries with it an implicit reader. This reader, in order to be 
able to complete the task of finishing the work and to materialize the 
state of affairs with all of its objects in their space and time, will have to 
be experienced, that is to say, he will need adequate and sufficient 
experience. Some have learned to read in this way by themselves, but 
the great majority of readers will need some kind of instruction. It is 
possible that the first step of this instruction will be to point out the 
layer of represented objects in the literary work of art, so that the 
reader can perceive them. 
The represented objects, created as intentional objects by the author 
and re-created or concretized by the reader, exist in relation. Some of 
them are purely intentional objects -
fairies, goblins and septicorns -
and others are derived intentional objects -
the Mancha of the 
Quixote (Cervantes), the Coyoacan of Where the Air is Clear (La region 
mas transparente del aire, of Carlos Fuentes) or Pancho Villa of the 
Memorias of Martin Luis Guzman, etc. -
but we cannot perceive any 
one of these objects in its totality. If we see a ball with various figures 
painted on it, all of them different but identifiable, so that we can 
situate the figures in relation to each other and know which figure is 
opposite to what other figure, even with this we do not perceive the 
whole object, although we see it "wholly" and recognize it in its entirety. 
We always see an aspect and only an aspect, but we always see this 
aspect in relation to the other aspects, which we know for having seen 
them on other occasions and because we know something about the 

102 
GERALD NYENHUIS 
"nature of things;" we always conclude that the object is whole. This 
phenomenon carries the name of "schematized aspects" in Ingarden's 
terminology, and is the last of the layers of strata that he discovers 
in the literary work of art. It is the last element in the polyphonic 
harmony. 
This phenomenon is important because it is the type of deception 
that the cinema practices on us. In the movie studio Churubusco, for 
example, we may see a series of objects that are only fac;ades, the fronts 
of buildings, employed in the filming of their works of cinematic art. 
But in the films we see in the movie theatres we see whole houses and 
complete buildings. We perceive them as represented realities because 
we supply the schematic structure to make them whole. The layer of 
schematic aspects is operating then not only in works of literary art, but 
also in works of cinematographic art. Of course, we do not refer only to 
physical features, perceptible to the senses, but also to the psychic and 
moral features of the represented objects. The smile that we perceive 
through its linguistic materialization, as part of the layer of schematic 
aspects, is related to the psychological make-up of the represented 
persons, etc. In fact, we never experience a pure aspect, always a fusion 
of aspects, the fusion always being controlled by the schema of aspects. 
All of this has to do with what is a self-evident truth, excessively 
obvious: if we know that something is and how it manifests itself, we are 
then in a condition to perceive it. Reading has to do with perceiving the 
literary work of art; the preconditions of reading then will be that of 
having a pre-concept of the work, of what it is and how it is manifested. 
The contribution of Roman Ingarden may be that of providing this per-
spective, this necessary pre-condition, to enable the reader, the student 
of literature, to perceive the object of this study. If the reader is to read 
more than words, and gain more than some information, he needs this 
preconditioning to be able to correctly perceive the literary work of art. 
The theory of Ingarden will contribute to this pre-conditioning so that 
reading will be a real perception of the literary work of art. 
Universidad lberoamericana, 
Mexico City 
NOTES 
* The substance of this paper was read, in Spanish, in the Cofoquio Nacionaf Universi-
tario sobre fa comunicacion escrita in the University Autonoma de Chihuahua, Mexico, 

READING AND ANALYSIS OF THE LITERARY TEXT 
103 
and published in a different form, also in Spanish, in Anuario de Humanidades of the 
Universidad Iberoamericana, Mexico City. 
1 The question, in this form, is not Roman Ingarden's. but it is nevertheless the 
question to which he addresses himself in two of his major works: Das literarische 
KlInstwerk and Von Erkellflell des literarischen KlInstwerks. both published by Max 
Niemeyer Verlag in Tiibingen, 1963 and 1968 respectively. The author of these lines 
has made a translation into Spanish which exists in manuscript form and has been used 
in graduate seminars in the Universidad Iberoamericana in Mexico City. This transla-
tion is the basis of the present study, but the English and French translations have been 
consulted. There exists a Portuguese translation, but the present author has not been 
able to acquire a copy. 
~ Here we are not able to enter into the question of the ontology of the literary work of 
art, a theme that Ingarden treats exhaustively in his works; by "reality" we simply affirm 
that the literary text and the literary work, in some sense, exist and they present 
themselves in their manifestations . 
.1 This idea, of course, is not original with Ingarden. Many linguists have emphasized 
the fact that the linguistic sign refers to the object by means of the concept. 

PART III 
THE APPLICABILITY OF INGARDEN'S 
THEORY 

WALTER BIEMEL 
KRITISCHE BEMERKUNGEN ZU INGARDENS 
DEUTUNG DES BILDES 
Husser! hatte zahlreiche Schuler von den verschiedensten Nationen -
aber unter diesen Schulern gab es zwei Lieblingsschuler, an denen er 
besonders hing, die er besonders schatzte, das ist Jean Hering aus 
Frankreich, der in StraBburg lebte und ihn oft besuchen konnte, und 
Roman Ingarden. Dazu kurz einige Belege. Als sich Roman Ingarden 
1925 habilitierte, schrieb ihm Husser!: "lhrer Zukunft bin ich sicher. Sie 
gehoren zu den ganz wenigen meiner Schuler, denen die Philo sophie 
nicht ein bloB schoner Lebensberuf im gewohnlichen Wortsinne ist, 
sondern Beruf im hochsten Sinne, der auf einen uberpersonlichen, den 
Herzpunkt der Personlichkeit treffenden Ruf hindeutet. fUnd er fugt 
auch gleich etwas uber die Universitat hinzu, an der Ingarden nun zu 
wirken begann:] Von groBem Segen wird fur Sie die Lehrtiitigkeit sein, 
da Sie das Gluck haben, an einer Universitat zu wirken, an der in der 
Studentenschaft traditionelle Liebe zur Philo sophie herrscht, wohl dank 
der Wirksamkeit Twardowskis." (Briefe an Roman fngarden, S. 34) 
Vier Jahre spater, anlal3lich des Erscheinens der Festschrift, die zum 
70. Geburtstag Husserls erschienen ist, schreibt er an Ingarden: "leh 
fuhle mich sehr in Ihrer Schuld. So behandle ich den liebsten und 
getreuesten meiner alten Schuler, neben dem mir eigentlich nur Jean 
Hering gleich nahe steht. fUnd zum Beitrag lngardens in der Festschrift 
sagt er:] "Ihre Arbeit ist vielleicht die schonste und wichtigste des 
Bandes, auBerordentlich fein durchgearbeitet." (Es handelt sich urn den 
Beitrag "Bemerkungen zum Problem 'Idealismus-Realismus"') S. 55 
Wenn man weiB, wie zahlreich die Schulerschaft Husserls war und 
wie kritisch er seine Schuler betrachtete, ist diese Beurteilung Ingardens 
etwas Einmaliges. 
Nach dem Erscheinen bzw. zu dem Erscheinen von Ingardens Werk 
Das literarische Kunstwerk sagt Ingarden selbst folgendes: "DaB das 
Thema meines Buches Husser! gefallen hat, zeigt sich u.a. daran, daB er 
bald nach meiner Anwesenheit in Freiburg Fink als Thema seiner 
Doktordissertation die Analyse des 'Bildes' gegeben hat." (Es hamle!t 
sich urn die Arbeit, die in dem Phanomenologischen Jahrbuch unter 
dem Tite! "Vergegenwartigung und Bild" erschienen ist.) Ingarden weist 
107 
/-fans II. Rudnick (ed.), Analec/a /-fusserlillflll, Vol. XXX, 107-122. 
© 1990 Khllver Academic Puhlisher.l. 

108 
WALTER BIEMEL 
auch darauthin daB durch seine Arbeit das Interesse fur asthetische 
Probleme in den phanomenologischen Kreisen wachgerufen wurde. In 
der Tat, bei dem Begrunder der Phanomenologie finden wir keine 
systematischen Kunstanalysen; er kam von der Mathematik und Logik 
zur Phanomenologie. Bei Oskar Becker und Eugen Fink gibt es gewich-
tige Analysen, und spater dann mit der Wandlung der Phanomenologie 
bei Heidegger. 
In dem Band Untersuchungen zur Ontologie der Kunst finden wir 
Analysen des Musikwerkes, des Bildes, der Architektur und des Filmes. 
Ich mochte mich mit seiner Analyse des Bildes kritisch auseinanderset-
zen und dabei die Punkte behandeln, die mir fragwurdig erscheinen. 
Das geschieht keineswegs urn die Bedeutung dieses Philosophen in 
Frage zu stellen, der den Horizont der phanomenologischen Forschung 
entscheidend erweitert hat, sondern eher urn zu fragen, ob der Hus-
serlsche Ansatzpunkt, der bei der Analyse der Logik so fruchtbar war, 
bei der Analyse der Kunstwerke nicht vielleicht hemmend wirkte. Ich 
will auch offen lassen, ob meine kritischen Bemerkungen wichtige 
Momente von Ingardens Darstellung betreffen oder bloB marginale. 
Ich beginne mit der Unterscheidung von Gemalde und Bild. Eine 
Vorbemerkung: Roman Ingarden war solch eine europaische Persbn-
lichkeit, daB er sich in mehreren Sprachen ausdrucken konnte und 
keine Ubersetzer benotigte. (Bei seiner ersten Arbeit bzw. Verbffentli-
chung im lahrbuch hatte Heidegger die sprachliche Uberarbeitung 
ubernommen, wie wir aus den Husserl-Briefen wissen. Spater war das 
nicht mehr notig.) Deutsch und Franzosisch waren ihm so vertraut wie 
seine Muttersprache. Aber solch eine Mehrsprachigkeit hat auch ihre 
Tucken. Wir stoBen darauf bei der Unterscheidung, die Ingarden 
zwischen Gemiilde und Bitd macht. Wie versteht Ingarden das Wort 
"Gemalde",! Fur ihn ist Gemalde das Ding, das an der Wand hangt, aus 
Leinen, Holz oder einem anderen Stoff besteht, mit Farbflecken 
bedeckt ist, einen Rahmen besitzt, "einen bestimmten Ausschnitt des 
realen Raumes ein[nimmtj" (139). Wenn er vom Gemalde spricht, 
meint er das reale Ding, das materiale Ding, das -
worauf er nieht 
eingeht -
sich von den anderen Dingen unserer Umwelt dadurch 
unterscheidet, dar3 es zu nichts nutzt, wahrend wir doch bei den 
anderen Dingen gerade aus der Anwendbarkeit und Brauchbarkeit 
ersehen konnen, was es mit ihrem Ding-sein auf sich hat. Von diesem 
Ding, Gemalde genannt, unterscheidet er dann das Bild. 

INGARDEN'S DEUTUNG DES BILDES 
109 
All dies [gemeint sind die Bestimmungen des Gemiildes) hat in bezug auf das '"Bild" im 
iisthetischen oder kunsttheoretischen Sinne entweder gar keinen rechten Sinn oder 
kann dem letzteren nur in einem ubertragenen, modifizierten Sinne zugesprochen 
werden. Infolgedessen muG das Bild fur einen von dem realen Gemiilde verschiedenen, 
ohwohl vielleicht mit demselben in einem Seinszusammenhang stehenden Gegenstand 
gehalten werden. (p. 140) 
In der deutschen Sprache ist mit dem Wort "Gemiilde" gerade das 
Seiende genannt, das sich von allen anderen Dingen dadurch unter-
scheidet, daB es etwas sehen liiBt und insofern gerade kein "Ding" ist. 
Das Wort Bild ist allgemeiner. Eine Photographie ist auch ein Bild, 
insofern es etwas ab-bildet. Man ist iiber eine Sache "im Bild" heiBt, 
man weiB, was es mit ihr auf sich hat. Eine Vorstellung liiBt uns etwas 
bildhaft gegenwartig werden, sie ist aber keineswegs ein Gemalde. 
Warum erwiihne ich das? Weil Ingarden den Begriff Bild in einer 
begrenzten Bedeutung gebraucht, wahrend er gegeniiber dem Begriff 
Gemiilde gerade eine erweiterte Bedeutung hat. Nun kann ein Philo-
soph durchaus einem Begriff eine besondere Bedeutung verleihen, wir 
miissen uns nur dariiber im Klaren sein, daB hier ein Bedeutungswandel 
gegeniiber dem urspriinglichen Sinn der Sprache vorliegt. 
Die Unterscheidung von Gemalde (realer Gegenstand) und Bild 
(asthetischer Gegenstand) steht im Mittelpunkt des ersten Teils seiner 
Analyse des Bild-Werkes. Wir werden auf die Frage antworten miissen, 
ob diese Unterscheidung von Gemalde und Bild sinnvoll ist und 
zweitens, soBte sie fragwiirdig sein, warum hat Ingarden sie dann 
iiberhaupt eingefiihrt? 
Bei seinen Analysen beginnt Ingarden mit Bildern, die ein Iitera-
risches Thema haben, zum Beispiel, das "Abendmahl" von Leonardo 
da Vinci. Das Bild zeigt uns eine bestimmte "Lebenssituation". Was 
heiBt hier "zeigen"? 
Diese Situation ist uns im Silde gegenwli'rtig, aber freilich doch nicht in der Weise, 
wie sie uns gegenwartig ware, wenn wir an dem '"Ietzten Ahendmahl'" einst wirklich 
tcilgenommen hatten. (1m Text stehl: teilniihmen p. 141) 
Es ist also zu unterscheiden zwischen der unmittelbaren Gegenwart an 
einem Geschehen und der bildlichen Priisentation. In der bildlichen 
Prasentation haben wir -
Husserlisch gesprochen -
nur eine Quasi-
Prasenz der Personen und Gegenstande, die zu einer gelebten Situation 
gehi:iren. Was fehlt hier'? Urn wieder einen Ausdruck Husserls zu 

110 
WALTER BIEMEL 
gebrauchen -
die leibliche Gegenwart. Diese Gegenwart erfahren wir 
in der Wahrnehmung oder Anschauung. 
In der Philosophie Husserls kommt der Wahrnehmung eine funda-
mentale Bedeutung zu. Wir finden bei ihm unzahlige Wahrnehmungsa-
nalysen, wei I die Wahrnehmung uns die Dinge in ihrer Realitat unmittel-
bar zuganglich macht. Der Begriff der Unmittelbarkeit ist -
anders als 
bei Hegel -
ein zuhochst positiver Begriff. In der Konstitutionsthema-
tik Husserls ist die Wahrnehmung die vorzuglichste Gegebenheitsweise, 
durch die uns die Dinge prasent sind. Deswegen spricht er in diesem 
Zusammenhang von "Selbstgegebenheit" oder "leibhafter Gegenwart". 
Aber wenn wir das Bild ansehen, haben wir doch auch eine 
Wahrnehmung. Was ist der Unterschied der Wahrnehmung des Bildes 
und der Wahrnehmung des Berges, wenn ich von meinem Schreibtisch 
aufblicke, auf die Bergkette am Sudrand von Deia? 1m Bild sind uns die 
dargestellten Gegenstande nicht in derselben Weise gegenwartig wie in 
der Realitat. lch kann den Berg ersteigen, den ich vor mir sehe, aber 
nicht den dargestellten Berg. Den kann ich nur sehen, durch die Weise 
der Darstellung. Bei der realen Situation habe ich zudem auch andere 
Sinneseindrucke, wie horen, riechen, schmecken, tasten. 
lngarden gibt aber zu, daB wir das Bild nicht auf die Sinnesempfin-
dungen reduzieren durfen. Wir sehen im Bild nicht nur die "Farben, 
Lichter und Schatten" (p. 142), sondern die dargestellten Dinge selbst. 
Aber im Unterschied zur gelebten Situation konnen wir uns den 
dargestellten Dingen nicht so nahern, wie wir das bei den realen Dingen 
konnen . 
. .. so bleiben die dargestellte Lebenssituation und die an ihr teilnehmenden Dinge 
sozusagen immer in derselben Entfernung von uns, wie sie "gemalt" wurden .... 
niemals kiinnen wir die durch das Bild festgelegte Distanz iiberwinden. (p. 143) 
Die Schwierigkeit, die lngarden hier aufzeigt, findet ihre Erklarung 
dadurch, daB im Bild eine entscheidende Verwandlung stattgefunden 
hat. Wir sehen die Dinge nicht unmittelbar, wie im Alltag, sondern wir 
sehen eine Darstellung der Dinge. Das Entscheidende ist nicht der Akt 
der Wahrnehmungsgegebenheit, sondern die verschiedene Gegebenheit 
des unmittelbar prasenten "realen Apfels" und die vermittelte des 
"gemalten Apfels". Ingarden muB zugeben, "daB ihre [sc. der Bilder] 
Gegebenheitsweise von der schlicht wahrnehmungsmaBigen grundsatz-
lich verschieden ist". (p. 144) Dabei sind die Bilder gerade auch 
wahrnehmungsmaBig zuganglich. 

INGARDEN'S DEUTUNG DES BILDES 
111 
Wenn lngarden im ersten Paragraph en "Bilder mit 'literarischen 
Themen'" sagt: 
Sowohl aber die im Bilde dargestellten Gegenstiinde, als auch das literarische Thema, 
an dessen Bestimmung sie teilnehmen, sind keine echten Teile, keine reellen Elemente 
des Gemiildes im Sinne des z.B. an der Wand hiingenden realen Dinges (p. 150) 
so ist soleh eine Aussage (durchaus im Sinne Husserls) nur moglich, 
weil eben von der unmittelbar gegebenen Realitat der Dinge als 
Vorzugsgegebenheit ausgegangen wird. Das im Bild Gezeigte hat eine 
andere Seinsweise als die Dinge, die es sehen laBt. Diese andere 
Seinsweise ist durch den phanomenologischen Terminus "intentionales 
Gebilde" von lngarden bestimmt. Wie ist er zu verstehen? lch zitiere 
den Satz, wo dieser Terminus zum ersten Mal auftaucht. Die darge-
stell ten Gegenstande 
sind rein intentionale Gebilde, die sich in andersartigen Elementen des Bildes bzw. des 
Gemiildes konstituieren und auf diese, wie auch auf bestimmte Intentionsoperationen 
des Autors bzw. des Betrachters seinsrelativ sind. (p. 150) 
Versuchen wir, diesen Satz fur einen Nicht-Phanomenologen zu erlau-
tern. Der dargestellte Apfel im Bild Cezannes ist nicht der reale Apfel, 
den er als Objekt vor sich hatte. Durch das, was uns das Gemalde zeigt, 
wird er uns zuganglich. Damit das aber moglich sein soli, muBte ihn der 
Maler als sujet nehmen. Das Wahlen des sujets ist ein intentionaler Akt. 
Aber dieser geniigt natiirlich nicht. Es gehort dazu auch die Ausfiih-
rung durch den Akt des Malens, durch den allein der reale Apfel in 
einen malerischen Gegenstand verwandelt wird, genauer in einen 
gemalten. Damit ist der Sachverhalt noch nicht erschopft. Es gehort 
auch ein Betrachter dazu, der bereit ist, sich auf das Gemalde einzulas-
sen. lngarden will das neue "intention ale Gebilde" so weiterbestimmen, 
daB er darauf hinweist, daB uns das Bild "visuelle Wahrnehmungsan-
sichten" vom betreffenden Gegenstand darbietet. Duch diese Ansichten 
wird der Gegenstand im Bild "rekonstruiert". 
Alles dreht sich darum, die besondere Seinsweise des Dargestellten 
zu fassen. Solange wir in der natiirlichen Einstellung bleiben, sind wir 
auf die Gegenstande unserer Urn welt gerichtet. Aber selbst in dieser 
natiirlichen Einstellung ist uns das Gemalde als Gemalde zuganglich 
und nicht einfach als ein reales Ding. Wir werden nicht nach dem Apfel 
des Bildes ~reifen, so wie wir nach dem Apfel auf dem Kiichentisch 
greifen. 

112 
WALTER BIEMEL 
Wichtig ist der Terminus "Wahrnehmungsansichten". Das Bild gibt 
uns eine bestimmte Ansicht yom Gegenstand, nicht den Gegenstand 
selbst. Nun haben wir aber auch im Urn gang mit den Dingen nach 
Husserl immer bestimmte Wahrnehmungsansichten, oder, wie er auch 
sagt, bestimmte "Abschattungen" des Dinges. Und erst dureh eine 
Synthese von verschiedenen Abschattungen wird uns das Ding bekannt, 
so daB wir dann die nieht gesehenen Seiten eines Korpers doeh 
mitsehen. Hier, beim Bild-Werk, ist eine bestimmte Ansieht in uber-
tragener Weise zuganglieh, durch Farbfleeken, Linien, Licht, Sehatten. 
Diese Farbflecken, die malerisehen Momente wie wir sie nennen 
woUen, haben "ihr ontisehes Fundament in entspreehenden Eigenschaf-
ten des real en Gemaldes" (p. 150). Das heiBt nichts anderes als: damit 
ich eine bestimmte Ansieht dieses Apfels erhaIten kann, mussen im 
Gemalde bestimmte Momente gegeben sein, eben Momente die auf 
unsere Wahrnehmungsorgane wirken. Wir konnen noch einen Sehritt 
weiter gehen und darauf hinweisen, daB diese Wahrnehmungsansiehten 
ihrerseits ihr Fundament im darzustellenden Gegenstand haben. 
Deswegen setzt Ingarden mit einer kurzen Wahrnehmungsanalyse der 
Gegenstande fort (S. 151-53) und kommt zum SchluB: "Die Tatigkeit 
des MaIers besteht eben darin, ... im Biide entsprechende visuelle, 
wenn aueh nieht rein visueUe (Wahrnehmungs-) Ansiehten mit male-
rischen Mitteln zu rekonstruieren". (p. 154) Naturlieh gibt es verschie-
dene Techniken der Rekonstruktion der Ansichten. Auf diese Rekon-
struktion kommt es an. Das ist prinzipieU wichtig, aber sachlich ist dann 
gerade die konkrete Analyse der DarsteUungsweisen das Entseheidende. 
Eine treffende Bemerkung Ingardens sei hervorgehoben. "Die Ansiehten 
mussen dabei so rekonstruiert werden. daB sie die Aufmerksamkeit des 
Betrachters nicht auf sich lenken, daB sie also von ihm bloB erlebt 
werden, da sie nur dann ihre DarsteUungsfunktion ausuben konnen". (p. 
154) Das ist eine kurze Kennzeichnung des Prozesses der DarsteUung 
und der Funktion der DarsteUung. 
Das Gemalde vermitteIt die Ansichten -
die Ansiehten sind das, 
was Ingarden "Bild" nennt. "Die Ansiehten bilden also das konstitutiv 
wiehtigste Element des Bildes, ohne welches es uberhaupt kein darstel-
lendes Bild und aueh keinen malerischen asthetisehen Gegenstand 
geben wurde." (p. 154) Was ist das Entscheidende dieser Interpretation 
des Bildes? Wir mussen versehiedene Sehichten ansetzen: Die mate-
rielle Sehieht des Gemaldes, die intentionale Sehicht der Ansichten, auf 
Grund der Ansichten den erscheinenden Gegenstand und schliel3lieh 

INGARDEN'S DEUTUNG DES BILDES 
113 
das "sujet" im Sinne des literarischen Themas, Das literarische Thema 
kann wegfallen, dann sind die bildnerischen Momente die rekonstruierte 
Ansicht und der dargestellte Gegenstand, Warum sagte Ingarden 
"rekonstruierte Ansicht" und nicht einfach "die gegebene Ansicht"? 
Weil gemaB seiner phanomenologischen Position die Ansicht auf einem 
Akt der Konstitution beruht 
Wenn ich das Stoffliche des Bildes, was Ingarden das Gemalde 
nennt, als eine Schicht angefuhrt habe, so habe ich nicht im Sinne 
Ingardens gesprochen, Er will radikal zwischen Gernalde und Bild 
unterscheiden, Diese Trennung erscheint mir erkunstelt Sie ist nur 
gerechtfertigt durch eine Schichtentheorie, bei der das Materiehafte als 
Materiehaftes abgewertet wird, da es zum Bereich des Realen gehort 
und das Bild als intentionales Gebilde verstanden werden solI. Ingar-
dens These lautet: Das Bild ist nicht mit dem Gemalde identisch, 
Gemalde ist fur ihn die Bezeichnung fur ein Ding, Und er sagt dann 
im letzteren Isc. dem Gemaldel gibt es gar keine "dargestellten" und zur Schau gestellten 
Gegenstande IDinge, Menschenl, aber auch keinc rekonstruierten Ansichten. Es gibt 
dagegen gewisse Teile oder auch Eigenschaften des Gemaldes, die daruber entscheiden, 
ob und welche rekonstruierten Ansichten sich fur den Beschauer in ihm rekonstruieren 
kiinnen und infolgedessen auch, ob und welche Gegenstande im Bilde zur Darstellung 
geiangen. Diese besonderen Teile (die Schicht der Farbenpigmente auf der Leinward, 
Papier, Holz) und die durch sie bestimmten Eigenschaften des Gemaldes bringt eben 
der Maler in seiner kunstlerischen Tatigkeit hervor, und das Hervorgebrachte bildet 
einen neuen Zustand eines real en Dinges und ist eben so wie dieses Ding real.' (p. 163f.) 
Ich meine hier den EinfluB von Husserls Konstitutionsproblematik 
zu finden, bei der eine Schicht auf der anderen aufbaut Husserl geht 
dabei mit Vorliebe von der Wahrnehmungsanalyse aus, findet in der 
Wahrnehmung die Sinnesempfindungen als die letzten Bausteine. Er ist 
beeinfluBt von den englischen Empiristen, besonders von Locke. Seine 
Analysen sind viel raffinierter und nuan<;ierter, aber der EinfluB bleibt 
doch sichtbar. Ich kann hier nicht auf die Unterscheidung von Noesis 
und Noema eingehen. Jan Patocka hat darauf hingewiesen, daB 
Ingardens Analysen sich im Bereich des Noematischen halten. Eine 
Bemerkung ist noch erforderlich: fur Husserl kommt es letzten Endes 
immer auf den konstituierten Sinn an. Er kann nur eine Leistung des 
konstituierenden Egos sein und findet sich nie in der Sphare der 
Realitat. Urn bei unserem Beispiel zu bleiben: was der Kunstler 
hervorbringt ist nur ein reales Ding. Das erscheint mir eine gefahrliche 
Behauptung zu sein. Es muBte heiBen: Der Kunstler bringt nie und 

114 
WAL TER BIEMEL 
nimmer bloB ein reales Ding hervor, sondem ein Gemalde im Sinne des 
Bildes. Aber weil zum Gemalde Stoffliches gehort, Leinwand, Farbe 
etc., ist diese Sphare als reale abgestempelt, degradiert und jetzt muB 
der Schritt voUzogen werden von der realen Sphare in die irreale 
Sphare der Kunst. Ingarden sieht natiirlich, daB auf das reale Moment 
nicht verzichtet werden kann, er spricht yom ''unentbehrlichen Seins-
fundament", fugt aber gleich hinzu, es bedarf noch eines anderen 
Seinsfundamentes "zu seiner voUen Konkretisierung" (p. 164). 
Welches ist dieses zweite Seinsfundament, worin liegt es? Es liegt im 
Betrachter. Erst durch den Betrachter gelangen wir zum Bild im 
kunsttheoretischen Sinne. Von dies em zweiten Fundament wird gesagt 
"es geht iiber das bloB Reale ... wesensmaBig hinaus". (p. 164) Bei der 
Bild-Analyse untersucht Ingarden nun die zwei fur es entscheidenden 
Schichten: die Ansicht und den Gegenstand. Unter dem EinfluB von 
Husserls-Schichtkonzeption reiBt Ingarden, das ist meine Kritik, das 
einheitliche Phanomen des Kunstwerks auseinander -
in eine reale 
Sphare und eine ideale Sphare. Der Kiinstler -
so sehe ich das -
wird 
zu einem bloB en Handwerker, der mit der Materie umgeht und nur 
materieUe Produkte hervorbringt, der Betrachter dagegen erhalt eine 
besondere Bedeutung, denn in seinem BewuBtsein konstituieren sich 
die Ansichten und durch die Ansichten kommen die dargesteUten 
Gegenstande zur Erscheinung. 
Wer Husserls Logische Untersuchungen gelesen hat, weiB wie dieses 
Werk durch immer scharfere Unterscheidungen gekennzeichnet ist und 
wie wir durch diese Unterscheidungen die Phanomene plotzlich anders 
zu Gesicht bekommen. Diese Kraft der Unterscheidung finden wir auch 
bei Ingardens Bildanalysen. Sie genau nachzuverfolgen wiirde eine 
ganze Vorlesung erfordem. Bei einer Zusammenfassung kommen wir in 
Gefahr, Wesentliches zu iibersehen. Ich mochte den Ausweg wahlen, 
daB ich versuche, den Gang der Untersuchung aufzuzeigen und dann 
an bestimmten Momenten aufs Detail einzugehen. DaB ich dann gerade 
kritische Bemerkungen vorbringe ist natiirlich einseitig und ungerecht. 
Nach der Unterscheidung von Gegenstand und Ansicht geht er auf 
die verschiedenartigen Qualitaten ein, die in einem Bildwerk auftreten 
konnen. (1) Qualitaten, die an sich neutral sind, aber im Bild fur das 
asthetische Moment bedeutsam sein konnen. (2) Die asthetisch wert-
voUen Qualitaten, die (a) an sich wertvoll sind und (b) "das aktive 
Moment des Kunstwerks" (p. 166) bilden und im Betrachter die 
asthetische Einstellung hervorrufen. (Beispiel: symmetrisch, asymme-

INGARDEN'S DEUTUNG DES BILDES 
115 
trisch, gestaltvoll, ungestalt -
er gibt sehr viele Beispiele, bei den 
Farben grelle, milde, gesattigte, gebrochene usw. (p. 166f.) (3) Asthe-
tische Wertqualitaten 
welche verschiedene Werte einerseits aufbauen, andererseits voneinander unterscheiden. 
In ihnen konstituieren sich die verschiedenen Abwandlungen der Werte, die ihr Seins-
und Bestimmungsfundament in entsprechenden iisthetisch relevanten Qualitiiten oder in 
ganzen Mannigfaltigkeiten von solchen Qualitiiten haben. (p. 167) 
Auf diese Qualitaten stiitzen sich dann die Werturteile. Ingarden 
verweist auf Abwandlungen der Schonheit in verschiedenen Epochen. 
Aber hierher gehoren auch Begriffe wie "Anmut", "Niedlichkeit", 
"Hiibsche", "Reife", "Vollkommenheit", "Einheitlichkeit". Die Gegenbe-
griffe: "HaBlichkeit", "Oberflachlichkeit" u.a. sind auch inbegriffen. Auf 
die Unterscheidung der asthetischen und der kiinstlerischen Werte 
komme ich zuruck. 
In einer nachsten Analyse unterscheidet Ingarden zwei Funktionen: 
(1) Die Funktion der Reprasentation des Gegenstandes, er nennt das 
die konstruktive Rolle und (2) die dekorative Funktion. Diese Unter-
scheidung, die logisch moglich ist, erscheint mir jedoch erkiinstelt. 
Konnen wir bei einem Bild Rembrandts sagen, diese Momente haben 
die Funktion, die Person in Erscheinung treten zu lassen, und diese 
anderen Momente machen das Bild zu einem asthetisch wertvollen 
Gegenstand? Ingarden selbst sagt bei der Erlauterung eines Beispiels, 
daB ein blauer Farbfleck besonders asthetisch schon sein kann und 
zugleich auch zur Darstellung dienen kann. 
In den Paragraphen 6 und 7 erortert Ingarden die as the tisch werthaf-
ten Momente in der Schicht der dargestellten Gegenstande und bei den 
Ansichten. Diese Unterscheidung ist fur seine Schichttheorie wichtig. 
Der Paragraph 6 beginnt folgendermaBen: 
In dem Gehalte einer im Bilde rekonstruierten Ansicht konnen ... neben den 
Momenten, deren Rolle im Bilde sich in ihrer Funktion der Zur-schaustellung des 
dargestellten Gegenstandes erschopft, auch Momente auftreten, welche in sich selbst 
iisthetisch werthaft sind, ganz unabhiingig davon, ob sie dabei noch eine konstruktive 
Rolle fiir die gegenstiindliche Welt spielen. (p. 188) 
Eine rekonstruierte Ansicht verweist darauf, daB ein realer Gegenstand 
Vorbild war. Aber Ingarden kritisiert sehr treffend die Auffassung der 
Kunst als pure Nachahmung. Er spricht auch von gegenstandlicher 
Schicht und asthetischer Schicht. Wie ich schon sagte, halte ich es fur 

116 
WALTER BIEMEL 
schwierig, bei einem groBen Kunstler die asthetischen Momente von 
den darzusteIlenden abzutrennen. Ingarden gibt sich groBe Muhe, im 
Zusammenhang mit dem Begriff der Komposition die asthetischen 
Momente herauszuarbeiten. Er sagt 
In einem und demselben Bild kann niimlich in seinen beiden Schichten eine Mannigfal-
tigkeit von iisthetisch werthaften Oualitiiten auftreten, die durch verschiedene an sich 
wertneutrale Momente des Bildes fundiert sind. (p. 191) 
Was ist unter diesen wertneutralen Momenten gemeint? Sind es die 
Farbe, die Zeichnung, die Raumgestaltung? -
Aber sie aIle sind doch 
zugleich das Medium, in dem das Bild entspringt und lebt! 
Ingarden insistiert so auf diesen Unterscheidungen, wei I er durch das 
HeraussteIlen der asthetischen Qualitaten eine Basis fur die Bewertung 
finden will. Ein Zitat zur Komposition: 
Unter "Komposition" wird also hier die werthafte Gestalt des Bildes verstanden, die aus 
einer bestimmten Mannigfaltigkeit iisthetisch werthafter Oualitiiten und deren Anord-
nung und Verteilung im Bilde sich ergibt. (p. 192) 
Die Schwierigkeit dieses Vorgehens solI an einem Beispiel erortert 
werden. Mit Recht verweist Ingarden auf Maler, die durch ihre Farbak-
korde hervorragen. " ... diese Farbakkorde sind qualitativ bestimmt, 
wobei diese Qualitaten keine Farben mehr sind, sondern bloB in 
Farben fundiert." (p. 194) Aber im gleichen Paragraphen weist er auch 
auf die asthetischen Qualitaten der Farben hin. Einmal sind die Farben 
asthetisch wertvoIl, ein anderes mal sind sie bloB fundierend fur etwas 
anderes, das selbst wertvoIl ist. Noch eine andere Bemerkung. Unter 
Aufnahme der Husserlschen Wahrnehmungsanalyse sagt Ingarden: 
. .. auf der Grundlage der sinn lichen Empfindungsdaten baut sich ein Netz von 
verschiedenen "Auffassungen" auf, von erfiillten und von mehr oder weniger unerfiillten 
Oualitiiten, die mit der sinnlichen Unterlage zusammen erst eine konkrete Ansicht eines 
Gegenstandes bzw. einer Mannigfaltigkeit seiner Eigenschaften bilden. Oer aus diesen 
"Auffassungen" bzw. Oualitaten gebildete "GehaIC' der Ansicht wird vom Betrachtenden 
in concreto erlebt und in seiner Oarstellungsfunktion zur Erschauung des entspre-
chen den Gegenstandes verwendet. (p. 194) 
Das Schwergewicht liegt auf der Funktion der Ansichten zur Prasenta-
tion der Gegenstande. Nur uber die Ansichten gibt es einen Zugang zu 
den Gegenstanden selbst. Husserl wurde sagen, im Kunstwerk gibt es 
nur Quasi-Realitaten, namlich die Gegenstande in Form von Ansichten. 
Es sei hier nicht darauf eingegangen, wie es dann mit der ungegenstan-
dlichen Kunst steht. Ingarden erkennt sie als Moglichkeit an, wenn auch 

INGARDEN'S DEUTUNG DES BILDES 
117 
als eine Kunst mit beschriinkten Dimensionen. Es gibt eine Parallele bei 
Gehlens Deutung der ungegenstandlichen Kunst in "Zeit-Bilder". 
Gehlen steht ihr kritischer gegeniiber. 
Wie sieht Ingarden die wertvollen Momente in der gegenstandlichen 
Schicht? (§7) Er geht von dem uns schon bekannten Unterschied 
zwischen den Gegenstiinden als solchen (den real en Dingen) und den 
Ansichten aus, die im Bild gegeben werden. 1m Bild haben wir ja immer 
nur Ansichten der Dinge. Zuerst behandelt er die Frage, ob die 
dargestellten Dinge iisthetisch wertneutral sind (p. 197) und verneint 
das. Sowohl die Ansicht der Dinge, wie die Dinge selbst konnen 
asthetisch wertvoll sein. In diesem Zusammenhang fallt auch der 
Ausdruck "metaphysische Qualitiiten", der gewirkt hat. Ais Beispiel 
fiihrt er "erhaben", "tragisch", "griiBIich", "erschiitternd", "unbegreif-
lich", "unheimlich", "damonisch", "teuflisch", "siindhaft", "heilig", "ek-
statisch" an. Zuerst werden diese Benennungen auf gelebte Situationen 
angewendet -
den Bereich der Realitiit -, und dann erfolgt die 
Anwendung auf den Bereich der Kunst. Er behauptet "in der Kunst 
schwiicht sich ihre Kraft ab" (p. 200), eine fragwiirdige These, wenn wir 
z.B. an die griechische Tragodie denken. Es muB hervorgehoben 
werden, und dem ist zuzustimmen, daB er in den metaphysischen 
Qualitiiten "einen der Griinde oder eine der Quellen, aus denen die 
Kunst entsteht" (p. 200) sieht. Dies ist meiner Deutung nach ein Punkt 
an dem Ingarden die wertphilosophische Perspektive verliiBt und an ein 
grundlegenderes Motiv riihrt. Sie wurde yom tschechischen Philosophen 
Jan Patocka in Berufung auf Ingarden eigens iibernommen. 
Bei der Erorterung der metaphysischen Qualitiiten versucht Ingar-
den zu zeigen, daB im Streit der Vertreter, die auf die Form das 
Schwergewicht legen und den Vertretern, die auf den Inhalt den Akzent 
setzen, keine der beiden Richtungen den Sieg davontragen kann, weil 
sowohl im Bereich der Form wie des Inhalts iisthetisch wertvolle 
Qualitiiten auftreten konnen. Wichtig erscheinen mir seine Ausfiihrun-
gen iiber die Bedeutung der Stilisierung. Seine positive Beurteilung 
beruht darauf, 
daB in dem Gegenstande eine Gestaltqualitiit zur Erscheinung gelangt, die seinen 
ganzen Seinsbereich umspannt und zugleich eine Vielheit von miteinander harmonisie-
renden und hierarchisch geordneten Qualitiiten, welche dieser Gestalt zugrunde liegen, 
innerlich zusammenschlieBt. (p. 2(4). 
Diese Ausfiihrungen soil ten zeigen, daB auch im gegenstandlichen 
Bereich -
in der doppelten Bedeutung genommen -
dem Bereich der 

118 
WAL TER BIEMEL 
Realitat und dem Bereich der kiinstlerischen Darstellung, asthetisch 
wertvolle Momente gegeben sind. 
Ingarden hat gut herausgestellt, daB zum Verstandnis des Bildes eine 
besondere Erfassungsweise des Betrachters gehort. Auch daB das 
Eingehen auf das Bild einen komplizierten BewuBtseinsver!auf darstellt, 
daB ein langer Umgang mit Kunstwerken die Voraussetzung dafur ist, 
daB wir das erfassen, was im Bild geschieht. Sehr wichtig finde ich die 
Behauptung, im Zusammenhang mit den ungegenstandlichen Bildem: 
Es kommt mir darauf an, uns zum BewuBtsein zu bringen, daB in den Aufbau eines 
jeden darstellenden Bildes ein sozusagen nichtdarstellendes Bild als sein unentbehrli-
cher Bestandteil eingeht und daB von dem kiinstlerischen Wert dieses Bestandteils der 
kiinstlerische bzw. iisthetische Wert des ganzen Bildes auf wesentliche Weise abhiingt. 
(p. 225) 
Wichtig erscheint mir auch seine Kritik der Einfiihlungsasthetik. Das 
Thema der Einfiihlung spielte in der Phanomenologie eine groBe Rolle. 
Man kann sagen, er versucht durch seine Schicht-Untersuchungen die 
Kunstanalyse aus dem Bereich der Einfiihlunsasthetik auf eine Asthetik 
zu ver!egen, die das Schwergewicht auf die Seins-Struktur des Bildes 
legt. Meine Frage lautet -
und damit komme ich zum letzten Thema 
dieser Ausfuhrungen -, ob bei dieser Untersuchung die Unterschei-
dung zwischen asthetischen und kiinstlerischen Wert en sinnvoll ist? 
Es ist der originelle Ansatz Ingardens, eine Unterscheidung vorzu-
nehmen zwischen dem Gemalde und dem Bild. Wir waren von dieser 
Unterscheidung ausgegangen. Das Gemalde ist das objektive Kunst-
werk, das der Kiinstler erstellt. Das Bild ist ein intentionaler Gegen-
stand. Es kommt zustande durch das Gegebensein des Gemaldes 
einerseits und den Akt des Erfassens des Betrachters andererseits. 
Ingarden nimmt aber nun eine Dreiteilung vor: Gemalde, Bild und 
Konkretisationen. Was veranlaBt ihn dazu? Husserls Wahmehmungs-
theorie. Nach Husser! sind uns immer nur bestimmte Abschattungen 
yom dreidimensionalen Gegenstand gegeben. Ich sehe die Riickseite 
des Stuhles nicht, erganze sie aber beim Sehen. Ingarden iibertragt das 
z.E. auch auf die Darstellung der Person im Bild. Ich sehe nur eine 
bestimmte emotionale Geste, aber nicht die innerlich erlebte Emotion 
der Person. Er sagt nun, es gibt bestimmte Unbestimmtheitsstellen im 
Bild, die "auf mannigfaltige Art 'ausgefullt' werden." (p. 240) Wenn der 
Betrachter die Ausfullung in der asthetischen Einstellung vollzieht, auf 
asthetische Ganzheit aus ist "so entsteht auf diesem Wege der unmittel-

INGARDEN'S DEUTUNG DES BILDES 
119 
bare Gegenstand des asthetischen Erlebnisses" (p, 240) Und weiter: 
"Dieser Gegenstand ist eben eine Konkretisation des betreffenden 
Bildes, eine von vielen moglichen, die demselben Bild zugeordnet sind." 
(p. 240) Hier ist Husserls Konstitutions-Thematik die Basis. 
Ingarden zieht nun folgende Konsequenz: Wir haben das Bild als 
Schema zu begreifen. Daraus ergibt sich weiterhin, das Bild ist nicht 
voll bestimmt. Diese Vollbestimmung geschieht erst in der Konkretisa-
tion, oder anders formuliert, in der Konstitution durch das betrach-
tende Subjekt. Ich mochte hier nicht darauf eingehen, ob es gliicklich 
ist, fur das Phanomen des Erfassens des Bildes den Begriff Konkretisa-
tion einzusetzen. 1m Grunde genommen geht es urn den Akt des 
Erfassens. Mein Einwand, den ich gleich vorbringen will, dreht sich 
darum, daB die Rolle des Betrachters erhoht und die des Kiinstlers 
herabgesetzt wird. Aber sehen wir uns den Text an. Niemand wird 
daran zweifeln, daB es verschiedene Weisen des Erfassens, des 
Eingehens auf das Bild gibt, was Ingarden (S. 240f.) analysiert. Das 
konnen sehr verschiedene Momente sein, von der seelischen Verfas-
sung des Betrachters ausgehend, bis zu den materiellen Vorausset-
zungen, Beleuchtung etc. Ich habe einen Einwand gegen die Behaup-
tung: 
Es wird dem Betrachter allmahlich klar, daB sie (sc. die Konkretisationen) dUTCh das 
Bild selbst nicht bestimmt werden, sondern in verschiedener Weise tiber seinen Gehalt 
hinausgehen, und daB man infolgedessen den verschiedenen Konkretisationen das eine 
Bild, als ein schematisches Gebilde entgegensetzen muB. (p. 241 ) 
Mein Einwand richtet sich gegen die Gleichsetzung des Bildes mit 
einem bloB en Schema. Sofern es Ingarden darauf ankommt zu zeigen, 
wie mannigfache Wei sen des Eingehens auf ein Bild moglich sind, ist 
ihm zuzustimmen, aber das Entscheidende ist ja doch, ob man auf das 
Bild eingeht, ihm gerecht wird und nicht, ob man iiber es hinausgeht, so 
daB er an einer Stelle sagen kann: "Der Betrachter ist dann ein groBerer 
Kiinstler als der Schopfer des Bildes selbst." (p. 242) Das ist er nie, 
aber er kann in seinem Umgang mit dem Bild diesem gerecht werden, 
seinen Reichtum erfassen, oder es verfehlen. Es geht nicht darum, wie 
bei Husserls Wahrnehmungsanalysen, nicht gesehene Seiten zu ergan-
zen, mitzusehen, sondern es geht darum, was hier wirklich geschaffen 
ist zu begreifen. Das ist der Unterschied meiner Deutung zu der von 
Ingarden. Ein Zitat, urn Ingardens Position zu erlautern: 
... einerseits: diejenigen Konkretisationen zu finden, die dem betreffenden Bilde am 

120 
WALTER BIEMEL 
niichsten stehen und sozusagen in seinem Geiste auch darin gebildet sind, worin sie 
uber den eigenen Gehalt des Bildes hinausgehen mussen; andererseits aber: diejenigen 
Konkretisationen abzugrenzen, in welch en die relativ hochsten iisthetischen Wertquali-
tiiten verkorpert werden, und zwar auch dann, wenn sie nicht ganz "im Geiste" des be-
treffenden Bildes gestaltet sind, also uber den Bereich der Moglichkeiten hinausgehen, 
die vom Bilde selbst bestimmt werden. (p. 242) 
Da spielt Ingardcn schon darauf an, daB man ein Bild yom kiinstleri-
schen und yom asthetischen Blickpunkt aus betrachten und beurteilen 
kann. Wenn Ingarden sagt, daB der epochale Geist bei der Betrachtung 
mitspielt, so ist dem wzustimmen. Aber das Bild ist immer mehr als ein 
Schema. Wir haben kein Recht -
das ist meine Gegenposition -, den 
Betrachter iiber den Schaffenden zu stellen. 
Ingarden sagt, daB das Bild einerseits sein Seinsfundament im 
Gemalde hat, andererseits im idealen Betrachter. Er insistiert "die 
Erfassung des Gemaldes und die Erfassung des Bildes, ist voneinander 
vollig verschieden." (p. 243) Andererseits muB er zugeben: 
im Gemiilde sind diejenigen Momente enthalten, die fur die Konstitution des Bildes von 
prinzipieller Bedeutung sind Isetzt dann aber fort, was meinen Widerspruch erregtl, 
obwohl sie selbst fur diese Konstitution nicht hinreichen, lund zur Rechfertigung dieser 
These behauptet erl es sind eben die an seiner Oberfliiche sich ausbreitenden konkreten 
Farbflecke, die in ihrer Qualitiit, Gestaltung und Anordnung vom Betrachter erfallt und 
zur Konstitution des Bildes ausgenutzt werden mussen. (p. 243) 
Hier spielt eine veraltete Sinnespsychologie mit, gegen die Ingarden an 
anderer Stelle selbst Stellung nimmt. Denn ich sehe nicht werst 
Farbflecken und Striche und mache daraus spater ein Bild, sondern ich 
sehe immer schon gleich ein Stilleben, ein Portrat, eine Landschaft oder 
eben eine abstrakte Komposition. 
Es ist mir klar, was Ingarden meint, wenn er sagt: 
Er Ider Betrachterl mull sich an die von dem Gemiilde erhaltenen Weisungen halten, 
urn das Bild getreu zu konstituieren, les ist mir nicht klar, was er sagen will. wenn er 
fortfiihrtj obwohl er dabei notwendig uber die in ihm enthaltenen Momente hinaus-
gehen muB. (p. 243) 
Inwiefern geht er iiber das Bild hinaus? Indem er aus Farbflecken 
Personen macht? Das ist erkiinstelt und unphanomenologisch. Ingarden 
gibt zu, daB sich der Betrachter an das Gemalde halten muB und sieht 
die Gefahr der Willkiir beim Betrachten; warum setzt er dann immer 
wieder den ProzeB des Hinausgehens an? 

INGARDEN'S DEUTUNG DES BILDES 
121 
Diese Ausfuhrungen hatten den Zweck, die Trennung des Werkes 
als Kunstwerk und als asthetisches Gebilde vorzubereiten, gegen welche 
Trennung ich meine Bedenken vorbringen will. Warum trennt er den 
kunstlerischen Wert yom asthetischen? Weil er behauptet, der kunstle-
rische Wert ist relativ, der astherische dagegen absolut. 
Wie versteht er den kunstlerischen Wert? 
Der kiinstlerische Wert eines Kunstwerkes ist in denjenigen Momenten desselben 
enthalten, die ... das Mittel zur Aktualisierung entsprechender asthetisch wertvoller 
Qualitaten und asthetischer Wertqualitaten im asthetischen Gegenstand sind. (p. 244) 
Also der kunstlerische Wert ermoglicht den asthetischen Wert, ist so 
etwas wie eine Voraussetzung fur ihn. Damit dann ein asthetischer 
Gegenstand realisiert werden kann, ist die asthetische Einstellung des 
Betrachters erforderlich. Wahrend Ingarden im vorhergehenden Para-
graph en so ausfuhrlich uber das Phanomen der Konkretisation im 
Sinne der Konstitution gesprochen hat, ist hier eine gewisse Wandlung 
bemerkbar. Die asthetische Einstellung ist wichtig, aber in dieser 
Einstellung soll nicht etwas yom Subjekt Bewertetes zuganglich werden, 
sondern der asthetische Wert als solcher. Der entscheidende Satz lautet: 
Sie [die Konstituierung des asthetischen Wertes[ betrifft namlich die sUbjektiven 
Bedingungen der Konstituierung eines bestimmten asthetischen Gegenstandes auf dem 
Untergrunde eines bestimmten Kunstwerkes bei aktivem Verhalten des asthetisch 
erlebenden Betrachters. Sobald aber dieser Gegenstand entstanden ist, kommt ihm ein 
bestimmter asthetischer Wert zu, und zwar ganz unabhangig von dem Verhaltnis des 
Gegenstandes zum Betrachter. (p. 245) 
Ich gebe noch eine andere Stelle: 
Der Wert is! nicht von der Bewertung abhangig, sondern von den ihm zugrunde 
liegenden asthetisch wertvollen Qualitaten. (p. 245) 
Mussen wir aber dann nicht das vorher tiber die Konkretisierung 
Gesagte in Frage stellen? Ich sehe hier ein gewisses Schwanken, das 
durch die Schwierigkeit im Zusammenhang mit der Darstellung der 
Konkretisation oder Konstitution entstanden ist. Wir sahen, daB 
Ingarden der Konkretisation eine so groJ3e Bedeutung zuerkannte, daB 
er den Betrachter uber den Kunstler steHte. Der Betrachter kann das 
Werk des Kunstlers ubertreffen. Jetzt gibt er sich Rechenschaft, daB die 
Bedeutung des Kunstwerkes nicht von der Bewertung abhangen darf. 
Er entwirft eine Art Wertphilosophie fur den Bereich der Kunst, mit 

122 
WAL TER BIEMEL 
den zwei Grund-werten: kiinstlerischer Wert und asthetischer Wert. 
Der kiinstlerische Wert solI eine dienende Funktion haben fur den 
asthetischen Wert. 
Was Ingarden iiber das Gefallen sagt, ist wichtig. Damit will er sich 
von Kant absetzen: Der asthetische Wert "ist etwas yom Gefallen volIig 
Verschiedenes". (p. 247) Denn das GefalIen ist ein Erlebnis, der Wert 
solI dagegen dem asthetischen Gegenstand selber zukommen. Fragwiir-
dig bleibt fur mich: 1. Die Unterscheidung von kiinstlerischem (rei a-
tivem Wert) zum asthetischen absoluten Wert; and 2. die Notwendig-
keit, das Wertschema, die Wertperspektive fur das Verstehen und den 
Umgang mit Kunstwerken ins Spiel zu bringen. 1m Grunde genommen 
wird dadurch nicht das erreicht, was eigentlich erstrebt wird, die 
Uberwindung der subjektivistischen Perspektive. Ich finde, lngarden 
gibt selbst den Ansatz zur Uberwindung dieser Perspektive, wenn er 
von dem Umgang mit der Kunst als einer Erkenntnisleistung spricht 
und zwar einer unmittelbaren Erkenntnis. Von dieser Einsicht sollten 
wir ausgehen, wenn wir Ingarden weiterfiihren wollen. Wir werden dem 
ratselhaften Phanomen der Kunst eher gerecht, wenn wir in ihr eine 
Deutung der Existenz des Menschen und seines Weltverhaltens sehen, 
wenn wir die Kunst in den Kontext der Wahrheit stelIen, statt in den 
des Wertes. 
AIs Ingarden mit seinen Untersuchungen begann, besaB die Wert-
philosophie, ausgehend von Windelband und Rickert noch ein groBes 
Ansehen. Heute hat sich die Situation gewandelt. Sicher hat auch 
Heideggers Kritik da mitgewirkt. lch bedaure, daB ich diese Bemer-
kungen Ingarden nicht personlich vorgetragen habe und nicht von ihm 
selbst eine Erwiderung erhalten konnte. Unsere Diskussionen kreisten 
urn die Philosophie Husserls und urn Probleme der Edition von 
Husserls Werk. Die Erinnerung an die Begegnungen mit lngarden 
bleiben mir unvergessen. 
K unstakademie, Diisseldorf 
NOTE 
* Es wird nach der Ausgabe von 1962 zitiert. 

EUGENE F. KAELIN 
THE DEBATE OVER STRATIFICA TlON 
WITHIN AESTHETIC OBJECTS 
Understanding the aesthetics of Roman Ingarden has been consistently 
thwarted by his primary interest in the ontology of aesthetic objects. 
The best known of his "investigations on the borderline between 
ontology, logic, and the theory of literature," The Literary Work of Art, 1 
had to be supplemented with a second, primarily epistemological, text 
on how literary works of art are cognized -
either preaesthetically, 
aesthetically, or postaesthetically.2 The preaesthetic cognition involves 
a description of the processes by which a given reader prepares a 
"concretization" of the multiply stratified work of art, which, as an 
eidos, is structured phenomenologically by a series of conscious acts 
founded one upon the other. 
For literary works, there are four such strata: besides the eidetic 
imagery of the phonological stratum -
which I prefer to call "the 
surface of the object" -
developing in a temporal sequence that gives 
form to the qualitatively distinct vowel and consonantial values that 
themselves embody certain aesthetically valent properties, there are the 
associated values of the semantical unities "referred" to in the dimension 
of meanings -
the second stratum -
which are related in such a way as 
to represent persons, actions, and events of a fictional nature. This 
world of "represented objectivities" constituting the third stratum, like 
the others, possesses its quota of aesthetically valent properties; but yet 
contains certain spots of indeterminacy which must be filled in by the 
reader's attention to an author's hints and suggestions of fulfilling 
imagery. Such fulfilling imagery tends to complete the concretization of 
the object, accomplished by each reader according to his or her own 
best lights of interpretation. Such is the final stratum to be found in the 
eidetically determined intentional object identified by Ingarden as the 
literary work of art. His term for such fulfilling imagery is "schematized 
aspects." 
As an aesthetic object, the literary work of art is therefore not a 
physical thing, such as a text. Being purely intentional, the literary work 
123 
Hans H. Rudnick (ed.), Analecta Husseriiana, Vol. XXX, 123-138. 
© 1990 Kluwer Academic Publishers. 

124 
EUGENE F. KAELIN 
does not exist in space and time like the objects of ordinary experience; 
such objects exist, but only for the consciousness that intends them. 
Whence, the importance of the reader's concretization, without which 
an individual work would never be cognizable. Texts may be said to 
"intend" the literary work, just as scores are said to intend musical 
objects; but texts and scores are mere physical means for guiding the 
consciousness that would contemplate a fully constituted aesthetic 
object. 
Already here a problem suggests itself. If an individual work is 
accessible only through specific concretizations of an eidetically deter-
mined intentional object, the question is posed of how the eidetic 
description of the intentional object itself was performed: not, for 
logical reasons, on the basis of a simple phenomenological reduction of 
an individual work; that would make the process circular. Phenomeno-
logically, reducing the physical text would yield only the appearance of 
a set of signs for producing an aesthetic object; and without the 
aesthetic cognition of an aesthetic object, there is no fully concrete 
intentional object to which an eidetic description may be given. 
If we look into the two principal texts presenting the matter, more-
over, we find no such reduction. Rather, we find an analysis of the 
structures of language -
of word signs and their meanings at various 
levels -
constituting, in a Kantian phrase, the conditions for the 
possibility of works of art, which, once they have been written by some 
author, are the means for attending to the "polyphonic harmony" of 
component value characteristics unified within the composite structure. 
In Husserl's terms, both the aesthetic object and its embodiment of a 
value are "transcendent" to the consciousness that intends them. 
Indeed, that is why Ingarden had spent so much time on the preaes-
thetic cognition of literary works: to show what activities of conscious-
ness are necessary for an individual work to be fully concretized. Once 
that is done, it becomes possible for a reader to contemplate the purely 
aesthetic properties of such objects, and to describe the features of the 
(intentional) object which determine its peculiar aesthetic value prop-
erties. It is only necessary to keep in mind here the importance of 
distinguishing between "artistic" and "aesthetic" values, i.e. between the 
values of the physical substratum -
the text as a means, as opposed to 
the aesthetic object itself as the ends projected through those means; 
these end-values, of course, are found only in the act of consciously 
intending the aesthetic object itself as the intentional correlate of the 
contemplating consciousness.3 

STRATIFICATION WITHIN AESTHETIC OBJECTS 
125 
The third form of cognition -
the postaesthetic -
is a description of 
original, distinctive works as variously concretized by different readers, 
or by readers in different moments of our ongoing cultures. Such 
cognition is of literary works as having a history of interpretation. In 
this way, literary works become objects of our cultural history. 
II 
Besides the problem noted above, critics of Ingardenian literary theory 
have referred to the vagueness -
or what is perhaps the same, the 
metaphoricity of his summary description of the literary work as a 
"polyphonic harmony" of counterpunctual strata funding into a single 
object like a baroque fugue. No aesthetician should object to an effective 
metaphor; only when metaphors are inexact do they become vague as 
explanations of a questionable phenomenon. And that is my charge 
here: all the voices of a fugue are tonal, and there is little theoretical 
difficulty in examining the determination of a harmony by homogene-
ously constituted temporally sequential moments of a complex sound 
experience: the unity of a harmony stems from the categorial or modal 
identity of the competing voices. They can combine into a single 
harmony only insofar as they are of the same species determination. 
Within the literary polyphony -
Huxley's Point Counter Point may 
come to mind here -
the competing voices are ontologically hetero-
geneous, and so, are objects of different kinds. If each of the strata may 
be said, in strict Husserlian fashion to found the other, each stratum is 
not only different, but each founding stratum must precede each 
founded stratum in the real psychic time of the aesthetic percipient. 
That would be the point of distinguishing a preparatory preaesthetic 
from a full-blown aesthetic cognition of the object. 
But the question remains, how are the contributing strata brought 
into the status of combinable elements within a single intentional object? 
What is the process by which the intending consciousness cognizes the 
serially ordered founding and founded strata as a single entity whose 
significance is other than that of the individual elements, and which yet 
pervades the entire set of perceived relationships obtaining between 
those elements in a tense moment of aesthetic contemplation? 
Ingarden has always had an out here, but as far as I know, he never 
accepted the gambit. His metaphor would seem less inexact to us, if the 
heterogeneous strata of the aesthetic object were, by the fact of some 
conscious functioning, reduced to homogeneous elements defining a 

126 
EUGENE F. KAELIN 
polyphonic harmony that is itself an object of higher order. Then, only 
the 'phonic' part of 'polyphonic harmony' would be metaphorical; and 
in explanation of the unity experienced in the resultant higher order 
organization of the strata as common elements, the harmony would be 
composed of those elements whose temporal characteristics could fund 
counterpunctually into a uniquely determined qualitative whole. The 
medium for such an exchange of value -
from heterogeneous com-
ponents to homogeneous "elements" could be consciousness itself -
i.e. 
human temporality as it is experienced in time and as a "tension" or 
"feeling." 
Such an explanation would be no more "idealistic" than Ingarden's 
own. The Husser!ian correlation between conscious intending and 
object intended would still remain intact in that no tension properly the 
part of an aesthetic object can be felt that is not the result of perceived, 
imagined or conceived elements of the composite structure constituted 
in the aesthetic cognition of the work. All perceptual Gestalten seem to 
possess similar conscious properties, and gestalt properties are not 
determined by a consciousness (i.e. are not purely subjective) even if 
they exist only for the consciousness that perceives them. The point is 
interesting, since Ingarden's chief antagonist concerning the functioning 
of heterogeneously defined strata to constitute a single experiential 
quale has often been charged with idealism of the crassest sort. But this 
antagonism was never formulated as a direct criticism: the debate 
occurred by indirection, as Ingarden and Hartmann merely read the 
same phemomena in different ways. For certain contemporary readers, 
however, Hartmann's work has been suspected of being too closely 
based upon Hegelian idealism. 
Following Husserl's indications on the sense-giving properties of 
certain conscious acts, Nicolai Hartmann, like Ingarden, refers to the 
"stratified structures" of different kinds of aesthetic objects.4 Where 
Ingarden pushed his ontological inquiry into artworks into a full-blown 
metaphysics, ultimately breaking with Husser! over consciousness' 
alleged constitution of the real world, principally in his Der Streit urn 
die Existenz der Welt,5 Hartmann began his works in aesthetics by 
taking up the Crocean gambit of differentiating what was living and 
what was dead in the ontology of Hegel in the ill-fated book entitled 
Das Problem des geistigen Seins.6 In that work, artworks were described 
as "objectified spirit," i.e. spirit as it exists for us, but which has been 
created by a personal spirit of an artist who has been formed by the 

STRATIFICATION WITHIN AESTHETIC OBJECTS 
127 
objective spirit of a given culture. Whence, the suspicion of metaphysical 
idealism at the very basis of Hartmann's aesthetics. 
He meant by "spirit" in each of its uses here the fourth order of 
ontological entities determined within a series of founding-founded 
orders of significance: from the physical to the organic to the broadly 
psychic to the uniquely spiritual structures of human existence. A newer 
order is recognized by its different sets of behavioral components 
reflecting various attitudes of organization from pure passivity to the 
ultimate in creative activityJ And these differences may be given a 
functional psychological interpretation. Still Hartmann was as wary of a 
false "psychologism" as was Husserl himself. 
Before turning to Hartmann's independent treatment of the stratifi-
cation problem, however, I shall consider some further difficulties I 
have experienced with Ingarden's aesthetic, as stemming from his 
account of the stratified essence of other kinds of artworks, to be found 
in his Untersuchungen zur Ontologie der Kunst. And from there I shall 
move on to a summary of Hartmann's account of aesthetic stratifica-
tion. In that way, I hope not only to clarify what the controversy 
concerning stratification within aesthetic objects has been in recent 
phenomenological aesthetics, but also to draw some implications for 
solving some of the related problems in art criticism. 
III 
The actual controversy over the stratification of an aesthetic object 
between Ingarden and Hartmann arose almost as an accident of history. 
In a footnote to his Untersuchungen, Ingarden points out that his 
Literarische Kunstwerk was published in 1930, two full years before 
the first appearance of Hartmann's Problem, where one will find a 
similar account of the mode of existence, essential structure, and 
identity of the artworks produced in several media.8 Das literarische 
Kunstwerk was originally conceived as containing additional material 
on the media of painting, sculpture, architecture, and music, but these 
details were omitted from the first edition. Even so, complained 
Ingarden, Hartmann did not feel the necessity of noting the similarity 
between his own and Ingarden's views. The gravamen of the complaint, 
obviously, presupposes that Hartmann had been aware of Ingarden's 
work. 
In the foreword to his text, however, Hartmann does not create the 

128 
EUGENE F. KAELIN 
impression of a scholar too proud to admit a debt to his contem-
poraries. Along with the admission of his constant awareness of Hegel's 
overpowering presence -
the Phenomenology of the Spirit after all was 
sufficient proof of the objectified personal spirit of the nineteenth 
century Master -, Hartmann mentions his debt to DiIthey and to a 
group of collaborating students who for two semesters helped him 
formulate his position -
in 1929/30. It was quite possible, then, that 
Hartmann had no access to Ingarden's text. Still Ingarden seemed to be 
interested in establishing priority: he mentions in the same note that the 
rough draft of his text had already been prepared in 1927/28. The 
point seems petty, and somehow beneath the dignity of someone 
researching after truth. 
More important for my case is Ingarden's explanation of the differ-
ences between his own and Hartmann's interpretation of the stratifica-
tion phenomenon. There are four conditions, he claimed, determining 
his own use of the expression. They are: (i) that the structure of the 
intentional object contain heterogeneous elements, such as the four 
strata named in The Literary Work of Art; (ii) that each stratum be 
composed of homogeneous elements capable of being related in such a 
way as to found higher orders of significance: as word sounds may be 
taken to represent seman tical unities, and the like, all of which in their 
turn are united in such a way as to determine qualities that permeate 
the global structure of the new intentional entity; (iii) that the stratum 
not lose its own independent structure within the whole in whose 
determination it apparently participates; and (iv) that there results from 
the relatedness between the participating strata an ultimate unity of 
expression -
the polyphonic harmony described in the earlier text. 
In the text of commentary supplied in the Untersuchungen, Ingarden 
explained that music does not contain a plurality of strata. In spite of 
the oddity of the expression, he maintains that music is a singly 
stratified (einschichtig) structural object of temporally related percep-
tual tensions, capable of being organized into second ordered structures 
such as melody, harmony and rhythm and of being accompanied in all 
cases by such "nonacoustical" elements as temporal structuring and in 
others by expressed feelings, or by certain representational motifs such 
as those found in "tone poems," and the like. But, in agreement with 
Eduard Hanslick before him,9 Ingarden suggests that all representation 
associated with a musical piece is beyond the scope of a pure or 
"absolute" music; and therefore should be excluded from the realm of 
music itself. 

STRATIFICATION WITHIN AESTHETIC OBJECTS 
129 
Beyond the level of a tone poem one can find such representational 
elements in music as the words of songs, and the narrative plots of 
operas and oratorios. But these are most probably better considered 
"mixed media," with a peculiar structure of their own. 
Hartmann, Ingarden charged, falsified the notion of an ideally defined 
intentional object when he admitted more than a single stratum within 
the constitution of a musical object. The reason given was Hartmann's 
peculiar interpretation of a phenomenologically stratified object, as a 
single object created by the relationship of "the founding of one 
conscious act by another." Whenever the object of one of these acts 
forms the antic foundation for the other in a process Husser! explains 
as "motivation" in Vol. II of the Ideen, III or whenever the one serves to 
represent the other by virtue of its own peculiar intentional "sense," or 
when both these conditions obtain, then in Hartmann's sense we are 
presented with a multiply stratified object. I I 
Music, in this interpretation, contains at least two strata of signific-
ance: the sounds as heard in real space and time and the time of the 
music created by the sequentiality of the patterned sound. The per-
ceived sounds, Hartmann claimed, create a foreground stratum behind 
which any number of background strata may be held in meaningful 
tension: precisely all those "nonacoustical" elements of a musical expe-
rience Ingarden's account would exclude from the sphere of relevance 
within an aesthetic response. 
I shall consider Hartmann's theory of phenomenological stratification 
in the next section of this essay. It must be remembered, however, that 
each of the phenomenologists was working independently of the other. 
Besides the "singly stratified" intentional object of music, Ingarden 
considers the objects of three other arts media in the Untersuchungen. 
Painting may yield an object of a variable number of strata, depending 
upon the nature of the objects depicted in them. "Historical" pictures, 
constructed of "reconstructed visual aspects" of the objects depicted, 
contain three such strata: that of the reconstructed aspects; that of the 
objects possessing the qualities represented by the aspects; and, finally, 
the historical event commemorated in the depiction. 
Paintings with a simple literary theme are similarly structured into 
three strata. For example, the story of the institution of the Eucharist is 
represented in Da Vinci's Last Supper only because the fresco painting 
represents the figures of Christ and his disciples gathered together to 
celebrate the feast of the Passover in the year of Christ's death. In this 
case, the third stratum (the religious event) is a representamen of the 

130 
EUGENE F. KAELIN 
second (the meal shared by the Teacher and his disciples), which is a 
representamen of the first (the ordering of those "reconstructed visual 
aspects" into the founding order of phenomenological significance, i.e. 
the colored surface of plastered wall as it is perceived). 
Portraits and pure images, on the other hand, have only a doubly 
stratified intentional object consisting of the level of reconstructed 
aspects and the figures represented. And pushing his examples one 
level deeper into abstraction, Ingarden considers the case of a "picture" 
(Bild) with no object pictured. Are such objects, like music, singly 
"stratified;" or, like architecture, doubly? In his characteristic humility, 
Ingarden suggests the question needs further study. 
Architecture is doubly stratified, since its contains a primary found-
ing stratum of reconstructed visual aspects and a corresponding 
founded stratum of three dimensional spatial gestalten. The difference 
between the spatial gestalten of a totally abstract painting and an 
architectonic piece is hard to determine, and can perhaps be achieved 
only on the basis of the perceptual data of the physical artifact itself -
the painting (Gemiilde) in the first instance, and the building (Gebiiude), 
in the second. 
In the painting we perceive a two dimensional representation of a 
three dimensional "world;" in the building, we perceive a three dimen-
sional presentation of positive and negative spaces ordered so as to 
represent a functional living space. In the first instance, an intentional 
object is motivated by the appearance of an organized two dimensional 
surface perceived as a sign; in the second, an intentional object appears 
in three-dimensional constitution, but its physical sign is likewise a 
three-dimensional perceptual object. 
Film, like architecture and some forms of painting, is doubly stratified. 
Like painters, cineasts employ reconstructed visual aspects to represent 
objects or events; and like, writers, they may represent any number of 
narratives. Sound films are more complicated than silent ones; and 
sound may be used to convey character through speech habits or as a 
purely "moodal" accompaniment of the visual aspects. At any event, 
the sound together with the visual imagery constitutes a structure of 
counterpoint within the first or founding stratum. Actually, then, the 
film is a medium which operates between the limits of literature (in 
particular, dramatic literature) and those of painting. 
In order to rightfully understand Ingarden's ontological claims, how-
ever, the aesthetic objects of all these media must be kept distinct from 

STRATIFICATION WITHIN AESTHETIC OBJECTS 
131 
the purely physical objects which are constructed by the artists: the 
music from the score as well as from its performances; the picture from 
the painting; the edifice from the building; and the film from celluloid 
and reflected light. Each of these distinctions parallels the one Ingarden 
had drawn between the physical artifact -
the text, in literature -
and 
the intentional object which makes its appearance upon the occasion of 
someone's perceiving the physical object as a sign for its production -
the literary work brought to light or concretized in the reading of a text. 
IV 
Nicolai Hartmann's ultimate account of the stratified nature of aesthetic 
objects was presented in his Asthetik, a book his wife tells us he 
finished during the fall of Berlin during World War lIP It was first 
published in 1953, and reedited in 1966. Owing to the reactionary 
quality of its political message for a nation just about to undergo the 
national socialistic revolution, Das Problem des geistigen Seins had little 
influence upon the reading public during the thirties and forties -
a point touchingly made by its author who described the book as 
undesirable to the political powers who actually decided what German 
readers should or could readP The first edition of the book had been 
exhausted for ten years, but it spoke of the living spirit and its historical 
life, as it did of its power to create and its reality as objectified in the 
works and institutions of a living nation. 
The same Hegelianism that made the book anathema to the ruling 
powers of Germany, however, permitted Hartmann to bridge the two 
schools of thought he found current in his own living present: a lingering 
personalistic idealism, stemming from Hegel's Phenomenology, and the 
more recent developments of Husserlian phenomenology. The concept 
that mediated the connection between the two schools was not the thing 
in itself, the first positing of the object for consciousness, but how that 
object, e.g. a work of art, could be explained to exist for us -
the 
second moment of the living conscious experience. For us, works of art 
exist only as they are intended; in the language of Husserl and Ingarden, 
they are purely intentional. 
Hartmann's account of a work of art's intentionality differs from that 
of Ingarden, but Ingarden's account of the difference, as explained 
above, seems accurate enough. What Ingarden failed to explain, how-
ever, was how his own ontological interests in aesthetic theorizing was 

132 
EUGENE F. KAELIN 
the determining factor of their differences. Hartmann could not admit 
that the first ontic founding stratum of an aesthetic experience -
the 
acts of perceiving the physical properties of an artist's construction -
were irrelevant to a description of the aesthetic properties of those 
perceived works. Not that those aesthetic properties existed outside the 
act of perception, but that within our acts of aesthetic contemplation 
one could not so easily separate the "artistic" from the "aesthetic" 
values of a work. 14 
Since Hartmann was not interested so much in the reality of aesthetic 
objects as they exist in themselves -
even if admittedly they exist only 
intentionally, but rather in our manner of cognizing them and the 
nature of our experiences of them as the creations of another living 
spirit, he always considers the purely perceptual moments of those 
experiences as the first, founding stratum of the temporally developing 
"aesthetic object." Indeed, our aesthetic descriptions do not begin only 
as we contemplate a finished aesthetic object in a peculiar moment of 
aesthetic cognition -
as differentiated from a preparatory preaesthetic 
and an eventual postaesthetic cognition of the same object. For this 
reason, Hartmann needed no second volume of aesthetics dedicated to 
the subject of how we come to know an aesthetic object. For him, all 
aesthetic objects have a first, founding stratum provided by our percep-
tion of the sensuous contents of the experience -
a fact, by the way, 
which will permit him to include the "charming" (das Anmutige) as one 
species of aesthetic value. ls 
From the foregoing, it seems clear that Hartmann's aesthetic is as 
comparable to Hegel's System of Fine Arts as it is to Ingarden's 
phenomenological aesthetics, which, for historical reasons, took literary 
works of art and their cognition as the paradigm cases of eidetic 
aesthetic description. The other media are treated by Ingarden as either 
being similar to or different from the standard set by The Literary Work 
of Art, and this has been the source of much confusion, in America, 
about what is to count as a phenomenological aesthetics or phenomen-
ological criticism. 
Hartmann's work is much more systematic. He shows that all media 
are either representational or nonrepresentational, and then merely 
follows through the further development of the related strata in both 
classes of arts media, including music, which may represent layer upon 
layer of further strata of significance, as Ingarden had himself hinted in 
his account of tone poems, art songs, operas, etc. Ingarden's decision to 

STRATIFICATION WITHIN AESTHETIC OBJECTS 
133 
exclude such references in some kinds of music on the grounds that 
music is essentially nonrepresentational simply begs the question at 
Issue. 
In my own terms, some art forms contain only an expressive surface, 
while others contain both a surface and a depth. All we have to do to 
characterize the relationship between expressing surface and expressed 
depth is to perform the acts of imagination or conception that constitute 
the intentional objects making their appearance in the nether strata of 
the artwork's structure, and then describe what appears as being tied to 
our original acts of perception. When our music is absolute (i.e. 
nonrepresentational), Ingarden's so-called "nonacoustical moments" of 
the musical expression constitute further developing strata of "musical" 
significance, attaching to the depth of the expression. 
For those who may be interested in the "number" of strata that might 
thus make their appearance, Hartmann found at least seven in his 
interpretation of the literary arts, expecially of those grander genres, 
such as the epic, the novel, or dramatic literatureY' According to the 
limitations of its form, a lyrical poem has fewer strata contributing to its 
total expressiveness. So, there is no eidetically determined number of 
structural strata within the aesthetic objects of any art medium. To 
claim otherwise is to arbitrarily limit the possibilities that might be 
exploited by the artists whose creative spirits have constituted such 
objects by instituting them with sense in the first place. 
Where Ingarden poses the existence of a polyphonic harmony of the 
aesthetically valent properties of the contributing strata of sense within 
a single aesthetic object, he avails himself of the disposition of con-
scious acts to be nested -
as the four strata are nested within an act of 
aesthetic contemplation; that is one of the possibilities Husserl had 
demonstrated both in the Logische Untersuchungen and later, more 
concretely, in the Ideen.17 But still another possibility had been demon-
strated in those same texts: the stacked nature of conscious acts to 
follow one upon the other either as founding and founded or as 
motivating a series of intentional references which can only be brought 
to closure by the intuition of an intention-fulfilling "object." 
In this respect, then, the aesthetics of both Ingarden and Hartmann 
are phenomenological in the Husserlian interpretation of this term. 
Ingarden's account utilizes the nesting, nested properties of conscious 
acts to explain the appearance of an aesthetic object, and Hartmann's 
account utilizes the founding, founded properties of acts that follow 

134 
EUGENE F. KAELIN 
each other in time -
or, if you will, in the human temporality within 
which these acts are performed. If one had to choose between them, 
it would not be on the grounds that the one is more properly "phe-
nomenological" than the other; but one might be led to choose between 
them if the relatively static description of aesthetic contemplation 
offered by Ingarden as the model of aesthetic cognition seems less 
effective than the relatively dynamic account Hartmann gives of an 
aesthetic experience that comes to closure through a sequence of 
conscious acts. 
Ingarden's interest in the ontology of aesthetic objects would naturally 
produce results that differ from any serious attempt to describe the 
objects of our aesthetic experiences as we experience them. So, one way 
to decide between the relative merits of these two phenomenological 
accounts of an aesthetic object is to ask oneself the question, Which 
offers a better justification for our critical judgments of them? The one 
which depicts an ontological divide between the artistic values of a 
work and the aesthetic values of the aesthetic object associated with its 
perception? Or the one which maintains that the aesthetic values of 
artworks are accessible only to those who have perceived the artistic 
values found in aesthetic expressions, and outlines a schema for tracing 
the relationship between the two sorts of values? I leave that choice to 
my readers. 
v 
Comparing and contrasting the aesthetic views of Roman Ingarden and 
Nicolai Hartmann is not a task performed with the intention of proving 
the one or the other the more astute observer or of showing which of 
the two phenomenologists was the first to elaborate the concept of a 
work of art as a multiply stratified intentional object. Ingarden's work 
is better known in America owing to the availability of the English 
translations of his work. In defending himself against Hartmann's 
contrary views on the relatively unfixed number of intentional strata, 
however, Ingarden called attention once more to the metaphorical 
nature of his phenomenological descriptions. If it is difficult for us to 
conceive of a polyphonic harmony of aesthetically valent properties 
attaching to heterogeneous strata within an aesthetic object -
unless all 
such properties are themselves homogeneous, thereby lending them-
selves to unification through harmony, it is likewise difficult to accept 

STRATIFICATION WITHIN AESTHETIC OBJECTS 
135 
Ingarden's description of the musical aesthetic object as "singly" strati-
fied. Stratification makes sense only if there are two or more related 
levels or strata whose relationship constitutes the composite whole. 
Music was therefore described not by what its experience itself yields, 
but in comparison to the standard set by Ingarden's eidetic aesthetic 
analyses of literary objects. 
Where Ingarden emphasized the internal structures of his "stratified" 
intentional objects, Hartmann takes pains to trace the relationship 
between the various strata, which make their appearance either in the 
foreground, the background, or indeed in the middle ground, some-
where between. Here, too, we find metaphorical language, likening the 
structures of intentional objects to those existing between figure and 
ground in ordinary acts of perception. But this metaphor does not court 
any serious disanalogical interpretations. 
The foremost ground of a work of art is indeed provided by the 
perception of some "sensuous surface," to use D. W. Prall's term for the 
object of aesthetic perception. IK As such, the perceptual field proper to 
the art medium being considered constitutes the "founding" stratum of 
the aesthetic object created by an artist working in that medium. Then, 
as conscious act is stacked upon conscious act -
Hartmann refers to 
this relationship as die Schichtenfolge of the aesthetic experience -, the 
strata of the deeper ground make their appearance. But the point to be 
retained is that all strata of the aesthetic object are intentional corre-
lates of, or objectivities for, some conscious act. 
Two consequences follow from these observations: first, that the 
medium permitting the homogenization of the heterogeneous strata 
found in aesthetic objects -
however many they may be -
is human 
consciousness itself. So, if there is a special kind of second-order 
intuition of the harmony existing between competing counterpunctual 
voices, that too is an intentional object and exists only for the conscious-
ness that attends to the relationship between the voices. Obviously, we 
have to read through the various levels of depth structure of a literary 
text, listen to the competing voices of a fugue, look at a painting, and 
inspect its composition in order to constitute the strata which even-
tually fund into some kind of uniquely determined object for further 
contemplation. 
Secondly, created by consciousness for consciousness, artworks as 
aesthetic objects unfold as the creator's or the appreciator's conscious-
ness performs the acts motivated hy a perception of the surface 

136 
EUGENE F. KAELIN 
phenomena. The performance of the acts of imagination and concep-
tion supply the "depth" strata organized into the artistic composition, 
held there by the tensions existing between them and any intervening 
strata that link them with the perceptual surface. So, an intentional 
object exists stretched between temporal moments of conscious aware-
ness "cognized" from the "inside" by the performance of the acts that 
intend them, and from the "outside" by further acts of reflection on the 
conditions that gave rise to their appearance. The terms "inside" and 
"outside" here refer to points of view that are either intrinsic or 
extrinsic to the acts themselves. 
Such are the consequences of a phenomenological aesthetics that 
unites the noetic phases of aesthetic perception with the noematic 
structures correlated with them. Do these descriptions make a difference 
for critical theory? 
The answer to this question seems obvious enough. The traditional 
categories of matter and form or matter and manner no longer seem 
pertinent to criticism. The reason: if aesthetic objects exist as felt 
tensions between an expressing surface and an expressed depth, there 
are formal displays of related elements in both the surface and the 
depth of the expression, and so neither can unambiguously fulfill the 
role of "form" to the other's "matter." 
Indeed, there is no word in aesthetic discourse more ambiguous than 
"form." If we restrict it to refer to a pattern of relatedness, there are as 
many different kinds of form as there are "matters" to be formed. And 
it should be obvious that the multistratified structures of aesthetic 
objects yield as many different matters as there are kinds of hetero-
geneous entities, which although they are similar to each other (and 
therefore combinable) yet are different from those found in the other 
strata of the objects, and therefore nonrelatable to the other strata of 
conscious activity except by time, temporal structure of human aware-
ness, or its attendant species-qualitative uniqueness. 
This last, we recall, was Ingarden's solution of the problem of the 
total expressiveness of an aesthetic object: the polyphonic harmony of 
the aesthetically valent properties deriving from the component strata 
of the aesthetic object as these are experienced in the aesthetic cogni-
tion of the work was itself the aesthetically valent property of the 
whole. The concepts of matter and form, on the other hand, are no 
more fitting the description of aesthetic objects as any object or sub-
stance of nature -
other than a tree, if we can trust the etymology of 

STRATIFICATION WITHIN AESTHETIC OBJECTS 
137 
the term for our concept of matter -
and whatever artificial shape into 
which someone might wish to hack it. We replace these outmoded 
critical categories with those of 'surface' and 'depth.' 
Surfaces and depths can both be described, and in strict phenomeno-
logical fashion as developing in progressive acts of awareness. When 
our phenomenological descriptions of the Schichtenfolge have been 
completed, the first step of critical analysis will have been completed, 
i.e. we will have described the object and how it has made its appear-
ance. And, as a result, no reference to matter and manner is necessary, 
either; we would have achieved their purpose without their vagueness. 
Finally, since the value of aesthetic objects is the experience we may 
have of them, in keeping with our notion of aesthetic value as intrinsic, 
this aspect of artistic criticism is fulfilled when the conditions for having 
the experience of a given work of art have become the object of 
reflection which confirms within the act of reflection what has already 
been felt in production of the object: the tense relationship between the 
surface and the depth of the expression in representational works or 
between the funding elements of a surface in nonrepresentational 
works. 
As an overview, then, contemplating the problems of the stratification 
of aesthetic objects leads one to a theory of criticism that should enable 
one to distinguish between good and bad criticism whatever other uses 
philosophers may have devised for their aesthetic theorizing. Ontology 
may be one such use, but where ontology begins, aesthetics has already 
performed its task. 
As I read the relationship between Ingarden and Hartmann on the 
stratification of an aesthetic object, each emphasizes one aspect of the 
conscious-act/intentional-object distinction at the expense of the other; 
and it obviously takes both aspects of the field of an engaged con-
sciousness to justify the deep reading or deep looking or deep listening 
a genuine work of art deserves. 
The Florida State University, 
Tallahassee 
REFERENCES 
I See Das literarische KlIllstwerk (Halle: Max Niemeyer Verlag, 1931). 
Vom Erkel/Ilell des literari.lchell KlIllstwerks (Tiibingen: Niemeyer Verlag. 19AH). 

138 
EUGENE F. KAELIN 
3 For the distinction between artistic and aesthetic values, see his Untersuchungen zur 
Ontologie der Kunst (Tiibingen: Niemeyer Verlag, 1962), pp. 170-71,247-48. 
4 For Hartmann's two treatments of stratification within aesthetic objects, see his Das 
Problem des geistigen Seins, second edition (Berlin: Walter de Gruyter & Co., 1962) 
and Asthetik, second edition (Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 1966). 
5 For Ingarden's account of Husserl's "idealism," see his Der Streit urn die Existenz der 
Welt (Tiibingen: Niemeyer, 1964); On the Motives which led Husser! to Transcendental 
Idealism, trans. A. Hannibalsson (The Hague: Nijhoff, 1975); and, finally, "The Letter to 
Husser! about the VIth [Logical[ Investigation and 'Idealism'," in Analecta Husser!iana 
4 (1976): 419-38. 
oSee Das Problem, p. iv. 
7 The levels of ontic determination of human behavior in Hartmann seem to parallel 
rather closely the two-part analysis of the Order of Forms and the Dialectic of Orders 
in the cultural anthropology sketched out by MerIeau-Ponty in La Structure du com-
portement (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1942). 
H Ingarden, Untersuchungen, p. 33. 
Y See Eduard Hanslick, The Beautiful in Music, trans. G. Cohen (New York: Liberal 
Arts Press, 1957). 
. 
10 See Vol. II, Ideen zu einer rein en Phiinomenologie und phiinomenologischen Phi-
losophie, Band III, in Husserliana, pp. 211-47. Husserl's account of art as be spirited 
objects occurs in pp. 236-47. 
II Ingarden, Untersuchungen, p. 34. 
12 See his Asthetik, p. 477. 
13 Hartmann, Das Problem, p. v. 
14 Ingarden, Untersuchungen, pp. 170-71,247-48. 
15 Hartmann, Asthetik, pp. 390-405. 
16 Ibid" pp. 183-85. 
17 Many phenomenologists prefer to distinguish a "protophenomenological phase of 
Husserl's philosophy, naming Logische Untersuchungen as the definitive work in this 
period. The reason is that Husserl was writing the Investigations to combat "psycho-
logism" in logic, and only discovered the intricacies of his later philosophical insights by 
changing methodologies while writing the sixth Investigation. Failure to note this change 
in methodology explains the disappointment of many an "analytical" philosopher to 
appreciate HusserI's contributions to logic or to philosophy more generally. 
Be that as it may, his account of meaning intentions and meaning fulfillments as 
determined by matter and quality in the Investigations was changed to the analysis of 
conscious acts with respect to their noetic and their noematic structures in the Ideas. 
See his Logische Untersuchungen, 6th ed. (Tiibingen: Niemeyer Verlag, 1980), II/I, 
pp. 426-456, and compare Ideen, Vol. II, Allgemeine Einfiihrung in die reine Phiino-
menologie, especially his treatment of "motivation" in the linkage of conscious acts, pp. 
236-47, with the structure of a noematic nucleus of meaning, pp. 252-54. 
18 D. W. Prall, Aesthetic Judgment (New York: Thomas Y. Crowell, 1929), passim. 

YOU ZHENG LI 
INGARDEN'S "STRATA-LA YERS" THEORY 
AND THE STRUCTURAL ANALYSIS OF 
THE ANCIENT CHINESE KUNQU OPERA 
Roman Ingarden's earlier studies on the strata of the work of literary 
art and his later research into the theory of aesthetic value are one of 
the most fruitful contributions to twentieth-century aesthetics. His work 
followed the tradition of philosophical aesthetics on the one hand, and 
joined the general trends of modern structural approaches to literature 
and the arts on the other. In contrast to the formalist interests of 
various structuralists, he had always been concerned with the problems 
of phenomenological ontology; while he could be distinguished from 
many contemporary conventional aestheticians as well, keeping closely 
to the structural analysis of form and meaning in the work of art itself. 
My impression is that, as a phenomenological aesthetician, his aesthetics 
seems more important than his phenomenology, while as a structural 
aesthetician his structural inquiry looks more attractive than his aesthetic 
ontology and his general value theory. 
It is very interesting to note that as a philosopher himself, Ingarden 
had always been obsessively preoccupied with literature. In fact, he 
took literature as the main subject of his aesthetic investigations, and we 
may even say he is one of the founders of the philosophy of literature 
as a discipline. So his last ambitious project to complete a panorama of 
literary philosophy -
Poetik 1 -
is understandable. While he had been 
hard at work on his original strata analysis of the literary work, the no 
less revolutionary Russian formalism and Czech structuralism had also 
begun flourishing. It is obvious in retrospect that all of their initial 
enterprises reflect and express the coming of a new intellectual era in 
this century, focusing on the themes of form and structure of the work 
itself. Owing to his philosophical background in phenomenological 
realism, however, Ingarden's task was bound to be more intricate and 
confronted with more theoretical challenges. Nevertheless his brilliant 
works have demonstrated that his heroic life-long effort has resulted in 
fruitful academic achievements. 
Ingarden takes literature as the main subject of his aesthetic investi-
gations, but he continually emphasizes the significance of studying other 
139 
Hans H. Rudnick (ed.), Analecta Husserliana, Vol. XXX, 139-156. 
© 1990 Kluwer Academic Publishers. 

140 
YOU ZHENG LI 
arts media. His own work covers painting, music, theater and even 
cinema. Inspired by his work this paper aims to apply in a tentative way 
his structural methods to a Chinese traditional opera -
the Kunqu 
(Kuen-Cheu) opera -
and to establish a stratification scheme for the 
work of this performance art. It will then proceed to examine critically 
some of his basic concepts, namely: those concerning the different 
strata of his represented objects (third) and the schematized aspects 
(fourth); the filling-out of gaps and concretization; the differences 
between artistically valent and aesthetically valent qualities; and finally 
the concept of value itself. 
1. PROBLEMS OF STRATIFICATION AND SIGNIFICATION 
IN THE KUNQU OPERA 
The history of traditional operas of various types is only about one 
thousand years old. The ancient Chinese operas consisting of plot, 
singing, poems and dance, first appeared fully-formed as synthetic 
products in the Southern Sung dynasty (1127-1279), and reached 
maturity in the Mongolian dynasty that followed: the Yuan (1260-
1341). In fact, the development of Chinese opera was strongly in-
fluenced by western and northern minorities' cultures. The latters' 
richly theatrical elements had been enormously assimilated by Chinese 
operas over time. Building on the dramatic achievements of the Yuan 
dynasty, the literati and musicians of the Ming dynasty (1369-1644) 
that followed the Yuan, developed variations and improvements in the 
opera, the best among them being the Kunqu. It blended the theatrical 
elements of the Yuan musical drama (called Zaju -
a poetic drama) 
with the highly sophisticated literary and musical traditions of the 
Southern Sung, producing a formula whose success has now lasted four 
hundred years. Historically speaking, there had been two centuries of 
cultural blossoming of the kunqu in a period from the middle of the 
Ming to the middle of the Qing dynasty (1644-1911, the last of the 
Chinese dynasties). The local operas of the two dynasties were generally 
of a popular nature, whereas the Kunqu was characteristically created, 
sustained and appreciated by intellectuals, officials and courtiers. In the 
long decline from the middle of the Qian until today with the exception 

INGARDEN'S '"STRATA-LAYERS" THEORY 
141 
of some short revivals, its attractions and influence have steadily 
decreased; today being reduced to the esoteric pastime of a small circle 
of intellectuals. Indeed, more seriously than any other traditional 
operas, the Kunqu has suffered the shock of modernization and Wes-
ternization. 
In general, the Kunqu opera has the following characteristics: 
(1) Singing and music have fixed schemes and patterns called Qupai 
(the aria-type). About four thousand aria-types have appeared in its 
history, and a few hundred among them have been successfully used. 
Each aria-type has a strictly regulated musical form as concerns struc-
ture, sound, tone, rhythm, as well as melody, that corresponds respec-
tively with specific emotional overtones. Thus a piece of the Kunqu 
opera consists of a special plot and a unique combination of a lot of the 
various pre-existing patterns of musical, poetic and dancing parts. 
Therefore, despite differences between the plot and verbal expressions 
of one opera and those of the other, music and melodies of the same 
aria-type used by different pieces of the Kunqu opera remain unchanged. 
And in respect of music, what is changeable are only the patterns of 
combinations of various aria-types as elements. 
(2) Most of the dramatic stories are generally quite mediocre and 
plain, while phrases in the verse forms of the aria-types are endowed 
with highly poetic charms. So we can say that the Kunqu is weak in its 
dramatic plots, but rich in its lyrical expressions and emotional con-
notations. 
(3) The magnificent richness of its dancing movements is unparalleled 
among all kinds of traditional Chinese operas. 
(4) Everything appearing on the stage is also precisely stylized, such 
as the schemes of setting, costumes, make-ups, stage properties are 
strictly prescribed too; each item of the various schemes has a fixed 
function and definite meaning in performance. 
(5) Paucity of representational function of its played stories prevails. 
Now let us try to offer a stratification analysis of the Kunqu opera 
more or less according to Ingarden's model, although the media of the 
novel and of the opera are heterogeneous. Obviously, the modes of 
existence of the literary work are different from those of performance 
arts which consist of two phases: the potential phase (namely music 
score, script or dance design) and the actual phase (namely musical 
performance, presentation on the stage, film showing and dance show). 

142 
YOU ZHENG LI 
In contrast a novel, for example, is a written text and has a fixed 
physical autonomy once it has been produced. As for the Kunqu, it has 
double phases like most other performance arts, but its formation is still 
more stereotyped and complicated than others. In its potential phase, 
the Kunqu contains a repertoire of scripts and the fixedly regulated 
schemes of manipulating or performing the various elements from 
several categories. Thus "the work itself" of the Kunqu amounts to the 
structural whole of visual and auditory expressions actually appearing 
on the stage during a span of time. By the way, I'd like to emphasize 
that we use the term "the work itself" here in the more synthetic 
Ingardenian sense (namely containing all of media, meaningful expres-
sions, the represented objects and the appearing ways of those objects 
altogether) rather than in , say, Metz' more formalist sense (for example 
his five physical signifier planes: image, sound, musical sound, noises 
and inscriptions on the screen).2 Although the structuralist methods can 
make the object of our anatomy appear more homogeneous, they 
generally neglect many interesting aspects concerning the meaningful 
parts of the work of art. Besides, Ingarden's strategy seems in some way 
more convenient for our understanding of the structural and functional 
phenomena of the work. 
Unfortunately, however, Ingarden never, as far as I know, presented 
a ready model for stratification of the works of performance arts 
comparable to his literary model. So in establishing stratification of the 
Kunqu, beside Ingarden's theory, we still have to refer to recent semiotic 
studies of film art (to Metz' concepts of cinematographical language 
and Eco's notions of cultural codes). 
Accordingly we can similarly divide the expression plane of the 
Kunqu into three strata, each of which contains many elements. So we 
have: 
(A) Spatial-static elements: every visual image on the stage, such as 
parts of human body wearing apparel, crowns and shoes, make-up 
designs, props, setting, etc .... 
(B) Temporal-dynamic elements: musical and vocal parts, namely 
songs, music of instruments and the streams of words of both songs and 
dialogues. In the musical category we include the subclasses of musical 
tunes and tunes of artistic pronunciation of words. And the above-
mentioned aria-types consist of fixed melodies, artistic ways of singing, 
length of articulating words and tonal patterns of verse. As for musical 

INGARDEN'S "STRAT A-LA YERS" THEORY 
143 
instruments there are divisions of stringed, wind and percussion instru-
ments, each of them containing several subdivisions. Like the part of 
the Kunqu, the music of instruments is also strictly stylized in con-
formity with the rules of the aria-types. On the whole, the musical 
formation of the Kunqu is expressed by a harmonious composition of 
the varied sounds of instruments, singing, poetic-styled pronunciation 
and recitation. 
(C) Spatiotemporal-dynamic elements: the visual elements in their 
dynamic combinations, namely the processes of performing the elements 
of the stratum A. Such as facial expressions, gestures, moving of long 
sleeves, fans, horse whips, long pheasant tail-feathers on the crowns, 
actors' step-figures, circling on the stage, expressively combing long 
ornamental beards by hands, etc. 
The above three can be called the strata of the basic signifying 
elements, and the organic combinations of the elements of those strata 
will be realized in the actual performance of the actors on the stage. So 
we have a more complete and synthetic signifying unit called "role", 
namely the living body, carrying all necessary elements of the three 
strata in a sophisticatedly designed performing process. In other words, 
the role on the stage looks like an organizer of numberless static and 
dynamic elements. Metaphorically speaking, through the performing of 
the actor, the various related elements formulate the dramatic "words," 
"phrases," "sentences," and "texts." And the harmonious performances 
of all roles on the stage in one piece or one act of the Kunqu opera 
form a structural "discourse," conveying the nuances of aesthetic 
meanings to audience. In addition, there is also a strictly pre-established 
scheme of roles in the Kunqu. Regularly there are four categories of 
roles consisting of dozens of sub-categories, respectively defined by sex, 
age, character, status, occupations, and each kind of role is ascribed 
with a set of pre-existing ways of meaningful acting. In terms of Barthes' 
semiology, we can say the actual performance of the role is unfolded 
along the syntagmatic line, while the elements of the above adumbrated 
strata, actually or potentially, exist in a paradigmatic system. We may 
thus say the Kunqu opera as a type of performance arts is structural as 
well as symbolic in nature. 
Now let us finish our description of the above three strata (i.e. a 
hierarchy on the plane of expression), which is tantamount to the first 
stratum of Ingarden's anatomy of the literary work, with schema I. 

144 
YOU ZHENG LI 
Schema I: The Three Strata of the Expression Plane of the Kunqu 
stratum 
state 
dimension form of perception media 
signifying elements 
A. things & static 
spatial 
visual 
material. 
costumes, orna-
bodies 
shapes, 
ments, beards, 
colors, etc. 
fans, settings, parts 
of body, props, 
make-ups, etc. 
B. music & dynamic temporal 
auditory 
pitch of 
melody, styles of 
songs 
tone, sound pronunciation of 
articulation, words, dactyle, 
rhythm, etc. ete. 
C. acts 
dynamic spatio-
visual 
material, 
facial expressions, 
temporal 
shapes, 
gestures, dancing, 
colors, 
use of sleeves and 
movements 
fans, etc. 
What we give here as the basic elements is intended only for practical 
explanation; we have not executed the formal anatomy quite thoroughly. 
It may be remarked that, for the present purpose of sketchily explaining 
the aesthetic functions of the Kunqu opera, the chosen larger performing 
units are relevant enough. As we said before, all elements shown in the 
schema could be roughly taken as "words" and "sentences"; and the 
combinations of them along the paradigmatic and syntagmatic axes are 
realized through the artistically performing acts of the roles. And those 
performing units can further form the larger textures. 
Now we will turn to the problems of meanings or implications of 
those elements and their combinations. We may generally divide the 
Kunqu's signifying ways into two channels: the verbal and the non-
verbal. The verbal channel is equal to the second stratum of Ingarden's 
model, for there are words in the songs and the plain speech on the 
stage. The pure semantic dimension is indeed essential for the Kunqu, 
and it covers both ordinary and poetic meanings. But the other channel 
is more important here and it consists of the parts formed by the 
elements of the three strata. As a matter of fact, the non-verbal 
elements of various categories and sub-categories convey the meaning-
ful message according to the fixedly regulated ways of signification. 

INGARDEN'S "STRATA-LA YERS" THEOR Y 
145 
Therefore the thousands of elements of the above strata and their com-
binations have their own definite (prescribed) correspondent meaning 
units covering ideal, emotional, circumstantial, volitive and intentional 
implications. In principle, we can surely establish a dictionary and 
grammar of the "language" of the Kunqu, but the task will be involved 
in the technically complicated work. Here we are only trying to give a 
few examples to show its general way to communicate the ordinary and 
aesthetic meanings through the non-verbal channel. Using the classifi-
cation of the above schema we have: 
(A) types of costumes (signifiers): the status, age, sex ... of the role; 
make-up designs: status, character, moral qualities and even some 
historical background of the role; the duster: the most exalted person; 
the gauze hat: officials; the great curtain: bed, canopy; the ornament 
weapons: the real weapons. 
(B) aria-types: various emotional tones; the specific subtle ways 
of singing and playing: varigated emotional overtones; the ways of 
artistically pronouncing words: the correspondent shades of aesthetic 
feelings. 
(C) gestures: pointing to some place, signifying some psychic states 
like bashfulness; stammering steps: astonishment, fear ... ; the patterned 
three laughs: several psychic states like pleasure, mocking or threatening. 
In contrast to the so-called "poetic nature" of film language em-
phasized by the late Italian director Passolini, for example, the Kunqu 
with strong visual elements has instead a well-established vocabulary 
and a strictly-formed syntax. Therefore stratification and signification of 
the Kunqu are a multiplicity of several formative dimensions. Firstly we 
have the sets of the fixed rules of stylizations which form a basic frame 
for signifying; secondly, the mechanical and precise performance of 
the stylized patterned designs of various strata, conveying the basic 
meanings or denotations of the elements; finally, the actors' creatively 
performing actions within the basic frame. It is understandable that the 
above first and second dimensions are only equivalent to grammatical 
levels, while the third is tantamount to the aesthetic level. A grammatical 
writing does not mean a beautiful writing, similarly a "grammatically" 
performing does not mean a beautiful performing. For the Kunqu 
opera, its aestheticaT essence can only be expressed or realized by the 
excellent virtuosity of the individual performers. 

146 
YOU ZHENG LI 
2. THE SO-CALLED REPRESENTED OBJECTS IN 
THE KUNQU OPERA 
Ingarden correctly points out the radical divergence between the actual 
world (we call it WI here) and the represented world in the work of art 
(we call it W2 here). Although the correspondent elements of the two 
worlds can have the same meaning (or signified), they have different 
referents, namely the one is real, while the other is intentional. But I 
think Ingarden somewhat confuses the status and formation of the two 
worlds, when he deals with the problems of the third and the fourth 
strata of the literary work. Firstly, he does not make clear the relation-
ship between WI and W2, imagining both to have co-extensive realms 
and homologous formations. But as a matter of fact, the author, while 
producing his work, simply chooses the favored images of a definite 
number of objects of WI as the material of W2 which is not intended 
to be a complete and sufficiently detailed one. During the process of 
writing or drawing, the writer or painter could dimly have a shadowy 
contour of a whole imaginary world termed as W2 in his mind, but 
most of its parts will not appear (never being effectively created) in W2 
or the so-called diegesis. Therefore, the number of the produced 
objects (that really appear in the work) of W2 is bound to be quite 
limited. In fact, the author does not imagine every detail of the 
imaginary world and every detail used by him in the creative process 
will not necessarily be accepted in the finally established diegesis. As a 
result, only the finally chosen objects in the finished work can be 
genuinely relevant or component elements of W2. Naturally W2 must 
be a schematized or sketchy one, or, metaphorically speaking, a skeleton 
with little flesh. In WI we (as localized finitude) can only have a 
schematized experience too, but we can empirically postulate the 
existence of a whole world. Nevertheless, in W2 such kind of postulation 
is either irrelevant or unnecessary. What matters in a fictive world is 
only the intentional selection and arrangement of images of elements of 
WI. And the process of selection and arrangement of those images 
itself immanently leads to the schematization of W2's appearance. If so, 
what is the real meaning of the notion of "uncertainty spots?" If you 
take the uncertainty spots in W2 as what is not expressed in the work, 
then we could sayan unlimited number of such spots "exists every-
where" (if the word has any intelligent meaning) in W2. If so, how can 
we try to fill them out one by one up to infinitude? What is called by 

INGARDEN'S '"STRATA-LAYERS" THEORY 
147 
Ingarden the act of filling out is only the aesthetic association which 
does not "belong to" the work itself or W2, but which only helps 
actualize the aesthetic experiences of readers, Association (from subject) 
and filling out (toward object) are different in their ontical suppositions. 
For the notion of filling out hints the existence of a pre-established 
whole world, and the task of readers or audience is to find the elements 
of this world. Of course, readers often use their imagination to color or 
enrich the original descriptions contained in the work and even auto-
matically create some new objects which do not appear in W2. Those 
new objects created by the reader, however, are only additional to 
nature rather than inherently component parts of the work. Structurally, 
we had better make a difference between "the work itself" and the 
reader's reaction, although the connection between the two parts is the 
necessary condition of realizing the whole process of aesthetic activities. 
Consequently, the notion of concretization merely means a union of the 
work and the reaction of the reader rather than making appear com-
pletely a potentially pre-established imaginary world. And the so-called 
schematized aspects are only aesthetically relevant aspects rather than a 
miniature of a postulated diegesis full of potential details. For example, 
when we are watching Monet's Rouen Cathedral, what is relevant here 
are only the foggy contours of the temple-building on his canvas rather 
than its real shapes with every observable detail. The "real" or clearly 
seen shapes do not matter here. As for the modern arts of this century, 
the images of W I are further reduced or distorted to elements of pure 
material which are joined in producing a new work with other elements. 
Even for the cinema scenes on the screen do not amount to the 
reproductions of some corners of the actual world, and what appears 
on the screen are only subjectively chosen artistic elements from the 
film-maker's creative use. Consequently, Bazin's so-called ontological 
realism is not true. 
When Ingarden says: " ... he (the observer) fills out its schematic 
structure, replenishing at least in part the areas of indeterminacy and 
actualizing various elements which are as yet only in a state of poten-
tiality" and " ... the concretion of the work is not only reconstruction 
thanks to the activity of an observer of what was effectively present in 
the work, but also a completion of the work and the actualization of 
its moments of potentiality," 3 terms like "potential," "actualization," 
"complete" in the quoted lines just demonstrate his tendency to mix up 
the on tic status of WI and the status of W2. Consequently we can 

148 
YOU ZHENG LI 
assert that what does not appear in the work does not "exist" inW2, or 
rather is not an inherent part of the latter. 
Owing to the very nature of the realist novels considered by Ingarden, 
the confusion between WI and W2 is more liable to be brought about. 
However, the Kunqu opera as a symbolic and unrealist art, because of 
its obviously unrepresentational nature, could be more easily taken as a 
proof for the non-existence of a whole diegesis in W2. The story or the 
content of plot is the main source of representational elements of the 
work of this performance art, for it is often said to be modeled on the 
appearance of WI. However, despite similarity between the appearance 
of WI and that of W2, the plot is not designed to reproduce the objects 
of WI, but only to make use of the latter to project the author's own 
idea. In the process of the production of the work, the images of some 
objects of WI are used merely as material for the purpose of creating 
fictive, schematized scenes of W2. As for the plot of the Kunqu 
presented through the visual and auditory media, its W2 is doomed to 
be the most schematized one during its unfolding on the stage. In 
essence, the plot is frequently reduced to a skeleton or narrative 
scheme on which various artistically expressive elements depend. So 
we could rather regard the temporal sequence of the plot here as a 
quasi-spatial situation. By the way, the contrast between narrative and 
situation is also characteristic of other Chinese traditional arts. 
In contrast to many other types of local musical dramas much richer 
in mediocre tale-tellings, the essence of the Kunqu does not consist in 
presenting the story itself. Instead it only utilizes the fairly sketchy 
narrative line as a means to he,lp perform an aesthetic compound of the 
music, the song, the verse and the dance. In a word, the simplified story 
becomes a rather obscure background conducive to projecting a lyrical 
or poetic situation on the stage. The images or the distorted images of 
W I are subtly manipulated as tools to form a symbolically expressed 
fictive land. Certainly, there are many signs in the play hinting at some 
historical or purely imaginary events or background, but those signs 
function only as "cultural codes" to guide the aesthetic appreciation of 
the audience. Besides, another strong proof of insignificance of the 
story itself or of its non-existence of a full fictive world is that the 
custom of performance of the Kunqu has been typical in presenting a 
few (regularly four) isolated acts (called "zhe") belonging to different 
operas rather than a full-length play originally containing many acts (for 
a time, in its beginning period, a piece of opera could even last up to 

INGARDEN'S "STRATA-LAYERS" THEORY 
149 
two or three days) in one show, Some modern researchers of the 
Kunqu often say that the custom of presenting the cut-off acts rather 
than the whole piece shows paucity of the dramatic power of the Kunqu 
as a performance art.4 Of course, in its historical development, the 
Kunqu, under strong competition with other more popular and vulgar 
local operas stressing plot-centeredness, began to consciously avoid the 
popular way of presenting the full-length dramas and turn to the 
direction of concentrating on the refinement of the major acts in the 
pieces, In my opinion, however, the direction of performance of the 
Kunqu is an active rather than passive reaction. Therefore, the artists of 
the Kunqu tended more and more to present a combination of the 
isolated acts chosen from several different pieces in one show. And the 
successful experiments prove that it is unnecessary to present a com-
plete story in a matinee or an evening performance. On the other hand, 
the acts of a drama missed in a show recede into the background of the 
audience's imagination. Over the time-honored practice they found out 
the single act with high artistic quality could be a more ideal and 
suitable performing unit for projecting a lyrical situation, and the 
performance of one single act could unburden them from the bondage 
of some aesthetically insignificant parts of a narrative so as to more 
freely execute its aesthetic function. 
It is clear that the represented world of the story of the Kunqu 
consists of a set of real objects (the real things from WI on the stage as 
the signifiers) and a multiplicity of potential realms from the historical 
and fictive stories as the signifying remainders in the audience's mind; 
the former is the actual and the latter is the potential, but both are 
schematized. The elements of the various realms are only the signifiers 
being used quasi-a temporarily in a quasi-spatial lyrical situation. Here 
the story is similar to a neutral skeleton to carry a great number of the 
signifying beads composing a system of melodies, poems, dancing and 
acrobatics. Consequently, the notion of a logical sequence of W2 can 
only be taken quite loosely. It is obvious that it cannot be grasped as a 
representation of the correspondent logical sequence of WI. In addition, 
the symbolic appearance of various elements (the prescribed types of 
costumes, props, gestures, make-ups, etc.) can effectively create a 
"distance" from the real world so as to obstruct any possible intention 
of "filling-out." So it is quite doubtful when Ingarden says: " ... if in a 
small poem a single state or in one situation, it is still always repre-
sented as something existing in an extensive objective whole: a more or 

150 
YOU ZHENG LI 
less determined background, which, along with the represented objects, 
constitutes an ontic sphere, is always present." 5 As we argued before, 
the audience, by watching or listening to a performance, does not try 
to concretize or complete by imagination a fictive world, instead it is 
only ready to effectively react to the stimulation of an organized set 
of artistic elements (namely those belonging to classes A, B, C in the 
schema of the Kunqu). In other words, a piece of the Kunqu opera 
amounts to a dynamic mechanism which functions to aesthetically 
evoke the emotional reactions of audience, while the representational 
function here is minimalized to the extreme. 
3. INGARDEN'S THEORY OF VALUE STRUCTURE 
Ingarden's thought shows an obvious consistency in its development, 
despite alternatively having different focuses at different stages. It might 
be remarked that all subjects of his research work compose a coherent 
whole whose constructive order seems as follows: man, ontology, 
axiology, value theory and stratification theory of literature. However 
the last subject was taken up by him first. (It is said that his intention to 
deal with the subject of man was dissuaded by Husserl at the very 
beginning; similarly Husserl did not like Scheler's axiological work). 
Later his considerations of value problems became more and more 
important on his academic schedule. But his value studies have always 
been interwoven with his general ontological system, which had re-
mained in conformity with the orientation of the earlier period of this 
century. That is the time of Neo-Kantianism, Scheler, and Hartmann; 
thus the topics of value, ontology and realism were predominant. We 
should notice that this intellectual ambience has been always the frame-
work of Ingarden's axiological efforts. Therefore, whether in the field of 
value or in the field of his earlier stratification studies, he shows an 
inner split and tension between the ontological line and the empirically 
structural line. I suppose his later theory of the three (neutrally, artisti-
cally and aesthetically) valent qualities is a natural development along 
the structural line. No doubt, this value theory is certainly his original 
contribution to contemporary philosophical aesthetics (while this direc-
tion has been gradually declining in contrast to the flourishing of 
various "theories" of literature and arts). According to his idea, the 
axiological hierarchy consists of five levels or categories, namely the 
neutral, the artistic, the aesthetic, the aesthetic value, and the aesthetic 

INGAR DEN'S "STRATA-LAYERS" THEORY 
151 
objects, with the former three being the basic or component ones. 
Among these three, the notion of neutral qualities is clear, but the 
difference between the artistic qualities and the aesthetic qualities is 
indeed ambiguous. For example, in his article "Artistic Value and 
Aesthetic Value" he offers the five criteria for the artistic value, among 
them (3) and (4) show "the characters of the work itself" and (2) shows 
that these qualities exist only in the qualities of the work itself.6 That 
means: "artistic value ... is something which consists in the work of art 
itself and has its existential ground in that." 7 And on pages 100-103 
he gives many examples of artistic qualities, such as clarity, transpar-
ence, lucidity, precision ... etc. If we specifically take them as purely 
perceptual terms, they indeed exist in the work itself, thus they become 
physical descriptions rather than aesthetic descriptions. But as a matter 
of fact, these terms or qualities can also in some cases or for some 
specific attitudes directly evoke pleasant feelings and thus become 
aesthetic ones. Moreover, his table of aesthetic qualities is even less 
definite, for he asserts: 
Aesthetic value is ... something which manifests itself only in the aesthetic object and 
as a particular moment which determines the character of the whole. The ground of 
aesthetic value consists of a certain aggregation of aesthetically valuable qualities .... ' 
If he takes the sentences as the definition of aesthetic value, his 
argument is similar to a tautology. Here his strategy is to replace the 
aesthetic value with the aesthetic object and then let the former and the 
latter justify each other. Besides, in his article "Das Problem des 
Systems der asthetisch valenten Qualitaten" he divided about 200 
aesthetic qualities into nine c1asses.Y But it is easily seen that the third 
sub-class "perceptual moments" of the first class of "material moments" 
and the sub-class "pure objects" of the second class of "form moments" 
can hardly be clearly distinguished from the artistic qualities. At least 
these two kinds of moments can be described physically as well as 
somewhat aesthetically in different situations, just like the above-men-
tioned typical artistic qualities. lo Consequently it is not easy to draw a 
clear demarcation line between artistic and aesthetic qualities. 
In the table of Ingarden's aesthetic qualities, existence (or appear-
ance) of them, in fact, has an inner connection with the aesthetic 
reaction of the subject. But for the purpose of avoiding subjectivism of 
value and considering the fact of the persistence of aesthetic attraction 
of some works of art, he emphasizes their belonging to the so-called 

152 
YOU ZHENG LI 
aesthetic object. He once said: "It is part of their (i.e. aesthetic qualities) 
essence that they are ontically dependent characters of something 
which carries them." II But we would like here to ask what are the 
meanings of words like "carries," "dependent," and "something" (or "the 
work itself")? His way to overcome the ambiguities is to use the 
concepts of "potential" and "concretization" once again. So we read: 
"Only when the work of literary art attains adequate expressions in a 
concretization is there -
in an ideal case -
a full establishment, an 
intuitive exhibition, of all of these qualities." 12 Then we further read: 
" ... the work of literary art constitutes an aesthetic object only when it 
is expressed in a concretization." 13 In the same page he continues: 
Taken in isolation, apart from its concretization, it is only a 'work of art' .... It is not 
the concretization itself which is the aesthetic object, rather the literary work of art 
taken precisely as it is expressed in a concretization in which it achieves its full 
incarnation. 14 
From the above paragraphs we could infer that "aesthetic object equals 
(objective) work plus (subjective) concretization." The left item is not 
equal to either of the right items but to the addition of the two. It is 
obvious that the aesthetic value or object is an organic combination of 
the physical object and the psychological subject; while Ingarden does 
not follow this more reasonable line of argument (although, I think, in 
some way he also cherished it himself), he tended to use the concept 
"actualization of the potential" to attach aesthetic value to the work of 
art as an independent object so as to be in conformity with his aesthetic 
realism. 
As for the concept of aesthetic value, I tentatively suggest here to 
take a relational position, so that we can show it in schema II. 
Schema II 
0 
R 
S 
object 
aesthetic value 
subject 
(beauty as a name of relation) 
work 
reader 
From the angle of "0" we can agree with Ingarden's remark: Artistic 
values ... belong to the work itself and primarily consist of a certain 

INGARDEN'S "STRATA-LAYERS" THEORY 
153 
efficacy inherent in the work and some of its components and prop-
erties -
the efficacy ... of affecting the perceiver and awakening his 
aesthetic experience .... " 15 But from the angle of "S", the focus can be 
placed on the aesthetic reaction of the subject. And from the angle of 
"R", the beauty (this special kind of relation) simply signifies that 0 and 
S are involved in a special relationship called "beauty." So "beauty" is 
not the name of some individual quality but the name of a relation with a 
special nature. If so, we no longer need Ingarden's realistic "autonomous 
value" or metaphysical entity and naturally recognize that confirmation 
of the establishment of "R" is directly offered by aesthetic experience of 
S rather than by some qualities inherent in the work itself. Thus we 
could say R is a function of 0 and S, while 0 and S consist respectively 
of several component elements. Consequently, an effective "encounter" 
is the result of interaction between various related elements. Further-
more, the elements of 0 can be purely perceptual and "artistic" (here 
covering Ingarden's artistic and aesthetic qualities both), while the 
elements of S can be divided into three parts of the individual physical-
psychological factors, the general cultural factors (formed by the sur-
roundings) and the special cultural factors (formed by the peculiar 
career and experience of the individual). Then we will not say 0 
contains some innate aesthetic qualities, but for the sake of showing the 
relative stability of aesthetic efficacy of some artistic elements, we 
instead may say 0 contains a group of perceptual elements (appearing 
in a form of artistic arrangements) which at the outset of the establish-
ment of the work of art once aroused in some way the aesthetic feeling; 
this historical fact itself conventionally places the work forever into the 
widely accepted category of "art." But this phenomenon of classification 
does not mean that it will all the time evoke a similar aesthetic feeling 
in the audience or in readers. And when, where, to whom, how strongly 
and how long the work evokes aesthetic feeling depends on the condi-
tions and states of S. In our description 0 remains unchanged forever 
(what changes is only its efficacy), whereas S as a person is subject to 
the changes of time, place, and cultural conditions, thus being constantly 
changeable. Consequently if the aesthetic attitude of S to one work of 
art is often changing, so R will change too. In effect, the aesthetic 
attitude and capability of S are highly culturally and socially determined. 
If we could put aside some of Ingarden's transcendental concepts of 
value, his idea might still be interpreted in conformity with our revised 
formula of value. For example, we can attend to his following remark: 

154 
YOU ZHENG LI 
"And for all that this object is something standing in relation to the 
observer and his experience, it is at the same time transcendental (a 
separate self-subsistent whole) just as much as is the work of art or any 
other existentially independent natural thing which exists of its own 
right." II> And he even definitely says: " ... we can assert that the 
existence of values is not the result or consequence of the fact that the 
human subject cognizes the object which has the value." 17 So I try to 
say that if we substitute the former term "value" with "R" and the latter 
term "value" with a phrase "connection with R", then the term "not" in 
the sentence could be safely erased. 
4. CONCLUSIONS 
Keeping our relational concept of aesthetic value in mind, we can 
reformulate Ingarden's structure of aesthetically valent qualities as 
follows. We shall tentatively say that what is taken by him as "inherent 
in the work" are two kinds of qualities instead of three. We call them 
Q1 (q1, q2, ... qn) and Q2(q'l, q'2, ... q'n), here q1, q2, ... and q' 1, 
q' 2 ... are the individual elements of classes Q 1 and Q2. Q 1 is of 
purely perceptual nature and aesthetically neutral, while the elements of 
Q2 are of artistic (man-made) nature. In a community there possibly 
exists a Q3 which is part of Q2 and capable of evoking, under certain 
conditions, aesthetic feelings. Here Q 1 and Q2 remain unchanged so 
long as the work is established, while existence of Q3, i.e. a special part 
of Q2, is dependent. If so, we can have a formula Q3 = R(Q2, S). 
When you say "elements of Q3 are inherent in the work," it only means 
that the physical carriers of the elements of Q3 are part of Q2. It is 
probable that the permanent overlapping of the elements of Q3 and the 
correspondent ones of Q2 is the cause of a realist phantasy, for the 
elements of Q2 are indeed inherent (in a physical sense) in the work. 
And the additional "morpheme" called "the aesthetic" here is only the 
effect of elements of some Q2 on S which are naturally frequently 
alterable. In our revised formulation we can say that classes A, B, C of 
the expression plane of the Kunqu opera discussed in section (1) all 
belong to Q1 (as the material for the formation of art) and Q2, the 
latter, contrary to literature, are still changeable. Because the artistic 
skills and the potential of the actors to actualize the pre-established 
performance rules of various kinds are necessarily involved in the 
formation of Q2 -
the effective signifiers are the thorough mastery of 

INGARDEN'S "STRATA-LA YERS" THEORY 
155 
the required technique, But in our present argument we can presuppose 
that Q2 in the Kunqu has remained unchanged for a period of time (i.e. 
the Kunqu actors are qualified enough in their performing skills). Then 
some of the Q2 elements can continually become elements of Q3 under 
the specific conditions of S and the surroundings. Thus the organic 
whole of elements of Q3 can bring about their effective influence, with 
a certain power, length and scope during their active life. 
Now we can conclude that in our formula R = f(O, S), if 0 is fixed, 
then the only variable is S which itself is also determined by multiple 
factors; so R depends on S. Concerning the Kunqu opera, its fate, 
presupposing its formation is effective enough, mainly depends on the 
states and qualities of its audience which have changed so much since 
the beginning of Chinese modernization. We have to search for many 
related factors in order to explain the axiological problems of the 
Kunqu rather than focus only on the immanent ones. 
Chinese Academy of Social Sciences 
NOTES 
I Rf. the table of contents of Poetik containing the titles of 27 chapters, in Gegenstand 
und Aufgaben der Literaturwissenschaft, Rolf Fieguth (ed.), Tiibingen, 1976. 
~ Rf. C. Metz: "On Cinematographical Language," in Movies and Methods, B. Nichols 
(cd.). Berkeley, 1976, p. 586 . 
.1 See: Ingarden: "Artistic and Aesthetic Values," Selected Papers in Aesthetics, Peter 
McCormick (cd.), Miinchen-Wien, 1985, p. 92. 
4 Rf. Lu Shu Cang & Li Ping: "the resultant custom of performing isolated Zhe's 
forcefully shows the wane of the Kunqu opera, because it explains the shortage of good 
scripts", in "Perspective from the Artistic Value and History of the Kunqu," On Chinese 
Classical Novels and Operas, Zhao Jing Shen (cd.), Shanghai, 1985, p. 171. 
5 See Ingarden: The Literary Work of Art, Evanston, 1973, p. 218. 
" Rf. Selected Papers of Aesthetics, p. 97. 
7 See ibid. p. 98. 
x See ibid. p. 98. 
o Rf. Ingarden: "Das Problem des Systems der iisthetisch valenten Qualitiiten," in 
Erlebnis, Kunstwerk und Wert, Tiibingen, 1969, pp. 184-186. 
III Actually Ingarden recognizes: "these artistic qualities ... are able to manifest them-
selves to the observer only at the moment when the latter achieves some apprehension 
of the work itself .... The observer must of course succeed in achieving this appre-
hension and appreciative commerce ... ," in Selected Papers in Aesthetics, p. 96. This 
paragraph shows that for Ingarden the artistic qualities cannot be separated from the 
observer. 

156 
YOU ZHENG LI 
II See: The Literary Work of Art, p. 370. 
12.13.14 Ibid. p. 372. 
" See: Selected Papers in Aesthetics, p. 20. 
16 Ibid. p. 98. 
17 See: Ingarden: Man and Value, If. by A. Szylewicz, Miinchen-Wien: Philosophia 
Verlag, 1983, p. 123. 

JOSEPH P. STRELKA 
ROMAN INGARDEN'S "POINTS OF 
INDETERMINATENESS": A CONSIDERATION OF 
THEIR PRACTICAL APPLICATION TO 
LITERARY CRITICISM 
In his books The Literary Work of Art and The Cognition of the 
Literary Work of Art, I Ingarden deals with an aesthetic phenomenon 
for which he coined the well formulated name "Unbestimmtheitsstellen", 
or "Points of Indeterminateness."2 Due to the special structure and the 
connotative character of the language of a literary work of art, this 
phenomenon constitutes one of the most essential elements of such a 
work and is of greatest significance for Literary Criticism. Although 
Ingarden points out the importance of Points of Indeterminateness to 
some extent, his pioneering and all-embracing work on the theory of 
the arts and especially of literature forces him to limit the discussion of 
it to the "stratum of presented objects", the third of the four strata or 
layers which, according to his theory, establish the work in its entirety; 
hence, he has devoted not more than ten pages in his first and seven 
pages in his second book to this problem. 
The above-mentioned third stratum consists of the unreal, fictional 
and imaginative world which embraces the people, things, processes, 
and events of a given work of art. In the traditional phrasing of Criti-
cism, it deals with the characters and the plot of the literary work. 
As Ingarden has quite correctly established, even the objectification, 
or the transition from the intentional states of affairs to the objects 
presented in the literary work, of very c1earcut and simple factual 
descriptions involving no points of indeterminateness can create diffi-
cult problems. The reason for these difficulties is that the presented 
objects are rarely static but change and develop during the unfolding of 
the literary work. These developments are presented in a multiplicity of 
states of affairs, and the objectification has to take into account all 
phases of the process. 
The individual objects are not only enriched by new attributes and appear later as 
objects with different determinations than they previously had. They are also constantly 
entering into new connections and relationships with other objectivities of the portrayed 
world and are freed from those relationships which had previously been binding. This 
157 
Hans H. Rudnick (ed.), Analecta Husserliana, Vo!. XXX, 157-169. 
© 1990 K1uwer Academic Publishers. 

158 
JOSEPH P. STRELKA 
whole play of events, and all that takes part in it, is portrayed in states of affairs and 
undergoes this or that mode of objectification during reading. Consequently, it is 
apprehended as what is 'objectively' present in the portrayed world.' 
The adequate reader in an adequate act of reading which Ingarden calls 
"active" reading can objectify the given states of affairs to quite some 
extent. The dynamic character of the unfolding of the literary work with 
time, which might be enlarged by an equally dynamic development of 
the reader's mind and state of mind, explains to some degree the 
possible differences of single individual concretizations, even if the 
same literary work is read by the same reader at different times. 
However, as far as the objectifications of definite given states of affairs 
are concerned, a fair amount of correct cognition can be achieved. 
The problem of cognition becomes increasingly more difficult if it 
comes to the concretization of the entire stratum of presented objects, 
which includes the so-called points of indeterminateness. Ingarden 
considers these "points" the major criterium which radically separates 
the intentionally created, presented objects of the literary work from 
individual empirical objects in real life. The particular constitutive 
nature of the latter is a concrete unity of its constituent properties, and 
of the particular (concrete) determinants of these properties. In differ-
ence to such a unity the intentionally created objects as presented on 
the aesthetic level of a literary work are made up by adding single, 
chosen determinants and even the greatest possible number can never 
reach (and accomplish) the total number of necessary determinants, 
which is infinite. 
Ingarden holds quite correctly, that most readers are unaware, 
during the act of the reading of a literary work, of any "gaps," which are 
constituted by the points of indeterminateness. They are also not aware 
of the fact that they usually unconsciously complete and fill at least 
some of these gaps.4 
The example which can most easily make many readers aware of 
these points of indeterminateness is probably the literary text of a play. 
Some, if not many, of the points of indeterminateness of the dia-
logues of the text itself are completed and filled by the stage directions 
of the author. These points' aesthetic significance is rarely fully under-
stood.5 Even more of the points of indeterminateness are completed 
and filled by each performance of the play. From the casting to the 
actors' body language, gestures, and facial expressions, a special way of 
dealing with these points of indeterminateness is doubtlessly established. 

INGARDEN'S "POINTS OF INDETERMINATENESS" 
159 
However, due to the deliberately subjective approach of many directors, 
certain single performances may open the door to most inadequate 
completions of these points. 
Fortunately, directors sometimes try to come to grips with the true 
meaning and structure of a play. I remember the first performance of 
Jura Soyfer's play "Vineta" after World War II in a small theater in 
Vienna in the late Forties. In the morning after the premiere I met a 
friend who was a theater critic for a student newspaper, and who had 
attended the performance. He was surprised to find out that I had read 
the play of whose existence he had not known until the performance, 
which I had not seen. "How would you characterize the play in one 
sentence?" he asked, still searching for a catchy title for his review. "A 
true, full blooded human being among masks," I answered. "You really 
have not seen the performance?" "No. Why?" "Because with the excep-
tion of the protagonist Johnny, the director had all other actors wear 
masks." 
In a certain way that was completing an important quality of the 
play's plot by spelling out what was implied but not expressed. Some 
point left open had been closed. This is not to say that two people 
arriving independently at the same conclusion prove an adequate 
completion, as two people may easily arrive independently at the same 
incorrect conclusion. But in this case, at least, a close reading of the text 
will reveal conclusively that here -
to use the splendid phrasing of 
E. M. Forster -
the protagonist Johnny represents the only "round 
character" in the play, and that he is set in opposition to all the other 
"flat characters" of the play. 
I chose the example of the performance of this play because it brings 
out clearly a seemingly paradox and really important general character-
istic of the filling of points of indeterminateness: the "round" character 
of the protagonist Johnny contains many more specifically given qualities 
of determined description of his personality, and therefore less points 
of indeterminateness, than the other "flat" characters in the play. 
According to a superficial, mechanical approach, one could expect that 
many more unforeseen and surprising moves and developments of 
behavior should be expected from the flat characters, which have many 
more points of indeterminateness, but in reality, the exact opposite 
holds true. 
The above is a rather simple example, although it is important for 
the play in question. We may remember, however, that Ingarden distin-

160 
JOSEPH P. STRELKA 
guishes between two different kinds of points of indeterminateness: 
firstly, those which can be "removed" due to specific qualities of the 
text itself which make adequate completion possible; secondly, those 
points of indeterminateness for which the states of affairs expressed by 
a certain literary work don't suffice to bring about a limited variety of 
adequate completions.1> 
Besides Ingarden's separation between the literary work itself as a 
stratified object with its own ontic basis on one hand, and the con-
cretizations of the work by its readers (listeners, etc.) on the other hand, 
it is mostly the latter type of points of indeterminateness which, 
ironically, has encouraged representatives of the so-called "reception-
aesthetics" to turn completely away from the work itself and to 
acknowledge only its different concretizations as the sole and equally 
valid cases of understanding. This turn toward a deliberate sUbjective 
conclusion is not only a misunderstanding and misuse of Ingarden's 
thoughts, but a hopeless resignation of meaningful scholarly literary 
criticism.7 
There is no doubt that Ingarden distinguished between right and 
wrong possible completions of the first kind of points of indeterminate-
ness for good reasons. Without modifying Ingarden's distinction between 
the two different types of points of indeterminateness, I would like to 
call the first kind, which can be removed relatively easily due to specific 
intrinsic qualities of the text itself the "directly solvable" or "directly 
completable" points of indeterminateness, and the second kind, the 
"indirectly solvable" or "indirectly completable" points of indetermi-
nateness. 
It is in the last sentence of paragraph 38 on the points of indeter-
minateness in which Ingarden reveals the way in which such a direct 
completion for the directly solvable points of indeterminateness can be 
found. He states here that it is the layer or stratum of schematized 
aspects, under which the presented objects appear, which actually 
makes their meaning apparent.~ In the case of the directly solvable 
points of indeterminateness, he means definitely intrinsic aspects of the 
text itself which were expressed in it by the author and become very 
clear. In the case of the quoted play of Jura Soyfer, for example, such 
revealing schematic aspects come into bearing already in the "prologue" 
of the play, in which the author explains his thoughts about the special 
meaning and position of the figure of Johnny. 
As far as the indirectly solvable points of indeterminateness are 
concerned, those in whose case the states of affairs expressed by a 

INGARDEN'S "POINTS OF INDETERMINATENESS" 
161 
certain literary work do not suffice in order to establish one particular 
adequate completion, I shall pick an especially extreme and difficult 
example, Even in this case, however, there is neither a reason nor any 
justification to resign from the aim of adequate cognition and to escape 
into the deliberate subjectivity of some readers' concretizations that 
cannot be verified by the control instance and last resort of the work 
itself. 
My example is a passage in Thomas Mann's novel Joseph in Egypt, 
in which the layer of presented objects consists almost completely of 
the double-meaning which simultaneously encompasses the modes of 
modern individual story telling and of the typically mythical. This 
duality has been described very well by Sem Dresden, who stated that 
Joseph and "the others are history and at the same time in a story."4 
I shall choose a point of indeterminateness of the passage which 
corresponds to some extent with the plot of the historical-biblical story 
of Moses, book I, chapter 37, verse 28. After the by-passing Israelites 
have rescued Joseph from the dry pit into which his brothers have 
thrown him, Thomas Mann described him as wearing a cloak with a 
hood and carrying a scroll. 
Writers mayor may not be aware of creating points of indeter-
minateness. In this case, however, Thomas Mann could not have 
explained how this particular point of indeterminateness should be 
filled, even if he had been asked directly after writing the passage. To 
be more precise: he could have explained, of course, the obvious literal 
meaning of the words, but not the mythical meaning hidden even to 
himself. 
However, his creative· spirit made him write, in difference and 
addition to the biblical story, that Joseph, while in the pit, anointed 
himself with the same oil which was used as a burial gift for the dead, 
who were to anoint themselves with it in another life. Mann also wrote 
that after Joseph faced the Midianite who took him to Egypt, he told 
him that he had lost his name because he had lost his life. Joseph must 
neither know his name nor his life, he said, since they had pushed the 
latter into the pit. 
It was only when, soon afterwards, Karl Kerenyi had sent Thomas 
Mann his article on Telesphoros, the little god of death of antiquity,IO 
that Mann realized the true additional meaning of the figure with cloak, 
hood, and scroll. He then called the coincidence which revealed its true 
nature "mysterious games of the spirit." II 
There is no doubt that however a point of indeterminateness is 

162 
JOSEPH P. STRELKA 
clarified and filled, it ought to be in a verifiable and adequate way and 
not by the hopelessly subjective means which can lead to misunder-
standing. Certainly, the extrinsic, schematized aspect which proved the 
meaning of the point of indeterminateness in question was actually 
brought to the author's attention only after he had written the passage. 
However, many other possibilities could, theoretically, have come into 
play: Thomas Mann could already have been aware of it when he wrote 
the passage or he could have become aware of it only decades later, or 
nobody might ever have become aware of it. The fact remains that the 
passage contains this meaning whether it is known or not and that the 
discovery of the meaning helps to deepen and to enlarge the under-
standing of the work. 
Let us invent for the sake of argument a Walt Disney cartoon: 
Mickey Mouse in a rainocat, a book under his arm, falls into a pit and 
is rescued by Pluto and Minnie Mouse. If a juvenile reader of the Fifties 
were to try to make a connection between this cartoon and the Thomas 
Mann passage, it would not have any bearing on the cognition of the 
passage at all. Even two, even thousands or an entire generation of such 
readers would not make a difference. They could playa certain role in 
the history of reception, but would remain unimportant for the true 
understanding of the passage itself. 
Ingarden's abstract and systematic mind unveils the points of in-
determinateness as the essential elements of a literary work if it is to 
function as a cohesive structure, culminating in the presentation of a 
self-contained, presented world. He also shows us different possible 
types of points of indeterminateness and the way in which their con-
cretization works. He mentions, however, only one or two practical 
examples: 
If. for instance, the color of Consul Buddenbrook's eyes -
in Thomas Mann's novel -
were not mentioned in Buddenbrooks (and I have not checked to see), then he would 
be completely undetermined in this respect. 12 
Ingarden hardly mentions the scope of artistic effects of points of 
indeterminateness. Since the early works of Thomas Mann are rooted 
in the period style of naturalism, and since naturalism draws its aesthetic 
affects from numerous precise descriptions, the blue color of Consul 
Buddenbrook's eyes is already established on the third page of the 
novel. However, it can be equally important or meaningless whether the 
color of a character's eyes is mentioned or not, and both ways of 

INGARDEN'S "POINTS OF INDETERMINATENESS" 
163 
treating the subject depend on the larger context, and on the specific 
way in which the presented objects unfold in a given literary work. 
In her early and rather weak fragment of a novel "Ein Edelmann," 
Marie von Ebner-Eschenbach uses points of indeterminateness in the 
plot as allusions in order to create artificial tensions through want of 
clearness. Unfortunately, most of the time, they have a clumsy or boring 
effect. On the other hand, the same author used points of indeter-
minateness in her later masterpiece, "Er lasst die Hand kiissen," in a 
most effective and superior way: 
When, for the first time, the countess sees the likable and handsome 
young man Mischka together with his girl friend and their child, her 
unconscious wishful thinking leaves no doubt in her mind that Mischka 
plays with his sister and her child. Confronted with the correct perspec-
tive of the same image, her moral outrage, her anger, and possibly her 
unconscious jealousy break open. 
Had the author used long and detailed "determined" explanations to 
explain all that, the effect would have been destroyed. The mere 
confrontation of the two images without any explanation on the other 
hand, has a truly powerful effect on the reader. 
Some of the greatest works of world literature draw some of their 
most powerful artistic effects from points of indeterminateness. One 
must only remember the famous passage in Dante's Commedia, where 
Francesca da Rimini tells the story of the beginning love between her 
and Paolo Malatesta and finishes the report abruptly with the famous 
sentence: 
Quel giorno pili non vi leggemo avante. 
This point of indeterminateness is so well chosen that the listening 
Dante faints over it. 
Hamlet's famous last words on stage are nothing but a kind of 
programmatic announcement of a point of indeterminateness when he 
utters: "The rest is silence." 
All the so-called to poi of Ineffability 13 hoil down to points of 
indeterminateness, and yes, indeed, most rhetorical tropes are at least 
related to them, since they do not determine anything directly, clearly, 
and literally, but involve as figures of speech a "'turn' or change of 
sense." Their use of a word "in a sense other than its proper literal one" 
at least borders, if not equals, points of indeterminateness. I 4 
Taking a critical view of the possibilities, limitations, and methods of 

164 
JOSEPH P. STRELKA 
completing places of indeterminateness reveals certain general patterns 
and criteria. One can draw analogies between this special act of cogni-
tion and other activities. The reconstruction by archeologists of a 
human face from an ancient skull would be one such parallel. The 
restoration of an old, damaged painting would be another. The con-
clusion from a newer, preserved copy to a lost original painting would 
be a third. 
We know, for example, from restoring old paintings that some 
elements can be restored fairly safely. The flattening of bubbles, the 
fixing of color, and the strengthening of the background wood or other 
material can be done without taking the risk that the original appearance 
of the painting will be altered. Furthermore, removing dirt and varnish 
layers does not create a big risk. On the other hand, it can become risky 
if places where the colors have totally disappeared are completed by 
the restorator. However, even here, there exist cases in which we know 
from reports or descriptiops what was there originally. It may also be 
possible to draw conclusions from parallel paintings. For example, we 
do know how Hugo van der Goes used to shape the tubes and straps of 
the Madonna's skirt. 
Similar problems are involved in filling out a literary place of 
indeterminateness, as in the Dante example quoted above. 
This day we did not go on reading. 
An unattentive, careless reader could come to the deliberate, subjective 
concretization that the two stopped reading merely because they ran 
out of time because Paolo wanted to go to a sports event and Francesca 
wished to attend a concert. 
The text itself, however, makes it very clear that they stopped 
reading because they fell overpoweringly in love with each other. They 
stop reading the book when they arrive at the place in the Lancelot 
novel where Galeotto requests that Ginevra kiss Lancelot. 
Dante actually does not give the names of the two unfortunate lovers 
when one of them tells the story. Only afterwards he reveals her name, 
addressing her as "Frances ca." Almost everybody in Italy at that time 
must have known that it must be the famous Francesca da Rimini, killed 
together with her brother-in-law by her husband. Indeed, Dante filled 
the place of indeterminateness himself by calling the girl "Francesca". 
According to the extrinsic schematic aspect of the actual historical 
story, it then became clear that it was this incident to which he referred: 

INGARDEN'S "POINTS OF INDETERMINATENESS" 
165 
The two lovers had only exchanged one kiss when the jealous husband 
interfered. In order to protect Paolo, Francesca stepped between the 
two brothers, which angered the husband even more. He stabbed both 
of them. 
The case in point is a good example to clarify that on one hand the 
passing down of the true, historical story and its knowledge help to 
enlarge the understanding of the passage. On the other hand, however, 
if we did not know about it, not too much harm would be done. The 
imagination of the individual reader would probably fill the place of 
indeterminateness with the picture of Paolo holding Francesca's hand 
or putting his arm around her shoulder. 
The important information that both lovers were killed is already 
given at the beginning of Francesca's report in the text. 
There can hardly be any doubt that it is the aim of scholarly criticism 
to use any possible means to retrieve all relevant information -
like the 
true historical story of Francesca and Paolo -
which will help to fill the 
place of indeterminateness in accordance with the text. If it should not 
be possible to come up with the necessary information for whatever 
reason -
be it that such information never existed, be it that it was lost 
over the years -
the place of indeterminateness can be filled in 
different ways within the limitations of the framework of the text. (The 
stopping of the reading because of a sports event is definitely not 
founded by any evidence within the text itself and is simply an incorrect 
concretization ). 
Up to a certain point within the framework of the text, the unleashing 
of a sensitive reader's imagination might even produce a tremendous 
aesthetic effect. 
Some places of indeterminateness are obviously shaped in such a 
way -
be it deliberately or unconsciously -
never to be filled in a 
direct, more or less complete way. For example, in Canto 34 of the 
Inferno (verse 24), Dante writes: 
Pero ch'ogni parlar sarebo poco 
then he uses the impossibility of expressing the state of his mind for a 
special aesthetic effect. 
Some places of indeterminateness, however, are shaped in order to 
be filled like the above mentioned verse about Francesca da Rimini. 
Finally, there exists a third possibility: passages which are not 
intended to be places of indeterminateness and which are very clearly 

166 
JOSEPH P. STRELKA 
determined at the time of their writing may transform, over the years, 
into places of indeterminateness. When, in his comedy "Twelfth Night", 
Shakespeare had his character Viola in man's clothes say that it was 
difficult for her to learn all the words of her message by heart, this was 
an allusion to the fact that the Czar of Russia had made his ambassador 
Mikulin at Queen Elizabeth's court learn the answers to all kinds of 
questions by heart. The audience of the premiere of the play under-
stood the allusion perfectly well and got a good laugh out of it. Later 
on, the allusion was forgotten, and the words turned into an invisible 
place of indeterminateness until the Canadian scholar Leslie Hotson 
reconstructed the first performance of the play in detail and so redis-
covered the original meaning of the allusion. 
This means that there are many more places of indeterminateness 
present in literary works in more important functions than what meets 
the eye at first glance. 
What literary device, then, is not a point of indeterminateness? And 
are these points of indeterminateness really limited to Ingarden's third 
stratum of presented objects? In his two major books on the literary 
work of art, Ingarden treats them exclusively within the framework of 
this third stratum. In the case of one certain type, he even claims that its 
appearance is possible only within this one stratumY Another time, 
however, distinguishing between two other types of points of indeter-
minateness, he asserts that they only come into being because of a 
different peculiarity in the stratum of meaning-units. 16 Still another 
time, he makes it clear that at least "some of the ... strata," and 
especially the "objective stratum" (= presented objects) contain points 
of indeterminateness. 17 
Ingarden also points out that the literary genres can greatly differ as 
far as points of indeterminateness are concerned. His studies of the 
basic types of lyric poems, carried out in Lvov in 1934-35, showed 
that the points of indeterminateness play an especially great role in 
poetry. "And the more 'purely lyric' the poem is, the less -
roughly 
speaking -
is the effective determination of whatever is positively 
stated in the text; most things remain unsaid." 18 
This implies, however, that the points of indeterminateness can play 
a most significant role in the strata of sound formation and of meaning-
units. This is because the layer of presented objects usually dominates 
in narrative works and plays, while in poetry, mostly the first two layers 
prevail. 

INGARDEN'S "POINTS OF INDETERMINATENESS" 
167 
I should like to choose here, as a practical example, a poem of Paul 
Celan, entitled "Hier": 
Hier - das meint hier wo die Kirschbliite schwarzer sein will als dort 
Hier - das meint diese Hand, die ihr hilft, es zu sein. 
Hier - das meint jenes Schiff, auf dem ich den Sandstrom heraufkam: 
Vertaut 
Iiegt es im Schlaf, den du streutest. 
Hier - das meint einen Mann, den ich kenne: 
seine Schlafe ist weiss, 
wie die Glut, die er loschte. 
Er warf mir sein Glas an die Stirn 
und kam, 
als ein Jahr herum war, 
die Narbe zu kiissen. 
Er sprach den Fluch und den Segen 
und sprach nicht wieder seither. 
Hier - das meint diese Stadt, 
die von dir und der Wolke regiert wird, 
von ihren Abenden her. 
This poem is so purely lyric that hardly anything at all is "positively 
stated in the text." Here we are definitely not dealing with that kind of 
points of indeterminateness which can be "removed" due to specific 
qualities of the text itself. Positive statements are made, but not enough 
to understand the full meaning of the poem. One could perhaps juxta-
pose "partial" vis-a-vis "total" points of indeterminateness. In the latter 
case, nothing at all is revealed (for example about the color of the eyes 
of a character), while in the first case, something but not enough is 
revealed. 
For our case in point, the most important problem in completing the 
points of indeterminateness contained in the Celan poem was solved 
when James Lyon revealed an extrinsic fact of schematized objects (or 
adumbrations), which is the key to the basic understanding of it. 
As Ingarden has pointed out: 
If the reader is concerned ... with reconstructing and viewing in his concretization the 
form proper to the work. then he must not proceed arbitrarily in the actualization of 
aspects. For things and persons should not be merely intentionally projected by 

168 
JOSEPH P. STRELKA 
linguistic means in the literary work of art: they should also show themselves to the 
reader in appropriately selected aspects.'" 
James Lyon has done exactly that by handing us the essential key from 
the author's own perspective of schematized aspects when he reveals 
that the poem was originally planned as a "Hiroshima-poem."2o After 
this revelation, several and the most essential things in the poem fall 
into place, although some problems, like the man with the white temple, 
still remain rather mysterious. 
But even if Lyon had allowed us to clarify all the points of indeter-
minateness in the poem, he hastens to caution us that we should be 
careful, and not be satisfied with this alone, since it means a reduction 
of the poem to which such a revelation could lead just too easily. In 
Ingarden's terms: there is much left open even after the total clarifica-
tion of all points of indeterminateness (if that is even possible), like the 
concretization of the "metaphysical qualities" and of the "polyphony" of 
the entire structure. However, a consideration of each of these aspects 
would require an article of its own. 
State University of New York at Albany 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
Paul Celans poem "Hier" © 1955 Deutsche Verlags-Anstalt, Stuttgart is reproduced by 
kind permission of the publisher. 
NOTES 
, Roman Ingarden: Das literarische Kunstwerk, Tiibingen 1965, pp. 261-270. 
Roman Ingarden: Vom £rkennen des literarischen Kunstwerks. Tiibingen 1968, pp. 
49-55. 
2 I follow in most cases the English translations of Ingarden's special terms and 
concepts Eugene Falk's brilliant book The Poetics of Roman Ingarden, Chapel Hill 
1981. 
.1 Translation of Ruth Ann Crowley and Kenneth R. Olson: The Cognition of the Literary 
Work of Art. Evanston, Illinois 1973, pp. 46-47. 
4 Das literarische Kunstwerk, op. cit., pp. 267-68. 
j Cf. the pioneering attempt of Jacob Steiner: Die Biihnenanweisung, Gottingen 1969. 
6 Das literarische Kunstwerk, op. cit., p. 268. 
7 Cf. Wolfgang Iser: Der Akt des Lesens, Miinchen 1976, pp. 267-280. 
x Das literarische Kunstwerk, op cit., p. 270. 

INGARDEN'S "POINTS OF INDETERMINATENESS" 
169 
o Sem Dresden: Thomas Mann and Marcel Proust: On Myth and Antimyth. In: Joseph 
Strelka (ed.): Literary Criticism and Myth, University Park and London 1980, p. 33. 
III Offprint from "Egyetemes Philologiai Kiizliiny", Budapest 1933, p. 156 and seq. 
II Thomas Mann - Karl Kerenyi: Ge~prdche in Briefen. Zurich 1960, pp. 42-43. 
" The Cognition of the Literary Work of Art, op. cit., p. 50. 
1.1 Cf. Ernst Robert Curtius: Europdische Literatur und lateinisches Mitte!alter, Bern 
1948, pp. 166-69. 
I. C. Hugh Holman: A Handbook to Literature, Indianapolis 1972, p. 540. 
" Das literarische Kunstwerk, op. cit., p. 270. 
II, Das literarische Kunstwerk, op. cit., p. 266. 
17 The Cognition6fthe Literary Work of Art, op. cit., p. 50. 
IX The Cognition of the Literary Work of Art, op. cit., p. 52. 
10 The Cognition of the Literary Work of Art, op. cit., p. 57. 
", James K. Lyon: "Ganz und gar nicht hermetisch": Oberlegungen zum "richtigen" 
Lesen von Paul Celans Lyrik. In: Joseph Strelka (ed.): Psalm und Hawdallah. Zum 
Werk Paul Celans. Bern - Frankfurt - New York 1986. 

HANS H. RUDNICK 
ROMAN INGARDEN AND THE VENUS OF MILO 
Ingarden visited Paris as often as circumstances allowed. Besides being 
attracted by the inspiring cultural qualities of the city itself, he was 
particularly drawn to the Louvre and its prominently displayed and 
world-famous statue called the Venus of Milo. This more than life-size 
marble statue of a female figure was found in the Mediterranean Sea in 
1820 off the coast from the island of Milo or Melos, in the Aegean Sea 
south of Greece. 
Several statues of this type have come to us from Greek antiquity. 
They all seem to have been sculpted in Asia Minor during the third or 
second centuries B.C. by the best Greek artists in a distinct style, which 
indicates that there must have been a tradition of creating such statues 
in Greece and that such statues must have played an important role in 
the life of the ancient Greeks. The prototype for this kind of statue 
seems to have been of Corinthian origin that showed similar charac-
teristics of composition already during the fourth century B.c. 
The surviving statues of this type have all been given the Roman 
name of Venus. The Greeks called this goddess of love, beauty, and 
fertility Aphrodite. It was she who in Greek mythology received the 
apple from Paris during the beauty contest, gave Helen to Paris, 
protected him during the ensuing Trojan war, and saw to it that the 
Trojan people survived after the fall of Troy by allowing Aeneas, one of 
Aphrodite's sons, to escape with his father Anchises and his own young 
son Ascanius. After a short stay with Dido at Carthage, Aeneas left for 
Latium, destined to become the legendary founder of Rome, who in 
Virgil's Aeneid was able to see the future of his family in a pageant 
performed in the underworld and depicted on a masterwork of a shield 
which his mother Venus brought from Hephaestus for Aeneas before 
the duel with Tumus. Romulus, another legendary founder of Rome, is 
said to have also been of Trojan descent. Venus, Aeneas' divine 
mother, became the national goddess of Rome. The Julian family, to 
which Caesar belonged, traced itself back to Venus. Caesar built a 
temple for Venus to show how important this ancestry was for him. 
Since the Renaissance, Venus, the classical goddess of love, beauty, 
171 
Hans H. Rudnick (ed.). Analecla Husserliana. Vol. XXX. 171-17'). 
© 1990 KllIwer Academic Publishers. 

172 
HANS H. RUDNICK 
fertility, and the sexual act, has become for us the idealized female pro-
totype who has been frequently represented in works of art. Statuettes 
from the early stone age showing the female body are also referred to 
as representing "Venus". Art historians seem to have agreed that statues 
of Greek antiquity showing a female figure, mostly nude from the waist 
up, will be named Venus, and to distinguish among them, the name of 
where they were found has usually been added. For example, there is a 
Venus of Knidos, and a Venus of Cyrene; the Greek name Aphrodite is 
rarely used for these statues. 
It is important to notice that art historians have agreed upon a 
typology which is only possible 
1. when an object displays recurrent characteristic features and 
2. when the observer can identify them as characteristic. 
Artwork and observer must meet on the grounds of displaying and 
recognizing characteristic features contained in the work. A typifying 
feature, therefore, defines the work of art, concretizes its nature, 
removes it from among the many possibilities open to artistic creation, 
and allows recognition and classification. 
In the case of the statue found near Milo, art historians have 
designated the female figure as one such feature together with many 
other attributes such as the nudity above the waist, the attitude of head 
and body, the standing position, and the line of the shoulders as 
defining the Venus category. Arbitrary as such a definition may be, it 
still provides a more telling identification than "female nude statue", 
which does not imply a statue of classical provenance, nude only above 
the waist, and striking only a certain characteristic pose that helps 
define it as being within the established characteristic criteria attributed 
to a "Venus." 
In chapter 24 of The Cognition of the Literary Work of Art Roman 
Ingarden refers on more than ten pages to the Venus of Milo (Ingarden, 
1973, p. 175 ff). This is Ingarden's most extensive reference to this 
statue, although he had earlier devoted nearly as many pages of argu-
mentation to her in his 1937 lecture on "Das asthetische Erlebnis" at 
'the Second International Congress of Aesthetics in Paris (Ingarden, 
1937, pp. 54-60). Ingarden attached high value to this aspect of his 
work because he chose exactly this subject for publication in English 
translation. He must have thought that to the English aesthetic tradition 
this subject was most representative of his .work (Ingarden, 1960). He 
must have believed that addressing the subject of "aesthetic experience 

THE VENUS OF MILO 
173 
and the aesthetic object" would have a profound influence on English 
aesthetics. More plainly stated, he was speaking about stone represent-
ing a female figure (Ingarden, 1973, p. 184); he was addressing the 
question of "reality" captured by the arts and the "primeval emotion" 
(Ursprungsemotion) it evokes in the observer (Ingarden, 1968, p. 220; 
1973, p. 212 "original aesthetic emotion"!). 
We are speaking about the mysterious aesthetic transformation 
which manifests itself in the transition from the initial reality of the 
marble block into a new "reality", a "quasi" reality, as Ingarden would 
say, representing now, in its transformed state, a delicate female figure 
"with all her slenderness, agility, and grace" (Ingarden, 1968, p. 181). 
Ingarden asks: 
Have we never had the experience of drawing back the curtain from our window on an 
early spring morning and suddenly seeing the trees in our garden, which have blos-
somed overnight, shimmering in the bright sun against the blue sky? We are dazzled 
and quite delighted .... (Ingarden, 1973, p. 175). 
We have all experienced such a scene of nature as Ingarden describes 
here if we have cared to observe and allowed ourselves to open our 
senses during springtime to nature's miraculous transformation. We 
may ask, has nature not remained the same? The trees are still the same 
trees we see every day standing at the same place. Has something 
changed so that the trees have transcended their own Being within me? 
Do I suddenly see more today than there actually is? Am I stepping out 
of day-to-day reality into a realm of another dimension? Ingarden 
writes: 
And is it otherwise ... , when we wander through the halls of the Louvre in Paris and 
all at once, from afar, catch sight of the Venus de Milo, snow white against a dark 
background, in all her slenderness and agility and with the charm of her barely indicated 
movement? (Ingarden, 1973, p. 175). 
Are we not as astonished by the Venus of Milo as we are overwhelmed 
by the sudden appearance of Spring, Ingarden seems to ask. If I would 
not know the full cycle of the seasons, I would probably not be very 
excited. I would only notice a sudden and unusual change in the trees I 
am observing around me every day, but I doubt that I would be 
touched by the appearance of Spring. As someone who cannot perceive 
a full seasonal cycle of nature, I am unable to recognize the essence 
of Spring because the full context which informs such a cognition is 

174 
HANS H. RUDNICK 
mIssmg. I am not capable of the "Seinsanerkennungsmoment" which 
implies recognition of the particular "consonance of aesthetically sig-
nificant qualities" (Zusammenklang iisthetisch wertvoller Qualitiiten", 
Ingarden, 1968, p. 224). Only the successful aesthetic object will 
demonstrate its validity in the specific form that the work has assumed 
out of the many possible forms. The "Seinsanerkennungsmoment" lifts 
the successful work of art out of anonymity (Ingarden, 1968, p. 222; 
1973, p. 214, "moments of acknowledgement of existence"!). 
It is the aesthetic experience which reveals its qualities to me if I am 
asking questions like the ones I have just asked. The transformation 
from marble block into a work of art is as astonishing as the over-
whelming sudden appearance of Spring. Something that I have taken 
for granted and for unchangeably stable assumes a new dimension 
which forces me to revise my previous conception. In this process of 
Seinsanerkennung I am reorienting my coordinates of understanding by 
answering to a Ur!>prungsemotion (primeval emotion) prompted by the 
aesthetic event that has occurred inside me. Recognizing Spring as a 
primeval sign of the renewal of nature's life cycle is as much an aesthetic 
experience as recognizing in the Venus of Milo, though made of marble, 
the primeval beauty of the female figure. The blossoming trees in the 
garden and the chiselled marble block have been given a new meaning 
by my emotional reaction to them and by my recognizing their new 
being. I have transformed them into aesthetic objects. 
Evidence of this intricate interrelation between the aesthetic ex-
perience and the aesthetic object abounds. Seinsanerkennung and 
Ursprungsemotion must both simultaneously occur. The natural object 
must offer transformation into an aesthetic object by exhibiting a 
schematic characteristic of Being. When the primeval emotion recog-
nizes the underlying schema, the aesthetic object comes into being. 
I shall give a few examples to demonstrate the validity of this process 
of experiencing the aesthetic. Michelangelo's depiction of God and 
Adam in the Sistine Chapel shows God floating above Adam. God is 
looking toward Adam, his arm casually extended in Adam's direction, 
while Adam is looking upward with his arm and hand reaching toward 
God's hand. Their fingers nearly touch, but do not touch. In this gesture 
of nearly touching we see the Ursprungsemotion manifested which 
expresses the primeval human desire to touch God and be like him. But 
at the same time we also recognize the Seinsanerkennung which is 
expressed in the space or distance that nevertheless remains between 
the fingers which are not destined to touch. We are dealing here with the 

THE VENUS OF MILO 
175 
manifestation of aesthetic experience that is evoked by Michelangelo's 
painting in most perceptive people who contemplate his statement in 
the Sistine Chapel. 
Another example from Michelangelo's work that reveals the nature 
of the aesthetic experience is his sculpture of St. Matthew. This marble 
statue is unfinished but shows nevertheless, as one critic put it, a 
"heroic quality which seems to push it towards the very limits of 
struggle and torment, in an expression of primordial suffering. The 
figure seems to triumph over chaos." (Baldini, p. 46). This statue does 
not come near Michelangelo's fine workmanship of the completed Pieta 
or David. St. Matthew seems to be in a state of suspended completion 
which only hints at the perfection that other finished statues have 
achieved. Chisel marks are clearly visible, leaving a very rough surface. 
And yet, as the statue has hardly taken shape, as it is still half un-
finished stone and half emerging from the medium, the lines of the 
figure and its pose already convey the full power of the work of art, 
finished or not, for the observer. 
The same holds true for some works by Rodin. "Aurora" (1885), 
"Thought" (1886), and "The Hand of God" (1898) are also seemingly 
incomplete works by the standards just applied to Michelangelo's St. 
Matthew, because here, too, the figures are barely emerging from stone. 
Yet the observer has the clear impression that the works are complete, 
while they are still slavishly captured in matter. This is particularly 
obvious in "The Hand of God" where a carefully finished hand emerges 
from the rough stone holding the rest of the unfinished material which 
itself again reveals a couple in a pastoral scene. Matter, human life, and 
God's will are here simultaneously captured by Rodin in a primordial 
constellation which imposes the conditions of being human on the 
sensitive observer. 
It does not matter whether the work is finished or not; what matters 
is the essence captured by the artist. The artist who achieves the task of 
representing the essence of human Being is the great artist who has 
earned immortality. Among those modern sculptors who have success-
fully left the petty detail behind and have concentrated on the essential 
are Ernst Barlach and Henry Moore. Their statues have succeeded in 
embodying human essence into their work in the same way as Michel-
angelo and Rodin did. Their art elicits an aesthetic experience from the 
observer that entails the Ursprungsemotion and the Seinsanerkennung 
despite or even just because of the lack of finished detail. 
Petty detail, self-pity, and confused chaos cannot serve the essential, 

176 
HANS H. RUDNICK 
they can only cater to the momentary and the distractions of the 
particular. The silken marble of Bernini's statues may want you to touch 
the stone in order to admire the artist's workmanship and the wonderful 
quality of the marble, but the thusly confirmed reality of the representa-
tion does not tell us anything about the essence of the human condition. 
The female figure resting on the marble mattress remains a person 
of marble resting on marble. What is missing here is the important 
function of the aesthetic experience which Ingarden describes as "con-
stituting the aesthetic object" 
in the "realization" of quite specific values which can be concretized only in this way 
and ... in the realization of an emotional-contemplative experience of the harmony of 
aesthetically valuable qualities and ... also of the values founded in it (Ingarden, 1973, 
p.213). 
It is the work of art that has to project its demands toward the observer. 
It is he or she who must be able to "read" or perceive these qualities of 
the work of art. Work of art and observer must encounter each other 
on the grounds of the "Ursprungsemotion" and the "Seinsanerkennungs-
moment", which together constitute the aesthetic experience. Artists 
and mathematicians have tried to find a formula which would ade-
quately represent the aesthetic experience. 
At the very beginning of the sixteenth century Durer wrote a hand-
book of applied constructive geometry. At that time he thought he 
could capture aesthetics and aesthetic experience in a neat formula by 
using Euclid and other formulas representing the laws of approximate 
and exact construction. He distinguished between "mechanical" (lat.: 
mechanice) and "demonstrative" (lat.: demonstrative) construction and 
employed the rules of mediaeval Bauhiitten (Schroder, p. 10). Durer 
was obsessed with finding a solid theoretical foundation for his artistic 
work. He demonstrated what he had in mind by carefully employing his 
ideas in his 1514 etchings of St. Jerome and Melancholy. Both pictures 
are geometrically constructed to such a perfection that only careful 
analysis will reveal their schemata. But the formulas have not helped 
Durer to capture the essence of a work of art that constitutes the 
aesthetic experience. He always thought that it was the artist's task to 
make absolute beauty visible (Winzinger, p. 62), but he had to recog-
nize that this could not be achieved by formula as much as Einstein did 
not succeed in finding the absolute comprehensive formula that would 
satisfy his criterion of universal validity. In the end Durer admitted 

THE VENUS OF MILO 
177 
failure by saying "WaB aber dy schonheit sey, daz weis ich nit" (I do not 
know what beauty is). 
Durer's admission of failure only refers to the geometric representa-
tion of beauty. In his artistic works he had already demonstrated his 
ability to capture beauty as early as 1504 in the etching of Adam and 
Eve. This picture leaves the flatness of mediaeval art behind, restores 
the linkage with classical antiquity, and shows not only the beauty of 
the naked human body, but also their complicity as innocently and 
gracefully as the creator of the Venus of Milo captured her timeless 
beauty and grace. 
Ingarden was well aware of the fact that a formula will not suffice to 
define the work of art as a whole. He knew that merely being moved by 
the circumstances of fate, sexual emotion, and social, ethical, or religious 
ideals "has nothing in common with the aesthetic Unprungsemotion 
and the values that reveal themselves in the aesthetic experience 
(Ingarden, 1968, p. 221; 1973, p. 213). He was also aware, however, of 
those formulaic qualities that, despite the necessary existence of "gaps" 
and "points of indeterminateness", "appear more or less vividly in our 
imagination" (Falk, 1981, p. 231). The power of the imagination creates 
the Zusammenklang (Ingarden, 1968, p. 212; 1973, p. 204: "quality of 
harmony") of the observed qualities by ordering them on the basis of 
past experience. Since structure or unity must be assumed of any 
serious human expression, it is only natural that 
lelvery discipline consists of both an already established and articulated field of knowl-
edge, and a yet-to-be-explored realm of discovery. The boundaries of a field of knowl-
edge are determined by the constitutive nature of its objects. Their nature determines 
the problems that need to be solved and also the relevance of the mode and the 
appropriateness of the range of the inquiry. (Falk, p. 230). 
For Roman Ingarden, the Venus of Milo naturally inspired these 
insights. Her perfect shape as aesthetic object clarified the problematic 
of the aesthetic experience for him. Although she is marred by minor 
flaws and missing arms, she still conveyed her unimpeded aesthetic 
power to the observing Ingarden in the same way as an unfinished statue 
by Rodin or Michelangelo might convey its power to us. The inherent 
and implied unity of each successful work of art reveals itself to the 
observer in its "Zllsammenklang" that appeals to our imagination for 
concretization. Experientially grounded "Seinsanerkennllng" provides 
the unifying force for the concretization which cannot be primarily 

178 
HANS H. RUDNICK 
guided by formula. If it can at all be influenced, it can merely be 
secondarily controlled by rules of compatibility that lead toward a 
possible unity. 
Such secondary rules are employed regularly in the process of 
rational understanding and artistic creating. Whether the archeologist 
successfully reconstructs an ancient vase from a few fragments of 
terracotta, or whether an anthropologist reconstructs an extinct baby-
whale species from vertebrae fossils, these secondary markers become 
primary in the specific reconstruction process which is nothing else but 
a concretization guided by compatibility toward unity, combining em-
pirical validity and formal consistency. The French theoretical archeo-
logist Jean-Claude Gardin recently put it this way: 
seriously, anyway, as long as we have not grown into the habit of grounding on explicit 
and reproducible reasoning -
mathematical or other -
the definition of the space and 
time series on which most of our explanatory constructions are based ... it is fairly 
obvious that the ways in which Itypologiesl have become "established" are not those of 
reason alone. A more efficient strategy is to combine in the same process, as types are 
being generated, the requirement of empirical validity and the requirement of formal 
consistency (Gardin, p. 88). 
The Venus of Milo was for Ingarden a pivotal artwork which defined in 
concreto for him the nature of the aesthetic object and the observer's 
aesthetic experience. Although I have by far not exhausted the subject, I 
must conclude my deliberations at this point and promise a sequel. It 
has become clear, I think, that Ingarden was right when he attributed 
such great importance to the ancient masterwork and decided that the 
future of fruitful discoveries in the field of aesthetic theory would 
be based on concretization (typology) resulting from a consonance 
(Zusammenklang) between reproducible reasoning, empirical validity, 
and formal consistency. This insight saved him from seriously trying to 
press the work of art into a formula that would guarantee its definition 
and cognition beyond the general nature of Ingarden's attempted outline 
of a poetics that addressed the schematics and system of the literary 
work of art (d. Fieguth, 90-101 ). 
REFERENCES 
Baldini, Umberto: The Complete Sculpfllre of Michelangelo, London, Thames and 
Hudson, 1981. 
Falk, Eugene H.: "Ingarden's Concept of the Aesthetic Objects," Comparative Litera-
tllre SflIdies, XVlII, 1981,230-237. 

THE VENUS OF MILO 
179 
Fieguth, Rolf (ed.): Roman Ingarden. Gegenstand lind Allfgaben der Literaturwissen-
schaft. Tiibingen, Niemeyer, 1976. 
Gardin, Jean-Claude: Archaeological Constructs, Cambridge, Cambridge University 
Press, 1990. 
Ingarden, Roman: "Das iisthetische Erlehnis," Deuxieme congres international d'esthe-
tiqlle et des sciences de rart, Paris. 1937, Vol. L 54-60. 
Ingarden, Roman: "Aesthetic Experience and Aesthetic Object." Philosophy and Phe-
nomenological Research, XIX (1960), 2g9-313. 
Ingarden, Roman: Vom Erkennen des literarischen Klinstwerks, Tiihingen, Niemeyer, 
1969. 
Ingarden, Roman: The Cognition of the Literary Work of Art, Evanston, Northwestern 
University Press, 1973. 
Schroder, Eherhard: [hirer: Kllllst IIl1d Geometrie, Basel, Boston, Stuttgart, Birkhiiuser, 
1990. 
Winzinger, Franz: Diirer, Hamhurg, Rowohlt, 1971. 
Southern Illinois University, 
Carbondale 

PART IV 
INGARDEN AND THE NATURE OF 
THE LITERARY WORK OF ART 

JAN WOLENSKI 
THE VERIFIABILITY PRINCIPLE: VARIATIONS 
ON INGARDEN'S CRITICISM 
Ingarden's talk at the Prague Congress in 1934 was the first serious 
attack on the verifiability principle, one of the pillars of logical em-
piricism. 1 My aim here is (I) to recall Ingarden's objections concerning 
the verifiability principle (VP, for brevity), (II) to show that Ingarden's 
criticism may be supported by additional arguments, with respect to 
those used by Ingarden himself, and (III) to note that Ingarden's style 
analysis of VP may be extended to other metaphilosophical regulative 
principles. 
Entering into a long and complicated story of VP exceeds the 
framework of the present paper. Ingarden addresses his remarks to 
earlier conceptions offered by the members of the Vienna Circle and, 
hence, it is quite sufficient to limit ourselves here to the current 
formulations of this principle in the early thirties. At that time, the 
following versions of VP were proposed: 
(1) 
A sentence S is meaningful if and only if S is verifiable; 
(2) 
The meaning of a sentence S is the method of its verifica-
tion; 
(3) 
A sentence S is meaningful if and only if S is either verifiable 
or analytic. 
The formula (2) is rather a metaphor, but it should be noted because it 
plays an important role in Inarden's analysis. The formulas (1) and (3) 
may be viewed as the early official statements of VP. They are easily 
comparable with respect to their contents -
(3) is an extension of (1). 
The reason of this modification is very simple: (1) excludes analytic 
sentences from the set of meaningful sentences. Of course, (3) improves 
this implausible situation. 
The statements (1) to (3) contain concepts which require further 
elucidation. However, intensive discussions among the adherents of VP 
in the thirties and later did not end with complete success. Fortunately, 
Ingarden's criticism is almost independent from meanings ascribed to 
such crucial words as "verifiable" and "analytic." However, let me note 
183 
Hans H. Rudnick (ed.), Analecta Husserliana, Vol. XXX, 183-192. 
© 1990 Kluwer Academic Publishers. 

184 
JAN WOLENSKJ 
that "verifiable" means here "weakly verifiable"; thus, I shall sometimes 
use "testable" instead of "verifiable." Also the words "meaning" and 
"sense" will be used as synonyms; other necessary explanations will be 
given on concrete occasions. 
Ingarden mentions in his talk only (1) and (2); however, he implicitly 
refers to (3) too. As far as I know (2) appeared in print for the first 
time in Schlick 1936 -
two years after Ingarden's talk. Unfortunately, 
Ingarden 1936, being a strict reproduction of his talk in Prague, has 
almost no references. It seems that the main source for Ingarden was 
Schlick 1932-33, since Schlick's famous example of "nucleus, which, 
though always present (within every electron), never has in any way any 
external effects" (p. 88) was discussed by Ingarden. Maybe, Ingarden 
derived (2) from Schlick 1932-33 or, what is more probable, he learnt 
this formula during the current debates concerning YP. 
According to Ingarden, (1) and (2) are examples of metalogical 
statements; of course, the same holds, a fortiori, for (3). Ingarden 
compares (1) and (2), and asserts that the latter is "more radical" than 
the former. This means for Ingarden that (1) formulates the condition 
of "having meaning", (2), however, identifies meaning and verification. 
This is an important point. Ingarden's arguments are mainly related to 
(2). However, the arguments which are valid with the respect to the 
stronger thesis are not necessarily valid with respect to the weaker one. 
Hence, it is reasonable to check whether Ingarden's arguments against 
(2) also go against (1); any assessment of the strength of Ingarden's 
criticism of YP obviously depends on making this point clear. 
Metalogical sentences are sentences about other sentences. More-
over, they are results of logical analysis. Now the principal question 
is this: are metalogical sentences meaningful? Ingarden argues that, 
assuming the principles of logical empiricism, metalogical sentences are 
either (i) meaningless, or (ii) they have a counter-sense, or yet (iii) they 
have a hidden, "smuggled" sense. 
If one assumes that (a) only these sentences which refer to something 
physical are intersubjectively verifiable, and (b) sentences are nothing 
physical, then metalogical sentences are meaningless. But (b), continues 
Ingarden, holds, since the verification means, according to the adherents 
of YP, a possibility of verification. Now comes the most essential step 
in Ingarden's argumentation. The possibility of verification is nothing 
physical. The same can be said about correlations of sentences and re-
lated sets of sense-data. Let us assume (2) which says that meaning is 
identical with verification. Under the assumption, metalogical sentences 

THE VERIFIABILITY PRINCIPLE 
185 
are meaningless. This argumentation essentially uses (2) and even may 
be regarded, assuming (a) and (b), as reductio ad absurdum of this form 
of VP; it is easily seen, that Ingarden's criticism of (2) has a straight-
forward application to (I). However, Ingarden points out one may keep 
(a) and abandon (b). This combination says that metalogical sentences 
are verifiable by physical data. Thus they have a meaning but this is just 
a countersense, since, according to Ingarden, both traditional philosophy 
as well as logical empiricism ascribe quite a different meaning to 
metalogical sentences than the meaning dictated by (2) together with (a) 
and not (b). Although this objection is right with respect to (2), it has 
no direct application to (1). The defenders of VP may claim that the 
replacement of (2) by (1) creates a quite semantic proposal which need 
not be consistent with traditional views on language and meaning. This 
course was taken by Neurath in his comments on Ingarden's talk; 
Neurath remarked that VP is formulated within logical syntax of 
language and refers to physical properties of sentences.2 On the other 
hand, the subsequent development of semantics fairly confirms Ingar-
den's view; I shall come back to this point in the second part of this 
paper. 
Although Ingarden seriously regards (i) and (ii), he is inclined to 
prefer (iii) as the most proper description of the theoretical situation 
of metalogical sentences. They have a hidden, "smuggled" sense; 
"smuggled" means here that this sense is independent from verification 
and unofficially respected by the proponents of VP. This objection has, 
however, another character than (i) and (ii). These are the results of the 
internal analysis of VP. The defects of VP exhibited by (i) and (ii) are, 
for Ingarden, motives for (iii) but the last must assume that sense is not 
reducible to physical data. In connection with this, Ingarden argues that 
the sense of a sentence is always prior to its verification; to establish 
that a sentence, say S, is not verifiable, one has to know the sense of S. 
As I have earlier remarked Ingarden also implicitly touches on (3). 
He considers the possibility that metalogical sentences are tautologies 
or conventions, i.e. analytical sentences in view of the Vienna Circle. 
Ingarden remarks that if one assumes that analytic sentences need not 
be verifiable, their meaningfulness falsifies (1) as well as (2). However, 
this argument does not devastate (3) since it shows only this, that if 
analytic sentences are to be meaningful, (1) and (2) are not adequate 
formulations of VP; the same conclusion was arrived at by logical 
empiricists before 1934. 
I think that it is profitable to distinguish the two lines in Ingarden's 

186 
JAN WOLENSKI 
criticism of VP. The first one is connected with (i). In particular, VP in 
its various formulations is a metalogical sentence too. Ingarden argues 
that metalogical sentences violate VP. By specialisation, we obtain that 
VP itself does not satisfy the condition which is formulated in it. 
Though Ingarden's analysis is explicitly directed at (1) and (2), it 
provokes the following problem: is (3) verifiable or analytic? Apart 
from this, we have the second line centered on the priority thesis: the 
meaning of a sentence is prior to its verification. 
Let me go back for a moment to discussions around VP. These are 
usually dominated by attempts to make clear the content of verifiability-
or-analycity condition. But the problem of the logical status of VP is also 
discussed from time to time; this problem is normally expressed thus: is 
VP a meaningful sentence? According to common opinion, this ques-
tion explicitly appeared for the first time in Ewing 1937. He says: 
The statement that all meaningful statements are verifiable is therefore not itself verifi-
able. It follows that if it is true it is meaningless. But a sentence cannot possibly be both 
true and meaningless. Therefore the sentence in question cannot be true, but must be 
either meaningless or false. According to my view it is the latter (p. 17) 
and further: 
The only d priori propositions that the theory admits are analytic tautologies. if these 
indeed can be called propositions, but the statement of the theory itself is essentially 
synthetic. It gives new information. and information not capable of formal proof. The 
theory therefore cannot, if it is true, be known d priori. (p. 18) 
What is made by Ewing is simply a completion of Ingarden (i) with 
respect to (3): since (3) is neither verifiable nor analytic, it follows that 
this formulation of VP is meaningless. Thus we are fully entitled to say 
that the problem of the logical status of VP is the Ingarden-Ewing 
problem; this gives a strong reason to recall Ingarden's analysis of VP. 
In fact, Ingarden's arguments have been almost entirely forgotten. I 
know only three published comments on Ingarden 1936. Neurath's 
remarks were already mentioned. They are preceded by Carnap's 
comments, who argues that (1) and (2) refer to synthetic sentences 
only; the meaningfulness of analytic sentences is a matter of syntax. The 
third remark on Ingarden's analysis of VP is in Zabtudowski 1966. He 
briefly criticizes the priority thesis: 
On the other hand, to prove a general rule which says that the assertion of non-testabil-

THE VERIFIABILITY PRINCIPLE 
187 
ity of any sentence requires the knowledge of its meaning, a difficult to prove thing 
would have to be proved: that one must know the sense of a sentence even to be able to 
say that this sentence has no sense. (p. 23) 
This objection, however, is not quite convincing, since its validity 
requires (2) as a necessary assumption. That is all what can be said 
about the reaction to Ingarden 1936 in philosophical literature. 
Turning to the metaphilosophical importance of Ingarden's analysis, 
let me start with the Ingarden-Ewing problem. According to Pap 1949, 
this problem is badly formulated: 
The critic takes for granted that the theory makes an assertion about a class of 
statements of which it itself is a member and is thus self-applicable. For without this 
assumption it would not follow from the premise that the theory is not verifiable that it 
is meaningless and hence not true, if it is true ... and hence false. But most proponents 
of the theory would hesitate to make this assumption since they know that once we 
admit statements that make assertions about themselves we entangle ourselves in 
paradoxes. (p. 341 ) 
Pap, however, does not show that the self-referential use of the predi-
cates "is meaningful" and "is meaningless" leads to paradoxes; he only 
alludes to the Liar paradox. Now I shall fill this gap. To do it, the 
following principles are necessary: 
(4) 
For any S, S is true or false or meaningless; 
(5) 
No sentence is both true and meaningless; 
(6) 
No sentence is both false and meaningless; 
(7) 
A sentence S expresses a proposition if and only if S is 
meaningful. 
Now let us consider 
(8) 
The sentence number (8) in this paper is meaningless. 
Let the letter X denote the sentence number (8) in this paper. Thus we 
have 
(9) 
X if and only if X is meaningless. 
Obviously, X cannot be true or meaningless, since it would be contrary 
to (5). Thus there remains the possibility that X is false. We get from 
(9) 
(10) 
X is false if and only if X is meaningful. 

188 
JAN WOLENSKI 
and then, by (7) 
(11) 
X expresses a proposition if and only if X is false. 
The inspection of all possibilities forces the conclusion that X expresses 
the proposition equivalent to that expressed by the sentence "X is 
false." This leads to 
(12) 
X if and only if X is false, 
and, finally to 
(13) 
X is true if and only if X is false; 
the last is the Liar paradox. Thus the self-referential use of "is meaning-
less" produces the same effect which is produced by the self-referential 
use of "is false." 3 This reasoning exactly confirms Pap's reservations to 
the Ingarden-Ewing argument. To block the paradox one must intro-
duce restrictions like these realized by Russell's theory of types or 
Tarski's truth definition; I shall follow here Tarski and, in particular, his 
idea of relativisation of semantic concepts to language. For an appro-
priate interpretation of YP, one should work with scheme: 
(14) 
rs -, is meaningful in L if and only if S is verifiable or analytic 
in L. 
To explain some details, let us consider YPo, i.e. the verifiability 
principle for the object language Lo. 
(15) 
rs -, is meaningful in Lo if and only if S is verifiable or 
analytic in Lo. 
What is the most important here is that (15) itself does not belong to 
Lo; it is formulated in L j 
-
the metalanguage with respect to Lo. In 
particular, the symbol rs -, is used as the name of a sentence in question 
and the letter S refers to a translation of this sentence into L j • Since 
(15) is not a sentence of Lo, it is not applicable to itself and the paradox 
disappears. 
As a result we obtain an infinite chain of YP's falling under (14) and 
related to the semantic hierarchy of language. This account has its own 
problems. Zabtudowski remarks that this theory "cannot be expressed 
without violating the rule which it refers to." (p. 23) The objection is 
similar to that formulated against Russell's theory of types. Hallden 
1949 defends the theory of types in the following way: 

THE VERIFIABILITY PRINCIPLE 
189 
The import of this solution is that the theory of types is taken not as one theory, but as 
an infinite set of theories. For each theory holds that it does not speak about any of 
those concepts which occur in it, but, concerning each concept occurring in it, holds 
that there is another theory belonging to the set, asserting of it something very much 
like what it itself asserts about its own conceptual outfit without being meaningless. It is 
general without being circular. (p. 16) 
By analogy, this explanation can be applied to the theory based on (14). 
However, one thing should be explicitly noted. It is indeed plausible to 
maintain that (14) is not circular, since it says something about the set 
of languages and not about a particular language. However, (14) being 
non-circular is an impredicative in Russell's sense. Thus, the theory of 
meaningfulness based on (14) is not correct for philosophers who do 
not accept impredicative constructions. 
Leaving the difficulties aside connected with the general theory of 
meaningfulness, let me turn to the Ingarden-Ewing problem. Pap's 
rejoinder of Ewing's, and a fortiori Ingarden's, reasoning, however, 
does not solve the problem in question. Restricting discussion to VPo, 
Pap's victory is limited to a negative result only: VPo is not meaningless 
relative to the condition stated by itself. However, when one asks what 
the logical status of VPo is, he certainly expects a positive answer. Now 
there are various possibilities. One was outlined by Wittgenstein who 
claimed that sentences like VPo are absolutely meaningless. Assuming 
that only these sentences are meaningful which satisfy VPo, this is a 
coherent solution. On the other hand, the assumption is rather arbitrary 
since there is nothing wrong with the view that we have a plurality of 
VP's; VPo interpreted in such a way evidently has a meaning in L l . Yet 
another solution is offered by Reichenbach 1951: "The verifiability 
theory of meaning lays down rules for the construction of meaningful 
expressions. These rules are conventions determining the structure of 
language. Being rules, they are neither true nor false, hut "volitional 
decisions." (p. 46) But what is a convention relative to Lo, yet can have 
a non-conventional character in L l ; thus Reichenbach rather avoids the 
problem than solves it. Pap 1965 proposes: "But perhaps one possibil-
ity has been overlooked: perhaps the verifiability theory of meaning is 
put forth as an analysis of an important sense of the word 'meaningful' 
... some definitions are not arbitrary stipulations but analyses of more 
or less vague meanings." (pp. 678/679) But it is not exactly clear what 
Pap's remarks prove. For VPo being a result of analysis is just a 
sentence and perhaps even an axiom of the theory of meaningfulness 

190 
JAN WOLENSKI 
for Lo; it has a meaning in L[. Thus, all mentioned proposals give no 
positive answer to the Ingarden-Ewing problem and either are arbitrary 
or fall under Ingarden's criticism that VPo has a hidden, smuggled 
sense. 
Following Russell's theory of types, one could claim that "verifiable" 
and "analytic" are systematically ambiguous expressions like logical 
connectives on Russell's account; this means that logical connectives 
have the same sense of various levels of the hierarchy of types; but they 
link sentences of various sorts. However, if we accept Ingarden's critic-
ism, then verifiability in VP [ is not verifiability in VP 0; for identification 
of both sorts of verifiability one needs to show that the former also 
consists in establishing a correlation between metalogical sentences and 
physical data. The known troubles with physicalism in philosophy of 
language confirm that verifiability on various levels of the semantic 
hierarchy is much more ambiguous than logical connectives are; thus, 
this way to the uniform concept of meaningfulness seems to be closed. 
To admit that the adjective "analytic" is systematically ambiguous is a 
more plausible view. Assuming that the analycity is definable at all, we 
can propose, for instance, that the class of analytic truths consists of 
logical tautologies and meaning postulates. Now we can claim that VPn 
(for arbitrary n) is an analytic sentence. However, one should be aware 
that the classes of analytic sentences on various levels of the linguistic 
hierarchy are not identical. In particular, VP 0 is an analytic sentence (a 
meaning postulate, strictly speaking) of L[ and it is not reducible to 
analytic sentences of Lo. This means that VPo has its own sense 
independent, at least partly, from the meanings of expressions in Lo. 
Putting this in another way: the meaning of VPo is prior to the condition 
stated by it. This gives a strong vindication for Ingarden's criticism 
listed under (iii). 
The outlined situation can be also illustrated by a metamathematical 
analogy. Let us assume that someone wants to define meaningful 
expressions of the first-order Peano arithmetic. Of course, he can do it 
by a definition of the well-formed arithmetical formula. But this would 
not be be related to VP which defines meaningfulness in a criterial way 
with respect to truth -
"verifiable or analytic" is to be co-extensional 
with "true or false". An analogon of VP is rather the formula: 
(16) 
A sentence S of Peano arithmetic is meaningful if and only if 
S is provable or disprovable. 

THE VERIFIABILITY PRINCIPLE 
191 
Now, by the first Godel incompleteness theorem there exists a true but 
undecidable sentence of Peano arithmetic. This sentence is meaningful 
because true, but meaningless by (16) because neither provable nor 
disprovable. Thus (14) is not an adequate definition of the meaning-
fulness in Peano arithmetic. What about (16) itself? Even though it can 
be expressed in the language of arithmetic, its meaningfulness does not 
consist in its provability or disprovability; (16) has own meaning in the 
metalanguage. Moreover, the truth definition for Peano arithmetic is 
not a provable arithmetical sentence (Tarski theorem). This is a useful 
analogy. Take the truth definition for arithmetic as an analogon of VPo; 
this definition is formulated in L,. The definition is, by (16), meaning-
less but it is difficult to propose that the truth definition for arithmetic 
is a meaningless sentence; its sense is independent from its provability 
or disprovability. A quite general phenomenon is that semantics is not 
definable in syntax and this phenomenon, I suppose, is in close relation 
to Ingarden's priority thesis. 
Now observe that my discussion can be extended to other conditions 
of meaningfulness and, then, to other metaphilosophical principles -
those of rationality, for instance. This means that when someone states 
a meta philosophical principle, especially one which is criterial in its 
character, he should expect that the principle does not satisfy the 
criteria in question. Thus, looking for ultimate criteria of philosophical 
activity is rather hopeless. 
I do not suggest that Ingarden would agree with all my remarks; this 
especially concerns the last conclusion. As a student of Ingarden, I 
remember that he did not believe that formal logic and metamathe-
matics had any major philosophical importance. I am sure that Ingarden 
would be opposed to the idea of an infinite chain of VP's or other 
metaphilosophical principles. He was just looking for ultimate prin-
ciples and firm bases constituting the meanings of sentences. However, 
it is interesting to notice that at some essential points Ingarden's results 
agree with those achieved with help of formal methods. Recently we 
have observed many attempts similar to the approach of phenomeno-
logy and formal analytic philosophy. Perhaps my remarks may be 
considered as proof that such attempts have no trivial reasons. 
Institute of Philosophy 
The iagiellonian University, Krakow 

192 
JAN WOLENSKI 
NOTES 
I See Ingarden 1936; the same problems are also discussed in Ingarden 1935. 
2 See Actes du IIuitieme Congres International de Philosophie Ii Prague, Prague 1936, 
pp. 244-245; Carnap's comments on Ingarden's talk are on p. 244 of this proceedings . 
.1 I assume two-valued logic; see Goddard and Routley 1973 for many-valued logic of 
meaningfulness. 
REFERENCES 
Ewing, A. C, "Meaninglessness", Mind 46 (1937), reprinted in A. C Ewing, Non-
Linguistic Philosophy, London, George Allen and Unwin, 1968, 15-33. 
Goddard, L. and Routley, R, The Logic of Significance and Context. Edinburgh and 
London, Scottish Academic Press, 1973. 
Hallden, S., The Logic of Nonsense. Uppsala, Universitets Arsskrift, 1949. 
Ingarden, R, "L'essai logistique d'une refonte de la philosophie", Revue Philosophique 
120 (1935), 137-159. 
Ingarden, R, "Der logistische Versuch einer Neugestaltung der Philosophie. Eine 
kritische Bemerkung" in Actes du Huitil!me Congres International de Philosophie Ii 
Prague. Prague, 1936,203-208. 
Pap, E., Elements of Analytic Philosophy. New York, Hafner, 1949. 
Pap, A., "Introduction to Meaning, Verification and Metaphysics" in A Modern Intro-
duction to Philosophy. Ed. P. Edwards and A. Pap, New York, The Free Press 
(1965), pp. 675-679. 
Reichenbach, H., 'The Verifiability Theory of Meaning", Proceedings of the American 
Academy of Arts and Sciences 80 (1951),46-60. 
Schlick, M., "Positivismus und Realismus", Erkenntnis 3 (1932-33), Eng!. tr. in 
Logical Positivism. Ed. A. Ayer, New York, The Free Press, 1959, pp. 82-107. 
Schlick, M., "Meaning and Verification", Philosophical Review 45 (1936), 339-369. 
Zabtudowski, A., "Sprawdzalnosc a znaczenie ITestability and Meaning!", Stl/diu Fi/o-
zoficzne 4(47) (1966), pp. 9-44. 

WLODZIMIERZ GALEWICZ 
THE AESTHETIC OBJECT AND THE WORK OF ART: 
REFLECTIONS ON INGARDEN'S THEORY 
OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT 
INTRODUCTION 
Ingarden's philosophical aesthetics rests on two basic distinctions. The 
one is that between the work of art and its physical foundation; the 
other is that between the work of art and the aesthetic object. It is not 
enough, according to Ingarden, to distinguish the work of art from the 
material thing in which it is embodied; it is also necessary to differen-
tiate it from the aesthetic objects which may be constituted on its basis. 
It is only the latter differentiation that I am going to discuss in this 
paper, although I am aware that many recent philosophers, hostile to 
any form of the pluralist ontology, are apt to question the former as 
well. Let me first sketch the outlines of Ingarden's doctrine. 
According to Ingarden, the work of art is a purely intentional 
formation which has the source of its being in an artist's creative acts of 
consciousness and its foundation in "a certain physical object like a 
book, a piece of marble, a painted canvas, which must be suitably 
shaped by the artist." 1 By virtue of its embodiment in the physical 
foundation, the work of art is intersubjectively accessible, "so that it 
becomes an intersubjective intentional object." 2 
The work of art as such has to be contrasted with its concretizations. 
The "concretization" of a work of art is taken by Ingarden in the 
objective sense to be the result of the process of "concretizing" or 
interpreting of the work. Thus, for instance, the concretizations of a 
literary work of art "are precisely what is constituted during the reading 
and what, in a manner of speaking, forms ... the concrete form in 
which the work itself is apprehended." 3 While the work of art is an 
intersubjective intentional object, its concretization is a monosubjective 
one.4 Ingarden says also that the work of art is "the product of inten-
tional activities of an artist", whereas the concretization of the work is 
"in a way a common product of artist and observer." 5 
As a purely intentional object, the work of art (or at least every 
representational work) is a schematic formation. That is to say: "several 
193 
Hans H. Rudnick (ed.), Analecta Hlisseriiana, Vol. XXX, 193-210. 
© 1990 Kiliwer Academic Publishers. 

194 
WLODZIMIERZ GALEWICZ 
of its strata, especially the stratum of portrayed objectivities ... contain 
'places of indeterminacy'."!> These are partially removed or "filled out" 
in the concretization. The concretization of the work of art is therefore 
"still schematic, but less so than the work itself." 7 
The perception of a work of art may be realized in one or another of 
two possible ways. It may be performed "in the service of some extra-
aesthetic preoccupation,"~ or in the framework of the aesthetic attitude, 
by which Ingarden means "an attitude oriented toward qualities, and 
therefore disregarding -
so to speak -
their function of qualifying a 
real object."~ The concretization of a work of art constituted within the 
aesthetic attitude is exactly what he calls the "aesthetic object." 
Further, Ingarden's distinction between the aesthetic object and the 
work of art has its counterpart in his differentiation between aesthetic 
values and artistic values. Aesthetic values, in his terminology, are 
peculiar phenomenal value qualities such as beauty, prettiness, ugliness, 
and the like. Artistic values, by contrast, are rather functional value 
capacities. Artistic values of a work of art, says Ingarden, "consist in a 
certain efficacy inherent in the work and some of its components and 
properties -
the efficacy, on the one hand, of affecting the perceiver 
and awakening his aesthetic experience and, on the other, of forming 
the basis for constituting in an aesthetic object the aesthetic qualities." III 
Thus the difference between aesthetic and artistic values is, first of all, a 
difference in nature. Apart from this, however, the two kinds of values 
are said to differ also as regards their proper subjects or carriers: 
"Artistic value", says Ingarden, "is something which arises in the work 
of art itself and has its existential basis in that." II Aesthetic value, 
instead, "is something which manifests itself only in the aesthetic ob-
ject." 12 
I think the differentiation between aesthetic and artistic values is 
indeed a significant one. It indicates an essential difference between two 
kinds of values emerging in the field of aesthetics. It does not matter, of 
course, whether we apply the term "aesthetic", as Ingarden does, merely 
to the values of the first kind, or also to those of the second. We might 
just as well contrast the former with the latter as the "phenomenal" and 
the "functional" aesthetic values respectively. The point is that the one 
values differ significantly from the other in their nature and, as a 
consequence, in the way they are apprehended. Phenomenal aesthetic 
values are given to us immediately and intuitively. In opposition to this, 
the functional aesthetic value or, in Ingarden's phraseology, the artistic 

INGARDEN'S THEORY OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT 
195 
value of a work of art, taken as the capacity of affording valuable 
aesthetic experiences, is arrived at only by inference. 
Is it true, however, that these two kinds of values occurring in the 
domain of aesthetics belong to different objects? Ingarden's contention 
that aesthetic value (in the narrower sense) manifests itself only in the 
aesthetic object turns out, on reflection, to be paradoxical enough. For 
if the aesthetic object is not identical with the work of art, then it seems 
to follow that aesthetic value qualities which show themselves to us in 
our comportment with a work of art do not exist in the work at all. One 
might perhaps take refuge in saying that the fact that the aesthetic value 
appears only in the aesthetic object does not prevent it from existing in 
the work of art. But this expedient, though in other situations theoreti-
cally possible, in this case would not do, in view of the fact that 
Ingarden regards the aesthetic values as phenomenal qualities. For it 
makes no sense to say of a phenomenal quality that it exists in one 
object but appears only in another. Thus we are justified in concluding 
that it is Ingarden's view that the aesthetic values which show them-
selves to us in our commerce with a work of art are in fact resident in, 
or carried by, a monosubjective aesthetic object constituted on the basis 
of the work at hand. In the sequel, I shall call this view on aesthetic 
values the "monosubjective-carriers" theory. 
I do not claim that the theory thus characterized is maintained by 
Ingarden quite consistently. I grant that he sometimes speaks as if he 
holds another theory on which aesthetic values exist actually in aesthe-
tic objects but potentially in works of art as well; so he says, for 
instance, that the qualities of aesthetic value "are present in the work of 
art itself in a peculiar potential state," 13 or that they "remain in a latent 
state of 'predeterminacy' and 'holding in readiness'." 14 At other times 
he also speaks of aesthetic values as if he treats them as ascribable to 
the works of art in a straightforward way; thus he says: "The gentle 
beauty of Vermeer's painting ... is one and the same, and always 
attaches to this painting irrespective of how many people view it." 1, 
What I claim is that the monosubjective-carriers theory, too, occurs in 
his writings again and again, and that he is strongly driven towards it 
for some reasons which I am about to bring to the surface. 
The point of my discussion is thus not to break down Ingarden's 
distinction between the aesthetic object and the work of art but to 
elucidate it and elicit the motives from which it results. I think the 
theory under discussion, though mistaken, is not baseless. I shall 

196 
WLODZIMIERZ GALEWICZ 
identify its basis as Ingarden's admission that one and the same work of 
art allows a number of equally well founded but divergent value judg-
ments. Then I shall point to some problems with the account for this 
state of affairs which seem to have motivated Ingarden's shift from this 
phenomenologically sound admission (which I shall call the thesis of the 
"aesthetic ambiguity" of the work of art) to his question-begging mono-
subjective-carriers theory. Finally, I shall suggest an alternative solution 
of the indicated problems. 
I shall set forth Ingarden's account of the aesthetic object as a way of 
dealing with some difficulties encountered by the theory of aesthetic 
value judgment in face of the results of his analysis of the aesthetic 
experience. By aesthetic value judgments (henceforth for short reference 
designated as A-judgments) I mean those which (a) concern works of 
art and (b) predicate aesthetic value qualities. This characterization calls 
for three explanatory remarks. First, I shall restrict my discussion to 
the judgments ascribing some aesthetic value quality or phenomenal 
aesthetic value like "beautiful", "pretty", "sublime", "ugly", "trivial", and 
so on. Thus I am not going to consider such "judgments of aesthetic 
value" as, for instance, "This is a good painting" or "This is a poor 
poem." These assign to their subjects a rank in a scale rather than a 
phenomenal value quality. Although Ingarden is not quite explicit on 
this point, I suppose he would count such value rankings rather among 
the judgments of artistic value. Second, I shall concentrate on those 
value judgments of the kind just specified which are concerned with 
works of art. Thus I leave out of account, as Ingarden practically does, 
analogous judgments about natural objects. Third, when I speak of the 
judgments "concerned with" works of art I do not take the above 
phrase as synonymous with "referring to." What I mean is merely the 
fact that the judgments under discussion are commonly expressed in 
terms of sentences which "speak of" works of art. Whether an 
A-judgment speaking of, or concerned with, a work of art should be 
understood as referring to that as its logical subject, is exactly what I 
have to discuss. 
It is quite clear that there is a room for a diversity of A-judgments 
concerned with one and the same work of art. This follows from the 
fact alone that it is possible for a work of art to present a number of 

INGARDEN'S THEORY OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT 
197 
aesthetic value qualities at the same time, for example, to be beautiful 
as well as sublime. It is not so clear, however, whether the same holds 
for A-judgments which are not only diverse but also divergent. By 
saying that two A-judgments, concerned with the same work of art, are 
divergent ones I mean that their value predicates are either contradictory 
(e.g. "beautiful" and "not beautiful") or contrary (e.g. "beautiful" and 
"ugly"), or otherwise mutually exclusive (e.g. "beautiful" and "triviaL") 
The question is whether any two A-judgments which in this sense 
diverge from one another can be equally well founded. The doctrine 
that asserts that the situation like this cannot arise, i.e., that whenever 
two persons make divergent A-judgments one at least of them can be 
convicted of incompetence, might be properly called the "absolutist" 
theory of aesthetic judgment. It is worth stressing that Ingarden's 
position is far away from that of aesthetic absolutism in the sense thus 
explicated. Indeed it is one of the most important results of his phe-
nomenological analysis of the aesthetic perception that every work of 
art allows us to arrive at various equally well founded but nevertheless 
divergent A-judgments. There are two main motives which have led 
him to this view. On the one hand, he conceives a well founded 
A-judgment as one that is based on, and justified by, an appropriate 
aesthetic experience. On the other hand, he grants that one and the 
same work of art can constitute the source of various appropriate 
aesthetic experiences. In order to elucidate the last point, it is necessary 
to explain what it is to say, for Ingarden, that an aesthetic experience, 
aroused and stimulated by the work of art, is "appropriate" to that. 
First of all, it is a basic condition to be satisfied by any appropriate 
aesthetic experience that the concretization to which it leads should be 
authentic or "faithful" to the work at hand. By a faithful concretization 
Ingarden means one that (a) involves the correct reconstruction of the 
work "in respect of its determined and actual elements" III and (b) 
"keeps within the bounds of the possibilities predetermined by the work 
itself for those elements (factors) in the concretization which go beyond 
simple reconstruction of the work." 17 Since the schematic structure of 
the work of art allows various completions or implementations which 
lie within the boundaries set by the work itself, it is obvious that being 
faithful alone does not prevent the concretizations from differing in 
respect of their aesthetic value qualities. 
In some places, however, Ingarden suggests that an aesthetic ex-
perience that is to be appropriate to the given work has to fulfil a more 

198 
WLODZIMIERZ GALEWICZ 
exacting set of conditions. Thus he stipulates that it should lead to 
a concretization which is not only faithful but also as "close" and 
"adequate" to the work as possible, and, in addition, "effective" in a 
sufficient degree. By saying that one concretization is closer to the work 
at hand than another he means that it involves implementations which 
are better "suited" to the work, although those which are introduced by 
the other can be equally "permitted." IH By the adequate concretization 
of the work he means the one that is "the exact embodiment of the 
"idea" indicated in it." I Y Lastly, by saying that one concretization of the 
same work has a greater effectiveness than another he means that it 
"contains a greater number of aesthetic values and a higher total 
aesthetic value." 20 
To be sure, the above criteria are not free form obscurities. But this 
much is clear that even if they are accepted there can be still a number 
of appropriate concretizations which differ significantly as to their 
aesthetic value. This follows, on the one hand, from the fact that each 
criterion can be, in Ingarden's view, satisfied in equal degree by more 
than one concretization. Thus as regards the criterion of closeness, 
Ingarden admits that "it does not seem impossible that there should be 
two concretizations equally close to the work."21 Similarly, as regards 
the criterion of effectiveness, he allows that "two aesthetic experiences 
... which take different courses can also lead to the constitution of two 
concretizations having a qualitatively different but equally high aesthetic 
value." 22 On the other hand, the mentioned criteria can conflict with 
each other. Thus, for example, "the concretizations which are close to 
the work ... need not necessarily be those which, relatively, have the 
highest aesthetic value." 23 Yet if so, there can be a conflict between the 
criterion of closeness and that of effectiveness, so that we are again 
unable to decide which concretization is the more appropriate one. 
So it turns out that no matter how stringent conditions we may 
impose upon the appropriate concretization of a work of art, there is 
still a room for a diversity of equally appropriate concretizations of one 
and the same work, which may differ among themselves in respect of 
their aesthetic value. But if an A-judgment is a well founded one when 
it is based on an appropriate aesthetic experience, then we are justified 
in concluding that equally well founded A-judgments can diverge from 
each other. It is therefore a characteristic of the work of art that it 
authorizes different competent perceivers to pass divergent A-judg-

INGARDEN'S THEORY OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT 
199 
ments. It will be convenient to call this characteristic the "aesthetic 
ambiguity" of the work of art. 
II 
The aesthetic ambiguity of the work of art means that there can be 
A-judgments which are in a sense "competing," that is: both divergent 
and equally well-founded. The trouble with so understood competing 
A-judgments is that they appear to be logically conflicting as well. But 
if this would be the case, they would infringe the principle of inter-
subjective validity, on which a judgment valid for one person must be 
valid for any other. Let us dwell on this point for a moment. 
What is it to say that a judgment is, or is not, intersubjectively valid? 
Ingarden's answer to this can be gathered from the following passage: 
"The question is whether the evaluation of an aesthetic concretization 
or of the literary work of art itself made by one reader on the basis of 
the material to which he has access is automatically binding and valid 
for other readers. Are those readers automatically obliged to acknowl-
edge it, or do they have the right to weigh it critically and then perhaps 
not acknowledge it?" 24 Thus it may be said, in the light of this quota-
tion, that a judgment uttered by one person is valid for any other if (a) 
its utterer has the right to advance it and (b) no one else has the right to 
refuse to acknowledge it. Under the opposite conditions it is not 
intersubjectively valid. 
It is obvious that the intersubjective validity in the sense so specified 
could not characterize competing A-judgments if they we·!"e conflicting 
with each other. For if someone has the right to advance one judgment 
he has also the right to refuse to accept another that logically conflicts 
with it. But if the other judgment could be equally validly advanced by 
someone else, it would follow that it is valid for one person but not for 
another. 
This consequence need not be dismaying. One might say, after all, 
that the principle of intersubjective validity simply does not apply to 
A-judgments. I shall still return to this alternative. It need hardly be 
stressed, however, that Ingarden is strongly opposed to it. He suspects 
that it would "jeopardize the scientific nature" 25 of disciplines con-
cerned with works of art, if "conflicting or even genuinely contradictory 
statements" 26 were necessary in the field of their study. As a result, he 

200 
WLODZIMIERZ GALEWICZ 
finds himself committed to account for the possibility of competing 
A-judgments in another manner. 
If we wish to reconcile the principle of intersubjective validity, as 
applied to A-judgments, with the thesis of the aesthetic ambiguity of the 
work of art, our only option is to show that competing A-judgments, 
thought apparently contradictory, are in actual fact compatible with 
each other. There are several ways of removing the apparent contradic-
tion between a pair of sentences of the form, say, "S is P" and "S is not 
P." One of them is to interpret those sentences as referring, in the final 
analysis, to different objects. It is by the help of this device that 
Ingarden attempts to save the intersubjective validity of A-judgments. 
So he assumes that A-judgments concerned with a work of art are 
properly applied rather to its concretizations which, of course, may 
differ from one case to another. On this assumption, the divergence 
among competing A-judgments resolves itself into "the admissible 
divergence among true judgments about different concretizations of the 
same work of art" 27 and thereby it ceases to involve any logical incom-
patibility. For: "Neither conflict nor contradiction occurs when two 
judgments about two different concretizations of the same work say 
something different about corresponding factors of the two concretiza-
tions. The conretizations may very well differ on this point." 28 
How are we to understand lngarden's claim that A-judgments are 
properly applied not to the work of art itself but only to its concretiza-
tions? First of all, I take it that he is not giving a report of how 
A-judgments are in fact meant by their utterers but making a recom-
mendation about how they should be meant if they are to be true. 
However, to say that A-judgments are true only if they are applied to 
aesthetic concretizations of works of art is to say that only those 
concretizations, and not the works of art themselves, are the proper 
logical subjects for aesthetic value predicates. That is how Ingarden 
arrives at his mono subjective-carriers theory, i.e., the thesis that 
aesthetic value manifests itself only in the aesthetic object, conceived as 
a monosubjective entity. 
To assess the thesis under consideration, we have first to distinguish 
between two different senses which may be assigned to it. I take it that 
"a concretization of a work of art" means the same as "a concretized 
work of art". Now it is easily noticed that the logical function of the 
attribute "concretized" in the latter phrase may be understood in at 
least two ways: either as that of determining, or as that of modifying the 

INGARDEN'S THEORY OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT 
201 
sense of the "work of art." In the first case, a concretized work of art is 
still a work of art; and then Ingarden's claim resolves itself into the 
weaker assertion that " ... the already produced work of art, the 
schematic entity, must be completed [concretized] by the consumer in 
many ways ... before it can acquire the shape of an aesthetic object."2Y 
In the second case, a concretized work of art is no longer a work of art; 
and then his thesis amounts to the stronger contention that the proper 
carrier of aesthetic value is the aesthetic object, as distinct from the 
work of art. 
It is interesting to note that in his earlier book "The Literary Work of 
Art" Ingarden seems to subscribe only to the first interpretation of the 
above thesis and to rule out the second. For he says: "It is not the 
concretization itself which is the aesthetic object, but rather the literary 
work of art taken precisely it is expressed in a concretization in which it 
achieves its full incarnation." 30 In his later writings, however, Ingarden 
himself identifies the proper aesthetic objects as the concretizations of 
works of art. It is not difficult to point to the reason which forced him 
to this transition from the weaker version of his thesis to the stronger 
one. For it is only the latter that enables him to account for the 
possibility of competing A-judgments. He could not argue that such 
judgments need not contradict each other thanks to the fact that they 
refer to different objects, unless he regarded the concretization of a 
work of art and the work itself as two logically distinct subjects of 
properties. 
Nevertheless, the transition thus outlined appears to be unfortunate 
enough. Whereas the weaker version of Ingarden's thesis, although 
disputable, is at least defensible, the stronger one, in my opinion, is 
totally unplausible. What does exactly mean the "concretization" of a 
work of art? I think it is best regarded as the intentional correlate of a 
manifold of acts of consciousness accomplished by the perceiver in the 
course of his aesthetic perception of the work. This answer, however, is 
still ambiguous. If we are asked what is the intentional object, say, of an 
aesthetic perception of a certain work of architecture, we can, first, 
point to the work itself. In this sense two different aesthetic perceptions 
of the same work have one and the same "intentional correlate", even if 
they concretize the work in two different ways. Then, however, we may 
realize that the given work presents itself in each aesthetic perception in 
a different manifold of "aspects"; and that the respective system of 
aspects is exactly what corresponds to an aesthetic perception and 

202 
WLODZIMIERZ GALEWICZ 
therefore deserves to be called its "intentional correlative." In this 
sense, two aesthetic perceptions of the same work have two different 
intentional objects. Now it is of course a matter of terminology whether 
we decide to speak of the intentional object of an aesthetic perception 
in the first sense or in the second. Yet if we have in mind the intentional 
object in one sense we must not transfer to it characteristics of the 
intentional object in the other sense. In particular, when we understand 
the intentional correlate of a definite aesthetic perception of a work of 
art as the respective system of aspects [or completions] of the work 
perceived we cannot consistently say of it that it is "given" in that 
perception. For what is given or perceived in a particular perception of 
a work of art is the work itself as the identical target of many different 
perceptions. Admittedly, the system of aspects corresponding to a 
certain perception and, so to speak, mirroring its content, can be given 
to the perceiver as well. For this, however, he has to perform a secon-
dary act of the phenomenological reflection. 
In view of the above, Ingarden's contention that aesthetic values 
appear not in the work of art itself but only in its aesthetic concretiza-
tions amounts to saying that the apprehension of those values can occur 
only at the level of phenomenological reflection. This, however, is 
patently false. For it is quite obvious that it is not necessary to reflect 
upon one's own experiences [nor their intentional correlates] in order to 
become aware of the appearance of such value qualities as "beauty" or 
"ugly." 
If I am right in what has been said, Ingarden's conception of the 
aesthetic object as a monosubjective formation would be unacceptable, 
even if it could serve well his purposes. Is it the case, however, that the 
conception under discussion allows Ingarden to achieve what he aims 
at? As we have seen, he attempts to interpret divergent A-judgments 
in such a way that they should not be contradictory and thereby could 
be intersubjectively valid. Yet the intersubjective validity is not the sole 
characteristic of such judgments which he presumably tries to preserve. 
His account of A-judgments is also designed to present them as judg-
ments that are, or can be, intersubjectively verifiable and "intuitive", i.e., 
justified by direct value intuition performed in the final phase of 
aesthetic experience. Is it really capable of ensuring to them all these 
cognitive virtues at the same time? 
To form some opinion on this point, we must first of all assign a 
more precise sense to Ingarden's proposal about how A-judgments 

INGARDEN'S THEORY OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT 
203 
should be understood if they are to be correct. If it is said that they 
should be taken as referring not to works of art but to concretizations 
of those, it can be asked: to what concretizations? I think there are 
three possible answers to this. Thus it may be stipulated that the 
A-judgment made by a person on the basis of the aesthetic perception 
of a work of art should properly refer either (1) to the person's 
individual concretization of the work in question or (2) to any appro-
priate concretization of the work, or (3) to a certain sub-class of the 
appropriate concretizations of the given work. Let us consider these 
alternatives in turn. 
1. On the first interpretation, any A-judgment is expressible in a 
sentence of the form "W in my concretization is V" (where "W" stands 
for a work of art and "V" for an aesthetic value). Consequently, there is 
actually no logical conflict between two well founded A-judgments 
which diverge from one another. If all I mean when I say that W is V is 
that the V is present in my concretization of the W, and if all any other 
person means when he says that W is not V is that the V is absent from 
his concretization of the W, it is obvious that we should not be at 
variance. Thus if A-judgments are taken as referring to individual 
concretizations of the work of art it is indeed not difficult to account 
for the fact that two competing A-judgments can both be intersub-
jectively valid. The trouble though is that, howsoever paradox this may 
sound, they are intersubjectively valid precisely because they are not 
intersubjectively verifiable. This paradox can be explained away when 
we remind ourselves of Ingarden's notion of intersubjective validity. On 
that notion, a judgment which is validly formed by one person is also 
valid interpersonally, if no other person has the right to refuse to 
acknowledge it. Yet it is clear that I do not have the right to refuse to 
accept someone else's judgment if I have no possibility of checking it. 
Thus it turns out that a judgment may be intersubjectively valid just 
because of lack of intersubjective verifiability, provided only it is valid 
for one subject. And this is exactly the case with A-judgments brought 
under the interpretation now discussed: in so far as they are valid for 
their utterers, they are valid for any other subject, since, due to the fact 
that they refer to monosubjective objects, no other subject is in a 
position to ascertain their truth or falsity. 
This undesired consequence is in part at least admitted by Ingarden. 
For he concedes that individual judgments which ascribe a peculiar 
attribute to a monosubjective object are not capable of intersubjective 

204 
WLODZIMIERZ GALEWICZ 
checking.ll Yet he insists that the situation is different with general 
judgments about monosubjective objects. Thus he says: "If a general 
judgment ascribes a common attribute to all monosubjective objectiv-
ities of a certain kind, then anyone to whom an object of this kind is 
given can test the truth of the judgment." 12 This quotation indicates two 
further possible ways of interpreting A-judgments as statements about 
monosubjective aesthetic objects. 
2. On the second account, A-judgments are explicable in sentences 
of the type "W in any appropriate concretization is V". In other words, 
they are judgments to the effect that a value V appears "on the visage" 
of a work W in all cases in which the W is appropriately concretized. 
Yet this account, though theoretically possible, is not useful for Ingarden 
either. After all, he distinguishes between the work of art and the 
aesthetic object in order to provide distinct logical subjects for com-
peting A-judgments and thus make them compatible with each other. 
However, if those judgments should refer to any appropriate concre-
tization of the work concerned, they would be incompatible all the 
same, so that his distinction would be quite abundant. Thus construed 
A-judgments could just as well be taken as referring directly to the 
work itself. 
Hence it looks as if on the first account the scope of A-judgments is 
too narrow, while on the second, too broad. This might tempt us to 
seek for an intermediary course. In order to become aware what could 
it consist in, it is convenient to introduce the concept of the "personal 
viewpoint" of an A-judgment. According to Ingarden, the concretization 
of a work of art depends partly on the effective characteristics of the 
work itself and partly on a number of subjective factors. It will be useful 
to divide all SUbjective factors that condition concretizations of a work 
of art into two groups: into the first we can include those subjective 
conditions which are necessary for a concretization to be appropriate 
(such as acquaintance with the work, competence, sensitiveness, and so 
on); into the second we can count all the other, i.e., those which cause 
the differences among various appropriate concretizations of the same 
work. Then we may call the total body of the subjective conditions of 
the second type, which influence a particular concretization of the given 
work, the "personal viewpoint" of that concretization. Now we are in a 
better position to specify the third possible form of the judgments about 
aesthetic concretizations of a work of art. 
3. Construed in the third way, an A-judgment can be rendered in a 

INGARDEN'S THEORY OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT 
205 
sentence of the form "W in any appropriate concretization performed 
from such and such a personal point of view is Y." This third rendering 
appears to be the most plausible one. In its light, divergent A-judgments 
can be both compatible with each other and intersubjectively verifiable, 
as well as intersubjectively valid. However, they cannot be "intuitive," 
for they require the cognition of lawful connections between well-
defined sets of subjective conditions and the appearance of particular 
aesthetic value qualities. Whether such cognition is possible at all I shall 
not debate at this juncture. The point is that, if it be possible, it had to 
go far beyond the simple apprehension of aesthetic value, providing the 
basis for intuitive A-judgments. 
Thus it turns out that competing A-judgments taken as statements 
about aesthetic concretizations would be either reconcilable and inter-
subjectively valid but not intersubjectively verifiable (case 1), or inter-
subjectively valid and verifiable but not reconcilable (case 2), or, finally, 
reconcilable as well as intersubjectively valid and verifiable but not 
intuitive. The monosubjective-carriers theory does not succeed in 
ensuring to them all the requisite cognitive characteristics at once. I 
think, however, it would be unreasonable to blame it just for this 
reason; for it is hardly likely that any other interpretation could be 
more successful in this. What it can be blamed for, instead, is that it 
introduces into the field of aesthetic study a kind of duality which is 
controverted rather than attested by aesthetic phenomena. 
III 
Ingarden's problem is how to account for the possibility of both 
divergent and equally well founded A-judgments. If we refuse to accept 
his solution of this, and if we are not to dismiss the problem itself (i.e. 
fall back to the absolutist position in the sense mentioned above), we 
are obliged to suggest an alternative. I think it is the relativist conception 
in one or another of its possible forms that offers a more plausible 
account of competing A-judgments. The difference between Ingarden 
and the relativist may be brought out at two levels: in the framework of 
the ontology of aesthetic values and within the analysis of the 
A-judgments themselves. 
1. At the level of ontology the disagreement between Ingarden and 
the relativist comes to light in their solutions of the problem of ob-
jectivity of aesthetic values. The term "objective", and its opposite 

206 
WLODZIMIERZ GALEWICZ 
"subjective", are of course extremely ambiguous. Ingarden himself 
enumerates a number of senses in which they are commonly employed. 
The most important among them, however, is at this juncture that in 
which the objectivity or subjectivity of a characteristic depends on 
whether or not it has sufficient foundation in the thing that is to possess 
it. In that sense, an objective characteristic is determined solely by other 
properties of the object to which it belongs. A subjective characteristic, 
by contrast, is conditioned only in part by other features of the object 
to which it belongs, and in part by certain subjective factors. The 
question arises whether the aesthetic value could be acknowledged as 
an objective characteristic, if it would be regarded as a characteristic of 
the work of art. And the answer to this must be negative, unless we 
drop the thesis of the aesthetic ambiguity of the work of art. For if we 
are to abide by it, we are committed to say that the aesthetic value 
qualities which are present in the concretization of a work of art 
depend only in part on effective and actual properties of the work itself, 
and in part on a number of subjective conditions. From this, however, 
two different consequences can be drawn. We may say that the aesthetic 
value is not a qualification of the work of art at all. Or we may say that 
the aesthetic value is a subjective qualification of the work of art. If the 
former, we adhere to Ingarden's view. If the latter, we subscribe to the 
relativist one. 
I am not sure for what reasons Ingarden prefers to treat aesthetic 
values as objective qualifications of monosubjective objects rather than 
as subjective qualifications of intersubjective objects. I suspect, however, 
that his standpoint has a great deal to do with his concept of the 
objective validity of a judgment or, simply, with his definition of truth. 
Ingarden defines in many places a true judgment as one that asserts an 
objective state of affairs.34 Thus he explicates the objective validity or 
"epistemological objectivity" of a judgment in relation to the ontic 
objectivity.35 How are we to understand, at this juncture, the requisite 
ontic objectivity of the state of affairs asserted by a true judgment? 
Ingarden's utterances are not quite univocal on this point. Sometimes 
he seems to allow that it is sufficient for a judgment to be true that the 
state of affairs which corresponds to it should be "objective" in the 
rather loose sense of being independent of the respective judgment 
itself3o; at other times, however, he seems to assume that the state of 
affairs corresponding to a true judgment has to be "objective" in the 
more strict sense previously mentioned.37 On the latter assumption he 

INGARDEN'S THEORY OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT 
207 
might perhaps argue that A-judgments could not be true, unless value 
characteristics were regarded as objective ones. This argument, how-
ever, would be unplausible. For if we admit that there are subjective 
characteristics as well as objective ones (as Ingarden himself does, after 
all, in distinguishing the one from the other), we are committed to allow 
that both the former and the latter can be, in an appropriate manner of 
course, truly related to, or predicated of, their ontic subjects. 
2. In order to bring out the difference between the Ingardenian and 
the relativist position at the level of the analysis of A-judgments, it is 
necessary to distinguish between two different forms of the relativist 
theory. It will be convenient to call the standard representatives of 
those "the relativist A" and "the relativist B" respectively. Let us begin 
with the contrast between Ingarden and the relativist A. 
Suppose someone makes a valid A-judgment ascribing an aesthetic 
value V to a work of art W. Suppose then he expresses his judgment in 
the form of the unqualified sentence: (1) "W is v." Now both Ingarden 
and the relativist A contend that aesthetic values are not ascribable to 
works of art in the straightforward way. Consequently they both claim 
that sentence (1), as it stands, cannot express adequately the judgment 
concerned. For this, it has to be somehow expanded, say, transformed 
into the sentence: (2) "W concretized appropriately under such and 
such conditions is V." Up to now Ingarden and his adversary can 
therefore agree with one another. They begin to disagree, however, the 
moment the question of an appropriate analysis of sentence (2) arises. 
On Ingarden's view, the subject term of this sentence would be the 
phrase "W concretized appropriately under such and such conditions". 
On the relativist A's view, by contrast, the Ingardenian analysis would 
be quite mistaken. According to him, "W concretized appropriately 
under such and such conditions" does not denote a distinct object 
which can be truly said to possess a certain quality when it is denied 
that the W itself does possess it. Rather, the actual logical structure of 
sentence (2) is more precisely rendered by the sentence: (3) "W is V, if 
it is concretized appropriately under such and such conditions". 
A-judgments reveal themselves as conditional statements. 
It is easily seen that the account of A-judgments as ascriptions of 
aesthetic values with reference to a set of conditions, too, allows us to 
dispose readily of undesired aesthetic antinomies. For there is no 
contradiction in saying that a certain work of art manifests a definite 
aesthetic value in one situation but does not manifest it in another. 

208 
WLODZIMIERZ GALEWICZ 
Thus Ingarden's device to reconcile the divergence of equally well 
founded A-judgments with the principle of the intersubjective validity is 
in no way the only possible one. Instead of saying of such judgments 
that they refer to different objects we can say of them that they carry 
the reference to different conditions. In doing so, we need not introduce 
new "aesthetic objects" as special ontic subjects for aesthetic value 
properties. 
The relativist A construes competing A-judgments as both logically 
reconcilable and interpersonally valid as well as verifiable. Yet he does 
not construe them as based on the direct aesthetic intuition and still less 
justified by it. In order to have the right to pass an A-judgment thus 
interpreted, it is not enough to perform an act of genuine aesthetic 
intuition; it is rather necessary to establish the lawful connection be-
tween an aggregate of objective characteristics of the work of art and a 
set of subjective circumstances on the one hand, and the appearance of 
the given aesthetic value on the other. Certainly we should not blame 
the relativist A's conception for the fact that it does not account for the 
possibility of well founded intuitive A-judgments, since it is not the 
purpose it aims at. But this is not to say that we should not look for a 
complementary conception. For we feel that it is possible in principle 
for an intuitive A-judgment to be a well founded one. That is why we 
are driven towards the position held by the relativist B. 
The relativist B denies the assumption, shared by both Ingarden and 
the relativist A, that the simple value statements of the unqualified form 
"W is V" are incomplete sentences in need of amplification. It is not 
true, on his view, that they have to be expanded by adding a qualifying 
conditional phrase. For it is not the case that the judgments expressed 
in terms of such statements contain the "implicit reference" to a set of 
conditions or to a point of view. Admittedly, they are always made 
from a personal viewpoint. But they are not related to the point of view 
from which they are made. In other words, they are passed not "with 
regard to" a personal viewpoint but rather "in the light of" it. 
Thus interpreted A-judgments can rest on the direct aesthetic intui-
tion. They do not require the cognition of empirical connections 
between value appearances and their conditions. Also, they are in 
principle intersubjectively verifiable, since the personal viewpoint from 
which they are made may be shared by a circle of subjects. However, 
they are not interpersonally valid. For they are not valid for those 
persons which stand outside the respective circle and adopt another 
point of view. 

INGAR DEN'S THEORY OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT 
209 
So there are two different versions of the relativist account of 
A-judgments. They agree in this that A-judgments are in a sense 
"relative", but they disagree about how this relativity is to be understood. 
On the first form of the relativist account, an A-judgment is valid only 
if related through its content to a set of conditions. On the second form, 
instead, an A-judgment is valid only under a set of conditions. In view 
of this, we may contrast those two relativist accounts of A-judgments 
as the "relative-content" theory and the "relative-validity" theory re-
spectively. 
I think there is no need to decide between these two forms of the 
relativist conception, since they may well go hand in hand, provided 
that they are applied to two different classes of A-judgments. The 
relative-validity theory seems to be right as applied to the "natural" or 
"spontaneous" A-judgments which are made in the pre-scientific com-
merce with the works of art. For it is not true that such natural 
appraisals can be explicated by statements about what aesthetic values a 
given work of art manifests to a properly qualified perceiver under 
specified circumstances. Certainly, in so far as they are legitimate, they 
can be "transformed into", or replaced by, such conditional statements, 
if we wish to render them intersubjectively valid. But this transformation 
consists in modification rather than in explication of their original 
sense. For the spontaneous appraisals claim to be unconditional and do 
not aspire to be interpersonally valid. The relative-content theory, on 
the other hand, seems to be right as applied to the "critical" or "reflec-
tive" A-judgments which are formed in the scientific discourse about 
works of art. For these should come up to scientific standards indeed. 
In conclusion, I think the two forms of the relativist theory, taken 
together, provide a more acceptable account of the aesthetic evaluations 
than the monosubjective-carriers theory advanced by Ingarden. More 
than this, I venture the opinion that they better fit in with the results of 
Ingarden's own analysis of the aesthetic experience and especially with 
his thesis of the aesthetic ambiguity of the work of art. 
University of Krakow 
NOTES 
I Ingarden, Selected Papers in Aesthetics, cd. by P. J. McCormick, Miinchen: Philoso-
phia Verlag, IYW'. p. 2Y. 
, Ingarden, The Cognition of the Literary Work of Art. trans. hy R. A. Crowley and 

210 
WLODZIMIERZ GALEWICZ 
K. R. Olson. Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1973, p. 14. Hereafter, for 
brevity, this will be cited only as Ingarden, The Cognition . 
.1 Ingarden, The Literary Work of Art, trans. by George G. Garbowicz, Evanston: 
Northwestern University Press, 1973, p. 332. 
4 See, for example, Ingarden, The Cognition, p. 411. 
, Ingarden, Selected Papers in Aesthetics, p. 92. 
I> Ingarden, The Cognition, p. 13. 
7 Lac. cit. 
x Ingarden, Selected Papers in Aesthetics, p. 92. 
Y Ibid., p. 122. 
]0 Ibid., p. 20. 
II Ibid., p. 98. 
12 Loc.cit. 
J.1 Ingarden, The Cognition, p. 13. 
14 Ingarden, The Literary Work of Art, p. 372. 
I, Ingarden, Man and Value, trans. by A. Szylewicz, Mi.inchen, Philosophia Verlag, 
1983, p. 136. 
II> Ingarden, The Cognition, p. 386. 
17 Lac. cit. 
IX See Ingarden, The Cognition, p. 387. 
IY Ibid., p. 394. 
20 Ibid" p. 369. 
21 Ibid., p. 389. 
'J') Ibid., p. 374. 
23 Ibid" p. 387. 
24 Ibid., p. 416. Italics mine. 
25 Ibid., p. 414. 
26 Loc. cit. 
27 Ibid., p. 415. 
2K Ibid., p. 414. 
2Y Ingarden, Selected Papers in Aesthetics, p. 30 . 
.111 Ingarden, The Literary Work of Art, p. 372 . 
.11 See Ingarden, The Cognition, p. 41 O . 
.12 Lac. cit. 
.1.1 See especially Ingarden, Studia z estetyki, tom III (Studies in Aesthetics, Vol. III), 
PWN Warszawa: 1970, pp. 306-308 . 
. H See, for example, Ingarden, Studia z estetyki, tom I (Studies in Aesthetics, Vol. I), 
PWN, Warszawa: 1957, p. 396 . 
.1, Cf. Ingarden, "Betrachtungen zum Problem der Objekivitiit," Zeitschrift Fir Philoso-
phische Forschung Vol. XXI, (1967), No. 1,31-46, and No.2, pp. 242-260 . 
.11> See note 34 . 
. 17 See note 35. 

JANINA MAKOTA 
ROMAN INGARDEN'S IDEA OF RELATIVELY 
ISOLATED SYSTEMS 
I. THE VIEWS OF INGARDEN 
The thought of relatively isolated systems has come to Ingarden's mind 
in connection with the problem of causality. Of some impact was also 
the attitude of the author who wanted to investigate the causal relations 
not as isolated cases but as members of the whole system of cases. I The 
role of causal relations is summarized by Ingarden in two points: 
I. the causal relation is a basis of the unity of the real world 
(perhaps the only one); 
2. due to it the world is not one simple object but a multiplicity of 
self-subsistent individual objects.2 
Ingarden still pursues his investigations in an ontological attitude, i.e., 
by confining himself to the consideration of pure possibilities and 
reserving metaphysics (possibly requiring a special metaphysical ex-
perience) for the future. He has not managed to take this last step. 
Various conceptions of causal relation which have come down from 
the philosophical tradition, and sometimes simply rejecting causality 
and reducing it to a succession of facts (Hume), seem to Ingarden 
unsatisfactory and therefore he penetratingly and thoroughly examines 
all the emerging difficulties by trying to find a way out of them. Above 
all he persistently tries to confute the absolute determinism, however, 
without omitting the less absolute forms. In the matter of causal relations 
there are several basic questions remarkably well solved by Ingarden 
or, at least, advanced in a right direction. They are as follows: the 
definition of a causal relation; the distribution of causes and effects in 
space and time (the spread of causal structure in the world); causal 
relations and the free will. In all those questions the relatively isolated 
systems play an irreplaceable role. Before elucidating it, it is, however, 
necessary to become briefly acquainted with Ingarden's views concern-
ing the causal relation to which problem there is devoted the third 
volume of The Controver!,] over the Existence of the World, indepen-
dently of the statements in the previous volumes of The Controversy 
and other works. 
211 
Hans H. Rudnick (ed.). Analecla Hus~erliana. Vol. XXX, 211-222. 
© 1990 KhlWer Academic Pllb/i~hers. 

212 
JANINA MAKOTA 
The notions elaborated earlier facilitate very much the disentangle-
ment, to some degree, of the confusion brought into the problem of 
causality by various authors. Ingarden has distinguished three kinds of 
objects, namely: objects persisting in time, processes, and events. The 
latter are momentary though they may be preceded and prepared by 
longer or shorter processes. And so, according to Ingarden, it is first of 
all events that are fitted for the role of the members of causal relations; 
processes (which always begin and end with events) may also suit this 
purpose, whereas things persisting in time cannot. A cause and an effect 
may take place only between real objects, existing in the same way. 
Thus one cannot speak of a causal relation, for example, between an act 
of consciousness, which is something real, and a purely intentional 
object.' The appearance of a cause by necessity produces an effect and 
also determines it. In this sense it is creative.4 
A direct cause is simultaneous with its effect. A cause is a dis-
turbance of an equilibrium, therefore it demands a complement, for 
which it cannot wait. Thus the occurrence of an event which is a cause 
results in simultaneous accomplishment of its effect as its complement." 
Causal relation, being of an existential character, cannot take place 
between objects distant in time, because when one event is existing, the 
other has already passed and as a past one it cannot be connected by 
an existential relation with the event just occurring.1> 
Ingarden considers the cause to be the last member of the active 
sufficient condition of an event; it is the cause that completes the 
already existing factors and, at the same time, activates them.7 The 
whole sufficient condition determines what the effect will be like but it 
is only due to the realization of the cause that the effect will take placeY 
Being the last completing factor, the cause must be simultaneous with 
its direct effect.~ It is only in relation to a system isolated from the rest 
of the world, at least in a way, that it is possible to state what is a 
sufficient condition for an event. In this way we come to the idea of 
relatively isolated systems. 
The simultaneousness of causes and their direct effects need not lead 
to the contraction of the history of the world to one moment, a 
possibility which Hume was afraid of, because between the events 
serving as causes of particular effects there may be periods when 
objects simply persist in being, i.e., the periods in which nothing 
happens, because it is not necessary for every effect to produce imme-
diately a new effect. It is the relatively isolated systems that warrant 

RELATIVEL Y ISOLATED SYSTEMS 
213 
such order in some regions of the world. The persistence in being is by 
Ingarden ascribed to things which for some length of time do not 
change, at least in some respect, and also to some processes, e.g., to a 
rectilinear movement going on in an empty space. The "persistence in 
being" belongs to the essence of existentially autonomous objects, and 
so the later phases of their persistence are no effects of the earlier 
phases. lo 
The cause is what brings about the transition from one existential 
state to another. Within the new state there is the effect. The effect is 
not the whole new state of a system but only what distinguishes the new 
state from the earlier. More exactly: the effect is the occurrence of those 
facts which distinguish the new state from the earlier. Correspondingly, 
the cause is not to be considered the whole past state of the given 
system. It is only an irruption of a disturbing factor into a system 
isolated in some respect and remaining in equilibrium. I I 
When considering the formal structure of the world, Ingarden detects 
in it a double discontinuity: (1) a discontinuity in what exists in the 
world simultaneously, (2) a discontinuity in what follows one another. 12 
The first discontinuity amounts to the assumption of relatively isolated 
systems. A relative isolation means a temporary isolation and only in 
some respect, as well as to some determinate limit. The isolation means 
that in the given respect a system jneither undergoes actions from the 
surrounding world nor affects this world itself. The number of the 
isolated sides of a given system, as well as the degree of isolation, may 
change in the course ·of time. In consequence the mutual openness of 
any two systems, i.e., the possibility of interaction may change. The 
sides in respect of which the systems are isolated ensure to them a 
determinate independence, whereas the sides in respect of which they 
are mutually open enable various relations between the systems which 
fact is the basis of the unity (cohesion) of the world. 13 
The isolation of particular systems in some respects is testified by the 
existence of "insulators" separating them from other systems; it may be 
also testified by a mutual indifference, i.e., "neutrality" of some of their 
states or processes. The "insulator" may be one-sided or two-sided. In 
the latter case it is impervious to the influences both from the outside of 
the system inwards and inversely. Some examples of the "insulators": a 
cuirass protects against strokes, clothes shelter from the cold, glass 
screens from some rays. Due to the isolation some processes within the 
given system either do not occur at all or are reduced. By rendering 

214 
JANINA MAKOTA 
the inside of a system independent of some outside processes, the 
"insulators" enable, at the same time, the proceeding of various pro-
cesses within the system. 
The impermeability to the outside influences is always (1) limited 
to processes or events of a definite kind; (2) the isolation is often 
imperfect, i.e., it does not eliminate some influences, only reduces them, 
whereby, however, it modifies the processes within the system. 14 The 
so-called "empty" space is an easily perceptible indication of the exis-
tence of relatively isolated systems. Ingarden insists that every separa-
tion of two simultaneously existing systems is a case of discontinuity in 
the being, a fact which conditions the persistence of unchanging states 
or the proceeding of uniform processes within particular systems. I) 
On the existence of relatively isolated systems, however, also depends 
the discontinuity of what proceeds in time; because a relative isolation 
of such systems from the world enables, during a period of time, a state 
of rest or continuation of uniform processes within them, on the 
assumption of an inertia in the real being. Moreover, Ingarden thinks 
that relatively isolated systems condition the very occurrence of causes 
in the real world. For it is possible to speak of causes only when they 
rea liter stand out in relief against the background of already existing 
circumstances to which they join as a new factor completing them to an 
active, sufficient condition of the effect. And it is possible to distinguish 
the cause from the corresponding circumstances only when in what 
exists there is something persisting in being, in addition to what 
changes; and it is for this that relatively isolated systems are necessary. 
After all, not only causes alone but also their distribution in the world 
and the ranges of causes and effects depend on the existence and the 
type of relatively isolated systems. I6 
Any two simultaneous events need not be members of the same 
causal relation, that is to say, they may be causally independent of one 
another. In such a case they belong to two different relatively isolated 
systems and take part in those of their sides in respect of which they are 
mutually closed. 
The world is one system qf many existentially autonomous individual 
objects which are either relatively isolated systems themselves or mem-
bers of such systems. 17 No object is totally isolated from the rest of the 
world. There must exist some basis of the unity of the world which is a 
multiplicity of individual objects. In the opinion of Ingarden two types 
of the factor uniting all the parts of the world into one whole are 

RELA TIVEL Y ISOLATED SYSTEMS 
215 
possible: (a) a field of forces, (b) direct and indirect causal relations. 
Both types are determined by the form and the material equipment of 
individual objects, therefore the ultimate basis of the unity of the world 
must be sought in the essence of the objects composing the world. 1 x 
Accoding to radical determinism, the world is a system forming one 
whole, and not a system of relatively isolated systems. In such a world 
there is no place either for the states persisting for some time changeless 
or for uniform processes. Consequently, neither would there be a place 
for an event completing a certain multiplicity of circumstances (i.e., for 
causes as defined by Ingarden). 19 And "if everything were causally 
dependent on everything", as is sometimes maintained, no experiment 
could be carried out because experimenting always requires the elimi-
nation of undesirable factors. 
In a world composed of many relatively isolated systems, in various 
systems, there are states which are simultaneous but independent of 
one another; on the other hand, there are also states interconnected by 
causal relations. The former correspond to those sides of two or more 
systems which are mutually protected, the latter to the sides mutually 
open. Of course, a causal relation may also take place within one 
system.211 Next, the author discusses various possibilities as to the outer 
and inner conditions of various events in superior systems. 
Ingarden admits that relatively isolated systems may comprise many 
variants. A partial separation of various systems within the world from 
their surrounding is a condition of their persistence for some time as 
something identical. A system remaining for some time in equilibrium 
may be thrust out of it by a "force" (cause) belonging to another system. 
Those two systems must be somehow separated from one another if, 
during a period of time, it does not come to the irruption of an agent 
disturbing the equilibrium. 
Ingarden discusses more exactly two examples of relatively isolated 
systems. One of them is man, another -
the constellations. Let us dwell 
on the first example. According to Ingarden, man is a relatively isolated 
system of a higher order, built hierarchically of many lower systems.21 
Within the human organism there are two main systems: A. The system 
enabling survival, B. The system of procreation. The subsequent division 
follows, e.g., A comprises: I. The basic skeletal and motorial system, II. 
The system of metabolism, III. The system of regulation, IV. The system 
of information. Those systems are further divided into lower and lower 
ones,zz Each of the distinguished systems is in an integument which 

216 
JANINA MAKOTA 
separates it from other systems and protects it against some influences; 
other influences, however, are selectively let in. The action of all the 
systems is co-ordinated so as to ensure a proper functioning of the 
organism. 
However, man is not only a body, but also a soul. Body is a 
hierarchy of many relatively isolated systems, and soul, for its part, is 
also such a system; and both systems find their expression in pure 
consciousness and in the modes of behaviour of the ego. The stream of 
consciousness is a plane of contact between body and soul, however, as 
a pure process it is no system itself. 
Statements concerning the relative isolation of the soul from the 
body, and also from the ego are expressed by Ingarden in no absolute 
way; as yet, he has only some intuitions and, therefore, he writes: "the 
things seem so-and-so." Thus the soul presents itself to Ingarden as a 
system relatively isolated from the ego. The author notices that the soul 
is not accessible to consciousness in all its range; sometimes the ego 
must overcome its resistance to "open" what is "closed" in it.23 It is also 
possible that the systems of human being change in the course of life. 
Next, Ingarden asks what conditions must be satisfied by those 
systems for free decisions of the ego to be possible.24 In his opinion, the 
problem of liberty may be solved only when liberty is understood not 
as absence of any cause but as independence of outer factors, enjoyed 
by the subject taking decisions, and when, at the same time, the radical 
determinism is confuted.25 Every event in the world must have its 
cause, this being demanded by its essence, therefore the decisions of 
the will, too, cannot be considered as having no cause.20 Here a 
terminological explanation is still necessary which would be helpful in 
placing the act of free decision among many possible events; namely, it 
is necessary to take into account what Ingarden says of the ranges of 
causes and effects. 
According to him, to every event there correspond two ranges: a 
range of causes and a range of effects. Each of those ranges comprises 
two areas, an inner and an outer area. Next, Ingarden draws up a table 
of theoretically possible types of events, conforming with three different 
values which may be taken by the four ranges in question. The most 
promising seem to be the events of partial ranges. 
The range of an event (in the moment t) is partial, if not all of non-
posterior, respectively non-anterior, events in the world (or only inside 
a corresponding object persisting in time, or outside it), but only some 
of them belong to that range.27 

RELA T1VEL Y ISOLATED SYSTEMS 
217 
Ingarden looks for the possibility of finding in the world a place for 
the free acts of will; however, he does not claim to have already solved 
this age-old problem. In his opinion, the way one should take is to show 
(first from the formal-ontological point of view) that such events that 
have no outer cause, but issue from an inner event alone, may be 
included into the causal network of the world.n At any rate, among 
many types of events, such events seem possible, and it is under them 
that "the free decisions of will" would fall. In the treatise Ober die 
Verantwortung (written later though published earlier than the third 
volume of The Controversy), Ingarden is more sure that in the relatively 
isolated systems "there is a key enabling to solve the so-called problem 
of liberty." 2~ Ingarden admits the possibility of various degrees of the 
liberty of decision but does not develop this question in detail. 
2. SOME CRITICAL REMARKS 
The idea of relatively isolated systems is of greatest importance for the 
understanding of what the unity of the world consists in. Connected 
with the problem of causality properly grasped, it is a safe passage 
between the Scylla of absolute determinism, conceiving the world as 
one system, of one causal chain, and the Charybdis of the world broken 
up into particular individual objects of which nobody knows why they 
adhere to one another. With the interconnection of the systems of lower 
and higher orders, and finally with the unity of the whole world, a 
relative independence of particular systems has been maintained and 
the possibility of realizing their own action within them. Thereby the 
network of causal relations in the world has become more complicated 
but, at the same time, loosened, admitting a continually changing 
mosaic of places in which momentarily nothing happens, and -
in the 
second dimension -
in accordance with our everyday experience, 
extending in time. 
At the same time the results of the existential- and formal-ontological 
investigations, carried out earlier, in particular the distinguishing of 
three kinds of objects in the real world, have proved useful: the objects 
persisting in time, processes and events. Now it looks as if the whole of 
the world, at first considered, so to say, statically, has been set in 
motion and has appeared in all its harmonious dynamism. All the 
conceptions prove interconnected. And so causal relations are defined 
by Ingarden in such a way as to be possible precisely in a world built of 
the kinds of objects which had been distinguished by him earlier. 

218 
JANINA MAKOTA 
Nevertheless some particular points have not been explained to the 
end and therefore they arouse questions. As an example may serve the 
question what is the scope of applicability of the idea of relatively 
isolated systems, of course, first in the aspect of causal relations? When 
speaking about man, Ingarden is inclined to treat the soul as a relatively 
isolated system in relation both to the body and to the conscious ego. 
However, he does not discuss those relations in detail. Here a doubt 
arises whether it is allowed to treat the psycho-spiritual sphere of man 
on a par with the systems within the human body or other physical 
systems. Between the particular organs or bodily systems there are 
always some "insulators," e.g., membranes coating the organs. Between 
the soul and the body something similar neither is nor can be, because 
the soul is not extended in space, though connected with a spatial body. 
Is that so that the role of an "insulator" is played by the very diversity 
of those entities? The second type of "insulation" distinguished by 
Ingarden is mutual "neutrality," but the author meant something like 
chemical neutrality. Between soul and body such reactions are, of 
course, excluded. Ingarden is well aware of this distinction of the soul 
and, as nobody before, he has investigated and described the psycho-
spiritual side of man. Only it seems to me that, the difference between 
body and soul being so essential, those two kinds of systems -
if soul is 
acknowledged to be a relatively isolated system at all -
cannot be 
placed, as it were, on the same plane, in one network of causes and 
effects. 
The soul is said to be a relatively isolated system not only in relation 
to the body, but also in relation to the conscious ego. This is supposed 
to be testified by various facts occurring in the soul, of which the ego 
does not know, of which it learns only afterwards (e.g., an originating 
love), and also by the fact that the soul often closes itself against the 
ego.30 Even if we accept such facts, is this sufficient? After all, no 
"insulator" is there and no mutual "neutrality" (even in the spiritual 
sense) and previously Ingarden wrote that the pure subject is "only a 
peculiar form, a specific moment of the shape, assumed of necessity by 
human soul coming to self-knowledge and finding vent for itself in 
conscious experiences and conscious action."31 And so the ego is 
nothing else than the soul itself in its peculiar character of a conscious 
representative of the whole human being. Ingarden also states that the 
stream of consciousness, the subject and the soul seem to be only some 
sides of a compactly built monad.32 If so, one can hardly speak of 

RELATIVEL Y ISOLATED SYSTEMS 
219 
relatively isolated systems within the soul itself. I think Ingarden's 
statements of the "ledges" of the soul to be right, but the ego draws 
from them as from its own "ledges." The ego seems to me pulsating, 
sharpened, so to say, in cognitive acts, especially those directed to the 
world or to scientific abstractions, and "widening" in affective states, in 
those of loosened attention, and the like. And between the "spheres" 
captured by the ego there are no boundaries, therefore one cannot 
speak here of relatively isolated systems. This whole sphere, in spite of 
various functions, is simple. 
The most difficult is the question of free decisions of will. Ingarden 
acknowledges as free the acts independent of outer causes, but not 
dispensing with an inner cause. The relatively isolated systems admit 
such events. However, Ingarden gives no example of such an inner 
cause for the act of will. The act of will is one of the possible acts 
gushing from the ego as from a spring. This act is an event; it has no 
outer cause, quite true. But what is its inner cause? Another act? In 
such a case this earlier act would be the proper act of will. Behind the 
act of wiJI there is only the ego, the conscious subject which is a thing 
persisting in time. Of course, it is the subject that is free, and the act of 
will is such only because it is an act of the free ego. Before expressing a 
particular act of will, the ego may consider various possibilities. But 
they are nothing real. It is only the act of choosing between them that 
will be real. The possibilities in question belong to the sphere of 
realizable values. The ego chooses freely. Every cause produces a 
corresponding effect with necessity. The possibilities (values) between 
which the ego makes a choice do not determine it; after all, they are no 
real events, so they cannot be causes. The presented goods (if not 
genuine, then considered to be such) may prompt us to a decision, 
impel us to it; but taking decision, responding to stimulation, rests with 
the subject, capable of choosing. Man has always a sense of free choice. 
Who apart from the person accomplishing an act has a better possibility 
to learn its character? A free act of will appears -
by human standard, 
of course -
as the first cause of an action, and the soul is an enclave 
where such acts may arise. An act of will always produces an inner 
effect consisting in the change of the ego.33 For example, in the moral 
sphere an act of will may render it better or worse. However, act of wiJI 
alone cannot produce an outer effect unless accompanied by an action 
of the body. This may be no more than lifting a hand. Act of will brings 
about the activation of a cause which alone enters into the network of 

220 
JANINA MAKOTA 
causal relations of the world; it does so, as it were, from above, from 
another plane. It is throwing a stone that is the direct cause of breaking 
the window-pane. The act of will decides that I start throwing a stone. 
A process occurring in the organism may be manifested -
this would 
be a passage to another sphere of the same reality. Whereas an act of 
will, accompanied by an outer action, is a passage to another reality and 
origination of a new causal chain. 
And here Ingarden's idea of relatively isolated systems proves irre-
placeable because the proposed network of causes and effects in the 
world is such as to admit inclusion of action following the free decisions 
of will. This network is not everywhere compact, so into its numerous 
"interstices" there may enter the causal chains originated by acts of will 
and actions in the outer world which follow them. An outer action may 
accompany an act of will immediately. If some time elapses between a 
decision and the realization of a corresponding action, it is necessary to 
assume that the taking of decision is one act of will leaving only a trace 
on the subject, and then comes another act decisive for an undelayed 
undertaking of an action. The subject may freely choose what it wants 
to successfully realize, of course, between the empirical possibilities 
opened at the given moment of the world and, within some limits, it 
may also choose the time of realization. The freedom of the subject 
consists, inter alia, in the possibility of initiating new causal chains; the 
giving up of an action is also availing oneself of freedom. 34 
Reflecting on the applicability of Ingarden's idea of relatively isolated 
systems, I think that it could be expanded also to some socio-cultural 
entities though they are existentially heteronomous. Of course, on 
account of the fact that such entities do not belong to the physical 
world but only form a sort of superstructure above it, such systems 
would have no direct influence on causality. I have in mind such 
formations as states, various societies, companies, and the like. In 
consequence of agreements, compulsion or in other ways there arise 
various social systems, relatively isolated from other systems. Corre-
sponding laws and rules control the access to determinate societies, 
intruders are not admitted. Hence -
until violence, inner transforma-
tions, or new agreements change those contracts -
within the societies 
of various kinds and degrees (though always anchored somehow in the 
world), actions may be carried out that are not disturbed by any outside 
influences or admitting those influences only selectively. 
The communication with other societies takes place within more or 

RELATIVELY ISOLATED SYSTEMS 
221 
less definite limits. All this -
on the plane of a superstructure -
does 
not belong to the causal network of the world but indirectly influences 
it in some way. The borders of states are fortified and lined with well-
armed people; families separate themselves from the world with the 
walls of their houses; and some companies or other carryon their 
independent action in their own ways. Thus the established societies are 
not without influence on the processes occurring in the physical world 
and on the direction of various causal chains which would take another 
course without human interference, not a direct one, but mediated by 
those peculiar relatively isolated systems. 
In the social world it is possible to speak of other, still less per-
ceptible, relatively isolated systems. Borders are here noticeable only 
for people of corresponding susceptibility. For example, various per-
sons, consciously or not, generate around them an atmosphere which 
protects them against an undesired approach of somebody. In the 
presence of some people "it is unbecoming" to behave more freely, the 
dignity emanating from somebody may intimidate, it may make one feel 
at a distance, and the like. In this manner there is formed here some-
thing like a relatively isolated system. Such atmosphere may arise also 
in some other places. In a temple it is unseemly to speak loud, unless it 
is a prayer; it is necessary to respect the silence of a cemetery or a place 
sanctified by someone's martyrdom, and the like. All those impercep-
tible insulating borders persist, of course, only until somebody breaks 
through them brutally. It is scarcely necessary to add that such relatively 
isolated systems do not belong to the causal network of the world, 
though in an indirect way some causal actions in the world are by them 
either provoked or thwarted. 
Krakow 
NOTES 
I ..... erst wenn man die kausalen Beziehungen nicht als isoliertc Fiille, sondern als 
Glieder in einem ganzen System von Fiillen hetrachtet .... ist es miiglich, gewisse 
Aspekte dieser Beziehung ans Licht zu hringen .... " R. Ingarden: Der Streit 11m die 
Exislenz der Well, Vol. III: Uber die kausale Struktur der realen Well. Tiihingen 1974, 
p.3. 
, Ibid., p. 2 . 
.1 R. Ingarden: "Quelques remarques sur la relation de causalite." Studill I'hilosophica, 
Vol. III, Cracovie et Posnaniae 1948, p. 166. 

222 
JANINA MAKOTA 
4 R. Ingarden: Ober die kausale Struktur ... , p. 18. 
5 Ibid., p. 51. 
I, Ibid., p. 65. 
7 "Die Ursache ist aber nur das zeitlich letzte sich hinzugesellende Glied der aus vielen 
Faktoren bestehenden aktiven hinreichenden Bedingung eines Ereignisses, das diese 
Faktoren zu der hinreichenden Bedingung ergiinzt und sie zugleich aktiviert ... ". Ibid., 
p.53. 
x R. lngarden: "Quelques remarques ... ," p. 164. 
y R. Ingarden: Ober die kausale Struktllr . .. , p. 69. 
10 Ibid., p. 73. 
II R. Ingarden: Der Streit urn die Existenz der Welt, Vol. I. Tiibingen 1964, pp. 103-
lOS. 
12 R. Ingarden: Oberdie kallsale Struklur . .. , p. 76. 
J 3 Ibid., p. 102. 
\4 Ibid., pp. 106-107. 
1.\ Ibid., pp. 111-112. 
I" Ibid., pp. 115-11 7. 
17 Ibid., p. 140. 
IH Ibid.,pp.141-142. 
IY Ibid., pp. 258-259. 
20 R. Ingarden: Ober die Verantwortung. Ihre ontischen Fundamente. Stuttgart 1970, 
pp. 103-104. 
21 Ibid., pp. 71-72. 
22 Ibid., pp. 74-77. 
23 " ... es scheint, dass die Seele dem Ich gegeniiber ebenfalb ein relativ isoliertes 
System bildet, wie der Leib, das dem Ich gegeniiber zum Teil "offen", zum Teil aber 
"verschlossen" ist, und dass sie damit auch dem Bewusstseinsstrom nicht in allen ihren 
Bereichen zugiinglich, "offen" is!. Das Ich kann versuchen, das "Verschlossene" in 
seiner Seele "aufzuschliessen". So wie jede Isolation eines Systems bei entsprechender 
Intensitiit des Angriffs und bei sonstigen Umstiinden durchbrochen werden kann, so ist 
es auch mit den "Scheidewiinden", die die Seele manchmal von dem Ich und dem 
Bewusstsein trennen". Ibid., pp. 93-94. 
24 Ibid" pp. 97-98. 
25 Ibid" p. 100. 
26 R. Ingarden: Ober die kausale Struktllr ... , p. 143. 
27 Ibid., p. 211. 
2H Ibid., pp. 401-402. 
2" R. Ingarden: Ober die Verantwortung ... , p. 68. 
30 Ibid., p. 94. 
31 R. Ingarden: Der Streit . .. , Vol. 2, part 2, Tiibingen 1965, p. 321. The quotation 
was translated by the authoress of this paper. 
32 Ibid., p. 325. 
33 Cf. also: "The precondition of freedom is the concrete ego, which while it is the 
subject is also the object determined by the acts of will". K. Wojtyla: The Acting Person. 
Trans!. by A. Potocki, Dordrecht: Holland/Boston: USA/London: England, 1979, p. 
120. 
34 Cf. also: "This freedom is best visualized by the human being in the experience aptly 
epitomized in the phrase'I may but I need not.''' Ibid., p. 100. 

PART V 
INGARDEN BIBLIOGRAPHY 

ROMANINGARDEN:ANINTERNATIONAL 
BIBLIOGRAPHY (1915-1989) 
INTRODUCTORY REMARK 
The magnitude of Ingarden's philosophy and Wirkung becomes clearly 
evident to anyone who tackles the enterprise of compiling a bibliog-
raphy of the Polish phenomenologist. This bibliography is the first to 
cover all Ingarden scholarship on a comprehensive international scale. 
It follows the standardized format consistent with the received norms of 
bibliographical display. Due respect must nevertheless be paid to the 
pioneering achievement of Andrzej P&hawski who published the very 
first Ingarden bibliography in 1964 and an updated version in 1985 
together with R. Jagannathan, P. J. McCormick, and J. Sidorek. For 
completeness and comparison for accuracy, both versions have neces-
sarily been consulted. 
Ingarden's own writings were and still are published in an unusually 
large number of countries and languages. As a consequence this is a 
truly international bibliography which assumes knowledge of the major 
European languages and supplies translation into English of the lesser-
known languages. Some of his publications are very hard to find 
because political conditions had their effect on scholarship and publica-
tions during WW II and also during the turmoil of political upheavals 
after the war. Lacking continuity caused by these events has, for 
example, left gaps in the publication of journals so that the bibliog-
rapher's task turns into a nightmare, not only because the journals 
could not be published on a regular schedule, but also because the 
issues that were published never arrived at libraries which one would 
justifiably suspect of having them. Consequently, compiling an Ingarden 
bibliography is a monumental task involving at least a decade's work of 
love that always reminds one of the fallibility of humankind. 
This bibliography is divided into two sections. In chronological 
sequence of publication, the first section lists Ingarden's own works as 
far as they deal with philosophical and aesthetic issues; the second 
section lists secondary literature in alphabetical order according to 
authors' names. The first section is subdivided into books; articles and 
225 
Hans If. Rudnick (ed.), Analecta Husserliana, Vol. XXX, 225-295. 
© 1990 Kluwer Academic Publishers. 

226 
HANS H. RUDNICK AND JOLANTA W. WAWRZYCKA 
treatises; reviews, lectures and miscellanea; translations; and letters by 
Roman Ingarden. The second section is subdivided into books and 
articles; and dissertations dealing with aspects of Ingarden's work. Some 
representative reviews of Ingarden's works have also been included. In 
three cases, titles of articles misspelled in the magazines they were 
published in have been corrected. 
While the compilers of this bibliography have done their very best to 
insure the accuracy of the provided data, flaws and errors will -
under 
the given conditions -
have nevertheless found their way into these 
pages. We apologize for such failings, inexcusable as they are, and shall 
be grateful for your understanding and for the kindness of your 
providing us with corrections. At this time an annotated Ingarden 
bibliography has to remain a desideratum. Our primary concern had to 
be the establishment of the corpus from which an annotated bibliog-
raphy may later emerge. 
H. H. R. 
J. w. w. 

AAS 
AdP 
AGP 
AHFMS 
Arbor 
BgB 
BJA 
BPTJ 
BuR 
CLS 
CollG 
DaH 
DeLit 
Delo 
Dialogue 
DialogW 
DU 
DVLG 
DzLit 
DZP 
DzPol 
EP 
ErasmusE 
FL 
FZPT 
GQ 
Helikon 
HumanS 
IPQ 
Izraz 
ABBREVIATIONS 
PERIODICALS 
Asian and African Studies 
Archives de Philosophie 
Archiv flir Geschichte der Philosophie 
Archiwum Historii Filozofii i Mysli Spolecznej [Archives of History of 
Philosophy & Social Thought] 
Arbor: Ciencia, Pensamiento y Cultura 
Berichte tiber die gesamte Biologie 
British Journal of Aesthetics 
Biuletyn Polskiego Towarzystwa Jt<zykoznawczego [Bulletin of the 
Polish Linguistic Society] 
Bucknell Review: A Scholarly Journal of Letters, Arts and Science 
Comparative Literature Studies 
Colloquia Germanica: Internationale Zeitschrift flir Germanische 
Sprach- und Literaturwissenschaft 
Dialectics and Humanism 
Deutsche Literaturzeitung 
Delo: Mesecni Knjizevni Casopis [Delo: A Monthly Literary Journal] 
Dialogue: Canadian Philosophical Review 
Dialog: Miesit<cznik Poswit<cony Dramaturgii Wsp6lczesnej: Teatralnej, 
Filmowej, Radiowej, Telewizyjnej [Dialogue: A Monthly for Contem-
porary Dramaturgy in Theatre, Film, Radio and Television] 
Der Deutschunterricht: Beitriige zu Seiner Praxis und Wissenschaft-
lichen Grundlegung 
Deutsche Vierteljahrsschrift flir Literaturwissenschaft und Geistesge-
schichte 
Dziennik Literacki [Literary Journal] 
Deutsche Zeitschrift ftir Philosophie 
Dziennik Polski [Polish Daily] 
Etudes Philosophiques 
Erasmus in English 
Forschungsbericht Literaturwissenschaft 
Freiburger Zeitschrift flir Philosophie und Theologie 
German Quarterly 
Helikon: Vilagirodalmi Figyelo [World Literature Observer] 
Human Studies: A Journal for Philosophy and the Social Sciences 
International Philosophical Quarterly 
Izraz: Casopis za Knjiievnu i Umjetnicku Kritiku [Izraz: Journal of 
Literature and Art Criticism] 
227 

228 
JAAC 
JBSP 
JHPh 
JP 
JPol 
JppF 
KFil 
KFilm 
KiS 
Knji 
KnjiK 
KnjIst 
KPsych 
LangQ 
LiLi 
LJGG 
LMi 
Mind 
MLit 
MSch 
NaP 
NiS 
NKs 
NLH 
NoK 
Nurt 
OL 
PFil 
PhiL 
PhR 
PHum 
PJGG 
PKul 
PL 
PPer 
PPow 
PPR 
Problemi 
PRun 
Poetica 
Poetique 
PoT 
PWar 
PWsp 
RdE 
ABBREVIATIONS 
Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism 
The Journal of the British Society for Phenomenology 
Journal of the History of Philosophy 
Journal of Philosophy 
J,<zyk Polski [Polish Language] 
Jahrbuch flir Philosophie und phanomenologische Forschung 
K wartalnik Filozoficzny [Philosophical Quarterly] 
Kwartalnik Filmowy [Film Quarterly] 
Kultura i Spoleczenstwo [Culture & Society] 
Knjiz.evnost [Literature] 
Knjizevna Kritika: Casopis za Estetiku Knjizevnosti [Literary Criticism. 
A Journal on Literary Aesthetics] 
Knjizevna Istorija [Literary History] 
K wartalnik Psychologiczny [Psychological Quarterly] 
The USF Language Quarterly 
Zeitschrift flir Literaturwissenschaft und Linguistik 
LiteraturwissenschaftIiches 
lahrbuch 
im 
Auftrage 
der 
Gorres-
GeseIIschaft 
Literaturna Misiil [Literary Thought] 
Mind: A Quarterly Review of Philosophy 
Miesi,<cznik Literacki [Literary Monthly] 
Modem Schoolman 
Nauka Polska [Polish Science] 
Nauka i Sztuka [Science & Art] 
Nowa KsillZka [The New Book] 
New Literary History: A Journal of Theory and Interpretation 
Nowa Kultura [The New Culture] 
Nurt: 
Miesi,<cznik 
Spoleczno-Kulturalny 
[Trend: 
Socio-Cultural 
Monthly] 
Orbis Litterarum 
Przegllld Filozoficzny [Philosophical Review] 
Philosophischer Literaturanzeiger 
Philosophical Review 
Przegilld Humanistyczny [Humanistic Review] 
Philosophisches Jahrbuch der Gorres-GeseIIschaft 
Przegilld Kulturalny [Cultural Review] 
Pami,<tnik Literacki [Literary Memoir] 
Philosophische Perspektiven 
Przegilld Powszechny [The Common Review] 
Philosophy and Phenomenological Research: A Quarterly Journal 
Problemi: Periodico Quadrimestrale di Cultura 
Philosophische Rundschau 
Poetica: Zeitschrift flir Sprach- und Literaturwissenschaft 
Poetique: Revue de Theorie et d' Analyse Litteraires 
Poetics Today: Theory and Analysis of Literature and Communication 
Przegl~d Warszawski [Warsaw Review] 
Przegllld Wsp6lczesny [Contemporary Review] 
Rivista di Estetica 

RdF 
RE 
RePh 
RevM 
RFil 
RIPh 
RLC 
RMM 
RoFil 
RoHum 
RoLit 
RPh 
RPL 
RuchL 
RUO 
RusL 
SAG 
Samtiden 
Sapienza 
SchM 
SDi 
SFil 
sri 
Slavia 
SMet 
SPC 
SPhiP 
SPhiS 
SprPAU 
SprPTPN 
SprTNL 
SprTNT 
SprWTN 
SRun 
SST 
StEs 
S12 
Teksty 
TIl 
TPol 
Tw 
TygP 
Univ 
Verri 
ABBREVIATIONS 
Revista de Filosofie 
Revue d'Esthetique 
Recherches Philosophiques 
Review of Metaphysics 
Ruch Filozoficzny [Philosophical Movement] 
Revue Internationale de Philosophie 
Revue de LitU:rature Comparee 
Revue de Metaphysique et de Morale 
Roczniki Filozoficzne [Annals of Philosophy] 
Roczniki Humanistyczne [Annals of the Humanities] 
Roczniki Literackie [Annals of Literature] 
Revue Philosophique de la France et de I 'Etranger 
Revue Philosophique de Louvain 
Ruch Literacki [Literary Movement] 
Revue de I'Universite d'Ottawa 
Russian Literature 
Stuttgarter Arbeiten zur Germanistik 
229 
Samtiden: Tidsskrift for Politikk, Litteratur og Samfunnssp~rsmAI [The 
Present: Journal on Politics, Literature and Entertainment] 
Sapienza: Rivista Internazionale di Filosofia e di Teologia 
Schweizer Monatshefte: Zeitschrift flir Politik, Wirtschaft, Kultur 
Slovenske Divadlo: Revue Dramatickych Umeni [Slovak Theater: Revue 
of Dramatic Art] 
Studia Filozoficzne [Studies in Philosophy] 
Swiat i Zycie [World & Life] 
Slavia: Casopis pro Slovanskou Filologii [Slavia: Journal of Slovak 
Philology] 
Studia Metodologiczne [Studies in Methodology] 
Studia Philosophiae Christianae 
Studia Philosophica (Polish) 
Studia Philosophica (Swiss) 
Sprawozdania PAU [Reports of the PAU] 
Sprawozdania PTPN [Reports of the PTPN] 
Sprawozdania TNL [Reports of the TNL] 
Sprawozdania TNT [Reports of the TNT] 
Sprawozdania WTN [Reports of the WTN] 
Slavische Rundschau 
Studies in Soviet Thought 
Studia Estetyczne [Studies in Aesthetics] 
Sprache im technischen Zeitalter 
Teksty: Teoria Literatury; Krytyka; Interpretacja [Texts: Literary 
Theory; Criticism; Interpretation] 
Tygodnik Ilustrowany [Weekly Illustrated] 
Tydzieri Polski [Polish Week] 
Tw6rczosc [Artistic Creativity] 
Tygodnik Powszechny [The Common Weekly] 
Universitas: Zeitschrift flir Wissenschaft, Kunst und Literatur 
II Verri: Rivista di Letteratura 

230 
VoFi 
WB 
WHR 
WLit 
YCC 
ZAaK 
ZaLit 
ZeD 
:liM 
:lLit 
Znak 
ZpF 
ZRL 
PAN 
PAU 
PTF 
PTPN 
PWN 
TNL 
TNT 
WL 
WTN 
ABBREVIATIONS 
Voprosy Filosofii [Questions of Philosophical Theory] 
Weimarer Beitriige: Zeitschrift fUr Literaturwissenschaft. Asthetik und 
Kulturtheorie 
Western Humanities Review 
Wiadomosci Literackie [Literary News] 
Yearbook of Comparative Criticism 
Zeitschrift fUr Asthetik und allgemeine Kunstwissenschaft 
Zagadnienia Literackie [Problems of Literature] 
Zeitschrift fUr Deutschkunde 
:lycie i Mysl [Life & Thought] 
:lycie Literackie [Literary Life] 
Znak: Miesie<cznik [The Sign: A Monthly] 
Zeitschrift fUr philosophische Forschung 
Zagadnienia Rodzaj6w Literackich [Problems of the Literary Genres] 
INSTITUTIONS AND PUBLISHERS 
Polska Akademia Nauk [Polish Academy of Sciences] 
Polska Akademia Umieje<tnosci [Polish Academy of Learning] 
Polskie Towarzystwo Filozoficzne [Polish Philosophical Society] 
Polskie Towarzystwo Przyjaci61 Nauk [Polish Society of Friends of 
Sciences] 
Panstwowe Wydawnictwo Naukowe [Polish Scientific Publishers] 
Towarzystwo Naukowe we Lwowie [Lw6w Scientific Society] 
Towarzystwo Naukowe w Toruniu [Torun Scientific Society] 
Wydawnictwo Literackie (Krak6w) [Literary Publishers (Krak6w)] 
Wrodawskie Towarzystwo Naukowe [Wrodaw Scientific Society] 

ROMAN INGARDEN 
INTERNATIONAL BIBLIOGRAPHY (1915-1989) 
PRIMARY SOURCES 
Books and Major Works 
1. Intuition und Intellekt bei Henri Bergson. Darstellung und Versuch einer 
Kritik. Inaugural Dissertation. Halle: Buchdruckerei des Waisenhauses, 1921. 
2. "Intuition und Intellekt bei Henri Bergson." JPpF 5 (1922): 285~61. 
3. Uber die Stellung der Erkenntnistheorie im System der Philosophie. Halle: 
Niemeyer, 1925. 
4. "Essentiale Fragen. Ein Beitrag zum Wesensproblem." JPpF 7 (1925): 
125-304. 
5. Das literarische Kunstwerk. Eine Untersuchung aus dem Grenzgebiet der 
Ontologie, Logik und Literaturwissenschaft. Halle: Niemeyer, 1931. 
6. 0 poznawaniu dziela literackiego [The Cognition of the Literary Work of 
Art]. Lw6w: Ossolineum, 1937. 
7. 0 budowie obrazu. Szkic z teorii sztuki [On the Structure of Painting. A 
Sketch in the Theory of Art], Vol. 67, no. 1. Krak6w: Rozprawy Wydzialu 
Filologicznego PAU, 1946. 
8. Sp6r 0 istnienie swiata [The Controversy Over the Existence of the World], 
Vol. 1. Krak6w: PAU, 1947. 
9. Szkice z jilozoJii literatury [Sketches in the Philosophy of Literature], Vol. 1: 
"Polonista." L6di: Sp61dzielnia wydawnicza, 1947. 
10. Sp6r 0 istnienie swiata [The Controversy over the Existence of the World], 
Vol. 2. Krak6w: PAU, 1948. 
11. Studia z estetyki [Studies in Aesthetics], Vol. 1. Warszawa: PWN, 1957. 
12. Studia z estetyki [Studies in Aesthetics], Vol. 2. Warszawa: Prace 
Filozoficzne PWN, 1958. 
13. 0 dziele literackim; badania z pogranicza ontologii, teorii j(}zyka i jilozojii 
literatury [The Literary Work of Art. An Investigation on the Borderlines of 
Ontology, Logic and Theory of Literature], translated from German into 
Polish by Maria Turowicz. Warszawa: PWN, 1960. 
14. Das literarische Kunstwerk, Anhang: Von den Funktionen der Sprache im 
Theaterschauspiel. 2. verbesserte und erweiterte Auflage. Ttibingen: 
Niemeyer, 1960. 
15. Sp6r 0 istnienie swiata [The Controversy Over theExistence of the World], 
Vol. 1, 2nd ed. Warszawa: PWN, 1960. 
16. Sp6r 0 istnienie swiata [The Controversy Over theExistence of the World], 
Vol. 2, 2nd ed. Warszawa: Prace Filozoficzne PWN, 1961. 
17. Untersuchungen zur Ontologie der Kunst: Musikwerk, Bild, Architektur, 
Film. Ttibingen: Niemeyer, 1962. 
231 

232 
HANS H. RUDNICK AND JOLANTA W. W A WRZYCKA 
18. Issledovania po Estetikie [Studies in Aesthetics], translated from Polish into 
Russian by A. Jermilova and B. Fiedorova. Foreword by W. Razumny. 
Moskwa: Izdatielstwo Inostrannoj Litieratury, 1962. 
19. Z badan nad jilozojiq wsp6lczesnq [Studies in Contemporary Philosophy]. 
Warszawa: PWN, 1963. 
20. Time and Modes of Being, translated by Helen Michejda. Springfield, IL: 
Charles C. Thomas Pub!., 1964. 
21. Der Streit urn die Existenz der Welt, Vo!. I: Existenzialontologie. Tiibingen: 
Niemeyer, 1964. 
22. Der Streit urn die Existenz der Welt, Vo!. 2: Formalontologie, Part 1: Form 
und Wesen. Tiibingen: Niemeyer, 1965. 
23. Der Streit urn die Existenz der Welt, Vo!. 2: Formalontologie, Part 2: Welt 
und Bewuj3tsein. Tiibingen: Niemeyer, 1965. 
24. Das Iiterarische Kunstwerk, Anhang: Von den Funktionen der Sprache im 
Theaterschauspie!. 3. durchgesehene Auflage. Tiibingen: Niemeyer, 1965. 
25. 0 strukturze obrazu [The Structure of Painting],translated from Polish to 
Slovak by Eduard Andras, revised by Marian Varess. Bratislava: Siovenske 
Vydavatelstvo Krasnej Literatury, 1965. 
26. PrzeZycie, dzielo, wartosc [Experience, Work of Art and Value]. Krak6w: 
WL,1966. 
27. Studia z estetyki [Studies in Aesthetics], Vois. I and 2, 2nd ed. Warszawa: 
PWN, 1966. [With an Ingarden bibliography by Andrzej Poltawski.] 
28. 0 poznavanf Iiterarnfho dfla [The Cognition of the Literary Work of Art], 
translated from Polish into Czech by Hana Jechova, Overview and 
Introduction by Jan Patocka. Prague: Ceskoslovensky Spisovatel, 1967. 
[Translation of 0 poznawaniu dziela Iiterackiego.] 
29. Vom Erkennen des Iiterarischen Kunstwerks. Tiibingen: Niemeyer; and 
Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1968. 
30. Fenomenologia dell' opera letteraria, translated by Guliana Brozich-Lipszer 
and Sergio Checconi. Milano: Silva, 1968. [Translation of Das Iiterarische 
Kunstwerk.] 
31. Erlebnis, Kunstwerk und Wert. Vortrage zur Asthetik 1937-1967. Tiibingen: 
Niemeyer; and Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1969. 
32. Uber die Verantwortung; ihre ontischen Fundamente. Stuttgart: Reclam, 
1970. 
33. Innj(Jring 1 Edmund Husserl Fenomenologi [Introduction to Edmund 
Husserl's Phenomenology]. Oslo: Johan Grundt Tanum, 1970. 
34. Studia z estetyki, Tom III [Studies in Aesthetics, Vo!.3]. Warszawa: PWN, 
1970. 
35. U podstaw teorii poznania [Foundations of the Theory of Cognition]. 
Warszawa: PWN, 1971. 
36. 0 Saznavanju Knjiievnog Umetnickog Dela [The Cognition of the Literary 
Work of Art], translated by Branimir Zivojinovic, Knjizevna misao series, 
Vo!. 3. Beograd: Srpska knjizevna zadruga, 1971. [Translation of Vom 
Erkennen des Iiterarischen Kunstwerks.] 
37. Ksiqieczka 0 czlowieku [A Little Book on Man]. Krakow: WL, 1972. 
38. Das Iiterarische Kunstwerk, Anhang: Von den Funktionen der Sprache im 
Theaterschauspie!. 4. unveriinderte Auflage. Tiibingen: Niemeyer, 1972. 

ROMAN INGARDEN INTERNATIONAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 
233 
39. Z teorii jf;zyka i JilozoJicznych podstaw logiki [The Theory of Language and 
the Philosophical Foundations of Logic], Danuta Gierulanka, ed. Warszawa: 
PWN,1972. 
40. Ksiqzeczka 0 czlowieku [A Little Book on Man], 2nd ed. Krak6w: WL, 1973. 
4l. The Literary Work of Art: An Investigation on the Borderlines of Ontology. 
Logic and Theory of Literature. With an Appendix on the Functions of 
Language in the Theatre, translated and with an introduction by George G. 
Grabowicz. Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press, 1973. [With a short 
Ingarden bibliography.] 
42. The Cognition of the Literary Work of Art, translated by Ruth Ann Crowley 
and Kenneth R. Olson. Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press, 1973. 
43. A obra de arte literaria [The Literary Work of Art], translated by Albin E. 
Beau, Maria da Concei~ao Puga and Joao F. Barrento, preface by Maria 
Manuela Saraiva. Lisbon: Funda~ao Calouste Gulbenkian, 1973. [Translation 
of Das literarische Kunstwerk.] 
44. Utwor muzyczny i sprawa jego tozsamosci [The Musical Work and the 
Problem ofIts Identity]. Krak6w: Polskie Wydawnictwo Muzyczne, 1973. 
45. Der Streit um die Existenz der Welt, Vol. 3: Uber die kausale Struktur der 
realen Welt. Tiibingen: Niemeyer, 1974. 
46. 
Wst~p do fenomenologii Husserla [Introduction to Husserl's Phenomenol-
ogy], translated by Andrzej P61tawski. Warszawa: PWN, 1974. [Translation 
of Ingarden's 1966 Oslo Lectures.] 
47. Dozivljaj. Umetnicko Delo i Vrednost [Experience, Work of Art and Value], 
translated by Drinka Gojkovic, Sazveidja series, Vol. 49. Beograd: Nolit, 
1975. [Translation of Erlebnis. Kunstwerk und Wert.] 
48. On the Motives Which Led Husserl to Transcendental Idealism, translated 
from Polish by Arn6r Hannibalsson. The Hague: Nijhoff, 1975. 
49. 0 poznawaniu dziela literackiego [The Cognition of the Literary Work of 
Art], translated from German by Danuta Gierulanka. Warszawa: PWN, 1976. 
50. Gegenstand und Aufgaben der Literaturwissenschaft: Aufsiitze und Diskus-
sionsbeitriige (1937-1964), edited, selected and introduced by Rolf Fieguth. 
Tiibingen: Niemeyer, 1976. 
5l. Az irodalni mualkotas [The Literary Work of Art], translated by Bonyhai 
Gabor. Budapest: Gondolat, 1977. [Translation of Das literarische 
Kunstwerk.] 
52. Det litterare Konstverket [The Literary Work of Art], translated by Margit 
Kinander. Lund: Bo Cavefors Bokforlag, 1977. [Translation of Das 
literarische Kunstwerk.] 
53. Sobre la Responsabi/idad, translated by Juan Miguel Palacios. Madrid: 
Dorcas-Verbo Divino, 1980. [Translation of Uber die Verantwortung.] 
54. Eseji iz Estetike. 0 zgradbi slike. 0 arhitekturni umetnini. Glazbena umetnina 
in Problem njene istovetnosti [Essays in Aesthetics. On the Structure of 
Painting. On Architectural Art. Musical Art and the Problem of Its Identity], 
translated by Frane Jerman, Filozofska knjifnica, Vol. 22. Ljubljana: 
Slovenska matica, 1980. [Translation from Studia z estetyki.] 
55. Spor 0 istnienie swiata, Tom III. 0 strukturze przyczynowej realnego swiata 
[The Controversy Over the Existence of the World, Vol. III. On the Causal 
Structure of the Real World], translated from German into Polish by Danuta 

234 
HANS H. RUDNICK AND JOLANTA W. W A WRZYCKA 
Gierulanka. Warszawa: PWN, 1981. 
56. Wyklady i dyskusje z estetyki [Lectures and Discussions on Aesthetics], Anita 
Szczepanska, ed. Warszawa: PWN, 1981. [Lectures 1 through 17 delivered 
between March and June 1960.] 
57. Sulla responsabilita, translated by Antonio Setola. Bologna: CSEO 
B iblioteca, 1982. [Translation of (j ber die Verantwortung.] 
58. Bungakuteki-geijutsu-sakuhin [The Literary Work of Art], translated by 
Makio Takiuchi and Yuusuke Hosoi. Tokyo: Keiso Shobo Co., 1982. 
[Translation of Das literarische Kunstwerk.] 
59. Husserl shokan-shu 1915-1938 [Husserl's Letters to Ingarden 1915-1938], 
translated by Kozo Kuwano and Marito Sato. Tokyo: Serika Shobo Co., 1982. 
[Translation of BrieJe an Roman Ingarden mit Erliiuterungen und Errinnerun-
gen an Husserl herausgegeben von Roman Ingarden.] 
60. Man and Value, translated from Polish and German by Arthur Szylewicz. 
Miinchen: Philosophia Verlag; and Washington, DC: Catholic University of 
America Press, 1983. 
61. L' oeuvre d'art litteraire, translated by Philibert Secretan with the collabora-
tion ofN. Liichinger and B. Schwegler. Lausanne: L'Age d'Homme, 1983. 
62. Ningen-Ron: Jikan, Sekinin, Kati [Essays on Man: Time, Responsibility, 
Value], translated from Polish and German by Yushiro Takei and Tsunehiro 
Akamatsu. Tokyo: Housei University Publishing House, 1983. 
63. Spor 0 istnienie swiata [The Controversy Over the Existence of the World], 3 
vols., 3rd critical ed., Danuta Gierulanka, ed. Warszawa: PWN, 1985. 
64. The Work oj Music and the Problem oj Its Identity, translated by Adam 
Czerniawski; Jean Harrell, ed. Berkeley: University of California Press; and 
London: Macmillan, 1986. 
65. The Ontology oj the Work oj Art: The Musical Work, the Picture, the 
Architectural Work, the Film, translated by Raymond Meyer with John T. 
Goldthwait. Athens: Ohio University Press, 1989. 
Articles and Treatises 
66. "DliZenia fenomenolog6w" [The Goals of Phenomenologists]. PFil 22, no. 3 
(1919): 118-156 and no. 4 (1919): 315-351. 
67. "0 jasnym i niejasnym stylu filozoficznym" [On Clear and Unclear 
Philosophical Style]. RFil5, no. 3 (1919-20): 45-48. 
68. "Uber die Gefahr einer Petitio Principii in der Erkenntnistheorie." JPpF 4 
(1921): 545-568. 
69. "Max Scheler." PWar 2, no. 4(13) (1922): 5-13. 
70. "Sp6r 0 istottr filozofii" [Controversy Over the Essence of Philosophy]. PWar 
2, no. 4(14) (1922): 161-172. 
71. "W sprawie istoty doswiadczenia wewntrtrznego" [On the Essence of Internal 
Experience]. PFil25, no. 4 (1922): 512-534. 
72. "Uwagi do 'Kr6tkiej rozprawy itd'" [Remarks On 'A Short Debate etc.']. 
PFil26, nos. 1-2 (1923): 100-104. 
73. "Stanowisko teorii poznania w systemie nauk filozoficznych" [The Place of a 

ROMAN INGARDEN INTERNATIONAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 
235 
Theory of Cognition in the System of Philosophical Disciplines]. 
Sprawozdanie Gimnazjum w Toruniu za r.szk. 1924-25 [Report of the Toruri 
Gymnasium for the Years 1924-25]. Toruli: 1925.5-14. 
74. "Max Scheler." Slowo Polskie 33, no. 154 (1926): 6-7. 
75. "Max Scheler, wspomnienie posmiertne" [Max Scheler: in memoriam]. PFil 
31, no. 4 (1928): 343-351. 
76. "Bemerkungen zum Problem Idealismus-Realismus." lPpF 11 (1929): 
159-190. [Supplementary volume: Husserl Festschrift.] 
77. "Psycho-fizjologiczna teorja [sic] poznania i jej krytyka" [Psycho-Physiologi-
cal Theory of Cognition and Its Criticism]. Ksit;ga Pamiqtkowa Gimnazjum 
im. K. Szajnochy [The Visitors' Book of Szajnocha's Gymnasium]. Lw6w: 
1930. 1-44. 
78. "Niekt6re zalo:ienia idealizmu Berkleya" [Some Premises of Berkeley's 
Idealism]. Ksit;ga Pamiqtkowa Polskiego Towarzystwa FilozoJicznego [The 
Visitors' Book of the Polish Philosophical Society]. Lw6w: 1931. 215-258. 
79. "Zagadnienie toisamosci dziela muzycznego" [On the Identity of the Musical 
Work of Art]. PFil36, no. 4 (1933): 320-362. 
80. "Formy obcowania z dzielem literackiem" [Forms of Contact with the 
Literary Work of Art]. WLit 10, no. 7 (1933): 3. 
81. "Logistyczna pr6ba uksztaltowania filozofii" [The Logistic Attempt at 
Reshaping Philosophy]. PFil37, no. 4 (1934): 335-346. 
82. "Edmund Husserl: tw6rca fenomenologji" [Edmund Husserl: the Founder of 
Phenomenology]. WLit 11, no. 41 (1934): 4. 
83. "Ieszcze 'Atulli mirohlady'" [More about 'Atulli Mirohlady' (folkloristic 
nonsense rhymes)]. WLit 11, no. 43 (1934): 4. 
84. "Niekt6re sprawy sporne we wsp6lczesnej psychologii" [Some Controversial 
Issues of Contemporary Psychology]. Marcholt 1, no. 1 (1934-35): 34-50. 
85. "Vom formalen Autbau des individuellen Gegenstandes" SPhiP I (1935): 
29-106. 
86. "L'essai logistique d'une refonte de la philosophie" RPh 120, nos. 7-8 
(1935): 137-159. 
87. "VIII Kongres Filozoficzny w Pradze" [The 8th Philosophical Congress in 
Prague]. Pion 3, no. 5 (1935): 6-7. 
88. "Czlowiek i jego rzeczywistosc" [Man and His Reality]. TPol6 (1935): 8. 
89. "Monachomachii humanistycznej 
ci:}g dalszy" [The Continuation of 
Humanistic Monachomachy]. Pion 3, no. 5 (1935): 2-3. 
90. "Formy poznawania dziela literackiego" [Ways of Cognizing the Literary 
Work of Art]. Zjazd Naukowy 
imienia Ignacego Krasickiego we 
Lwowie ... 1935 roku [Ignacy Krasicki's Scholarly Convention in Lw6w, June 
8-10, 1935], Ludwik Biernacki, ed. Lw6w: 1936. 
91. "Der logistische Versuch einer Neugestaltung der Philosophie. Eine kritische 
Bemerkung." Actes du VIlI-eme Congres International de Philosophie a 
Prague, 1934. Prague: Comite d'Organisation du Congres, 1936.203-208. 
92. "Gl6wne tendencje neopozytywizmu" [Main Tendencies of Neo-Positivism]. 
Marcholt 2, no. 2 (1936): 264-278. 
93. "Formy poznawania dziela literackiego" [Ways of Cognizing the Literary 
Work of Art]. PL 33, no. 3 (1936): 163-192. 
94. "Poznanie" [Cognition]. srz (Encyclopedia) 4 (1936): 345-354. 

236 
HANS H. RUDNICK ANDJOLANTA W. WAWRZYCKA 
95. "Racjonalizm" [Rationalism]. Sit (Encyclopedia) 4 (1936): 507-515. 
96. "Teoria poznania" [Theory of Cognition]. si!z (Encyclopedia) 4 (1936): 
1073-1087. 
97. "Kazimierz Twardowski." Nowe Czasy 2, no. 9 (1936): 4. 
98. "Czy zadaniem filozofii jest synteza nauk szczeg610wych?" [Is It the Task of 
Philosophy to Synthesize the Findings of the Exact Sciences?]. KFiI 13, no. 3 
(1936): 195-214. 
99. "Wandlungen in der philosophischen Atmosphare in Polen." SRun 9, no. 4 
(1937): 224-233. [With a bibliography oflngarden's works.] 
100. "Der Mensch und die Zeit." Traveaux du IX-erne Congres International de 
Philosophie (Congres Descartes), Vol. 8. Paris: 1937. 129-136. 
101. "Das asthetische Erlebnis." II-erne Congres International d' Esthetique et des 
Sciences de ['Art, Vol. 1. Paris: 1937.54-60. 
102. "0 tak zwanej prawdzie w literaturze" [On So-Called Truth in Literature]. 
PWsp 61, no. 182 (1937): 80-94 and no. 183 (1937): 72-91. 
103. "0 psychologii i psychologiimie w nauce 0 literaturze" [Psychology and 
Psychologism in Literary Scholarship]. Pion 5, no. 34 (1937): 1-2. 
104. "Czas i czlowiek; fragment" [Man and Time; a Fragment]. Czas 89, no. 352 
(1937): 15. 
105. "Sprawa formy i tresci w dziele literackim" [Form and Content in the Literary 
Work of Art]. ZLit 1, no. 5 (1937): 153-167. 
106. "Czlowiek i czas" [Man and Time]. PFil41 (1938): 54-67. 
107. "Das Form-Inhalt Problem im literarischen Kunstwerk." Helikon 1, nos. 1-2 
(1938): 51-67. 
108. "Dzialalnosc naukowa Kazimierza Twardowskiego" [The Scientific Activity 
of Kazimierz Twardowski]. Kazirnierz Twardowski, nauczyciel, uczony, 
obywatel [Kazimierz Twardowski; Teacher, Scholar, Citizen]. Lw6w: 
Nauczyciel-Uczohy-Obywatel, 1938. 13-30. 
109. "Mscislaw Wartenberg." DzPo14, no. 111 (1938): 6. 
110. "Gl6wne linie rozwoju pogllld6w filozoficznych Edmunda Husserla" [Major 
Directions in the Development of Edmund Husser!'s Philosophical Views]. 
PFil42, no. 2 (1939-45): 25-76. 
111. "W sprawie tzw.'fenomenologizmu'" [The So-called 'Phenomenologism']. 
TygP 1, no. 33 (1945): 6. 
112. "0 dziele architektury" [The Architectural Work of Art]. NiS 2, no. 1 (1946): 
3-26 and no. 2 (1946): 217-242. 
113. "Esencjalne zagadnienie formy i jej podstawowe pojt<cia" [The Essential 
Problem of Form and its Basic Concepts]. KFilI6, nos. 2-4 (1946): 101-164. 
114. "Czlowiek i czas" [Man and Time]. Tw 2, no. 2 (1946): 121-137. 
115. "0 r6znych rozumieniach 'prawdziwosci' w dziele sztuki" [Different 
Understandings of 'Truthfulness' in the Work of Art]. ZaLit 10, no. 1 (1946): 
12-19 and no. 2 (1946): 36-43. 
116. "Quelques remarques sur la relation de causalite." SPhiP 3 (1947): 151-166. 
117. "The Scientific Activity of Kazimierz Twardowski." SPhiP 3 (1947): 17-30. 
118. "Le temps, l'espace et Ie sentiment de realite." Revue Internationale de 
Filrnologie 1, no. 2 (1947): 127-141. 
119. "Ks. Konstanty Michalski, uczony, filozof, czlowiek" [Father Konstanty 
Michalski; Savant, Philosopher, Human Being]. TygP 3, no. 34 (1947): 1-2. 

ROMAN INGARDEN INTERNATIONAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 
237 
120. "0 poznawaniu cudzych stan6w psychicznych" [Studying the Psychological 
States of Others]. KPsych 13 (1947): 1-28. [With a summary in English.] 
121. "Problem formy a obsahu w literamim dile" [The Problem of Form and 
Content in the Literary Work of Art]. Blok Brno 2. no. 1 (1947): 4-7. 
122. "Quelques remarques sur Ie probU!me de 1a re1ativite de valeurs." Actes du 
III-eme Congres des Socieres de Philosophie de langue franr,;aise. Bruxelles-
Louvain. Paris: Vrin. 1947. [8 pp. submitted separately after the Congress.] 
123. "Mi«dzynarodowy kongres filozoficzny w Rzymie" [The International 
Congress of Philosophy in Rome). PFil43. nos. 1-4 (1947): 157-158. 
124. "Z dziej6w teorii dziela literackiego. (Uwagi na marginesie Poetyki Arys-
totelesa)" [On the History of the Theory of the Literary Work of Art. (A 
Marginal Commentary on Aristotle's Poetics»). KFil 17. nos. 1-2 (1948): 
133-172. 
125. "Uwagi 0 wzgl«dnosci wartosci" [Remarks on the Relativity of Values]. PFil 
44. nos. 1-3 (1948): 83-94. 
126. "Nekolik uvah 0 filmovem umeni" [Some Remarks Concerning the Art of 
Film]. Blok Brno 3. no. 2 (1948): 91-96. 
127. "Wspomnienie 0 prof. Zawirskim" [Remembering Professor Zawirski]. DzLit 
2. no. 18 (1948): 7. 
128. "Quelques remarques sur la relation de causalite." Attidel Congresso 
Internazionale di Filosofia. Roma 1946. Vol. 3. Milano: 1948.573-577. 
129. "Zagadnienie przypadku" [The Problem of Hazard). SprPAU49. no. 4 (1948): 
195-200. 
130. "Krytyczne uwagi 0 pogilldach fonologicznych. Z«dziej6w teorii j«zyka w 
XX wieku" [Critical Observations on Phonological Concepts. The History of 
Language Theory in the 20th Century]. SprPAU 49. no. 3 (1948): 124-129. 
131. "Les modes d'existence et Ie probleme 'idealisme-realisme· ... Proceedings of 
the 10th International Congress of Philosophy. Amsterdam 1948. Amsterdam: 
1949.347-350. 
132. "Ze studi6w nad zagadnieniem formy i tresci dziela sztuki" [Studies in the 
Form and Content of a Work of Art]. PFil45. nos. 1-2 (1949): 65-86. 
133. "0 slldzie warunkowym" [On the Conditional Judgement]. KFil18. nos. 3-4 
(1949): 263-308. 
134. "Des differentes conceptions de la verite dans l'reuvre d·art." RE 2. no. 2 
(1949): 162-180. 
135. "Kritische Bemerkungen zu Husserls Cartesianischen Meditationen." Edmund 
Husserl: Gesammelte Schriften. Vol.1: Cartesianische Meditationen und 
Pariser Vortriige. The Hague: Nijhoff. 1950; 2nd ed .• 1963.203-218. 
136. "Descartes a fizyka nowozytna" [Descartes and Modem Physics]. KFil 19. 
nos. 1-2 (1950): 71-149. 
137. "Wspomnienie 
0 
Stanislawie 
Ignacym 
Witkiewiczu" 
[Remembering 
Stanislaw Ignacy Witkiewicz]. TygP 7. no. 20 (1950): 3-4. 
138. "De la structure du tableau." Bulletin International de l' Academie Polonaise 
des Sciences et des Lettres 1945. nos. 1-10. Krak6w: 1953.36-39. 
139. "De la poetique." Bulletin International de l'Academie Polonaise des 
Sciences et Lettres 1945. nos. 1-10. Krak6w: 1953.39-42. 
140. "Lekcewazenie pami«ci" [The Misunderstood Memory]. Muzeum. no. 1 
(1953): 8-18. 

238 
HANS H. RUDNICK AND JOLANTA W. WA WRZYCKA 
141. "0 tlumaczeniach" [On Translations]. 0 sztucet lumaczenia [The Art of 
Translation], Michal Rusinek, ed. Wroclaw: Ossolineum, 1955. 127-190. 
142. "La valeur esthetique et Ie probleme de son fondement objectif." Aui del III 
Congresso Internazionale di Estetica, Venezia 1956. Torino: Istituto di 
Estetica dell 'Universita di Torino, Edizioni della Rivista di Estetica, 1957. 
167-173. 
143. "Uber die gegenwartigen Aufgaben der Phiinomenologie." Archivio di 
Filosofia, il Cornpito della Fenornenologia, nos. 1-2 (1957): 229-241. 
144. "Die Asymmetrie der ursiichlichen Beziehung." PJGG 66 (1957) (Festschrift 
fur Hedwig Conrad-Martius): 100-110. 
145. "Wspomnienie 
0 Stanislawie Ignacym Witkiewiczu" [In Memory of 
Stanislaw Ignacy Witkiewicz]. Stanislaw Ignacy Witkiewicz, czlowiek i 
tw6rca [Stanislaw Ignacy Witkiewicz; Man and Artist], Tadeusz Kotarbinski, 
ed. Warszawa: Paristwowy Instytut Wydawniczy, 1957. 169-170. 
146. "I compiti attuali della fenomenologia" Archivio di Fitosofia, it Cornpito della 
Fenornenologia, nos. 1-2 (1957): 243-249. 
147. ''The Hypothetical Proposition." PPR 18, no. 4 (1958): 435-450. 
148. "Bemerkungen zum Problem des iisthetischen Werturteils."RdE 3, no. 3 
(1958): 414-423. 
149. "Le probleme de la constitution et Ie sens de la reflexion constitutive chez 
Edmond Husser!." Cahiers de Royaumont: Philosophie: Husserl, Vo!. 3. 
Paris: Editions de Minuit, 1959. 242-264 and (contributions to discussion) 
66-67,88-89,188,233-234,265-270,329-330,373. 
150. "Von den Funktionen der Sprache im Theaterschauspie!."ZRL 1 (1959): 
65-91. 
151. "L'intuition Bergsonienne et Ie probleme phenomenologique de la constitu-
tion." Actes du X-erne Congres des Societes de Philosophie de langue 
franr;aise. Congres Bergson, Vol. 1. Paris: Colin, 1959. 163-166; And Vol 2: 
Discussions. Paris: Colin, 1959.26-27. 
152. "Edmund HusserI zum 100. Geburtstag." ZpF 13, no. 3(1959): 459-463. 
153. "Uber den transzendentalen Idealismus bei E. Husser!." Phaenornenologica, 
Vol. 2: Husserl und das Denken der Neuzeit. Akten des II. internationalen 
phiinornenologischen Kolloquiurns, Krefeld 1956. The Hague: Nijhoff, 1959. 
190-204. 
154. "De l'idealisme transcendental chez E. Husser!." Phaenornenologica, Vol. 2: 
Husserl et la pensee rnoderne. Actes du II-erne Colloque International de 
Phenornenologie, Krefeld 1956. The Hague: Nijhoff, 1959.205-215. 
155. "Besinnung auf Grundfragen." Slavische Geisteswelt, West- und SUdslaven, 
Vol. 3: Mensch und Welt, S. Hafner, O. Turecek and G. Wytrzens, eds. 
Baden-Baden: Holle, 1959. 145-154. 
156. "0 tak zwanym malarstwie abstrakcyjnym" [On So-Called Abstract 
Painting]. Estetyka 1 (1960): 147-168. 
·157. "0 zagadnieniu percepcji dziela muzycznego. Fragment" [On the Question of 
the Perception of the Musical Work of Art. A Fragment]. Charisteria: 
Rozprawy filozoficzne zloione w darze Wladyslawowi Tatarkiewiczowi w 
siedemdziesiqtq 
rocznic~ urodzin [Charisteria: Essays in Philosophy 
Dedicated to Wladyslaw Tatarkiewicz on his 70th Birthday]. Warszawa: 
PWN, 1960. 109-124. 

ROMAN INGARDEN INTERNATIONAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 
239 
158. "Notes sur I'objet de I'histoire de la philosophie." Diogene 7, no. 29 (1960): 
130-141. 
159. "Reflections on the Subject Matter of the History of Philosophy." Diogenes 7, 
no. 29 (1960): 111-121. 
160. "Podstawowe twierdzenia 0 budowie dziela literackiego" and "Dodatek: 
Przedmiot i zadania wiedzy 0 literaturze" [Basic Statements on the Structure 
of the Literary Work with an Appendix on The Object and Tasks of Literary 
Theory]. Teoria badar! literackich w Polsce [Theory of Literary Scholarship 
in Poland], Vol. 2, Henryk Markiewicz, ed. Krak6w: 1960. 178-206. 
161. "Racourcis de perspective du temps dans la concretisation de l' ceuvre 
litteraire," translated by Elisabeth Willman. RMM 65, no. 1 (1960): 19-51. 
162. "The General Question of the Essence of Form and Content," translated by 
Max Rieser. JP 57, no. 7 (1960): 222-233. [From Vol. 2 of Studia z estetyki.] 
163. "L'homme et la nature." Atti del XII Congresso Internazionale di Filosofia, 
Venezia 1958, Vol. 2. Firenze: Sansoni, 1960.209-213. 
164. "Zasady epistemologicznego rozwaZlinia doswiadczenia estetycznego" [The 
Principles of the Epistemological Consideration of Aesthetic Experience]. 
Estetyka 2 (1961): 3-11. 
165. "Aesthetic Experience and Aesthetic Object," translated by Janina Makota 
with the co-operation of Shia Moser. PPR 21, no. 3 (1961): 289-313. 
166. "Nature humaine." Nature hurnaine. Actes du XI-erne Congres des Socieres de 
Philosophie de langue jram;aise, M ontpellier 1961. Paris: 1961. 220-223. 
167. "0 dyskusji owocnej sl6w kilka" [A Few Words on Fruitful Discussion]. 
PKul 10, no. 48 (1961): 1. 
168. "La pittura astratta," translated by G. Vattimo. RdE 6, no. 2 (1961): 165-190. 
169. "Bemerkungen zum Problem des iisthetischen WerturteiIs."1l guidicio 
estetico. Atti del Simposio di Estetica. Venezia 1958. Padua: Edizioni della 
Rivista di Estetica, 1961. 41-50. 
170. "Osservazioni sui problema del guidizio di valore estetica." II guidicio 
estetico. Atti del Sirnposio di Estetica. Venezia 1958. Padua: Edizioni della 
Rivista di Estetica, 1961. 41-50. 
171. "A Marginal Commentary on Aristotle's Poetics. Part I," translated by Helen 
Michejda. JMC 20, no. 2 (1961): 163-173. 
172. "A Marginal Commentary on Aristotle's Poetics. Part II," translated by Helen 
Michejda. JMC 20, no. 3 (1962): 273-285. 
173. "Prinzipien einer erkenntniskritischen Betrachtung der iisthetischen Erfah-
rung." Actes du IV-erne Congres International d' Esthetique, Athens 1960. 
Athens: Myrtides, 1962. 622-631. 
174. "Poetik und Sprachwissenschaft." Poetics [Proceedings of the International 
Conference on Poetics, Warsaw 1960]. Warszawa: PWN; and The Hague: 
Mouton, 1961. 3-9. 
175. "Bemerkungen zum Problem der Begriindung." Studia Logica 13 (1962): 
153-176. 
176. "Le mot comme element d'une langue." Thinking and Meaning. Entretien 
d'Oxford 1962, Logique et Analyse, Nouvelle Serie 5, no. 20 (1962): 
212-216. 
177. "Edith Stein on Her Activity as an Assistant of Edmund Husserl. Extracts 
from the Letters of Edith Stein with a Commentary and Introductory 

240 
HANS H. RUDNICK AND JOLANTA W. WAWRZYCKA 
Remarks." PPR 23, no. 2 (1962): 155-175. 
178. "Leopold Blaustein, teoretyk radia i filmu" [Leopold Blaustein; Radio and 
Film Theoretician]. Zeszyty Prasoznawcze 4, no. 4 (1963): 86-93. 
179. "Dialogue avec Ansermet. II oblige Ie lecteur It penser par lui meme." 
Supplement litteraire du Journal de Geneve, no. 293 (1963): v. 
180. "Artistic and Aesthetic Values." BJA 4, no. 3 (1964): 198-213. 
181. "Das schopferische Verhalten des Autors und das MitschOpfertum des 
Virtuosen und der Zuhorer." Aspecten van Creativiteit. Verhandelingen 
voorgedragen in een zifting ter herdenking van het 50-jarig bestaan van het 
Bureau voor Muziek-Auteursrecht BUMA. Amsterdam: 1964. 29-33. 
182. "Husserls Betrachtungen zur Konstitution des physikalischen Dinges." AdP 
27, nos. 3-4 (1964): 356-407. 
183. "W sprawie budowy dziela literackiego. Profesorowi Markiewiczowi w 
odpowiedzi" [On the Structure of the Literary Work of Art. An Answer to 
Professor Markiewicz]. PL 55, no. 1 (1964): 183-202. 
184. "Zakonczenie dyskusji z prof. Markiewiczem" [Concluding my Discussion 
with Professor Markiewicz]. PL 55, no. 2 (1964): 435-438. 
185. "List do Redakcji" [Letter to the Editor]. StEs 1(1964): 245-247. [Response 
to Jadwiga Slawinska: "Uwagi 0 teorii dziela architektonicznego Romana 
Ingardena."] 
186. "Fenomenologia" 
[Phenomenology]. 
Wielka 
Encyklopedia, 
Vol. 
3. 
Warszawa: PWN, 1964.616. 
187. "Edmund Husserl." Wielka Encyklopedia, Vol. 4. Warszawa: PWN, 1964. 
776. 
188. "Husserls Betrachtungen zur Konstitution des physikalischen Dinges." 
Archives de l'lnstitut International des Sciences Theoretiques, Vol. 13: La 
phenomenologie et les sciences de la nature. Colloque de l' Academie 
Internationale de Philosophie des Sciences. 2-4 Septembre 1963. Fribourg 
(Suisse). Bruxelles: Office international de librairie, 1965.36-87. 
189. "Zagadnienie systemu jakosci estetycznie donioslych" [On the System of 
Aesthetically Valent Qualities]. StEs 2 (1965): 3-26. 
190. "Werte, Normen und Strukturen nach Rene Wellek." DVLG 40, no. 1 (1966): 
43-55. 
191. "Einige ungelOste Probleme der W erttheorie." Orbis Scriptus • Festschrift fur 
Dimitrij Tschizewskij. Miinchen: Fink, 1966.365-373. 
192. "Uwagi 0 niekt6rych twierdzeniach ontologicznych w ksi¥ce Kazimierza 
Twardowskiego pt. 'Zur Lehre vom Inhalt und Gegenstand der Vorstellun-
gen'" [Comments on Some Ontological Assertions in Kazimierz Twar-
dowski's "Zur Lehre vom Inhalt und Gegenstand der Vorstellungen"]. RFil 
25, nos. 1-2 (1966): 21-35. 
193. "Uwagi do Uwag Zofii Lissy" [Remarks on Zofia Lissa's Comments]. StEs 3 
(1966): 115-128. 
194. "0 bezposrednim poznaniu apriorycznym" [On Direct A Priori Cognition]. 
Glowne zagadnienia JilozoJii, Vol. 2, Wladyslaw Krajewski, ed. Warszawa: 
1966.228-239. 
195. "Zygmunt Lempicki jako teoretyk literatury" [Zygmunt Lempicki's Theory of 
Literature]. Zygmunt Lempicki: Wybor pismo Tom II: Studia z teorii literatury 
[Zygmunt Lempicki: Works, Vol. 2: Studies in Literary Theory]. Warszawa: 

ROMAN INGARDEN INTERNATIONAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 
241 
1966.9-17. 
196. "Betrachtungen zum Problem der Objektivitat." ZpF 21, no. 1 (1967): 31-46 
and no. 2 (1967): 242-260. 
197. "Poghldy 1. Volkelta na wczucie" [1. Volkelt's Views on Empathy 
(Einflihlung)]. StEs 4 (1967): 135-149. 
198. "Z teorii dziela literackiego" [On the Theory of the Literary Work of Art]. 
Problemy teorii literatury 
[Problems of Literary Theory], 
Henryk 
Markiewicz, ed. Wrodaw-Warszawa-Krak6w: 1967.7-59. 
199. "La 'vita' dell 'opera letteraria." Verri, no. 23 (1967): 3-28. 
200. "L'homme et la nature." La Pologne, no. 6 (1967): 17. 
201. "Der Mensch und die Natur." Polen, no. 6 (1967): 17. 
202. "Man and Nature." Poland, no. 6 (1967): 17. 
203. "0 saznavanju knjizevnog dela" [The Cognition of the Literary Work of Art]. 
Izraz 11, nos. 2-12; and 12, no. 1 (1967): (serial publication). [Translation of 
Vom Erkennen des literarischen Kunstwerks.] 
204. "A kep es az irodalni mualkotas" [The Picture and the Literary Work of Art], 
translated by Barley Laszl6. Helikon 14 (1968): 3-4 and 396-403. 
205. "Problemet on verdienes 'relativitet'" [Problems of the Relativity of Values], 
translated by Per Fredrik Christiansen. Minerva 12 (1968): 181-195. 
206. "Meine Erinnerungen an Edmund Husserl." Edmund Husserl: Briefe an 
Roman Ingarden. Mit Erliiuterungen und Erinnerungen an Husserl, Roman 
Ingarden, ed. Phaenomenologica, Vol. 25. The Hague: Nijhoff, 1968. 
106-135. 
207. "Erlauterungen zu den Briefen [Husserls]." Edmund Husserl: Briefe an 
Roman Ingarden. Mit Erliiuterungen und Erinnerungen an Husserl, Roman 
Ingarden, ed. Phaenomenologica, Vol. 25. The Hague: Nijhoff, 1968. 
136-184. 
208. "Die ontischen Fundamente der Verantwortung." Akten des XIV. Inter-
nationalen Kongresses fur Philosophie, Wien 1968, Vol. 1. Vienna: Herder, 
1968. 235-242. 
209. "De la connaissance de l'reuvre litteraire." AdP 31, no. 2 (1968): 202-263. 
210. "Das Problem des Systems der as the tisch relevanten Qualitaten." Actes du V-
eme Congres International d' Esthetique, Amsterdam 1964. The Hague: 1968. 
448-456. 
211. "Sprawa stosowania metod statystycznych do badania dziela sztuki" [On 
Applying Statistical Methods to the Analysis of Works of Art]. KiS 12, no. 4 
(1968): 35-50. 
212. "Asthetik und Kunstphilosophie." Akten des XIV. Internationalen Kongresses 
fur Philosophie, Wien 1968, Vol. 4. Vienna: Herder, 1969.214-219. 
213. "Le concept de philosophie chez Franz Brentano." AdP 32, no. 3 (1969): 
458-475 (Part 1); and no. 4 (1969): 609-638 (Part 2). 
214. "Z rozwazan nad wartosciami moralnymi" [Meditations on Moral Values]. 
Rozprawy filozoficzne. Ksigga Pamiqtkowa z okazji 80 roczicy urodzin prof 
T. Czeiowskiego [Essays in Philosophy. The Visitors' Book on the 80th 
Birthday of Professor T. Czezowski]. Towarzystwo Naukowe w Toruniu. 
Prace Wydzialu Filologiczno-Filozoficznego [Torun Scientific Society. 
Publications of the Philological-Philosophical Department] 21, no. 2 (1969): 
105-117. 

242 
HANS H. RUDNICK AND JOLANTA W. W A WRZYCKA 
215. "The Physicalistic Theory of Language and the World of Literature," 
translated from German by Maria Pelikan. YCC 2 (1969): 80-98. 
216. "Co jest nowego w ostatniej pracy Husserla?" [What is New in Husserl's Last 
Work?]. SFil, nos. 4-5 (1970): 3-14. 
217. "Ktinstlerische Funktionen der Sprache. Ein Ausblick." Sprachkunst 1, no. 
1-2 (1970): 20-31. 
218. "Bemerkungen zu den Bemerkungen von Professor Zofia Lissa," translated 
by Antoni Starzerlski. SFiI (in translation), no. 4 (1970): 351-363. 
219. "Bericht tiber meine Studien zur Asthetik." Contemporary Philosophy. A 
Survey, Vol. 4, Raymond Klibansky, ed. Firenze: La nuova Italia Editrice, 
1971. 106-110. 
220. "Ausgangsprobleme zur Bertrachtung der kausalen Struktur der Welt." 
Philomates, Studies and Essays in Memory of Philip Merlan, Robert B. 
Palmer and Robert Hamerton-Kelly, eds. The Hague: Nijhoff, 1971. 398-411. 
221. "Die vier Begriffe der Transzendenz und das Problem des Idealismus bei 
Husser\." Analecta Husserliana I (1971): 36-74. 
222. "0 badaniach filozoficznych Edith Stein (12.10.1891 - 9.8.1942)" [On Edith 
Stein's Philosophical Investigations (10/12/1891 - 81911942»). Znak 23, no. 4 
(1971): 389-409. 
223. "Les fonctions du langage au theatre." Poetique 8 (1971): 531-538. 
224. "Knjizevno delo kao viSeslojna tvorevina" [The Literary Work as a Many-
Sided Creation]. Polja 17, no. 15 (1971): 24. [Excerpt from Das literarische 
Kunstwerk.] 
225. "Pogled na neka kriticko-epistemoloska pitanja saznanja knjizevnog dela" [A 
View on Some Critical-Epistemological Questions of Knowledge of Literary 
Work]. KnjiK 2, nos. 1-3 (1971): 58-64; and no. 4 (1971): 75-94. 
226. "Max Bense und das Problem der Anwendung statistischer Methoden in der 
Literaturforschung." Sprachkunst: Beitriige zur Literaturwissenschaft 3, nos. 
3-4 (1972): 177-213. 
227. "Filozofia Edmunda Husserla, Zarys encyklopedyczny" [The Philosophy of 
Edmund Husser\. An Encyclopedic Outline]. Fenomenologia Romana 
lngardena [The Phenomenology of Roman Ingarden]. SFil (special edition) 
(1972): 5-17. 
228. "What io New in Husserl's 'Crisis'?" Analecta Husserliana 2 (1972): 23-47. 
229. "Uber den transzendentalen Idealismus bei E. Husserl", translated into 
Japanese by Susumu Kaneta. Husserl to gendai shiso [Husserl and Modem 
Thought]. Tokyo: Serika Shobo Co., 1972. 149-166. 
230. "Istrazivanja u ontologiji umetnosti." Umetnost 8, nos. 29-30 (1972): 63-74. 
[From Untersuchungen zur Ontologie der Kunst.] 
231. "Osnovne tvrdnje 0 sustinskoj strukturi knjizevnog umetnickog del a" [A 
Basic Assertion On the Essential Structure of the Literary Work of Art]. 
Venac 1, no. 3 (1972): 15. [Excerpt from 0 saznavanju knjizevnog 
umetnickog dela.] 
232. "On So-called Truth in Literature." Aesthetics in Twentieth-Century Poland. 
Selected Essays, Jean G. Harrel and Alina Wierzbiarlska, eds. Lewisburg, PA: 
Bucknell University Press, 1973. 164-204. 
233. "About the Motives that led Husserl to Transcendental Idealism." 
Phenomenology and Natural Science, Dale Riepe, ed. New York: 1973. 

ROMAN INGARDEN INTERNATIONAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 
243 
95-117. 
234. "G16wne kierunki polskiej filozofii" [Main Directions of Polish Philosophy]. 
SFil, no. 1 (1973): 3-15. [Originally written in German in 1936.] 
235. "Identitet muzickog dela" [On the Identity of the Musical Work of Art]. TreCi 
program Radio Beograda, no. 19 (1973): 471-595. 
236. "Istrazivanja iz ontologije umetnosti: film" [Investigations in the Ontology of 
Art: Film]. Filmske sveske, no. 
1 (1973): 7-25. [Foreword from 
Untersuchungen zur Ontologie der Kunst.] 
237. "0 razlicitom shvatanju istinitosti u delima umetnosti" [Different Concep-
tions of Truth in Works of Art]. Stremljenja 16, no. 6 (1973): 685-700. 
238. "0 filosofskoj estetici" [On Philosophical Aesthetics]. KnjiK 4, no. 1 (1973): 
24-31. 
239. '''A priori' Knowledge in Kant vs. 'a priori' Knowledge in Husser!." DaH 
(inaugural issue) (1973): 5-18. 
240. "Main Directions of Polish Philosophy." DaH 1, no. 2 (1974): 91-103. 
[Originally written in German in 1936.] 
241. "Psychologism and Psychology in Literary Scholarship." NLH 5, no. 2 
(1974): 215-223. [With a note from the translator, John Fizer, 213-215.] 
242. "Napomene na marginama Aristotelove poetike" [A Marginal Commentary 
on Aristotle's Poetics]. Polja 20, nos. 186-187 (1974): 8-12; and no. 188 
(1974): 2-6. 
243. "0 recenici" [On the Sentence]. Knji 29, no. 1 (1974): 71-83. 
244. "0 problemu percepcije muzickog dela" [On the Problem of the Perception of 
the Musical Work]. Vidici [Beograd], nos. 169-170 (1975): 16-18. 
245. "On the Ontology of Relations." lBSP 6, no. 2 (1975): 75-80. [Prepared for 
publication by Guido Kling.] 
246. "Remarks Concerning the Relativity of Values." lBSP 6, no. 2 (1975): 
102-108. [Prepared for publication by Guido Kling and E. M. Swiderski.] 
247. "Phenomenological Aesthetics: An Attempt at Defining Its Range." lAAC 33, 
no. 3 (1975): 257-269. 
248. "Estetska vrednost i problem njenog fundiranja u umetnickom delu" 
[Aesthetic Value and the Problem of Its Foundation in the Work of Art]. 
Knjiievna ree 4, no. 4 (1975): 36. 
249. "Kriticke primedbe prof. dr Romana Ingardena" [Critical Remarks of Prof. 
Dr. Roman Ingarden]. Kartezijanske Meditacije, Vo!. 1, by Edmund Husser!. 
Zagreb: 1975. 173-184. 
250. "Lesingov Laokoon" [Lessing's Laokoon]. Knji 30, no. 1 (1975): 62-70. 
251. "Poetika i nauka 0 jeziku" [Poetics and the Science of Language]. Knjiievna 
ree 6, no. 4 (1975): 38. 
252. "Stvaralacko ponasanje autora i stvaralacka radnja izmedju virtuoza i 
slusaoca" [The Creative Behavior of the Author and the Creative Action 
between the Virtuoso and Listener]. Knjiievna ree 4, no. 4 (1975): 36. 
253. "Slika" [Painting]. Fenomenologija, Milan Damnjanovic,ed. Beograd: Nolit, 
1975. 188-232. [Excerpt from Untersuchungen zur Ontologie der Kunst.] 
254. "Probleme der Husserlschen Reduktion." Analecta Husserliana 4 (1976): 
1-7l. 
255. "0 funkcijama jezika u pozorisnoj scenskoj igri" [Von den Funktionen der 
Sprache im Theaterschauspiel]. Estetika Modernog Teatra, Radoslav Lazic 

244 
HANS H. RUDNICK AND JOLANTA W. W A WRZYCKA 
and Dusan Rnjak, eds. Beograd: Vuk Karadzic, 1976. 99-122. [From Das 
literarische Kunstwerk.] 
256. "Covek i vreme" [Man and Time].ldeje 8, no. 3 (1977): 1-19. 
257. "On Moral Action." Analecta Husserliana 7 (1978): 151-162. 
258. "Covek i priroda" [Man and Nature]. Knjiievna rec7 (Jul. 25) (1978): 105. 
259. "Lesingov Laokoon" [Lessing's Laokoon]. Odnosi Medju Umetnostima, 
Branislava Milijic, ed. Beograd: Nolit, 1978. 116-130. [From Studia z 
Estetyki, Vol. 1.] 
260. "Opaske na marginama Aristotelove 'Poetike'" [A Marginal Commentary on 
Aristotle's Poetics]. Knjiievna smotra 10, nos. 31-32 (1978): 33-48. 
261. "Covek i njegova stvamost" [Man and His Reality]. Savremenik 24, no. 4 
(1978): 320-325. 
262. "Uber die philosophischen Forschungen Edith Steins."FZPT 26, nos. 2-3 
(1979): 456-480. 
263. "Kiinstlerische und asthetische Werte" (from Erlebnis, Kunstwerk und Wert), 
translated into Japanese by Takashi Nishizawa. The Journal of Gifu College 
of Economics 13, no. 4 (1979): 278-303. 
264. "0 r6mych rozumieniach prawdziwosci w dziele sztuki" [On Various 
Understandings of "Truthfulness" in the Work of Art], translated into 
Japanese by Yushiro Takei. The Journal ofGifu College of Economics 14, no. 
1 (1980): 122-142. 
265. "Fragmenty dyskusji" [Fragments of Discussions (with Roman Ingarden)]. 
StEs 17 (1980): 3-31. 
266. "Psychologism and Psychology." Psychologism and Psychoaesthetics: A 
Historical and Critical View of Their Relations, by John Fizer. Amsterdam: 
Benjamins Press, 1981. 202-216. 
267. "Nekoliko napomena 0 filmskoj umetnosti" [Several Remarks on the Art of 
Film]. Lica 10, nos. 5-7, (1981): 43-49. 
268. "Nekoliko rijeCi 0 plodotvomoj diskusiji" [Some Words on Fruitful Discus-
sion]. Kulturni radnik 34, no. 3 (1981): 53-60. 
269. "0 funkciji govora u pozoriSnoj predstavi" [Von den Funktionen der Sprache 
im Theaterschauspiel]. Moderna Teorija Drame, Mirjana MioCinovic, ed. 
Beograd: Nolit, 1981. 244-263. [From Das literarische Kunstwerk.] 
270. "0 raznim shvatanjima 'istinitosti' u umtnickom delu" [On Different 
Conceptions of "Truth" in a Work of Art].ldeje, no. 8 (1981): 31-43. 
271. "Wartosci artystyczne: wartosci estetyczne" [Artistic Values: Aesthetic 
Values]. StEs 19 (1982): 194-214. 
272. "Teorijska poetika i normativna poetika" [Theoretical and Normative 
Poetics]. Knjiievne novine 34 (1982): 651. 
273. "On Philosophical Aesthetics." DaH 10, no. 1 (1983): 5-12. 
274. "Subjekat spoznavanja i covek koji spoznaje" [The Object of Cognition and 
Cognizing Man]. Dijalog, nos. 1 and 2 (1983): 29-44. 
275. "Definicija poet ike i njen odnos prema filozofiji knjizevnosti i nauci 0 
knjizevnosti" [The Definition of Poetics and Its Relation to Literary Theory 
and Criticism]. Knjiievna ree< 12 (1984): 7-8. 
276. "Reminiscences of Stanislaw Ignacy Witkiewicz." DaH 12, no. 2 (1985): 
55-59. 
277. "On the Cognition of the Literary Work of Art." The Hermeneutics Reader. 

ROMAN INGARDEN INTERNATIONAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 
245 
Texts of the German Tradition from the Enlightenment to the Present, Kurt 
Mueller-Vollmer, ed. New York: Continuum, 1985. 187-213. [Excerpts from 
The Cognition of the Literary Work of Art.] 
278. "Phenomenological Aesthetics: An Attempt at Defining Its Range." Critical 
Theory Since 1965, Hazard Adams and Leroy Searle, eds. Tallahassee, FL: 
University Presses of Florida, 1986. 185-197. 
279. "Ober die philosophischen Forschungen Edith Steins."Edith Stein - Eine 
grojJe Glaubenzeugin, translated by Waltrand Herbstrith. Annweiler: Ploger, 
1986.203-229. 
280. "Theory of Knowledge as Phenomenology of the 'Essence' of Cognitive 
Experiences and Their Correlates," translated by A. Szylewicz. Aletheia: An 
International Journal of Philosophy, Vol. 4: Epistemology and Logic. Bern: 
Lang, 1988. 1-106. 
Reviews, Lectures and Miscellanea 
281. Logische Untersuchungen, by Edmund Husserl, 2nd revised ed. Halle: 1913. 
Rev. in PFilI8, nos. 3-4 (1915): 305-311. 
282. Jahrbuchfur Philosophie und phiinomenologische Forschung, Vol. 3. Halle: 
1916. Rev. in RFil5, no. 9 (1919-20): 181-184. 
283. Gesammelte Schriften, by Adolf Reinach. Halle: 1921. Rev. in RFil 6, nos. 
8-10 (1921-22): 116-117. 
284. Wielosc rzeczywistosci [The Multiplicity of Reality], by Leon Chwistek. 
Krak6w: 1921. Rev. in PFil25, no. 3 (1922): 451-468. 
285. Wielosc rzeczywistosci [The Multiplicity of Reality], by Leon Chwistek. 
Krak6w: 1921. Rev. in RFil7, nos. 7-8 (1922-23): 99-101. 
286. Wartosci tworcze religijnej mysli polskiej [Creative Values of Polish 
Religious Thought], by Jadwiga Marcinowska. Warszawa: 1922. Rev. in 
PWar 3, no. 2 (20) (1923): 254-275. 
287. Ksigga Pamiqtkowa ku uczczeniu .. .Kazimierza Twardowskiego [The Visitors' 
Book ... in Memory of Kazimierz Twardowski]. PFil (special vol.) 23 
(1920). Rev. in PWar 4, no. I (30)(1924): 370-383. 
288. "0 pytaniach esencjalnych" [On Essential Questions]. SprTNL 4, no. 3 
(1924): 119-135. [Summary of a lecture delivered by K. Twardowski, May 
13, 1924.] 
289. "0 pytaniu i jego trafnosci" [On the Question and Its Pertinence]. RFil9, nos. 
3-5 (1925): 73-74. [Summary of lecture delivered on May 9, 1925 to the 
PTF.] 
290. "0 klasyfikacji" [On Classification]. RFil 9, nos. 9-10 (1925): 164. 
[Summary of a lecture delivered on Dec. 15, 1925 to the PTF.] 
291. "Polskie czasopisma filozoficzne" [Polish Philosophical Periodicals]. PWar 
5, no. 2 (43-44) (1925): 108-110 and 237-245. 
292. Intuicjonizm Bergsona [Bergson's Intuitionism], by Zygmunt Myslakowski. 
Warszawa: 1924. Rev. in RFillO, nos. 7-10 (1926-27): 103-106. 
293. "Czy i jak mowa wykazac obiektywnosc spostrzerenia zewm,trznego?" [Can 
the Objectivity of External Perception Be Proven? If so, How?]. PFil 30, no. 

246 
HANS H. RUDNICK AND JOLANTA W. WAWRZYCKA 
4 (1927): 303-305. [Summary of a lecture delivered to the First Polish 
Congress of Philosophy, Lw6w 1923.] 
294. "Badania marburskie nad obrazami ejdetycznymi" [Marburg-School Analyses 
of Eidetic Images]. RFilll, nos. 1-10 (1928-29): 164. [Summary of a lecture 
delivered on April 21, 1928 to the PTF.] 
295. "Idealizm transcendentalny E. Husserla" [HusserI's Transcendental Idealism]. 
RFil 11, nos. 1-10 (1928-29): 167-168. [Summary of a lecture delivered on 
Dec. 6, 1928 to the PTF.] 
296. "Zagadnienia tkwilJce w problematyce idealizmu i realizmu" [Questions on 
the Problem of Idealism and Realism]. RFil 11, nos. 1-10 (1928-29): 
168-169. [Summary of a lecture delivered on Dec. 13, 1928 to the PTF.] 
297. Husserlowska nauka 0 akcie, tretci i przedmiocie przedstawienia [HusserI on 
the Act, Content and Object of Representation], by Leopold Blaustein. Lw6w: 
1928. Rev. in PFil32, no. 4 (1929): 315-316. 
298. Husserlowska nauka 0 akcie, tretci i przedmiocie przedstawienia [HusserI on 
the Act, Content and Object of Representation], by Leopold Blaustein. Lw6w: 
1928. Rev. inSRun 1 (1929): 837-839. 
299. "0 nazwach i wyrazach funkcyjnych" [On Functional Names and Words]. 
RFil 12, nos. 1-10 (1930-31): 204-205. [Summary of lecture delivered on 
Oct. 19, 1929 to the PTF.] 
300. "Verbum finitum a zdanie" [The Finite Verb and the Sentence). RFilI2, nos. 
1-10 (1930-31): 205-206. [Summary of lecture delivered on Oct. 26,1929 to 
the PTF.] 
301. "Formale und transzendentale Logik," by Edmund Husserl. IPpF 10 (1929): 
1-298. Rev. in Kantstudien 38, nos. 1-2 (1933): 206-209. 
302. Psychologia [Psychology], by Wladyslaw Witwicki, 2nd ed. Lw6w: 
1930-1933. Rev. in Przyjaciel Szkoly 13, nos. 1-2 (1934): 61-62. 
303. Zwischen Hegel und Nietzsche. Der Asthetiker Friedrich Theodor Vischer, by 
Ewald Volhard. FrankfurtlMain: Klostermann, 1932. Rev. in Kantstudien 40 
(1935): 325. 
304. "Czy zadaniem filozofii jest synteza wynik6w nauk szczeg610wych?" [Is It 
the Task of Philosophy to Synthesize the Findings of the Natural Sciences?]. 
PFil 39, no. 4 (1936): 352-355. [Summary of a lecture delivered on Sep. 16 
1936 to the Third Polish Congress of Philosophy, Krak6w.] 
305. "Analiza zdania warunkowego" [Analysis of the Conditional Sentence]. 
SprPTPN 10 (1936): 17-27. [Lecture delivered on Dec. 13, 1935 to the 
PTPN.] 
306. "0 niekt6rych twierdzeniach R. Odebrechta (sprostowanie)" [On Some 
Statements by R. Odebrecht (Rectification)]. Marcholt 3, no. 3 (1937): 
365-367. 
307. "Sprostowanie 
niekt6rych 
twierdzen 
H. 
Zyczynskiego 
w 
artykule 
'Nowinkarstwo w polonistyce'" [Rectification of Some Statements of H. 
Zyczyrfski in his Article "Innovations in Polish Studies"]. Prosto z Mostu 3, 
no. 29 (1937): 4. 
308. 308. "List do Redakcji" [Letter to the Editor). NKs 4, no. 4 (1937): 218-219. 
309. Geist und Sache, by Wilhelm Grebe. FrankfurtlMain: 1934. Rev. in NaP 22 
(1937): 333-336. 
310. "Problematyka tozsamosci przedmiotu indywidualnego" [The Problem of the 

ROMAN INGARDEN INTERNATIONAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 
247 
Identity of the Individual Object]. RFil 14, nos. 1-3 (1938): 134-136. 
[Summary of a lecture delivered on Feb. 12,1937 to the PTF.] 
311. Osobowosc twarcza Zeromskiego rZeromski's Artistic Persona], by Stefan 
Baley. Warszawa: 1936. Rev. inNKs 5, no. 1 (1938): 15-16. 
312. Wstgp do badarf 1U1d dzielem literackim [Introduction to the Analysis of the 
Literary Work], by Manfred Kridl. Wilno: 1936. Rev. in PL 35 nos. 1-4 
(1938): 265-271. 
313. "Forma i norma" [Form and Norm]. Prace ofiarowane Kazimierzowi 
Waycickiemu [Works Dedicated to Kazimien W6ycicki], by Zygmunt 
Lempicki. Wilno: 1937. 17-32. Rev. in PL 35, nos. 1-4 (1938): 271-279. 
314. Phiinomenologie und Metaphysik. Das Problem des Relativismus und seiner 
Uberwindung, by Arnold Metzger. Halle: 1934. Rev. in RFil 14, nos. 1-3 
(1938): 53-54. 
315. "Pnem6wienie na pognebie Kazimiena Twardowskiego" [Obituary for 
Kazimierz Twardowski]. RFil14, nos. 1-3 (1938): 11-12. 
316. "Sp6r 0 istnienie swiata mi«<dzy idealizmem a realizmem" [The Controversy 
over the Existence of the World Between Idealism and Realism]. SprPAU 46, 
no. 7 (1945): 154-155. [Summary oflecture delivered on July 20, 1945 to the 
Dept. of History and Philosophy, PAU.] 
317. "0 budowie obrazu" [On the Structure of Painting]. SprPAU 46, no. 8 (1945): 
183-184. [Summary of a lecture delivered on Oct. II, 1945 to the Committee 
on the History of Art, PAU.] 
318. "0 poetyce" [On Poetics]. SprPAU 46, no. 8 (1945): 183. [Summary of a 
lecture delivered on Oct. 29,1945 to the Dept. of Philology, PAU.] 
319. "Z dziej6w teorii dziela Iiterackiego. Cz«<sc I" [From the History of the 
Theory of the Literary Work of Art. Part 1]. SprPAU 48, no. 3 (1947): 63. 
[Summary of a lecture delivered on March 19, 1947 to the Dept. of Philology, 
PAU.] 
320. "Sprostowanie" [Rectification]. Tw4; no. 5 (1948): 123-127. 
321. "Krytyczne uwagi 0 pogl~dach fonolog6w. Cz«<sc 1. Z dziej6w teorii j«<zyka 
xx wieku" [Critical Remarks on the Views of Phonologists. Part 1: The 
History of the Language Theories in the 20th Century]. SprPAU 49, no. 3 
(1948): 124-129 [Summary of a lecture delivered on March 23, 1948 to the 
Dept. of Philology, Committee on Linguistics, PAU.] 
322. "Krytyczne uwagi 0 pogl~dach fonolog6w. Cz«<sc 2" [Critical Remarks on the 
Views of Phonologists. Part 2]. SprPAU 49, no. 5 (1948): 219-224. 
[Summary of a lecture delivered on May 18, 1948 to the Dept. of Philology, 
PAU.] 
323. "Zagadnienie pnypadku" [The Problem of Chance]. SprPAU 49, no. 4 
(1948): 195-200. [Summary of a lecture delivered on April 26, 1948 to the 
Dept. of History and Philosophy, PAU.] 
324. "Metodologiczny wst«<p do teorii poznania" [Methodological Introduction to 
the Theory of Cognition]. SprWTN 3 (1948): 242-244. [Summary of a lecture 
delivered on May 16, 1948 at the Dept. of History and Philosophy in 
Wroclaw.] 
325. "0 slowie jako skladniku okreslonego j«<zyka" [On the Word as an Element 
of a Given Language]. SprPAU 50, no. 4 (1949): 182-186. [Summary of a 
lecture delivered on April 28, 1949 at the Committee on Linguistics, PAU.] 

248 
HANS H. RUDNICK AND JOLANTA W. WAWRZYCKA 
326. "0 slowie jako skladniku okreslonego jetzyka" [On the Word as an Element 
of a Given Language]. JPol 29 (1949): 231-232. [Partial reprint of number 
324 above.] 
327. "0 slldzie warunkowym" [On the Conditional Judgement]. SprPAU 50, no. 9 
(1949): 503-504. [Summary of a lecture delivered on Nov. 18, 1949 to the 
Committee on Philosophy, PAU.] 
328. "Introduction" to: La gnoseologie de Dante, by Konstanty Michalski. 
Krak6w: WL, 1950. 
329. "0 moi.liwosci i 0 warunkach jej zachodzenia w swiecie realnym" [On 
Possibility and the Conditions of Its Occurrence in the Real World]. SprPAU 
52, no. 2 (1951): 123-127. [Summary of a lecture delivered on Feb. 27, 1951 
to the Committee on Philosophy, PAU.] 
330. "Z dziej6w teorii dziela literackiego. CZetSC 2: Lessing, Laokoon" [On the 
History of the Theory of the Literary Work of Art. Part 2: Lessing's 
Laocoon]. SprPAU 53, no. 2 (1952): 92-98. [Summary of a lecture delivered 
on Feb. 20,1952 to the Committee on Western European Philologies, PAU.] 
331. "0 przedmiocie historii filozofii" [On the Subject-Matter of the History of 
Philosophy]. SprPAU 53, no. 5 (1952): 273-279. [Summary of a lecture 
delivered on May 23,1952 to the Committee of Philosophy, PAU.] 
332. (Glos w dyskusji nad referatem) Zofia Lissa. "0 percepcji dziela 
muzycznego" [(Discussion of the essay by) Zofia Lissa. "On the Perception 
of the Musical Work of Art"]. Materia/y do studi6w i dyskusji z zakresu teorii 
i historii sztuki [Materials for Study and Discussion of Theory and History of 
Art] 6, nos. 1-2 (1955): 286-289. 
333. "Niekt6re twierdzenia 0 zwillzku przyczynowym" [Some Statements on 
Causality]. SprTNT 4, nos. 1-4 (1955): 77-82. [Summary of a lecture 
delivered on Sep. 21, 1955 to the Dept. of Philosophy and Philology in 
Torurl.] 
334. "Elementy dziela muzycznego" [The Elements of the Musical Work of Art]. 
SprTNT 9, nos. 1-4 (1955): 82-84. [Summary of a lecture delivered on Sep. 
21, 1955 to the Dept. of Philosophy and Philology in Torurl.] 
335. "Przedmowa" [Introduction]. Problematyka estetyki. Przedmiot i metoda 
[Problems in Aesthetics. Subject and Method], by Jerzy Galecki. Krak6w: 
1962.5-9. 
336. "Przedmowa" [Introduction]. 0 klasyjikacji sztuk pigknych [On Classification 
of the Fine Arts], by Janina Makota. Krak6w: 1964.5-8. 
337. "Uczciwosc i dobroc: Dyskusja" [Honesty and Goodness: Discussion]. Znak 
17, no. 4 (1965): 419. [Discussion of Wladyslaw Tatarkiewicz's lecture: 
"Uczciwosc i dobroc."] 
338. "Dyskusja" [Discussion]. Znak 17, no. 4 (1965): 466-467. [Discussion of a 
lecture by Wladyslaw Str6rewski.] 
339. "Jean Hering (1890-1966)." PPR 27, no. 2 (1966): 308-309. 
340. "Czlowiek i przyroda" [Man and Nature]. Polska 6, no. 154 (1967): 17. 
341. "przedmowa" [Introduction]. Idee czystej fenomenologii i fenomenologicznej 
jilozojii [The Ideas of Pure Phenomenology and Phenomenological 
Philosophy], by Edmund Husserl, translated from German into Polish by 
Danuta Gierulanka. Warszawa: PWN, 1967. 2nd ed.: 1975. xiii-xxiv. 
342. "Remarques" [Remarks on Asbjl'lrn Aarnes' "Roman Ingarden i Norge"]. 

ROMAN INGARDEN INTERNATIONAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 
249 
RMM 72, no. 3 (1967): 341-343. 
343. "Bemerkungen ... " [Remarks on Asbj~m Aames' "Roman Ingarden i Norge"]. 
OL 22, nos. 1-4 (1967): 6~1. 
344. "Bemerkninger. .. " [Remarks on Asbj~m Aames' "Roman Ingarden i Norge"]. 
Samtiden 76, no. 2 (1967): 107-108. [Text in German.] 
345. "Uwagi Romana Ingardena" [Remarks on Asbj~m Aames' "Roman Ingarden 
i Norge"]. Fenomenologia Romana Ingardena [The Philosophy of Roman 
Ingarden]. SFil (special issue) (1972): 501-502. 
346. Edmund Husserl: Briefe an Roman Ingarden. Mit Erliiuterungen und 
Erinnerungen an Husserl, Roman Ingarden, ed. Phaenomenologica, Vo!. 25. 
The Hague: Nijhoff, 1968. 
347. Encic/opedia Jilosofica, 2nd ed., interamenta vielaborata. Firenze: Sansoni, 
1967. Rev. in RFil28, nos. 1-2 (1970): 27-32. 
348. "Gastvorlesung von Roman Ingarden." Bulletin International d' Estherique 5, 
no. 14 (1970): 5-7. [Summary of a lecture delivered in Amsterdam on March 
14, 1969.] 
349. "Uwagi Romana Ingardena" [Remarks of Roman Ingarden] on: "Roman 
Ingarden w Norwegii" [Roman Ingarden in Norway], by Asbj~m Aames. 
Fenomenologia Romana Ingardena [The Phenomenology of Roman 
Ingarden]. SFil (special edition) (1972): 501-502. 
350. "Formale und transzendentale Logik," by Edmund Husser!. IPpF 10 (1929): 
1-298. Rev. reprinted in Husserl, Hermann Noack, ed. Dannstadt: 1973. 
168-173. 
351. (Contribution to the discussion of) "Wahrheit und Lebenswelt," by A. 
Pazanin. Phaenomenologica, Vol. 61: Verite et verification I Wahrheit und 
Verifikation. Akten des IV. Internationalen Kolloquiums fur Phiinomenologie, 
8-11 September 1969. The Hague: Nijhoff, 1974.92. 
352. (Contribution to the discussion of) "Probleme des Verstehens," by Stephan 
Strasser. Phaenomenologica, Vol. 61: Verite et verification I Wahrheit und 
Verifikation. Akten des IV. Internationalen Kolloquiums fiir Phiinomenologie, 
8-11 September 1969. The Hague: Nijhoff, 1974. 182. 
353. "0 fenomenoloskoj estetici. Pokusaj odredbe oblasti istraiivanja" [On 
Phenomenological Aesthetics. An Attempt to Define the Field of Research]. 
Gledista 16, no. 3 (1975): 289-310. [Lecture held at the Institute of Aes-
thetics in Amsterdam on March 17, 1969.] 
354. "0 teoriach kontemplacji" [On Theories of Contemplation]. StEs 14 (1977): 
99-110. [Part of Lecture IX of May 3, 1960.] 
355. "0 sytuacji estetycznej" [On the Aesthetic Situation]. StEs 14 (1977): 
110-116. [Part of Lecture XI of May 10, 1960.] 
356. "przedmowa" [Introduction]. Krytyka teorii przyczynowosci Davida Hume' a 
[Critique of David Hume's Theory of Causality], by Jan Szewczyk. Krak6w: 
WL, 1980. 5-8. 
357. "Lectures on Aesthetics," translated by Boguslaw Lewandowski. Literary 
Studies in Poland 11 (1983): 15-37. [Translation of Lectures 13 and 14 from 
Wyklady i dyskusje z estetyki.] 
358. Uzasadienie metaJizyki moralnosci" [Foundations of the Metaphysics of 
Morals], by Immanuel Kant, 3rd ed., translated by M. Wartenberg, Roman 
Ingarden, ed. Warszawa: PWN, 1984. 

250 
HANS H. RUDNICK AND JOLANTA W. W A WRZYCKA 
Translations 
359. "0 zjawisku tragicznosci" [On the Phenomenon of the Tragic] ("Zum 
Phiinomen des Tragischen" by Max Scheler). PWar 2, no. 4 (13) (1922): 
32-52. 
360. "0 rehabilitacji 
cnoty" 
[On 
the 
Rehabilitation of Virtue] 
("Zur 
Rehabilitierung der Tugend" by Max Scheler), translated in collaboration 
with Stefan Kolaczkowski. Marcholt 3, no. 1 (1936): 5-28. 
361. "0 zjawisku tragicznosci" [On the Phenomenon of the Tragic] ("Zum 
Phiinomen des Tragischen" by Max Scheler), 2nd corrected ed. Biblioteczka 
Filozo!iczna, Vol. 10. Lw6w: 1938. 
362. Krytyka czystego rozumu [Critique of Pure Reason](Kritik der reinen 
Vernunft by Immanuel Kant). Warszawa: PWN, 1957. 
363. "0 zjawisku tragicznosci" [On the Phenomenon of the Tragic] ("Zum 
Phiinomen des Tragischen" by Max Scheler). 0 tragedii i tragicznosci [On 
Tragedy and the Tragic], by Aristotle, David Hume and Max Scheler. 
Krak6w: WL, 1976. 
364. Krytyka wladzy sqdzenia [Critique of Judgment], by Immanuel Kant. 
Warszawa: PWN, 1986. 
Letters 
365. "Letters Pro and Con" [Letter to Professor Fizer on "Schematism"]. fAAC 28, 
no. 4 (1970): 541-542. 
366. "Roman Ingarden's Two Letters to Janusz Kuczynski, the Editor of SFil." 
SFil, nos. 4-5 (1970): 193-194. [Preceded by a note from the Editors, cf. 
"OD REDAKCJI," item no. 828.] 
367. "Der Brief an Husserl tiber die VI. Untersuchung und den Idealism[us]." 
Analecta Husserliana 2 (1972): 357-374. 
368. ''The Letter to Husserl about the VIth '[Logical] Investigation' and 
'Idealism'." Analecta Husserliana 4 (1976): 419-438. 
SECONDARY SOURCES 
369. AARNES, Asbjfllm. "Roman Ingarden en Norvege." RMM 72, no. 3 (1967): 
332-340. 
370. AARNES, Asbjfllm. "Roman Ingarden en Norvege." OL 22, nos. 1-4 (1967): 
49-60. 
371. AARNES, Asbjfllm. "Roman Ingarden i Norge" [Roman Ingarden in 
Norway]. Samtiden 76, no. 2 (1967): 96--107. 
372. AARNES, Asbjfllm. "Roman Ingarden w Norwegii" [Roman Ingarden in 
Norway]. Fenomenologia Romana Ingardena [The Phenomenology of 
Roman Ingarden]. SFiI (special issue) (1972): 493-501. 
373. ACHAM, K. L. Review of Der Streit urn die Existenz der Welt, by Roman 
Ingarden. PhiL 19, no. 3 (1966): 147-155. 

ROMAN INGARDEN INTERNATIONAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 
251 
374. ALES BELLO, Angela. "Valore e Significato della Filosofia di Anna-Teresa 
Tymieniecka." Sapienza 26, no. I (1973): 113-115. 
375. ALES BELLO, Angela. "Fenomenologia e Creativita." Sapienza 28, no. 2 
(1975): 229-233. 
376. ALES BELLO, Angela. "A proposito della polemica Ingarden-Husserl." 
Rivista d' Europa 1 (1978). 
377. AMERIKS, Karl. "Hussed's Realism." PhR 86, no. 4 (1977): 498-519. 
378. ARANITOVIC, Dobrilo and CEKIC, Miodrag. "Bibliography of Ph en om enol-
ogy in Yugoslavia." Analecta Husserliana 27 (1989) [Roman Ingarden]: 
769-777. 
379. ARANITOVIC, Dobrilo and CEKIC, Miodrag. "Supplementary Bibliography 
of Phenomenology in Yugoslavia (1982-1988)." Analeeta Husserliana 27 
(1989) [Roman Ingarden]: 817-818. 
380. BACZEWSKI, A. "Poznanie dziela Iiterackiego a elementy teorii R. 
Ingardena" [The Cognition of the Literary Work of Art and the Elements of 
R. Ingarden's Theory]. Studia i Materialy WSP Zielona G6ra, no. 7 (1981): 
81-87. 
381. BARCK, Karlheinz. "Zur Kritik des Rezeptionsproblems in biirgerlichen 
Literaturauffassungen." Gesellschaft-Literatur-Lesen. Literaturrezeption in 
theoretischer Sieht, Manfred Naumann, ed. Berlin und Weimar: Aufbau-
Verlag, 1975. 125-130. 
382. BAR-ON, A. Z. "On the Autonomy of the Literary Work of Art: On A.-T. 
Tymieniecka's Criticism of Ingarden's Aesthetics" (in Hebrew). Iyyun 32, 
nos. 1-2 (1983): 87-91. 
383. BARRAL, Marie, R. "The Phenomenology of the Specifically Human 
Person." The Human Person and Philosophy in the Contemporary World, J. 
M. Zyciriski, ed. Krak6w: The Pontifical Faculty of Theology, 1980. 95-116. 
384. BARTOSZYNSKI, Kazimierz. "Teoria miejsc niedookreslenia na tie 
Ingardenowskiego systemu filozoficznego" [The Theory of Undefinable 
Places in the Context of Ingarden's Philosophical System]. Wypowiedt 
literaeka a wypowiedi JilozoJiczna [Literary Expression vs. Philosophical 
Expression], Michal Glowiriski and Janusz Slawinski, eds. Wrodaw: 
Ossolineum, 1982. 183-197. 
385. BARTOSZYNSKI, Kazimierz. "The Ontology of Objects in Ingarden's 
Aesthetics." Analecta Husserliana 27 (1989): 369-393. 
386. BERG, Temma F. "Wrestling with the Deconstructive Angel." Reader 12 
(1984): 1-10. 
387. BIEMEL, Walter. "Reflexionen zu Ingardens Deutung des Bildes." The 
Philosophy of Roman Ingarden: Reports on Philosophy (Polish), no. 10 
(1986): 5-18. 
388. BLAUSTEIN, L. 0 ujmowaniu przedmiotow estetycznych [On Apprehension 
of Aesthetic Objects]. Lw6w: 1938. 
389. BLEICH, David. "Teleology and Taxonomy in Critical Explanation." BuR 
26, no. 1 (1981): 102-127. 
390. BOCHENSKI, Joseph M. Contemporary European Philosophy. Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 1956. 
391. BOCHENSKI, Joseph M. Europiiische Philosophie der Gegenwart. Bern: 
Francke, 1947; 2nd ed., Miinchen: 1951. 

252 
HANS H. RUDNICK AND JOLANTA W. WA WRZYCKA 
392. BOIT AR, Endre T. "Slavonian Structuralism in the Literary Scholarship" (in 
Hungarian). Magyar Filoz6Jiai Szemle (1975): 369-394. 
393. BOJTAR, 
Endre 
T. 
"Der 
ontologische 
Structuralismus 
in 
der 
Literaturwissenschaft (Roman Ingarden)." Neohelicon. Acta Comparationis 
Litterarum Universarum 6, no. 2 (1978): 47-82. 
394. BOlT AR, Endre T. Linguistic and Literary Studies in Eastern Europe 
(LLSEE): Slavic Structuralism. Amsterdam: Benjamins Press, 1985.80-121. 
[Translation of Hungarian co-published A szlciv strukturalizmus az irodalom-
tudo mdnyban. Budapest: Academia Kiad6, 1985.] 
395. BOROWY, Waclaw. "Szkola krytyk6w" [The School of Critics]. PWsp 16, 
no. 2 (1937): 35-41. 
396. BORZYM, Stanislaw. "Ingardenowska krytyka bergsonizmu jako teorii 
poznania" [Ingarden's Critique of Bergsonism as Theory of Cognition]. SFil, 
no. 11 (1981): 23-41. 
397. BORZYM, Stanislaw. Bergson a przemiany swiatopoglqdowe w Polsce 
[Bergson and the Change of Philosophical Thinking in Poland]. Wroclaw-
Warszawa: Ossolineum, 1984. 
398. BRECHT, F. J. Summary review of "Bemerkungen zum Problem Idealismus-
Realismus," by Roman Ingarden [JPpF 11 (1929)]. Kantstudien 36, nos. 1-2 
(1931): 168-170. 
399. BREDELLA, Lothar. "Die Tiitigkeit des Lesers beim sinnhaften Aufbau der 
fiktiven Welt literarischer Texte: Zur Kritik von Ingardens Begriff der 
'Unbestimmtheitsstelle'." Anglistentag 1981: Vortriige, JOrg Hasler, ed. 
Frankfurt/Main: Lang, 1983. 170--189. 
400. BRESLIN, C. F. Review of The Literary Work 0/ Art, by Roman Ingarden. 
RevM 28, no. 3 (1975): 555-556. 
401. BRINKER, Menachem. "Roman Ingarden and the 'Appropriate Aesthetic 
Attitude' to the Literary Work of Art." PoT 5, no. I (1984): 129-148. 
[Includes a I-page bibliography.] 
402. BRINKER, Menachem. "Phenomenology and Literature: Roman Ingarden 
and the 'Appropriate Aesthetic Attitude' to the Literary Work of Art" (in 
Hebrew).lyyun 33, nos. 1-2 (1984): 137-155. 
403. BRUNIUS, Teddy. "The Aesthetics of Roman Ingarden." PPR 30, no. 4 
(1970): 590--595. [Discussion of Vom Erkennen des literarischen Kunstwerks 
and Erlebnis, Kunstwerk und Wert.] 
404. CAPEK, Milic. Bergson and Modern Physics. Boston Studies in the 
Philosophy o/Science, Vol. 7, Robert S. Cohen and Marx W. Wartofsky, eds. 
Dordrecht: Reidel, 1971. 168-172. 
405. CAVAILLES, Jean. "L'ecole de Vienne au Congres de Prague." RMM 42 
(1935): 145-146. 
406. CERVENKA, Miroslaw. Der Bedeutungsaufbau des literarischen Werks. 
Theorie und Geschichte der Literatur und der schonen Kiinste series, Vol. 36. 
MUnchen: Fink, 1978. 
407. CHARLSON, Price. Review of Untersuchungen zur Ontologie der Kunst, by 
Roman Ingarden. PPR 32, no. 2 (1971): 269-271. 
408. CHUDY, Wojciech. "Zagadnienie naocznosci akt6w poznawczych" [How to 
Present the Acts of Cognition]. RoFi129, no. 1 (1981): 165-232. 
409. CHWISTEK, Leon. "Kr6tka rozprawa z panem Romanem Ingardenem, 

ROMAN INGARDEN INTERNATIONAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 
253 
doktorem Uniwersytetu Fryburskiego" [A Brief Confrontation with Mr. 
Roman Ingarden, doctor of Freiburg University]. PFil 25, no. 4 (1922): 
540-544. 
410. CHWISTEK, Leon. "Tragedja werbalnej metafizyki" [The Tragedy of Verbal 
Metaphysics]. KFil 10, no. 1 (1932): 46-76. [Review of Das literarische 
Kunstwerk.] 
411. CICHON, Wladyslaw. "W sprawie relatywnoSci wartosci" [On the Relativity 
of Values]. Fenomenologia Romana Ingardena [The Phenomenology of 
Roman Ingarden]. SFil (special issue) (1972): 429-443. 
412. CLARK, Walter H. Review of The Cognition of the Literary Work of Art, by 
Roman Ingarden. JAAC 33, no. 2 (1974): 220-222. 
413. COBB-STEVENS, Veda. "Contextual Phenomenology and the Problem of 
Creativity." Analecta H usserliana 7 (1978): 163-174. 
414. COHEN, Sibyl. "Ingarden's Benign Circle." DaH 4, no. 4 (1977): 137-149. 
415. COHEN, Sibyl. "Ingarden's Aesthetics and Dance." Illuminating Dance: 
Philosophical Explorations, Maxine Sheets-Johnstone, ed. Lewisburg: 
Bucknell University Press. London and Toronto: Associated University 
Presses, 1984. 146-166. 
416. COLLINS, J. Review of Der Streit urn die Existenz der Welt, by Roman 
Ingarden. MSch45 (1967--68): 151-155. 
417. COLOMB, Gregory. "Roman Ingarden and the Language of Art and 
Science." JAAC 35, no. 1 (1976): 7-13. 
418. CROWLEY, Ruth. "Roman Ingarden and Literary Truth Value." Erkennen 
und Deuten. Essays zur Literatur und Literatur Theorie, Martha Woodmansee 
and Walter F. W. Lohnes, eds. Berlin: E. Schmidt, 1983.42-53. 
419. CSASTO, Edward. "Funkcje mowy scenicznej" [Functions of Stage Diction]. 
Estetyka 3 (1962): 177-202. 
420. CYSARZ, Herbert. Review of Das literarische Kunstwerk, by Roman 
Ingarden. DeLit 25, no. 34 (1931): (columns) 1595-1599. 
421. CYWINSKI, Stanislaw. "Niezwykla ksilli.ka Ingardena: 0 poznawaniu dziela 
literackiego" [Ingarden's Extraordinary Book: The Cognition of the Literary 
Work of Art]. Siowo (Wilno) 16, no. 184 (1937): 3. 
422. CYZEWSKYJ, D. "Der VIII. Intemationale Philosophische Kongress in Prag 
am 2.-7. September 1934." SRun 6, no. 6 (1934): 422-425. 
423. CZERNIAK, Stanislaw. "Philosophical Perspectivism and the Rigours of 
Dialectics." DaH 3, no. 1 (1976): 135-143. 
424. CZEZOWSKI, Tadeusz. "Roman Ingarden (1893-1970)." RFil 29, no. 1 
(1971): 1--6. 
425. DP,.BROWSKI, Stanislaw. "Ontologiczne ugruntowanie aksjologii literatury 
w uj«ciu Romana Ingardena" [The Ontological Foundation of the Axiology of 
Literature by Roman Ingarden]. RFil38, nos. 3-4 (1980): 248-250. 
426. DP,.BROWSKI, Stanislaw. "Od stylistyki do metafizyki (mi«dzy referatami a 
Ingardenem)" [From Stylistic to Metaphysic]. Wypowiedi literacka a 
wypowiedi filozoJiczna [Literary Expression vs. Philosophical Expression], 
Michal Glowinski and Janusz Slawinski, eds. Wroclaw: Ossolineum, 1982. 
65-78. 
427. DP,.BROWSKI, Stanislaw. "Roman Ingarden et la perspective temporelle dans 
la concretisation de l'oeuvre litteraire" (in Polish). PL 77, no. 2 (1986): 

254 
HANS H. RUDNICK AND JOLANTA W. WAWRZYCKA 
161-178. 
428. Df,MBSKA, Izydora. "Roman Ingarden (1893-1970)." RPh 160, no. 4 
(1970): 503-506. 
429. Df,MBSKA, 
Izydora. 
"Pogllldy 
fIlozoficzne 
Romana 
Ingardena" 
[Philosophical Views of Roman Ingarden). KiS 15, no. 1 (1971): 3-7. 
430. Df,MBSKA, Izydora. "0 pewnych punktach stycznych w fIlozofii j~zyka 
Ingardena i Fregego" [On Certain Tangential Points in Ingarden's and Frege's 
Philosophy of Language]. RFit 34, no. 3 (1976): 203-206. 
431. DAMNJANOVIC, Milan. "In memoriam. Roman Ingarden (1893-1970)." 
Fitozofija 12, nos. 2-3 (1970): 211-213. 
432. DAMNJANOVIC, Milan. "Ingardenov nagovestaj jedne teorije fIlma" 
[Ingarden's Announcement of a Theory of Film]. Fitmske sveske 5, no. 1 
(1973): 1--6. 
433. DAMNJANOVIC, Milan. "Ideja fenomenoloSke estetike Romana Ingardena" 
[The Idea of the Phenomenological Aesthetics of Roman Ingarden]. 
Fenomenologija, Milan Damnjanovic, ed. Beograd: Nolit, 1975. 186-187. 
434. DAWES-HICKS, G. Review of Intuition und Intellekt bei Henri Bergson, by 
Roman Ingarden. Hibbert lournal21 (1922-23): 182-183. 
435. DE VRIES, J. Review of Der Streit urn die Existenz der Welt, by Roman 
Ingarden. Theologie und Phitosophie 44, no. 1 (1969): 138-139. 
436. D~BOWSKI, J6zef. "Ingardenowska koncepcja eliminacji 'petitio principii' z 
teorii poznania" [Ingarden's Concept of Eliminating the 'Petitio Principii' 
from the Theory of Cognition]. SFit, no. 12 (1980): 31-44. 
437. D~BOWSKI, J6zef. "U ir6del fikcji przetrwania" [On the Sources of the 
Fiction of Enduring]. Akcent, no. 3 (1982): 128-135. 
438. D~BOWSKI, J6zef. "Koncepcja czlowieka" [The Concept of Man]. Czlowiek 
i swiatopoglqd 9 (1982): 77-100. 
439. DELGADO, Ana Maria. "A Note on Misreading; or Filling the Author's 
Gaps II." Proceedings o/the 10th Congress o/the International Comparative 
Literature Association, Anna Balakian et al., eds. New York: Garland, 1985. 
19-23. 
440. DES LOGES, Marian. "Nowe podstawy nauki 0 literaturze" [New Founda-
tions of Literary Scholarship). Lw6w Literacki 1, no. 3 (1937): 3. 
441. DISCUSSION. Analecta Husser/iana 2 (1972): 64-77 and 218-241. 
442. DISCUSSION. Analecta Husser/iana 3 (1974): 147-158. 
443. DJEMIDOK, Bohdan. "Teorija vrednosti umetnickog dela Romana Ingardena 
u svetIosti marksistiCke estetike" [The Theory of Value of the Work of Art of 
Roman Ingarden in the Light of Marxist Aesthetics]. KnjiK 7, no. 3 (1976): 
27-36. 
444. DJORDJIC, Stojan. "Roman Ingarden: Dotivljaj, umetnicko delo i vrednost" 
[Roman Ingarden: Erlebnis, Kunstwerk und Wert]. KnjIst 8, no. 32 (1976): 
687--692. 
445. DOBROWOLSKI, T. "Uwagi 0 rozprawie na temat budowy obrazu" 
[Comments on (Ingarden's) Article, 'On the Structure of Painting')' Tw 2, no. 
12 (1946): 79-100. [Review of "0 budowie obrazu."] 
446. DOLGOW, K. M. "Fenomenologia literatury Romana Ingardena" [Roman 
Ingarden's Phenomenology of Literature]. Fenomenologia Romana Ingar-
dena [The Phenomenology of Roman Ingarden]. SFit (special issue) (1972): 

ROMAN INGARDEN INTERNATIONAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 
255 
359-380. 
447. DOLGOV, K. M. "Roman Ingarden's Phenomenology of Literature." DaH 2, 
no. 2(1975):95-108. 
448. DOLINAR, Darko. "Roman Ingarden: Eseji iz estetike" [Roman Ingarden: 
Essays on Aesthetics]. Primerjalna knjifevnost, no. 2 (1981): 42-44. 
449. DREWNOWSKI, T. and JANION, M. "Zagadnienie flkcji literackiej ze 
stanowiska socjologicznej teorii literatury" [The Question of Literary Fiction 
from the Point of View of the Sociological Theory of Literature]. Tw 4, no. 2 
(1948): 70-92. 
450. DUFRENNE, Mikel. Phenomenologie de l' experience esthetique. Paris: 
1953. 
451. DUFRENNE, Mikel. "Filozofla czlowieka i ftIozofla natury" [The 
Philosophy of Man and the Philosophy of Nature]. Fenomenologia Romana 
Ingardena [The Phenomenology of Roman Ingarden]. SFit (special issue) 
(1972): 483-492. 
452. DUFRENNE, Mikel. The Phenomenology of Aesthetic Experience. Evanston: 
Northwestern University Press, 1973. 
453. DZIEMIDOK, Bohdan. "Romana Ingardena teoria wartosci dziela sztuki w 
swietle estetyki marksistowskiej" [Roman Ingarden's Theory of Value of the 
Work of Art in the Light of Marxist Aesthetics]. SFit, no. 3 (1975): 49-68. 
454. DZIEMIDOK, Bohdan. "Roman Ingarden's Theory of Value of the Work of 
Art in the Light of Marxist Aesthetics." DaH 2, no. 2 (1975): 123-132. 
455. DZIEMIDOK, Bohdan. "Pluralizm estetyczny" [Aesthetic Pluralism]. StEs 
12, (1975): 247-263. 
456. DZIEMIDOK, Bohdan. "Roman Ingarden's Views on the Aesthetic 
Attitude." Roman Ingarden and Contemporary Polish Aesthetics, Piotr Graff 
and Slaw Krzemieri-Ojak, eds. Warszawa: PWN, 1975.9-32. 
457. DZIEMlDOK, Bohdan. "Kontrowersje wok6l wartosci estetycznych: Pr6ba 
typologizacji stanowisk" [The Controversy Surrounding Aesthetic Values: An 
Attempt at a Typology of Positions]. Studia z dziej6w estetyki polskiej 
1918-1939 [Studies in the History of Polish Aesthetics 1918-1939]. 
Warszawa: PWN, 1975.7-47. 
458. DZIEMIDOK, Bohdan. "La teoria di Roman Ingarden suI val ore dell'opera 
l'arte alia luce dell'estetica marxista." Bolletino di Storia della Fitosojia 
dell' Universita degli Studi di Lecce 4 (1976): 59-70. 
459. DZIEMlDOK. Bohdan. "Sp6r 0 nature; przezya emocjonalnych doznawanych 
podczas obcowania z dzielem sztuki" [Controversy Over the Nature of 
Emotional Experiences from Contact with the Work of Art]. Annales 
Universitatis Mariae Curie-Sklodowska 1, sectio 1 (1976): 263-284. 
460. DZIEMIDOK, Bohdan. "Aestheticism and Formalism in the Theory of the 
Value of the Work of Art - Ingarden versus Marxism." VlIIth International 
Congress of Aesthetics. Darmstadt: 1976.5-11. 
461. DZIEMlDOK. Bohdan. "Ingarden i marksizm wobec estetyzmu i formalizmu 
w teorii wartosci dziela sztuki" [Ingarden and Marxism Facing Aestheticism 
and Formalism in the Theory of the Value of the Work of Art]. StEs 14 
(1977): 56-59. 
462. DZIEMlDOK, Bohdan. Teoria przezyc i wartosci estetycznych w polskiej 
estetyce dwudziestolecia miedzywojennego [The Theory of Aesthetic 

256 
HANS H. RUDNICK AND JOLANTA W. WAWRZYCKA 
Experiences and Values in Polish Aesthetics between the WarsJ. Warszawa: 
PWN,1980. 
463. DZIEMIDOK, Bohdan. "Aesthetic Experience and Evaluation." Essays on 
Aesthetics: Perspectives on the Work of Monroe C. Beardsley, John Fisher, 
ed. Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1983. 53-68. 
464. DZIEMIDOK, Bohdan. "Estetski dozivljaj i vrednovanje" [Aesthetic 
Experience and EvaluationJ. KnjiK 15, nos. 5 and 6 (1984): 45-57. 
465. DZIEMIDOK, Bohdan and McCORMICK, Peter J., eds. On the Aesthetics of 
Roman Ingarden: Interpretations and Assessments, Nijhoff International 
Philosophy Series, Vol. 27. Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1989. 
466. DZIEMIDOK, Bohdan. "Ingarden's Theory of Values and the Evaluation of 
the Work of Art." On the Aesthetics of Roman Ingarden: Interpretations and 
Assessments, Nijhoff International Philosophy Series, Vol 27, Bohdan 
Dziemidok and Peter J. McCormick, eds. Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1989.71-100. 
467. EDIE, James M. (ed.) An Invitation to Phenomenology: Studies in the 
Philosophy of Experience. Chicago: Quadrangle Books, 1965. 
468. ELBRACHT-HOLSEWEH, Lucie. Jacob Bidermanns "Belisarius". Ein 
Beitrag 
zur 
phiinomenologischen 
Behandlung 
eines 
Iiterarischen 
Kunstwerkes. Berlin: Junker und Diinnhaupt, 1935. 
469. ESHELMAN, Martin. "Aesthetic Experience, the Aesthetic Object and 
Criticism." Monist 50 (April 1966): 281-298. 
470. EWING, A. C. Review of "Essentiale Fragen," by Roman Ingarden. Mind 35, 
no. 138 (1926): 250. 
471. EYKMAN, Christoph. Phiinomenologie der Interpretation. Bern and 
Miinchen:Francke, 1977. 
472. EYKMAN, Christoph. "Eidetic Conception and the Analysis of Meaning in 
Literature." Analecta Husserliana 12 (1982): 443-453. 
473. FALK, Eugene H. "Ingarden's Concept of the Aesthetic Object." CLS 18, no. 
3 (1981): 230-237. 
474. FALK, Eugene H. The Poetics of Roman Ingarden. Chapel Hill, NC: 
University of North Carolina Press, 1981. 
475. FALK, Eugene H. "Ingarden's Conception of Aesthetic Values in Literature." 
YCC, Vol. 10: Literary Criticism and Philosophy (1983): 78-85. 
476. FARBER, Marvin. "Tezy 0 istnieniu swiata jako problem fiIozoficzny" 
[Theses on the Existence of the World as a Philosophical ProblemJ. 
Fenomenologia Romana Ingardena [The Phenomenology of Roman 
IngardenJ. SFiI (special issue) (1972): 229-235. 
477. FARBER, Marvin. "On Subjectivism and the World Problem. In Memory of 
Roman Ingarden." PPR 34, no. 1 (1973): 134-141. 
478. FARBER, Marvin. "On Subjectivism and the World Problem. In Memory of 
Roman Ingarden." Revolutionary World, no. 7 (1974): 1-7. 
479. FATAUD, Jean-Marie. "Roman Ingarden, Critique de Bergson." For Roman 
Ingarden. Nine Essays in Phenomenology, A.-T. Tymieniecka, ed. The 
Hague: Nijhoff, 1959.7-28. 
480. PELS, H. Review of Das Iiterarische Kunstwerk, by Roman Ingarden. P JGG 
45, no. 2 (1932): 250-251. 
481. FIEDLER, Theodore. "Taking Ingarden Seriously: Critical Reflections on 
The Cognition of the Literary Work of Art. Part I." JBSP 6, no. 2 (1975): 

ROMAN INGARDEN INTERNATIONAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 
257 
131-140. 
482. FIEGUTH, Rolf. "Rezeption kontra falsches und richtiges Lesen, oder: 
MiBverstandnisse mit Ingarden." StZ 38 (1971): 142-159. 
483. FIEGUTH, Rolf. (ed.) Werksinterne und werksexterne literarische Kom-
munikation. Konstanz: Scriptor, 1975. 
484. FIEGUTH, Rolf. "Notiz des Herausgebers." Gegenstand und Aufgaben der 
Literaturwissenschaft. Aufsatze und Diskussionsbeitrage (1937-1964), edited, 
selected and introduced by Rolf Fieguth. Tiibingen: Niemeyer, 1976. vii-viii. 
485. FIEGUTH, 
Rolf. 
"Einleitung." 
Gegenstand 
und 
Aufgaben 
der 
Literaturwissenschaft. Aufsatze und Diskussionsbeitrage (1937-1964), edited, 
selected and introduced by Rolf Fieguth. Tiibingen: Niemeyer, 1976. x-xliii. 
486. FIEGUTH, Rolf. "Literarischer Wandel -
Struktur des Einzelwerkes." 
Merleau-Ponty und das Problem der Struktur in den Sozialwissenschaften, 
Richard Grathoff and Walter Sprondel, eds. Stuttgart: Enke, 1976. 81-94. 
487. FIEGUTH, Rolf. "Pierwiastek historyczny w Iiteraturoznawczych kon-
cepcjach Romana Ingardena" [The Historical Element in Roman Ingarden's 
Conceptions of Literary Science]. Teksty, no. 1 (1978): 37-62. 
488. FIEGUTH, Rolf. "Zur poetischen Bedeutung des Bedeutungslosen. Norwids 
Gedicht 'Zwei Knopfen (hinten)'." RusL 13, no. 3 (1983): 291-312. 
489. FILEK, Jacek. "Od 'wartosci czegos' do 'wartosci samej'" [From "Value of 
Something" to "Value in Itself']. SFil, no. 6 (1984): 187-204. 
490. FIZER, John. "Schematism: Aesthetic Device or Psychological Necessity?" 
fAAC 27, no. 3 (1969): 417-423. 
491. FIZER, John. "Letters Pro and Con" [A Response to Professor Ingarden; cf. 
Ingarden "Letters" section above, item no. 365] fAAC 28, no. 4 (1970): 542. 
492. FIZER, John. "The Concept of Strata and Phases in Roman Ingarden's 
Theory of Literary Structure." YCC 6 (1973): 10-39. 
493. FIZER, John. "Conceptual Affinities and Differences Between A. A. 
Potebnaja's Theory of 'Internal Form' and Roman Ingarden's 'Stratum of 
Aspects'." American Contributions to the VIIlth International Congress of 
Slavists, Vol. 1. Warszawa: 1973. 101-115. 
494. FIZER, John. "Fazy Ingardena, 'duree reelle' Bergsona, strumieri Williama 
Jamesa. Metaforyczne warianty rozumienia czasu czy wykluczajllce si« 
poj«cia czasu?" [Ingarden's Phases, Bergson's 'Duree Reelle', and William 
James' Stream: Metaphoric Variants or Mutually Exclusive Concepts on the 
Theme of Time?]. SFil, nos. 10-11 (1975): 27-43. 
495. FIZER, John. "Ingarden's Phases, Bergson's Duree Reelle, and William 
James' Stream: Metaphoric Variants or Mutually Exclusive Concepts on the 
Theme of Time." DaH 2, no. 3 (1975): 33-48. 
496. FIZER, John. "Ingarden's Phases, Bergson's Duree Reelle, and William 
James' Stream: Metaphoric Variants or Mutually Exclusive Concepts on the 
Theme of Time." Analecta Husserliana 4 (1976): 121-139. 
497. FIZER, John. 
'''EltOXTj"', Artistic Analysis, Aesthetic Concretization: 
Reflections upon Roman Ingarden's Reflections." Linguistic and Literary 
Studies in Eastern Europe (LLSEE), Vol. 1: Language, Literature and 
Meaning, John Odmark, ed. Amsterdam: Benjamins Press, 1979.351-371. 
498. FIZER, John. "Indeterminancies as Structural Components in Semiotically 
Meaningful Wholes." Proceedings of the 8th Congress of the International 

258 
HANS H. RUDNICK AND JOLANTA W. WAWRZYCKA 
Comparative Literature Association, II: Twentieth Century Literatures 
Originating in Different Cultures & Comparative Literature and Theory of 
Literature, Bela Kopeczi and Gyorgy M. Vajda, eds. Stuttgart: Bieber, 1980. 
767-773. 
499. FIZER, John. Psychologism and Psychoaesthetics: A Critical View of Their 
Relations. Amsterdam: Benjamins Press, 1981, 202-215. 
500. FIZER, John and KUCZYNSKI, Janusz; an interview. "Philosophy and 
Slavic Literatures." DaH 9, no. 2 (1982): 79-90. 
501. FIZER, John. "Ingarden's and Mukarovsky's Binominal Definition of the 
Literary Work of Art. A Comparative View of Their Respective Ontologies." 
RusL 13, no. 3 (1983): 269-290. 
502. FIZER, John. "Deconstruction of the Subject in Light of Ingarden's Epis-
temology." The Philosophy of Roman Ingarden: fagiel/onian University 
Reports on Philosophy (Polish) 10 (1986): 19-26. 
503. FIZER, John. "Ingarden's and Mukarovsky's Binominal Definition of the 
Literary Work of Art: A Comparative View of Their Ontologies." On the 
Aesthetics of Roman Ingarden: Interpretations and Assessments, Nijhoff 
International Philosophy Series, Vol. 27, Bohdan Dziemidok and Peter J. 
McCormick, eds. Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1989. 159-186. 
504. FOHT, Ivan. "Ucenje 0 heteronomiji muzickog djela - Roman Ingarden" 
[Doctrine on the Heteronomy of the Musical Work - Roman Ingarden]. 
Savremena Estetika Muzike. Beograd: Nolit, 1980. 141-155. 
505. FORREST, William C. "The Poem as a Summons to Performance." BfA 9 
(Jul 1969): 298-305. 
506. FRANCKOWIAK, Franciszek. "Budowa dziela sztuki u Nicolaia Hartrnanna 
i Romana Ingardena" [The Structure of the Work of Art in Nicolai Hartmann 
and Roman Ingarden]. SFiI, no. 5 (1976): 85-96. 
507. FRANK, W. A. Review of The Cognition of the Literary Work of Art and The 
Literary Work of Art, by Roman Ingarden. RevM 28, no. 3 (1975): 554-557. 
508. FRYDE, Ludwik. "Lekcja marzenia" [A Dream Lesson] TIl, no. 17 (1937): 
330. [Review of 0 poznawaniu dziela literackiego.] 
509. GABRIEL, Gottfried. Fiktion und Wahrheit: Eine semantische Theorie der 
Literatur. Stuttgart-Bad Cannstatt: Frommann-Holzboog, 1975. 
510. GADAMER, Hans-Georg. "Die phiinomenologische Bewegung." PRun 11, 
nos. 1-2 (1963): 1-45. 
511. GADAMER, Hans-Georg. "Die phanomenologische Bewegung." Kleine 
Schriften III: Idee und Sprache. Tiibingen: J. C. B. Mohr, 1972. 150-189. 
512. GALAROWICZ, Jan. "U podstaw sporu Ingardena z Husserlem. Czt<sc I: 
Sp6r 0 metodt<" [The Grounds of the Controversy between Husserl and 
Ingarden. Part 1: Controversy over Method]. SFiI, nos. 3-4 (1982): 79-86. 
513. GALAROWICZ, Jan. "U podstaw sporu Ingardena z Husserlem. Czt<sc II: 
Sp6r 0 swiadomosc" [The Grounds of the Controversy between Husserl and 
Ingarden. Part 2: Controversy over Consciousness]. SFiI, nos. 5-6 (1982): 
83-95. 
514. GALEWICZ, Wlodzimierz. "Slldy ontologiczne a istnienie" [Ontological 
Judgments and Existence]. SFiI, no. 2 (1981), 45-57. 
515. GALEWICZ, Wlodzimierz. "Prawdziwosc a inne wartosci poznawcze. 
Uwagi w zwillzku z Ingardenowskll definicjll prawdy" [Truth and Other 

ROMAN INGARDEN INTERNATIONAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 
259 
Cognitive Values. Remarks on Ingarden's Definition of Truth]. SFil, nos. 1-2 
(1983): 135-144. 
516. GIERGIELEWICZ, M. Review of Das literarische Kunstwerk, by Roman 
Ingarden. PL 29, (1932): 260-272. 
517. GIERULANKA, Danuta and P6LTAWSKI, Andrzej. "0 istnieniu i 
strukturze dziela literackiego" [On the Existence and Structure of the Literary 
Work of Art]. SFil, no. 5 (1958): 142-157. 
518. GIERULANKA, Danuta. Review of Studia z estetyki, Vols. 1 and 2, by 
Roman Ingarden. RPh 151 (1961): 367-370. 
519. GIERULANKA, 
Danuta. 
"Siedemdziesi<tciolecie 
Profesora 
Romana 
Ingardena" [The 70th Birthday of Professor Roman Ingarden]. SFil, nos. 3-4 
(1963): 323. 
520. GIERULANKA, Danuta. "Roman Ingarden." NaP 10, no. 1 (1963): 93-97. 
521. GIERULANKA, Danuta and P6LTAWSKI, Andrzej. "Kierunki badarl 
filozoficznych Romana Ingardena" [Directions of Roman Ingarden's 
Philosophical Investigations]. Szkice JilozoJiczne Romanowi Ingardenowi w 
darze [Philosophical Sketches presented to Roman Ingarden]. Warszawa-
Krak6w: 1964.473-482. 
522. GIERULANKA, Danuta. "Teoria poznania bez kompromis6w" [The Theory 
of Cognition without Compromises]. ZiM 18, no. 1 (1968): 47-64. 
523. GIERULANKA, Danuta. "Roman Ingarden - 5. II 1893 - 14. VI 1970." 
Kroniki Uniwersytetu Jagiel/oriskiego. (1968/69-1969nO). 223-226. 
524. GIERULANKA, Danuta. "Roman Ingarden (1893-1970)." NaP 21 (1971): 
114-116. 
525. GIERULANKA, Danuta. "Filozofia Romana Ingardena" [Roman Ingarden's 
Philosophy]. Fenomenologia Romana Ingardena [The Phenomenology of 
Roman Ingarden]. SFil (special issue) (1972): 71-90. 
526. GIERULANKA, Danuta. "Zarys struktury wewn<ttrznej filozoficznego dziela 
Romana Ingardena" [Outline of the Internal Structure of Roman Ingarden's 
Philosophical Work]. RFil30, no. 1 (1972),4-10. 
527. GIERULANKA, Danuta. "Od wydawcy" [From the Editor]. Z teorii jt;zyka i 
JilozoJicznych podstaw logiki [The Theory of Language and the Philosophical 
Foundations of Logic], Danuta Gierulanka, ed. Warszawa: PWN, 1972.5-11. 
528. GIERULANKA, Danuta. "Slowo wst<tpne" [Foreword]. Ksiqieczkq 
0 
czlowieku [A Little Book on Man]. Krak6w: WL, 1972; 2nd ed., 1973.7-9. 
529. GIERULANKA, Danuta. "Przedmowa tlumacza" [Translator's Foreword]. 0 
poznawaniu dziela literackiego [The Cognition of the Literary Work of Art]. 
Warszawa: PWN, 1976.5-10. 
530. GIERULANKA, Danuta. "The Philosophic Work of Roman Ingarden - (A 
Systematic Outline)." DaH 4, no. 4 (1977): 117-128 (plus 2 flow-charts). 
531. GIERULANKA, Danuta. "The Philosophic Work of Roman Ingarden." 
Felsete Arkivi Sayi 21 den Ayri Basim. Istanbul: 1978. 3-21. 
532. GIERULANKA, Danuta. "Jak dopelnialo si<t dzielo Romana Ingardena" 
[How Ingarden's Work Has Taken Shape]. SFil, no. 12 (1980): 3-11. 
533. GIERULANKA, Danuta. "Przedmowa tlumacza" [Translator's Foreword]. 
Spar 0 istnienie swiata. Tom Ill. 0 strukturze przyczynowej realnego swiata 
[Controversy Over the Existence of the World. Vol. 3. On the Causal 
Structure of the Real World]. Warszawa: PWN, 1981. 5-12. 

260 
HANS H. RUDNICK AND JOLANTA W. WAWRZYCKA 
534. GIERULANKA, 
Danuta. 
"Foreword." 
Man 
and Value. 
Miinchen: 
Philosophia Verlag, 1983.9-15. 
535. GIERULANKA, Danuta. "Ingarden's Philosophical Work: A Systematic 
Outline." On the Aesthetics of Roman Ingarden: Interpretations and 
Assessments, Nijhoff International Philosophy Series, Vol. 27, Bohdan 
Dziemidok and Peter J. McCormick, eds. Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1989. 1-20. 
536. GIERULANKA, Danuta. "Select Bibliography of the Philosophical Works of 
Roman Ingarden." On the Aesthetics of Roman Ingarden: Interpretations and 
Assessments, Nijhoff International Philosophy Series, Vol. 27, Bohdan 
Dziemidok and Peter J. McCormick, eds. Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1989.297-301. 
537. GLOWINSKI, Michal. "On Concretization." Roman Ingarden and Contem-
porary Polish Aesthetics, Piotr Graff and Slaw Krzemieri-Ojak, eds. 
Warszawa: PWN, 1975.33-46. 
538. GLOWINSKI, Michal. Style odbioru [Styles of Reception]. Krak6w: 1977. 
539. GLOWINSKI, Michal. "0 konkretyzacji" [On Concretization]. Style odbioru 
[Styles of Reception]. Krak6w: 1977.93-115. 
540. GLOWINSKI, Michal. "On Concretization." Linguistic and Literary Studies 
in Eastern Europe (LLSEE), Vol. 1: Language, Literature and Meaning, John 
Odmark, ed. Amsterdam: Benjamins Press, 1979.325-349. 
541. GOLASZEWSKA, Maria. "0 estetyce Ingardena" [On Ingarden's Aes-
thetics]. ZLit, no. 1 (1957). [Review of Studia z estetyki, Vois. 1 and 2.] 
542. GOLASZEWSKA, Maria. "Roman Ingarden (1893-1970)." StEs 8 (1971): 
3-8. 
543. GOLASZEWSKA, Maria. "Romana Ingardena fIlozofia moralnosci" [Roman 
Ingarden's Moral Philosophy]. Estetyka 9 (1971): 1l3-144. 
544. GOLASZEWSKA, Maria. "Ingardenowska filozofia sztuki" [Ingarden's 
Philosophy of Art]. Nowe Ksiqzki, no. 18 (1971): 1223-1226. [Review of 
Studia z estetyki, Vol. 3.] 
545. GOLASZEWSKA, Maria. "Ingardenowski swiat wartosci" [Ingarden's 
World of Values]. Fenomenologia Romana Ingardena [The Phenomenology 
of Roman Ingarden]. SFil (special issue) (1972): 397-420. 
546. GOLASZEWSKA, Maria. "Pologne." RE 25, nos. 1-2 (1972): 199-205. 
547. GOLASZEWSKA, Maria. Zarys estetyki. Problematyka, metody, teorie 
[Aesthetics. Problematics, Methods and Theories]. Krak6w: WL, 1973. 
326-331. 
548. GOLASZEWSKA, Maria. "Romana Ingardena fIlozofia wartosci es-
tetycznych" [Roman Ingarden's Philosophy of Aesthetic Values]. Zeszyty 
Naukowe Uniwersytetu Jagiel/onskiego, no. 310: Zeszyty Filozojiczne, no. 3 
(1973): 33-49. 
549. GOLASZEWSKA, Maria. "0 Ingardenowskiej epistemologii" [On Ingar-
den's Epistemology]. Zeszyty Naukowe Uniwersytetu Jagiel/onskiego, no. 
358: Zeszyty Filozojiczne, no. 4 (1974): 63-79. 
550. GOLASZEWSKA, Maria. "Ingarden's World of Values." DaH 2, no. 2 
(1975): l33-146. 
55l. GOLASZEWSKA, Maria. "Ingardenowska koncepcja osoby" [Ingarden's 
Concept of Person]. SFil, no. 7 (1975): 125-14l. 
552. GOLASZEWSKA, Maria. "Aesthetic Values in Ingarden's System of 
Philosophy." Roman Ingarden and Contemporary Polish Aesthetics, Piotr 

ROMAN INGARDEN INTERNATIONAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 
261 
Graff and Slaw Krzemien-Ojak, eds. Warszawa: PWN, 1975.47-68. 
553. GOLASZEWSKA, Maria. "Roman Ingarden's Moral Philosophy." Analecta 
Husserliana 4 (1976): 73-103. 
554. GOLASZEWSKA, Maria. "Ingarden's Concept of Aesthetic Values in the 
Light of His Theory of Partly Isolated Systems." Phenomenology Information 
Bulletin 8 (1984): 25-42. 
555. GOLASZEWSKA, Maria. Zarys estetyki. Problematyka. Metody. Teorie 
[Aesthetics. Problematics, Methods and Theories]. Warszawa: PWN, 1984. 
326-331. 
556. GOLASZEWSKA, Maria. "Platonic Ideas in Ingarden's Phenomenological 
Aesthetics." Diotima (Greece) 12 (1984): 113-119. 
557. G6RNIAK-KOCIKOWSKA, 
Krystyna. 
"Controversy 
about 
Actual 
Existence: Anna-Teresa Tymieniecka's Contribution to the Study of Roman 
Ingarden's Philosophy." Analecta Husserliana 27 (1989): 165-192. 
558. GRABOWICZ, George G. "Translator's Introduction." The Literary Work of 
Art. An Investigation on the Borderlines of Ontology, Logic and Theory of 
Literature. With an Appendix on the Functions of Language in the Theatre. 
Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press, 1973.lv-lxx. 
559. GRABOWICZ, George G. "Value and Valuation in the Phenomenological 
Theory of Roman Ingarden." SAG, Vol. 94: Davis Symposium on Literary 
Evaluation, Karl Menges and Daniel Rancoure Laferriere, eds. Stuttgart: 
Akademischer Verlag Hans-Dieter Heinz, 1981.22-34. 
560. GRABOWSKI, Tadeusz. "Pr6ba syntezy nowej nauki 0 literaturze" [An 
Attempt to Synthesize New Studies of Literature]. PPow 198, no. 592 (1933): 
50-67 (Part 1); and no. 593 (1933): 198-221 (Part 2). 
561. GRABOWSKI, Tadeusz. Krytyka literacka w Polsce w epoce realizmu i 
modernizmu 1863-1933 [Polish Literary Criticism in the Period of Realism 
and Modernism, 1863-1933]. Poznan: 1934. 
562. GRAFF, Piotr and KRZEMIEN-OJAK, Slaw, eds. Roman Ingarden and 
Contemporary Polish Aesthetics. Warszawa: PWN, 1975. 
563. GRAFF, Piotr. "The Ontological Basis of Roman Ingarden's Aesthetics. A 
Tentative Reconstruction." Roman Ingarden and Contemporary Polish 
Aesthetics, Piotr Graff and Slaw Krzenien-Ojak, eds. Warszawa: PWN, 1975. 
69-96. 
564. GRAFF, Piotr. "0 poznawaniu cudzych stan6w psychicznych" [On the 
Cognition of the Mental States of Others]. Studia z dziejow estetyki polskiej, 
1918-1939, Slaw Krzemien-Ojak and W. Kalinowski, eds. Warszawa: PWN, 
1975. 105-121. 
565. GRAFF, Piotr. "Poj«cie przedmiotu estetycznego w najnowszej polskiej 
refleksji nad sztuk:l" [The Concept of Aesthetic Object in Recent Polish 
Thought on Art]. StEs 19 (1982): 251-274. 
566. GREGOIRE, Fran~ois. "Notes sur la philosophie de Roman Ingarden." RPh 
150 (1960): 505-512. 
567. GRELLlNG, K. "Bericht tiber den VIII. Internationalen Kongress fUr 
Philosophie in Prag." Erkenntnis (The Journal of Unified Science) 4, no. 2 
(1934): 437-438. 
568. GRLIe, Danko. "Roman Ingarden." Leksikon Filozofa. Zagreb: Naprijed, 
1968.255. 

262 
HANS H. RUDNICK AND JOLANTA W. W A WRZYCKA 
569. GRLIC, Danko. "Estetski Osnovi Aristotelovskog i Savremenog Teatra: 
Ingardenovo interpretiranje katarze" [Aesthetic Foundations of Aristotle's 
Theater and Contemporary Theater: Ingarden's Interpretation of Catharsis]. 
Filosofija: Jugoslovensld Casopis za Filosofiju 15, no. 4 (1971): 43-44. 
570. GRLIC, Danko. "Roman Ingarden." Filozofija (lexicon). Beograd: Interpres, 
1973. 
571. GRODZINSKI, Eugeniusz. "Roman Ingarden 
0 
wsp6lczesnej logice 
formalnej" [Roman Ingarden's Remarks on Present-Day Formal Logic]. SFil, 
no. 1 (1985): 107-121. 
572. GRUNEWALD, Bernward. Review of Der Streit um die Existenz der Welt, 
Vol. 3, by Roman Ingarden. AGP 59 (1977): 339-345. 
573. GRUSZEWSKA, Ludmila. "Polish Studies in Literary Space." Essays in 
Poetics: The Journal of the British Neo-Formalist School 9, no. 2 (1984): 
24-32. 
574. GUMPEL, Liselotte. '''The Essence of Reality' as a Construct of Language." 
Foundations of Language 11, no. 2 (1974): 167-185. 
575. GUMPEL, Liselotte. Metaphor Reexamined. A Non-Aristotelian Perspective. 
Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1984. 
576. GUNTHER, Hartmut. Struktur als Prozess. Studien zur Asthetik und 
Literaturtheorie. Miinchen: Fink, 1973. 
577. GUTH, A. Review of Das literarische Kunstwerk, by Roman Ingarden. 
Etudes Germaniques 18, no. 4 (1963): 506-507. 
578. GUY, A. Review of Das literarische Kunstwerk, Der Streit um die Existenz 
der Welt and Untersuchungen zur Ontologie der Kunst, by Roman Ingarden. 
EP 22, no. 4 (1967): 473-475. 
579. GUY, A. Review of Das literarische Kunstwerk, Der Streit um die Existenz 
der Welt and Untersuchungen zur Ontologie der Kunst, by Roman Ingarden. 
Bulletin de l' Universite de Toulouse 22 (1967): 285-287. 
580. HAFNER, Stanislaus et al. (eds.) Slavische Geisteswelt, West- und Siidslaven, 
Vol. 3: Mensch und Welt. Baden-Baden: Holle, 1959. 145-154. 
581. HALDER, A. Review of Untersuchungen zur Ontologie der Kunst, by 
Roman Ingarden. PJGG 70 (1962): 414-416. 
582. HAMBURGER, Kathe. Die Logik der Dichtung. Stuttgart: Klett, 1957. 
583. HAMM, Victor. "The Ontology of the Literary Work of Art: Roman 
Ingarden's Das literarische Kunstwerk." The Critical Matrix. Washington, 
DC: Georgetown University Press, 1961. 171-209. 
584. HAMRICK, William S. "Ingarden on 'Aesthetic Experience and Aesthetic 
Object'." JBSP 5, no. 1 (1974): 71-80. 
585. HAMRICK, William S. "Ingarden and Artistic Creativity." DaH 2, no. 4 
(1975): 3~9. 
586. HAMRICK, William S. "Ingarden i tw6rczosc artystyczna" [Ingarden and 
Artistic Creativity]. StEs 13 (1976): 17-31. 
587. HANIN, D. M. "La conception estMtique de Roman Ingarden et son analyse 
dans l'estMtique contemporaine" (in Russian). VoFi, no. 7 (1984): 111-119. 
588. HANNEBORG, Knut. "New Concepts in Ontology: Roman Ingarden's Der 
Streit um die Existenz der Welt." Inquiry 9 (1966): 401-409. 
589. HART, Samuel L. Review of Der Streit um die Existenz der Welt, by Roman 
Ingarden. PPR 27, no. 1 (1966): 144-145. 

ROMAN INGARDEN INTERNATIONAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 
263 
590. HECKER, K. Review of Das literarische Kunstwerk, by Roman Ingarden. 
Blatter jUr deutsche Philosophie 7, nos. 1-2 (1933): 157-158. 
591. HELLER, Michal. "Przyczynek do sporu 0 istnienie swiata" [A Contribution 
to the Controversy Over the Existence of the World]. Znak, no. 1 (1978): 
145-147. 
592. HELMAN, Alicja. "The Influence of Ingarden's Aesthetics on the Theory of 
Film." Roman Ingarden and Contemporary Polish Aesthetics, Piotr Graff and 
Slaw Krzemieri-Ojak, eds. Warszawa: PWN, 1975.97-108. 
593. HEMPOLINSKI, Michal. "On Ingarden's Conception of 'Pure' Epistemology 
as a Starting Point to His Criticism of So-Called Psychophysiological 
Epistemology." DaH2, no. 3 (1975): 49-54. 
594. HEMPOLINSKI, Michal. "Epistemologie und Metaphysik bei Husserl und 
Ingarden." DZP 24, no. 12 (1976): 1546--1555. 
595. HEMPOLINSKI, Michal. "Ingarden's Concept of 'Pure' Theory of Cogni-
tion" (in Russian). VoFi, no. 8 (1976): 135-138. 
596. HEMPOLINSKI, Michal. "0 fenomenologicznej i tzw. psychofizjologicznej 
koncepcji 
teorii 
poznania" 
[On 
Phenomenological 
and 
So-Called 
Psychophysiological Conceptions of the Theory of Cognition]. SFiI, no. 6 
(1976): 3-33. 
597. HERNADI, Paul. (ed.) What Is Literature? Bloomington: Indiana University 
Press, 1978. 115-126. 
598. HOLL, O. "Zum letzten deutschsprachigen Werk Roman Ingardens." 
Literatur und Kunst 71, no. 2 (1979): 45-50. 
599. HOLLINGSWORTH, Alan. "Beyond Survival." Profession 77. New York: 
Modem Language Association of America, 1977.7-11. 
600. HOLMES, R. H. "Is Transcendental Phenomenology Committed to 
Idealism?" Monist 59, no. 1 (1975): 98-114. 
601. HOLUB, Robert C. "Teorija recepcije" [Reception Theory]. TreCi program 
Radio-Sarajeva, no. 59 (1988): 399-436. 
602. HOMNAN, Ursula. Review of Der Streit urn die Existenz der Welt, Vol. 3, by 
Roman Ingarden. PhiL 29 (1976): 96--100. 
603. HUDZIK, Jan P. "The Reception in Polish Literature of Roman Ingarden's 
Theory of Painting." Analecta Husserliana 27 (1989): 417-436. 
604. HUSSERL, Edmund. "Drei unverOffentlichte Briefe von Husserl an 
Ingarden." ZpF 13, no. 2 (1959): 349-351. 
605. HUSSERL, Edmund. Edmund Husserl: Briefe an Roman Ingarden. Mit 
Erlauterungen und Erinnerungen an Husserl, Roman Ingarden, ed. 
Phaenomenologica, Vol. 25. The Hague: Nijhoff, 1968. 
606. IRZYKOWSKI, 
K. 
"Monachomachia 
humanistyczna" 
[Humanistic 
Monachomachia]. Pion 3 (1935): 26--27. 
607. ISEMINGER, Gary. "Roman Ingarden and the Aesthetic Object." PPR 33, 
no. 3 (1973): 417-420. 
608. ISER, Wolfgang. Der Akt des Lesens. Theorie asthetischer Wirkung. 
MUnchen: Fink, 1976. 
609. JADACKI, Jacek J. "Odpowiedzialnosc i istnienie swiata" [Responsibility 
and the Existence of the World]. SFiI, no. 5 (1973): 245-257. 
610. JADACKI, Jacek J. "0 pogl1ldach Romana Ingardena naj~zyk. (oraz) Wykaz 
prac Romana Ingardena dotycz1lcych zagadnien j~zyka" [Roman Ingarden's 

264 
HANS H. RUDNICK AND JOLANTA W. W A WRZYCKA 
Views on Language. (And) Index of Roman Ingarden's Works on Language]. 
Studia Semiotica 5 (1974): 17-54. 
611. JADACKI, Jacek J. "0 pogllldach Romana Ingardena na dzielo muzyczne" 
[On Roman Ingarden's Views of the Musical Work of Art]. Zeszyty Naukowe 
Panstwowej Wyzszej Szkoly Muzycznej w Gdansku, no. 14 (1975): 5-30. 
612. JADACKI, Jacek J. "Wiedza i istnienie. 0 pogllldach Romana Ingardena - w 
dziesilltll rocznict< smierci" [Cognition and Existence. On the Views of 
Roman Ingarden - on the Occasion of the Tenth Anniversary of his Death]. 
SFiI, no. 6 (1980): 73-98. 
613. JADACKI, Jacek J. "Sp6r mit<dzy Romanem Ingardenem a Edmundem 
Husserlem" [The Controversy between Roman Ingarden and Edmund 
Husserl). AHFMS 27 (1981): 191-225. 
614. JADACKI, Jacek J. "On Roman Ingarden's Semiotic Views: A Contribution 
to the History of Polish Semiotics." Analecta Husserliana 27 (1989): 
523-540. 
615. JAGANNATHAN, R. et al. "Roman Ingarden Bibliography." Roman 
lngarden: Selected Papers in Aesthetics, Peter J. McCormick, ed. Miinchen: 
Philosophia; and Washington, DC: Catholic University of America Press, 
1985.181-261. 
616. JECHOVA, Hana. "La Representation par l'absence: Statut narratif des 
personnages chez Dostoevskij." RLC 219-220 (3-4) (1981): 465-479. 
617. KAELIN, Eugene Francis. Art and Existence: A Phenamenological Aes-
thetics. Lewisburg, PA: Bucknell University Press, 1970. 
618. KAELIN, Eugene Francis. "Language as a Medium for Art." JAAC 40, no. 2 
(1981): 121-130. 
619. KAELIN, Eugene Francis. "Exposition: Man-the-Creator and the 'Prototype 
of Action.' A Contemporary Formulatiom of The Great Chain of Being." 
Analecta Husserliana 11 (1981): 11-37. 
620. KAELIN, Eugene Francis. "What Makes Philosophical Literature Philosophi-
cal?" Analecta Husserliana 19 (1985): 451-467. 
621. KAELIN, 
Eugene 
Francis. 
"Etre-dans-un-monde-litteraire." 
Analecta 
Husserliana 23 (1988): 407-433. 
622. KAKABADZE, Zurab M. "Przyczynek do krytyki fenomenologii Husserla" 
[Towards the Criticism of Husserl's Phenomenology]. Fenomenologia 
Romana lngardena [The Phenomenology of Roman Ingarden). SFil (special 
issue) (1972): 113-126. 
623. KALINOWSKI, Georges. Review of Z badarf nad jilozojiq wspOlczesnq, by 
Roman Ingarden. RPL 65, no. 87 (1967): 389-390. 
624. KALINOWSKI, Georges. "Ontologie et esthetique chez Roman Ingarden." 
AdP 31, no. 2 (1968): 281-287. [Review of Das literarische Kunstwerk and 
Untersuchungen zur Ontologie der Kunst.] 
625. KALINOWSKI, Georges. Review of Der Streit um die Existenz der Welt, 
Vols. 1 and 2, and Time and Modes of Being, by Roman Ingarden. AdP 31, 
no. 2 (1968): 329-334. 
626. KALINOWSKI, Georges. Review of Yom Erkennen des literarischen 
Kunstwerks, by Roman Ingarden. EP 3 (1969): 406-407. 
627. KALINOWSKI, Georges. Review of Yom Erkennen des literarischen 
Kunstwerks, by Roman Ingarden. AdP 33, no. 1 (1970): 162-164. 

ROMAN INGARDEN INTERNATIONAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 
265 
628. KALINOWSKI, Georges. "Les theses principales de l'estMtique Ingar-
denienne." AdP 33, no. 4 (1970): 945-950. [Review of Erlebnis, Kunstwerk 
und Wert.] 
629. KALINOWSKI, Georges. "Metaphysique: science ou my the? A propos des 
recents livres d'Ingarden et de Kolakowski." AdP 38, no. 2 (1975): 239-252. 
630. KALINOWSKI, Georges. "La pensee philosophique de Karol Wojtyla et la 
Faculte de Philosophie de I'Universite Catholique de Lublin." Aletheia: An 
International fournal of Philosophy, Vol. 4: Epistemology and Logic. Bern: 
Lang, 1988. 198-216. 
631. KANATA, S. "Ingarden in Japan." Phenomenology Information Bulletin 6 
(Oct. 1982): 1-5. 
632. KASPRZYK, Leszek. (Introductory remarks to the conference on) 
"Marksistowska krytyka fenomenologii a filozofia Romana Ingardena" 
[Marxist Criticism of Phenomenology and the Philosophy of Roman 
IngardenJ. SFil, no. 9 (1975): 13-14. 
633. KAST, Emil. Review of Das literarische Kunstwerk, by Roman Ingarden. 
Kantstudien 39, no. 2 (1934): 224-225. 
634. KAYSER, Wolfgang. Das sprachliche Kunstwerk. Bern: Francke, 1948 and 
1976. 
635. KELLY, Eugene. "Philosophy, Aesthetic Experience, and the Liberal Arts." 
fournal of Aesthetic Education 17, no. 3 (1983): 5-17. 
636. KERSTEN, Fred. "On Understanding Idea and Essence in Husserl and 
Ingarden." Analecta Husserliana 2 (1972): 55-63. 
637. KHATCHADOURIAN, Haig. Review of The Literary Work of Art, by 
Roman Ingarden. fMC 33, no. 2 (1974): 217-220. 
638. KIVY, Peter. Review of The Work of Music and the Problem of Its Identity, 
by Roman Ingarden. fMC 45, no. 4 (1987): 413-415. 
639. KLIMSKI, T. "Sesja ku czci Ingardena" [A Session in Honour of Ingarden (in 
ATK, Warsaw 1972)]. SPC 8, no. 2 (1972): 277-282. 
640. KMITA, Jerzy. "Od wu [sic] metodach doboru tennin6w teoretyczno-
literackich" [On Two Methods of Choosing Theoretical Tenns for a Theory 
of Literature]. StEs 2 (1965): 143-160. 
641. KMITA, Jerzy. Problematyka terminow teoretycznych w odniesieniu do pojec 
literaturoznawczych [The Theoretical Tenninology in Literary Research]. 
PTPN Prace Komisji Filozoficznej, Vol. II, no. 21. Poznan: PTPN, 1967. 
642. KMITA, Jerzy. "Work of Art: Its Concretization, Artistic Value, Aesthetic 
Value." Roman Ingarden and Contemporary Polish Aesthetics, Piotr Graff 
and Slaw Krzemieri-Ojak, eds. Warszawa: PWN, 1975. 109-128. 
643. KOGUT, R. "Koncepcja czasu w filozofii Romana Ingardena" [The Concept 
of Time in Roman Ingarden's Philosophy]. Prace Naukowe Uniwersytetu 
Slqskiego. Prace Nauk Spolecznych, no. 4 (1978): 25-38. 
644. KOJEVNIKOFF, A. Review of Das literarische Kunstwerk, by Roman 
Ingarden. RePh 2 (1932-33): 480-486. 
645. KOLACZKOWSKI, 
Stefan. 
"Bilans 
'estetyzmu'" 
[The 
Balance of 
'Aestheticism']. Marcholt 3, no. 2 (1937): 149-185. 
646. KOLNAI, A. Review of Untersuchungen zur Ontologie der Kunst, by Roman 
Ingarden. BfA 4, no. 2 (1964): 164-166. 
647. KONIG, R. "Das Kunstwerk als QueUe kunsttheoretischer Einsichten." ZAaK 

266 
HANS H. RUDNICK AND JOLANTA W. WA WRZYCKA 
30, no. 1 (1936): 1-27. 
648. KONRAD, G. Review of Erlebnis, Kunstwerk und Wert, by Roman Ingarden. 
Literarische Monatsschrift, no. 10 (1970). 
649. KONSTANTINOVIC, Zoran. "Ingardenova teorija 0 slojevima" [Ingarden's 
Theory 
on 
Layers]. 
Fenomenoloski 
Pristup 
Knjiievnom 
Delu 
[Phenomenological Approach to the Literary Work]. Beograd: Prosveta, 
1969. 154-166. 
650. KONST ANTINOVIC, Zoran. "Devet metodoloskih beleski. Teoreticari 
nemacke nauke 0 knjizevnosti" [Nine Methodological Notes. Theoreticians of 
Gennan Literary Scholarship]. TreCi program Radio Beograda, no. 6 (1970): 
403-470. 
651. KONSTANTINOVIC, Zoran. "Fenomenologija i kritika" [Phenomenology 
and Criticism]. Savremenik 17, no. 10 (1971): 275-279. [Review of Yom 
Erkennen des literarischen Kunstwerks.] 
652. KONST ANTINOVIC, Zoran. "Predgovor knjizi Romana Ingardena: 0 
Saznavanju Knjiievnog Umetnickog Dela" [Foreword to Ingarden's Book: 
Yom Erkennen des literarischen Kunstwerks]. Beograd: Srpska knjizevna 
zadruga, 1971. vii-xiii. 
653. KONSTANTINOVIC, Zoran. Phiinomenologie und Literaturwissenschaft. 
Skizzen zu einer wissenschaftstheoretischen Begriindung. Miinchen: 1973. 
[List Taschenbuch der Wissenschaft. Literaturwissenschaft Band 1448.] 
654. KONSTANTINOVIC, Zoran. "Od Ingardena dalje ... " [Ingarden and 
Beyond]. Delo 20, no. 11 (1974): 1355-1376. 
655. KONSTANTINOVIC, 
Zoran. 
"Uber 
Ingarden 
hinaus ... 
Forschungsgeschichtliche 
Hinweise 
zur 
Entwicklung 
des 
phanomenologischen Ansatzes in der Literaturwissenschaft." LiLi 5, no. 17 
(1975): 25-34. 
656. KONST ANTINOVIC, Zoran. "Huserlovim tragovima" [Following Husserl]. 
Fenomenologija i viseznacnost knjiievnog dela. lngardenova teorija 
opalizacije [Phenomenology and the Meaning of the Literary Work. 
Ingarden's Theory of Concretization], by Dragan Stojanovic. Politika 
(newspaper) 74 (Dec. 1) (1977): 23044. 
657. KONTE, Bozidar. "Dve interpretacije Aristotelove poetike (Ingarden, 
Grassi)" [Two Interpretations of Aristotle's Poetics (Ingarden, Grassi)]. 
Problemi 18, nos. 194-195 (1980): 41-54. 
658. KOPRINAROV, Lazar. "Belezki za fenomenologiceskata estetika na Roman 
Ingarden." LMi (Bulgaria) 21, no. 1 (1977): 65-87. 
659. KORMIR, Peter M. "Knjizevne istine i metafizicki kvaliteti" [Literary Truth 
and Metaphysical Qualities]. KnjiK 16, no. 6 (1985): 107-119. 
660. KOS, Janko. "Roman Ingarden i kriza evrospske aksiologije" [Roman 
Ingarden and the Crisis of European Axiology]. Knji 35, no. 3 (1980): 
521-528. 
661. KOTOW A, Barbara. "Ziemska moc programu Ingardena. Ziemska moc 
nauki" [The Earthly Power of Ingarden's Program. The Earthly Power of 
Science]. Nurt, no. 12 (1976): 1-4. 
662. KOTOW A, 
Barbara. 
"Zalozenia 
Ingardenowskiego 
programu 
badari 
literackich" [The Foundations of Ingarden's Program of Literary Research]. 
SMet, no. 16 (1977): 21-58. 

ROMAN INGARDEN INTERNATIONAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 
267 
663. KOTOWA, Barbara. Zaioienia JilozoJiczne programu badan literackich 
Romana Ingardena [The Philosophical Foundations of Ingarden's Program 
for the Study of Literature]. Poznan: PWN, 1980. 
664. KOTOW A, Barbara. "Ingardenowski minimalizm aksjologiczny" [Ingarden' s 
Axiological Minimalism]. SMet, no. 21 (1981): 49-65. 
665. KOWALSKI, Jerzy. "Romana Ingardena koncepcja materii i fonny. Pr6ba 
analizy krytycznej" [Roman Ingarden's Concept of Matter and Fonn. A 
Critical Analysis]. RFilI4, no. 3 (1966): 99-126. 
666. KOWALSKI, Jerzy. "Ingardenowska koncepcja filozofii" [Ingarden's 
Concept of Philosophy]. SPC 2, no. 1 (1966): 107-134. 
667. KOWALSKI, Jerzy. "Problem absolutu w filozofii Romana Ingardena" [The 
Problem of the Absolute in Roman Ingarden's Philosophy]. Cu;stochowskie 
Studia Teologiczne 3 (1975): 163-183. 
668. KOWALSKI, Jerzy. Review of Wst~p do fenomenologii Husserla, by Roman 
Ingarden. RPL 74, no. 22 (1976): 311-317. 
669. KOWATZKI, Inngard. "Die Funktion des konstituierenden BewuBtseins in 
einem 'Studium flir die Seelenmaler'." Analecta Husserliana 4 (1976): 
149-164. 
670. KRAMPF, W. "Der VIII. Intemationale Kongress flir Philosophie in Prag." 
PJGG 47, no. 4 (1934): 525-530. 
671. KRATTLI, A. "Diagram me der Literatur." SchM 49, no. 1 (1969): 116-118. 
[Review of Yom Erkennen des literarischen Kunstwerks.] 
672. KRAUS, Oskar. "Epilog zum Philosophenkongress." Zur Philosophie der 
Gegenwart. Prague: Lerche, 1934. 
673. KREJCI, 
Karel. 
"Der 
Kampf 
urn 
die 
Methoden 
in 
polnischer 
Literaturwissenschaft." SRun 8, no. 3 (1936): 162-168. 
674. KREJCI, Karel. "Nove slovenske prace 0 metodice literami vedy" [New 
Slovakian Publications on the Methodology of Literary Scholarship]. Sbornik 
Matice Slovenskej 15, no. 4 (1937). 
675. KREJCI, Karel. "Z nove literatury 0 metodice literami vedy" [From the New 
Literature on the Methodology of Literary Scholarship]. Slavia 15, no. 2 
(1937-38): 241-255. 
676. KRENZLIN, Norbert. "Flir die Erforschung der fonnalen Seite der Schtinen 
Literatur." DZP 12, no. 9 (1964): 1116-1127. 
677. KRENZLIN, Norbert. Review of Das literarische Kunstwerk, by Roman 
Ingarden. WB 13, no. 3 (1967): 519-521. 
678. KRENZLIN, Norbert. "Untersuchungen zur phanomenologischen Asthetik." 
WB 14, no. 6 (1968): 1236-1284. 
679. KRENZLIN, Norbert. "Blirgerliche Ideologieentwicklung und asthetische 
Theorie. Untersucht an der phanomenologischen Konzeption der Asthetik." 
DZP 17, no. 11 (1969): 1285-1309. 
680. KRENZLIN, Norbert. 
Review of Yom 
Erkennen des 
literarischen 
Kunstwerks, by Roman Ingarden. Referatendienst zur germanistischen 
Literaturwissenschaft, no. 2 (1969): 7-8. 
681. KRENZLIN, Norbert. "R6i:nice w pogl~dach Romana Ingardena i Wal-
demara Conrada. Przyczynek do historii metody fenomenologicznej w 
estetyce" [Differences of Opinion between Roman Ingarden and Waldemar 
Conrad. A Contribution to the History of the Phenomenological Method in 

268 
HANS H. RUDNICK AND JOLANTA W. WAWRZYCKA 
Aesthetics]. SFil, no. 1 (1976): 41--49. 
682. KRENZLIN, Norbert. "A Critique of the Phenomenological Approach to the 
Theory of Literature." DaH 4, no. 4 (1977): 151-156. 
683. KRENZLIN, Norbert. Das Werk "rein fur sich": Zur Geschichte des 
Verhiiltnisses von Phiinomenologie, Asthetik und Literaturwissenschaft. 
Berlin: Akademie Verlag, 1979. 
684. KRIDL, Manfred. Wstgp do badari nad dzielem literackim. [Introduction to 
the Investigation of the Literary Work of Art]. Wilno: 1936. 
685. KRIDL, Manfred. "Badania nad literatunf' [Investigations in Literature]. 
RoLit (1936): 208-211. 
686. KRIDL, Manfred. Review of 0 poznawaniu dziela literackiego, by Roman 
Ingarden. RoLit 1 (1936): 208-211. 
687. KRIDL, Manfred. "Teoria literatury" [The Theory of Literature]. RoLit 2 
(1937): 262-266. [Review of "0 tak zwanej 'prawdzie' w literaturze," "0 
psychologii i psychologiimie w nauce 0 literaturze," and "Sprawa formy i 
tresci w dziele literackim."] 
688. KRIDL, Manfred. A Survey of Polish Literature and Culture. The Hague: 
Mouton, 1956. 
689. KROLL, W. and FLAKER, A. Literaturtheoretische Modelle und kommunika-
tives 
System. 
Zur 
aktuellen 
Diskussion 
in 
der 
polnischen 
Literaturwissenschaft. Kronberg-Taunus: Scriptor, 1974. 
690. KRONSKA, Irene. Review of Spar 0 istnienie swiata, by Roman Ingarden. 
RPh 139 (1949): 219-225. 
691. KRONSKA, Irena. Review of Studia z estetyki, Vols. 1 and 2, by Roman 
Ingarden. RoLit 1 (1962): 550-552. 
692. KRONSKA, Irena. "Roman Ingarden: Fragment retrospekcji" [Roman 
Ingarden: A Retrospective Fragment]. Tw, no. 10 (1971): 86-94. 
693. KRONSKA, Irena. "Wspomnienie 0 profesorze Ingardenie w pierwszq 
rocznic~ jego smierci" [Remembering Professor Ingarden on the 1st 
Anniversary of his Death]. Fenomenologia Romana Ingardena [The 
Phenomenology of Roman Ingarden]. SFit (special issue) (1972): 59-70. 
694. KRONSKI, Tadeusz J. Review of Das literarische Kunstwerk, by Roman 
Ingarden. PFil36, no. 4 (1933): 387-391. 
695. KRONSKI, Tadeusz J. "Swiat w klamrach ontologii" [The World in 
Ontological Fetters]. Mysl Fitozoficzna, no. I (1952): 318-331. [Review of 
Spar 0 istnienie swiata.] 
696. KRZEMICKA, Irena. "Dzielo literackie i formy jego poznawania" [The 
Literary Work of Art and Forms of Its Cognition]. Pion 5, no. 5 (1937): 4. 
[Review of 0 poznawaniu dziela literackiego.] 
697. KRZYZANOWSKI, Julian. "W poszukiwaniu teorii literatury" [In Search of 
a Theory of Literature]. NKs 4, no. 2 (1937): 65-71. [Review of 0 poz-
nawaniu dziela literackiego.] 
698. KSIAZEK-KONICKA, Hanna. "Semioticki aspekti Ingardenove koncepcije 
slojevitosti" [Semiotic Aspects of Ingarden's Understanding of Layers]. 
Filmske sveske 18, no. 4 (1986): 230-234. 
699. KUCZYNSKI, 
Janusz. 
(Przem6wienie 
inauguracyjne 
na 
konferencji 
poswi~conej tematowi) "Marksistowska krytyka fenomenologii a filozofia 
Romana Ingardena" [(The Opening Speech at the Conference on) Marxist 

ROMAN INGARDEN INTERNATIONAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 
269 
Criticism and the Philosophy of Roman Ingarden]. SFil, no. 9 (1975): 5-7. 
700. KUCZYNSKI, Janusz. "Homo Creator versus Homo Contemplator. 
Dialektyka a fenomenologiczna koncepcja czlowieka" [Homo Creator versus 
Homo Contemplator. The Dialectical and Phenomenological Conception of 
Man]. SFil, nos. 10-11 (1975): 67-86. 
701. KUCZYNSKI, Janusz. "Homo Creator versus Homo Contemplator. The 
Dialectical and Phenomenological Conception of Man. Introductory 
Remarks." DaH 2, no. 3 (1975): 99-121. 
702. KUCZYNSKI, Janusz et al. "From the Editors." DaH 2, no. 2 (1975): 67-70. 
[Special section on "Marxist Critique of Phenomenology and the Philosophy 
of Roman Ingarden."] 
703. KUCZYNSKI, Janusz et al. "The Conference at Jadwisin (June 19-22, 1975). 
A Report." DaH 2, no. 3 (1975): 7-16. [Special section on "Marxist Critique 
of Phenomenology and the Philosophy of Roman Ingarden."] 
704. KUDEROWICZ, Zbigniew. "Osobowosc filozoficzna Romana Ingardena" 
[The Philosophical Personality of Roman Ingarden]. SFil, nos. 4-5 (1970): 
195-200. 
705. KUDEROWICZ, Zbigniew. "The Problem of the Relation of Philosophy to 
Special Sciences as Discussed in Cracow in the Period 1944-1974." DaH 2, 
no. 2 (1975): 147-155. 
706. KUNG, Guido. Review of Spor 0 istnienie swiata, by Roman Ingarden. PhiL 
14, no. 6 (1961): 258-261. 
707. KUNG, Guido. Review of Das literarische Kunstwerk, by Roman Ingarden. 
PhiL 14, no. 8 (1961): 351-353. 
708. KUNG, Guido. Review of Untersuchungen zur Ontologie der Kunst, by 
Roman Ingarden. ZpF 17, no. 1 (1963): 179-181. 
709. KUNG, Guido. "Nowe spojrzenie na rozw6j filozoficzny Husserla" [A New 
Look at Husserl's Philosophical Development]. Fenomenologia Romana 
Ingardena [The Phenomenology of Roman Ingarden]. SFil (special issue) 
(1972): 145-156. 
710. KUNG, Guido. "Ingarden on Language and Ontology." Analecta Husserliana 
2 (1972): 204-217. 
711. KUNG, Guido. "The World as Noema and as Referent." JBSP 3, no. 1 
(1972): 15-26. 
712. KUNG, Guido. "Zum Lebenswerk von Roman Ingarden: Ontologie, 
Erkenntnistheorie und Metaphysik." Phaenomenologica, Vol. 65: Die 
Munchener Phiinomenologie, H. Kuhn et aI., eds. The Hague: Nijhoff, 1975. 
158-173. 
713. KUNG, Guido and SWIDERSKI, E. "Marxism and Phenomenology: An 
International Congress in Poland." SST 16, nos. 1-2 (1976): 113-120. 
714. KUNG, Guido. "Understanding and Its Rational Justification." Dialectica, 33 
(1979),217-232. 
715. KUNG, Guido. "Roman Ingarden (1893-1970): Ontological Phenomenol-
ogy." The Phenomenological Movement, Herbert Spiegelberg, ed., 3rd 
revised ed. The Hague: Nijhoff, 1982.223-233. 
716. KUNG, Guido. "Brentano and Ingarden on the Experience and Cognition of 
Values." The Philosophy of Roman Ingarden: Jagie//onian University Reports 
on Philosophy (Polish) 10 (1986): 57-67. [Includes a one-page bibliography.] 

270 
HANS H. RUDNICK AND JOLANTA W. WA WRZYCKA 
717. KUNZ, Hans. Review of Der Streit urn die Existenz der Welt, by Roman 
Ingarden. SPhiS 25 (1965): 239-242. 
718. KUROWICKI, J. "Kwestia poznania bezposredniego u Ingardena" [The 
Question of Direct Cognition in Ingarden]. Zeszyty Naukowe Politechniki 
Slqskiej, no. 351: Nauki Spoleczne, no. 14 (1973): 45-56. 
719. KURYt.OWICZ, J. Review of Z teorii jt}zyka i/ilozo/icznych podstaw logiki, 
by Roman Ingarden. BPTJ, no. 31 (1972): 163-169. 
720. KUZNICKA, Danuta. "Ingarden on the Theatre." On the Aesthetics of Roman 
Ingarden: Interpretations and Assessments, Nijhoff International Philosophy 
Series, Vol. 27, Bohdan Dziemidok and Peter J. McCormick, eds. Dordrecht: 
Kluwer, 1989.283-296. 
721. LAFERRIERE, D. "Ingarden and Husser! versus Literary Semiotics." 
Semiotica 26, nos. 1-2 (1979): 181-196. 
722. LABUS, Mladen. "Ontologija umjetnosti Romana Ingardena" [The Ontology 
of Art of Roman Ingarden]. Dometi (Rijeka) 14, no. 4 (1981): 5-10. 
723. LALO, Charles. Review of Das literarische Kunstwerk, by Roman Ingarden. 
RPh 112, nos. 9-10 (1931): 308. 
724. LASKEY, Dallas. "Ingarden's Criticism of Husserl." Analecta Husserliana 2 
(1972): 48-54. 
725. LAUER, Q. Review of Time and Modes of Being, by Roman Ingarden. 
International Philosophical Quarterly 4 (1964): 630--631. 
726. t.EMPICKI, Zygmunt. "Dzielo literackie: struktura i wygllJd" [The Literary 
Work of Art: Structure and Appearance]. WLit 9, no. 9 (1932): 2. [Review of 
Das literarische Kunstwerk.] 
727. t.EMPICKI, Zygmunt. Review of 0 poznawaniu dziela literackiego, by 
Roman Ingarden. PL 35, nos. 1-4 (1938): 279-287. 
728. t.EMPICKI, Zygmunt. "Dzielo literackie: moc i dzialanie" [The Literary 
Work of Art: Its Power and Action]. WLit 9, no. 10 (1932): 3. [Review of Das 
literarische Kunstwerk.] 
729. t.EMPICKI, Zygmunt. "Dzielo literackie: struktura i wygllJd" [The Literary 
Work of Art: Structure and Appearance]. WybOr pism, Vol. 2: Studia z teorii 
literatury, by Zygmunt t.empicki. Warszawa: PWN, 1966.225-229. [Review 
of Das literarische Kunstwerk.] 
730. t.EMPICKI, Zygmunt. "Dzielo literackie: moc i dzialanie" [The Literary 
Work of Art: Its Power and Action]. WybOr pism, Vol. 2: Studia z teorii 
literatury, by Zygmunt t.empicki. Warszawa: PWN, 1966.229-234. [Review 
of Das literarische Kunstwerk.] 
731. t.EMPICKI, Zygmunt. Review of 0 poznawaniu dziela literackiego, by 
Roman Ingarden. Wybor pism, Vol. 2: Studia z teorii literatury, by Zygmunt 
t.empicki. Warszawa: PWN, 1966.323-330. 
732. LEO, Ulrich. "Pirandello, Kunsttheorie und Maskensymbol." DVLG 11, no. 1 
(1933): 94-129. 
733. LEON, P. Review of Das literarische Kunstwerk, by Roman Ingarden. Mind 
41, no. 161 (1932): 97-106. 
734. LESIC, 
Zdenko. 
"Fenomenoloski 
pristup 
knjizevnom 
delu" 
[Phenomenological Approach to the Literary Work]. Moderna Tumacenja 
Knjiievnosti. Sarajevo: SvjetIost, 1981. 137-164. 
735. LEVIN, D. M. "Foreword." The Literary Work of Art: An Investigation on the 

ROMAN INGARDEN INTERNATIONAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 
271 
Borderlines of Ontology, Logic and Theory of Literature. With an Appendix 
on the Functions of Language in the Theatre, by Roman Ingarden. Evanston, 
IL: Northwestern University Press, 1973. xi-liv. 
736. LEW ANOOWSKA, M. "Revue de certaines conceptions de la tMorie 
logique des questions." Zeszyty Naukowe Uniwersytetu Lodzkiego, Seria I, 
Nauki Humanistyczno-Spoleczne I, no. 9 (1976): 63-85. 
737. LEWICKI, B. W. "0 autonomii estetycznej dziela literackiego" [On the 
Aesthetic Autonomy of the Literary Work of Art]. Siowo Polskie 36, no. 20 
(1932): 4. 
738. LI, You-Zheng. "On Ingarden's Phenomenological Aesthetics" (in Chinese). 
Aesthetics (Chinese), Vol. 2. Shanghai: The People's Publisher, 1980. 
739. LI, You-Zheng. "Roman Ingarden" (in Chinese). The Chinese Encyclopedia 
(Chinese), volume on Philosopy. Shanghai: The Dictionary Publisher, 1987. 
740. LICHANSKI, Jakub Z. "Uwagi do Romana Ingardena teorii dziela literack-
iego" [Remarks on Roman Ingarden's Theory of the Literary Work of Art]. 
SFil, no. 4 (1973): 75-78. 
741. LIDA, Raimundo. "La obra literaria." Megafono (Buenos Aires) 11 (Aug. 
1933): 6-8. 
742. LIPIEC, J. "Ingarden." ZLit, no. 29 (1975): 15. 
743. LISSA, Zofia. "Uwagi 0 Ingardenowskiej teorii dziela muzycznego" 
[Remarks on Ingarden's Theory of the Musical Work]. StEs 3 (1966): 
95-114. 
744. LISSA, Zofia. "Zur Ingardenschen Theorie des musikalischen Werks." SFil 
(in translation), no. 4 (1970): 331-350. 
745. LISSA, Zofia. "Einige kritische Bemerkungen zur Ingardenschen Theorie des 
musikalischen Werkes." International Review of the Aesthetics and Sociology 
of Music 3, no. 1 (1972): 75-95. 
746. LISSA, Zofia. "Some Remarks on Ingardenian Theory of a Musical Work." 
Roman Ingarden and Contemporary Polish Aesthetics, Piotr Graff and Slaw 
Krzemieti-Ojak, eds. Warszawa: PWN, 1975. 129-144. 
747. LONG, E. T. Review of The Cognition of the Literary Work of Art, by Roman 
Ingarden. RevM 28, no. 3 (1975): 554-555. 
748. LOZINSKI, Jerzy. "Intencjonalnosc i przedmiot intencjonalny w filozofii 
Romana Ingardena" [Intentionality and Intentional Object in Ingarden' s 
Philosophy]. SFil, no. 9 (1974): 49-62. 
749. LUBNICKI, Narcyz. "Sylwetka filozoficzna Romana Ingardena" [Roman 
Ingarden's Philosophical Profile]. Folio Societatis Scientiarum Lublinensis, 
Sectio A, no. 12 (1971): 21-28. 
750. LUBNICKI, Narcyz. "Sylwetka filozoficzna Romana Ingardena" [Roman 
Ingarden's Philosophical Profile]. Fenomenologia Romana Ingardena [The 
Phenomenology of Roman Ingarden]. SFil (special issue) (1972): 91-111. 
751. LUBNICKI, Narcyz. "Roman Ingarden's Philosophical Profile." DaH I, no. 3 
(1974): 157-177. 
752. LUKIC, Sveta. "Publika kao funkcija umetnicke istine." Knji 38, nos. 8-9 
(1983): 1332-1334. 
753. LUTHE, Rudolf. "Czy alternatywa dla sceptycyzmu? 0 niekt6rych aspektach 
Ingardenowskiej teorii wartosci dziela sztuki" [Is There An Alternative to 
Scepticism? Some Aspects of Ingarden's Theory of Value of the Work of 

272 
HANS H. RUDNICK AND JOLANTA W. WA WRZYCKA 
Art]. StEs 14 (1977): 29-44. 
754. LUTHE, Rudolf. "Objectivism or Decisionism? A Critical Interpretation of 
Ingarden's Value Theory from an Ingard[en]ian Point of View." JBSP 9, no. 
2 (1978): 82-91. 
755. MACKIEWICZ, Witold. "Nad Ksiqieczkq 0 czlowieku" [On A Little Book on 
Man]. SFil, no. 9 (1973): 126-128. [Review of Ksiqieczkq 0 czlowieku.] 
756. MAGLIOLA, Robert R. Phenomenology and Literature: An Introduction. 
West Lafayette, IN: Purdue University Press, 1977. 
757. MAKOTA, Janina. 0 klasyfikacji sztuk pit;knych [On Classification of the 
Fine Arts]. Krak6w: WL, 1964. 
758. MAKOTA, Janina. "Fenomenologia swiadomosci w filozofii Romana 
Ingardena" [The Phenomenology of Consciousness in Roman Ingarden's 
Philosophy]. Fenomenologia Romana Ingardena [The Phenomenology of 
Roman Ingarden]. SFil (special issue) (1972): 237-251. 
759. MAKOTA, Janina. "Applicability of Roman Ingarden's Aesthetic Categories 
to Contemporary Art." Proceedings of the VIlth International Congress of 
Aesthetics, Bucharest 1972. Bucharest: Editura Academiei Republicii 
Socialiste, 1976.611--614. 
760. MAKOTA, Janina. "Stosowalnosc kategorii estetycznych Ingardena do sztuki 
wsp6lczesnej" [Applicability of Ingarden's Aesthetic Categories to Contem-
porary Art]. StEs 11 (1974): 45-50. 
761. MAKOTA, Janina. "Roman Ingarden's Theory of Man." JBSP 6, no. 2 
(1975): 126-130. 
762. MAKOTA, Janina. "Roman Ingarden's Views on the Communication with a 
Work of Art." Roman lngarden and Contemporary Polish Aesthetics, Piotr 
Graff and Slaw Krzemieri-Ojak, eds. Warszawa: PWN, 1975. 145-158. 
763. MAKOTA, Janina. "Aesthetic vs. Moral Values in Roman Ingarden's 
Philosophy" (in Polish). Etyka 22 (1986): 183-194. 
764. MAKOTA, Janina. "Nicolai Hartmann's and Roman Ingarden's Philosophy 
of Man." The Philosophy of Roman lngarden: Jagielionian University 
Reports on Philosophy (Polish) 10 (1986): 69-79. 
765. MARGOLIS, J. Review of Time and Modes of Being, by Roman Ingarden. 
Revue de Synthese 87 (1966): 275-277. 
766. MARKIEWICZ, Barbara. "Ingarden." Nowe Ksiqiki, no. 19 (1981): 58--60. 
[Reviews of Wyklady i dyskusje z estetyki and Spor 0 istnienie swiata, Vol 3.] 
767. MARKIEWICZ, Henryk. "Roman Ingarden 0 dziele Iiterackim" [Roman 
Ingarden on the Literary Work of Art]. Estetyka 2 (1961): 266-277. [Review 
of 0 dziele literackim.] 
768. MARKIEWICZ, Henryk. "Jeszcze 0 budowie dziela Iiterackiego. W zwi¢u 
z artykulem prof. R. Ingardena" [More on the Structure of the Literary Work 
of Art. A Response to Prof. R. Ingarden's Article]. PL 55, no. 2 (1964): 
429-434. 
769. MARKIEWICZ, Henryk. "Tw6rczosc Romana Ingardena a rozw6j badari 
Iiterackich" [Roman Ingarden's Work and the Development of Literary 
Scholarship]. Fenomenologia Romana lngardena [The Phenomenology of 
Roman Ingarden]. SFil (special issue) (1972): 307-322. 
770. MARKIEWICZ, Henryk. "Das Werk Roman Ingardens und die EntwickJung 
der Literaturwissenschaft." Formalismus, Strukturalismus und Geschichte, A. 

ROMAN INGARDEN INTERNATIONAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 
273 
Flaker and V. Zroegac, eds. Kronberg-Taunus: Scriptor, 1974.221-246. 
771. MARKIEWICZ, Henryk. "Places of Indetenninacy in a Literary Work." 
Roman Ingarden and Contemporary Polish Aesthetics, Piotr Graff and Slaw 
Krzemien-Ojak, eds. Warszawa: PWN, 1975. 159-172. 
772. MARKIEWICZ, Henryk. "Polnische Diskussion uber Fonn und Inhalt." RusL 
13, no. 3 (1983): 223-268. 
773. MARKIEWICZ, Henryk. "Ingarden and the Development of Literary 
Studies." On the Aesthetics of Roman Ingarden: Interpretations and 
Assessments, Nijhoff International Philosophy Series, Vol. 27, Bohdan 
Dziemidok and Peter J. McConnick, eds. Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1989. 101-130. 
774. MARTINEZ-BONATI, Felix. Fictive Discourse and the Structures of 
Literature, translated by Philip W. Silver. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University 
Press, 1981. 
775. MA TIUS, U. "0 wkladzie fenomenologii do wsp6lczesnej teorii wartosci" 
[On the Contribution of Phenomenology to the Contemporary Theory of 
Values]. Czlowiek i swiatopoglqd, nos. 1-2 (1982): 127-135. 
776. MA YENOWA, Maria Renata. Review of Studia z estetyki, Vols. 1 and 2, by 
Roman Ingarden. RoLit I, no. 2 (1962): 154-157. 
777. MA YENOW A, Maria Renata. Poetyka teoretyczna. Zagadnienia jgzyka 
[Theoretical Poetics. Problems of Language]. Wroclaw: Ossolineum, 1974. 
29-38. 
778. MAYS, W. "The Later Husser!." Inquiry 17, no. I (1974): 113-125. 
779. MAYS, W. "Editorial [on IngardenJ." JBSP 6, no. 2 (1975): 72-74. 
780. MAZUREK, Franciszek J. "Le caractere intentionnel du droit et son rOle dans 
la detennination des relations sociales." RUO 44, no. 3 (1974): 362-372. 
781. McCORMICK, Peter J. "On Ingarden' s Account of the Existence of Aesthetic 
Objects." DaH 2, no. 4 (1975): 31-38. 
782. McCORMICK, Peter J. Review of The Literary Work of Art and The 
Cognition of the Literary Work of Art, by Roman Ingarden and Roman 
Ingarden and Contemporary Polish Aesthetics, Piotr Graff and Slaw 
Krzemien-Ojak, eds. Dialogue 15 (1976): 511-515. 
783. McCORMICK, Peter J. "Z zagadnien struktury dziela Iiterackiego" [On the 
Problem of the Structure of the Literary Work). StEs 16 (1979): 173-191. 
784. McCORMICK, Peter J. "Literary Truths and Metaphysical Qualities." 
Journal of the Faculty of Letters, The University of Tokyo (Aesthetics) 8 
(1983): 1-14. 
785. McCORMICK, Peter J. (ed.) Roman Ingarden: Selected Papers in Aesthetics. 
Munchen: Philosophia; and Washington, DC: Catholic University of America 
Press, 1985. 
786. McCORMICK, Peter J. Fictions, Philosophies, and the Problems of Poetics. 
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1988.93-106. 
787. McCORMICK, Peter J. "Literary Truths and Metaphysical Qualities." On the 
Aesthetics of Roman Ingarden: Interpretations and Assessments, Nijhoff 
International Philosophy Series, Vol. 27, Bohdan Dziemidok and Peter J. 
McConnick, eds. Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1989. 187-232. 
788. MENGES, Karl. "Theories of Aesthetic Response and the Question of 
Literary Evaluation." SAG, Vol. 94: Davis Symposium on Literary Evalua-
tion, Karl Menges and Daniel Rancour-Laferriere, eds. Stuttgart: 1981. 

274 
HANS H. RUDNICK AND JOLANTA W. W A WRZYCKA 
35-45. 
789. MERCIER, A. Review of Der Streit um die Existenz der Welt, Vol. 3, by 
Roman Ingarden. ErasmusE 27 (1975): 706-708. 
790. MICHALSKI, Bohdan. "Miejsce filozofii Witkacego we wsp6lczesnej mu 
filozofii polskiej (monadyzm biologiczny a reizm i fenomenologia)" [The 
Place of Witkacy's Philosophy in Contemporary Polish Philosophy 
(Biological Monadism vs. Reism and Phenomenology)]. SFil, no. 3 (1978): 
79-94. 
791. MICHEJDA, Helena R. "Whitehead i Ingarden" [Whitehead and Ingarden]. 
Szkice jilozojiczne Romanowi Ingardenowi w darze [Sketches in Philosophy 
for Roman Ingarden]. Warszawa-Krak6w: 1964.5-18. 
792. MILBRANDT, M. Review of 0 poznawaniu dziela literackiego, by Roman 
Ingarden. PFil41 (1938): 314-325. 
793. MISIEWICZ, Janusz. "0 tak zwanych quasi-slldach Romana Ingardena" [On 
So-Called Quasi-Judgements of Roman Ingarden]. Annales Universitatis 
Mariae Curie-Sklodowska, Sectio F 28, no. 16 (1973): 321-328. 
794. MISIEWICZ, Janusz. "The Work of Art and Aesthetic Categories According 
to Ingarden." On the Aesthetics of Roman Ingarden: Interpretations and 
Assessments, Nijhoff International Philosophy Series, Vol. 27, Bohdan 
Dziemidok and Peter J. McCormick, eds. Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1989.55-70. 
795. MISKIEWICZ, W. "A propos de l'origine des 'Le~ons sur la conscience 
intime du temps." RMM 89, no. 4 (1984): 536-542. 
796. MITIAS, Michael H. "Ingarden on the Aesthetic Object." DaH 12, nos. 3--4 
(1985): 199-220. 
797. MITOSEK, Zofia. "Fenomenologia literatury (Ingarden, 1893-1971)" [The 
Phenomenology of Literature (Ingarden, 1893-1971)]. Teorie badari 
literackich [Theories of Literary Research]. Warszawa: PWN, 1983. 129-156. 
798. MITSCHERLING, Jeff. "Roman Ingarden's The Literary Work of Art: 
Exposition and Analyses." PPR 45, no. 3 (1985): 351-382. 
799. MOKREJS, Anton. "Filosofie umeni Romana Ingardena" [Roman Ingarden's 
Philosophy of Art]. Filozofia 28, no. 5 (1973): 559-573. 
800. MORAWSKI, 
Stefan. 
"Ingardenowska 
koncepcja 
sztuki 
filmowej" 
[Ingarden's Concept of Film Art]. KFilm 8, no. 4 (1958): 17-32. 
801. MORAWSKI, Stefan. 
"Estetyczne kr61estwo 
Ingardena" [Ingarden's 
Aesthetic Kingdom]. NoK 27 (1958). [Review of Studia z estetyki, Vols. 1 
and 2.] 
802. MORAWSKI, Stefan. "Skola kladeni otazek" [The School of Asking 
Questions]. Estetyka 6, no. 4 (1969): 284-307. 
803. MORAWSKI, Stefan. "Szkola stawiania pytari I" [The School of Asking 
Questions I]. StEs 7 (1970): 261-282. 
804. MORAWSKI, Stefan. "Szkola stawiania pytari II" [The School of Asking 
Questions II]. StEs 8 (1971): 243-256. 
805. MORAWSKI, Stefan. "Eine Schule des Fragens. Zu Roman Ingardens Buch 
Erlebnis - Kunstwerk - Wert." ZAaK 19, no. 2 (1974): 143-158. 
806. MORAWSKI, Stefan. "Ingarden on the Subject-Matter and Method of 
Aesthetics." Roman Ingarden and Contemporary Polish Aesthetics, Piotr 
Graff and Slaw Krzemieri-Ojak, eds. Warszawa: PWN 1975. 173-190. 
807. MORCHEN, Hermann. Review of Das literarische Kunstwerk, by Roman 

ROMAN INGARDEN INTERNATIONAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 
275 
Ingarden. Mitteilungen des Deutschen Germanisten-Verbandes 8, no. 1 
(1961). 
808. MORCHEN, Hennann. Review of Yom Erkennen des literarischen 
Kunstwerks, by Roman Ingarden. Mitteilungen des Deutschen Germanisten-
Verbandes 16, no. 4 (1969): 173-189. 
809. MOTROSHILOVA, N. V. "The Problem of the Cognitive Subject as Viewed 
by Husser! and Ingarden." DaH 2 no. 3 (1975): 17-31. 
810. MOTROSZILOWA, N. W. "Problem podmiotu poznania u E. Husserla i R. 
Ingardena" [The Problem of the Cognitive Subject in E. Husserl and R. 
Ingarden]. SFil, no. 1 (1976): 3-17. 
811. MUELLER-VOLLMER, Kurt. Review of Yom Erkennen des literarischen 
Kunstwerks, by Roman Ingarden. Germanistik 10, no. 2 (1969): 282-283. 
812. MUELLER-VOLLMER, 
Kurt. 
"Rezeption 
und 
Neuansatz: 
Phiinomenologische Literaturwissenschaft in den Vereinigten Staaten." LiLi 
5, no. 17 (1975): 10-24. 
813. MUELLER-VOLLMER, Kurt. (ed.) The Hermeneutics Reader. Texts of the 
German Tradition from the Enlightenment to the Present. New York: 
Continuum, 1985. 187-213. 
814. MULLER, GUnter. "Uber die Seinsweise der Dichtung." DVLG 17, no. 2 
(1939): 137-152. 
815. MURRAY, Michael. Modern Critical Theory. A Phenomenological 
Introduction. The Hague: Nijhoff, 1975. 119-126. 
816. NICOLAE, V. A. "L'esthCtique phenomenologique de Roman Ingarden." 
RdF 17, no. 10 (1970): 1223-1230. 
817. NISHIZAWA, Takashi. "On Roman Ingarden's The Literary Work of Art: 
Part 1" (in Japanese). The Journal of Gifu College of Economics 13, nos. 1-2 
(1979): 203-220. 
818. NISHIZAWA, Takashi. "On Roman Ingarden's The Literary Work of Art: 
Part 2" (in Japanese). The Journal of Gifu College of Economics 13, no. 4 
(1979): 267-277. 
819. NISHIZAWA, Takashi. "On Roman Ingarden's The Literary Work of Art: 
Part 3" (in Japanese). The Journal ofGifu College of Economics 18, nos. 3-4 
(1984): 143-163. 
820. NISHIZA WA, Takashi. "The Literary Work of Art and Its Concretization in 
Roman Ingarden" (in Japanese). Doku-Ou-Bungaku-Ronbunshu [Collected 
Articles on Gennan-Austrian Literature]. Nagoya: Nagoya University Press, 
1986.349-374. 
821. NITTA, Hiroe. "Sprache der Dichtung." Bigaku 21, no. 4 (1971): 1-11. 
822. NITTA, Hiroe. "Sprache der Dichtung." Bigaku 22, no. 1 (1971): 41-52. 
823. NOACK, Hennann. "Uber Arbeiten auf dem Felde der Asthetik und 
Kunstwissenschaften." DVLG 10, no. 1 (1932): 164-165. [Review of Das 
literarische Kunstwerk.] 
824. NOTA, John H. "Misunderstanding and Insight About Edith Stein's 
Philosophy." HumanS 10 (1987): 205-212. 
825. NYGAARD, Jon. "Druga wizyta Romana Ingardena w Norwegii" [Roman 
Ingarden's Second Visit to Norway]. Fenomenologia Romana Ingardena 
[The Phenomenology of Roman Ingarden]. SFil (special issue) (1972): 
503-506. 

276 
HANS H. RUDNICK AND JOLANTA W. WAWRZYCKA 
826. NYGAARD, Jon. "An Analysis of Ingarden's Distinction Between the 
Literary Work of Art and Its Related Branches of Art." DaR 2, no. 2 (1975): 
109-121. 
827. OBERTI, Elisa. "Estetica e ulteriorita metafisica nel pensiero di Roman 
Ingarden." RdE 9 (1964): 401-426. 
828. "OD REDAKCJI" [From the Editors]. SFil, nos. 4-5 (1970): 192-193. [A 
note on Ingarden's death followed by his last two letters to the Editor, cf. 
Ingarden "Letters" section, item no. 366.] 
829. "OD REDAKCJI" [From the Editors]. Fenomenologia Romana Ingardena 
[The Phenomenology of Roman Ingarden]. SFil (special issue) (1972): 3-4. 
830. ODMARK, John. "Ingarden and the Concretization of the Literary Text." 
Proceedings of the 9th Congress of the International Comparative Literature 
Association, Vol. 2, Zoran Konstantinovic et aI., eds. Innsbruck: AMOE, 
1980. 223-226. 
831. ODUJEW, Stiepan F. "Fenomenologia i nietzscheanizm" [Nietzsche and 
Phenomenology]. Fenomenologia Romana Ingardena [The Phenomenology 
of Roman Ingarden]. SFil (special issue) (1972): 445-456. 
832. OKOPIEN, K. "Ingarden, czyli swiadomosc niedofenomenologizowana" 
[Ingarden, or the Underphenomenologized Consciousness]. Teksty, no. 1 
(1979): 85-102. 
833. OSTERREICH, Christian. "Zur Identitat des literarischen Werkes." Erkennen 
und Deuten. Essays zur Literatur und Literaturtheorie, Martha Woodmansee 
and Walter F. W. Lohnes, eds. Berlin: E. Schmidt, 1983.54-67. 
834. PACKMAN, David. Vladimir Nabokov. The Structure of Literary Desire. 
Columbia: University of Missouri Press, 1982. 
835. PACULA, St. "Profesor Roman Ingarden - odkrywca nowego wymiaru 
rzeczywistosci" [Professor Roman Ingarden - The Discoverer of a New 
Dimension of Reality]. ZiM, no. 9 (1970): 140-142. 
836. PACZKOWSKA, Elzbieta. "Z ingardenowskich spor6w 0 teorit; przedrniotu" 
[Ingardenian Controversies on the Theory of Objects]. SFil, no. 5 (1976): 27-
33. 
837. PACZKOWSKA, Elzbieta. Psychika i poznanie. Epistemologia Kaziemierza 
Twardowskiego [Psyche and Cognition. The Epistemology of Kazimierz 
Twardowski]. Warszawa: PWN, 1980. 
838. PAGEL, Albert. Summary review of "Essentiale Fragen," by Roman 
Ingarden [lPpF 7 (1925)]. Kantstudien 31, nos. 2-3 (1926): 371-372. 
839. PARRET, H. "Taalfilosifische perspektieven in het werk van Roman 
Ingarden" [Roman Ingarden's Philosophy of Language]. Tijdschift Voor 
Filosofie 33 (Dec. 1971): 684-736. 
840. PASNICZEK, Jacek. "Struktura ontologiczna przedmiot6w nieistniejl!cych: 
Meinong a Ingarden" [The Ontological Structure of Non-Existent Objects: 
Meinong and Ingarden]. SFil, no. 4 (1984): 27-41. 
841. PASTEKA, Julius. "Roman Ingarden 0 divadle a filme" [Roman Ingarden on 
Theater and Film]. SDi 11, no. 3 (1963): 441-445. 
842. PASTEKA, Julius. Review of Untersuchungen zur Ontologie der Kunst, by 
Roman Ingarden.AAS 1 (1963): 174-179. 
843. PASTERNAK, Gerhard. Theoriebildung in der Literaturwissenschaft. 
Miinchen: Fink, 1975.58-66 and 208-212. 

ROMAN INGARDEN INTERNATIONAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 
277 
844. PATOCKA, Jan. "Uwagi 0 Romana Ingardena filozofii obrazu" [Remarks on 
Roman Ingarden's Philosophy of Painting]. Fenomenologia Romana 
Ingardena [The Phenomenology of Roman Ingarden]. SFil (special issue) 
(1972): 267-275. 
845. PATOCKA, Jan. "Zu Roman Ingardens Ontologie des malerischen 
Kunstwerks." PPer4 (1972): 117-125. 
846. PATRIK, L. E. "The Aesthetic Experience of Ruins." Husserl Studies 3, no. 1 
(1986): 31-55. 
847. PEDERIN, Ivan. "Dramaturgija Romana Ingardena" [The Dramaturgy of 
Roman Ingarden]. Pozoriste 13, nos. 1-2 (1971): 77-82. 
848. PELC, Jerzy. "0 istnieniu i strukturze dziela literackiego. RozwaZania 
logiczne nad Studiami z estetyki Romana Ingardena" [On the Existence and 
Structure of the Literary Work of Art: Logical Considerations on Roman 
Ingarden's Studies in Aesthetics]. SFil, no. 3 (1958): 121-164. 
849. PELC, Jerzy. "Polnische philosophische Publikationen." Wochentliche 
Rundschau, no. 16 (1961): 24-26. 
850. PELC, Jerzy. "Zdanie a Slid w dziele literackim. Wartosc logiczna i charakter 
a sertoryczny quasi-slldu" [Opinion and Judgement in the Literary Work of 
Art: Logical Truth and the Assertive Character of the Quasi-Judgement). 
Estetyka 3 (1962): 131-154. 
851. PELC, Jerzy. "Roman Ingarden." Tw, no. 10 (1970): 124-127. 
852. PELC, Jerzy. "The Development of Polish Semiotics in the Post-War Years." 
DaH (inaugural issue) (1973): 225-235. 
853. PETERSEN, Julius. Die Wissenschaft von der Dichtung, Vol. I: Werk und 
Dichter. Berlin: Junker und Diinnhaupt, 1939. 
854. PETROVIC, Miodrag. "Ingardenova poetika" [lngarden's Poetics). Most 
(Nis) 17 (1982): 3-14. 
855. PETSCH, Danuta. "PWN-owska edycja 'Dziel Filozoficznych' R. Ingardena" 
[R. Ingarden's Philosophical Works Published by the Polish Scientific 
Publishers]. SFi/, nos. 10-11 (1975): 87-88. 
856. PETSCH, Danuta. "Roman Ingarden's Works Published by the Polish 
Scientific Publishers." DaH 2, no. 3 (1975): 123-124. 
857. PFAFF, P. Review of Das literarische Kunstwerk, by Roman Ingarden. 
Germanistik 2, no. 2 (1961): 193-194. 
858. PISARKOW A, Krystyna. "Roman Ingarden a j~zykoznawstwo (1893-1970)" 
[Roman Ingarden and Linguistics (1893-1970»). BPTJ, no. 29 (1971): 3-11. 
859. PLOETZ, Hans Achim. Die Theorie der Dichtung. Berlin: Triltsch und 
Huther, 1936. 
860. POCIEJ, B. "Ingarden Symposium." Polskie Perspektywy, no. 1 (1972): 
51-53. 
861. POLLICK, G. David. "The Sculptural Work of Art: Uniquely 'Within' the 
World." On the Aesthetics of Roman Ingarden: Interpretations and Assess-
ments, Nijhoff International Philosophy Series, Vol. 27, Bohdan Dziemidok 
and Peter J. McCormick, eds. Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1989.255-282. 
862. P6L TA WSKI, Andrzej. "0 dziele literackim" [The Literary Work of Art]. 
RuchL 2, no. 1 (1961): 44-49. [Review of The Literary Work of Art.] 
863. roL T A WSKI, Andrzej. "0 istnieniu intencjonalnym" [On Intentional 
Existence] Szkice JilozoJiczne Romanowi Ingardenowi w darze [Sketches in 

278 
HANS H. RUDNICK AND JOLANTA W. W A WRZYCKA 
Philosophy for Roman Ingarden]. Warszawa-Krak6w: PWN, 1964. 71-84. 
864. roL T A WSKI, Andrzej. "Prace filozoficzne Romana Ingardena. Bibliografia" 
[Philosophical Works of Roman Ingarden. A Bibliography]. Szkice 
jilozojiczne Romanowi Ingardenowi w darze [Sketches in Philosophy for 
Roman Ingarden]. Warszawa-Krak6w: PWN, 1964.483-511. 
865. roL TA WSKI, Andrzej. "Bibliografia prac filozoficznych Romana Ingar-
dena" [Bibliography of Roman Ingarden's Philosophical Works]. Studia z 
estetyki [Studies in Aesthetics], Vols. 1 and 2, 2nd ed. Warszawa: PWN, 
1966.495-527. 
866. roL TA WSKI, Andrzej. "Roman Ingarden - The Structure of Reality and the 
Structure of Art." Poland, no. 6 (1967): 18-19. 
867. roLT A WSKI, Andrzej. "Roman Ingarden -
struktura rzeczywistosci i 
struktura sztuki" [Roman Ingarden - The Structure of Reality and the 
Structure of Art]. Polska, no. 6 (1967): 18-19. 
868. roLT A WSKI, Andrzej. "Roman Ingarden - die Struktur der Realitat und die 
Struktur der Kunst." Polen, no. 6 (1967): 18-19. 
869. roLTAWSKI, Andrzej. "Roman Ingarden - la structure de la realite et la 
structure de I'art." La Pologne, no. 6 (1967): 18-19. 
870. roLTA WSKI, Andrzej. "Dane wra:ieniowe a doswiadczenie pierwotne" 
[Sense Data and Primary Experience]. Fenomenologia Romana Ingardena 
[The Phenomenology of Roman Ingarden]. SFil (special issue) (1972): 
157-173. 
871. roLTA WSKI, Andrzej. "Bibliografia prac filozoficznych Romana Ingar-
dena: 1915-1971" [Bibliography of Roman Ingarden's Philosophical Works: 
1915-1971]. Fenomenologia Romana Ingardena [The Phenomenology of 
Roman Ingarden]. SFil (special issue) (1972): 19-54. 
872. roLTAWSKI, Andrzej. "Czysta swiadomosc a ontologia Ingardena" [Pure 
Consciousness and Ingarden's Ontology]. RFil30, no. 1 (1972): 10-14. 
873. roL T A WSKI, Andrzej. "Constitutive Phenomenology and Intentional 
Objects." Analecta Husserliana 2 (1972): 90-95. 
874. roLTAWSKI, Andrzej. Swiat, spostrzeienie, swiadomosc [World, Percep-
tion, Consciousness]. Warszawa: PWN, 1972. 
875. P6LTAWSKI, Andrzej. "Consciousness and Action in Ingarden's Thought." 
Analecta Husserliana 3 (1974): 124-137. 
876. P6LTAWSKI, Andrzej. "Od tlumacza" [Translator'S Note]. Wstgp do 
jenomenologii Husserla 
[Introduction to 
Husserl's Phenomenology]. 
Warszawa: PWN, 1974.5. 
877. roLTAWSKI, Andrzej. "Ingarden's Way to Realism and His Idea of Man." 
DaH 2, no. 3 (1975): 65-76. 
878. P6LTA WSKI, Andrzej. "Swiadomosa a dzialanie w filozofii Ingardena" 
[Consciousness and Action in Ingarden's Thought]. SPC 11, no. 2 (1975): 
131-152. 
879. roLTAWSKI, Andrzej. "Ingardena droga do realizmu a jego koncepcja 
czlowieka" [Ingarden's Way to Realism and His Idea of Man]. SFil, no. 1 
(1976): 27-39. 
880. roLTAWSKI, Andrzej. "The Idea and the Place of Human Creativity in the 
Philosophy of Roman Ingarden." DaH 5, no. 2 (1978): 129-140. 
881. P6LTAWSKI, Andrzej. "Slowo wstc<pne" [Foreword]. Medytacje kartez-

ROMAN INGARDEN INTERNATIONAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 
279 
jariskie, by Edmund Husserl. Warszawa: PWN, 1982. xi-xxvii. 
882. P6L T A WSKI, Andrzej. "The Epistemological Situation of Moral Values" (in 
Polish). SPC 22, (1986): 175-195. 
883. roLTAWSKI, Andrzej. "Roman Ingarden. Ein Metaphysiker der Freiheit." 
The Philosophy of Roman Ingarden: Reports on Philosophy (Polish), no. 10 
(1986): 43-56. 
884. PRUCHA, Milan. "Technika a filosofie" [Technology and Philosophy]. 
Filosoficky Casopis 16, no. 3 (1968): 357-364. 
885. PYTKA, L. Review of Ksiqzeczkq 0 czlowieku, by Roman Ingarden. 
Argumenty, no. 31 (1972): 4-10. 
886. PYTLAK, Andrzej. "Kilka uwag na temat Ingardenowskiej koncepcji dziela 
muzycznego" [Some Remarks On Ingarden's Conception of the Musical 
Work of Art]. StEs 3 (1966): 81-94. 
887. PYTLAK, Andrzej. "Propozycje aksjologiczne Ingardena" [Ingarden's 
Axiological Propositions]. SFil, no. 1 (1968): 210-215. [Review of PrzeZycie 
- dzielo - wartosc.] 
888. PYTLAK, Andrzej. "On Ingarden's Conception of the Musical Composi-
tion." On the Aesthetics of Roman Ingarden: Interpretations and Assessments, 
Nijhoff International Philosophy Series, Vol. 27, Bohdan Dziemidok and 
Peter J. McCormick, eds. Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1989.233-254. 
889. RACZYNSKA, I. Review of "Essentiale Fragen." PFil 29, nos. 1-2 (1926): 
113-118. 
890. RAY, William. "Ingarden and Iser: Reading as Concretization." Literary 
Meaning: From Phenomenology to Deconstruction, by William Ray. Oxford, 
London and New York: Blackwell, 1984. 27-40. 
891. RAY, William. "Ingarden, Iser, and the Geneva School: Three Versions of 
Phenomenological Criticism." Literary Meaning: From Phenomenology to 
Deconstruction, by William Ray. Oxford, London and New York: Blackwell, 
1984.41-59. 
892. REESE, William. "Phenomenology and Metaphysics." RevM 19 (Sep 1965): 
103-114. 
893. RICO, Joaquin. "La teoria de la recepcion literaria." Arbor: Ciencia, 
Pensamiento y Cultura 116, no. 455 (1983): 15-33. 
894. RIESER, Max. "Die Philosophie in Polen" ["Przegllld niemiecki w Polsce"]. 
Deutsche Rundschau [in Polen] 5, nos. 79-85 (1959): 409-418. 
895. RIESER, Max. "The Philosophy in Poland." ]P 57, no. 7 (1960): 201-209. 
896. RIESER, Max. "Contemporary Aesthetics in Poland." ]MC 20, no. 3 (1962): 
421-428. 
897. RIESER, Max. Review of Untersuchungen zur Ontologie der Kunst, by 
Roman Ingarden. ]MC 24, no. 3 (1966): 454. 
898. RIESER, Max. "Roman Ingarden and His Time." ]MC 29, no. 4 (1971): 
443-452. 
899. RIESER, Max. "Romana Ingardena filozofia sztuki" [Roman Ingarden's 
Philosophy of Art]. Fenomenologia Ramana Ingardena [The Phenomenology 
of Roman Ingarden]. SFil (special issue) (1972): 259-265. 
900. RIESER, Max. "The Philosophy of Roman Ingarden in a Critical Light." DaH 
2, no. 2 (1975): 89-94. 
901. RISCH, 
Claudia. "Zeit und 
Musik. 
Kritische 
Betrachtungen zum 

280 
HANS H. RUDNICK AND JOLANTA W. W A WRZYCKA 
Kunstverstandnis im Schaffen H.-G. Gadamers und R. 
Ingardens." 
Asthetische Erfahrung und das Wesen der Kunst. SPhiS 43 (1984); 156-172. 
902. RISCH, Claudia. "Die Rolle der Zeit in der Asthetik H. G. Gadamers und R. 
Ingardens." ZAaK 30, no. 1 (1985); 119-137. 
903. RISCH, Claudia. Die Identitiit des Kunstwerks: Studien zur Wechselwirkung 
von Identitiitskriterien und ontologischem Status des Kunstwerks. Bem-
Stuttgart; Haupt, 1986. 
904. RISKA, Augustin. "The 'A Priori' in Ingarden's Theory of Meaning." 
Analecta Husseriana 3 (1974); 138-146. 
905. RISKA, Augustin. "Language and Logic in the Work of Roman Ingarden." 
Analecta Husserliana 4 (1976); 187-217. 
906. ROSNER, Katanyna. 0 funkcji poznawczej dziela literackiego [On the 
Cognitive Function of the Literary Work of Art]. Wroclaw; Ossolineum, 
1970. 
907. ROSNER, Katarzyna. "Swiat przedstawiony a funkcja poznawcza dziela 
literackiego" [Represented World and the Cognitive Function of the Literary 
Work of Art]. StEs 7 (1970); 69-93. 
908. ROSNER, Katanyna. "Ingardenowska koncepcja budowy dziela literackiego 
jako ir6dlo inspiracji do analizy komunikacji artystycznej" [Ingarden's 
Philosophy of Literature and Analysis of Artistic Communication]. Studia 
Semiotyczne 5 (1974); 55-74. 
909. ROSNER, Katanyna. "Ingarden's Philosophy of Literature and the Analysis 
of Artistic Communication." Roman Ingarden and Contemporary Polish 
Aesthetics, Piotr Graff and Slaw Krzemierl-Ojak, eds. Warszawa; PWN, 1975. 
191-222. 
910. R6zANOWSKI, R. "Swiadomosc estetyczna a zdrowy rozslldek" [Aesthetic 
Consciousness and Common Sense]. MLit, no. 11 (1982); 55-fJ7. 
911. RUDNICK, Hans H. "Zur Wertontologie des literarischen Kunstwerkes." 
Proceedings of the 14th International Congress of Philosophy, Vol. 4. 
Vienna; Herder, 1969.230-234. 
912. RUDNICK, Hans H. "Roman Ingarden's Aesthetics of Literature." ColiG 8, 
nos. 1-2 (1974); 1-14. 
913. RUDNICK, Hans H. "Roman Ingarden's Literary Theory." Analecta 
Husserliana 4 (1976); 105-119. 
914. RUDNICK, Hans H. "From Things to Individuals." Phenomenology 
Information Bulletin 1 (1977); 3-14. 
915. RUDNICK, Hans H. Review of Roman Ingarden: Gegenstand und Aufgaben 
der Literaturwissenschaft, edited, translated, and introduced by Rolf Fieguth, 
and Literatur als System und Prozess by Janusz Slawinski. Phenomenology 
Information Bulletin 3 (1979); 71-75. 
916. RUDNICK, Hans H. Review of Roman Ingarden: Gegenstand und Aufgaben 
der Literaturwissenschaft, edited, translated, and introduced by Rolf Fieguth. 
ColiG 14, no. 1 (1979); 119-121. 
917. RUDNICK, Hans H. "The Literary Work of Art as a System." Progress in 
Cybernetics and Systems Research, Vol. 8, Franz Pichler, ed. Washington, 
DC; Hemisphere, 1980. 93-96. 
918. RUDNICK, 
Hans 
H. 
"Roman 
Ingarden 
als 
Literatursystematiker." 
Proceedings of the 6th International Congress of Germanists, Vol. 8, no. 3. 

ROMAN INGARDEN INTERNATIONAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 
281 
Berne: Lang, 1980. 189-194. 
919. RUDNICK, Hans H. "The Historicity of the Literary Work of Art: An 
Ingardenian Perspective." CLS 18, no. 3 (1981): 251-259. 
920. RUDNICK, Hans H. "The Concretization of Meaning: Roman Ingarden." 
Semiotica 41 (1982): 247-255. 
921. RUDNICK, Hans H. "Strelka als Literaturwissenschaftler." Sinn und Symbol: 
Festschrift jiir Joseph P. Strelkil, Karl Konrad Polheim, ed. Bern, Frankfurt, 
New York, Paris: Lang, 1987.639-645. 
922. RUTHROF, Horst. "A Phenomeno-Sociological Approach to Fiction." PPR 
33, no. 3 (1973): 399-407. 
923. RYBICKI, Janusz. "Romana Ingardena i Wladyslawa Tatarkiewicza teorie 
przezyc estetycznych (analiza por6wnawcza)" [The Theories of Aesthetic 
Experience of Roman Ingarden and Wladyslaw Tatarkiewicz (A Comparative 
Analysis)]. StEs 10 (1973): 193-213. 
924. RYBICKI, Janusz. "Teorie przezyc estetycznych -
struktura i funkcje 
gl6wnych koncepcji" [Theories of Aesthetic Experience - The Structure and 
Functions of Central Concepts]. Studia z dziejow estetyki polskiej, 
1918-1939, Slaw Krzemieri-Ojak and W. Kalinowski, eds. Warszawa: PWN, 
1975.92-100. 
925. RYLE, Gilbert. Review of "Essentiale Fragen," by Roman Ingarden. Mind 
36, no. 143 (1927): 366-370. 
926. RYLE, Gilbert. "Roman Ingarden: 'Essentiale Fragen'." JBSP 4, no. 1 
(1973): 72-75. 
927. RZEPINSKA, Maria. "Remarks on the Existence of a Painting." Roman 
1ngarden and Contemporary Polish Aesthetics, Piotr Graff and Slaw 
Krzemieri-Ojak, eds. Warszawa: PWN, 1975.223-236. 
928. SANCIPRIANO, Mario. "R. Ingarden et Ie 'vrai' Bergsonisme." Analecta 
Husserliana 4 (1976): 141-148. 
929. SARNA, J. W. "Ontologia sztuki w uj«ciu Romana Ingardena" [The 
Ontology of Art of Roman Ingarden]. Studia Kieleckie, no. 3 (1977): 5-23. 
930. SARNA, J. W. "De I'evaluation philosophique de la phenomenologie realiste 
de Roman Ingarden." (in Russian) Fitos (Nauki, USSR), no. 4 (1980): 
121-129. 
931. SARNA, J. W. Fenomenologia Romana 1ngardena na tie filozofii Edmunda 
Husserla [Roman Ingarden's Phenomenology against the Background of 
Edmund Husserl's Philosophy]. Kielce: 1981. 
932. SARNOWSKI, Stefan. "Fenomenologia i egzystencjalizm" [Phenomenology 
and Existentialism]. Fenomenologia Romana 1ngardena [The Phenomenol-
ogy of Roman Ingarden]. SFit (special issue) (1972): 457-482. 
933. SAUTER, J. "Der VIII. Internationale Philosophen-Kongress 1934." Bliitter 
jiir Deutsche Philosophie 8, no. 6 (1934): 437-438. 
934. SCARAMUZZA, Gabriele. "II tempo della letteratura: Roman Ingarden." 
Materiali Filosofici: II tempo dell' arte, Fulvio Papi et aI., eds. Milano: Franco 
Angeli, 1984.40-59. 
935. SCHAPER, GUnter. Review of Untersuchungen zur Ontologie der Kunst by 
Roman Ingarden. ZAaK 14, no. 2 (1969): 237-245. 
936. SCHAPER, Eva. Review of Yom Erkennen des literarischen Kunstwerks, by 
Roman Ingarden. JBSP 1, no. 3 (1970): 82-84. 

282 
HANS H. RUDNICK AND JOLANTA W. W A WRZYCKA 
937. SCHMALENBACH, Hennann. "Neues zum Problem der Phanomenologie." 
Deutsche Literaturzeitung 33, no. 44 (1922): 971-973. [Review of Intuition 
und Intellekt bei Henri Bergson and "Uber die Gefahr einer 'Petitio Principii' 
in der Erkenntnistheorie."] 
938. SCHMID, Herta. "Das dramatische Werk und seinstheatralische Konkretisa-
tion im Lichte der Literaturtheorie Roman Ingardens." Das Drama und seine 
Inszenierung, Erika Fischer-Lichte et aI., eds. Tiibingen: Niemeyer, 1985. 
22-36. 
939. SCHMIDT, Wolf A. von. Philosophische Grundfragen der Literarasthetik. 
Miinchen: Ehrenwirth, 1970. 
940. SCHOBER, Rita. Abbild, Sinnbild, Wertung: Aufsatze zur Theorie und Praxis 
literarischer Kommunikation. Berlin und Weimar: Aufbau, 1982.253-256. 
941. SCHOPPER, Werner. Das Seiende und der Gegenstand: Zur Ontologie 
Roman Ingardens. Miinchen: Berchmanskolleg Verlag, 1974. 
942. SCHWABE, Karl-Heinz. Review of Vom Erkennen des literarischen 
Kunstwerks, by Roman Ingarden. DZP 17, no. 11 (1969): 1395-1399. 
943. SCHWANKL, P. Review of Der Streit um die Existenz der Welt, by Roman 
Ingarden. Univ (Gennan edition) 12, no. 12 (1967): 1323-1324. 
944. SEIDLER, Herbert. "Deutsche Dichtungswissenschaft in den letzten Jahren." 
DU 3, no. 15 (1963): 1-16. [Review of Das literarische Kunstwerk.] 
945. SEIFERT, Joseph. "Roman Ingarden's Realism and the Motives that Led 
Husserl to Adopt Transcendental Idealism: Critical Reflections on the 
Importance and Limits of Roman Ingarden's Critique of Husserl's Transcen-
dental Phenomenology." The Philosophy of Roman Ingarden: lagiellonian 
University Reports on Philosophy (Polish) to (1986): 27-42. 
946. SERRETTI, M. Conoscenza di se e trascendenza. Introduzione aI/a filosofia 
del/'uomo attraverso Husserl, Scheler, Ingarden, Wojtyla. Bologna: Centro 
Studi Europa Orientale, 1984. 
947. SHUSTERMAN, Richard. "Ingarden, Inscription and Literary Ontology." 
lBSP 18, no. 2 (1987): 103-119. 
948. SHUSTERMAN, Richard. "Ingarden, Inscription, and Literary Ontology." 
On the Aesthetics of Roman Ingarden: Interpretations and Assessments, 
Nijhoff International Philosophy Series, Vol. 27, Bohdan Dziemidok and 
Peter J. McConnick, eds. Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1989. 131-158. 
949. SIDOREK, J. "Now a ksi:tZka Romana Ingardena" [A New Book of Roman 
Ingarden]. KiS 21, no. 1 (1977): 293-296. [Review of 0 poznawaniu dziela 
literackiego.] 
950. SIDOREK, J. "0 Ingardenowskiej teorii przedmiot6w czysto intencjonal-
nych. Cz«sc 1" [On Ingarden's Theory of Purely Intentional Objects. Part 1]. 
SPC 13, no. 2 (1977): 163-185. 
951. SIDOREK, J. "0 Ingardenowskiej teorii przedmiot6w czysto intencjonal-
nych. Cz«sc 2" [On Ingarden's Theory of Purely Intentional Objects. Part 2]. 
SPC 16, no. 1 (1980): 167-177. 
952. SIEMIANOWSKI, A. "Roman Ingarden (5.2.1893 - 14.6.1970)." Wigi 9, no. 
9 (1970): 125-126. 
953. SILVERMAN, Hugh. "Dufrenne's Phenomenology of Poetry." Philosophy 
Today 20, no. 1 (1976): 20-24. 
954. SIMONS, Peter M. Review of On the Motives Which Led Husserl to 

ROMAN INGARDEN INTERNATIONAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 
283 
Transcendental Idealism, by Roman Ingarden. iBSP 9, no. 2 (1978): 137. 
955. SIMONS, Peter M. "Categories and Ways of Being." The Philosophy of 
Roman Ingarden: iagielionian University Reports on Philosophy (Polish) 10 
(1986): 89-104. 
956. SIMONS, Peter M. "Computer Composition and Works of Music: Variation 
on a Theme ofIngarden." iBSP 19, no. 2 (1988): 141-154. 
957. SKOLIMOWSKI, Henryk. "Roman Ingarden." Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 
Vol. 4. New York: 1967. 193-194. 
958. SKOLIMOWSKI, Henryk. "Roman Ingarden." Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 
Vol. 4, 2nd ed. New York: 1974. 195-197. 
959. SKOLIMOWSKI, Henryk. Polish Analytical Philosophy. A Survey and a 
Comparison with British Analytical Philosophy. London: Routledge-Kegan 
Paul, 1967; New York: Humanities Press, 1967.29-31. 
960. SKUSEK-MOCNIK, Zoja. "Roman Ingarden: Konstitucija estetskega 
objekta" [Roman Ingarden: The Constitution of the Aesthetic Object]. 
Problemi 17, nos. 192-193 (1979): 100-105. 
961. SKWARCZYNSKA, Stefania. Wst~p do nauki 0 literaturze [Introduction to 
Literary Scholarship]. Warszawa: 1954. 
962. SKW ARCZYNSKA, Stefania. "Rodzaje literackie wsr6d podstawowych 
pojt<c teoretyczno-literackich Romana Ingardena" [Literary Genres Among 
Roman Ingarden's Basic Concepts 
in the Theory of Literature]. 
Fenomenologia Romana Ingardena [The Phenomenology of Roman 
Ingarden]. SFil (special issue) (1972): 323-358. 
963. SKWARCZYNSKA, Stefania. "Roman Ingarden on Literary Genres." 
Linguistic and Literary Studies in Eastern Europe (USEE), Vol. 1: 
'Janguage, Literature and Meaning, John Odmark, ed. Amsterdam: Ben-
jamins Press, 1979.391-467. 
964. SLAWINSKA, Jadwiga. "Roman Ingarden's Theory of the Work of 
Architecture." Roman Ingarden and Contemporary Polish Aesthetics, Piotr 
Graff and Slaw Krzemien-Ojak, eds. Warszawa: PWN, 1975.237-246. 
965. SLA WINSKA, Jadwiga. "Uwagi 0 teorii dzieia architektonicznego Romana 
Ingardena" [Roman Ingarden's Theory of the Work of Architecture]. StEs 1 
(1964): 235-244. 
966. SLA WINSKA, Jadwiga. "Inspiracja Ingardena w teatrologii wsp6tczesnej" 
[Ingarden's Inspiration in Contemporary Theatre]. DialogW 21, no. 5 (1976): 
91-99. 
967. SLAWINSKA, Jadwiga. Wsp6lczesna ref/eksja 0 teatrze. Ku antropologii 
teatru [Contemporary Reflection on Theatre. Towards the Anthropology of 
Theatre]. Krak6w: 1978. 
968. SLAWINSKA, Jadwiga. "Ingarden's Impact on Theatre Criticism." Poetica 
Siavica: Studies in Honour of Zbigniew Folejewski. Ottawa: University of 
Ottawa Press, 1981. 181-189. 
969. SLAWINSKI, Janusz. Literatur als System und Prozess. Miinchen: Nymphen-
burger Verlagsbuchhandlung, 1975. 
970. SMITH, Barry. Review of The Literary Work of Art by Roman Ingarden. 
iBSP 6, no. 2 (1975): 141-144. 
971. SMITH, Barry. "The Ontogenesis of Mathematical Objects." iBSP 6, no. 2 
(1975): 91-101. 

284 
HANS H. RUDNICK AND JOLANTA W. W A WRZYCKA 
972. SMITH, Barry. "Historicity, Value and Mathematics." Analecta Husserliana 
4 (1976): 219-239. 
973. SMITH, 
Barry. 
"Matematyka 
a 
ontologiczna 
estetyka 
Ingardena" 
[Mathematics and the Ontological Aesthetics of Ingarden]. SFil, no. 1 (1976): 
51-56. 
974. SMITH, Barry. "An Essay in Formal Ontology." Grazer philosophische 
Studien 6 (1978): 39-62. 
975. SMITH, Barry. "Roman Ingarden: Ontological Foundations for Literary 
Theory." Linguistic and Literary Studies in Eastern Europe (LLSEE), Vol. 1: 
Language, Literature and Meaning, John Odmark, ed. Amsterdam: Ben-
jamins Press, 1979.373-390. 
976. SMITH, Barry. "Ingarden vs. Meinong on the Logic of Fiction." PPR 41, nos. 
1-2 (1980): 93-105. 
977. SMITH, 
Barry. 
"Meinen 
und 
Vorstellen 
in 
der 
literarischen 
Gegenstandskonstitution." Kunst und Kunstjorschung, Beitriige zur Asthetik, 
G. Wohlandt, ed. Bonn: Bouvier, 1983.49--61. 
978. SMITH, Barry. "Practices of Art." Practical Knowledge. Outlines of a Theory 
of Traditions and Skills, J. C. Nyiri and Barry Smith, eds. London: Croom 
Helm, 1988. 172-209. 
979. SODEIKA, Tomas. "The Ingarden-Husserl Controversy: The Methodological 
Status of Consciousness in Phenomenology and the Limits of the Human 
Condition." Analecta Husserliana 27 (1989): 209-221. 
980. SOKOLOWSKI, Robert. Review of On the Motives Which Led Husserl to 
Transcendental Idealism, by Roman Ingarden. Report by Arn6r Hannibalson: 
JP 74, no. 3 (1977): 176--180. 
981. SOW A, Ewa. "Problem literackiej metafory" [The Problem of Literary 
Metaphor]. Fenomenologia Romana Ingardena [The Phenomenology of 
Roman Ingarden]. SFil (special issue) (1972): 381-395. 
982. SPIEGELBERG, Herbert. Review of Das literarische Kunstwerk, by Roman 
Ingarden. ZAaK 25, no. 4 (1931): 379-387. 
983. SPIEGELBERG, Herbert. The Phenomenological Movement, 3rd revised ed. 
The Hague: Nijhoff, 1982. 
984. SPYTKOWSKI, J6zef. "Anatomia dziela literackiego" [The Anatomy of the 
Literary Work]. Gazeta Polska 9, no. 172 (1937). [Review of 0 poznawaniu 
dziela literackiego.] 
985. STANNY, B. "Filozofia kt6ra wymaga charakteru" [Philosophy which 
Requires Character]. Kierunki, no. 29 (1970): 3. 
986. STANZEL, Franz K. Die typischen Erziihlsituationen im Roman. Wien: W. 
Braumiiller, 1955. 
987. STANZEL, Franz K. Narrative Situations in the Novel: Tom Jones, Moby 
Dick, The Ambassadors, Ulysses. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 
1971. 
988. STARZYCKI, Andrzej. "Uwagi 0 rozwaZaniach aksjologicznych Romana 
Ingardena" [Remarks on Roman Ingarden's Axiological Considerations]. 
Zeszyty Naukowe Uniwersytetu LOdzkiego, Seria I, Nauki Humanistyczno-
Spoleczne, no. 2 (1975): 53--61. 
989. STEINBACH, Heribert. "1st Ontologie als Phanomenologie moglich? 
Kritische Betrachtungen zu Ingardens Existenzialontologie." ZpF 22, no. I 

ROMAN INGARDEN INTERNATIONAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 
285 
(1968): 78-100. 
990. STEINBACH, Heribert. Review of Briefe an Roman Ingarden, by Edmund 
Husser!. PhiL 23, no. 2 (1970): 88-91. 
991. STJ;:PIEN, Antoni. "Metafizyka a ontologia" [Metaphysics and Ontology]. 
RoLit 9, no. 1 (1961): 85-98. 
992. STJ;:PIEN, Antoni. "Ocena metodologiczna analizy istnienia u Romana 
Ingardena" [Methodological Evaluation of the Analysis of Existence in 
Roman Ingarden]. Sprawozdania Towarzystwa Naukowego KUL 13 (1962): 
37-39. 
993. STJ;:PIEN, Antoni. "0 sposobie istnienia dziela sztuki" [On the Mode of 
Existence of the Work of Art]. Zeszyty Naukowe KUL 6, no. 3 (1963): 55-64. 
994. STJ;:PIEN, Antoni. "0 filozofii Romana Ingardena" [On Roman Ingarden's 
Philosophy]. RFil22, nos. 2-4 (1964): 153-159. 
995. STJ;:PIEN, Antoni. "Ingardenowska koncepcja teorii poznania. Proba oceny" 
[Ingarden's Concept of the Theory of Cognition. An Evaluative Attempt]. 
RoFil12, no. 1 (1964): 77-92. 
996. STJ;:PIEN, Antoni. "W sprawie moZliwosci teorii poznania" [On the 
Possibility of the Theory of Cognition]. RoFil13, no. 1 (1965): 73-88. 
997. STJ;:PIEN, Antoni. "Zagadnienie punktu wyjscia teorii poznania" [The 
Problem of the Starting Point of the Theory of Cognition]. RoFil 13, no. 1 
(1965): 89-104. 
998. STJ;:PIEN, Antoni. "W kierunku metasystemu teorii poznania" [Towards a 
Metasystem of the Theory of Cognition]. RoFil13, no. 1 (1965): 105-118. 
999. STJ;:PIEN, Antoni. 0 metodzie teorii poznania [Methodology of the Theory 
of Cognition]. Lublin: 1966. 
1000. STJ;:PIEN, Antoni. "Fenomenologia w Polsce 1945-1965" [Phenomenology 
in Poland 1945-1965]. SPC 1, no. 1 (1966): 29-47. 
1001. STJ;:PIEN, Antoni. Review of PrzeZycie, dzielo, wartosc, by Roman Ingarden. 
Zeszyty Naukowe KUL 12, no. 4 (1969): 58-59. 
1002. STJ;:PIEN, Antoni. "Rodzaje bezposredniego poznania" [Types of Immediate 
Cognition]. RoFil19, no. 1 (1971): 95-127. 
1003. STJ;:PIEN, Antoni. "Uwagi 0 Ingardenowej koncepcji ontologii" [On 
Ingarden's Concept of Ontology]. RoFil20, no. 1 (1972): 5-14. 
1004. STJ;:PIEN, Antoni. "Utwor filmowy a Ingardenowa teoria warstw" [The 
Cinematic Work and Ingarden's Theory of Strata]. RoFil 20, no. 1 (1972): 
119-121. 
1005. 
1006. 
1007. 
1008. 
1009. 
STJ;:PIEN, Antoni. "Istnienie (czegos) a poj~cie i Slid" [Existence (of 
Somethinft) vs. Concept and Judgement]. SPC 9, no. 1 (1973): 235-261. 
STJ;:PIEN, Antoni. Propedeutyka estetyki [Propaedeutics of Aesthetics]. 
Warszawa: Akademia Teologii Katolickiej, 1975. 
STJ;:PIEN, Antoni. "Bemerkungen zu Ingardens Konzeption der Ontologie." 
St. Thomas Acquinas 700th Anniversary of Death: Modern Interpretation of 
his Philosophy. Lublin: Towarzystwo Naukowe Katolickiego Uniwersytetu 
Lubelskiego, 1976. 127-139. 
STJ;:PIEN, Antoni. Elementy jilozojii [Elements of Philosophy]. Lublin: 
Towarzystwo Naukowe Katolickiego Uniwersytetu Lubelskiego, 1976. 
STJ;:PIEN, Antoni. Wprowadzenie do jilozojii [Introduction to Philosophy]. 
Lublin: Towarzystwo Naukowe Katolickiego Uniwersytetu Lubelskiego, 

286 
1010. 
1011. 
1012. 
1OI3. 
1014. 
1015. 
1016. 
1017. 
1018. 
1019. 
1020. 
1021. 
1022. 
1023. 
1024. 
1025. 
1026. 
1027. 
1028. 
1029. 
HANS H. RUDNICK AND JOLANTA W. WA WRZYCKA 
1982. [2nd ed. of Elementy [ilozofii.] 
STOJANOVIC, Dragan. "Ingarden i Huserl" [Ingarden and Husserl]. Delo 
20, no. 11 (1974): 1377-1396. 
STOJANOVIC, Dragan. "Ingardenova koncepcija knjizevnog umetnickog 
dela" [Ingarden's Conception of the Literary Work of Art]. Knji 30, no. 1 
(1975): 21-41 (Part 1); and no. 2 (1975): 161-178 (Part 2). 
STOJANOVIC, Dragan. "'Neznacenjski' vodovi fenomena viseznacnosti u 
Ingardenovoj koncepciji" ["Meaningless" Aspects of the Phenomenon of 
Meaning in Ingarden's Conception]. KnjiK 6, no. 4 (1975): 25-43. 
STOJANOVIC, Dragan. Fenomenologija i viseznacnost knjiievnog dela. 
Ingardenova teorija opalizacije [Phenomenology and the Meaning of the 
Literary Work. Ingarden's Theory of Concretization]. Beograd: Vuk 
Karadiic, 1976. 
STRELKA, Joseph P. Review of Yom Erkennen des literarischen 
Kunstwerks, by Roman Ingarden. GQ 43, no. 2 (1970): 237-240. 
STRELKA, Joseph P. "The Literary Work: Its Structure, Unity, and 
Distinction from Forms of Non-Literary Expression." What Is Literature?, 
Paul Hernadi, ed. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1978. 115-126. 
STRELKA, Joseph P. Literarische Textanalyse. TUbingen: Francke, 1989. 
STR6zEWSKI, Wladyslaw. Review of "0 tak zwanym malarstwie 
abstrakcyjnym," by Roman Ingarden. RFil21, no. 2 (1962): 165-166. 
STR6zEWSKI, Ladislav. "Gli studi di estetica di Roman Ingarden." RdE 8 
(1963): 131-142. 
STR6zEWSKI, Wladyslaw. "Ontologia, metafizyka, dialektyka" [Ontology, 
Metaphysics, 
Dialectics]. 
Fenomenologia 
Romana 
Ingardena 
[The 
Phenomenology of Roman Ingarden]. SFil (special issue) (1972): 209-228. 
STR6zEWSKI, Wladyslaw. "Program estetyki Romana Ingardena" [Roman 
Ingarden's Aesthetic Program]. RFil30, no. 1 (1972): 14-20. 
STR6zEWSKI, Wladyslaw. Review of Ksiqieczkq 0 czlowieku, by Roman 
Ingarden. TygP, no. 33 (1972): 3. 
STR6zEWSKI, Wladyslaw. "Nad Ksiqieczkq 0 czlowieku" [On A Little 
Book on Man]. SFil, no. 9 (1973): 123-126. [Review of Ksiqieczkq 0 
czlowieku.] 
STR6zEWSKI, Wladyslaw. "Man and Values in Ingarden's Thought." 
Analecta Husserliana 5 (1976): 109-123. 
STR6zEWSKI, Wladyslaw. "Blisko Ingardena" [Close to Ingarden]. 
Student, no. 9 (1977): 8. [Interview by Z. Szlachta.] 
STR6zEWSKI, Wladyslaw. "On the Truthfulness of the Work of Art." RevM 
35, no. 2 (1981): 251-273. 
STR6zEWSKI, Wladyslaw. "Wst,<p" [Introduction]. Wyklady i dyskusje z 
estetyki [Lectures and Discussions on Aesthetics], Anita Szczepariska, ed. 
Warszawa: PWN, 1981. 5-14. 
STR6zEWSKI, Wladyslaw. Dialektyka tw6rczosci [Dialectics of Creativity]. 
Krak6w: Polskie Wydawnictwo Muzyczne, 1983. 
STR6zEWSKI, Wladyslaw. "Roman Ingarden's Aesthetic Program." 
Aletheia: An International Journal of Philosophy, Vol. 4: Epistemology and 
Logic. Bern: Lang, 1988. 226-234. 
STRUBE, Werner. "Was heiBt 'Wahrheit' auf Kunstwerke bezogen? 

ROMAN INGARDEN INTERNATIONAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 
287 
Uberlegungen im AnschluB an Roman Ingarden." UGG 22 (1981): 325-335. 
1030. STUCKI, Pierre-Andre. "Le langage litteraire selon M. Roman Ingarden." 
SPhiS 25 (1965): 189-199. 
1031. STYCZEN, Tadeusz. "0 metodzie antropologii filozoficznej: na marginesie 
Osoby i czynu K. Wojtyly oraz Ksiqzeczki 0 czlowieku R. Ingardena" [On the 
Method of Philosophical Anthropology: A Marginal Note on The Acting 
Person by K. Wojtyla and A Little Book on Man by R. Ingarden]. RoFil 21, 
no. 2 (1973): 105-114. 
1032. STYCZEN, Tadeusz. "Reply to Kalinowski: By Way of an Addendum to the 
Addenda." Aletheia: An International Journal of Philosophy, Vol. 4: 
Epistemology and Logic. Bern: Lang, 1988.217-225. 
1033. SUMIC-RIHA, Jelica. "Teorija estetskega ucinka in vloga komunidacije: 
Ingarden-Iser-Austin." Primerjalna Knjiievnost 8, no. 1 (1985): 34-4l. 
1034. SUROWIEC, D. "Dylematy odbioru w teorii Romana Ingardena" [Dilemmas 
of Reception in Roman Ingarden's Theory]. PHum 22, no. 11 (1978): 93-102. 
1035. SUROWIEC, D. "Prawda dziela literackiego w rozwaZaniach Romana 
Ingardena" [The Truth of the Literary Work of Art in Roman Ingarden's 
Considerations]. PHum 23, no. 3 (1979): 71-89. 
1036. SUROWIEC, D. "Wartosci w swiecie literatury" [Values in the World of 
Literature]. PHum 23, no. 9 (1979): 148-15l. 
1037. SWEENEY, Robert, D. "Axiology in Scheler and Ingarden and the Question 
of Dialectics." DaH 2, no. 3 (1975): 91-97. 
1038. SWIDERSKI, Edward. "Some Salient Features of Ingarden's Ontology." 
JBSP 6, no. 2 (1975): 81-90. 
1039. SWIDERSKI, Edward. "Pewne gl6wne rysy ontologii Ingardena" [Some 
Salient Features of Ingarden's Ontology]. SPC 14, no. 1 (1978): 89-108. 
1040. SWIDERSKI, Edward. "L'reuvre d'art en tant qu'objet esthetique." FZPT 33 
(1986): 571-591. 
1041. SWIDERSKI, 
Edward. 
"Ingarden's 
Puzzling 
Ontology-Metaphysics 
Distinction." Jagiellonian University Reports on Philosophy (Polish) 11 
(1987): 67-85. 
1042. SWI~CIMSKI, Jerzy. "Filozofia ingardenowska jako narzt;dzie: jej dzialania 
w dziedzinie niekt6rych nauk szczeg610wych" [Ingardenian Philosophy as a 
Tool: Its Influence on Some Natural Sciences]. Fenomenologia Romana 
Ingardena [The Phenomenology of Roman Ingarden]. SFil (special issue) 
(1972): 293-305. 
1043. SWI~CIMSKI, Jerzy. "Scientific Information Function and Ingarden's 
Theory of Forms in the Constitution of the Real World." Analecta Husser-
Liana 3 (1974): 290-322. 
1044. SWI~CIMSKI, Jerzy. "Museum Exhibition as a Work of Art and a Subject of 
'Specific Aesthetics'." Analecta HusserLiana 4 (1976): 165-186. 
1045. SZCZEPANSKA. Anita. "Niejasnosc jako estetycznie doniosla jakosc" 
[Ambiguity as an Aesthetically Significant Quality]. Fenomenologia Romana 
Ingardena [The Phenomenology of Roman Ingarden]. SFil (special issue) 
(1972): 277-292. 
1046. SZCZEPANSKA, Anita. "W sprawie interpretacji niekt6rych twierdzen 
ingardenowskiej estetyki" [On the Interpretation of Some Propositions of 
Ingarden's Aesthetics]. StEs 9 (1972): 341-356. 

288 
HANS H. RUDNICK AND JOLANTA W. WAWRZYCKA 
1047. SZCZEPANSKA, Anita. "Perspektywy aksjologicznych badari struktury 
dziela sztuki w koncepcji R. Ingardena" [Perspectives of the Axiological 
Investigations of the Work of Roman Ingarden]. StEs 10 (1973): 239-254. 
1048. SZCZEPANSKA, Anita. "Perspectives of the Axiological Investigations of 
the Work of Roman Ingarden." JBSP 6, no. 2 (1975): 116-125. 
1049. SZCZEPANSKA, Anita. "Artistic Functions of Clarity in Proust." Roman 
Ingarden and Contemporary Polish Aesthetics, Piotr Graff and Slaw 
Krzemieri-Ojak, eds. Warszawa: PWN, 1975.247-268. 
1050. SZCZEPANSKA, Anita. "Polemiki wok61 Ingardena" [Controversies on 
Ingarden]. Studia z dziejaw estetyki polskiej 1918-1939 [Studies in the 
History of Polish Aesthetics 1918-1939], Slaw Krzemieri-Ojak and W. 
Kalinowski, eds. Warszawa: PWN, 1975. 123-139. 
1051. SZCZEPANSKA, Anita. "Ingardena wyklady z estetyki" [Ingarden's 
Lectures on Aesthetics]. StEs 14 (1977): 89-98. 
1052. SZCZEPANSKA, Anita. "0 definicjach sztuki" [On Definitions of Art]. 
Studia 0 wsp61czesnej estetyce polskiej [Studies in Contemporary Polish 
Aesthetics], Slaw Krzemieri-Ojak, ed. Warszawa: PWN, 1977.33-48. 
1053. SZCZEPANSKA, Anita. "Ingardenowska teoria quasi-s'ld6w a funkcje 
poznawcze sztuki" [Ingarden's Theory of Quasi-Judgements and the 
Cognitive Function of Art]. StEs 15 (1978): 171-183. 
1054. SZCZEPANSKA, Anita. "Zwi'lzki Ingardenowskiej teorii j~zyka z lingwis-
tyk'l wsp6Iczesn'l" [Relationships Between Ingarden's Theory of Language 
and Contemporary Linguistics]. StEs 17 (1980): 165-185. 
1055. SZCZEPANSKA, Anita. "ad wydawcy" [Editorial]. Wyklady i dyskusje z 
estetyki [Lectures and Discussions on Aesthetics], Anita Szczepariska, ed. 
Warszawa: PWN, 1981. 15-18. 
1056. SZCZEPANSKA, Anita. "Mysl fenomenologiczna w polskiej estetyczne [sic] 
wsp6lczesnej" 
[Phenomenological 
Thought 
in 
Contemporary 
Polish 
Aesthetics]. StEs 19 (1982): 275-301. 
1057. SZCZEPANSKA, Anita. "The Structure of Artworks." On the Aesthetics of 
Roman Ingarden: Interpretations and Assessments, Nijhoff International 
Philosophy Series, Vol. 27, Bohdan Dziemidok and Peter J. McCormick, eds. 
Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1989.21-54. 
1058. SZCZEPANSKI, Artur. "Ingardenowska koncepcja zwi'lzku przyczynowego" 
[Ingarden's Concept of Causality]. Fenomenologia Romana Ingardena [The 
Phenomenology of Roman Ingarden]. SFil (special issue) (1972): 253-258. 
1059. SZCZEPANSKI, Artur. "Poslowie fizyka" [Epilogue of a Physicist]. Spar 0 
istnienie swiata. Tom III. 0 strukturze przyczynowej realnego swiata 
[Controversy Over the Existence of the World. Vol. 3. On the Causal 
Structure of the Real World]. Warszawa: PWN, 1981. 424-428. 
1060. SZCZEPANSKI, Jan. 
(Introductory remarks to 
the conference on) 
"Marksistowska krytyka fenomenologii a filozofia Romana Ingardena" 
[Marxist Criticism of Phenomenology and the Philosophy of Roman 
Ingarden]. SFit, no. 9 (1975): 7-8. 
1061. SZEMINSKI, P. "0 budowie obrazu Romana Ingardena - kilka uwag" [Some 
Remarks on Roman Ingarden's On the Structure of Painting]. Roczniki 
Akademii Sztuk Pif;knych [Annals of the Academy of Fine Arts]. Warszawa: 
1974.65-68. 

ROMAN INGARDEN INTERNATIONAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 
289 
1062. SZEWCZYK, Jan. "Estetyka--nonnatywna czy opisowa? Uwagi na 
marginesie przedmowy do rosyjskiego wydania pism estetycznych Romana 
Ingardena" [Is Aesthetics Nonnative or Descriptive? Marginal Comments on 
the Foreword to the Russian Edition of Ingarden's Essays in Aesthetics]. SFil, 
no. 2 (1963): 127-139. 
1063. SZEWCZYK, Jan. "Roman Ingarden." Wielka Encyklopedia Powszechna, 
Vol. 5. Warszawa: PWN, 1965.54. 
1064. SZEWCZYK, Jan. "Sp6r 0 istot<; filozofii" [The Controversy Over the 
Essence of Philosophy]. SFil, no. 2 (1966): 179-201. 
1065. SZUMAN, S. Review of 0 poznawaniu dziela literackiego, by Roman 
Ingarden. PWsp 62, nos. 8-9 (1937): 283-290. 
1066. SZYMA, Tadeusz. "0 Ingardenowskiej koncepcji analizy dziela literackiego" 
[On Ingarden's Concept of the Analysis of the Literary Work of Art]. StEs 10 
(1973): 287-301. 
1067. TAKE!, Yushiro. "On Roman Ingarden's Philosophy (1893-1970): Part I" 
(in Japanese). The Journal of Gifu College of Economics 12, no. 3 (1979): 
141-160. 
1068. TAKE!, Yushiro. "On Roman Ingarden's Philosophy (1893-1970): Part 2" 
(in Japanese). The Journal ofGifu College of Economics 13, nos. 1-2 (1979): 
221-255. 
1069. TAKEI, Yushiro. "On Roman Ingarden's Philosophy (1893-1970): Part 3" 
(in Japanese). The Journal of Gifu College of Economics 13, no. 4 (1979): 
305-329. 
1070. TAKEI, Yushiro. "On Ingarden's The Structure of the Literary Work of Art 
and Its Concretization" (in Japanese). The Journal of Gifu College of 
Economics 15, no. 1 (1981): 25-41. 
1071. TAKE!, Yushiro. "The 'Life' of the Literary Work of Art and Human Life: 
Part 1" (in Japanese). The Journal of Gifu College of Economics 16, no. 4 
(1982): 149-169. 
1072. TAKEI, Yushiro. "The 'Life' of the Literary Work of Art and Human Life: 
Part 2" (in Japanese). The Journal of Gifu College of Economics 17, no. 1 
(1983): 67-96. 
1073. TAKEI, Yushiro. "The Literary Work and Its Concretization in Roman 
Ingarden's Aesthetics." Analecta H usserliana 17 (1984): 285-307. 
1074. TARNOWSKI, Karol. "Konstytucja transcendentalna w oczach Romana 
Ingardena" [Roman Ingarden's Critique of Transcendental Constitution]. 
SFil, no. 4 (1973): 65-74. 
1075. TARNOWSKI, Karol. "Roman Ingarden's Critique of Transcendental 
Constitution." DaH 3, no. 1 (1976): 111-119. 
1076. TATARKIEWICZ, Wladyslaw. "Roman Ingarden, 1893-1970." PPR 31, no. 
3 (1971): 460-462. 
1077. TATARKIEWICZ, Wladyslaw. "Roman lngarden." Fenomenologia Romana 
Ingardena [The Phenomenology of Roman Ingarden]. SFil (special issue) 
(1972): 55-57. 
1078. TATARKIEWICZ, Wladyslaw. "Uczczenie pami<;ci Romana Ingardena" [In 
Memory of Roman Ingarden]. RFil30, no. 1 (1972): 1-4. 
1079. TATARKIEWICZ, Wladyslaw. "Roman Ingarden." DaH 1, no. 3 (1974): 
153-155. 

290 
HANS H. RUDNICK AND JOLANTA W. WA WRZYCKA 
1080. TERTULIAN, N. "Genese et structure." RE 25, no. 3 (1972): 279-285. 
1081. TISCHNER, J6zef. "Teoria poznania w wi«zach ontologii" [Theory of 
Cognition in Ontological Fetters]. Analecta Cracoviensa 3 (1971): 33-50. 
1082. TISCHNER, J6zef. "Perspektywy herrneneutyki" [Perspectives of Her-
meneutics]. Znak 23, nos. 2-3 (1971): 145-172. 
1083. TISCHNER, J6zef. "Ingarden-Husserl: sp6r 0 istnienie swiata" [Ingarden-
Husserl: The Controversy over the Existence of the World]. Fenomenologia 
Romana Ingardena [The Phenomenology of Roman Ingarden]. SFil (special 
issue) (1972): 127-143. 
1084. TISCHNER, J6zef. "Swemu istnieniu zaufac" [Trusting One's Own 
Existence]. Znak 24, no. 11 (1972): 1557-1562. [Review of Ksiqzeczkq 0 
czlowieku.] 
1085. TISCHNER, J6zef. "W kr«gu mysli Husserlowskiej" [In the Sphere of 
Husserl's Thinking]. AHFMS 24 (1978): 215-236. 
1086. TISCHNER, J6zef. "Teoria poznania w wi«zach ontologii" [Theory of 
Cognition in Ontological Fetters]. Myslenie wedlug wartosci [Thinking 
According to Values], by JozefTischner. Krak6w: Znak, 1982.50-70. 
1087. TISCHNER, Jozef. "Perspektywy herrneneutyki" [Perspectives of Her-
meneutics]. Myslenie wedlug wartosci [Thinking According to Values], by 
J6zefTischner. Krakow: Znak, 1982.88-119. 
1088. TISCHNER, J6zef. "Swemu istnieniu zaufac" [Trusting One's Own 
Existence]. Myslenie wedlug wartosci [Thinking According to Values], by 
J6zef Tischner. Krakow: Znak, 1982. 43-49. [Review of Ksiqzeczkq 0 
czlowieku.] 
1089. TISCHNER, Jozef. "W kr«gu mySli Husserlowskiej" [In the Sphere of 
Husserl's Thinking]. Myslenie wedlug wartosci [Thinking According to 
Values], by J6zefTischner. Krak6w: Znak, 1982. 17-42. 
1090. TISCHNER, J6zef. Der unmogliche Dialog: Christen tum und Marxismus in 
Polen, translated from the Polish by Theo Mechtenberg. Graz-Wien-K6In: 
Styria, 1982. 
1091. TODOROV, Tzvetan. "Semiologie du theatre. Petr Bogatyrev, 'Les signes du 
theatre'; Roman Ingarden, 'Les fonctions du langage au theatre'." Pottique 8 
(1971): 515-538. 
1092. TRUMBLE, Rodney R. "The Essential Core and Essential Nothingness. An 
Essay of Critical Comparison Between the Ontological Positions of Roman 
Ingarden and Jean-Paul Sartre vis-a-vis the Notion of Essence." Verite et 
Ethos: Recueil Commemoratif dedie a Alphonse-Marie Parent sous la 
direction de Jaromir Danek. Quebec: Les Presses de I'Universite Laval, 
1982. 265-280. 
1093. TYMIENIECKA, Anna-Teresa. "Roman Ingarden ou une nouvelle position 
du probleme Idealisme-Realisme." Actes du XI-eme Congres International de 
Philosoph ie, Bruxelles 1953, Complement au Vol. 13. Amsterdam-Louvain: 
1953.317-321. 
1094. TYMIENIECKA, Anna-Teresa. "Un dessin de la philosophie de Roman 
Ingarden." RMM 60 (1955): 32-57. 
1095. TYMIENIECKA, Anna-Teresa. Essence et Existence. Etude a propos de la 
philosophie de Roman Ingarden et de Nicolai Hartmann. Aubier: Editions 
Montaigne, 1955. 

ROMAN INGARDEN INTERNATIONAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 
291 
1096. TYMIENIECKA, Anna-Teresa. Essence et Existence. Etude a propos de la 
philosophie de Roman lngarden et de Nicolai Hartmann, 2nd ed. Paris: 
Editions Montaigne, 1957. 
1097. TYMIENIECKA, Anna-Teresa. Review of Spor 0 istnienie swiata, by Roman 
Ingarden. Mind 66, no. 262 (1957): 269-271. 
1098. TYMIENIECKA, Anna-Teresa. Review of Studia z estetyki, Vols. 1 and 2, by 
Roman Ingarden. fAAC 17, no. 3 (1959): 391-392. 
1099. TYMIENIECKA, Anna-Teresa. (ed.) "Editorial: The Second Phenomenol-
ogy." For Roman lngarden: Nine Essays in Phenomenology. The Hague: 
Nijhoff, 1959. 1-5. 
1100. TYMIENIECKA, Anna-Teresa. (ed.) For Roman lngarden: Nine Essays in 
Phenomenology. The Hague: Nijhoff, 1959. 
1101. TYMIENIECKA, Anna-Teresa. (ed.) "L'analyse de I'idee et la participa-
tion." For Roman lngarden: Nine Essays in Phenomenology. The Hague: 
Nijhoff, 1959. 160--179. 
1102. TYMIENIECKA, Anna-Teresa. Phenomenology and Science in Contem-
porary European Thought. New York: Farrar Straus, 1962. 
1103. TYMIENIECKA, Anna-Teresa. "Existence Vindicated or the Hundred Real 
Dollars." Personalist 46 (1965): 211-221. 
1104. TYMIENIECKA, Anna-Teresa. "Dem Wendepunkt der Phanomenologie 
entgegen." PRun 14, nos. 2-3 (1967): 183-208. 
1105. TYMIENIECKA, Anna-Teresa. "Trzy wymiary fenomenologii -
on-
tologiczny, transcendentalny, kosmiczny - rola Romana Ingardena" [The 
Three Dimensions of Phenomenology - Ontological, Transcendental, Cosmic 
- and the Role of Roman Ingarden]. Fenomenologia Romana lngardena [The 
Phenomenology of Roman Ingarden]. SFil (special issue) (1972): 175-208. 
1106. TYMIENIECKA, Anna-Teresa. "Roman Ingarden's Philosophical Legacy 
and Beyond: The Creative Freedom of the Possible Worlds." DaH 2, no. 2 
(1975): 71-87. 
1107. TYMIENIECKA, Anna-Teresa. (ed.) lngardeniana. Analecta Husserliana, 
Vol. 4. Boston: Dordrecht, 1976. 
1108. TYMIENIECKA, Anna-Teresa. 
"Beyond Ingarden's Idealism-Realism 
Controversy with Husser!: The New Contextual Phase of Phenomenology." 
Analecta Husserliana 4 (1976): 241-418. 
1109. TYMIENIECKA, Anna-Teresa. "The Initial Spontaneity and the Modalities 
of Human Life." Analecta Husserliana 5 (1976): 15-37. 
1110. TYMIENIECKA, Anna-Teresa. "The Prototype of Action: Ethical or 
Creative?" Analecta Husserliana 7 (1978): 177-211. 
1111. TYMIENIECKA, Anna-Teresa. "Man the Creator and His Triple Telos." 
Analecta Husserliana 9 (1979): 3-29. 
1112. TYMIENIECKA, Anna-Teresa. "Existence and Order." Ana/ecta Husser-
liana 11 (1981): 5-10. 
1113. TYMIENIECKA, Anna-Teresa. "Poetica Nova: The Creative Crucibles of 
Human Existence and of Art. Part I: The Poetics of Literature." Analecta 
Husserliana 12 (1982): 1-93. 
1114. TYMIENIECKA, Anna-Teresa. "The Theme" [Introduction]. Analecta 
Husserliana 14 (1983): xi-xx. 
1115. TYMIENIECKA, Anna-Teresa. "The Main Feature of Ingarden's Aesthetics 

292 
HANS H. RUDNICK AND JOLANTA W. WA WRZYCKA 
in a Philosophical Perspective" (in Hebrew). Iyyun 32, nos. 1-2 (1983): 
76-86. 
1116. TYMIENIECKA, Anna-Teresa. "The Tenets of Roman Ingarden's Aesthetics 
in a Philosophical Perspective." Analecta Husserliana 17 (1984): 271-283. 
1117. TYMIENIECKA, Anna-Teresa. "Aesthetic Enjoyment and Poetic Sense: The 
Irreducible in Literature." Analecta Husserliana 18 (1984): 3-21. 
1118. TYMIENIECKA, Anna-Teresa. "First Principles of the Metaphysics of Life 
Charting the Human Condition." Analecta Husserliana 21 (1986): 3-73. 
1119. TYMIENIECKA, Anna-Teresa. "The Moral Sense and the Human Person 
Within the Fabric of Communal Life." Analecta Husserliana 20 (1986): 
3-100. 
1120. TYMIENIECKA, Anna-Teresa. Logos and Life: Creative Experience and the 
Critique of Reason, Book I. Analecta Husserliana, Vol. 24. Dordrecht: 
Kluwer, 1988. 
1121. TYSZCZYK, A. "L'identite, la vie, la duree de l'oeuvre litteraire sur la 
tMorie de l'oeuvre d'art de R. Ingarden" (in Polish). RoHum 32, no. 1 (1984): 
5-49. 
1122. ULICKA, D. "Ingarden wypowiedziany" [Ingarden Expressed]. PHum 25, 
nos. 10-12 (1981): 152-160. [Review ofWyklady i dyskusje z estetyki.] 
1123. V AIDA, Gyorgy M. and SIMON, S. "Phenomenology and Literary 
Criticism." Literature and Its Interpretation, Lajos Nyiro, ed. Budapest: 
Akademiai Kiado, 1979. 165-230. 
1124. VAJDA, Gyorgy M. "Phenomenology and Comparative Literature (A Kind 
of a Fictitious Letter to Students)." Neohelicon: Acta Comparationis 
Litterarum Universarum 10, no. 2 (1983): 133-146. 
1125. VALDES, Mario J. Shadows in the Cave: A Phenomenological Approach to 
Literary Criticism Based on Hispanic Texts. Toronto: University of Toronto 
Press, 1982. 
1126. VAN BREDA, H. L. "In Memoriam Roman Ingarden." RPL 68, no. 99 
(1970): 423-426. 
1127. VAN BREDA, H. L. "Professor Roman Ingarden." lBSP 1, no. 3 (1970): 
100. 
1128. VAN BREDA, H. L. "Roman Ingarden 5.2.1893 -
14.6.1970." RIPh 24 
(1970): 161-162. 
1129. VAN PEURSEN, C. A. "Some Remarks on the Ego in the Phenomenology of 
Husserl." For Roman Ingarden: Nine Essays in Phenomenology, A.-T. 
Tymieniecka, ed. The Hague: Nijhoff, 1959.29-41. 
1130. VODICKA, Felix. Die Struktur der literarischen Entwicklung. Miinchen: 
Fink, 1976.87-125. 
1131. VOISE, Waldemar. "Polish Considerations of Time." The Study of Time, Vol. 
3, J. T. Fraser, Nathaniel Lawrence and D. Park, eds. New York: Springer, 
1978.471-480. 
1132. VON LEDEBUR, R. "Oberlegungen zur Asthetik Roman Ingardens an 
Beispielen neuerer deutscher Shakespeare-Rezeption." Poetica, no. 2 (1976): 
134-144. 
1133. WALLNER, Ingrid M. "In Defense of Husserl's Transcendental Idealism: 
Roman Ingarden's Critique Re-Examined." Husserl Studies 4 (1987): 3-43. 
1134. WARNKE, Camilla. "Marxistische Kritik der Phanomenologie und die 

ROMAN INGARDEN INTERNATIONAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 
293 
Philosophie Roman Ingardens." DZP 23 (1975): 1513-1517. 
1135. WARNKE, Camilla. "Husserlowski podmiot transcendentalny. Pr6ba 
interpretacji" [HusserJ's Transcendental Subject. Toward Interpretation]. SFil, 
no. 1 (1976): 19-25. 
1136. W ASZCZENKO, 
Piotr. 
"Roman 
Ingarden 
filozof 
rzetelnego 
doswiadczenia" [Roman Ingarden - Philosopher of Genuine Experience]. 
Kierunki, no. 18 (1964). 
1137. WASZCZENKO, Piotr. "Idee i moZliwosci. U podstaw Ingardenowskiej 
koncepcji ontologii" [Ideas and Possibilities. The Basis of Ingarden's Concept 
of Ontology]. tiM 18, no. 1 (1968): 65-78. 
1138. ~RZECKI, Adam. "Czlowiek i sztuka. 0 niekt6rych rysach pogl~d6w 
estetycznych Romana Ingardena" [Man and Art. On Some Features of Roman 
Ingarden's Aesthetic Views]. tiM 18, no. 1 (1968): 79-87. 
1139. ~RZECKI, Adam. "0 absolutnosci wartosci etycznych i estetycznych" 
[On the Absoluteness of Ethical and Aesthetic Values]. Fenomenologia 
Romana Ingardena [The Phenomenology of Roman Ingarden]. SFit (special 
issue) (1972): 421-427. 
1140. ~RZECKI, Adam. "Roman Ingarden: L'homme et son oeuvre." EP, no. 1 
(1972): 55-60. 
1141. ~RZECKI, Adam. "On the Absoluteness of Values." JBSP 6, no. 2 
(1975): 109-115. 
1142. ~RZECKI, Adam. "Idea systemu wzgl«dnie izolowanego w antropologii 
filozoficznej" [The Concept of a Relatively Isolated System in Philosophical 
Anthropology]. RFil33, nos. 3-4 (1975): 339-342. [Summary only.] 
1143. ~RZECKI, Adam. "Idea systemu wzgl«dnie izolowanego wantropologii 
filozoficznej" [The Concept of a Relatively Isolated System in Philosophical 
Anthropology]. SFit, no. 1 (1976): 57-69. 
1144. ~RZECKI, Adam. "Uwagi Romana Ingardena 0 poznawaniu drugiego 
czlowieka" [Roman Ingarden's Notes on the Cognition of the Other]. SFil, 
no. 12 (1980): 13-19. 
1145. WELLEK, Rene and WARREN, Austin. Theory of Literature. New York: 
Harcourt, Brace, 1949. 
1146. WELLEK, Rene. Four Critics: Croce, Valery, Lukdcs and Ingarden. Seattle, 
W A: University of Washington Press, 1981. 55-85. 
1147. WELLEK, Rene. "An Answer to Roman Ingarden." Komparatistik: 
Theoretische 
Uberlegungen 
und siidosteuropiiische 
Wechselseitigkeit. 
F estschrijt fiir Zoran Konstantinovic. Heidelberg: Carl Winter, 1981. 21-26. 
1148. WENISCH, Fritz. "Insight and Objective Necessity: A Demonstration of the 
Existence of Propositions which are Simultaneously Informative and 
Necessarily True." Aletheia: An International Journal of Philosophy, Vol. 4: 
Epistemology and Logic. Bern: Lang, 1988. 107-197. 
1149. WERKMEISTER, H. Review of Time and Modes of Being, by Roman 
Ingarden. Personalist 45, no. 4 (1964): 560-561. 
1150. WIATOR. "Trzy portrety" [Three Portraits]. Pismo Literacko-Artystyczne, 
no. 3 (1984): 161-165. 
1151. WILLIAMS, Marcellette G. "How Can You Tell the Poem from the Reader?" 
LangQ 19, nos. 3-4 (1981): 39-40. 
1152. WOLENSKI, Jan. "R. Ingardena krytyka logiki formalnej" [Roman 

294 
HANS H. RUDNICK AND JOLANTA W. W A WRZYCKA 
Ingarden's Examination of Formal Logic]. RFil38, nos. 1-2 (1980): 61-64. 
1153. WOLENSKI, Jan. "Remarks on Primitivity and Secondarity as Moments of 
Existence." The Philosophy of Roman Ingarden: Jagiellonian University 
Reports on Philosophy (Polish) 10 (1986): 81-87. 
1154. ZABOROWSKA, M. "Le contexte 'interieur' de la these d'Ingarden sur Ie 
caractere purement intentionnel de I'reuvre d'art" (in Polish). SMet, no. 24 
(1985): 229-245. 
1155. ZAGORSEKOVA, M. "Ku kritike fenomenologickej interpretace umeleck-
eho diela" [On the Criticism of the Phenomenological Interpretation of a 
Literary Work]. Filozojia 34, no. 1 (1979): 37-51. 
1156. ZEGLEN, Urszula. "0 moZliwosci formalnej analizy ontologii Romana 
Ingardena" [On the Possibility of a Formal Analysis of Roman Ingarden's 
Ontology]. SPC 16, no. 2 (1980): 192-198. 
1157. ZEGLEN, Urszula. "Pr6ba analizy formalnej fragmentu ontologii R. 
Ingardena" [An Attempt at a Formal Analysis of Pure Qualities in R. 
Ingarden's Ontology]. RoFil29, no. 1 (1981): 51-64. 
1158. ZEGLEN, Urszula. "Analiza semantyczna relacji wyst~pujqcych w ontologii 
Romana Ingardena" [Semantical Analysis of Relations of Roman Ingarden's 
Ontology]. Studia Semiotyczne 13 (1983): 35-47. 
1159. ZEGLEN, Urszula. "An Attempt at a Formal Analysis of Pure Qualities in 
Ingarden's Ontology." Studies in Logic and Theory of Knowledge, Ludwik. 
Borkowski et aI., eds. Lublin: 1984.79-89. 
1160. ZIOMEK, Jerzy. "Die Frage der Quasi-Urteile und das fIktive Bezugsfeld." 
Semiotics and Dialectics: Ideology and the Text, Peter V. Zima, ed. Amster-
dam: Benjamins Press, 1981. 283-308. 
1161. ZIOMEK, Jerzy. "Fikcyjne pole odniesienia a problem quasi-sqd6w" 
[Fictional Field of Reference and the Problem of Quasi-Judgments]. 
Wypowiedi literacka a wypowiedi jilozojiczna [Literary Expression vs. 
Philosophical Expression], Michal Glowinski and Janusz Slawinski, eds. 
Wroclaw: Ossolineum, 1982. 183-198. 
1162. ZNAMIEROWSKI, Cz. "Filozofia polska na kongresie praskim" [Polish 
Philosophy at the Prague Congress]. Cazeta Polska 7, no. 127 (1935): 5. 
1163. ZYCZYNSKI, Henryk. "Nowinkarstwo w polonistyce" [Innovations in 
Polish Studies]. Prosto z Mostu 3, no. 27 (1937): 5. 
1164. ZYCZYNSKI, Henryk. "P.[anu] Ingardenowi w odpowiedzi" [An Answer to 
Mr. Ingarden]. Prosto z Mostu 3, no. 32 (1937): 4. 
DISSERTATIONS 
1165. AMIGONE, Grace R. Apprehending a Literary Work of Art: A Comparative 
Study of Interventions Into a Poem by Experienced and Inexperienced 
Readers. DAI. Diss. SUNY Buffalo: 1983. 
1166. BUSCH, Charles Peter, Jr. Concerning Husserl's Apparent Metaphysical 
Idealism. A Critique of Roman Ingarden's Thesis. DAI. Diss. University of 
Southern California: 1977. 
1167. COHEN, Sibyl S. Roman Ingarden's Aesthetics of Literature. DAI. Diss. 
Temple University: 1976. 

ROMAN INGARDEN INTERNATIONAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 
295 
1168. COOLEY, Michael E. Intentionality in Literary Critical Theory and in 
Pedagogical Methodology. DAI. Diss. University of Louisville: 1983. 
1169. DE KIR, Antoinette. Phenomenological Perspectives on Space in the Reading 
of Drama: An Analysis of "Therese Raquin," "Vor Sonnenaufgang," and 
"The Three Sisters". DAI. Diss. University of Toronto (Canada): 1981. 
1170. HANNIBALSON, Arn6r. Roman Ingarden's Ontology. DAI. Diss. University 
of Edinburgh: 1973. 
1171. JAGANNATHAN, R. Roman Ingarden's Critical Phenomenology. DAI. 
Diss. University of Ottawa (Canada): 1978. 
1172. JORDAN, Michael C. The Idea of the Literary Work of Art in Sophocles' 
"Antigone" and Anouilh's "Antigone". DAI. Diss. The University of North 
Carolina at Chapel Hill: 1982. 
1173. LEECH, Thomas H. Approaches to Narrative in German: The Critical 
Theories of Ernst Hirt, Robert Petsch, Eberhard Lammert, and Franz Stanzel. 
DAI. Diss. The University of Texas at Austin: 1985. 
1174. LlBRACH, Ronald S. Phenomenology and Hermeneutics: The Mind's 
Metaphors for Itself. DAI. Diss. University of Missouri at Columbia: 1984. 
1175. McKENNA, William Anthony. Roman Ingarden: Ontology and Idealism. 
DAI. Diss. Northwestern University: 1975. 
1176. MELBOURNE, Lucy L. The Nested Structure of Unreliable First-Person 
Narrative: Explicit and Implicit Texts in Saul Bellow's "Dangling Man," 
Albert Camus's "La Chute" and Franz Kafka's "Ein Landarzt" . DAI. Diss. 
The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill: 1984. 
1177. MIR, Maqsood H. The Phenomenological Response Theory: A Model for 
Synthesizing Reader Response and Literary Text in Teaching College English. 
DAI. Diss. University of Louisville: 1983. 
1178. MOORE, John J. A Phenomenological Approach to the Aesthetic Receptivity 
of a Dramatic Art Work. DAI. Diss. SUNY Buffalo: 1982. 
1179. POWELL, Brenda J. The Metaphysical Quality of the Tragic. A Study of 
Sophocles' "Electra," Giraudoux' "Electre" and Sartre's "Les Mouches". 
DAI. Diss. The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill: 1981. 
1180. SACKEN, Jeannee P. "A Certain Slant of Light": Aesthetics of First-Person 
Narration, Readings of Gide' s "L'lmmoraliste" and Cather's "My Antonia". 
DAI. Diss. The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill: 1982. 
1181. SCHWEIZER, Hans. Die theoretischen Grundlagen der Literaturwissen-
schaft. DAI. Diss. Ziirich: Genf A. Bochsler, 1944. 
1182. SHANAHAN, Joseph B. Reader Response Literature: A Source for Effective 
Descriptors of the Revision Stage in the Process of Writing. DAI. Diss. SUNY 
Buffalo: 1984. 
1183. SMITH, Jadwiga S. A Theory of the Stage Play: A Contribution to the 
Literary Aesthetics of Roman Ingarden. DAI. Diss. Duquesne University: 
1983. 
1184. SOUTHARD, David R. Author, Text and Reader in Modern Experimental 
Hispanic Narrative. DAI. Diss. University of Kentucky: 1983. 
1185. TAYLOR, Larry G. A Critical Study of Roman Ingarden's Phenomenology of 
Literary Works of Art. DAI. Diss. The Florida State University: 1984. 
1186. TISAL, A. Der iisthetische Wert in Roman Ingardens "Untersuchungen zur 
Ontologie der Kunst". DAI. Diss. Salzburg: 1972. 

296 
HANS H. RUDNICK AND lOLANTA W. WAWRZYCKA 
1187. UDWIN, Victor M. Experience Interrupted: The Dynamics of Literary 
Interpretation. DAI. Diss. University of California at Berkeley: 1985. 
1188. V AN TUYL, Joanne. The Aesthetic Immediacy of Selected Lyric Poems of 
Keats, Fet and Verlaine. DAI. Diss. The University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill: 1986. 
1189. WILLIAMS, Marcellette G. A Phenomenological Study of Place of Indeter-
minacy in "Axel" and "Tiny Alice". DAI. Diss. Michigan State University: 
1981. 

-A-
Ales Bello, A. 83, 84 
Archimedes 26, 27, 60 
Aristotle 71, 72, 79 
Baldini, U. 178 
Barlach, E. 175 
Barthes, R. 143 
Bazin 147 
-B-
Beardsley, M. 86, 88,90-93 
Becker, O. 108 
Beckett, S. 9 
Berger, G. 69 
Bergson, H. 66, 68 
Bernini, G. L. 176 
Blondel, M. 45 
Brooks, C. 87, 92 
Brozich Lipizer, G. 84 
-C-
Camus, A. 9 
Carnap, R. 186, 192 
Celan, P. 167, 168 
Cervantes, M. de 101 
Cezanne, P. III 
Checconi, S. 84 
Cobb-Stevens, V. 38 
Cohen, G. 138 
Colderidge, S. T. 87 
Conrad-Marti us, H. 73 
Croce, B. 126 
Crowley, R. A. 94, 168,209 
Curti us, E. R. 169 
INDEX OF NAMES 
297 
Dante 163-5 
Darbon, A. 43 
da Vinci, L. 4, 129 
-D-
Descartes, R. 5, 6, 7, 14,23,43, 58, 73 
Dilthey, W. 128 
Disney, W. 162 
Dumery, H. 56,69 
DUrer, A. 176, 177 
Dresden, S. 161, 169 
-E-
Earle, W. x 
Ebner-Eschenbach, M. v. 163 
Eco, U. 84, 142 
Edwards, P. 192 
Einstein, A. 176 
Eliot, T. S. 85-87, 90, 92, 93 
Empson, W. 87, 88 
Euclid 176 
Ewing, A. C. 186-190, 192 
-F-
Falk, E. 168, 177, 178 
Fieguth, R. 155, 178, 179 
Fink, E. 51, 66, 69,107,108 
Forster, E. M. 159 
Fuentes, C. 10 I 
-G-
Garbowicz, G. 210 
Gardin, J.-c. 178, 179 
Geiger, M. 33, 74, 82 
Goddard, L. 192 
Godel, K. 191 
G6rniak, K. 36 

298 
INDEX OF NAMES 
Gurwitsch, A. 47 
Guzman, M. L. 101 
-H-
Hallden, S. 188, 192 
Hanslick, E. 128, 138 
Hartmann, N. 126-129. 131-135, 137, 138. 
150 
Hegel, G. W. F. 110, 126, 128, 131, 132 
Heidegger, M. 12,29,30, 108 
Hempolinski, M. 44 
Hering, J. 107 
Holman, C. H. 169 
Hotson, L. 166 
Hulme, T. E. 85, 86. 90. 93 
Hume, D. 211, 212 
Husscrl, E. x, xi, xv, xvi, 4, 5, 7, 8, 14, 15, 
19-23,29-32,35-47,51-69,71-76,83, 
84,88,107,108,110,112-114,118, 
119,125,129,131,138, ISO 
Huxley, A. 125 
-1-
Iser, W. 168 
-J-
Jacob 26 
Jankelevitch, V. 68, 69 
Jesus Christ 129 
Joseph 161 
Julius Caesar 171 
-K-
Kant, I. 7,14, 19,20,21,29,69, 124, ISO 
Kerenyi, K. 161,169 
Kuspit. D. 46 
-L-
Landgrebe. L. 68 
Leibniz, G. W. v. 4, 19,21. 66, 68 
Levinas, E. 68 
Li Ping 155 
Locke,J.113 
Uiwith, K. 68 
Lu Shu Cang 155 
Lyon, J. 167-169 
-M-
McCormick, P. J. 209. 225 
McKeon, R. 43 
Maine de Biran. P. 45 
Mann, T. 161, 162, 169 
Marechal, J. 47 
Mcrleau-Ponty, M. 7, 25, 29, 44,66, 138 
Metz. C. 142,155 
Michelangelo 174, 175, 177 
Mickiewicz, A. 68 
Monet, C. 147 
Moneta. G. C. 47 
Moore, H. 175 
Morin. S. 45 
Mrozek, S. 9 
Neurath, O. v. 185 
Nichols, B. 155 
-N-
-0-
Olson, K. R. 94,168,210 
Pap, A. 192 
Pap, E. 187-189, 192 
Parmenides 62 
Pascal, B. 13,65 
Pasolini, P. P. 145 
-P-
Patocka, J. 67, 68,113,117 
Peano. G. 190, 191 
Pfander, A. 47, 225 
Plato 18 
Poltawski, A. 47, 225 
Prall. D. W. 135. 138 
Pyrrhus 67 
Ransom. J. C. 87 
-R-

Reichenbach, H, 189, 192 
Rembrandt 115 
Richards, L A, 87, 91-93 
Ricoeur, p, 68 
Rodin, F, 175, 177 
Routley, R. 192 
Rudnick, H, xiii, 84 
Russell, B, 43, 188, 189 
-S-
Sartre, J, p, 19 
Scheler, M, xi, 13,28,66,68, 150 
Schlick, M, 184, 192 
Schroder, E, 176 
Schuhmann, K, 67 
Scrimieri, G, 84 
Shakespeare, W. 166 
Sidorek, J. 225 
Soyfer, J. 159, 160 
Stein, E. 71 
Steinbach, H. 46 
Steiner, J. 168 
Strasser, S. 46 
Stre1ka, J. 169 
Szy1ewicz, A. 156, 210 
INDEX OF NAMES 
299 
-T-
Tarski, A. 188, 191 
Tymieniecka, A-T. xv, 22, 24, 25-36, 
37-47,84,85,92,93 
Valery, P. 4 
van der Goes, H. 164 
Vermeer, J. 195 
Vonnegut, K. 9 
-V-
-W-
Warren, A. 93 
Wellek,R.46,74,85,93,94 
Wimsatt, W. K. 86, 88, 90-93 
Winzinger, F, 176 
Witkiewicz, W. 9 
Wittgenstein, L. 90, 189 
Wojtyla, K. xi, 222 
Wordsworth, W. 85 
-Z-
Zhao Jing Shen 155 
Zabludowski, A. 186, 188, 192 

Analecta Husserliana 
The Yearbook of Phenomenological Research 
Editor-in-Chief 
Anna-Teresa Tymieniecka 
The World Institute for Advanced Phenomenological Research and Learning, 
Belmont, Massachusetts, U.S.A. 
1. Tymieniecka, A-T. (ed.), Volume I of Analecta Husserliana. 1971 
ISBN 90-277-0171-7 
2. Tymieniecka, A-T. (ed.), The Later Husserl and the Idea of Phenomenology. 
Idealism - Realism, Historicity and Nature. 1972 
ISBN 90-277-0223-3 
3. Tymieniecka, A-T. (ed.), The Phenomenological Realism of the Possible 
Worlds. The' A Priori', Activity and Passivity of Consciousness, Phenomenol-
ogy and Nature. 1974 
ISBN 90-277-0426-0 
4. Tymieniecka, A-T. (ed.), Ingardeniana. A Spectrum of Specialised Studies 
Establishing the Field of Research. 1976 
ISBN 90-277-0628-X 
5. Tymieniecka, A-T. (ed.), The Crisis of Culture. Steps to Reopen the 
Phenomenological Investigation of Man. 1976 
ISBN 90-277-0632-8 
6. Tymieniecka, A-T. (ed.), The Self and the Other. The Irreducible Element in 
Man, Part I. 1977 
ISBN 90-277-0759-6 
7. Tymieniecka, A-T. (ed.), The Human Being in Action. The Irreducible Element 
in Man, Part II. 1978 
ISBN 90-277-0884-3 
8. Nitta, 
Y. 
and Hirotaka Tatematsu (eds.), Japanese Phenomenology. 
Phenomenology as the Trans-cultural Philosophical Approach. 1979 
ISBN 90-277-0924-6 
9. Tymieniecka, A-T. (ed.), The Teleologies in Husserlian Phenomenology. The 
Irreducible Element in Man, Part III. 1979 
ISBN 90-277-0981-5 
10. Wojtyla, K., The Acting Person. Translated from Polish by A. Potocki. 1979 
ISBN Hb 90-277-0969-6; Pb 90-277-0985-8 
11. Ales Bello, A. (ed.), The Great Chain of Being and Italian Phenomenology. 
1981 
ISBN 90-277-1071-6 
12. Tymieniecka, A-T. (ed.), The Philosophical Reflection of Man in Literature. 
Selected Papers from Several Conferences held by the International Society for 
Phenomenology and Literature in Cambridge, Massachusetts. Includes the 
essay by A-T. Tymieniecka, Poetica Nova. 1982 
ISBN 90-277-1312-X 
13. Kaelin, E. F., The Unhappy Consciousness. The Poetic Plight of Samuel 
Beckett. An Inquiry at the Intersection of Phenomenology and literature. 1981 
ISBN 90-277-1313-8 
14. Tymieniecka, A-T. (ed.), The Phenomenology of Man and of the Human 
Condition. Individualisation of Nature and the Human Being. (Part I:) Plotting 
the Territory for Interdisciplinary Communication. 1983 
Part II see below under Volume 21. 
ISBN 90-277-1447-9 
15. Tymieniecka, A-T. and Calvin O. Schrag (eds.), Foundations of Morality, 
Human Rights, and the Human Sciences. Phenomenology in a Foundational 
Dialogue with Human Sciences. 1983 
ISBN 90-277-1453-3 

Analecta Husserliana 
16. Tymieniecka, A-T. (ed.), Soul and Body in Husserlian Phenomenology. Man 
and Nature. 1983 
ISBN 90-277-1518-1 
17. Tymieniecka, A-T. (ed.), Phenomenology of Life in a Dialogue Between 
Chinese and Occidental Philosophy. 1984 
ISBN 90-277-1 620-X 
18. Tymieniecka, A-T. (ed.), The Existential Coordinates of the Human Condition: 
Poetic - Epic - Tragic. The Literary Genre. 1984 
ISBN 90-277-1702-8 
19. Tymieniecka, A-T. (ed.), Poetics of the Elements in the Human Condition. (Part 
I:) The Sea. From Elemental Stirrings to Symbolic Inspiration, Language, and 
Life-Significance in Literary Interpretation and Theory. 1985 
For Part 2 and 3 see below under Volumes 23 and 28. 
ISBN 90-277-1906-3 
20. Tymieniecka, A-T. (ed.), The Moral Sense in the Communal Significance of 
Life. Investigations in Phenomenological Praxeology: Psychiatric Therapeutics, 
Medical Ethics and Social Praxis within the Life- and Communal World. 1986 
ISBN 90-277-2085-1 
21. Tymieniecka, A-T. (ed.), The Phenomenology of Man and of the Human 
Condition. Part II: The Meeting Point Between Occidental and Oriental 
Philosophies. 1986 
ISBN 90-277-2185-8 
22. Tymieniecka, A-T. (ed.), Morality within the Life- and Social World. Interdis-
ciplinary Phenomenology of the Authentic Life in the 'Moral Sense'. 1987 
Sequel to Volumes 15 and 20. 
ISBN 90-277-2411-3 
23. Tymieniecka, A-T. (ed.), Poetics of the Elements in the Human Condition. Part 
2: The Airy Elements in Poetic Imagination. Breath, Breeze, Wind, Tempest, 
Thunder, Snow, Flame, Fire, Volcano ... 1988 
ISBN 90-277-2569-1 
24. Tymieniecka, A-T., Logos and Life. Book I: Creative Experience and the 
Critique of Reason. 1988 
ISBN Hb 90-277-2539-X; Pb 90-247-2540-3 
25. Tymieniecka, A-T., Logos and Life. Book II: The Three Movements of the 
Soul. 1988 
ISBN Hb 90-277-2556-X; Pb 90-247-2557-8 
26. Kaelin, E. F. and Calvin O. Schrag (eds.), American Phenomenology. Origins 
and Developments. 1989 
ISBN 90-277-2690-6 
27. Tymieniecka, A-T. (ed.), Man within his Life-World. Contributions to 
Phenomenology by Scholars from East-Central Europe. 1989 
ISBN 90-277-2767-8 
28. Tymieniecka, A-T. (ed.), The Elemental Passions of the Soul. Poetics of the 
Elements in the Human Condition, Part 3. 1990 
ISBN 0-7923-0180-3 
29. Tymieniecka, A-T. (ed.), Man's Self-lnterpretation-in-Existence. Phenomenol-
ogy and Philosophy of Life. - Introducing the Spanish Perspective. 1990 
ISBN 0-7923-0324-5 
30. Rudnick, H. H. (ed.), Ingardeniana 11. New Studies in the Philosophy of 
Roman Ingarden. With a New International Ingarden Bibliography. 1990 
ISBN 0-7923-0627-9 
Kluwer Academic Publishers - Dordrecht / Boston / London 

