METAPHYSICAL STRUCTURE • 71
 ESSENT IAL DEPENDENCE, 
TRUTHMAKING, AND MEREOLOGY: 
THEN AND NOW
Ross Inman
ABSTRACT
One notable area in analytic metaphysics that has seen a revival of Aristotelian and scho-
lastic inspired metaphysics is the return to a more robust construal of the notion of essence, 
what some have labelled “real” or “serious” essentialism. How ever, it is only recently that this  
more robust notion of essence has been implemented into the debate on truthmaking, mainly 
by the work of E. J. Lowe. The fi rst part of the paper sets out to explore the scholastic roots 
of essential dependence as well as an account of truthmaking for accidental predications in 
terms of accidents. Along the way, the author examines the dialectical role the possibility of 
separated accidents in the Eucharist play with respect to developing a scholastic account of 
truthmaking as essential dependence. In conclusion the author utilises Aquinas’s hylomorphic 
ontology to suggest a new way forward for an essentialist account of truthmaking.
1. INTRODUCTION
One notable area in analytic metaphysics that has seen a revival of Aristotelian 
and scholastic inspired metaphysics is the return to a more robust construal of 
the notion essence, what some have labelled “real” or “serious” essentialism.1 
However, it is only recently that this more robust notion of essence has been 
implemented into the debate on truthmaking, mainly by the work of E. J. Lowe. 
The fi rst part of the paper sets out to explore the scholastic roots of essential 
dependence as well as an account of truthmaking for accidental predications in 
terms of accidents. Along the way, I examine the dialectical role the possibility of 
separated accidents in the Eucharist play with respect to developing a scholastic 
account of truthmaking as essential dependence. I conclude by utilising Aquinas’s 
hylomorphic ontology to suggest a new way forward for an essentialist account 
of truthmaking.
1  See D. Oderberg, Real Essentialism (London: Routledge, 2007) and E. J. Lowe, “Two Notions 
of Being: Entity and Essence”, in Royal Institute of Philosophy Supplement, 62 (2008): 23–24.

Ross Inman
ESSENTIAL DEPENDENCE, TRUTHMAKING, AND MEREOLOGY
72 • METAPHYSICAL STRUCTURE
2. CONTEMPORARY TRUTHMAKING AND ESSENTIAL DEPENDENCE
Let us, then, begin by explicating the current discussion surrounding the 
notion of truthmaking, with an emphasis on the notion of essential dependence.2 
The fundamental insight driving the commitment to truthmakers is that truth 
is determined by reality. To say that something determines some particular truth 
is to say that it is the ontological ground of that truth; its existence explains why 
that truth is true. Consider the singular existential proposition that e exists, e 
exists, and suppose that e exists is true. Now, intuitively, it is e itself that is 
the truthmaker for e exists that is, e determines the truth of e exists. We can 
call this relationship between e and e exists the relation of truthmaking, TM 
henceforth, and represent “e is the truthmaker for e exists” as TM(e,e exists).3
With this in mind, let us formulate what I will call the truthmaker principle 
(TMP) as follows:4
(TMP) Truthmaker Principle: pT ≡ E!x TM(x,p)5
That is, p is true (pT henceforth) if and only if there exists something, x, 
that stands in the truthmaking relation to p. While there are many important 
questions regarding the notion of truthmaking operative in TMP (like the status 
of truthmaker maximalism, i.e. whether every truth has a truthmaker), I limit 
my discussion here to the status of truthmaker necessitarianism; whether the re-
lation of truthmaking (TM) carries modal import such that the existence of the 
truthmaker necessi tates pT.
The proponent of truthmaker necessitarianism claims that if x is the truth-
maker for p in some world W, then x is the truthmaker for p not only in W but 
in every possible world in which x exists. Most truthmaker theorists agree that 
truthmakers necessitate the propositions they make true.6 We can formulate 
truthmaker necessitarianism as follows:
(TNec) Truthmaker Necessitarianism: TM(x,p) → □(E!x → pT)
2  For an excellent introduction to the contemporary debate on truthmaking see Gonzalo 
Rodriguez-Pereyra, “Truthmakers”, Philosophy Compass 1, no. 2 (2006): 186–200.
3  I take it for granted that TM is a relation. For a denial of this assumption, see Joseph 
Melia, “Truthmaking without Truthmakers” in Truthmakers: The Contem porary Debate, ed. H. 
Beebee and Julian Dodd, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005, 67–84. What’s more, for our 
purposes in this paper I will generally assume that truthmaking is a cross-categorial relation 
that obtains between propositions (truthbearers) and entities in the world.
4  I use the existence predicate ‘E!x’ (‘x exists’) as shorthand for ‘∃y(x = y)’.
5  My quantifi ers are to be taken as universal unless otherwise noted.
6  Though Josh Parsons is a notable exception, see his “There is No ‘Truth maker’ Argument 
Against Nominalism”, Australasian Journal of Philosophy 77, no. 3: 325–334.

Ross Inman
Essential Dependence, Truthmaking, and Mereology
METAPHYSICAL STRUCTURE • 73
That is, if x is the truthmaker for p, then, necessarily, if x exists then pT. In 
this way, the existence of x is said to necessitate pT. For our purposes here, let us 
assume the truth of TNec, together with the rather contentious thesis that TNec, 
in some form or other, is both necessary and suffi  cient for truthmaking.7 If so, 
we then get the following explication of the notion of the truthmaking relation:
(TM) Truthmaker: TM(x,p) ≡ E!x  □(E!x →pT)
In words: x is a truth-maker for p if and only if x exists and it is necessary 
that if x exists, then p is true.
Many truthmaker advocates are of the opinion that the modality operative 
in the above formulation of TM is to be construed as metaphysical necessity (as 
opposed to logical or physical necessity) such that, at the very least, pT meta-
physically depends on the existence of x. Several truthmaker theorists, how ever, 
have expressed doubts as to whether or not standard conceptions of metaphysical 
necessitation – where the existence of the truthmaking entity is necessary for 
the truth in question – is fi ne-grained enough to capture the sort of dependence 
that obtains between a true proposition and its truthmaker(s).8
One such contemporary truthmaker theorist is E. J. Lowe.9 Following closely 
the infl uential work of Kit Fine regarding the shortcomings of modal construals 
of essence, Lowe questions the adequacy of standard accounts of metaphysical 
necessitation in its ability to capture the modal dependence operative in TM.10 
Lowe critiques modal construals of TM that rely on what he calls “rigid-existential 
dependence”, which can be formulated as follows:
(RD) x depends rigidly on y =def □(E!x → E!y)11
As a construal of metaphysical dependence in terms of modality and existence, 
RD states that x depends on y just in case it is necessary that y exists if x exists. As 
an example of RD, Lowe cites the dependence of a boundary or a hole on its host or 
that of a heap of stones upon the individual stones that it contains. A boundary, 
thus, rigidly necessitates the existence of its host in that it exists only if its host 
7  Thanks to Jeff rey Brower for conversation on this point.
8  The plural here denotes the fact that TM can be a many-many relation.
9  See E. J. Lowe, “An Essentialist Approach to Truthmaking”, in Truth and Truthmaking 
(Acumen Press, 2008), 201–217; and The Four Category Ontology (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
2006), 192–210.
10  Kit Fine, “Essence and Modality”, in Philosophical Perspectives 8: Logic and Language, ed. 
James E. Tomberlin (Atascadero, CA: Ridgeview, 1994), 1–16.
11  Alternatively, ¬◊(E!x  ¬E!y), i.e. x cannot exist unless y exists. RD also goes by the name 
‘weak foundation’ in Peter Simons, Parts: A Study in Ontology (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
1987), 295.

Ross Inman
ESSENTIAL DEPENDENCE, TRUTHMAKING, AND MEREOLOGY
74 • METAPHYSICAL STRUCTURE
exists. According to an understanding of TM along the lines of RD, pT rigidly 
depends on the existence of x such that it is necessarily the case that pT only if 
x exists. It is in this sense that x is said to rigidly necessitate pT.
Lowe contends that a modal construal of TM in terms of RD leads to some rather 
untoward consequences, what we might generally dub the objection from irrelevance. 
Fundamentally, an RD reading of TM suggests that every true proposition rigidly 
depends on necessary beings. Again, recall that x is a truthmaker for some 
proposition p, say Socrates is pale, if and only if x exists and it is necessarily 
the case that if x exists, then Socrates is pale is true. But suppose that x is a 
necessary being, say the number 7, and thus exists in every possible world. If the 
number 7 exists in every possible world, then it, ipso facto, exists in the world in 
which Socrates is pale is true. It follows from this that Socrates is pale rigidly 
depends for its truth on the number 7 and, consequently, the latter is what makes 
the former true.12 But this seems implausible as the existence of the number 7 
is wholly irrelevant regarding whether or not Socrates is pale is true. Though 
Socrates is pale may well necessarily imply the existence of the number 7, one is 
hesitant to make the further claim that therefore the number 7 is the truthmaker 
for Socrates is pale.
In light of this, Lowe contends that to say that x metaphysically necessitates 
pT is not merely to espouse the view that x exists in every world in which pT, i.e. 
that x is necessary for pT. Rather, metaphysical necessitation is better expressed 
by the fact that the non-existence of x is necessary for the falsehood of p.13 Alternatively, 
for x to be the ontological ground for pT is for x’s non-existence to be necessary 
for the falsehood of p. Consequently, Lowe claims that RD fails to adequately 
construe the modal dependence operative in TM.
Lowe maintains that the failure of RD to capture the relevant notion of 
metaphysical necessitation in TM does not entail that all species of metaphysical 
dependence are therefore inadequate to do so. In the place of RD, Lowe puts 
forward a relation – essential dependence – that he takes to entail rigid existential 
dependence, but is not entailed by it. That is, every case of essential dependence 
is a case of rigid-existential dependence, but not the converse.14 As such, essential 
dependence is more fi ne-grained than rigid-existential dependence and thus is 
better suited to capture the notion that pT metaphysically depends on x. Lowe 
states the notion of essential dependence as follows:
12  For an early statement of this sort of worry, see Simons, Parts, 295.
13  Lowe, The Four-Category Ontology, 202.
14  It should be noted that Lowe in “Two Notions of Being” takes the notion of essence to 
be primitive and does not reify essences. Rather, Lowe takes the locution “the essence of x” 
to denote “what x is, or what it is to be x”. Further, Lowe states the fact that essential (identity) 
dependence entails rigid existential dependence as follows: “that if one entity depends for its 
identity upon another, then the former could not have existed without the latter” – Lowe, The Four-
Category Ontology, 35.

Ross Inman
Essential Dependence, Truthmaking, and Mereology
METAPHYSICAL STRUCTURE • 75
(ED) x essentially depends on y =def There is a function f such that it is
part of the essence of x that x is f(y).15
One particular example of ED would be the relationship between Socrates and 
his singleton {Socrates}, the set whose sole member is Socrates. Now, according 
to ED, {Socrates} essentially depends on Socrates precisely because it is of the 
essence – the very identity – of {Socrates} that it be the singleton set of Socrates, 
that is, to be the value of the singleton-set-of function, where Socrates serves as 
the argument.
Let us consider how ED might serve to elucidate the species of metaphysical 
dependence operative in TM. It is precisely in virtue of the fact that ED is more 
fi ne-grained than RD that the former is able to sidestep the objection from 
irrelevance. Recall that an RD reading of TM stated that x is the truthmaker 
for Socrates is pale if and only if x exists and rigidly necessitates the truth of 
Socrates is pale, thereby allowing the unintuitive notion that every true pro-
position is rigidly necessitated, and thus made true, by some necessary being (the 
number 7). On a more fi ne-grained ED reading of TM, however, such an inference is 
unwarranted on the grounds that it is not part of the essence of Socrates is pale 
that it be true only if the number 7 exists. While Socrates is pale might be rigidly 
necessitated by the number 7, it is not essentially necessitated by it in the sense 
that Socrates is pale does not depend for what it is – its very identity – on the 
existence of the number 7.16 Consequently, as one cannot infer from the existence 
of a necessary being (number 7) that everything is essentially dependent upon it, 
the objection from irrelevance is avoided, thereby making essential dependence 
a welcome candidate for the species of metaphysical neces sity operative in TM.
In the case of accidental predications, an ED reading of TM proves to be fruitful. 
Take, for instance, an accidental predication of the form x is F, where ‘F’ denotes 
the mode F-ness that is predicated of a sub stance x. On Lowe’s four-category 
ontology, F-ness essentially depends on x as well as the universal F (F-ness being 
a particularised instance of F). That is, it is part of the essence of F-ness that it (i) 
characterise or inhere in x and (ii) be an instance of F. Since F-ness is essentially 
dependent on these two entities, it follows, according to Lowe, that the existence 
of F-ness essentially necessitates x’s being F and thus the truth of the proposition 
x is F. In other words, the existence of F-ness suffi  ces to secure the existence 
15  More generally, R(□XRxy): for some relation R, x is essentially related by that relation 
to y. I should note that Lowe takes identity dependence to be a species of essential dependence, 
though I do not think this aff ects what I say here. For an extensive treatment of diff erent 
conceptions of ontological dependence see Fabrice Correia, Existential Dependence and Cognate 
Notions (Philosophia Verlag, 2005).
16  Although, as David Oderberg suggests in Real Essentialism, the number 7 is a virtual part 
of the essence of Socrates is pale in so far as the latter, an existing entity, is essentially self-
identical and thus has as a (virtual) part of its essence being distinct from the number 7.

Ross Inman
ESSENTIAL DEPENDENCE, TRUTHMAKING, AND MEREOLOGY
76 • METAPHYSICAL STRUCTURE
of x, F, x’s being F, and therefore the truth of the proposition x is F. As a result, 
F-ness is said to metaphysically necessitate the truth of x is F in the right sort of 
way, thereby satisfying TM.
3. SCHOLASTIC ESSENTIAL DEPENDENCE
In spite of this recent turn to essence in the contemporary literature on 
truthmaking, there has been little exploration of the historical roots of the formal 
concept of essential dependence as it pertains to the notion of truthmaking 
broadly conceived. My aim in this section is to explore the scholastic roots of 
the notion of essential dependence as developed in the work of Duns Scotus. In 
section 4, I proceed to examine the relationship between Scotus’s understanding 
of essential order with his account of truthmaking for accidental predications 
in terms of accidents. I then show how his account fails to satisfy the modal 
constraints on TM in light of his commitment to the possibility of separated 
accidents in the Eucharist as well as the objection from irrelevance outlined 
above. I conclude with a brief examination of a scholastic account of truthmaking 
for accidental predications that does satisfy the modal constraints of TM and thus 
presents itself as a viable option for contemporary truthmaker theorists.
3.1. Scotus on Essential Order
The notion of one entity depending on another for its existence and/or essence 
has a formidable history in the Aristotelian tradition. Let us begin, then, with 
an examination of Scotus’s understanding of depen dence, as displayed in his 
philosophical theology and substance-accident ontology.
In the context of the metaphysics of the incarnation, Scotus contends that the 
union that takes place between the Word, the second person of the Trinity, and 
the human nature of Christ (i.e. the hypostatic union) is a “union of order.”17 After 
considering and rejecting two other kinds of unity that might obtain between the 
Word and the human nature of Christ, Scotus states,
All that remains therefore is the third type, namely, a union of order. The order, 
however, is that of the posterior to the prior. The Word obviously is not posterior 
to [human] nature; hence it is the other way around. The nature is posterior with 
respect to the Word and thus dependent on him.18
For Scotus, then, the Word is ordered with respect to the human nature of 
Christ in such a way that the latter is posterior to, and thus dependent on, the 
former.
Scotus’s most developed treatment of the notion of dependence is found in 
his De Primo Principio. There, he elucidates the notion of posteriority and priority, 
17  John Duns Scotus, Quaestiones Quodlibetales [Quodl.], q. 19, n. 2.
18  Ibid., n. 5.

Ross Inman
Essential Dependence, Truthmaking, and Mereology
METAPHYSICAL STRUCTURE • 77
labelling it “essential order” and proceeds to explicate two distinct varieties 
of essential order: the order of eminence and the order of dependence.19 The order 
of eminence pertains to the notion of perfection; x is eminently ordered with 
respect to y if x’s perfection (of essence) exceeds the perfection of y, and is thereby 
said to be prior to y in the order of eminence. The order of dependence, on the 
other hand, involves the notion of priority and posteriority with respect to the 
essence or nature of the two relata involved; “the dependent is said to be posterior 
whereas that on which it depends is prior”.20
Here it is crucial to note that Scotus maintains that the relata of essential 
ordering relations are essences (i.e. forms). Again, in the context of the hypostatic 
union, Scotus explicitly endorses the notion that the relata of essential ordering 
relations are essences, “As for the case at hand, the personal or hypostatic entity 
has no essential priority in respect to creatures, for an essential order obtains per 
se only between essences (in contrast to hypostatic entities), since it is forms (i.e. 
essences) that are like numbers”.21 In short, the order is one of essential dependence 
in so far as the priority or posteriority stems from the nature or essence of the 
entity in question.
Scotus further suggests that essential ordering relations imply a sort of exis-
tential dependence of the posterior on that which is prior, “the prior according to 
nature and essence can exist without the posterior but the reverse is not true”.22 
He continues,
And this I understand as follows. Even though the prior should produce the posterior 
necessarily and consequently could not exist without it, it would not be because the 
prior requires the posterior for its own existence, but it is rather the other way about. 
For even assuming that posterior did not exist, the existence of the prior would 
not entail a contradiction. But the converse is not true, for the posterior needs the 
prior. This need we can call dependence, so that we can say that anything which is 
essentially posterior [in this way] depends necessarily upon what is prior but not vice 
versa, even should the posterior at times proceed from it necessarily.23
Following Aristotle, Scotus maintains that if x is essentially posterior to y, 
then x depends on y for its existence. He states that if x is essentially ordered to 
y, then x’s existence “needs” or “requires” y’s existence, i.e. it is impossible that x 
exist without y’s existing.
19  John Duns Scotus, De Primo Principio [DPP] 1.6.
20  DPP 1.8.
21  Quodl. q. 19, n. 19. However, it should be noted that Scotus does, at times, allow for a wider 
variety of relata in essential ordering relations. See Quodl. 19., a. 2, n. 30 where he distinguishes 
diff erent conceptions of essential dependence by their diff erent relata.
22  DPP 1.8.
23  DPP 1.8.

Ross Inman
ESSENTIAL DEPENDENCE, TRUTHMAKING, AND MEREOLOGY
78 • METAPHYSICAL STRUCTURE
Here, however, we must proceed with caution. The claim that x is existentially 
dependent on y admits of two readings, each diff ering in its respective scope. 
We have already encountered the strong variety of existential dependence in 
Lowe’s explication of rigid-existential depen dence (RD) above. Recall that this 
stronger notion stated that neces sarily, x exists only if y exists, □(E!x → E!y), 
where ‘y’ denotes some particular entity such that necessarily, x exists only if 
that particular y exists. While rigid-existential dependence captures the notion 
of an entity’s existence requiring the existence of a particular entity, the weaker 
reading captures the notion of an entity’s existence requiring the existence of 
an object of a particular sort. As such, the weaker reading states that necessarily, 
x exists only if F exists, where ‘F’ is a general term denoting some instance of the 
class of Fs. Thus, on this weak reading, x cannot exist unless something is an F, i.e. 
□(E!x → E!y  Fy). Let us follow Lowe once more and label this weak variety of 
existential dependence “non-rigid existential dependence”.
In the passage above it is not clear as to which notion of existential depen-
dence Scotus takes essential order to entail. For now, let us just say that if an 
entity is essentially ordered to another entity, then the former is existentially 
dependent on the latter in some sense or other (understood in a wide enough sense 
to capture both rigid and non-rigid existential dependence).
Let us, then, formulate Scotus’s conception of essential order using our sen-
tential operator ‘□X’ to stand for ‘it is part of the essence of x’:
(EO): x is essentially ordered to y ≡ □X (E!x → E!y)24
That is, x is essentially ordered to y if and only if x is essentially such that it 
exists only if y exists. Michael Gorman has pointed out that Scotus puts forward of 
several formal features that govern EO in De Primo Principio 2: irrefl exivity, asym-
metry, and transitivity.25 Using “□O” to stand for “essentially ordered”, Scotus 
maintains that EO is governed by the following axioms:
Irrefl exivity: “Nothing whatever is essentially ordered to itself.”26
 
¬(□O(x,x))
24  Scotus defi nes “of the essence of x” (what I am referring to in EO above as “part of the 
essence of x such that”) as “that which is included per se in the quidditative concept of x and 
therefore, is posited in the essential notion of its quiddity, and not as something added.” See 
John Duns Scotus, Quaestiones super libros Metaphysicorum Aristotelis [In Met.] VII, q. 1.
25  Michael Gorman, “Ontological Priority and John Duns Scotus”, in The Philosophical 
Quarterly 43 (173) (1993): 460–471.
26  DPP 2.2.

Ross Inman
Essential Dependence, Truthmaking, and Mereology
METAPHYSICAL STRUCTURE • 79
Asymmetry: “In any essential order a circle is impossible.”27
 
□O(x,y) → ¬□O(y,x)
Transitivity: “What is not subsequent to the prior
is not subsequent to the posterior”28
 
(□O(x,y)  □O(y,z)) → (□O(x,z))
Consequently, what emerges from our above discussion of Scotus’s conception 
of dependence is a partial ordering relation that obtains between essences that 
is governed by the axioms of irrefl exivity, asymmetry, and transitivityThough 
essential order is commonly understood within the context of distinguishing per 
se and per accidents causal series, Scotus takes essential ordering relations to be 
commonplace, especially as it pertains to his substance-accident ontology.29 In 
attempting to distinguish essential order from any sort of causal dependence, he 
suggests that essential order “can be shown somehow in [the relation of] subject 
and accident.”30 What’s more, referring again to the essential order that obtains in 
the hypostatic union, Scotus notes that the human nature of Christ is dependent 
on the Word such that the latter sustains the former in existence and, further, 
that this sustenance is “maximally similar to that of an accident by its subject”.31
But how exactly does Scotus conceive of the relation between a substance 
and its accidents? The issue, as we will see shortly, is complicated given his com-
mitment to the Eucharistic doctrine that upon consecration the accidents of the 
bread and the wine remain in existence, even though their underlying substance 
ceases to exist.32 Let us turn, then, to examine Scotus’s notion of EO as applied to 
his understanding of the relation between a substance and its accidents with an 
eye on the prospects of its application to the notion of truthmaking below.
Scotus operates out of an Aristotelian ontology where substances are the 
fundamental units of being and accidents are taken to inhere in substances. By an 
accident “inhering” in a substance, Scotus means to convey either: (i) the actual 
union of an existing accident with its existing subject as a kind of act with the 
potential or (ii) the dependence of the accident upon the substance, where the 
27  DPP 2.4.
28  DPP 2.6.
29  DPP 1.
30  Ord. III, dist. 1, q. 1, n. 3, as cited in Richard Cross, The Metaphysics of the Incarnation: 
Thomas Aquinas to Duns Scotus (New York: Oxford University Press, 2002), 123.
31  Ord. III, dist. 1, q. 4, n. 2, as cited in Cross, ibid.
32  For an excellent treatment of the Eucharist and its role in scholastic metaphysics, see 
Marilyn McCord Adams “Aristotle and the Sacrament of the Altar: A Crisis in Medieval 
Theology”, Canadian Journal of Philosophy, Supplementary Volume 17 (1991): 195–249.

Ross Inman
ESSENTIAL DEPENDENCE, TRUTHMAKING, AND MEREOLOGY
80 • METAPHYSICAL STRUCTURE
substance is essentially prior and the accident is naturally posterior.33 Regarding 
(i), we can say that if x inheres in y then x actualises some potency in y, call this 
‘inherenceA’ as it underscores the fact that x informs y in such a way that y’s 
passive potency (to be x) is actualised by x. Concerning (ii), if x inheres in y, then 
x is dependent on y for its continued existence, call this ‘inherenceD’ (to be read 
in the broadest terms to include rigid and non-rigid existential dependence). By 
claiming that accidents are “naturally posterior” to substances, Scotus means 
that “the natural entity of these [accidents] is through substance”.34 That is, it 
is the natural order of things that accidents depend on substances as external, 
effi  cient causes of their continued existence.
Furthermore, Scotus is clear that inherenceD is more fundamental than in-
herenceA in so far as an accident’s (natural) dependence on substance serves 
as the ground for its capacity to actualise some potency in its substance. If an 
accident, F-ness, is to actualise some potency in Socrates (inherenceA), to be pale 
for instance, then there must be a sense in which F-ness depends on Socrates (i.e. 
inherenceD) as opposed to Crito, say.
Scotus further distinguishes two ways an accident may inhere simpli citer 
(i.e. inhereA or inhereD) in a substance: actual inherence and aptitudinal inherence.35 
Heavily infl uenced by the Eucharistic doctrine concerning separated accidents 
(i.e. accidents that no longer depend on their host substance for their sustained 
existence), Scotus argues that while it is not of the essence of an accident to 
actually inhere simpliciter in a substance (as is the case with separated accidents 
present in the Eucharist), it is of the essence of an accident that it aptitutidinally 
inhere simpliciter in a substance (the separated accidents are such that they 
naturally tend to inhere in a substance, though it is not part of their essence that 
they actually do so).36 Hence, the aptitude or disposition to inhereA and inhereD in 
a substance is part of the essence (what Scotus calls the “quidditative concept”) 
of an accident, irrespective of whether or not it actually does so. Consequently, 
we have the following classifi cation of accidental inherence:
 
INHERENCE 
ACTUAL 
APTITUDINAL 
INHERENCEA 
INHERENCED 
INHERENCED 
INHERENCEA 
33  Quodl. q. 19, n. 13; In Met. VII, q. 1, n. 9. However Scotus intends the modal import of 
‘natural’ here, I understand it to be (at the very least) weaker than metaphysical necessity 
(broad logical necessity) as construed by contemporary philosophers. See Cross, The Meta-
physics of the Incarnation, 104 for more on Scotus’s view of accidents being naturally posterior 
to substances.
34  In Met. VII, q. 4, n. 2.
35  See In Met. VII, q. 1, n. 10; and Quodl. q. 19, n. 24.
36  In Met. VII, q. 1, n. 12.

Ross Inman
Essential Dependence, Truthmaking, and Mereology
METAPHYSICAL STRUCTURE • 81
One apparent implication of Scotus’s metaphysics of the Eucharist for his 
substance-accident ontology (and for his view of truthmaking as we will see 
shortly) is that while an accident may be naturally ordered to substance, it is not 
essentially ordered (posterior) to it.37 The reasoning here is straightforward. In 
so far as it is metaphysically possible for an accident to exist without actually 
inheringD in a substance38 it follows that it is not part of its essence to actually 
inhereD in a substance and, ipso facto, is not essentially ordered to it. This reasoning 
relies on Scotus’s earlier contention that that which is essentially ordered is 
existentially dependent (in either the rigid or non-rigid sense) on that which is 
prior.39 Here I interpret Scotus as espousing the view that that which is essentially 
ordered to another must actually depend for its existence on that which is prior, 
i.e. it must actually inhereD in either its particular host substance or some substance 
or other.40 Consequently, Scotus’s adherence to the metaphysical possibility of an 
accident exis ting without actually inheringD in either the strong or weak sense 
implies that accidents are not, strictly speaking, essentially ordered to substance.
At the same time, however, Scotus does speak as though accidents, in the 
normal order of things, actually inheredD in a substance. In fact, he is of the opi-
nion that accidents are (naturally) sustained in existence by their host substances 
in such a way that the latter is “the end term of the dependence of the actual 
existence of an assumed nature”.41 Elsewhere, he refers to this dependence rela-
tion as the substance communicating its existence to the accident.42
In adhering to the possibility of separated accidents together with the fact that 
accidents do at times actually inhereD in their host substances, Scotus appears to 
be affi  rming the seemingly implausible thesis that being existentially dependent is a 
contingent aff air. In fact, Scotus says just this when he states:
37  See Quodl. q. 19, n. 13. Also, as Richard Cross has shown, Scotus does provide independent 
philosophical argumentation in support of the thesis that accidents are not essentially ordered 
to their host substances. See his The Physics of Duns Scotus (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
1998), 100.
38  Something Scotus explicitly affi  rms, “the natural entity of these [accidents] is through sub-
stance; they can [however] exist without substance with an aptitude for a subject” – In Met. VII, q. 4, 
n. 2). The implication here is that an accident may exist without actually inhering (simpliciter) 
in a substance, though it cannot exist without having the aptitude to inhere in a substance.
39  DPP 1.8.
40  Further evidence for this reading is found in his using the notions of actual inherenceD 
and essential order interchangeably (In Met. VII, q. 1, n. 9) and then, shortly after, stating 
explicitly that it is not of the essence of an accident that it actually inhereD (ibid., n. 12) in a 
substance.
41  Ord. III, dist. 1, q. 5, n. 8, as cited in Cross, The Metaphysics of the Incar nation.
42  Ord. III, dist. 1, q. 5, n. 8, as cited in Cross, The Metaphysics of the Incar nation; Quodl. q. 19, 
n. 23.

Ross Inman
ESSENTIAL DEPENDENCE, TRUTHMAKING, AND MEREOLOGY
82 • METAPHYSICAL STRUCTURE
We show this thirdly as follows: An accident can have the mode of substance [i.e. 
it can exist without inhering in a substance], although not perfectly in the sense 
that it would be repugnant for it to depend on a subject, but in some analogous way, 
viz., insofar as it does not actually depend; this is seen in the case of a separated 
accident.43
The way in which an accident has the mode of substance in the Eucharist is 
that it enjoys independent existence. Be that as it may, separated accidents remain 
as accidents in so far as they retain their aptitude to actually inhereD in a substance 
(substances do not have this feature). Nonetheless, it remains that the view has 
the rather untoward consequence that being existentially dependent is a contingent 
matter.44 I must, at this point, leave these interpretive niceties to those with a 
more detailed knowledge of the issues surrounding Scotus’s ontology of accidents.
As a result, we have seen that Scotus relies on a conception of essential 
dependence (i.e. essential order) that is governed by (i) the notion of priority and 
posteriority between essences (ii) the existential dependence of the posterior on 
the prior (in some sense or other) and (iii) the axioms of irrefl exivity, asymmetry, 
and transitivity. Let us turn, then, to discuss several scholastic conceptions 
of truthmaking for accidental predictions and their relation to the notion of 
essential dependence (order).
4. SCHOLASTIC TRUTHMAKING AND ESSENTIAL DEPENDENCE
Though the scholastics did not express the notion of truthmaking in precisely 
the same terms as we do today, the idea is not without witness in the Aristotelian 
tradition.45 In fact, both Scotus and Aquinas, with Aristotle, adopt the fundamental 
intuition behind the notion of truth making: the dependence of truth on being.46 
As John Fox has noted,
43  Quodl. q. 19, n. 84.
44  One rather contentious way out of this would be to suggest that while it appears that 
being rigidly existentially dependent is non-contingent, being non-rigidly existentially dependent 
might be a contingent feature of an entity (as it is a weaker dependence relation). That is, a 
non-rigidly dependent entity can fail to be dependent as such and yet exist nonetheless. For an 
excellent historical treatment of the scholastic debate concerning the view that accidents have 
various modes of existence (modus essendi), see Robert Pasnau, Metaphysical Themes 1274–1689 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011).
45  For Aristotle, see especially Categories 14b16–23. For a defence of the thesis that 
the scholastics utilised a truthmaking theory of predication see John Fox, “Truthmaker”, 
Australasian Journal of Philosophy 65 (1987): 188–207; Jeffery Brower, “Simplicity and Aseity”, 
The Oxford Handbook to Philosophical Theo logy (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009); Tim Pawl, 
A Thomistic Account of Truthmakers for Modal Truths (doctoral dissertation, St. Louis University, 
2008); and Cross, The Metaphysics of the Incarnation.
46  For Aquinas see his Quaestiones Disputatae de Veritate [QDV], q. 1, a. 2, ad 3; ibid. ad l. For 
Scotus see Ord III, dist. 6., q. 1, n. 6; Reportata Parisiensia III, dist. 1, q. 2, n. 5, as cited in Cross, 
The Metaphysics of the Incarnation.

Ross Inman
Essential Dependence, Truthmaking, and Mereology
METAPHYSICAL STRUCTURE • 83
Medieval philosophers customarily defi ned something’s whiteness, heaviness, exis-
tence, manhood, or colour, as that by which it was white, was heavy, existed, was a 
man, or was coloured… this ‘by which’ is to be elucidated in terms of truthmaking.47
For both Scotus and Aquinas, substances are “made to be” by their accidents in 
a qualifi ed sense; accidents are said to actualise some potency in their substances, 
thereby causing substances to be in some particular manner.
In particular, Aquinas speaks of an accident being related to a substance as 
potency to act and that “a subject, in virtue of an accident, is in certain ways” 
and that “whiteness makes a potentially white human being actually white…
non-essential forms make it [substance] actually exist in various non-essential 
modes”.48 What’s more, he states that, “Snow is ‘white’ by reason of its whiteness”.49 
Consequently, Aquinas emphasises the role of accidents in a substance’s coming to 
be modifi ed in a particular manner (although we will see shortly that his account 
does not appeal to accidents alone).
As for Scotus, the actualisation of passive potency in a substance by an acci-
dent is, as we have already seen, embodied in his notion of inherenceA. Scotus, 
like Aquinas before him, argued that Socrates is white “by the existence of a 
white thing”.50 Following Richard Cross (2002), I take this feature of accidents to 
be what Scotus elsewhere calls their ability to confer existence denominatively on 
their respective substances.51 Consequently, both Scotus and Aquinas were of the 
opinion that Socrates’ potency for being white is actualised by the inhering of 
the accident whiteness.
However, both of these thinkers diff ered as to the details concerning the 
truthmaking role for accidents. To get clear on this, let us represent their views 
regarding the multifaceted relationship between an accident and its substance 
as follows:
(A) For any accident F-ness and any substance x in which F-ness inheres,
(1) F-ness existentially depends on x, either actually or aptitudinally.
(2) F-ness actualises x’s potency to be F.52
(3) F-ness is a truthmaker, such that x is F is true.53
47  Fox, “Truthmaker”, 190.
48  Summa theologiae [STh] I, q. 3. a. 6 and De principiis naturae 1, respectively.
49  STh III, q. 77, a. 1, ad 4.
50  Ord III, dist. 6, q. 1, n. 6, as cited by Cross ibid.
51  Cross, ibid., 125, n. 21. See also Ord. III, q. 6, a. 1, n. 6, as cited by Cross ibid., and In Met. 
VII, q. 1, n. 10.
52  As with (1), F-ness may either actually or aptitudinally actualise x’s potency to be F. Since 
both Scotus and Aquinas appear to ignore an accident’s having the aptitude to actualise x’s 
potency to be F, I focus here on an accidents actually doing so.
53  Ord. I, dist. 8, pars 1, q. 4, n. 213–214, adapted from Cross, ibid., 34.

Ross Inman
ESSENTIAL DEPENDENCE, TRUTHMAKING, AND MEREOLOGY
84 • METAPHYSICAL STRUCTURE
Both Scotus and Aquinas were committed to (1) and (2) regarding the rela-
tionship between an accident and its host substance.54 However, they diff er as 
to how (1) and (2) bear on (3), that is, the truthmaking role of accidents. Here, 
I consider Scotus’s account of truthmaking for accidental predications and pro-
ceed to Aquinas’s more detailed account in the fi nal section.
4.1 Scotus’s account of truthmaking
In general, Scotus construes (3) in terms of (1). In fact, Scotus is quite adamant 
that (3) can be understood without reference to (2). He states:
You will object: how is something formally wise by wisdom unless [wisdom] is 
its form? I reply: a body is animate denominatively (as it were), because the soul 
is its form. A human being is said to be animate essentially, and not (as it were) 
denominatively, because the soul belongs to him or her as a part. So being of a 
certain sort because of something does not require that the thing [paleness] is a form 
informing something [Socrates], because a form [paleness] is not a form informing 
the whole, even though [the whole] is said to be of a certain sort because of it.55
Thus, paleness need not actualise some passive potency in Socrates in or-
der to serve as the truthmaker for Socrates is pale. Rather, Scotus was of the 
opinion that the truthmaking role for accidents is best construed in terms of 
(1); it is in virtue of a substance x’s possessing an accidental form F-ness via 
actual inherenceD that it is true that x is F, i.e. F-ness is the truthmaker for the 
accidental predication x is F. As Marilyn McCord Adams notes,
Scotus declares that ontological dependence of a broad sense property thing on a 
subject is suffi  cient for characterization. Even if whiteness did not actualise a potency 
in Socrates, Socrates would be the subject on which the whiteness ontologically 
depended and that would be enough to make it true that Socrates is white.56
Scotus’s explication of truthmaking in terms of (1) instead of (2) is ultimately 
tied to his view that inherenceD is more fundamental than inherenceA in so far as 
an accident’s actualising some passive potency in a substance requires that the 
accident depend on that very substance for its existence.
Given the earlier line of reasoning in section 2 above, however, it appears that 
this proposal is inadequate to secure the requisite modal strength contemporary 
philosophers commonly ascribe to the relation of truthmaking. Recall our ear-
lier attempt to construe existential dependence (and hence inherenceD) in the 
broadest possible terms in order to allow for either a strong or weak reading 
(i.e. rigid or non-rigid respectively) in light of the ambiguity latent in Scotus’s 
54  For Aquinas, see STh III, q. 77, a. 1, ad. 2.
55  Ord. I, dist. 8, pars 1, q. 4, n. 213–214, adapted from Cross, ibid.
56  Marylyn McCord Adams, Christ and Horrors (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
2006), 126.

Ross Inman
Essential Dependence, Truthmaking, and Mereology
METAPHYSICAL STRUCTURE • 85
claim that essential order entails existential dependence in some sense or other. 
Unfortunately, we can no longer remain neutral on this matter as the tenability 
of Scotus’s proposal of truthmaking in terms of (1) heavily depends on whether 
or not he understands an accident to be rigidly or non-rigidly existentially 
dependent on a substance.
To see this, suppose we construe (1) in terms of non-rigid existential de pen-
dence and thus explicate (3) as F-ness non-rigidly depending on x. On this account, 
the existence of F-ness does not, strictly speaking, necessitate the truth of x is F, 
say, Socrates’ being F. Rather, at most, the existence of F-ness necessitates that 
some x is F, not that this particular, viz. Socrates, is F. On this reading, the existence 
of F-ness could just as easily necessitate the truth of Glaucon is F. Consequently, 
interpreting (1) in terms of non-rigid existential dependence is not strong enough 
to capture the modal force operative in TM.
The same fate awaits an interpretation of (1) in terms of rigid-existential 
dependence. As was previously demonstrated, this species of metaphysical de-
pendence does not appear to be fi ne-grained enough to capture the notion of 
truthmaking, hence the objection from irrelevance we met in section II. As Lowe 
(2006) has pointed out, “a truthmaker is not, or not merely, something whose 
existence is necessary for the truth of a proposition but something whose non-
existence is necessary for its falsehood.”57
Lastly, we might underscore here the implications of Scotus’s meta physics of 
the Eucharist for his account of truthmaking in terms of (1). If separated accidents 
are metaphysically possible, then there could be instances where the F-ness (the 
whiteness of the bread) of x exists and yet the accidental predication x is F (the 
bread is white) is false given that x ceases to exist altogether. Yet this undermines 
the fact that truth makers are said to metaphysically necessitate their truths.
Consequently, in so far as we place any stock in the objection from irrelevance 
and thereby require the modal force of truthmaking to be stronger than that of 
rigid-existential dependence, it appears that we must bid farewell to a scholastic 
account of truthmaking for accidental predications in terms of accidents alone.
4.2 Hylomorphic Truthmakers
I want to conclude by briefl y unpacking an alternative essential dependence 
account of truthmaking for accidental predications, one that fi nds its roots in 
the hylomorphic ontology of Thomas Aquinas. Aquinas’s hylomorphic account, I 
believe, has much to off er the contem porary truthmaker theorist as it provides 
a novel alternative to tropes and states of aff airs as truthmakers for accidental 
predications.
Though at times Aquinas speaks as though accidents alone serve as truth-
makers for accidental predications in virtue of satisfying (2) above, he clearly 
57  Lowe, The Four-Category Ontology, 202.

Ross Inman
ESSENTIAL DEPENDENCE, TRUTHMAKING, AND MEREOLOGY
86 • METAPHYSICAL STRUCTURE
states that it is the combining of an accident and its host substance that serves as 
the truthmaker for accidental predications. Aquinas is clear that, “when I say, 
“Man is white,” the cause of the truth of this enunciation is the combining of 
whiteness with the subject”.58 Elsewhere, he makes the same point, albeit more 
subtly, “But the reasoning by which the affi  rmative enunciation, ‘Man is worthy,’ 
is true, i.e., by some worthy man existing, is the same as the reasoning by which 
‘Man is shameful’ is true, i.e., by a shameful man existing”.59
For Aquinas, the result of the combining of seatedness and Socrates is a nu-
merically distinct hylomorphic compound, seated-Socrates (what he calls an 
“accidental being” generally), whose matter is Socrates and accidental form is 
seatedness. And, it is the existence of this numerically distinct accidental being, 
seated-Socrates, which is said to ground the truth of the accidental predication 
Socrates is seated. As a result, Aquinas is of the opinion that what enters into 
the truthmaking relation for accidental predications are not accidents alone (pace 
Scotus), but rather a distinct mereologically complex entity that is composed of 
an accident and a substance.
How does Aquinas’s hylomorphic proposal fair as an explication of the truth-
makers for accidental predications? For one, accidental beings have the requi-
site modal features such that their existence essentially (as opposed to rigidly) 
necessitates the existence of each of their proper parts (in our example of seated-
Socrates, the substance Socrates and the accidental form seatedness), thereby 
avoiding the objection from irrelevance.
To help bring out the modal features of accidental beings qua hylomorphic 
compounds, we can represent the essential and ontological priority of the parts 
of these compounds as being governed by the following mereological principle: 
necessarily, if any object x is part of an accidental being, y, then, it is part of the 
essence of y that if y exists then x is a part of y. As an accidental being, seated-
Socrates exists and is what it is in virtue of the existence and essence of its proper 
parts, Socrates and seatedness.
It is precisely because accidental beings exhibit these modal features that 
the existence of seated-Socrates is said to essentially necessitate Socrates’ being 
seated and not merely the co-existence of two, unrelated entities: Socrates and 
seatedness. In so far as the essence of seated-Socrates – its very identity – involves 
reference to Socrates as modifi ed by his inhering mode of seatedness, it follows that 
the existence of seated-Socrates essentially necessitates Socrates’ being seated 
and, ipso facto, the accidental truth of Socrates is seated.
Aquinas’s hylomorphic account of truthmaking for accidental predications 
will most likely fi nd favour with those who are already favourably disposed 
58  Thomas Aquinas, Commentary on the Metaphysics of Aristotle IX, lect. 11, n. 1898. I owe 
this and the following reference to Pawl, Thomistic Account of Truthmakers.
59  Thomas Aquinas, Sententia super Peri hermenias I, lect. 11, n. 10.

Ross Inman
Essential Dependence, Truthmaking, and Mereology
METAPHYSICAL STRUCTURE • 87
toward a hylomorphic ontology and whose aesthetic sensibilities are not off ended 
by including what Gareth Mathews has famously dubbed ‘kooky objects’ in their 
ontology.60 Nevertheless, I take Aquinas’s hylomorphic account of truthmaking 
to be yet another example of how a hylomorphic ontology is remarkably fecund 
in its application to contemporary issues in metaphysics and thus deserves to be 
taken seriously as a viable metaphysic of material objects.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Adams, Marilyn McCord. “Aristotle and the Sacrament of the Altar: A Crisis in Medieval 
Theology”. Canadian Journal of Philosophy, Supplementary Volume (1991): 195–249.
Adams, Marilyn McCord. Christ and Horrors. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
2006.
Aquinas, Thomas. Translated by Fathers of the English Dominican Province. London: 
Burns, Oates, and Washbourne 1912–36. Reprint, New York: Benziger Brothers 1947–48. 
Reprint, New York: Christian Classics, 1981.
― Questiones Disputatae de Veritate: The Disputed Questions on Truth. Translated by Robert 
W. Mulligan, S.J. Chicago: Henry Regnery Co., 1952.
― Sententia super Metaphysicam: Commentary on the Metaphysics of Aristotle. Translated by 
J. P. Rowan. Chicago: Regnery, 1964.
― Sententia super Peri hermenias: Aristotle on Interpretation: Commentary by St. Thomas and 
Cajetan. Translated by J. T. Oesterle. Milwaukee: Marquette University Press, 1962.
― De Principiis Naturae: On the Principles of Nature. Translated by Timothy McDermott. In 
Aquinas: Selected Philosophical Writings. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008.
Aristotle. The Complete Works of Aristotle: The Revised Oxford Translation. Edited by J. Barnes. 
2 vols. Bollingen Series. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1984.
Brower, Jeffrey. “Simplicity and Aseity”. The Oxford Handbook to Philosophical Theology. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009.
Correia, Fabrice. Existential Dependence and Cognate Notions. Philosophia Verlag, 2005.
Cross, Richard. The Metaphysics of the Incarnation: Thomas Aquinas to Duns Scotus. New York: 
Oxford University Press, 2002.
― The Physics of Duns Scotus. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998.
Fine, Kit. “Essence and Modality”. In Philosophical Perspectives 8: Logic and Language, edited 
by James E. Tomberlin, 1–16. Atascadero, CA: Ridgeview, 1994.
Fox, John. “Truthmaker”. Australasian Journal of Philosophy 65 (1987): 188–207.
Gorman, Michael. “Ontological Priority and John Duns Scotus”. The Philo sophical Quarterly 
43 [173] (1993): 460–471.
60  Gareth Mathews, “Accidental Unities”, in Language and Logos, ed. M. Schofi eld and 
M. Nussbaum (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982).

Ross Inman
ESSENTIAL DEPENDENCE, TRUTHMAKING, AND MEREOLOGY
88 • METAPHYSICAL STRUCTURE
Lowe, E. J. The Four-Category Ontology. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006.
― “Two Notions of Being: Entity and Essence”. Royal Institute of Philosophy Supplement, 62 
(2008): 23–48. DOI:10.1017/S1358246108000568.
Lowe, E. J. and Rami, A. Truth and Truthmaking. Acumen Press, 2008.
Matthews, Gareth. “Accidental Unities”. In Language and Logos, edited by M. Scho fi eld 
and M. Nussbaum, 223–240. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer sity Press, 1982.
Melia, Joseph. “Truthmaking Without Truthmakers”. In Truthmakers: The Contemporary 
Debate, edited by H. Beebee & J. Dodd, 67–84. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005.
Oderberg, David. Real Essentialism. London: Routledge, 2007.
Parsons, Josh. “There is No “Truthmaker” Argument Against Nominalism”. Australasian 
Journal of Philosophy 77, no. 3 (1999): 325–334.
Pasnau, Robert. Metaphysical Themes 1274–1689. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011.
Pawl, Tim. A Thomistic Account of Truthmakers for Modal Truths. Doctoral dissertation, St. 
Louis University, 2008.
Scotus, John Duns. Quaestiones Quodlibetales: God and Creatures: The Quodlibetal Questions. 
Translated with an introduction, notes and glossary by Felix Alluntis and Allan B. 
Wolter. Washington, D. C.: The Catholic University of America Press, 1975.
― Quaestiones super libros Metaphysicorum Aristotelis: Questions on the Metaphysics of 
Aris totle by John Duns Scotus. Edited by Girard J. Etzkorn and Allan B. Wolter OFM. 
St. Bonaventure, NY: The Franciscan Institute, 1997–1998.
― De Primo Principio: John Duns Scotus, A Treatise on God as First Principle. Edited by Allan 
B. Wolter. 2nd edition, revised with a commentary. Chicago: Franciscan Herald Press, 
1983.
Simons, Peter. Parts: A Study in Ontology. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1987.

