VOLUME I 
INTRODUCTION TO 
MATHEMATICAL 
LOGIC 
BY ALONZO CHURCH 
PRINCETON, NEW JERSEY 
PRINCETON UNIVERSITY PRESS 
1956 

PUBLISHED 1956, BY PRINCETON UNIVERSITY PRESS 
ISBN 0-691-07984-6 
Sixth Printing, 1970 
PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 

Preface 
This is a revised and much enlarged edition of Introduction to Mathematical 
Logic, Part I, which was published in 1944 as one of the Annals of Mathe-
matics Studies. In spite of extensive additions, it remains an introduction 
rather than a comprehensive treatise. It is intended to be used as a textbook 
by students of mathematics, and also within limitations as a reference work. 
As a textbook it offers a beginning course in mathematical logic, but 
presupposes some substantial mathematical background. 
An added feature in the new edition is the inclusion of many exercises 
for the student. Some of these are of elementary character, straightforward 
illustrations serving the purpose of practice; others are in effect brief sket-
ches of difficult developments to which whole sections of the main text might 
have been devoted; and still others occupy various intermediate positions 
between these extremes. No attempt has been made to classify exercises 
systematically according to difficulty. But for routine use by beginning 
students the following list is tentatively suggested as a basis for selection; 
12.3-12.9, 14.0-14.8, 15.0-15,3, 15.9, 15.10, 18.0-18.3, 19.0-19.7, 19.9, 
19.10, 23.1-23.6, 24.0-24.5, 30.0-30.4 (with assistance if necessary), 34.0, 
34.3-34.6, 35.1, 35.2, 38.0-38.5, 39.0, 41.0, 43.0, 43.1, 43.4, 45.0, 45.1, 
48.0-48.11, 52.0, 52.1, 54.2-54.6, 55.1, 55.2, 55.22, 56.0-56.2, 57.0-57.2. 
The book has been cut off rather abruptly in the middle, in order that 
Volume I may be published, and at many places there are references forward 
to passages in the still unwritten Volume II. In order to make clear at least 
the general intent of such references, a tentative table of contents of Volume 
II has been added at the end of the table of contents of the present volume, 
and references to Volume II should be understood in the light of this. 
Volume I has been written over a period of years, beginning in 1947, 
and as portions of the work were completed they were made available in 
manuscript form in the Fine Hall Library of Princeton University. The work 
was carried on during regular leave of absence from Princeton University 
from September, 1947, to February 1, 1948, and then under a contract of 
Princeton University with the United States Office of Naval Research from 
February 1 to June 30, 1948. To this period should be credited the Introduc-
tion and Chapters I and II — although some minor changes have been made 

VI 
PREFACE 
in this material since then, including the addition of exercises 15.4, 18.3, 
19.12, 24.10, 26.3(2), 26.3(3), 26.8, 29.2, 29.3, 29.4, 29.5, as well as changes 
designed to correct errors or to take into account newly published papers. 
The remainder of the work was done during 1948-1951 with the aid of 
grants from the Scientific Research Fund of Princeton University and the 
Eugene Higgins Trust Fund, and credit is due to these Funds for making 
possible the writing of the latter half of the volume. 
For individual assistance, I am indebted still to the persons named in 
the Preface of the edition of 1944, especially to C. A. Truesdell — whose 
notes on the lectures of 1943 have continued to be of great value, both in the 
writing of Volume I and in the preliminary work which has been done towards 
the writing of Volume II, and notwithstanding the extensive changes which 
have been made from the content and plan of the original lectures. I am 
also indebted to many who have read the new manuscript or parts of it and 
have supplied valuable suggestions and corrections, including especially 
E. Adler, A. F. Bausch, W. W. Boone, Leon Henkin, J. G. Kemeny, Maurice 
L'Abbe, E. A. Maier, Paul Meier, I. L. Novak, and Rulon Wells. 
ALONZO CHURCH 
Princeton,, New Jersey 
August 31, 1951 
[Added November 28, 1955.) For suggestions which could be taken into 
account only in the proof I am indebted further to A. N. Prior, T. T. Robin-
son, Hartley Rogers, Jr., J. C. Shepherdson, F. O. Wyse, and G. Zubieta 
Russi; for assistance in the reading of the proof itself, to Michael Rabin and 
to Zubieta; and especially for their important contribution in preparing the 
indexes, to Robinson and Zubieta. 
(Added January 17, 1958.) In the second printing, additional corrections 
which were necessary have been made in the text as far as possible, and those 
which could not be fitted into the text have been included in a list of Errata 
at the end of the book. For some of these corrections I am indebted to Max 
Black, S. C. Kleene, E. J. Lemraon, Walter Stuermann, John van Heijenoort; 
for the observation that exercise 55.3(3) would be better placed as 55.2(3), 
to D. S. Geiger; and for important corrections to 38.8(10) and footnote 550, 
to E. W. Beth. For assistance in connection with Wajsberg's paper (see the 
correction to page 142) I am further indebted to T. T. Robinson. 
ALONZO CHURCH 

Contents 
PREFACE 
v 
INTRODUCTION 
1 
00. Logic 
1 
01. Names 
3 
02. Constants and variables 
9 
03. 
Functions 
15 
04. • Propositions and propositional functions 
23 
05. 
Improper symbols, connectives 
31 
06. Operators, quantifiers 
39 
07. The logistic method . 
47 
08. Syntax 
58 
09. 
Semantics 
64 
CHAPTER I. 
The Propositional Calculus 
69 
10. The primitive basis of Px 
69 
11. Definitions 
74 
12. Theorems of Px 
81 
Exercises 12 
85 
13. The deduction theorem 
86 
14. Some further theorems and metatheorems of Px 
91 
Exercises 14 
93 
16. Tautologies, the decision problem 
94 
Exercises 15 
102 
16. Duality 
106 
17. Consistency 
108 
18. Completeness 
109 
Exercises 18 
Ill 
19. 
Independence 
112 
Exercises 19 
115 
CHAPTER II. 
The Propositional Calculus (Continued) 
119 
20. The primitive basis of P2 
119 
21. 
The deduction theorem for P2 
120 

via 
TABLE 
OF 
CONTENTS 
22. Some further theorems and metatheorems of P2 
121 
23. Relationship of P2 to Px 
125 
Exercises 23 
128 
24. Primitive connectives for the propositional calculus 
129 
Exercises 24 
134 
25. Other formulations of the propositional calculus 
136 
Exercises 25 
138 
26. Partial systems of propositional calculus 
140 
Exercises 26 
143 
27. Formulations employing axiom schemata 
148 
28. Extended propositional calculus and protothetic 
151 
Exercises 28 
154 
29. Historical notes 
155 
Exercises 29 
166 
CHAPTER III. 
Functional Calculi of First Order 
168 
30. The primitive basis of F 1 
169 
Exercises 30 
176 
31. 
Propositional calculus 
178 
32. Consistency of F 1 
180 
33. 
Some theorem schemata of F 1 
186 
34. Substitutivity of equivalence 
189 
Exercises 34 
191 
35. Deriyed rules of substitution 
191 
Exercises 35 
195 
36. The deduction theorem 
196 
37. Duality 
201 
38. Some further theorem schemata 
205 
Exercises 38 
206 
39. 
Prenex normal form 
209 
Exercises 39 
212 
CHAPTER IV. 
The Pure Functional Calculus of First Order . . 
218 
40. An alternative formulation 
218 
Exercises 40 
220 
41. 
Independence 
220 
Exercises 41 
223 
42. Skolem normal form 
224 
43. Validity and satisfiability 
227 
Exercises 43 
231 

TABLE 
OF CONTENTS 
ix 
44. 
Godel's completeness theorem 
233 
45. 
Lowenheim's theorem and Skolem's generalization 
238 
Exercises 45 
245 
46. 
The decision problem, solution in special cases 
246 
Exercises 46 
257 
47. 
Reductions of the decision problem 
270 
Exercises 47 
280 
48. 
Functional calculus of first order with equality 
280 
Exercises 48 
282 
49. 
Historical notes 
288 
CHAPTER V. 
Functional Calculi of Second Order 
295 
50. The primitive basis of F* 
295 
51. 
Propositional calculus and laws of quantifiers 
297 
52. Equality 
300 
Exercises 52 
302 
53. 
Consistency of F* 
306 
54. Henkin's completeness theorem 
307 
Exercises 54 
315 
55. 
Postulate theory 
317 
Exercises 55 
333 
56. Well-ordering of the individuals 
341 
Exercises 56 
342 
57. Axiom of infinity 
342 
Exercises 57 
345 
58. 
The predicative and ramified functional calculi of second order 
346 
Exercises 58 
354 
59. Axioms of reducibility 
354 
Exercises 59 
356 
INDEX OF DEFINITIONS 
357 
INDEX OF AUTHORS CITED 
373 
ERRATA 
• 377 

TENTATIVE TABLE OF CONTENTS OF VOLUME TWO 
CHAPTER VI. 
Functional Calculi of Higher Order. 
CHAPTER VII. 
Second-Order Arithmetic. (The Logistic System A2.) 
CHAPTER VIII. 
Godel's Incompleteness Theorems. 
CHAPTER IX. 
Recursive Arithmetic. 
CHAPTER X. 
An Alternative Formulation of the Simple Theory of 
Types. 
CHAPTER XL 
Axiomatic Set Theory. 
CHAPTER XII. 
Mathematical Intuitionism. 
-

Introduction 
This introduction contains a number of preliminary explanations, which 
it seems are most suitably placed at the beginning, though many will be-
come clearer in the light of the formal development which follows. The 
reader to whom the subject is new is advised to read the introduction through 
once, then return to it later after a study of the first few chapters of the book. 
Footnotes may in general be omitted on a first reading. 
00. Logic. Our subject is logic—or, as we may say more fully, in order 
to distinguish from certain topics and doctrines which have (unfortunately) 
been called by the same name, it is formal logic. 
Traditionally, (formal) logic is concerned with the analysis of sentences 
or of propositions1 and of proof2 with attention to the form in abstraction 
from the matter. This distinction between form and matter is not easy to 
make precise immediately, but it may be illustrated by examples. 
To take a relatively simple argument for illustrative purposes, consider 
the following: 
I 
Brothers have the same surname; Richard and Stanley are brothers; 
Stanley has surname Thompson; therefore Richard has surname 
Thompson. 
Everyday statement of this argument would no doubt leave the first of the 
three premisses3 tacit, at least unless the reasoning were challenged; but 
iSee §04. 
lIn the light both of recent work and of some aspects of traditional logic we must 
add here, besides proof, such other relationships among sentences or propositions as 
can be treated in the same manner, i.e., with regard to form m abstraction from the 
matter. These include (e.g.) disproof, compatibility; also partial confirmation, which 
is important in connection with inductive reasoning (cf. C. G. Hempel in The Journal 
of Symbolic Logic, vol. 8 (1943), pp. 122—143). 
But no doubt these relationships both can and should be reduced to that of proof, 
by making suitable additions to the object language (§07) if necessary. E.g., in reference 
to an appropriate formalized language as object language, disproof of a proposition or 
sentence may be identified with proof of its negation. The corresponding reduction of 
the notions of compatibility and confirmation to that of proof apparently requires 
modal logic—a subject which, though it belongs to formal logic, is beyond the scope 
of this book. 
sFollowing C. S. Peirce (and others) we adopt the spelling premiss fur the logical 
term to distinguish it from premise in other senses, in particular to distinguish the 
plural from the legal term 
premises. 

2 
INTRODUCTION 
for purposes of logical analysis all premisses must be set down explicitly. 
The argument, it may be held, is valid from its form alone, independently 
of the matter, and independently in particular of the question whether the 
premisses and the conclusion are in themselves right or wrong. The reasoning 
may be right though the facts be wrong, and it is just in maintaining this 
distinction that we separate the form from the matter. 
For comparison with the foregoing example consider also: 
II 
Complex numbers with real positive ratio have the same amplitude; 
* — V3/3 and a) are complex numbers with real positive ratio; co has 
amplitude 2:rc/3; therefore i — V3/3 has amplitude 2JZ/3. 
This may be held to have the same form as I, though the matter is different, 
and therefore to be, like I, valid from the form alone. 
Verbal similarity in the statements of I and II, arranged at some slight 
cost of naturalness in phraseology, serves to highlight the sameness of 
form. But, at least in the natural languages, such linguistic parallelism 
is not in general a safe guide to sameness of logical form. Indeed, the 
natural languages, including English, have been evolved over a long 
period of history to serve practical purposes of facility of communication, 
and these are not always compatible with soundness and precision of 
logical analysis. 
To illustrate this last point, let us take two further examples; 
III 
I have seen a portrait of John Wilkes Booth; John Wilkes Booth 
assassinated Abraham Lincoln; thus I have seen a portrait of an 
assassin of Abraham Lincoln. 
IV 
I have seen a portrait of somebody; somebody invented the wheeled 
vehicle; thus I have seen a portrait of an inventor of the wheeled 
vehicle. 
The argument III will be recognized as valid, and presumably from the 
logical form alone, but IV as invalid. The superficial linguistic analogy of 
the two arguments as stated is deceptive. In this case the deception is quickly 
dispelled upon going beyond the appearance of the language to consider the 
meaning, but other instances are more subtle, and more likely to generate 
real misunderstanding. Because of this, it is desirable or practically necessary 
for purposes of logic to employ a specially devised language, a formalized 
language as we shall call it, which shall reverse the tendency of the natural 
languages and shall follow or reproduce the logical form—at the expense, 

§01] 
NAMES 
where necessary, of brevity and facility of communication. To adopt a 
particular formalized language thus involves adopting a particular theory 
or system of logical analysis. {This must be regarded as the essential feature 
of a formalized language, not the more conspicuous but theoretically less 
important feature that it is found convenient to replace the spelled words 
of most (written) natural languages by single letters and various special 
symbols.) 
01. Names. One kind of expression which is familiar in the natural 
languages, and which we shall carry over also to formalized languages, is the 
proper name. Under this head we include not only proper names which are 
arbitrarily assigned to denote in a certain way—such names, e.g., as 
"Rembrandt," "Caracas," "Sirius," "the Mississippi," "The Odyssey," 
"eight"—but also names having a structure that expresses some analysis 
of the way in which they denote.4 As examples of the latter we may cite: 
"five hundred nine," which denotes a certain prime number, and in the way 
expressed by the linguistic structure, namely as being five times a hundred 
plus nine; "the author of Waverley," which denotes a certain Scottish 
novelist, namely Sir Walter Scott, and in the particular way expressed by 
the linguistic structure, namely as having written Waverley; "Rembrandt's 
birthplace"; "the capital of Venezuela"; "the cube of 2." 
The distinction is not always clear in the natural languages between the 
two kinds of proper names, those which are arbitrarily assigned to have a 
certain meaning (primitive proper names, as we shall say in the case of a 
formalized language), and those which have a linguistic structure of mean-
ingful parts. E.g., "The Odyssey" has in the Greek a derivation from 
"Odysseus," and it may be debated whether this etymology is a mere 
matter of past history or whether it is still to be considered in modern 
English that the name "The Odyssey" has a structure involving the name 
"Odysseus." This uncertainty is removed in the case of a formalized 
language by fixing and making explicit the formation rules of the 
language (§07). 
There is not yet a theory of the meaning of proper names upon which 
u 
'We extend the usual meaning of proper name in this manner because such alternative 
terms as singular name or singular term have traditional associations which we wish to 
avoid. The single word name would serve the purpose except for the necessity of 
distinguishing from the common names (or general names) which occur in the natural 
languages, and hereafter we shall often say simply name. 
We do use the word term, but in its everyday meaning of an item of terminology, 
and not with any reference to the traditional doctrine of "categorical propositions" 
or the like. 

4 
INTRODUCTION 
general agreement has been reached as the best. Full discussion of the 
question would take us far beyond the intended scope of this book. But it 
is necessary to outline briefly the theory which will be adopted here, due in 
its essentials to Gottlob Frege.5 
The most conspicuous aspect of its meaning is that a proper name always 
is, or at least is put forward as, a name of something. We shall say that a 
proper name denotes* or names1 that of which it is a name. The relation 
between a proper name and what it denotes will be called the name relation* 
BSee his paper, "Ueber Sinn und Bedeutung," in Zeitschrift 
fiir Philosophic 
und 
philosophische Kritik, 
vol. 100 (1892), pp. 25-50. (There are an Italian translation of 
this by L. Geymonat in Gottlob Frege, Aritmetica 
e Logica (1948), pp. 215-252, and 
English translations by Max Black in The Philosophical Review, vol. 57 (1948), pp. 
207-230, and by Herbert Feigl in Readings 
in Philosophical 
Analysis 
(1949), pp. 
85-102. See reviews of these in The Journal 
of Symbolic Logic, vol. 13 (1948), pp. 
152-153, and vol. 14 (1949), pp. 184-185.) 
A similar theory, but with some essential differences, is proposed by Rudolf Carnap 
in his recent book Meaning and Necessity 
(1947). 
A radically different theory is that of Bertrand Russell, developed in a paper in 
Mind, vol. 14 (1905), pp. 479-493; in the Introduction to the first volume of Principia 
Mathematica (by A. N. Whitehead and Bertrand Russell, 1910); and in a number of 
more recent publications, among them Russell's book, An Inquiry 
into Meaning <S-
Truth (1940). The doctrine of Russell amounts very nearly to a rejection of proper 
names as irregularities of the natural languages which are to be eliminated in constructing 
a formalized language. It falls short of this by allowing a narrow category of proper 
names which must be names of sense qualities that are known by acquaintance, and 
which, in Fregean terms, have Bedeutung 
but not 
Sinn. 
aIn the usage of J. S. Mill, and of others following him, not only a singular name 
(proper name in our terminology) but also a common or general name is said to denote, 
with the difference that the former denotes only one thing, the latter, many things. 
E.g., the common name "man" is said to denote Rembrandt; also to denote Scott; 
also to denote Frege; etc. 
In the formalized languages which we shall study, the nearest analogues of the com-
mon name will be the variable and the form (see §02). And we prefer to use a different 
terminology for variables and forms than that of denoting—in particular because we 
wish to preserve the distinction of a proper name, or constant, from a form which is 
concurrent to a constant (in the sense of § 02), and from a variable which has one thing 
only in its range. In what follows, therefore, we shall speak of proper names only as 
denoting. 
From another point of view common names may be thought of as represented in the 
formalized languages, not by variables or forms, but by proper names of classes (class 
constants). Hence the usage has also arisen according to which a proper name of a class 
is said to denote the various members of the class. We shall not follow this, but shall 
speak of a proper name of a class as denoting the class itself, (Here we agree with Mill, 
who distinguishes a singular collective name, or proper name of a class, from a common 
or general name, calling the latter a "name of a class" only in the distributive sense of 
being a name of each individual.) 
'We thus translate Frege's bedeuten by denote or name. The verb to mean we reserve 
for general use, in reference to possible different kinds of meaning. 
8The name relation is properly a ternary relation, among a language, a word or phrase 
of the language, and a denotation. But it may be treated as binary by fixing the language 
in a particular context. Similarly one should speak of the denotation of a name with 
respect to a language, omitting the latter qualification only when the language has been 
fixed or when otherwise no misunderstanding can result. 

§01] 
NAMES 
5 
and the thing9 denoted will be called the denotation. For instance, the proper 
name "Rembrandt" will thus be said to denote or name the Dutch artist 
Rembrandt, and he will be said to be the denotation of the name "Rem-
brandt." Similarly, "the author of Waverley" 
denotes or names the Scottish 
author, and he is the denotation both of this name and of the name "Sir 
Walter Scott." 
That the meaning of a proper name does not consist solely in its denotation 
may be seen by examples of names which have the same denotation though 
their meanings are in some sense different. Thus "Sir Walter Scott" and 
"the author of Waverley" 
have the same denotation; it is contained in the 
meaning of the first name, but not of the second, that the person named is 
a knight or baronet and has the given name "Walter" and surname "Scott";10 
and it is contained in the meaning of the second name, but not of the first, 
that the person named wrote Waverley {and indeed as sole author, in view 
of the definite article and of the fact that the phrase is put forward as a 
proper name). To bring out more sharply the difference in meaning of the 
two names let us notice that, if two names are synonymous 
(have the same 
meaning in all respects), then one may always be substituted for the other 
without change of meaning. The sentence, "Sir Walter Scott is the author of 
Waverley," 
has, however, a very different meaning from the sentence, "Sir 
Walter Scott is Sir Walter Scott": for the former sentence conveys an important 
fact of literary history of which the latter gives no hint. This difference in 
meaning may lead to a difference in truth when the substitution of one name 
for the other occurs within certain contexts.11 E.g., it is true that "George IV 
once demanded to know whether Scott was the author of Waverley"; 
but 
false that "George IV once demanded to know whether Scott was Scott."12 
•The word thing is here used in its widest sense, in short for anything namable. 
10The term proper name is often restricted to names of this kind, i.e., which have 
as part of their meaning that the denotation is so called or is or was entitled to be so 
called. As already explained, we are not making such a restriction. 
Though it is, properly speaking, irrelevant to the discussion here, it is of interest to 
recall that Scott did make use of "the author of Waverley" as a pseudonym during the 
time that his authorship of the Waverley Novels was kept secret. 
11Contexts, namely, which render the occurrences of the names oblique in the sense 
explained below. 
12The particular example is due to Bertrand Russell; the point which it illustrates, 
to Frege. 
This now famous question, put to Scott himself in the indirect form of a toast "to the 
author of Waverley" at a dinner at which Scott was present, was met by him with a flat 
denial, "Sire, I am not the author of Waverley," 
We may therefore enlarge on the 
example by remarking that Scott, despite a pardonable departure from the truth, did 
not mean to go so far as to deny his self-identity (as if he had said "I am not I"). 
And his hearers surely did not so understand him, though some must have shrewdly 
guessed the deception as to his authorship of 
Waverley. 

6 
INTRODUCTION 
Therefore, besides the denotation, we ascribe to every proper name an-
other kind of meaning, the sense,1* saying, e.g., that "Sir Walter Scott" 
and "the author of Waverley" have the same denotation but different sen-
ses.14 Roughly, the sense is what is grasped when one understands a name,18 
and it may be possible thus to grasp the sense of a name without having 
knowledge of its denotation except as being determined by this sense. If, in 
particular, the question "Is Sir Walter Scott the author of Waverley}" is 
used in an intelligent demand for new information, it must be that the 
questioner knows the senses of the names "Sir Walter Scott" and "the 
author of Waverley" without knowing of their denotations enough to identify 
them certainly with each other. 
We shall say that a name denotes or names its denotation and expresses16 
its sense. Or less explicitly we may speak of a name just as having a certain 
denotation and having a certain sense. Of the sense we say that it determines 
the denotation, or is a concept11 of the denotation. 
Concepts17 we think of as non-linguistic in character—since synonymous 
names, in the same or different languages, express the same sense or concept 
—and since the same name may also express different senses, either in 
different languages or, by equivocation, in the same language. We are even 
13We adopt this as the most appropriate translation of Frege's Sinn, especially since 
the technical meaning given to the word sense thus comes to be very close indeed to the 
ordinary acceptation of the sense of an expression. (Russell and some others following 
him have used "meaning" as a translation of Frege's Sjnn.) 
l4A similar distinction is made by J. S. Mill between the denotation and the connota-
tion of a name. And in fact we are prepared to accept connotation as an alternative trans-
lation of Sinn, although it seems probable that Frege did not have Mill's distinction in 
mind in making his own. We do not follow Mill in admitting names which have denotation 
without connotation, but rather hold that a name must always point to its denotation 
in some way, i.e., through some sense or connotation, though the sense may reduce in 
special cases just to the denotation's being called so and so (e.g., in the case of personal 
names), or to its being what appears here and now (as sometimes in the case of the 
demonstrative "this"). Because of this and other differences, and because of the more 
substantial content of Frege's treatment, we attribute the distinction between sense and 
denotation to Frege rather than to Mill. Nevertheless the discussion of names in Mill's 
A System of Logic (1843) may profitably be read in this connection. 
18It is not meant by this to imply any psychological element in the notion of sense. 
Rather, a sense (or a concept) is a postulated abstract object, with certain postulated 
properties. These latter are only briefly indicated in the present informal discussion; 
and in particular we do not discuss the assumptions to be made about equality of senses, 
since this is unnecessary for our immediate purpose. 
19This is our translation of Frege's driickt aus. Mill's term connotes is also acceptable 
here, provided that care is taken not to confuse Mill's meaning of this term with other 
meanings which it has since acquired in common English usage. 
17This use of concept is a departure from Frege's terminology. Though not identical 
with Carnap's use of concept in recent publications, it is closely related to it, and was 
suggested to the writer by correspondence with Carnap in 1943. It also agrees well 
with Russell's use of class-concept in The Principles 
of Mathematics 
(1903)—cf. §69 
thereof. 

§01] 
NAMES 
prepared to suppose the existence of concepts of things which have no name 
in any language in actual use. But every concept of a thing is a sense of 
some name of it in some (conceivable) language. 
The possibility must be allowed of concepts which are not concepts of 
any actual thing, and of names which express a sense but have no denotation. 
Indeed such names, at least on one very plausible interpretation, do occur 
in the natural languages such as English: e.g., "Pegasus,"18 "the king of 
France in A.D. 1905." But, as Frege has observed, it is possible to avoid 
such names in the construction of formalized languages.19 And it is in fact 
often convenient to do this. 
To understand a language fully, we shall hold, requires knowing the senses 
of all names in the language, but not necessarily knowing which senses 
determine the same denotation, or even which senses determine denotations 
at all. 
In a well constructed language of course every name should have just one 
sense, and it is intended in the formalized languages to secure such univ-
18While the exact sense of the name "Pegasus" is variable or uncertain, it is, we take 
it, roughly that of the winged horse who took such and such a part in such and such 
supposed events—where only such minimum essentials of the story are to be included as 
it would be necessary to verify in order to justify saying, despite the common opinion, 
that "Pegasus did after all exist." 
We are thus maintaining that, in the present actual state of the English language, 
"Pegasus" is not just a personal name, having the sense of who or what was called so 
and so, but has the more complex sense described. However, such questions regarding 
the natural languages must not be supposed always to have one final answer. On the 
contrary, the present actual state (at any time) tends to be indeterminate in a way to 
leave much debatable. 
19For example, in the case of a formalized language obtained from one of the logistic 
systems of Chapter X (or of a paper by the writer in The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 
vol. 5 (1940), pp. 56-68) by an interpretation retaining the principal interpretation of 
the variables and of the notations A (abstraction) and ( ) (application of function to 
argument), it is sufficient to take the following precautions in assigning senses to the 
primitive constants. For a primitive constant of type o or t the sense must be such 
as—on the basis of accepted presuppositions—to assure the existence of a denotation in 
the appropriate domain, £) (of truth-values) or 8 (of individuals). For a primitive 
constant of type a/? the sense must be such as—on the same basis—to assure the exist-
ence of a denotation which is in the domain 2193, i.e., which is a function from the (entire) 
domain 93 which is taken as the range of variables of type /J, to the domain % which is 
taken as the range of variables of type a. 
Then every well-formed formula without free variables will have a denotation, as 
indeed it must if such interpretation of the logistic system is to accord with formal 
properties of the system. 
As in the case, e.g., of ta(0a), it may happen that the most immediate or naturally 
suggested interpretation of a primitive constant of type a/? makes it denote a function 
from a proper part of the domain 33 to the domain 2t. In such a case the definition of 
the function must be extended, by artificial means if necessary, over the remainder of 
the domain 93, so as to obtain a function having the entire domain 93 as its range. The 
sense assigned to the primitive constant must then be such as to determine this latter 
function as denotation, rather than the function which had only a proper part of 93 
as its range. 

8 
INTRODUCTION 
ocacy. But this is far from being the case in the natural languages. In par-
ticular, as Frege has pointed out, the natural languages customarily allow, 
besides the ordinary (gewbhnlich) use of a name, also an oblique [ungerade) 
use of the name, the sense which the name would express in its ordinary use 
becoming the denotation when the name is used obliquely.20 
Supposing univocacy in the use of names to have been attained (this 
ultimately requires eliminating the oblique use of names by introducing 
special names to denote the senses which other names express21), we make, 
with Frege, the following assumptions, about names which have a linguistic 
structure and contain other names as constituent parts: (1) when a con-
20For example, in "Scott is the author of Waverley" the names "Scott," 
"Waverley," 
"the author of Waverley" have ordinary occurrences. But in "George IV wished to 
know whether Scott was the author of Waverley" the same three names have oblique 
occurrences (while "George IV" has an ordinary occurrence). Again, in "Schliemann 
sought the site of Troy" the names "Troy" and "the site of Troy" occur obliquely. 
For to seek the site of some other city, determined by a different concept, is not the 
same as to seek the site of Troy, not even if the two cities should happen as a matter of 
fact (perhaps unknown to the seeker) to have had the same site. 
According to the Fregean theory of meaning which we are advocating, "Schliemann 
sought the site of Troy" asserts a certain relation as holding, not between Schliemann 
and the site of Troy (for Schliemann might have sought the site of Troy though Troy 
had been a purely fabulous city and its site had not existed), but between Schliemann 
and a certain concept, namely that of the site of Troy. This is, however, not to say that 
"Schliemann sought the site of Troy" means the same as "Schliemann sought the con-
cept of the site of Troy." On the contrary, the first sentence asserts the holding of a 
certain relation between Schliemann and the concept of the site of Troy, and is true; 
but the second sentence asserts the holding of a like relation between Schliemann and 
the concept of the concept of the site of Troy, and is very likely false. The relation 
holding between Schliemann and the concept of the site of Troy is not quite that of 
having sought, or at least it is misleading to call it that—in view of the way in which 
the verb to seek is commonly used in English. 
(W. V. Quine—in The Journal of Philosophy, vol. 40 (1943), pp. 113-127, and else-
where—introduces a distinction between the "meaning" of a name and what the name 
"designates" which parallels Frege's distinction between sense and denotation, also a 
distinction between "purely designative" occurrences of names and other occurrences 
which coincides in many cases with Frege's distinction between ordinary and oblique 
occurrences. For a discussion of Quine's theory and its differences from Frege's see a 
review by the present writer, in The Journal of Symbolic Logic, vol. 8 (1943), pp. 46-47; 
also a note by Morton G White in Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, vol. 9, 
no. 2 (1948), pp. 305-308.) 
"As an indication of the distinction in question we shall sometimes (as we did in the 
second paragraph of footnote 20) use such phrases as "the concept of Sir Walter Scott," 
"the concept of the author of Waverley," "the concept of the site of Troy" to denote the 
same concepts which are expressed by the respective names "Sir Walter Scott," "the 
author of Waverley," "the site of Troy." The definite article "the" sufficiently distin-
guishes the phrase (e.g.) "the concept of the site of Troy" from the similar phrase "a 
concept of the site of Troy," the latter phrase being used as a common name to refer to 
any one of the many different concepts of this same spot. 
This device is only a rough expedient to serve the purpose of informal discussion. It 
does not do away with the oblique use of names because, when the phrase "the concept 
of the site of Troy" is used in the way described, it contains an oblique occurrence of 
"the site of Troy." 

§02] 
CONSTANTS 
AND 
VARIABLES 
9 
stituent name is replaced by another having the same sense, the sense of the 
entire name is not changed; (2) when a constituent name is replaced by 
another having the same denotation, the denotation of the entire name is 
not changed (though the sense may be).22 
We make explicit also the following assumption (of Frege), which, like 
(1) and (2), has been implicit in the foregoing discussion: (3) The denotation 
of a name (if there is one) is a function of the sense of the name, in the sense 
of §03 below; i.e., given the sense, the existence and identity of the deno-
tation are thereby fixed, though they may not necessarily therefore be 
known to every one who knows the sense. 
02. Constants and variables. We adopt the mathematical 
usage 
according to which a proper name of a number is called a constant, and in 
connection with formalized languages we extend this usage by removing 
the restriction to numbers, so that the term constant becomes synonymous 
with proper name having a 
denotation. 
However, the term constant will often be applied also in the construction 
of uninterpreted calculi—logistic systems in the sense of §07—some of the 
symbols or expressions being distinguished as constants just in order to 
treat them differently from others in giving the rules of the calculus. Ordi-
narily the symbols or expressions thus distinguished as constants will in 
fact become proper names (with denotation) in at least one of the possible 
interpretations of the calculus. 
As already familiar from ordinary mathematical usage, a variable is a 
symbol whose meaning is like that of a proper name or constant except that 
the single denotation of the constant is replaced by the possibility of various 
values of the variable. 
Because it is commonly necessary to restrict the values which a variable 
may take, we think of a variable as having associated with it a certain non-
empty range of possible values, the range of the variable as we shall call it. 
Involved in the meaning of a variable, therefore, are the kinds of meaning 
which belong to a proper name of the range.23 But a variable must not be 
"To avoid serious difficulties, we must also assume when a constituent name has no 
denotation that the entire name is then likewise without denotation. In the natural 
languages such apparent examples to the contrary as "the myth of Pegasus," 
"the 
search by Ponce de Leon for the fountain of youth" are to be explained as exhibiting 
oblique occurrences of the italicized constituent name. 
28Thus the distinction of sense and denotation comes to have an analogue for variables 
Two variables with ranges determined by different concepts have to be considered as 
variables of different kinds, even if the ranges themselves should be identical. However, 
because of the restricted variety of ranges of variables admitted, this question does not 
arise in connection with any of the formalized languages which are actually considered 
below. 

10 
INTRODUCTION 
identified with a proper name of its range, since there are also differences 
of meaning between the two.24 
The meaning which a variable does possess is best explained by returning 
to the consideration of complex names, containing other names as constit-
uent parts. In such a complex name, having a denotation, let one of the 
constituent names be replaced at one or more (not necessarily all) of its 
occurrences by a variable, say x. To avoid complications, we suppose that x 
is a variable which does not otherwise occur,26 and that the denotation of the 
constituent name which x replaces is in the range of x. The resulting expres-
sion (obtained from the complex name by thus replacing one of the constit-
uent names by a variable) we shall call a form.26 Such a form, for each value 
of x within the range of x, or at least for certain such values of x, has a value. 
Namely, the value of the form, for a given value of x, is the same as the 
denotation of the expression obtained from the form by substituting every-
where for x a name of the given value of x (or, if the expression so obtained 
"That such an identification is impossible may be quickly seen from the point of 
view of the ordinary mathematical use of variables. For two proper names of 
the range are fully interchangeable if only they have the same sense; but two 
distinct variables must be kept distinct even if they have the same range determined 
by the same concept. E.g., if each of the letters x and y is a variable whose range 
is the real numbers, we are obliged to distinguish the two inequalities x(x + y) ^ 0 
and x(x + x) ^ 0 as different —indeed the second inequality is universally true, the 
first one is not. 
S6This is for momentary convenience of explanation. We shall apply the name form 
also to expressions which are similarly obtained but in which the variable x may other-
wise occur, provided the expression has at least one occurrence of a; as a free variable 
(see footnote 28 and the explanation in §06 which is there referred to). 
"This is a different use of the word form from that which appeared in §00 in the dis-
cussion of form and matter. We shall distinguish the latter use, when necessary, by 
speaking more explicitly of logical form. 
Our present use of the word form is similar to that which is familiar in algebra, and in 
fact may be thought of as obtained from it by removing the restriction to a special kind 
of expressions (polynomials, or homogeneous polynomials). For the special case of 
propositional forms (see §04), the word is already usual in logic in this sense, indepen-
dently of its use by algebraists—see, e.g., J. N. Keynes, Formal Logic, 4th edn., 1906, 
p. 53; Hugh MacColl in Mind, vol. 19 (1910), p. 193; Susanne K. Langer, Introduction 
to Symbolic Logic, 1937, p. 91; also Heinrich Scholz, Vorlesungen iiber Grundziige der 
Mathematischen 
Logik, 
1949 (for the use of Aussageform 
in German). 
Instead of the word form, we might plausibly have used the word variable here, by 
analogy with the way in which we use constant. I.e., just as we apply the term constant 
to a complex name containing other names (constants) as constituent parts, so we might 
apply the term variable to an appropriate complex expression containing variables aa 
constituent parts. This usage may indeed be defended as having some sanction in 
mathematical writing. But we prefer to preserve the better established usage according 
to which a variable is always a single symbol (usually a letter or letter with 
subscripts). 
The use, by some recent authors, of the word function (with or without a qualifying 
adjective) for what we here call a form is, in our opinion, unfortunate, because it tends 
to conflict with and obscure the abstract notion of a function which will be explained 
in §03. 

§02] 
CONSTANTS 
AND VARIABLES 
11 
has no denotation, then the form has no value for that value of a;).27 
A variable such as x, occurring in the manner just described, is called a 
free variable28 of the expression (form) in which it occurs. 
Likewise suppose a complex name, having a denotation, to contain two 
constituent names neither of which is a part of the other, and let these two 
constituent names be replaced by two variables, say x and y respectively, 
each at one or more (not necessarily all) of its occurrences. For simplicity 
suppose that x and y are variables which do not occur in the original complex 
name, and that the denotations of the constituent names which x and y 
replace are in the ranges of x and y respectively. The resulting expression 
{obtained by the substitution described) is a form, with two free variables 
xand y. For certain pairs of values of x and y, within the ranges of x and y 
respectively, the form has a value. Namely, the value of the form, for given 
values of x and y, is the same as the denotation of the expression obtained 
from the form by substituting everywhere for x and y names of their re-
*'It follows from assumption (2), at the end of §01, that the value thus obtained 
for the form is independent of the choice of a particular name of the given value of x. 
The distinction of sense and denotation is, however, relevant here. For in addition 
to a value of the form in the sense explained in the text (we may call it more explicitly 
a denotation value), a complete account must mention also what we may call a sense 
value of the form. Namely, a sense value of the form is determined by a concept of some 
value of x, and is the same as the sense of the expression obtained from the form by 
substituting everywhere for x a name having this concept as its sense. 
It should also be noted that a form, in a particular language, may have a value even 
for a value of x which is without a name in that language: it is sufficient that the given 
value of x shall have a name in some suitable extension of the language—say, that 
obtained by adding to the vocabulary of the language a name of the given value of x, 
and allowing it to be substitutable for x wherever x occurs as a free variable. Likewise 
a form may have a sense value for a given concept of a value of x if some suitable ex-
tension of the language contains a name having that concept as its sense. 
It is indeed possible, as we shall see later by particular examples, to construct 
languages of so restricted a vocabulary as to contain no constants, but only variables and 
forms. But it would seem that the most natural way to arrive at the meaning of forms 
which occur in these languages is by contemplating languages which are extensions of 
them and which do contain constants—or else, what is nearly the same thing, by 
allowing a temporary change in the meaning of the variables ("fixing the values of the 
variables") so that they become constants. 
"We adopt this term from Hilbert (1922), Wilhelm Ackermann (1924), J. v. Neu-
mann (1927), Hilbert and Ackermann (1928), Hilbert and Bernays (1934). For what we 
here call a free variable the term real variable is also familiar, having been introduced 
by Giuseppe Peano in 1897 and afterward adopted by Russell (1908), but is less satis-
factory because it conflicts with the common use of "real variable" to mean a variable 
whose range is the real numbers. 
As we shall see later (§06), a free variable must be distinguished from a bound variable 
(in the terminology of the Hilbert school) or apparent variable (Peano's terminology). 
The difference is that an expression containing x as a free variable has values for various 
values of x, but an expression, containing x as a bound or apparent variable only, has 
a meaning which is independent of x—not in the sense of having the same value for 
every value of x, but in the sense that the assignment of particular values to x is not a 
relevant procedure. 

12 
INTRODUCTION 
spective values (or, if the expression so obtained has no denotation, then the 
form has no value for these particular values of x and y). 
In the same way forms with three, four, and more free variables may be 
obtained. If a form contains a single free variable, we shall call it a singularyn 
form, if just two free variables, binary, if three, ternary, and so on. A form 
with exactly n different free variables is an n-ary form. 
Two forms will be called concurrent if they agree in value—i.e., either 
have the same value or both have no value—for each assignment of values 
to their free variables. (Since the two forms may or may not have the same 
free variables, all the variables are to be considered together which have 
free occurrences in either form, and the forms are concurrent if they agree 
in value for every assignment of values to these variables.) A form will be 
called concurrent to a constant if, for every assignment of values to its free 
variables, its value is the same as the denotation of the constant. And two 
constants will be called concurrent if they have the same denotation. 
Using the notion of concurrence, we may now add a fourth assumption, 
or principle of meaning, to the assumptions (l)-(3) of the last two para-
graphs of §01. This is an extension of (2) to the case of forms, as follows: 
(4) In any constant or form, when a constituent constant or form is replaced 
by another concurrent to it, the entire resulting constant or form is con-
current to the original one.30 The significance of this principle will become 
clearer in connection with the use of operators and bound variables, explained 
in §06 below. It is to be taken, like (2), as a part of our explanation of the 
name relation, and thus a part of our theory of meaning. 
As in the case of constant, we shall apply the terms variable and form 
also in the construction of uninterpreted calculi, introducing them by special 
definition for each such calculus in connection with which they are to be 
used. Ordinarily the symbols and expressions so designated will be ones 
which become variables and forms in our foregoing sense under one of the 
principal interpretations of the calculus as a language (see §07). 
It should be emphasized that a variable, in our usage, is a symbol of a 
"We follow W. V. Quine in adopting this etymologically more correct term, rather 
than the presently commoner "unary." 
SQFor completeness—using the notion of sense value explained in footnote 27 and 
extending it in obvious fashion to «-ary forms—we must also extend the assumption (1) 
to the case of forms, as follows. Let two forms be called sense-concurrent if they agree 
in sense value for each system of concepts of values of their free variables; let a form 
be called sense-concurrent to a constant if, for every system of concepts of values of its 
free variables, its sense value is the same as the sense of the constant; and let two con~ 
stants be called sense-concurrent if they express the same sense. Then: (5) In any con-
stant or form, when a constituent constant or form is replaced by another which issense-
concurrenttoit.theentireresultingconstantorformissense-concurrenttotheoriginalone. 

§02] 
CONSTANTS 
AND 
VARIABLES 
13 
certain kind 3 1 rather than s o m e t h i n g (e.g., a n u m b e r ) which is denoted or 
otherwise m e a n t by such symbol. Mathematical writers do speak of "variable 
real n u m b e r s , " or oftener " v a r i a b l e q u a n t i t i e s / ' b u t it seems best not to 
interpret these phrases literally. Objections to the idea that real n u m b e r s 
are to be divided into two sorts or classes, " c o n s t a n t real n u m b e r s " a n d 
"variable real n u m b e r s , " have been clearly stated by Frege 3 2 and need not 
be repeated here at length. 3 3 T h e fact is that a satisfactory theory has never 
been developed on this basis, a n d it is not easy to see how it might be done. 
The mathematical theory of real numbers provides a convenient source of 
examples in a system of notation 3 4 whose general features are well established. 
Turning to this theory to illustrate the foregoing discussion, we cite as particular 
examples of constants the ten expressions: 
1 
1 
1 - 
4 -f- 1 
n 
sin n\1 
0, 
, e, 
, 
, 4e4, e6, e — e, — —, 
. 
2 
2n 
In 
2n 
njl 
Let us say t h a t x and y are variables whose range is the real numbers, and m, n, r 
are variables whose range is the positive integers.35 The following are examples 
of forms: 
"Therefore, a variable (or more precisely, particular instances or occurrences of a 
variable) can be written on paper—just as the figure 7 can be written on paper, though 
the number 7 cannot be so written except in the indirect sense of writing something 
which denotes it. 
And similarly constants and forms are symbols or expressions of certain kinds. It is 
indeed usual to speak also of numbers and physical quantities as "constants"—but 
this usage is not the same as that in which a constant can be contrasted with a variable, 
and we shall avoid it in this book. 
"See his contribution to Festschrift 
Ludwig Boltzmann 
Gewidmet, 1904. (Frege's 
theory of functions as "ungesattigt," mentioned at the end of his paper, is another mat-
ter, not necessarily connected with his important point about variables. It will not be 
adopted in this book, but rather we shall take a function—see §03—to be more nearly 
what Frege would call "Werthverlauf einer Function.") 
"However, we mention the following parallel to one of Frege's examples. Shall we 
say that the usual list of seventeen names is a complete list of the Saxon kings of 
England, or only that it is a complete list of the constant Saxon kings of England, and 
that account must be taken in addition of an indefinite number of variable Saxon 
kings? One of these variable Saxon kings would appear to be a human being of a very 
striking sort, having been, say, a grown man named Alfred in A.D. 876, and a boy named 
Edward in A.D. 976. 
According to the doctrine we would advocate (following Frege), there are just seven-
teen Saxon kings of England, from Egbert to Harold, and neither a variable Saxon king 
nor an indeterminate Saxon king is to be admitted to swell the number. And the like 
holds for the positive integers, for the real numbers, and for all other domains abstract 
and concrete. Variability or indeterminacy, where such exists, is a matter of language 
and attaches 
to symbols or expressions. 
"We say "system of notation" rather than "language" because only the specifically 
numerical notations can be regarded as well established in ordinary mathematical 
writing. They are usually supplemented (for the statement of theorems and proofs} 
by one or another of the natural languages, according to the choice of the particular 
writer. 
"Every positive integer is also a real number. I.e., the terms must be so understood 
for purposes of these illustrations. 

14 
INTRODUCTION 
l 
1 
l l - 4 + l 
y, 
—, 
, 
, 
. 4ex, xex, 
x', 
y 
x 
2x 
4LX 
x 
r 
sin x sin r 
x — x, n — n, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
2x 
2r 
x 
r 
y 
r x — m -4- 1 
yex, 
, 
, 
. 
xy 
xv 
mn 
The forms on the first two lines are singulary, each having one free variable, y, x, n, 
or r as the case may be. The forms on the third line are binary, the first two having 
x and y as free variables, the third one x and r, the fourth one x and m.s* 
The constants 
1 
1 - 4 + 1 
and 
2n 
4» 
are not identical. B u t they are concurrent, since each denotes the same number. 8 7 
Similarly the constants e — e and 0, though not identical, are concurrent because 
the numbers e — e and 0 are identical. Similarly — TC/2TC and — 1/2. 
The form xex, for the value 0 of x, has the value 0. (Of course it is the number 
0 that is here in question, not the constant 0, so that it is equally correct to say 
that the form xex, for the value 0 of x, has the value e — e; or that, for the value 
e — e of x, it has the value 0; etc.) For the value 1 of x the form xex has the 
value e. For the value 4 of a? its value is ie*, a real number for which (as it happens) 
no simpler name is in standard use. 
The form yex, for the values 0 and 4 of £ and y respectively, has the value 4. 
S8To illustrate the remark of footnote 28, following are some examples of expressions 
containing bound variables: 
xxdx, 
hm 
, 
> 
I I 
. 
The first two of these are constants, containing x as a bound variable. The third is a 
singulary form, with a: as a free variable and m and n as bound variables. 
A variable may have both free and bound occurrences in the same expression. An 
example is f*xxdx, 
the double use of the letter x constituting no ambiguity. Other 
examples are the variable Ax in (Dx sin x)Ax and the variable a; in xE{k), if the notations 
Dx sin x and E{h) are replaced by their equivalents 
,. 
sin(x + Ax) — sin x 
hm 
-j 
4x-+0 
Ax 
rVi - kw 
X2 
and 
J 
" — dx 
respectively. 
"Whether these two constants have the same sense (as well as the same denotation) 
is a question which depends for its answer on a general theory of equality of senses, 
such as we have not undertaken to discuss here—cf. footnote 15. It is clear that Frege, 
though he formulates no complete theory of equality of senses, would regard these two 
constants as having different senses. But a plausible case might be made out for sup-
posing that the two constants have the same sense, on some such ground as that the 
equation between them expresses a necessary proposition or is true on logical grounds 
alone or the like. No doubt there is more than one meaning of "sense," according to 
the criterion adopted for equality of senses, and the decision among them is a matter 
of convention and expediency. 

§03] 
FUNCTIONS 
For the values 1 and 1 of x and y it has the value le1; or, what is the same thing, 
it has the value e. 
The form — yjxy, for the values e and 2 oi x and y respectively, has the value 
— 1/e. For the values e and e of x and y, it has again the value — 1/e. For the 
values e and 0 of a: and y it has no value, because of the non-existence of a quo-
tient of 0 by 0. 
The form — rjxr, for the values e and 2 of a; and r respectively, has the value 
— 1/e. But there is no value for the values e and e of x and r, because e is not 
in the range of r (e is not one of the possible values of r). 
The forms 
1 
1 - 4 + 1 
— — and 
2x 
4x 
are concurrent, since they are both without a value for the value 0 of x, and 
they have the same value for all other values of x. The forms — Ijx and — yjxy 
fail to be concurrent, since they disagree for the value 0 of y (if the value of x 
is not 0). But the forms — Ijx and — rjxr are concurrent. 
The forms — \jy and — Ijx are not concurrent, as they disagree, e.g., for the 
values 1 and 2 of x and y respectively. 
The forms x — x and n — n are concurrent to the same constant, namely 0,38 
and are therefore also concurrent to each other. 
The forms — xj2x and — rj2r are non-concurrent because of disagreement 
for the value 0 of x. The latter form, but not the former, is concurrent to a 
constant, namely to — 1/2. 
03. Functions. By a function—or, 
more explicitly, a one-valued 
singulary 
function—we shall understand an operation39 which, when applied to some-
thing as argument, yields a certain thing as the value of the function for that 
argument. It is not required that the function be applicable to every possible 
thing as argument, but rather it lies in the nature of any given function to 
be applicable to certain things and, when applied to one of them as argu-
ment, to yield a certain value. The things to which the function is applicable 
constitute the range of the function (or the range of arguments of the function) 
and the values constitute the range of values of the function. The function 
itself consists in the yielding or determination39 of a value from each argu-
ment in the range of the function. 
As regards equality or identity of functions we make the decision which is 
"Or also to any other constant which is concurrent to 0. 
S8Of course the words "operation," "yielding," "determination" as here used are 
near-synonyms of "function" and therefore our statement, if taken as a definition, 
would be open to the suspicion of circularity. Throughout this Introduction, however, 
we are engaged in informal explanation rather than definition, and, for this purpose, 
elaboration by means of synonyms may be a useful procedure. Ultimately, it seems, we 
must take the notion of function as primitive or undefined, or else some related notion, 
such as that of a class. (We shall see later how it is possible to think of a class as a 
special case of a function, and also how classes may be used, in certain connections or 
for certain purposes, to replace and do the work of functions in general.) 

16 
INTRODUCTION 
usual in mathematics. Namely, functions are identical if they have the same 
range and have, for each argument in the range, the same value. In other 
words, we take the word "function" to mean what may otherwise be called 
a function in extension. If the way in which a function yields or produces 
its value from its argument is altered without causing any change either in 
the range of the function or in the value of the function for any argument, 
then the function remains the same; but the associated function concept, 
or concept determining the function (in the sense of §01), is thereby changed. 
We shall speak of a function from a certain class to a certain class to mean 
a function which has the first class as its range and has all its values in the 
second class (though the second class may possibly be more extensive than 
the range of values of the function). 
To denote the value of a function for a given argument, it is usual to 
write a name of the function, followed by a name of the argument between 
parentheses. And of course the same notation applies (mutatis mutandis) 
with a variable or a form in place of either one or both of the names. Thus 
if / is a function and x belongs to the range of /, then f(x) is the value of the 
function / for the argument x.i0 
This is the usual notation for application of a function to an argument, 
and we shall often employ it. In some contexts (see Chapter X) we find it 
convenient to alter the notation by changing the position of the parentheses, 
so that we may write in the altered notation: if / is a function and x belongs 
to the range of /, then (fx) is the value of the function / for the argument x. 
So far we have discussed only one-valued singulary functions (and have 
used the word "function" in this sense). Indeed no use will be made in this 
book of many-valued functions,41 and the reader must always understand 
"This sentence exemplifies the use of variables to make general statements, which 
we assume is understood from familiar mathematical usage, though it has not yet been 
explained in this Introduction. (See the end of §06.) 
41It is the idea of a many-valued (singulary) function that, for a fixed argument, 
there may be more than one value of the function. If a name of the function is written, 
followed by a name of an argument between parentheses, the resulting expression is a 
common name (see footnote 6) denoting the values of the function for that argument. 
Though many-valued functions seem to arise naturally in the mathematical theories 
of real and complex numbers, objections immediately suggest themselves to the idea 
as just explained and are not easily overcome. Therefore it is usual to replace such many-
valued functions in one way or another by one-valued functions. One method is to 
replace a many-valued singulary function by a corresponding one-valued binary prop-
ositional function or relation (§04). Another method is to replace the many-valued 
function by a one-valued function whose values are classes, namely, the value of the 
one-valued function for a given argument is the class of the values of the many-valued 
function for that argument. Still another method is to change the range of the function, 
an argument for which the function has n values giving way to n different arguments 
for each of which the function has a different one of those n values (this is the standard 
role of the Riemann surface in the theory of complex numbers). 

§03] 
FUNCTIONS 
17 
"function" to mean a one-valued function. But we go on to explain functions 
of more than one argument. 
A binary function, or function of two arguments,42 is characterized by being 
applicable to two arguments in a certain order and yielding, when so applied, 
a certain value, the value of the function for those two arguments in that 
order. It is not required that the function be applicable to every two things 
as arguments; but rather, the function is applicable in certain cases to an 
ordered pair of things as arguments, and all such ordered pairs constitute 
the range of the function. The values constitute the range of values of the 
function. 
Binary functions are identical (i.e., are the same function) if they have the 
same range and have, for each ordered pair of arguments which lies in that 
range, the same value. 
To denote the value of a binary function for given arguments, it is usual 
to write a name of the function and then, between parentheses and separated 
by a comma, names of the arguments in order. Thus if / is a binary function 
and the ordered pair of x and y belongs to the range of /, then f{x, y) is the 
value of the function / for the arguments x and y in that order. 
In the same way may be explained the notion of a ternary function, of a 
quaternary function, and so on. In general, an w-ary function is applied to 
n arguments in an order, and when so applied yields a value, provided the 
ordered system of n arguments is in the range of the function. The value of 
an w-ary function for given arguments is denoted by a name of the function 
followed, between parentheses and separated by commas, by names of the 
arguments in order. 
Two binary functions <f> and xp are called converses, each of the other, in 
case the two following conditions are satisfied: (1) the ordered pair of x and 
y belongs to the range of (f> if and only if the ordered pair of y and x belongs 
to the range of \p; (2) for all x, y such that the ordered pair of x and y belongs 
to the range of </>,43 
4>{x,y) ~---xp{y,x). 
A binary function is called symmetric if it is identical with its converse. 
The notions of converse and of symmetry may also be extended to w-ary 
functions, several different converses and several different kinds of symme-
"Though it is in common use we shall avoid the phrase "function of two variables" 
(and "function of three variables" etc.) because it tends to make confusion between 
arguments to which a function is applied and variables taking such arguments as values. 
"The use of the sign = to express that things are identical is assumed familiar to 
the reader. We do not restrict this notation to the special case of numbers, but use it 
for identity generally. 

18 
INTRODUCTION 
try appearing when the number of arguments is three or more (we need not 
stop over details of this). 
We shall speak of a function of things of a certain kind to mean a function 
such that all the arguments to which it is applicable are of that kind. Thus 
a singulary function of real numbers, for instance, is a function from some 
class of real numbers to some (arbitrary) class. A binary function of real 
numbers is a binary function whose range consists of ordered pairs of real 
numbers (not necessarily all ordered pairs of real numbers). 
We shall use the phrase " 
is a function of 
," filling the blanks 
with forms,44 to mean what is more fully expressed as follows: "There 
exists a function / such that 
= /( 
) 
for all 
," where the first two blanks are filled, in order, with the same 
forms as before, and the third blank is filled with a complete list of the 
free variables of those forms. Similarly we shall use " 
is a function of 
and 
," filling the three blanks with forms, to stand for: "There 
exists a binary function / such that 
• 
= /( 
• 
) 
for all 
," where the first three blanks are filled, in order, with the same 
forms as before, and the last blank is filled with a complete list of the free 
variables of those forms.46 And similar phraseology will also be used where 
the reference is to a function / of more than two arguments. 
The phraseology just explained will also be used with the added statement 
of a condition or restriction. For example, " 
is a function of 
and 
if 
," where the first three blanks are filled with forms, and the 
fourth is filled with the statement of a condition involving some or all of 
the free variables of those forms,46 stands for: "There exists a binary function 
/ such that 
for all 
for which 
," where the first three blanks are filled, in order, 
"Our explanation assumes that neither of these forms has the particular letter / as 
one of its free variables. In the contrary case, the explanation is to be altered by using 
in place of the letter / as it appears in the text some variable (with appropriate range) 
which is not a free variable of either form. 
"The theory of real numbers again serving as a source of examples, it is thus true 
that xa + ya is a function of x + y and xy. But it is false that x* + x*y — xy* + y% 
is a function of x + y and xy (as is easily seen on the ground that the form x* -f x*y — 
xy1 + y* is not symmetric). Again, x* + y* + z* -f ix*y + ixy* + ix'z + 4xz* + 
i.yzz + 4yz3 is a function of x -f y + z and xy + zz + yz. But x* + y* -f z* is not 
a function of x 4- y •+ z and xy -f %z + yz. 
"Thus with a propositions 
form in the sense of §04 below. 

§03] 
FUNCTIONS 
19 
with the same forms as before, the fourth blank is filled with a complete 
list of the free variables of those forms, and the fifth blank is filled in the 
same way as the fourth blank was before.47 
Also the same phraseology, explained in the two preceding paragraphs, 
will be used with common names48 in place of forms. In this case the forms 
which the common names represent have to be supplied from the context. 
For example, the statement that "The density of helium gas is a function 
of the temperature and the pressure" is to be understood as meaning the same 
as "The density of hiss, function of the temperature of h and the pressure of h," 
where the three italicized forms replace the three original italicized common 
names, and where A is a variable whose values are instantaneous bits of 
helium gas (and whose range consists of all such). Or to avoid introducing the 
variable h with so special a range, we may understand instead: "The density 
of b is a function of the temperature of b and the pressure of b if b is an 
instantaneous bit of helium gas." Similarly the statement at the end of §01 
that the denotation of a name is a function of the sense means more explic-
itly (the reference being to a fixed language) that there exists a function / 
such that 
denotation of Ar = /(sense of N) 
for all names TV for which there is a denotation. 
It remains now to discuss the relationship between functions, in the ab-
stract sense that we have been explaining, and forms, in the sense of the pre-
ceding section (§02). 
If we suppose the language fixed, every singulary form has corresponding 
to it a function / (which we shall call the associated function of the form) by 
the rule that the value of / for an argument x is the same as the value of the 
form for the value x of the free variable of the form, the range of / consisting 
of all x's such that the form has a value for the value x of its free variable.49 
"Accordingly it is true, for example, that: x3 + x2y — xy2 + y3 is a function of x -f y 
and xyiix 
^ y. For the special case that the variables have a range consisting of real or 
complex numbers, a geometric terminology is often used, thus: x3 -f x*y — xy1 -f y3 
is a function of x + y and xy in the half-plane x ^ y. 
"See footnotes 4, 6. 
"For example, in the theory of real numbers, the form ^(ex — e~x) determines the 
function sinh as its associated function, by the rule that the value of sinh for an argu-
ment x is \(e* — e~*). The range of sinh then consists of all x's (i.e., all real numbers x) 
for which ±{ex — e~x) has a value. In other words, as it happens in this particular case, 
the range consists of all real numbers. 
Of course the free variable of the form need not be the particular letter x, and indeed 
it may be clearer to take an example in which the free variable is some other letter. 
Thus the form $(ey — e~v) determines the function sinh as its associated function, 
by the rule that the value of sinh for an argument x is the same as the value of the form 
\\ev — e~v) for the value x of the variable y. (I.e., in particular, the value of sinh for 

20 
INTRODUCTION 
But, still with reference to a fixed language, not every function is necessarily 
the associated function of some form.60 
It follows that two concurrent singulary forms with the same free variable 
have the same associated function. Also two singulary forms have the same 
associated function if they differ only by alphabetic change of the free vari-
able,51 i.e., if one is obtained from the other by substituting everywhere 
for its free variable some other variable with the same range—with, however, 
the proviso {the need of which will become clearer later) that the substituted 
variable must remain a free variable at every one of its occurrences resulting 
from the substitution. 
As a notation for (i.e., to denote) the associated function of a singulary 
form having, say, x as its free variable, we write the form itself with the 
letters Xx prefixed. And of course likewise with any other variable in place of 
x.5z Parentheses are to be supplied as necessary.63 
the argument 2 is the same as the value of the form £(ev — e~v) for the value 2 of the 
variable y; and so on for each different argument x that may be assigned.) 
Ordinarily, just the equation 
sinh (x) = %(ex — e~x) 
is written as sufficient indication of the foregoing. And this equation may even be called 
a definition of sinh, in the sense of footnote 168, (1) or (3). 
"According to classical real-number theory, the singulary functions from real num-
bers to real numbers (or even just the analytic singulary functions) are non-enumerable. 
Since the forms in a particular language are always enumerable, it follows that there is 
no language or system of notation in which every singulary function from real numbers 
to real numbers is the associated function of some form. 
Because of the non-enumerability of the real numbers themselves, it is even impossible 
in any language to provide proper names of all the real numbers. (Such a thing as, 
e.g., an infinite decimal expansion must not be considered a name of the corresponding 
real number, as of course an infinite expansion cannot ever be written out in full, or 
included as a part of any actually written or spoken sentence.) 
"E.g., as appears in footnote 49, the forms $(ex — e~*) and \(e* — er*) have the 
same associated function. 
"Thus the expressions kx(\(ex — e~x)), ky{\{ev — e_v)), sinh are all three synony-
mous, having not only the same denotation (namely the function sinh), but also the 
same sense, even under the severest criterion of sameness of sense. 
(In saying this we are supposing a language or system of notation in which the two 
different expressions sinh and kx{\(ex — e~x)) both occur. However, the very fact of 
synonymy shows that the expression sinh is dispensable in principle: except for con-
siderations of convenience, it could always be replaced by the longer expression 
kx{\{ex ~ e~x)). In constructing a formalized language, we prefer to avoid such dupli-
cations of notation so far as readily possible. See §11.) 
The expressions kx(^(ez — e~x)) and ky{\{ev — «"")) contain the variables x and y 
respectively, as bound variables in the sense of footnotes 28, 36 (and of §06 below). 
For, according to the meaning just explained for them, these expressions are constants, 
not singulary forms. But of course the expression \(e* — e~") is a singulary form, with 
x as a free variable. 
The meaning of such an expression as kx(yex), 
formed from the binary form ye' 
by prefixing Xx, now follows as a consequence of the explanation about variables and 
forms in §02. In this expression, x is a bound variable and y is a free variable, and the 

§03] 
FUNCTIONS 
21 
As an obvious extension of this notation, we shall also prefix the letters 
Xx {Ay, etc.) to any constant as a notation for the function whose value is 
the same for all arguments and is the denotation of the constant, the range 
of the function being the same as the range of the variable x.H This function 
will be called an associated singulary function of the constant, by analogy 
with the terminology "associated function of a form," though there is the 
difference that the same constant may have various associated functions 
with different ranges. Any function whose value is the same for all argu-
ments will be called a constant function (without regard to any question 
whether it is an associated function of a constant, in some particular language 
under consideration).55 
Analogous to the associated function of a singulary form, a binary form 
has two associated binary functions, one for each of the two orders in which 
the two free variables may be considered—or better, one for each of the two 
ways in which a pair of arguments of the function may be assigned as values 
to the two free variables of the form. 
The two associated functions of a binary form are identical, and thus 
reduce to one function, if and only if they are symmetric. In this case the 
binary form itself is also called symmetric.™ 
Likewise an w-ary form has n\ associated n-ary functions, one for each 
of the permutations of its free variables. Some of these associated functions 
are identical in certain cases of symmetry. 
Likewise a constant has associated ra-ary functions, for m = 1, 2, 3, . . . , 
by an obvious extension of the explanation already made for the special 
case m = 1. And by a still further extension of this we may speak of the 
associated ra-ary functions of an n-ary form, when m > n. In particular a 
expression is a singulary form whose values are singulary functions. From it, by pre-
fixing Xy, we obtain a constant, denoting a singulary function, and the range of values 
of this singulary function consists of singulary functions. 
63In constructing a formalized language, the manner in which parentheses arc to be 
put in has to be specified with more care. As a matter of fact this will be done, as we 
shall see, not by associating parentheses with the notation Xx, but by suitable provision 
for parentheses (or brackets) in connection with various other notations which may 
occur in the form to which Xx is prefixed. 
"Thus in connection with real-number theory we use Xx2 as a notation for the func-
tion whose range consists of all real numbers and whose value is 2 for every argument. 
"Note should also be taken of expressions in which the variable after X is not the 
same as the free variable of the form which follows; thus, for example, Xy(^(ex —- e~x)). 
As is seen from the explanation in §02, this expression is a singulary form with x as 
its free variable, the values of the form being constant functions. For the value 0 of x, 
e.g., the form Xy(${ex — e~x)) has as its value the constant function XyO. 
In both expressions, Xy(${ex — e~x)) and XyO, y is a bound or apparent variable. 
"We have already used this term, as applied to forms, in footnote 45, assuming the 
reader's understanding of it as familiar mathematical terminology. 

22 
INTRODUCTION 
singulary form has not only an associated singulary function but also 
associated binary functions, associated ternary functions, and so on. 
(When, however, we speak simply of the associated function of a singu-
lary form, we shall mean the associated singulary function.) 
The notation by means of A for the associated functions of a form, as 
introduced above for singulary functions, is readily extended to the case of 
w-ary functions,67 but we shall not have occasion to use such extension in this 
book. The passage from a form to an associated function (for which the 
A-notation provides a symbolism) we shall speak of as abstraction or, more 
explicitly, m-ary functional abstraction (if the associated function is m-ary). 
Historically the notion of a function was of gradual growth in mathe-
matics, and its beginning is difficult to trace. The particular word "function" 
was first introduced by G. W. v. Leibniz and was adopted from him by 
Jean Bernoulli. The notation f(x), or fx, with a letter such as / in the role 
of a function variable, was introduced by A. C. Clairaut and by Leonhard 
Euler. But early accounts of the notion of function do not sufficiently sep-
arate it from that of an expression containing free variables (or a form). 
Thus Euler explains a function of a variable quantity by identifying it with 
an analytic expression,58 i.e., a form in some standard system of mathemat-
ical notation. The abstract notion of a function is usually attributed by 
historians of mathematics to G. Lejeune Dirichlet, who in 1837 was led by 
his study of Fourier series to a major generalization in freeing the idea of a 
function from its former dependence on a mathematical expression or law 
of circumscribed kind.69 Dirichlet's notion of a function was adopted by 
Bernhard Riemann (1851),60 by Hermann Hankel (1870),fll and indeed by 
mathematicians generally. But two important steps remained to be taken by 
"This has been done by Carnap in Notes for Symbolic Logic (1937) and elsewhere, 
t%" Functio quantitatis variabilis est expressio analytica quomodocunque composita ex 
ilia quantitate variabili et numeris seu quantitatibus constantibus. Omnis ergo expressio 
analytica, in qua praeter quantitatem variabilem z omnes quantitates illam expressio* 
nem componentes sunt constantes, erit functio ipsius z . . . Functio ergo 
quantitatis 
variabilis ipsa erit quantitas variabilis." 
Introductio in Analysin 
Infinitorum 
(1748), 
p. 4; Opera, ser. 1, vol. 8, p. 18. See further footnote 62. 
"See his Werke, vol. 1, p, 135. It is not important that Dirichlet restricts his state-
ment at this particular place to continuous functions, since it is clear from other pas-
sages in his writings that the same generality is allowed to discontinuous functions. On 
page 132 of the same volume is his well-known example of a function from real numbers 
to real numbers which has exactly two values, one for rational arguments and one for 
irrational arguments. 
Dirichlet's generalization had been partially anticipated by Euler in 1749 (see an 
account by H. Burkhardt in Jahresberickt der Deutschen 
Mathematiker-Veremigung, 
vol. 10 part 2 (1908), pp. 13-14) and later by J. B. J. Fourier (see his Oeuvres, vol. 1, 
pp. 207, 209, 230-232). 
"Werke, 
pp. 3 ^ . 
s lIn a paper reprinted in the Mathematische Annalen, 
vol. 20 (1882), pp. 63-112. 

§04] 
PROPOSITIONS 
AND 
PROPOSITIONAL 
FUNCTIONS 
23
Frege (in his Begriffsschrift 
of 1879 and later publications): (i) the elimina-
tion of the dubious notion of a variable quantity in favor of the variable as
a kind of symbol;62 (ii) the admission of functions of arbitrary range by
removing the restriction that the arguments and values of a function be 
numbers. Closely associated with (ii) is Frege's introduction of the prop-
ositional junction 
(in 1879), a notion which we go on to explain in the 
next section. 
04. Propositions and propositional functions. According to gram-
marians, the unit of expression in the natural languages is the sentence, 
an aggregation of words which makes complete sense or expresses a 
complete thought. When the complete thought expressed 
is that of 
an assertion, the sentence is called a declarative sentence. In what follows 
we shall have occasion to refer only to declarative sentences, and the 
simple word "sentence" is to be understood always as meaning a declarative 
sentence.63 
We shall carry over the term sentence from the natural languages 
also to the formalized languages. For logistic systems in the sense of 
§07—uninterpreted calculi—the term sentence will be introduced by special 
definition in each case, but always with the intention that the expres-
sions defined to be sentences are those which will become sentences in 
our foregoing sense under interpretations of the calculus as a formalized 
language.64 
In order to give an account of the meaning of sentences, we shall adopt a 
theory due to Frege according to which sentences are names of a certain 
kind. This seems unnatural at first sight, because the most conspicuous 
use of sentences (and indeed the one by which we have just identified or 
"The passage quoted from Euler in footnote 58 reads as if his variable quantity were 
a kind of symbol or expression. But this is not consistent with statements made else-
where in the same work which are essential to Euler's use of the notion of function 
—e.g., "Si fuerit y functio quaecunque ipsius z, turn vicissim z erit functio ipsius y" 
[Opera, p. 24), "Sed omnis transformatio consistit in alio modo eandem functionem 
exprimendi, quemadmodum ex Algebra constat eandem quantitatem per plures 
diversas formas exprimi posse" (Opera, p. 32). 
"The question may be raised whether, say, an interrogative or an imperative logic 
is possible, in which interrogative or imperative sentences and what they express 
(questions or commands) have roles analogous to those of declarative sentences and 
propositions in logic of ordinary kind. And some tentative proposals have in fact been 
made towards an imperative logic, and also towards an optative logic or logic of wishes. 
But these matters are beyond the scope of this book. 
"Cf. the explanation in §02 regarding the use in connection with logistic systems of 
the terms constant, variable, form. An analogous explanation applies to a number of 
terms of like kind to be introduced below—in particular, propositional variable, prop-
ositional form, operator, quantifier, 
bound variable, 
connective. 

24 
INTRODUCTION 
described them) is not barely to name something but to make an assertion. 
Nevertheless it is possible to regard sentences as names by distinguishing 
between the assertive use of a sentence on the one hand, and its non-asser-
tive use, on the other hand, as a name and a constituent of a longer sentence 
(just as other names are used). Even when a sentence is simply asserted, we 
shall hold that it is still a name, though used in a way not possible for other 
names.65 
An important advantage of regarding sentences as names is that all the 
ideas and explanations of §§01-03 can then be taken over at once and applied 
to sentences, and related matters, as a special case. Else we should have to 
develop independently a theory of the meaning of sentences; and in the 
course of this, it seems, the developments of these three sections would be 
so closely paralleled that in the end the identification of sentences as a kind 
of names (though not demonstrated) would be very forcefully suggested as 
a means of simplifying and unifying the theory. In particular we shall require 
variables for which sentences may be substituted, forms which become 
sentences upon replacing their free variables by appropriate constants, and 
associated functions of such forms—things which, on the theory of sentences 
as names, fit naturally into their proper place in the scheme set forth in 
§§02-03. 
Granted that sentences are names, we go on, in the light of the discussion 
in §01, to consider the denotation and the sense of sentences. 
As a consequence of the principle (2), stated in the next to last paragraph 
of §01, examples readily present themselves of sentences which, though in 
some sense of different meaning, must apparently have the same denotation. 
Thus the denotation (in English) of "Sir Walter Scott is the author of 
Waverley" must be the same as that of "Sir Walter Scott is Sir Walter Scott," 
*6To distinguish the non-assertive use of a sentence and the assertive use, especially 
in a formalized language, Frege wrote a horizontal line, —, before the sentence in the 
former case, and the character (— before it in the latter case, the addition of the vertical 
line thus serving as a sign of assertion. Russell, and Whitehead and Russell in Principia, 
Maihematica, 
did not follow Frege's use of the horizontal line before non-asserted 
sentences, but did take over the character (— in the role of an assertion sign. 
(Frege also used the horizontal line before names other than sentences, the expression 
so formed being a false sentence. But this is a feature of his notation which need not 
concern us here.) 
In this book we shall not make use of a special assertion sign, but (in a formalized 
language) shall employ the mere writing of a sentence displayed on a separate line or 
lines as sufficient indication of its assertion. This is possible because sentences used 
non-assertively are always constituent parts of asserted sentences, and because of the 
availability of a two-dimensional arrangement on the printed page. (In a one-dimen-
sional arrangement the assertion sign would indeed be necessary, if only as punctuation,) 
The sign (- which is employed below, in Chapter I and later chapters, is not the Frege-
Russell assertion sign, but has a wholly different use. 

§04] 
PROPOSITIONS 
AND PROPOSITIONAL 
FUNCTIONS 
25 
the name "the author of Waverley" being replaced by another which has 
the same denotation. Again the sentence "Sir Walter Scott is the author of 
Waverley" must have the same denotation as the sentence "Sir Walter 
Scott is the man who wrote twenty-nine Waverley Novels altogether/' since 
the name "the author of Waverley" is replaced by another name of the same 
person; the latter sentence, it is plausible to suppose, if it is not synonymous 
with "The number, such that Sir Walter Scott is the man who wrote that 
many Waverley Novels altogether, is twenty-nine," is at least so nearly 
so as to ensure its having the same denotation; and from this last sentence 
in turn, replacing the complete subject by another name of the same number, 
we obtain, as still having the same denotation, the sentence "The number of 
counties in Utah is twenty-nine." 
Now the two sentences, "Sir Walter Scott is the author of Waverley" 
and "The number of counties in Utah is twenty-nine," though they have 
the same denotation according to the preceding line of reasoning, seem 
actually to have very little in common. The most striking thing that they 
do have in common is that both are true. Elaboration of examples of this 
kind leads us quickly to the conclusion, as at least plausible, that all true 
sentences have the same denotation. And parallel examples may be used in 
the same way to suggest that all false sentences have the same denotation 
(e.g., "Sir Walter Scott is not the author of Waverley" must have the same 
denotation as "Sir Walter Scott is not Sir Walter Scott"). 
Therefore, with Frege, we postulate68 two abstract objects called truth-
values, one of them being truth and the other one falsehood. And we declare 
all true sentences to denote the truth-value truth, and all false sentences 
to denote the truth-value falsehood. In alternative phraseology, we shall 
also speak of a sentence as having the truth-value truth (if it is true) or 
having the truth-value falsehood (if it is false).87 
The sense of a sentence may be described as that which is grasped when 
one understands the sentence, or as that which two sentences in different 
languages must have in common in order to be correct translations each of 
the other. As in the case of names generally, it is possible to grasp the sense 
"To Frege, as a thoroughgoing Platonic realist, our use of the word "postulate" 
here would not be acceptable. It would represent his position better to say that the 
Situation indicates that there are two such things as truth and falsehood {das Wahre 
and das 
Falsche), 
*7The explicit use of two truth-values appears for the first time in a paper by C. S. 
Peirce in the American Journal of Mathematics, vol. 7 (1885), pp. 180-202 (or see his 
Collected Papers, vol. 3, pp. 210-238). Frege's first use of truth-values is in his Funkiion 
und Begriff of 1891 and in his paper of 1892 which is cited in footnote 5; it is in these 
that the account of sentences as names of truth-values is 'first put forward. 

26 
INTRODUCTION 
of a sentence without therefore necessarily having knowledge of its denota-
tion (truth-value) otherwise than as determined by this sense. In particular, 
though the sense is grasped, it may sometimes remain unknown whether the 
denotation is truth. 
Any concept of a truth-value, provided that being a truth-value is contained 
in the concept, and whether or not it is the sense of some actually available 
sentence in a particular language under consideration, we shall call a prop-
osition, translating thus Frege's Gedanke. 
Therefore a proposition, as we use the term, is an abstract object of the 
same general category as a class, a number, or a function. It has not the 
psychological character of William of Ockham's propositio mentalis or of 
the traditional judgment: in the words of Frege, explaining his term 
Gedanke, it is "nicht das subjective Thun des Denkens, sondern dessen 
objectiven Inhalt, der fahig ist, gemeinsames Eigenthum von Vielen zu 
sein." 
Traditional (post-Scholastic) logicians were wont to define a proposition 
as a judgment expressed in words, thus as a linguistic entity, either a sen-
tence or a sentence taken in association with its meaning.88 But in non-
technical English the word has long been used rather for the meaning (in 
our view the sense) of a sentence,69 and logicians have latterly come to 
accept this as the technical meaning of "proposition." This is the happy 
result of a process which, historically, must have been due in part to sheer 
confusion between the sentence in itself and the meaning of the sentence. 
It provides in English a distinction not easily expressed in some other 
languages, and makes possible a translation of Frege's Gedanke which is 
less misleading than the word "thought."70 
According to our usage, every proposition determines or is a concept of 
'•E.g., in Isaac Watts's Logick, 1725: "A Proposition is a Sentence wherein two or 
more Ideas or Terms are joined or disjoined by one Affirmation or Negation. . . . In 
describing a Proposition I use the Word Terms as well as Ideas, because when mere 
Ideas are join'd in the Mind without Words, it is rather called a Judgment; but when 
clothed with Words, it is called a Proposition, even tho" it be in the Mind only, as well 
as when it is expressed by speaking or Writing." Again in Richard Whately's Elements 
of Logic, 1826; "The second part of Logic treats of the proposition; which is, 'Judgment 
expressed in words.' A Proposition is defined logically 'a sentence indicative,' i.e. 
affirming or denying; (this excludes commands and questions,)" Here Whately is follow-
ing in part the Latin of Henry Aldrich (1691). In fact these passages show no important 
advance over Petrus Hispanus, who wrote a half millennium earlier, but they are quoted 
here apropos of the history of the word "proposition" in English. 
"Consider, for example, the incongruous result obtained by substituting the words 
"declarative sentence" for the word "proposition" in Lincoln's Gettysburg Address, 
,0For a further account of the history of the matter, we refer to Carnap's Introduction 
to Semantics, 
1942, pp. 235-236; and see also R. M. Eaton, General Logic, 1931. 

§04] 
PROPOSITIONS 
AND PROPOSITIONAL 
FUNCTIONS 
27 
(or, as we shall also say, has) some truth-value. It is, however, a somewhat 
arbitrary decision that we deny the name proposition to senses of such 
sentences (of the natural languages) as express a sense but have no truth-
value.71 To this extent our use of proposition deviates from Frege's 
use of Gedanke. But the question will not arise in connection with the 
formalized languages which we shall study, as these languages will be 
so constructed that every name—and in particular every sentence—has 
a denotation. 
A proposition is then true if it determines or has the truth-value truth, 
false if it has the truth-value falsehood. When a sentence expressing a prop-
osition is asserted we shall say that the proposition itself is thereby 
asserted.72 
A variable whose range is the two truth-values—thus a variable for which 
sentences (expressing propositions) may appropriately be substituted—is 
called a propositional variable. We shall not have occasion to use variables 
71By the remark of footnote 22, such are sentences which contain non-obliquely one 
or more names that express a sense but lack a denotation—or so, following Frege, we 
shall take them. Examples are: "The present king of France is bald"; "The present king 
of France is not bald"; "The author of Pnncipia 
Mathematica 
was born in 1861." 
(As to the last example, it is true that the phrase "the author of Principia 
Mathematica" 
in some appropriate supporting context may be an ellipsis for something like "the author 
of Principia Mathematica who was just mentioned" and therefore have a denotation; but 
we here suppose that there is no such supporting context, so that the phrase can only 
mean "the one and only author of Principia 
Mathematica" 
and therefore have no 
denotation.) 
To sentences as a special case of names, of course the second remark of footnote 22 
also applies. Thus we understand as true (and containing oblique occurrences of names) 
each of the sentences: "Lady Hamilton was like Aphrodite in beauty"; "The fountain 
of youth is not located in Florida"; "The present king of France does not exist." 
Cases of doubt whether a sentence has a truth-value or not are also not difficult to 
find in this connection, the exact meaning of various phraseologies in the natural 
languages being often insufficiently determinate for a decision. 
7,Notice the following distinction. The statement that a certain proposition was 
asserted (say on such and such an occasion) need not reveal what language was used 
nor make any reference to a particular language. But the statement that a certain 
sentence was asserted does not convey the meaning of the transaction unless it is added 
what language was used. For not only may the same proposition be expressed by differ-
ent sentences in different languages, but also the same sentence may be used to assert 
different propositions according to what language the user intends. It is beside the 
point that the latter situation is comparatively rare in the principal known natural 
languages; it is not rare when all possible languages are taken into account. 
Thus, if the language is English, the statement, "Seneca said that man is a rational 
animal," conveys the proposition that Seneca asserted but not the information what 
language he used. On the other hand the statement, "Seneca wrote, 'Rationale enim 
animal est homo,' " gives only the information what succession of letters he set down, 
not what proposition he asserted. (The reader may guess or know from other sources 
that Seneca used Latin, but this is neither said nor implied in the given statement—for 
there are many languages besides Latin in which this succession of letters spells a de-
clarative sentence and, for all that thou and I know, one of them may once have been 
in actual use.) 

28 
INTRODUCTION 
whose values are propositions, but we would suggest the term intensional 
propositional variable for these. 
A form whose values are truth-values (and which therefore becomes a 
sentence when its free variables are replaced by appropriate constants) is 
a propositional form. Usage sanctions this term73 rather than "truth-value 
form," thus naming the form rather by what is expressed, when constants 
replace the variables, than by what is denoted. 
A propositional form is said to be satisfied by a value of its free variable, 
or a system of values of its free variables, if its value for those values of its 
free variables is truth. (More explicitly, we should speak of a system of 
values of variables as satisfying a given propositional form in a given 
language, but the reference to the particular language may often be omitted 
as clear from the context.) A propositional form may also be said to be true 
or false for a given value of its free variable, or system of values of its free 
variables, according as its value for those values of its free variables is truth 
or falsehood. 
A function whose range of values consists exclusively of truth-values, and 
thus in particular any associated function of a propositional form, is a 
propositional function. Here again, established usage sanctions "proposi-
tional function"74 rather than "truth-value function," though the latter 
term would be the one analogous to, e.g., the term "numerical function" for 
a function whose values are numbers. 
A propositional function is said to be satisfied by an argument (or 
ordered system of arguments) if its value for that argument (or ordered 
system of arguments) is truth. Or synonymously we may say that a 
propositional function holds for a particular argument or ordered system 
of arguments. 
From its use in mathematics, we assume that the notion of a class is 
already at least informally familiar to the reader. (The words set and 
aggregate are ordinarily used as synonymous with class, but we shall not 
follow this usage, because in connection with the Zermelo axiomatic set 
"Cf. footnote 26. 
74This statement seems to be on the whole just, though the issue is much obscured by 
divergencies among different writers as to the theory of meaning adopted and in the 
accounts given of the notions of function and proposition. The idea of the propositional 
function as an analogue of the numerical function of mathematical analysis originated 
with Frege, but the term "propositional" function is originally Russell's. Russell's 
early use of this term is not wholly clear. In his introduction to the second edition of 
Principia Mathematica (1925) he decides in favor of the meaning which we are adopting 
here, or very nearly that. 

§04] 
PROPOSITIONS 
AND PROPOSITIONAL 
FUNCTIONS 
29 
theory75 we shall wish later to give the word set a special meaning, somewhat 
different from that of class.) We recall that a class is something which has 
or may have members, and that classes are considered identical if and only 
if they have exactly the same members. Moreover it is usual mathematical 
practice to take any given singulary propositional form as having associated 
with it a class, namely the class whose members are those values of the free 
variable for which the form is true. 
In connection with the functional calculi of Chapters III—VI, or rather, 
with the formalized languages obtained from them by adopting one of the 
indicated principal interpretations (§07), it turns out that we may secure 
everything necessary about classes by just identifying a class with a 
singulary propositional function, and membership in the class with 
satisfaction of the singulary propositional function. We shall consequently 
make this identification, on the ground that no purpose is served by 
maintaining a distinction between classes and singulary propositional 
functions. 
We must add at once that the notion of a class obtained by thus identi-
fying classes with singulary propositional functions does not quite coincide 
with the informal notion of a class which we first described, because it does 
not fully preserve the principle that classes are identical if they have the 
same members. Rather, it is necessary to take into account also the range-
members of a class {constituting, i.e., the range of the singulary propositional 
function). And only when the range-members are given to be the same is the 
principle preserved that classes are identical if they have the same members. 
This or some other departure from the informal notion of a class is in fact 
necessary, because, as we shall see later,76 the informal notion—in the pres-
ence of some other assumptions difficult to avoid—is self-inconsistent and 
leads to antinomies. (The sets of Zermelo set theory preserve the principle 
that sets having the same members are identical, but at the sacrifice of the 
principle that an arbitrary singulary propositional form has an associated 
set.) 
Since, then, a class is a singulary propositional function, we speak 
of the range of the class just as we do of the propositional function 
{i.e., it is the same thing). We think of the range as being itself a class, 
having as members the range-members of the given class, and having the 
same range-members. 
(In any particular discussion hereafter in which classes are introduced, 
"Chapter XI. 
"In Chapter VI. 

30 
INTRODUCTION 
and in the absence of any indication to the contrary, it is to be understood 
that there is a fixed range determined in advance and that all classes have 
this same range,) 
Relations may be similarly accounted for by identifying them with binary 
propositional functions, the relation being said to hold between an ordered 
pair of things (or the things being said to stand in that relation, or to bear 
that relation one to the other) if the binary propositional function is satisfied 
by the ordered pair. Given that the ranges are the same, this makes two re-
lations identical if and only if they hold between the same ordered pairs, 
and to indicate this we may speak more explicitly of a relation in extension— 
using this term as synonymous with relation. 
A property, as ordinarily understood, differs from a class only or chiefly 
in that two properties may be different though the classes determined by 
them are the same (where the class determined by a property is the class 
whose members are the things that have that property). Therefore we 
identify a property with a class concept, or concept of a class in the sense of 
§01. And two properties are said to coincide in extension if they determine 
the same class. 
Similarly, a relation in intension 
is a relation concept, or concept of a 
relation in extension. 
To turn once more for illustrative purposes to the theory of real numbers and 
its notations, the following are examples of propositional forms: 
sin x = 0, 
sin x = 2, 
e* > 0, 
ex > 1, 
x > 0, 
e > 0, 
E < 0, 
xs + y3 = 3xy, 
xi^y, 
\x — y\ < /, 
\x — y\ < E, 
If \x — y\ < d then ]sin x — sin y\ < e. 
Here we are using x, y, I as variables whose range is the real numbers, and E and 3 
as variables whose range is the positive real numbers. The seven forms on the 
first three lines are examples of singulary propositional forms. Those on the 
fourth line are binary, on the fifth line ternary, while on the last line is an exam-
ple of a quaternary propositional form. 
Each of the singulary propositional forms has an associated class. Thus with 
the form sin x = 0 is associated the class of those real numbers whose sine is 0, 
i.e., the class whose range is the real numbers and whose members are 0, n, — n, 
2n, — 27i, 3n, and so on. As explained, we identify this class with the prop-
ositional function Aa;(sin x = 0), or in other words the function from real num-
bers to truth-values which has for any argument x the value sin x = 0. 

§05] 
IMPROPER 
SYMBOLS, 
CONNECTIVES 
31 
The two propositional forms ex > 1 and x > 0 have the same associated 
class, namely, the class whose range is the real numbers and whose members 
are the positive real numbers. This class is identified with either ?.x{ex > 1) 
or Xx(x > 0), these two propositional functions being identical with each other 
by the convention about identity of functions adopted in §03. 
Since the propositional form sin x = 2 has the value falsehood for every value 
of x, the associated class Aa?(sin x = 2) has no members. 
A class which has no members is called a null class or an empty 
class. From 
our conventions about identity of propositional functions and of classes, if the 
range is given, it follows that there is only one null class. But, e.g., the range of 
the null class associated with the form sin x — 2 and the range of the null 
class associated with the form e < 0 are not the same: the former range is the 
real numbers, and the latter range is the positive real numbers. 7 7 We shall speak 
respectively of the "null class of real numbers" and of the "null class of positive 
real numbers." 
A class which coincides with its range is called a universal class. For example, 
the class associated with the form ex > 0 is the universal class of real numbers; 
and the class associated with the form e > 0 is the universal class of positive 
real numbers. 
The binary propositional forms x3 -|- y3 = 3zy and x ^ y are both symmetric 
and therefore each have one associated binary propositional function or relation. 
In particular, the associated relation of the form x =£ y is the relation of diversity 
between real numbers; or in other words the relation which has the pairs of real 
numbers as its range, which any two different real numbers bear to each other, 
and which no real number bears to itself. 
The ternary propositional forms J.r: — y\ < / and \x — y\ < e have each three 
associated ternary propositional functions78 (being symmetric m x and y). All 
six of these propositional functions are different; but an appropriately chosen 
pair of them, one associated with each form, will be found to agree in value for 
all ordered triples of arguments which are in the range of both, differing only in 
t h a t the first one has the value falsehood for certain ordered triples of arguments 
which are not in the range of the other. 
05. Improper symbols, connectives. When the expressions, especially 
the sentences, of a language are analyzed into the single symbols of which 
they consist, symbols which may be regarded as indivisible in the sense that 
"According to the informal notion that classes with the same members are identical, 
it would be true absolutely that there is only one null class. The distinction of null 
classes with different ranges was introduced by Russell in 1908 as a part of his theory 
of types (see Chapter VI), The same thing had previously been done by Ernst Schroder 
in the first volume of his Algebra der Logik (1890), though with a very different moti-
vation. 
"We may also occasionally use the term ternary relation (and quaternary relation etc). 
But the simple term relation will be reserved for the special case of a binary relation, or 
binary propositional function. 

32 
INTRODUCTION 
no division of them into parts has relevance to the meaning,79 we have 
seen that there are two sorts of symbols which may in particular appear, 
namely primitive proper names and variables. These we call proper symbols, 
and we regard them as having meaning in isolation, the primitive names as 
denoting (or at least purporting to denote) something, the variables as 
having (or at least purporting to have) a non-empty range. But in addition 
to proper symbols there must also occur symbols which are improper—or 
in traditional (Scholastic and pre-Scholastic) terminology, syncategorematic 
—i.e., which have no meaning in isolation but which combine with proper 
symbols (one or more) to form longer expressions that do have meaning 
in isolation.80 
Conspicuous among improper symbols are parentheses and brackets of 
various kinds, employed (as familiar in mathematical notation) to show the 
way in which parts of an expression are associated. These parentheses and 
brackets occur as constituents in certain combinations of improper symbols 
such as we now go on to consider—either exclusively to show association and 
in connection with other improper symbols which carry the burden of show-
ing the particular character of the notation,81 or else sometimes in a way 
that combines the showing of association with some special meaning-pro-
ducing character.82 
Connectives are combinations of improper symbols which may be used 
together with one or more constants to form or produce a new constant. 
"The formalized languages are to be so constructed as to make such analysis into 
single symbols precisely possible. In general it is possible in the natural languages only 
partially and approximately—or better, our thinking of it as possible involves a certain 
idealization. 
In written English (say), the single symbols obtained are not just the letters with 
which words are spelled, since the division of a word into letters has or may have no 
relevance to the meaning. Frequently the single symbols are words. In other cases they 
are parts of words, since the division, e.g., of "books" into "book" and "s" or of 
"colder" into "cold" and "er" does have relevance to the meaning. In still other cases 
the linguistic structure of meaningful parts is an idealization, as when "worse" is taken 
to have an analysis parallel to that of "colder," or "I went" an analysis parallel to that 
of "I shall go," or "had I known" parallel to that of "if I should hear." (Less obvious 
and more complex examples may be expected to appear if analysis is pressed more in 
detail.) 
aoApparently the case may be excluded that several improper symbols combine with-
out any proper symbols to form an expression that has meaning in isolation. For the 
division of that expression into the improper symbols as parts could then hardly be said 
to have relevance to the meaning. 
B1Thus in the expression (t — (x — y)) we may say that the inner parentheses serve 
exclusively to show the association together of the part x — y of the expression, and 
that they are used in connection with the sign —, which serves to show subtraction. 
fl2In real number theory, the usual notation | 
| for the absolute value is an obvious 
example of this latter. Again it may be held that the parentheses have such a double 
use in either of the two notations introduced in §03 for application of a singulary func-
tion to its argument. 

§05] 
IMPROPER 
SYMBOLS, 
CONNECTIVES 
XI 
Then, as follows from the discussion in §02, if we replace one or more of the 
constants each by a form which has the denotation of that constant among 
its values, the resulting expression becomes a form (instead of a constant); 
and the free variables of this resulting form are the free variables of all the 
forms (one or more) which were united by means of the connective (with 
each other and possibly also with some constants) to produce the resulting 
form. In order to give completely the meaning-producing character of a 
particular connective in a particular language, not only is it necessary to 
give the denotation83 of the new constant in every permissible case that the 
connective is used together with one or more constants to form such a new 
constant, but also, for every case that the connective may be used with forms 
or forms and constants to produce a resulting form, it is necessary to give 
the complete scheme of values of this resulting form for values of its free 
variables. And this must all be done in a way to conform to the assump-
tions about sense and denotation at the end of §01, and to the conventions 
about meaning and values of variables and forms as these were described in 
§02. Connectives may then be used not only in languages which contain 
constants but also in languages whose only proper symbols are variables.84 
The constants or forms, united by means of a connective to produce a 
new constant or form, are called the operands. A connective is called sin-
gulary, binary, ternary, etc., according to the number of its operands. 
A singulary connective may be used with a variable of appropriate range 
as the operand (this falls under our foregoing explanation since, of course, 
a variable is a special case of a form). The form so produced is called an 
associated form of the connective if the range of the variable includes the 
denotations of all constants which may be used as operands of the connective 
and all the relevant values of all the forms which may be used as operands 
of the connective (where by a relevant value of a form used as operand is 
meant a value corresponding to which the entire form, consisting of con-
nective and operand, has a value). And the associated function 
of a sin-
gulary connective is the associated function of any associated form. The 
associated function as thus defined is clearly unique. 
8sIt is not necessary (or possible) to give the sense of the new constant separately, 
since the way in which the denotation is given carries with it a sense—the same phrase 
which is used to name the denotation must also express a sense. 
Further questions arise if, besides constants, names having a sense but no denotation 
are allowed. Such names seem to be used with connectives in the natural languages and 
in usual systems of mathematical notation, and indeed some illustrations which we 
have employed depend on this. However, as already explained, we avoid this in the 
formalized languages which we shall consider. 
•*Cf. footnote 27. 

34 
INTRODUCTION 
The notion of the associated function of a singulary connective is possible 
also in the case of a language containing no variable with a range of the kind 
required to produce an associated form, namely we may consider an exten-
sion of the language obtained by adding such a variable. 
In the same way an w-ary connective may be used together with n 
different variables as operands to produce a form; and this is called an 
associated form of the connective if, for each variable, the range includes 
both the denotations of all constants and all relevant values of all forms 
which may be used as operands at that place. The associated function of the 
connective is that one of the associated «-ary functions of an associated 
form which is obtained by assigning the arguments of the function, in their 
order, as values to the free variables of the form in their left-to-right order 
of occurrence in the form. 
In general the meaning-producing character of a connective is most 
readily given by just giving the associated function, this being sufficient 
to fix the use of the connective completely.85 
Indeed there is a close relationship between connectives and functional 
constants or proper names of functions. Differences are that (a) a functional 
constant denotes a function whereas a connective is associated with a function, 
(b) a connective is never replaced by a variable, and (c) the notation for 
application of a function to its arguments may be paralleled by a different 
notation when a corresponding connective takes the place of a functional 
constant. But these differences are from some points of view largely non-
essential because (a) notations of course have such meaning as we choose 
to give them (within limitations imposed by requirements of consistency 
and adequacy), (b) languages are possible which do not contain variables 
with functions as values and in which functional constants are never re-
placed by variables, and (c) the notation for application of a function 
to its arguments may, like any other, be changed—or even duplicated 
"For example, the familiar notation ( — ) for subtraction of real numbers may be 
held to be a connective. That is, the combination of symbols which consists of a left 
parenthesis, a minus sign, and a right parenthesis, in that order, may be considered as 
a connective—where the understanding is that an appropriate constant or form is to 
be filled in at each of two places, namely immediately before and immediately after 
the minus sign. To give completely the meaning-producing character of this connective, 
it is necessary to give the denotation of the resulting constant when constants are filled 
in at the two places, and also to give the complete scheme of values of the resulting form 
when forms are filled in at the two places, or a form at one place and a constant at the 
other. In order to do this in a way to conform to §§01, 02, it may often be most expedi-
tious first to introduce (by whatever means may be available in the particular context) 
the binary function of real numbers that is called subtraction, and then to declare this 
to be the associated function of the connective. 

§05] 
IMPROPER 
SYMBOLS, 
CONNECTIVES 
35 
by introducing several synonymous notations into the same language.86 
In the case of a language having notations for application of a function to 
its arguments, it is clear that a connective may often be eliminated or dis-
pensed with altogether by employing instead a name of the associated func-
tion—by modifying the language, if necessary, to the extent of adding such 
a name to its vocabulary. However, the complete elimination of all connec-
tives from a language can never be accomplished in this way. For the no-
tations for application of a singulary function to its argument, for application 
of a binary function to its arguments, and so on (e.g., the notations for these 
which were introduced in §03) are themselves connectives. And though 
these connectives, like any other, no doubt have their associated functions,87 
nevertheless not all of them can ever be eliminated by the device in question.88 
"Thus, to use once more the example of the preceding footnote, we may hold that 
the notation ( — ) is a connective and that the minus sign has no meaning in isolation. 
Or alternatively we may hold that the minus sign denotes (is a name of) the binary 
function, subtraction, and that in such expressions as, e.g., (x — y) or (5 — 2) we have 
a special notation for application of a binary function to its arguments, different from 
the notation for this which was introduced in §03. The choice would seem to be arbitrary 
between these two accounts of the meaning of the minus sign. But from one standpoint 
it may be argued that, if we are willing to invent some name for the binary function, 
then this name might just as well, and would most simply, be the minus sign. 
"As explained below, we are for expository purposes temporarily ignoring difficulties 
or complications which may be caused by the theory of types or by such alternative 
to the theory of types as may be adopted. On this basis, for the connective which is the 
notation for application of a singulary function to its argument, we explain the asso-
ciated function by saying that it is the binary function whose value for an ordered pair 
of arguments /, x is f(x). But if a name of this associated function is to be used for the 
purpose of eliminating the connective, then another connective is found to be necessary, 
the notation, namely, for application of a binary function to its arguments. If the latter 
connective is to be eliminated by using a name of its associated function, then the no-
tation for application of a ternary function to its arguments becomes necessary. And 
so on. Obviously no genuine progress is being made in these attempts. 
(After studying the theory of types the reader will see that the foregoing statement, 
and others we have made, remain in some sense essentially true on the basis of that 
theory. It is only that the connective, e.g., which is the notation for application of a 
singulary function to its argument must be thought of as replaced by many different 
connectives, corresponding to different types, and each of these has its own associated 
function. Or alternatively, if we choose to retain this connective as always the same con-
nective, regardless of considerations of type, then there may well be no variable in the 
language with a range of the kind required to produce an associated form: an extension 
of the language by adding such a variable can be made to provide an associated form, 
but not so easily a name of the associated function. See Carnap, The Logical Syntax of 
Language (cited in footnote 131), examples at the end of §53, and references there given; 
also Bernard Notcutt's proposal of "intertypical variables" in Mind, n.s. vol. 43 (1934), 
pp. 63-77; and remarks by Tarski in the appendix to his Wahrheitsbegriff 
(cited in 
footnote 140).) 
88There is, however, a device which may be used in appropriate context (cf. Chapter 
X) to eliminate all the connectives except the notation for application of a singulary 
function to its argument. This is done by reconstruing a binary function as a singulary 
function whose values are singulary functions; a ternary function as a singulary function 
whose values are binary functions in the foregoing sense; and so on. For it turns out 

36 
INTRODUCTION 
Connectives other than notations for application of a function to its 
arguments are apparently always eliminable in the way described by a 
sufficient extension of the language in which they occur (including if nec-
essary the addition to the language of notations for application of a function 
to its arguments). Nevertheless such other connectives are often used— 
especially in formalized languages of limited vocabulary, where it may be 
preferred to preserve this limitation of vocabulary, so as to use the language 
as a means of singling out for separate consideration some special branch 
of logic (or other subject). 
In particular we shall meet with sentence connectives in Chapter I. Namely, 
these are connectives which are used together with one or more sentences 
to produce a new sentence; or when propositionai forms replace some or 
all of the sentences as operands, then a propositionai form is produced rather 
than a sentence. 
The chief singulary sentence connective we shall need is one for negation. 
In this role we shall use, in formalized languages, the single symbol -, which, 
when prefixed to a sentence, forms a new sentence that is the negation of 
the first one. The associated function of this connective is the function from 
truth-values to truth-values whose value for the argument falsehood is truth, 
and whose value for the argument truth is falsehood. For convenience in 
reading orally expressions of a formalized language, the symbol ~ may be 
rendered by the word "not" or by the phrase "it is false that." 
The principal binary sentence connectives are indicated in the table which 
follows. The notation which we shall use in formalized languages is shown 
in the first column of the table, with the understanding that each of the 
two blanks is to be filled by a sentence of the language in question. In the 
second column of the table a convenient oral reading of the connective is 
suggested, or sometimes two alternative readings; here the understanding 
is that the two blanks are to be filled by oral readings of the same two sen-
tences (in the same order) which filled the two corresponding blanks in the 
first column; and words which appear between parentheses are words which 
that «-ary functions in the sense thus obtained can be made to serve all the ordinary 
purposes of «-ary functions (in any sense). 
The alternative device of reducing (e.g.) a binary function to a singulary function by 
reconstruing it as a singulary function whose arguments are ordered pairs is also useful 
in certain contexts (e.g., in axiomatic set theory). This device does not {at least prima 
facie) serve to reduce the number of connectives to one, as besides the notation for 
application of a singulary function to its argument there will be required also a con-
nective which unites the names of two things to form a name of their ordered pair 
(or at least some notation for this latter purpose). Nevertheless it is a device which 
may sometimes be used to accomplish a reduction, especially where other connectives— 
or operators (§06)—are available, 

§05] 
IMPROPER 
SYMBOLS, 
CONNECTIVES 
37 
may ordinarily be omitted for brevity, but which are to be supplied whenever 
necessary to avoid a misunderstanding or to emphasize a distinction. In 
the third column the associated function of the connective is indicated by 
means of a code sequence of four letters: in doing this, t is used for truth and 
f for falsehood, and the first letter of the four gives the value of the function 
for the arguments t, t, the second letter gives the value for the arguments 
t, f, the third letter for the arguments f, t, the fourth letter for the argu-
ments f, f. In many cases there is an English name in standard use, which 
may denote either the connective or its associated function. This is indicated 
in a fourth column of the table; where alternative names are in use, both are 
given, and in some cases where none is in use a suggested name is supplied. 
[-
-] 
(or both). 
tttf 
(Inclusive) disjunction, 
alternation. 
-] 
H. 
if. 
then 
(materially) implies 
89 
ttft 
Converse implication. 
tftt 
The (truth-functional) 
conditional,90 
(material) implication. 
V _ 
-] 
if and only if 
is (materially) equi-
valent to 
89 
and 
Not both 
and 
tfft 
The (truth-functional) 
biconditional,90 
(materia,!) equivalence. 
tfff 
Conjunction. 
fttt 
Non-conjunction, 
Sheffer's stroke. 
or 
but not both, 
fttf 
Exclusive disjunction, 
is not (materially) 
(material) non-
equivalent to 
,89 
equivalence. 
but not 
Not 
but 
_] 
Neither. 
ftff 
(Material) non-implication. 
fftf 
Converse non-implication, 
ffft 
Non-disjunction. 
"The use of the English words "if," "implies," "equivalent" in these oral readings 
must not be taken as indicating that the meanings of these English words are faithfully 

38 
INTRODUCTION 
The notations which we use as sentence connectives—and those which we 
use as quantifiers (see below)—are adaptations of those in Whitehead and 
Russell's Principia Mathematica (some of which in turn were taken from 
Peano). Various other notations are in use,91 and the student who would 
rendered by the corresponding connectives in all, or even in most, cases. On the con-
trary, the meaning-producing character of the connectives is to be learned with accuracy 
from the third column of the table, where the associated functions are given, and the 
oral readings supply at best a rough approximation. 
As a matter of fact, the words "if . . . then" and "implies" as used in ordinary non-
technical English often seem to denote a relation between propositions rather than 
between truth-values. Their possible meanings when employed in this way are difficult 
to fix precisely and we shall make no attempt to do so. But we select the one use of the 
words "if . . . then" (or "implies")—their material use, we shall call it—in which they 
may be construed as denoting a relation between truth-values, and we assign this 
relation as the associated function for the connective [ Z3 ]. 
As examples of the material use of "if . . . then," consider the four following English 
sentences: 
(i) 
If Joan of Arc was a patriot then Nathan Hale was a patriot. 
(ii) 
If Joan of Arc was a patriot then Vidkun Quisling was a patriot. 
(in) 
If Vidkun Quisling was a patriot then attar of roses is a perfume. 
(iv) 
If Vidkun Quisling was a patriot then Limburger cheese is a perfume. 
For the sake of the illustration let us suppose examination of the historical facts to 
reveal that Joan of Arc and Nathan Hale were indeed patriots and that Vidkun Quisling 
was not a patriot. Then (i), (in), and (iv) are true, and (ii) is false; and to reach these 
conclusions no examination is necessary of the characteristics of either attar of roses or 
Limburger cheese. (If the reader is inclined to question the truth of, e.g., (iii) on the 
ground of complete lack of connection between Vidkun Quisling and attar of roses, 
then this means that he has in mind some other use of "if . . . then" than the material 
use.) 
90These terms were introduced by Quine, who uses them for "the mode of composition 
described in" the list of truth-values as given in the third column of the table—i.e., 
in effect, and in our terminology, for the associated function of the connective rather 
than for the connective itself. See his Mathematical 
Logic, 1940, pp. 15, 20. 
We prefer the better established terms material implication and material equivalence, 
from which the adjective material may be omitted whenever there is no danger of con-
fusion with other kinds of implication or equivalence—as, for example, with formal 
implication and formal equivalence (§06), or with kinds of implication and equivalence 
(belonging to modal logic) which are relations between propositions rather than be-
tween truth-values. 
"Worthy of special remark is the parenthesis-free notation of Jan Lukasiewicz. In 
this, the letters N, A, C, E, K are used in the roles of negation, disjunction, implication, 
equivalence, conjunction respectively. Further letters may be introduced if desired 
[R has been employed as non-equivalence, D as non-conjunction). In use as a sentence 
connective, the letter is written first and then in order the sentences or propositional 
forms together with which it is used. No parentheses or brackets or other notations 
specially to show association are necessary. E.g., the propositional form 
[IP =3 [qvr]] 
=>~p] 
(where p, q, r are propositional variables) becomes, in the Lukasiewicz notation, 
CCpAqrNp. 
It is of course possible to apply the same idea to other connectives, in particular to 
the notation for application of a singulary function to its argument. Hence (see foot-
note 88) parentheses and brackets may be avoided altogether in a formalized language, 
The possibility of this is interesting. But the notation so obtained is unfamiliar, and 
less perspicuous than the usual one. 

§06] 
OPERATORS, 
QUANTIFIERS 
39 
compare the treatments of different authors must learn a certain facility 
in shifting from one system of notation to another. 
The brackets which we indicate as constituents in these notations may in 
actual use be found unnecessary at certain places, and we may then just omit 
them at such places (though only as a practically convenient abbreviation). 
We shall use the term truth-function92 
for a propositional function of truth-
values which has as range, if it is w-ary, all ordered systems of n truth-values. 
Thus every associated function of a sentence connective is a truth-function. 
And likewise every associated function of a form built up from propositional 
variables solely by iterated use of sentence connectives.93 
06. Operators, quantifiers. An operator is a combination of improper 
symbols which may be used together with one or more variables—the 
operator variables (which must be fixed in number and all distinct)—and one 
or more constants or forms or both—the operands—to 
produce a new con-
stant or form. In this new constant or form, however, the operator variables 
are at certain determinate places not free variables, though they may have 
been free variables at those places in the operands. 
To be more explicit, we remark that, in any application of an operator, the 
operator variables may (and commonly will) occur as free variables in some 
of the operands. In the new constant or form produced we distinguish three 
possible kinds of occurrences of the operator variables, viz.: an occurrence 
in one of the operands which, when considered as an occurrence in that 
operand alone, is an occurrence as a free variable; an occurrence in one of 
the operands, not of this kind; and an occurrence which is an occurrence as an 
operator variable, therefore not in any of the operands. In the new constant 
or form, an occurrence of one of the two latter kinds is never an occurrence 
as a free variable, and each occurrence of the first kind is an occurrence as a 
free variable or not, according to some rule associated with the particular 
operator.94 The simplest case is that, in the new constant or form, none of the 
occurrences of the operator variables are occurrences as free variables. And 
this is the only case with which we shall meet in the following chapters 
"We adopt this term from Principia Mathematica, giving it substantially the meaning 
which it acquires through changes in that work that were made (or rather, proposed) 
by Russell in his introduction to the second edition of it. 
•*For example, the associated function of the propositional form mentioned in foot-
note 91. 
"We do require in the case of each operator variable that all occurrences of the first 
kind shall be occurrences as free variables or else all not, in any one occurrence of a 
particular operand in the new constant or form produced. For operators violating this 
requirement are not found among existing standard mathematical and logical notations, 
and it is clear that they would involve certain anomalies of meaning which it is prefer-
able to avoid. 

40 
INTRODUCTION 
(though many operators which are familiar as standard mathematical 
notation fail to fall under this simplest case). 
Variables thus having occurrences in a constant or form which are not 
occurrences as free variables of it are called bound variables of the constant or 
form.95 The difference is that a form containing a particular variable, say x, 
as a free variable has values for various values of the variable, but a constant 
or form which contains x as a bound variable only has a meaning which is 
independent of x—not in the sense of having the same value for every value 
of x, but in the sense that the assignment of particular values to x is not a 
relevant procedure.96 
It may happen that a form contains both free and bound occurrences of 
the same variable. This case will arise, for example, if a form containing a 
particular variable as a free variable and a form or constant containing that 
same variable as a bound variable are united by means of a binary connec-
tive.97 
As in the case of connectives, we require that operators be such as to con-
form to the principles (l)-(3) at the end of §01; also that they conform to the 
conventions about meaning and values of variables as these were described 
in §02, and in particular to the principle (4) of §02.e8 
An operator is called m-ary-n-ary if it is used with m distinct operator 
variables and n operands,99 The most common case is that of a singulary-
singulary operator—or, as we shall also call it, a simple operator. 
In particular, the notation for singulary functional abstraction, which 
BSCf. footnote 28. 
"Therefore a constant or form which contains a particular variable as a bound variable 
is unaltered in meaning by alphabetic change of that variable, at all of its bound occur-
rences, to a new variable (not previously occurring) which has the same range. The 
condition in parentheses is included only as a precaution against identifying two varia-
bles which should be kept distinct, and indeed it may be weakened somewhat—cf. the 
remark in §03 about alphabetic change of free variables. 
E.g., the constant [\%*Ax (see footnote 36) is unaltered in meaning by alphabetic 
change of the variable x to the variable y: it has not only the same denotation but also 
the same sense as 
f*yvdy, 
*7See illustrations in the second paragraph of footnote 36. 
98And also to the principle (5) of footnote 30. 
"Thus, in the theory of real numbers, the usual notation for definite integration is a 
singulary-ternary operator. And in, e.g., the form \%x*dx (see footnote 36) the oper-
ator variable is x and the three operands are the constant 0, the form x, and the form xx. 
Again, the large JJ (product sign), as used in the third example at the beginning of 
footnote 36, is part of a singulary-ternary operator. The signs — above and below the 
17 are not to be taken as equality signs in the ordinary sense (namely that of footnote 
43) but as improper symbols, and also part of the operator. In the particular application 
of the operator, as it appears in this example, the operator variable is m and the 
operands are 1, «, and 
x — m -f- 1 

§06] 
OPERATORS, 
QUANTIFIERS 
41 
was introduced in §03, is a simple operator (the variable which is placed 
immediately after the letter X being the operator variable). We shall call 
this the abstraction operator or, more explicitly, the singulary 
functional 
abstraction operator. In appropriate context, as we shall see in Chapter X, 
all other operators can in fact be reduced to this one.100 
Another operator which we shall use—also a simple operator—is the 
description operator, (i ). To illustrate, let the operator variable be x. Then the 
notation (ix) is to have as its approximate reading in words, "the x such 
that"; or more fully, the notation is explained as follows. It may happen 
that a singulary propositional form whose free variable is x has the value 
truth for one and only one value of x, and in this case a name of that value 
of x is produced by prefixing (ix) to the form. In case there is no value of a; 
or more than one for which the form has the value truth, there are various 
meanings which might be assigned to the name produced by prefixing (ix) 
to the form: the analogy of English and other natural languages would 
suggest giving the name a sense which determines no denotation; but we 
prefer to select some fixed value of x and to assign this as the denotation 
of the name in all such cases (this selection is arbitrary, but is to be made 
once for all for each range of variables which is used). 
Of especial importance for our purposes are the quantifiers. 
These are 
namely operators for which both the operands and the new constant or form 
produced by application of the operator are sentences or propositional forms. 
As the universal quantifier 
(when, e.g., the operator variable is x) we use 
As another example of application of the same operator, showing both bound and free 
occurrences of m, we cite 
-I-T 
x — m 4- 1 
m = m + l 
Examples of operators taking more than one operator variable are found in familiar 
notations for double and multiple limits, double and multiple integrals. 
It should also be noted that «-ary connectives may, if we wish, be regarded as 
0-ary-«-ary operators. 
100In the combinatory logic of H. B. Curry (based on an idea due to M. Schonfinkel) 
a more drastic reduction is attempted, namely the complete elimination of operators, 
of variables, and of all connectives, except a notation for application of a singulary 
function to its argument, so as to obtain a formalized language in which, with the 
exception of the one connective, all single symbols are constants, and which is neverthe-
less adequate for some or all of the purposes for which variables are ordinarily used. 
This is a matter beyond the scope of this book, and the present status of the undertaking 
is too complex for brief statement. The reader may be referred to a monograph by the 
present writer, The Calculi of Lambda-Conversion 
(1941), which is concerned with a 
related topic; also to papers by Schonfinkel, Curry, and J. B. Rosser which are there 
cited, to several papers by Curry and by Rosser in The Journal oj Symbolic Logic in 1941 
and 1942, to an expository paper by Robert Feys in Revue Pkilosophique de Louvaxn, 
vol. 44 (1946), pp. 74-103, 237-270, and to a paper by Curry in Synthese, vol. 7 (1949), 
pp. 391-399. 

42 
INTRODUCTION 
the notation (Vz) or (x), prefixing this to the operand. The universal 
quantifier is thus a simple operator, and we may explain its meaning as 
follows (still using the particular variable x as an example). (x) 
is 
true if the value of 
is truth for all values of x, and (x) 
is false if 
there is any value of x for which the value of 
is falsehood. Here the 
blank is to be filled by a singulary propositional form containing a; as a free 
variable, the same one at all four places. Or if as a special case we fill the 
blank with a sentence, then (x) 
is true if and only if 
is true. (The 
meaning in case the blank is filled by a propositional form containing other 
variables besides x as free variables now follows by the discussion of variables 
in §02, and may be supplied by the reader.) 
Likewise the existential quantifier is a simple operator for which we shall 
use the notation (3 ), filling the blank space with the operator variable and 
prefixing the whole to the operand. To take the particular operator variable 
x as an example, (3a;) 
is true if the value of 
is truth for at least 
one value of x, and (3a;) 
is false if the value of 
is falsehood for all 
values of x. Here again the blank is to be filled by a singulary propositional 
form containing a; as a free variable. Or if as a special case we fill the blank 
with a sentence, then (3a;) 
is true if and only if 
is true. 
In words, the notations "(x)" and "(3a;)" may be read respectively as 
"for all x" (or "for every a;") and "there is an x such that." 
To illustrate the use of the universal and existential quantifiers, and in 
particular their iterated application, consider the binary propositional form, 
[xy > 0], 
where x and y are real variables, i.e., variables whose range is the real 
numbers. This form expresses about two real numbers x and y that their 
product is positive, and thus it comes to express a particular proposition as 
soon as values are given to a; and y. If we apply to it the existential quantifier 
with y as operator variable, we obtain the singulary propositional form, 
(3y)[xy>0], 
or as we may also write it, using the device (which we shall find frequently 
convenient later) of writing a heavy dot to stand for a bracket extending, 
from the place where the dot occurs, forward, 
(3y) 
.xy>0. 
This singulary form expresses about a real number x that there is some real 
number with which its product is positive; and it comes to express a partic-
ular proposition as soon as a value is given to x. If we apply to it the uni-

§06] 
OPERATORS, 
QUANTIFIERS 
43 
versal quantifier with x as operator variable, we obtain the sentence, 
(x){3y).xy>0. 
This sentence expresses the proposition that for every real number there is 
some real number such that the product of the two is positive. It must be 
distinguished from the sentence, 
{ly){x).xy>0, 
expressing the proposition that there is a real number whose product with 
every real number is positive, though it happens that both are false.101 To 
bring out more sharply the difference which is made by the different order 
of the quantifiers, let us replace product by sum and consider the two 
sentences: 
(x){ly).z-\-y>0 
(3y)(*).s + y > 0 
Of these sentences, the first one is true and the second one false.102 
It should be informally clear to the reader that not both the universal and 
the existential quantifier are actually necessary in a formalized language, if 
negation is available. For it would be possible, in place of (3a;) 
, to 
write always ~(x)~ 
; or alternatively, in place of (x) 
, to write 
always ~(3x)~ 
. And of course likewise with any other variable in place 
of the particular variable x. 
In most treatments the universal and existential quantifiers, one or both, 
101The single counterexample, of the value 0 for x, is of course sufficient to render the 
first sentence false. 
The reader is warned against saying that the sentence (x)(3y) . xy > 0 is "nearly 
always true" or that it is "true with one exception" or the like. These expressions are 
appropriate rather to the propositional form (iy) . xy > 0, and of the sentence it must 
be said simply that it is false. 
10,A somewhat more complex example of the difference made by the order in which 
the quantifiers are applied is found in the familiar distinction between continuity and 
uniform continuity. Using x and y as variables whose range is the real numbers, and e 
and 6 as variables whose range is the positive real numbers, we may express as follows 
that the real function / is continuous, on the class F of real numbers (assumed to be an 
open or a closed interval): 
(y)(£)(3<5)(s) . F(y) => . F{x) => . \x - y\ < 6 zo . \f(x) - f(y)\ < e 
And we may express as follows that / is uniformly continuous on F: 
(*)(3d)(a0(y) • F(y) 
ZD . F(x) 
ZD . \x - 
y\ < d ZD . \((x) - 
f(y)\ 
< e 
To avoid complications that are not relevant to the point being illustrated, we have 
here assumed not only that the class F is an open or closed interval but also that the 
range of the function / is all real numbers. (A function with more restricted range may 
always have its range extended by some arbitrary assignment of values; and indeed it 
is a common simplifying device in the construction of a formalized language to restrict 
attention to functions having certain standard ranges (cf. footnote 19).) 

44 
INTRODUCTION 
are made fundamental, notations being provided for them directly in setting 
up a formalized language, and other quantifiers are explained in terms of 
them (in a way similar to that in which, as we have just seen in the preceding 
paragraph, the universal and existential quantifiers may be explained, either 
one in terms of the other). No definite or compelling reason can be given for 
such a preference of these two quantifiers above others that might equally 
be made fundamental. But it is often convenient. 
The application of one or more quantifiers to an operand (especially uni-
versal and existential quantifiers) is spoken of as quantification.10* 
Another quantifier is a singulary-binary quantifier for which we shall 
use the notation [ 
z> 
], with the operands in the two blanks, and 
the operator variable as a subscript after the sign r>. It may be explained by 
saying that [ 
=>x 
] is to mean the same as (x)[ 
z> 
], the 
two blanks being filled with two propositional forms or sentences, the same 
two in each case (and in the same order); and of course likewise with any 
other variable in place of the particular variable x. The name formal impli-
cation10* is given to this quantifier—or to the associated binary propositional 
function, i.e., to an appropriate one of the two associated functions of (say) 
the form[F(u) ZDU G(u)], where u is a variable with some assigned range, 
and F and G are variables whose range is all classes (singulary propositional 
functions) that have a range coinciding with the range of w. 
Another quantifier is that which (or its associated propositional function) 
is called formal equivalence.10* For this we shall use the notation [ 
= 
], 
with the two operands in the two blanks, and the operator variable as a sub-
script after the sign = . It may be explained by saying that [ 
=x 
] 
is to mean the same as (x) [ 
= 
], the two blanks being filled in each 
case with the two operands in order; and of course likewise with any other 
variable in place of x. 
We shall also make use of quantifiers similar in character to those just 
explained but having two or more operator variables. These (or their 
associated propositional functions) we call binary formal implication, binary 
formal equivalence, ternary formal implication, etc. E.g., binary formal im-
plication may be explained by saying that [ 
^z>xv 
] is to mean the 
103The use of quantifiers originated with Frege in 1879. And independently of Frege 
the same idea was introduced somewhat later by Mitchell and Peirce. (See the historical 
account in §49.) 
l04The names formal implication and formal equivalence are those used by Whitehead 
and Russell in Principia 
Mathematica, and have become sufficiently well established 
that it seems best not to change them—though the adjective formal is perhaps not very 
well chosen, and must not be understood here in the same sense that we shall give it 
elsewhere. 

§06] 
OPERATORS, 
QUANTIFIERS 
45 
same as (x)(y)[m 
^ 
], the two blanks being filled in each case with 
the two operands in order; and likewise with any two distinct variables in 
place of x and y as operator variables. Similarly binary formal equivalence 
[ 
= B V 
], ternary formal implication [ 
^xv* 
]> an(^ s o on-105 
Besides the assertion of a sentence, as contemplated in §04, it is usual also 
to allow assertion of a propositional form, and to treat such an assertion as 
a particular fixed assertion (in spite of the presence of free variables in the 
expression asserted). This is common especially in mathematical contexts; 
where, for instance, the assertion of the equation sin {x + 2?t) = sin a; may 
10*With the aid of the notations that have now been explained, we may return to §00 
and rewrite the examples I-IV of that section as they might appear in some appropriate 
formalized language. 
For this purpose let a and b be variables whose range is human beings. Let v be a 
variable whose range is words (taking, let us say for definiteness, any finite sequence of 
letters of the English alphabet as a word). Let B denote the relation of being a brother 
of. Let S denote the relation of having as surname. Let Q and a denote the human beings 
Richard and Stanley respectively, and let T denote the word "Thompson." Then the 
three premisses and the conclusion of I may be expressed as follows: 
B{a,b) 
ZDab .S(a,v) 
=vS{b, 
v) 
Bie.o) 
S(o,z) 
s(e.r) 
Further, let z and w be variables whose range is complex numbers, and x a variable 
whose range is real numbers. Let R denote the relation of having real positive ratio, and 
let A denote the relation of having as amplitude. Then the premisses and conclusion 
of II may be expressed as follows: 
R{z, w) =>,„ . A{z, x) =x A [w, x) 
R(i - 
Vjj/3, to) 
A {to, 2JI/3_) 
A{i 
- 
V3/3, 
2JI/3) 
Here it is obvious that the relation of having real positive ratio is capable of being 
analyzed, so that instead of R(z, w) we might have written, e.g.: 
(3x) [x > 0] [z = xw] 
Likewise the relation of having as amplitude or (in I) the relation of being a brother of 
might have received some analysis. But these analyses are not relevant to the validity 
of the reasoning in these particular examples. And they are, moreover, in no way 
final or absolute; e.g., instead of analyzing the relation of having real positive ratio, we 
might with equal right take it as fundamental and analyze instead the relation of being 
greater than, in such a way that, in place of x > y would be written R(x — y, 1). 
In the same way, for III and IV, we make no analysis of the singulary propositional 
functions of having a portrait seen by me, of having assassinated Abraham Lincoln, 
and of having invented the wheeled vehicle, but let them be denoted just by P, L and 
W respectively. Then if /} denotes John Wilkes Booth, the premisses and conclusion of 
III may be expressed thus: 
P(0) 
LIS) 
(3a)[P(a)L(a)) 
And the premisses and fallacious conclusion of IV thus: 
(3a)P(a) 
(3a)W(a) 
(3a)[P{a)W(a)] 
When so rewritten, the false appearance of analogy between III and IV disappears. 
It was due to the logically irregular feature of English grammar by which "somebody" 
is construed as a substantive. 

46 
INTRODUCTION 
be used as a means to assert this for all real numbers x; or the assertion of the 
inequality x2 -f- y2 ^ 2a;yjnay be used as a means to assert that for any real 
numbers x and y the sum of the squares is greater than or equal to twice the 
product. 
It is clear that, in a formalized language, if universal quantification is 
available, it is unnecessary to allow the assertion of expressions containing 
free variables. E.g., the assertion of the propositional form 
x2 + y2 ^ 2xy 
could be replaced by assertion of the sentence 
{x){y).z2 + 
y2^2xy. 
But on the other hand it is not possible to dispense with quantifiers in a 
formalized language merely by allowing the assertion of propositional forms, 
because, e.g., such assertions as that of 
*(#) (y) . sin [x + y) = sin x + sin y,106 
or that of 
(y)[\z\^\y\]zix.x 
= 0, 
could not be reproduced. 
Consequently it has been urged with some force that the device of assert-
ing propositional forms constitutes an unnecessary duplication of ways of 
expressing the same thing, and ought to be eliminated from a formalized 
language.107 Nevertheless it appears that the retention of this device often 
facilitates the setting up of a formalized language by simplifying certain 
details; and it also renders more natural and obvious the separation of such 
restricted systems as propositional calculus (Chapter I) or functional cal-
culus of first order (Chapter III) out from more comprehensive systems of 
which they are part. In the development which follows we shall therefore 
make free use of the assertion of propositional forms. However, in the case 
of such systems as functional calculus of order a> (Chapter VI) or Zermelo set 
theory (Chapter XI), after a first treatment employing the device in question 
we shall sketch briefly a reformulation that avoids it. 
106This assertion (which is correct, and must sometimes be made to beginners in 
trigonometry) is of course to be distinguished from the different (and erroneous) 
assertion of 
<«* .sin (x + y) = sin x -\~ sin y. 
107The proposal to do this was made by Russell in his introduction to the second edi-
tion of Principia Mathematica 
(1925). The elimination was actually carried out by 
Quine in his Mathematical 
Logic (1940), and simplifications of Quine's method were 
effected in papers by F. B. Fitch and by G. D. W. Berry in The Journal of Symbolic 
Logic (vol. 6 (1941), pp. 18-22, 23-27). 

§07] 
THE LOGISTIC METHOD 
47 
07. The logistic method. In order to set up a formalized language 
we must of course make use of a language already known to us, say English 
or some portion of the English language, stating in that language the vocab-
ulary and rules of the formalized language. This procedure is analogous to 
that familiar to the reader in language study—as, e.g., in the use of a Latin 
grammar written in English108—but differs in the precision with which the 
rules are stated, in the avoidance of irregularities and exceptions, and in 
the leading idea that the rules of the language embody a theory or system of 
logical analysis (cf. §00). 
This device of employing one language in order to talk about another is 
one for which we shall have frequent occasion not only in setting up formal-
ized languages but also in making theoretical statements as to what can be 
done in a formalized language, our interest in formalized languages being 
less often in their actual and practical use as languages than in the general 
theory of such use and in its possibilities in principle. Whenever we employ 
a language in order to talk about some language (itself or another109), we 
shall call the latter language the object language, and we shall call the 
former the meta-language.llQ 
In setting up a formalized language we first employ as meta-language a 
certain portion of English. We shall not attempt to delimit precisely this 
portion of the English language, but describe it approximately by saying 
that it is just sufficient to enable us to give general directions for the manip-
108It is worth remark in passing that this same procedure also enters into the learn-
ing of a first language, being a necessary supplement to the method of learning by 
example and imitation. Some part of the language must first be learned approximately 
by the method of example and imitation; then this imprecisely known part of the lan-
guage is applied in order to state rules of the language (and perhaps to correct initial 
misconceptions); then the known part of the language may be extended by further 
learning by example and imitation, and so on in alternate steps, until some precision 
in knowledge of the language is reached. 
There is no reason in principle why a first language, learned in this way, should not 
be one of the formalized languages of this book, instead of one of the natural languages. 
(But of course there is the practical reason that these formalized languages are ill 
adapted to purposes of facility of communication.) 
10eThe employment of a language to talk about that same language is clearly not 
appropriate as a method of setting up a formalized language. But once set up, a formal-
ized language with adequate means of expression may be capable of use in order to 
talk about that language itself; and in particular the very setting up of the language may 
afterwards be capable of restatement in that language. Thus it may happen that object 
language and meta-language are the same, a situation which it will be important later 
to take into account, 
u 0The distinction is due to David Hilbert, who, however, speaks of "Mathematik" 
(mathematics) and "Metamathematik" 
(metamathematics) 
rather than 
"object 
language" and "meta-language." The latter terms, or analogues of them in Polish or 
German, are due to Alfred Tarski and Rudolf Carnap, by whom especially (see footnotes 
131, 140) the subjects of syntax and semantics have been developed. 

48 
INTRODUCTION 
ulation of concrete physical objects (each instance or occurrence of one of 
the symbols of the language being such a concrete physical object, e.g., a 
mass of ink adhering to a bit of paper). It is thus a language which deals 
with matters of everyday human experience, going beyond such matters 
only in that no finite upper limit is imposed on the number of objects that 
may be involved in any particular case, or on the time that may be required 
for their manipulation according to instructions. Those additional portions of 
English are excluded which would be used in order to treat of infinite classes 
or of various like abstract objects which are an essential part of the subject 
matter of mathematics. 
Our procedure is not to define the new language merely by means of 
translations of its expressions (sentences, names, forms) into corresponding 
English expressions, because in this way it would hardly be possible to avoid 
carrying over into the new language the logically unsatisfactory features of 
the English language. Rather, we begin by setting up, in abstraction from 
all considerations of meaning, the purely formal part of the language, so 
obtaining an uninterpreted calculus or logistic system. In detail, this is done 
as follows. 
The vocabulary of the language is specified by listing the single symbols 
which are to be used.1:1 These are called the primitive symbols of the lan-
guage,112 and are to be regarded as indivisible in the double sense that (A) in 
luNotice that we use the term "language" in such a sense that a given language has 
a given and uniquely determined vocabulary. E.g., the introduction of one additional 
symbol into the vocabulary is sufficient to produce a new and different language. (Thus 
the English of 1849 is not the same language as the English of 1949, though it is con-
venient to call them by the same name, and to distinguish, by specifying the date, only 
in cases where the distinction is essential.) 
112The fourfold classification of the primitive notations of a formalized language 
into constants, variables, connectives, and operators is due in substance to J. v. 
Neumann in the Mathematische Zeitschrift, vol. 26 (1927), see pp. 4-6. He there adds a 
fifth category, composed of association-showing symbols such as parentheses and 
brackets. Our terms "connective" and "operator" correspond to his "Operation" and 
"Abstraktion" respectively. 
Though there is a possibility of notations not falling in any of von Neumann's cate-
gories, such have seldom been used, and for nearly all formalized languages that have 
actually been proposed the von Neumann classification of primitive notations suffices. 
Many formalized languages have primitive notations of all four (or five) kinds, but it 
does not appear that this is indispensable, even for a language intended to be adequate 
for the expression of mathematical ideas generally. 
As an interesting example of a (conceivable) notation not in any of the von Neumann 
categories, we mention the question of a notation by means of which from a name of a 
class would be formed an expression playing the role of a variable with that class as its 
range. Provision might perhaps be made for the formation from any class name of an 
infinite number of expressions playing the roles of different variables with the class as 
their range. But these expressions would have to differ from variables in the sense of 
§02 not only in being composite expressions rather than single symbols but also in the 

§07] 
THE 
LOGISTIC 
METHOD 
49 
setting up the language no use is made of any division of them into parts 
and (B) any finite linear sequence of primitive symbols can be regarded in 
only one way as such a sequence of primitive symbols.113 A finite linear 
sequence of primitive symbols is called a formula. And among the formulas, 
rules are given by which certain ones are designated as well-formed 
formulas 
(with the intention, roughly speaking, that only the well-formed formulas 
are to be regarded as being genuinely expressions of the language).114 Then 
certain among the well-formed formulas are laid down as axioms. 
And 
finally (primitive) rules of inference (or rules of procedure) are laid down, 
rules according to which, from appropriate well-formed formulas as prem-
isses, a well-formed formula is immediately 
inferred115 as conclusion. 
(So 
long as we are dealing only with a logistic system that remains uninterpreted, 
the terms premiss, immediately 
infer, conclusion have only such meaning as 
is conferred upon them by the rules of inference themselves.) 
A finite sequence of one or more well-formed formulas is called a proof if 
each of the well-formed formulas in the sequence either is an axiom or is 
immediately inferred from preceding well-formed formulas in the sequence 
by means of one of the rules of inference. A proof is called a proof of the last 
well-formed formula in the sequence, and the theorems of the logistic system 
possibility that the range might be empty. A language containing such a notation has 
never been set up and studied in detail and it is therefore not certain just what is feasible. 
(A suggestion which seems to be in this direction was made by Beppo Levi in Universi-
dad Nacional de Tucumdn, 
Revista, ser. A vol. 3 no. 1 (1942), pp. 13-78.) 
The use in Chapter X of variables with subscripts indicating the range of the variable 
(the type) is not an example of a notation of the kind just described. For the variable, 
letter and subscript together, is always treated as a single primitive symbol. 
113In practice, condition (B) usually makes no difficulty. Though the (written) 
symbols adopted as primitive symbols may not all consist of a single connected piece, 
it is ordinarily possible to satisfy (B), if not otherwise, by providing that a sequence of 
primitive symbols shall be written with spaces between the primitive symbols of fixed 
width and wider than the space at any place within a primitive symbol. 
The necessity for (B), and its possible failure, were brought out by a criticism by 
Stanislaw Lesniewski against the paper of von Neumann cited in the preceding footnote. 
See von Neumann's reply in Fundamenta 
Mathematicae, vol. 17 (1931), pp. 331-334, 
and Lesniewski's final word in the matter in an offprint published in 1938 as from 
Collectanea Logica, vol. 1 (cf. The Journal of Symbolic Logic, vol. 5, p. 83). 
114The restriction to one dimension in combining the primitive symbols into ex-
pressions of the language is convenient, and non-essential. Two-dimensional arrange-
ments are of course possible, and are familiar especially in mathematical notations, but 
they may always be reduced to one dimension by a change of notation. In particular 
the notation of Frege's Begriffsschrift 
relies heavily on a two-dimensional arrangement; 
but because of the difficulty of printing it this notation was never adopted by any one 
else and has long since been replaced by a one-dimensional equivalent. 
n sNo reference to the so-called immediate inferences of traditional logic is intended. 
We term the inferences immediate in the sense of requiring only one application of a 
rule of inference—not in the traditional sense of (among other things) having only one 
premiss. 

50 
INTRODUCTION 
are those well-formed formulas of which proofs exist.118 As a special case, 
each axiom of the system is a theorem, that finite sequence being a proof 
which consists of a single well-formed formula, the axiom alone. 
The scheme just described—viz. the primitive symbols of a logistic 
system, the rules by which certain formulas are determined as well-formed 
(following Carnap let us call them the formation rules of the system), the 
rules of inference, and the axioms of the system—is called the primitive basis 
of the logistic system.117 
In defining a logistic system by laying down a primitive basis, we employ 
as meta-language the restricted portion of English described above. In ad-
dition to this restriction, or perhaps better as part of it, we impose require-
ments of effectiveness as follows: (I) the specification of the primitive sym-
bols shall be effective in the sense that there is a method by which, whenever 
a symbol is given, it can always be determined effectively whether or not it 
is one of the primitive symbols; (II) the definition of a well-formed formula 
""Following Carnap and others, we use the term "language" in such a sense that for 
any given language there is one fixed notion of a proof in that language. Thus the intro-
duction of one additional axiom or rule of inference, or a change in an axiom or rule of 
inference, is sufficient to produce a new and different language. 
(An alternative, which might be thought to accord better with the everyday use of 
the word "language," would be to define a "language" as consisting of primitive sym-
bols and a definition of well-formed formula, together with an interpretation (see below), 
and to take the axioms and rules of inference as constituting a "logic" for the language. 
Instead of speaking of an interpretation as sound or unsound for a logistic system (see 
below), we would then speak of a logic as being sound or unsound for a language. Indeed 
this alternative may have some considerations in its favor. But we reject it here, partly 
because of reluctance to change a terminology already fairly well established, partly 
because the alternative terminology leads to a twofold division in each of the subjects 
of syntax and semantics (§§08, 09)—according as they treat of the object language 
alone or of the object language together with a logic for it — which, especially in the 
case of semantics, seems unnatural, and of little use so far as can now be seen.) 
U7Besides these minimum essentials, the primitive basis may also include other 
notions introduced in order to use them in defining a well-formed formula or in stating 
the rules of inference. In particular the primitive symbols may be divided in some way 
into different categories: e.g., they may be classified as primitive 
constants, variables, 
and improper symbols, or various categories may be distinguished of primitive constants, 
of variables, or of improper symbols. The variables and the primitive constants together 
are usually called proper symbols. Rules may be given for distinguishing an occurrence 
of a variable in a well-formed formula as being a free occurrence or a bound occurrence, 
well-formed formulas being then classified as forms or constants according as they do or 
do not contain a free occurrence of a variable. Also rules may be given for distinguishing 
certain of the forms as propositional forms, and certain of the constants as sentences. 
In doing all this, the terminology often is so selected that, when the logistic system 
becomes a language by adoption of one of the intended principal interpretations (sec 
below), the terms primitive 
constant, variable, improper symbol, proper symbol, free, 
bound, form, constant, propositional form, sentence come to have meanings in accord 
with the informal semantical explanations of §§02-06. 
The primitive basis of a formalized language, or interpreted logistic system, is ob-
tained by adding the semantical rules (see below) to the primitive basis of the logistic 
system. 

§07] 
THE LOGISTIC METHOD 
51 
shall be effective in the sense that there is a method by which, whenever a 
formula is given, it can always be determined effectively whether or not it 
is well-formed; (III) the specification of the axioms shall be effective in the 
sense that there is a method by which, whenever a well-formed formula is 
given, it can always be determined effectively whether or not it is one of 
the axioms; (IV) the rules of inference, taken together, shall be effective in 
the strong sense that there is a method by which, whenever a proposed 
immediate inference is given of one well-formed formula as conclusion from 
others as premisses, it can always be determined effectively whether or not 
this proposed immediate inference is in accordance with the rules of infer-
ence. 
(From these requirements it follows that the notion of a proof is effective 
in the sense that there is a method by which, whenever a finite sequence of 
well-formed formulas is given, it can always be determined effectively 
whether or not it is a proof. But the notion of a theorem is not necessarily 
effective in the sense of existence of a method by which, whenever a well-
formed formula is given, it can always be determined whether or not it is 
a theorem—for there may be no certain method by which we can always 
either find a proof or determine that none exists. This last is a point to which 
we shall return later.) 
As to requirement (I), we suppose that we are able always to determine 
about two given symbol-occurrences whether or not they are occurrences of 
the same symbol (thus ruling out by assumption such difficulties as that of 
illegibility). Therefore, if the number of primitive symbols is finite, the 
requirement may be satisfied just by giving the complete list of primitive 
symbols, written out in full. Frequently, however, the number of primitive 
symbols is infinite. In particular, if there are variables, it is desirable that 
there should be an infinite number of different variables of each kind 
because, although in any one well-formed formula the number of different 
variables is always finite, there is hardly a way to determine a finite upper 
limit of the number of different variables that may be required for some 
particular purpose in the actual use of the logistic system. When the number 
of primitive symbols is infinite, the list cannot be written out in full, but the 
primitive symbols must rather be fixed in some way by a statement of finite 
length in the meta-language. And this statement must be such as to conform 
to (I). 
A like remark applies to (III). If the number of axioms is finite, the re-
quirement can be satisfied by writing them out in full. Otherwise the axioms 
must be specified in some less direct way by means of a statement of finite 

52 
INTRODUCTION 
length in the meta-language, and this must be such as to conform to (III). 
It may be thought more elegant or otherwise more satisfactory that the 
number of axioms be finite; but we shall see that it is sometimes convenient 
to make use of an infinite number of axioms, and no conclusive objections 
appear to doing so if requirements of effectiveness are obeyed. 
We have assumed the reader's understanding of the general notion of 
effectiveness, and indeed it must be considered as an informally familiar 
mathematical notion, since it is involved in mathematical problems of a 
frequently occurring kind, namely, problems to find a method of computa-
tion, i.e., a method by which to determine a number, or other thing, effec-
tively.118 We shall not try to give here a rigorous definition of effectiveness, 
the informal notion being sufficient to enable us, in cases we shall meet, 
to distinguish given methods as effective or non-effective.119 
The requirements of effectiveness are (of course) not meant in the sense 
that a structure which is analogous to a logistic system except that it fails 
to satisfy these requirements may not be useful for some purposes or that 
it is forbidden to consider such—but only that a structure of this kind is 
unsuitable for use or interpretation as a language. For, however indefinite 
or imprecisely fixed the common idea of a language may be, it is at least 
fundamental to it that a language shall serve the purpose of communication. 
And to the extent that requirements of effectiveness fail, the purpose of 
communication is defeated. 
Consider, in particular, the situation which arises if the definition of well-
llgA well-known example from topology is the problem (still unsolved even for ele-
mentary manifolds of dimensionalities above 2) to find a method of calculating about 
any two closed simplicial manifolds, given by means of a set of incidence relations, 
whether or not they are homeomorphic—or, as it is often phrased, the problem to find 
a complete classification of such manifolds, or to find a complete set of invariants. 
As another example, Euclid's algorithm, in the domain of rational integers, or in 
certain other integral domains, provides an effective method of calculating for any two 
elements of the domain their greatest common divisor (or highest common factor). 
In general, an effective method of calculating, especially if it consists of a sequence of 
steps with later steps depending on results of earlier ones, is called an algorithm. (This 
is the long established spelling of this word, and should be preserved in spite of any 
considerations of etymology.) 
119For a discussion of the question and proposal of a rigorous definition see a paper by 
the present writer in the American Journal of Mathematics, vol. 58 (1936), pp. 345-363, 
especially §7 thereof. The notion of effectiveness may also be described by saying that 
an effective method of computation, or algorithm, is one for which it would be possible 
to build a computing machine. This idea is developed into a rigorous definition by A. M. 
Turing in the Proceedings of the London Mathematical 
Society, vol. 42 (1936-1937), 
pp. 230-265 (and vol. 43 (1937), pp. 544-546). See further: S. C. Kleene in the Mathe-
matische Annalen, vol. 112 (1936), pp. 727-742; E. L. Post in The Journal of Symbolic 
Logic, vol. 1 (1936), pp. 103-105; A. M. Turing in The Journal of Symbolic Logic, vol. 2 
(1937), pp. 153-163; Hilbert and Bernays, Grundlagen der Mathematik, vol. 2 (1939), 
Supplement II. 

§07] 
THE LOGISTIC 
METHOD 
53 
formedness is non-effective. There is then no certain means by which, when 
an alleged expression of the language is uttered (spoken or written), say as 
an asserted sentence, the auditor (hearer or reader) may determine whether 
it is well-formed, and thus whether any actual assertion has been made.120 
Therefore the auditor may fairly demand a proof that the utterance is well-
formed, and until such proof is provided may refuse to treat it as constituting 
an assertion. This proof, which must be added to the original utterance in 
order to establish its status, ought to be regarded, it seems, as part of the 
utterance, and the definition of well-formedness ought to be modified to 
provide this, or its equivalent. When such modification is made, no doubt 
the non-effectiveness of the definition will disappear; otherwise it would be 
open to the auditor to make further demand for proof of well-formedness. 
Again, consider the situation which arises if the notion of a proof is non-
effective. There is then no certain means by which, when a sequence of 
formulas has been put forward as a proof, the auditor may determine wheth-
er it is in fact a proof. Therefore he may fairly demand a proof, in any 
given case, that the sequence of formulas put forward is a proof; and until 
this supplementary proof is provided, he may refuse to be convinced that the 
alleged theorem is proved. This supplementary proof ought to be regarded, 
it seems, as part of the whole proof of the theorem, and the primitive basis 
of the logistic system ought to be so modified as to provide this, or its 
equivalent.121 Indeed it is essential to the idea of a proof that, to any one 
who admits the presuppositions on which it is based, a proof carries final 
1X0To say that an assertion has been made if there is a meaning evades the issue 
unless an effective criterion is provided for the presence of meaning. An understanding 
of the language, however reached, must include effective ability to recognize meaning-
fulness (in some appropriate sense), and in the purely formal aspect of the language, the 
logistic system, this appears as an effective criterion of well-formedness. 
121Perhaps at first sight it will be thought that the proof as so modified might con-
sist of something more than merely a sequence of well-formed formulas. For instance 
there might be put in at various places indications in the meta-language as to which 
rule of inference justifies the inclusion of a particular formula as immediately inferred 
from preceding formulas, or as to which preceding formulas are the premisses of the 
immediate inference. 
But as a matter of fact we consider this inadmissible. For our program is to express 
proofs (as well as theorems) in a fully formalized object language, and as long as any 
part of the proof remains in an unformalized meta-language the logical analysis must 
be held to be incomplete. A statement in the meta-language, e.g., that a particular 
formula is immediately inferred from particular preceding formulas—if it is not super-
fluous and therefore simply omissible—must always be replaced in some way by one or 
more sentences of the object language. 
Though we use a meta-language to set up the object language, we require that, once 
set up, the object language shall be an independent language capable, without continued 
support and supplementation from the meta-language, of expressing those things for 
which it was designed. 

54 
INTRODUCTION 
conviction. And the requirements of effectiveness (l)-(IV) may be thought 
of as intended just to preserve this essential characteristic of proof. 
After setting up the logistic system as described, we still do not have a 
formalized language until an interpretation is provided. This will require a 
more extensive meta-language than the restricted portion of English used 
in setting up the logistic system. However, it will proceed not by translations 
of the well-formed formulas into English phrases but rather by semantical 
rules which, in general, use rather than mention English phrases (cf. §08), 
and which shall prescribe for every well-formed formula either how it 
denotes122 {so making it a proper name in the sense of §01) or else how it has 
values122 {so making it a form in the sense of §02). 
In view of our postulation of two truth-values (§04), we impose the re-
quirement that the semantical rules, if they are to be said to provide an 
interpretation, must be such that the axioms denote truth-values (if they 
are names) or have always truth-values as values (if they are forms), and 
the same must hold of the conclusion of any immediate inference if it holds 
of the premisses. In using the formalized language, only those well-formed 
formulas shall be capable of being asserted which denote truth-values (if 
'"Because of the possibility of misunderstanding, we avoid the wordings "what it 
denotes" and "what values it has." 
For example, in one of the logistic systems of Chapter X we may find a well-formed 
formula which, under a principal interpretation of the system, is interpreted as denoting; 
the greatest positive integer n such that 1 -f- «r is prime, r being chosen as the least 
even positive integer corresponding to which there is such a greatest positive integer n. 
Thus the semantical rules do in a sense determine what this formula denotes, but the 
remoteness of this determination is measured by the difficulty of the mathematical 
problem which must be solved in order to identify in some more familiar manner the 
positive integer which the formula denotes, or even to say whether or not the formula 
denotes 1. 
Again in the logistic system F l h of Chapter III (or A0 of Chapter V) taken with its 
principal interpretation, there is a well-formed formula which, according to the seman-
tical rules, denotes the truth-value thereof that every even number greater than 2 is 
the sum of two prime numbers. To say that the semantical rules determine what this 
formula denotes seems to anticipate the solution of a famous problem, and it may be 
better to think of the rules as determining indirectly what the formula expresses. 
In assigning how (rather than what) a name denotes we are in effect fixing its sense, 
and in assigning how a form has values we fix the correspondence of sense values of 
the form (see footnote 27) to concepts of values of its variables. (This statement of the 
matter will be sufficiently precise for our present purposes, though it remains vague 
to the extent that we have left the meaning of "sense" uncertain—see footnotes 15, 37.) 
It will be seen in particular examples below (such as rules a-g of §10, or rules a-f 
of §30, or rules <x-£ of §30) that in most of our semantical rules the explicit assertion is 
that certain well-formed formulas, usually on certain conditions, are to denote certain 
things or to have certain values. However, as just explained, this explicit assertion is 
so chosen as to give implicitly also the sense or the sense values. No doubt a fuller treat-
ment of semantics must have additional rules stating the sense or the sense values ex-
plicitly, but this would take us into territory still unexplored. 

§07] 
THE LOGISTIC METHOD 
55 
they are names) or have always truth-values as values (if they are forms); 
and only those shall be capable of being rightly asserted which denote truth 
(if they are names) or have always the value truth (if they are forms). Since 
it is intended that proof of a theorem shall justify its assertion, we call an 
interpretation of a logistic system sound if, under it, all the axioms either 
denote truth or have always the value truth, and if further the same thing 
holds of the conclusion of any immediate inference if it holds of the premisses. 
In the contrary case we call the interpretation unsound, A formalized lan-
guage is called sound or unsound according as the interpretation by which 
it is obtained from a logistic system is sound or unsound. And an unsound 
interpretation or an unsound language is to be rejected. 
(The requirements, and the definition of soundness, in the foregoing para-
graph are based on two truth-values. They are satisfactory for every formal-
ized language which will receive substantial consideration in this book. 
But they must be modified correspondingly, in case the scheme of two truth-
values is modified—cf. the remark in §19.) 
The semantical rules must in the first instance be stated in a presupposed 
and therefore unformalized meta-language, here taken to be ordinary 
English. Subsequently, for their more exact study, we may formalize the 
meta-language (using a presupposed meta-meta-language and following the 
method already described for formalizing the object language) and restate 
the semantical rules in this formalized language. (This leads to the subject 
of semantics (§09).) 
As a condition of rigor, we require that the proof of a theorem (of the ob-
ject language) shall make no reference to or use of any interpretation, but 
shall proceed purely by the rules of the logistic system, i.e., shall be a proof 
in the sense defined above for logistic systems. Motivation for this is three-
fold, three rather different approaches issuing in the same criterion. In the 
first place this may be considered a more precise formulation of the tradi-
tional distinction between form and matter (§00) and of the principle that 
the validity of an argument depends only on the form—the form of a 
proof in a logistic system being thought of as something common to its 
meanings under various interpretations of the logistic system. In the second 
place this represents the standard mathematical requirement of rigor that 
a proof must proceed purely from the axioms without use of anything 
(however supposedly obvious) which is not stated in the axioms; but this 
requirement is here modified and extended as follows: that a proof must 
proceed purely from the axioms by the rules of inference, without use of 
anything not stated in the axioms or any method of inference not validated 

56 
INTRODUCTION 
by the rules. Thirdly there is the motivation that the logistic system is 
relatively secure and definite, as compared to interpretations which we may 
wish to adopt, since it is based on a portion of English as meta-language so 
elementary and restricted that its essential reliability can hardly be doubted 
if mathematics is to be possible at all. 
It is also important that a proof which satisfies our foregoing condition 
of rigor must then hold under any interpretation of the logistic system, so 
that there is a resulting economy in proving many things under one pro-
cess.123 The extent of the economy is just this, that proofs identical in form 
but different in matter need not be repeated indefinitely but may be sum-
marized once for all.124 
Though retaining our freedom to employ any interpretation that may be 
found useful, we shall indicate, for logistic systems set up in the following 
chapters, one or more interpretations which we have especially in mind for 
the system and which shall be called the principal interpretations. 
The subject of formal logic, when treated by the method of setting up a 
formalized language, is called symbolic logic, or mathematical logic, or logistic.126 
The method itself we shall call the logistic method. 
m T h i s remark has now long been familiar in connection with the axiomatic method 
in mathematics (see below). 
i2*The summarizing of a proof according to its form may indeed be represented to a 
certain extent, by the use of variables, within one particular formalized language. 
But, because of restricted ranges of the variables, such summarizing is less comprehen-
sive in its scope than is obtained by formalizing in a logistic system whose interpretation 
is left open. 
The procedure of formalizing a proof in a logistic system and then employing the 
formalized proof under various different interpretations of the system may be thought 
of as a mere device for brevity and convenience of presentation, since it would be pos-
sible instead to repeat the proof in full each time it were used with a new interpretation. 
From this point of view such use of the meta-language may be allowed as being in 
principle dispensable and therefore not violating the demand (footnote 121) for an in-
dependent object language. 
{If on the other hand we wish to deal rigorously with the notion of logical form of 
proofs, this must be in a particular formalized language, namely a formalized meta-
language of the language of the proofs. Under the program of §02 each variable of this 
meta-language will have a fixed range assigned in advance, according, perhaps, with the 
theory of types. And the notion of form which is dealt with must therefore be cor-
respondingly restricted, it would seem, to proofs of a fixed class, taking no account of 
sameness of form between proofs of this class and others (in the same or a different 
language). Presumably our informal references to logical form in the text are to be 
modified in this way before they can be made rigorous—cf. §09.) 
m T h e writer prefers the term "mathematical logic," understood as meaning logic 
treated by the mathematical method, especially the formal axiomatic or logistic method. 
But both this term and the term "symbolic logic" are often applied also to logic as 
treated by a less fully formalized mathematical method, in particular to the "algebra 
of logic," which had its beginning in the publications of George Boole and Augustus 
De Morgan in 1847, and received a comprehensive treatment in Ernst Schroder's 
Vorlesungen iiber die Algebra der Logik (1890-1905). The term "logistic" is more defi-

§07] 
THE 
LOGISTIC 
METHOD 
57 
Familiar in mathematics is the axiomatic method, according to which a 
branch of mathematics begins with a list of undefined 
terms and a list of 
assumptions, or -postulates involving these terms, and the theorems are to 
be derived from the postulates by the methods of formal logic,126 If the last 
phrase is left unanalyzed, formal logic being presupposed as already known, 
we shall say that the development is by the informal axiomatic 
method}21 
And in the opposite case we shall speak of the formal axiomatic 
method. 
The formal axiomatic method thus differs from the logistic method only 
in the following two ways: 
(1) In the logistic system the primitive symbols are given in two cate-
gories: the logical primitive 
symbols, thought of as pertaining to the under-
lying logic, and the undefined terms, thought of as pertaining to the particular 
branch of mathematics. Correspondingly the axioms are divided into two 
categories: the logical axioms, 
which are well-formed formulas containing 
only logical primitive symbols, and the postulates}28 
which involve also 
the undefined terms and are thought of as determining the special branch of 
mathematics. The rules of inference, to accord with the usual conception of 
nitely restricted to the method described in this section, and has also the advantage that 
it is more easily made an adjective. (Sometimes "logistic" has been used with special 
reference to the school of Russell or to the Frege-Russell doctrine that mathematics 
is a branch of logic—cf. footnote 545. But we shall follow the more common usage 
which attaches no such special meaning to this word.) 
"Logica mathematica" and "logistica" were both used by G. W. v. Leibniz along 
with "calculus ratiocinator," and many other synonyms, for the calculus of reasoning 
which he proposed but never developed beyond some brief and inadequate (though 
significant) fragments. Boole used the expressions "mathematical analysis of logic," 
"ma.thematical theory of logic." "Mathematischc Logik" was used by Schroder in 
1877, "mat6matic6skaa logika" (Russian) by Platon Poretsky in 1884, "logica matema-
tica" (Italian) by Giuseppe Peano in 1891. "Symbolic logic" seems to have been first 
used by John Venn (in The Princeton 
Review, 1880), though Boole speaks of "sym-
bolical reasoning." The word "logistic" and its analogues in other languages originally 
meant the art of calculation or common arithmetic. Its modern use for mathematical 
logic dates from the International Congress of Philosophy of 1904, where it was proposed 
independently by Itelson, Lalande, and Couturat. Other terms found in the literature 
are "logischer Calcul" (Gottfried Ploucquet 1766), "algorithnie logique" (G. F. Castillon 
1805), "calculus of logic" (Boole 1847), "calculus of inference" (De Morgan 1847), 
"logique algorithmique" (J. R. L. Delboeuf 1876), "Logikkalkul" (Schroder 1877), 
"theoretische Logik" (Hilbert and Ackermann 1928). Also "Boole's logical algebra" 
(C. S. Peirce 1870), "logique algebrique de Boole" (Louis Liard 1877), "algebra of 
logic" (Alexander Macfarlane 1879, C. S. Peirce 1880). 
mAccounts of the axiomatic method may of course be found in many mathematical 
textbooks and other publications. An especially good exposition is in the Introduction 
to Veblen and Young's Projective Geometry, vol. 1 (1910). 
1,TThis is the method of most mathematical treatises, which proceed axiomatically 
but are not specifically about logic—in particular of Veblen and Young (preceding 
footnote). 
m T h e words "axiom" and "postulate" have been variously used, either as synon-
ymous or with varying distinctions between them, by the present writer among others. 
In this book, however, the terminology here set forth will be followed closely. 

58 
INTRODUCTION 
the axiomatic method, must all be taken as belonging to the underlying 
logic. And, though they may make reference to particular undefined 
terms or to classes of primitive symbols which include undefined terms, 
they must not involve anything which, subjectively, we are unwilling to 
assign to the underlying logic rather than to the special branch of mathe-
matics.129 
(2) In the interpretation the semantical rules are given in two categories. 
Those of the first category fix those general aspects of the interpretation 
which may be assigned, or which we are willing to assign, to the underlying 
logic. And the rules of the second category determine the remainder of the 
interpretation. The consideration of different representations or interpre-
tations of the system of postulates, in the sense of the informal axiomatic 
method, corresponds here to varying the semantical rules of the second 
category while those of the first category remain fixed. 
08. Syntax. The study of the purely formal part of a formalized language 
in abstraction from the interpretation, i.e., of the logistic system, is called 
syntax, or, to distinguish it from the narrower sense of "syntax" as con-
cerned with the formation rules alone,130 logical syntax.131 The meta-language 
used in order to study the logistic system in this way is called the syntax 
language1*1 
We shall distinguish between elementary syntax and theoretical syntax. 
The elementary syntax of a language is concerned with setting up the 
logistic system and with the verification of particular well-formed formulas, 
"'Ordinarily, e.g., it would be allowed that the rules of inference should treat differ-
ently two undefined terms intended one to denote an individual and one to denote a 
class of individuals, or two undefined terms intended to denote a class of individuals 
and a relation between individuals; but not that the rules should treat differently two 
undefined terms intended both to denote a class of individuals. But no definitive con-
trolling principle can be given. 
The subjective and essentially arbitrary character of the distinction between what 
pertains to the underlying logic and what to the special branch of mathematics is illus-
trated by the uncertainty which sometimes arises, in treating a branch of mathematics 
by the informal axiomatic method, as to whether the sign of equality is to be considered 
as an undefined term (for which it is necessary to state postulates). Again it is illustrated 
by Zermelo's treatment of axiomatic set theory in his paper of 1908 (cf. Chapter XI) 
in which, following the informal axiomatic method, he introduces the relation e of 
membership in a set as an undefined term, though this same relation is usually assigned 
to the underlying logic when a branch of mathematics is developed by the informal 
axiomatic method. 
1S0Cf. footnote 116. 
131The terminology is due to Carnap in his Logische Syntax der Sprache (1934), trans-
lated into English (with some additions) as The Logical Syntax of Language (1937). In 
connection with this book see also reviews of it by Saunders MacLane in the 
Bulletin 
of the American Mathematical Society, vol. 44 (1938), pp. 171-176, and by S. C. Kleene 
in The Journal 
of Symbolic Logic, vol, 4 (1939), pp. 82-87. 

§08] 
SYNTAX 
59 
axioms, immediate inferences, and proofs as being such. The syntax language 
is the restricted portion of English which was described in the foregoing 
section, or a correspondingly restricted formalized meta-language, and the 
requirements of effectiveness, (I)-(IV), must be observed. The demonstra-
tion of derived rules and theorem schemata, in the sense of §§12, 33, and 
their application in particular cases are also considered to belong to ele-
mentary syntax, provided that the requirement of effectiveness holds which 
is explained in §12. 
Theoretical syntax, on the other hand, is the general mathematical theory 
of a logistic system or systems and is concerned with all the consequences of 
their formal structure (in abstraction from the interpretation). There is no 
restriction imposed as to what is available in the syntax language, and re-
quirements of effectiveness are or may be abandoned. Indeed the syntax 
language may be capable of expressing the whole of extant mathematics. But 
it may also sometimes be desirable to use a weaker syntax language in order 
to exhibit results as obtained on this weaker basis. 
Like any branch of mathematics, theoretical syntax may, and ultimately 
must, be studied by the axiomatic method. Here the informal and the formal 
axiomatic method share the important advantage that the particular 
character of the symbols and formulas of the object language, as marks upon 
paper, sounds, or the like, is abstracted from, and the pure theory of the 
structure of the logistic system is developed. But the formal axiomatic 
method—the syntax language being itself formalized according to the pro-
gram of §07, by employing a meta-meta-language—has the additional ad-
vantage of exhibiting more definitely the basis on which results are obtained, 
and of clarifying the way and the extent to which certain results may be 
obtained on a relatively weaker basis. 
In this book we shall be concerned with the task of formalizing an object 
language, and theoretical syntax will be treated informally, presupposing 
in any connection such general knowledge of mathematics as is necessary 
for the work at hand. Thus we do not apply even the informal axiomatic 
method to our treatment of syntax. But the reader must always understand 
that syntactical discussions are carried out in a syntax language whose for-
malization is ultimately contemplated, and distinctions based upon such 
formalization may be relevant to the discussion. 
In such informal development of syntax, we shall think of the syntax 
language as being a different language from the object language. But the 
possibility is important that a sufficiently adequate object language may be 
capable of expressing its own syntax, so that in this case the ultimate for-

60 
INTRODUCTION 
malization of the syntax language may if desired consist in identifying it 
with the object language.132 
We shall distinguish between theorems of the object language and theo-
rems of the syntax language (which often are theorems about the object 
language) by calling the latter syntactical theorems. Though we demonstrate 
syntactical theorems informally, it is contemplated that the ultimate formal-
ization of the syntax language shall make them theorems in the sense of §07, 
i.e., theorems of the syntax language in the same sense as that in which we 
speak of theorems of the object language. 
We shall require, as belonging to the syntax language: first, names of the 
various symbols and formulas of the object language; and secondly, vari-
ables which have these symbols and formulas as their values. The former 
will be called syntactical constants, and the latter, syntactical variables.1™ 
As syntactical variables we shall use the following: as variables whose 
range is the primitive symbols of the object language, bold Greek small 
letters (a, f$, y, etc.); as variables whose range is the primitive constants and 
variables of the object language—see footnote 117—bold roman small 
letters (a, b, c, etc.); as variables whose range is the formulas of the object 
language, bold Greek capitals (I\ A, etc.); and as variables whose range is 
the well-formed formulas of the object language, bold roman capitals (A, 
B, G, etc.). Wherever these bold letters are used in the following chapters 
the reader must bear in mind that they are not part of the symbolic appara-
tus of the object language but that they belong to the syntax language 
and serve the purpose of talking about the object language. In use of the 
object language as an independent language, bold letters do not appear 
(just as English words never appear in the pure text of a Latin author 
though they do appear in a Latin grammar written in English). 
As a preliminary to explaining the device to which we resort for syntac-
tical constants, it is desirable first to consider the situation in ordinary 
1S2Cf. footnote 109. In particular the developments of Chapter VIII show that the 
logistic system of Chapter VII is capable of expressing its own syntax if given a suitable 
interpretation different from the principal interpretation of Chapter VII, namely, an 
interpretation in which the symbols and formulas of the logistic system itself are counted 
among the individuals, as well as all finite sequences of such formulas, and the functional 
constant 5 is given an appropriate (quite complicated) interpretation, details of which 
may be made out by following the scheme of Godel numbers that is set forth in Chapter 
VIII. 
"'Given the apparatus of syntactical variables, we could actually avoid the use of 
syntactical constants by resorting to appropriate circumlocutions in cases where syn-
tactical constants would otherwise seem to be demanded. Indeed the example of the 
preceding footnote illustrates this, as will become clear in connection with the cited 
chapters. But it is more natural and convenient, especially in an informal treatment of 
syntax, to allow free use of syntactical constants. 

§08] 
SYNTAX 
61 
English, with no formalized object language specially in question. We must 
take into account the fact that English is not a formalized language and the 
consequent uncertainty as to what are its formation rules, rules of inference, 
and semantical rules, the contents of ordinary English grammars and dic-
tionaries providing only some incomplete and rather vague approximations 
to such rules. But, with such reservations as this remark implies, we go on to 
consider the use of English in making syntactical statements about the 
English language itself. 
Frequently found in practice is the use of English words autonymously 
(to 
adopt a terminology due to Carnap), i.e., as names of those same words.134 
Examples are such statements as "The second letter of man is a vowel," 
"Man is monosyllabic," "Man is a noun with an irregular plural." Of course 
it is equivocal to use the same word, man, both as a proper name of the 
English word which is spelled by the thirteenth, first, fourteenth letters of 
the alphabet in that order, and as a common name (see footnote 6) of 
featherless plantigrade biped mammals135—but an equivocacy which, like 
many others in the natural languages, is often both convenient and harmless. 
Whenever there would otherwise be real doubt of the meaning, it may be 
removed by the use of added words in the sentence, or by the use of quotation 
marks, or of italics, as in: "The word man is monosyllabic"; " 'Man' is 
monosyllabic"; "Man 
is monosyllabic." 
Following the convenient and natural phraseology of Quine, we may 
distinguish between use and mention of a word or symbol. In "Man is a 
rational animal" the word "man" is used but not mentioned. In "The Eng-
lish translation of the French word homme has three letters" the word "man" 
is mentioned but not used. In "Man is a monosyllable" the word "man" is 
both mentioned and used, though used in an anomalous manner, namely 
autonymously. 
Frege introduced the device of systematically indicating autonymy by 
quotation marks, and in his later publications (though not in the Begriffs-
schrift) words and symbols used autonymously are enclosed in single quota-
tion marks in all cases. This has the effect that a word enclosed in single 
134In the terminology of the Scholastics, use of a word as a name of itself, i.e., to de-
note itself as a word, was called sxipposiho materialis. Opposed to this as supposiiio 
formalis was the use of a noun in its proper or ordinary meaning. This terminology is 
sometimes still convenient. 
The various further distinctions of supposiliones are too cumbrous, and too uncertain, 
to be usable. All of them, like that between supposiiio materialis and formalis, refer to 
peculiarities and irregularities of meaning which are found in many natural languages 
but which have to be eliminated in setting up a formalized language. 
135To follow a definition found in The Century 
Dictionary. 

62 
INTRODUCTION 
quotation marks is to be treated as a different word from that without the 
quotation marks—as if the quotation marks were two additional letters in 
the spelling of the word—and equivocacy is thus removed by providing two 
different words to correspond to the different meanings. Many recent writers 
follow Frege in this systematic use of quotation marks, some using double 
quotation marks in this way, and others following Frege in using single 
quotation marks for the purpose, in order to reserve double quotation marks 
for their regular use as punctuation. As the reader has long since observed, 
Frege's systematic use of quotation marks is not adopted in this book.136 
But we may employ quotation marks or other devices from time to time, 
especially in cases in which there might otherwise be real doubt of the 
meaning. 
To return to the question of syntactical constants for use in developing the 
syntax of a formalized object language, we find that there is in this case 
l36Besides being rather awkward in practice, such systematic use of quotation marks 
is open to some unfortunate abuses and misunderstandings. One of these is the misuse 
of quotation marks as if they denoted a function from things (of some category) to 
names of such things, or as if such a function might be employed at all without some 
more definite account of it. Related to this is the temptation to use in the role of a 
syntactical variable the expression obtained by enclosing a variable of an object lan-
guage in quotation marks, though such an expression, correctly used, is not a variable 
of any kind, and not a form but a constant. 
Also not uncommon is the false impression that trivial or self-evident propositions 
are expressed in such statements as the following: ' 'Snow is white' is true if and only 
if snow is white' (Tarski's example); ' 'Snow is white' means that snow is white'; 
'Cape Town' is the [or aj name of Cape Town.' 
This last misunderstanding may arise also in connection with autonymy. A useful 
method of combatting it is that of translation into another language (cf. a remark by 
C. H. Langford in The Journal of Symbolic Logic, vol. 2 (1937), p. 53). For example, 
the proposition that 'Cape Town' is the name of Cape Town would be conveyed thus 
to an Italian (whom we may suppose to have no knowledge of English): ' 'Cape Town' 
e il norae di Citta del Capo.' Assuming, as we may, that the Italian words have exactly 
the same sense as the English words of which we use them as translations—in particular 
that 'Citta del Capo' has the same sense as 'Cape Town' and that ' 'Cape Town' ' has 
the same sense in Italian as in English—we see that the Italian sentence and its English 
translation must express the very same proposition, which can no more be a triviality 
when conveyed in one language than it can in another. 
The foregoing example may be clarified by recalling the remark of footnote 8 that 
the name relation is properly a ternary relation, and may be reduced to a binary re-
lation only by fixing the language in a particular context. Thus we have the more ex-
plicit English sentences: ' 'Cape Town' is the English name of Cape Town'; ' 'Citta del 
Capo' is the Italian name of Cape Town.' The Italian translations are: ' 'Cape Town' e 
il nome inglese di Citta del Capo'; ' 'Citta del Capo' e il nome italiano di Citta del Capo.' 
Of the two propositions in question, the first one has a false appearance of obviousness 
when expressed in English, the illusion being dispelled on translation into Italian; 
the second one contrariwise does not seem obvious or trivial when expressed in English, 
but on translation into Italian acquires the appearance of being so. 
(In the three preceding paragraphs of this footnote, we have followed Frege's syste-
matic use of single quotation marks, and the paragraphs are to be read with that under-
standing. As explained, we do not follow this usage elsewhere.) 

§08] 
SYNTAX 
63 
nothing equivocal in using the symbols and formulas of the object language 
autonymously in the syntax language, provided that care is taken that no 
formula of the object language is also a formula of the syntax language in 
any other wise than as an autonym. Therefore we adopt the following 
practice: 
The primitive symbols of the object language will be used in the syntax 
language as names of themselves, and juxtaposition will be used for juxta-
position.^1 
This is the ordinary usage in mathematical writing, and has the advantage 
of being self-explanatory. Though we employ it only informally, it is also 
readily adapted to incorporation in a formalized syntax language138 (and in 
fact more so than the convention of quotation marks). 
As a precaution against equivocation, we shall hereafter avoid the 
practice—which might otherwise sometimes be convenient—of borrowing 
formulas of the object language for use in the syntax language (or other 
meta-language) with the same meaning that they have in the object 
language. Thus in all cases where a single symbol or a formula of 
the object language is found as a constituent in an English sentence, 
it is to be understood in accordance with the italicized rule above, i.e., 
autonymously. 
Since we shall later often introduce conventions for abbreviating well-
formed formulas of an object language, some additional explanations will 
be necessary concerning the use of syntactical variables and syntactical 
constants (and concerning autonymy) in connection with such abbreviations. 
These will be indicated in §11, where such abbreviations first appear. But, 
as explained in that section, the abbreviations themselves and therefore 
any special usages in connection with them are dispensable in principle, 
however necessary practically. In theoretical discussions of syntax and in 
particular in formalizing the syntax language, the matter of abbreviations 
of well-formed formulas may be ignored. 
137I.e., juxtaposition will be used in the syntax language as a binary connective having 
the operation of juxtaposition as its associated function. Technically, some added no-
tation is needed to show association, or some convention about the matter, such as 
that of association to the left (as in §11). But in practice, because of the associativity 
of juxtaposition, there is no difficulty in this respect. 
X38This is, of course, on the assumption that the syntax language is a different lan-
guage from the object language. 
If on the contrary a formalized language is to contain names of its own formulas, 
then a name of a formula must ordinarily not be that formula. E.g., a variable 
of a language must not be, in that same language, also a name of itself; for a proper 
name of a variable is no variable but a constant (as already remarked, in another con-
nection, in footnote 136). 

64 
INTRODUCTION 
09. Semantics. Let us imagine the users of a formalized language, 
say a written language, engaged in writing down well-formed formulas of 
the language, and in assembling sequences of formulas which constitute 
chains of immediate inferences or, in particular, proofs. And let us imagine 
an observer of this activity who not only does not understand the language 
but refuses to believe that it is a language, i.e., that the formulas have 
meanings. He recognizes, let us say, the syntactical criteria by which for-
mulas are accepted as well-formed, and those by which sequences of well-
formed formulas are accepted as immediate inferences or as proofs; but he 
supposes that the activity is merely a game—analogous to a game of chess 
or, better, to a chess problem or a game of solitaire at cards—the point of 
the game being to discover unexpected theorems or ingenious chains of 
inferences, and to solve puzzles as to whether and how some given formula 
can be proved or can be inferred from other given formulas.139 
To this observer the symbols have only such meaning as is given to them 
by the rules of the game—only such meaning as belongs, for example, to 
the various pieces at chess. A formula is for him like a position on a chess-
board, significant only as a step in the game, which leads in accordance 
with the rules to various other steps. 
All those things about the language which can be said to and understood 
by such an observer while he continues to regard the use of the language as 
merely a game constitute the (theoretical) syntax of the language. But those 
things which are intelligible only through an understanding that the well-
formed formulas have meaning in the proper sense, e.g., that certain of them 
express propositions or that they denote or have values in certain ways, 
belong to the semantics of the language. 
Thus the study of the interpretation of the language as an interpretation 
is called semantics.1^ The name is applied especially when the treatment is 
139 A comparison of the rules of arithmetic to those of a game of chess was made by 
J. Thomae (1898) and figures in the controversy between Thomae and Frege (1903-
1908). The same comparison was used by Hermann Weyl (1924) in order to describe 
Hilbert's program of metamathematics or syntax of a mathematical object language. 
U0The name (or its analogue in Polish) was introduced by Tarski in a paper in 
Przegl<\d Filozoliczny, 
vol. 39 (1936), pp. 50-57, translated into German as "Grundle-
gung der wissenschaftlichen Semantik" in Actes du Congres International 
de Philosophie 
Scientijique (1936). Other important publications in the field of semantics are: Tarski's 
Poje_cie Prawdy w Jezyhach Nauk Dedukcyjnych 
(1933), afterwards translated into 
German (and an important appendix added) as "Der Wahrheitsbegriff in den forma-
lisierten Sprachen" in Studia Philosophica, 
vol. 1 (1936) pp. 261-405; and Carnap's 
Introduction to Semantics (1942). Concerning Carnap's book see a review by the present 
writer in The Philosophical 
Review, vol. 52 (1943), pp. 298-304. 
The word semantics has various other meanings, most of them older than that in 
question here. Care must be taken to avoid confusion on this account. But in this book 
the word will have always the one meaning, intended to be the same (or substantially 

§09] 
SEMANTICS 
65 
in a formalized meta-language. But in this book we shall not go beyond some 
unformalized semantical discussion, in ordinary English. 
Theorems of the semantical meta-language will be called semantical theo-
rems, and both semantical and syntactical theorems will be called metatheo-
rems, in order to distinguish them from theorems of the object language. 
As appears from the work of Tarski, there is a sense in which semantics 
can be reduced to syntax. Tarski has emphasized especially the possibility 
of finding, for a given formalized language, a purely syntactical property 
of the well-formed formulas which coincides in extension with the semantical 
property of being a true sentence. And in Tarski's W ahrheitsbegriffui the prob-
lem of finding such a syntactical property is solved for various particular 
formalized languages.142 But like methods apply to the two semantical con-
cepts of denoting and having values, so that syntactical concepts may be found 
which coincide with them in extension.143 Therefore, if names expressing 
so) as that in which it is used by Tarski, C. W. Morns {Foundations oj the Theory of 
Signs, 1938), Carnap, G. D. W. Berry {Harvard University, 
Summaries of Theses 1942, 
pp. 330-334). 
14lCited in the preceding footnote. 
U2Tarski solves also, for various particular formalized languages, the problem of 
finding a syntactical relation which coincides in extension with the semantical relation 
of satisfying a propositional form. 
In a paper published in Monatshe/te fur Mathemaiik und Physik, vol. 42, no. 1 (1935), 
therefore later than Tarski's Po^cie Prawdy but earlier than the German translation 
and its appendix, Carnap also solves both problems (of finding syntactical equivalents 
of being a true sentence and of satisfying a propositional form) for a particular formal-
ized language and in fact for a stronger language than any for which this had previously 
been done by Tarski. Carnap's procedure can be simplified in the light of Tarski's 
appendix or as suggested by Kleene in his review cited in footnote 131. 
On the theory of meaning which we are here adopting, the semantical concepts of 
being a true sentence and of satisfying a propositional form are reducible to those of 
denoting and having values, and these results of Tarski and Carnap are therefore 
implicit in the statement of the following footnote. 
143More explicitly, this may be done as follows. In §07, in discussing the semantical 
rules of a formalized language, we thought of the concepts of denoting and of having 
values as being known in advance, and we used the semantical rules for the purpose 
of giving meaning to the previously uninterpreted logistic syslem. But instead of this it 
would be possible to give no meaning in advance to the words "denote" and "have 
values" as they occur in the semantical rules, and then to regard the semantical rules, 
taken together, as constituting definitions of "denote" and "have values" (in the same 
way that the formation rules of a logistic system constitute a definition of "well-
formed"). The concepts expressed by "denote" and "have values" as thus defined 
belong to theoretical syntax, nothing semantical having been used in their definition. 
But they coincide in extension with the semantical concepts of denoting and having 
values, as applied to the particular formalized language. 
The situation may be clarified by recalling that a particular logistic system may be 
expected to have many sound interpretations, leading to many different assignments 
of denotations and values to its well-formed formulas. These assignments of denotations 
and values to the well-formed formulas may be made as abstract correspondences, so 
that their treatment belongs to theoretical syntax. Semantics begins when we decide 
the meaning of the well-formed formulas by fixing a particular interpretation of the 
system. The distinction between semantics and syntax is found in the different sigmf-

66 
INTRODUCTION 
these two concepts are the only specifically semantical (non-syntactical) 
primitive symbols of a semantical meta-language, it is possible to transform 
the semantical meta-language into a syntax language by a change of inter-
pretation which consists only in altering the sense of those names without 
changing their denotations. 
However, a sound syntax language capable of expressing such syntactical 
equivalents of the semantical concepts of denoting and having values—or 
even only a syntactical equivalent of the semantical property of truth— 
must ordinarily be stronger than the object language (assumed sound), in 
the sense that there will be theorems of the syntax language of which no 
translation (i.e., sentence expressing the same proposition) is a theorem of 
the object language. Else there will be simple elementary propositions about 
the semantical concepts such that the sentences expressing the correspond-
ing propositions about the syntactical equivalents of the semantical con-
cepts are not theorems of the syntax language.144 
For various particular formalized languages this was proved (in effect) 
by Tarski in his Wahrheitsbegriff. And Tarski's methods146 are such that they 
can be applied to obtain the same result in many other cases—in particular 
in the case of each of the object languages studied in this book, when a 
formalized syntax language of it is set up in a straightforward manner. No 
doubt Tarski's result is capable of precise formulation and proof as a result 
about a very general class of languages, but we shall not attempt this. 
The significance of Tarski's result should be noticed as it affects the ques-
tion of the use of a formalized language as semantical meta-language of 
itself. A sound and sufficiently adequate language may indeed be capable 
lcancu given to one particular interpretation and to its assignment of denotations and 
values to the well-formed formulas; but within the domain of formal logic, including 
pure syntax and pure semantics, nothing can be said about this different significance 
except to postulate it as different. 
Many similar situations are familiar in mathematics. For instance, the distinction 
between plane Euclidean metric geometry and plane projective geometry may be found 
in the different significance given to one particular straight line and one particular 
elliptic involution on it. And it seems not unjustified to say that the sense in which 
semantics can be reduced to syntax is like that in which Euclidean metric geometry 
can be reduced to projective geometry. 
All this suggests that, in order to maintain the distinction of semantics from syntax, 
"denote" and "have values" should be introduced as undefined terms and treated by the 
axiomatic method. Our use of semantical rules is intended as a step towards this. And in 
(act Tarski's Wahrheitsbegriff already contains the proposal of an axiomatic theory of 
truth as an alternative to that of finding a syntactical equivalent of the concept of truth. 
1UA more precise statement of this will be found in Chapter VIII, as it applies to the 
special case of the logistic system of Chapter VII when interpreted, in the manner 
indicated in footnote 132, so as to be capable of expressing its own syntax. 
UBReIated to those used by Kurt Godel in the proof of his incompleteness theorems, 
set forth in Chapter VIII. 

§09] 
SEMANTICS 
67 
of expressing its own syntax (cf. footnote 132) and its own semantics, in 
the sense of containing sentences which express at least a very comprehen-
sive class of the propositions of its syntax and its semantics. But among 
these sentences, if certain very general conditions are satisfied, there will 
always be true sentences of a very elementary semantical character which 
are not theorems—sentences to the effect, roughly speaking, that such and 
such a particular sentence is true if and only if 
, the blank being filled 
by that particular sentence.146 Hence, on the assumption that the language 
satisfies ordinary conditions of adequacy in other respects, not all the se-
mantical rules (in the sense of §07), when written as sentences of the lan-
guage, are theorems. 
On account of this situation, the distinction between object language and 
meta-language, which first arises in formalizing the object language, re-
mains of importance even after the task of formalization is complete for 
both the object language and the meta-language. 
In concluding this Introduction, let us observe that much of what we 
have been saying has been concerned with the relation between linguistic 
expressions and their meaning, and therefore belongs to semantics. However, 
our interest has been less in the semantics of this or that particular language 
than in general features common to the semantics of many languages. And 
very general semantical principles, imposed as a demand upon any language 
that we wish to consider at all, have been put forward in some cases, notably 
assumptions (1), (2), (3) of §01 and assumption (4) of §02.147 
We have not, however, attempted to formalize this semantical discussion, 
or even to put the material into such preliminary order as would constitute 
a first step toward formalization. Our purpose has been introductory and 
explanatory, and it is hoped that ideas to which the reader has thus been 
informally introduced will be held subject to revision or more precise for-
mulation as the development continues. 
From time to time in the following chapters we shall interrupt the rig-
orous treatment of a logistic system in order to make an informal semantical 
aside. Though in studying a logistic system we shall wish to hold its inter-
pretation open, such semantical explanations about a system may serve in 
l4SA more careful statement is given by Taiski. 
By the results of Gbdel referred to in the preceding footnote (or alternatively by 
Tarski's reduction of semantics to syntax), true syntactical sentences which are not 
theorems must also be expected. But these are of not quite so elementary a character. 
And the fundamental syntactical rules described in §07 may nevertheless all be theorems 
when written as sentences of the language. 
147And assumption (5) of footnote 30. 

68 
INTRODUCTION 
particular to show a motivation for consideration of it by indicating its 
principal interpretations (cf. §07). Except in this Introduction, semantical 
passages will be distinguished from others by being printed in smaller type, 
the small type serving as a warning that the material is not part of the formal 
logistic development and must not be used as such. 
As we have already indicated, it is contemplated that semantics itself 
should ultimately be studied by the logistic method. 
But if semantical passages in this Introduction and in later chapters are 
to be rewritten in a formalized semantical language, certain refinements 
become necessary. Thus if the semantical language is to be a functional 
calculus of order to in the sense of Chapter VI, or a language like that of 
Chapter X, then various semantical terms, such as the term "denote" 
introduced in §01, must give way to a multiplicity of terms of different 
types,148 and statements which we have made using these terms must be 
replaced by axiom schemata149 or theorem schemata149 with typical ambi-
guity.149 Or if the semantical language should conform to some alternative 
to the theory of types, changes of a different character would be required. 
In particular, following the Zermelo set theory (Chapter XI), we would have 
to weaken substantially the assumption made in §03 that every singulary 
form has an associated function, and explanations regarding the notation A 
would have to be modified in some way in consequence. 
11SA11 the expressions of the language—formulas, or well-formed formulas—may be 
treated as values of (syntactical) variables of one type, But terms "denote" of different 
types are nevertheless necessary, because in " 
denotes 
," after filling the first 
blank with a syntactical variable or syntactical constant, we may still fill the second 
blank with a variable or constant of any type. 
Analogously, various other terms that we have used have to be replaced each by a 
multiplicity of terms of different types. This applies in particular to "thing," and the 
consequent weakening is especially striking in the case of footnote 9—which must 
become a schema with typical ambiguity. 
See also the remark in the last paragraph of footnote 87. 
14'The terminology is explained in §§27, 30, 33, and Chapter VI. (The typical ambi-
guity required here is ambiguity with respect to type in the sense described in footnote 
578, and is therefore not the same as the typical ambiguity mentioned in footnote 585, 
which is ambiguity rather with respect to level.) 

I. The Propositional Calculus 
The name propositional calculus1™ is given to any one of various logistic 
systems—which, however, are all equivalent to one another in a sense which 
will be made clear later. When we are engaged in developing a particular 
one of these systems, or when (as often happens) it is unnecessary for the 
purpose in hand to distinguish among the different systems, we speak of the 
propositional calculus. Otherwise the various logistic systems are distin-
guished as various formulations of the propositional calculus. 
The importance of the propositional calculus in one or another of its for-
mulations arises from its frequent occurrence as a part of more extensive 
logistic systems which are considered in this book or have been considered 
elsewhere, the variables of the propositional calculus (propositional varia-
bles) being replaceable by sentences of the more extensive system. Because 
of its greater simplicity in many ways than other logistic systems which we 
consider, the propositional calculus also serves the purposes of introduction 
and illustration, many of the things which we do in connection with it being 
afterwards extended, with greater or less modification, to other systems. 
In this chapter we develop in detail a particular formulation of the prop-
ositional calculus, the logistic system Pv Some other formulations will be 
considered in the next chapter. 
10. The primitive basis of P1.15Q The primitive symbols of ?l are 
three improper symbols 
(of which the first and third are called brackets) and one primitive constant 
/ 
and an infinite list of variables 
p 
q 
r 
s 
p l 
q1 
rx 
Sl 
p2 
q2 
. . . 
(the order here indicated being called the alphabetic order of the variables). 
The variables and the primitive constant are called proper symbols.ltl 
""Historical questions in connection with the propositional calculus will be treated 
briefly in the concluding section ot Chapter II. 
151 Regarding the terminology, sec explanations in §07 and in footnote 117. 

j 
70 
THE PROPOSITIONAL 
CALCULUS 
[CHAP. I 
I 
We shall hereafter use the abbreviations "wf" for "well-formed," "wff" 
6 
for "well-formed formula," "wffs" for "well-formed formulas." The for-
j 
mation rules of Px are:152 
1 
•: 
10i. 
The primitive constant / standing alone is a wff. 
I 
lOii. 
A variable standing alone is a wff. 
| 
lOiii. 
If T and A are wf, then [T ZD A] is wf.163 
I 
To complete the definition of a wff of Px we add that a formula is wf if 
I 
and only if its being so follows from the three formation rules. In other 
| 
words, the wffs of Pa are the least class of formulas which contains all the 
I 
formulas stated in lOi and lOii and is closed under the operation of lOiii. 
? 
Though not given explicitly in the definition, an effective test of well-
formedness follows from it. If a wff is not of too great length., it may often 
1 
be recognized as such at a glance. Otherwise we may employ a counting 
i 
procedure in the following way. If a given formula consists of more than one 
symbol, it cannot be wf unless it ends with ] and begins with [. Then we 
may start counting brackets at the beginning (or left) of the formula, pro-
mSystematic methods of numbering theorems, axioms, etc. so as to indicate the sec-
tion in which each occurs were perhaps first introduced by Peano. The method adopted 
here has some features in common with one that has been used by Quine. 
We shall number sections by numbers of two or more digits in such a way that the 
number of the chapter in which the section occurs may be obtained by deleting the 
last digit. However, chapter numbers are given by Roman numerals. Some chapters 
have at the beginning a brief introductory statement not in any numbered section. 
We shall number axioms, rules of inference, theorems, and metatheorems by numbers 
of three or more digits in such a way that the number of the section in which they occur 
may be obtained by deleting the last digit. We place a dagger, f. before the number 
of an axiom or theorem of the logistic system; an asterisk, *, before the number of a 
(primitive) rule of inference, axiom schema, derived rule of inference, or theorem 
schema; and a double asterisk, **, before the number of other metatheorems. (The 
terminology, so far as not already explained in the introduction, will be explained in 
this and following chapters.} The numbers of axioms, axiom schemata, and primitive 
rules of inference have 0 as the next-to-last digit, and are thus distinguished from the 
numbers of theorems, theorem schemata, derived rules of inference, and other metatheo-
rems. 
In numbering formation rules we use the number of the section in which they occur 
and a small Roman numeral. Thus lOi, lOii, lOiii are the formation rules in §10. 
A collection of exercises has the same number as the section which it follows. For 
individual exercises in the collection we use the number of the collection of exercises, 
followed by a period, then another digit or digits. Thus 12.0, 12.1, and so on are the 
exercises which follow §12. 
Definitions and definition schemata are numbered Dl, D2, and so on, without regard 
; 
to the section in which they occur. 
1 
1S3Concerning the use of bold letters as syntactical variables see §08. Also see the 
italicized statement near the end of §08. 
I 
Without the convention that juxtaposition is used for juxtaposition (see footnote 
137),we would have to state lOiii more lengthily as follows: If T and A are wffs, then the 
i 
formula consisting of [, followed by the symbols of T in order, followed by 33, followed 
I 
by the symbols of A in order, followed by ], is wf. 

§10] 
PRIMITIVE 
BASIS 
71 
ceeding from left to right, counting each left bracket, [, as + 1 and each 
right bracket, ], as — 1, and adding as we go.154 When the count of 1 first 
falls either on a right bracket or on a left bracket with a proper symbol 
immediately after it,155 the next symbol must be the implication sign, ID, if 
the formula is wf.156 This is called the principal 
implication sign of the for-
mula, the part of the formula between the initial left bracket and the prin-
cipal implication sign is called the antecedent, and the part of the formula 
between the principal implication sign and the final right bracket is called 
the consequent. Then the given formula is wf if and only if both antecedent 
and consequent are wf. Thus the question of the well-formedness of the given 
formula is reduced to the same question about two shorter formulas, the 
antecedent and the consequent. We may then repeat, applying the same 
procedure to the antecedent and to the consequent that we did to the given 
formula. After a finite number of repetitions, either we will reach the ver-
dict that the given formula is not wf because one of the required conditions 
fails (or because we count all the way to the end of some formula without 
finding a principal implication sign), else the question of the well-formedness 
of the given formula will be reduced to the same question about each of a 
finite number of formulas consisting of no more than one symbol apiece. 
A formula in which the number of symbols is zero—the null formula—is of 
course not wf. And a formula consisting of just one symbol is wf if and only 
if that symbol is a proper symbol.157 
Hereafter we shall speak of the principal implication sign, the antecedent, 
and the consequent, only of a wff, as indeed we shall seldom have occasion to 
refer to formulas that are not wf. If a formula is wf and consists of more 
m T h e choice of left-to-right order is a concession to the habit of the eye. A like 
procedure could be described, equally good, in which the couuting would proceed from 
right to left. 
155More explicitly, if the given formula is wf and consists of more than one symbol, 
then the first symbol must be [, and the second symbol must be either a proper symbol 
or [. If the second symbol is a proper symbol, the third symbol must be ZD, and this third 
symbol is the principal implication sign. If the second symbol is [, then the count is 
made from left to right as described; when the count of 1 falls on a ], the next symbol 
must be ID, and this is the principal implication sign. 
l56Here [, ], and :r> are being used autonymously. Notice that in addition to the use 
of symbols and formulas of the object language, in the syntax language, as auionymous 
proper names, i.e., as proper names of themselves in the way explained in §08, we shall 
also sometimes find it convenient to use them as auionymous common names, i.e., as 
common names (see footnotes 4, 6) of occurrences of themselves. 
When used autonymously, [ may be read orally as "left bracket," ] as "right bracket," 
and :z> as "implication sign" (or more fully, "sign of material implication"). 
In oral reading of wffs of Pa (or other logistic system) the readings "left bracket" and 
"right bracket" may also occasionally be convenient for [ and ] respectively. But in 
this case, :z> should be read as "implies" or "if 
then," as in the table in §05. 
1S7In practice, the entire procedure may often be shortened by obvious devices. 

72 
THE PROPOSITIONAL 
CALCULUS 
TCHAP. I 
than one symbol, it has the form [A => B] in one and only one way.168 And 
A is the antecedent, B is the consequent, and the TD between A and B is the 
principal implication sign. 
By the converse of a wff [A ZD B] we shall mean the wff [B D A], 
In Px all occurrences of a variable in a wff are free occurrences; a wff is an 
n-ary form if it contains (free) occurrences -of exactly n different variables, 
a constant if it contains (free) occurrences of no variables; all forms are 
propositional forms; and all constants are propositional constants or 
sentences. (Cf. footnote 117.) 
In order to state the rules of inference of Plf we introduce the notation 
"S 
|" for the operation of substitution, so that SgA| is the formula which 
results by substitution of B for each occurrence of b throughout A.168 This 
is a notation for which we shall have frequent use in this and later chapters. 
It is, of course, not a notation of Px (or of any logistic system studied in this 
book) but belongs to the syntax language, just as the apparatus of syntac-
tical variables does: its use could always be avoided, though at the cost of 
some inconvenience, by employing English phrases containing the words 
"substitute," "substitution," or the like. 
The rules of inference are the two following:180 
*100. 
From [A ID B] and A to infer B. 
(Rule of modus ponens.) 
*101. From A, if b is a variable, to infer S^AI.161 
(Rule of substitution.) 
In the rule of modus ponens (*100) the premiss [A :=> B] is called the major 
premiss, and A is called the minor premiss. Notice the condition that the 
antecedent of the major premiss must be identical with the minor premiss; 
the conclusion is then the consequent of the major premiss.162 
The axioms of Pa are the three following: 
tl02. 
IP ^{q=> p]] 
fl03. 
Us ^>[p=> q}} z> [[s =>p]ZD[sZi q]]) 
|104. 
[[lfiZDf]z>f]=>p] 
1S8 As explained in §08, the bold roraan capitals have as values formulas (of the lo-
gistic system under consideration) which are wf. This makes it unnecessary to put in an 
explicit condition, "where A and B are wf." 
I6°The bold roman small letters, as " b " here, have proper symbols as values—see 
§08. When b does not occur in A, the result of the substitution is A itself. 
160For brevity, we say simply "infer" in stating the rules rather than "immediately 
infer," which is the full expression as introduced in §07. 
m I t is meant, of course, that B may be any wff. The result of the substitution 
is wf, as may be proved by mathematical induction with respect to the number 
of occurrences of :D in A. 
162The terms modus ponens, major premiss, minor premiss, antecedent, consequent are 
from Scholastic logic (as are, of course, also premiss, 
conclusion). 

§10] 
PRIMITIVE 
BASIS 
1:1 
The first of these axioms (f 102), or its equivalent in other formulations of 
the propositional calculus (whether or not it is an axiom), is called the law 
of affirmation 
of the consequent. 
Similarly, the second axiom is called the 
self-distributive 
law of {material) implication. 
And the third axiom is called 
the law of double 
negation.™ 
In accordance with the explanation in §07, a proof in Px is a finite sequence 
of one or more wffs each of which either is one of the three axioms, or is 
(immediately) inferred from two preceding wffs in the sequence by modus 
ponens, or is (immediately) inferred from one preceding wff in the sequence 
by substitution. A proof is called a proof of the last wff in the sequence,164 
and a wff is called a theorem if it has a proof. 
In addition to the abbreviations "wf," "wff," we shall also use, in this and 
later chapters, the abbreviations "t" for "the truth-value truth" and "1" 
for "the truth-value falsehood." 
The intended principal interpretation of the logistic system P, has already 
been indicated implicitly by discussion in §05 and in the present chapter. We 
now make an explicit statement of the semantical rules (in the sense of §07). 
These are: 
a. 
/ denotes f. 
b. 
The variables are variables having the range t and f. 
c. 
A form which consists of a variable a standing alone has the value t 
for the value t of a, and the value f for the value f of a. 
d. 
Let A and B be constants. Then [ A D B ] denotes t if either B denotes t 
or A denotes f. Otherwise [A ID BJ denotes f. 
e. 
Let A be a form and B a constant. If B denotes t, then [A n> B] has the 
value t for all assignments of values to its variables. If B denotes f, then [A ZD B], 
for a given assignment of values to its variables, has the value f in case A has the 
l93The uncertainty as to whether the name law of double negation shall be applied to 
fl04 or to the wff which results from fl04 by interchanging antecedent and consequent 
is here resolved in favor of the former, and to the latter we shall therefore give the 
name converse law of double negation. Thus the law of double negation is the one which 
(through substitution and modus ponens) allows the cancellation of a double negation. 
Also the self-distributive law of implication, t 103, (through substitution and modus 
Ponens) allows the distribution of an implication over an implication. And the converse 
self-distributive 
law of (material) implication is the converse of f 103, which allows the 
inverse process to this. 
If in 1103 and f 104 we replace the principal implication sign by the = of D§ below 
(or by an equivalent = in some other formulation of the propositional calculus), there 
result the complete self-distributive law of (material) implication and the complete law of 
double negation, as we shall call them respectively. 
164Observe that the definition of a proof allows any number of digressions and n-
relevancies, as there is no requirement that every wff appearing in a proof must actually 
contribute to obtaining the theorem proved or that the shortest way must always be 
adopted of obtaining a required wff from other wffs by a series of immediate inferences. 

74 
THE 
PROPOSITIONAL 
CALCULUS 
[CHAP. I 
value t for that assignment of values to the variables, and has the value t in case 
A has the value f for that assignment of values to the variables. 
f. 
Let A be a constant and B a form, If A denotes f, then [A ID B] has the 
value t for all assignments of values to its variables. If A denotes t, then 
[A :r> B], for a given assignment of values to its variables, has the same value 
that B has for that assignment of values to the variables. 
g. 
Let A and B be forms, and consider a given assignment of values to the 
variables of [A D B ] Then the value of [A 3> B] is t if, for that assignment of 
values to the variables, either the value of B is t or the value of A is f. Otherwise 
the value of [A r> B] is f. 
This has been written out at tedious length for the sake of illustration. Of 
course the last three rules may be condensed into a single statement by intro-
ducing a convention according to which a constant has a value, namely, its 
denotation, for any assignment of values to any variables. And rule d may be 
included in the same statement by a further convention according to which 
having a value for a null class of variables is the same as denoting. 
The reader should see that these rules have the effect of assigning a unique 
denotation to every constant (of PJ, and a unique system of values to every 
form. 
As to the motivation of the rules, observe that rule d just corresponds to the 
account of material implication as given in §05, namely, that everything implies 
truth, and falsehood implies everything, but truth does not imply falsehood. 
Rules c, e, f, g are then just what they have to be in view of the account of 
variables and forms in §02. 
Besides this principal interpretation of Pj other interpretations are also 
possible, and some of them will be mentioned in exercises later. 
The reader must bear in mind that, in the formal development of the system, 
no use may be made of any intended interpretation, principal or other (cf. §§07, 
09). 
11. Definitions. As a practical matter in presenting and discussing the 
system, we shall make use of certain abbreviations of wffs of Px. 
In particular the outermost brackets of a wff may be omitted, so that we 
write, e.g., 
P z> [q => p] 
as an abbreviation of the wff |102. (Of course the expression p => [q ZD p] 
is a formula as it stands, but not wf; since we shall hereafter be concerned 
with wffs only, no confusion will arise by using this expression as an abbre-
viation of [p r> [qzD pi].) 
We shall also omit further brackets under the convention that, in re-
storing omitted brackets, association shall be to the left. Thus 
p-=>j=>\=>p 
is an abbreviation of ^104, while 

§11] 
DEFINITIONS 
75 
is an abbreviation of the wff 
[\P =5 [/ =D /]] 3 fl. 
Where, however, in omitting a pair of brackets we insert a heavy dot, . , 
the convention in restoring brackets is (instead of association to the left) 
that the left bracket, [, shall go in in place of the heavy dot, and the right 
bracket, ], shall go in immediately before the next right bracket which is 
already present to the right of the heavy dot and has no mate to the right 
of the heavy dot; or, failing that, at the end of the expression.165 (Here a 
left bracket is considered to be the mate of the first right bracket to the 
right of it such that an equal number, possibly zero, of left and right 
brackets occur between.) Thus we shall use 
P=>.q=>P 
as an abbreviation of J102, and 
[£=>./ Z> /]=> £ 
as an alternative abbreviation of the same wff for which the abbreviation 
pZ>[f ZD /] => P 
was just given. 
The convention regarding heavy dots may be used together with the pre-
vious convention, namely, that of association to the left when an omitted 
left bracket is not replaced by a heavy dot. Thus for f 103 we may employ 
either one of the two alternative abbreviations: 
Similarly, 
s1 => [sa z> . p 3 [ft => ft] => VJ => r2 
is an abbreviation of 
[fo z> [s2 ID [ip z> [ft => ft]] =) rx]]} 3 r2]. 
As we have said, these abbreviations and others to follow are not part of 
the logistic system Pt but are mere devices for the presentation of it. They 
"'Compare the use of heavy dots in §06. 
The use of dots to replace brackets was introduced by Peano and was adopted by 
Whitehead and Russell in Principia Mathematica. The convention here described for 
use of dots as brackets is not the same as that of Peano and Whitehead and Russell, 
but is an modification of it which the writer has found simpler and more convenient in 
practice. 

76 
THE PROPOSITIONAL 
CALCULUS 
[CHAP. I 
are concessions in practice to the shortness of human life and patience, such 
as in theory we disdain to make. The reader is asked, whenever we write 
an abbreviation of a wff, to pretend that the wff has been written in full and 
to understand us accordingly.166 Indeed we must actually write wffs in full 
whenever ambiguity or unclearness might result from abbreviating. And if 
any one finds it a defect that devices of abbreviation, not part of the logistic 
system, are resorted to at all, he is invited to rewrite this entire book without 
use of abbreviations, a lengthy but purely mechanical task. 
Besides abbreviations by omission of brackets, we employ also abbre-
viations of another kind which are laid down in what we call definitions. 
Such a definition introduces a new symbol or expression (which is neither 
present in the logistic system itself nor introduced by any previous defini-
tion) and prescribes that it shall stand as an abbreviation167 for a particular 
wff, the understanding being (unless otherwise prescribed in a special case) 
that the same abbreviation is used for this wff whether it stands alone or as 
a constituent in a longer wff.168 
mThere will be a few exceptions, especially in this section and in §16, where abbre-
viations are used as autonyms in the strict sense, i.e., as names of the abbreviations 
themselves rather than to denote or to abbreviate the wffs. But we shall take care that 
this is always clear from the context. 
167ln a few cases we may make definitions which fail to provide an abbreviation in 
the literal sense that the new expression introduced is actually shorter than the wff 
for which it stands. Use of such a definition may nevertheless sometimes serve a purpose 
either of increasing perspicuity or of bringing out more sharply some particular feature 
of a wff. 
16flDefinitions in this sense we shall call abbreviative definitions, in order to distinguish 
them from various other things which also are called or may be called definitions (in 
connection with a formalized language). These latter include: 
(1) Explicative 
definitions, which are intended to explain the meaning of a notation 
(symbol, wff, connective, or operator) already present in a given language, and which 
are expressed in a sentence of that same language. Such an explicative definition may 
often involve a sign of equality or of material or other equivalence, placed between the 
notation to be explicated, or some wff involving it, and another wff of the language. 
(We do not employ here the traditional term real definition because it carries associations 
and presuppositions which we wish to avoid.) 
(2) Statements in a semantical meta-language, giving or explaining the meaning of 
a notation already present in the object language, These may be either {primitive) 
semantical rules in the sense of §07, or what we may call, in an obvious sense, derived 
semantical 
rules, 
(3) Definitions which are like those of (1) in form, except that they are intended to 
extend the language by introducing a new notation not formerly present in it. Since 
definitions in this sense are as much a part of the object language in which they occur as 
are axioms or theorems of it, the writer agrees with Lesniewski that, if such definitions 
are allowed, it must be on the basis of rules of definition, included as a part of the primi-
tive basis of the language and as precisely formulated as we have required in the case 
of the formation and transformation rules (in particular, appropriate conditions 
of 
effectiveness must be satisfied—cf. §07). Unfortunately, authors who use definitions 
in this sense have not always stated rules of definition with sufficient care. And even 
Hilbertand Bernays's Grundlagender Mathematik may be criticized in this regard (their 
account of the matter in vol. 1, pp. 292-293 and 391-392, is much nearer than many to 

§11] 
DEFINITIONS 
In order to state definitions conveniently, we make use of an arrow, " -V, 
to be read "stands as an abbreviation for" (or briefly, "stands for"). This 
arrow, therefore, belongs to the syntax language, like the term "wff" or 
the notation "S |" of §10. At the base (left) of the arrow we write the 
definiendum, the new symbol or expression which is being introduced by the 
definition. At the head (right) of the arrow we write the defmiens, the wff 
for which the definiendum is to stand. And in so writing the definiens we 
allow ourselves to abbreviate it in accordance with any previous definitions 
or other conventions of abbreviation. 
Our first definition is: 
Dl. 
* - • / = / 
This means namely that the wff [/=>/], the definiens, may be abbreviated 
as t, whether it stands alone or as a part of a longer wff. In particular, then, 
the wff which we previously abbreviated as 
may now be further abbreviated as 
pZD t^D p. 
complete rigor, but fails to allow full freedom of definition, as provision is lacking for 
many kinds of notation that one might wish for sonic purpose to introduce by delini-
tion). On the other hand, once the rules of definition have been precisely formulated, 
they become at least theoretically superfluous, because it would always be possible to 
oversee in advance everything that could be introduced by definition, and to provide 
for it instead by primitive notations included in the primitive basis of the language. 
This remains true even when the rules of definition are broad enough to allow direct 
introduction of new notations for functions of positive integers or of non-negative in-
tegers by means of recursion equations, as is pointed out in effect, though not in these 
words, by Carnap in The Logical Syntax of Language, §22 (compare also Hilbert and 
Bernays, vol. 2, pp. 293-297). 
Because of the theoretical dispensability of definitions in sense (3), we prefer not to 
use them, and in defining a logistic system in §07 we therefore did not provide for the 
inclusion of rules of definition in the primitive basis. Thus we avoid such puzzling 
questions as whether definitions of this kind should be expressed by means of the same 
sign of equality or equivalence that is used elsewhere in the object language or by means 
of some special sign of equality by definition such as " = ar"; and indeed whether these 
definitions do not after all (being about notations) belong to a meta-language rather 
than the object language. 
Not properly in the domain of formal logic at all is the heuristic process of deciding 
upon a more precise meaning for a notation (often a word or an expression of a natural 
language) for which a vague or a partial meaning is already known, though the result 
of this process may be expressed in or may motivate a definition of one kind or another, 
Also not in the domain of formal logic is the procedure of oslaistve definition 
by winch 
a proper name, or a common name, is assigned to a concrete object by physically 
showing or pointing to the object. 
(In connection with an unformalized meta-language we shall continue to speak of 
"definitions" in the usual, informal, way. It is intended that, upon formalization of the 
meta-language, these shall become abbreviative definitions.) 

78 
THE PROPOSITIONAL 
CALCULUS 
[CHAP. I 
In stating definitions we shall often resort to definition schemata, which 
serve the purpose of condensing a large number (commonly an infinite 
number) of definitions into a single statement. For example, if A is any 
wff whatever, [A z> /] is to be abbreviated by the expression which consists 
of the symbol ~ followed by the symbols of A in order. This infinite list of 
definitions is summed up in the definition schema: 
D2. ~A -> A z=> f 
Notice here, as in other examples below, that we use the same abbreviations 
and the same methods of abbreviation for expressions which contain syntactical 
variables and have wffs as values that we do for wffs proper. This is perhaps 
self-explanatory as an informal device for abbreviating expressions of the 
syntax language, and when so understood it need not be regarded as a 
departure from the program of §08 (cf. the last paragraph of that section). 
We add also the following definition schemata:169 
D3. 
[A 4: B] -* ~ . B =) A 
D4. 
[ A V B ] ^ A D B D B 
D5. 
[AB] -> A <£ B c£ B 
D6. 
[A ==. B] -* [A =) B] [B ZD A] 
D7. 
[A =}= B] -* [A cj: B] v [B cj: A] 
D8. 
[A a B] -* B r> A 
D9. 
[A :£ B] -> B c£ A 
D10. 
[A vB] -*~A~B 
Dll. 
[A | B] ->~Av~B 
Of course it is understood that a wff may be abbreviated at several places 
simultaneously by the application of definitions. E.g., 
ptv ~p 
is an abbreviation of 
[[[[[/ =>f]=> [[[/ =>/]=> p] => /]] Z>f]=>\fi=> /]] => \_P 3 /]]. 
Also the conventions about omission of brackets which were introduced 
at the beginning of this section, for wffs not otherwise abbreviated, are to 
be extended to the case in which abbreviations according to Dl-11 are 
already present. (In fact we have done this several times above already; 
e.g., in D5 we have omitted, under the convention of association to the left, 
169Some of these receive little actual use in this book, but are included so as to be 
available if needed. The character v is employed, in place of the v with a vertical 
line across it, only in consequence of typographical difficulties. 

§11] 
DEFINITIONS 
79 
two pairs of brackets belonging with the two signs cf: according to D3, and 
in D6 we have omitted an outermost pair of brackets which would be present 
according to D5.) 
Here the convention about restoring an omitted pair of brackets repre-
sented by a heavy dot remains the same as given before. For example, 
p.q=> 
r 
becomes, on restoring brackets, 
[Plq^r]], 
which in turn is an abbreviation of the wff, 
[[[q=>r]ZD 
[ [ [ p r ] D f l D / ] ] 3 / l . 
The convention of association to the left is, however, modified as follows. 
The bracket-pairs appearing in wffs and in expressions abbreviating wffs 
are divided into three categories. In the highest category are bracket-pairs 
which belong with the sign r> according to lOiii or which belong with one of 
the signs <£, = , =£, <=., dp according to D3, D6, D7, D8, D9. In the second 
category are bracket-pairs belonging with one of the signs v, v, | according 
to D4, D10, D l l . And in the third category are the bracket-pairs of D5. 
Among bracket-pairs of the same category, the convention of association 
to the left applies as before in restoring brackets. But bracket-pairs of higher 
category are to be restored first, without regard to those of lower category, 
and are to enclose those of lower category to the extent that results from 
this.170 The sign ~ has no brackets belonging with it, but it is of a fourth and 
lowest category in the sense that a restored left bracket (not represented 
by a heavy dot), if it falls adjacent to an occurrence of * or a series of succes-
sive occurrences of ~, must be placed to the left thereof rather than the right. 
For example, upon restoring brackets in p v qr, the result is [p v [qr]] 
rather than [\j> v q] r]. Upon restoring brackets in 
the result is 
p ZD qv ~rs = ~p V ~q V s, 
[ » 3 [ ? V W ] ] = 
[ W V ^ V S ] ] . 
When the convention regarding categories of bracket-pairs is used in 
conjunction with the convention regarding heavy dots, the procedure in 
170A similar convention about restoring brackets or parentheses is familiar in reading 
equations of elementary algebra, where the brackets or parentheses with the sign of 
equality are in a highest category, those with the signs of addition and subtraction in a 
second category, and those with multiplication in a third category, and where other-
wise the convention of association to the left applies. For example, xy — 3x -f -y = 
x — y — 4 is to be read as [{{{xy) — (3x)) -|- (2r/)) = {{x — y) — 4)1, and not (e.g.) 
as [{{{xy) - 3)(ar + {2y))) = {x - {y - 4))]. 

80 
THE PROPOS1TIONAL 
CALCULUS 
[CHAP. I 
restoring brackets is as follows. In the case that there are no heavy dots 
occurring between a pair of brackets already present, we take the expression 
as broken up into parts by the heavy dots, restore the brackets in each of 
these parts separately (using the convention regarding categories of bracket-
pairs, and among bracket-pairs of the same category the convention of 
association to the left), and then finally restore all remaining brackets as rep-
resented by the heavy dots. In the contrary case we first take a portion of 
the expression which occurs between a pair of brackets already present, and 
which contains heavy dots but contains no heavy dots between any pair of 
brackets already present within it; we treat this portion of the expression 
in the way just explained, so restoring all the brackets in it; and then we 
take another such portion of the resulting expression, and so continue until 
all brackets are restored. For example, upon restoring brackets in 
p ZD q *rs, 
p ZD qr mr ZD s, 
p ZD .q 
mrs, 
p ZD . qr ur ZD s, 
sZD[pZDmqZDrv.sZD 
~q~\ r ) . S D 
~p, 
the results are respectively 
[&=>g][rs]], 
[[p=>[qr]][r=>s]], 
[pz>[q[rs]]], 
[j> => [[qr][r ZD s]]], 
[[s D [ p 
[[q ZD r] V [S ZD -?]]]] ZD[sZD ~ f l ] . 
Finally we also allow ourselves, for convenience in abbreviating a wff, 
first to introduce extra brackets enclosing any wf part of it. Thus, for 
example, we use 
p ZD q .r, 
p ZD q ,~r, 
p = qy 
,~r 
as abbreviations of wffs which would be written more fully as 
[[P ZD q}r], 
[[p ZD q] ~r], 
[[p = q] V ~rj. 
The fact that the definienda in D2-11 agree notationally with sentence connec-
tives introduced in §05 is of course intended to show a certain agreement in 
meaning. Indeed in each definition schema the convention of abbreviation which 
is introduced corresponds to and is motivated by the recognition that a certain 
connective is already provided for, in the sense that there is a notation already 
present in Px (though a complex one) which, under the principal interpretation 
of P1, has the same effect as the required connective. 
For example, giving P : its principal interpretation, we need not add the 
connective ~ to Px because we may always use the notation [A ID /] for the 
negation of a sentence A (or of a propositional form A). All the purposes of the 
notation ~A, except that of brevity, are equally served by the notation [A zs /], 
and we may therefore use the latter to the exclusion of the former. 

*12] 
THEOREMS 
81 
In the same manner, D4 corresponds to the recognition that [[A D B] =) B] 
may be used as the (inclusive) disjunction of A and B, so that it is unnecessary to 
provide separately for disjunction.171 The reader may see thisby observing that, for 
fixed values of the variables (if any), [[A D B ] D B ] is false172 if and only if 
[A rD B] is true178 and at the same time B is false; but, B being false, [A rD B] 
is true if and only if A is false; thus [[A r> B] ZD B] is false if and only if both A 
and B are false (and of course is true otherwise); but this last is exactly what we 
should have for the disjunction of A and B. 
Similarly, the motivation of the definition Dl is that the wff abbreviated as 
t is a name of the truth-value truth (according to the semantical rule d of §10). 
12. Theorems of P x. As a first example of a theorem of P x we prove: 
tl20. 
p ZD p 
{Reflexive law of {material) 
implication.) 
The reader who has in mind the principal interpretation of Px, as given in §10, 
may be led to remark that this proposed theorem is not only obvious but more 
obvious than any of the axioms. This is quite true, but it does not make un-
necessary a proof of the theorem. For we wish to ascertain not merely that the 
proposed theorem is true but that it follows from our axioms by our rules; and 
not merely that it is true under the one interpretation but under all sound 
inte rpretations.173 
A proof of |120 is the following sequence of nine formulas: 
s => 
S ZD 
S ZD 
PZD 
P=> 
P=> 
[pZDq]ZD 
[r ZDq]ZD 
[r ZD p]zD 
[rZDp)ZD 
p=> 
pZDqZD 
P 
. S ZD p ZD , 
.SZDr 
ZD , 
. S ZD Y ZD , 
. p ZD f ZD , 
.pZD 
q ZD , 
.q ZDp 
.PZDP 
.pZDp 
ZDP 
.s 
ZDq 
. s ZD q 
.SZDp 
.pZDp 
.pZDp 
The wffs have here been abbreviated by conventions 
preceding section, and in verifying the proof the 
introduced 
: reader must imagine 
in the 
: them 
171It would also be possible and perhaps more natural to use ~A rz> B (i.e., [[A O /] 
rs B]) as the disjunction of A and B. We have chosen A ^ B r ) B instead 
because 
there is some interest in the fact that use of the constant / (or of negation) can be avoid-
ed for this particular purpose. The definition of A V B ;is A 3 B a B is given by 
Russell in The Principles 
of Mathematics 
(1903), and again, more formally, in the 
American 
Journal 
of Mathematics, 
vol. 2S (li)U(i), p. 201. 
m A s explained in §04, a sentence is true or false according as it denotes t or f. And 
for fixed values of the free variables we call a propositional form true or false according 
as its value is t or f. 
173Including interpretations that are sound in the generalized sense of §10. 

82 
THE PROPOSITIONAL 
CALCULUS 
[CHAP. I 
rewritten in unabbreviated form (or, if necessary, must explicitly so rewrite 
them). 
It is sufficient theoretically just to write the proof itself as above, without 
added explanation, since there are effective means of verification. But for 
the practical assistance of the reader we may explain in full, as follows. The 
first wff of the nine is fl03. The second wff we obtain from the first by *101, 
substituting r for p. Again the third wff is obtained from the second by sub-
stituting p for q. The fourth one is obtained from the third by substituting 
p for s. The fifth is obtained from the fourth by substituting q for r. The 
sixth wff is 1102. The seventh one results by modus ponens from the fifth 
one as major premiss and the sixth as minor premiss. Then the eighth wff 
results from the seventh by another application of *101, q z> p being sub-
stituted for q. Finally p ZD p results by modus ponens from the eighth and 
the sixth wffs as major premiss and minor premiss respectively. 
The fifth wff in the proof may conveniently be looked upon as obtained 
from the first by a simultaneous substitution, namely the substitution of 
p, q, p for s, p, q respectively. And the proof exhibits in detail how the effect 
of this simultaneous substitution may be obtained by means of four succes-
sive single substitutions. 
We extend the notation for substitution introduced in §10, so that 
C b i b » - b * 
Ai 
SBlB,...B„ Al 
shall be the formula which results by simultaneous substitution of Bv Ba, 
.. ., Bn for bv b2, . . ., bn in A. The substitution is to be for all occurrences 
of blt b2, . . ., b„ throughout A. It is required that bx, b 2,. . ., b n be all 
different (else there is no result of the substitution). But of course it is not 
required that all, or even any, of b1( b2, . . ., bn actually occur in A. 
The effect of the simultaneous substitution, 
C bl b>" b-. 
A I 
^B1B,...B1l A|, 
where bv b2, . . ., b„ are variables and all different, may always be obtained 
by means of 2» successive single substitutions, i.e., 2« successive applica-
tions of *101. In some cases it may be possible with fewer than 2« single 
substitutions, but it is always possible with 2w, as follows. Let c^ ca, . . ., cn 
be the first n variables in alphabetic order not occurring in any of the wffs 
Bj, B2, . . ., Bn, A (such will always exist, because of the availability of an 
infinite list of variables). Then in A substitute successively Cj for bv ct 
for b2, . . ., cM for bn, Bx for c1( B2 for c2, . . ., B n for cn. 
We shall use the sign h as a syntactical notation to express that a wff is a 

§12] 
THEOREMS 
83 
theorem (of Px, or, later, of other logistic system). Thus "h p z> p" may be 
read as an abbreviation of "p z> p is a theorem," etc. (Cf, footnote 65.) 
With the aid of this notation we may state as follows the metatheorem 
about simultaneous substitution of which we have just sketched a proof: 
•121. 
If r- A, then h S ^ X 
A|. 
We shall make use of this metatheorem as a derived rule of inference. I.e., 
in presenting proofs we shall pass from A immediately to 
*3BlB1...B.
 
A l ' 
not giving details of intermediate steps but referring simply to * 121 (or to 
"simultaneous substitution" or to "substitution"). 
Justification for such use of derived rules of inference is similar to that for 
the use of definitions and other abbreviations (§11), namely, as a mere 
device of presentation which is fully dispensable in principle. On this account, 
however, it is essential that the proof of a derived rule of inference be effec-
tive (cf. §§07, 08) in the sense that an effective method is provided according 
to which from a given proof of the premisses of the derived rule it is always 
possible to obtain a proof of the conclusion of the derived rule.174 For we 
must be sure that, whenever a proof presented by means of derived rules is 
challenged, we can meet the challenge by actually supplying the unabridged 
proof. In other words we take care that there is a mechanical procedure for 
supplying the unabridged proof whenever called for, and on this basis, when 
a proof of a particular theorem of a logistic system is presented with the 
aid of derived rules, we ask the reader to imagine that the proof has been 
written in full (and, on occasion, actually to supply it in full for himself). 
The proof of *121 is clearly effective, as the reader will see on reviewing it. 
With the aid of *121 as a derived rule, and some other obvious devices 
of abbreviation, we may now present the proof of |120 as follows: 
By simultaneous substitution in 1103: 
h£Z3 [qZDp]-=> ,pz> q=> ,p"=>p 
By |102 and modus ponens: 
h pZD q o ,p ID p 
By substitution of q ZD p for q\ 
\-pZD[q-=>p]ZD,pZDp 
m W e shall later—in particular in Chapters IV and V—consider some metatheorems 
whose proof is non-effective. But such metatheorems must not be used in the role of 
derived rules. 

84 
THE PROPOSITIONAL 
CALCULUS 
[CHAP. I 
Finally by f 102 and modus ponens: 
\-p=> p 
(Thus a presentation of the proof and some practical explanation of it are 
condensed into about the same space as occupied above by the unabridged 
proof alone.) 
We now go on to proofs of two further theorems of P1# 
fl22. 
f-=>p 
By simultaneous substitution in fl02: 
By 1104 and modus ponens: 
\-f=>.p=>f=>f^p 
By simultaneous substitution in fl03: 
h/=>[0=>/=3/=> £] = ./=>&> = / = > / ] = > . / = * 
By modus ponens: 
By simultaneous substitution in |102: 
h / = > . £ = > / = > / 
Hence by modus ponens: 
hfZDp 
fl23. 
/> => /=) apz> q 
By simultaneous substitution in f 102: 
h/=>?=> .p => ./=>? 
By substitution in |122:175 
Vf^q 
By modus ponens: 
h £ = > 
mf=> q 
By simultaneous substitution in f 103: 
\-<pzi[f=>q]=>mp=>f=>.<p=>q 
Hence by modus ponens: 
\-p-=> f •=> ,p ID q 
(fl23 is known as the law of denial of the antecedent. Notice that it may 
be abbreviated by D2 as ~p ID .p => q.) 
m T h e entire proof of f 122 therefore enters at this point as part of the proof of 1123 
when written in full. 

§12] 
EXERCISES 
12 
85 
EXERCISES 12 
12.0. Prove (as a metatheorem) that the effective test of well-formedness 
given in §10 does in fact constitute a necessary and sufficient condition that 
a formula be wf according to the formation rules lOi-iii. (Use mathematical 
induction with respect to the number of occurrences of ZD in the formula.) 
12.1. Prove the assertion made in §10 that, if a formula is wf and consists 
of more than one symbol, it has the form [A Z) B] in one and only one way. 
Also that any wf (consecutive) part of the formula is either the entire for-
mula or a wf part of A or a wf part of B.176 (For the proof, employ the same 
method of counting brackets as in the effective test of well-formedness, and 
again proceed by mathematical induction with respect to the number of 
occurrences of => in the formula.) 
12.2. Let P1L be the logistic system which we obtain from Px by a change 
of notation, writing systematically C 
in place of [ 
=> 
], in 
the way described in footnote 91, and leaving everything else unaltered. 
State the primitive basis of P1L. State and prove the metatheorems about 
P1L which are analogues of those of 12.0 and 12.1.177 
The following proofs are to be presented with the aid of * 121 and in the same 
manner as is done in the latter part of §12. Do not use methods of later sections. 
12.3. Prove <?z> r = ) . ^ z > ^ = ) . ^ = ) r a s a theorem of P r Use this theorem 
in order to give proofs of fl22 and fl23 which are briefer than those above, 
in the sense that they can be more briefly presented.178 
12.4. Use the result of 12.3 in order to prove the transitive law of {material) 
implication, pZDq=).q^>rZD.p^r, 
as a theorem of P r (One method is to 
apply the self-distributive law to the result of 12.3, then to use p => q =D . 
q^r=>mp=>q.) 
m B y a different method than that indicated here, proved by S. C. Kleene in the 
Annals of Mathematics, 
vol. 35 (1934), pp. 531-532. Kleene's proof is carried out for a 
different logistic system than that of the text, but the question involved is the same in 
all,essentials. 
The first of the two metatheorems of this exercise is proved below as **143, and 
analogous metatheorems for the logistic system P 8 are proved in the next chapter. 
However, the reader should carry through the present exercise without looking forward 
at these later proofs. Or, alternatively, if the proofs given below are followed, they 
should be written out more fully, and in particular, details should be given of the 
proof of the lemma which is used below in proving ** 143-
*"Cf. Karl Menger in Ergebmsse eines mathemalischen Kolloquiums, 
no. 3 (1932), 
pp. 22-23; Lukasiewicz in footnote 5 (credited to Jaskowski) of a paper in Comptes 
Rendus des Seances de la Societe des Sciences el des Lettres de Varsovic, Classe III, vol. 24 
(1932), pp. 153-183; Karl Schroter in Axiomatisicrung 
der Fvegeschen 
Aussagenkalkule 
(1943). 
l78Not necessarily in the sense that the proof written in full consists of a shorter 
sequence of wffs. 

86 
THE PROPOSITIONAL CALCULUS 
[CHAP. I 
1:1.5. Prove p -::J q -::J P -::J • P -::J I -::J p asa theorem of Pl' (Use t123.12.4.) 
1 :1.6. Prove Peirce's law, p -::J q -::J P -::J P as a theorem of Pl' (Apply the 
self-distributive law to p -::J I -::J • P -::J I, and use the result of 12.5.) 
1:1.7. Let Pw be the logistic system which has the same primitive sym-
bols, formation rules, and rules of inference as PI and which has as its axioms 
the transitive law of implication, Peirce's law. t102, and tl22. Prove the 
following in order, as theorems of Pw, and hence show that PI and Pw are 
equivalent systems in the sense that they have the same theorems: 
[P -::J • P -::J q] -::J • P -::J q 
(Law of assertion.) 
rP -::J • q -::J r} -::J • q -::J • P -::J r (Law 0/ commutation.) 
q -::J r -::J • P -::J q -::J • P -::J r 
S -::J [P -::J q J -::J • s -::J P -::J • S -::J q 
P -::J I -::J I -::J P 
Carry out the proofs in such a way that no use is made of the fourth axiom, 
tl22, except in the proof of the last theorem, p -::J I -::J I -::J p. 
1:1.8. Prove as theorems of Pw, without making use of the fourth axiom, 
tI22: q -::J r -::J r -::J • P :::::> q -::J r -::J r; 
r -::J • P -::J • q -::J r; p -::J r -::J r -::J • 
q -::J r -::J • P -::J q -::J r; p -::J r -::J • P -::J q -::J r -::J r. 
1 :1.9. For each of the three following interpretations of PI (cf. § 10), state the 
remaining semantical rules, and discuss the soundness of the interpretation in 
the sense of §07: (1) Rules a, b, c are retained, but [A;:) B} denotes tifAand B 
are any constants. (2) Rules a, b, c are retained, but [A ;:) B] denotes t if A and 
B denote the same truth-value, [A ;:) BJ denotes f if A and B denote different 
truth-values. (3) Rules a, d are retained, but the variables (so-called) are inter-
preted as constants denoting t. 
13. The deduction theorem. A variant of a wff A of PI is a wff obtained 
from A by alphabetic changes of the variables of such a sort that two occur-
rences of the same variable in A remain occurrences of the same variable, 
and two occurrences of distinct variables in A remain occurrences of distinct 
variables. Thus if aI' a2, ... , an are distinct variables, and bI> b2, ... , btl 
are distinct variables, and there is no variable among bl • bs, •. " btl which 
occurs in A and does 110t occur among ~1' aa, ... , am then 
SB1 ...... ·Bn AI 
b1bj ... b n 
isa variant of A. (Variants of t102, for example, are r -::J. S -::J rand q -::J. 
P -::J g, but not p -::J • r -::J r or p -::J • P -::J p.) 

§13J 
THE DEDUCTION THEOREM 
87 
It is clear that if B is a variant of A, then A is a variant of B. And any 
variant of a variant of A is a variant of A. ALo of course any wff A is a var-
iant of itself. 
In many ways, two wffs which are variants of one another serve the same 
purposes. In particular, in view of * 10 I, every variant of a theorem is a 
theorem. Also, if we alter the system P j by replacing one or more axioms by 
variants of them. the theorems remain the same. In the case of tbeorem,; to 
which verbal names have been assigned (e.g., "the self-distributive law of 
implication." "Peirce's law," etc.), we shall use the same name also for any 
variant of the theorem. 
A finite sequence of wfts is called a van'ant proof if each wff is either a 
variant of an axiom or is immediately inferred from preceding wffs in the 
sequence by one of the rules of inference. Evidently the final wff in a variant 
proof is always a theorem. since every variant of an axiom is a theorem; and 
we shall call the variant proof a variant proof of its final wff. 
A finite sequence of wfis, B1, Bz •... , Bm. is called a proof from the 
hypotheses AI' A 2 •.•. , A" if for eachi either: (1) Bi is one of AI' A 2 •.. " An; 
or (2) B, is a variant of an axiom; or (3) B, is inferred according to *100 
from major premiss B J and minor premiss Bb where i < i, k < i; or (4) Bi 
is inferred. according to *101, by substitution in the premiss B,. where i < i. 
and where the variable substituted for does not occur in At. A 2, " .• , An-
Such a finite sequence of wfis. B,,, being the fin~d furmula of the sequence, is 
called more explicitly a proof ot Bm from the hypothe~es A j • A 2 •.••• An; 
and we use the notation 
to mean: there is a proof of Bm from the hypotheses A1, A 2 •• " "' An. 
Observe that the sign f- is not a symbol belonging to thf' logistic system PI 
nor is it part of any schema of abbreviation of wffs of Pl' but rather it be longs 
to the syntax language (like the notation "s ," or the ahbreviation "wff") 
and is used in making statements about the wffs of PI 
The use of the sign f- which was introduced in ~l:? may be regarded as 
amounting to a special case of the f'Jregoing. namely the special case that 
n = 0. For a proof of Bm from no hypotheses is the same as a variant proof 
of B",; and we may now read the notation ~ B", either as meaning thitt 
there exists a variant proof of B,n or as meaning that B u , is a theorem (the 
two being trivially equivalent). 
In the definition of proof from hypotheses, the condition attacheu to (4) 
should be especially noted, that the variable substituted for must not be 

88 
THE PROPOSITIONAL CALCULUS 
[CHAP. I 
one of the variables occurring in AI' A 2, •.• , An. For example, although 
q ::::) I ::::) I :::::> I results from q :::::> I :::::> I by substitution of q :::::> I for q, it is false 
that q::::) I :::::> I I- q ::::) I:::::> I :::::> I· On the other hand it is true that 
q ::::) I ::::) I I- q, by *100 and an appropriate variant of tl04. 
After these preliminaries, we are ready to state and prove the meta-
theorem which constitutes the principal topic of this section: 
*130. If AI' A2, •.. , An I- B, then AI' A2, ••. , An_1 I- An :::::> B. 
(The deduction theorem.) 
Prool. Let Bl , B 2, ... , B", be a proof of B from the hypotheses AI' A2 , 
... , An (Bm being therefore the same as B). And construct first the finite 
sequence of wffs, An::::) Bl , An:::::> B 2, ... , An:::::> Bm. We shall show how to 
insert a finite number of additional wffs in this sequence so that the resulting 
sequence is a proof of An::::) B"" i.e., of An ::::) B, from the hypothe~es AI' A2, 
... , An-I' The inserted wffs will be put in before each of the wffs An :::::> B; 
in order in such a way that, after completing the insertions as far as a par-
ticular An:::::> B;, the whole sequence of wffs up to that point is a proof of 
An ::::) B, from the hypotheses AI, A2, ... , An_I.1'9 
In fact consider a particular An ::::) B;, and, if i > 1, suppose that the in-
sertions have been completed as far as An:::::> B;_l' The following five cases 
arise: 
Case la: B; is An. Then An:::::> Bi is An:::::> An. Insert nine wffs before 
An::::) B;, constituting namely a variant proof of an appropriate variant of 
tl20 trom which An::::) B; can be inferred by substitution. 
Case 1 b: B; is one of AI' A2, •• " An_I' say AT' Then AT:::::> • An :::::> B; is 
AT::::) • An :::::> AT' From an appropriate variant of t 102, AT:::> • An :::::> B; can 
be inferred in two steps by substitution (*101). Before An:::::> Bi insert first 
the three wffs which show this, then AT' From the last two of these four wffs, 
namely AT :::::> • An :::::> Bi and AT' An :::::> Bi can be inferred by modus ponens 
(*100). 
Case 2: B; is a variant of an axiom. Following the same plan as in case 1b, 
insert four wf£s before An ::::) B" namely first a variant proof of B;:::::> • An:::::> Bi 
(in two steps by substitution from a variant of tl02), then Bi (a variant of 
an axiom). 
Case 3: B; is inferred by modus ponens from major premiss B; and minor 
premiss Bko where i < i, k < 1'. Then B j is Bk :::::> B;. Before An:::::> Bi insert 
first the four wffs which show the inference of An :::::> B j :::::> • An :::::> Bk :::::> • 
"'Thus In effect the mtthod of the proof 15 that of mathematical induction with 
respect to m (or i) 

§13J 
THE DEDUCTION THEOREM 
Ra 
An::::> B i , by three successive substitutions, from a variant of tl03; then 
after these the wff An::::> Bk ::::> • An ::::> Bi (which can be inferred by modus 
ponens, and from which then An ::> B; can be inferred by modus ponens, since 
the necessary minor premisses, A" ::::> B; and An ::::> Bb are among the earlier 
wffs already present in the sequence being constructed), 
Case 4: Bi is inferred, according to *101, by substitution In B;,where 
i < i and where the variable substituted for does not occur in AI' A 2 , ' , " An-
No wffs need be inserted before An::::> B i , as the same substitution suffices 
to infer An ~ B; from An ~ B; (here, of course, it is essential that the vari-
able substituted for does not occur in An)' 
As the special case of the deduction theorem in which n = 1 we have the 
following corollary: 
·131. If A f- B, then f- A ~ B, 
In connection with the deduction theorem we shall need also the three 
following metatheorems: 
Proof, Let ai' a2, ' , "az be the complete list (in alphabetic order) of 
those variables which occur in CI , C2, ' , " Cr but not in A l , A 2, •• " An' 
If the given proof of B from the hypotheses AI, A2 , ' • " An is not also a 
proof ot B from the hypotheses C1 , C2, ' , " C" AI> Az, ' • " An, it can only 
be because it involves substitutions for some of the variables aI' a3, ' . " a"~ 
Therefore let cI , C2, ' , " Cz be variables which are all distinct and which do 
not occur in Cl , C2, • , " Cr, AI' A 2, ' •. , An or in the given proof of B froll1 
the hypotheses AI' A 2, ' , "An (to be specific, say that CI , C2, ' , " Cz are 
the first l such variables in the alphabetic order of the variables). And 
throughout the given proof of B from the hypotheses A" Az, .. " An replace 
aI' a2, .. " a z by c t ' c2' ... , Cz respectively, The result is a proof from the 
hypotheses CI , C2, ' , " Cr , AI' A2, .. " An of 
To obtain a proof of B from the same hypotheses, it is then necessary only to 
add l additional steps, substituting successively al for cI , az for c2, . ' ., 
az for cz' 
Proof, This is the special case of *132 in which n = 0, 
I 
, , 
1: 
Ii 
" 
I' 

90 
THE PROPOSITIONAL CALCULUS 
[CHAP. I 
"'134. If every wff which occurs at least once in the list Al , ASI .. '1 An 
also occurs at least once in the list CII CI , •• " Cr , and if Av AI' 
, 
, 
'1 An f- B, then Cl , C2, ' , " Cr f- B. 
Proof. Since it is clearly indifferent, in connection with proof from hypoth-
eses, in what order the hypotheses are arranged, or how many times a 
particular hypothesis is repeated, this is a corollary of ·132. 
Importance of the deduction theorem to the meta theory (syntax and seman-
tics) of the system P is clear~as a matter of showing the adequacy of the system, 
in a certain direction, for the purposes for which it is intended, namely for formal-
ization of the use of sentence connectives (see §05) and of inferences involving 
them. 
It is also possible to make use of the deduction theorem in the role of a 
derived rule of inference (cf. §12), since the proof of the deduction theorem 
provides an effective method according to which, whenever a proof of B 
from the hypotheses A l , A 2, .•. , An is given, it is possible to obtain a proof 
of An ::::::> B from the hy'Potheses AI' A 2, ••• , An- l -hence by repetitions of 
the method to obtain a proof of Al::::::> • ~ 
::::::> •.•• An- l ::::::> • An ::::::> B. 
As examples of this use of the deduction theorem as a derived rule, we 
present the following alternative proofs of the last two theorems of §12: 
Proal 01 tI22. By simultaneous substitution in tl02.· 
l-t::::::>.p::::::>t::::::>t 
Hence by modus ponens: 
If- P -:;:) I::::::> t 
Hence by t 104 and modus ponens: 
tf-p 
Hence by "'131: 
f-/::::::> P 
Proof of t123. By modus ponens: 
p::::::> I, p f-t 
By the variant, / ~ q, of t122 and modus ponens: 
p -:;:) /. P l- q 
Hence by "'130: 
P:::Jfl-P~q 
Hence by "'130 again (or, what comes to the same thing, by *131): 
f-p::::::>/::::::>.p::::::>q 

§14] 
FURTHER THEOREMS AND METATHEOREMS 
91 
14. Some further theorems and metatheorems of PI" We go on 
to prove three additional theorems of PI' using the deduction theorem in 
order to present proofs more briefly. 
t140.180 P => • q => I=>. P => q => I 
By two applications of modus pot/ens: 
p, q => I, p => q r I 
By three applications of the deduction theorem: 
f-p=>.q=>/=>.P=>q-:::>I 
tl4L P => q => • q -:::> r => • p -:::> r 
By two applications of modus ponens: 
p => q, q::J r, p f- r 
Hence by the deduction theorem: 
f-p=>q=>.q=>r=>.p=>r 
(As already indicated in 12.4, t141 is known as the transitive law of 
implication. ) 
t142. P => / => r => • p :::::> r => r 
By the transitive law of implication (i.e., by substitution in 1141 or d 
suitable variant, and modus ponens): 
p => r, r -:::> I f- P => f 
Hence by two applications of modus ponens: 
p => t => r, p => r, r => t f- t 
Hence by the deduction theorem. 
p :::::> I => r, p => r f- r => I -:::> t 
Hence by a variant of tl04 and modus ponens: 
p -:::> t -:::> r, p -:::> r f- r 
lSOq :::> f may be read in words either as "not q" or as "q I; false" "wher'~ "is false" IS 
of course not the seman tIcal term but merely a "ynonym vi "not" or "implies false-
hood"). t140 may be read in word;;: "If p, if not 'I. then p doc, nut imply q." SimIlo.rly 
we may read PH in words thus: "Ii p implies q. if q implies 1', p imphes Y." And t142 
thus: "If not p implies Y, If P Implies r, then y." 
I
II 
,I: 
I 

92 
THE PROPOSITIONAL CALCULUS 
[CHAP. I 
Hence by the deduction theorem: 
We add also the following meta theorem, which will be needed in the next 
section: 
**143. If a formula is wf and consists of more than one symbol, it has the 
form [A:::::> BJ in one and only one way. 
Proof. It is immediate, from the definition of a wff, that a wif of more 
than one symbol has the form [A :::::> BJ in at least one way. We must show 
that it cannot have this form in more than one way. 
We use the same process of counting brackets which is described in §lO. 
Namely we start at the beginning (or left) of a formula and proceed from 
left to right, counting each occurrence of [as +1 and each occurrence of] 
as 
1, and adding as we go. The number which we thus assign to an occur-
rence of a bracket will be called the number of that occurrence of a bracket 
in the formula. 
It follows from the definition of a wff that, if a wff contains the symbol :::::>, 
it must begin with an occurrence of l and end with an occurrence of J; these 
we shall call respectively the initial bracket and the final bracket of the wft. 
By mathematical induction with respect to the total number of occurrences 
of ::::> we establish the following lemma: The number of an occurrence of a 
bracket in a wlf is positive, except in the case 0/ the final bracket, which has the 
number O. 
Now suppose that [A ::::> BJ and [C :::J DJ are the same wff. Case 1: If A 
contains no occurrence of :::::>, it must consist of a single symbol, either a 
variable or I; since C begins with the same symbol as A, it follows that C 
has no initial bracket and therefore cannot contain the symbol:::::>; therefore 
C must be identical "",ith A. Case 2: If C contains no occurrence of ::::>, it 
follows by the same argument that A must be identical with C. Case 3: If 
A and C both contain the symbol :::::>, then the final bracket of A is the first 
occurrence of a bracket with the number 0 in A, and therefore is the second 
occurrence of a bracket with the number 1 in [A::::> BJ; and the final bracket 
of C is the first occurrence of a bracket with the number 0 in C, and therefore 
is the second occurrence of a bracket with the number 1 in [C ~ DJ; this 
makes the final bracket of A and the final bracket of C coincide, and so 
makes A and C identical. Finally, since it follows in all three cases that A 
and C are identical, it is then obvious that Band D must be identical. 
We do not continue further with proofs of particular theorems of Pi> 

§I4] 
EXERCI."ES 14 
although there are many morc theorems of the propositlOnal calculus which 
will be of importance in later chapters. For all such theorems can be ob-
tained by the more powerful method of the next section, to establish which 
the theorems and metatheorems that we already have are sufficient. Indeed 
in the next section we shall make direct use only of *100, *101, tI02, tl:20, 
+123, "'130, t140, tl42,*"'143- other axioms, theorems, and metatheorems 
being used only so far as they contribute to the proof of these. 
EXERCISES 14-
14.0. Rewritet140and ~142 in abbreviated form. using D2, D4, <lnd Dn, 
14.1. From the hypothesesp and p => q there is a proof of q, in one step 
by modus ponens. Hence by using the method provlded in the proof of * 1:30 
we may obtain a proof of the la,p! 0/ ~ssertion, p :::> • p => q ::J q. Simplify this 
proof by deleting all unnecessary repetitions of the same wff or variants oi 
it. also by using tI20 and t 102 in order to prove p ::J • r => r in a more direct 
manner. Present the resulting proof of the law of assertion in the style of 
§12, without making use of the deduction theorem or of theorems whose 
proof has been presented only by means of the deduction theorem. 
14.2. Present a proof of tl40 without making use of the deuuctlOn 
theorem or of theorems v>,hose proof has been pre~"ntecl only by means of 
the deduction theorem, (The proof of §14 is impracticably cumbrous when 
presented without the aid of the deduction theorem; nevertheless we may 
make heuristic usc of the idea of applying, to the proof of t140 as presented 
in §14, the method provided in tr1e proof of * 130.) 
Present proofs 0/ the following theorems I'n the style oj §14, m,.kt'ng use of the 
deduction theorem and 0/ any theorems and metatheorems which have been 
previously proved, either in the text or as exeroses: 
14 .. 3. p::J • q::J r::J • p => q => r 
14.4. p::J q::J Y => • P ::J r => r 
L~. 5. P => r => r ::J • P ::J t => r 
14.6. p::J q => Cr1 :::> s) =>.P::J :'2 => sJ ::J. r1 =>. r2 ::J s 
14·7·pvq=>qvp 
14.8. ~p => q] V [q => p] 
14,9- Establish the following fouf derived rules uf PI directly-without 
use of *130 or of the notion of a proof from hypotheses: 
(1) If f- B, then f· Al => • A2 => •... An => B, 
(2) If e'.'ery wff which occurs at least once in the list AI' Az, ' .. , A" 

94 
THE PROPOSITIONAL CALCULUS 
also occurs at least once in the list CI' Cz, 0 
0 
0 Cr , and if I- At ::::> • A2 ::::> • 
• 
0 
• An ::::> B, then I- Ct :::J • C2 ::::> •... C. ::::> B. 
(3) If B is one of AI' A2, •.• , A,.., then f- AI::::> • A2 ::::> •.. 0 An ::::> B. 
(4) If every wff which occurs at least once in the list At> AI' .. '. An. 
BI , B2, ••. , B". also occurs at least once in the list Cl , C2, •• " Cr ! if 
f- Al ::::> • A2 ::::> •... An :::J A and I- BI ::::> " Ba ::::> •.. , B", ::::> • A ::::> B, then 
f- Cl ::::> • C2 ::::> •.• , C. ::::> B. 
Expl2.in in detail how these derived rules may be used as a substitute 
for the deduction theorem in presenting proofs of theorems of PI' Illustrate 
by presenting proofs of the three theorems of §14 with the aid of these 
derived rules (and without the deduction theorem) ,181 
15. Tautologies, the decision problem, Let B be a wff of Pl' let 
ai, az, . , " an be distinct variables among which are all the variables occur-
ring in B, and let al' a2, •. " all be truth-values (each one either t or f). 
We define the value of B tor Ihe values aI' a2 , •• OJ an of all a2, • , " an by a 
recursion process which assigns v,llues to the wf parts C of B, in order of 
increasing number of occurrences of ::::> in C, as follows, If C is I, the value of 
Cis f; if C is ai' the value of Cis ai: if C is [CI ::::> C2], the value of C is t in 
case either the value of Ca is t or the value of CI is f, and the value of C is f 
in case the values of C1 and C 2 arc t and f respectively. By repetitions of 
~his process a value, tor f, is ultinntely assigned to B, and this we call the 
value of B for the values aI' a 2• ' .. , an of aI' a 2, . , " an' 
The uniqueness of the value of B for a given system of values of its 
variables follows as a consequence of **143. 
A wff B of P1 is called a tautology if its value is t for every system of 
values of its variables (the values being truth-values), a contradiction if its 
value is f for every system of values of its variables, 
It will be seen that the foregoing recursion process, by which we obtain the 
value of B for a system of values of its variables, just follows the semantical 
rules given in § 1 0 for the principal interpretation of P" But in § 10 we understood 
"denoting" and "having values" as Imown kinds of meaning, and we used the 
BlThes<: derived mlcs have a slmplt-r character than that of the deduction theorem in 
the role of a derived rule. For, lilte uur pnmitive rules of inference, they require as 
premisses only certain asserted \\' fc", and, when these arc given, the check of the inference 
IS effectiv",. En t when the deductwfl theorem IS used as a derived rule. it is necessary to 
slIbmit a ilidte sequence of wfis nut as asserted but as constituting a proof from hy-
potheses, and only then IS an cifect!ve eheck avatlable. 
0" the uther hand these denved rules. 14.0 (1)-(4), may casily be made an efficient 
substltute tor the deductiol\ theorem as a means of abbreviating the presentatIOn of 
proofs. Advantages of the deduction theorem in this rolc are largely psychological and 
heuristic. 

§15] 
TAUTOLOGIES, THE DECISION PROBLEM 
95 
semantical rules in order to assign an interpretation to P, as a language designed 
for meaningful communication. On the other hand in the present section we 
use the same rules, otherwise substantially unchanged, 1ll order to define ab-
stractly a correspondence called "having values." between wffs (w:th given 
values of their variables) and truth-values. The word "values" at its two italicized 
occurrences is meant as a newly introduced technical term, with no reference 
to the idea of meaning, and the correspondence is defined abstractly, or syn-
tactically. in the sense that it may be used independently of what interpretation 
(if any) is assigned to the logishc system Pl' Compare footnote 14:3. 
The process provided in the definition for obtainillg the value of B for 
a given system of values of its variables is effective (see the discussion of 
the notion of effectiveness in §07, and footnotes 118, 11!)). Si!lCe a wff B 
can have only a finite number of variables. and hence only a finite number 
of systems of values of its variables. this leads to an effective process for 
deciding whether B is a tautology or a contradiction or neither. As an illus-
tration of this algorithm, we show the following verification that p03 is 
a tautology, adopting a convenient arrangement of the work that is due to 
Quine: 
S:::J [p :::J q] :::J • S :::J P :::J • S :::J q 
t t 
t t t 
t 
t t 
t t 
t f 
t f f 
t t 
t f 
t t 
f 
t 
t f 
t 
t 
t t 
f t f 
f t 
t t t 
t 
t t 
t t 
f t 
t f f 
t 
t 
f 
f 
f t f t t 
t 
f 
f t t 
f t 
f t f 
f 
f t 
f 
f 
In detail the work is as follows. first the wff t 1O:~ is written on one line. The 
three variables occurring in it are s, p, q; all possible svstems of values of 
these variables arc written down in the form of three cl)luml1s of t's and f's, 
one column below the first occurrence of each of these variables in the wff. 
Then below each remaining occurrence of a variable in the wff is copied the 
same column of t's a'ld f's that stands below its first occurrence. Then systems 
of values are assigned to the various wf parts of the entire wif, in order of 
increasing length of the parts, the system of values assigned to each part 
being written as a column of t's and f's below the principal implication sign 
of that part. For example, the values assigned to ~p :::J qj appear in the col-
umn below the second implication sign of the entire wff; the t at the top of 
I 
Ii 
I 
l 
I 
: I 

}6 
THE PROPOSITIONAL CALCULUS 
[CHAP. I 
this column is obtained from the values t, t of p, q, in accordance with the 
:ule given in the first paragraph of this section; the f next to the top of the 
:olumn is obtained from the values t, f of p, q, in accordance with the same 
:ule; and so on. Again, the values assigned to s::> [P ::> q] appear in the col-
lmn below the first implication sign of the entire wff; the t at the top of 
this column is obtained from the values t, t of p, [p::> qJ; and so on. The 
:eader should carry out the work in full and compare his result with that 
;hown above. At the end of the work, the system of values of the entire 
.'Iff appears in the column below its principal implication sign, and the fact 
:hat this column consists wholly of 1's shows the wff to be a tautology. 
A table showing the value of p ::> q for every system of values of p, q is 
:alled a truth-table of ::>. Like truth-tables may be calculated also for each 
)f the notations introduced in D2-11; e.g., in accordance with D4, the truth-
:able of v will show the value of p ::> q::> q for every system of values of p, q, 
15 this is worked out by the rule given in the first paragraph of this section. 
[he complete list of truth-tables, including that of ::>, is as follows: 
I 
I 
I 
t 
t 
t 
I 
f 
I t I t 
t 
f 
t 
f 
f 
f 
I 
I 
t 
f 
f 
f 
I 
t I f 
f 
t 
t 
t 
f 
t 
f 
I 
i 
f 
f 
f 
f 
t 
t 
t 
t 
i 
t 
I ! 
t 
f 
f 
t 
f 
I f 
t 
f 
t 
f 
t 
t 
I 
, 
I 
I 
Though these truth-tables show explicitly, e.g., the value of p v q for 
~iven values of p and q, of course it is understood that they may be used 
.'lith arbitrary wffs replacing the variables, e.g., to find the value of C1 v C2 
:or given values of C1 and C2• 
When the above described algorithm for calculating the system of truth-
.ralues of a wff is to be applied to a wff abbreviated by means of DI-Il, the 
.'Iff may be first rewritten in unabbreviated form and the algorithm then 
tpplied. In theoretical discussions we shall assume that this is done. But in 
Jractice it is more efficient to leave the wff in abbreviated form and to use 
:he complete foregoing list of truth-tables. For example, the verification that 
s a tautology, using the abbreviated form of this wff, is arranged as 
'allows: 

§15J 
TAUTOLOGIES, THE DECISION PROBLEM 
t:::Jpvq=·p$q$P 
q:::Jj 
t f t f t t 
t f t t t t t f f 
t f t f f t 
t t f t t f f f f 
t f f f t t 
f t t t f f t f f 
t t f t f t 
f f f f f f t f 
We now prove the metatheorem . 
.... 150. Every theorem of PI is a tautology. 
Proof. We first establish the following lemma' II aI' a2, ... , an, 1
distinct vartables among whtch are all the varzables occurring zn A and all 
occurring in B. and il. lor the values ai' a2 • ••• , an, a 01 al • a2, •••• an, t 
value 01 B is b and the value 01 S~AI is c, then the value 01 A tor the v 
al • a2 • •••• an. b 01 a l • a 2, •..• an. b is c. 
The lemma is obvious if A consists of a single symbol. And we then 
ceed by mathematical induction with respect to the total number of 0 
rences of :::J in A. If A is Al :::J Aa. then S~AI is S~AJi :::J S~A21. SUI 
that. for the values a l • all' .... an. a of a l • a 2• ' . '. an, b, the value of E 
and the value of S~A! is c. and the value of S~AII is c1, and the val 
S~A21 is ca. Then cis f, if CI is t and c2 is f; and c is t in all other cases, B 
hypothesis of induction we have, for the values al • a2 • •••• an, b of a l • a~ 
an, b. that the value of Al IS ci and the value of A2 IS c2 ; hence the va 
A is f if c1 is t and C2 is f, and the value of A is t in all other cases; i.e 
value of A is c. 
The lemma then follows by mathematical lllductiOn.-For the fI 
substitution. *101, we have as an immediate consequence of the lemma 
if the conclusion S~AI has the value f for some system of values { 
variables. then the premiss A must have the value f for some system ( 
ues of the variables, Therefore if the premiss A of *101 is a tautolog 
conclusion S:AI mllst be a tautology. 
For the rule of modus ponens. *]00, if the minor premiss A is a taut 
and if the conclusion B has the value f for some system of values· 
variables (of A and B), then for the same system of values of the val 
it follows directly from the definition of the value of a wff that the 
of the major premiss A:::J B is f. Therefore if both premisses of *11 
tautologies, the conclusion must be a tautology. 
We have thus shown that the two rules of inference of PI preserve t 
ogies, in the sense that, if the premiss or premisses are tautologiE 
conclusion is a tautology. We leave it to the reader to verify that thE 
axioms of PI are tautologies. **150 then follows. 

98 
THE PROPOSITIONAL CALCULUS 
[CHAP. I 
*151. 
Let B be a wff of PI' let all a2, . _ ., an be distinct variables among 
which are all the variables occurring in B, and let all az, . __ , an be 
truth-values. Further, let Ai be at or at :::> I according as a~ is t or f; 
and let B' be B or B ::> I according as the value of B for the values 
aI' a 2, ••• , an of aI' az, . - ., an is t or f. Then AI' A2, ... , An ~ B'. 
In order to prove that 
(1) 
we proceed by mathematical induction with respect to the number of occur-
rences of ::J in B. 
If there are no occurrences of :::> in B, then B is either lor one of the vari-
ables a i . In case B is I, we have that B' is I:::> I, and hence (1) follows by 
substitution in an appropriate variant of t 120. In case B is at, we have that 
B' is the same wff as Ai, and (1) follows trivially, the proof of B' from the 
hypotheses AI' Az, ... , An consisting of the single wif B'. 
Suppose that there are occurrences of :::> in B. Then B is Bl :::> Bz. By the 
hypothesis of induction, 
(2) 
(3) 
where B~ is BI or BI ::J I according as the value of BI for the values ai' 
az, ... , an of al , az, ... , an is t or f, and B~ is B2 or Bz :::> I according as the 
value of B2 for the values ai' a2, • _ ., an of ai' a z, .. _, an is t or f. In case 
B~ is B 2, we have that B' is Bl :::> B 2, and (1) follows from (3) by substitution 
in an appropriate variant of t102 and modus ponens. In case B~ is Bl ::::::> I, 
we have again that B' is BI ::J B 2, and (1) follows from (2) by substitution in 
an appropriate variant of tI23 and modus ponens. There remains only the 
case that B; is BI and B~ is B2 ::> I, and in this case B' is BI :::> Bz:::> I, and (1) 
follows from (2) and (3) by substitution in an appropriate variant of t140 
and two uses of modus ponens. 
Therefore *151 is proved by mathematical induction. 
The proof of *151 is effective in the sense that it provides an effective 
method for finding a proof of B' from the hypotheses AI' A2, • _ ., An. If 
B has no occurrences of ::J, this is provided directly. If B has occurrences of 
:::>, the proof provides directly an effecti ve reduction of the problem of finding 
a proof of B' from the hypotheses AI' Az, ... , An to the two problems of 
finding proofs of B; and B; from the hypothesis AI' Az, ... , An; the same 
reduction may then be repeated upon the two latter problems, and so on; 

§15] 
TAUTOLOGIES, THE DECISION PROBLEM 
99 
after a finite number of repetitions the process of reduction must terminate, 
yielding effectively a proof of B' from the hypotheses AI' A2, ••• , An. 
We now go on to proof of the converse of **150, which will also be effec-
tive. 
*152. If B is a tautology, ~ B. 
Proof. Let aI' a 2, •• " an be the variables of B, and for any system of 
values av a2, •• " an of av a 2, •• " an let AI' A2, •• ., An be as in *151. The 
B' of * 151 is B, because B is a tautology. Therefore, by *151, 
AI' A2, ••• , An r B. 
This holds for either choice of an, i.e., whether an is f or t, and so we have 
both 
and 
By the deduction theorem, 
AI' A 2, ••. , An-I ~ an ::::> t ::::> B, 
Av A2, ••• , An-I r- an::::> B. 
Hence, by substitution in an appropriate variant of tI42 and two uses of 
modus ponens, 
AI' A2, •. " An- l r B. 
This shows the elimination of the hypothesis An. The same process may 
be repeated to eliminate the hypothesis An-I' and so on, until all the hypoth-
eses are eliminated.182 Finally we obtain r B. 
The decision problem of a logistic system is the problem to find an effective 
procedure or algorithm, a decision procedure, by which, for an arbitrary wff 
of the system, it is possible to determine whether or not it is a theorem (and 
if it is a theorem to obtain a proof of ip83). 
Ul2Implicitly, therefore, the method of the proof is that of mathematical induction 
with respect to n. Cf. footnote 179. 
18SThis parenthetic part of the problem will, in this book, always be included explic-
itly in solutions or partial solutions of the decision problem of a system. 
However, it might be dismissed as theoretically superfluous, on the ground that there 
always exists an efiectiv0 enul1.>.~ration of the proofs of a logistic system-as will appear 
in Chapter VIII-and that once a proof of a wff is known to exist, it may be found by 
searching through in order such an effective enumeration of all proofs. Possible objec-
tions to this are (1) that a procedure for finding something should not be cal1ed effective 
unless there is a predictable upper bound of the number of steps that will be required, 

100 
THE PROPOSITIONAL CALCULUS 
[CHAP. 1 
The effective procedure for recognizing tautologies, as described at the 
beginning of this section, and the effective proofs which have been given 
of **150 and *152, together constitute a solution of the decision problem of 
the logistic system Pl' 
This solution of the decision problem of P, does not depend on any particular 
interpretation of P" Being purely syntactical in character it may be used under 
any interpretation of P" or even if no interpretation at all is adopted. 
The decision problem in this sense we call more fully, the decision problem 
for provability, in a logistic system, or in a formalized language obtained by 
interpretation of the logistic system. 
In the case of a formalized language there is also the semantical decision 
problem, as we shall call it, namely, to find an effective procedure for determining 
of an arbitrary sentence whether it is true in the semantical sense (§§04,09), 
and of an arbitrary propositional form whether it is true for all values of its 
variables. I.' For the formalized language which is obtained by adopting the 
principal interpretation of P" the seman tical decision problem is trivial, because 
the semantical rules, given at the end of §1O, directly provide the required 
effective procedure. This triviality of the semantical decision problem, however, 
by no means holds for formalized languages in general, as the definition of truth 
contamed in the seman tical rules is often non-effective. 
The decision problem for provability, as we have seen, is non-trivial even in 
the relatively simple case of the system P" 
In view of the solution of the decision problem of PI' the explicit presenta-
tion of proofs of particular theorems of PI is now no longer necessary. When-
ever we require a particular theorem of Pv it will be sufficient that we just 
write it down, leaving it to the reader to verify that it is a tautology and 
hence to find a proof of it by applying the procedure which is given in the 
proofs of *152 and *151. In particular we now add, on this basis, the five 
following theorems of PI: 
and (2) that not only the decision procedure itself ought to be effective, but also the 
demonstration of it ought to be effective in the sense that it proceeds by effectively 
producing the proof of the wff (when the proof exists), But these 0 bj ections are not easy 
to maintain. Indeed the restriction on the notion of effectiveness. as proposed in (1), is 
vague, and the writer does not know how to make it definite without excluding proce-
dures that must obviously be considered effective by common (informal) standards, 
The requirement proposed in (2) is in the direction of mathematical intuitionism-see 
Chapter XII-and must be regarded as radical from the point of view of classical mathe-
matics, 
mThe writer once j1roPQaod the nll.me "doducihlltty problem" for what I. here oanld 
thu decillion problem tor pruvabJUty, the Jnttmtlon being to reserve the name "decisloll 
problem" either for the semantical decision problem or for what is called in §46 the 
decisIOn problem loy validity, It seems better, however, to use "decision problem" as a 
general name for problems to find an effective criterion (a decision procedure) forsorne-
thing, and to distinguish different decision problems by means of qualifying adjectives 
or phrases. 

§15] 
TAUTOLOGIES, THE DECISION PROBLEM 
t153. 
t => p = p 
tIM. --P = P 
tIM. P = q => • q = P 
t156. P = q ::::> • p => q 
t157. P = q => • q = r ::::> • p = r 
101 
tIM is the complete law of double negation (d. footnote 103). tl55 is the 
comm1,tative law 0/ (material) equivalence, and jl57 is the transitive law of 
(material) equivalence. 
Proofs of metatheorems of P1 are also often greatly simplified by the solu-
tion of the decision problem. This is true, for example, in the case of the 
following: 
.158. If B results from A by substitution of N for M at one or more places 
in A (not necessarily for all occurrences of M in A), and if r M = 
N, 
then r A = B. 
Proof. Let aI' a 2 .... , 8" be the complete list of variables occurring in 
A and B together. Since M == N is a theorem, it is a tautology. Therefore, 
by the truth-table of :::::, M and N have the same value for every system of 
values of a I • a2, ••. , an" Since B is obtained from A by substitution of N 
for M at certain places, it follows that A and B have the same value for 
every system of values of a1, a2, •. "an (details of the proof of this, by 
mathematical induction with respect to the number of occurrences of => in 
A, are left to be supplied by the reader, using the result of exercise 12.1). 
Therefore, by the truth-table of ===., we have that A _ B is :1 tautology, 
Therefore by *152, r A = B. 
As a corollary we have also: 
"'159. If B results from A by substitutiolJ of N for M at one or more places 
in A (not necessarily for all occurrences of M in A), if r M = N 
and r A, then r B. 
(Rule at substitutivity 0/ equivalence.) 
Proal. By "'158. f- A. B. Therefore by t156, substitution, and modus 
f'onens, f- A=> B. Since f- A, we have by another use of modus ponens that 
I-B. 
I: 

102 
THE PROPOSITIONAL CALCULUS 
[CHAP. I 
EXERCISES 15 
15.0. Verify the following tautologies: 
(1) 
The wffs of 14.4 and 14.5. 
(2) 
The wif of 14.6. 
(3) 
pq ::::J r ::::J • P ::::J • q ::::J r 
(Law 01 exportation.) 
(4) 
[P ::::J • q ::::J r] ::::J • pq ::::J r 
(Law 01 importation.) 
(5) 
[P ::::J q] [P ::::J r] ::::J • P ::::J qr 
(Law 0/ composition.) 
(6) 
p ::::J q ::::J • -q ::::J -p 
(Law 0/ contraposition.) 
(7) 
p == q == • q = p 
(Complete commutative law 01 equivalence.) 
(8) 
The transitive law of equivalence. t157. 
(9) 
-. p-p 
'(10) P v-p 
(Law 0/ contradiction.) 
(Law 01 excluded middle.) 
15. I. Determine of each of the following wifs whether it is a tautology or 
a contradiction or neither: 
(1) 
p::::J r ;::) r ::::J • P ::::J q ::::J r 
(2) 
p::::J q;::) [r ;::) s] ::::J • P ::::J ,. ::::J • q ::::J S 
(3) I::::J 1 ::::J .1 ::::J I ::::J 1 
(4) P = q == p v q = -p v-q 
15.2. Prove: If B results from A by substitution of N for M at one or 
more places in A (not necessarily for all occurrences of M in A). then 
I- M = N ::::J • A = B. 
15.3. Present proofs of tI54 and tI56 in the style of §14. not using 
methods or results of §I5. 
15'4' A wff B which contains n different variables is said to be in im-
plicative normal/orm if the following conditions are satisfied: (i) B has the 
form C1 ::::J • C 2 ::::J •... Cm ::::J I; (ii) each Ci (i = 1, 2 •. , '. m) has the form 
Cil::::J • Cla::::J •..• Con::::J /; (iii) each Cae (i = 1.2. ' , " m and k = I. 
2 •...• n) is either bk or -b'e> where bl: is the ktb of the variables occurring 
in B, according to the alphabetic order of the variables (§10); (iv) the 
antecedents Ct are all different and are arranged among themselves according 
to the rule that, if Ci1• C;2' . , .• Ci(k-l) are the same as C./1. Cia, .. "C,(1:_1I re-
spectively. and C i " is bIt. and Ci " is .... b k • then i < j. Show that for every wff 
A there is a unique corresponding wff B (the implicative normallorm 01 A) 
such that B is in implicative normal form. and each C, contains the same 
variables that A does, and I- A = B. (Make use of the values of the given wff 
A for the various systems of values of its variables. in order to determine B 
in such a way that A = 
B is a tautology.) 
What is the implicative normal form of a tautology containing the n 

§15] 
EXERCISES IS 
103 
different variables b l , b 2 , ••• , b n , and no other variables? Of a contradiction 
containing these variables and no others? 
Vvhat are the possible implicative normal forms of a wff containing no 
variables? Of a wff containing just one variable? Of a wff containing just 
two (different) variables? 
15.5. Show that PI is a commutative ring, with equivalence as the ring 
equality, non-equivalence as the ring addition, and conjunction as the ring 
multiplication, in the sense that the following analogues of the ring laws 
are tautologies and therefore theorems of PI; 
P$q=·q$P 
p$[q$r]=.p$q$r 
p$q=rc.q=.p$r 
pq - qp 
p[qr] = pqr 
P[q$r.i=.pq$pr 
Identify the ring subtraction (d. the third law of those above). Also identify 
the zero element and the unit element of the ring. 
15.6. In a like sense, show further that PI is a Boolean ring by verifying 
the tautologies;l85 
P$P=I 
pp=p 
15.7. In a like sense, show that PI is a Boolc:m ring with equivalence as 
the ring equality, equivalence as the ring addition, and disjunction as the 
'''The reader must be careful not to misunderstand the assertions made in 15.5-15.8. 
In 15.6, e.g .• it is meant that, with equivalence in the role of equality, non-equivalence 
in the role of addition. and conjunction in the role of multipllcation. the defining laws 
for a Boolean ring appear as theorems of PI' and hence also all laws of Boolean rings 
which are derivable from these by methods of the propositional c.alculus (including 
the rule of substitution, '"101, and the rule of substitutivity of equivalence, *159). 
There is no question of a ring in the sense of a particular system of elements and opera-
tions on them obeying the ring laws, until we deal with a particular interpretation of PI' 
If we allow interpretations that arc sound in the generalized sense of §19, then many 
sound interpretations of PI do turn out to be Boolean rings (with equivalence in the 
rol€' of equality, etc.) in the sense of a particular system of elements and operations; 
but it is not true that eve"y sound interpretation 01 P, 15 a Boolran rinli' in thiS sense-or 
better, in view of cases like those of exercises 19.11 and I !l.12, it is not easy to decide 
on a generally satisfactory meaning for the italicized statement 
Under its principal interpretation, PI is not merely a Boolean ring, but a two-element 
field, with addition and multiplication identified in the way described in 15.5. This 
remark, and its application to formal work in the propositional calculus, is due to 
J. 1· Gegalkine in Recueil Iv! athimatique de la Societe M a1ltbnaliq!H de !VI OSCO", voL 
34, (1927), pp. 9-28. To anyone familiar with the procedures of elementary algebra, 
it is indeed very convenient to rewrite all expressions of the propositional calculus in 
terms of non-equivalence and conjunction as fundamental connectiv(;s, using also 0 and 
1 as propositional constants, and writing the sign + instead of $. 
The term Boolean ring, now standard, is due to :\1. H. Stone (1936). 

104 
THE PROPOSITIONAL CALCULUS 
[CHAP. I 
ring multiplication. Identify the ring subtraction, and the zero element and 
the unit element of the ring,lSS 
15.8. In a like sense, PI is also a Boolean algebra, again with equivalence 
in the role of equality. and with disjunction and conjunction identified as 
the Boolean sum and Boolean product respectively,181 Verify the following 
tautologies that are implied in this statement: the complete distributive law 
of conjunction over dis lunction; the complete d£stributive law 0/ disiunction over 
conjunction; the two laws 0/ absorption, 
p v pq == p. 
P[P v q] = P. 
and the two lau's 0/ De l\i organ, 188 
-[P V qj = .... p -g, 
-[pq~ = -p v -q. 
15.9. Various works on traditional logic treat of certain kinds of inferences, 
known as hypothetical sylloglSms, disj unctive syllogisms, and dilemmas. These 
are stated verbally, and include:'·' 
Hypothetical Syllogism 
Afodus ponens: 
If A then B. 
A 
Therefore, B. 
Modus tallens: 
If A then B. 
Not B. Therefore, not A. 
l·'This IS the dua.l (in the senSe of §16) of the rema.rk of 15.5, 15.6. It was used by 
Jacques Herbrand in his dissertation of 1930, independently of G~galkine, and again 
by Stoue in 1937. It provides a.nother method, dual to that of the preceding footnote, 
by which procedures of elementary algebra may be utilized for propositional calculus; 
namely, all expressions of the propositional calculus are rewritten in terms of equiva-
lence and disjunction as fundamental connectives, together with the constants 0 and 1, 
and the usual signs of addition and multiplication are employed instead of = and V 
respectively. (Compare exercise 24.3.) 
The laws pp == p and It::; dual are known as the laws ot tautology, though this is quite 
a different sense of the won] "tautology" from that introduced in the text. From the 
point of view of ring theory they might also be called idempotent laws. 
l81This remark is implicit already in Peirce's paper of 1885, cited in footnote 67. 
("Peirce's law" of 12.6 IS also found in this paper.) 
'""Not these laws but the corresponding laws of the class calculus were enunciated 
by Augustus De Morgan in his Formal Logic of 1847. 
In verbal formulation these laws of the propositional calculus were .known already 
to the Scholastics, perhaps first to Ockham. Cf. a paper by Lukasiewicz in Erkemllnis. 
vol. 5 (1935). pp. 11/·-131, In which some rudiments of the propositional calculus are 
traced back not only to th~ Scho\;J.stics but to antiquity-material implication in partic-
ular, to Philo of Megal a. And concerning the history of the De Morgan laws among 
the Scholastics, see further Philotheus Boehner in Aychill fur Philosoph ie, vol. 4 
(1951), pp. 113-146. 
l"We make no attempt to enter into the hIstory of the matter, but have merely 
compiled a representative list from a number of comparatively recent works of tradi-
tional character. Some discrepancIes will be disclosed if parts (1) and (2) of the exercise 
are carried through. These may be attrihuted partly to uncertainties of meaning, partly 
to disagreements among different writers. 

§16] 
1110dus tollendo ponens: 
Modus ponendo tollens: 
EXERCISES I5 
Disjunctive Syllogism 
A or B. 
Not A. 
Therefore. B. 
A or B. 
A. 
Therefore, not B. 
Dilemma 
105 
Simple constructive: If A then C. 
If B then C. 
A or B. 
Therefore, C. 
Simple destructive: If A then B. If A then C. Not B, or not C. Therefore, not A. 
Complex constructive: If A then B. If C then D. A or C. Therefore, B or D. 
Complex destructive: If A then B. If C then D. ~ot B, or not D. Therefore, 
not A, or not C. 
The letters A, B, C, D are here replaceable by sentences1,o-indeed we might 
bave used bold letters (under the conventions of §08) except for the lack of a 
dcfimte object language to which they could be understood to refer. Some 
writers are in disagreement among themselves, and others are unclear, (al as 
to whether the words "if ... then" mean material implication or some other 
kind of implication, and (b) as to whether the word "or" means exclusive dis-
junction or inclusive disjunction. (Cf. §05. 1 
(I) On the assumption that "if ... then" means material implication anD 
"or" means exclusive disjunction, the leading principle of, e.g., the simple de-
structive dilemma is 
p => q ::> • P ::> J' ::> • -q ;$ _r ::> -p 
On this assumption, write in the same manner the leading principle of each of 
the kinds of inference listed. Check each of the kinds of inference by ascertaining 
whether its lea.ding principle is a tautology. (\Vherever possible, of course, make 
use of known theorems of T\ in order to shorten tlie work.) 
(2) On the assumption that "if ... then" means material implication and 
"or" means inclusive disjunction, again write the leading principle of each of 
the kinds of inference, and check in the same way.1&I 
15.10. When Sancho Panza was governor of Barataria, the folloWlIlg case 
came hefore him for decision. A certain manor was divided by a river upon which 
was a bridge. The lord of the manor had erected a gallows at one end of the 
bridge and had enacted a law that whoever would cross the bridge mllst first 
swear whither he were going and on what business; if he swore truly he should 
be allowed to pass freely; but if he swore falsely and did then cross the bridge 
he should be hanged forthwith upon the gallows. One man, coming up to the 
other end of the bridge from the gallows, when his oath was required swore, 
"I go to be hanged on yonder gallows," and thereupon crossed the bridge. The 
vexed question whether the man shall be hanRed is brought to Sancho Panza, 
who is hOlding court in the immediate vicinity, and who is of course obligated 
to uphold the law as validly enacted by the lord of the manor.19O 
lOoThe traditional assumption that the sentences mllst have the subject-predicate 
form is omitted as irrelevant. 
ulFor the hypothetical and disjunctive syllogi~ms, the question of reproduction in 
the notation of the propositional calculus is discu~sed by S. K. Langer in an appendix 
to her Introduction to Symbolic Logic (1937). 
1"The story is here only very slightly modified from the uriginal as given by Miguel 
de Cervantes (1615). 

106 
THE PROPOSITIONAL CALCULUS 
[CHAP. I 
Let p. Q, R. S be constants expressing the propcsitions, respectively, that he 
[the man in the story] crosses the bridge, that he is hanged on the gallows, 
that the oath to which he swears is true, and that the law is obeyed. Use a formu-
lation of the propositional calculus containing these four propositional constants, 
as well as propositional variables. Then the given data are expressed in the three 
wffs: R == PQ. p. 5 ::::> • Q == P -R. (Notice in particular that to replace the 
third wif by 5 ::::> • P -R ::::> Q would not sufficiently represent the data, since 
we must suppose that it is as much a violation of the law to hang an innocent 
man as it is to let a guilty one go free.) 
Verify the tautology, 
r == pq ::::> • p ::::> • s ::::> [q == P -r] ,::::> -S, 
and hence by substitution and modus ponens demonstrate that the law cannot 
be obeyed in this instance. 
16. Duality. The process of dualization is most conveniently applied, 
not to wffs of P1 but to expressions which are abbreviations of wifs of Pi 
in accordance with Dl-ll (but without any omissions of brackets). The dual 
of such an expression is obtained by interchanging simultaneously, wherever 
they occur, the letters t and j, and each of the following pairs of connectives: 
=> and ¢' disjunction and conjunction, == and $. c and ::p, v and I. The 
symbol (connective), -, is left unchanged by dualization, and is therefore 
called sell-dual. The letters t and I are called duals of each other; likewise 
the connectives conjunction and disjunction; likewise => and ¢; etc. 
Thus, e.g., the dual of the expression 
[rep V t] => [qr]J = [r V -p]] 
is the expression 
[[cpn ¢ [q V rJJ $ ir .... P]J· 
A dual of a wff of PI is obtained by writing any expression of the foregoing 
kind which abbreviates the wH, dualizing this expression, and then finally 
writing the wff which the resulting expression abbreviates. It is not excluded 
that the wff itself may be used in the role of the expression which abbre-
viates it, and when this is done the principal dual ofthewff is obtained. For 
example, the wff 
[[P => qJ => tJ 
has as its principal dual the wff 
[[P ¢ q] ct: tJ, 
i.e., the wff 
[[[/ => f] => [[q => Pl => fj] ::::> f]; 
but because the same wff, 

§16] 
DUALITY 
[[p :::J q J :::J tJ, 
may also be abbreviated as [q ¢ P], it has also the wff 
[q:::JPJ 
as a dual. 
107 
Except in the case of a wff consisting of a variable alone, the principal dual 
of the principal dual of a wff is not the same as the wff itself. However, of 
course the wff itself is always included among the various duals of anyone of 
its duals. And any dual of a dual of a wff is equivalent to the wff in the 
sense of *160 below. 
In order to minimize the variety of different duals of a given wff, Dl-11 
have been arranged as far as possible in pairs dual to each other. But this 
could not be done in the case of Dl-3, and it is from these three that the 
possibility arises of different duals of the same wH. By examining Dl-3, 
it may be seen that any two duals of the same wff can be transformed one 
into the other by a series of steps of the four following kinds: replacing a wf 
part t :::J N by N, replacing a wi part N by t :::J N, replacing a wf part _A N 
by N, and replacing a wf part N by --N. By tI53, ~l54, tI55, *158, tI57 
(together with substitution and modus ponens) it therefore follows that any 
two duals of the same wif are equivalent in the following sense: 
*160. If Band C are duals of A, f- B = C. 
In the truth-tables in §15 it will be seen that the truth-table for :::J is 
transformed into that for ¢ if t and f are interchanged throughout (in all 
three columns of the table). In fact, if t and f are interchanged, the truth-
tables for :::J and ¢ are interchanged; likewise those for disjunction and con-
junction; likewise those for = and :$; likewise those for c and ::p; likewise 
those for V and I; and the truth-table for - is transformed into itself. From 
this it follows that the dual of a tautology is a contradiction. Hence, in view 
of the truth-table for negation, there follows the metatheorem: 
*161. If f- A, if Al is a dual of A, then f- -AI' (Principle ot duality.) 
Two corollaries of *161, special pr£nciples of duality, are obtained by 
means of the tautologies: 
t162. -[p ¢ q] :::J • q:::J P 
tl63. -[P:$ q] :::J • P = q 
These corollaries of *161 are: 
I' 

108 
THE PROPOSITIONAL CALCULUS 
[CHAP. I 
$164. If r A :::J B, if Al and BI are duals of A and B respectively. then 
f- B, :::J AI' 
(S pecial principle ot duality for implications.) 
$165. If r A = B. if Al and BI are duals of A and B respectively. then 
r Al == B I . 
(Special principle of duality tor equivalences.) 
17. Consistency. 
The notion of consistency of a logistic system is seman tical in motivation, 
arising from the requirement that nothing which is logically absurd or self-
contradictory in meaning shall be a theorem, or that there shall not be two theo-
rems of which one is the negation of the other. But we seek to modify this orig-
inally seman tical notion in such a way as to make it syntactical in character 
(and therefore applicable to a logistic system independently of the interpretation 
adopted for it). This may be done by defining relative consistencj-' with respect to 
any transformation by which each sentence or propositional form A is trans-
formed into a sentence or propositional form AI, the definition (given below) 
being such that relative consistency reduces to the semantical notion of con-
sistency under an interpretation that makes A' the negation of A. Or we may 
define absolute consistency by the condition that not every sentence or propo-
sitional form shall be a theorem, since in the case of nearly all the systems with 
which we shall deal it is easy to see that, once we had two theorems which were 
negations of each other, every sentence and propositional form whatever could 
be proved (e.g., in the case of P, this follows by tl23, substitution, and modus 
ponens). Or, following Hilbert, we might in the case of a particular system 
select an appropriate particular sentence and define the system as being con-
sistent if that particular sentence is not a theorem (e.g., we might call PI 
consistent on condition that t is not a theorem). Or if the system has prop· 
ositional variables, we may define it as being consistent in the sense of Post l .. 
if a wff consisting of a propositional variable alone is not a theorem. 
Turning now to the purely syntactical statement of the matter, we have 
the following: 
(a) A logistic system is consistent with respect to a given transformation 
by which each sentence or propositional form A is transformed into a sen-
tence or propositional form A', if there is no sentence or propositional form 
A such that I- A and f- N. 
(b) A logistic system is absolutely consistent if not all its sentences and 
propositional forms are theorems. 
(c) A logistic system is consl:stent in the sense 0/ Post (with respect to a 
mE. L. Post in the American Journal 0/ Mathematics, vol. 43 (1921), see p. 177. 
The notion of absolute consistency is, in view of the rule of substitution, closely 
related to that of consistency in the sense of Post; it seems to have been first used ex-
plidtly as a general definition of consistency by Tarski (Monatshe/le fUr A!athemalik 
.md PhYS1k, vol. 37 (1930), see pp. 387-388) A similar remark applies to the notion 
of absolute complett'ness (d. Tarski, ibid., pp. 390-391). 

§lfl) 
COMPLETENESS 
109 
certain category of primitive symbols designated as "propositional van-
abIes"} if a wft consisting of a propositional variable alone is not a theorem. 
··170. 
PI is consistent with respect to the transformation of Ainto A:;::) f. 
Proal. By the definition of a tautology (and the truth-table of :;::)), not 
both A and A ::::J I can be tautologies. In fact, if A is a tautology, then A ::::J t 
is a contradiction. Therefore by **150, not both A and A::::J t can be theorems 
of Pl' 
"171. 
PI is absolutely consistent. 
Proof. The wff f is not a tautology, and therefore by **150 it is not a 
theorem of Pl' 
"172. 
PI is consistent in the special sense that t is not a theorem. 
Prool. The same as for **171. 
··173. 
PI is consistent in the sense of Post. 
Proo/. A wff consisting of a propositional variable alone is not a tautology, 
because its value is t for the value f of the variable. Therefore by **150, 
it is not a theorem of Pl' 
18. Completeness. 
As in the case of consistency, the notion of completeness of a logistic system 
has a semantical motivation, consisting roughly in the intention that the system 
shall have all possible theorems not in conflict with the interpretation. As a 
first attempt to fix the notion more precisely, we might demand of every 
sentence that either it or its negation shall be a theorem; but since we allow the 
assertion of propositional forms (see the concluding paragraphs of §06), this may 
prove insufficient. Therefore, following Post. U3 we are led to define a logistic 
system as being complete if, for every sentence or propositional form B, either 
~ B or the system would become inconsistent upon adding B to it as an axiom 
(without other change). This leads to several purely syntactical definitions of 
completeness. corresponding to the different syntactical definitions of con-
sistency of a system as given in the preceding section. 
Another approach starts from the idea that a system is complete if there is a 
sound interpretation under which every sentence that denotes truth is a theorem 
and every propositional form that has always the value truth is a theorem-
then seeks to replace the notion of an interpretation by some suitable syntactical 
notion. This approach, however, requires certain restrictions on the character 
of the interpretation allowed, and thus leads to the introduction of models in 
the sense of Kemeny. It will be discussed briefly in Chapter X. 

llO 
THE PROPOSITIONAL CALCULUS 
[CHAP. I 
As syntactical definitions of completeness we have, for the present, the 
follovv'ing: 
(a) A logistic system is complete with respect to a given transformation by 
which each sentence or propositional form A is transformed into a sentence 
or propositional form A', if, for every sentence or propositional form B, 
either ~ B or the system, upon addition of B to it as an axiom, becomes 
inconsisten t with respect to the given transformation. 
(b) A logistic system is absolutely complete if, for every sentence or prop-
ositional form B, either ~ B or the system, upon addition of B to it as an 
axiom, becomes absolutely inconsistent. 
(c) A logistic system is complete in the sense 01 Post if, for every sentence or 
propositional form B, either I- B or the system, upon addition of B to it as 
an axiom, becomes inconsistent in the sense of Post. 
Let B be a wff of PI which is not a theorem. Then by *152, B is not a 
tautology. I.e., there is a system of values of the variables of B for which the 
value of B is f. 
If B is added to PI as an axiom, it becomes possible by *121 to infer the 
result of any simultaneous substitution for the variables of B. In particular, 
we may take one of those systems of values of the variables of B for which 
the value of B is f, and substitute for each variable a( either t or 1 according 
as the value at of that variable is t or f. Let E be the wff which is inferred in 
this way. 
Since E contains no variables, the definition at the beginning of §15 
J
assigns one value to E, and because of the way in which E was obtained from 
'.1, 
B it follows that this value is f (the explicit proof of this by mathematical 
induction is left to the reader). Therefore by the truth-table of ::::>, E::::> 1 is 
a tautology. Thus by *152, we have that E :::::> f is a theorem ofPl , therefore 
i 
also a theorem of the system which is obtained by adding B to PI as an 
axiom. 
In the system obtained by adding B to PI as an axiom we now have that 
both E and E ~ I are theorems. Therefore by modus ponens we have that f 
is a theorem. Therefore by tI22 and modus ponens, p is a theorem. Thence 
by substitution we may obtain any wff whatever as a theorem, including, of 
course, with every wff A, also the wff A:::::> I. 
Thus we have proved the completeness of Pl in each of the three senses: 
u180. 
PI is complete with respect to the transformation of AintoA:::::> /. 
H181. 
PI is absolutely complete. 
u182. 
PI is complete in the sense of Post. 

SI8] 
EXERCISES I8 
III 
EXERCISES 18 
Discuss the consistency and completeness 0/ each ,)/ the /olto'iI.'ing logistic 
systems, in each of the senses oj "170-**173, **180-**182: 
18.0. The system obtained from PI uy deleting the axiom t 104. (Show 
that a wit A containing occurrences of / is a theorem if and only if sl AI 
is a theorem, where a is a variable not occurring in A.) 
18.1. The primitive symbols and the formation rules are the same as 
those of Pl' There is one aXIOm, namely p. There is one rule of inference, 
namely *101 with the restriction added that B must not be /. 
18.:l.· The primitive symbols and the formation rules are the same as 
those of Pl' There is one axiom, P ::::> q, and one rule of inference, *101. 
18.3. The system p1 obtained from the system P w of 12.7 by deleting' 
from among the primitive symbols, and making only such furthei' changes 
as this deletion compels, namely, omitting the formation rule 10i and the 
fourth axiom, tI22. (Make use of the results of 12.7 and 12.8; prove an ana-
logue of *151 in which a variable r is selected, different from av a 2, ... , an, 
and A, is defined to be a, or a i ::::> r according as a, is t or 1. and B' is defined 
to be B ::::> r => r or B ::::> r according as the valu~ of B for the values aI' aa' 
.. " an of al , 9 a, ... , an is t or f; and hence prove that "'152 holds for P~. 
In place of **170 and **180, show that P~ is consistent and complete with 
respect to the transformation of A into A::::> a, where ais the first variable 
in alphabetic order not occurring in A.) 
18'4' The system pi having the same primitive symbols and wffs as P~. 
the same rules of inference, and the single following axiom: 
p=>q=>r::::>.r::::>p::::>.s::::>p 
(After verifying that this axiom is a tautology, we may prove the axioms 
of p1 as theorems of Pi. and then use the results of 18.3. For this purpose, 
first establish the derived rules, that if ~ A ::::> B ;:) C, then ~ C => A ::::> • 
a => A, ~ a :::> A :::> C::::> • b => C, ~ B::::> C: then following Lukasiewicz, prove 
r ::::> g ::::> • r ::::> q ::::> p ::::> • 5 ::::> P, 
PI ;:) r::::> [s ::::> P J ::::> • r ::::> q ::::> p ::::> • s ;:) p, 
r::::> q ::::> [s => PJ => • 'I' ::::> p ::::> • S ::::> p, 
r => P ::::> [s => P J ::::> fp ::::> q:::> r ::::> PIJ ::::> • ql :::> • P ::::> q ::::> r ::::> PI' 
r::::> P => P => [5::::> P] ;:) • P ::::> q ;:) r::::> • s::::> P, 
p;:)r::::>q=>q=>.q=>r::::>.p::::>~ 
p ::::> q ::::> • P ::::> r ::::> q :::> g, 
and the transitive law of implication, in order, as theorems of Pi.) 

112 
THE PROPOSITIONAL CALCULUS 
~CHAP. I 
18.5. By means of semantical rules similar in character to a~g of § 10, supply 
sound interpretations of the systems of 18.0-18.3, and discuss for each system 
the possible variety of sound interpretations of this sort. 
19. Independence. I94 An axiom A of a logistic system is called independ-
ent if, in the logistic system obtained by omitting A from among the axioms, 
A is not a theorem. A primitive rule of inference R of a logistic system is 
called independent if, in the logistic system obtained by omitting R from 
among the primitive rules, R i!i not a derived rule. Or equivalently, we may 
define an axiom or rule of inference to be independent if there is some theo-
rem which cannot be proved without that axiom or rule.Is• 
It should not be regarded as obligatory that the axioms and rules of 
inference of a logistic system be independent. On the contrary there are 
cases in which important purposes are served by allo\\ing non-independence. 
And if the requirement of independence is imposed, this is as a matter of 
elegance and only a part of the more general (and somewhat vague) require-
ment of economy of assumption.196 
In this book we shall often ignore questions of independence of the axioms 
and rules of a logistic system. But for the sake of illustration we treat the 
matter at length in the case of Pl' 
In the propositional calculus a standard device for establishing the in-
dependence of axioms and rules is to generalize the method of §15 as follows. 
Instead of two truth-values, a system of two or more truth-values, 
0, 1, ... ,1', 
is introduced,197 the first fJ. of these, 
0,1, ... , p, 
lUThe reader who wishes to get on rapidly to logistic systems of more substantia! 
character than propositional calculus may omit §19 and all of Chapter II except 
§§20-23, 27. Especially §§26, 28 and the accompanying exercises may well be post-
poned for study in connection with later cbapters. 
l"ln the case of rules of inference, the equivalence of the two definitions of independ-
ence depends on considerations like those adduced in footnote laS-to show that the 
conditions of effectiveness which we demand of a primitive rule of inference are sufficient 
to ensure that. when the same rule is demonstrated as a metatheorem of some other 
system. the required conditions of effectiveness for derived rules of inference (§12) 
will therefore be satisfied. In what follows, we shall make us€' only of the second defini-
tion of independence of a rule of inference, viz., that the rule is independent if there is 
at least one theorem which cannot be proved without it. 
The possibility should be noticed that a rule of inference not previously independent 
may become so when additional axioms are adjoined to a logistic system. 
It4The requirement of economy of assumption is usually understood to concern also 
the length and complication (or perhaps the strength, in some sense) of individual rules 
and axioms-in addition to merely the number of them. 
u'!t is convenient in practice to use numerals in this way to denote the truth-values, 
though analogy with the notation used in the case of two truth·values would suggest 

§19] 
INDEPENDENCE 
II:{ 
(where ] ~ tt < v) being called designated truth-values. 198 To each of the 
primitive constants (if any) is assigned one of these truth-values as value. 
and to each primitive connective is assigned a truth-table in these truth-
values. Analogously to the first paragraph of §15 is defined the valne of a 
wff for given values of its variables, the possible values of the variables 
being the truth-values 0,1, ... , v, and a wff is called a lautologv if, for every 
system of values of its variables, it has one of the Jesigllated truth-values as 
its value. If then every rule of inference has the property of preserving 
tautologies (i.e., that the conclusion must be a tautology when the premisses 
are tautologies) and every axiom but one is a tautology, it follows that the 
one axiom which is not a tautology is independen t. Or if every axiom is a tau-
tology and every rule of inference except one has the property of preserving 
tautolog-ies, and if further there is a theorem of the logistic system that is not 
a tautology, it follows that the exceptional rule of inference is independent. 
In the case of Pl' it happens that we may establish thf' indt>pendence of 
each of the axioms and rules of inference, with the exception of the rule of 
SUbstitution, by means of a system of three truth-values, 0, 1, 2, of which 
o is the only designated truth-value, and 2 is assigned to the primitive 
constant f as a value. The required truth-tables of :::J are as follows (the 
number at the head of each column indicating the aXlOilI or rule whose 
independence is established by the table in that column) . 
II *100 t102 
t103 
t104 
--"!_I_q- p ~ 
q p:::Jq p-:Jq P :::J q 
0 
0 
II 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
0 
2 
J 
1 
I, 
0 
! 2 
Ii 
2 
2 
!2 
2 
1 
0 
0 
2 
0 
0 
1 
1 
0 
2 
0 
0 
1 
2 
II 
2 
0 
2 
2 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
2 
1 
II 
1 
0 
0 
0 
2 
2 
0 
0 
0 
0 
rather t" t" ... , tp for the designated truth-values and f,. f... ,,[v-I' for the non· 
designated truth-values. 
Also in the work of verifying tautologl(:s in the manner of §J,3. Ute n\.lmerals (I and I 
are often used instead of the letters t and f. 
mAn infinite number of truth-values may also be used, with either a finite or an 
infimte number of designated tru th-values. and likewise of non-designated tru th-values. 
In this case the direct process of verifying tautologies (in a manner analogous to that of 
§15) is no longer effective, but the notion of a tautology may neverthe[essstill be useful. 

114 
THE PROPOSITIONAL CALCULUS 
[CHAP. I 
For the proof of independence of *100, it is necessary to supply also an 
example of a theorem of PI which is not a tautology according to the truth-
table used. One such example is f :::::> p; another is p :::::> [q:::::> fJ :::::> f :::::> q. 
The rule of substitution *101 is necessarily tautology-preserving for any 
system of truth-values and truth-tables, and hence its independence cannot 
be established by this method. However, the independence of *101 follows 
from the fact that without it no wff longer than the longest of the axioms 
could be proved. And in fact a like proof of the independence of the rule of 
substitution will continue to hold after the adjunction of any finite number 
of additional axioms (since examples are easily found of wffs of arbitrarily 
great length which are theorems of PI)' 
The foregoing method of finding independence examples by means of a 
generalized system of truth-values suggests also a generalization of the prop-
ositional calculus itself. Namely, we may fix upon a generalized system of 
truth-values as above, then ill troduce a number of connectives with assigned 
truth-tables, and possibly also a number of constants to each of which a 
particular truth-value is assigned as value. The wffs of a logistic system may 
be constructed by using variables and these connectives and constants, and 
we may supply a list of axioms which are tautologies (in the generalized 
system of truth-values) and rules of inference ""hich preserve tautologies, 
Especially if this is done in such a way that every tautology is a theorem, 
the resulting logistic system is called a many-valued propositional calculus 
in the sense of ·Lukasiewicz. 
The same considerations lead also to a generalization of the requiremen ts 
imposed in §07 on an interpretation of a logistiC system, these requirements 
being modified as follows when a generalized system of truth-values is used. 
The semantical rules must be such that the axioms either denote truth-values 
or have always truth-values as values and the rules of inference preserve this 
property. Only those wffs are capable of being asserted which denote truth-
values or have always truth-values as values; and only those are capable of being 
rightly asserted which denote a designated truth-value or have only designated 
truth-values as values. An interpretation of a logistic system is called sound if, 
under it, all the axioms either denote designated truth-yalues or have only 
deSIgnated truth-values as values, and the rules of inference preserve this prop-
erty (in the sense that, if all the premisses of an immediate inference either 
denote deSignated truth-values or have only designated truth-values as values, 
then the same holds of the conclusion). 

§19} 
EXERCISES I9 
115 
EXERCISES 19 
19.0. Carry out in full detail the proof of independence of the axioms and 
mles of Pl which is outlined in the text. (In showing thQt particular wffs are 
or afe not ta.utologies in the gcneralizeu system of truth-values, USe an ar-
rangement analogous to that described in §15.) 
19.1. Consider the possibility of demonstrating the independence of the 
axioms and rules of PI by means of a system of only two truth-values. I.e., 
\ for each axiom and fule, either supply the required demollstrati0Jl or show 
it to be impossible. 
19.Z. Similarly consider the possibility of demonstrating the independence 
of the axioms and rules of PI by meallS of d system of three truth-values of 
which two are designated. 
H}.3. The truth-table given in the text for the independence of *100 
shows that there are theorems contaiuing the symhol f which cannot be 
proved without use of *100, but is insufficient to show that there are any 
such theorems not containing f. Prove this statement. Devise another truth-
table for the independence of *100, not having this defect. 
19.4. Consider a logistic system whose wffs :1re the same a,.: those of I'r, 
whose rules of inference are modus ponens and substitution, ,vhich has a 
finite number of axioms, and for which the metatheorem *152 holds. Prove 
that the rules of modus ponens and substitution arc necessarily hoth inde-
pendent. (In the casc of modus pOllens, this C:111 be done by exhibiting an 
infinite list of tautologies lin the sense of §l:i) no two of which are variants 
of each other, and proving that no one of them is obtalJlablc by su bstitu bon 
from any tautology other than a variant of itself.) 
19.5. Prove the independence of the axioms and rules of P w (see exercise 
12.7). Except in the case of the rule oi subsbtution, use the method of truth-
tables. 
19.6. Let P+ be the system obtained from I\ by deleting I from among the 
primitive symbols, and making only such further changes as this deletion 
compels, namely, omitting the formation rule lOi and the axiom t 104. 
Prove that thr system P+ is not complete. Determine which of the axioms of 
P~ (exercise 18.3) are theorems of p~ and which not. 
19.7. Discuss the independence of the rule' of modus po-nens in the system 
P+. Does this independence follow trivially from any rC!:iult already estab-
lished (in text or exercises)? If not, how can it be shown? 
19.8. Using modus pOllens and substitution as rules of inference, find 
axioms for the following many-valued propusitional c'lkulus (due to 
I 
'I 
/ 

116 
THE PROPOSITIONAL CALCULUS 
[CHAP. I 
Lukasiewicz -
ct. footnote 276). There are three truth-values, 0, I, 2, of 
which 0 is designated. There are two primitive constants 11 and 1'1.' to which 
1 and 2 are assigned as values respectively. And there is one primitive con-
nective, ::>, which is binary and to which the following truth-table is assigned: 
p 
q 
p::>q 
0 
0 
;i 
0 
0 
I 
Ii 
1 
Ii 
0 
2 
11 
2 
1 
0 
0 
1 
I 
0 
1 
2 
d 
I 
2 
0 
II 
0 
Ii 
2 
I 
ii 
0 
2 
2 
Ii 
0 
Prove a modified deduction theorem for this system, that if AI' A2, • ", An r B, 
then AI' A2 •.. " An- 1 r An =:) _ A" =:) B; and hence prove analogues of 
** 150 and * 152. 
19-9- Consider an interpretation of PI by means of four truth-values, 0, 1, 2, 
3, of which 0 is the only designated truth-value, and 3 is assigned to the constant 
f as \·alue. For each of the following different truth-tables of =>. discuss the sound-
ness of the interpretation: 
I 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
P 
q __ 
I! t:::>q 
p-:::>q 
p => q 
p ::.> q 
p => q 
p => q 
0 
0 
Ii 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
II 
0 
2 
3 
0 
0 
0 
2 
I 
0 
2 
3 
0 
0 
0 
0 
3 
0 
3 
1 
1 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
; 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
2 
2 
II 
0 
2 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
3 
0 
2 
0 
0 
0 
0 
2 
0 
,I 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
2 
II 
0 
1 
0 
1 
2 
2 
2 
2 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
2 
3 
0 
1 
0 
3 
0 
0 
3 
0 
I 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Ii 
3 
1 
II 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
3 
2 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
3 
3 
Ii 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

§19] 
EXERCISES I9 
117 
19.10. It mayhappen thata sound interpretation of Pi by means of a system 
'. of truth-values and truth-tables is reducible to the principal interpretation (§ I 0) 
by replacing the deSignated truth-values everywhere by t and the non-designated 
. truth-values everywhere by f. Following Carnap, let us call such a sound inter-
pretation of P1 a normal interpretation, and other interpretations of P" non-
'fIOf'mal interpretations.1U Then a normal interpretation of Pi may be thought of 
/ as differing from the principal interpretation only in that, after division of 
, propositions into true and false in ordinary fashion, some further subdivision is 
, made of one or both categories, But a sound non-normal interpretation differs 
from the principal interpretation in some more drastic way. 
Of the sound interpretations of PI found in 19.9, determine which are normal 
interpretations and which are non-normal interpretations. Also determllle which 
can be rendered normal without loss of soundness, by changing only the way in 
, which the truth-values are divided into designated and non designated truth-
values, 
19.11. Consideranmterpretation of P, by means of six truth-values, 0, J. 2, 
3, 4, 5, of which 0 and 1 are the designated truth-values, and 5 is assigned to 
the constant I as value, the truth-table of :::::l being as follows: 
p 
P:::::l q 
P 
q 
II p:::::lq 
p 
q 
Ii p :::::l q 
_ .. _----
0 
0 
2 
0 
0 
4 
0 
Ii 
0 
0 
2 
1 
I 
4 
1 
'I 
0 
I! 
0 
0 
2 
2 
0 
4 
2 
0 
0 
4 
2 
3 
4 
4 
3 
II 
0 
0 
4 
2 
4 
4 
4 
4 
Ii 
0 
0 
4-
2 
5 
3 
4 
[) 
U 
0 
3 
0 
0 
5 
0 
Ii 
0 
0 
3 
5 
I 
0 
I 
2 
3 
2 
0 
5 
2 
() 
3 
3 
3 
0 
5 
3 
I: 
0 
1 
4 
i' 
4 
3 
4 
0 
5 
4 
I 
0 
" 
5 
d 
4 
3 
5 
2 
5 
5 
j, 
0 
(I) Show that the interpretation is sound. (Suggestion: Ld A :::::l B and A be 
tautologies (in the six truth-values). It follows immediately from the fourth, 
fifth, sixth, tenth, eleventh, and twelfth entries in the table that B cannot have 
the value 3, 4, or 5 for any system of values of its variables. Hence it follows that 
B cannot have the value 2 for a system of values of its variables, because if it did, 
l~~This is not Carnap's terminology but an adaptation of it to the present context. the 
word "interpretation" being used by Carnap in a somewhat different sense from ours, 
The possibility of sound interpretations of the propositional calculus (in ally one of its 
formulations) which are not normal was pointed out, in effect, by B, A, Bernstclll in 
the Bulletin oi the American Mathematical SOCIety, voL 38 (1932) pp, 390,592; also 
independently by Carnap in his book, Fot'maluation 0/ Logic (1943), Sec further a re-
view of the latter by the present writer in The Ph.tosophi(al ReVieW, vol. 53 (1944), 
pp, 493-498. 
, .. 

I I I 
J 
118 
THE PROPOSITIONAL CALCULUS 
[CHAP. I 
the value 3 would be obtained for B upon interchanging the values 2 and 3 in 
this system of values of its variables. Hence B is a tautology.) 
(2) Use this interpretation as a counterexample to show that the following 
statement is false: ., In a sound interpretation of P, the truth-table of == is 
symmetric in the sense that. if p == q has a designated value for given values of 
p and q, it also has a designated value upon interchanging the values of p and q." 
(3) Discuss the question in what way or ways it is possible to weaken this 
statement so as to obtain a true metatheorem of interest. 
I9.IZ. Using an interpretation of Pi by means of the three truth-values 0, I, 
2, of which 0 and I are designated truth-values, and 2 is assigned to the constant 
I as value, show that the following statement is false: "In a sound interpretation 
of P" and for given values of p, q. and r, if P == q and q == r have designated 
truth-values, then p == " must have a designated truth-value." (Suggestion: The 
most obvious method is to use for::) the truth-table of § 15, with 0 and 2 in the 
roles of t and f respectively. and to give to p ::) q the value 1 whenever either 
p or q has the value 1. A different method is suggested by a remark of Church 
and Rescher in their review of a paper by Z. P. Dienes, in The Journal of Sym-
bolic Logic, vol. 15 (1950), pp. 69-70,) 

II. The Propositional Calculus (Continued) 
20. The primitive basis of P2' Another formulation of the propositional 
calculus is the logistic system P 2' which differs from PI primarily in the lack 
of (propositional) constants. 
The primitive symbols of P 2 are the four improper symbols 
:::> 
and the infinite list of (propositional) variables 
p q r 
s PI 
ql 
r 1 
Sl 
P2 
(the order here indicated being called the alphabetic order of the variables). 
The formation rules of P 2 are: 
20i. 
A variable standing alone is a wff. 
20ii. 
If r is wi, then -r is wf. 
20iii. If rand fl. are wf, then [r:::> fl.] is wi. 
A formula of P 2 is wf if and only if its being so follows from the three 
formation rules. As in the case of PI' an effective test of well-formedness 
follows. In §22 we shall prove also that every wff of P 2, other than a variable 
standing alone, is of one and only one of the forms -A and [A :::> BJ (where 
A and Bare wf) and in each case is of that form in only one way. In a wff 
[A :::> BJ, the wf parts A and B are the antecedent and consequent respectively 
and the occurrence of :::> between them is the principal implication sign. 
The rules of inference of P 2 are the same as those of PI: 
·200. From [A:::> B] and A to infer B. 
·201. 
From A to infer S~Ai. 
The axioms of P 2 are the three following: 
t202. P:::>· q :::> P 
t203. s:::> [P :::> q] ::::> • S ::::> p ::::> • S :::> q 
t 204. -p:::> -q :::> • q :::> p 
(Rule 0/ modus ponens.) 
(Rule 0/ substitution.) 
The axioms are in order the law 0/ al/irmation 0/ the consequent, the sel/-
distributive law 0/ implication, and the converse law 0/ contraposilion. In 

120 
THE PROPOSITIONAL CALCULUS 
[CHAP. II 
stating them we have used the same conventions about omission of brackets 
and use of heavy dots that were explained in §ll. and we shall use these 
hereafter without remark in connection with any formulation of the prop-
ositional calculus. For P2 we shall use also the definition schemata D3-11 
of §ll, however understanding the" -" which appears in them to be the 
primitive symbol - of P 2. 
The principal interpretation of p. is given by the following semantical rules; 
a. 
The variables are variables having the range t and f. 
b. 
A wff consisting of a variable a standing alone has the value t for the 
value t of a, and the value f for the value f of a. 
c. 
For a given assignment of values to the variables of A, the value of -A 
is f if the value of A is t; and the value of -A is t if the value of A is f. 
d. 
For a given assignment of values to the variables of A and B, the value 
of [A ::::l BJ is t if either the value of B is t or the value of A is f; and the value 
of [A ::::l BJ is f if the value of B is f and at the same time the value of A is t. 
21. The deduction theorem for P 2' As in the case of Pl' we have 
at once the rule of simultaneous substitution as a derived rule: 
·2lO. If ~ A and if bv b2, .•. , b n are distinct variables, then I- S~I~:::~:AI. 
We have also, as theorem of P2: 
t211. 
p:::J P 
(Reflexive law of implication.) 
Proof. By simultaneous substitution in t203: 
~ p:::> [q:::J PJ :::J • P :::J q:::J • P :::::> P 
Hence by t202 and modus ponens: 
~p-=>q-=>.p-=>p 
Hence by substituting q -=> P for q. and using t202 and modus ponens again: 
~P-=>P 
Now the proof of the deduction theorem in §13 required only p -=> p, the 
law of affirmation of the consequent. and the self-distributive law of im-
plication (together with the rules of modus ponens and simultaneous sub-
stitution). Hence by the same proof we obtain the deduction theorem, and 
its corollary, as metatheorems of P 2: 
$212. If AI' A2, ••. , An ~ B, then AI' A2, ...• An _1 I- An:::> B. 
$213. If A ~ B. then 
~ A :::> B. 

§22] 
FURTHER THEOREMS AND AfETATHEOREMS 
121 
Also analogues of .. I :~:J an d .. 1::14 are proved as before: 
*214. 
If every wft which occurs at least once in the list AI' A2 •• , •• An 
also occurs at least once in the list C1• Cz, ... , Cp and if AI. A 2 ••• '. 
A" ~ B. then C1 • C 2 •• , ., Cr ~ B. 
*215. 
If ~ B then ClI C 2, •. " Cr ~ B. 
22. Some further theorems and metatheorems of P2' Hereafter 
we shall adopt a more condensed arrangement in exhibiting proofs of P2 1 
and later of other logistic systems. In particular we shall often omit explicit 
references to uses of substitution, modus ponens, or deduction theorem. 
t220. -p => • p => q 
(Law of denial oi the antecedent.) 
t221. 
t222. 
t223. 
Proof. By t202, -p !- -q :::J -po 
Hence by t204, -p !- P ::::::> q. 
Then use the deduction theorem. 
__ p::::l P 
Proof. By t220, --p ~ ~ P ::::l ---po 
Hence by t204, _ ... p ~ --p :::> p 
(Law of daub! e negation.) 
Use modus ponens, then the deduction theorem. 
p ::::::>--p 
(Converse law of double negatwn.) 
Proof. By t221. f- _-_p :::.> -po Hence usc t204. 
P ::::l q::::::> .-q:::.>-P 
(Lmi) of crmtrapositl'on,) 
Proof. By t22J , P => q, --p ~ q. 
Hence by t222, P => q. "",-p ~ --q. 
Hence p => q I- --p :::> --g. 
Use t204. Then use the deduction theorem. 
t224. p:::> [r cj: r] :::.> -p 
Proof. By t221, P => [r ¢ r]. --p ~ r ¢ r. 
Hence p::::::> ~r ¢ rJ ~ --p ::::l • r ¢ r. 
Hence by t204, P :::> [r cj: rJ I- r :::> r:::J -po 
Hence by tZll, p => [r cj: rJ \- -p. 
Then use the deduction theorem. 
For the effective test of well-formedness referred to in §20, and also for 
a number of other metatheorems which now follow, we make use of the 
1 ! ' 
I: 
j j 
Il 
I' 
i 
~ : 
I; 
H 
p 
" 
'I 
j I 

122 
THE PROPOSITIONAL CALCULUS 
[CHAP. II 
same process of counting brackets which is described in §IO. Namely, we 
start at the beginning (or left) of a formula and proceed from left to right, 
coun ting each occurrence of [ as + 1 and each occurrence of J as -I, and 
adding as we go. The number which we assign. by this counting process, to 
an occurrence of a bracket will be called the number ot that occurrence of a 
bracket in the formula. 
It follows from the definition of a wff that, if a wff contains brackets, it 
must end with an occurrence of ] as its final symbol; this we shall call the 
final bracket of the wft. By mathematical induction with respect to the total 
number of occurrences of ::J and -, the following lemma is readily established: 
The number of an ocwrrence ot a bracket in a wit is positive, except in the case 
ot the jinal bracket, which has the number O. and the number of an occurrence 
ot ( in a wf/ is greater than 1, except in the case of the first occurrence of [. 
**225. 
Every wft, other than a variable standing alone, is of one and only 
one of theforms -A and r A :::J BJ, and in each case it is of that form 
in one and only one way. 
Proof. The first half of the theorem is obvious, by the definition of a wff. 
Again it is obvious that, if a wff has the form -A, it has that form in only 
one way (i.e., A is uniquely determined), for we may obtain A by just 
deleting - from the beginning of the wft. 
I t remains to show that, if a wff has the form [A :::J BJ. it has that form in 
only one way. Suppose then that [A:::J B) and [C :::J D] are the same wft. 
If A contains no brackets; then-because it is evident, from the definition 
of a wff, that the first occurrence of:::J in a wff must be preceded by an occur-
rence somewhere of ~ -it follows that the first occurrence of ::> in [A :::J B] 
is immediately after A, and hence·-for the same reason-that C is iden-
tical with A. By the same argument, if C contains no brackets, C and A 
are identical. If A and C both contain brackets, then the final bracket of A 
is the first occurrence of a bracket with the number 0 in A, and therefore is 
the second occurrence of a bracket with the number 1 in [A :::> B}; and the 
final bracket of C is the first occurrence of a bracket with the number 0 in C. 
therefore the second occurrence of a bracket with the number 1 in [C:::J D]; 
this makes the final bracket of A and the final bracket of C coincide, and 
so makes A and C identical. Thus we have in every case that A and Care 
identical, and it then follows obviously that Band D are identical. 
**226. 
A wf part200 of -A either coincides with -A or is a wf part of A. 
Proof, The case to be excluded is that of a wf part M of -A, obtained by 

§22} 
FURTHER THEOREMS AND l'vIETATHEORElvlS 
123 
deleting one or more symbols at the end (or right) of -A and none at the 
beginning (or left). If M contains brackets, the impossibility of this follows 
because the number of the final bracket of M would be 0 in A although it 
is not the final bracket of A. If M contains no brackets, the impossibility 
follows quickly by mathematical induction with respect to the number 
of consecutive occurrences of - at the beginning of A. 
**227. 
Awfpartof [A => B] either coincides with CA => BJ or is a wf part 
of A or is a wf part of B.201 
Prool. The case to be excluded is that of a wf part of 
~ A :::> BJ which, 
'without coinciding with [A => B], includes the principal implication sign 
of [A => Bj or the final bracket of [A => BJ or the OCCllrrence of [ at the 
beginning of [A :::> B]. 
Suppose that M is such a wf part of ~A => BJ. Then M contains brackets. 
Either the final bracket of M precedes the final bracket of [A => BJ. and 
therefore has the number 0 in M but a positive number in ~A => B:; or else 
the first occurrence of Lin Mis latcr than the occurrence of [at the beginning 
of [A:::> B], and therefore has the number 1 in M but a greater number in 
[A:::> B]. It follows in either case that every occurrence of a bracket in M 
has a number in M less than its number in r A => BJ. Helice the final bracket 
of M must indeed precede the final bracket of fA:::> B}, and the first 
occurrence of [ in M must also be later than the occurrence of 
at the 
beginning of [A => B]. 
Since we now have, as the only remaining possibility, that M includes 
the principle implication sign of [A => B J, it must include somewhere at 
least one bracket which precedes this principal implication sign and is 
therefore in A. Thus A contains brackets. The final bracket of A has the 
number 0 in A, therefore the number I in [A => B], therefore it number less 
than 1 in M; but this is impossible because it is not the final bracket of M. 
**228. If A, M, N are wf and r results from A by substitution of N for 
M at zero or more places (not necessarily at all occurrences of M 
in A), then r is wf. 
Prool. For the two special cases, (a) that the substitution of N for M is 
at zero places in A, and (b) that M coincides with Aand the substitution of 
N for M is at this one place in A, the reslllt is immediate. For we have in 
case (a) that r is A, and in case (b) that r is N. 
laqBya "wf part" of a. formula we shall alwa.ys mean a wi consecutive part of it-as 
indeed is the natural and obvious terminology. 
IOlAs to the metatheorems "225-"227, compare 12.1 and footnote liB. 

I 
I 
I 
124 
THE PROPOSITIONAL CALCULUS 
[CHAP. II 
In order to prove **228 generally, we proceed by mathematical induction 
with respect to the total number of occurrences of the symbols => and -
in A. If this total number is 0, we must have either case (a) or case (b), and 
the well-formedness of r is then immediate, as we have just seen. Consider 
then a wff A in which this total number is greater than 0; the only possible 
cases are the two following: 
Case 1: A is of the form -AI' Then by **226 (unless we have the special 
case (b) already considered) r is -rv where r 1 results from Al by substi-
tution of N for M at zero or more places. By hypothesis of induction, r 1 is 
wf. Hence by 20ii it follows that r is wf. 
Case 2: A isof the form (AI => A2J. Then by **227 (unless we have the special 
case (b) already considered) r is [rl => r 2], where r 1 and r 2 result from 
Al and A2 respectively by substitution of N for M at zero or more places. 
By hypothesis of induction. r 1 and r 2 are wf. Hence by 20m it follows that 
r is wf. 
The proof by mathematical induction is then complete. 
*229. If B results from A by substitution of N for M at zero or more 
places (not necessarily at all occurrences of M in A), then 
M => N, N => M f- A => B 
and 
M => N, N => M f- B => A. 
Proof. For the two special cases, (a) that the substitution of N for M is 
at zero places in A, and (b) that M coincides with A, and the substitution of 
N for M is at this one place in A, the result is immediate; namely, in case 
(a) by substitution in t211, and in case (b) because A => Band B => A are 
the same as M => Nand N => M respectively. 
In order to prove *229 generally, we proceed by mathematical induction 
with respect to the total number of occurrences of the symbols => and -
in A. If this total number is 0, we must have one of the special cases (a) and 
(b), and the result of *229 then follows immediately, as we have just seen. 
Consider then a wff A in which this total number is greater than 0; the only 
possible cases are the two following: 
Case I: A is of the form -AI' Then by **226 (unless we have the special 
case (b) already considered) B is of the form -BI' where BI results from Al 
by substitution of N for M at zero or more places. By hypothesis of induction, 
M => N, N => M f- Al => B I • 
M => N, N => M f- ~ => AI' 
j 

§23J 
RELATIONSHIP OF THE HVO FORMULATIONS 
125 
Hence we get the result of *229 by substitution in t223 and modus ponens. 
Case 2: A is of the form AI::;:' A2 • Then by **227 (unless we have the special 
case (b) already considered) B is of the form BI :::> B2, where BI and B2 result 
from Al and A2 respectively, by substitution of N for M at zero or more 
places. By hypothesis of induction, 
By modus ponens. 
M ::;:, N, N::;:, M f- Al :::> B I , 
M :::> N, N:::> M f- Bl :::> AI' 
M ::::> N, N::::> M f- A2 ::::> B2, 
M ::::> N, N::::> M f- B2 ::::> A2• 
B1 ::::> AI' Az ::;:' B2, AI:::> A2, HI f- B2• 
Al ::::> BI , B2 ::::> A2, B1 :::> Bz, Al f- A2• 
Hence we get the result of *229 by use of the deduction theorem. 
Thus the proof of *229 by mathematical induction is complete. 
23. Relationship of P z to PI" Though the constant t is absent from 
the system Pz, we shall nevertheless be able to show the equivalence of the 
systems PI and P 2 in a sense which involves using in P2 the wff r cf: r (i.e., 
- [r:::> rJ) to replace the constant f of Pl' 
Under the principal interpretations of P, and p., the constant t of Pi allU the 
wii t' ¢ r of p. in fact do not have the same meaning. For the former is a constan t 
denoting f, while the latter is a smgu!ary form which has the value f fur every 
value of its variable, r, Nevertheless the two meanings ::>u fficicntly resemble 
each c)ther that r ¢ r can be used in P 8 to serve many of the same purposes as 
might a constant denoting f 
If A is any wif of P2' then by a process of one-by-one replacement of the 
various wf parts -C each in turn by C ::J [r cf: r J we may obtain from A a 
wfi Au of P 2 in which - does not occur otherwise than as a constituent in 
r q: r. We may impose the restriction that, if -C is the special wff r ¢ r, 
the replacement of -C by C ::::> [r cj:: r] shall not be made. Then from a given 
wff A we obtain, by the process described. a unique \\if Ao' which we shall 
call the expansion of A with respect to negation. If then in Ao we replace f cf: r 
everywhere by f, we obtain a unique wff AI of PI which we shall call the 
representative of A in f\. 
We have the following rnetatheorerns (proofs omitted. when oDvirlUS): 
*230. If B results from A by replacement of -C by C ::::> [r cf: r] at one 
place in A, then A f- Band B f- A. 

126 
THE PROPOSITIONAL CALCULUS 
[CHAP. II 
Prool. This follows from *229 amI modus ponens because, by substitution 
in t220 and t224, 
I- -c ::> • C ::> [r ¢ r], 
I- C ::::> [r ¢ r] ::::> .... C. 
*231. If Ao is the expansion of A with respect to negation, A I- Ao and 
Ao I-A. 
*232. If two wffs A and B of Pz have the same representative in Pl' then 
A I- Band B I- A. 
*233. If two wffs A and B of P 2 have the same representative in Pl' then 
I- A ::> B and I- B ::> A. 
*234. 
A wff A of Pz is a theorem of P2 if its representative At in PI is a 
theorem of Pl' 
Proof. Let Ao be the expansion of A with respect to negation. By *231, it 
is sufficient to prove that Ao is a theorem of Pz if At is a theorem of Pl' 
Since Ao is 
we proceed as follows. 
We first observe that, if X is an axiom of PI> then 
S~[T => rlXI 
is a theorem of P 2' In fact, if X is t 102 or t 103, this is immediate by t202 and 
t203; and if X is t104, this follows by t221 and *231. 
If a proof of A, in PI is given in which the variable r does not occur, we 
replace I everywhere in this proof by -[r::> rJ. The resulting sequence of 
wffs of Pz becomes a proof of Ao in Pz upon supplying the proof of 
Sf~[r => ,lXI 
whenever necessary (this will be, as a matter of fact, whenever X is t104). 
If the variable r does occur in the given proof of A, in PI' we begin by 
selecting a variable a which does not occur and replacing r by a throughout. 
After that we proceed as before, i.e., we replace I everywhere by -[r => r], 
and then supply proof (in P 2) of 
Sl 
~[r => rlXI 
wherever necessary. Then finally we use *201 to substitute r for a. 
Employing the same truth-tables of ::::> and,.., as those given in §15, we 
may define the value of a wff of P 2 for a system of values of its variables, in 
the same way that we did in the case of a wff of Pl' It is also possible, in the 

§23J 
RELA nONSHI P OF THE nvo rORJfU LA nONS 
l ·)~ 
~I 
same way as before, to cany uut the actual computa tilltl of the vaiues of a 
wit for all systems of values of its variables. And a wff of P 2 is called a 
tautology if its value is t for all systems of v,dues of its variables. a contra-
diction if its value is f for all svstem~ (Jf values of its variables. 
"235. 
Every theorem of P 2 is a tautology. 
Proof. The three axioms of Pz are tautologies and the two rules of infer-
ence have the property of preserving tautologies. (Cf. th,> proof uf ** J iii).) 
**236. 
If two wffs of P 2 have the same representative IT1 PI' then they have 
the same value for any system of values of the variables occurring 
in them. 
Proof. By *233, "235, and the truth-table of :::>. 
"2:17. 
A wif A of P 2 is a tautology if and only if its n'pres,:ntatiH' AI in 
PI is a tautology. 
Proof. Let Ao be the expansion of A with respect to negation. Because the 
wff -[r:::> rJ of P 2 has always the value t. it follows that Ao is a tautology 
if and only if AI is a tautology. :For the full prouf ()f trlls, the redder 
mllst supply an analogue of the lemma which was llcied ill thl' prullf 
of ** 150.) Therefore **2:)7 follows by **236. 
"238. 
A wff A of P2 is a theorem of P2 only if its representative AI in 
P1 j, a theorem uf 1\. 
Proof. If A is a theorem of 1\. then by """~35 it is ,l tautulogy. Tlwlefurc, 
by ·*237, AI is a tautology. Therefore, by "'152, AI is a theorem of 1\ 
The sense in which we have equivalence of the systems Pz and 1\ now 
appears in *234 and **238. Namely, in the correspondence of each wff of 
P 2 to its representative in P1 we have a ma:lv-one correspond<:llcr bctwren 
the wffs of Pz and of PI such that theorems correspond to theorems and 
non-theorems to non-theorems. And this many-one correspondence satis-
fies the structural conditions that, if At and BI are the representative'3 of 
A and B re~pecti'vely, then A, :::> BI is the representativf of A:::> B. and 
AI :::> f is the representative of -A 202 (unless A is [r::::> rJ). 
I02The bare eXistence of a many-one curresp'llldcnc(', ur even of a one-to-one" corrc-
spondence, between the wffs of PI and of p., such that theorems correspoad to theorems 
and non-theorems to non-theorems, might be demonstrated just on the g",tmd tl:at 
the theorems and the non-theoren15 .arc denurnerablv infinite classes both 1n ttl!' case 
of PI and in tl,e case of p •. But WIthout somn addecl-conditiOIb, suell '" 1),e ~trHLlur;d 
con(litions here stated. the bare eXistence of such a corr~spondence could h .lfdly I,.. 
said to constitute asignificant equivalence of tbe two systems. We shall return In Chap-
ter X to the question, what meaning 1, best gIven, Hl general, to the <'<]tllva!,,;re of 
two logistic systems. 
Ij 
'r 
I, 

128 
THE PROPOSITIONAL CALCULUS 
[CHAP. II 
From this equivalence between the two systems, together with **237, 
we have also the converse of **235: 
·239. If a wff A of Pa is a tautology, I- A. 
In **235 and *239, together with the algorithm for determining whether 
a viif is a tautology, we have a solution of the decision problem of P2• In 
this connection the reader should satisfy himself that the proof of *239 
(together with the proofs of preceding metatheorems on which it depends) 
directly provides an effective procedure to construct a proof of A in P 2 if 
it has been verified that A is a tautology. 
As in the case of Pp the consistency and completeness of P2' in the various 
senses discussed in Chapter I, now follow as corollaries of this solution of 
the decision problem. 
Principles of duality for P2' analogues of *161, *164, *165, also follow in 
the same way as for Pl' 
EXERCISES 23 
23.0. Let P 2L be the logistic system which is identical with P 2 except 
that the wffs are translated into the parenthesis-free notation of Lukasie-
wicz. State the primitive basis of P 2L, and state and prove the analogues 
of **:.!21i-**227 for P ZL' (Compare exercise 12.2, and footnote 91.) 
23.1. By the methods of §19, discuss the independence of the axioms and 
rules of P2' 
23.2. As a corollary of *229, prove the analogue of *159 (substitutivity 
of equivalence) for P2' 
23.3. Prove for P 2 that every tautology is a theorem, by a method which 
parallels the proof of the corresponding metatheorem of P1 as this is con-
tained in §§12-15, and which therefore avoids use of **226-*229. 
23.4. According to our conventions, the expression "-p ::J • q ¢ P" ab-
breviates a certain wff of 1\ and a certain (different) wff of P2• Write each 
of these wffs without abbreviations other than omissions 6f brackets. For 
each wH, as thus written, carry out the computation of its values for all 
systems uf values of its variables. Verify that corresponding values of the 
two wffs are always the same; and explain why this must b{' so in all such 
cases. 
23.5. By analogy to §16, treat in detail the matter of duality in P 2• 
23.6. Let PF be the logistic system having the same primitive symbols and 
wits as P 2' *200 and *201 as its rules of inference, and the six following 
axioms: 

§24] 
PRIMITIVE CONNECTIVES 
P=>·q=>P 
s => [P => q) => • S => P => • S => q 
P => [q :::;) rJ => • q => • P => r 
P => q => • -q => -P 
--P => P 
P => --P 
129 
(1) Prove t204 as a theorem of P F , and thus establish that the theorems of 
P F are the same as those of P 2' (2) Discuss the independence of the axioms 
of P F. 
23.7. Let Pt. be the logistic system having the same primitive symbols 
and wffs as P 2' *200 and *201 as its rules of inference. and the single follow-
ing axiom: 
PI => [ql => PI] => [-r => [P => -sJ => [r => [P => q] => • s => P => • s => q] 
=> P2J => • q'l, => P2 
Establish that the theorems of Pl. are the same as those of P2 by showing 
(I) that the single axiom of Pt. is a tautology, and (2) that the axioms of 
Pi are theorems of Pl.' 
23.8. Establish the same result also for the logistic system PI which is 
like PL except that the following (somewhat shorter) single aXIOm is used: 
[P => • -q => [r => sJ => • s => q => • PI => • r => q] => [-ql => [qi => rd => sd => 51 
23.9. Establish the same result also for the logistic system PSt which 
is like Pt. except that the single axiom is the following: 
rl => [P => q => s => ql] => LSI => • S => PI => • -P => -r J => .51 => • S => P => • r => P 
(Make use of the result of exercise 18.4.) 
24. Primitive connectives for the propositional calculus. In Pz 
we used implication and negation as primitive connectives for the prop-
ositional calculus, and in PI we used implication and the constant /. We 
go on now to consider some other choices of primitive connectives (including, 
for convenience of expression, the constants as O-ary connectives). 
With one exception, we shall not consider connectives which take more 
than two operands. The exception is a ternary connective for which, when 
applied to operands A, B, C, we shall use the notation ~A. B, C]. We call 
this connective conditioned disittnction. and assign to it the following truth-
table:203 
30'A ,~onvenient oral reading of "[P. q. rJ" is "p or r accordlng as q or not q." 
I 
I' 
i. 
H'"

130 
THE PROPOSITIONAL CALCULUS 
[CHAP. II 
P 
q 
·~p,q,rJ 
t 
t 
t 
t 
t 
t 
f 
t 
t 
f 
t 
t 
t 
f 
f 
f 
f 
t 
t 
f 
t 
f 
f 
f 
t 
t 
f 
f 
f 
(It follows that the dual of [p, q, r] is [r, g, PJ in the sense that the truth-
table of [P, q, r] becomes the truth-table of [r, q, Pl upon interchanging t 
and f.) 
The singulary and binary connectives which we shall consider are those 
of §05,104 with truth-tables as in §15. The constants are t and /, with values 
assigned as t and f respectively. If we include the truth-table 
P 
P 
t 
t 
f 
f 
it will be seen that all possible truth-tables are then covered (for connectives 
that are no more than binary), except those truth-tables in which the value 
in the last column is independent of one of the earlier columns. 
When a number of primitive connectives are given, together with the 
usual infinite list of propositional variables, the definition of wff is then 
immediate by analogy with §§1O, 20. And the value of a wif for each system 
of values of its variables is then given by a definition analogous to that of 
§15. It is clear that the values of a particular wff for all systems of values of 
its variables may be given completely in a finite table like the truth-table 
of a connective; we shall call this the truth-table 0/ the wff. 
A system of primitive connectives for propositional calculus v.rill be called 
complete if all possible truth-tables of two or more columnsllOll are found among 
the truth-tables of the resulting wffs. And a particular one of the connectives 
$O'I.e., the sentence connectives of §05. 
a·'Notice that a wff with one variable has a truth-table of two columns, a wff with 
two variables a truth-table of three columns, and so on. A wff with no variables has 
just one (fixed) value and may therefore be said to have a truth-table of just one column 
(and one row). In the definition of completeness we have purposely excluded one-col-
umn truth-tables because we wish to allow as complete not only such a system of 
connectives as implication and f but also, e.g., such a system as implication and nega-
tion. 

§2( 
PRIMITIVE CONNECTIVES 
131 
will be called independent if, upon suppression of that particular connective, 
its truth-table is no longer among the truth-tables of the resulting wffs-or 
in the case of a constant, t, or /, if upon suppression of it there is no longer 
among the resulting wffs anyone which has the value t, or the value f. 
respectively, for all systems of values of its variables. 
The problem of complete systems of independent primitive connectives 
for the propositional calculus has been treated systematically by POSt.206 
We shall not make an exhaustive treatment here, but shall call sider only 
certain special cases. We begin with the following: 
Conditioned disjunction, I, and I constitute a complete system 0/ independent 
primitive connectives lor the propositional calculus. 
The completeness is proved by mathematical induction with respect to 
the number of different variables in a wff constructed from these connectives. 
Among the wffs containing no variables, it is clear that all possible systems 
of values are found, since the wif t has the value f, and the wff t has the value 
t. Suppose that among the wffs containing 11 variables all possible systems of 
values, i.e., all possible truth-tables, are found. And consider a proposed 
system of values for a wff containing n .J... 1 variables, i.e., a proposed 
(n + 2)-column truth-table, T. Let the first column in the truth-table T 
be for the variable b. Let the truth-table T1 be obtained from T by deleting 
all the rows which have f in the first column and then deleting the first 
column. Let T2 be obtained from T by deleting all the rows which have tin 
the first column and then deleting the first column. By hypothesis of 
induction, wffs A and C exist whose truth-tables are 1~ and T2 respectively. 
Then the wff lA, b, C] has the truth-table T. as may be seen hy rdercncc 
to the truth-table of conditioned disjunction. (Thus the completeness of 
the given system of primitive connectives follows by 
mathematical 
induction. ) 
The independence of conditioned disjunction is obvious, since without 
conditioned disjunction there would be no wffs except those consisting of a 
single symbol (f or t or a variable). 
The independence of t may be proved by reference to the last row in the 
truth-table of conditioned disjunction, since it follows from this last row 
that, if a wif is constructed from conditioned disjunction and f (without 
IOIIn his monograph, The Two- Valued Iteya/iuB Systems of ]1.{ alhematical Logic (1941). 
For connectives which are no more than binary, there is a different treatment by 
William Wernick in the Tt'a1lsactio1ls oj the A merna" Mathematical SODlety, vol. 51 
(1942), pp. 117-132. 
Post deaJs also with the problem of characterizing the truth-tables wh;ch result from 
an arbitrary system of primitiv~ connectives (with assigned truth-tilblcs). 
:i r 
!! 

132 
THE PROPOSITIONAL CALCULUS 
[CHAP. II 
use of t), then it must have the value f when the value f is given to all its 
variables. In the same way the independence of f may be proved by reference 
to the first row in the truth-table of conditioned disjunction. 
We may now prove completeness of other systems of primitive connectives 
by defining by means of the given primitive connectives (in the manner of 
§11) the three connectives, conditional disjunction, t, and /, and showing 
that the definitions give the value t to t, the value f to /, and the required 
truth-table to conditioned disjunction. Thus the completeness of implication 
and I follows by Dl (see §ll) and the definition: 
Dl2. 
[A, B, C] ...... [B ~ AJ[-B ~ C] 
In the case of systems of primitive connectives which do not include 
constants, it is not possible to give definitions of t and /. But in proving 
completeness it is sufficient instead to give an example of a wff which has 
the value t for all systems of values of its variables, i.e., which is a tautology, 
and an example of a wff which has the value f for all systems of values of its 
variables, i.e., which is a contradiction. Thus the completeness of impli-
cation and negation follows by Dl2 above (as reconstrued when implication 
and negation are the primitive connectives) together with any example of 
a tautology, say r ~ r, and any example of a contradiction, say r ¢ r. 
In each of the systems, implication and f, implication and negation, the 
independence of the second connective follows because no wff constructed 
from implication alone can be a contradiction (as we may prove by mathe-
matical induction, using the truth-table of implication). The independence 
of implication is in each case obvious because of the very restricted class of 
wffs which could be constructed without implication. Thus: 
Each 0/ the systems, implication and /, implication and negation, is a com-
plete system 0/ independent primitive connectives lor the propositional calculus. 
Having this, we may now also prove completeness of a system of primitive 
connectives by defining either implication and / or implication and negation, 
and showing that the definitions give the required truth-tables (and, if / 
is defined, that they give the value f to I). 
In particular the completeness of negation and disjunction follows by 
the definition of [A ::J B] as -A v B. And the completeness of negation 
and conjunction follows by the definition of [A::J B] as -[A -B]. Independ-
ence may be proved in each case in a manner analogous to that in which the 
independence of implication and negation was proved. Thus: 
Each 0/ the systems negation and disjunction, negation and coniunction, is 

§24] 
PRIMITIV E CONN r;CTlV F'; 
a complete S\'stem 0/ independent primitive connectives lor the propositional 
calculus. 
We leave to the reader the proof of the following: 
Implication and converse non-implication constitute a complete system 0/ 
independent primitive connectives lor the propositional calculus. 
This last system of primitive connectives has, like the system consisting 
of conditioned disjunction, t, and /, the substantial advantage of being sc!/-
dual in the sense that the dual of each primitive connective either is itself 
a primitive connective or is obtained from a primitive connective by 
permuting the operands. Indeed it is clear that a treatment of duality, 
like that of §16 for PI' would be much simpler in the case of a formulation 
of the propositional calculus based on a self-dual system of primitive 
connectives. 
Of the two self-dual systems of primitive connectives suggested, that con-
sisting of implication and converse non-implication has the disadvantage 
that it is impossible to make a definition of negation which is sell-dual in 
the sense that the dual of -A is -AI' where Al is the dual of A. Therefore it 
becomes necessary (for convenience in dualizing) to make two definitions of 
negation which are duals of each other. Then, if the symbols - and -
are 
used for the two negations. the dual of -A will be -AI' where Al is the dual 
of A. 
The self-dual system consisting of conditioned disjunction, t, and /, does 
not have this disadvantage. But it does have the obvio\ls disadvantages 
associated with the use, as primitive, of a connective which takes more than 
two operands. 
For this reason it has sometimes been suggested that the requirement of 
independence be abandoned in the interest of admitting a more convenient 
self-dual system of primitive connectives. In particular the system consisting 
of negation, conjunction. and disjunction has been proposed. Another possi-
bility, of course, is negation. implication, and converse non-implication. 
For certain purposes there are advantages in a complete system of primi-
tive connectives which consists of one connective only, although to obtain 
such a system it is necessary to make a rather artificial choice of the primi-
tive connective (and also to abandon any requirement of self-duality if 
the primitive connective is to be no more than binary). We leave to the 
reader the proof of the following :207 
1·'The possibility of a single primitive connective for the propositional calculus was 
known to C. S, Peirce, as appears from a fragment, written about 1880, and from 
,1 
" 'I 

f1 
. I 
134 
THE PROPOSITIONAL CALCULUS 
II' 
Non-conjunction, taken alone, constitutes a complete system 0/ primitive 
connectives lor the propositional calculus. Likewise non-disjunction alone. These 
are the only connectives which are no more than binary and which have the 
property 0/ constituting a complete system of primitive connectives for the 
propositional calculus when taken alone. 
EXERCISES 24 
24.0. Taking conditioned disjunction, t, and f as primitive, give defini-
tions of all the singulary and binary connectives. Select the simplest pos-
sible definitions, subject to the conditions that definitions of mutually dual 
connectives shall be dual to each other and that the definition of negation 
shall be self-dual. 
24.1. Taking implication and converse non-implication as primitive, give 
definitions of the singulary and remaining binary connectives. Select the 
simplest possible definitions, subject to the condition that definitions of 
mutually dual connectives shall be dual to each other. As indicated in the 
text, supply definitions of two negations dual to each other. 
24.2. With conditioned disjunction, t, and I as primitive, assume that a 
formulation of the propositional calculus has been given such that every 
theorem is a tautology and every tautology is a theorem. Supply for this 
formulation of the propositional calculus a treatment of duality, analogous 
to that of §16 for Pl' Discuss first the dualization of wffs proper, and then 
Chapter 3 of hIS unfinished Minute Logic, dated January-February 1902. These were 
unpublished during Peirce's lifetime, but appeared in 1933 in the fourth volume of his 
Collected Papers (see pp. 13-18, 215-216 thereof). First pUblication of the remark that 
the propositional calculus may be based on a single primitive connective was by 
H. M. Sheffer in a paper in the Transactions o/Ihe American Mathematical Society, vol. 
14 (1913), pp. 481-488. 
The analogous remark for Boolean algebra is that the usual Boolean operations may 
be based on 3. single primitive operation, for which two choices, dual to each other, are 
possible. Both of these operations are used together by Edward Stamm as a self-dual 
system of primitive operations for a postulational treatment of Boolean algebra, in a 
paper in Mona/she/Ie fur Iv!alhematik und Physik, vol. 22 (1911), pp. 137-149. The ex-
pliCit basing of Boolean algebra on a single primitive connective first appears in Sheffer's 
paper of 1913 (there is also some suggestion of this in Peirce's unpublished fragment of 
1880). 
Peirce's notations, which are his two alternative single primitive connectives for 
the propositional calculus, have not been used by others and need not be reproduced 
here. Sheffer uses the sign of disjunction, v, inverted as a sign of non-disjunction; he 
introduces non-conjunction only in a footnote and uses no special sign for it. The 
vertical line, since called Sheffer's stroke, was used by Sheffer only in connection with 
Boolean algebra; its use as a sign of non-conjunction was introduced by J. G. P. Nicod 
in the paper which has his single axiom for the propositional calculus, discussed in the 
next section (cf. Proceedings 0/ the Cambridge Philosophical Society, vol. 19 (1917-1920). 
pp. 32-41). 

§24:J 
EXERCISE.')' 24 
135 
also the dualization of expressions that arc abbreviatiolls of wHs uncler the 
definitions of 24:.0. 
24.3. Show that equivalence, disjunction, and I constitute a complete 
system of independent primitive connectives for the propositilJnal calculus. 
(Compare exercise 15.7, and footnote 186.) 
24.4. In each of the follo'wing systems of primitive connectives for the 
propositional calculus, demonstrate the independence of the connl'ctives: 
(1) negation and disjunction; (2) negation and conjunction; (3) implication 
and converse non-implication. 
24.5. Taking non-conjunction as the only primitive connective, give 
definitions of the singulary and remaining bilury connectives. l'.'cglecting 
considerations of duality, select the definitions in which the definiens is 
shortest (when written out in full, in terms of the primitive connective). 
24.6. Show that eqUivalence and nOll-equivalence do not constitute a 
complete system of primitive connectives for the propositional calculus. 
Determine all possible ways of adding to the list one or more connectives 
which are no more than binary, so as to obtain a <::omplete system of inde-
pendent primitive connectives for the propositional calculus. 
:24-7. It may happen that a complete system of primitive connectives for 
the propositional calculus, though all are indr-penden t, is Cil pil ble of heing 
reduced without loss of completeness by replilCll1g aIle of the connectIve:; by 
a connective which can be defined from it alone and takes fewer operands than 
it docs. For this purpose, any tautology is to be treated as if it supplied a 
definition of t, and any contradiction a definition of I, though these are not 
definitions in the proper sense (cf. the remark in the text on thi, point). 
'When a complete system of independent primitive connectives fur the prop-
ositional calculus is not capable of beillg reduced in this war, it is a spe-
cialized system of primitive connectives for the propositiollill calculus, in the 
sense of Post. Of the various complete systems of independent primitive 
connectives for the propositional calculus \vhich are mentioned in the text, 
determine which are specialized systems. Of those which are not, supply all 
possible reductions to specialized systems. 
24.8. Do the same thing for each of the complete systems of independent 
primitive connectives found in 24.6. 
:24.9. Consider a formulation of the propositional calculus in which the 
primitive connectives are negation, COI1)ullctiClll, and disjunction. :\ wit B 
which contains n different variables is said to be in lull disjunctive normal 
lorm if the following conditions are satisfied: (i) B hilS the form of a dis-
junction C1 v Cz V ..• v Cn,; (ii) each term Ci of this disjunction has the 

136 
THE PROPOSITIONAL CALCULUS 
[CHAP. II 
form of a conjunction, CiIGt2 ... Cin; (iii) each Ctk (i = I, 2, ... , m and 
k = 1, 2, .. " n) is either b k or -b k , where ble is the kth of the variables 
occurring in B, according to the alphabetic order of the variables (§20); 
(iv) the terms G j are all different and are arranged among themselves accord-
ing to the rule that, if Cil' Gi2 • ••• , Cj(k_l) are the same as Gn, C;2' 
•• " G;(k_U respectively, and Gil: is bl<' and C;k is -bA:' then i < f. Introduce 
material equivalence by an appropriate definition, and let a wif B be called 
a lull disjunctive normal lorm 01 a wff A if B is in full disjunctive normal form 
and contains the same variables as A does and A = 
B is a tautology. Show 
that every wff not a contradiction has a unique full disjunctive normal 
form; and by means of the two laws of De Morgan (d. 15.8) and commuta-
tive, associative, and distributive laws involving conjunction and dis-
junction (d, 15.5, 15.7, 15.8), show how to reduce the wff to full disjunctive 
normal form. Show that a wff is a tautology if and only if it has a full 
disjunctive normal form in which m 
2n. 
24.10. For a formulation ofthe propositional calculus in which the primi-
tive connectives are conditioned disjunction, t, and I, we may define normal 
lorm as follows, by recursion with respect to the number of different variables 
which a wff contains: a wff containing no variables is in normal form if and 
only if it is one of the two wffs, t, I; a wff in which the distinct variables 
contained are, in alphabetic order, bI , b 2 •••• , b n is in normal form if and 
only if it has the form [A, b n , C], where each of the wffs A and G contains 
all of the variables bI> b 2, •.• , b n _ l , does not contain hn' and is in normal 
form. For this case establish a result about reduction to normal form, 
analogous to that of exercise 24.9 for reduction to full disjunctive normal 
form in the case of negation, conjunction, and disjunction as primitive 
connectives. 
25. Other formulations of the propositional calculus. Formulations 
of the propositional calculus so far considered, in the text and in exercises, 
have been based either on implication and I or on implication and negation 
as primitive connectives. We go on now to describe briefly some formulations 
based on other primitive connectives. 
Very well known is the formulation, PRJ of the propositional calculus 
which is used in Principia Mathematica. In this the primitive connectives 
are negation and disjunction. The rules of inference are substitution and 
modus ponens (the latter in the form, from -A v B and A to infer B). The 
axioms are the five following, in which A:::J B is to be understood as an 
abbreviation of -A v B: 

§251 
OTB ER FORMULA TJONS 
PVp=>jJ 
q=>pvtj 
pvq-:::)qvp 
P V l q v r J => q v [p V r J 
q=>r=>.pvq=>pvr 
l:n 
Several reductions of this sytem have been proposed. Of these the most 
immediate is the system P a obtained by just deleting the fourth axiom, 
which is, in fact, non-independent Another is the system P!, in which the 
five axioms are replaced by the following four axioms: 
p v p -:::) P 
P=>I)vq 
p v [q vrJ => q v [p v rJ 
q=>r=>.pvtJ-:::)pvr 
Still another is the system PI, in which the five axioms are replaced by the 
following three: 
pVp-=:Jp 
p=>pvq 
q=>r-=:J.pvq=>rvp 
For some purposes there may be advantages in a formulation or the prop-
ositional calculus which is based on only one primitive connective, only 
one axiom, and besides substitution only one rule of inference, although in 
order to accomplish this it is necessary to make a rather artificial selection 
of the primitive connective and to allow the single axiom to be relatively 
long. As long as the procedure in constructing a logistic system is regarded 
as tentative, with the choice held open as to what assumptions (in the form 
of axioms or rules) will finally be accepted~or if the emphasis is upon fixing 
the ground of theorems ;tnd meta theorems in the sense of distinguishing 
what assumptions each one rests upon -the preference will be for natural-
ness in the selection of primitive connecti ves and for simplicity in the iudi vid-
ual axioms and rules, rather than for reduction in their number. On the 
other hand the proof of desired metatheorems may well be simplified in 
some cases by the contrary course of reducing the number of primitive 
connectives, axioms, and rules. even at the expense of naturalness or sim-
plicity; and a rnetatheorem, once proved- for one formulation, may perhaps 
be extended to other formulations by establishing equivalence of the for-
mulations (in some appropriate sense). 
For the propositional calculus, a formulation of the proposed kind was 
first found hy]. G. P. Nieod. His system, call it P n , is based on non-conjunc-

138 
THE PROPOSITIONAL CALCULUS 
[CHAP. II 
tion as the primitive connective. The rules of inference are substitution and 
the rule: from A I. B I C and A to infer C. The single axiom is: 
P I [q I rJ I • PI I =Pd PI] I • s I q I • Pis I • Pis 
In another such formulation of the propositional calculus, P w, the prim-
itive connective and the rules of inference are the same as in P n, and the 
single axiom is the following: 
P I [q I r J I • [s I r I • Pis I • Pis] I • PI. P I q 
(This axiom, unlike Nicod's, is organic, in the sense of Wajsberg and Le-
sniewski, i.e., no wf part shorter than the whole is a tautology.) 
In still another such formulation of the propositional calculus, P L' the 
primitive connective and the rules of inference are still the same as in P n, 
and the single axiom is: 
P I =q I r J I • P I [r I P] I • s I q I • Pis I • Pis 
(This axiom is closer to Nicod's, and still organic.) 
EXERCISES 25 
25.0. Establish the sufficiency of P R for the propositional calculus by 
carrying the development of the system far enough, either to prove directly 
that a wff is a theorem if and only if it is a tautology, or to show equivalence 
to P 2 in a sense analogous to that of §23. (To facilitate the development, the 
derived rule should be established as early as possible, that if M, N, A, B 
satisfy the conditions stated in *229, and if r M ::::> Nand r N ::::> M, then 
r A::::> Band r B :::> A.) 
25.1. Establish the sufficiency of PB for the propositional calculus by 
proving the fourth axiom of P R as a theorem. 
25.2. Discuss the independence of the axioms and rules of PB' 
25.3. Establish the sufficiency of P N for the propositional calculus by 
proving the second and third axioms of P R as theorems. 
25.4. Discuss the independence of the axioms and rules of P N . 
25.5. Establish the sufficiency of PG for the propositional calculus by 
proving the axioms of P R as theorems. (The chief difficulty is to prove the 
theorem P ::::> p. For this purpose, following H. Rasiowa, we may first prove 
in order the theorems P ::::> --p, q V P :::> • -P :::> q, -- • ---P :::> -p, -P v. 
P V ---p, --IP:::> r] :::> • s V [q V Pl :::> r V q V s.) 
25.6. Discuss the independence of the axioms and rules of P G' 
25.7. Establish the sufficiency of Pn for the propositional calculus by 
showing its equivalence to P R in a sense analogous to that of §23. 

EXERCISES 25 
139 
~5.8. Establish the sufficiency of P n for the pruposltional c8.lculus, with-
out use of P R' by showing its equivalence to P 2 in a smse analogolls to that 
of §23. 
~5.9. Discuss the independence of the axioms and rules of P n . (This 
question can be answered by means of immediately obvious considerations, 
without use of truth-tables or generalized systems of truth-values in the 
sense of §19.) 
~5.IO. By the method of §190r otherwise, determine \\'hether Pn remains 
sufficient for the propositional calculus when its second rule of inference is 
weakened to the following: from A I • BIB and A to infer B. 
~5.11. Establish the sufficiency of P w for the propositional calculus by 
proving the axiom of Pn as a theorem. 
~5.12. Establish the sufficiency of P L for the propositional calculus. 
~5. I 3.208 (1) Given implication and converse non-implication as primitive 
connectives, and substitution and modus ponens as rules of inference, find 
axioms so that the resulting system is sufficient for the propositional cal-
culus. Seek, as far as feasible, to make the individual axioms simple. and 
after that to make their number small. (2) Establish the independence of 
the axioms and rules. 
25_14.208 Given negation, conjunction, and disjunction as primitive con-
necti'ies, find axioms and rules of inference so that the resulting logistic 
system is sufficient for the propositional calculus. In doing so, make the 
system of axioms and rules of inference self-dual in such a sense that a meta-
theorem analogous to "'161 (principle of duality) follows immediately there-
from. Subject to this condition seek, as far as feasible. to make the individual 
axioms and rules simple, and after that to make their number small. Can 
the axioms and rules be made independent without excessive complication 
or loss of the feature of self-duality? 
:2 5.15.208 Answer the same questions if the primitive connectives are con-
ditioned disjunction, t, and f. 
~5.16.208 Let the primitive connectives be conditioned disjunction, L, 
and f. Let the rules of inference be the rule of substitution and the following 
rule: from [A, B, C] and B to infer A. Find axioms so that the resulting 
system is sufficient for the propositional calculus. Seek, as far as feasible. 
to make the individual axioms simple, and after that to make their number 
small. (Ignore the matter of duality.) 
I06This is offered as an open problem for investigation, r:~thcr than as an exercise 111 
the ordinary sense. The writer has not attempted to find a solution. 

I 
140 
THE PROPOSITIONAL CALCULUS 
[CHAP. II 
26. Partial systems of propositional calculus. We have so far 
emphasized the matter of logistic systems adequate to the full propositional 
calculus, in the sense of being equivalent in some appropriate sense to Pi or 
P 2. Studies have also been made, however, of various partial systems, not 
adequate to the full propositional calculus, and in this section we shall 
describe briefly some of these. 
One sort of partial system of propositional calculus is based on an in-
complete system of primitive connectives, axioms and rules being so chosen 
tbat the theorems coincide with the tautologies in those connectives. An 
example is the impticational propositional calculus, which has implication as 
its only primitive connective, and which is formulated by (e.g.) either the 
logistic system Pk of exercise 18.3 or the system p~ of 18.4. Other examples 
will be found in the exercises following this section. 
The chief interest of partial systems of this sort would seem to be as step-
ping-stones toward formulations of the full propositional calculus. For 
example, the result of exercise 18.4, together with that of 12.7, leads to a 
formulation FA of the propositional calculus in which the primitive connec-
tives are implication and t, the rules of inference are modus ponens and sub-
stitution, and the axioms are the two following: 
p::::> q::::> r::::> .r:::J p::::>.s::J p 
f::::> p 
The foregoing formulation of the full propositional calculus is elegant for 
its brevity, and sharply separates out the role of the constant f from that of 
implication, but fails to separate from one another what may be regarded 
as different assumptions about implication. If we wished to separate from 
the others those properties of implication whi.ch are involved in the deduc-
tion theorem, we might begin with the logistic system P+ of exercise 19.6 
(or an equivalent)-the positive implicational propositional calculus of 
Hilbert-and add primitive connectives and axioms to obtain a formulation 
of the full propositional calculus. 
Akin to the positive implicational propositional calculus is the positive 
propositional calculus of Hilbert, designed to embody the part of the prop-
ositional calculus which may be said to be independent in some sense of 
the existence of a negation. This may be formulated as a logistic system pP, 
as follows. The primitive connectives are implication, conjunction, disjunc-
tion, and equivalence (which then are not independent, even as primitive 
connectives for this partial system of propositional calculus). The rules of 
inference are modus ponens and substitution. And the axioms are the 

§26J 
eleven following: 
PA RTIAL SYS"TEMS 
p::::::>.q=>p 
s => [p => qJ ::::::> • s ::::::> p => • s ::::::> q 
pq => p 
pq => q 
p::::::> • q ~ pq 
p=>pvq 
q ~ P v q 
p=>r:::>.q=>r-:::>.pvq::::::>r 
p=q-::::>.p-::::>q 
p=q:::>.q-::::>p 
p::::::>q::::::>.q~p::::::>.p=q 
141 
The system pP may be extended to a formulation of the full propositional 
calculus by adding negation as a primitive connective and one or more 
suitably chosen axioms involving negation. We may for example use t204 as 
a single additional axiom, so obtaining a formulation of the propositional 
calculus which we shall call PH 
On the other hand by adding to pI' a weaker axiom or axioms involving 
negation we m,lY obtain a formulation of the intuilionistic prupositional 
calculus of Heyting.209 
The mathematical intuitionism of L. E. ]. Brouwer will be discussed in 
Chapter XII. On grounds to be explained in that chapter, it rejects certain 
principles of logic which mathematicians ha ve traditionally accepted without 
question, among them certain laws of propositional calculus, especially the 
law of double negation and the law of excluded mIddle. (Of course this in-
volves also rejection of such an interpretation of propositIOnal calculus as 
that of §10 or §20, not perhaps in itself but in the light of the actual usc of 
the propositional calculus as a part of a more extensive language.) 
Heyting's logistic formalization of the ideas of Brouwer (accepted by 
Brouwer) gave them a precision which they otherwise lacked, and has played 
a major role in subsequent debate of the merits of the intuitionistic critique 
of classical mathematics. For the intllitionistic propositional G.llculus we 
adopt not Heyting's original formulation but the follo\ving equivalent 
formulation P~. 
The primitive connectives of P~ are implication, conjunction, disjunction, 
equivalence, and neg;} tion. The rules of inference are modus ponens and 
.a·Arend Heyting in SitzulIgsoerichte dey Pyeussischeti Akademze dey IVissenscha/lell. 
Physikalisch-mathematische Klassc', 1930. Pl'. 42-.56. 

142 
THE PROPOSITIONAL CALCULUS 
[CHAP. II 
substitution. The axioms are the eleven axioms of pP and the two following 
additional axioms: 
(Special law of reductio ad absurdum.) 
(Law of denial of the antecedent.) 
The minimal prupositional calculus of Kolmogoroff and J ohansson210 
makes a more drastic rejection of classical laws involving negation. A for-
mulation of it, Pg'. may be obtained from P~ by replacing the two foregoing 
axioms by the single axiom: 
P ::J q ::J • P ::J -q ::J -p 
(Law of reductio ad absurdum.) 
Wajsberg has shown211 that any theorem A of P~ can be proved from the 
first two of the thirteen axioms together with only those axioms which 
contain the connectives, other than implication, actually appearing in A. 
As a corollary the same thing may be shown also for Pg'. It follows that those 
theorems of the intuitionistic propositional calculus P~, or of the minimal 
propositional calculus Pg', which do not contain negation are identical with 
the theorems of the positive propositional calculus; further, that those 
theorems of anyone of the three systems in which implication appears as 
the only connective are identical with the theorems of the positive implica-
tional propositional calculus. 
The decision problem of p~ has been solved by Gentzen, and again by 
Wajsberg. 212 By the results referred to in the preceding paragraph, solution 
of the decision problem follows for pP and P+. And by the result of 
exercise 26.19 (2), solution of the decision problem follows also for Pg'. 
mA, Kolmogoroff in Recueil Malhi5malique de la Sociele Malhemalique de Moscou. 
voL 32 (1924-1925), pp, 646-667, and Ingebrigt Johansson in Compositio Mathematica, 
vol. 4 (1936), pp, 119-136. See also the paper of Wajsberg cited in the next footnote. 
Kolmogoroff considers pnmarily not the full minimal calculus but the part of it 
obtained by suppressing :he three primitive connectives, conjunction, disjunction, 
equivalence, and the axioms contaimng them (and finds for this calculus a similar 
result to that later found by V, Glivenko, quoted in exercise 26.15, for the intuitionistic 
propositional calculus). Addition of the three axioms for disjunction which are given in 
the text is mentioned by Kolmogoroff in a footnote, but the full minimal calculus and 
the name ("minimal calculus" Or "Minimalkalkiil") first occur in johansson's paper. 
Kolmogoroff uses for implication not the two axioms in the text but four axioms taken 
from Hilbert that arc equivalent to these; and he takes the th'ree axioms for disjunction 
from Ackermann. Johansson uses Heyting's axioms (from the paper cited in footnote 
209), suppressing one of those for negation, 
21lMordchaj Wajsberg in Wiadomosci Matemalyczne, vol. 46 (1938), pp. 45-101. 
2UGerhard Gentzen in Mathematische Zeitschri/t, vol. 39 (1934), pp. 176-210,405-431. 
Wajsberg, loc.cit, Other decision procedures for the intuitionistic propositional calculus 
are due to J, C. C. McKinsey and Alfred Tarski in The Journal of Symbolic Logic, voL 13 
(1948), pp. 1-15, to Ladislav Rieger in Acta Facultatis Rerum Naluralium Universi-
tatis Carolinac, no. 189 (1949), and to B. U. Pi\'~ak in the Doklady Akademii Nauk 
SSSR, vol. 75 (1950), pp. 773-776. 

§26] 
EXERCISES 26 
143 
EXERCISES 26 
26.0. Let P~ be the partial system of propositional calculus based all 
equivalence as the only primitive connective, the rules of inference being 
substitution and the rule, from A = B and A to infer n, and the axioms 
being the two following: 
p=q=.q=p 
p = [q = rJ = . p = 
q = 
r 
Prove the following theorems of P~v: 
p=p=q=q 
p=p 
p=q=.r=.p=.q=r 
[s = . p = . q = r: = . p = q = r = 
s 
r = p = 
[q = 
rJ = . P = 
q 
q=r=.p=q-.'/>=r 
PI = 
q1 == . P2 = 
q2 = . PI = 
P2 = . 
q1 = q2 
(The order in which the theorems are given is one possible order in which 
they may be proved. Heuristically, solution of 26,0 and 26.2 may be facili-
tated by noticing that the given axioms are the complete commutative and 
associative laws of equivalence.) 
26. I. Hence prove the following meta theorem of p~, by a method anal-
ogous to that of the proof of *229: If B results from A by substitution of N 
for M at zero or more places (not necessarily at all occurrences of M in A), 
and if I- M = N, then I- A -
B. 
26.2. Hence prove that a wit of Pf~ is a theorem if and only if every 
variable in it occurs an even number of times.213 Hence the theorems of P~. 
coincide with the tautologies in which equivalence appears as the only 
connecti ve. 
26'3. (1) Let P; be the system obtained from Pt~ by replacing the 
two axioms by the following single axiom: 
the theorems of P~ are iden tical \vith those of P-2. 
(2) Let Pf be the system obtained from P~ by replacing the two axioms 
by the following single axiom: 
IUThis solution of the decision problem of the equivalence calculus is due to Lesniew· 
ski. Notice its relationship to 15.7. 

144 
THE PROPOSITIONAL CALCULUS 
[CHAP. II 
q=.r=.p=q=..r=p 
Prove that the theorems of P~ are identical wIth those of p~. 
(3) Following Lukasiewicz, use the result of 26.2 and the method of §19 
to show that no shorter single axiom can thus replace the two axioms of p~. 
26.4. Let pEN be the system obtained from p~v by adjoining negation as 
an additional primitive connective, and one additional axiom: 
-p = -q =. p = q 
In a sense analogous to that of §23, demonstrate equivalence of pEN to 
the system pEl obtained from P~~ by adjoining I as an additional primitive 
symbol, and no additional axioms-negation being defined thus in pEl; 
-A -}. A=t 
Hence prove that a wff of pEN is a theorem if and only if every variable in it 
and the sign - occur each an even number of times (if at all).214 Hence the 
theorems of pEN and of pEl coincide with the tautologies in equivalence 
and negation, and in cqui valence alld t, respectively. 
26.5. Show that the system pEN is not complete in the sense of Post, 
since the wff p = -p can be added as an axiom without making the wff p 
a theorem. 215 
26.6. A partial system of propositional calculus is to have equivalence 
and disjunction as primitive connectives, and, besides the rule of substitu-
tion, the two following rules of inference: from A and A = 
B to infer B; 
from A to infer A V B.216 (1) Find axioms such that the theorems coincide 
with the tautologies in equivalence and disjunction. (2) With the aid of any 
previous results proved in the text or in exercises, show that the system (as 
based on these axioms) is complete in the sense of Post. (3) Discuss also the 
independence of the axioms and rules of inference. 
26.7- Making use of results already found for Pz (so far as they apply), 
show that a wff of PH is a theorem if and only if it is a tautology. 
26.8. (1) Establish the independence of p ::::> • q ::::> P as an axiom of PH 
by means of the following truth-tables, in which 0 and 1 are the designated 
truth-values: 
'''This solution of the decision problem 01 the equivalence-negation calculus is due 
independently t" \TcKinsey etflU ~I[hallcscu. as a corollary of Leilniewski's solution of 
the clecision pro hie III 01 the "'l"ll'aience calculus: see The Journal of Symbolic LogIC, vol. 
2, p. 175, and, 01. 3, p, 55. Here again the relationship to 15.7 should be noticed. 
"'Eugcn Gh. l\hhaJlescu m An",.ies Scientifiques de I'Universili de jassy, part 1. 
vol. 23 (1937). pp. 369-408. iv, 
""These two rules are used by ),1. H. Stone in Amertcan jounlal of lila/hematic •• 
vol. 59 (1937). pp. 506-514 

§26J 
EX ERCIS ES 26 
145 
P I q Ilt=>q pq pvq p=q -p 
o Ol 
0 ---I 
1 
1 
3 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
2 
2 
4 
4 
0 
3 
2 
4 
4 
0 4 
4 
4 
4 
1 0 
0 
1 
2 
I 
I 
1 
I 
2 
2 
4 
1 
4 
I 
3 
2 
4 
4 
I 
4 
4 
4 
1 
4 
2 0 
() 
4 
4 
3 
2 
I 
1 
4 
4 
., 
2 
0 
4 
4 
I 
'" 
2 
3 
0 
4 
4 
4 
.) 
4 
1 
4 
4 
1 
"-
3 0 
2 
4 
4 
3 
3 
1 
1 
4-
4 
3 ' ') 
2 
4 
4 
4 
31; 
2 
4 
4 
4 
3 ' 4 
4 
4 
4 0 
() 
4 
4 
0 
4 
I 
4 
I 
4 
4 
2 
0 
4 
4 
I 
4 
3 
0 
4 
4 
4 4 
I 
4 
4 
(2) By a modification of these truth-Ltbles establish also the independence 
of p => • q => p as an axiom of pk. (Sug!;ts/wn: I n both parts (1) and (2), in 
order to minimize the labor of verifying tautologies mechanically, make 
use as far as possibJe of argulllents of a general character.) 
26.9' Discuss the independellce of the remaining axioms (l) of the 
system PH' and (2) of the system P~. 
26. I O. Consider a system of truth-valllcs 0, I, ... , v with ° as the only 
designated truth-value, and th" followlllg truth-tables of the connectives of 
pk: the value of p => q is 0 if the value of p is greater than or equal to the 
value of q, and in the contrary case it i" the same as the value of q; the value 
of pq is the greater of the values of p and q; the value of p v q is the lesser of 
i,/ 
I 
I 
I 
,I 
'I 
,I 

146 
THE PROPOSITIONAL CALCULUS 
[CHAP. II 
the values of p and q: the value of p = q is 0 if the values of p and q are the 
same, and in the contrary case it is the greater of the values of p and q; 
the value of -p is 0 if the value of P is v, and in all other cases the value of 
-p is v. Show that all theorems of P~ are tautologies according to these 
truth-tables. 
~6.11. Hence show that the following are not theorems of P~: the law 
of double negation: the law of excluded middle; the converse law of contra-
position; and the law of indirect prool, 
-P => q => • -P => -q => p. 
26.12. Following Kurt G6del, use these same truth-tables to show that 
[PI = pzJ V [Pl - PaJ v ... V [Pl = PnJ 
v [pz = PaJ v [P2 = P,J v ... V [pz 
PnJ v ...... v rPn-l = PnJ 
is not a theorem of p~ (for any n), also that this wff becomes a theorem 
of P~ upon identifying any two of its variables (by substituting one of the 
variables everywhere for the other), and hence finally that there is 11,0 system 
0/ truth-tables in finitely many truth-values such that under it not only are all 
theorems of P~ tautologies but also all tautologies are theorems of P~.2l1 
~6.13. With the aid of the deduction theorem (which can be demon-
strated for P~ in the same way as for Pz), show that the following are theo-
rems of Pk: 
P => q => • P => -q => -P 
P => --P 
---P =>-P 
P => q => • -q => -p 
--. p v-p 
-.p -p 
(Law 01 reductio ad absurdum.) 
(Converse law 01 double negation.) 
(Law 01 triple negation.) 
(Law 01 contraposition.) 
( Weak law 01 excluded middle.) 
(Law of contradiction.) 
~6'I4.' Let P r be the system obtained by adjoining the law of excluded 
middle. p v -po to P~ as an additional axiom. Prove t204 as a theorem of 
P r' Hence show that the theorems of P r are the same as the theorems of 
p 11-therefore, by the result of 26.7, that the theorems of P r are the same as 
the tautologies (according to the usual two-valued truth-tables, §15). 
~6. I 
• Using the results of 26.13 and 26.14, establish the following results 
mStanislaw Jaskowski has constructed a system of truth-tables in infinitely many 
truth-values which is such that under it the t.,utologies coincide with the theorems of 
the intuitionistic propositional calculus (i.e., which, in the terminology of McKinsey, 
is characteristic for the intuitionistic propositional calculus). See Actss du Congres Intsy· 
national ete Philosophie Scientitique, Paris 1935 (published 1936), part VI, pp, 58-61. 
(Added in PYOOI, See further a paper by Gene F, Rose in the Transactions of the 
American Mathematical SOCIety, voL 75 (1953). pp. 1-19.) 

§26] 
EXERCISES 26 
147 
of V. Glivenko: If a wff A of pk is a tautology according to the usual two-
valued truth-tables, then __ A is a theorem of P~. A wff -A of Ph is a theo-
rem of pk if and only if it is a tauto10gy according to the usual two-valued 
truth-tables . 
.:l6.16. As a corollary of the results of 26.15. establish also the following 
result of Godel :218 A wff A of P~ in which can j unction and negation are the 
only connectives appearing is a theorem of Pk if and only if it is a tautology 
according to the usual two-valued truth-tables. 
26.! 7. Discuss the independence of the axioms of P r (exercise :W.14). 
showing in particular that the axiom p :::J -P :::J -p is non-independent. 
26.18. Let P~ be the system obtained from P~ by replacing the axiom 
P :::J -P :::J -p by the two followillg axioms: 
-. p-p 
P :::J q :::J • -q => -p 
(1) Show that the theorems of P~ are the same as those of pk. (::!) Show that 
the theorems of P~ which can be proved vvithout use of the axiom,..,p :::J • P :::J q 
are the same as the theorems of p~". (3) Discuss the independence 0 f the 
axioms of ph. 
26.19. Let P~ be the system obtained from pP by adjoining I as an 
additional primitive symbol and I=> P as all additional axiom. Let PT be 
the system obtained from pP by adjoining I as an additional primitive 
symbol and no additional axioms. Show that *229 is valid as a 
metatheorem of pk. aud of P;)'. (1) Hence establish the equivalence of P~ 
and P~ in the sense of §23. (2) Likewise establish the equivalence of P;)' 
and Pj in the sense of §23.219 
26.20. Establish the following result (substantially that of Kolmogoroff 
referred to in footnote 2lO): In any theorem of the full propositional calculus 
P2-in which the connectives occurring are only implication and negation-
let every variable a be replaced throughout by its double negation --a. 
The resulting formula is a theorem of the minimal calculus P~. 
26.21. Establish the equivalence of p~l and the system P::; o\)tained frum 
it by replacing its last axiom (the law of reductio ad absurdum) by the axiom 
P => -q :::J • q :::J -po 
26.22. For the system pP, show that implication is definable from COI1-
tl8See Glivenko's paper cited in footnote 271. and a paper by Godel in Ergel.misse 
sines Mathematischen Kolloquiums. no. 4 (1933), pp. 34--38. 
mThis result regarding the minimal calculus was found by Johansson. loc.clt.; and 
later by Wajsberg, loc.cil, for Kolmogoroff's minimal calculus with implication and 
negation as only primitive connectives. (See footnotes 210, 211.) 

148 
THE PROPOSITIONAL CALCULUS 
[CHAP. II 
junction ancl equivalence, in the sense that p:::> q = . p = pq is a theorem 
of the' system. 
26.23- For the system pP, show in a like sense that both implication and 
conjunction are definable from disjunction and equivalence. Hence disjunc-
tion, equivalence, and I constit4te (in an appropriate sense) a complete 
system of independent primitive connectives for P\v (see 26.19),220 
l6.24. By means of the truth-table of ~xercjse 26.10 with v = 2, show, 
for the system pt that eqllivalence Is no~ defina-ole from disj"flction and 
negation. Hence, by the result of the preceding exercise, disjunction, equiv-
alence. and negation constitute (in an appropriate sense) a complete 
system of independent primitive connectives for pk.lIIII 
27. Formulations employing axiom schemata. Formulations of the 
propositional calculus so far considered have been based each on a finite 
number of axioms, although the program of §07 allows 'also that the number 
of axioms be infin.te, provIded there is supplied an effecti" method by 
which to recognize a given wff as being or not being an axiom. 
When the axioms are infinite in number, of course they cannot be written 
(Jut in full, and it is necessary rather to indicate them (or all but a finite 
number of them) by one or more statements in the syntax language each 
introducing an infinite class of axioms, Such a statement in the syntax 
language may always be reworded as a rule of inference with an empty class 
of premisses, and in this sense the distinction between an infinite and a finite 
number of axioms is illusory. The more significant distinction is between 
formulations which rely more or less heavily on syntactical statements (such 
as rules of inference) to take the place of separately stated axioms in the 
object langllage-but here no sharp line of division can be drawn. 
Formulations of the kind which we describe as based on an infinite number 
of axioms have important allvantages in some cases. We consider in this 
section a particular class of such formulations, namely, those in which the 
primitive basis involves axiom schemala.221 
"O\Vajsberg has shown (iOC.Clt,) that IlllplicatlOn-conjunction-disJLlflction-/ and im-
plication-conjunction-disjunctlOn-negation constitute complete systems of independent 
primitive connectives for p~\' and ph rcspectiwly, i,e" for the intuitionistic proposi. 
tional calculus. 
221A formulation of a different kwd having an infinite number of axioms is obtained 
by choosmg some suitable system of connectives as primitive and then making every 
tautology an axiom, no rules of inference being then necessary-as pointed out, in 
effect, by Herbrand in 1930. 
This procedure provides n[) dcch:ctivc analysis of the propositional calculus. and no 
opportumty to consider the effects of making or rejecting various particular assump-
tions (such as, e.g" the law of excluded middle or the law of denial of the antecedent-
d, §26), Nevertheless it may be useJ,,1 in a case where lt is desired to deal wlth the prop-

§27] 
AXIOM SCHEAIATA 
149 
An axiom schema represents an infinite number of axioms by means of 
an expression containing syntactical variahles-a form, in the sense 01 
§02-which has wfis as values. 222 Every value of the expression is to be taken 
as an axiom. For convenience of statement we shall indicate this by writing 
the expression itself in the same manner as an axiom. 
An example of a formulation of the propositional calculus with axiom 
schemata is the following system P. 
The primitive symbols and the wffs of P are the same as those of P 2 (§20). 
The axioms. mtinite in number, are given by the three following axiom 
schemata: 
A~.B~A 
A ~ [B ~ C] ~ • A ~ B => _~ A => C 
-A ~ -B ~. B ~ A 
And the only rule of inference (if we do not count the dxiom :>chemata d::i 
such) is the rule of modus ponens. 
*270. 
Every theorem of P is a theorem of Pz. 
Proof. Every axiom of P either is an axiom of Pz or is obtained from an 
axiom of P2 by a substitution (*201) or a simultaneous substitution (*210). 
And the one rule of inference of P is also a rule of inference of P 2' 
**271. 
Every theorem of P 2 is a theorem of P. 
Proof. Since every axiom of P 2 is an axiom of p. and the rules of inference 
are the same except for the rule of substitution (*201). it will be sufficient 
to show that the rule of substitution is a derived rule of P. This is done as 
follows: 
In an application of the rule of modus ponens. let the major premiss be 
C ~ D, the minor premiss C. and the conclusion D. If we substitute the 
wff B for the variable b throughout in both premisses and in the conclusion, 
the three resulting wffs, 
S~C ~ DI. 
are also premisses and conclusion of an application of the rule of modus 
ositional calculus rapidly and only as it prdiminary to it study of more comprehensive 
systems. It has been used in this way by HIlbert and BerIlays (Gru11dlagen der ,'VIathe-
malik, vol. 1 (1934), see pp. 83,105). by Quine (;V1alhematicai Log'c, 1940, see pp. 88-89) 
and by others. 
A similar short cut is indeed possible in the treatment of any logistic system whose 
decision problem has been solved in such a way as to provide a practically feasible 
decision procedure, but of course only after the solution of the decision problem. 
'''Compare the discussion of defi!litlOn schemata in § II. 
'/

150 
THE PROPOSITIONAL CALCULUS 
[CHAP. II 
ponens, in Vlew of the fact that 
S~C :=l Di 
is the same wff as 
S~Cj :=l S~DI. 
Since the only rule of inference of P is modus ponens, and since the result of 
making the substitution of B for b throughout an axiom of P is again an 
axiom of P, it follows that a proof of a wff A as a theorem of P can be trans-
formed into a proof of 
as a theorem of P by just substituting B for b throughout, in every wff in 
the proof. 
This completes the proof of the metatheorem **271.223 It may of course be 
used as a derived rule of p, but we have numbered it with a double asterisk 
as a metatheorem of P2• 
As a corollary of **271, we have also the following metatheorem of P 2 : 
**272. 
There is an effective process by which any proof of a theorem of P 2 
can be transformed into a proof of the same theorem of P 2 in which 
substitution is applied only to axioms (i.e., in every application of 
the rule of substitution the premiss A is one of the axioms of P~). 
In the foregoing we have chosen the system P as an example, because it 
is closely related to the particular formulations of the 'functional calculi of 
first order that receive treatment in the next chapter. It is clear, however, 
that any formulation of the propositional calculus or any partial system of 
propositional calculus, if the rules of inference are modus ponens and sub-
stitution, may be reformulated in the same way, i.e., we may replace each 
axiom by a corresponding axiom schema and take modus ponens as the one 
rule of inference, so obtaining a new system which has the same theorems 
as the original one. 
A like reformulation is also possible if the rules of inference are substitution 
and one or more rules similar in character to modus ponens. For example, 
the system P L of §25 may be reformulated as follows, as a system P La 
Z23The remark should be made that. in spite of the equivalence of P to p. in the strong 
sense that is given by '270 and **271. and in spite of the completeness of PI' neverthe-
less P is not complete in any of the three senses of §18. In fact the wif P =:Jq, for example. 
could be added to P as an axiom without producing any inconsistency. Semantically. 
this is connected with the fact that P has a wider class of sound interpretations than 
p •. the rules of P being (in consequence of the omission of the rule of substitution) no 
longer sufficient to distinguish between propositional varia.bles and propositiona.l 
constants. 

§28] 
PROTOTHETIC 
151 
whose theorems are the same as those of PL' The primitive symbols and the 
wfis of P La are the same as those of PL' The one rule of inference is: From 
A I • B I C and A to infer C. And the axioms are all the wfis, 
A I [B I C] I • A I [C I AJ I • D I B I. A I D I . A I D, 
where A, B, C, Dare wffs (to be taken in all possible ways). 
28. Extended propositional calculus and protothetic. 
The extended propositional calculus of Russell and Lukasiewicz-Tarski'" has. 
besides notations of the propositional calculus. also the universal qualltzjier or 
the existential quantifier or both (d. §06). with propositional variables as the 
operator variables 
Primitive symbolS for a formuJatWIl of the extended propositional calculus 
may be selected in various ways. among which may seem most obvious the 
addition of one or both of the quantifiers to the primitive symbols of a formula· 
tion of the propositional calculus. But because this latter method, when applied 
to P l or Pi' leads to non-independence of the primitive connectives and operators, 
Lukasiewicz and Tarski propose instead implication and the universal quantifier 
as primitive connective and opera torY· Other connectives and operators are 
then introduced by definition. Eg., the following definitions may be made:'" 
f -+ (5)5 
-A ->- A :=l I 
(3c)A -+ -(c)~A 
t -+ (3':)5 
[A :=lc BJ ->- (c)[A :=l BJ 
And other sentence connectives may then be defined as in § 11. 
IUThc extended propositional calculus was treated by Russell under the name of 
"theory of implication" in the American Journal 0/ Alathcmalics, vol 28 (1906). pp. 
159-202. It was treated by Lukaslewicz and Tarski as "erweitcrtcr Aussagenkalkiil" 
in the Comples Rendus des Seances dt la SOclc!e drs Sciences el desT.eltres de Varsone, 
Classe III, vol. 23 (1930). pp. 44-50, 
mAs appears from an informal account in The Prinoples of Mathematics (1903) and 
from his further discussion of the matter in 1906, Hussell also intended to use these 
primitives for the extended propositional calculus. But in 1906 he takes negation as an 
additional primitive connective on the grounrl that it would otherwlse be impossible 
to express the proposition that not everything is truc~·which. he holds. is aJequately 
expressed by -(P)p but not by iMP::l (s)s. (To the writer it would seem that Hussell's 
pOllition of 1906 involves th" very doubtful thesis that theIc is one indispensable con-
cept of negation. given a priori. which it is the business of the IOl;ician to reproduce: 
perhaps not even the extreme realism of Frege would support this.; 
2uIn 1903 Russell defines _po in effect. as P::l,'" In 1906 he considers and rejects 
the definition of -pas p::) (S)5, Also due to Russell (1903. 1906) is the definition of the 
conjunction pq (or, more generally, of AB). which is suggested by the third of the four 
displayed formulas on the next page. 
The definition of -p as P ::l," is foreshadowed in C. S. Peirce's paper oj 1885 
(American Journal 0/ Mathematics. vol. 7, see pp. 189-190). And it may have been from 
this source that Russell had the idea. However. Peirce does not explicitly use the uni-
versal quantifier in a definition of negation, but rather expresses the negation of P 
by p:::::> a. where a is explained verbally as an "index of no matter what token," 
I
.11: 

I 
! I 
I 
I 
152 
THE PROPOSITIONAL CALCULUS 
[CHAP, II 
Adopting the Lukasiewicz-Tarski primitives and the above definitions, to-
gether with conventions about omissions of brackets parallel to those of § 11, 
we may cite the following as some examples of wffs (sentences or propositional 
forms) which are true or have always the value truth in the intended interpre-
tation and therefore ought to be theorems: 
p ::::> q ::::>q [q ::::> rJ ::::> r 
p ::::> q == . q ::::> r ::::>~ • p ::::> r 
pq == . p ::::> [q ::::> r] =>r r 
(P)(3q)(r) .p => q =>.q => P => r 
Using still the same primitives, and relying on the intended interpretation, we 
can show that the extended propositional calculus and the formulation PI of 
the propositional calculus are equivalent in a sense similar to that in which PI 
and P t were shown to be equivalent in §23. For it is clear that (b)B is concurrent 
(in the sense of §02) to the conjunction CD,tI1 where C is obtained from B by 
substitutmg j => f (Le., (s}s => (s}s) foral! free occurrences of b, and D is obtained 
from B by substituting f (i.e., (5)5) for ail free occurrences of b. Given a wff A of 
the extended propositional calculus, we may iterate the operation of replacing 
a wf part (b)B by the conjunction CD just described, only obeying the restric-
tion that this replacement is not be made if (b)B is the particular wff (s)s, 
After a sufficient number of iterations of this, the wff A will be changed to a 
wff Ao in which the universal quantifier does not appear except in wi parts 
(5 )s. Upon replacing (5)5 everywhere by the primitive symbol f of PI. Ao becomes 
a wff AI of PI' The correspondence between A and A, is a many-one correspond-
ence between wffs of the extended propositional calculus and wffs of Pl' And by 
assumption (4) of §02, A and A, are concurrent. In view of the solution of the 
decision problem of PI' this leads us to a solution of the seman tical decision 
problem of the extended propositional calculus; and in formulating the extended 
propositional calculus as a logistic system we may be guided by the demand that 
solution of the decision problem for provability shall be the same as of the 
semantical decision problem. 
The protothetic of Lesniewski 218 has, in addition to the notations of the extend-
ed propOSitional calculus, also variables whose values are truth-functions (in 
the sense of the last paragraph of §05), say 
fl, gl, hi. f:. g:, h:. f!, . , , 
as variables whose range consists of the singulary truth-functions, and 
t', g', h', f~, g~, h:. f: .... 
as variables whose range is the binary truth-functions, and 
fS, gS, ha, I~, g~, h;. t!. ' , . 
mIn addition to the use of the word "conjunction" to denote the connective or its 
associated truth-function, as explained in §05, it will be convenient also to speak of 
a wff CD (formed from C and D by means of this connective) as u a conjunction." 
Similarly a wff C V D will be called u a disjunction," a wff C == D "an equivalence," 
a wit -C u a negation," and so on. 
'''Stanis!aw Lesniewski, "Grundziige eines neuen Systems der Grundlagen der Mathe-
matik," in Fundame'lia Malhemal:cae, vol. 14 (1929), pp. 1-81. 

§28] 
P ROTOT H ETlC 
153 
as variables whose range is the tenlary truth-functions, alld so on. Further. the 
notation for application of a function to its argument or arguments (see §03) is 
provided for among the primitive symbols. And the quantifiers are allowed to 
have not only propositional variables but variables of any kind as operator 
variables. Lesniewski allows also variables of still other types, e.g., variables 
whose values are propositional functions of truth-functions, but these seem to 
play a less important role, and we venture to change his terminology to the 
extent of excluding them from protothetic. Ole Finally, Lesniewski allows asser-
tion of sentences only, and not of wffs containing free variables (cf the end of 
§06); but this is from one pOint of view a non-essential feature, and we would 
propose that the name P'Yotothetic be applied also to systems, otherwise like 
Lesniewski's, in which wffs with or without free variables may be asserted. 
For the primitive symbols of a formulation of protothetic, besides the various 
kinds of variables and the notation for application of a function to its argument 
or arguments, we may take implication as primitive sentence connective, and 
the universal quantifier as primitive operator (allowing it to have a variable of 
any kind as operator variable). Or, following a discovery of Tarski,''''' implication 
may be replaced by (material) equivalence as primitive connective. 
Equivalence of protothetic to extended propositional calculus, and thus ulti-
mately to propositional calculus, may be shown by a similar method and in a 
similar sense to those for the equivalence of extended propositional calculus to 
PI' In lieu of an explicit statement of the many-one correspondence between 
wffs of protothetic and of extended propositional calculus (which would be 
lengthy), we shall merely indicate the correspondence by giving some examples. 
For the WfflSl (/1) • P :::> (q)fl (q) == (q) • p :::> 11 (q) of protothetic, the correspond-
ing wff of extended propositional calculus is the conj unction of the four 
follo wing: ... 
P :::> (q)t == (q) • p :::> t 
p :::> (q)q == (q) • p :::> q 
p :::> (q) -q == (q) • p :::> -q 
p:::> (q}i == (ql • P :::> I 
Again, for the wff (tl) • P == q :::> (r) • I'(P, r) == ,'(q. 1') of protothetic, the cor-
responding wff of extended propositional calculus is a conjunction of sixteen 
others, which we shall not write out in full hut which include, e.g., the following: 
'''We may speak of higher prolothetu; when variables of sl1ch higher types are to be 
allowed. (Added in proof. Since this was written a comprehenSive account of proto-
thetic by Jerzy Slupecki has appeared m Studia Logiea (Warsaw), vol. I (1953), pp . 
• 4-112; S}upecki gives the names propositional calculus with quantifiers, elementary 
Pt'0tothetics, and P'Yotothetics to what we here call extended proposttional calculus, 
protothetie, and higher P'Yolothelic respectively.) 
130F!nldamenta Mathematicae, vol. 4 (1923), pp. 196-200. 
aalAs an abbreviation, in writing particular wffs of protothetic, the superscripts after 
the letters i, g, h may simply be omitted. No confusion can result among variables 
whose values are functions of different numbers of arguments, or even with the letter I 
denoting the truth-value falsehood. 
IUBy the conjunction of four wffs A, B, C, D we mean, of course, the conjunction 
ABCD, understood according to the convention of association to the left (§ll). 

I 
f 
! I I 
t 
l. 
154 
THE PROPOSITIONAL CALCULUS 
P == q :::> (1") • t == I 
P == q :::> (r) • p V r == q V l' 
P == q :::> (r) • p c: l' == . q c: r 
p == q :::> (1') • P == q 
p == q :::> (r) • p :::> l' == . q :::> ,.. 
p == q :::> (r) .,' == y 
[CHAP. II 
For a wff (say) (f3)B of protothetic, where B contains ,I as a free variable only 
and contains no other truth-functional variables, the corresponding wff of 
extended propositional calculus would be a conjunction of 256 others (there are, 
namely, 256 different ternary truth-functions, and we must use some systematic 
method of setting down for each one a propositional form which has it as an 
associated function), m If the en tire given wff (as distinguished from a wf part 
of it) has free truth-functional variables, it is necessary first to prefix universal 
quantifiers binding these variables, and then to apply the indicated method of 
obtaining a corresponding wff of extended propositional calculus, 
Like propOSitional calculus, both rxtended propositional calculus and proto-
thctic or a modified form of protothetic'" wm occur as parts of more extensive 
logistic systems to be considered later~in particular, of functional calculi of 
second or higher orders. However, in the treatment of these logistic systems which 
we shall adopt. extended propositional calculus and protothetic do not playa 
fundamental role in the way that the propositional calculus does. Therefore in 
this section we have confined ourselves to a brief sketch. 
EXERCISES 28 
28.0. Using the solution of the decision problem which is indicated in the 
text, verify the four exam pIes which are given of wffs of extended propositional 
calculus that are true or have always the value truth, (Of course, where possible. 
make use of known results regarding propositional calculus in order to shorten 
the work.) 
28. I. In the same way, verify the following as wiis of protothetic that have 
always the value tru tho '" 
"'For this solution 01 the decision problem of protothetic, d. Lesniewski, loc,cit., 
and references to LukasiewIcz and to Tarski which are there given. 
tUln the case of the functional calculus of fourth or higher order, the modification of 
protothetic (besides a change in the letters used as truth-functional variables) will 
consist in allowing the notation for application of a function to its arguments to be used 
only in such combinations as alb), a(b, c), a(b, c, d). ' .. , where a is in each case a 
truth-functional vanable of appropriate kind and b, c, d, ... must be propositional 
variables. For reasons which will become clear later. this may be considered II. modi. 
flclltian in til .. p-.rticl'!lH !urtnl.llIlUl.ln of protothl>tio rll.thor th"n in prototillltic it ... lf, 
the deCision depending on what notion of equivalence botween logistic systems we aTe 
willing to accept for this purpose'. But, e.g" although 28, I (4) and 28, I (7) are wffs of 
formulations of prot()thetic which are contemplated in this section, they are not wffs 
nf any functional calculus of higher order (even with change of the letters j, g). 
On the other hand, protothetic occurs as a part of the logistic system of Chapter X 
with no modifications other than essentially trivial changes of notation, 
1
l " 1

§29] 
(l)m 
(2) 
(3)11' 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
(7) 
(8)'" 
(9)m 
HISTORICAL NOTES 
p == q::> ·f(P) == flq) 
P == q == (f) .f(P) ::::l/(q) 
pq == (f) • P == .f(P) == f(q) 
f(P,p) ::::l.t(P,-P)::::l (q)f(P,q) 
155 
g(P) == g(t)P v g(f) -p 
(Boole's law o{ development. m ) 
g(P, q) == g(t, t)pq v g(t, f) P -q v gU, t) -P q v g(f, f) -p -q 
(Boole's law of development in Iwo variables."') 
(3q)(P) -f(g(P)) =g(/(P)) == q 
pq == (I) ·f(P, q) == fit, t) 
pq == (I) .f(P, q) == /(q, P == q) 
28.2. With aid of the solution of the decision problem which is indicated in 
the text. establish a principle of duality for a formulation of extended propo-
sitional calculus with the Lukasiewicz-Tarski primitives, analogous to the prin-
ciple of duality *161 for the propositional calculus. 
28.3- Likewise establish a principle of dual ity for a formulation of protothetic 
with implication as the only primitive sentence connective. and the universal 
quantifier as the only primitive operator. 
29_ Historical notes. The algebra 0/ lor;z'c had its begilIning ill Hl·n,239 
in the publications of Boole and De Morgan.240 This concerned itself at 
first with an algebra or calculus of classes, to which a simila.r algebra of 
'I6Notice the relationship ot this to the metatheorem (!f exercise 15.2 (or to the 
analogue of this metatheorem for any other formulation of the propOSitional calculus). 
Namely, all theorems given by this metatheorcm are in a certain sense included in tile 
one theorem of protothetic, being directly obtainable from it by a rule of substitntion 
for propo;,itional variables, like '101 or '201, and a rule of substitutIOn for truth-func-
tional variables, analogous to the rule of substitution for functional variables which is 
discussed in the next chapter. Thus the relationship lS like that of. e.g", the theorem 
-P::::l , P ::::l q of the propositional calculus to the metathcorem that every wff -A :::> • 
A ::::l B is a theorem. 
"'CI. Tarski in the paper cited in footnote 230. 
'''Given by George Boole for the class calculus. Notice the relationship to the meta-
theorem of exercise 24.9 (concerning reduction to full disjunctive normal form). 
'33From a paper by Boleslaw Sobocinski. Z Badan nad Prototelykq, which was 
published as an offprint in 1939, but nearly all copies of which were destroyed in the 
war. An English translation with an added explanatory introduction was published in 
1949 by the "Institut d'Etudes Polonalses en BelgIque" under the tItle An Inve5tigailOn 
0/ Prololhelie. 
"'There were a number of anticipations of th(~ idea of an algc!Jra or a calculus of 
logic, especially by Leibniz, Gottfried Ploucquet, J H. Lnm!Jert. G" F. Castillon, but 
these were in various ways inadequate or incornpiete and never led to a connected 
development. See Louis Couturat's La LOlllqH!' d, Ldbm:: (1001) and n,"uselll" cI 
il'YIlIf"WIIIJ [",dll, ,I. L"'mi. (11103). c 
r. L"IV"i' •. '1.0;/<,1'1"1' ,),! .''J'Hluu/IL (,<'lill (I\JIM): 
J "rgull J 0rg6n~en'~ A 'Frea/Iss 0/ FaY/nai [.rJllle (lila LJ 
Karl lJ(i ['[". ,. Diu 
l.u,,"~tll< 
Johann Heinrich Lamberts" m Festschrift Andrl'a5 Sl'flser (1945); il.nd th~ writer's 
.. A Bibliography of Symbolic LogIC" in volllmes 1 and :l of The J oHrtliti oj S),>Jtholtc 
Logic. 
"·George Boole, The lyE athematical A naiys1s at LOf{ic (1847). and A n I nl'estigalioll 0/ 
Ihe Laws 0; Thouf{h/ (1854). Augustus Dc Morgan, Formal Logic (lR47). 

156 
THE PROPOSITIONAL CALCULUS 
[CHAP. II 
relations241 was later added. Though it was foreshadowed in Boole's treat-
ment of "Secondary Propositions," a true propositional calculus perhaps 
first appeared from this point of vicw in the work of Hugh MacColl, begin-
ning in 1877.242 
The logistic method was first applied by Frege in his Begriffsschrift of 
1879. And this work contains in particular the first formulation of the prop-
ositional calculus as a logistic system, the system P F of 23.6. Due to 
Lukasiewicz24.3 as a simplification of Frege's formulation is the system P 2, 
which we have used in this chapter (§20). 
However, Frege's work received little recognition or understanding until 
long after its publication, and the propositional calculus continued develop-
ment from the older point of view, as may be seen in the work of C, S, Peirce, 
Ernst Schroder, Giuseppe Peano, and others. The beginnings of a change 
(though not yet the logistic method) appear in the work of Peano and his 
school. And from this source A. N, Whitehead and Bertrand Russell derived 
much of their earlier inspiration; later they became acquainted with the 
more profound work of Frege and were perhaps the first to appreciate its 
significance.2u 
After Frege, the earliest treatments of propositional calculus by the lo-
gistic method are by Russell. Some indications of such a treatment may be 
found in The Principles of Mathematics (1903). It is extended propositional 
calculus (§28) which is there contemplated rather than propositional cal-
culus: but by making certain changes in the light of later developments, it 
is possible to read into Russell's discussion the following axioms for a partial 
system pkK of propositional calculus with implication and conjunction as 
primitive connectives, the rules of inference being modus ponens (explicitly 
stated by Russell) and substitution (tacit): 
IUDe Morgan, Syllabus 0/ a Proposed System of Logic (1860), and a paper in the 
Transactions oj the Cambrllige Philosophical Society, vol. 10 (1864), pp. 331-358; 
C. S. Peirce, various papers 1870-1903, reprinted in volume 3 of his Collected Papers; 
J. J. Murphy, various papers 1875-1891; Ernst Schroder. Algebra del' Logik, vol. 3 
( 1895). 
2UMathematical Questions, vol. 28 (1877). pp. 20-23; Proceedings 0/ the London 
,">fathematical Society, vol. 9 (1877-1878), pp. 9-20, 177-186, and vol. 10 (1878-1879), 
pp. 16-28; Mind, vol. 5 (1880), pp. 45-60; Philosophical Magazine, 55. vol. 11 (1881). 
pp. 40-43. 
"'See Lukasiewicz and Tarski, "Untersuchungen tiber den Aussagenkalktil" in 
Comptos Rendus des Seances de la Societe des Sciences 01 des Let/res de Vaysovie, Classe 
III, vol. 23 (1930), pp. 30-50. 
'''An excellent historical and expository account of the work of Whitehead and 
Russell is found in Chapter 2 (by W. V Quine) of The Philosophy 0/ AI/red North 
Whitehead. 

§29] 
HIsrORICAL NOTES 
pq:::::> p 
lP::::) qJ[q::::) r]::::). p::::) r 
p::::) [q:::::> rJ :::::> • pq ::::) r 
pq :::::> r ::::) • P ::::) • q ::::) r 
[p ::::) q J j; :::::> r: ::::) . P ::::) qr 
p:::::>q::::)p::::)p 
157 
As a part of Russell's treatment of extended propositional calculus in 1906,224 
there appears a formulation Pr of the propositional calculus, with implication 
and negation as primitive connectives, modus ponens and substitution as 
rules of inference, and the following axioms: 
p::::)p 
p:::::> • q:::::> p 
p::::)q::::).q::::)r::::).p::::)r 
p ::::) [q::::) r] ::::) • q ::::) • P :::::> r 
--p::::) p 
p::::)-p::::)-p 
p::::)-q:::::>.q::::)-p 
The formnlation P R of the propositional calculus (§25) was published by 
Russell in 1908,~45 and was afterwards used by Whitehead and Russell in 
Principia Mathemat£ca in 1910, It may be simplified to the system P[j by 
just deleting the axiom whose non-independence was dIscovered by Paul 
Bernays,246 Other simplifications of it are the system P N , due to J. G. P. 
Nicod,247 and the system P G' due to Gotlind and Easiowa,248 
Statement of the rule of substitution was neglected by Frege in 1879, but 
appears explicitly in connection with a different system in his Gntndgesetze 
der Arithmetik, vol. 1 (1893). First statement of the rule of substitution 
specifically for the propositional calculus is by Louis Couturat in Les 
Principes des Mathematiques (1905), but his statement is perhaps insufficient 
as failing to make clear that the expression substituted for a (propositior"al) 
variable may itself contain variables. Russell states this rule more satis-
factorily in his paper of 1906, but omits it in 1908. And in Principia lUathe-
matica the authors hold that the rule of substitution cannot be stated, 
writing: "The recognition that a certain proposition is all instance of some 
general proposition previously proved ... cannot itself be erected into a 
JUAmerican Journal 0/ llifa/hematics, vol. 30 (1908). pp. 22~-26~. 
"'Malhematische Zeitschrijt, vol. 25 (1926), pp. 305-320. 
1(7 Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical Society. vol. 19 (1917-1920), pp. 32-41. 
UBErik Gotlind in the Norsk Matematisk Tidsskriit. vol. 29 (1947). pp. 1-4; H. 
Rasiowa, ibid" vol. 31 (1949), pp. 1-3. 
j 
I ! 
; 

158 
THE PROPOSITIONAL CALCULUS 
[CHAP. II 
general rule." This seems to show that Whitehead and Russell had aban-
doned Frege's method ot stating rules of inference syntactically, or perhaps 
had never fully accepted it. But C. 1. Lewis, writing in immediate connection 
with Principia M athematica, states the rule of substitution explicitly for 
a proposed system of Strict Implication in 1913,2411 and in his Survey of 
Symbolic Logic (1918) he supplies this rule also for the system of Principia. 
And Russell, in his Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy (1919), recog-
nizes that there is an omission in Principia in failing to state the rule of 
substitution for the propositional calculus. 
The device of using axiom schemata, as in §27, so that a rule of sub-
stitution becomes unnecessary was introduced by J. v. Neumann.250 
For the propositional calculus, the name "calculus of equivalent state-
ments" was used by MaceolL The name "Aussagenkalkul" was introduced 
by Schroder in German in 1800 and 1801. Perhaps as a translation of this, 
Russell uses "propositional calculus" in 1903 and again in 1906-but, at 
least in 1903, he applies the name to extended propositional calculus rather 
than to propositional calculus proper (according to the terminology now 
standard). Couturat251 translates Russell's "propositional calculus" into 
French as "caleul des propositions," but at the same time he so alters Rus-
sell's method that the name comes to be applied to propositional calculus 
proper. The name "calculus of propositions" was used by Lewis in a series 
of papers beginning in 1912 and in A Survey ot Symbolic Logic (1918). Since 
then the names "propositional calculus" and "calculus of propositions" have 
received general acceptance in the sense, or about the sense, in which we 
ha ve used the former. 252 
"'TI", Journal 0/ Phi/usa/)hy, Psychology, alld Scientific ;Welhods, vol. 10 (1913), 
pp. 428-438. 
2soMalhemaiische Zeitschrijt, vol. 26 (1927), pp. 1-46. Von Neumann's device may be 
employed as a means of formulating a logistic system for which a rule of substitution 
cannot be used because of the absence of propositional variables or other variables 
suitable for the purpose. Thus in particular a simple applied functional calculus of first 
order, in the sense of the next chapter (§30), must be formulated with the aid of axiom 
schemata rather than a rule or rules of substitution. 
See a discussion of the matter by Hilbert and Bernays in Grundlagen der Mathematik, 
vol. 1, pp. 248-249; also, specially for the propositional calculus, by Bernays in Logical 
Calculus (1935-1936). pp. 44-47; also by Bernays, ibid., pp. 50-53. 
mIn Revue de Mitaphys'que et de j"!orale. vol. 12 (1904), pp. 25-30, and in Les 
Principes des ,".1 aliufmaliques (1905). 
26'Other names found in the literature are "theory of deduction" (in Principia 
1Y1alhemat1ca and in Russell's Introduction 10 A!alhematical Philosophy) and "sentential 
calculus" (i.e., calculus of sentences, by a number of recent writers). But both of these 
names seem rather inappropriate because they refer to certain syntactical aspects of 
the calculus (deducibility, sentences) rather than to corresponding meanings (impli-
cation, propositions). Indeed a theory of deduction or a calculus of sentences would more 
naturally be a branch of logical syntax and be expressed in a meta-language. 
1
J
1

§29] 
HISTORICAL NOTES 
I5!) 
A formulation of the propositional calculus with a single axiom was given 
by Nicod in January 1917,253 the system P n of §25. Modifications of this, 
having still a single axiom. are the systems P w of Wajsberg,254 and PI. 
of Lukasiewicz.2M All three systems are based on Sheffer's stroke (non-
conjunction) as primitive connective and employ a more powerful rule of 
inference in place of modus ponens. 
Regarding formulations of the propositional calculus with a single axiom 
and with only modus ponens and substitution as rules of inference, see the 
historical account given by Lukasiewicz and Tarski in the paper cited in 
footnote 243. Of these, the system Pz. (exercise 23.7) is due to Lukasiewicz 
and is given in the same paper; the system PI (23.8) is also due to Lukasie-
wicz, being credited to him in a paper by Boleshw Sobociitski;256 and the 
system of Ps (23.0) is obtained, by a method of Sobocinski,m from the single 
axiom of exercise 18.4 for the implicational propositional calculus {the 
system pD, which latter is due to LukasiewiczM ' 
Another formulation of the implicational propositional calculus is the 
system P~ of exercise 18.3, which is due to Tarski and Bernays.258 Wajsberg 
has shown that,259 the rules of inference being always modus ponens and 
substitution, a complete formulation of the implicational propositional cal-
culus becomes a complete formulation of the (full) propositional calculus 
with implication and t as primitive connectives upon adjoining f ::::> P as an 
additional axiom. Hence the system 
P w 
of 
12.7. 
obtained thus 
from P~, and the system Pol (§26), which is obtained in the same way 
from P~. 
Lesniewski was especially interested in equivalence as a primitive con-
nective because he took definitions in sense (3) of footnote 168, and therefore 
expressed definitions, in the propositional calculus or in protothetic, as 
(material) equivalences.2ao The first formulation of a partial system of prop-
ositional calculus with equivalence as sole primitive connective (such that 
IUln the paper cited in footnote 247. 
iUMonaJshe/le luI' Mathematlk und Physik. vol. 39 (1932), pp. 259-262. 
156Given in Wajsberg's paper cited in the preccdmg footnote. Still another modIfi-
cation of Nicod's aXiom. due to Lukasiewicz, is given by Lesniewski Hl the paper cited 
in footnote 228, p. 10. 
mPrzeglqd Filozoliczny, vol. 35 (1932), pp. 171~193. 
mproeeeJillgs of ihe Royal Irish Academy, vol. 52 section A no. 3 (1948), pp. 25-33. 
(Added in proof. Various still shorter single axioms for the propositional calculus are 
given by C. A. Meredith in The Journal of Computing Systems, vol. I no. 3 (1953), 
pp. 155-164.) 
u·See the account of the matter by LukasieWICZ and Tarski ill the paper cited in 
footnote 243. 
IIIIn Wiadomosci Matema/yezne, vol. 43 (1937), pp. 131~168. 
I80See the paper cited in footnote 228. pp. 10·-11. 

I 
1 
160 
THE PROPOSITIONAL CALCULUS 
[CHAP. II 
all tautologies in this connective are theorems) was by LeSniewski.281 Other 
such formulations are the system P~ of 26.0, by Wajsberg;262 and the 
systems with a single aXIOm. P; of 26.3(1). by Wajsberg, and P~ of 
26.3(2). by Lukasiewicz.1I63 The system pEN of 26.4, with equivalence and 
negation as primitive connectives, is due to Mihailescu."4 
Returning to formulations of the full propositional calculus. we mention 
also the system P A of Lukasiewicz, having implication and negation as 
primitive connectives, modus p01'!ens and substitution as rules of inference, 
and the three following axioms: 
P :::::J q :::J • q :::J r :::::J • P :::J r 
-p :::J P :::J P 
P:::J·-P:::::Jq 
A proof of the completeness of P A (not quite the same as the original treat-
ment of the system by Lukasiewicz265 ) is outlined in exercise 29.2 below. 
Opposite in tendency to such formulations as P A and P A' in which econ-
omy is emphasized, are formulatlOns of the propositional calculus by Hil-
bert2611 which are designed to separate the roles of the various connectives, 
though at the cost of economy and of independence of the primitive connec-
tives. Of this latter kind is the system PH (§26). which is one of a number of 
closeiy related such formulations that are given by Hilbert and Bernays in 
the first volume of their Grundlagen der Mathematik (1934).167 
"'In the same paper, p. 16. 
"'In the paper cited in footnote 259. p. 163. Tht' axioms were previously announced. 
without proof of their sufficiency, in the paper cited in footnote 254. 
'''The system of 26.3(1) is in Wajsberg's paper of footnote 259. p. 165. previously 
announced in the paper of footnote 254. The same papers have also two other formu-
lations of the equivalence calculus by Wajsberg, one of them with a single axiom. 
Various other single axioms for the eqUIvalence calculus are quoted (without proof of 
sufficiency) in the paper cited in footnote 256. However. the shortest single axioms for 
the equivalence calculus, wIth rule" of inference as in 26.0. are due to LukaSIewicz. 
one of them being the axiom given in 26.3(2) (see a review by Heinrich Scholz in 
Zentralblatt fur Mathematik und IllYe Grenzgebiete, vo\. 22 (1940). pp. 289-290). 
'·'In the pape, c1ted in footnote 215. 
'''In his mimeographed Elementy Loglki Matematyr:znej. Warsaw 1929. 
"'E.g., in Abha>ldlungen aus dem J',1alhemat,schm Seminay dey Hambut'gischen Univet'-
sitat, voL 6 (1928). pp. 65-85. 
'''Hilbert and Bernays use the axiom p => q => • p => r => • p => qr in place of the shorter 
axiom p => • q => pq. They mention the obvious possibility of using the shorter axiom. 
but point out that by doing so in the case of the formulation of the propositional cal-
culus which they adopt primarily (and which 15 in some other respects not quite the 
same as our oystem PH) the independence of the axiom p => • q => P would be destroyed. 
In his LogIcal Calculus (1935-1936). p. 44, Be,na.ys introduces a formulation PH' of 
the propositional calculus which differs from PH only in having the law of reductio ad 
absurdum and the law of double negatIOn as axioms in place of the converse law of 
contraposition. The independence of p => • q => P as an axiom of PH was established 

§29] 
HISTORlCAL NOTES 
161 
By omitting from PH negation and the one axiom containing Tlegation, 
there is obtained a formulation pP of what Hilbert and Bernays call "posi-
tive Logik," or positive propositional calculus. This is intended to be that part 
of the propositional calculus which is in some sense independent of the existence 
of a negation (e.g., Peirce's law is not a theorem of It). By omitting all con-
nectives other than implication, and the axioms containing them, there is 
obtained a formulation P+ of the positive implicational propositional calculus. 
Such a system as PH has also the advantage (indicated by Hilbert and 
Bernays) of exhibiting in very convenient form the relationship between 
the full propositional calculus and the intuitionistic propositional calculus. 
Namely, the systems P~ and P~ of §26 are obtained by adding to pP negation 
and appropriate axioms containing negation. or in other words by altering 
only the negation axioms of PH' The formulation pk of the intuitionistic 
propositional calculus is due to Heinrich Scholz and Karl Schr6ter.268 The 
formulation P~ of the intuitionistic propositional calculus (employing f 
as primitive instead of negation, and adding the axiom f ::::> P to Pp) was 
given by Wajsberg,2e& but a similar observation regarding the possibility of 
using f in place of negation in formulating the intuitionistic propositional 
calculus had been made also by Gerhard Gentzen.110 
The formulation P r (26.14) of the full propositional calculus may be cred-
ited to V. Glivenko on the basis of his remark that a formulation of the full 
propositional calculus is obtained from a formulation of the intuitionistic 
propositional calculus by adjoining only the law of excluded middle as an 
additional axiom.21l 
Many other formulations of the propositional calculus and partial systems 
of propositional calculus are found in the literature. We mention in this sec-
tion only those which we have actually used in text or exercises, or which 
seem to have some outstanding interest or historical importance. 
The truth-table decision procedure for the propositional calculus (d. §15) 
is applied in an informal way to special cases by Frege in his Begrillsschrift 
abuv~ In ~(j.8; and its mdepcndence as all aXIOm uf PH' (a que:;tiull left upen by Bernay,,) 
may be established by a minor modification of the Same method. 
Additional results and remarks in connection with PH and related systems. including 
the positive implicational propositional calculus, the positive propositional calculus, 
and the intuitionistic propositional calculus, are in Supplement III of thtl second 
volume of Hilbert and Bernays's G"undlagen de" Mathematik. 
···Credited to them by Wajsberg In the paper cited ill footnote 211. 
"'In the paper cited in footnote 211. 
noSee Malhematische Zeitschri/I. vol. 39, p. 189. 
IIIIn his paper in Academle Royale de Belgique, Bullt'llns de la Cia sse des SCIences, 
series 5 vol. 15 (1929), pp. 183-188 (which contains also, as its principal result. the meta· 
theorems of exercise 26.15). 

162 
THE PROPOSITIONAL CALCULUS 
[CHAP. II 
of 1879 (in connection with implication and ~egationaS primitive connec· 
ttv .. ). The first 5tatement of it as a general decision procec!ure is six years 
later by Peircel7t (in connection with bnpitcation and ~QJl-implicatioll as 
primitive connectives). Much of the recent development of the method 
stems from its use by Lukasiewiczl78 and by Post.m The term tautology is 
taken from Wittgenstein.276 
• 
Using three truth-va.lues instead of two, and q\lth-tables in thee three truth· 
values. LukasiC)wic~ first introduced a three-valued propositlopal calculus (d. 
§19) in 1920.11' He was led to this by ideas about modality, according to which 
.. third truth-vaIQe-:-possibility, or better, contingency-has to be considered 
in a.dditioIl to truth and falsehooQ; but the abl\tra.ct importance pf thc new 
calcultls transcends that of any particlllar associated ideli.6 of this kind. Gen-
eralization to a many-valued propositional calculus, with v + 1 truth-values 
of which p. + 1 are designated (I ~ J.' < v), was made by Post in 1921,HT 
independently of Lukasiewicz, and from a purely abstract paint of view. After-
wards, but independently of Post, Lukasiewicz generalized his three-valued 
propositional calculus to obtain higher many-valued propositional calculi; this 
was in 1922, according to his statement, but was not published until 11}21} and 
1930. m I.ukasiewicz's calculi differ from those of Post in that there is just one 
designated truth-value, and also in not being lull (Le., not every possible truth-
function, in terms of the v truth-values, is represented by a form of which it is 
an associated function). \\·hen. however, Lukasiewicz's many-valued proposi-
tional calculi are extended tel full many-valued propositional calculi by the 
method of Slupecki. 270 they become special cases of those of Post. 
A primitive basis (especially axioms and rules of inferenee) for Lukasiewic;;'s 
three-valued propositional calculus, So that it becomes a logistic system, was 
provided by \Vajsberg;2aO and l.ukasiewicz and Tarski assert that this may also 
mIn his paper cited in footnote 67. pp. 190-192 (or Collected Papers, vol. 3, pp 
223-225). 
t1! Jan Lukasiewicz in Prugi4.d Filozoj,cmy, vol. 23 (1921), pp. 189-206, and in 
la ter pu blica tions. 
"'E. L. Post in the American Journal 0/ Afalhema/ics, voL 43 (1921), pp. 163---185. 
Il6Ludwig Wittgenstein. "Logisch-philosophlsche Abhandlung" in Annalen der Nalur-
philosophie, vol. 14 (lII21), pp. 185-262; reprinted in book form, with English trans-
lation in parallel, as Traclalus Logtco-philosophicus. 
m Ruch FiloEojiczny, vol. 5 (1920), pp. 169-171. Lukasiewicz's truth-table for ::::l 
appears in exercise 19.8, where a three-valued propositional calculus closely related 
to that of Lukasiewicz is described. 
mIn the paper cited in footnote 274, which is Post's dissertation of 1920. 
178In the publications cited in footnotes 243,265. and in Lukasiewicz'S Philo$ophische 
Bemerkungen zu mehrwertlgen Systemen des A ussagenkalkUls, which immediately follows 
(in the same periodical) the paper of footnote 243. 
171 J erzy Slupecki in Comptes Rendus des Seances de ia Societe des Sciences et des 
LeI/res de Varso(lie. Classe Ill, vol. 29 (19:36). pp. 9-11, and vol. 32 (1939), pp. 102-128. 
II°In the Comples Rendus des Seances de la Societe des Sciences el des Leltres de Varsovie, 
Classe III, vol. 24 (193!), pp. 126---148, Another system of axioms and rules of inference 
for Lukasiewicz's three-valued propositional calculus has been given recently by 
Alan Rose in The Journal o/the London l\lalhemalical Society, vol. 26 (1951), pp. 60--58. 

§29] 
HISTORICAL NOTES 
163 
be done for all the Lukasiewicz finitely many-valued propositional calculi, For 
full finitely many-valued propositional calculi primitive bases have been given 
by Slupecki."Q Ami more recently the question of primitive bases for finitely 
many-valued propositional calculi (and functional calculi) has been treated by 
J. B, Rosser and A. R Turquette in a series of papers in The Journal 01 Symbolic 
Logic. Lukasiewicz introduced also an infinitely many-valued propositional 
calculus, but the question of a primitive basis for this seems to be still open, 
For the purpose of proving independence of the axioms of the proposi· 
tional calculus, the use of many-valued truth-tables (with one or more 
designated values) was introduced by Bernays in his Habilitationsschrift of 
1918, but not published until 1926.281 This idea was also discovered indepen-
dently by L).lkasiewicz but not published, Tbe remark that the methclll \ .ill 
be exte,nded to rules of inference was made by HUlltmgton.282 The method 
employed in §19 of proving independence of the rule of substitution is due 
to Bernays (who suggested it to the writer in 1936), 
The independence results of 26.11 and the three-valued truth-table used 
to obtain them are due to Heyting,283 The result of :!6,1~. and the many-
valued truth-tables of 26.10 (except in the cases v 
1,2) are G6del's.284 
Proofs of consistency and completeness of the propositional calculus, 
based on the truth-table method, were first made by Post.285 Since then, a 
number of different proofs of completeness of the propositional calculus have 
been published, of which we mention here only those by Kalmar286 and 
Quine.287 Quine makes use of the particular formulation P w of the propo-
sitional calculus, with implication and f as primitive connectives. The for-
mulation PI of the propositional calculus, due to Wajsberg,288 combines 
some of the features of P 2 and pv/ and the method by which we proved the 
completeness of Pi in Chapter I is an adaptation to this case of the method 
mIn the Mathematische Zeilschri/t, voL 25 (1926), pp, 305-320, 
uaE. V, Huntington in the Annals 0/ Mathematics, ser, 2 voL 36 (1935), pp. 313-324, 
'83The first two of the independence results of 26.11 are proved in his paper of 1930, 
cited in footnote 209, Ail of them follow immediately by th", same method, whether for 
Heyting's original formulation of the intuitionistic propositional calcuills or any other 
IO'A kademie dey Wissenscha/ten in Wien, M athematisch-natUYWISSenschaftliche Klasse, 
Anzeiger, vol. 69 (1932), pp, 65-66. 
086In the paper of footnote 274, 
""LaszI6 Kalmar in Acta Scientiarum Malhemalical.um. vol. 7 no, 4 (1935), pp, 
222-243, 
18'1n The Journal of Symbolic l.ogic. vol. 3 (1938), pp, 37-40, References to earlier 
completeness proofs will be found in this paper. 
asBln a paper in Wiadomosci Malemalyczne, vol. 47 (1939). pp, 119-139, The idea of 
applying Kalmar'S method to this formulation of the propositional calculus was sug-
gested to the writer by Leon Henkin as yielding perhaps the briefest available complete-
ness proof for the propositional calculus (if based on independent aXlOJTlS with modus 
ponens and substitution as rules of inference), 
The system p~ of exercise 26,21 is obtained from this same paper of \Vajsberg, where 
it is briefly mentioned on p, 139 in indicating a correction to the paper of footnote 211, 

164 
THE PROPOSITIONAL CALCULUS 
[CHAP. II 
of Kalmar. Especially the method of the proof of "'152 (which is a necessary 
preliminary to the proof of completeness in §IS), the idea of using *151 as 
a lemma for *152, and the method of the proof of "'151, are taken from 
Kahmir with obvious adaptations. 
For the implicational propositional calculus, a completeness proof was 
published by Wajsberg2B9 (an earlier completeness proof by Tarski seems not 
to have been published). The method which was suggested in 18.3 for a 
completeness proof for the implicational propositional calculus follows 
Kalmar288 in general plan; but the idea of using a propositional variable in 
place of t is taken from Wajsberg,289 and the crucial idea of taking B' to be 
B => r => r (rather than B) when the value of B is t, together with correspond-
ing changes at various places in proving analogues of *151 and *152, was 
communicated to the writer by Leon Henkin in July 1948. 
The proof of equivalence of P2 to PI in §23 follows in large part a 
proof used by Wajsberg2B9 for a similar purpose. 
The deduction theorem (§13) is not a peculiarity of the propositional cal-
culus but has analogues for many other logistic systems (in particular for 
fllllctional calculi of first and higher orders, as we shall see in the chapters 
following). The idea of the deductIOn theorem and the first proof of it for 
a particular system must be credited to Jacques Herbrand.2!10 Its formulation 
as a general methodological principle for logistic systems is due to Tarski.2II1 
The name "deduction theorem" is taken from the German "Deduktions-
theorem" of Hilbert and Bernays.292 
The idea of using the deduction theorem as a primitive rule of inference in 
formulations of the propositional calculus or functional calculus is due in-
dependently to Jaskowski293 and Gentzen.294 Such a primitive rule of infer-
ence has a less elementary character than is otherwise usual (d. footnote 
181), and indeed it would not be admissible for a logistic system according 
mIn the paper cited in footnote 259. 
epoA modified form of the deduction theorem, adapted to a special formulation of the 
functional calculus of first order. was stated by him, without proof, in an abstract in the 
Comptes Rendus des Seances de {'Academic des Sciences (Paris), vol. 186 (1928), see 
p. I ~7 5. The ded uction theorem was stated and proved. for a system like the functional 
calculus of order w, in his Pari, dissertation, Recherches sur la Theorie de la Demon-
stration, published in 1!}30 as no. 33 of the Travaux de la Socitflif des Sciences el des 
Leltres de Varsovie, see pp. 61-!12. In proving the deduction theorem, in Chapter I and 
again in Chapter III. we employ what is substantially Herbrand's method . 
.. lIt is stated by him in this way in a paper in the Comptes Rendus des Stances de la 
Societe des Scie·nces et des Let/res de Varsovie, Classe III, vol. 23 (1930)--see Axiom 8· 
on p. 24. 
oUGrundlagen der Mathematik, vol. 1, p. 155, and vol. 2, p. 387. 
"'Stanislaw Jaskowski, O'J the RHles 0/ Suppositions in Formal Logic. 1934. 
··'In the Mathematische Zeitschri/t, vol. 39 (1934), pp. 176-210,405-431; see especially 
II. Abschnitt. pp. 183-190. 

§29] 
HISTORlrAL NOTES 
165 
t<2 the definition as we actually gave it in §07. But this disadvantage may be 
t~ought to be partly offset by a certain naturalness of the method; indeed 
to take the deduction theorem as a primitive rule is just to recognize formally 
the usual informal procedure (common especially in mathematical reasoning) 
of proving an implication by making an assumption and drawing a conclusion. 
Employment of the deduction theorem as primitive or derived rule must 
not, however, be confused with the use of Sequenzen by Gentzen2115 (d. 
39.l0-a9.l2 below). For Gentzen's arrow, --+, is not comparable to our 
syntactical notation, 1-, but belongs to his object language (as is clear from 
the fact that expressions containing it appear as premisses and conclusions 
in applications of his rules of inference). And in fact we might well have 
introduced Sequenzen in connection with PI by means of the following 
definition schemata:296 
AI' A 2 , 
0 
0 
., An--+ 
-* At :::) • A2 :::J • 
0 
0 
0 An :::J I, 
AI' A 2, 
0 
: 
., All --+ Bt, B 2, . 
0 
0, B", 
-* At :::J • A2 :::J • 
0 
0 
0 An :::J Ht V B2 V 
0 
•• V Bm 
where n = 0, I, 2,3, .. " and m = 1,2,3, ... , and where in both cases the 
abbreviation is to be used only for all entire asserted wff (never for a wf 
proper part of such). Thus we would have obtained all the formal properties 
of Gentzen's Sequenzen, and in particular would have been able to state the 
derived rules of 14.9 somewhat more conveniently. 
For the derived rules of 14.9 themselves (as an alternative to use of the 
deduction theorem) credit should be given to Frege, rules very similar in 
nature and purpose having been employed by him in the first volume of 
his Grundgesetze der A rithmetik (1893). 
The derived rule of sub~titlltivity of equivalence (*159) anti the related 
metatheorem of 15.2 were demonstrated for the propositional calculus-
specifically, for PR-by POSt. 297 The related metatheorem *229 (where two 
implications take the place of an equivalence) was obtained for the implica-
tional propositional calculus by Wajsberg. 298 
The full disjunctive normal form (24.9) may he traced back to Boole's law 
295Ibld., Ill. Abschnitt. pp. 190-210. Gcntzen's use of Stqw'nzen is taken in part 
from Paul Hertz-see a paper by Gentzen in the Mathematische Annalen, voL 107(1932). 
pp. 329-350. and references to Hertz which are there given. 
···Substantially the same equivalences as those WhICh appear from these definition 
schemata are given by Gentzen in the paper just cited, p. 180 and p. 418. 
mIn the paper cited in footnote 274. See also the discussion of truth·functions and 
formal equivalence in the introduction to the first volume of Principia 11!Iathematica 
(1910). 
I08In the paper cited in footnote ~59. 

16() 
THE PROPOSITIONAL CALCULUS 
[CHAP. II 
of development (28.1(5), (6)), and it is used on this basis by Schroder in 
Der Operationskreis des Logikhalhuls (1877). Both the full disjunctive normal 
form and its dual, the full con]ltnctive normal form, were given in 1880 by 
Peirce. 2BB Schroder ·and Peirce state the normal forms for the class calculus, 
but extension to the propositional calculus is immediate. 
The principle of duality is to be credited to Schroder, who gives it for the 
class calculus in his Operationskreis, just cited, and again in his Algebra der 
Logik. Schroder does not extend the principle of duality to the propositional 
calculus, but such extension is immediate and seems to have been assumed 
by various later authors without special statement of it (e.g., by Whitehead, 
Couturat, Sheffer) Heinrich Behmann, in the paper cited in footnote 299, 
explicitly establishes the principle of duality in a form corresponding to 
*165 not only for the propositional calculus but also, in effect, for the func-
tional calculi of first and second orders (where quantifiers are involved in 
additioll to sentence connectives~see Chapters III-V below); and Hilbert 
and Ackermann in the first edition of their Grundzuge der theoretischen Logik 
(1928) establish analogues of *164 and *165 for the propositional calculus 
and for the functional calculus of first order. However, a principle of duality 
in connection with quantifiers appears already in the third volume of 
Schroder's Algebra der Logik. 
EXERCISES Z9 
Z9'O. (1) Establish the completeness of Pr by proving as theorems the 
axioms of some formulation of the propositional calculus which has the 
same primitive connectives and the same rules of infe,rence and is already 
known to be complete. (2) Discuss the independence of the axioms of Pro 
Z9. I. (1) Establish the completeness of the partial system of propositional 
calculus pkK • (Compare IS.R.) (2) Discuss the independence of the axioms 
of pkK • 
'"'In the Amertcan Journal 0/ lvfalhemalics, vol. 3 (ISS0), pp. 37-39 (or Collected 
Papers, vol. 3, pp. 133-134). 
Heinrich Behmann (in a paper in the Mathematische Annalen, vol. 86 (1922), pp. 
163-229) gives the name "disjunktive Normalform" to a disjunction of terms C j in 
which each term C j has the form of a conjunction of propositional variables and ne-
gations of propositional variables; and the name "konjunktive Normalform" to the 
dual of thIS. For the use of these normal fortns in the propositional calculus, Behmann 
refers to Bernays's unpu bUshed H abilitationsschri/t of 1915. 
The full conjunctive normal form corresponds to the "ausgezeichnete konjunktive 
Normalform" of Hilbert and Ackermann (in Gt'und4uge det' Iheol'elischen Logik) and 
is thus a special case of the "konjunktive Normalform" of Bernays. Behmann, Hilbert 
and Ackermann. And dually the full disjunctive normal form is a special case of the 
disjunctive normal form. 

§29] 
EXERCISES 29 
167 
:19.:1. Establish the completeness of P i\ by proving the following theorems 
of P A (in order) and then using the result of exercise 12,7: 
_p ~ q:J ~-q ~ qJ ::;) • p:J • -q ::J q 
_q ::J -P ::;) • P ::;) • -q ::J q 
_q :J -P -:::::J • -q ~ q ~ q -:::::J • P ::;) q 
q -:::::J • -q ::;) q :J q ::J • P -:::::J q 
_ 
P -:::::J. -q -:::::J q -:::::J q 
_q::::> q :J q ::;J rp ~ qJ :J • -[P ~ q] ::J • P ::::> q 
_q -:::::J q -:::::J q ::::> :p -:::::J q l ::::> • p ::J q 
q::::> • p -:::::J q 
_q ::;J -P -:::::J • P :J q 
_p::::> • P ::J q 
p::;Jq::Jp~P 
:19.3. In the system p,\, use the method of truth-tables to establish the 
independence of the three axioms and the rule of modus ponens, (Except ill 
one case, that of the first axiom, a system of two truth-values is sufficient.) 
:19.4. Use the result of 29,2 to establish the completeness of the system 
PJ of propositional calculus in which the primitive connecti\'cs and the 
rules of inference are the same as for PH (see §26) and the axioms ar,' the 
nine following: 
pvq=.p:Jq::Jij 
P:Jq:J·qv·P:JY 
p=q::::>·P:Jij 
p=qv.qvp 
P:J·q=p=q 
p ::::> • pq = q 
p:J.q:J.r:Jp 
P=-P:Jq 
pq -:::::J P 
, (This system-minimizing the length of the separate axioms rather than 
the number of axioms-is due to Stanislaw Jaskowski, 1ll SLudia Societatis 
Scientiarum Torunensis, vol. 1 no. I (lB4S).) 
:19.5. Discuss the independence of the axioms of Pi' 

III. Functional Calculi of First Order 
The functional calculus 0/ first order has or may have, in addition to no-
tations of the propositional calculus, also individual variables, quantifiers 
with individual variables as operator variables (ef. §06), individual constants, 
functional variables, functional constants. 
Various different functional calculi of first order are distinguished accord-
ing to just which of these notations are introduced. But the individual 
variables are always included, and either some functional variables or some 
fUIlctional constants. And one or more quantifiers are always included, 
either the universal quantifier or one or more quantifiers which are (when 
taken together, and in the presence of the other primitive notations) 
definitionally equivalent to the universal quantifier in the sense that they 
can be obtained from the universal quantifier, and the universal quan-
tifier can be obtained from them, by abbreviative definitions (d. §ll, and 
footnote 168) which reproduce the requisite formal properties. Propositional 
variables are not necessarily included, but there must be a complete system 
of primitive connectives for the propositional calculus, or something from 
which such a complete system of sentence connectives can be obtained by 
abbreviative definitions so as to reproduce the requisite formal properties. 
In this chapter we study a particular formulation of each of the functional 
calculi of first order, the various formulations being in their development so 
nearly parallel to one another that they can be treated simultaneously with-
out confusion or awkwardness. \Vhcre not necessary to distinguish the var-
ious different functional calculi of first order we speak just of "the func-
tional calculus of first order," and the particular formulation of the func-
tional calculus of first order smdied in this chapter is then called "Fl." 
One of the functional calculi of first order is the pure /lJnctional calculus 0/ 
first order (as explained in §30 below), and we call our formulation of it 
'T1p." Thus "P" is ambiguous among various logistic systems, one of which 
is FIr. 
In Chapter I V we shall consider further the pure functional calculus of 
first order, introducing, in particular, an alternative formulation of it, F~p. 

§30] 
P RI MITIV E BASIS 
169 
30. The primitive basis of FI, The primitive symbols of FI are the 
eight improper symbols 
[:::> 
and the infinite list of individual variables 
x 
Y Z 
Xl 
Yl 
Zl 
X 2 
Y2 
Z2 
alit> some or all of the following, including either at least one of the infinite 
lists of functional variables or at least one functional constant: 300 the infinite 
list of propositional variables 
P q 
r 
S PI 
ql 
r l 
SI P2 
and for each positive integer n an infinite list of tt-ary functional variables, 
namely, the infinite list of singulary functional variables 
FI G1 HI 
F~ G~ Hi 
F~ 
and the infinite list of binary functional variables 
F2 
G2 
H2 
F~ Gi 
H~ F~ 
and so on, further any number of individual constants, any number of sin-
gulary functional constants, any number of binary functional constants, 
any number of ternary functional constants, and so on. \Ve do not specify 
the particular symbols to be used as functional constants, but allow them 
to be introduced as required, subject to conditions (B) and (T) of §07 (as to 
(B), d. also footnote 113). 
In the case of each category of variables, the order indicated for them is 
called their alphabetic order. 
The formation rules of FI are: 
30i. 
30ii. 
30iii. 
30iv. 
30v . 
A propositional variable standing alone is a WfPOI 
If f is an tt-ary functional variable or an n-ary functional constant, 
and if all a2, ... , a" are individual variables or individual constants 
or both (not necessarily all different), then f(al , a 2, .•. , a,,) is a wit. 
If r is wf then -r is wi. 
If rand tJ. are wf then [r:::> £1] is wi. 
If r is wf and a is an individual variable then (Va)r is wf. 
• OOWe require that either all or no tIC of the variables In anyone category be :r.cluded, 
e.g" either the entire infinite list of binary functional variables or none of them. But 
where individual or functional constants are pre~ent, their number may be fInite. 
,o'Of course 30i may be vacuous in the ease of certain systems F', namely, if propo-
sitional variables are not included among the primitive symbols. We might therefore 
have written, "A propositional variable stanCj.ing alone, if the system F' contains such, 
is a wii." The added clause (between commas) increases clearness, but is not otherwise 
actually necessary. 

170 
FUNCTIONAL CALCULI OF FIRST ORDER [CHAP. III 
A formula of Fl is wf if and only if its being so follows from the formation 
rules. As in the case PI and Pz (see §§IO, 20) there follows, for a particular 
given system Fl, an effective test of well-formedness. The demonstration of 
this is left to the reader. 
The wf parts A and B of a wff [A:::l BJ are called the antecedent and 
COIl sequent respectively, and the occurrence of :::l between them is called the 
principal implication sign. That the antecedent and consequent and 
principal implication sign of any wff [A:::l BJ are unique is part of the 
metatheorem **312 of the next section, 
The converse of [A:::l BJ is the wff [B :::l AJ obtained by interchanging 
the antecedent and consequent. The converse of 
('v'a1)('v'a2) ••• ('v'anHA :::l BJ is ('v'a1)('v'a2) •.• ('v'an)[B :::l A]. 
The elementary parts of a wff are the parts which are wf according to 30i 
or 30H, i.e., they are those wf parts which have either the form of a prop-
ositional variable alone or the form f(av a 2, •• " an) where f is an n-ary 
functional variable or constant and ai, a 2, •• " an are individual variables 
or constants. 
An occurrence of a variable a in a wff A is called a bound occurrence of a 
in A if it is an occurrence in a wf part of A of the form ('v' a) B; otherwise it 
is called a free occurrence of a in A. The bound variables of A are the variables 
which have bound occurrences in A; and the tree variables of A are those 
which have free occurrences in A.302 
From the definition of a wff of P it follows that all occurrences of prop-
ositional and functional variables are free occurrences. But an occurrence 
of an individual variable in a wff of Fl may be either free or bound. 
A wff is an n-ary form if it has exactly n different free variables, a constant 
if it has no free variables. In P, all forms are propositional/arms, and all 
constants (wffs) are propositional constants or sentences. (Cf. note 117.) 
In addition to the syntactical notations, 
explained in §§10, 12, we shall use also the syntactical notation 
:)~A' 
for the result of substituting r for all free occurrences of b 111 A, and 
S~b .... bnA' 
~ r1r Ii, •• r n 
for the result of substituting simultaneously r 1 for all free occurrences of 
'"'Compare the first four paragraphs of §06. and footnotes 28, 36, 96. 

§30] 
PRIMITIVE BASIS 
171 
hI' r 2 for all free occurrences of b 2, ..• , r n for all free occurrences of b n , 
throughout A (the dot indicating substitution for free occurrences only). 
In writing wffs of P we make use of the same abbreviations by omission 
of brackets that were explained in §ll, including the same conven tions 
about association to the left and about the use of heavy dots. WE' also ab-
breviate by omitting superscripts on functional variables~writing, e.g., F (x) 
instead Iil#F1(x), and F (x, y) instead of P(x, y)~since the superscript required 
to make the formula wi can always be supplied in only one way (ef. 30ii). 
Also we adopt for use in connection with Fl the definition schemata 
D3-12, understanding the "-" which appears in them to be the primitive 
symbol- of Fl. However, the brackets which appear as part of the notation 
[A, B, C] introduced by D12 must (unlike other brackets) never be omitted. 
And we add further the following definition schemata, in which a, 8 1, 
as, ... must be individual variables: 
DI3.303 
DI4. 304 
D15.306 
DI6. 806 
Dl7. 
(a)A ->- (Va)A 
(3a)A ....... (a)-A 
[A ::l.,., ...•• BJ ... (a1)(a2) •.. (an) • A ::.> B 
[A =.,."" •• BJ -+ (at) (a2) ... (a,,) • A = B 
[A I. B] -+ (a) • A! B 
n = 1,2,3, .. . 
n = 1,2,3, .. . 
In abbreviating wffs by omission of brackets, we nse (as already stated) 
the convention of association to the left of §ll. This convention is modified 
in the same way as in §ll by dividing bracket-pairs into categories, the 
same division into categories being used as before with the following ad-
ditions: (1) when one of the signs ::l, =, I is used 'with subscripts (according 
to Dl5-17), the bracket-pair that belongs with it is considered in the same 
category' as if there were no subscripts; (2) the combinations of symbols 
(Va), (a), (3a) (simple quantifiers with operator variable) are placed along 
with the sign -, in a fourth and lowest category, in the same sense as already 
explained in §1l for -. 
In stating the rules of inference and the axiom schemata of Fl, we make 
use (for convenience) of the definition schemata and other conventions of 
abbreviation which have just been described. 
""l.e., in writing wffs we may as an abbreviatlOn simply omit the symbol V. 
Compare the discussion of tbe universal quantifier in §06. 
1°'Compare the discussion of the existential quantifier in §06. 
""Compare the discussion of formal implication and formal equivalence in §06. 
The purely abbreviative definition schemata. Dl5 and D16, are to be distinguished 
from the seman tical statements made in §06. The latter provide definitions of formal 
implication and formal equivalence rather in sense (Z) of footnote 168. and they must 
apply to object languages in which the notations in question are truly present. 

172 
FUNCTIONAL CALCULI OF FIRST ORDER [CHAP. III 
The rules of inference are the two following: 
*300. 
From A:=J B and A to infer B 
(Rule 01 modtlS ponens.) 
*301. 
From A, if a is an individual variable, to infer (a)A. 
(Rule of generalization.) 
In an application of the rule of modus ponens, we call A :=J B the ma1'or 
premiss, and A the minor pre·miss. In an application of the rule of generali-
zation, we say that the variable a has been generalized upon. 
The axioms of Fl are mfinite in number, and are represented by means of 
five axiom schemata in the manner described in §27. These axiom schemata 
are as follows: 
*302. 
A:=J. B :=J A 
*303. 
A:=J [B :=J C] => • A => B=>. A => C 
*304. 
-A:=J -B :=J • B => A 
*305, 
A::::>. B=>. A:=J (a)B, where a is any individual variable which is 
not a free variable of A, 
*306. 
(a) A => S~AI, where a is an individual variable, b is an individual 
variable or an individual constant, and no free occurrence of a in 
A is in a wf part of A of the form (b)C. 
In *305 and *306, we here meet for the first time with axiom schemata 
which, unlike those introduced in §27, have conditions attached to them 
(stated in the syntax language). For example, according to *305, not every 
wff A::>. B:=J • A::::> (a)B is an axiom, but only those wffs of this form which 
satisfy the further condition that A contains no free occurrence of a. 
The intention of *305 and *305 may be made clearer by giving some 
examples, for the sake of which we suppose that the propositional variables 
and the singulary and binary functional variables are included among the 
primitive symbols of Fl. 
_ 
Thus one of the wffs which is an axiom according to *305 is30G 
P:=J", F(x) => • p:=J (x) F (::c), 
or, as we may write it if we do not use the abbreviation of D15, 
(x)[P ::::> F(xr :=J • p::> (x)F(x). 
(This may be called a basic instance of *305, in the sense that all other in-
"'In tillS example. A is the wff p. a IS the individual variable x. and:a is the wff F(ee). 

§30J 
PRIMITIVE BASIS 
l73 
Itances of ·305 may be obtained from it by means of rules of substitution 
to be discussed in §35, and that no shorter instance of ·305 has this property.) 
Again the wff 
G(x) =>11 H(y) ::::> • G(x) => (y)H(y) 
is an axiom, an instance of *305 (though not a basic instance). And also 
an cugpm by *305 is 
F(x) =>11 [G(y, z) =>. H(z)] ::::> • F(x) => • G(y, z) ::::>1/% H(z), 
and so on, an infinite number of axioms altogether. But the following wff 
is not an instance of *305 and not an axiom: 
F(x) =>., G(x) ::::> • F(x) => (x)G(x) 
Some wffs which are instances of ·306 and therefore axioms are the follow-
ing (the first two are basic instances):307 
(x)F(x) => F(y) 
(x)F(x) ::::> F(x) 
F(x) ::::>", (y)G(y) ::::> • F(y) => (y)G(y) 
F(x) =>", (x)G(x) ::::> • F(y) => (x)G(x) 
F(x, y) ::::>", (z)G(x, z) => • F(y, y) ::::> (z)G(y, z) 
On the other hand the following wffs are not instances of ·306 and not 
axioms:308 
(x) (y)F(x, y) ::::> (y)F(y, y) 
F(x) ::::>", (y)G(x, y) ::::> • F(y) => (y)G(y, y) 
As we did in connection with formulations of the propositional calculus, 
we shall place the sign f- before a wff to express that it is a theorem. 
Among the various functional calculi of first order, P, whose primitive 
bases have now been stated, we distinguish certain ones by special names 
as follows. The pure functional calculus of first order, Flp, is that in which the 
primitive symbols include all the propositional variables and all the func-
tional variables (singulary, binary, ternary, etc.), but no individual constants 
and no functional constants. The singulary functional calculus oj first order, 
FI.1, is that in which the primitive symbols include all the propositional 
variables and all the singulary functional variables, but no other functional 
variables, no individual constants, and no functional constants; if to these 
3O'To state quite explicitly how these five wffs are instances of "S06, we have, taking 
them in order: in the first one, A is F(x). a is x, b is y; in the second one, A is F(x), 
a is x, b is z; in the third one, A is F(x)::::) (y)G(y). a is x, b is y; 10 the fourth one, 
A is F(z)::::) (x)G(z), a is x, b is y; in the last one, A is F(x, y)::::) (z}G(x. z), a is x. 
and b is y. 
IOIThe first one of the two is, however, a theorem, as we shall see later (exercise 34.3). 

I 
174 
FUNCTIONAL CALCULI OF F1 RST ORDER [CHAP. III 
primitive symbols we add the binary functiollal variables we have the binary 
functional calculus of first order, p,2; and so on. A functional calculus of 
first order in which the primitive symbols include individual constants or 
functional constants or both is an applied functional calcul1ls 0/ first order; 
if no propositional variables and no functional variables are included, it is a 
simple applied functional calculus 01 first order (in this case there must be 
at least one functional constant). 
This terminology will be useful to us later. But in this chapter we shall 
often not need to distinguish different functional calculi of first order by 
name, because, as already explained, we treat the various functional calculi 
of first order simultaneously by giving a development which holds equally 
for anyone or ,111 of them. 
The intended principa 1 111 terpreta bons of the functional calculi of first order 
may be roughly indicated by saying that propositional variables and sentence 
connectives are to hav,· the same meaning as in the propositional calculus, the 
universal quantifier. (V ). is to have the meaning described in §06, and the func· 
tional variables are to have propositional functions of individuals as values 
(e.g., the range of a singulary functional variable is the singulary functions from 
individuals to truth·values, and similarly for binary functional variables, etc.). 
For application of a function to its argument or arguments the notation described 
in §O:-I is used. For the individuals. i.e., the range of the individual variables, 
various choices may be made, so that various different principal il'.terpretations 
result. Indeed if no individual or functional constants are among the primitive 
symbols, it is usual to allow the individuals to be any well-defined non-empty 
class'D> Bllt If there are individual or functional constants, the intended inter-
pretation of these may lead to restnctions upon or a special choice of the class 
of individuals. 
\Ve illustrate by stating the semantical rules explicitly in two cases, namely 
that of the pure functional calculus of first order, FIP, and that of a simple 
applied functional calculus of first order. ph, which has two ternary functional 
constants, I and II, and no other functional constants or individual constants 
among its primitive symbols. 
I n the case of pP, some lion-empty class must first be chosen as the individ uals. 
and there is then one principal interpretation, as follows: 
a. 
The individual variables are variables having the individuals as their 
range. 310 
'O'The term "indlvidual" was introduced by Russell in connection with the theory 
oi types, to be disclls,;ed below ;n Chapter VI. A rather special meaning was given to 
the term by Russell, the individuals being described as things "destitute of complexity" 
(Russell, 1908) or as objects which "are neither propositions nor functions" (Whitehead 
and Russell, 1910). But in the light of Russell's recognition that only relative types are 
actually relevant in any context, it is now usual to employ "individual" in the way 
described in the text. CL Carnap. Abyiss dey Logistf.h (1929), p. 19. 

§30] 
P RIi'vIlTl V E BASIS 
175 
boo 
The propositional variables are variables havmg the range t ano f. 
b,. 
The singulary functional variables are variables having as their range the 
singulary (propositional) functions from individuals to truth-values. OlD 
b a. 
The binary functional variables are variables ha"ing as their range the 
binary propositional functions whosp range is the ordered pam; of individuals. 3lO 
b n , 
The n-ary functional variables are variables having as their range the 
n-ary propositional functions whose range is the ordered n-t\lples of individuals,no 
co' 
A wff consisting of a proposltional variable a standing alone has the 
value"'; for the value t of a, and the value f for the value f of a, 
C n • 
Let f(al , a., . , ' , an) be,a wff in which f is an n-ary functional variable, 
and a" a •.. , , , an are individual variables. not necessanly all different, Let 
b l , hi' ... , h m be the complete list vf different individual variables among 
8 1, a i , ... , an' Consider a 
system of values, b of f, and b" b", ., b .. of 
hi' hi' .. ' , h m ; and let aj, a" ' .. , an be the values which are thus given to 
all a 2,. ., an in order, Then the value of f(a l , a., . 
, an) for the system of 
values b, bl, b •. .. , , b", of f. hi' b", "b", (in that order) is b(a1, a." 
., a n ),31l 
d, 
For a given system of values of the free variables of -A, the value of -A 
is f if the value of A is t; and the value of -A IS t if the value of A is f.m 
e. 
For a given system of values of the free variables of LA ::J B], the value of 
[A ::J B] is t if either the value of B is t or the value of A is f; and the value of 
[A => BJ is f if the value of B is f and at the same time the value of A IS t, 
f. 
Let a be an individual variable and let A be any wif, For a given system 
of values of the free variables of ('ta)A, the value of ('talA is t if the value of A 
is t for every value of a; and the value of ('ta)A is f if the value of A is f for at 
least one value of a,3" 
'10SinCl' the individual and fUllet,,,nal variables have vabps as v<triables, It might 
therefore be thought mc,re natural to cUfbl<ler them ",Us wh,'u "t'llllilllg alune ane.: to 
provide seman tical rules giving them v:Jiue, as forms (as rule Co does ill the case uf the 
propositional variables), Also a similar ["mark might be th(Jllg~lt to apply to individu;d 
and functional constants in an applied functlOllal calculus of first order. For the logistic 
system of Chapter X we shall indeed follow this idea, But for the functional calculi of 
:' first (and higher) order it i~ practically more convenient not to call a fu[mula wi which 
consists of an indi"idual or functional variable or an mdividual or functional constant 
standing alone, In adopting this terminology for the functIonal calculi, we shall never-
theless regard the individual and functional variables and the indIvidual and functional 
constants as proper symbols (d, footnote RO) and as having meaning in iS0lation, And 
in particular we shall speak of the individual and functlonal 'constants ac, having deno-
tations-which are given by the semantical rules, 
allThe same notation for application of a function to its arguments that we have intro-
duced in the object language is here US",rl also in th", meta-language, We shall follow 
this practice generally, not considering it a violatIOn of the next-to-Iast paragraph of 
§08, For a rare case in which this might lead to ambiguity in conllection wlth autonyrny, 
we hold in reserve the possibility of an appropriate circumlocution to render the mean-
ing unmistakable. 
allThis and following rule~ are to be understood according to the cOI1\'cntions(lntr'J-
duced in §lO) that: (Il to have a value fOI a null class of vall abIes is to denote; (:2; thl' 
value of a constant for any system of values of any variables l~ the denot1l.tinIl of the 
constant; (3) the value of a form for any system of values uf "ny variables whIch mclude 
tlf.s!ree variables 01 the lorm is the same as the value of the form for the given val\ll's of 
the free variables of the form (values of other variables being ignored), 
aUN ate should be taken of the following special cases of rule f and rule " in accordance 
with the conventions referred to in footnote 312. If A contains the individual variable 

176 
FUNCTIONAL CALCULI OF FIRST ORDER [CHAP. III 
For convenience of reference we have here indicated an infinite list of rules 
bo' bl , b., ... and an infinite list of rules co, cl , ca, •.•. These may, however, be 
condensed in statement into just two rules, band C. IU 
In the case of ph, the individuals shall be the natural numbers, Le., the positive 
integers and O. There is one principal interpretation, as follows:. 
lXO' The individual variables are variables having a non-empty range ~. 
lXI . The range ~ of the individual variables is the natural numbers. 
Po. Each of 1: and II denotes a ternary propositional function of the 
members of ~. 
PI' 
1: denotes the ternary propositional function of natural numbers whose 
value, for any natural numbers al• a., a. as arguments (in that order), is tor f 
according as aa is or is not the sum of al and a l . 
p,. II denotes the ternary propositional function of natural numbers whose 
value, for any natural numbers ai' a., a. as arguments (in that order), is t or f 
according as a. is or is not the product of al and aJ. 
y. 
Let f be a ternary functional constant denoting the propositional function 
b, and let ai' a., as be individual variables, not necessarily all different. Then 
the value of f(a l , a •. a.) for a system of values of the individual variables is 
b(al • a., a.). where ai' a" as are the respective values of ai' a., aa. 
o. 
Identical in wordmg to rule d above. 
f 
Identical in wording to rule e above. 
C. 
Identical in wording to rule f above .... 
EXERCISES 30 
30.0. Express the following proposition by a wf of ph (taking the principal 
interpretation of Flh): For all natural numbers a, b, c, if a + b = c, then b + a=c. 
30.1. Similarly, express in ph: For all natural numbers a, b, either a ~ b 
or b ~ a. (An abbreviative definition should first be introduced to represent the 
relation ~, say [a ~ bJ ->- (3c)1:(a, c, b) where a and b are any individual 
variables and c is the first individual variable in alphabetic order which is not 
the same as either a or b.) 
a as its sole free variable, then (ValA denotes t if the value of A is t for every value of a, 
and (Va)A denotes f if the value of A is f for at least one value of a. If A does not con-
tain the individual variable a as a free variable. the value of (Va)A is the same as the 
value of A, for any system of values of the free variables. If A contains no free variables, 
and if a is any individual variable, (ValA has the same denotation as A. 
3HLe., in an appropriate semantical meta-Ignguage the two infinite lists of rules may 
be reduced to two rules, as described. It is beyond the scope of our present treatment to 
undertake the detailed formalization (of the meta-language) which would be necessary 
to answer the question, what is an appropriate semantlcal meta-language for this pur-
pose. \\le remark, however, using a terminology to be explained in later chapters, that 
such a semantical meta-language might with the aid of certain artifices be based on an 
applied functional calculus of sufficiently high (finite) order, functional constants being 
introduced to represent certain syntactical and seman tical notions and axioms (postu o 
lates) added concerning them. 

§30] 
EXERCISES 30 
177 
30.2. Simi!arly, express in Flh: if two natural numbers have a product equal 
to 0, then one of them is equal to O. (A notation, say Z.(a), should first be intro-
. duced by abbreviative definition to represent the proposltional fUllction, equality 
to O. Use may then be made of the wff (3z) • II(x, y, z)Zo(z) to express that two 
natural numbers [values of x and yJ have a product equal to 0.) 
3°.3. Similarly, find in Flh wffs expressing as nearly as possible each of the 
following; (1) A natural number remains the same if it is multiplied by 1. 
(2) ThtlllSum of two odd numbers is an even number. (3) For every prime number 
there exists a greater prime number; (4) The one and only even prime number is 
2. (5) For all natural numbers a, b, and all natural numbers c except 0, if {lC ~ be, 
then a ~ b; (6) For all natural numbers a, b, (a + b) 2 = (a 3 "';" b9 ) + 2ab. 
3°,4- Consider an applied functional calculus of first order, F'&, which has the 
functional constants 1: and II, with the same meaning as III F'h, and in addition 
has all propositional and functional variables The principal interpretation may 
be taken as obvious by analogy with those given for Flr' and F'h, the individuals 
being again the natural numbers. In this functional calculus of first order, 
express as nearly as possible, by means of a wff containing free fUllctional varia-
bles, each of the following assertions: (1) In any non-empty class of Tlatural 
numbers there is a least number,'" (2) If a non-empty class of natural numbers 
contains no greatest natural number, then for any given na.tural number it 
contains a greater natural number. (:I) The relation ~ between natural numbers 
is characterized by the three conditions;'" that it holds between 0 and every 
natural number; that it does not hold between any natural number other than 
o and 0; and that (for all natural numbers a and 0) it rwlcls between a -:- 1 and 
b + 1 if and only if it holds between a and b. (4) For every natural number k, the 
sum of the odd numbers less than 211 is k", (Suggestion: Given a class C of natural 
numbers, the relation between a natural number k and the Slim of the natural 
numbers of C which are less than k is characterized by the three conditions: that 
it holds between 0 and 0; that it does not hold between 0 and any natural number 
other than 0; and that, for all natural numbers a and b, it holds between a + 1 
and b if and only if there is a natural number e such that it holds between a and 
C, and b is equal to c + a or c according as a does or does not belong to C.) 
(~) Perfect numbers exist,117 
30.5. Taking the individuals to be the odd perfect numbers,317 let an inter-
pretation of F'p be given by the same semantical rules a-f as for a principal 
interpretation. (1) If there are odd perfect numbers, the interpretation is a 
principal interpretation; on this hypothesis, show that the mterpretation is 
sound, (2) On the hypothesis that there are no odd perfect numbers, show that 
the interpretation is unsound. (On the latter hypothesis, observe that a wff 
containing free individual variables must be said to have the value t for all 
ouRecall that, according to §04, a class is the same thing as a singulary propositional 
function. 
IIIOr in other words, a. relation between natural numbers IS the relation :s;: if and 
only if it satisfies these three conditions. 
-
m A perfect number is a natural number, other tha.n 0, which is equal to the sum of 
Ita aliquot parts, i.e" to the sum of the natural numbers It!ss than itself by which it is 
exactly divisible. 

178 
FUNCTIONAL CALCULI OF FIRST ORDER [CHAP. III 
systems of values of its free variables, and also to have the value f for all systems 
of values of its free variables; but it must not be said that it has the value f for 
at least one system of values of its free variables.) 
30.6. The operator, or quantifier, which is introduced by abbreviative def-
inition in D17 may of course also be used as a primitive (singulary-binary) 
quantifier in a formulation of the functional calculus of first order. For a formu-
lation of the pure functional calculus of first order in which this is the only 
primitive sentence connective or quantifier, state the formation rules; state the 
semantical rules for a principal interpretation; and supply definitions of the 
universal quantifier, implication, and negation which will provide the appro-
priate agreement in meaning of the kind explained in the seman tical paragraphs 
at the end of § ll. 
30 .7. The intended principal interpretation of the extended propositional cal-
culus (in the sense of §28) is informally indicated by the seman tical discussion 
in §§O4-06, 28. For a formulation of the extended propOSitional calculus in which 
implication is the one primitive sentence connective, and the universal quantifier 
is the one primitive quantifier, state the formation rules; and state the semanti-
cal rules for the principal interpretation. 
30 •8• The intended principal interpretation of protothetic (in the sense of §28) 
is informally indicated by the semantical discussion in §§04-06, 28. For a for-
mulation of protothetic in which equivalence is the one primitive sentence 
connective, and the universal quantifier is the one primitive quantifier (which 
takes. however, either a propositional variable or a truth-functional variable as 
operator variable), state the formation rules; state the semantical rules for the 
principal interpretation; and supply definitions of implication and negation 
which will provide the appropriatE: agreement in meaning. 
31. Propositional calculus. If the primitive symbols of Fl include 
the propositional variables, then every theorem of the propositional calculus, 
in implication and negation as primitive connectives, is a theorem also of 
Fl-as follows immediately from the results of §27. because the axioms of 
the system P of §27 are included among the axioms of Fl (in *302, *303, and 
*304) and the one rule of inference of P is a rule of inference also of Fl. 
Even if the propositional variables are not included among the primitive 
symbols of Fl, we may draw a similar conclusion regarding substitution 
instances of theorems of the propositional calculus. 
By a substitution instance of a wff A of any formulation of the propositional 
calculus we mean, namely, an expression or formula 
Sb,b .... bn AI 
D 1B 'I .•• 8 • 
I 
where hI' h g, •••• h" is the complete list of (distinct) propositional vari-
ables of A, and B1• B 2 •.•.• Bn are any wffs of the logistic system under 
consideration in the particular context. in this chapter, the logistic system Fl. 

§31] 
PROPOSITIONAL CALCULUS 
179 
It is clear. then, that a substitution instance of a \vff of P is a \\1f of Fl. 
Moreover, a substitution instance 
of a theorem A of P must be a theorem of P. For every substitution instance 
of an axiom of P is an axiom of Fl (by *302-*304). And if a proof is given of 
A as a t~rem of P, let b1, bz, ... , b", c1, c2, .•• , Cm be the complete list 
of (distinct) propositional variables occurring, choose arbitrary wffs 
Cv Cz, ... , Cm of Fl, and substitute simultaneously B1 for h1' B2 for hz, ... , 
B" for b n , C1 for Cv Cz for c Z' ••• , Cm for Cm throughout the given proof. 
The result of this substitution is a proof of 
Sb,bs ... b n AI 
B 1B 1· .. B'1 
as a theorem of P-valid applications of the rule of modus ponens in P 
being transformed by the substitution into valid applications of the rule of 
modus ponens in P. 
Since we know (by **235, *239, *270, **271) that the theorems of P arc 
the same as the tautologies of P (in the sense of §15), we may, without loss, 
put the foregoing results in the following form: 
*310. 
Every tautology of P is theorem of Fl if it is a wff of Fl. 
*311. 
Every substitution instance of a tautology of P is a theorem of Fl. 
In the foregoing, the arbitrary choice of the wffs Cl , C2, ... , Cm is easily 
replaced by a definite rule for their choice. For example. since n > 0, we 
might just make each of the wffs Cv C2, .• " Cm identical with B1. Thus the 
proof of *311 becomes effective, in the sense of §12, so that *311 (as well as 
*310) may be employed as a derived rule of inference. 
The use of *311 as a derived rule is facilitated by the fact that there is an 
effective procedure to determine whether a given wff of P is or is not a 
substitution instance of a tautology of P-and to find a tautology of P of 
which it is a substitution instance, in case there is one. Details of this are 
now left to the reader. \Ve shall rely on it in order to set down, whenever 
required, a wff of Fl as a substitution instance of a tautology of P, and to 
leave it to the reader to verify it as such. 
We shall often ma.ke use of *311 as a derived rule of inference in this way. 
And ordinarily, as sufficient indication of such use of *311, either alone or 
followed by one or more applications of modus ponens, we shall write simply 
the words, "by P," or "use P," or the like. 

180 
FUNCTIONAL CALCULI OF FIRST ORDER [CHAP. III 
We add here, for reference, the five following metatheorems: 
**312 Every wff is of one and only one of the five following forms, and 
in each case it is of that fortn in one and only one way: a proposi. 
tional variable standing alone; f(al, a2, •. 'J an), where f is an n·ary 
functional variable or n-ary functional constant and a1> a., .. " a" 
are individual variables or individual constants or both; -A; 
[A:::) BJ; (Ya)A. where a is an individual variable. 
**;)13, 
A wf part of -A either coincides with -A or is a wf part of A. 
**314. 
A wf part of [A:::) BJ either coincides with [A:::> BJ or is a wf part 
of A or is a wf part of B. 
**315. 
A wfpart of (Va)Aeithercoincides with (Va)Aor is a wf part of A. 
**316. If r results from A by substitution of N for M at zero or more 
places (not necessarily at all occurrences of M in A), then r is wi. 
These metatheorems are used in particular in the proof of **323, of *340, 
and of **390, below. Their proofs are analogous to those of **225·**228, 
and are left to the reader. 
32. Consistency of Fl. A wff of Fl is called quantifier·free if it contains 
no quantifiers--or, what comes to the same thing, if it contains no occur-
rence of the symbol V. From any wff of Fl we obtain its associated quanti/ier-
free formula (also wf) by deleting all occurrences of the universal quantifier 
-i.e., by deleting the four symbols (Va), at every place where such four 
symbols occur consecutively. 
From a wff of Fl we obtain an associated formula of the propositional cal· 
culus (abbreviated "afp") by first forming the associated quantifier.free 
formula, and then, in the latter, replacing every wf part f(a1, a 2, •.. , an) by 
a propositional variable not previously occurring, in accordance with the 
following rule: two wf parts f(al, a 2,. ., an) and g(b1, b2, ••. , bm ) are re-
placed by the same propositional variable if and only if f and g are the same 
functional variable or functional constant (as, of course, can happen only 
when m 
n). 
For example, in Flp, the wff G(x) :::)" H(y) :::) • G(x) :::) (y)H(y) has as its 
associated quantifier-free formula G(x) :::) H (y) :::) • G (x) :::) H (y), and thus an 
aip is p :::) q:::) • P :::) q. The wff F(x, y) :::)", (z)G(x, z):::). F(y, y):::) (z)G(y, z) 
has as its associated quantifier.free formula F(x, y) :::) G(x, z) :::) • F(y, y) 
:::) G(y, z), and therefore again an afp is p:::) q :::) • P :::> q. 

§32] 
CONSISTENCY 
181 
Clearly, all the aips of a given wff of 1'1 are variants of one another in the 
sense of §13. Hence, if one of the afps of :l given wff of FI is ~ t,lutolo,~y, all 
of them are. 
Now it is easily verified that every afp of an axiom of FI is a tautology. 
In fact for any instance A ~ • B ~ A of axiom schema *302, an afp must 
have the form Ao ~ • Bo ~ Ao, where Ao and Bo are aips of A and B respec-
tively; and .4.0 ~ • Bo ~ Ao must be a tautology, because it is obtainable by 
substitutioll from the tautology p ~ • q ~ p. Similarly, afps of instances of 
aXIOm schemata *303-*305 must have, in ord(:r, the forms: 
Ao ~ [Bo ~ CoJ ~ • Ao ~ Bo ~ • AD ~ Co 
-Ao ~ -Bo ~ • Bo ~ Ao 
Ao ::;) Bo ~ • AD ~ Bo 
And each of these is obviously a tautology because obtainable by substitu-
tion from a known tautology. In the case of *306, A and 
differ (if at all) only by the substitution of one individual variable or con-
stant for another, and therefore they must have tlte same afp An. It follows 
that an afp of an instance of axiom schema *:{OB must have the form Ao ~ Ao, 
which is obviously a tautology because obtainable by substitution from the 
known tautology p ~ p. 
Moreover, the rules of inference of f1 preserve the property of having a 
tautology as afp, i.e" if the premiss or premisses of the rule have this prop-
erty, then the conclusion does also. In the case of *301, this is immediate. 
In the case of *300, we must make use of the remark that, if l\He afp of a 
wif is a tautology, then all are. Let Ao ~ Bo be an afp of the major premiss 
A ~ B. Then Ao and Bo are afps of A and B respectively. Since Ao and 
Ao ~ Bo are tautologies, it follows that Bo is a tautology, in consequence of 
. the'truth-table of ::;) (compare the proof of **150). 
Since the axioms all have the property of having a tautology as afp, and 
since the rules of inference preserve this property, there follows the meta-
; theorem: 
"320. Everv theorem of Fl has a tall tology as afp. 
Now it is clear that if a wff A has a tautology as afp, its negation -A has 
as afp, not a tautology but a contradiction. Hence by **320, not hath A 

182 
FUNCTIONAL CALCULI OF FIRST ORDER [CHAP, III 
and -A can be theorems. Thus we have the consistency of Fl in the following 
senses:318 
··321. FI is consistent with respect to the transformation of A into -A. 
··322. P is absolutely consistent. 
This proof of the consistency of Fj differs from our proof of consistency 
of the propositional calculus (§17) in that it is not associated in the same 
way with a solution of the decision problem. In fact the converse of "320 
fails, as we go on to show by giving an example of a non-theorem which 
has a tautology as afp. For this purpose we first establish the two following 
metatheorems: 
··323. For every quantifier-free theorem of P there is a proof in which 
only quantifier-free formulas occur. 
Proof. Let any proof be given of a quantifier-free formula C, and let 
Cv c2, ••• , cn be the complete list vi individual variables and individual 
constants occurring in the proof. Then replace every wff B occurring in 
the proof (i.e., occurring as one of the finite sequence of wffs which consti-
tutes the proof) by a quantifier-free formula Bt, according to the following 
procedure. 
Choose individual variables bl , b 2 , ... , bn which are distinct among 
themselves and distinct from all of CII C2 ..... Cn; and throughout the wff B 
substitute bI , b 2 ••• " b n for c1 , cZ' ••• , cn respectively. In the resulting wff 
B', a wf part (\>'br)A is to be replaced by the conjunction Aj A2 •• , An' 
where Ai is 
S~TAI 
t 
(i 
I, 2, , .. , n). If there is more than one wf part of B' of the form (\>'br)A, 
then the stated replacement is to be made first for one of the wf parts 
"'If propositional varrables are among the primitive symbols. it follows by the same 
methods that FI is consistent III the sense of Post. 
(Added ~n proof.) The demonstration of consistency is here made in a form which 
could be applied also, with obvious modihcations. to a formulation such as F~J) (see §40) 
having a rule of substitution for functional variables as a primitive rule. However, 
as pointed out to me by ] ohn G. Kemeny, the argument leading up to **321 and 
• '322 in the present section could be greatly simplified by using a more simply 
defined associated formula in the propositional calculus. Namely let the singulary 
associaled formula of the propositional calculus (abbreviated "sfp") be obtained from 
the associated quantifier.free formula of any wff of F1 by replacing every elementary 
part b,' the one propositional variable p. -It follows from this that, e.g., F(x) => G(y} 
could be added as an axiom to FlC without producing inconsistency. but could not be 
so added to Fi". 

§32] 
CONSISTENCY 
183 
(Ybr)A in which A is quantifier-free (obviously there must be one such); 
then in the resulting wff another wf part (Yb,)A is to be chosen in which 
A is quantifier-free, and the stateu replacement is to be made again; and so 
on, the successive replacements being continued until B' has become a 
quantifier-free formula Bt. Then B~ is to be the conjunction (in some 
specified order) of all the nn wffs 
-
where dv d 2, .• " d n are an y among the v;lria bIts and cons t.ml<; c1 • c.l • ... , C,,' 
taken 1n any order, and not necessarily all different. 
If B is an axiom, then B~ is a substitution instance of a tautology (of P) 
as the reader may verify by considering separately each of the schemata 
"'302-*306. By *311, Bi is therefore a theorem of Fl, and in fact the method 
which we used in establishing *311 provides without difficulty a proof of 
Bt in which only quantifier-free formulas occur. 
If, in the given proof of C, B is inferred by *300 from premisses A :::> B 
and A, then Ai is the conjunction of the nn wffs 
Sb,b •... b. At I 
d1d, ... d ll 
I 
and [A:::> BJ:j: is the conjunction of the nn wffs 
Sb1b .... b"At I :::> Sb,b .... bnBt I; 
d,d •... d" 
d1d •... d n 
. 
and therefore it is possible by a series of steps in volving methods of the prop-
ositional calculus only (d. §31) to infer each of the ntl wffs 
Sbtb •.. bnBt I 
d,d .... d. 
. 
from [A:::> BJi and Ai; and therefore by further steps involving propo-
sitional calculus only it is possible to infer B:j:. Specifically, what is needed 
is proofs of two substitution instances each, of the nn tautologies, 
an~ proof of an appropriate substitution instance of the tautology, 
PI :::l • P2 :::l •.•. Pn"-l ::::> • Pn" ::::> P1P2 ... Pn", 
and a number of applications of modus ponens. By the method used in the 
demonstration of *311, all of this can be accomplished without use of other 
than quantifier-free formulas. 
If, in the given proof of C, B is inferred from premiss A by generalizing 
upon the individual variable cr (thus by *301), then Bt is the conjunction 
of the n wffs 

184 
FUNCTIONAL CALCULI OF FIRST ORDER [CHAP. III 
(i = 1,2, ... , n), and A+ is the conjunction of the n" wffs 
Sb1b .... bnA t I. 
d 1d 2·• d l1 
Thus 
A+:::> Sb,b •... b .. Bt i 
+ 
d,d .... d. 
. 
IS a substitution instance of a tautology 
PIPz ... P 
11" :::> P J,P', ... P 
f~ 
(where the subscripts fl' i2' ... , j" are a certain n different ones among the 
subscripts 1.2, ... , nn), and therefore is a theorem of P by *311. Hence 
from At we may infer by modus ponens each of the wffs 
Sb,b •... bnBt 1 
d1dz".d" 
J 
and hence finally by a suitable substitution instance of the tautology 
PI :::> • P2 :::> •... p"n :::> PIP2 ... P.o" 
and modus ponens we may infer Bt. Again by the method used in the dem-
onstration of *:31 I, this can all be accomplished without use of other than 
quantifier-free formulas. 
To sum up, we have now shown how the given proof of C can be trans-
formed into a proof of Ct in which only quantifier-free formulas occur. 
But by hypothesis C is quantifier-free. Therefore Ct is 
Sc,c •... c" CI 
b,b .... b.. 
' 
and Ct is a conjunction of wffs one of which is C. Bya further application 
of propositional calculus we can therefore go on to prove C, and by the 
method of *311 this can be done still without use of other than quantifier-
free formulas. 
**324. 
Every quantifier-free theorem of P is a substitution instance of a 
tautology of P. 
Proof. Given a quantifier-free theorem C of P we can find, by **323, 
proof of C in which only quantifier-free formulas occur. In this proof of C, 
the only axioms used must be instances of the schemata *302, *303, *304, 
and therefore substitution instances of axioms of P; and the only rule of 
inference used must be modus ponens. Thus we have for each successive 
wff in the proof of C, as it is obtained, that it is a substitution instance of a 
theorem of P. Ultimately we have that C is a substitution instance of a 
theorem of P, and therefore a substitution instance of a tautology of P. 

§32] 
CONSiSTENCY 
185 
We remark, in passing, that from **3~4 we hn.ve a ncw proof of the con-
sistency of Fl. Indeed the absolute consistency of Fl follows from **324 upon 
giving one example of a quantifier-free formula which is not a substitution 
instance of a tautology, And the consistency of f1 with respect to the trans-
formation of A into -A then follows because, by *31 I and the law of dellial 
of the antecedent 
-
-p :::J • P :::J q, 
if A and -A were both theorems in any instance, then every wff would be 
a theorem, (This proof of the consistency of Fl again is not associated \..,ith 
any general solution of the decision problem of Fl, but it does involve a 
solution of the decision problem for the special case of quantifier-free for-
mulas.) 
Now in particular, F(x) :::::> F(y) is a quantifier-free formula of PP which 
is not a substitution instance of a tautology, therefore it is a non-theorem, 
although it has a tautology as afp. Or, more generally, if f is an n-ary fUllc-
tional variable or an n-ary functional constant, amI if ai' a 2 , •• " an, 
~, b 2, •. " b n are individual variables or individual constants, then 
f(al> a2, .•. , a,,) =:; f(bI , bz, ... , b 7l ) 
has a tautology as afp, but is not a theorem of Fl unless aI' 32, ... , a" are 
in order the same as bl , b2 , ... , bn-
The proof of **320 makes use of no property of the axioms of Fl except 
that every axiom has a tautology as afp. In consequence, the addition to Fl 
of another axiom having a tautology as afp would not alter the property of 
the system that every theorem has a tautology as afp, and therefore would 
not destroy the consistency of the system. It follows that Fl is no! complete 
in any of the senses of §18, and especially: 
**325. 
FI is not complete with respect to the transformation of A into -A, 
and is not absolutely complete. 
However, in §44 we shall prove a completeness theorem for pv, and for 
the equivaient system Fip , establishing their completeness in a weaker sense. 
An explanation of the incompleteness of F'p may qUickly be seen from the 
point of view of the interpretation. The wff F(x) :::;J FlY), for example, has th~ 
value t for all values of its free variables, in the case of a pTlllcipal in terpreta troll 
in which there is just one individual; also, regardless of the number of individuals, 
in an interpretation which is like a principal interpretation except that the range 
of some or all of the singulary functional variables, including tbe variable F, 
is restricted to two particular singulary propositional functions of individuals, 

186 
FUNCTIONAL CALCULI OF FIRST ORDER 
~CHAP, III 
namely, the propositional function whose value is t for all arguments and the 
proposItional function whose value is f for all arguments. (An interpretation of 
this latter kind, though not principal, is sound, as may readily be verified.) If 
only sucl1 interpretations as these were contemplated, it would be natural to 
expect F(x) ;::) F(y) as a theorem, and to add it as an axiom if it were not other-
wi~ ~ t~!,orem. But in other principal interpretations of Flp, in which the num-
ber of individuals is greater than one, F{aJ) ::.l F(y) does not have the value t 
for all values of its free variableR and therefore, for the sake of the soundness 
of the interpretation, must not be a theorem .. 
The completeness theorem of §44 will mean, semantically, that all those wffs of 
FIP are theorems which have, in every principal interpretation, the value t for all 
values of their free variables. Hence the theorems of any functional calculus of 
first order may be described by saying that they are the wffs w:hich, under the 
intended way of interpreting the connectives and quantifier, are true (1) for 
all values of the free variables, (2) regardless of the denotations assigned to the 
constants, and (3) independently of the nature and number of the individuals-
provided only that there are individuals, that the values of the individual 
variables and the denotations of the individual constants are restricted to be 
individuals, that the values of the propositional variables are restricted to 
truth-values, and that the values of the n-ary functional variables and the de-
notations of the n-ary functional constants are restricted to be n-ary proposi-
tional functions of individuals. 
33. Some theorem schemata of Fl, A theorem schema is a syntactical 
expression which represents many theorems (commonly an infinite number 
of different theorems) of a logistic system, in the same way that an axiom 
schema represents many different axioms. In the treatment of Fl we shall 
deal with theorem schemata rather than with particular theorems, and shall 
supply for each theorem schema, by means of a schema 01 prool, an effective 
demonstration that each particular theorem which it represents can be 
proved. As in the case of derived rules of inference (discussed in Chapter I), 
justification of this lies in the effectiveness of the demonstration, whereby 
for any particular theorem represented by a given theorem schema the 
particular proof can always be supplied on demand. Thus our procedure 
amounts not to an actual formal development of the system Fl but rather 
to giving effective instructions which might guide such an actual develop-
ment. It is important to remember that the theorem schemata are in fact 
syntactical theorems about Fl, and only their instances, the particular 
theorems which they represent, are the theorems of Fl, 
*330. 
~ S~AI :::::> (3a)A, where a is an individual variable, b is an individual 
variable or an individual constant, and no free occurrence of a in A 
is in a wf part of A of the form (b)C. 

§33] 
SOME THEORE},{ SCHEMATA 
Proof. By *306, I- (a)~A:J -$~A:. 
Hence by P,319 I- $~Ai :J __ (a)_A.3S0 
*331. 
f- (a)A::::::> (3a)A.321 
Proo/. By "'306, I- (a)A ::::J A.322 
~ *330, I- A :J (3a)A.323 
Then use the transitive law of implication.3u 
*332. 
I- A:Ja B :J • (a)A:::> B. 
Proof. By "'~l06, I- A ::::::> .. B ::::::> • A => B.325 
Also by *306, I- (a)A :J A.325 
Then use P.328 
*333. 
I- A:J a B:J • {alA :J (alB. 
187 
Proof. By *332 and generalization,327 I- A:::> .. B :J B • (a)A :J B. 
Hence by *305, I- A:Ja B :J • (a)A:Ja B.32s 
By *305, I- (a)A::::::>a B ::::::> • (a)A:J (a)B. 
Then use the transitive law of implication.3H 
I- A =a B:J • (a)A = {alB. 
Proof. By P, I- A = B ::::::> • A ::::::> B. 
IlIFor explanation of the phrase "by P" (l.e., by propositlOnal calculus) see the 
explanation which follows *311 in §31. 
II°This final expression is identical with *:1:10, the theorem schema to be proved 
(ef. D14). In such cases we shall not refer explicitly to the definitions or uefmitlOn sche-
mata involved but shall merely leave it to the reader to see that the proof is complete. 
IIlThe condition that a shall be an individual variable may be taken as obvious, smce 
the formula would not otherwise be wf.\Ve shall hereafter, in stating theorem schemata, 
systematically omit explicit statement of such conditions when obvious for this reason. 
IUThis special case of "306 in which b is the same vanable as a will be used frequf'ntly. 
In particular (by modus ponens) it provides the inverse of the rule of generalization, as 
a derived rule; and we shall later have occasion to use it HI this way also. 
"'This is' the special case of "330, in which b IS the same variable as a. 
"'Such a reference to a particlJlar tautology of P by name will be employed as ,1 more 
explicit substitute for the words "by P" or "then use P", thus as induding a reference 
to *311 (d. footnote 319). 
IUCompare footnote 322. 
"OSee the explanation in §31. 
U7I.e., with "332 as premiss, the rule of inference '301 is applied. 
UBMore explicitly, we take as major premiSS 
A. => .. B =>. [(alA. => B~ => • A =>a B => • (a) A => .. B, 
instance of '305, and use modus poncns. 

188 
FUNCTIONAL CALCULI OF FIRST ORDER [CHAP, III 
Hence by generaliLation alld *333,329 
~ A =. B :::::> • A :::J. B. 
Hence by *333 and the transiti \'e law of implication, 
~ A ==,. B ::> • (a)A:::::> (a)B. 
Again, by P, ~ A == B :::::> • B ::> A. 
And hence by a similar series of steps, ~ A =. B:::::> • (a)B :::::> (a)A, 
Then use P. 
*335. 
~ A:::J (a)B = . A:::::>,. B, if a is not free in A. 
Proof. By *306, ~ (a)B :::::> B. 
Hence by P, 
~ A:::J (a)B:::::> • A:::::> B. 
Hence by generalization and *305, 
~ A:::::> (a)B :::::> • A:::::>. B. 
Then use *305 and P. 
*336. 
~ (a)(b)A = (b)(a)A. 
Proof. By *306, 
~ (b)A :::::> A. 
Hence by generalization and *333, 
~ (a) (b)A:::::> (alA. 
Hence by generalization and *305, 
~ (a)(b)A::> (b)(a)A. 
Similarly. ~ (b)(a)A:::J (a)(b)A. 
Then use P. 
*337. 
~ (a)A = A, if a is not free 111 A, 
Proof. By' P, 
~ A :::J A. 
Hence by generalization and *305, 
~ A::> (a)A. 
By *306, ~ (a)A :::J A. 
Then use P. 
*338. 
~ -(3a)A = (a) ... A. 
Proof. By P, ~ -~(a)-A = (a)-A. 
*339. 
~ (a)A = (b)B, if there is no free occurrence of b in A, and no free 
occurrence of a 1Il A is in a wf part of A of the form (b )e, and B is 
$~A! 
Proof. By *aOD, 
~ (a)A :::::> B. Hence, by generalizing upon b and then 
'''I.e., more explicitly. we takr; 
A=R::::I.A::::IB 
as premiss, ,,:lei generalize UpOll a (*:101). then we lake the resulting wff as minor 
premiSS, and an appropriate tnst~nce of *333 as major premiss. and use modus ponens. 

§34] 
SUBSTITUTIVITY OF EQUIVALENCE 
189 
using *305, we have that I- (a)A::::) (b)B. Now the given relation between 
the wffs (a)A and (b)B is reciprocal, i.e., there is no free occurrence of a in 
B, and no free occurrence of b in B is in a wf part of B of the form (a)D, 
and A is S~BI· Therefore in the same way we have that I- (b)B ::J (a)A. 
Therefore by P, I- (alA = (b)B. 
34. Sbbstitutivity of equivalence. In this section we establish the 
rule of substitutivity of equivalence (*342) and some related derived rules of 
inference. (Compare *158, *159, 15.3 in the propositional calculus.) 
*340. If B results from A by substitution of N for M at zero or more places 
(not necessarily at all occurrences of M in A), and if aI' a 2, •.. , an 
is a list of individual variables including at least those free variables 
of M and N which occur also as bound variables of A, then 
I- M =8 8 a N::J • A = B. 
! 2'" 
,.~ 
Prool. In a manner analogous to that of the proof of *229, we proceed by 
mathematical induction with respect to the total number of occurrences 
of the symbols ::J, -, V in A. 
We cOllsider first the two special cases, (a) that the substitution of N 
for M is at zero places in A, and (b) that M coincides with A and the sub-
stitution of N for M is at this one place in A. In case (a), B is the same as 
A, and therefore I- M =8182 ... 8" N::J • A = B by P. In case (b), A and B 
are the same as M and N respectively, and therefore by n uses of *306,330 
and the transitive law of implication, I- M =", ...... 8 n N => • A = B. 
Now if the total number of occurrences of the symbols::J, -, V in A is 0, 
we must have one of the special cases (a), (b), and the result of *340 then 
follows quickly, as we have just seen. Consider then a \'.-1f A in which this 
total number is greater than 0: the possible cases are the three follo .... ;ng: 
Case 1: A is of the form AI ::J A2• Then (unless we have the special case 
. (b) already considered) B is of the form BI ::J B 2, where Bl and B2 result 
. from Al anc.l A2, respectively, by substitution of N for 1\1 at zero or more 
places. By hypothesis of induction. 
I- M = .. a "N::J. Al = Bl , 
I 2'" 
'1 
I- M =a,a .... 8.N ::J • A2 = B2• 
Hence we get the result of *340 by P, using an appropriate substitution 
instance of the tautology, 
U·Agalll thIS JS the special CaSe of "30ti 1n which a "Ilel b are the' same var.able, 
I, 
I I 
i, 
I, 
; I 
f-! 
! 
i 

190 
FUNCTIONAL CALCULI OF FIRST ORDER (CHAP. III 
Case 2: A is of the form ,...At · Then (unless we have the special case (b) 
already considered) B is of the form ,...B1, where Bl results from Ai by sub-
stitution of N for M at zero or more places. By hypothesis of induction, 
~ M = 
.. a 
& N => • Al == Bl , 
I 2'" 
n. 
Hence we get the result of *340 by P. using an appropriate substitution in-
stance of the tautology, 
Case 3: A is of the form (a)A1 . Then (unless we have the special case (b) 
already considered) B is of the form (a)BI' where Bl results from Al by 
substitution of N for M at zero or more places. By hypothesis of induction, 
~ M =.... " N::J. Al == Bl . 
1 S'" n 
Hence by generalizing upon a and then using *305,331 we have that 
~ 1\1 =&l ...... a" N ::J • Al =& Bt . 
Hence we get the result of *340 by using *334 and the transitive law of 
implica tion. 
Thus the proof of *340 by mathematical induction is complete. 
The two remaining metatheorems of this section follow as corollaries: 
*341. If B results from A by substitution of N for M at zero or more 
places (not necessarily at all occurrences of M in A), and if ~ M = N, 
then ~ A = B. 
Prool. By *340, *301, and *300. 
*342. 
If B results from A by suhstitution of N for M at zero or more places 
(not necessarily at all occurrences of M in A), if ~ M == Nand 
~ A, then ~ B. 
(Rule of subst-itutivity of (material) equivalence.) 
Proof. By *341 and P. 
"SlAt this step it is esscntiu.l that a IS not a free variable of 
M =&18 .... &" N. 
This is secured by the hypothesis that among a l • a. ..... an are all the free variables 
of M and N which have bound occurrences in A. 

§35] 
DERIVED RULES OF SUBSTITUTION 
191 
EXERCISES 34 
34.0. With Clid of the results uf §32, show that the following are non-
theorems of FIp: 
(1 ) 
(2) 
(3) -
F(x) =>" G(x) => (3x) • F(x)G(x) 
(3x)F(x) => (x)F(x) 
F{x) =>",. F(y) =>v [G(x) => G(y)] v (z)F(z) 
34.1. Show that any proof of a wff (a)A as a theorem of P must contain 
an application of the rule of generalization (*301) in which the variable 
that is generalized upon is a,332 
34.;;l. In "'340, to what extent may the hypothesis be weakened that 
among al' a 2, .•. , an are all the free individual variables of M and N 
which occur as bound variables in A' 
Establish the following theorem schemata at Fl, using methods and results of 
§§30-34, but not those 0/ any later section: 
34.3. The theorem schema of which (x) (y)F(x, y) => (y)F(y, y) is a basic 
instance. 
34.4. f- B =>a A=>. (3a)B ::J A, if a is not free in A. 
34.5. f- A =>a B=>. (3a)A => (3a)B. 
34.6. f- A =a B=>. {3a)A == {3a)B. 
35. Derived rules of substitution. By taking advantage of the device 
of axiom schemata, as discussed in §27, we have formulated the system Fl 
without use of rules of substitution as primitive rules of inference. And 
indeed this way of doing it seems to be the only possibility in the case of a 
simple applied functional calculus of first order. But if there is a sufficient 
apparatus of variables, an alternative formulation is possible in which there 
are primitive rules of substitution (in addition to the rules of modus ponens 
and generalization) and the number of axioms is finite-as we shall see in 
§40. 
In this section, the rules of substitution in question are obtained as derived 
rules of P. In doing this no distinction need be made of different kinds of 
functional calculi of first order, as the rules in fact all hold even in the case 
of a simple applied functional calculus of first order. But in a case in which 
variables of a particular kind are not present, of course a rule of substitution 
for variables of this kind reduces to something trivial. 
snln consequence of the mctatheorem of thiS exerCise, the treatment of t:"l(' deduction 
theorem for FI is unsound as it appears in Chapter II of the 1944 edition of lnlroductw>l 
to Malhemallcal Logic, Pari I. An amended treatment of the deduction theorem appears 
in §36 below. 

192 
FUNCTIONAL CALCULI OF FIRST ORDER [CHAP. III 
*350. If a is an individual variable which is not free in Nand b is an 
individual variable which does not occur in N, if B results from A 
by substituting S:NI for a particular occurrence of N in A, if ~ A, 
then ~ B. 
(Rule of alphabetic change of bound (individual) variable.) 
Proof. By *339 and *342 (the various wf parts of N of the form (a)A; 
being taken one by one in left-to-right order of their initial symbols). 
*351. If a is an individual variable and b is an individual variable or an 
individual constant, if no free occurrence of a in A is in a wi part of 
A of the form (b)C, if ~ A, then ~ S:A,. 
(Rule at substitution tor individual variables.) 
Pro at. By *301 and *306. 
In order to state rules of substitution for propositional and functional 
variables we introduce a new substitution notation for which we use the 
letter ~. 
If p is a propositional variable, the notation 
S~AI 
shall stand for333 A unless the condi tion is satisfied that (1) no wf part of A 
of the form (b )C, where b is a free variable of B, contains a freess, occurrence 
of p; and, if this condition is satisfied, it shall stand for333 
$~AI. 
If f is an n-ary functional variable and Xl' X2, ... , Xn are distinct indi-
vidual variables, the notation 
0 f!x1,x ..... ,x .. ) AI 
;::'8 
, 
shall stand for 335 A unless the two conditions are satisfied that: (1) no wf 
part of A of the form (b )C, where b is a free variable of B other than 
Xl' X2 •... , X n , contains a freeas6 occurrence of f; and (2) for each ordered 
"'I.e .. for any particular propositional variable p and any particular wffs A and B, 
the syntactical notation III question denotes the wff A if the condition (1) is not satis-
fied, and, if the condition (1) is satisfied, it denotes the wff which results by substituting 
B for all free occurrences p in A. 
'''In connection with FI the word "free" here is superfluous. It is included because 
we shall wish to use the same substitution notation also in connection with other systems 
(without changing the wording of the definition). 
336Compare footnote 333. 
'''The restriction to free occurrences of r is superfluous in connection with Ft, be. 
cause in a wff of Ft every occurrence of f is a free occurrence. As before, the restriction 
is included for the sake of use of the same notation in connection with other logistic 
systems. 

§35J 
DERIVED RULES OF SUBSTITUTION 
193 
n-tuple at, a 2 , ••. , an of individual variables or individual constants (or 
both. not necessarily all distinct) for which f(al , a2• ' .. , an) occurs in A in 
such a wa.y that the occurrence of f is a free occurrence,336 the wf parts of B, 
if any, that have the forms (allC, (az)C, ... , (an)C contain no free occur-
rences of Xl' X 2, .• " Xn respectively.337 And, if these two conditions are 
satisfied, the notation shall stand for 335 the result of replacing f(al , a2 • 
. . "*1'.)' at all of its occurrences in A at which f is free,336 by 
this replacement to be carried out simultaneously for all ordered n-tuples 
a1• a 2, •.. , an of individual variables or individual constants (or both, not 
necessarily all distinct) such that f(a1, a2, •.• , an) has an occurrence in A 
at which f is free. 
*3520_ 
If p is a propositional variable, if ~ A, then 
f- S~AI. 
(Rule ot substit1~tion tor propositional variables.) 
"'352n . 
If f is an n-ary functional variable and Xl' X 2, .. " X" are distinct 
individual variables, if ~ A, then 
I- S~xl,x, .. ",x")AI. 
(Rule 0/ substitution. jar n-arv junctional variables.) 
Proof. The proof of *3520> *352n is analogous to that of **271. 
"'Ie make use of a wff B' which differs from B by alphabetic changes of 
the bound and free individual variables of B in such manner that: (i) the 
individual variables occurring in B' are none of them the same as individual 
variables occnrring anywhere in the given proof of A; and (ii) the same 
variable occurs at two places in B' if and only if the variables occurring at 
the two corresponding places in B are the same. Let Yi (i = 1,2, ... , 11) 
be the variable which occurs in B' in place of the variable Xi in B; ur if 
Xi does not occur in B, choose Yi to be an individual variable not occurring 
otherwise. 
\Ve' observe that, if E is any axiom occuring in the gl VC!1 proof of A, then 
rp E 
or 
rr(ypy ...... Y .. JEI 
.:::lB': 
.:::lB' 
; 
(as the case may be) is again an axiom. 
SS1ln other words. to satisfy condltion (2), if f(a l , ai' ... , an) has an occurrence in 
A at which f i:; free, and (aIlC is a wf part of B. th~n (al)C shall contain no free occur-
rence of XI; if f(al, a •.... , a.) has all occurrenCe; in A at wl.ith f i.s rr,cc:, and (a.:C is 
a. wf part of B, then (a.)C shall contain no free occurrence of X.; and so on. 

194 
FUNCTIONAL CALCULI OF FIRST ORDER [CHAP. III 
Moreover •. ill <my application of the rule··ofmodu.s pon~s 'in the given 
proof of A,' let the premisses and conclusion be C::> D, C, P. Then 
S:.C::::> DI. S:,Ci. 
~:,DI 
or 
~f(fl,y •• ···,,..lC . DI 
p' 
::>. 
(as the case may be) are also premisses and conclusion for a.n application of 
the rule of modus ponens. 388 
.. 
• ,.,~:~. 
Again. in any application of the rule of generalization in the given proof 
t)f A. let the premiss and conclusion be C. (b)C. Then 
~:,q, 
~:,(b)Ci 
~~~I' rl' ... , Y.) (b)C! 
are also pr~miss and conclusion for ,ul application 91 the TUl~ of generali-
zation. 339 
If. therefore, in the given proof, 
of A we replace each wff Ai (i = 1,2, ... , m) by, 
we obtain a proof of 
(as. the case may be). 
or 
<,,-flYI> Y" .... Yn)A.1 
0B' 
" 
."'p 
."'f(y," Yt ..... YnlAI 
':'s,A: 
or 
~B' 
In order to obtain the required proof of the wff 
S~AI or 
S~"!'''''''''''''')AI 
(unless this is the same wff as A, in which case the matter is trivial) we use 
the proof just found of 
S:.AI 
or 
S~:I> Y ..... , Y.) AI 
and add to it a series of steps in which the required alphabetic changes of 
"·The reason for introducing the wf£ B' may be seen in this paragraph of the proof. 
Namely, it is necessary to employ B' instead of B for substitution in C and C ::J D. 
because of the possibility that the numbered conditions, (1), or (1) and (2). though 
holding for the S-substitution of B in D may fail for the S-substitution of B in C and 
in C => D. 
UlAgain in this paragraph of the proof the necessity of employing B' instead of B 
is seen, because of the p03sibility that b might be a free variable of B. 

§35J 
EXERCISES 35 
195 
bound individual variables are accomplished by means of *339 and *342 (as 
in the proof of *350) and the required substitutions for free individual 
variables are accomplished by means of *301 and *306 (as in the proof of 
*351) .340 To make matters definite we may specify that first the required 
alphabetic changes of bound variables shall be made in alphabetic order 
of the variables to be changed. and, for anyone variable, in left-to-right 
order of the relevant occurrences of B'; and that then the required sub-
stitutions shall be made in alphabetic order of the variables to be substituted 
for. 
This completes the proof of *352v. *352,., except that, in order to make it 
possible to use these metatheorems as derived rules, it is necessary to fix 
explicitly how the individual variables of B' and the individual variable~ 
YI' Y2' ... , y,. shall be chosen. We dl! this by taking the different individual 
variables of B in order of their first occurrence in B, then after them the 
remaining variablfs (if any) among Xv X 2 ••.. , ~11' in order. To each of these 
in turn, as corresponding variable (in B' or amo!1g YI' )'2' .. " Yn), is assigned 
the first individual' variable in alphabetic order which occurs nowhere in 
the given proof of A and which has not previously been assigned. 341 
EXERCISES 35 
35.0. In *350, to what extent may the conditions be weakened that a 
is not free in N and that b does not occur in N: (1) if the remainder of the 
metatheorem is to remain unchanged; and (2) if instead of S:N! is used 
the result of substituting b for the bound occurrences of a throughout N? 
35.1. In each of the following cases, write the result of the indicated 
substi tution: 
?,-F(r.li) 
3 
(1) 
;:'C.I[FIII,.)::> GI"', 11)]( x)(y)F(y, x) ::::> (3x)F(x, x)1 
?,-F(i1:) 
(2) 
;:'(1i)F("" II) (x)F(x) ::::> F(y)] 
[<.F("'.1i) 
(3) 
;:'("'IG(x)::> Gly)F(x. z) ::::> (3y)F(y, Z)i 
"°It is here that the numbered conditions, (I), or (1) and (2). in the definition of the 
notation S are essential, in order to assure that in this added series of steps constituting 
the final part of the proof nothing is required ex<;cpt alphabetic changes of bOllnd 
individual variables and substitutions for free individual varlables in accordance with 
·350 and ·351 respectively. 
UINotice that the derived rules of *350 and *351, and our proofs of them, will con-
tinue to hold for a system obtaililcd from FI by adjoining any addltional axioms. But 
*352 will continue to hold only if the additional axioms are such as to maintalll the Slt-
ua.tion that the result of an S-substitubon in any axiom is again an aXIOm. or at least 
a theorem. 

: 1 
I 
,1 
I 
I 
i , i 
, 
~ 
I 
t 
t I 
1, 
~ ~ 
II 
lr 
, I 
{ ! 
I I 
r 
t, 
: i 
j , 
19G 
FUNCTIONAL CALCULI OF FIRST ORDER [CHAP. III 
j<.F(~, II) 
3 
(4) 
~G{",.II •• )F(xl y) =>"", ( z)F(x, z)1 
(5) 
s~i:::i::> (1I)G(II •• )F(y, z) =>" G(x. y) =>110' F(y, z) => (z)G(z, y)1 
(6) 
s~i:::; ~ F(., V)(x)F(z, x) v (y)F(y, z) => F(z. z)1 
35.2. In order to verify th~ necessity for each of the num bered conditions, 
(1) and (2), in the definition of the notation 
S'(K!. x" '''' KolAI 
'-1J 
show by examples that *:1521 would fail if either of these numbered condi-
tions were omitted. 
36. The deduction theorem. We shall now establish a deduction theorem 
for Fl, analogous to that for the propositional calculus (d. §13). 
The notion of a variant of a wft, introduced in §13 for the system Pl' 
may be extended in obvious fashion to wffs of Fl or of other formulations 
of the functional calculus of first order: namely, a variant B' of a wff B 
differs from B only by alphabetic changes of the variables of B of all kinds 
(bound or free. individual, propositional, or functional), in such a way that 
the same variable occurs at two places in B' if and only if the variables 
occurring at the two corresponding places in B are the same. In connection 
with the deduction theorem for Fl, we need only observe that every variant 
of an axiom is also an axiom, But in other cases, such as, e,g., the formula-
tions of functional calculi of first order introduced in §40, this will not hold; 
and in such cases the notion of a variant must playa role in the treatment 
of the deduction theorem analogous to that which it had in §13. 
A finite sequence of wffs, B1, B 2, .•• , Bm. of Fl is called a proof from the 
hypotheses AI' A2, . , " An if for each i either: (1) Bi is one of AI' A2, •. . ,An; 
or (2) Bi is an axiom; or (3) Bi is inferred according to "'300 from major 
premiss B) and minor premiss B k , where i < i, k < i; or (4) BI is inferred 
according to *301 (the rule of generalization) from the premiss Bi , where 
i < i. and where the variable that is generalized upon does not occur as a 
free variable in AI' A2, ••• , An; or (5) Bi is inferred by an alphabetic change 
of bound variable, according to *350,342 from the premiss Bi , where i < i; 
or (6) Bi is inferred according to "'351,342 by substitution in the premiss Bt, 
where i < i, and where the variable, a, that is substituted fordoes not occur 
as a free variable in Al • A2, ' , ., A,,; or (7) BI is inferred according to *352,348 
by substitution in the premiss B;, where i < i, and where the variable, 
~"Or. more exactly, according to " 35O-or "3lil-or ·362. as these would be restated 
to make them read as primitive rules of inference. 

§36J 
THE DEDUCTION THEOREM 
197 
p or f, that is substituted for does not occur as a free variable in AI' A2• 
"" An· 
Such a finite sequence of wffs, Bm being the final formula of the sequence. 
is called more explicitly a proof 01 Bm from the hypotheses AI' A 2, ••• , An. 
And we use the (syntactical) notation 
AI' A2, ••.• An f- Bm 
to mean: there is a proof of Bm from the hypotheses At. A2 •.•• , An. 
The special case that n = 0 is not excluded. It is true that, because of 
clauses (5), (6), (7) in the foregoing definition, a proof from the null class 
of hypotheses is not the same thing as a proof. But we shall hereafter use 
the notation, f- Bm. indifferently in the sense of §30, to mean that there is a 
proof of the wff in question, and in the sense of the present section, to mean 
that there is a proof of it from the null class of hypotheses-relying on the 
meta theorems *350-*352 to enable us to obtain (effectively) a proof of 
any wff whenever we have a proof of it from the null class of hypotheses.343 
*360. If Ai> A2, ••• , An f- B, then AI' A2, •• ., A"_l f- An ::::> B. 
(The deduction theorem.) 
Prool. Let B1> B2, •• " Bm be a proof of B from the hypotheses Ai> A2, 
.. " A" (Bm being therefore the same as B), And construct the finite se-
quence of wffs A,,::::> B1• An::::> B 2, ' • " An ::::> Bm. \Ve shall show how to 
insert a finite number of additional wffs in this sequence so that the resulting 
sequence is a proof of An::::> Bm, i.e., of An::::> B, from the hypotheses 
AI' A2, ••• , A"_l' 
In fact consider a particular An::::> B i , and if i > 1 suppose that the in-
sertions have been completed as far as An ::::> B, .. I' The eight following cases 
arise: 
Case la: Bi is An' Then An ::::> Bi is An ::::> An, a substitution instance of 
the tautology p::::> p. Therefore insert before An::::> Bi the wffs needed to 
make up the proof of it that is obtained by the method used in the demon-
stratjon of *311. (No substitutions or generalizations appear in this.) 
Case Ib; BI is one of AI' A2, ••• , An_I' say Ar. Then Ar::::> • An::::> Bi is 
an axiom, an instance of *302. Therefore insert before An::::> Bi the two wffs 
"'rhe ambiguity of sense will lead to no confusion, in the contexts in which the nota-
tion will actually be used, because we know that f- B in one sense if and only if f- B in the 
other sense. However, the ambiguity may be removed if desired by agreeing that when 
hypotheses are explicitly written (as in, e.g .• "p f- q:::> p" or "A" A., ... , An f- Bm") 
the notation shall be understood in the sense of the present section-and in such a case 
as "A" AI' ..•• A .... B .. " this shall not be aiiected by the possibility of assigning the 
value 0 to n. But when the sign f- is written actually without hypotheses appearing 
before it (as, e,g., "I- p ::;:) • q :::> P"), it shall be understood in the sense of §30. 

198 
FUNCTIONAL CALCULI OF FIRST ORDFR [CHAP. III 
Ar ~ • An ~ Bi and A" from which An ~ Bi is inferred by *300 (modus 
ponens). 
Case 2: Bi is an axiom. Then Bi => • An ~ Bi is an axiom, an instance of 
*302. Therefore insert before An => Bi the two wifs Bi => • An ~ B t and B{. 
which both are axioms, anel from which An::> Bi is inferred by modus ponens. 
Case 3: Bi is inferred by modus ponens from major premiss Bf and minor 
premiss B", where i < i, k < i. Then B f is B" => B t• Insert before An ~ Bt 
first the wff A" => Bi ~ • An ~ Bk => • A" ~ Bi (which is an axiom, an in-
stance of *303) and then the wff An=> B k ::> • An => Bi (which can be inferred 
by modus ponens, and from which then An=> Bi can be inferred by modus 
po nens , since the necessary minor premisses, A .. => BI and An ~ B k , are 
among the earlier wffs already· present in the sequence being constructed). 
Case 4: Bi is inferred by the rule of generalization from the premiss B j , 
\\rhere i < i. Then Bi is (a)Bi' where a is an individual variable which does 
not occur as a free variable in A1, AI, ' . " An. Insert before An=> Bi first 
the wff An =>a Bi => • A" ~ Bi (since a is not a free variable of An'S" this is 
an axiom, an instance of *:305), and then the wff An =>8 B f (which can be 
inferred by generalization344 from the earlier wff An => Bi already present in 
the sequence being constructed, and from which then An::> Bi can be in-
ferred by modus ponens). 
Case 5: Bi is inferred by an alphabetic change of bound variable. according 
to *350, from the premiss B i , where i < i. In this case a corresponding 
alphabetic change of bound variable suffices to infer An => B, from An => B,. 
Case 6: B .. is inferred according to *351, by substitution in the premiss B f , 
where i < i, and where the (individual) variable that is substituted for 
does not occur as a free variable in A1• A2, •.. , An. In this case the same sub-
stitution suffices to infer An => Bi from Art ~ Bf ·345 
Case 7: Bi is inferred according to *352, by substitution in the premiss 
Bi • where i < i, and where the (propositional or functional) variable that 
is substituted for does not occur as a free variable in AI' AI' ... , An. In 
this case the same substitution suffices to infer An => B; from A" => B I.346 
This completes the proof of the deduction theorem. From the special case 
of it in which n = 1 we have the corollary: 
*361. If A I- B, then I- A ::> B. 
a"~ottce here the role of the condition that a does not occur as a free variable in 
AI' Ai' ... , An (clause (4) in the definition of proof from hypotheses at the beginning 
of this section) . 
• uNotice, in particular, the role of the condition that the variable which is substituted 
for does not occur as a free va.ria.ble in An. 

§36] 
THE DEDUCTION THEOREM 
199 
In what follows we shall often use the deduction theorem as a derived 
rule in establishing theorems or theorem schemata. For this purpose it is 
essential that our proof of it is effective.346 It is left to the reader to verify 
this. after supplying a definite particular proof of the wff An ::::> An to be 
used for the case lao 
The following metatheorems. *362 and *363,347 are also needed in con-
nection with use of the deduction theorem as a derived rule. Tacit use will 
often be made especially of *363.348 
.362. If every wff which occurs at least once in the list Al • A2 ••.• , An 
also occurs at least once in the list Cl • C2 ••.•• Cr. and if Al • A2 • 
. . . , A., I- B. then Cl • C2, ••• , Cr I- B. 
Prool. Let al , aa, .. " a, be the complete list of those variables of all kinds 
(individual, propositional. functional) which occur as free variables in 
0 1• Cz •.. 0, Cr but do not occur as free variables in Al , Az, ...• An (though 
some of them may perhaps occur as bound variables in Al • Az ... _. An). Then. 
if the given proof of B from the hypotheses Al • A2 •.••• An is not also a proof 
of B from the hypotheses Cl , C2 •• 0 
_, Cr , it can only be because it involves 
generalizations upon or substitutions for some of the variables all az ... -. aI_ 
Therefore let cl , cz, . __ , ct be variables which are all distinct and which 
do not occur in ClI Cz, ... , Cr or in the given proof of B from the hypotheses 
Al , Az, ... , An' <; being a variable of the same type (individual, proposi-
tional, singulary functional, binary functional, etc.) as all c2 being a variable 
of the same type as aa. ca a variable of the same type as a3• and so on. 
And throughout the given proof of B from the hypotheses Al • Az ....• An 
replace al , az ..... at by c l , cz .... , ct respectively. The result is a proof of 
S818 .... 8'BI 
clc .... c, 
from the hypotheses Dl • D 2, • 0 
., Dr. where Dl , Da •...• Dr differ from 
C1, C2, ••• , Cr , respectively, at most by certain alphabetic changes of bound 
variables. This is changed into a proof of B from the hypotheses Dl , D2 • 
• 
0 
OJ Dr by adding at the end. if necessary, an appropriate series of alpha-
betic changes of bound variables and substitutions (under clauses (5), (6), 
(7) in the definition of proof from hypotheses). Then finally a proof of B 
"'Compare the discussion of derived rules of inference in § 12. and the diSCUSSIon at the 
end of §13 of the use of the deduction theorem for the propositional calculus. 
"'Compare *132-*134. 
'''For example, when *333 is used in the proof of *365. when *364 is used in the 
proof of *366. when ·365 is used in the proof of *367. when *333 and *392 are used in 
the proof of *421. 

200 
FUNCTIONAL CALCULI OF FIRST ORDER [CHAP. III 
from the hypotheses Cl • C2 ••• " Cr is obtained by inserting. for various. 
values of i, as necessary. wffs to constitute a proof of D, from Cj by alpha-
betic changes of bound variables. 
The foregoing construction has to be made more explicit at several places, 
in order to allow the metatheorem to be used as a derived rule. For example. 
definite instructions must be given as to the choice of the variables cI , ca . 
. . . , c" so as to make it fully determinate. Details of this are obvious but, 
cumbersome, and may be left to the reader.349 
By taking n = 0 in *362. we have as a corollary: 
*363. If f-- B. then Clo Ca .... , c,. f-- B. 
We go on to establish a number of derived rules (*366-*369) that facilitate 
the use of the existential quantifier, in connection with the deduction 
theorem. As a preliminary to this, two theorem schemata (*364, *365) are 
demonstrated, with aid of the deduction theorem as a derived rule. 
*364. 
f-- B =>. A=>. (3a)B => A, if a is not free in A. 
Proof· By *306. B =>. A f-- B => A. 
Hence by P, B =>. A f-- -A => -B. 
Hence by generalization, B =>. A f-- -A =>. _B.36O 
Hence by *305, B =>. A f-- -A => (a)-B. 
Hence by P, B=>. A f-- -(a)-B => A. 
Then use the deduction theorem. 
*365. 
f-- A =>. B=>. (3a)A => (3a)B. 
Proof. By *306, A =>. B f-- A => B. 
Hence by P, A=>. B f- -B => -A. 
Hence by generalization, A =>. B f- -B =>. _A.s60 
Hence by *333. A:=l. B f-- (a}-B => (a}-A. 
Hence by P, A=>. B f- -(a)-A => -(a)-B. 
Then use the deduction theorem. 
*366. If AI' Ai' .. " A" f-- B. and a is an individual variable which does 
not occur as a free variable in AI' A., ... , Aft_V B, then All A. •... , 
4"_,, (1.)4" '" a.ln 
UOCompare the last two paragraphs in the proof of ·362. 
nOWhere generaliZation is thus used in connection with the deduction theorem, oare 
mUlt be taken thAt the vAriable. which il ,.nar.liaH upon dOlll not ooou: U & 1m 
variable in any of the hypotheses. It is left to tile reader to verity thil tn eaoh 08.10. 

DUALITY 
deduction theorem. 
AI' A 2, ••• , A n - I f- An ::J B. 
generalizing upon a and then using *364, we have that 
AI' A z, ... , An- I f- (3a)An ::J B. 
modus ponens, 
201 
If AI' A 2, ••• , An f- B, and a is an individual variable which does 
not occur as a free variable in AI' A z, .. " An_I. then AI> A 2, . , " 
An-I' (3a)An f- (3a)B. 
Proof, By the same method as the proof of *366, but with use of *365 
that of *364. 
If AI' A 2, ••• , An f- B, and a is an individual variable which does not 
occur as a free variable in AI' A2, ••. , An_~, B, then AI' A 2, •• " 
A n....-, (3a) • An-T+lAn-H2 ... An f- B. 
Proof. By P, 
Ai> A 2 •.•. , An - r , A n - H1A,,-H2 ... An f- B. 
use *::166. 
If AI> A2, ••• , A" f- B, and a is an individual variable which does not 
occur as a free variable in AI> A2 , ••. , An_,., then AI' A2 , ••. , An_TO 
(3a) • An-HIAn-r+2 ... An f- (3a)B. 
Proof. By the same method as the proof of *368, but with use of *367 
.. replacing that of *366. 
37. Duality. As in § 16, we begin by applying the process of dualization 
not to wffs but to expressions which are abbreviations of wEts in accordance 
with certain definitions. Namely, we alJow abbreviation by Va-II and D14, 
but not by other definition schemata3,,2 and not by omissiuns of brackets. 
S6IThe case n = 1 of -:366 is proved as it meta theorem of the illnctu)nal calculus of 
first order by Hilbert and Bernays, Grundlagettder 1'.1 athematik, vol. 1 (19:34), pp. 157-158. 
It may also be compared with theorems I and lIT of the writer's" A Set of Postulates 
'It' ill' 'Q~na.tlQIl or ~.nlfto" (In ~tI. 04,,,,.1. 0/ /lfff//t,,,,/C/jll., vlll. all (Ill. alil. ~I!f pp, 808 • 
• 1111 -with whloh, hllwclVor, It I. fll.r from Idlllltloa.1. l>IIC~\l1I1I thll IOKI,tle 'YI~ilm 11",,-
Iidered in that paper is a quite different system from any of the functional ealcull of 
first or higher order. and indeed is one which was afterwards shown by Kleene and 
. ROSller (in the Annals 0/ Mathematics, vol. 36 (1930), pp. 630-636) to be IIlconsistent. 
'''More DIS m!lfht well 11110 be ILllowed, but It Nimpli(jea tho IItatoment of the matter 
.lightly if we exc1uue it. In order to allow D12, 0111-17, we would havo to adu dual$ 

202 
FUNCTIONAL CALCULI OF FIRST ORDER [CHAP, III 
Of such an expression the dual is obtained by interchanging simultaneously. 
wherever they occur. each of the following pairs of connectives and quanti· 
fi~rs (or better, each of the following pairs of symbols): :::::> and ¢. disjunction 
and conjunction. = and $, c: and :p, v and I. V and 3, 
Of a wff of Fl a dual is obtained by writing any expression of the foregoing 
kind which abbreviates the wff. dualizing this expression. and then finally 
writing the wff which the resulting expression abbreviates. As a particular 
case. the given wff itself may be used in the role of the expression which 
abbreviates it, and when this is done the principal dual of the given wff is 
obtained. 
By examining D3-11 and D14, it will be seen that any two duals of the 
same wff can be transformed one into the other by a series of steps of 
which each consists, either in replacing a wf part --N by N, or in replacing 
a wf part N by --N (i.e., as we may say, either in deleting or in inserting 
a double negation). Hence by P and *341: 
*370. If Band C are duals of A, then I- B == C. 
In order to establish for Fl a principle of duality analogous to "'161. we 
shall show for each axiom of Fl that the negation of any dual of it is a the~ 
rem of Fl: also for each rule of inference of Fl that. if we replace the premisses 
and conclusion by negations of duals of them, the inference still holds as a 
derived rule. It will then follow that the negation of a dual of a theorem of 
Fl is always a theorem of Fl. 
To begin with the rules of inference. consider first "'300. Here the premisses 
are A :::::> B and A, the conclusion B. Let Al be a dual of A. and Bl a dual of 
B. Then one of the duals of A :::> B is A] ¢ ~. By p. if I- - • Al ¢ Bl and 
f- -AI' then I- -B1• Hence by *370 and P. if the negation of any dual of 
A :::> B and the negation of any dual of A are theorems, then the negation of 
every dual of B is a theorem. 
Likewise consider *301. The premiss is A and the conclusion (a)A. From 
-Al , the negation of any dual of A, we may infer first (a)-AI by *301, and 
thence -(3a)A1 by *338 and P. This is the negation of one of the duals of 
the conclusion, and from it the negation of every other dual of the conclusion 
follows by *370 and P. 
Turning now to the axioms, we see that one of the duals of any axiom 
which is an instance of *302, *303. "'304 must have. in corresponding order, 
of these defimtion schemata. inventing suitable notations for the purpose; but this 
seems not worth while, as the notations so introduc.ed would hardly be used exc.ept in 
connection with the treatment of duality. 

§37] 
DUALITY 
203 
the following forms (where AI> B l • C1 are duals of A, B, C respectively): 
Al ¢. BI ¢ Al 
Al ¢ [Bl ¢ C1J ¢ . Al ¢ BI ¢ . Al ¢ CI 
-A] ¢ -BI ¢ • BI ¢ Al 
And the negation of each of these may be seen to be a substitution instance 
of a tautology, therefore a theorem by *311. That the negation of every 
other dual of the same axiom is also a theorem, then follows by "'370 and P. 
In the case of an axiom which is an instance of *306, one of its duals has 
the form 
(3a)A} ¢ ~:All, 
where a is an individual variable, b is an individual variable or an individual 
constant, and no free occurrence of a in Al is in a wf part of Al of the form 
(b)C 353 That the negation of this is a theorem follows by "'330 and P. Hence 
by *370 and P, the negation of every dual of the axiom is also a theorem. 
In the case of an axiom which is an instance of *305, in order to prove 
similarly that the negation of every dual of it is a theorem, we need only the 
following theorem schema of P: 
*371. 
f- A ¢ (3a)B ::> (3a) • A ¢ B, if a is not free in A. 
Proof. By P, fa B ::> A = --. B ::> A. 
Hence by *364 and *342, I- (a)--[B ::> A] ::> • (3a)B ::::l A. 
Then use the law of contrapositiol1 (t22a). 
Thus we have shown that every axiom of FI has the property that the 
negation of every dual of it is a theorem of P, and that the rules of inference 
of Fl preserve this property. Hence every theorem of Fl has the property, 
Le.: 
*372. 
If f- A, and if Al is a dual of A, then f- -AI' 
(Principle of duality.) 
As in §16, two spec£al principles of duality follow as corollaries, by P: 
*373. If f- A ::> B, and if Al and BI are duals of A and B respectively, then 
f- Bl ::> AI' 
(Special principle at duality for (material) implications.) 
'Uln *306, the condition that no iree occurYe>lce of a in A is in a w/ pari of A 0/ the 
form (b) C is clearly cq uivalen t to the cond ition tha t >10 Iree occurrence 0/ a in A is in 
Ii wj part oj A oj either oj thl' forms (b)C or (3b)C. In the latter form, It :s obvious that 
the condition is unchanged by dualization. 

204 
FUNCTIONAL CALCULI OF FIRST ORDER [CHAP. III 
*374. If I- A = B, and if Al and Bl are duals of A and B respectively, then 
~ Al = B 1· 
(SPecial principle 0/ duality lor (material) equivalences.) 
By the dual of a theorem schema or axiom schema of Fl we shall mean: 
(1) if the schema has the form of an implication, the theorem schema ob-
tained from it by *373; (2) if the schema has the form of an equivalence, 
the theorem schema obtained from it by *374; (3) in other cases, the theorem 
schema obtained from it by *372. In case (1), the dualization is to be per-
formed on the antecedent and consequent of the schema as actually written, 
and according to the instructions as given in the first paragraph of this 
section; similarly, in case (2) the dualization is to be performed on the two 
parts of the schema as actually written, and in case (3) it is to be performed 
on the schema as actually written, again according to the instructions in the 
first paragraph of this section. Thus the dual of a theorem schema or axiom 
schema may differ according to what abbreviations are u~ed in writing 
the schema, but it is uniqlle for any schema as actually written;.It is under-
stood that, before dualizing a schema, any abbreviations by omission of 
brackets or by D12, DI3, D15-17 are first to be withdrawn, restoration 
towards un abbreviated form proceeding thus far but no farther. 
In writing the dual of a theorem schema or axiom schema, the subscripts 
1 on the bold capital letters to indicate dualization-as we used them, e.g., 
in proving .372-may be omitted, on the ground that every wff is a dual of 
some 'lyff. If verbally stated conditiuns are attached to a theorem schema or 
axiom schema (as for instance in the case of *306, *306, ·339). the condi hans 
must be dualized in an appropriate sense; but in most cases with which we 
shall meet in practice the verbally stated conditions are the same as or equiv-
alent to their duals and may therefore be left unaltered. m 
To illustrate the dualization of theorem schemata and axiom schemata, 
we may cite the following examples. The dual of ·302 is the theorem schema 
which asserts that 
I- B cf:: A => A. 
The dual of *304 is the theorem schema asserting that 
I- B ¢ A=>. -A ¢ -B. 
The dual of *305 is *371. The dual of *306 is *330. The dual of *330 is *306, 
"'Besides theorem schemata, we shall sometimes speak also of duals of other meta-
theorems, in the sense of corollaries of them by ·372, "373, "374. We do not attempt to 
make this notion more precise, but shall use the terminology in this case only heuristi-
cally or suggestively. 

§38] 
FURTHER THE()REM SCHEMATA 
205 
or, more correctly, it is the theorem schema which is an immediate coroUary 
of "'306, asserting that every instance of "'306 is a theorem. The dual of "'331 
is "'331, ie., as we shall say. "'331 is self-dual. 
Again, the following theorem schemata are, in order, the duals of the 
theorem schemata "'336, "'337, "'338, "'339: 
*375. 
~ (3a)(3b)A = (3b)(3a)A. 
*376. 
~ (3a)A == A, if a is not free in A. 
*377, 
~ -(alA = (3a)-A. 
*378. 
~ (3a)A = (3b )B, if there is no free occurrence of b in A, and no 
free occurrence of a in A is in a wi part of A of the form (b)G, and 
B is S~AI. 
38. Some further theorem schemata. 
*380. 
f- (la)B ~ A = . B ~ 
.. A, if a is not free in A. 
Proof. By dualizing *335, ~ A ¢ (3a)B -
(3a) • A ¢ B. 
Hence by *377 and P, 
~ A ¢ (3a)B == -(a) • B ~ A. 
Then use P. 
·381. 
~ (a) A ~ (3a)B = (3a) • A ::::J B. 
Proof. By P, 
~ -A => • A :::J B. 
Hence by generalization and *365, f- (3a)-A:::J (3a) • A ~ B. 
Hence by ·377 and P, 
~ -(alA ~ (3a) • A :::J B. 
Also by *302, generalization, and "'365, ~ (3a)B ~ (3a) • A ~ B 
Hence by P,355 f- {a)A:::J (3a)B :::J (3a) • A ~ B. 
By "'306 and modus ponens, A:::J B, (ajA ~ B. 
Hence by *367, (3a)rA::::J Bj, (ajA ~ (3a)B. 
Hence by the deduction theorem, ~ (3a)[A:::> BJ :::> • (a)A:::> (3a)B. 
Then use P. 
·382. 
~ A:::> (3a)B::;:: (3a) • A:::> B, if a is not free in A. 
Proof. By "'381, "'337, and "'34:2. 
*383. 
f- (a)B:::> A = (3a) • B :::J A, if a is not free in A. 
Proof. By *381, *376, and *342 . 
• liThe tautology used is _p ;:::) Y;:::) • q ;:::) Y;:::) • P ;:::) q ;:::) Y 

206 
FUNCTIONAL CALCULI OF FIRST ORDER [CHAP. III. 
*384. 
f- [-A =>. C][B =>. CJ = . A => B=>. C. 
Proof. By P,355 -A=> C, B=> C f- A => B => C. 
Hence by P and *306, [-A =>. C][B =>. C] f- A => B=> C. 
Hence by generalization, [-A =>. C] [B =>. C] I- A=> B =>. C. 
Hence f- [-A =>. CEB =>. C] => • A => B=>. C. 
By *306 and P, A => B =>. C f- -A => C. 
Hence by generalization, A => B =>. C I- -A =>. C. 
Again by *306, P, and generalization, A => B =>. C I- B =>. C. 
Hence by P, A=> B=>. C f- [-A =>. C][B =>. C]. 
Hence f- A => B => .. C => [-A =>. C][B =>. C]. 
Then use P. 
*385. 
f- (a) [A v B] == A v (a)B, if a is not free in A. 
Proof. By *335 and P, f- (a) [-A=> B] = . -A=> (a)B. 
Then use P and *342. 
*386. 
f- (a)[B v A) == (a)B v A, if a is not free in A. 
Proof. By *385, P, and *342. 
*387. 
f- A =. B => • (3a)A = (3a)B. 
Proof. By *340 and *350. 
*388. 
f- A =. B => • A _ (3a)B, if a is not free in A. 
Proof. By *387, *376, and *342. 
EXERCISES 38 
38.0. For the proof of the deduction theorem, *360, case la, write out 
explicitly the full list of wffs that are to be inserted before A" => Bt • 
38.1. Write the duals of the theorem schemata *383-*388. 
38.~. Establish the theorem schema *365 as a corollary of *333 by dual-
ization. 
38.3. Similarly establish the theorem schema *387 as a corollary of -334 
by dualization. 
38'4' Similarly establish a corollary of *332 by dualization (in the ex-
pression of which, "-" shall occur only through the abbreviation" (3a)" 
for "-(a)-", and, in particular, "¢" shall not occur). 

EXERCISES 38 
38.5. Establish the following theorem schemata of f1; 
f- (a)A(a)B = (a). AB. 
f- (a)A(3a)B::::> (3a) • AB. 
207 
f- (a)(3b)[A::::> BJ = (3bJ(a) • A::::> B, if a is not free in A and b is 
not free in B. 
f- (a)(3b)[B::::> AJ == (3b)(a) • B::::> A, if a is not free in A and b 15 
not free in B. 
38.6. A formulation Fli of the intuitionistic functwnal calmlus of first 
. order may be given as follows. The primitive symbols are those of P, with 
such additions to them as to make the existential quantifier primitive as 
well as the universal quantifier, and to supply all the primitive sentence 
connectives of the system P~ (see 26.18). The formation rules are those of 
. Fl, with the obvious added rules to correspond to the additional primitive 
symbols, The definition of bound and free occurrences of variables must be 
changed so that an occurrence of a in A is bound if it is in a wf part of A of 
either of the forms (Va)B or (3a)B, otherwise free. Of the defillition sche-
mata employed in connection with Fl, ollly D13, Dl5, DIU arc: n.:tainecl. The 
same abbreviations by omission of brackets are retained, including the same 
convention about the use of heavy dots, and also the abbreviation by omit-
ting superscripts on functional variables. The rules of inference are *300 and 
*301, the same as for Fl, The axioms comprise all substitution instances of 
axioms of P~, and all instances of four additional axiom schemata which, 
with obviously necessary modifications, are the same as *305, *:~06, *330, 
*364,368 
By the same or nearly the same proofs as for Fl, the following hold (with 
ob,/ious modifications) also for F I ;; a modified form of *311 with theorems of 
p~ taking the place of tautologies of P; *331-*337; *339, Hence show that 
*365 and *340-*342 hold for Fli. 
38.7. Show that the rule of alphabetic change of bound variable, *350, 
holds for Fli. (Hence *351, *352, *360-*363, *366-*369 hold for Fli by the 
same proofs as for Fl,) 
mSpecifically. the changes to be made in *305, *306, *330, '364 are as follows: 
-330 and *364 are to be modified to read as axiom schemata instead of theorem sche-
mata; existential quantifiers occurring a.re to be read, not according to D14, but rather 
lIS involving the primitive symbol 3 of FlI; the terms "free occurrence" and "free 
variable" arc to be construed according to the moddled definition as just given for 
Fll; and in ·306 anti '330 the last of the verbally stated conditions is to be altered t" 
read, "and no free occurrence of a In A is III a wi part of A of eIther of the forms ('ib)C 
or (3b)C." 

208 
FUNCTIONAL CALCULI OF FIRST ORDER [CHAP. III 
3~t8o Assuming the rbults of the two preceding exercises, as well as 
results obtained in Exercises :2G regarding the intuitionistic propositional 
calculus, establish the following theorem schemata of Fli: 
(1) 
I- (3a)-A => -(alA. 
(2) 
I- -(3a}A = (a)-A. 
(3) 
r (3a)--A :::::> --(3a)A. 
(4) 
r--(a)A => (a)--A. 
(5) 
r (3a)(3b)A:= (3b)(3a)A. 
(6) 
I- (3a)A = A, if a is not free in A. 
(7) 
I- (3a)B => A=> • B =>a A, if a is not free in A. 
(8) 
I- (3a) [B => AJ :::::> • (a)B => A, if a is not free in A. 
(9) 
r (3a}[A::::> BJ ::> • A => (3a}B, if a is not free in A. 
(IO) 
I- (3a)[A V BJ = 
A v (3a)B, if a is not free in A. 
3809. A formulation F~ of the (ordinary, or non-intuitionistic) functional 
calculus of first order may be obtained from Fli by adding the axiom schema, 
A v -A. State and prove an appropriate metatheorem of equivalence be-
tween F} and Fl. (Compare 26.14.) 
38.10, A formulation Flm of the mInimal functional calculus of first order 
may be obtained from Fli by omittmg the axiom schema ,..A ::> • A :::::> B 
(with no other change). Of the results of 38.6-38.8 regarding FIf, extend as 
many as possible to Fltn. 
38, I L Another formulation, F}''', of the minimal functional calculus of 
first order may be obtained from Fli by suppressing the primitive symbol ""', 
introducing a new primitive symbol I (a propositional constant), and altering 
accordingly the formation rules, rules of inference, and axiom schemata. 
(The three aXIOm ~chemata which involve the symbol _ explicitly are thus 
omitted; the other aXIom schemata and rules of inference remain unaltered 
except in that the notion of a wff has been changed by the change in the 
formation rules; no now axiom IIche!Tnllta or rule. of inforence are Added,) 
Establish the equivalence of F 1m and Fjll! in a sense like that of §23. (Compare 
26.19.) 
38. I a. For every wff A of F~ let an associated wff A* be defined. by reo 
cur~ion as follows: If A is u propositional variable standing alone, or if A is 

PRENEX ,VORlt,fAL FORM 
209 
of the form f(aI , a 2, ••• , an) where f is an n-ary functional variable or con-
stant and aI' a 2 , .•. , an are individu:1l variables or constants, then A* is 
....... A; [A::::J BJ* is --CA*::::J B*J; [AB]* 
is 
--lA*B*~; lA v BJ* is 
"" ... [A* v B*j; [A = BJ* is --[A* == B*]; if C is -A, then C'" is -A"'; 
if Cis (Va)A, then C* is --(Va)A*; if C is (3a)A, then C* is --(3a)A*. 
that A is a theorem of F} if and only if A* is a theorem of F1m,s57 
(This may be done by showing that the axioms of F~ have the property 
that the associated wif is a theorem of Fl ru , and that the rules of inference 
preserve this property.) 
38.13- In a wff of Fl the elementary parts, as defined in §30, are thuse 
wf parts which have either the form of a propositional variable alone or the 
form f(al , a 2, ... , an) where f is an n-ary functional \'uriable or constant 
and aI' a 2, .. " an are individual variables or constants. Let A", be the wff 
obtained from A by replacing each elementary part E of A by .... -E. Show 
that A is a theorem of F1 if and only if A", is a theorem of rIm. (ese the 
result of 38.12, together with that of 26.20, and 38.8(4) as a theorem schema 
of F IOl, and *342 as a metatheorem of Flm.) 
38.14. Extend the result of 38.1:~ to wffs A of F~ which do not contain 
. either disjunction or the existential quantifier.3ss 
39. Prenex normal form. If (Va)C or (3a)C appears as a wf part 
of a wff A, the scope of that particular occurrence of the quantifier, (Va) 
or (3a), in A is the particular oCCurrt'nce of C immediately following that 
occurrence of (Va) or (3a),359 
An occurrence of a quantifier, (Va) or (3a), in a wif is init'ially placed if 
either it is at the beginning of the wff (i.e., with no symbols preceding it, 
"'This re~lllt is due in sub"tance to f(olmogomff in the pdp"r CltL'(j in footn(,tc 210. 
(Added i11 proo/.) A number of further results similar to those 01 :lS.12, as.13. g~.14, 
but for intuitionistic rather than minimal functional cakulus of first order, arc in 
Kleene's Introdudion to Metal1'lathemaitcs (l952j, see p. 4\)5. 
IO"This result, regarding the minimal functIOnal calculus of first mdtr. should be 
compared with a result of Gbdc!, regarding inluit;lJlllstic arithmetic, in IllS paper III 
Ergebnisse ei,>,,, AJathematischl'>! J{nlicq"iHm.l. n\). 4 (HJ33), pp. 34-B8. 
UiiOn the analogy of D14, \Ve are }'H:rl~ ll:'1!ng "(3a)" as dh~re\,iati()Il uf "_("fa)I'fa,I", 
and "(3 )" as an abbreviatIOn of "-(''1 )_", ,\Iso tIl speaking uf an occurrence n: (''V ) 
or of (3 ), we mean that the blank space shall be filled by a variable-so that, e.g., an 
occurrence of ('<I ) consists of Oll(, uccurrence of each of the three symbuls (. 'V, ), in 
th ... t order, the tbrc~e occ.urrences t)(.·lllg cOllsccntiv,; except that a single symbol, ,,( 
variablo, mURt stand betw",," the occurrcnc<, o[ V and that of ). 
Strictly ~JlUilklll!!, lin OCCI11'l'CJl1C" "I' tho IInlv~'I,"lltUHl\lJrjl'r \. "" oeqll'l'''m''' ,,( (V l-
and (m Fl) an occurrence of the existential quantjfier is an ()Gcurrence uf -(''1 )_. 
But we shall sometimes find it conVenlellt to speak loosely. in a way that lnduues the 
operator variable in an occurrence of the' universal or eXistentIal quantifier. Thus we' 
.poa.k hero of occurrcmcel of (Va) lind (3Q} !\8 occurrences ot the universal and cxisten-
~11l.1 quantl/tllra. And thlll·el. a >!lnllli.Ll· iraunt III th., tlut PlHtljjl'lIph u( III~. In till! Mtl4i,,· 
ment of ·'391 uelow, and elsewb"re, 

210 
FUNCTIONAL CALCULI OF FIRST ORDER lCHAP. III 
not even brackets) or it is preceded only by one or more occurrences of quan-
tifiers, (V ) and (3 ), each with its own operator variable. 3&9 
An occurrence of a quantifier, (Va) or (3a), in a wff is called vacuous if 
its operator variable a has no free occurrence in its scope. In the contrary 
case it is called non-vacuOtts.359 
A wff is said to be in prenex normal form if it has no occurrences of quanti-
fiers otherwise than in initially placed non-vacuous occurrences of (V ) and 
(3 ).359 
Thus a wff A is in prenex normal form if and only if it has the form 
IT1IT2 •.. IT"M, 
where M is wf and quantifier-free, where each IT. is either (Vai ) or (3a,) 
(i = 1.2 ... '. n), and where a l • a 2• ' • " an are variables which are all differ-
ent and which all have at least one (free) occurrence in M. Then the formula 
IT1IT2 .•• IT" 
is called the prefix of A, and the wff M is called the matrix of A. (As a 
special case, we may have that n = 0; in this case the prefix is the null 
formula, and the matrix M coincides with A.) 
In order to obtain what we shall call the prenex normal/arm 01 a wff A. 
we consider the following operations of reduction. applicable to a wif con-
taining quantifiers that are not initially placed: 
(i) If (in left-to-right order) the first occurrence of a quantifier that is 
not initially placed is in a wf part -(Va)C, where C does not begin with-. 
then this wi part (i.e., this one occurrence of it) is replaced by (3a)""C. 
Cf. *377. 
(ii) If the first occurrence of a quantifier that is not initially placed is in 
a wf part -(3a)C, this wf part is replaced by (Va)-C. Cf. *338. 
(iii) If the first occurrence of a quantifier that is not initially placed is 
in a wf part [(Va)C:::) D], this wi part is replaced by 
(3b)[S:q :::) DJ. 
where b is either a. in case a has no free occurrence in D. or otherwise the 
first individual variable in alphabetic order after a which does not occur in 
C and has no free occurrence in D. Cf. *350, *383. 
(iv) If the first occurrence of a quantifier that is not initially placed is in 
a wf part [(3a)C:::) DJ. this wf part is replaced by 
(Vb HS:CJ :::) DJ, 
where b is determined as in (iii). Cf. *350. *380. 

PRENEX NORAfAL FORM 
211 
r §39 
r (v) If the first occurrence of a quantifier that is not initially placed is in a 
wf part [D;::) (Va)C], where D is quantifier-free, then this wf part is re-
placed by 
t. 
C'ib)[D;::) S:Ci], 
~ .. 
~' where b is determined as in (iii). Cf. ·350, ·335. 
(vi) If the first occurrence of a quantifier that is not initially placed is in 
k' a wf part [D :::::> (3a)C], where D is quantifier-free, then this wf part is re-
t", placed by 
~ 
(3b)[D:::::> S:Ci], 
~. where b is determined as in (iii). Cf. *350, *382. 
~ 
, ··390. 
l 
By a finite number of successi ve applications of the reduction steps 
(i)-(vi), any wff A of F1 can be reduced to a wff A' of Fl in which all 
f; 
quantifiers are initially placed. This process of reduction is effective, 
and the resulting wff A' is uniquely determined when A is given, 
Proof, At each stage in the process, as long as there are any quantifiers 
not initially placed, one and only one of the .eduction steps (i)-(vi) is 
possible and the result of making this reduction step is determined effectively 
, and uniquely. It remains only to show that the process must terminate in 
a finite number of steps. 
Let a particular occurrence of one of the signs ;::) or - be called external 
toa particular occurrence of a quantifier if: (1) it is not in the scope of that 
occurrence of the quantifier, and also (2) in case of an occurrence of (V ) 
with an occurrence of -' both immediately before and immediately after it 
(or, in other words, in case of an occurrence of (3 ) ) it is not one of those 
two occurrences of -
(which form part of that occurrence of (3 ) ). 
Now each reduction step either diminishes the number of occurrences of 
I quantifiers that are not initially placed, or else, while leaving this number 
unchanged, diminishes the total number of occurrences of the signs;::) and --
external to the first occurrence of a quantifier that is not initially placed. 
Since both numbers are of course finite in the given wff A, it follows that 
the process of reduction must terminate in the required wff A' whose 
quantifiers are all initially placed. 
**391. 
Any wff A of f1 can be reduced to a wff B of f1 in prenex normal 
form, by first applying the reduction process of .... 390 to reduce A 
to a wff A' in which all quantifiers are initially placed, and then 
deleting all vacuous occurrences of quantifiers, (Va) or (3a), in A' 

212 
FUNCTIONAL CATCULl OF FIRST ORDER [CHAP. III 
to obtain B. This process of reduction is effective, and the resulting 
wif Bin prenex normal form is uniquely determilled when A is given .. 
Proof. Obvious as a corolbry nf **3UO. 
Definition. The wff B which is obtained from the wff A by the reduction. 
process of **391 is called the prenex normal form of A. 
*392. If B is the prenex normal form of A, I- A == B. 
Pruof. At each step of the reduction process of **3HO, the \vff obtained is 
equivalent to the previous wff, in the sense that the material equivalence of , 
the two wffs is a theorem of Fl. Thus by the transitive law of equivalence, 
I- A == A'. Again, in the reduction of A' to B by deleting vacuous (')N'l1 rrp n." 
ces of quantifiers, the deletions may be performed one by one, and at each 
step the \'iff obtained is equivalent to the previous wff. Therefore, by the 
transitive law of equivalence, f- A = B. 
The derived rule *341 here has to be used at each step, in establishing the 
equivalence of the wff obtained to the previous one. Given *341, the re-
quired equivalence follows, in the case of reduction step (i), by *377; in the 
case of reduction step (ii). by *;~38; in the case of (iii), by *350 and *383; 
in the case of (iv), by *350 and *380; ill the case of (v), by *350 and *335; 
in the case of (vi), by *350 and *382; in the case of deletion of a vacuous 
occurrence of a quantifier. by *3;~7 or *376. 
Although the prenex normal form of a wff is unique, as we have here 
defined it, and although a wff is always equivalent to its prenex normal form 
(in the sense that the equivalence is a theorem of Fll, it is not true in general 
that, if two wffs are equivalent to (~ach other (in this sense), they therefore 
have the same prenex normal form. Counterexamples are obvious, and are 
left to the reader. 
EXERCISES 39 
39.0. Find the prenex normal form of each of the following: 
(I) 
--(y)F(y, z) ::>z --(3x)G(x, y, z) 
(2) 
(:3 ) 
(4) 
(5) 
(Answer: (z)(3xd(3x).--F(Xl'Z)::> G(x,y,z).) 
(y)F(x, y) ::> (y)F(x, x) 
F(y) ~v -
• (x)G(x, y) ::> (y)-F(y) 
F(x) v -(y)F(y) 
(3x)F(x, y, z) -
(y)G(x, y, z). 

EXERCISES 39 
:J13 
39.1. Show that the matrix of the prenex normal form of a wff difiers 
the associated quantifier-free formula (in the sense of §3:2) at most 
changes in the individual variables at certain places, and deletions of 
negations --. 
39.2. A formulation of the functional calculus of first order is to have 
tion, conjunction, and disjunction as its primitive sentence connectives, 
the universal and existential quantifiers as its primitive quantifiers. 
the primitive symhols are to he the same as for Fl. (I) Write the 
rules for this formulation of the functional calculus of first order. 
Given that the rules of inference are generalization (*301) and modus 
(in the form, from -A V B and A to infer B), supply suitable axiom 
ta-making them as few and as simple as feasible -:md then dem-
..... ,.~,' ... " equivalence of the system to FI in an appropriate sense. 
39.3. Extend the definition of lull dis/unctil'e normal form (see exercise 
to quantifier-free formulas of the system introduced in 3\J.2. Show for 
system that, if A and B are quantifier-free, then 1- A = 
B if and only 
A and B either have the same full disjunctive normal form or both have 
full disjunctive nOlmal form. 
39.4-. Define prenex normal form in an ;J ppropriate way for ttl" system of 
39.2, and demonstrate analogues of **390, **391. *3U2. 
39.5. In the system of exercise 39.2, if the propositional variables are 
included among the primitive symbols, let a wff be said to be in prenex-
disiunct·ive normal form if either it is p -p or: (I) it is in prenex normal form, 
and (II) the variables in its prefix are, in order of their OCCtlrrellGe ill the 
prefix, and for some n, the first n individual variables in alphabetic order. 
and (III) its matrix is in full disjunctive normal form. (l) Establish meta-
.theorems about reduction to prenex-disjunctive normal form, analogous to 
· those of 39.4 about reduction to prenex normal form. (2) Answer the qucs-
whether it is true in general that, if f- A = 
B, then A and B have the 
same prenex-disjunctive normal form. 
39.6. In the case of the singulary functional calculus of first artier, with 
· primitive basis as given in §30 (i.e., in the formU'lation fl.l), the process of 
bringing quantifiers forward by means of the reduction steps (i)-(vi) of 
this section can be in a certain sense reversed. The following reduction steps 
are used: (a) to delete a vacuous occurrence of a quantifier (3a) or eva); 
(b) to replace a wf part (3a)-C by -(\1'a)C; (c) to replace a wf part (\1'a)-C 
· by -(3a)C, if it is not immediately preceded by -; (d) to replRce it wf part 
(3a)~C => D] by ~(\1'alC => (3a)D]; (e) to replace a wf part ('v'aEC => DJ 
by ~(3a)C => Dj, if a is not free in D; (f) to replace a wi part (\1'a)[C => DJ 

214 
FUNCTIONAL CALCULI OF FIRST ORDER [CHAP. III 
by [C => (Va)D], if a is not free in C; (g) to replace a wf part (Va)[[Cl => C2 ) 
=> D] by -[(Va)~-C! => DJ::::J -(Va)[C2 ::::J DJ]. By a series of applications 
of these reduction steps, together with steps which consist either in a 
transformation of a wf part by means of propositional calculus (and +342) 
or in an alphabetic change of bound variable, show that every wff A of 
the singulary functional calculus of first order, Fl,l, can be reduced to a 
wff B such that: (I) the only occurrences of quantifiers in B are in wf parts 
of the form (V x) • D! ::::J • D2 => •... D,H ::::J D n, where n may be lor great-
er,3GO and where each D, separately is either f;(x) or -fi(x), the functional 
variables fl' f2' ... , fn being all different in the case of anyone particular 
such wf part of B;36! and (2) f- A = 
B.362 
39.7. Apply the reduction process of the preceding exercises to the follow-
mg wffs of Fl,l: 
(1) 
(3x)(y). F(x) => G(x) => .Glx)::::J H(x) =>. F(y) => H(y} 
(2) 
(3x)(y)(z) • F(x) ::::J G(y) ::::J H(x) => • F(z) => G(x) => H(z) 
(3) 
F(x) =>",. F(y) =>11 [G(x) ::::J G(y)] V (z)F(z). 
39.8. For a formulation of the singulary functional calculus of first order 
with primitive basis as in 39.2, supply the analogue of the reduction process 
and the metatheorem of 39.6. (In order to simplify the statement of the 
reduction process, make use of the full disjunctive normal form-d. 39.3-
and its dual, the full conjunctive normal form.) 
39.9. For a formulation of the functional calculus of first order, let the 
primitive symbols be as described in exercises 30.6. And let there be two 
rules of inference, as follows (a and b being individual variables): from 
Ala' B Ib C and A to infer C, if b is not free in C; from Ala B to infer 
S:Aj I b ~:B:, if no free occurrence of a in A or B is in a l£'ell-formed part of 
the form C Ib D. Find axiom schemata (seek to make them as few and as 
simple as· possible) such that the system becomes equivalent to Fl in an 
appropriate sense, and carry the development far enough to establish this 
equivalence. (Use may be made of results previously obtained regarding the 
propositional calculus, including those of exercise" 25.) 
39.10. Establish the equivalence to Fl, in an appropriate sense, of the 
''"In case tl is 1. the wf part of B in yuestion is simply (V:l::)D j , Le., either (VX)tl(X) 
or (Vx)-f, (x). 
3O'But the same functional variable or some of the same functional variables may 
occur in two or more different such wf parts of B. 
mThe result of this exercise is due to Heinrich Behmann in a paper in the Malh.-
matische Annalen. vol. 86 (1922), pp. 153-229 (see especially pp. 190-IIH). 

§39] 
EXERCISES 39 
2 US 
following svstem F!b' The primiti\'{' symbols are the same as those of FI 
with the two additional primitive symbols, 3 and _, The wffs are of two 
kinds, terms and sentences. Kamely, the terms are gi\'en by the same forma-
tion rules as those of Fl, with "wff" replaced hy "term" (and "wr' by "a 
term") throughout, together with one additional rule: if r is a term anel a is 
an individual variable, then (3a)r is a term. The sentences are all formulas 
r1, r 2' . , " r n -
11; where n is any na tural number (not excluding 0), and 
r l and r z .. , and rn and 11 are terms. Thus no wff contains more than one 
occurrence of _, and a wff is a sentence or a term according as it ciocs or 
does not contain an occurrence of _. In a term, an occurrence of a variable 
a is bound if it is an occurrence in a \vi part of either of the forms (V'a)B or 
(3a)B; otherwise free, In il sentence all occurrcnces of variables arc b()und, 
There is ant axiom schema. namely A _ A, wllere A is a term, And the rules 
of inference are the eleven following, where Ao, AI' A 2, . , ., An' A, B, Care 
terms, and a is an individual variable, and b is an individual variable or an 
individual constant: (1) from AI' Az,"" A,,_ B to infer Ao, AI' A2".·, 
An -
B;363 (II) from A l , A 2, . , ., A k-_I, A k , Ak+l' A kt2, .. " An -
B to infer 
AI' A 2 , ..• , A k_ 1, Ak+l, A k • Ak+2' .. " An -
B; (III) from AI' AI, A 2 , . , ., 
An -
B to infer AI' A z, _ • " An -
B; (IV) from AI' A z, ... , An _ B to 
infer Ai> A 2! •• " A n_1 -
An::> B; (V) from A l • Az,"" An-+A => Band 
AI' A z, , .. , An- A to infer AI' A2, , • _, An _ 
B;364 (VI) from AI' A 2, , ... 
An -+ B and AI' A 2 , ••• , An -
-B to infer AI' A z, ... , A'H -
-An; (VII) 
from A l, A z, .. " An -
--B to infer AI' Az. ' , ., An _ B ;364 (VIII) from 
AI' A z, . , " An -
A to infer AI' A 2, ••• , An _ 
(V'a)A, if a is not free in 
Av A 2, ' • " An;364 (IX) from AI, A z, .. " A" _ 
(V'a)A to infer AI' A z, •• " 
An -
$~A', if no free occurrence of a in A is in a wi part of A of either of 
the forms (V'b)C or (3b)C;364 (X) from A j • A 2 , _ , "An _ :;;:Ai to infer 
A j , A2, .• "An- (3a)A, if no free occurrence of a in A is in a wf part of 
A of either of the forms (V'b)C or (3b)C;364 (Xl) from A j , A z, . .' ., An- B 
to infer At, A 2, ' , ., An_I> (3a)An- B, if a is not free in AI' A 2, .. " A"_l' 
B.365 (As a fi rst step toward establishing the desired equivalence show that, 
if B is any term of F;b and B' is the corresponding wff of P, obtained from 
B by replacing (3 ) everywhere by -(V' )-. then -
B is a theorem of F~b 
if and only if B' is a theorem of P.) 
39. I I. Also establish the equivalence to P, in an appropriate sense, of 
363The sp~cldl case that " = () is not excluded, Le .. from ~ B to infer /\ -+ B_ 
SUAgain, as a special case, n may be O. 
selThc system of this exercise is intermedlate between Gcntzen's calculi N 1< and L1( 
(see his paper cited in footnotes 294-295), with a modification due to Bernays (Logical 
Calculu.l, 1935-1936). 

216 
FUNCTIONAL CALCULI OF FIRST ORDER [CHAP. III 
the following system F!,3dO The primitive symbols and the terms are the same 
as those of F!b (see the preceding exercise). The sentences ("Sequenzen") are 
all formulas r l , r 2' ' • " r n -+ d v d 2 •••. , d".; where m and n are natural 
numbers (not excluding 0). and r l and r 2 , • , and r" and d t and d 2 ••• 
and d m are terms,307 Thus no wff contains more than one occurrence of -+, 
and a wff is a sentence or a term according as it does or does not contain 
an occurrence of -+, Free and bound occurrences of variables are defined as 
in the preceding exercise, Again there is one axiom schema, A -+ A, 
where A is a term. And the rules of inference are the following, where 
Ao, AI' Ai' .," An' Bo. B}> B 2, 
' •• , Bm, A, B, C are terms, and a is 
an individual variable, and b is an individual variable or an individual 
constant: 
la. From AI' Az, ••. , A" -+ Bl , Bz, .. '. Bm to infer Ao' AI' A2, ' •• , A,,-+ 
~, Bz, .•. , Bm ·308 
lb. From AI' Az, •• " A" -+ Bv B 2, • , "B ... to infer AI' Ai' .. " A,,-+ 
Bo, BlI Bz, •• " Bm ,368 
IIa. From AI' Az, ' , " Ak- l , A k , Ak+l' A k +2' ' • " An -+ Bl , B2, • , ., Bm to 
infer AI' A2, • , " Ak-t> Ak+l' A k , A k+2, ••• , A,,-+ B1, B 2, ••• , Bm.309 
lIb. From AI' A2, ..• , A" -+ Bl • B 2, ' •• , B I _I, BI, BH1 , B1H, •.• , Bm to 
infer AI' A2 •••• , A".-. B1> B 2, ' , ., BI- 1, Bl+l' B" B1H, ' • " Bm,370 
IIIa. From AI' AI' Ag, ••• , A" -+ B1, Bi , ' .. , Bm to infer AI' A2, ••• , A .. -+ 
B1• B2, ••• , B",.309 
IIIb. From AI' A2, ' • " A" -+ Bv Bl• Bz, .•• , Bm to infer AI' Az •• 0 ., 
A" -+ BI> B g, ••• , Bm .370 
IVa. From Av Az •• , ., An -+ B to infer AI> Az, .•. , An _l -+ An => B. 
IVb. From AI' A2, ••. , An-+ A and B-+ B1> B I , . , " B", to infer AI' 
Az, ... , An, A=> B-+ B1, Bz, •.. , Bm.388 
Va. From AI' AI' ... , A .. -+ BI, Bz •... , B ... to infer AI> Az, .. 0, A .. _1-+ 
-An' B1, B g, ••• , B .... 36. 
Vb. From AI' As, ... , An -+ BI• Bz, ••. , B", to infer AI' Az, ... , A .. , 
-B1-+ Bz, Bs' ••• , B",.370 
VIa. From Av Ag, 0 
• '. A" -+ A to infer AI' AI' .. " A .. -+ ('v'a)A, if a is 
not free in AI' Az •. , " An' 370 
366T!llS is Gentzens' calculus LI{. with some obvious minor simplifications (which 
were not adopted by Gentzen because he wished to maintain as close a similarity as 
possible between LJ( and the intuitionistic calculus LJ). Compare the discussion of 
Gentzen's methods in §29. 
mIn particular. the arrow standing alone constitutes a sentence, 
"tHere m or n or both may be O. 
'"'Here m may be O. 
"oHere n may be O. 

§39] 
EXERCISES 39 
217 
Vlb. From B-+ B 1, B 2, ••• , Bm to infer (3a)B -+ B1, B2, .• " B"" if a 
is not free in B 1, Ba, ... , B m.36D 
VIIa. From $:A; -+ B 1, B 2, .•• , Bm to infer (v'a)A-+ B1, B 2, .. '. Bm , 
if no free occurrence of a in A is in a wf part af A of either of the forms 
('Vb)C or (3b)C.369 
VIIb. From AI> Ai"'" An-+S:Ai ta infer AI, A 2 •••• , An-+ (3a)A, if 
no free occurrence of a in A is in a wf part of A of ei ther of the forms ('Vb) C 
or (3b)C.370 
VIII. From AI> A 2, ••• , Ak-+ C, B1 , Bz, ... , B j and Ak+l' A k+2 , ••• , An' 
C-+ B j , Bl+l' ... ' B ... to infer AI' A z,"" An- B1, B 2, ... , B m.371 
39.12. Establish the equivalence to F! of the system F!h obtained by 
replacing the rule of inference VIII by the inverses of the two rules Va and 
Vb, and adding a rule of alphabetic change of bound variable-in the 
sense that the theorems of the two systems are identical. 372 
'''Here we may have as special cas~s any or all of k = 0, I = 0, k = n. i = m, 
'''This is Gentzen's "Hauptsatz" for [,FC as modified to conform to changes which 
we have made in the system. Gcntzen's method is to show first how to eliminate an 
application of VIII from a proof. if such an application occurs only once and as the 
last step of the proof. and if C is not identical with any of the terms B , . B 2 •••• B" 
A.+" A kH, . ' " An- ThIS is flot done in one step. but rather the application of VIII 
in the given proof is rcplaced by one or two applications of VIII which eithc:r come 
earlier in the proof or have a term C that contains a smaller total number of occur-
rences of the symbols =>, -, V. 3. Details of this, which involve a mathematical in-
duction of rather complex form, may be found in Gentzen's original paper. But the 
re1!der who is interested in following the matter up is urged first to work thi~ ont for 
himself and then afterwards to look up Gentzen's trcatment. 

IV. The Pure Functional Calculus of First Order 
40. An alternative formulation. In the case of a functional calculus 
of first order having a suffIcient apparatus of variables, a formulation is 
possible, as already remarked, in which rules of substitution are used (in 
addition to the rules of modus ponens and generalization) and the axiom 
schemata of §30 are replaced by basic instances of them-so that the number 
of axioms is then finite. In this section we give such a formulation, FiP, of 
the pure functional calculus of first order. 
The primitive symbols are the eight improper symbols listed in §30, the 
individual variables, the propositional variables. and for each positive inte-
ger n the n-ary functional variables. The formation rules, 40i-v are the same 
as 30i-v except that the references to functional constants and individual 
constants in 30ii are deleted. The same abbreviations of wffs are used as 
described in §30, including the definition schemata D3-17. The rules of 
inference are the following: 
·400. 
From A:::> B and A to infer B. 
(Rule of modus ponens.) 
"'401. 
Fwm A, if a is an individual variahle, to infer (a)A. 
(Rule of generalization.) 
*402. 
From A, if a is an individual variable which is not free in Nand b 
is an individual variable which does not occur in N, if B results 
from A by .substituting S:N for a particular occurrence of N in A, 
to infer B. 
(Rule of alphabetic change of bound variable.) 
"403. 
From A. if a and b are individual variables, if no free occurrence of 
a in A is in a wf part of A of the form (b)C, to infer S:AI. 
(Rule of substitution for individual variables.) 
*4040, 
From A, if p is a propositional variable. to infer S~AI. 
(Rule of substitution jor propositional variables.) 
"404,.. From A, if f is an n-ary functional variable and Xl> x2, ••• , x" are 
d.istinct individual variables, to infer 
,xf(x., x, ..... xn)A' 
;::'B 
f· 
(Rule of substitution lor functional Vari(lbles.) 

AN ALTERNATIVE FORilfULATION 
The axioms are the five following: 
t405. 
P::::l. q ::::l P 
t406, 
S::::l [1' ::::l q] ::::l • S ::::> P ::::l • S ::::l q 
t407. 
-1'::::l -q ::::l " q ::::> p 
t408. 
p::>", F(x) ::::> • p ::> (x)F(x) 
t409, 
(x)F(cr)::::> F(y) 
219 
From results obtained in the preceding chapter (especially §35), then: 
follows the equivalence of the systems F~jJ and r,Ip in the sellse that every 
theorem of either system is a theorem also of the other. Hence also the de-
rived rules of Fip which were obtained in the precedmg chilpter may be 
extended at once to the system F~P 
The developments of the follov,'ing sections (§§414i) belong to the theoret-
ical syntax of the pure functional calculus of first oruer, and-except the 
results of §41, which concern the particu\;u formulation qP-they apply 
to the pure functional calculus of first order indifferently in either of the 
formulations FIP or F~p. Many of the results can be extended to other func-
tional calculi of first order, some even to all arbitrary functional calculus of 
first order in the formulation fl. But we shall confine attention to the pure 
functional calculus of first order, leaving it to the n'arler to make sLlch 
extensions of the results where obvious. 
We remark that the method of the presen t section, for obtaining a for-
mulation of the functional calculus of first order in which the axiom sche-
mata of Fl are replaced by a finite number of axioms, can be extended to 
any ca5e in which functional variables of at leilst one type are present. 
Namely, the appropriate chang(~s are made in the list of primitive symbols 
and in the formation rules, The rules of inference remain the same except 
that: (1) if individual constants are present, the appropriate changes are 
to be made in *403 and *404n to allow for them (as in *351 and. *352,,); :1l1d 
(2) if any of the rules *404n become vacuous, they may be omitted. The 
five axioms remain the same as in F~P if the required variables are present, 
and otherwise they receive an obvious modi fica tion. 
In particular, for any positive integer m, a formulation F~,m of the m-ary 
functional calculus of first order may be obtained from FiP by merely 
omitting from the list of primitive symbols all functional variables which 
are more than m-ary and omitting all the rules *404 n for which n > m. 
This formulation of the m-ary functional calculus of first order is easily 

220 PURE FUNCTIONAL CALCULUS OF FIRST ORDER [CHAP.IV 
seen to be equivalent (in the sense that the theorems are the same) to the 
m-ary functional ca;culus of first order in the formulation Fl,m of Chapter III. 
EXERCISES 40 
4°.0. Show that the theorems of the singulary functional calculus of first 
order are identical with those theorems of the pure functional calculus of 
first order in which all the functional variables are singulary. 
40.1. In the system F~P show that, without changing the class of theorems, 
the rule of generalization and the axioms t408 and t409 could be replaced 
by the two following rules of inference: from A::::> B, if a is an individual 
variable which is not free in A, to infer A::::> (a)B; from A::::> (alB, if a is 
not free in A, to infer A::::> B. 
40.:1. For a formulation of the extended propositional calculus with prim-
itive symbols as indicated in exercise 30.7. let the rules of inference be 
modus ponens, the rule of substitution (for propositional variables), and the 
two rules introduced in 40.1 as these are modified by taking a to be a prop-
ositional variable rather than an individual variable. And let the axioms 
be the same as the three axioms of P~. Carry the development of the system 
far enough to establish a solution of its decision problem along the lines 
suggested in §28.400 (Make use of the result of 18.3.) 
40.3. In a partial system of extended propositional calculus, with 
primitive symbols as in 30.7, rules of inference modus ponens, generaliza-
tion, and substitution, the two axioms of P+, and axiom schemata (alA::::> A, 
and (a)[b ::::> A] ::::> • b ::J (alA where b is not a, show that under suitable 
definitions of conjunction, Jisjunction, equivalence, and negation the entire 
intuitionistic propositional calculus is contained. (See 19.6.) 
41. Independence. From the equivalence of F~P and FIp it is easily 
seen that the rules *4042, *4043, ••• of F~P are non-independent. For by 
means of the rules *402, *403, *4040, *4041 it is possible to infer an arbitrary 
instance of one of the five schemata *302-*306 from the corresponding one 
of the five axioms t405-t409. 
Though not independent, the rules *404 n (n > 1) are nevertheless in a certain 
sense not superfluous, since they restrict the class of sound interpretations of 
F~P Indeed an interpretation which is like the principal interpretation of Flp 
except that functional variables with superscript greater than 1 are interpreted 
as functional constants (each one corresponding to a particular propositional 
function of individuals) is a sound interpretation of the system Flp, and of the 
41lOThese axioms and rules of inference for the extended calculus are given in the paper 
of footnote 243, where they are credited to Tarski. 

§4IJ 
INDEPENDENCE 
221 
system obtained from F~P by deleting the rules *404" (n > 1), but is not a sound 
interpretation of F~P itself. 
The need for the rules *404n (n > 1) may be seen from a syntactical 
standpoint if F~P is thought of not as a self-sufficient system but as a system 
to which undefined terms and postulates are to be added in order to develop 
some special branch of mathematics by the formal axiomatic method (a:; 
described in the concluding paragraphs of §07). For such an added postulate' 
may well contain, e.g., a binary functional variable in such a way that *4042 
must be used in making required inferences from it. 
Except *404,. (n> 1), the rules and axioms of F~P are independent. We 
go on to indicate briefly how this may be established. 
Consider a formulation of the propositional calculus in which the rules of 
inference are substitution and modus ponens. and the five axioms are t405, 
t406, t407, P ::> r ::> • p ::> r, and r ::> r. Here the last two axioms are afps of 
t408 and t409 respectively, in the sense of §32. Hence from a given proof of 
any theorem A of F~P, upon replacing each wff in the proof by a suitably 
chosen afp of it. we obtain a proof of an afp Ao of A as a theorem of this 
formulation of the propositional calculus. By the methods of §19 we may 
show, for this formulation of the propositional calculus, the independence 
of the rule of modus ponens and of each of the axioms t405, t406, t4-07. 
There follows, for F~P, the independence of each of *400, t405, t406, t407. 
(Details are left to the reader.) 
Consider the transformation upon the wffs of F~P which consists in re-
placing all occurrences of (Va) by -(Va)-, simultaneously for all individual 
variables a. I.e., briefly, consider the transformation which consists in re-
placing the universal quantifier everywhere by the existential quantifier. 
It may be verified that this transforms every axiom of FiP except t409 
into a theorem of F~P; and, in an obvious sense, it transforms every primitive 
rule of inference of F~P into a primitive or derived rule of F~p. But t409 is 
transformed into (3x)F(x) ::> F(y), which is not a theorem. (If ~ (3x)F(x) ::> 
F(y), then, by *330 and P, I- F(x) ::> F(y), contrary to **324.) The inde-
pendence of t409 follows. 
Consider the transformation upon the wffs of F~P which consists in re-
placing simultaneously every wf part ofthe form (Va)Cby (Va).-[C ::> C],4.0J 
This transforms every axiom into a theorem. and every primitive rule of 
inference except *401 (the rule of generali.zation) intc a primitive or derived 
401More explicitly, by this transformation every quantifIer-free formula is trans-
formed into itself, and if C and D are transformed into C' and D' respectively, then 
[C => DJ is transformed into [C' => D'], -C is transformed into -C', and (Va)C is 
. transformed into (Va)-CC' => C'J. 

222 PURE FW"TCTIONALCALCULUSOF FIRST ORDER [CHAP. IV 
rule. On the other hand it transforms the theorem F(x) :::J", F(x) into the 
non-theorem (x)-. F(x) :::J F(x) :::J • F(x) :::J F(x). There follows the inde-
pendence of *401. 
Consider the transformation upon the wffs of F~P which consists in re-
placing ('Va) by -('Va)- whenever a is a different variable than x. This 
transforms every axiom into a theorem and every primitive rule of inference 
except *402 (the rule of alphabetic change of bound variable) into a primi-
tive or derived rule. It transforms the theorem (y)F(y)::> F(z) into the 
non-theorem (3y)F(y):::J F(z). There follows the independence of "'402. 
Consider the transformation upon the wffs of F~P which consists in re-
placing every wf part of the form ('Va)C by S:q. (Or, as the transformation 
may also be described, every bound occurrence of an individual variable in 
the wff is replaced by the particular individual variable y, and then ('Vy) is 
omitted wherever it occurs.) This transforms every axiom into a theorem 
and every primitive rule of inference except "'403 (the rule of substitution 
for individual variables) into a primitive or derived rule. It transforms the 
theorem (x)F(x) :::J F(z) into the non-theorem F(y) :::J F(z) (ef. §32). There 
follows the independence of "'403. 
Consider the transformation upon the wffs of F~P which consists in omit-
ting - wherever it occurs and at the same time replacing p everywhere by 
[p :::J Pl This transforms every axiom into a theorem and every primitive 
rule of inference except *4040 (the rule of substitution for propositional 
variables) into a primitive or derived rule. It transforms the theorem 
-q:::J q :::J q into the non-theorem q :::J q:::J q ( ...... 320). There follows the inde-
pendence of *4040, 
Consider the transformation upon the ¥rffs of F~P which consists in 
replacing F(a) throughout by IF(a) :::J F(a)] (for every individual variable 
a, but only for the one functional variable Fl) and at the same time replacing 
('Va) throughout by -('Va)- (for every individual variable a). This trans-
forms every axiom into a theorem and every primitive rule of inference 
except "'4041 (the rule of substitution for singulary functional variables) 
into a primitive or derived rule. It transforms the theorem (x)C(x) :::J Cry) 
into the non-theorem (3x)C(x) :::J C(y). There follows the independence of 
*4041, 
Finally, to establish the independence of t408 we use a more elaborate 
transformation upon the wffs of F~P, which is described in steps as follows. 
First replace every individual variable by the individual variable next 
following it in alphabetic order, i.e., replace simultaneously x by y, Y by z, 
z by Xl' and so on. Then change simultaneously every propositional variable 

EXERCISES 4I 
223 
to a singulary functional variable and every n-ary functional variable to an 
(n + 1)-ary functional variable in the following way: a propositional vari-
able a is to be replaced by b(x), where b is the singulary functional variable 
having the same alphabetic position as a (Le., if a is the ith propositional 
variable in alphabetic order, then b is the ith singulary functional variable 
in alphabetic order); and, a heing an n-ary functional variable, each wf 
,part a(c}, c~, ... , cn) is to be replaced by b(c1, C 2, ••. , Cn' x) where b is the 
(n + l)-ary functional variable having the same alphabetic position as a. 
Then in every wf part having the form of an implication [A:::> B] prefix an 
existential quantifier ""("Ix)",, to the antecedent A and to the consequent B 
(i.e., change [A:::> B] to [-(Vx)-A:::> -(Vx)-B]), and at the same time 
change every universal quantifier (Va) to (Va) ("Ix), and change - every-
where to (Vx)-. 
The result of applying this transformation to t408 is 
(1) (3x)[(3x)F(x) :::>V", (3x)F(y, x)]:::> (3x) • (3x)F(x):::> (3x) (y) (x)F(y, x), 
which is not a theorem of F~p. On the other hand, application of this trans-
formation to the remaining axioms of qP yields, in order, 
(3x)F(x) :::> (3x) • (3x)G(x) :::> (3x)F(x), 
(3x)[(3x)Fl(X) :::> (3x) • (3xJF(x) :::> {3:;r.)G{x)J => (3:1:). 
(3x)[(3x)Fl(X) :::> (3x)F(x)):::> (3:t) • (3x)F1(X) => (3x)C(x), 
(3x)[(3x)(x)-F(x) :::> (3x)(x)-G(x)] :::> (3x) • (3x)G(x) :::> (3x)F(x), 
(3x) (y) (x)F(y, x) :::> (3x)F(z, x), 
are theorems of F~p. 
Moreover, by this transformation every primitive rule of inference of F~P 
is transformed into a primitive or derived rule. (In order to show this in the 
case of "'400, it is necessary to make use of the fact, which is a corollary of 
. **320, that no theorem of F~P fails to contain an implication sign, and hence 
that no theorem of F~P is transformed into a wff containing x as a free 
variable.) The independence of t408 follows. 
EXERCISES ,p: 
41.0. In order to complete the proof of independence of t408 as described 
supply details of the demonstration that (1) is a non-theorem of 
F~P and that (2)-(5) are theorems. (For the first part, using rules of sub-
stitution for functional variables, proceed by showing that, if (1) is a theo-
. rem, then C(x) :::> Cry) is a theorem, contrary to **324.) 
i
" : 
I 
I: 
I 
I 
i ; 
J. 
r 
l' 
1. 
'i 
iI 1-

224 PURE FUNCTIOZVALCALCULUSOF FIRST ORDER [CHAP. IV 
,p.1. Following G6del, prove the independence of t408 by means of the 
transformation upon wffs of FiP which consists in replacing every wf part 
of the form (Va)f(a), where a is an individual variable and f is a singulary 
functional variable, and also every wf part of the form (Va)b, where a is 
an individual variable and b is a propositional variable, by [p cf: P]. 
41.2. Following the analogy of §40, and using the same rules of inference 
*400--*404" as in §40, reformulate the system Fli of exercise 38.6 as a pure 
intuitionistic functional calculus of first order F~iP with a finite number of 
axioms. Discuss the independence of the axioms and rules of F~ip. (Use may 
be made of the results of 26.18. 36.6-38.8. and §41.) 
41.3. Investigate the independence of the axioms and rules of the for-
mulation of the extended propositional calculus which was introduced in 
exercise 40.2. 
42. Skolem normal form. A wff402 is said to be in Slwlem normal form 
if it is in prenex normal form without frcc individual variables and has 
a prefix of the form 
(3a)) (3a2) ... (3a",) (bl ) (b2) ..• (bn ). 
where m > 1 and 11 ~ O. In other words, a wff in prenex normal form is 
in Skolem normal form if it has no free individual variables and its prefix 
can tains at least one existential quantifier and every existential quantifier 
in the prefix precedes every universal quantifier. 403 
In order to obtain what we shall call ihe Skolem normal form 0/ a wff A, 
we apply the following reduction procedure: 
1. 
First reduce A to its prenex normal form B by the method of §39. 
11. 
If c 1 is the first in alphabetic order of the free individual variables 
of B, prefix the universal quantifier (Vel) to B. Repeat this step until B 
has been reduced to a wff C1 which is in prenex normal form without free 
individual variables. (Thus C1 is (eu ) (eu - 1) •.• (Cr)B, where Cr' ct , •.. , eu 
are the free individual variables of B in alphabetic order. Of course u may 
be 0.) 
iii. If C1 is in Skolem normal form. let C be the same as C1. 
IV. If C1 has a null prefix (this will be the case if C1 is a wff of P), let C 
be(3_:L:,_~ix) => F(x) => C1• Then C is in Skolem normal form. 
O··In \§42-47, "wi[" shall mean "well-formed formula of the pure functional ca.lculus 
oj first order in either of the formulations F'P or F!p." except where the contrary is 
indicated by using the explicit wording "wff of' such and such a system. 
4·'Vi.'hen we refer to th" universal quantifiers in the prefix. we mean only the uni-
versal quantifiers which are without -
before and after, i.e., we exclude those universal 
quantifiers which occur as parts of the eXIstentIal quantifiers (DI4). This remark applies 
here and at various plilces below. 

§42J 
SKOLEM NORlvIAL FORi'.! 
v. 
Except in the cases iii and iv, C1 must have the form 
(3a1)(3a2) ••• (3ak ) (ak+1)Nl> 
225 
where k ~ 0, and Nl is in prenex normal form and has 3 1, 3 2, ... , a k+1 
as its only free individual variables. Let 11 be the first (k + 1 )-ary functional 
. variable in alphabetic order which does not occur in Cl . Let Cz be the prenex 
normal form of 
(3a1)(3a2) •.• (3ak ) • (a k+lHNI =:> fl (a1, a 2, .. " ak+l)] =:> 
(ak -l-1)f1 (aV 3 2, ••. , aleH)· 
~. Then, if Cz is in Skolem normal form, let C be the same as C2• Otherwise 
~ repeat the reduction. I.e., Cz has the form 
~ .. r 
(3a1) (3a2) ... (3ak,) (ak'+l)Nz, 
where k' > k, and Nz is in prenex normal form and has aI' a z' ... , a k,+! as 
its only free individual variables. Let f2 be the first (k' +- I )-ary functiunal 
variable in alphabetic order which does not occur in Cz. Let C3 be the prenex 
normal form of 
(3a1)(3a2) ... (3a1<'). (ak'+I)LNz :::l (2(a1, a2, ... , ak'H)]:::l 
(ak'+l)f2(a1, a2, ... , ak'H)' 
t Then, if Ca is in Skolem normal form, let C be the same as Ca. Otherwise 
~ repeat the reduction again, reducing Ca to C,; and so on until a wff Cn _ l +! 
i; in Skolem normal form is obtained, which is then C. We shall see that C is 
. Cn-HI> where l is the number of universal quantifiers which occur at the end 
. of the prefix of Cv after the last existential quantifier, and where n is the total 
~ number of uni versal quantifiers in the prefix of C1 (which is in fact the 
~ same as that in the prefix of C), 
[ '*420. 
i, 
Any wff A can be reduced to a wff C in Skolem normal form, by 
the procedure just described in i-v. This process of reduction is 
effective, and the resulting wff C in Skolem normal form is uniquely 
determined when A is given. 
Proof. In the series of reductions described in v, by which C1 is reduced to 
C1, C2 to C3 , and so on, the effect on the prefix at each step is to change the 
first universal quantifier to an existential quantifier and at the same time to 
.Wfo see this It is necessary to take into account the nature of the process of reduction 
to prenex normal form, as defined in §39. Thus. if the prefix of Nl is n,n •... n., the 
prefix of C. is 
by the reduction steps (iil)-(v) of §39. Here e 
m + I -
k -
I, and b H1 is the first 
individual variable in alphabetic order after l!k+1> which does not occur in C 1.) 

226 PURE FUNCTIONAL CALCULUS OF FIRST ORDER [CHAP. IV 
add a universal quantifier at the end of the prefix (without other change in 
the prefix).404 Thus at each step the number of universal quantifiers is re-
duced by I which occur in a position preceding any existential quantifier. 
The series of reductions must therefore terminate in a wff C in Skolem nor-
mal form. The remaining part of the theorem is then obvious. 
Definition. The wff C which is obtained from the wff A by the procedure 
described in i-v is called the Skolem normal form of A. 
*421. If C is the Skolem normal form of A, then ~ A if and only if ~ C. 
Proof. We ~ontinue to use the same notations as in the statement of i-v 
above. 
. 
By "'392, ~ A 
. B. Hence by P, 
~ A if and only if I- B. 
By "'301 and *306-else by *401, t409, and *4041-1- B if and only if 
t- C1.406 . 
. 
Ii C is obtained by iii. then C is the same as C1. Hence I- A if and only if 
r C. 
In case C is obtainecl by iv, we have by P: 
~ C1 = . F(x) :::::I F(x) => C1• 
Hence by generalizing upon x and then using *388, since C1 is without free 
individual variables, we have: 
f- C1 == (3x) • F(x) => F(x) => Ct. 
I.e., ~ C1 = C. Hence by P, ~ C1 if and only if I- C. Hence ~ A if and only if 
~ C. 
Finally we consider the case that C is obtained by v. We must show that 
~ C1 if and only if ~ C2 ; ~ C2 if and only if ~ C3 : ••• ; I- C,,_I if and only if 
f- Cn-l+!' Since C is the same as Cn-I+l' it will then follow that ~ A if and only 
if ~ C. 
We state in detail the proof that I- C1 if and only if I- C 2• The proofs that 
~ C2 if and only if I- Ca, and so on, are precisely similar-the argument may 
therefore be completed by mathematical induction, a step that is left to 
the reader. 
By "'306 (ef. footnote 405) and P, 
(akH)N1 ~ N1 :::> fr(ar, a 2, •• " a"tl) :::> f1(Sl' S2' ... , Sk+l)' 
Hence by generalization upon a k +1' and "'333, 
"'The aXiom schemata of F"P are, with obvious modification in wording, also theorem 
schemata of F~p, And we shall hereafter use them by number in this dual role (just as 
we use the numbered theorem schemata of F"p as being at the same time theorem sche-
mata of FiP). 

§43] 
VA.LIDITY AND SA HSFIABILITY 
227 
(ak+1)Nl I- (ak+lllNl ~ fl(at, a2 •. , " ak-l-1)] ::> (ak.;.jlf1(al • a2" 
ak+t)· 
Hence by *367, 
(3al )(3a2) .•• (3a;J (ak+l)N1 I- (3a1) (3a2) ... (3ak) • 
(ak+1HNI ~ fl(al , a2, ' .. , akul] ~ (akll)fl(al' a2,·· "ak+1)' 
Hence by *392 and P, Cl I- C2• Hence If I- Cl then I- C2, 
~ow suppose that I- C2 • Then by *392 and P, 
I- (3a1) (3a2 ) ••• (3ak ). (ak+lHNI ::> fl(al , a2 •... , ak+1iJ::> 
(ak+l)fdal' a2, • , ., ak-tl)· 
Hence by the rule of substitution for functional variables, substituting 
. Nl for fl(al, a2, .. " ak+l), we have: 
I- (3a1)(3a2 ) • , • (3ak) • (ak+1)"N1 ::> Nl~ ::::) (akll)NI · 
Now by P and generalization, I- (ak+l)~NI::> N 1:. Hence by modus ponens, 
(ak+J[~l::> NIJ ::::) (ak+l)N1 I- (ak_IlN1· 
Hence by *367, 
(3a1) (3a2 ) .•• (3ak ) • (ak+l) [NI => NIJ ::::) (ak+l)NI t-
(3a1)(3a2) •.• (3ak ) (aktl:lN1 , 
Therefore I- (3al )(3a2) ... (3ak)(ak+1)N1. I.e., I- Cl • 
43. Validity and satisCiability. The rules a-f. given in small type 
in §30 as semantical rules determining a principal interpretation of Flp, may 
be modified or reinterpreted in such a way as to give them a purely syn-
tactical character. 
Namely, in the statement of these rules in §30 we understood the words 
"range" and "value," each in a (presupposed) semalltlcal sense-so tllat the 
rules are thereby relevant to the question what we take to be intended by a 
person who, using F'P as an actual language £C,r purposes of communication. 
asserts a particular one of its ,dfs-or, more exactly, so that the rules constitute 
a proposa.l of a norm, all ideal demand as to what shall be llltcnd"d by s\Jch a 
person. 
But we now reintroduce the rules a-f with a new meaning, according to 
which we do not take the words "range" and" value" in any seman tical 
sense, but rather, after selecting a particular non-empty class as domain of in-
dividuals, we regard the rules as constituting a definition of the words "range" 
and "value" (in the case of the word "value," an inductive definition). On 
this basis, the "range" of a variable comes to be merely a certain class 
which is abstractly associated with the variable by the definition; and the 
"value" of a wff for a given system of "values" of the variables a l , a 2, •. " an 
(all of the free variables of the wff being included among ai' a 2 , .... an) 
!i 
I. 
/1 
I, 
f 
1 L 
! 
l: 
r
I 
j. 
I 
I 
j. 
I 
Ij 
1 
i 

228 PURE FUNCTIONAL CALCULUS OF FIRST ORDER [CHAP. IV 
comes to be merely a certain truth-value,08 which is abstractly associated 
with the wff and with n ordered pairs <~. al)' <al!' as), ... , <a1l• a,,) in 
which each a; is a member of the range of a j . Hereafter, when the words 
"range" 4pd "value" occur in a syntactical discussion, they are to be under-
stood in this syntactical sense, the fact that a passage is not in small type 
being sufficient indication that the words do not have their semantical 
sense. (Where needed for clarity, however, we may use such more explicit 
phrases as' "value in the syntactical sense.") 
These syntactical notions of range and value may of course be used in-
dependently of any interpretation of the system FIp or F~P-thus even if 
the system is used purely as a formal calculus, without interpretation-or 
even if it is used with, some interpretation quite different from the principal 
interpretations as given in §30. 
A non-empty. domain of indlviduals having been selected, a wii is said to 
be lJali4 in tbat domain if it has the yalut: t for all possible values of its free 
variables, satisfiable in th/!t domain if it has the value t for at least one 
:;,y~~em of possible values vi its free varialJles. (Here. by a "possible" value 
of a variable is meant mt!rely a value that belongs to the range of the 
variable according to rules a, b".) 
A wff is said to be valid if it is valid in every non-empty domain, satisfiable 
if it is satisfiable in some non-empty domain.407 
By the universal closure of a wff B we shall mean the .,.,1f (C,,)(C"'_l) , . _ 
(c1)B, where c1 , c2, ... , ell are the free individual variables of B in alpha-
betic order. Similarly, the existential closure of B is the wff (3c,J (3C'HJ ... 
·'·Observe that this reference in the definitlOn to truth-values does not of itself render 
the defimtion sernantical. Nevertheless, if preferred. any two other things may be used 
here instead of the two truth-values. Fur example, in the synta.ctical definition of 
"value" we might use the numbers 0 and J in place of the truth-values. truth and false-
hood respectively. and then define a wff to be "valid" in a given domain if it has the 
value 0 for all possible values of its free variables. 
'01At this point §§07-0D of the introduction sh"uld be reread, especially the discussion 
In §09 of Tarski's syntactical definition of truth, and footnotes 142, 143, That we have 
gIven here a syntactical definitIOn of validity rather than of truth is just because the 
pure functional calculus of fi,st order has no wffs without free vatiables, 
The notions of validity and of satisflability may also be regarded as analogues, 
for the functional calculus of first oreier, of the notions of being a tautologv and of not 
being a contradiction in the propositIOnal calculus. Indeed, in the special case of a wff 
of the pure functional calculus of first order which is at the same time a wff of the prop-
ositional calculus, the former nobons immediately reduce to the latter. And it is 
obvious that the discussion in the present section, regarding the distinction between the 
syntactical <lnd the sernanttcal notions of value, and the corresponding discussion at 
the beginning of §15 are closely pa~alleL But there is the important difference that an 
effective test was given for recogni2!ng a wif of the propositional calculus (say of P" 
or of p.) as being or not being a tautology, whereas no effective test is possible for 
recognizing a wff of the pure functional calculus of first order as being or not being valid. 

§43J 
VALIDITY AND SA TlSFIA BILITY 
22f) 
(3c1)B, where c1, c2, .• " C u are the free individual variables of B in alpha-
betic order. 
*"'430. 
A wff A is valid in a given non-empty domain if and only if its 
negation ""A is not satisfiable in that domain. A \Vif A is valid if 
and only if its negation .-A is not satisfiable. 
Proof. This follows at once by rule d, or, more correctly, by the clause 
corresponding to rule d in the definition of "value" in the syntactical 
sense. 
"431. 
A wff is satisfiable in a given non-empty domain if and only if its 
negation is not valid in that domain. A wft is satisfiable if and only 
if its negation is not valid. 
Proof. Again this follows at once by rule d. 
·*432. 
A wff is valid in a gl "en non-empty domiiin if and only if its univer-
sal closure is valid in that domaill. A wff is v<Llid if and only if its 
universal closure is valid. 
Proal. By rule f. 
**433. 
A wff is satisfiable in a given non-empty domain if and only if its 
existential closure is satisfiable in that domain. A wff is satisfiable 
if and only if its existential closure is satisfiable. 
Proof. By rules d and f. For from these two rules together it follows that, 
for a given system of values of the free variables of (3a)A, the value of 
(3a)A is t if the value of A is t for at least one value of a, and the value of 
(3a)A is f if the value of A is f for every value of a. 
"434. 
Every theorem is valid. 408 
Proof. Using either of the formulations Flp and F~P, we may show that 
all the axioms are valid and all the rules of inference preserve validity. 
Details are left to the reader. 
"435, 
A wff is valid in a given non-empty domain if and only if its prenex 
normal form is valid in that domain. A wff is valid if and only if its 
prenex normal form is valid. 
•• SThi, metatheorem may be regarded as the analogue (for the pure functional 
calculus of first order) of ··150 or .·235 (for the propositional calculusl. And ill fact 
the method of proof is the same. Notice that **:l24, and hence ·'323, could now 
be proved as corollaries of ··43'~. But by the proofs in §32 these two metatheorems 
were established on a much weaker basis than that re:1uired :or **434. 
I 
i 
! 
I: 
! 
i' 
I' 

230 PURE FUNCTIONAL CALCULUS OF FIRST ORDER [CHAP. IV 
Proof. If B is the prenex normal form of A, we have by *392 that I- A = B. 
Hence by **434, A = B is valid. Hence by rules d and e, A and B have the 
same value for every system of values of their free variables. From this the 
meta theorem follows by the definition of validity. 
**436. A wff is satisfiable in a given non-empty domain if and only if its 
prenex normal form is satisfiable in that domain. A wff is satisfiable 
if and only if its prenex normal form is satisfiable. 
Proof. As in the previous proof, if B is the prenex normal form of A, then 
A and B have the same value for every system of values of their free vari-
ables. From this the metatheorem follows by the definition of satisfiability. 
**437. 
A wff is valid in a given non-empty domain if and only if its Skolem 
normal form is valid in that domain. A wff is valid if and only if its 
Skolem normal form is valid. 
Proof. The proof of this parallels exactly the proof of *421, except that 
wherever that proof makes use of a theorem the present proof must instead 
make use of the fact that that theorem is valid, and wherever that proof 
makes use of a rule of inference the present proof must instead make use 
of the fact that that rule of inference preserves validity (in an arbitrary 
non-empty domain). 
A wff is said to be in the skolem normal form for saUsfiability if it is in 
prenex normal form without free individual variables and has a prefix of 
the form 
where m ~ 1, n ~ 0. 
Given any wff A, we may find the Skolem normal form of NA. This will 
be a wff 
in which m ~ 1, n ~ 0, and M is quantifier-free. Then the prenex normal 
form of the negation of this wff will be a wff 
where M' is obtained from M by either deleting or inserting an initial ne-
gation sign N. This last wff, the prenex normal form of the negation of the 
Skolem normal form of the negation of A, is in Skolem normal form for 
satisfiability; we shall call it the skolem normal form of A for satisfiability. 

EXERCISES 43 
231 
A wff is satisfiable in a given non-empty domain if and only if its 
Skolem normal form for satisfiability is satisfiable in that domain. 
A wff is satisfiable if and only if its Skolem normal form for satis-
fiability is satisfiable. 
Proof. By **431, ··437, **430, **436. 
If a wff is valid in a given non-empty domain, it is valid in any 
non-empty domain having the same or a smaller number of 
individuals. If a wff is satisfiable in a given non-empty domain, it 
is satisfiable in any domain having the same or a larger number 
of individuals. 
Proof. Suppose that A is satisfiable In the non-empty domain ~. and let 
be a domain having the same or a larger number of individuals. Then a 
lDe-W-OIle correspondence can be found between ~ and some part .\1'0 of the 
.\1' (where ~o may coincide with ~ or may be a proper part of ~). 
j is any individual in ,3, let i' be the corresponding individual in .\1'0 under 
one-to-one correspondence. Also select a particular individualio in ~. 
k is any individual in ~o, let k' be the corresponding individual in ~ under 
foregoing one-to-one correspondence; and if k is any individual which is 
~ but not in ~o, let k' be io. If Ij) is an m-ary propositional function over~, 
a propositional function whose range is the ordered m-tuples of individ-
of ,3, let (j)' be an m-ary propositional function over sr, determined by 
rule that (j)'(k], k2' ... , km ) is Ij)(k;, I{~, ... , k~J. 
Let aI' a2, .. " an be the complete list of free variables of A. Since A is 
ble in 3', there is a system of values av a2, .•• , an of aI' a 2, ... , an for 
the value of A is truth, each a i being an individual in S or a pro po-
" sitional function over S. Then a~, a~, ... , a~ is a system of values of a j , a 2, 
',' •. , an for which the value of A is truth, each a: being an individual in Sf or 
propositional function over .\1'. Thus A is satisfiable in .\1'. 
This completes the proof of the second part of the metatheorem. From this 
first part then follows by **430. 
EXERCISES 43 
Let A have no free individual variables and let C be the Skolem 
normal form of A. Show by an example th~t it is not in general true that 
~A == C. Is it always true that f- A => C' That f- C::J A? 
4-3.1. Find the Skolem normal form of each of the following: 

232 PURE FUNCTIONAL CALCULUS OF FIRST ORDER 
(I) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
F(x) ::::) F(x) 
(x)F(x) ::::) (3x)F(x) 
p::::) (3x)p 
G(x) ::::)x H(:l:) ::::) • (3x)G(x) ::::) (3x)H(x) 
(3x)(3y)F(x, y, z) ::::) (3y)(3x)F(x, y, z) 
+3.2. As was done in the text for FIp and rules a-f, let the rules <x-C of 
§30 be reinterpreted as syntactical definitions of "range" and "value" for 
the case of the system Flh. Let a wft of Flh be called valid if it has the value 
truth for all possible values of its free variables; and let a wff of Flh without 
free variables be called true if it has the value truth. Also, given a wff A 
of Flh in which the distinct individual variables (bound and free) that occur 
are aI' 8 2 •... , a". let the characteristic function of any wf part H of A be 
defined by induction as follows: The characteristic function of E(a;, a" ak) 
is the n-ary functiC'n of natural numbers whose value for arguments al • ai' 
... , a,.. is 0 if a. + aj = alt, and 1 in the contrary case; the characteristic 
function of fl(a i , aj , ak) is the n-ary function of natural numbers whose 
value for arguments aI' az . .... a" is 0 if aia, = ak , and I in the contrary 
case; if the characteristic function of Bl is 11, the characteristic function of 
-HI is the n-ary function of natural numbers whose value for arguments 
aI' a2, .• " an is 1 
11 (aI' az . ... , an); if the characteristic functions of Bl 
and H2 are /1 and 12 respectively, the characteristic function of [BI ::::) B2] 
is the n-ary function of natural numbers whose value for arguments' 
aI' a2, , •• , an is (1 -ll(al • az,' .. , an ))!2(a1, a2" .. , a,..); if the characteristic 
function of HI is iI, the characteristic function of ('Vaj)H1 is the n-ary, 
function of natural numbers whose value for arguments al. a2' , , " a" is ' 
a, 
the product being taken over all natural numbers al. with the convention 
that the product is 1 if all the factors are l, 0 if any factor is O. Prove that 
a wff A of FIh is valid (or in case A has no free variables. true) if and only if 
the characteristic function of A as a wi part of A vanishes identically. i.e., 
has the value 0 for all possible arguments. 
43.3. Show tha.t the wff 
(3x) (y) • F(x. y) ::::) • -F(y. x) ::::) • F(x, x} = F(y, y) 
is valid in any domain consisting of not more than three individuals but is ' 
not valid in a domain of four individuals. 

§44} 
COEDEL COMPLETENESS THEOREM 
233 
4-3.4. Prove **324 by showing that. if a quantifier-free formula is not a 
substitution instance of a tautology, there is a finite non-empty domain in 
which it is non-valid. 
43.5. Show that the following wffs are valid in every non-empty finite 
domain but not valid in an infinite domain :409 
(1) 
(3x)(y)(3z) • F(y, z) ::::> F(x. z) ::::> • F(x, x) ::::> F(y. x) 
(2) 
(Xl) (x2)(xa)[F (Xl> Xl) • F (Xv X3) ::::> F(x}> X2) ¥ F (XZ• Xa)] ::::> (3y) (z)F (Y,z) 
43.6. (1) Without relying on or presupposing the reduction of a wff to 
Skolem normal form by the method of §42, make a direct statement of a 
process for reducing a wff to its Skolem normal form for satisfiability. 
(2) Apply this process to the negation of the wff of exercise 43.5 (1). 
43.7. Prove directly that a wff is satisfiable if and only if its dual is not 
valid. 
44. Godel's completeness theorem. 
"«0. Every valid wff is a theorem. 
(Cadet's completeness theorem.) 
Proof. By *421 and **437, it is sufficient to consider a wff A in Skolem 
normal form, 
where M is quantifier-free and contains the individual variables al' a 2, ... , 
8 m, bv b 2, ••• , bn (and no other individual variables). \Ve shall show that 
her (I) A is a theorem, or (2) A is not valid. 
Let us enumerate the (ordered) m-tuples of positive integers according to 
the following rule: If il + i2 + ... + im < jl --j- i2 + ... + im, the m-tuple 
(iI' i z, .. " im) comes before (i.e., comes earlier in the enumeration than) 
the m-tuple (iI' 12, ... , im>; if il + i z + ... + im 
i1 ..I-. 12 + ... + im' 
= i1' i2 = i2' ... , i k = ill;, i k+1 < ik+l' the m-tuple (ii' i z, ... , im> again 
comes before the m-tuple (iI, i2' ... , im)·m 
Thus the m-tuples of positive integers are enumerated, or arranged in an 
seq uenee. The first m-tuple in this enumeration is (1, 1, 1, .. " 1, I, 1 > 
the second m-tuple is (1, 1,1, .. " 1, 1,2): the third one is <1, 1,1, .. " 
'otThese are modified forms of examples due, one to Kurt SchUtte, and the other to 
Paul Bernays and Moses Schonfinkel. 
llOThat is, the m-tupJes <il • i •• .... i m) are arranged in order of increaSing sums 
1\ + i •... + i m' And m-tuples having the ~amc sum are arranged among themselves 
in lexicographic order. 
,.li 

,. 
234 PURE FUNCTIONAL CALCULUS OF FIRST ORDER [CHAP.IV 
1,2,1); the fourth is <I, I, I, ... , 2, 1, 1); and so on.mEvidently, no 
sitive integer occurring in the kth m-tuple is greater than k (if m ;;;;; 1). 
We let the kth m-tuple in this enumeration be <[kl], [k2], ... , [kmJ). 
I.e., we use [kl] as a notation for the lth positive integer in the kth m-tuple. 
Now let Ble be 
let Cle be 
and let Die be 
We notice that the variables x(k-l)n+2' X'k-l)n+a, .. " Xkn+l' which are here 
substituted for bv b2, •. " b" are none of them the same as any of the·· 
variables X[kl]' X(k2J' •.• , x[kml' which are substituted for aI' 8 2, ••• , am •. 
Moreover the variables X(k-l),,+2' x(k-lln+3' ... , x lc,,+! are all different among 
themselves, and different from all the variables occurring in BlI BI .... " 
Bk- 1• But all the variables Xl' Xa, ... , X Ic,,+1 occur in C k• 
(It is possible that n may be 0, and the reader should observe that this 
special case makes no difficult y; but m is never less than 1.) 
Since M is quantifier-free, it follows that Bk and Ok are also quantifier-
free. And, except in the case n = 0, the complete list of free individual 
variables in Ck is Xl> x 2, •• " xle,,+!' 
Lemma: 
For every k, Die f- A. 
We prove the lemma by mathematical induction with respect to k. In 
doing so, we assume that none of the variables 8 11 8 2 .••• , 8 m , hI' h2' ... , hl\ 
are the same as any of the variables Xl' X2, X 3, ••• (as may be brought 
about by' alphabetic changes of bour..d variable in A if necessary). 
By *330 and modus ponens, repeated m times, 
(b ) (b ) 
(b ) S8,8a ... 8"'MI ~ A. 
J 
2' •• 
n 
X,X''''ZI 
Hence by *306 and modus ponens, 
( ) (h ) (b ) 
(b ) SR,82 ••• 8"'MI ~ A. 
Xl 
1 
2'" 
,,- x, xl''' ", 
Hence by alphabetic change of bound variable, repeated n times, Dl ~ A. 
This is the case k = 1 of the lemma. 
"'Here. for purposes of illustration, we have taken m > 6; and the dots in each case 
represent a number of l's. As further illustration the mth m-tuple is 0, 2, I, ... , I, 1, I): 
the (m + l)th IS (2. I, 1 •... , I, 1. I); the (m + 2)th is (I. I, 1, .. ,1, 1,3); the 
(m + 3)th is (I, I, 1, ' , .• 1.2,2); the (m + 4)th is (I, 1, I, ... , I, 3, I); the 
(m + 5)th is (I, 1, 1 •...• 2. 1,2). 

GOEDEL COMPLETENESS THEORE,\f 
Now suppose, for some particular k greater than 1, that Dk - 1 I- A. By *385 
and *341 and P, repeating n times, we have that 
(X(k-l)n+2)(xck- 1)n+3) ••• (xkn+lHCk- 1 V BkJ ~ 
Ck- 1 v (Xrk-l)'l+2){xrk- 1)'l+3) ... (Xkn+1)Bk· 
From this, since C"_l v Bk is the wff Ck , we have by *306 and modus ponens, 
repeated (k 
l}n + I times, that 
Dk ~ Ck •• ! V (XCk-l)nH)(x(k-l,n+3) ... (xkn+1)Bk· 
Hence by alphabetic change of bound variable, repeated n times, 
Dk ~ Ck-1 V (b1)(b2) ••• (bn ) S:;"]:~k.'::::~mJM!. 
Also by *330 and the transitive law of implication, 1» times. 
~ (b1) (b2) ••• (bn) S:' 
~. 
"'~m JMI => A. 
~:kIJ~[k~)"'~[km 
Dk f- Ck- 1 V A. 
Hence by generalizing upon X(k-l)n~l and using *386 and P, then generalizing 
upon xCk-1)n and using *386 and P, and so on, repeating {k -
I)n + I 
times, we have that 
Dk ~ D"_1 V A. 
Since D k - 1 ~ A, we have that I- D k _ 1 ::> A, and hence by P that Dk I- A. 
This completes the proof of the lemma. Continuing the proof of **440, 
we distinguish two cases.m 
Case 1: for some k, Cit: is a theorem. Then by generalization (kn + 1 
times), Dk is a theorem. Hence by the lemma, A is a theorem. 
Case 2: for every k, C/c is a non-theorem. Then for every k, by *3ll, it 
is possible to find such an assignment of truth-\,a!ues to the elementary 
parts of Ck (i.e., the wi parts which have either the form of a propositional 
variable alone or the form f(cl , c2, ••. , ci )) that the value of C k • as obtained 
by the truth-tables of ::> and -, is f. Or. as we shall say, it is possible to find 
a falsifying assignment of truth-values to the elementary parts of Ck . (The 
same elementary part may occur more than once in C k • in which case of 
course the same truth-value is to be given to it at every occurrence; but 
different elementary parts may receive different truth-values, even if they 
differ only as to individual variables.) 
'IIAt this point of the proof we make use of the law of excluded middle (m the 
syntax language). But since no effective means is at hand to determine which of the two 
cases holds for a given A. the method of the proof yields no solution of the decision 
problem of the pure functional calculus of first order. 

236 PURE FUNCTIONAL CALCULUS OF FIRST ORDER [CHAP, IV 
.. • 
~ 
I 
~ , .' 
• 
' 
No,,:" ~t EI , Ea. Ea. ' , "be ,an enumer~tion of the diffe:rent elementary 
,- 'Parts "occurring in 'C1• C2, Ca, ' '" according to the following order: first 
the different elementary parts of CI • in the order of their first occurrence in 
C1 ; then the different elementary parts of Cz that do not occur in Cl , in the 
order at" their first occurrence'in C2 ; then the different, elementary parts of 
C3 that do not occur in C1• Ca. in the order of their first occurrence in Cs; 
and so on.' 
We proceed to make a "master assignment" of truth-values to EI • EI , 
Ea, ' , " as follows, If EI receives the value t in infinitely many of the falsi-
fying assignmentsUl of truth-values to the elementary parts of CI , Cli' 
Ca. ' , '. we give El the value t in the master assignment; in the contrary 
case. El must ~eceive the value f in infinitely many of the ~alsifying assign-
ments of truth-values to the elementary parts of CI • C2• Ca, . , " and we give 
El the value f in the master assignment. Next we consider those infinitely 
many falsifying assignments of truth-values to the elementary parts of 
C,.. C2 • Ga. ' . , in which Et receives the same truth-value as in the masler 
al:lsignml!nt; if E2 receives the value t in infinitely many of these, we give El 
the value t in the mastt:r assignment; iJ,nd in the contrary case we give E, 
the value f in the master assignment, Next we consider those infinitely many 
falsifying assignments of truth-values to the elementary parts of CI • CIl, 
C3 , ' , , in which ~ and Ell receive each the same truth-value as in the master 
assignment; if Ea receives the value t in infinitely many of these, we give Ell 
the value t in the master assignment; and in the contrary case we give 
E3 the value f in the master assignment. And so on. 
Now suppose that the master assignment should result in the value t for 
one of <;, CIl• Ca, ' . " say for C k , The different elementary parts of Ck are 
contained in a finite initial segment of El • Ell, Ea •.. '. say in ~, Ell' ' , " EI , 
Let ev ell' ' , " el be the truth-values assigned to ~, Ell, • ' .• E, respectively, 
by the master assignment. Then in view of the form of Cv C2, Cs. ' , . as 
disjunctions, and in view of the truth-table of v, we have that no assignment 
of truth-values to the elementary parts of Ci, i > k, can be a falsifying 
assignment if it includes the assignment of ev Ca, ' , " c, to EI , Et • ' , " EI 
USIt may happen that there is more than one falsifying assignment of truth-values 
to the elementary parts of Ck (though the number is always finite for a fixed C~), , 
In speaking of "the falsifying assignments of truth-values to the elementary parts of 
C,. C •• Cs. ' , , ." we mean to include. for each C~. all the various falsifying assignments 
of truth-values to the elementary parts of C k • 
In the special case n = O. it may also happen that falsifying assignments of truth· 
values to the elementary parts of C k and of 0, coincide in the sense that the list of 
elementary parts involved is the same and the truth-values assigned are the same; 
nevertheless we count the two assIgnments as different if k and 1 are different. 

§44J 
GOEDEL C01v[PLETENESS THl:.;()H~·M 
respectively. But this contradicts the rule which was used in assigning the 
truth-value e1 to EI in the construction of the master assignment. 
It follows that the master assignment results in the value f for ever\, Ck . 
I.e., C1, C 2 , C3 •... are simult.alleously falsified by the TIlJ.ster assigtllncnt. 
Now we take the positive integers as domain of individuals, and proceed 
to assign values to the propositional and functional variables of A as follows. 
To a propositional variable p is given the same value as given to p in the 
master assignment. To an i-ary functional variable f is assigned as value 
an i-ary propositional function tP of indivIduals, as determined by the 
following rule: tP(ul • u2, ' •• , Ui) has the same truth-value which is assigned 
to f(xu , Xu •• , " xu) in the master assignment; or if no truth-value is 
1. 
' 
assigned to f(xu,. xu.' ' .. , xu,) in the master assignment. the truth-value 
of tP(u11 U2, ' . " 11,) is t. 
This assignment of values to the propositional and functional variables of 
A is at the same time an assignment of values to the propositional and 
functional variables of each Bi: and of each Ck , If we also assign to each in-
dividual variable x" the positive integer u as value, we ll<lve ,t11 assignment 
of values to all the variables of Bk and of Ck , This assignment gives to C, 
the value f (since we have proved that the master assignment falsifies C k ). 
Hence it also gives to Bk the value f (since Ck IS C k- 1 V B k • and in view of 
the truth-table of v). Hence by rule f of §30 (or by the clause corresponding 
to rule f in the definition of "value" in the syntactical sense), it gIves the 
value f also to 
i.e., to 
'b ) 'b ' 
(b ) Sal s, 
.,.8 m 
MI 
\ 
1 \ 
2) . .. 
n' x 
x ·r· 
. 
[k!J [kO. "l''''J 
This holds for all k; and as k runs through all values, we know that <X[klJ> 
X[k2J' . , " x[kmJ> runs through all possible m-tuples of the variables xu' and 
hence that all possible substitutions are made of variables Xu for aI' a 2, 
.. " am. Hence the value f is given to 
Thus we have found an assignment of values to the propositional and 
functional variables of A such that the value of A is f. Therefore A is not 
valid. 
This completes the proof of *"'440. We notice a,; a corollary the foliowing 
meta theorem : 
I; 
j 
.' 
i 
j 
II
~ 
i 

I 
t 
1 
I 
238 PURE FUNCTIONAL CALCULUS OF FIRST ORDER [CHAP. IV 
>1<>1<441. 
If A is a wff in Skolem normal form, 
(3a1) (3a2) •.• (3am) (bl ) (b2) ••• (bn}M. 
if Bk IS the quantifier-free wf£. 
Sal ". 
...a m 
bl 
b. 
...b" MI 
x [~IJX [.2]'"'' [Om] X(~_l )nH"(O_1).+3,,·X.,,+1 
' 
and if C .. is BI V B2 V •.. V B k, then A is a theorem (and is valid) 
if and only if there is some positive integer k such that Ck is a sub-
stitution instance of a tautology of P. 
45. Ltiwenheim's theorem and Skolem's generalization. In case 2 
of the foregoing proof of Godel's completeness theorem we have shown about 
an arbitrary wff A which is in Skolem normal form and is not a theorem that 
it is not valid in the domain of positive integers. Hence, if a wff in Skolem 
normal form is valid in the domain of positive integers, it is a theorem, and 
therefore by *>1<434 it is valid in every non-empty domain. Hence by *>1<437, 
if any wff is valid in the domain of positive integers, it is valid in every non-
empty domain. 
Moreover, by >1<>1<439, any enumerably infinite domain (in particular, e.g., 
the domain of natural numbers) may take the place here of the domain of 
positive integers. Thus follows: 
>1<*450. 
If a wff is valid in an enumerably infinite domain, it is valid in 
every non-empty domain.U4 
(Lowenheim's theorem.) 
As a corollary by >1<*431, we have also: 
>1<>1<451. 
If a wff is satisfiable in any non-empty domain, it is satisfiable in 
an enumerably infinite domain. 
Skolem's generalization of this is the metatheorem that, if a class of wffs 
(it may be an 'infinite class) is simultaneously satisfiable in any non-empty 
domain, then it is simultaneously satisfiable in an enumerably infinite 
domain. 
Here the definition of simultaneous satisfiability is the obvious generali-
zation of the definition of satisfiability of a single wff. Namely, a class r 
of wffs is said to be s'imultaneously satisfiable in a given non-empty domain 
of individuals if, of all the free variables of all the wffs of r taken together, 
there exists at least one system of possible values for which every wff of r 
(l(Thus, if a wff is valid In the domain of natural numbers, it is valid also in non-
enumerably infinite domains. If a wff is satisfiable in a non-enumerably infinite 
domain, it is satisfiable also in the domain of natural numbers. 

§45] 
LonVENHEIM-SI<.OLEM THEOREMS 
23n 
has the value t. (In the case of a finite non-empty class F of wffs, it is clear 
that simultaneous satisfiability is eq ui valent to the satisiiabili ty of a single 
wif, the conjunction of all the wffs of r.) 
A class of wffs is said to be szmultaneously satisfiable if it is simultaneously 
satisfiable in some non-empty domaill of individuals. 
We shall need also the following definitions (which we adopt not only for 
the case of the pure functional calculus of first order but also for other 
functional calculi of first and higher orders4l5 ). 
Where r is any class of wffs and B is any wff, we say that r I- B if there 
area finite number of wffs A1 • Az,"" AmofFsuch thatAl , A2 , .... Am f- B. 
A class F of wffs is called inconsistent if there exists a wff B such that 
r I- Band r f- -B. If no such wff B exists, we say that r is consistent. 
Where r is any class of wffs and C is any wff. we say that C is consistent 
with T' if the class is consistent whose members are C and the membl'r~ 
(wffs) of F; otherwise we say that C is inconsistent with r. 
A class r of wffs is called a maximal consistent class if r is consistent and 
no wff C is consistent with F which is not a member of r. 
We establish the following as a lemma: 
•• 452. 
Every consistent class r of wffs can be extended to a maximal 
consistent class r, i.e., there exists a maximal consistent class r 
among whose members Clrc all the members of r. 
Proof. We shall give a rule by which the maximal consistent class r is 
uniquely determined when r is given. (However, this rule will not be such 
as to provide in any sense an effective construction of the members of r.) 
First the wffs must be enumerated, as is possible by well-known methods 
(since the primitive symbols are enumerable, amI the wffs are certain finite 
sequences of primitive symbols).416 Then we shall speak of "the first wff," 
"the second wff," and so on, referring to this enumeration of the wffs. 
'''At one place below. we use als" an obvious extension of the ddinition of simulta-
neous satisfiability to an applied functional calculus of first order . 
• loFor example, we may use til" [,,!lowing enumeration of the wffs. 
First take the enumeratioll of the "rd~rcd m-tuples of positive integers which was 
introduced in §44. And let us speak 
the kth m-tuple of positive integers to mean thl' 
lith m-tuple of posItive llltegcrs l'l this enumeratIOn. (In pcrtlcular, we shall speak In 
this way of the kth ordered pai r of positive integers.) 
Then let the pnmitive symbols of the pure functional CCllculu'i of !trst order, as intro-
duced in §30, he enumerated as follows. The first eight pmmUvc symbols in the enu-
meration arc the eight improper symbols, in the order in which they are listc'd in §30. 
The (k + 8)th primitive symbol in the enumeration is: the mth individuill variable in 
alphabetic order. if the kth ordered pair of positive integers is (I, m); the mth prop-
ositional variable ill alphabetic order, if the ktll ordered pair of positive integers is 

j • 
240 PURE FUNCTIONAL CALCULUS-OF FIRST ORDER [CHAP. IV 
And for every wff there is a positive integer n such that it is "the nth wft" 
(i.e., the nth wff of the enumeration). 
Given any class r of wffs, we define the infinite sequence of classes 
ro, r l , r 2, .•. , (by recursion) as follows: ro is the same as r. If the (n + 1) th 
wff is consistent with rn, then rn+! is the class whose members are the 
(n + l)th wff and the members of rn. Otherwise Tn+! is the same as r n . 
It follows by mathematical induction that ro, r l , r 2, •.. are consistent 
classes of wffs if r is consistent. For r o is the same as r. And the consistency 
of Tn+ 1 follows at once from that of rn. 
We let r be the union of the classes ro, P, r2, .... I.e., a wff C is a mem-
ber of r if and only if there is some n such that C is a member of rn. 
Now if r is a consistent class, it follows that r is a consistent class. 
For suppose that r is inconsistent. Then there are a finite number of 
wffs AI' A 2, ... , Am of r, and a wff B, such that AI' A2, ••. , Am f.. Band 
AI' A2, ••. , Am f.. -B. Say that Al is the alth wff, A2 is the a~th wff, ... , Am is 
t he am th wff; and let a be the greatest of the posi ti ve integers aI' a2, ••• , am. 
Then all the wffs AI' Az . ... , A,,, are members of ra, and consequently ra 
is inconsistent. But this contradicts our proof above that all the classes 
ro, r l, 1'2, ... are consistent (if r is consistent). 
Moreover r is a maximal class, if r is consistent. 
For let C be any wff which is consistent with r. Say that C is the (n 
1 )th 
wff. Being consistent with r, C must be consistent with rn. Therefore, by 
the definition of rn+1. Cis ,( member of Tn+!. Therefore C is a member of r. 
Thus the proof of the lemma, **452, is completed. We observe that a 
corresponding lemma holds not only for the pure functional calculus of 
first order but also for any applied functional calculus of first order if the 
primitive symbols are enumerable. And indeed **452 can be extended to a 
wide variety of logistic systems, since the proof requires only a suitable 
notion of consistency of a class of wfts, and the enumerability of the primi-
tive symbols of the system. 417 
<2, m). and the mth i-ary functwnal variable In alphabetic order, if the kth ordered 
pair of pOSItive integers IS (i + 2, m). 
And let us speak of the ,uth primitive symbol to mean the ,uth primitive symbol in 
the foregoing enumeration. 
Then let the formulas of the pure functional calculus of first order be enumerated by 
the rule that, if the kth order pair of positive integers is (p, m) and the ,uth m-tuple of 
positive integers is <,ut, ,u., .... ,urn)' then the kth formula in the enumeration is 
1L11L •... ILm' where ILl is the ,ulth primitive symbol, J.1t is the ,u.th primitive symbol, 
.. ,IL .. 
i~ the ,u .. th pnmltlve symbol. 
Finally, from the enumeration of the formulas, delete all those which are not 
well-formed, so obtaimng an enumeration of the wffs. 
<1'This last is presumably a con~cquence of requirement (I) of §07. 

§45J 
LOEWENHEIM-SKOLEM THEOREMS 
241 
We now consider an infinite sequence of applied functional calculi of first 
order So, SI' S2' .. " having as primitive symbols all the primitive symbols 
of the pure functional calculus of first order and in addition certain individual 
constants. Namely, the primitive symbols of So are those of the pure func-
tional calculus of first order and the individual constants wO,o, U\o, wz,o, . , ,; 
the primitive symbols of Sn+! are those of S,.. and the additional individual 
constants WO,n+I' WI,"+!' W2,nH' • , .. 
Also we let S., be the applied functional calculus of first order which has 
as its primitive symbols the primitive symbols of all the systems So. SI' 
52' ' ... (Thus the individual constants of Sw are all the constants wm,n' for 
m = 0, 1,2, .. , and n = 0, 1,2, .... ) 
In the same way that we have already remarked for the pure functional 
calculus of first order, it is possible to enumerate the wffs of So>' Then, in 
the case of each S", an enumeration of its wffs is obtained by deleting from 
the enumeration of the wffs of SU) those which are not wffs of Sn. And re-
ferring to this enumeration we shall speak of "the first wff of Sn'" "the 
second wff of S"," and so on, 
Using these enumerations, we can extend any consistent cbss Ll,. of wffs 
of Sn to a maximal consisten t class If n, of wffs of S", by the method stated 
above in the proof of **452. 
Now let a consistent class 1'0 be given of wffs uf So which have no free 
individual variables. We define the classes rr;: (m = 0,1,2,3, ... and 
n = 1,2,3, ' .) as follows: r~ is roo If the (m 
1 )th wff of Sn, n > 0, 
has the form -(alA and is a member of r~, then r~'+l is the class whosE' 
members are 
_sa 
AI 
. Wm,n 
and the members of rr;:; otherwise r>;:+1 is the same as r~'. Andr~+l isJn , 
where L1" is the union of the classes r~, r~, r!, .... 
Evidently the members of r;: are wiis of S1l' And r~+1 is a maximal con-
sistent class of wffs of S", 
Assume that, for some particular m, rr;: is consistent but r;:+1 is incon-
sistent. Then we must have the case that r;:+1 is not the same as rr;: but has 
the additional member 
By the inconsistency of r;:+I, and the deduction theorem, 
rm ~ _Sa 
Ai::::> B 
11 
• wm ,1'I 
I 
and 

242 PURE FUNCTIONAL CALCULUS OF FIRST ORDER 
Hence by P, 
a 
rr;: f- $w .. ,n A; 
Let X be an individual variable which does not occur in this proof 
from hypotheses, and in it replace the constant wm,fI everywhere by X; 
since wm,n does not occur in any of the members of rr;:, we thus have; 
rr;: f- $: AI. 
By generalizing upon x,ns and then making one or more alphabetic changes. 
of bound variable, we have that rr;: f- {alA; but since -(alA is a member of 
r~ and therefore of rr;:, this contradicts the assumption that rr;: is consistent. 
Thus we have proved that, if r,: is consistent, then rr;:+1 is consistent. 
By mathematical induction, it follows that, if r~ is consistent, then rr;: is 
consistent for every m, and therefore r~+1 is consistent. Since r~ is the same 
as ro, and is therefore consistent, it follows by a second mathematical in-
duction that r! is consistent for every n. 
Let rw be the union of the classes r~, r~, r~, .... Then rw is a maximal 
consistent class of wffs of Sw' (For rw could be inconsistent only if. for some· 
n, r~ were inconsistent. Further, if C is a wff of Sw consistent with rw. then, 
for some n, C is a wff of 5" and is consistent with r~+1; since r!+l is a maximal 
consistent class of wffs of S", it follows that C is a member of r~+l and 
therefore a member of r w') 
We need the following properties of rw: 
dl. If A is a member of rw ' then -A is a non-member of rO). (For other-
wise rw would be inconsistent.) 
d2. If A is a non-member of r w' then -A is a member of rw' (For, if A 
is a non-member of rw' then A must be inconsistent with rw: therefore, by 
the deduction theorem and P, r", f- -A; therefore -A is consistent with r",; . 
therefore -A is a member of rw') 
el. If B is a member of r w' then A::> B is a member of rO). (For by P, 
rO) f- A ::> B; thus A::> B is consistent with raJ and therefore a member of 
rw') 
e2. If A is a non-member of r w ' then A::> B is a member of rw' (For by 
d2, -A is a member of rw' and therefore by P, rw f- A::> B.) 
e3. If A is a member of 1:" and B is a non-member of r w' then A::> Bis a 
.18This is permissible because x does not occur in any of the members of r:: which 
are here actually used as hypotheses in the proof of 
S: AI 

LOEWENHEIM-SKOLEM THEOREMS 
243 
ber of rw' (For by d2, -B is a member of raJ; hencl', if A =:;! B were 
member of rO), rOl would be inconsistent, by an application of modus po-
.) 
fl. If, for every individual constant l£'m,n) 
Sa 
A 
• Wm,n 
I 
a member of r"" then (a) A is a member of Tw' (For, if (a)A is not a mem-
of TOll it follows by d2 that -(alA is a member of raJ; hence, for some 
-(alA is a member of r~; hence, by the way in which the classes r:+l 
defined, we have for some m that 
-S:,..,n AI 
is a member of T:+l and therefore a member of TO); thus by dI we have for 
m and n that 
a non-member of rw') 
f2. If, for at least one individual constant W",.n' 
S.. 
A 
• "'m,n 
a non-member of Tw' then (a)A is a non-member of rw' (For, if (a) A is a 
. 
of T aJ, we have by ·306 and modus ponens, for an arbitrary individ-
that 
Saw 
Ai, 
• 
m, .. 
consistent with Ttl), must be a member of TaJ') 
Taking the natural numbers as domain of individuals, we now assign 
to aU the propositional and functional vanables of SOl -or, what is 
same thing, to all the propositional and functional variables of the pure 
ional of first order-as follows: 
To a propositional variable p is assigned the value t if the wff p is a 
..... ''''''LJI01 of Tw, the value f if the wff p is a non-member of Tw' Letting u""n 
the natural number t(m2 + 2mn + n2 + 3m + n),419 we have for each 
UtThis corresponds in an obvious way to the following enumeratlOn of the ordered 
of natural numbers, 
(0,0),(0, 1),<1.0),(0,2),<1, 1),,::,0),(0. 3), .. , , 
lDaJ.og()US to the enumeration of the ordered m-tuples of positive integecs which was 
in §44. 
I

244 PURE FUNCTIONAL CALCULUS OF FJRSTORDER [CHAP,IV 
individual constant w",.n a unique corresponding natural number Um," , and 
for each natural number urn,,, a unique corresponding individual 
'1£)m,n' Then to an i-ary functional variable f is assigned as value the 
propositional function l/J of individuals such that ({>(um1•n1 , urn" ... , ... , urn!,"". 
is t or f according as f(Wm1'''1' wm""" .. ,' wm/,nJ is a member or a non-member 
of I'",. 
Now notice the way in which dl and d2 above are related to rule d 
of §30, and el, e2, e3 are related to rule e of §30, and fl and f2 are related 
rule f of §30. From this relationship (or, more correctly, we should speak 
the relationship to the clauses which correspond to rules d-f in the defi . 
of "value" in the syntactical sense) it follows that every wff of SOl wi 
free individual variables has, for the system of values that we have j 
assigned to the propositional and functional variables of S." the value t 
the value f according as it is a member or a non-member of rO). (It is 
to the reader to state the proof of this explicitly by mathematical illu.u\.,'.,v,"," 
Since the members of ro are without free individual variables and 
included among the members of r W' we have thus shown that ro is 
neously satisfiable in the domain of natural numbers, hence, by an 0 
extension of **439, simultaneously satisfiable in any enumerably infinite 
domain. 
But ro was chosen as an arbitrary consistent class of wffs of So wit 
free individual variables. Hence every consistent class 0/ well-formed fnr'mula.,: 
of So without free individual variables is simultaneously satisfiable in 
enumerabty infinite domain (with such an assignment of values to the individ-
ual constants as to give a different value to each). 
To extend this result to any consistent class of wffs of the pure functional 
calculus of first order, we have only to substitute, for the free occurrences 
of individual variables, individual constants w".o, in such a way that a 
different individual constant is substituted for the free occurrences of each 
differen t individual variable. 
Thus we have the following meta theorem of the pure functional 
of first order: 
**453. 
Every consistent class of wffs is simultaneously satisfiable in an 
enumerably infinite domain. 
\Ve need also the following: 
**454. 
Every simultaneously satisfiable class of wffs is consistent. 
Proof. Let r be an inconsistell t class of wffs. Then there are a finite 

EXERCISES 45 
245 
of wffs AI' A2, •.• , Am of r. :tnu a wff B, such tklt AI, A2, ••• , 
~ B and AI> A2 •.•. , Am ~ -B. By **321. m > O. Therefore by tht' de-
tion theorem and p. ~ - • AIA2 ... A",. Therefore by **434. -. AjA2 
• Am is valid. In view of the truth-tables of negation anci conjunction. it 
that AI' Az, ... , Am cannot have the value t slmultal1t:Uusly, for any 
of values of their free variables. Thus r cannot be simultaneously 
From **453 and "454 we obtain as a corollary the result of Skolem which 
mentioned at the heginning of this section: 
If a class of wffs is simultaneously satisfiable in any non-empty 
domain, it is simultaneoush' satisfiable in an enumerably infinite 
domain. 
,It is worth noticing that G6del's completeness theorem and L6wenheim's 
now follow as corollaries, so that we obtain alternative proofs of 
theorems, in which there is no use of the Skolem normal form or of §44. 
the case of Godel's theorem, this is seen as follows. Let A be any valid 
Then by **430, the class whose single member is -A is not simulta-
satisfiable. Therefore by **45:3, this class is not consistent. Therefore 
some wff B, both -A ~ B and -A ~ -8. Therefore by the deduction 
EXERCISES 45 
Carry through the proof of **440 (as given in §44) explicitly for the 
that n = O. making such simpliitcations as are possible 111 this special 
and verifying that the proof is sounu also for this case. 
4.5.1. Establish **454, withuut use of **321 and **434, by ,bowing 
that the process of proof from hypotheses, as defined in §36. pre-
the property of having the value t for a gl\'Cn system of values of the 
variahles of the hypotheses (and for all values of the other free variables 
. g) . 
. 45.2. On the basis of the definition of validi ty (§43) and of the two proofs 
**440 that are given in the text (§§44 and 4;3), discuss the question~, 
whether **440 may be used as a derived rule of infl~rence of the pure 
al calculus of first order, and (2) whether **440 may be used in the 
of an axiom schema in a formulation of the pure functional calculus of 
order. (See the discussion of the logistic method and the definition of a 
. system in §07, the distinction in §08 between elementary and theoret-
i: 
I I 
j, 
~ 
i, 
I 
r 
f 
, 
f I 
Ii 
Ii 
II 
!: 
;1 

I 
2,*6 PURE FUNCTIONAL CALCULUS OF FIRSTORDER 
~CHAP. 
ical syntax, the introduction of the idea of derived rules of inference in 
and the remarks of footnotes 183, 221.) 
45.3. Prove the completeness of the propositional calculus, in the 
lation PI' by applying the ideas used in the text in the proof of **452 
**453. Compare this completeness proof for the propositional calculus 
the completeness proof of Chapter I, especially as regards the question 
a stronger or weaker basis on which results are obtained (cL the ini 
paragraphs of §08). 
45.4. Let a classr of wiis be given, and a particular valuation of r in 
domain of natural numbers, i.e., with the natural numbers as the indi . 
a particular system of possible values of the free variables of the wffs of 
And suppo,;e that, for this valuation, every wff of r has the value t. S 
that the method which is employed in §45 (in the proofs of **452 and **453 
to obtain a valuation of r for which every wff of r has the value t, can 
made to yield the given particular valuation of r by a suitable choice 
of the enumeration of the wffs that is used, and (b) of the cOJ~e:5D(mclenlct 
that is used, not necessarily a one-to-one correspondence, between 
constants li m •n and the natural numbers Urn.". 
45.5. Let a class r of wffs be called disjunctively valid in a given 
empty domain of individuals if, for each valuation of rin that domain, 
exists at least one wff of r which has the value t. (1) If a class of wffs 
disjunctively valid in an infinite domain, then the disjunction of some 
subclass of them is valid. (2) If a class of wffs is disjunctively valid in 
fini te domain. then the disj unction of some finite subclass of them is 
in that domain. 
46. The decision problem, solution in special cases. Though 
decision problem of the pure functional calculus of first order is known to 
unsolvable-in the sense that no effective decision procedure exists 
suffices to determine of an arbitrary wff whether or not it is a f"h.'AT·An' .... '....; 
there nevertheless exist solutions in a number of special cases421 which ha . 
•• OAlonzo Church In The Joumal oj Symbolic Logic, vol. I (1936), pp. 40-41, 101-102. 
Hilbert and Bernays, CYlmdlagen del' ]v!athemalik, vol. 2. Supplement II. 
UIBya solution of the d<'cision problem in a special case we mean that there shall 
given a special class of wffs, an effective procedure to determine of an arrllTT,UV 
whether it belongs to this class (this will be obvious in most cases di 
and an effective procedure to determine of any wff of this class whether it is a 
To this we seek always to add an effective procedure by which to find a proof of 
wff which has thus been ascertained to be a theorem-but this last requirement 
subject to the reservations that are indicated in footnote 183. 
(Added in prOOf,) A comprehensive treatment of solutions of the decision 
in special cases is in \Vilhelm Ackermann's monograph, Sotllabl, Caus 01 th, 
p,.oblem (1954). 

THE DECISION PROBLE},J, SPECIAL CASES 
247 
some substan hal interest. Some of the simpler of these will be treated in 
this section. 
We begin with a solution of the decision problem (due to Bernays alld 
Sch6nfinkel) for the special case of: 
Well-formed formldas hav~ng a prenex normal form such that, in the 
pre/ix, no existential quantifier precedes any universal quantifier. 
It will be sufficient, by §39, and *301, *306, to find a decision procedure 
for the universal closure of the prenex normal form of the wff. Hence the 
solution of this case of the decision problem is contained in the four following 
metatheorems: 
Let M be a quantifier-free formula, and let b I , bz, .. " b n (n ~ 0) 
be the complete list of individual variables in M. If any aip of M is a 
tautology, 
Proof. S:l~'::'.~" Mi is a substitution instance of the afp of M and IS 
therefore a theorem by *311. I-renee use *:)30 and modus pOllens. 
Let M be a quantifier-free formula, and let bl , b 2, ... , b n (n ~ 0) 
be the complete list of individual variables in M. If 
f- (3b1)(3b2) ..• (3bn }M, 
every afp of M is a tautology, 
Proof. Every afp of M becomes an afp of 
(3bd (3b2) .•• (3b n }M 
upon prefixing 211 negation signs, -. Hence use **320 and the truth-table 
of negation. 
Let M be a quantifier-free formula, and let ai' a2, .• " am. b i , b2 
• 
, 'J b n (m ~ 1, n ~ 0) be the complete list of individual variables 
in M. If the disjunction D of all the wff~m 
Sb,b .... b. M 
d,dl ... d. 
I 
is a substitution instance of a tautology of P, where dl , d 2, . , ., d n 
UIThe order in which these m" different wffg are combined into a disjunction is 
evidently immaterial, in view of the commutative and associative laws of disjunction. 
In order to make the decision procedure definite, it may be fixed in Some arbitrary 
(effective) way. 

248 PURE FUNCTIONAL CALCULUS OF FIRST ORDER [CHAP, IV 
are any among the variables aI' a2, ' , ., a,,,, taken in any order and 
not necessarily all different. then 
f- (al ) (a2) • , • (am)(3bl ) (3ba) .• , (3bn )M. 
Proof. By *330 and modus ponens, 
S:~::::::: Mj r (3bl )(3b2) , •. (3bn )M. 
Hence by the deduction theorem and P, 
D r (3bl ) (3bz) ••. (3bn )M. 
Therefore. since D is a substitution instance of a tautology, we have by 
*311 that 
Hence by generalization. 
f- (a1)(a2) ... (am) (3bl ) (3b, ) ... (3b .. lM. 
**463. 
Let M be a quantifier-free formula, and let a1> all' , , " am> bI> bz, 
... , b n (m ~ I, n ~ 0) be the complete list of individual variables 
in M, If 
f- (a1)(a2) ••• (am)(3b1)(3bs) , .. (3bn)M, 
then the disjunction D of all the WffS411fl 
Sb1b .... b .. MI 
dld •... d. 
is a substitution instance of a tautology of P, where dlt da, .•. , d n 
are any among the variables aI' a2, ... , am, taken in any order and 
not necessarily all different. 
Proof. By *306 and modus ponens, (3bl )(3bz)'" (3b n)M is a theorem. 
Therefore by "4:34 it is valid, hence, in particular, valid in a domain of m 
individuals Uv u 2 • ••• , um' 
Taking this finite domain of individuals, consider any system of possible 
values of the free variables of (3b1 ) (3hz) .. ,(3bnl M such that the values of 
av a 2, ••• , am are Ul , U2, .• " U,n respectively. For this system of values of its 
free variables (3bl )(3b2) ••• (3bn )M has the value t. Hence by the def-
inition of value (rules d and f of §30), for this same system of values of the 
variables and for certain values U i , U i , •• " u· of bl , b 2, ' •• , bn respectively, 
1 
J 
'" 
M has the value t. If d1, d2 •••. , d n are chosen as a, , at , ... , a j respectively, 
1 
I 
.. 
then 
Sb1b .... bn Mj 
d,d .... d .. 
has the value t. Therefore-still for the same system of values of the free 

§46J 
THE DECISION PROBLEM, SPECIAL CASES 
249 
variables of (3b1) (3b2l ' .. (3b lllM-the disjunctioll D has the value t. 
Since the free variables of D are the same as those of (3bll (3b2l ... (3b n lM 
we have thus shown that-for this finite domain of m individuals, and for 
any system of possible values of the free variables of D such that ai' a 2, 
... , am have the values u1, u 2, .. '. Um respectively-the value of D is t. Now 
given any assignment of truth-values to the elementary parts of D,423 it is 
clear that (because the values of ai' a 2 , •• '. am are all different) it will always 
be possible to choose the values of the propositional and functional variables 
of D in such a way as to reproduce the given assignment of truth-values to 
the elementary parts of D. Therefore D has the value t for every assignment 
of truth-values to its elementary parts. Therefore D is a substitution instance 
of a tautology of P. 
In *462 and **463, it is now clear that the condition that D is a subsb-
tution instance of a tautology is equivalent to the condition that 
. is valid in a domain of m individuals, Also in *460 and **461, the condition 
. that an afp of M is a tautology is equivalent to the condition that 
is valid in a domain of a single individual. Hence we have the following 
corollary of *460-**463: 
Let M be a quantifier-free formula, and let all a 2• ' ..• am' bl • b 2 , 
... , bll (m ~ O. n ~ 0) be the complete list of individual varia bles 
in M. Then 
is a theorem if it is valid in a domain of m individuals, or, in the case 
m = 0, of a single individual. 
Since the definition of validity in a domain leads immediately to an effec-
tive test for validity in any particular finite domain-and since, by **434, a 
theorem must be valid in all non-empty domains, including finite domains-
we may regard *464 as stating an alternative form of our solution of the 
special case I of the decision problem. Indeed it is in this latter form that 
'''Where the same elementary part occurs more than once In D. of course it is meant 
that the same truth-value 1S assigned to it at all of its occurrences. 
(As defined in §30. the elementary parts of a wff are those wi parts which have either 
the iorm of a propositional variable alone or the form ((a,. a" ' .. , an).) 
~j , 
,
L 
II 
I .
I: 
1 
~ 
i: 
I, li 
! , 
f. 

250 PURE FUNCTJONALCALCULUSOF FIRST ORDER [CHAP. IV 
the solution is more usually stated. And we shall introduce a corresponding 
form of statement of the solution (referring to validity in a specified finite 
domain) also in some other cases below. 
We turn now to consideration of another decision procedure, which is 
applicable in a variety of cases. It will be convenient first to state the de-
cision procedure itself, before considering the question of characterizing a 
class of wffs to which it is applicable. 
A particular occurrence of a wff P as a wf part of a wff A is called an 
occurrence as a truth-functional constituent, or, as we shall also say, an occur-
rence as a P-constituent, in A if it is not within the scope of a quantifier and 
does not have either of the forms -B or [BI:::J Bt ]. And the truth-functional 
r:onstituents, or the P-consi!iuents, of A are those wffs which have occurrences 
as P-constituents in A. 
It is clear that each of the P-constituents of a wfi either is an elementary 
part or else is of the form (a)B. Moreover, any wff can be thought of as 
obtained from a wff of P by substituting its P-constituents in an appropriate 
way for the propositional variables; and, for a particular wff, the wff of P 
and the required substi tution are determined uniquely to within an alpha-
betic change of propositional variables. 
As a first step ill the decision procedure we are about to describe, we reduce 
(separately) each P-constitucnt of the given wff to prenex normal form, and 
if any of the P-constituents are then found to differ only by alphabetic 
changes of bound variables, we make the appropriate alphabetic changes 
of bound variables to render them identica1. 424 Let A be the wff so obtained. 
(Evidently the given wff is a theorem if and only if A is a theorem.) 
If A has just m different P-constituents, PI' P 2, ... , Pm' then for each 
of the 2'" different systems of truth-values of these P-constituents we may 
ascertain the corresponding truth-values of A. (The work of doing this may 
be arranged in the same way as described ill §15 for the case of wffs of the 
propositional calculus.) If the value of A is found to be t for all systems of 
truth-value" of its P-constituents, then f- A by *311. Otherwise we list all 
the falsifying systems of truth-values of the P-constituents of A, Le., the 
systems of truth-values for which the corresponding value of A is f. And 
'''In practice it will be desirable also to make at this stage any preliminary simplifi-
cations by propos1tional calculus that are seen to be possible, both to the wff as a whole 
(the P-consti tuents being treated as units) and with1I1 the matrix of each separate 
P-constituen t. Especially, if any of the P-constituents can be rendered iden tical by 
such simplifications of their matrices, together with alphabetic changes of bound varia-
bles. this should be done; and it may be desirable to test systematically for the possi-
bility of this, by the truth-table decision procedure (§15). 

§46) 
THE DECISION PROBLEM, SPECIAL CASES 
251 
then we make use of the following metatheorem, which has an obvious 
'connection with the conjunctive normal form: 
-465. 
Where A is any wff, let the complete list of the P-constituents of A 
be Pl , P 2, ••• , Pm. and let the complete list of falsifying systems of 
truth-values of the P-constituents of A consists in the systems of 
values T~, T~, .•• , T!.. of Pl' P2, •.. , Pm respectively (i = 1, 2, .. " n). 
Let P: be Pi or -Pi according as T; is t or f. Then f- A if and only if 
all of the wffs 
; 
j 
i 
; 
P l ::::> .Pa ::::>···· Pm- 1 ::::> -Pm 
are theorems. 
Proof. For every system of truth-values of Pl , P 2, ••.• Pm' the value of 
A is f if and only if the value of one of the wffs 
P i 
pi 
pi 
pi 
1 ::::>. 
2::::>···· 
m-l::::> -
m 
is f. Consequently 
A = [P~ ::::> • pi::::> •... P;'-l ::::> -P;,J[P~ ::::> • P~ ::::> •... P!-l ::::> -p!) 
['pn 
pn 
pn' P" 
.. '. 1:::>' 2::::>·'·· 
m-l:::> -
mJ 
is a substitution instance of a tautology, and therefore a theorem hy *:n I. 
Hence, by P, if f- A, all of the wffs 
PI 
pi 
pi 
pi 
1 ::::>. 
2::::>···· 
m-l::::> -
m 
, are theorems, and conversely, if all of these wffs are theorems. then f- A. 
Thus the decision problem for A is reduced to the decision problem for 
the wffs 
P~ :::> • P~ ::::> • , , . P~'-l ::::> -P:,.. 
We deal with these latter wffs by reducing them to a prenex normal form, 
since decision procedure are known for wffs in prenex normal form with 
prefixes of various special kinds. According to the fixed procedure of §39 
for reduction to the prenex normal form. the quantifiers are taken one by 
one in left-to-right order and brought forward into the prefix. Here, however, 
we vary this fixed procedure by allowing the quantifiers to be taken (and 
brought forward into the prefix) also in any other order that is feasible. 
And we endeavor in this way to obtain a prefix of one of the kinds for which 
a decision procedure is known. E.g., if we succeed in obtaining, in all of the 
n cases, a prefix in which no existential quantifier precedes any universal 
quantifier, we are then able to decide whether A is a theorem by using our 
previous solution of the decision problem for the special case I. 
I 
! 
l t 
f. 
;.: 
. t

252 PURE FUNCTIONAL CALCULUS OF FIRST ORDER 
In particular, such a reduction to the special case I can always be obtained 
when the foregoing procedure is applied to anyone of the:425 
II 
Well-formed formulas in which every truth-functional constituent either is 
quantifier-free or has a prenex normal form that has only universal 
quantifiers in the prefix. 
We mention also the following subcase of II as of especial importance: 
II' Well-formed formulas in which there are no free individual variables and 
in which every truth-functional constituent either is quantifier-free (there-
fore a propositional variable) or has the form (a)M, where M is quantifier-
free and contains no propositional variables, 
In the subcase II' the two following simplifications of the decision proce-
dure are possible, as it is left to the reader to verify: 
(1) Suppose that the P-constituents of A are numbered in such an order 
that PI' P 2, .•. , P k are the ones which are propositional variables, and the 
remaining P-constituents are Pk+I' P k +2! •.. , Pm. Then in applying '"465 
we may simplify the conclllsion of the metatheorem as follows: f- A if and 
only if all of the wffs 
P~l ::::l • P~+2 ::::l •... P~-l ::::l -P!" 
are theorems. 
(2) By alphabetic changes of bound variables we may suppose that A 
has been brought into such a form that only the one individual variable x 
occurs. Then Pk+l' P kH , .. " Pm have the forms (x) Mk+l' (X)Mk+2' .. " 
(x)Mm respectively, where MkTl' M h2, ... , Mm are quantifier free and 
contain no proposi tional variables and no individual variables other than x, 
From a particular falsifying system of truth-values T1, T~, ' , " T~ of Pl , Pa, 
, .. , Pm select the last m ~ k truth-values T~l' T~+2' ' . " T~, and among 
these suppose that T! ,T',' , ... , T't are t and Tti , Tti , ... , Tli 
I are f. Then in 
~l 
2:! 
I 
2 
rn-k-
order that 
'''As a matter of fact. whenever such a reduction to the special case I is possible, it 
will always be possible also to reduce more directly to case I. Namely, among the various 
prenex normal forms to which A can be reduced. there wiJI always be one in whose pre-
fix no existential quantifier precedes any uni versal quantifier. But by making use ot 
-463 in the way described, it is possible more easily to control the kind of prefix which 
is obtained and often also, especially in case II" to shorten the work otherwi8o. 
When the procedure described in the text. by making use of *465. results in a. reduc-
tion to one of the special cases V-IX that are listed at the end of this section. it is not 
necessarily true that one of the prenex normal forms of the given wff A w,ll also 
fall under one of these cases. And in this way solutions may be obtained of additional 
special cases of the decision problem. 

THE DECISION PROBLEM, SPECIAL CASES 
253 
t 
; 
j 
pi 
P 10+1 :::::> • P k+2::::l •. , , p m-l ::::l -
m 
theorem, it is necessary and sufficient that at least one of the 
quantifier-free formulas 
MI,:::::> • M t , :::::> • , .. Mil:::::> Mtj 
shall be a substitution instance of a tautology (j= 1,2, .... m -
k -
I). 
Returning to the general case of the above-described decision procedure 
(based on *46.5), we notice that, roughly speaking, the finer the division of 
A obtained by dividmg A into its P-constituents, the greater is the chance of 
success in determining by this procedure whether A is a theorem. Therefore 
before applying the decision procedure to a given wff A it may be desirable 
first to reduce A as far as possible by means of the reduction steps (a)-(g) 
of exercise a9.6. 426 
In particular, as proved in exercise 39.6, if A contains none but singulary 
functional variables, the reduction process of that exercise suffices to reduce 
the universal closure of A to the case II' which we have just treated. This is 
Quine's solution of the decision problem for the special case of: 
Well-/ormed iormulas oi the singtdary jUllctional cuimIt-ls 01 first order. 
The history of this case of the decision problem is described in §49. Besides 
Quine's solution (which goes back to Behmann), another approach may be 
: based on the following meta theorem of Bernays and Schonfll1kel;m 
If a wff of the singulary functIOnal calculus of first order is vaJid ill 
a domain of '2N individuals, where N IS the num!y;r of diffcrCl:l iunc· 
tional variables appearing, then it is valid in all domains of individ-
uals. 
Proof, We may suppose, by **432, that the given wffhas no free individual 
variables. Let the propositional \'ariables appearing be PI' P2' .. " Pi and 
U'Thc reduction proC<.:ss may be shortened by Cldding corresponding r>.'ductIOD steps 
for connectives other than imphcation and ncgatlOf!, so as to be ;lble to deal (hreeti y 
with a wff abbreviated by means of D3-11 (as well as D14) rather than forst tf' rell'nte 
it in unabbreviated furlll. The full dlSjU"Ctivc and. full cUl1Jur:l'tlve nu, m'll furms may 
· also be found useful, as in 39.S, Or the implicative normal form (15.4) may replace the 
lull disjunctive normal form, and the lull conjunctive normal form may be used in the 
· modified version thM I1.ppOB.fl In the pruuf at .*011. lJ{jtail~ of organizJn!; the reductlon 
process in the most efficient manner are left to the reader. 
mIn practice the decision procedure of ··466 is generally longer and therefore less 
advantageous than QUine's. But even Quine's procedure may become forbiddingly 
long in comparatively simple cases, as the reader may see by "pplying it. for ll1stance, 
· to '6,J2(3). 
i 
'j i

254 PURE FUNCTIONAL CALCULUS OF FIRST ORDER [CHAP. IV 
the functional variables, fl' f20 •. '0 fN; and consider a system of values 
i l > 7:2' ••.• Teo (/>1> (/>2' ... , (/>N of these variables in order. the domain of in-
dividuals being some arbitrary non-empty domain U. Let the individuals 
of U be divided into classes by the rule that U1 and U 2 belong to the same class 
if and only if the truth-values if>1(U1), cfJa(ut ) ••..• if>N(u1) are identical with 
the truth-values cfJI (u 2), cfJz(uz)' .. '1 cfJN (u 2) respectively. Thus are obtained 
at most ZN non-empty classes of individuals. call them VI' V 21 ••• , Vn 
11 ;;:;;; tt ;;:;;; 2N ). And let singulary propositional functions 'PI' P 2, .• '0 'PN 
of these classes be defined by the rule that P;(v;) is the same truth-value as 
(/i.(U) , where u is any member of the class v;. 
Now we may take also the finite domain 58. 'consisting of the individuals 
VI' Va' ... , Vn and COllsider the values 
Tl , 'ta •••. , it, 'PI' p z ••• . , 'PN of 
PI' P2 ... '1 Pt, fl' f2' .. '1 fN respectively. For this system of values of its 
free variables the given wff has the value t (because. being valid in a domain 
of 2N individuals, it is by **439 valid in the domain 58). But from the way 
in which the propositional functions 'Pi were defined it follows that the given 
wff has the same va;ue for the domain ~ and for the system of values 
Yl, '['20' .. , ii' 'PI' P2' .. '. 'Pl;' of its free variables that it does for the domain 
U and for the system of values 'tIl "2' ... , 'tl' cfJl , <P2, .•. , <PN of its free 
variables. Therefore the v;tlue of the given wff is t also for the domain U 
;J.nd for the latter ,ystem of value" of its free variables. 
Thus we have shown about the given wff that its value is t for an arbitrary 
system of values of its free variables and for an arbitrarily chosen domain U. 
I.e., we have shown that it is valid. 
It will be observed that ...... 466 is stated not as a solution of a special case 
of the decision problem (i.e., of the decision problem for provability) but 
rather as a solution of a special case of what we shall call the decision prob-
fem lor validity, i.e, the problem of finding an effective procedure to deter-
:nine validity. 
By Godel's completeness theorem (as proved in §44, and by another 
method in §45) it is true in one sense that a solution of a special case of the 
decision problem for validity is also a solution, in the same special case, of 
the decision problem. But in another sense-which we have not attempted 
to make preCise-this is not true, as may be seen from the fact that the proof 
of **46G provides no effective method of finding a proof of a wff A which 
passes the test of containing none but singulary functional variables and 
being valid in a domain of 2N individuals.42S 
"'On the other hand. our demonstration of Quine's solution of the special case III 

§46J 
THE DECISION PROBLEl'vf, SPECIAL CASES 
255 
Closely related to the decisioll problem for validity is the decision problem 
lor satisfiability, i.e., the problem of finding an effective procedure to de-
termine satisfiability. By **4:~O and **431, every solution of a special case 
of either of these problems leads to a solution of a corresponding special 
case of the other, so that the two problems need not be considered separately. 
In much of the existing literature on the subject. it is the decision problem 
for satisfiability to which attention is primarily given. And apropos of the 
importance of this problem it should be observed that (by Godel's complete-
ness theorem) the consistency of a logistic system obtained by adding posttl-
lates4.29 to a simple applied functional calculus of first order is always equiv-
alent, in an obvious way, to the satisfiability of a corresponding wff of the 
pure functional calculus of first order. 
The pure functional calculus of first order becomes a formalized language 
upon adopting one of the principal interpretations (§30). The domain of indi-
viduals on which the interpretation is based may be either infinite or finite. In 
the former case the semantical decision problem of the language (as defined in 
§15) is equivalent to the decision problem for validity, in the sense that any' 
solution of a special case of either problem is also a solution, in the same special 
case, of the other. In the latter case the semantical decision, problem of the 
language is equivalent to the decision problem for validity in the same finite 
domain and is therefore completely solved (Oll the aSSllmptlOn that the finite 
domain is given in such a way that the number of indivitluals is known). 
\Ve shall nut here treat further the questlull of ~pt'ciJ.1 cases of allY uf these 
decision problems, but we conlcude merely by recording the existence of 
solutions of the decision problem or of the decision problem for validity in 
each of the following cases (either explicitly in the literature or easily ob-
tained by methods existing in the literature) :430 
of the decision problem does (implicitly) provide such an effective method of finding a 
proof of a wit which passes the test. In order to accomplish this also in connection with 
the Bernays-Schonfinkel solution of case III, the method may be followed which IS 
suggested below in exercise 46.l. 
II'Compare §55, as well as the discussion of the axiomatic method at the end of §07. 
&3°See Wilhelm Ackermann in the il1athema/Hcile A.malen, vol. 100 (1928), pp. 
638-649; Thoralf Skolem in the Norsk Malemalisk Tldsskri/I, vol. 10 (1928), pp. 
125-142; jacques Herbrand in the Comples Rendus des Seances de fa Societe des Sciences 
61 des Lettres de Varsovie, Classe III, vol. 24 (1931). pp. 12-56; Kurt Gtldel in Menger's 
Ergebnisse cines Jl;lalhematischen Kolloquiu1'lls, no. 2 (for 1929-1930, published 1932), 
pp. 27-28; Laszl6 Kalmar in the },1alhemalische Annalen, vol. 108 (1933), pp. 466-484; 
GOdel in the 1Honatshe/te IUr Nlathematik und Physik, vol. 40 (1933). pp. 433-·443; 
Kurt Schutte in the lvfatftematische AnYlale>!. vol 109 ([(l:H!. pp. 572··-60a, ar:d vol. 
110 (1934). pp. 161-194; Ackermann In the Mathema/ische Antlalen, vol. ll~ (1936). 
pp. 419-432. 
Whenever in these papers the results are given in the form of solutions of special 
cases of the decision problem for satisfiability, they may be restated as solutions of 

256 PURE FUNCTIONAL CALCULUS OF FIRST ORDER [CHAP, IV 
IV 
Well-formed formulas A such that in each elementary part at most one 
variable has occurrences at which it is a bound variable of A. 
v' 
Well-formed formulas hav1ng a prenex normal/arm in which the matrix 
satisfies the condition 01 bc:ing a dis/unction of elementary parts and 
negations 0/ elementary parts or equivalent by laws of the propositional 
calculus to stiCh a disJunction,431 
VI 
Well-formed formulas having a prenex normal form with only one 
existential quantifier in the prefix, i.e., with a prefix of the form 
(a1)(aZ) . , , (am) (3b) (c1)(CZ) .. , (CI).432 
VII 
Well-formed formulas having a prenex normal form with a prefix of the 
form (a1)(aZ) ... (a.",)(3b1 ) (3bz) (cl ) (cz) , , , (cll.m 
VIII 
Well-formed formulas having a prenex normal form with a prefix of the 
form 
(all (az) . , . (am) (3bl ) (3b2) , , • (3b,,) (cl ) (c 2l ' . ,(cI) 
and a 
matrix in which every elementary part that contains any 0/ the variables 
bv bz> •• " b1l contains either all of the variables b 1, b 2, •• " b" or 
at least one of the variables cI , cz, . , ., C I .434 
corresponding special cases of the decision problem for validity, and for the sake of 
uniformity in summarizing the results we have done this systematically. The decision 
problem in the sense of footnote 421 IS dealt with explicitly only by Herbrand. 
I8lThis case is solved by Herbrand, loc.dl. An equivalent condition on the matrix is 
that it shall have the form AI ::::> • A. ::::> •... An_I::::> An' where n ;;:;; I and each Ai 
(t 
1,2, ... , n) is either an elementary part or the negation of an elementary part, 
or shall be equivalent by laws of the propositional calculus to a matrix of this form. 
Still another equivalent combtion IS that the value of the matrix shall be f for at most 
one asslgnment of truth-values to the elementary parts, 
U2Ackermann, Skolem, and Herbrand, loc.cit. According to Ackermann (1928). a 
wff of class VI which contains no free indIvidual variables and no functional variables 
that are more than binary is valid If it is valid in a domain m + «ml + I)" -
1)/ (ml + 
I -
I) illdivitluals, where N is the number of tliffcrent functional variables appearing 
and 
v = 3 X 2N(2m+l)(m+l)2Z2 + 1. 
Or in case m = 0, I 
I, the wff is valid if valid in a domain of 3 X 2N individuals, 
If ternary or higher functional variables appear, then a similar result may be found by 
Ackermann's methods. 
This provides a strictly theoretical solution of case VI of the decision problem for 
validity, and is hardly available for use in practIce. A more practicable decision proce-
dure, however, may be obtained from anyone of the three papers, and is indicated in 
exercises at the end of this sectiol!. 
mG6del, Kalmar, and Schutte, loc.cit. According to Schutte, a wff of class VII that 
contains no free individual variables is valid if it is valid in a domain of m + 220Y 
individuals, where N is the number of different functional variables appearing, none of 
the functional variables is more than hoary, and 
v 
Nl 22"(m + 1)Jt..-H, 
Again there is a more practicable decision procedure which may be obtained from 
the papers of Godel or that of Kalmar. 
'''Skolem, loc.Clt. 

§46] 
EXERCISES 46 
:257 
IX 
Well-formed formulas h,,,:ing a prenex normal form with a prefix ter-
minating in (ell (ez) ... (ell and a matrix in which every elementary 
part that contains any of the variables ocwrring in the prefix contains 
at least one of the variables e1, ez, .. " C I.434 
X 
Wdljormed formulas of the form (a l ) (a 2 ) . 
(a,,)M:::> (3b) ic)f(b, c), 
where n ~ 4, and M is quantifier-free and contains ne' vanables other 
than i, aI, az, .. " a n .435 
Treatment or partial treatment uf all of these cases except VII and X 
will be indicated briefly in exercises which follow at the end of this section, 
as well as oj some other cases of lesser importance. 
In most of the cases it is possible to put the solution of the decision prob-
lem for validity in the form that, jf a wff of the class in questioll is valid in 
a domain of a specified finite number of individuals, then it is valid (though 
this is seldom the most efficien t form of the solution [or use ill practice, 
i,e., in applying the decision procedure to particular wffs). Case X is of some 
interest as an exception to this. For it includes wffs that are valid in every 
finite domain without being valid in an infinite domain, as may be shown 
by the example 43.5(2). 
EXERCISES 46 
,..6.0. In order to establish the simplified decision procedure for case II' 
of the decision problem, prove the rules (1) and (2) which arc given above in 
connection with this case. 
,..6. I. (J) Consider a wff A of the singulary fUllctional calculus of first 
order (case III) and let the different functional vari;ll!les appearing in A he 
fll f2' ... , iN' \Ve may suppose, by **432, that there arc no free individual 
variables in A. According to QUine's solution of case III of the decision prob-
lem, as described above, the reduction process of exercise 39.0 is first to be 
applied to A. By a modification of this reduction process, show that A may 
be reduced to a wff B such that ~ A = B, and all the P-constitucnts of B 
other than propositional variables are of the form (xl. DI ::J • D2 :::> • 
, .. DN_ 1 ::J DN where each D; separately is either f,(x) or -i,(x) (i = 1,2, 
,. 'I N). But only 2N different P-constituents of this form are possible. 
Hence prove **466 by applying to B the decisioll procedure of case II'. 
'liThe solution of this case is in Ackermann's paper of 1936, cited in footnote 430. 
A modification of one part of Ackermann's decision procedure, reducing its length for 
application in practice, is given by J. J. Gegalkine in the Recueil .l'vI athimalique, new 
series vol. 6 (1939), pp. 185-19S. 
The solution of the decision problem in case X should be compared with the reduction 
of the deCision problem which is stated in footnote 447. 
.illi 
.1, 

258 PURE FUNCTIONAL CALCULUS OF FIRST ORDER [CHAP. IV 
(2) Show also that f- A if and only if in every falsifying system of truth-
values of the P-constituents of B all the P-constituents other than propo-
sitional variables have the value t. 
46.z. Apply Quine's solution of case III to each of the following wffs: 
(1) 
(3x)(y) • F(x) = P ~. F(y) == P 
(2) 
(3x)(y) • F(x) == F(y) 
(3) 
(3x)[F(x) :::> G(x)] = (3x)(3y)[F(x) ~ G(y)] 
(4)436 
F(x) ~" [F(y) ~ G(x)J ~ • p ~ • (x)F(x) ~ G(y) 
(5) 
(3x) (3Y)(Zl)(ZZ) • F(y) ~ G(Zl) ~ G(x) -F(Zl) ~ • 
F(x) v G(x) ~ H(x) ~ H(Z2) • H(y) :J • F(Z3) v G(Z2) ~ H(zz) 
46.3. Solve case IV of the decision problem by employing the same 
reduction process (ef. exercise 39.6) as in Quine's solution of case III. 
Illustrate by using this method to determine which of the following wffs are 
theorems: 
(1) 
(3x) (Yl) (yz) • -F(x, z) ~ F(z, Yl) :::> • F(Y2' z) ~ F(z, Y2) 
(2) (3z)F(x, z):::> (z)G(x, z):::::>. (z)[G(z, z):J F(z, y)] ~ .F(x,Y) == (z)G(x,z) 
46.4. Solve case IV of the decision problem by reducing it to case III, 
finding for every wff A of class IV a corresponding wff of class III which is 
a theorem if and only if A is a theorem. (Suggestion: Make use of the idea of 
replacing each elementary part of A by an elementary part involving only a 
singulary functional variable.) Check your solution by applying it to the 
two following wffs and verifying that the same results are obtained as when 
the ~cision procedure for case I is applied to them: 
F(x, y) :::>~ F(y, x) ~ ..., • F(x, y) :JQl -F(y, x) 
F(x, y) ~ F(y, x) ~'" G(x, y) ~ "" • F(x, y) ~ F(y, x) ~Ql ""G(x, y) 
46.5. As explained above, every solution of a special case of the decision 
problem for validity leads to a solution of a corresponding special case of the 
decision problem for satisfiability. State special cases of the decision problem 
for satisfiability which thus correspond to cases I-IV of the decision problem 
for validity; and state a decision pr?cedure for each of them, directly (i.e., 
without referring to decision procedures for cases I-IV of the decision prob-
lem for validity). 
46.6. Let case VI~ be the subcase of case VI in which there are no free 
individual variables, and m = 0, I = 1. I.e., in case VI~ the given wff A 
UtThis is a modified form of an example used by Quine. 

§46] 
EXERCISES 46 
259 
has as prenex normal form (3b)(c)M, where M is the matrix and contains 
no individual variables except band c. 
Suppose that no propositional variables appear and the only functional 
variable appearing is a binary functional variable f. Taking the positive 
integers as the domain of individuals, consider the following attempt to 
find a value of the functional variable f for which the value of A is f (false-
hood). For the value 1 of b we must find a corresponding value of c for which 
M has the value f, and we may suppose without loss of generality that this 
corresponding value of cis 2. The (distinct) elementary parts of M are some 
or all of f(b, c). ftc, b), f(b, b), f(c, c); by assigning appropriate truth-
values to these we can, in 0 or more ways, give to M the value f. Thus, if 
rp is the propositional function which is to be the value of f, we determine the 
possibilities as to what <1>(1,2), <1>(2,1), $(1.1), <1>(2, 2} may be. Then we 
must consider also the value 2 of b and find corresponding to it a value of c 
for which M has the value f. Without loss of generality we may suppose that 
this new value of c is 3. Again we consider the truth-values to be assigned to 
f(b, c), f(c, b), f(b, b), ftc, c) so as to give to M the value f; and thus we 
determine the possibilities as to what <1>(2, 3), <1>(3, 2), <1>(2. 2}. <1>(3,3) may 
be. This gives us two separate uetennmatiolls of what (/)(2, ~) is to be, <lnu 
it is seen that there are the following alternatives. (i) It may happen that 
the two determinations of the value <1>(2. 2) of <1> cannot be reconciled with 
each other by using any of the possible assignments of truth-values to 
f(b, c), ftc. b), f(b, b), ftc, c) that give to M the value f (either bv using the 
same assignment of truth-values to f(b, c), f(c, b), fib, b), ftc, c) both 
times or by using two different assignments); then A is valid. (ii) It may hap-
pen that the two determinations of the value ifJl2, 2) of <1> can be reconciled 
with each other; then we may go on to find corresponuing to the value 3 of 
b a value 4 of c for which M has the value f, and corresponding to the value 
4 of b a value 5 of c for which M has the value f, and so forth; because no 
further hindrance can be encountered, it follows that A is not valid. Thus 
the issue depends on whether or not it is possible to find a value <1> of f such 
that M has the value falsehood both for the values 1, 2 of b, c and for the 
values 2, 3 of b, c. 
(1) Supply details of the argument which is outlined in the preceding 
paragraph, and complete it so as to show that A is valid if and only if the 
disjunction 
SbC 
I 
SbC 
'" '" M; v 
'" '" 1\11 
lIla 
is a substitution instance of a tautology, or, as we shall say, if and only if 
this disj unction is tautologous. 
I 

260 PURE FUNCTIONAL CALCULUS OF FIRST ORDER [CHAP. IV 
(2) Extend this result to the more general subase of case VI~ in which 
any number of propositional variables appear and a single functional vari-
able (not necessarily binary). I.e., show in this case also that A is valid if 
and only if the disjunction 
Sbe 
. Sbe 
"'I"'. MI V 
:lOt'"> Mi 
is tautologous. 
(3) Complete the solution of this special case of the decision problem by 
stating explicitly a proof of A if the foregoing disj unction is tautologous. 
46.7. By the same method solve the further subcase of case VI~ of the 
decision problem in which there appear any number of propositional varia-
bles and just two functional variables. Show in this case that A is a theorem 
if and only if the disjunction 
Sb C 
Sb C 
Sb C 
Sb C 
, 
, x x Mi V 
'" x MI v "'" MI v 
z'" Mi 
13: 
13 
3. 
..I 
is tautologous. 
46.8. By the same method solve case VI~ of the decision problem. 
Namely, show that A is a theorem if and only if the disjunction 
Sbe 
Sbe 
Sb e 
"z MI v 
"'" MI v ... v 
~ 
MI 
I , 
• a 
~sNZsN+t 
is tautologous, where N is the number of different functional variables 
appearing. 
46.9. Apply the decision procedure of 46.6-46.8 to determine which of 
the following wffs are theorems: 
(I) 
(3l:)(Y) • F(x, y) = F(x, x) ::::) • F(x, y) == F(y, y) 
(2)437 
(3x)(y) • F(x, x)::> F(y, y)::> F(x, y)C(x) ::> Cry) 
(':-';otice that it is not asked to write out explicitly the proof of a wff which 
is found to be a theorem. Therefore instead of making use of the disjunction 
which, according to 46.6-46.8, is tautologous if and only if the given wff is 
a theorem, it may often be found more convenient just to follow through the 
same procedure by \\lhich this disjunction was obtained, i.e., the procedure 
described in the second paragraph of 46.6, or a suitable generalization of 
this procedure.) 
46.10. As a corollary of 46.8 establish the resplt of Bernays and Schon-
finkel that, in case VI~, A is valid if it is valid in a domain of 2N' individuals, 
where N' is the number of different functional variables appearing or the 
number 2, whichever is greater. 
"'This is essentially the same as one of Skolem's examples. 

§46] 
EXERCISES 46 
261 
,..6.1 I. The method used in 46.6-46.8 to solve case VI~ of the decision 
problem can as a matter of fact be extended to solve case VI in genera1. 438 
(I) Use this method to solve the case VI~, in which the given wff A has 
a prenex normal form (3b) (cl ) (c2)M, where M is the matrix and contains 
no individual variables except b, c1, c2. Show in this case that A is a theorem 
if and only if the disjunction 
S b elc, M' 
Sb C1C' M 
Sb CtC. M 
Sb c,c. M I 
Sb <, c. 
M 
"''''''' " IV.",,,,,' Iv",,,,,,, 
Iv",,,,,,, 
IV",V"", '" 
i 
1 I: 3 
2 , 6 
3 e 1 
.. 6 t 
Jl tjJ IJl+1 
is tautologous, where N is the number of different functional v,lrillblcs 
appearing and 
!l = 2zN -
l. 
(2) Use this method to solve the case VI~, in which the given wff A has a 
prenex normal form (a)(3b )(c)M, where M is the matrix and contains no 
individual variables except a, b, c. Show in this case that A is a theorem if 
and only if the disjunction 
Sabc M 
Sab C M I Sab c M I S .. b C M I 
Sab 
C 
M I 
"'''''' 
IV"",,, 
v 
.",,_,,' 
v ",,,,,,,v ... v 
"'., 
'" 
1 
1 • 
r8 
3 .. 
.'" -1 
It' 
is tautologous, where v is the sum of the weights of the different functional 
variables that appear, the weight of an h-ary functional variable f being 
the number of different wffs of the form f(dl , dz, .. " d,,) which occur as 
elementary parts in S~MI, with the exception of the one wff f(a, a, ... , a) 
(which is not to be counted). (Taking the natural numbers as the domain of 
individuals, attempt to give to A the value f; for this it is sufficient to find 
one value of a for which the value of (3b) (e)M is f, and it may be supposed 
<UThe close relationship should be noticed between th,s method and the method 
which was later used by Godel in his proof of completeness of the functional calculus 
of first order. Indeed the disjunctIOns which are used in 46.6-46.8 and in 46.11 (1) are 
the same as the disjunctions C. of §44, each for a certain particular value of k. 
In working with part (1) of exercise 46.11, it is recommended that the reader replace 
the notations, 
and so on, 
by the simpler notations MxtxaXs, Mxtx,x., and so on. Similarly, in part (2) the no-
tations, 
Sabc MI 
"'="'1 
" 
and so on, 
may be replaced by Mx=., Mxx.x., and so on respectively. This SImplified notation 
for substitution, essentially that of the Hilbert school, may conveniently be used in a 
context in which all substitutions are for the same list of variables, and especially when 
it is always a variable (or other single symbol) that is substituted for each variable. It 
will be useful also in connection with the exercises immediately following, and at many 
other places. However, in the text we shall retain the mare explicit notation for substi-
tution. 

266 PURE FUNCTIONAL CALCULUS OF FIRST ORDER [CHAP. IV 
(6) 
(3x) (3y) (z) • F(x, y) ::::> [F(x, z) == G(y, z)] ::::> • 
F(x, y) = [F(z, z) ::::> G(z, z)] :;:) • G(x, y) == G(z, z) 
(7) 
(3x)(3y)(z). F(x, z)::::>. F(z, z)::::> G(z, z) == F(x. y)::::>. 
G(z, z)::::> F(z, z) = G(x, y) =:l • G(x, y) ::::> F(y, x) == G(y, z) :;:) • 
F(z, y) = 
F(y. x) 
46.15. Extend the method of 46.13 (1) (compare also 46.11 (2)) to solve 
case V' of the decision problem. First work out the method in application, 
to the following particular examples: 
(1) 
(x) (3Yl) (3yz)(z) • F(x, z)::::> .F(Y!I z)::::> .F(yz. z):;:) .F(Yl' x):;:) F(z,y.). 
(2) 
(Xl) (x 2 ) (3y)(z) • F(xl' y) ::::> • F(z, XI) ::::> • F(z, y)::::> F(x2' y) V F(x2' z) 
(3) 
(3x) (y)(3z) • F(x, y) :;:) • F(z, x) ::::> F(y, y) 
(4) 
(3x) (y)(3z) • F(x, y, z)::::> F(y, z, z) 
(5) 
(3x) (y)(3z1l (3z2) • F(x, y, ZI, Z2' Zl) ::::> F(z1' x, y. Z1' Z2} 
(6) 
(3x1) (x2)(3x3 )(X4 ) • F (Xl' x2• Xli) ::::> F (X2' xa' X,) 
(7) 
(x1)(3x2)(x3)(3x4 ) • F(xl' x2, xs) ::::> F(x" x,. Xl) 
Then (8) state the method in general and show that it provides a solution of 
case V' of the decision problem for validity. Finally (9) show how to obtain 
a proof of a wff which has been found by this method to be valid. 
46.16. (1) By the same method solve also the following case V of the 
decision problem: 
V 
Well-formed formulas with a prenex normal lorm in which the matrix 
satisfies the condition 01 not having the t'alt.('e lalsehood 101' two different 
assignments 01 truth-values to its elementary parts unless the two assign- . 
ments diller in the truth-value /01' at least one elementary part that con-
tains none of the variables occurring in the prejix. 
And illustrate by applying the solution to the following particular examples 
(after dropping universal quantifiers from the beginning of the prefix if 
necessary) : 
(2) 
(3Yl)(3yz)(z) • F(x, 'lid:;:) F(z, x):;) F(x, X) ::::> F(x, X)F(Yl' '1/2) 
(3) 
(X)(3YI)(3Y2)(Z). F(x, z) ::::> iF(Yl' z) ::::> F(Y2' x)~ ::::> F(x, x} ::J • 
F(x, x) • F(Yl' 'liz)::::> F(z,z) 
(4) 
(Xl) (X2) (3YIJ (3Y2) (2') • 
F(xl• x2, Yl)::::> F(Y2' Yl' z) ::::> [F(XI' Xl. Xi)::::> F(xv xa. x:)J ::::>. 
F(x2' YI> Y2) ::::> F(Yl' z, z) ::::> [F(xI' xa. x2) ::::> F(Xl' Xl' x2)] ::::> • 
F (YI' Y2' z) ::::> F (X2' x2, Yt! • F (Xl> Xl' x2) = F (Xl' xa. x2) 

EXERCISES 46 
267 
46.17. (I) In the same way. extend the method of 46.13(2) to solve case 
IX of the decision problem. And illustrate by applying the solution to the 
following particular examples: 
(Xl) (Xa) (31h) (3YZ)(Zl)(ZZ) • F (x2• 2'1) ::::::> • 
F(y!. Z2) ::J F(y!. zl)F(Y2' 2'1) V F(x2' zz)F(yz. 2'2) 
(3xl ) (3X2)(Y) • f(xl . y) = F(xz, y) = F(z!. Z2)J V • F(zl' Y) = F(z2' y)] 
(3XI) (X2) (3xa) (X,) • [F(xl' x~) = 
F(x,. X3) = F(xs. x,) = F(x4' Xl)]' 
F(x2' x,) = F(x,. xal = F(X3' x,) = F(x4,. X2 ) 
(3XI) (x2)(3xa)(x4 ) • FiXl' X 4 ) == F(x 2• x4 )::::::>. 
F(xl' x,) = F{x,. xs) 
F(xa, x,) = F(x,. x 2 ) 
46.18. (I) In the same way. extend the method of 46.13(3). (4) to solve 
. case VIII of the decision problem.440 Illustrate by applying the decision 
. procedure to the following particular examples: 
(X)(3YI) (3yz) (z) • F(x. z) = F(z. x) ::::::> • 
F(x, z) = F(yz, z) • F(Yl' z) ::J F(y). Y2) 
(Xl )(x2)(3Yl) (3Y2) (zl • F{xl' Y2' Xl' z) ::::::> • 
F (Xl' Yl' x), Y2) = 
F (Yl' x 2 • Yl' Yz) ::::::> • 
F(x}. Yl' Xl' Yz) ::::::> [F(Xl' Y2' YI' Y2) ::::::> F(xl • Z. Yl' z)] • 
F (Xl' Z. YI' z) ::::::> • F (Xl> Yl' Xl' Yz) = F (Xl' YZ' Yl' Y2) 
(xl)(xz)(3Yl) (3yz)(z) • F(x!, x2)::::::> • F(YI' Yz) ::::::> F(xz. z) Y F(Y2' z) ::::::> • 
F(y!> yz) ::::::> [F(X2' z) == F(yv z)J ::::::> F(z. z) ::::::> • 
i'(Yl' Y2) • F(YI. z) = F(Y2' z) 
(x) (3YI) (3Y2l (3Ya)(z) • 
F(y!. Y2' Ya) ::::::> [F(x. x, z) ::::::> F(Y2' Ya. Yl) v F(Ya. Yl, Y2)] ::::> • 
F(Ya, Yl' Yz) ::::::> F(YI' Yz. YS)F(Y2' Y3' Yl) == F(Y2' Yl' z) ::::::> • 
F(Y2' Y3. Yl)::::::> F(y!> Y2' Ys)F(Ya. Yl' Y2) = F(YI' z, Y2)::J· 
F(Ya, Yl. Yz) ::::> ... F(yz. Ya. YI) :::> F(Yl' Yz. Ya) = F(z. Yz. Yl) ::::> • 
F(YI' Y2' Ya)F(Y2' Ya, Yl)F(Ya. YI' Y2) = P(z, Z, z) 
46.19. Apply the remark of footnote 425 in order to reduce the solutllJll 
of each of the folloVv1ng additional special cases of the decision problem to 
that of cases 1, V-IX: 
Well-formed formulas in which every truth-functional constituent is in 
prenex normal form with an elementary part or the negation of au 
elementar}-' part as its matrix, 
:1 
I.

268 PURE FUNCTIONAL CALCULUS OF FIRST ORDER [CHAP. 
XI 
Well-formed formulas in which every truth-functional constituent is in 
-i; prenex normal form with a matrix that has a(~st o~ elementary pari 
containing any of the variables that occur in #$ prefix. 
XII 
Well-formed formulas in which the prenex normal forms 0/ the truth-
functional constituents have prefixes of the following forms only: 
(a1), (alHas), (a1)(9b1). (a1)(1la)(3bt ). (a1)(3b1)(3ba), (al)(all)(3~) 
(Elba)· 
XIn Well-/ormed formulas in which the prenex normal/arm of each truth-
functional constituent p. has a prefix of one of the forms (bl ) (bl ) •.. (b.l 
or (a1)(8.) ... (am,)(3b1)(3bll) ... (3b,,) and a matrix in 
every elementary part other than a propositional variable contains all of 
the variables btl bl' .. '1 bn-where the number n is the same lor all the 
constituents P tl and the numbers mt are each 0/ them less than or equal 
to n. 
46.",0. Consider the following additional case of the decision problem: 
XIV 
Well-/ormed formulas having a prenex normal/arm with a prefix 0/ the 
form (a1)(a.) ... (Rm)(3bl )(3b.) ... (3bn (ct )(c.) ... (c,) and a 
trix in which the complete list of functional variables occurring is 
fl' f2' .... f M • gl' g21 .. '1 gNI such that no elementary part with one 
0/ the functional variables fi contains any of the variables c1• cz •... , C/. 
and each elementary part with one 0/ the functional variables gi contains 
either none of the variables bv b2 •• _ " b n or at least one 0/ the variables 
cl • c2• ' . '. Ct· 
(1) By the method described in 46.13. solve the subcase XIVo in which there 
are no free individual variables and m = 0, showing in this case that K = 1. 
(2) Extend this method to solve case XIV in general. (3) By taking I = 0. 
find a solution of case I as a corollary of the solution of case XIV. (4) Illu-
strate the solution of case XIV by applying it to the following example: 
(3:1) (xa) (3Yl) (3Ya) (z) • F(XI' xa) :::::> • G(Xl> XI) :::::> • 
G(X2' z) == G(Ya. z) :::::> [F(YI' Y2) :::::> F(xa• y.l] :::::> • 
G(X2' z) == G(YI. z) :::::> F(xl • YIlF(xa. Yl)F(Yl' Ya)· 
46.:u. Consider the general method for the solution of the decision prob-
lem which is outlined in footnotes 439 and 440, and study the question of 
extending it to cases in which a row in the table (or row-pair. etc.) may be 
related to more than one earlier row (row-pair, etc.). Explain why the 
method cannot be extended to an arbitrary such case; and seek for any 
special cases of this sort to which the extension may be possible. Consider 

EXERCISES 46 
26H 
in particular the case VIl~ of any wff A having a prenex normal form in 
which there are no free individual variables and the prefix is (3b1) (3b2) (e). 
46.~~. The problem traditionally treated under the h~ad of the categorical 
'._'MI,w .. 
,,·.~ ..... may be represented as follows in connection with an applied 
A ... ,'-~"vual calculus of first order having singulary functional constants 
its primitive symbols. Let a sentence be said to express a categorical 
if it has one of the four forms f(x) :J~ g(x), f(x):::J., -g(x), 
• f(x)g(x), (3x) • f(x) -g (x), where (in each case) f and g are singulary 
constants.'4! It is required to find all valid forms of inference in 
there are two premisses, and the premisses and conclusion each of them 
one of the four categorical forms. But cases are to be excluded in which 
is essentially only one premiss, i.e., in which there is a simpler valid 
lnTerf~nC~f' according to which the conclusion in question would follow from 
of the two premisses alone. 
For example, among the required forms of inference are the following 
correspond to the traditional syllogisms in Darii. Feria, and Feriso 
, and which are to be distinguished as all three different: from 
(z) :::::>" h (x) and (3x) • f(x)g (x) to infer (3x) • f(x)h(x); from g (x) :::::>., -h (x) 
(3x) • f(x)g(x) to infer (3x). f(x) -hex); from g(x):::::>., -hex) and 
• g(x)f(x) to infer (3x) • f(x) -hex). 
Evidently such forms of inference can be tested by writing for each one 
a corresponding leading prt·n.cipte, expressed as a wff of the pure functional 
calculus of first order (compare exercise 15.9). And the form of inferenc(' j~ 
to be considered valid if and only if Its leading principle is valid. For example, 
leading principle ofDariiisG(x) :::::>xH(x):::::>. (3x)[F(x)G(x)]:::::> (3x). 
F(x)H(x); and it may be verified by the decision procedure for case III, as 
above, that this leading principle is valid, and that neither of the 
simpler leading principles G (x) :::::>x H (x) :::::> (3x) • F (x)H (x), (3x)[F(x)G (x) J 
(3x) • F (x)H (x) is valid. 
UlTraditionally the four forms are called A, E, I, 0 respectively and are rendered in 
as: all F's are G's, no F's are G's, some F's are G's, some F's are not G's. Notice, 
,·hnw"'",,r that the version here suggested of the traditional doctrine of categorical 
and the categorical syllogism 1S not put forward as the correct interpretation 
only as one possible or plausible interpretation. 
fact is that the traditional doctrine is not sufficiently definite and coherent-and 
,lfHfl'>r •• nt- writers are not sufficiently in agreement-to make it clear what is the best or 
most faithful representation of it in a logistic system. For there is, on the one hand, the 
. difficulty about "existential import," as it is called (some aspects of the traditional 
doctrine would seem to be better represented if A and E were taken as (3x)f(:I:). 
::I .. g(x) and (3x)l(x) .l(x) ::I .. -g(x) respectively, instead of in the way suggested 
exercise). And there is, on the other hand, the question whether the traditional 
"terms" should not rather be construed as common names r,eP footnotes 4, 6) or a~ 
variables instead of class names or functional constants. 

270 PU RE FUNCTIONAL CA LCULUS OF FI RST ORDER [CHAP. 
By the method indicated, solve the problem of finding all such valid 
of inference (valid categorical syllogisms). 
46.2.3. Implicit in some of the foregoing exercises (see 46.11(2),46. 
46.1.'i-46.18) is a mctatheorem due to Herbrand,442 namely a 
of **441 to the case of a wff A in prenex normal form with an arbi 
prefix, the only further difference in the statement of the generalized 
theorem being in the substitution by which the quantifier-free wff B. 
obtained from M. State this generalization of **441 explicitly: (1) for 
case that the prefix is (3b)(c)(3d)(e) and the free individual variables 
A are a l and a 2; (2) for the case of an arbitrary prefix and an arbi 
number of free individual variables in A. 
46.2.4. By means of the metatheorem of 46.23, prove the 
(in the sense of §44) of the following described formulation, F~P, of the 
functional calculus of first order, due to Herbrand:442 The primitive sen 
connectives are negation and disjunction. The primitive quantifiers are the 
universal and existential quantifiers. The axioms are all quantifi 
tautologous wffs. And the rules of inference, none requiring more than 
single premiss, are as follows: the rule of alphabetic change of bound varia 
(*402); the rule of generalization (*401); from A to infer (3b)B, where 
is an individual variable which does not occur in A, and B is obtained 
A by replacing zero or more free occurrences of the individual variable a 
A (not necessarily all free occurrences of a in A) by b; to replace a wi 
(a) [C v DJ by (a)C v D, if a is not free in D; to replace a wi part (3a) (C v 
by (3a)C v D, if a is not free in D; to replace a wf part (a) -C by -(3a 
to replace a wf part (3a) -C by -talC; to replace a wf part P v Q by Q v P; 
to replace a wf part P v CQ v RJ by [P v Q: v R; to replace a wf 
[P v QJ v R by P v [0 v RJ; to replace a wI part P v P by P. 
47. Reductions of the decision problem. A reduction 0/ the decision 
problem (of the pure functional calculus of first order) consists in a 
class r of \\1fs and an effective procedure by which, when an arbitrary 
A is given, a corresponding wff Ar of the class r can be found such that 
is a theorem if and only if Ar is a theorem, and by which, further, a proof of 
A can be found if a proof of Ar is known. For example, **420 and *421 con-
stitute a reduction of the decision problem, the class r being in this case 
class of wfts in Skolem normal form. 
'''Recherches sur la Thiorie de I" Demonstration, \Varsaw 1930. This is Herbrand's 
dissertation at the UniversIty of Paris, (Added in proof. See in this connection a paper 
of Burton Dreben in the Proceeding of the Nat10nal Academy 0/ Sciences 01 the U.S.A .. 
vol. 38 (1952), pp. 1047-1052.) 

REDUCTIONS OF THE DECISION PROBLEAf 
271 
reduction ot the decision problem tor validity consists in a special class r 
wifs and an effective procedure by which, when an arbitrary wff A is 
, a corresponding wff Ar of the class r can be found which is valid if 
only if A is valid. Similarly, a reduction 0/ the decision problem lor 
u"",,u,ttnt,u/v consists in a special class of wffs and an effective procedure by 
when an arbitrary wff A is given, a corresponding wif of the special 
can be found which is satisfiable if and only if A is satisfiable. 
Clearly, every reduction of the decision problem for satisfiability leads to 
corresponding reduction of the decision problem for validity, and 1JiCe 
(The correspondence between **4:n and *"'438 may be taken as an 
tion of this.) Thus it is necessary to treat only one of the two kinds of 
. Wherever results in the literature are stated as reductions of the 
:~'''CJ'''IVll problem for satisfiability, we shall here reproduce them in the other 
i.e., we shall state the corresponding reduction of the decision problem 
validity. 
With the exception of the reduction to Skolem normal form, and reduc-
which (like that to prenex normal form) can be regarded as included 
this or which (like those of 39.5, *465) follow 1:)y little more than propo-
calculus, reductions of the decision problem in our presen t !'>ense, 
, of the decision problem for provability, have rarely received treatment 
the literature, perhaps only in the work of Herbrand. Since for many pur-
the weaker result is sufficient, we shall deal in the remainder of this 
with reductions of the decision problem for validity; and it will be 
t to express such reductions by saying that the class r is a reduc-
class. 
In view of the unsolvability of the general decision problem of the pure 
"Wj'"UVU,,,-, calculus of first order (whether for provability or validity), it is 
that, il r is a reduction class, then the special case 01 the decision prob-
jar wlls 01 the class r is unsolvable. And this may be regarded as being 
part of the significance of reductions of the decision problem for validity. 
As a lemma for later proofs, we first establish the following metatheorem, 
idea of which is due to Herbrand: 443 
Let A be any wff, let PI' P2' ... , PM be the complete list of distinct 
propositional variables occurring in A, and let fl' f2' ... , fN be the 
complete list of distinct functional variables occurring in A. Sup-
pose that f; is an hcary functional variable (i = 1,2, ... , N), and 
let h -
I be the greatest of the, numbers hI' h2 . ' . '. hs' Choost' 
mIn the paper cited in footnote 430. 
I
, 
I
1 

272 PURE FUNCTIONAL CALCULUS OF FIRST ORDER ,CHAP.! 
distinct individual variables·" Xl' X2' ... , X M+N' YI' YI' ... , 
of which Xl' X 2' ••. , X M+N do not occur in A, and choose an 
functional variable f."· Let Ci be f(Xi' x" .. " Xi) (i = 1, 2, ... , 
let Fi be f1(Yl' Y2, ' • " Y/ij) (i = 1,2, ... , N); let Di be f( 
XMH' ' . "XM +i • YlO YI' .. " Y/iJ (i = 1,2, ... , N); and let B be 
S~I S~I", S~MM S~ S~I ... S~N AI, , . III ... II· 
I 
I 
1 
I 
Then B is valid if and only if A is valid. 
Proal. If ~ A, then ~ B by *352. By **440 and **434 it follows that, if A 
is valid, then B is valid. 
By *301 and -306, we may suppose that A contains no free indi 
variables. Taking the positive integers as domain of individuals, assume 
B is valid. and consider any system of values '!.'l' Ta, ' . " T M , (/)1' (/)2' .•• , 
of the free variables PI' P2' .. " PM' fl' f2' ... , fN of A. Let the 
1,2, ... , M + N be assigned to the free variables xl> x 2 , ' •• , X M+N of 
respectively, and let a value (/) of the free variable f of B be determined as 
follows: (/)(f, i, "', i) = 7:i U = 1,2, ... , M); (/)(M+i, M+i, .'" M 
ul , u2 • • , "U/ij) = (/)t(Ut , U2, ... , uhj ) (i = 1, 2, ... , N); (/)(u1• u2 • ••• , U/i)= 
in all other cases, The value of B for this system of values of its free v<u ..... ~,,0;;;:1 
is evidently the same as the value of A for the system of values Tl' T! •.• 
'!.'M' (/)1' (/)2' .•. , (/)N of the free variables of A. And since the value of B is 
it follows that the value of A is t. 
Thus we have shown that, if B is valid in the domain of positive 
then A is valid in the domain of positive integers. Hence by """450, if B 
valid, then A is valid. 
It follows that the class of wffs containing only one functional varia 
and 110 propositional variables, is a reduction class. However, we go on 
once to obtain stronger reductions than this. 
According to a result of L6wenheim, the class of wffs containing only 
nary functional variables is a reduction class. By a refinement of Lowen-
heim's method it is possible to obtain the result that the class of wffs 
taining only a single binary functional variable (no other functional 
abIes. and no propositional variables) is a reduction class:u6 We proceed 
show how this may be done, 
Given an arbitrary wff A, we first reduce it by **470 to a wff B which con-
"'To render the reductIon process eifechve, the choice must be made explicit in 
some manner, say by takmg in each case the first available variable or variables, 
according to the alphabetic order of the variables. 
"'First proved by Kalmar in Compositio Mathematica, vol. 4 (1936), pp. 137-144.· 

REDUCTIONS OF THE DECISION PROBLEM 
2i3 
only a single h-ary functional variable f. If h -/= 2, we choose a hinary 
mCUOll1al variable g, and '2h -+- 1 distiuct individual variables cl , c2, ... , c h • 
ds, ... , dh+l' of which d l , dt , .. " dll+1 do not occur in B.H4 And we let 
be the conj unction 
d2)g(d2, ds) ... g(d", d h+1)g(d"+1' dl )g(d1• cl )g(d2, c2) ..• 
g(d", chi -g(dl , d l ) -g(cl , d 2) -g(c2, da) ... -g(ch . d"ll)g(d,,+v cil. 
letting C be 
show that C is valid if and only if B is valid, therefore if and only if A 
valid. 
If I- B, then I- C by *352. By **440 and **434 it follows that, if B is valid, 
C is valid. 
By *301 and *306 we may consider, instead of Band C, their universal 
B' and C'. Taking the natural numbers as domain of individuals, 
that C' is valid, and consider an arbitrary value q; of the single free 
f of B'. Then let a value lJI of the single free variable g of C' be 
, .. "",.","u as follows. 
the natural numbers occurring ill tht' ktll Ii-tupk are all lt'ss than k 
y to the enumeration used in §44, this may be done by arranging 
h-tuples <VI' V2, •.. , v,,) in order of increasing SlIms <'I T V2 1-
., -;- ,'/i. 
having the same sum being arrallged among themselves in lexlco" 
ordeL) Then lJI(u, u) = t except when II = k(h + I} + J (Le., 
when U is congruent to 1 mod h -+- I). If there is a natural number k 
thatul = k(h + 1) + I, u2 = k(h+ 1) + 2,.,., U h+1 = (!? + l)(h-+-l). 
lJI(IlI' u2) = lJI(u2• ua) = ... = 'P(u,,, tlMl ) 
lJI (U'''+l' HI) = t. 
If 
VlI• ' •• , v,,) is the (k -+- 1 )th h-tuple ancl III 
l?(h -+- 1) +. l (l 
1, ~, 
"h -t- I), then lJI(UI,VI ) =" lJl(u2, l'~) 
=, lJIlUi" Vh) 
= 
t, :ll:d 
VI) = q;(vl • V 2, ••. , Vh)' And in all remaining cases "!j/(t<, v) = f. 
. In view of the special properties of the propositional function 'P, the 
of C' for the value lJI of g is the same as the value of B' for the value 
of f. And since the value of C' is t, it follows that the value of B' is t. 
. Thus we have shown that, if C' is valid in the domain of n,ttural numbers, 
B' is valid in that domain. It follows that, if C is valid, then B is valid . 
... This completes the proof, since C contains oIlly the single billary fUllC-
variable g, and we have shown altogether that C is valid if and only 
A is valid. 
. ; 
i; 
·1 
i 

274 PURE FUNCTIONAL CALCULUS OF FIRST ORDER [CHAP. I 
Notice that in place of (3dl ) (3d2 ) ... (3dlHllG in the foregoing 
we might equally well have used (dl ) (d2 ) , , • (dh+I)H. where H is 
g(dl • d2 ) => • g(d2• dsl => •... g(dh , dh+l) ::::> • g(dlow d1 ) :::J • 
g(dl. cll :::J • g(d~. c2) ::::> •• , . g(d}!, eh ) :::J • -g(dl • dl ) => • 
-g(cl • d2 ) => • -g(c2, da) :::J • , , , -g(c}P dhTl ) :::J g(dh+I. 
For both of the wffs (3dl ) (3d2 ) , . , (3dh+l)G and (dl ) (d 2) • , . ( 
alike have the value 1/1(,,1, V 2 • .. " 
VII) for the system of values P, VI' v2, ' • 
VII of their free variables g, cl> c2 •• , '. ch (where P is the propositional 
tion which was introduced above), By taking advantage of this nh""1'1'" 
we now go on to establish the following still stronger reduction of the 
sion problem for validity: 
**471. 
The class of wffs in Skolem normal form which contain only a 
binary functional variable (no other functional variables, and 
propositional variables) is a reduction class, 
Proof, By **437 we may suppose that the given wff A is already in 
normal form, 
We consider first the case that A contains only a single h-ary 
variable f, making use in this case of the wifs G and H that were in 
above. Therefore let A be 
and let the distinct elementary parts of the matrix M of A be El • E2, ' , " 
where Ei is f(Cil, Ci2' ' , "Clio) (i = 1,2, ' , ',fl)' Since the P-cons 
of M are the same as its elementary parts, we have by *465 that a 
equivalence M = Ml is valid, where Ml has the form of a conj 
[E~ => • E~ => • , , , E~_l ::::> -E~J [E; :::J • E; => •. , , E!_I :::J -E!J ' , . 
[E~ ::::> • E; :::J •• , .E~I ::::> 
each Ei being either Ei or -E, U = 1,2, ' , ',fl, and i = 1,2, .. " 
Therefore A is valid if and only if Al is valid, where Al is 
(3a1)(3a2)", (3am) (bl )(b2) •• , (bn)MI' 
Choose distinct individual variables cl , c2 •.• " cII , d l • d 2 •• ' " dll+I • 
which di • d2• ' , " dh+l do not occur in AI"" let M2 be obtained from 
by replacing each part E: by 
Sf(Cl • Ca, '''' ChI 
Ell 
(dl)(dsi, .. (dh+l)H 
i 
and let A2 be 

REDUCTIONS OF THE DECISION PROBLEl'rJ 
275 
is 
st(CI , C" "" ch ) 
A 
(d1)(d,I .. ,(d .. 1)H 
I" 
by *352, "'*440, and .... 434 it follows that if Al is \'alid, then A2 is valid. 
Ma be obtained from Ml by replacing each part E: by 
st(cl , C.' "', CAl 
Ei 
(3dl )(3d.) .. ,(3d.+I )G ;1 
st(CI,C" ... , ChI 
E~: 
(d1)(dl)···(dA+I)H 
.' 
as E! is Ei or -E;, and let As be 
(3al )(3a2 ) ... (3am)(bl ) (b2) ... (bn)Ma· 
A, be 
(3dIl (3d2 ) ••• (3d"+l)G =>c,c .... c. (dl ) (d2) .•. (dh.I)H => A 3 · 
the same argument that was used above (employing again the domain 
'natural numbers and the same binary propositional function lJ') we may 
that, if A, is valid, then Al is valid. 
ting K be the con j ullction of all the wHs 
S~~1~:.:::~:.(3dl)(3d2)'" (3d"+I)G::> (dl )(d2J··· (dh+l)H, 
have by P that ~ M2 => • K => M 3 . Hence by *:~O!i alld P, 
.~M2=>' (3dtl(3d 2 ) , •• (3d h+l)G=>cI C .... Ch (d1 ) (d 2 ) ••. (dhtl)H::> Ma· 
by "'301, *333, *335, *365, *382, and P, ~ A2 => A4• Bymodusponens, 
since we know that the valid wffs are the same as the theorems (by 
and **434), it follows that, if A2 is valid, then A4 is valid. Cunsequent-
if Al is valid, then A, is valid. 
the prenex normal form of A, is in Skolem normal form, contains 
, the single binary functional variable g, and is valid if and only if A 
:valid. 
This completes the proof of the case that A contains only one functional 
Turning now to the general case, we suppose that A is in Skolem 
form 
matrix, and contains Jv! different propositional variables 
PI' ... , PM and N different functional variables fl' f2' .. " fN · Let fi be 
hcary functional variable (i = 1,2, ... , N), and let h be the greatest 
the numbers hI' h2' .. '. hN . 

276 PURE FUNCTIONAL CALCULUS OF FIRST ORDER (CHAP. IV 
In place of the two wffs G and H which were used in the first part of the 
proof, we now use 2(M + N) wffs Gv G2, , • ., GM+N• Hv Ha,··., HM+N • 
Namely, where g is a binary functional variable and cI , ca •... , c,p d1• dar 
... , dh+M;-N are distinct individual variables of which dl , d 2, ••• , dh+M+N 
do not occur in A,4U we take Ga. to be the conjunction 
g(d1, d2)g(d2, da) , , . g(dHM+N - 1, dh+M+N)g(dh+M+N' d1) 
g(d1• c1)g(d2, c2) , , ,g(d", Ch) -g(dv d1 ) -g(c1, d 2) 
-g(c2, ds) , ,. -g(ch • d"+l)g(dh+a.' cll 
(oX = 1,2, . , " M + N), and we take H" to be 
g(d1l d 2 ) ::::> • g(d 2, da) =>. , , ,g(dil+M+N-l' dh+M+N) => .g(d"+M+N' d1)::>· 
g(d1, cI ) => • g(d2, c2) ::::> •••. g (d", c,,) => • -g(d1l d1 ) => • -g(~, d2) => 
-g(c2, d3 } => •... -gl:C", d"+l) => g(dh+iX' el } 
(0: =- 1,2, ' , '1 M + N). 
The same use is made as before of the natural numbers as domain of 
individuals, And given a system of values TIl Tz •. , " TM' r;[;l' r;[;2' ' . "r;[;N 
of the propositional and fUIlctional variables PI' P2' ' , ., PM' fl' fl!' ' . " fN' 
the propositional function P, used as a value of the variable g. is now deter- ' 
mined as follows. The same enumeration is used of the ordered h-tuples of 
natural numbers. 'P(u, u) = t except when u = k(h + M + N) + 1 (i 
except when u is congruent to 1 modulo h + M + N). If there is a na 
number k such that ttl = k(h + M + N) + I, u 2 = k(h + M + N) + 
... , Uh+M+N = (k + 1) (h + M + N), then P(uv 1t2 } = 'P(u2, u3 ) = ... = 
'P(uh+M+N- 1 , uh+M+N) = 'P(uh+M+N' u1) = t. If (VI. V2' ... , v,,) 
is the 
(k + l)th h-tuple uf natural numbers and U 1 = k(h + M + N) +, 
(t = 1,2, .. " h + M + N). then 'P(u1, vd = 'P(u 2, v2 ) = . , . = 'P(ull• v,,) 
= t, and P(uh+j' t'l) = Tj (j = 1,2, .. " M), and 'P(U'h+M+i' VI) = <Pi(v!> 
v2' .• "v"J (i = 1,2, ... , N), And in all remaining cases 'P(u, v) = f. 
In place of the substitutions 
SfiCl' C2' .,,' elll 
, 
d 
St1cI' C2' "', elll 
,3d1Jl3d21 ... (3d"+1)G 
dn 
(d1)(dz) ... (d"+1IH 
which were used in the first part of the proof, we now use the substitutions' 
where i = l, 2, ... , M, and i = 1,2, ' , "N. 

REDUCTIONS OF THE DECISION PROBLEM 
277 
With these indications, we leave it to the reader to supply the remainder 
of the proof, following the same plan used in the first part of the proof. 
By similar methods, involving the use of an enumerably infinite domain 
of individuals (such as the positive integers or the natural numbers) and of 
, an enumeration of the ordered pairs or of the ordered II-tuples of individuals, 
many other reductions of the decision problem for validity can be obtained" 
We shall indicate briefly the proof of one more such result, and then con-
clude this section by stating without proof some of the other results which 
can be found in the literature" 
The class of wffs which are in Skolem normal form with just three 
existential quantifiers in the prefix and which contain just four 
binary functional variables (no other functional variables, and no 
propositional variables) is a reduction class, 
Proal" By **471 we may suppose that the given wff A is in Skolem normal 
form 
. M being the matrix, and contains only a single binary functional variable g. 
We may suppose also that m > :3, the required reduction being obvious ill 
the contrary case. Let gl' g2' ga be binary functional variables which are 
Ifl"'Tln,"r from one another and from g, let Xl' X2• " . '" Xm,,-l> y, Z, Cl> C2• ca 
distinct individual variables which do not occur in A, and let B be: 
(XI)(Y)(Z) (3cl)(3c2) (3Ca)[gl(XI , cl)ga(xl• Ca)gl(Ca, y)g2(Cg, z) • 
gl(XI , y)gl(Xl, z) ::::> gs(y, z) • g2(XI , y)g2(XI , z) ::::> g3(Y' z) • ga(Y, z) ::::> • 
gl(Y. Xl) == gl(Z, Xl) .g2(Y' Xl) = 
g2(Z, Xl) .g(y. Xl) = 
g(z. Xl). 
g(xl• y) = 
g(xl• z)] ::::> 
(3xll (Xa) (Xa) . " (Xm_l) (al) (a2 ) ••• (am) (bl) (ba) ... (bn ) • gl (Xl' all ::::> • 
tla (Xl' X2) ::::> • gl (Xa. a 2) ::::> • ga (Xa, Xa) ::::> •••• gl (xm - l• am_I) ::::> • 
g.(Xm - 1• am) ::::> M 
By *381. B can be reduced to an equivalent wff C in which the quantifiers 
'(Xl) and (3Xl) have been deleted from the antecedent and the consequent 
of B respectively and have been replaced by an initially placed quantifier 
(3x1). The prenex normal form of C then satisfies the required conditions, 
that it is in Skolem normal form with just three existential quantifiers in 
the prefix and contains just four binary functional variables gl' ga' ga. g. 
We have at once that the prenex normal form of C is valid if and only if 
B is valid. That B is valid if and only if A is valid we leave to the reader to 
prove, with the aid of the following remark. 

278 PURE FUNCTIONAL CALCULUS OF FIRST ORDER [CHAP. 
Take the natural numbers as domain of individuals, and choose 
enumeration of the ordered pairs of natural numbers. Given an arbitrary 
value lJI of ~, a system of values lJIl , lJI2, lJIs of ~l' ~2' ga, may be determined 
as follows so as to give to the antecedent of B the value t: lJI1(u, v) 
t 
and only if v is the first number in the (u + l)th ordered pair; lJIz(u, v) =' 
if and only if v is the second number in the (u + 1 lth ordered pair; lJIs (u,v) 
t if and only if u 
v. For this particular system of values of ~l> ~z' ~3 it 
clear that the consequent of B has the value t if and only if A has the 
t. It is true that, for a given value of~, other systems of values of ~l' ~2' 
may in general be found so as to give to the antecedent of B the value 
but (as may be read from the antecedent of B itself) these other svsten~ 
of values of ~l' ~2' ~3 must always have certain properties in common 
the system lJIl , lJI2, P s which are sufficient to ensure that the N·,'nc.,,,,, 
of B has the value t if and only if A has the value t. 
As will be indicated in exercises below, the reduction process of **472 
readily be modified so as to obtain only three binary functional 
in the wffs of the reduction class instead of four, or, alternatively, so as 
obtain one binary and one ternary functional variable (the other 
remaining in either case unchanged). By more elaborate methods of the 
kind it is even possible to reduce this to a single binary functional 
According to known results, including that just mentioned, each of the 
following classes of wffs is a reduction class (where it shall be understood in 
each case, without separate mention, that the wffs are to contain no free 
vidual variables and no propositional variables, and that either the wff 
or its indicated antecedent and consequent are to be in prenexnormal 
Wffs with prefix (3a1)(3azJ (3a3)(bl )(b2) .•. (bn ) which contain a single 
binary functional variable. 446 
Wffs with prefix (a)(3b) (c)(3d1)(3d 2) ..• (3d n ) which contain a single 
binary functional variable.447 
446The reduction to wffs of this prefix containing none but binary functional variables 
is due to GOdel in Monalshe/le fur Mathematik und Physik, vol. 40 (1933), pp. 
(another proof by Skolem in Acta Scientiarum Mathematica,um, vol. 7 (1 
193-199). The further reduction to a single binary functional variable is due to 
Kalmar and Janos Suranyi in The Journal ot Symbolic Logic, vol. 12 (1947), pp. 
The proof of **472 which is given in outline above is by GOdel's method. 
U7The reduction to wffs of this prefix is due to Ackermann in the paper cited in 
notes 430,435, and the further reduction to a single binary functional variable is 
Kalmar in The Journal oj Symbollc Logic, vol. 4 (1939), pp. 1-9. The result 
Ackermann can be stated in the somewhat stronger form that the class of wffs of 
form 
(3a) (a1) (a2) ... (a.)M => (3b) (c)f(b, c), 
where M is quantifier-free and contains no individual variables other than a, a1 • 
. . . , an and f is a binary functional variable occurring in M, is a reduction class. 

REDUCTIONS' OF THE DECISION PROBLEM 
279 
Wffs wIth preilx (3bj)(3b2)(C)(3dtl:3d2)" 
(3d,,) whir:h ('ontain 
cl 
single billary functional variable. 448 
Wffs with prefix (3a1)(3a 2) ... (3a,,)(b) which contaiL a single binary 
onaI variable. 449 
Wffs of the form (a)(b)(c)Ml:::::> (3a)(3bl(c)M2' when, Ml and M2 are 
quantifier-free and contain none but binary functional \'ariables. 450 
Hence also wffs \vith prefix (3a)(3b) (3c)( d) which contain none bu t 
functional variables. 4so 
And also wffs with prefix (3a)(3b) (c)(3d) which contain none but binary 
"'The reduction to wffs of this prefix is due to J6zef Pepis in Fundamenta Ala/he-
, vol. 30 ([038). pp. 257-348. More fully. Pepis's result in this paper is tha l th,! 
of wffs of the form 
(ad(a.) ... (an)M:;:) (3b,)(3b,) (c)f(b,. b" el, 
M is quantifier-free, and contains no individual variables other than a l • a,. 
and contains besides the ternary functional variablr: f only one singulary 
.• w,,,v.,vual variable, is a reduction class. Or f(b,. b •. e) may be replaced by the dis-
',(b l • c) v r.(b •. c). in which case M contains the two binary functional 
YIUH"~'I"" f, and f, and one singulary functional variable. The reductlOn t(~ the prefix 
(c}(3d,) (3d,) ... (3d nl and a single binary functional variable is due to 
and Suninyi in The Journal 0/ Symbolic Logle. vol. 15 (1950). pp. 161-1 i3. 
red uction to wffs of this prefix is again due to Pepis. being a corollary of the 
result quoted in the preceding footnote. The fUrther reduction to a single bmary 
fllnctional variable is due to Suranyi in Ma/ematikai 8S Fizikai Lapok, vol. 50 (19431. 
pp. 61-74 (see also the paper of Kalmar and SuranYl which IS clted I!I the precclilnb 
footnote). 
The same paper of Pepis contains also a number of other results. in the direction 
reducing the number of functional variables required in connection with various 
Some of these have since been superseded by stronger results. but the following 
be worth quoting: in the Ackermann normal form as given in footnote 447, 
be restricted to contain, besides the binary functional variable f. only one singu-
one ternary functional variable, or else only one sini!ulary and two binary 
fulliction,a.[ variable,; (as preferred L 
(6CThese reductions are due to Suran"l ill tilt, paper Llted III the p"ccedJ!'K f,)"tnotc. 
(Added in proof.) The same reductions are also obtained bv Surinyl in a paper lU 
t,falhematica ACudemzae Scunliayum rlungartcae. voL I (19:"0), pp. 2tll-271. 
Another paper by Sutfmyi in the same periodical, vol. 2 (1951), pp. 3%-:B5, add'ito 
the list of reduction classes the two following: wffs with prefix (al(3b)(c)(3dJ(3e) 
contain none but singulary and binary functional variables. including at most 
binary functional variables; and wffs with prefix (3a)(b)(c)(3d)(3e) whlch 
none but singular), and binary functional variables, including at most seven 
functional variables, Two papers by Kalmar. ibid., vol. I (1950), pp. 64-73, 
2 (1951), pp. 19-38. add the three following reduction classes: wffs with 
(3a.)(b,)(b.) . ,. (bn )(3c) which contain a single binaryfunctiollal vanable; 
prefix (3a)(b,)(b.) ... (b")(3cd(3e.) which contain a single binary functional 
"'1ll'''U)I'', and wffs with prefix (a!l(a.), .. )(a.)(3b)(c,)(e.) .' . (eu )(3d,)(3d.) which 
single binary functional variable, A reduction of the deCision problem for 
to! that concerning validity in every finite domain. and hence a reduction 
decision problem for validity to that concerning satisfiability in some finite 
is contained in another paper of Kalmar. ibid., vol. 2 (1951). pp. 125--141 
unsolvahility of the decision problem concerning validity in every finite domain 
already been proved by Trachtenbrot in the paper Cited in footnote 667). 
i 
i 
. i 

280 PURE FUNCTIONAL CALCULUS OF FIRST ORDER 
EXERCISES 47 
47.0. Extend the result of **470 to obtain a reduction of the u",,"'l'J~ 
problem for provability, by showing how to find a proof of A if a proof 
B is known. 
47. I. Supply in detail the last part of the proof of **471, 
omitted in the text. 
47.2. For the proof of **472, supply in detail the omitted ue;.uv •• "u 
that B is valid if and only if A is valid. 
47.3. Show that, in **472, the number of binary functional variables 
be reduced from four to three by introducing a binary functional variable h,. 
replacing g2(d, e) everywhere by h(d, e) .-h(e, d), and g3(d, e) ".",',r"",m", ... 
by h(d, e)h(e, d). 
47.4. Show that, in **472, the reduction process may be modified so 
to obtain one binary and one ternary functional variable, replacing gl(d, e) 
everywhere by h(d, e, el, g2(d, e) by h(d, e, d), and g3{d, e) by .-h(d, d, e) 
47.5. The leading idea of the reduction process of **472 is to make use of 
an enumeration of the ordered pairs of natural numbers in order to replace a 
sequence of existential quantifiers (3al )(3a2) •.. (3aml by a single exis-
tential quantifier (3XIl, at the expense of increasing the number of univer-' 
sal quantifiers. With appropriate modifications, the same idea may be used 
to replace a sequence of universal quantifiers by a single universal 
er, at the expense of increasing the number of existential quantifiers. 
example, (bl )(b2)M might be replaced by (xil (3b1){3b2) • gl(XV 
g2(Xl> b 2)M, which will have the same value as (b1){b2)M if gl and g2 have 
the values lJil and lJi2 that are given in the proof of *"'472. Investigate the 
questioll wha t additional reductions of the decision problem for validity can 
be obtained (beyond those of **470-**472) by using this method, t()<rp,tl'A" 
with the methods and results of **420-**421, **470-**472. 
48. Functional calculus of first order with equality. The tu~tcttomrl. 
calculus 0/ first order with equality is a logistic system obtained from 
functional calculus of first order by adding a binary functional constant 
and certain axioms (or postulates, according to the point of view) that 
tain I. Or, alternatively, it may be described as obtained by adjoining 
additional axioms to an applied functional calculus of first order among 
whose primitive symbols is the binary functional constant I. The wffs of 
system are the same as the wffs of this applied functional calculus of 
order, but of course there are additional theorems in consequence of the 
added axioms. 

FUNCTIONAL CALCULUS WITH EQUALITY 
2Rl 
We shall speak of the pure functional calculus of first order with equal#y if 
primitive symbols include all propositional and functional variables (as 
in §30) and no functional constants except J; an applied functional 
"nfJ'w.'I.~ o//irst order with equality if there are other functional constants in 
lUUlL",1H to f; a simple applied functional calculus 0/ first order with equality 
there are other functional constants in addition to I and no functional 
... " ..... ,,' • .,. Besides these there is the simple calculus of equality, obtained by 
appropriate axioms to the simple applied functional calculus of first 
which has I as its only functional constant. 
If the formulation of §30 is used for the functional calculus of first order, 
axioms to be added are the single aXIOm 
f(x, x) 
the infini te list of aXIOms gi ven by the aXlOm sr.hema 
I(a, b):::::> .A:::::> B. 
a is an individual variable or an individual constant, b is an individual 
or an individual constant, <lnd B is obtJ.incll from A by repLlcing 
particular occurrence of a by b, this particular occurrence of a being 
the scope neither of a quantifier (a) nor of.a quantifier (b). The for-
of the functional calculus of first order with equality that is ob-
by adding the functional constant 1 and the foregoing axioms to Ia 
shall call Fl. And in particular thE' formulation F/p of the pure functional 
of first order with equality is obtained by adding the fUllctional 
t I and these axioms to pr. 
For the simple calculus of equality we may begin with the fl)rmulation FI 
a simple applied functional calculus of first order havillg I as its only 
constant. To this we may add the axiom J (x, x) and all the axioms 
by the above axiom schema, so obtaining the formulation ~ of the 
calculus of equality. It is sufficient, however, to add only the three 
ng axioms: 
J(x, x) 
J(x, y) :::::> fly, x) 
J(x, y):::::> .I{y, z):::::> I(x, z) 
(Reflexive taL' a/ equality.) 
(Commutative law oj equahtv.) 
(Transitive law uf equality.) 
the formulation of the simple calculus of equality that is obtained in 
way we call E. 
For the pure functional calculus of first order we may use also the formu-
F~P of §40, By adding to this the functional constant I and two axioms, 
I
I 
I
t: 
l. 
I' I
L
!.',· f! 
'i 
'II 
'~ , 
, 

282 PURE FUNCTIONAL CALCULUS OF FIRST ORDER 
1 (X, x) 
I (x, y) :::> • F (x) :::> F (y), 
we obtain a formulation of the pure functional of first order with 
which we shall call F;p. 
In all of these calculi the notations = and 4=, more familiar than I, may 
be introduced by definition as follows: 
DI8. 
ia = bj ~;..] (a, b) 
Dl9. 
[a 4= hj ~ -I(a, b) 
And of course all the definitions and methods of abbreviation of wffs con-
linue in force which were introduced for the functional calculus of 
order in §30. 
For the principal interpretation of all of these systems it is intended that 
shall denote the relation of equality, or identity, between individuals. 
For example. in the case of the pure functional calculus of first order with 
equality. after choosing some non-empty class as the individuals, we fix the 
principal interpretation by the same seman tical rules a-I as given in S30 
the pure functional calculus of first order). together with two additional rules 
follows: 
g" 
If a is an individual variable. the value of l(a, a) is t for all values of 
g.. 
If a and b are distinct individual \'ariables, the value of I(a, b) is t 
the value of a is the same as the value of b, and the value of I (a, b) is f if 
values of a and b are different. 
The syntactical definitions of validity and satisfiability (§43), as well as 
the metatheorem that every theorem is valid (**434), can he extended 
obvious fashion to the pure functional calculus of first order with eq 
and. e'Specially in some of the exercises following, we shall assume that 
has been done. 
EXERCISES 48 
4-8.0. In the formulation E of the simple calculus of equality, the cornmu· 
tative and transitive laws of equality may be replaced by Euclid's 
that "things equal to the same thing are also equal to each other," ex-pn:sst!d 
as follows in the notation of the system: 
I (X, z)J (y, z) :::> I (x, y) 
Thus is obtained a formulation E of the simple calculus of equality 
has only two added axioms instead of three. Show that E and E are equiva-
lent in the sense that their theorems are the same. 

EXERCISES 48 
283 
48.1. Foreachofthe systems E and E show that the added axioms, con-
taining I, are independent . 
. 48.::1. Show that the two formulations :r~ and E of the simple calculus of 
'ty are equivalent in the sense that their theorems are the same. (Com-
the proof of *340, which may here be paralleled in certain respects.) 
48.3. Show that the two formulations }TIp and F;P of the pure functlOnal 
calculus of first order wi th equali ty are eq ui va'-~n t ill the scn"e that their 
. theorems are the same. (The same method may be used by which the equiv-
alence of F1P and F!P was proved. But notice, in particular, that the added 
here introduce some new questions in cOllllection with the rules of 
. ) 
48.4. For a formulation of a simple applied functional calculus of first 
with equality, if the number of functional constants is finite, show that 
finite number of added axioms is sufficient. as follows: the reflexive, 
..." .. ~rnl1t"tive, and transitive laws of equality; for each singulary functional 
..., .. ,,, •• , .. , f an axiom, 
[(:I:, Y) :::I • f(x) => f(y); 
each binary functional constant f other than I, two axioms. 
[(x, y) :::I • f(:I:, z) => f(y, z), 
[(x, Y) :::> • f(z, :1:) => f(z, y), 
each ternary functional constant, three analogous axioms; and so on until 
of this kind have been introduced for all the functional constants. 
compare the method of proof of *340.) 
48.S. By using an idea similar to that of the preceding exercise, but 
to functional variables rather than functional constants, show how, 
any wff A of FIp, to find a corresponding wff A' of Flp which is valid if 
and only if A is valid and which is a theorem of Flp if and only if A is a thea-
of F/P. Hence extend the G6del completeness theorem, **440, to the pure 
~um;uuui:U calculus of first order with equality. 
48.6. Use the same method to prove the following extension of **450 
the pure functional calculus of first order with equality: if a wff of FIp is 
in every non-empty finite domain and is also valid in an enumerably 
domain, then it is valid in every non-empty domain . 
. . 48.7. Find and prove similar extensions of **453 and **455 to the pure 
calculus of first order with equality. 
Prove the consistency of FI by making use of the afp of a wff as in 
I· 
! 

284 PURE FUNCTIONAL CALCULUS OF FIRST ORDER 
.8.9. Extend the metatheorem **323 to Fl. 
48.10. Extend the metatheorem **325 to Fl . 
• 8.1I. Extend the principles of duality *372-*374 to Fl. 
are to be rcy.Titten by means of DI8 and DIg in such a way that the symbol 
I no longer appears explicitly. Then in dualizing. the notations == and '" 
are to be interchanged, rtS well as :::> and ¢' disjunction and conjunction, 
== and $, c and :p, Y and I, 'V and 3.) 
.8.12, By using the reduction found in 48.5, solve the decision problem· 
for the case of wits of F1p which have a prenex normal form such that, in the 
prefix, no existential quantifier precedes any universal quantifier. (Notice 
that this includes, in p~irticular, the case of quantifier-free formulas of FIP.) 
48,13. Solve the decision problem for quantifier-free formulas of FIp 
directly, by a method as c:osely similar as possible to the truth-table decision 
procedure by which it is determined whether a quantifier-free formula of 
FIp is tautologous. Hence restate the solution of the decision problem for the 
special case of 48.12, in a form as similar as possible to that of *460-**463. 
48.14. Solve the decision problem for the singulary functional calculus of 
first order with equality, i.e., for the class of wffs of F1p in which all the 
functional variables occurring are singulary. 
Su.ggestion: Following I:~ehmann, we may add the following reduction 
steps to the reduction steps (a)-(g) of exercise 39.6: (oc) to replace a wf part 
(a) [a = bJ by (a) (e) [a = el, if a and b are distinct individual variables and 
e is the first individual variable in alphabetic order other than a and b; 
(fJ) to replace a wf part (a)[a =!= bJ by (aHa =!= aj, if a and b are distinct· 
individual variables; (y) to replace a wf part (aHa =!= bI :::> • a =!= hz::;) •... 
a =!= bll :::> a = b: by the conjunction A,,[b1 = b 2 :::> An-I] [bl = b 3 :::> An-I] 
... [b" = b:::> A"_lJ [hI = b 2 :::> • b I = ba :::> An_zJ Lb1 = b 2 :::> • b l = b, :::> 
A n _ 2] ,.. [b"_2 = b:::> , bn _ l = b,,:::> A n _ 2] [b"_l = b,,:::> • b n - 1 = b:::> ' 
An- 2 ] •.•... [bI = b 2 ::::> • bl = ba :=;) •••• bI = b :::> AoJ, if a, b l , b~ •... , 
b n • b are distinct individual variables. c1• ca, •.. , en. c are the first n + 1 
individual variables in alphabetic order distinct from each other and from 
a, b}l b2, ..• , b n , b. and Ai is 
(a)(c1)(c2) ... (c;l (C) • a =l= c1 ::::> • a =!= c2 :::> •... a =l= ci :::> • c1 =l= c2 :::> • 
c1 *' c3 :::> •... c1 =1= C, :::> • c1 =!= c :::> • c2 =l= c3 :::> • . .. . .. Ci 
=!= c:::> a = c 
(i = 0, 1,2, .. '. n); (a) to replace a wi part (aHa = a:::> kl by (a)A; 
(e) to replace a wf part (a)[a = b :::> A] by 
S:AI, 

EXERCISES 48 
285 
if a and b are cli~(inct individual variables and A is quantifier-free; (;) to 
replace a wf part (aHa + a::::> A] by (aHa = a]; (tj) to replace a \\-1 part 
(a) [a + b I ::::> • a + ba ::::> •... a =l= b,,::::> A] by the conjunction An[Bl 
~ A"-IJ [B2 ::::> A"-IJ .•. [Bn::::> A"_I: [b1 = b 2 ::::> A n - 1J [bi = ba::::> A n - 1J ... 
[bn-l = bn ::::> An-I] [BI ::::> • Ba::::> An-aJ [B1::::>. Ba::::> An-aJ . .. [Bn- 1 ::::>. B" 
~ 
An_2~ ~bl = b 2 ::::> • Bs::::> A"-2J [b1 = ba::::> • B4::::> A"-2J ... [bn - l = b,,::::> • 
B .. _2 ::::> A"_2] [bi = b2 ::::> • bl = ba::::> An_a: [bI = b 2 ::::> • bi = b4 ::::> A"-2J ... 
[bn-s = b" ::::> • b n - 2 = b n __ 1 => A"-2J [bn _ 2 = b n - 1 ::::> • b n - 2 = bn ::::> A n _ 2: ..• 
. . [B1 ::::> • B2 ::::> •.. - Bn ::::> ~:, if a, bl , bz, ... , b" are distinct individual 
,UHum." and c1 • cz, _ . _, cn are the first n individual variables in alphabetic 
distinct from each other and from a, bI , b 2, .•. , b", and if, further, 
A is quantifier-free and contains no individual variables except a. and B, 
and C, are respectively 
and S; AI 
i 
and Ai is 
(a)(cI)(cZ) ... (ci ) • a =l= c1 ::::> • a =l= c2::::> •.. , a =l= ci ::::> • 
c1 =l= Cz ::::> • c1 =l= Ca::::> •... Ci-l =l= c,::::> • -C1 ::::> • -Ca ::::> •... -C i ::::> A 
(i = 0, 1, 2, ... , n) (thus in particular Ao is (a)A). 
48. I 5. Solve the decision problem for wffs A of F1p such that in each 
elementary part not containing I at most one variable has occurrences at. 
which it is a bound variable of A. 
48.16. (I) Extend the method of 46.8 to solve the decision problem for 
of F1p having a prenex normal form (3b)(c)M in which .M is the 
x and contains no individual variables except band c. And illustrate 
, by applying the solution to the following particular examples: 
(3x)(y). P(x)::::> [F(y) ::::> x = yJ::::> • F(x) = G(y) ::::>. F(y) = G(x) 
(3x)(y) • [F(x) == G(x): V ~F(y) _ G(y) == x = yJ 
48.17. (1) Extend the method of 46. II (2) to solve the decisi(Jn problem 
for wffs of F1p having a prenex normal form (a)(3b) (c)l\I in whlch M is the 
matrix and contains no individual variables except a, b, c. And illustrate 
by applying the solution to the following particular examples: 
(x)(3y)(z) • F(x, x) ::::> • F(x, z)::::> x = y y y = z:=> • 
F(x, z) = F(x, y) _ F(y, y) ::::> • F(y, y) == P(z, z) 
(x)(3y)(z) • F(x) ::::> • G(x) ::::> • F(y) ::::> ~G(y) ::::> x = yJ ::::> • 
x =l= z::::> • G(y) = F(z) ::::> • F(y) = C(z) 

286 FURE FUNCTIONAL CALCULUS OF FJRsTORDER 
(4) 
(x)(3y)(z) • x '* z v y '* z 
48. J8, Apply the decision procedure of 48.14 to (2) the example 48.16 (2), 
alld (3) the example 48.17(:3). 
48.J9. (I) Solve the decision problem for wffs of FIp having a prenex 
normal form (al )(az)(3b)(c)M in which M is the matrix and contains no 
individual variables except aI' a 2• b, c. Illustrate by applying the decision 
procedure to show that the following wffs are theorems of FIp: 
(2) 
(Xl) (x2) (3y)(z) • F(xI' x2);j • F(x!, z) = F(y, y) :::::>. 
x! '* Z V X 2 '* z:::::> [F(x!, z) :::::> F(xl' yr :::::> • 
F(xl' y) V F(x}, z) :::::> F(x2' x2 ) 
(:~) 
(X1 )(X2 ) (3y)(z) • F(Xll;j • F(x2):::::> • G(xI ):::::> • G(x2):::::>. 
Xl '* Y:::::> ~F(z):::::> G(z)] :::::> • H(Xl):::::> H(X2);j [G(y):::::> F(y)]:::::>. 
G(y) == F(z) :::::> • F(y) = 
G(z) 
48.20. Apply the decision procedure of 48.15 to the example 48.19(2). 
48.21. (I) State and 501ve a special case of the decision problem of F1p 
which is analogous to case V' of the decision problem of fIll. (Cf. 46.15.) 
(2) Illustrate by applying the solution to the following particular example: 
(3x) (3y)(z) • -F(x, x) v F(x, z) v F(y, z) 
v [x = z = . F(x, x) = F(t, z)] v.'y = z == . F(y, y) = 
F(z, z) 
48.2z. Prove the following metatheorem: Let r be a (finite or infinite) 
class of wffs of FIP. Let the complete list of free individual variables occur· 
ring in wffs of r be av a 2, a 3 , ' ••. Let the complete list of propositional 
vanables occurring be PI' P2' P3' ... , and let the complete list of functional' 
variables occurring be fl' f2' (3' ... (of course any or all of these lists may be 
infinite), and suppose tha.t f, is an hcary functional variable (~ = 1,2,3, ... ) 
Suppose further that r is simultaneously satisfied in the domain of positive 
integers by the system of values VI' V 2, V 3 , ... , Tl • T 2, Ta, ... , tPl ' tP2, tP3, ••• 
of the variables aI' az, a3, .. " PI' P2 Pa, ... , fl' f2' fa .. '" Then in the 
domain of rational integers (i.e., positive integers, negative integers, and 0) 
there exist propositional functions 'PI' 'P2, lJ'3' ... , such that 'Pj is an hcary, 
propositional function of rational integers (i = 1, 2,3, ... ), and for arbi· 
trary positive integers uI ' u2 • ... UAI the truth-value lfIi(u j , li 2, •.. , Uh,) is 
the same as tPi(Ul , u2 , .• "ti".), and r is simultaneollsly satisfied in the 
domain of rational illtegr·rs by the system of values VI' Vi' "3' ... , TI , T2, Ta, , 

§48] 
EXERCISES 48 
287 
... , 'PI> 'P2 , 'P3 , ••• of the variables a l. az, a3, ... , PI' Pz, P3' ... , fl' f2' f3, 
461 
Suggestion: We may suppose without loss of generality that the individual 
variables aI' az, a3, ... , jf any, are the particular variables ZI' Z2' Z3' .... 
Adjoin to r all of the wffs Xj =F x, fur which the subscripts i and Ie are 
distinct positive integers, also all of the wffs 
for which r/);(ul , u 2, ... , Uk) is truth, and also all of the wffs 
for which r/);(u1, u2' ... , Uh,) is falsehood. Let the class of wffs so obtained 
. be T'; and let rn be obtained from !" by adjoining further all of the wffs 
til =F X k for which the subscripts i and k are arbi trary positive integers, and 
all of the wffs Yi ::P y" for which the subscripts i and k are distinct positive 
integers. Show that T' is consistent, hence that every finite subclass of rtf 
is consistent. Hence use the result of exercise 48.7 to show thaJ Tn i~ 
simultaneously satisfiable in an enumerably infinite domain 0'. The individ-
uals of the domain ~ which ,;ervc as values of Xl' xz, X:1, ... may be idcn ti-
fied with the positivc integers t,:2, :1, ... respectiVely. Besides these S 
necessarily includes infinitely many other indlviduals, which may then be 
identified in some arbitrary way with the non-positive integers 0, -1, -2, .. 
48.~3. As acorollaryoftheforegoing, prove the following metatheorem: 
Let r be a (finite or infinite) class of wffs of F1p, and let one of the functional 
variables occurring in wfts of r be the binary functional variable s. Suppose 
UlThe reference to the particular domains of positive integers and of rational integers 
is evidently non-essential, the substance of the metatheorcm being that an enumerably 
infinite model of r (i.e., an enumerably infinIte domain together with such a system 
of values of the free variables as to satisfy r simultaneously in that domain) is always 
capable of an enumerably infinite extenSion. The result is substantially due to A .. Mal-
cevin a paper in the Recueilll,1alhbnatlque, vol. 43 (n.s. vol. I) (1936), pp. 323--336, and 
the proof which is suggested above cmploys some of 1I1alcl.'v's ideas. Although l\lalcev's 
own proof is defective in regard to the use which he make; t)f the' SkoIcm nurmal form 
for satisfiability, It appears that the defcct IS not diffICult to renlL'(ly--by ~UPplYlllg dn 
appropriate discussion ot the relationship bctw"'~Jl a model of r and a model of tIll.' 
class Is obtained from r by first making a suitably chosen alphabetic change of func-
tional vanables and then reducing every wff to Skolem llurmal form for satlsfiabillty III 
such a way that the new functional variables Introduced are all distinct from each 
other and from functional variables previously present. However, it seems to be pref-
erable to avoid use of the Skolem normal form for satisfiability by substituting a proof 
like that suggested above. 
It should be added that Malcev proves only that every infinite model of r has an 
extension (which might be a finite extension). But his methods can be made to yield the 
stronger result that there is an enumerably infinite extension. 
On the other hand, Malcev deals with non-enumerably infinite models as well as 
enumerably infinite models, a matter into which we do not enter here. 
j. 
:' 
.. i: 
I 

288 PURE FUNCTlONA.LCA.LCULUSOF FIRSTORDER [CHAP.IV 
that r is simultaneously satisfiable in the domain of positive integers in 
such a way that the value of s is the successor relation, Le., the relation (J 
such that a(u, v) is truth if and only if u + 1 = v. Then r is also simultane~ 
ously satisfiable in an enumerably infinite domain 3, with (jj as the value of 
s, in such a way that there is no one~to-one transformation of 3 into the 
positive integers under which the relation (jj is transformed into the re-
lation 0'.462 
48.~4. Prove that, if a class of wfts of F1p is simultaneously satisfiable in 
some non-empty finite domain of individuals but is not simultaneously 
satisfiable in an enumerably infinite domain, then there is a greatest finite 
domain in which it is simultaneously satisfiable. 
49. Historical notes. The chief features which distinguish the functional 
calculi of first order (and of higher orders) from the propositional calculus. 
namely, the notion of propositional function and the use of quantifiers, 
originated with Frege in his Begriffsschrift of 1879. 
Somewhat later, and independently, quantifiers were introduced by C. S. 
Peirce,m who credits the idea to O. H. Mitchell. Still later, quantifiers 
appear in the work of Schroder, Peano, Russell, and others. The terms 
"quantifier" and "quantification" are Peirce's. The notation which we have 
been using for quantifiers is Russell's modification of the Peano notation. 
The separation of the functional calculi of first order from those of higher 
order is implicit in Russell's theory of types,464 or perhaps even earlier in 
Frege's hierarchy of "Stufen" or Schroder's hierarchy of "reine Mannig-
faltigkeiten." The consideration by L6wenheim,m and afterwards by 
Skolem,466 of "Zahlausdriicke" and .. Zahlgleichungen" in connection with 
the Schroder calculus is in effect a treatment of the functional calculus of 
first order with equality. The singulary functional calculi of first and second 
order, with and without equality, were also treated by Behmann.467 But the 
first explicit formulation of the functional calculus of first order as an in-
"'From this there follows quickly the result of Skolem according to which no cate-
gorical system of postulates for the positive integers (whether the number of postulates 
is finite of infinite) can be expressed in the notation of a simple applied functional 
calculus of first order with equality. See exercise 55.18 and footnote 547. 
u'See American Journal of Mathematics, vol. 7 (1885), p. 194. Peirce's reference is 
probably to a paper by Mitchell in Studies in Logic (1883); but one essential point, the 
use of an operator variable in connection with the quantifier, was contributed by 
Peirce himself as a modification of Mitchell's notation. 
u'Bertrand Russell, "Mathematical Logic as Based on the Theory of Types." pub-
lished in the American Journal 0/ Mathematics, vol. 30 (1908), pp. 222-262. 
mIn the Malhematische Annalen, vol. 76 (1915). pp. 447-470. 
"·In papers published in SII1'1/le,. Utgit au Vidensllapsselskapet i Krisliania, 1. Mate. 
matisk·naturvidenskabelig Klasse. volumes for 1919 and 1920. 
mIn the Mathematische A.;nalen, vol. 86 (1922), pp. 163-229. 

HISTORICAl" VOTF.\ 
dependent logistic system is perhaps in the first edition of Hilbert and 
Ackermann's Grundziige der Theoretischen Logik (1928). 
For the functional calculus of first order and the functional calculus of 
second order (see Chapter V) Hilbert and Ackermann in their first edition 
the names "engerer Funktionenkalkiil" and "erweiterter Funk-
',.'~'Uo;;J""'<LL"-"U" respectively. In their second edi bon (1938) I partly following 
and Bernays, they change these names to "engerer Priidikatenkal-
, kill" and "Pradikatenkalkiil der zweiten Stufe." This change is based on a 
usage of the word "Pradikat" (predicate)458 which appears already in the 
first edition of Hilbert and Ackermann, but which we wish to avoid. In 
this book we have taken the term "functional calculus" from Hilbert and 
Ackermann's first edition, but have borrowed the numbering of orders 
from their second edition (where they use "Pradikatenkalktil der ersten 
Stufe" as synonymous with "engerer Pradikatenkalktil"). 
The axioms and rules of inference for the system Fl are essentially those 
of Russell in his paper of 1908,454 with some modifications, and with Russell's 
axioms for the propositional calculus [('placed by those of Lukasiewicz. 
Russell, however, does not make it unmistakably clear whether he is stating 
single axioms or axiom schemata. It is pussible to resolve this ambiguity in 
favor of axiom schemata, as in Fl. Later statements by Russell seem to 
favor on the whole the interpretation as single axioms, but then his rules of 
inference must be augmented by adding rules of substitution, as in F~p. 
Especially difficult is the matter of a correct statement of the rule of 
substitution for functional variables. An inadequate statement of this rule 
for the pure functional calculus of first order appears in the first edition of 
Hilbert and Ackermann (1928). There are better statements of the rule in 
, Carnap's Logische Syntax der Sprache and in Quine's A System of Logistic 
(1934), but neither of these is fully correct. In the first volume of Hilbert 
and Bernays's Grundlagen der Alathematih (1934) the error of Hilbert and 
Ackermann is noted,459 and a correct statement of a rule of substitution for 
IIIBy Hilbert and Ackermann, and by Hllbert and Bernays, the name "Pradikat" 
is applied to the same things which we call "propositional functions" and which 
Hilbert and Bernays call also "logische Funktionen" (see their Grund/agen dey A1athe-
malik, voL 1 (1934), pp. 7, 126, 190). We prefer here the usage of Carnap (Logische 
, 
deY Spmche, 1934), who applies the name "Pradikat" to what is called by Hilbert 
and Bernays "Pradikatensymbol." Indeed Ca.rnap's usage is nearer to the familiar use 
of "predicate" as a grammatical term in connection with the natural languages, and 
therefore seems to run less risk of leading in practice to confusion of usc and mentIOn 
(ct. §08). 
"·A revised sta.tement of the rule is given abu In the secund edition of Hilbert and 
,Ackermann's book (1938. see pp. 56-57), but this is sbll open to some objection. In 
the third edition the rule is correctly stated (1949, see pp, 60-61), 
l' 
h 
I

290 PURE FUNCTIONAL CALCULUS OF FIRST ORDER 
functional variables is given for the first time. However, Hilbert and Ber-
nays's form of the rule could not be used in this book, because its correctness 
depends on a special feature of their formation rule corresponding to our 
30v, according to which (Va)B is not wf if B contains a as a bound vari-
able. 460 And our form of the rule is to be thought of rather as compiled by 
combining the versions of Carnap and of Quine.'ill 
In §32 the proof of consistency of Fl which depends on **320 is taken from 
the first edition of Hilbert and Ackermann (1928). It is given in a form to 
make its character unmistakable as being purely syntactical (rather than 
semantical). But it may also be described as depending on the remark, that 
the axioms are valid in a domain consisting of a single individual and the 
rules of inference preserve this property. And in this form it becomes ob-
vious how the method may be extended to prove the consistency of the 
functional calculi of higher order, in particular of the functional calculus of 
order w. This is Herbrand's proof462 of the consistency of the functional cal-
UOThis contravenes the idea, which is implicit in the account given in §02, and which 
would seem to the writer natural on its own account, that a constant, as distinct from a. 
form, may be used with the same meaning in any context (without regard to variables 
appearing). And, more serious, it imposes in connection with the use of abbreviative 
definition the practically intolerable burden of remembering for every definiendum the 
particular bound variables that occur in the definiens. However, this latter difficulty 
does not arise for Hilbert and Bernays, because, as already noticed, they do not make 
lise of abbreviative definition. 
"lIn the case of logistic systems which involve operators other than quantifiers, 
such as the abstraction operator). or the description operator' (see §06), correct state-
ment of the rule of substitution for functional variables becomes still more troublesome 
and lengthy. Foran exampleofastatementof the rule insuchacase, reference may be made 
to GOdel's On Undecidable Propositions of Formal Mathematical Systems (mimeographed 
lecture notes of 1934). where the full statement was included at the suggestion of S. C. 
Kleene; also to a reproduction of this statement, with modifications to adapt it to another 
system, in the present writer's review of the above·mentioned book of Quine in the 
Bulktin 0/ the American Mathematical Society, voL 41 (1936), pp. 698-603. (The state-
ment in the COdel notes is, however, not quite correct, but requires to be amended by 
adding to 4b on page 10 the additional condition that no bound variable of G{x) is free 
in A) 
In the case of systems having the abstraction operator)., it is possible to replace the 
rule of substitution for functional variables by a number of simpler primitive rules 
which may be thought of as constituting an analysis of It. as we shall see in Chapter X. 
Because of the complrcations which attend the rule of substitution for functional varia-
bles, even in the comparatively simple case of the functional calculus of first order, there 
therefore seems to be some ground for preferring systems (like that of Chapter X) 
which have the operator ).. However, the functional calculi, not having this operator, 
have been more extensively studied; and they do have an argument of economy in their 
favor, in view of Russell's dIscovery that description and abstraction operators can for 
many purposes be dispensed with. 
"'In his dissertation. cited in footnote 442-\Varsaw 1930, see p. 61 and pp, 67-60. 
Independently of Herbrand, and of one allother, this consistency proof was later found 
also by Tarski. then by Gentzen, and by E. W. Beth. Th,~ remark is added by Beth 
(Nieuw Archie! voor Wisku»de, ser. 2 vol. 19 nos 1-2 (1936). pp. 59-62) that the same 
method can be used to prove consistency of the predicative and ramified functional 

HISTORICAL NOTES 
291 
culi of first and higher orders; it remains applicable if axioms of choice or 
multiplicative axioms are added (as Herbrand remarks) and if axioms of 
ality are also added, but not of course upon addition of any sort 
axiom of infinity.m 
The remark is made in the first edition of Hilbert and Ackermann that 
the functional calculus of first order (in a formulation which is somewhat 
different from Fl or F~P, but easily seen to be equivalent) is not complete 
with respect to the transformation of A into -A, and the question of 
completeness in the weaker sense of **440 is put as an unsolved problem. 
The first proof of completeness in the latter sense is that of Godel,464 which is 
·:reproduced in §44. Another proof of completeness of the functional calculus of 
first order is due to Leon Henkin48!; and is reproduced in §45 (see further §54). 
Independence of axioms for the pure functional calculus of first order was 
first treated by G6del,466 and for a formulation which is nearer to that of 
Russell454 than our F1p or F~p. Indeed Godel adds also the axioms x = x 
and x = y:::::> • F(x) :::::> F (y), and establishes the independence of the axioms 
the resulting formulation of the pure functional calculus of first order 
: with equality. He does not prove the independente of the rules of inference, 
"but makes only the statement that this can easily be done. 
For the Hilbert-Ackermann formulation of the pure functional cal-
culus of first order, independence of both the axioms and the rules of in-
ference was treated by :\'1cKinsey.467 However, McKinsey understands the 
independence of a rule of inference in a weaker sense than that which we have 
adopted, and his proofs are not in all cases sufficient to show the independ-
ence of Hilbert and Ackermann's rules in the strong sense.468 The second 
edition of Hilbert and Ackermann (1938) contains a demonstration of the 
calculi-to which axioms of reducibility may be added. if desired. as well as axioms of 
choice and of extensionality. but not of course any axiom of infinity. 
,uThe terminology will be explained in Chapters V and VI. 
mMonatshe/te JUI' Mathematik und Physik, vol. 37 (1930), pp. 349-360. The essential 
points of a completeness proof by a method similar to that of Giidel are also in Her-
. brand's dissertation of 193O-compare exercises 46.23, 46.24. The germ of the method 
used by Herbrand and by G6del is to be found already in Skolem's paper of 1928 
(cited in footnote 430). 
'''In his dissertation (Princeton University, 1947) and in a paper in The Journal 0/ 
Symbolic Logic. vol 14 (1949). pp. 159-166. 
mIn the paper cited in footnote 464. Compare exercise 41.1. 
617American Journal 0/ Mathematics. voL 58 (1936), pp. 336-344. 
""As indicated in the discussion in §41 of the rules -404 .. (n > 1). the weaker sense of 
independence is not without its importance. But it seems desirable to prove independ-
ence in the strong sense when possible. (The question of the separate independence of 
the different rules *404 .. does not arise for McKinsey or for Hilbert and Ackermann 
: because they take all of these rules together as a single rule. or, in the case of Hilbert 
and Ackermann, all of them but *404 •. ) 
i 
I 
'j 
, 
',. 
It 'l 

292 PURE FUNCTIONAL CALCULUS OF FIRST ORDER 
~CHAP. IV· 
independence of their axioms and rules, credited to Bernays, in which this 
defect is overcome. 
The results of §34 are found in the first edition of Hilbert and Ackermann 
(Hi28) in a form which differs only in detail from ours. And see also the 
discussion of "truth-functions" and "formal equivalence" in the introduc-
tion to the first volume of l'rincipia Mathematica (1910). 
Use of the prenex normal form was introduced by C. S. Peirce, although in 
a different terminology and notation.469 Peirce uses the term "Boolian" for 
what we here, following Principia M atkematica, call the matrix, and speaks 
of the prefix as "Quantifier" or "quantifiers." The process of reduction 
to prenex normal form which is explained in §39 is to be found in substance· 
in the first volume of Principia Mathcmatica,470 though it is there somewhat 
obscured by the peculiar doctrine that (in effect) only formubs in prenex 
normal form are to be considered wf, other formulas which we would treat 
as wf being construed, by abbreviative definition, simply as standing for 
their prenex normal forms. And from this source the reduction process 
appears in Behmann's paper of 1922, already referred to, and again in a 
paper of C. H. Langford,471 
Origin of the functional calculus of first order with equality is difficult to . 
fix. In a sense, it is implicit already in the work of Peirce and Schroder. 
Especially good is the treatment of this subject in the first volume of Hilbert 
and Bernays, which contains much that we have not here touched upon. 
From this source we have taken, in particular, the results which are indi-
cated in exercises 48.0, 48.4. The idea of the reduction indicated in exercise 
48.5 is due to Kalmar472 and G6del,473 and the result of the exercise is due to 
Gbdel. 473 The simple calculus of equality has been treated in detail by 
Heinrich Scholz. m 
Developments of the last three or four decades in regard to questions of 
validity and satisfiability, the derision problem, and related matters may 
U9See a paper in The Monist, vol. 7 (1897). pp. 161-217; also his paper, already· 
referred to, in the American Journal 0/ Mathematics, vol. 7 (1885), pp. 180-202; and 
an otherwise unpublished addendum to the latter which appears in his Collect~d Pap~", 
voL 3 (1933), pp. 239-249. 
mOf course it is not important in this connection that in Principia disjunction and 
negation are used as primitive connectives rather than our implication and negation, 
as the process of reduction to prenex normal form appropriate to one system of primi-
tive IOIltonce connllCltivel is very easily modified to lit another. And in f&CIt the Intro. 
duction to the ,econd edition of Principia Indicates thll modification to bll ma.dll tor 
the case of Sheffer's stroke as sole primitive sentence connective, 
mIn the Bull~lin 0/ Ihe American Mathematical Society, vol 32 (1926), see p. 701. 
"'Acta Scienlarum MathsftUJticarum, vo!' 4 no. 4 (1929). pp. 248-252. 
''"In the paper cited in footnote 464. 
CHIn his AfetaPhysik als Sirenge Wissenschu/t, 1941. 

HISTORICAL ,VOTES 
perhaps be dated from Lowenheim's paper of 1915,475 This contains the 
following results regarding the functional calculus of first order with equal-
ity: a solution of the decision problem for validity in the case that only 
singulary functional variables appear; a reduction of the general case of the 
decision problem for validity to that in which only binary functIOnal van-
. abIes appear; recognition of the existence of wifs that are valid in every 
domain but not valid in an infinite domain, and a demonstration 
no wff containing only singulary functional variables can have this 
.",.,,,n,prt,,; finally, a proof of the metatheorem now known as Lowenheim's 
th.>nrMl'l, i.e., **450 and the extension of **450 which is stated in exercise 
After the pioneering work of Lowenheim there followed the contributions 
of Skolem in his papers of 1919 and H)20,476 The first paper contains, in 
, a solution of the decision problem for validity for the singulaly func-
calculus of second order, including at the same time an improved form 
the solution for the singuJary functional calculus of first order with equal-
In the paper of 1920 the Skolem normal form for satisfiability is intro-
and is used to obtain a simpler proof of Lowenheim's theorem. The 
of view of satisfiability is adopted in this paper rather than that of 
ty (as by Lowenheim), and Lowenheim's theorem is therefore restated 
the form of **451 and the extension of **451 to Fl. Also Skolem's gen-
eralization of Lowenheim's theorem, **455, is here proved for the first time. 
Behmann's paper77 of 1922 contains the result of exercise 39.6, and solu-
tions of the decision problem for validity for the singulary functioml cal-
culus of first order, the singulary fUllctional calculus of first order with 
equality, and the singulary functional ca.lculus of second ordcr. For tht, 
singulary functional calculus of first order Behmann's method. with somt' 
modifications due to Quine,478 is reproduced in §46 above. And for the sin-
functional calculus of first order with equality Behmann's method is 
in exercise 48,14, The latter method is similar to that of Skolem in 
important respects, but seems to have been found independently by 
The reduction of a wff A of the singulary functional calculus of first order 
to the form B which is described in exercise 46,1 (1) is due in substance to 
meited in footnote 41Hl. 
"'Cited in footnote 456. 
4"Cited in footnote 457. 
mSee Quine's paper in The Jou~nal of Symbolic Logic, vol. 10 (1945). pp, 1-12, Com-
also the modified form of Behmann's method which is given by Hilbert and Ber-
Grundlagen dey Mathematik, vol. 1 (l!l34), pr. 193-195. 
·,1 
i, 
I 
, 
;, ·;1· 
I"~ 
i 
! ". 
r: 
! 
~ 
,.j 
, 
! 
, 
i 
" 
4"1 

294 
PURE FUNCTIONAL CALCULUS OF FIRST ORDER [CHAP. IV 
Herbrand.47B and the resulting form of the solution of the decision problem 
of the singulary functional calculus of first order which is given in 46.1(2) 
is due to Quine.'sO 
The first treatment of cases of the decision problem in which functional 
variables other than singulary may appear is in a paper by Paul Bern 
and Moses Schonfinkel in 1928.481 This paper contains a solution of case I 
of the decision problem of the functional calculus of first order which (ex-. 
cept that only the decision problem for validity is treated) is substantially 
the same as that given in §46 above. Also a solution of case VI~ of the de-
cision problem for validity. and the solution of case III (singulary functional 
calculus of first order) which is reproduced above in **466 and its proof. . 
The subsequent history of work on the decision problem has already been 
given in some detail in §§46 and 47, including exercises and footnotes to these· 
sections. It remains only to mention the paper of F. P. Ramsey482 dealing 
with the special case of the decision problem of the pure functional calculus 
of first order with equality for which a solution is indicated in exercises 
48.12, 48.13. (The method of these two exercises is, however, much simpler. 
than that of Ramsey.) 
In a paper of 1929,483 Skolem gives a new proof of his generalization of· 
LDwenheim's theorem in which the result is freed of dependence on the axiom 
of choice,m and at the same time use of the Skolem normal form is avoided. 
The metatheorem **453 is due to Godel,486 as well as the extension of 
**453 to the pure functional calculus of first order with equality (48.7). 
The proof of "453 which is given in §45 is due to Henkin, as wel! as the proof 
of Skolem's generalization of Liiwenheim's theorem (**455) which is based 
on this,48G and the remark of exercise 45.4. 
mIn his dissertation, cited in footnote 442, Chapter 2, §1.I.2. 
uOln his 0 SenUdo da Nova L6gica. Sao Paulo, Brazil, 1944. 
UlMa.themalische Annalen, vol. 99 (1928). pp. 342-372. 
m,pyoceedings oj the London Mathematical Societ)', ser. 2 vol. 30 (1930), pp. 264-286. 
Reprinted in Ramsey's The FOItndaiions 0/ Mathematics and Other Logical Essays, 
pp. 82-111. 
uaSkYi/ter uigitl all det Norske Videnskaps-A kademi i Oslo, I. Matematisk-naturviden· 
skapelig Klasse. volume for 1929. 
Ul1.e., the axiom of choice is not used 1il the syntax language. (See the discussion of 
the axiom of choice in Chapter VI.) 
mIn the paper cited m iootnote464. 
'''In his dissertation. and in the paper cited in footnote 465. 

V. Functional Calculi of Second Order 
The lunctional calculus 01 second order or, as we shall also say (in order 
to distinguish from the ramifi('C\ fUllctional calculi of second order which 
are described in § 58 below). the simple Junctional calculus 0/ second order 
has, in addition to notations of the functIOnal calculus of first order, 
quantifiers with propositional or functional variables as operator variables. 
As in the case of the functional calculus of first order, there are various 
different systems, (simple) functional calculi of second order, which we 
treat simultaneously. 
The particular formulation selected for 
t in this chapter we call F~ (the subscript referring to the par-
ticular formulation of the propositional calculus which is contained). 
Or, where necessary to distinguish the different functional calculi of second 
. order, F;P is the formulation of the pure functional calculus of second order 
treated in this chapter, F~' 1 the singulary functional calculus of second order, 
. 
Z the binary functional calculus of second order, and so on. 
50. The primitive basis of F~. The primitive symbols of F~ are idcntical 
those of f1 or F~ (see §30). The pure functional calCtilus 0/ second order 
F:P includes among its primitive symbols all the individual, propositional, 
functional variables, but no (individual or functional) constants. The 
functional calculus of second order F;'" includes all the illdividual and 
'nrnnn",f,'onal variables, all the functional variables which are no more than 
and no constants. An applied functional calculus 01 second order in-
at least one constant, as well as all the individual variables and at 
one kind of functional variables. 
In order that the system be considered a functional calculus of second 
at all, of course functional variables of one kind at least should be 
.LU'-'UL'CU among the primitive symbols. \Ve shall confine our treatment to 
case that both propositional variables and singulary functional variables 
(at least) are present, and in particular we use variables of both these kinds in 
the axioms. This is, however, not an essential poi,)t, alld modification of the 
treatment to fit other cases may be left to the reader. 
The formation rules of F~ are the same as those of P, with removal of the 
restriction to individual variables in the fifth rule: 

296 
FUNCTIONAL CALCULI OF SECOND ORDER 
[CHAP. V 
50i. 
A propositional variable standing alone is a wff. 
50ii. 
If f is an n-ary functional variable or an n-ary functional constant, 
and if aI' ai' ... , an are individual variables or individual constants 
or both (not necessarily all different), then f(a" aa, ... , an) is a wfi. . 
50iii. If r is wf, then -r is wf. 
50i\,. If rand II are wi, then [r::;, ll] is wf. 
50v. 
If r is wf and a is any variable, then (\ta)r is wI. 
As in the case of fl, ~l!l effective test of well-formedness follows, as well 
as uniqueness of the analysis of a wff into one of the forms -A, [A::::> B]. 
(\ta)A, and analogues of the metatheorems **313-**316. The terms 
antecedmt, consequent, principal implication sign, converse, elementary 
arc introduced with the same meaning as for Fl. 
The distinction between bound variables and tree variables is made in the 
same way as in §30. But in the functional calculus of second order, not only 
individual variables but also propositional and functional variables may have 
bound occurrences. 
A wff will be called an n-ary form if it has exactly n different free variables, 
and it will be called a constaltt, or a closed wff, if it has no free variables .. 
As in P, all forms are propositional/arms, and all closed wffs are sentences .. 
The same methotls of abbreviating wffs ate used as for P, including the 
same cOllventions for omission of brackets, and the definition schemata 
D3-17. In D13-17 it is to be understood that the variables a, aI' a2, ... , a" 
may be of any kinds, propositional or functional as well as individual. 
Additional definitions and definition schemata may be introduced from 
time to time as required. And in particular we introduce at once the two 
following definitions: 
D20. f -+ (s)s 
D21. 
t -)- (3s)s 
The rules of inference, axiom schemata, and axioms of F: are the follow-
ing: 
*500. 
*501. 
From A ::;, B and A to infer B. 
From A, if a is any variable, to infer 
(Rule 0/ modus ponens.) 
(a)A. 
(Rule 01 general£zation.) 
*502. 
From A, if a is an indivIdual variable which is not free ill Nand b is 
an individual variable which does not occur in N, if B results from 
A by substituting S;N: for a particular occurrence of N in A, to in-
fer B. 
(Rztle of alphabeHc change 0/ MJUnd individual variable.) 

PROPOSITIONAL CALCULUS AND QUANTIFIERS 
207 
.503. 
From A, if a is an individual variable, if b is an individual variable 
or an individual constant, if no free occurrence of a in A is in a wf 
part of A of the form (b)C, to infer $~AI.500 
(Rule oj substitution lor individual variables.) 
p=>.q=>p 
s => rp => qJ => • s => p => • s => q 
-p=>-q=> .q"=>p 
p =>", F(x) => • p ::::> (x)F(x) 
A "=>p B=>. A"=> (p)B, where p is any propositional variable 
which is not a free variable of A. 
A=>, B=>. A:J (f)B, where f is an n-ary functional variable which 
is not a free variable of A. 
(x)F(x) => F(y) 
(p)A => S&AI, where p is any propositional variable.6oo 
(f)A => S~ltl,lt., ... ,ltn) Ai, where f is an n-ary functional variable 
and Xl' X 2, . , ., Xn are distinct individual variables.6oo 
As in the case of F'P (or F!P), the principal interpretation of F!P depends on a 
domain of individuals, which must be non-empty. Once the domain of individ-
uals is chosen, the prinCipal interpretation is given by the same semantical 
rules a-f as in §30, with the single change that in rule f the restriction is removed 
. that the variable a must be an individual variable. I.e., rule f is replaced by the 
following: 
fl. 
Let a be any variable and let A be any wff. For a given system of values 
of the free variables of (Ya)A, the value of (YalA is t if the value of A is t for 
every value of a; and the value of (YalA is f if the value of A is f for at least one 
value of a. 
51. 
Propositional calculus and laws of quantifiers. Deduction 
theorem. By *509 (with "'501 and "'500) the rule of substitution for prop-
ositional and functional variables follows as a denved rule of F~: 
If p is a propositional variable, if f- A, then 
f-S~AI. 
If f is an n-ary functional variable and Xl' X 2, ... , Xn are distinct 
individual variables, if f- A, then 
S~lt"ltl, ... ,ltn) AI. 
Now by "'502, "'503, and "'510 we may obtain from t505-t508, t,,)OO all 
of the axiom sch~mata ("'302-"'306) of FI as theorem schemata of F~. Since 
lOO'fhe syntactical notations "$" and "~" have the meanings which are explained in 
1130, 35. 

298 
FUNCTIONAL CALCULI OF SECOND ORDER [CHAP. V 
the two rules of inference (i.e., *300 and *301) of Fl are included in *000 
and *501, it follows that every theorem of Fl is a theorem of F:, with the un-
derstanding that we take calculi Fl and F: that have the same list of primi-
tive symbols. Analogously to the use of the term in §31 let us understand by 
a substitution instance of a wff A of Fl any wff B of the logistic system under 
consideration (in this chapter, the system F:) such that B is obtained from· 
A by a finite succession of the substitution steps of *503, *5100 , and *510". 
Then follows: 
*011. 
Every substitution instance of a theorem of Fl is a theorem of FI • 
The role of *511 as a derived rule of F: is similar to that of *311 as a 
derived rule of Fl. In using *511 in this way, we may refer to it by the 
phrase "by Fl," or "by P" (in case propositional calculus only is involved); 
or we may simply refer to one of the theorem schemata of Fl by number, 
treating it as a theorem schema of F:. 
It is also possible to establish, as theorem schemata of F~, analogues of 
the theorem schemata of §33 in which a and b are allowed to be variables of 
arbitrary kind, instead of merely individual variables. (In the analogues 
of *330 and *339, but not in that of *336, a and b must be variables which 
are of the same kind.) The proofs follow closely those given in §33 and are 
left to the reader. 
The following analogue of *340 may also be established as a the:ore:m 
schema of F; (the proof follows closely that in §34, using in case 3 
analogue of *334 in place of *334 itself): 
*512. If B results from A by substitution of N for M at zero or more 
places (not necessarily at all occurrences of M in A), and if 
the variables aI' a2, ... , an include at least those free variables 
of M and N which occur also as bound variables of A, 
f- M =a a aN:::>. A = B. 
1 ,." " 
Hence, as in §34, we obtain the rule of substitutivity of equivalence as a 
derived rule: 
*513, If B results from A by substitution of N for M at zero or more places· 
(not necessarily at all occurrences of M in A), if f- M = Nand 
f- A, then f- B. 
The following theorem schema is also a consequence of *512: 
*514. 
f- Sf AI :::> • S~ AI :::> (p )A, where p is a propositional variable which is 
not a bound variable of A. 

PROPOSITIONAL CALCULUS AND QUANTIFIERS 
299 
Proof. By *5090, r (s)-s :::::> - • q :::::> q. 
Hence by P, f- -(S)-5. 
I.e. (d. D21), l- t. 
Also. by *5090 , l- t :::::> p. 
By *512, l- p = 
t:::::> • A = Sf AI. 
And, by *512 .. f- p = 
t:::::> • A = S~ A:. 
Hence (using the four preceding lines) we have by P that 
Hence by *501, l- (p) • Sf AI:::::> • S~ AI :::::> A. 
Then use *5080 and P. 
f- S~ Ai :::::> • S~ Ai :::::> A. 
The rule of alphabetic change of bound propositional and functional vari-
may now be proved in exact analogy to the proof of *350 in §35, by 
the analogue of *339 and using *513 in place of *342: 
If a is a propositional or functional variable which is not free in N, 
and b is a variable of the same kind as a not occurring in N, if B 
results from A by substituting S~N: for a particular occurrence of N 
in A, and if l- A, then l- B. 
The definition of proof from hypotheses for F~ is closely analogous to that 
in §36 for fl. The changes are that the axioms of Fl are replaced by 
of F:, and *300 is replaced by *500, *301 by *501, *350 by *502 and 
5, *351 by *503, and *352 by *510. Then the deduction theorem may be 
in the same way as in §36: 
If AI> A2, ••. , An I- B, then AI> A2, ••. , A n_1 l- An:::::> B, 
Also we may prove an analogne of *362: 
7. If every wff which occurs at least once in the list A1, A g, ' • '. An 
also occurs at least once in the list ell Cz, .. " C~ and if A1, A 2, .• " 
An l- B, then GI , Ci , ' . " Cr I- B. 
By first proving analogues of the theorem schemata *364 and *365, we 
establish the following derived rules facilitating the use of the existen-
quantifier in connection with the deduction theorem: 
If Al • A2 •.•.• An l- B, and a is any variable which does not occur as 
a free variable in A l , A 2 , ' •• , A n _y , B, then Ai, A 2 ..•. , A n _ r , (3a). 
A n- H1A n -r+2' • , An I- B. (r = 1,2, .. " n,) 
If AI> At, ' .. , An I- B, and a is any variable which does not occur as 
a free variable in AI' A 2• , .• , A n _ y, then AI' All' .. '. A n - r , (3a) • 
A n ...... +lAn - r +2 ' , • An l- (3a)B. (r =- 1.2, .. ,.n.) 
! 
li 
\ i 
f 

300 
FUNCTIONAL CALCULI OF SECOND ORDER [CHAP. 
The discussion of duality for F~ follows closely that in §37 and may 
left to the reader. The definition of the dual is word for word the "'''-1,11<'.''-
as well as the statement of the three principles of duality which cOI:re:'p(lind 
to *372" .. "'374 and which may be shown to hold also for F:. 
Finally, analogues of the theorem schemata of §§37-38 may be proved 
which a and b are allowed to be variables of arbitrary kind; and hence 
reduction to prenex normal form (§39) may also be extended to F:, 
It should be noticed that all the derived rules of this section 11l\,;lUllllllC 
"'510 and *515, in contrast with the remark of footnote 340 about 
have been established in such a way as to show that they will continue 
hold for a system obtained from F: by the addition of any further 
52. Equality. 
In §48 we saw how the functional calculus of first order can be augmented 
adding a functional constant I to denote the relation of equality, or 
between individuals, together with appropriate axioms containing I. We 
of course do the same thing in connection with the functional calculus of 
order, so obtaining a functional calculus of second order with equality. But 
is unnecesssary because it is in fact possible to introduce the relation of 
by definition in F;. I.e., it is possible to find a wff of F: which has the indi 
variables a and b as its only free variables and which has the value t or f (in 
principal interpretation of F:l according as a and b do or do not have the 
value; one such wff of F: is the definiens in D22 below, and the notation 
may thus be introduced by the abbreviative definition D22.,ol 
In the functional calculi of fourth and higher orders we are able, by an 
lOlln addition to D3-11 and D14, abbreviation by D20-23 may be allowed in 
expression to be dualized. In this case, f and t are to be interchanged in dualizing. 
also -
and .... 
lOlThis definition is due to Leibniz in the form, "Eadem sunt quorum unum 
5ubstitui alteri salva veritate." See Erdmann's God. Guil. Leibnitii Opera ''''''''''']1"'''' 
vol. 1 (1840), p. 94, and Gerhardt's Die Philosophischen Seh,i/ten von 
Leibniz, v,ol. 7 (1890), pp. 228, 236 (also in English translation in the "PIJenUiX 
Lewis's A Survey 0/ Symbolic Logic). In this form there is a certain confusion of 
mention: things are identical if the name of one can be substituted for tha.t of the 
without loss of truth. Nevertheless the important idea of the definition is to be 
to Leibniz. 
Frege a.dopts Leibniz's definition unchanged in Die Grundlagen de, Arithmetik ( 
In Frege's Gfundgesetze der Arithmetik, vol. I (1893), the confusion of use and 
is corrected, but the principle appears in the form of an axiom rather tha.n a delini'tiOI 
!p(z -11) :::;) !p((F)[F(m):::;) F(1I)]). The first statementofthe principle in the 
definition of identity and without the confusion of use and mention seems to 
by C. S. Peirce in 1885 (American Journal of Malh,matics, vol. 7, see page 1 
Russell's The PrinCiples 0/ Mathematics (1903) the definition appears in 
<Om is identical with 11 if 11 belongs to every class to which m belongs, in other 
if 'z is a u' implies '11 is a u' for all values of u." In Principia Mathematica, vol. 
(1910), we Hnd the notation == introduced by an a.bbreviative definition which 
substantially the same as our D22. 

EQUALITY 
301 
IW"'VI\''"'U", definition, to introduce the relation of equality also between thillgs 
individuals, allowing a and b to be, e.g., propositional or functional 
(of the same type). 
We add now the two following definition schemata, ill which a is an in-
variable or individual constant and b is an individual variable or 
al constant, and then we go on to a number of theorems and derived 
statement of which we make use of the definitions: 
[a 
bJ ~ F(a) ::::> F F(b) 
La =F bJ ~ (3F) • F(a) cj:: F(b) 
Proof. By P, ~ F(x) ::::> F(x). 
Generalize upon F (*501). 
(Reflexive lawai equality.) 
x = y ::::>. y = x 
(Commutative law 0/ equality.) 
Proof. By *509], f- x = y::::> 5;:~~F(x) ::::> F(y)i. 
Hence by modus ponens (*500), x = Y ~ x = x::::> • y = x. 
Hence by t520 and modus ponens, x = y f- y = x. 
Then use the deduction theorem. 
x=y::::>.y=z::::>.x=z 
('Transitive law of equality'.) 
Proof. By t521, x = y f- y = x. 
Hence by *5091, x = Y ~ S;:;:;F(y) ::::> F(xll. 
Then use the deduction theorem. 
x = y = . y = x 
(Complrle commutative law 0/ equality.) 
Proof. By t521, *503, and P. 
x = y ::::> • F(x) == F(y) 
Proof. By *5091 , x = Y f- F(x) ::::> F(y). 
By t521 and *5091, x = y f- F(y) ::::> F(x). 
Then use P and the deduction theorem. 
x'4=y=-.x=y 
Proof. By t523 and 
By P, ~ F(y) ::::> F 
Then use *513. 
P, 
~ -(F) :F(y) ::::> F(x)J = -. x = y. 
= -. F(x) cj:: F(y). 
F(x} ::> • -F(y) ::::> x '4= y 
Proof. By *509], ~ X = y::::> • F(x) ::::> F(y). 
Hence by P, ~ F(x) ::::> • -F(y) ::::> - • x 
y. 
Then use t525 and P. 
'; 
'"'" 
t,. 
". 
! ~ i 
'I 
.J 
I 
"i 
':1 I 
..~I 
:f~ 
.~ 
I 
'J 

302 
FUNCTIONAL CALCULI OF SECOND ORDER [CHAP. 
"'527. If a is an individual variable or an individual constant, if b is 
individual variable or an individual constant, if B results from 
by substitution of b for zero or more free occurrences of a, no one 
which is within a wf part of A of the form (b )C-and not ne,c:es:sarIl1 
at all free occurrences of a in A-then I- a = b::> • A::> B 
Proof, Let x be an individual variable which does not occur in A. 
all tlu; occurrences of a in A at which b is substituted in obtaining B, 
for every such occurrence of a substitute x. And letX be the wif which 
sults from A by this substitution. 
By "'5091 : 
(4F(x) 
f- a = b::> ';::'x 
F(a)::> F(b)l. 
I.e., I- a = b ::> • A ::> B. 
From this of course we have as corollaries, by modus ponens: 
"'528. If a is an individual variable or an individual constant, if b is 
individual variable or an individual constant, if B results from 
by substitution of b for zero or more free occurrences of a, no one 
which is within a wi part of A of the form (b)C-and not 
at all free occurrences of a in A-then a = b I- A::> B. 
*529. If a is an individual variable or an individual constant, if b is 
individual variable or an individual constant, if B results from A 
substi tution of b for zero or more free occurrences of at no one 
which is within a wf part of A of the form (b)C-and not U<::'.<::''''<UUJ 
at all free occurrences of a in A-then a = b, A I- B. 
52 .0 . 
(I) 
(2) 
(3) 
(Rule of substitutivity 0/ equality 
EXERCISES 52 
Prove the following theorems of F~: 
x 
z _. y = z = . x = y 
x 
Y 
F(x) 
• F(x) ==F F(y) 
(3y) • F(y) • x = y 
(4) 
F(x) ::>" x '* y == NF(y) 
(5) F(x1. X2)::>F [F(Yl' Y2)::> F(zv Z2)] = 
[Xl = Zl]lX2 
Z2] V [Yl 

EX E RClSES 52 
30:~ 
52. I. A formulation of the functional calculus of second oreler is to ha Vl: 
same primitive symbols as F~ with the omission 0(-, the notatio11 -A 
introduced by definition in the way suggested in §28. Show how the 
and axioms of F: are (0 be modified, and in an appropriate sense 
, h the equivalence of the resulting system to F;. 
52.2. A formulation of the functional calculus of second order is to have 
same primitive symbols as F~ with omission of - and lIf all prupositional 
bles. Show how notation -A is to be defined and how the rules and 
of F~ are to be modified, and in an appropriate sense establish the 
of the resulting system to Fi. Then generalize this to the case 
not only - and the propositional variables are ornitted but also all 
variables that are less than n<uy, the n-ary functional variables 
ng retained. 
52.3- Extend **434 to Fip • Hence using the result of 4ti..:i, shu" lila t ever\, 
of F;P which is a theorem of F~P is also z\ theorem of F~P 
52.4. Solve the decision problem for the singulary fUllctlOl1<l.1 c,liculus of 
order F 2,l, by adding to the reduction steps (a)-(g) of exercise 39.6 
the reduction steps (a)-(1]) of exercise 48.14, ill the first place analogues 
(a)-(g) in which a is a singulary functional variable instead of an indi vid-
variable, and secondly the following reduction steps 
which P is any 
nrrmn,~1T1f"mal variable, and f is allY singulary functiollZlI vClnable, alld 
aI' az, ... , am, bv bz, ... , b n , Cv c2 .... , Ci are distinct individual vari-
; (A) to replace a wf part (p)E by the conjunction S~EISrEI; (E) to 
a wf part (l)[l(a}):::> • i(a2 ) :::> •• , . flam) :::> -f(a)] by /; (e) to replace 
wf part (i) [-f(al ) :::> .-f(a2):::> •... -f(am ):::> f(a)] by/; (D) to replace a 
part (fH-flaI):::> • -f(a2):::> .... -f(am ):::::> • f(bI ):::::> • f(b2l:::::> •... f(b n ) :::::> 
)J by b j '* aj :::> • b 2 '* al :::> ., , . b l1 '* al :::::>. b l '* az:::::> • b 2 '* a 2 :::::> •... 
'* a2 :::> •. " ,., bi '* am :::> • bz '* am :::> •... b n '* a,,,:::::> • b i '* a :::::> • 
'* a :::> • , .. bTl = a; (E) to replace a wf part (f)iE]:::::>. E2 :::::> •.. 
:::> (a)D] by (a) (f) [EI :::> • E2 :::::> •... En :::> D~ if a is not a free variable of 
E2 •.• " En; (F) to replace a wf part (f)[EI :::> • E2 :::::> •... En :::> - (a)D j 
(f)[E~ :::> • E~:::> •.. , E: :::> -(a)D'], where E; IS 
(i = 1,2, .. " n), and D' is 
«,l(a) 
, 
;:"(a) ... D E;, 
('-lla· 
;:"ia) .. o D, 
provided that Ev E2 •••• , En, D contain no bound propositional or func-
tional variables other than the bound functional variable Fin wf parts of 
the form b = cor b '* c, and D contains no bound indiviuual variables; (G) 
i:! 
I ~ 
i: 

304 
FUNCTIONAL CALCULI OF SECOND ORDER [CHAP. 
to replace a w£ part (f) :E1 ~ • E2 ~ •... En ~ --(a)(c1) (c2) ..• (cd. a =1= C,::::l 
a =1= C2 ~ •.•• a i: Ci ~ • c, =1= C 2 ~ • c, i: Ca ~ •... Ci - 1 i: C, ~ • NCl :::l . 
-C2 ~ ••.. -C, ~ Aj, where Cj is 
S" Al 
c, 
(i = I, 2 •...• i). by 
(cl ) (c'l) ... (ct ) (f) CEI ::> • E.::::> •... Eft::::> "" 
a i: cl => • a i: Cz => •... a i: C i ~ AJ. provided that E,. Ez, ... , En, A 
not contain ci • c2' ••. , c j as free variables, and contain no bound nrr,n" ... ; 
tional or functional variables other than the bound functional variable F 
wf parts of the form b = C or b i: c, and A contains no bound' 
variables. (In all of these reduction steps of course m or n may as a 
case be 0.) 
52.5. With the aiJ of the foregoing results discuss the completeness, 
various senses, (1) of the singular}' functional calculus of second order 
and (2) of the logistic system obtained from 
F~" by adding the 
infillite list of axioms; {3xd (3x2 ) • Xl i: xz, (3x,) (3x 2 ) (3xa) • Xl i: Xt . 
Xl i: X3 • X 2 i: X 3, (3xd (3x2) (3X3) (3x,,) • Xl i: X 2 • Xl =1= Xa' Xl i: X" • X 2 =1= Xs . 
X 2 -t X 4 • X3 =1= X 4 , .... 
5z.6. The elimination probLem of the functional calculus of second 
is the problem to find an effective procedure by which from a given wff 
of the functional calculus of second order there is obtained a wff B of 
functional calculus of first order with equality, such that A = B is a tnE~or,em 
of the functional calculus of second order.503 \Ve shall here require also 
effective procedure by which to find a proof of A = B. The wff B is t 
called the resultant of A. 
(1) Solve the elimination problem of the singulary functional calculus 
second order F:·l by means of the reduction steps (a)-(g), (a)-(1]) , (A)-( 
of 39.6, 48.14, and 52.4.504 
(2) Apply the elimination procedure found in (I) to get the resultant 
the following wif A:b06 
(3F) • F(x) ~x Gt(x) • G2(x) =>x F(x) • (3xHF(x)H(x)] ~. H(x) ~'" F(x) . 
Show that the resultant call be simplified to: 
G2(x) ::Ix Gt(x) • (3x)[G 2(x)H(x)]:::>. H(x)~:I: Gt(x) 
52.7. (1) Solve tile elimillation problem for the special case of wfis of 
F~P of the form 
-The elimination problem goes back to Schroder. See an account of the matter by 
Ackermann In a paper in the !.1alhemalisch" Annalen, vol. 110 (1934). pp. 390-413. 
'·'This solution is due to Skolem and Behmann III their papers of 1919 and 1 
referred to in §49. There is also a sketch of a solution in Lowenheim's paper of 191 
106This example is taken from Ackermann's paper. cited in footnote 503. 

EX ERCISES 52 
305 
(3f) • e . f(a, b) =>ab D 
f is a binary functional variable and a and b are distinct individual 
, e and D contain no bound propositional or functional variables, 
does not contain f, and the matrix M of the prenex normal form of C has 
property that60e 
that in this case a resultant is 
('.f(a,b) C' 
;::)0' 
I, 
e' and D' differ from e and D by (at most) certain alphabetic changes 
of bound variables. 50? Hence in particular find resultants of the following 
wffs of F:P: 
(3F). (x)(y)[F(x, y) => G(x, y)](x) (3y)[H(x, y) => F(x, y)] 
(3F) (x)(y) • F(x, y) => G(x, y) • Hdx, y) => F(x, xl. 
H 2(x, y) :::> F(x, x)F(y, y) 
53.8. Similarly solve the elimination problem for the special case of 
of F:P of the form 
(3f) • e . D =>ab f(a, b) 
where f is a binary functional variable and a alld b are distinct individual 
variables, e and D contain no bound propositional or functional variables, 
D does not contain f, and the matrix M of the prencx normal form of e has 
the property thatfi08 
f- M => s~(a,b) MI. 
100In other words, M can be reduced to a disjunctive normal form (in the sense of 
299) in which f nowhere appears with a negation sign before it. 
solution of this special case of the elimination problem, as well as of the special 
of 52.8-52.10 and the particular examples 52.7 (2) and 52.7 (3). are due to Acker-
mann in his paper cited in footnote 503. 
Ackermann's paper contains also a proof of the unsolvability of the general elimina-
problem of the functional calculus of second order, in the sense that for some wffs 
there is no possible resultant; and a generalization of the elimination problem is treated 
in which the resultant of a wff of the functional calculus of second order is to be a class 
of wffs of the functional calculus of first order. 
A note by Ackermann in the Mathematische Annalen, vol. III (1935), pp. 61-63, 
i.co.ntams solutions of a few further special cases of the elimination problem-.. ·not quite 
for the functional calculus of second order, but for a system obtained from the func-
tional calculus of second order by adding as axioms, summarized in an axiom schema, 
. 
cases of an axiom of choice which are expressible in the notation of the 
'IUllI;; .. Ulliill calculus of second order (see §56 and footnote 555). 
lO'I,e., M has a disjunctive normal form in which f nowhere appears without a ne-
gation sign before it. Or alternatively we might define the panty (oddness or evenness) 
I
'J 

306 
FUNCTIONAL CALCULI OF SECOND ORDER 
[CHAP, 
5::.9. Generalize the results of 52.7 (1) and 52.8, (1) by replacing f by 
n~ary functional variable, and (2) by replacing f(a, b) by f(al> aa, ' .. , 
== E. where E is quantifier-free and does not contain f. 
52.10. Parallel to the foregoing series of solutions of the " .. " .... ""'" .. , 
problem for wffs beginning with an existential quantifier (3f). find a 
of solutions of the elimination problem for wffs beginning with a 
quantifier (f) (by considering the negations of the latter wffs). 
5::. II. Following Behmann, show that the decision problem of the 
tended propositional calculus may, instead of the method described in 
be solved by a reduction process like that of exercise 39.6, i.e., by a 
of the process of reduction to prenex normal form. 
5::. I::. Apply the decision procedure found in the foregoing exercise 
the four examples of exercise 28.0. 
5::.13. How may the decision procedure of exercise 52.4 be modified 
the light of exercise 52.11? 
53. Consistency of F;. As already suggested in §49, it is possible 
prove the consistency of F: by a very elementary syntactical 
closely similar to that used in §32 to prove the consistency of Fl. 
For this purpose let us take a formulation of the extended 
calculus in which the primitive connectives and opera tor are 
negation. and the universal quantifier, and let llS modify as follows the 
cis ion procedure described in §28. Take t and f not as abbreviations of 
of F: or of the extended propositional calculus but as primitive 
of a formulation of the propositional calculus. GIven a wff A of the '-A'."U ....... '" 
propositional calculus, replace a wff part (b)B in it by the conjunc 
$~BI$~BI, 
and iterate this until all occurrences of the universal quantifier have 
removed. If the quantifier-free formula ~ which is thus obtained is 
tautology (of the appropriate formulation of the propositional calculus), 
shall say that A is valid. 
Thus we have an effective test for the validity of any wff of the 
propositional calculus. 
From any wff of F~ we obtain an assoct'ated formula 0/ the extended 
of each occurrence of an elementary part in'M as follows: when an elementary 
shwds alone, this IS an even occurrence of the elementary part; in ""K the 
each occurrence of an elementary part is reversed as compared to K; in 
panty is reversed for each occurrence of an elementary part in K but remains the 
in L. Then the requirement here IS that f shall appear only at odd places in M; and 
52.7(1) the reqUirement is that f shall appear only at even places, 

HENKIN CO."'.1PLETENESS THEOREJJ 
307 
1ISl.~iUl'HU calculus (abbreviated "afep") as follows. First we delete all those 
of the universal quantifer in which the operator variable is an 
variable. Then, if fl' f2' .. '. fm are the distinct functional vari-
and functional constants that appear, \'v'e select m distinct propositional 
PI' P2' .. '. Pm not previously occurring, and we replace every wf 
fj(u1 , a 2, .•. , an,) by Pi, and we replace every universal quantifier 
) by (¥Pi) (i -'" 1. 2, ... , mi· 
We need not (for our present purpose) distinguish among the different 
of a given wif of F;, since they differ among themselves only by alpha-
changes of bound and free variables. 
Now every axiom of Fi has a valid afep, and the rules of inference pre~ 
the property of having a valid afep, as we leave it to the reader to 
in detail. Hence follows: 
Every theorem of F: has a valid afep . 
. Since any afep of -C is the negation of an afep of C, it follows that not 
.... C and C can have a valid afep, hence by **530 that not both -C and 
be theorems of F;. Thus we have: 
F: is cOllsistent with respect to th,: transformation of C into -C. 
F: is absolutely consistent. 
F~ is consistent in the sense of Post. 
Similar syntactical consistency proofs are possible also for the fWlctional 
uli of higher order, employing, instead of the afep, an associated formula 
protothetic or of higher protothetic.609 
54. Henkin's completeness theorem.b10 
The principal intet'prdation 0/ F;P for a glven non-empty clomain 0 of individ-
uals is given by rules a-e, f" of'§50. \Ve now introduce also what we call the 
0/ F:P for a given domain ~ of individuals and given domains 
~1' ~a, tya •... of propositional functions of individuals, where all 
of iJl nlust be singulary propositional functions whose range is the 
"'See ~49 and footnote 462. For the singulary functional calculus of order w the 
. proof is earned out in especial detail by Gentzen III the ]\fathematische ZettscflYilt. vol. 41 
(1936), pp. 357-366, though in a slightly different form from that wdlcated here. 
'lAIThe method which is used in this section to prove a weak completeness t.heorem for 
the functional calculus of second order is clue to Leon Henkin (in his ni,;sertation. 
Princeton University. 1(47). It is essentially the same as the method used l!1 §45 
(also due to Henkin, cf. footnote 465) to prove GOdel's completene~5 theorem for the 
. functional calculus of first order. And it may be extended to functiona.l c«lenh of higher 
order. though for systems containing a suitahle form of the axiom of choice the modified 
method which is used by Henkin in a paper tn The journal 01 Symbohc LogiC, vol. 15 
(19110), pp. 81-91, may be preferable. 
, 
,; 
1 
,j 
~ 
II 
"I 
. ! 

308 
FUNCTIONAL CALCULI OF SECOND ORDER [CHAP. 
individuals. all members of ~2 must be binary propositional functions 
range is the ordered pairs of individuals. and so on. Namely. these new 
pretations of F:P are given by the same rule~ which give the principal inter-
pretatiuns, except that rules 0,. b,. ba• ' .. are replaced by the following: 
b~" 
The singulary functional variahles are variables having ~, as their 
b\3'., 
The binary functional variables are variables having 15, as their 
b\3'n. 
The n-ary functional variables are variables having \3'n as their 
Among these interpretations of F:P it is clear that not all are sound. But 
among them which are sound, and are not principal interpretations. we 
secondary interpretations of F!p. 
We must leave open temporarily the question of existence of such "''',Vi.LUG .. • 
interpretations, But an affirmative answer to this question will follow 
results obtained below. In fact it will follow that there exist secondary inter-
pretations of F:P in which aU of the domains.s. \3'v \3' •. ~3' •.. are enumerably', 
infinite, 
Analogously to what was done in §43. the seman tical rules, just 
in small type. may be restated and reinterpreted in such a way as to 
them a purely syntactical character. Namely, the words "range" 
"value" are replaced everywhere by the phrases "range with respect to 
r-
'::'l:: 
~ ct. 
"d'> I 
'th" 
t 
'" ''1: 
ct. 
'"r: 
.. 
. 
t" 
1 
"I. lJl' D"2' U3. ' ,. an 
va ue WI 
respec to \.S, 010 U 2' 'lis. . .. respec lYe y. 
And the rules are then regarded as constituting a (syntactical) def . 
of these latter phrases, 
A wff of F~P is said to be valid with respect to the system of domains 
0-1> iJ2' iJ3, ' . , if it has, with respect to S.lJl' 0-2' \}S •... , the value t for all 
possible values of its free variables ;6Il and satisfiable with respect to the system 
of domains :J. 'IT1' lJz. \}a ... " if it has, with respect to ~. \}l' 'iJ2' \}3' ... , 
value t for at least one system of possible values of its free variables. 
by a "possible" value of a variable is meant a value that belongs to the r 
of the variable with respect to ~,'iJl' iJ2' 'iJa, ' .•. ) 
A system of domains ~> \}1> 'iJ2> o-a, .. , is said to be normal if all the ax 
of F:P are valid with respect to it, and every rule of inference of F:P has 
property of preserving validity with respect to it (i.e., the property that. 
whenever the premisses of the rule are valid wi th respect to~. 'iJl' 1'5-2' iJs ....• ' 
the conclusion is also valid with respect to 0, 'iJ1' 'iJ2> {J3' ... J. Evidently, in 
a normal system of domains, no domain is empty. 
A wif of FiP is said to be valid in the non-empt y domain ~ of individuals 
if it is valid with respect to the system of domains ~. 1'5-1> 1'5-2' 'iJa, . , '. v;'here 
'iJl is the class of all propositional functions having the individuals (all 
members of 0') as their range, \}2 is the class of all proposi tional functions' 
<11 As usual. if there are no frec variables, then, by "having the value t for all possible 
values of ItS free variables," we undcr~tand simply. denoting t. (Compare footnote 312.) 

HENKIN COMPLETENESS THEOREM 
309 
have all ordered pairs of individuals as their range, and so on.m 
a wff is said to be satisfiable in the non-empty domain ~ of individuals 
it is satisfiable with respect to this same system of domains. 
A wff is valid if it is valid in every non-empty domain ~ of intlividuals: 
"",,,,,,nuu.e if it is satisfiable in some non-empty domain ~ of individuals. A 
is se.condarily valid if it is valid with respect to every normal system of 
; secondarily satisfiable if it is satisfiable with respect to some normal 
of domains. It can be shown that every secondarily valid wff is valid, 
every satisfiable wff is secondarily satisfiable (compare the proof of 
). 
The universal closure of a wff B in which no free functional variable is 
than n-ary is the wff 
(c: ) (c: -1) . , . (c~) (c:-1 ) (c:-·1 -1) ... (C~l) ... 
n" 
n-l 
n-l 
(c~,) (C~1-1) ... (c~) (c~o) (C~._l) ... (c~) (Cu ) (cu _ 1) ... (c1)B, 
C~, C~, ... , C~k are the free k-ary functional variables of B in alpha-
betic order (k = 1, :2, •.. , n), c~, c~, .... c~ are the free propositional vari-
o 
abies of B in alphabetic order, and c1• c 2 , ' .. , C u are the free individual 
of B in alphabetic order. The existential closure of B is similarly 
, with existential quantifiers replacing the univerMI quantifiers. 
The following meta theorems about F~P are proved in the same way as 
,their analogues in §43: 
A wff A is valid with respect to a given normal system of domains 
if and only if -A is not satisfiable with respect to that system of 
domains; valid in a given non-empty domain of individuals if and 
only if.-A is not satisfiable in that domain; valid if and only if -A 
is not satisfiable; secondarily valid if and only if .-A is not secon-
daril y satisfiable. 
A wff A is satisfiable with respect to a gIven normal system of 
domains if and only if -A is not valid with respect to that system 
of domains; satisfiable in a given non-empty ciomam of indivic!uals 
if and only if -A is not valid in that domain; satisfiable if and 
only if -A is not valid; secondarily satisfiable if and only if -A is 
not secondarily valid. 
. 
IlIThe domain of individuals being fixed as some particular non·empty domain. a 
closed wff may be said to be true if it is valid in that domain. Since the sentences of the 
(pure) functional calculus of second order are the same as the closed wfis, this may be 
taken as the syntactical equivalent 0/ the semantical property of being a true sentence, 
. as described in §09. 
I
I 

310 
FUNCTIONAL CALCULI OF SECOND ORDER [CHAP, 
"'542. A wff is valid with respect to a given normal system of domains 
and only if its universal closure is valid with respect to that 
of domains; valid in a given non-empty domain of individuals 
and only if its universal closure is valid in that domain; valid 
and only if its universal closure is valid; secondarily valid if and 
only if its universal closure is secondarily valid. 
**543. 
A wff is satisfiable with respect to a given normal system of do-
mains if and only if its existential closure is satisfiable (or equiva-
lently. valid) with respect to that system of domains; satisfiable 
a given non-empty domain of individuals if and only if its 
closure is satisfiable in that domain; secondarily satisfiable if 
only if its existential closure is secondarily satisfiable, 
*544. 
Every theorem of F~P is secondarily valid. and therefore also valid. 
As in §45, if r is any class of wffs of any of the functional calculi of second 
order. we say that r I- B if there are a finite number of wffs Al • AI' .. " A"" 
of r such that Al • As •...• Am I- B. r is inconsistent if r I- f. and in the· 
contrary case r is consistent. 
C is inconsistent with r or consistent with 
according as the class whose members are C and the members of r is 
sistent or consistent. r is a maximal consistent class of closed fJJej'J,-tl»'ffll&l-
formulas if r is consistent and no closed wff C is consistent with r which is 
not a member of r. 
A class r of wffs of F:P is said to be simultaneously satisfiable with resper;' 
to a system of domains if. with respect to that system of domains, all the 
wffs of r have the value t simultaneously for at least one system of possible 
values of all their free variables taken together. And r is said to be simultane-
ously satisfiable in the non-empty domain ~ of indiv;duals if it is simultane-
ously satisfiable with respect to the system of domains 3, ~1' ~a. ~3' ••• , 
where ~1 is the class of all propositional functions having the class 3 of 
individuals as their range. ~2 is the class of all propositional functions having 
the class of ordered pairs of individuals as their range, and so on. And r is 
said to be simultaneously satisfiable if it is simultaneously satisfiable in some 
non-empty domain 3. 
We consider an applied functional calculus of.second order, S, having as 
primitive symbols all the primitive symbols of F:P, together with the indi-
vidual constants Woo Wl' W 2 • ... and, for every positive integer k, the k-ary 
functional constants w:. w~. w~ ..... By an adaptation of the method 
footnote 416. we fix a particular enumeration of the closed wffs of S, 

HENKIN COMPLETENESS THEOREM 
311 
to this enumeration, we speak of Uthe first closed wff of S," "the 
closed wff of S," and so on, Moreover, using this enumeration, we 
extend an arbitrary consistent class r of closed wffs of S to a maximal 
t class r of closed wffs of S--by the same method which was used in 
(compare **452 and its proof). 
Now let H be a closed wff of F:P which is not a theorem. 
The class ro whose single member is -H is then a cOllsistent class of 
wffs-of F:P, and therefore also of S. \Ve define the classes rn by the follow-
ing recursion rule:~18 If the (n + I )th closed wff of S has the form (a)A, 
a is an individual variable, and if in the list wo, Wl' W 2, ••• the first 
that does not occur either in A or in any member of rn is W m , 
members are 
$:", AI ::> (alA 
the members of rn: if the (n + l)th dosed wff of S has the form (a)A, 
a is a k-ary functional variable (k = 1, 2, 3, ... ), and if in the list 
w~. ~, ... the first constant that does not occur either in A or in any 
of 1'" is w~, then r n +! is the class whose members are 
$:~ AI ::> (alA 
the members of r,,; and otherwise T n _1 is the same as Tn. 
Then (for n = 0,1,2, ... ) rn is a finite class of closed v.1£s of S_ We shall 
by mathematical induction that every Tn is consistent. 
Suppose that, for some particular n, T.,. is consistent but I'Ml IS mcon-
t. Then we must have the case that Tn+l is not the same as rn but has 
additional member 
$:A/ ::> (a)A, 
where w is a suitably chosen constant (as described above), By the incon-
sistency of rMl , and the deduction theorem (*516), 
rn I- $:Ai ::> (a)A::J I· 
this proof from hypotheses, replace w everywhere by a llew variable x, 
is of the same type as a and which does not otherwise occur. Since w 
not occur in A or in any of the members of rn' we thus have 
"lThe device which is used at this point was suggested to the writer by Henkin in 
July 1950. As compared to the procedure at the corresponding point m §45, or in Hen-
kin's dissertation, it has the advantage of making it possible to replace the mfinite 
teQuellce of applied functional calculi S" S., S., ... by the single applied functional 
S. A similar Simplification could have been made In §45 in the proof of ··453; 
because the difference in length is slight, we have there retained the older form of 
proof (which it is thought may be instructive). 

312 
FUNCTiONAL CALCULI OF SECOND ORDER [CHAP. 
rn ~ $:AI => (alA => f. 
Hence by generalizing upon x and then using the theorem schemata * 
and *383 (or analogues of them), 
rn ~ (x) S:AI => (alA:::> i. 
By alphabetic change of bound variable,614 
rn ~ (a)A => (alA => I. 
But since (alA => (alA is a theorem (by P), we then have rn ~ /, rrn,h"'''' 
to the supposed consistency of rn-
Since ro is consistent, and the consistency of rn+! follows from that of 
(as just shown), therefore every rn is consistent. 
Let r be the union of the classes I~, r l , r 2 , ••• , and let r be the 
of r to a maximal consistent class of closed wffs of S. 
We need the following properties of r (where in dl-f::3, A and B 
closed wffs of S): 
dl. If A is a member of r, then -A is a non-member of r. (For 0 
r would be inconsistent, by P.) 
d2. If A is a non-member of r, then -A is a member of r. (For if A is 
non-member of r, then A must be inconsistent with r; therefore, by 
deduction theorem and P, r r -A; therefore -A is consistent \\1th 
therefore -A is a member of r.) 
el. If B is a member of r, then A=> B is a member of r. 
(For by 
r r A=> B; thus A=> B is consistent with r and therefore a member of 
e2. If A is a non-member of r, then A=> B is a member of r. (For by 
-A is a member of r, and therefore by P, r r A => B.l 
e3. If A is a member of rand B is a non-member of r, then A=> B is 
non-member of r. (For by d2, -B is a member of r; hence if A=> B were 
member of r, r would be inconsistent.) 
fl. If a is an individual or functional variable, and if, for every c.U''''.,Ol'a 
W of the same type as the variable a, 
$:Aj 
is a member of r, then (alA is a member of r. (For in consequence of 
way in which the classes rn were defined, there is some constant w of 
same type as the variable a such that 
U'If a does not occur as a bound variable in A, one application of "010 is "u ........ 'u, 
OtherWise the required result may be obtained by three or more successive .. l-'flU ......... ' .. 
of '515. 

§54J 
HENKIlvT COMPLETENES'S THEOREM 
S:'Ai:::> (a) A 
is a member of r, therefore a member of r.) 
flf. If a is a propositional variable, and if both S~ AI and S; AI are 
members of r, then (a)A is a member of r. (By *514, *515.) 
£2. If a is an individual or functional variable, and if, for at least one 
constant W of the same type as the variable a. 
S:'AI 
. is a non-member of r, then (a}A is a non-member of r. (By t509 and *509n.) 
£2'. If a is a propositional variable, and if either 
S: AI 
or S;Ai 
is a non-member of r, then (a) A is a non-member of r. (By *5090 ,) 
To each of the individual constants Wn we now assign as associated natural 
number the number n (i.e., 0 is the associated natural number of wo, ] is 
the associated natural number of WI< and so on). And to each of the k-ary 
functional constants w~ we assign as associated propositional function the 
k-ary propositional function c[)~ of natural numbers determined by the rule 
that rI>"k(Ul> U2, ... , Uk) is t or f according as wnk(w" ' w", .. ,,1£'1.1) is a 
I. 
k 
member or a non-member of r. 
We shall also speak of the natural number n as associated to the constall t 
w". and of the propositional function rI>~ as associated to the constant w!. 
Let the domain ~ consist of the natural numbers, let the domain tyl 
consist of the associated propositional functions of all the singulary func-
tional constants w~, let ty2 consist of the associated propositional functions 
of all the binary functional constants w!, and so 011. Then each of the do-
mains ~. tyl' ty2' ty3' ... is finite or enumerably infinite.516 
With respect to the system of domains 0', tyl' ty2' tya, ... , the value of a 
wff X of F~P, for a given system of values of its free variables Xl' X 2 .... , X m , 
is t or f according as 
SX,"O· .. x", Xi 
• W 1W I "·Wm 
' 
is a member or a non-member of r, where Wi is the constant, or one of the 
constants, to which the value of Xi is associated (i = 1,2, ... , m), or in case Xi 
is a proposi tional variable, Wi is t or I according as the value of Xi is t or f. 
IUThe possibility that the domains \11' \1 •. tr •.... may all be finite is realized if, 
for example, we take H to be the wff (3z)(3y) (3F) • F(z} -F(y), which has a non-
valid afep and is therefore not a theorem (**530}. On the other hand. if we take H to 
be the negation of one of the axioms of infinity (see §57), then all the domains must 
be enumerably infinite, 
j 
':1' 
:; 
I 
" 
j 
1 

316 
FUNCTIONAL CALCULI OF SECOND ORDER [CHAP. V 
sense that the class of valid wffs is the same. (2) Prove that a wff of the 
extended propositional calculus is a theorem of F~P if and only if it is valid. 
54-.1. In view of the solution of the elimination problem of the singulary 
functional calculus of second order in 52.6 (1), and of results concerning F1p 
obtained in exercises 48, prove that, if a wff of the singulary functional 
calculus of second order F~,l is valid in every non-empty finite domain, 
then it is valid, and a theorem. 
54-.2. Determine which of the following things are true of every normal 
system of domains ~, iJ1' iJ2' iJ3' ... , and supply a proof or disproof in each 
case: (1) iJl contains the null class and the universal class of individuals.518 
(2) If iJl contains any two classes of individuals, it always contains also the 
class which is the union of those two classes. (3) iJ2 contains the relation of 
identity or equality between individuals, and the relation of non-identity or 
diversity between individuals.516 (4) If iJ2 contains any relation between 
individuals, then iJl always contains the domain and the converse domain 
of that relation. 511 (5) If iJ2 contains any two relations between individuals, 
it always contains also their relative product.518 
54-.3 Let S' iJ1' iJ2' i'h ... , be a system of domains of the kind described 
in the first paragraph of §54. Show that it is a normal system of domains if 
and only if S is non-empty and, for every wff A of F~P, for every list 
aI' a2, ... , an of distinct individual variables (n ::;:;; 1), and for every system 
S of values (with respect to~, iJ1' iJ2' iJ3 ... ) of the free variables of A 
other than aI' a2, •.. , an' there is a propositional function rp in iJn such 
that rp(a1, a2, ... , an) is always the same as the value of A with respect to 
~, iJ1' iJ2' iJ3' ... for the values aI' a2, ... , an of aI' 8 2, ... , an and the 
system of values S of the remaining free variables of A. (Notice that this 
characterization of a normal system of domains, unlike that in the text, is 
independent of the axioms and rules of inference of F~p.) 
54-.4-. Show (as is assumed in the text) that every consistent class of 
wffs of F~P is a consistent class of wffs of the applied functional calculus S. 
61"As explained in §04, we take classes to be singulary propositional functions and 
relations to be binary propositional functions. 
61'The domain of a relation is the class of things (individuals) which bear that relation 
to at least one thing; and the converse domain of a relation is the class of things to which 
at least one thing bears that relation. (The converse domain of a relation is thus the 
same as the domain of the converse of the. relation, where "converse" has the meaning 
explained in §03.) 
618The relative product of two relations t1J and 'Jf is the relation which holds between 
two things (individuals) a and b if and only if there is at least one thing c such that a 
bears the relation t1J to c and c bears the relation 'Jf to b. 
For example, if we take the individuals to be human beings, the relative product of 
the relation husband and the relation dattghter is the relation son-in-law; and the relative 
product of the relation parent and the relation parent is the relation grandparent. 

§55] 
POSTULATE THEORY 
317 
54.5. By the methods of §54 prove: Every consistent class of wffs of F~P 
is simultaneously satisfiable with respect to some normal system of finite 
and enumerably infinite domains. 
54.6. Supply a proof of Godel's completeness theorem for the fUllctional 
r. calculus of first order which parallels as closely as possible the proof of 
t 
the metatheorems **545 and **546 in §54, 
55, Postulate theory,518 From the viewpoint which is explained in 
, §07, when a system of postulates is used as basis for the formal treatment of 
~ r some mathematical theory or branch of mathematics (say, for example, 
~, arithmetic, or Euclidean plane geometry), the postulates have to be thought 
of as added to an underlying logic, And indeed for the precise syntactical 
definition of the particular branch of mathematics it is necessary to state 
not only the specific mathematical postulates but also a formalization of 
l,' the underlying logic, since the class of theorems belonging to the branch of 
, mathematics in question is determined by both the postulates and the 
r underlying logic, and could be changed by a change in either. 520 
~., 
mFor other discussions of postulate theory from the logistic standpomt see for exam· 
pie Carnap's Abriss der Loglstik (Vienna, 1!J2!1), Carnap's The Loglcal Syntax 0/ Lan· 
guage (New York and London, 1937), and Hilbert and Bernays's Grundlagen dey Mathe-
matik (Berlin, 1934, 1939), Though the reader must allow for some differences in 
approach and terminology, we believe that our account of the matter IS in essential 
agreement with that of these authors. 
""The point may be illustrated by the case of elementary number theory versus 
analysIs, since these two hranches of mathematics m<l.y be based if we like on the very 
same system of postulates, but with different underlying logics, Namely, elementary 
number theory may be defined by adding the postulates (All, given helow, to an applied 
functional calculus of first order containing all propositional and functional variables 
as well as the functional constants which appear in the postulates, And analysis may 
be defined by adding the same postulates to an applied functional caJrlllus of fourth 
" order-since, in the resulting system, rational, real, and complex numbers may be 
e introduced by any of various well-known methods for defining these numbers in terms 
t
i: 
.. "" of the natural numbers. 
The foregoing statement is open to certain reservations because of uncertainty as to 
exactly what should be understood by "elementary number theory" and "analysis" 
as they appear in common (informal) mathematical usage, It is the feeling of the writer, 
however, that "elementary number theory" is preferahly understood in such a way as 
not to exclude the expression of certain generalities about classes and functions of 
natural numbers-as, e.g" the proposition that in every class of natural numbers there 
is a least number. 
On the other hand, in the system ohtained by adding the postulates (All to an 
applied functional calculus of second order there is a certain sense in which a large part 
of analysis can already be obtained, by means of appropriate artifices which are heyond 
the scope of our present discussion. The decision to go as high as the functional calculus 
of fourth order in specifying the underlying logic of mathematical analysis is thus open 
to some question, but again it would seem to the writer that this best represents the 
existing informal usage, 
When the underlying logic is a functional calcldus of second or higher order it is usual, 
as noted below, to replace the postulates (AI) by the morc economical system of 
postulates (AI)' However, this need not affect our present illustratioIl, ,ince the postu· 
lates (Ad could always be reta1t1ed if desired, 

318 
FUNCTIONAL CALCULI OF SECOND ORDER [CHAP. V 
The present section is devoted to a digression for the further treatment of 
this matter, and the introduction of a number of examples. This seems to be 
an appropriate place for such a discussion, because in many cases it is 
sufficient to take the underlying logic to be a functional calculus of first or 
second order. 
As a first example we take the following system of postulates for arith-
metic, which we shall call (Ao), and for which the underlying logic is to be 
(syntactically) a simple applied functional calculus of first order. There are 
two undefined terms, the ternary functional constants E and Jl; and the 
notations Zo, Z1> and = are introduced by the following definition sche-
mata,52l in which a and c are any variables, b is the next individual variable 
in alphabetic order after a, and d and e are the first two individual variables 
in alphabetic order distinct from each other and from a and c: 
Zo(a) --+ (b).E(a, b, b) 
Zl(a) --+ (b)If(a, b, b) 
[a 
cl --r (d)(e) • E(a. d, e)::::> E(c, d, e) 
The postulates include first of all the twelve following: 
(3z)E(x, y, z) 
E(Xl' x2, Yl) ::::> .1.'(X2> X3> y,) ::::> • E(YI' X3> z) ::::> E(Xl' Y2' z) 
E(x> y, z) ::::> E(y, x, z) 
E(Xl> Y, z) ::::> • E(X2> Y, z) ::::> • Xl = X2 
(3x)E(x, y, y) 
(3z)II (x, y, z) 
JI(Xl' xz, YI) ::::> • Jl(X2' x3, Y2) ::::> • Jl(Yl> x3, z) ::::> Jl(Xl> YZ' z) 
0211n connection with the informal statement of these postulates, additional undefined 
terms 0, 1, and = 
(some or all of them) would often be list~d. However, the logistic 
method shows these addItional undefined terms to be unnecessary. Individual constants 
o and I indeed are not provided for by the definitions which we give, but the notations 
Zo and ZI serve the essential purposes which would be served by the actual inclusion of 
individual constants 0 and I as undefined terms. 
For the informal statement of the postulates, "natural number" would also ordinarily 
be listed as an undefined term. This additional undefined term has not so much been 
eliminated by our present method as incorporated into th(l undefined terms 1: and n, 
because we regard the range of a function as determined by the function, and as being 
gIven as soon as the function itself is given. (To change ':h~ range would be to change 
the function itself to a different [unction. i 0 .. alternatIvely, if the reader prefers, he 
may regard the undefined term "natural number" of the informal statement as rep-
resented by the individual variables--which have the individuals, i.e., the natural 
numbers, as their range. 

§55] 
POSTULATE THEORY 
JJ(X, y, zj ::::> 17(y, x,:o) 
[J(Xl' y, Z) :::> • U(X2' Y, z) :::> ZolY) v Xl = X2 
(3x)Il(x, Y, y) 
319 
n(xl' X 2, Y2) :::> • Il(x1, Xa, Ya) :::> • E(x2, x 3, Yd :::> • E(Y2' Y3' z) :::> Il(xl' YI' z) 
Zl(Y) ::::> .E(x, y, z):::> -Zo(Z) 
Thcn in addition to these twelve, there is an infinite list uf postulates of 
mathemat£cal induction-as given by the folluwing postuhte schen1c1, 
111 
which A is any wif not containing the variable z and B is $~A, 
Zo(x):::> • Zl(Y)::::> • A:::> • A:::>,t (3zHE(x, y, ,z)B]:::> (x}A 
This system of postulates (Ao) is t() be added to the simple applied 
functional calculus of first order Flh (see §30) as underlying logic. The re-
sulting system is a formulation of what we shall call elementary arithmetic. 522 
Of the logistic system 1\0, obtained iJv adding the pustulates (Ao) to F'h, the 
prinCipal interpretation is the same a.s for F I " ltsdf, and is given by the ."e-
mantical rules cr:-C of §30. The separation of the seman tical rules into two 
categories, as spoken of in §07, is by assigning the rules a •• fl •. y. (5, e, C to the 
underlying logic, and thus putting them in the first category, \vhile the rules 
IXI' PI' and P. are put in the second category. 
As a result, for the value a of a, Zo(a) denotes t or f accordlllg as a is or is not 
0, Z.(a) denotes t or f according as a is or is not 1. We may thus take these 
notations as meaning respectively that a is 0 and that a is L And in a similar 
way we may take the notation = as meaning equality of natural numbers For 
although this is a different sense of ., =" or "equals" from that given bv D22, 
there is no reason that we should n()t change the sense of "equals" 111 connection 
with AO, since the propositional function is not changed in extension, and since 
the mathematical theory is not thereby altered formally or prevented from serv-
ing its purpose. 
The first five postulates of (Ao) express, in order, the existence of the sum of 
two natural numbers, the associative law of addition, the commutative law of 
addition, the law of cancellation for addition, and (in a weak sense) the existence 
of an identity element for additioll. The next fi'.e postulates express the fin.' 
corresponding properties of multiplication of natural numbers, The eleventh 
postulate expresses the distributive law. And the twelfth postulate expresses 
that the result of adding 1 to a natural number is never 0, 
Each of the postulates of mathematical induction-as given by the postulate 
schema-either expresses a certain particular ease of tl1(' principlo of mathe-
matical induction, if A contains no free variables exc(~pt x. oc else, if A contain" 
other free variables, expresses a principle which (though It has some generality) 
"-Introducing this term in a sense which we dIStmguish irom that 01 "elementary 
number theory," 
. 
.j, 
'''i 
.f'l t, 
" 
i, 
j" 

320 
FUNCTIONAL CALCULI OF SECOND ORDER 
[CHAP, V 
15 still to be regarded as obtained from the general principle of mathematical 
induction by a specialization. 
In view of the lack of functional variables, it is not possible in AO to express 
the principle of mathematical induction as a general law. However, such an 
C'xpression of the general principle c,f mathematical induction appears bf'low 
as the final postulate of the system of postulates (AI)' 
In spite of the restriction imposed by the lack of functional variables, substan-
tially all the propositions of elementary number theory, as usually understood, 
can be expressed and proved in AO, excepting only those which directly require 
functional variables (such as, e.g., the principle of mathematical induction, or 
the principle that is stated in exercise 55.12). vVe shall not carry this out here, 
even in part, but refer the reader to the treatment of an equivalent system by 
Hil bert and Bema ys in Grundlagen der Mathematik. A cru cial poin t is the method, 
due to Godel,'" of introducing by definition other numerical functions than 
addition and multiplicatlOn-e.g., exponentiation, the factorial, the quotient 
and remainder upon division, the nth prime number as a function of n, and in-
deed recursive functions generally. 
Another example is the following system of postUlates (Ad. The undefined 
terms are 1: and II, and the definition schemata for the notations Zo, Zl> = 
are the same as in the case of (Ao), There are thirteen postulates, of which 
the first twelve are the same as the first twelve postulates of (AoL and the 
thirteen th is the postulate 0/ mathematical induction, 
The underlying logic is (or is formalized as) the functional calculus F~a, 
i.e., a functional calculus of first order which has the ternary function3.1 
constants 1: and n, and in addition 3.11 propositional and functional vari-
ables, the same as the functional calculus Fl. of 30.4 except that the rules 
and axioms of §40 are used instead of those of §30. And the logistic system 
obtained by adding the po-;tulates U\) to this underlying logic we shall take 
as a formulation of elementary number theory, or (as we shall also say) of 
first-order arithmetic.62' 
The postulates (AI) might of course also be added to a functional calculus 
of second or higher order as underlying logic, so obtaining a stronger system, 
mMonatshe/te fur Mathematik und Physik, vol. 38 (1931), see pp. 191-193. 
"'CI. footnote 52U. To iugisti.: formulations of either elementary a.rithmetic or first-
order arithmetic the name HIlbert arithmetic is often gIven because of the introduction 
of systems of this kind by HIlbert and his school. See a paper by Hilbert in Abhand-
tungm aus dcm Alathemallsche>l Seminar deY Hamburgischen Vniversilli.t, voL 6 (1928), 
pp. 65-8<5 (reprinted in the seventh edition of Hilbert's Grund/al"' d" Geotn~lrj,); 
11110" pllpar b)' AOItUl11l1llH In tn_ MIf/llf'tHlftt'f'/., A II If "''''. val. In Cl040i,I'f" lCla-IO.1 
as well as the treatment of the systems Z, Z., ZH, Z', etc. by Hilbert and Demay. 
in Grund/agen dey lkJatilematik. 

§55] 
POSTULATE THEORY 
321 
but instead of this we prefer to employ the following different system of 
postulates (A2). which are equivalent to (AI) when so used. 
The postulates (A2) are essentially a form of Peano's postulates for the 
natural numbers,52~ as modified for usc in the present context. There is a 
single undefined term, the binary functional constant S. The notations = 
and 4= are those introduced in D:?2 and D23. And the notations Zo, Zl are 
introduced by the following definition schemata, in which a is any individual 
variable, and b is the next individual variable in alphabetic order after a: 
Zo(a) ~ (b)""S(b, a) 
Zl(a) ~ (3b) • Zo(b)S(b, a) 
The postulates are the five following: 
(3y)5(x, y) 
5(x, y) =>. Six, z) =>. y = z 
Sly, x) => • S{z, xl => • y = z 
(3x)Zo(x) 
Zo(x) => • F(x)::J • F(y) =>. :S(y, z) =>. F(z)J::J (y)F(y) 
In the interpretation, the individuals arc again the natural numbers And S 
denotes the relation of having as 5ucce.ssor, so that, if a and b are the values of a 
and b, then S(a, b) denotes t or f according as b is or is not equal to a ., 1. 
Detailed statement of the semantical rulc~, for the case of a functional calculus 
of second order as underlying logic, may be supplied by analogy and is left to 
the reader. 
The notations Zo(a) and Zda), for a value a of a, again may be taken as mean-
ing, respectively, that a is 0 and that a is 1. The sense is indeed changed as com-
pared to the notations Zo and Zl used ill connectlQn With (Ao), or with (Ad. 
But the fact that the corresponding propositional functions arc the same in 
extension is sufficient for the purpose of the mathematical theory. 
A similar remark applies to the notations 1.: and n which are introduced below 
by definition to replace the notations 1.: and n that appeared as undefined 
terms in the postulates (Ao), or (AI)' 
The logistic system obtained by adding the postulates (Ao) to Flh we 
call ,1\0. That obtained by adding the postul::ttes (All to F~a we call Al 
Those obtained by adding the postulates (A 2 ) to a functional calculus of 
6UA.ilhmelices PrincipIa, Nova Melhoilo E;r;posila, Turin, 1889; Formulaire de },{athi-
matiqulIs, vol. II §2, Turin, 1898, As Peano points out, his postulates are in the treatise 
of Rlohartl n.tI_kjnd. W.u 
~''i"d urlll WII$ SulJtH 
di~ Z"h/,nr (I!!S!!), though not 
quite as postulates, Some of the essentials, however, are already contained in a paper 
by C. S, Peirce in the Am,,,j,,;m JouY1lal 0/ Mathematics, vol. 4 (1881), pp. 815-95, 

i; 
I, 
i 
l L , 
, 
t I I 
322 
FUNCTIONAL CALCULI OF SECOND ORDER 
nth order (n = 2,3,4, ... ) which has all propositional and functional vari-
ables appropriate to its order. and has in addition the binary functional 
constant S, we call N, AS, A4, .... And we call An (n = 1, 2, 3, 4, . _ .) 
a formulation of nth-order arlthmehc. 
The detailed development of the system N will be the subject of a later 
chapter. At this place. we carry the matter no further, except to state the 
following definition schemata. introducing notations .E and II to replace 
the primitive notations L and II of AO and Al;526 
E(a,b,c) ~ [ZO(bO)::::lb .a=co =>c F(bo,co)J[F(bo,cO)=>bC' 
u 
0 
0 0 
S(bo. bt ) ::::lb, • S(co. cl ) =>c, F(b1 • cllJ::::lF F(b, c) 
ll(a, b, c) ~ 10 (bo) =>bo • Zo (co) ::::leo F (bo. Co) J [F(bo, co) ::::lboCo • 
S(bo. bll ::::lbl • .E(a, co' cll ::::lei F(b1, cd: ::::IF F(b, c) 
--where, in both cases, a, b. c are any individual variables, and boo co' b l • c1 
are the first four individual variables in alphabetic order after the latest. 
ill alphabetic order, of tile variables a, b, c, 
It should be noticed that these definitions do not introduce the notations 
2: and II as functional constan ts, or as names of the propositional functions which 
in the systems AO anc! Al were denoted by 2: and II, In fact the system A' does 
not contain names of these propositional functions, and the definitions do not 
as~ign any formula of A' which is abbreviated by the letter 2: or the letter II 
standing alone. Only the complete notations E(a, h, c) and Il(a, h, c) are 
abbreviations of formulas of A". 
~evertheless, for every theorem of AO or Al there is a corresponding theorem 
of Ai in which the notations L'(a. h. c) and lI(a, h, c) of AO or Al are replaced 
"'These two definition schemata illustrate a general method that may be used to 
tind expressions in the system to represent a numerical function which, in the informal 
treatment, would be introduced by means of recursion equations. The first schema, for 
example. corresponds to the followmg recursion equations for addition: 
a-t-O=a 
a + (b + 1) = (a + b) + I 
And the second schema similarly corresponds to the following recursion equations for 
multiplication: 
axO=O 
u< (/> -l- I) = a + (a X b) 
This method, illustrated in tile two detinition 5chemata in the text, was introduced 
by Hilbert and Bernays in Gmndlagen dey Mathematik, voL 2 (1939). Supplement IV G, 
and by Paul Lorenzen in a paper In 51onaishc/tf' lur l\1"thematik und Physik. voL 47 
(193S-1939), pp. 35B-35S. Other methods servmg the same purpose are du~ to Dede-
kmd (1888) and to Kahm),r 11930, lfl40) , and might also be adapted for usein the pres-
ent u)nnection. For an informal exposition of the matter and a brjef account of its 
history, see Kalmar's paper in Acta Scientiarum Mathematicarum, voL 9 no. 4 (1940), 
pp. 227-232, 
The (iniormally stater!) recursion equations themselves for addition and multipli-
cation are due to C, S. Peirce in the paper cited in the preceding footnote. 

§55J 
POSTULATE THEORY 
323 
by the different notations I(a, b, c) and J1(a, b, c) of A'.Ul And it is in this 
sense that we say that AI is adequate for elementary number theory and does 
not req Ulrc the functional constants I and II as additional undefined terms. 
In such a case, where a complex notation introduced by definition carries the 
false appearance or suggestion th'lt SOlne part of the notation is to be taken as 
denoting (or otherwise as having meaning in isolation 1. it is usual to speak of 
contextual de/mition. For example, by the two definition schemata lust given, 
the letters I and II are contextually defined: they acquire significance only in 
the particular contexts I(a, b, c), JT(a, b, c), and not in isolation or in other 
contexts. Similarly, by earlier definition schemata in this section-whether 
those introduced in connection with AO and Al or those for AI-the letters Z. 
and ZI are contextually defined. 
On the other hand, D6 (for example) would nM ordinarily be called a context-
ual definition of the SIgn =, and D24 would not be called a contextual definition 
of =. The difference is that, in the notatIOns which are mtroduced by LJ6 and 
D24, there is nothing which suggests that either of the signs == or = standing 
alone is significant in any way (e.g., as an abbreviation of a formula of a logistic 
system). 
Thus the contextuality of the definitions of I and n arises from the fact that, 
in the above defmition schemata, we introduced the saHIB parl'ntheses and 
commas for use after the letters 1: and n that \\'C aho US(: aftcr functional 
variables and functional constants. The contextual character uf tllc clefmitions 
might be avoided by changing the notations 17(a. b, c) and /l(a, b, c) to, say, 
1:abc and Ilabc' However, the convenience of using ordinary parentheses and 
commas outweighs the possible deceptiveness,62s and the present explanation 
should serve to preclude misunderstandings. 
We turn now to consideration of another and different point of \'lew 
towards the postulates of a mathematical theory, which is possible in certain 
connections, and which also requires explanation here. In order to distin-
guish the two we may, from the point of vipw which w<' have so far been 
explaining, speak of postulates as added aXIOms 0/ a logdic system and, from 
the new point of view, of postulates as propositional /unctions. S29 
U1This will follow from our later detailed treatment of the ,.ystern A', since all the 
postulates of AO and Al can be proved as theorems of A' when they arc modified in the 
way described (i,e., when the notations l.'(a, b. c) and JT(a. b, c) of AO and A' arc 
replaced by those of .\') . 
• nOne aspect of thts cunvemencc IS tn the process of subst:tutlOll for functional vari-
ables, For example, the mere replacement of the ternary futlctional variable F ev('ry· 
where by the letter17 represents what, in tht' unabbrevrated n,)t:ltioll. WQuid appeal as 
a considerably more complicated substitutwn operation (permitted 1,'11 the rule of 
substitu tion for functional variables). 
"·The second p'Hnt of view, as described below. has long been implicit III the use made 
of postulates by mathematiCians, and in Informal expositions of postulate theory. 
though the logistic method makes possible a more accurate stat~ment of it. This point 
of view bas been emphasized in particular by C. J. Keyscl. who ,peaks in this connection 
of a "doctrinal function"-see a paper by him in The Journal 0/ Philosophy, vol. 15 

-. 
II 
'I 
~;!, 
324 
FUNCTIONAL CALCULI OF SECOND ORDER [CHAP. V 
It is necessary first to introduce the notion of the representing form of a 
postulate belonging to a given system of postulates. 530 
Given a system of postulates, we first select for each of the undefined 
terms a corresponding variable of the same type (i.e., an individual variable 
to correspond to an individual constant, and an n-ary functional variable 
to correspond to an n-ary functional constant), these variables being all 
different among themselves, and all of them occupying an odd-numbered 
place (first, third, fifth, etc.) in alphabetic order. To make the procedure 
definite, we are to select in each case the first available variable in alpha-
betic order; and where there are several undefined terms of the same type, 
they are to be taken in their own alphabetic order (the order in which they 
were originally listed) and the corresponding variables for them are to be 
introduced in that order. Then we replace each postulate by its universal 
closure-where the "universal closure" is to be understood in the sense that 
all the free variables of the postulate are bound by ini tially placed universal 
quantifiers, and where therefore in some cases the expression obtained may 
not be a wff of the underlying logic of the postulates but only of the func-
tional calculus of next higher order. Then in these closures of the postulates 
we make alphabetic changes of all the variables, replacing a variable that 
occupies the mth place, in the alphabetic order of variables of its type, by 
the variable of the same type that occupies the 2mth place in alphabetic 
order. Then finally in each postulate we substitute everywhere for the un-
defined terms (constants) appearing, their correspondi'.lg variables. The 
result of this substitution is the representing form of the postulate. 
For example, in the system of postulates (AI), the representing form of the 
postulate of mathematical induction is the following wff of the pure func-
tional calculus of second order: 
(G) (X1)(Y2) • (xa)F(Y2' X3, xa) => • (zl)H(Xl' Zl' Zl) => • G(Y2) => • 
G(y) =>" (3zl )[F(y, XI' Zl)G(Zl)] => (y)G(y) 
(1918), pp. 262-267. The "abstract" treatment of a system of postulates ("assump-
tions"), as described by Veblen and Young in the Introduction of the first volume of 
their ProjectilJe Geometry (first published in 1910), represents substantially the same 
idea, though the term "propositional function" is not actually used. 
Neither Veblen and Young nor Keyser make the distinction which is introduced 
below between the theorems and the consequences of a system of postulates. Indeed 
this would hardly have been possible before the work of Tarski and Carnap. 
lIoWe treat here only the case that the underlying logic is one of the functional calculi 
of not higher than second order-though extensions to other cases, in particular to one 
of the functional calculi of higher order, may be made by analogy. The method of 
extension to iu nctional calculi of higher order will become clear after the explicit for-
mulation of these calculi which is to be given in our next chapter. 

§55] 
POSTULATE THEORY 
325 
After having obtained thus the representing forms of the postUlates, we 
may introduce also in the same way the representing form of any sentence 
or propositional form,681 B, of the logistic system which consists of the under-
lying logic together with the postulates. Namely, we apply the same proce-
dure to the wff B that we did to each of the postUlates. 
In order to introduce the notion of a model of a system of postulates, let 
r be the class of representing forms of the postulates, and let F be the pure 
functional calculus of lowest order in which all the formulas of rare wf.532 
Then a model of the postUlates is a non-empty domain 3 of individuals 
together with a system of values of the free variables of the representing 
forms of the postulates which satisfies r simultaneously in 3 (or, in other 
words, which gives the value t simultaneously to the representing forms of 
the postulates, according to the notion of "value" which is defined in the 
theoretical syntax of F). 
We remark that the various definitions of "value," as introduced for the 
various pure functional calculi, are coherent in the sense that a wff A of a 
pure functional calculus F has the same value for a given system of values of 
its free variables, whether A is taken as a wff of F or as a wff of one of the 
pure functional calculi of higher order than F. In regard to the pure function-
al calculi of first and second orders, this is clear from the definitions already 
given; and it will continue to hold also for the pure functional calculi of third 
and higher orders (to be discussed in Chapter VI). Hence in connection with 
a model of a system of postulates, the represen ting form of a wff that belongs 
to the underlying logic may be said to have a value for the model, even if 
this representing form is wf only in a functional calculus of higher order than 
is required for the representing forms of any of the postulates. 
N ow given a system of postUlates, instead of considering the theorems of 
the logistic system, we may consider the consequences of the postulates in 
the following different (and non-effective) sense: A sentence or propositional 
form, A, of the logistic system which consists of the underlying logic to-
gether with the postulates is a consequence of the postulates if the value of the 
representing form of A is t for every model of the postulates. aSS 
From the point of view towards postulate theory which we are now explaining, 
each postulate is looked upon in effect as a propositional function such that a 
IUIn the case of one of the functional calculi, any wff. 
"'For this purpose, the pure functional calculus of first order with equality is to be 
counted as having an order between the first and the second. 
"'This is the notion of "logical consequence" introduced by Tarski, Przeglqd Filo-
loticzny, vol. 39 (1936). pp. 58-68. and Acles du Congres International de Philosophie 
Scifntitique (Paris, 1936), part VII, pp. 1-11. 

326 
FUNCTIONAL CALCf'U OF SECOND ORDER ["CHAP. V 
system of arguments of the propositional function would consist of a non-empty 
domain fI of individuals together with a value of each of the free variables of 
the representing form of the postulate, and the value of the propOSitional 
function for these arguments would be the same as the value which they deter-
mine of the representing form of the postulate. Similarly the complete system 
of postulates corresponds to a propositional function, of which a system of argu-
ments would consist of a non-empty domain .(J' of individuals together with a 
value of each of the different free variables that appear in the representing forms 
of the postulates, the value of the propositional function being t or f according 
as these arguments do or do not constitute a model of the postulates. 510 The 
consequences of the postulates--in the above non-effective sense of "conse-
quence"-again correspond to propositional functions in the same way. Syn-
tactically, the mathematical theory to which the postulates lead consists of 
all the wffs taken together which are consequences. 6U This mathematical theory, 
however, may be expected to have many interpretations-in fact, since we 
require a principal interpretation of the underlying logic, each different model 
"''vVe assume, in making this sL,tem,;nt. that the number of undefined terms is 
finite. "'rodification to fIt the contrary cast! could be made by considering a binary 
propositional function of which one argument would be the domain of individuals and 
tIle other argument would be the complete system of values of the free variables of the 
representing forms of the postUlates. 
mContrast this with the previous point of view, according to which the mathematical 
theory consists of the theorems. 
Objection may indeed be made tu this new point of view, on the basis of the sort of 
absolutism which it presupposes--or Plalunism as Bernays calls it (L' Enseignement 
Malhimali'lue. va\. 34 nos. 1-2 (1935), pp. 52-69; ct. also A. Fraenkel. ibid., pp, 18-32). 
But it should be pointed out that this Platonism is already inherent in classical mathe-
matics generally, and it i~ not made more acute or more doubtful, but only more con-
spicuous, by its application to theoretical syntax. For our definition of the conse-
quences of a system at postulates can be stated for. and treated within, a formalized 
meta-language which we do not describe 1n detail here but which can be seen to be 
not essentially different from formalized languages which are required for the logistic 
treatment of classical mathematics. 
There would cL'rtainly be cog-cnt ohjectiolls (ef. §(7) to the proposal to introduce a 
formalized language by means of the non-effective notion of consequence, and to re-
place in this way the initial construction of the language within what we have called 
elementary syntax (§08). But after this formalization of the language (or at least after 
the formalization of both the object language and the meta-language), the use of the 
non-effective notion of consequence in the theoretical syntax of the object language is 
a different matter, and objections to it are on a different leve\. 
It is true that the non-effective notion of consequence, as we have introduced it in 
theoretical syntax, presupposes a certain absolute notion of ALL propositional functions 
of individuals. But this IS presupposcd also in classical mathematics, especially classical 
analysis, and objections against it kad to such modifications of classical mathematics 
as mathematical intuitionlsl1l (to be discussed in a later chapter) or the partial intui· 
tionism of Hermann Weyl's Dils ]{ontinut,m {Leipzig, 1918). 
(In this lattcr book, Weyl's objectlOns to fhe absolute notion of all and to the viciolls 
circle which it is held to Illvolve lead him to a position which we may describe roughly 
as follows, that the simple functional calculi are replaced either by the corresponding 
predicative functional calculi Or by the ramified functional calculi (d, §,;8 and footnote 
583). Hussell's axioms of f<'ducibility (§59) being rejected. As is well known. though he 
is able to make a partial reconstruction of analysis. Weyl reaches the conclusion that 
a substantial part of the dassical theory is a house built upon sand.) 

§55J 
POSTULATE THEORY 
of the systelll of postulates yt<:lds olle interpretation of the mathematical 
theory. 630 Thus the content of the mathematical theory is not fixed. but is itself 
to be looked on as the value of a function. '37 
The notions of consistency, independence, and completeness ill connection 
with a system of postulates can be introduced in two different ways, which 
we may associate with the two different points of view towards postulate 
theory. We shall distinguish "consistency as to provability" and "consist-
encyas to consequences"-and similarly in the cases of independence and 
completeness. 
The notions of consistency, independence, and completeness as to prov-
ability will each depend in an essential wayan the choice of the underlying 
logic as well as on the postulates themselves. But in the case of the corre-
sponding notions as to consequences this dependence can be wholly or partly 
removed, as we shall see below. 
A system of postulates will be said to be COJlsistent as /0 provability if the 
logistic system which cOllsi:;ts of the postulates together with the underlying 
logic is consistent in one of our earlier senses (§ 17), say in the sense that there 
is no wff A such that both A and -A are theorems. 53B 
A system of postulates will be said to be consistent as to consequences if 
there is no wii A such that both A and -A are consequences of the postu-
lates. Here A is a wff of the logistic system which consists of the postulates 
together with the underlying logic. But the dependence on the underlying 
logic is removed at once by the following metatheorem (which for the mo-
ment we must restrict to the case that the underlying logic is a functional 
calculus of no more than second order, but which can be generalized later 
to the case of a functional calculus of higher order): 
'''By an Interpretation of the mathematical theory we mean, Hamely, an interpre-
tation of the logistic system which is obtained by adjoinillg the postuiatcs, as additional 
axioms, to the underlying logic. This is the same sense in which an interpretatioll of the 
postulates is referred to in the last paragraph of §07. 
The advantage of economy in the axiomatic method, in that tht: results ubtained 
hold for all the various interpretations. is a pOInt which has been too often stressed by 
other writers to need repetition here. (Compare the correspondlllg remark about thc' 
logistic method generally in §07.) 
"'This is Keyser's doctrinal junction, referred to in footnote 529. An accurate account 
of this notion from the point of view of the dlstmctlOn of sense and dcnotatlon involves 
some complexities and will not be attempted here . 
• 38Such a notion of consistency, involving the particular symbol _, is sufficient here 
because we are considering, as underlying logic, only the ordinary (applied) functional 
calculi of various orders, in the particular formulations adopted in Chapters III-VI. 
In order to extend the account to other systems as unllerlymg IOlPcs, it will be neCessarY 
in each case to specify the sign (primItIve or defined) which has to be Identified as -
Or if this cannot be done, then one of the other notions of consistency may be used 
which is introduced in §17. 

328 
FUNCTIONAL CALCULI OF SECOND ORDER [CHAP. V 
"550. A system of postulates is consistent as to consequences if and only 
if it has a model. 
We leave the proof of this to the reader, as well as of the following meta-
theorem: 
**551. If a system of postulates is consistent as to consequences, it is 
consistent as to provability. 
In a system of postulates, the postulate A will be said to be independent as 
to provability if it is not a theorem of the logistic system which consists of the 
postulates other than A together with the underlying logic. And A will be 
said to be independent as to consequences if it is not a consequence of the other 
postulates. 
Again we leave to the reader the proof of the metatheorems: 
**552. 
In a system of postulates, a postulate A is independent as to con-
sequences if and only if the postulates other than A have a model 
for which the value of the representing form of A is f. 
**553. 
In a system of postulates, if a postulate A is independent as to 
consequences, it is independent as to provability. 
The metatheorem **552 provides for the familiar method of establishing 
the independence of a postulate A in a system of postulates by exhibiting a 
model of the remaining postulates which gives to the representing form of 
A the value f. Such a model is called an independence example for A.&80 
The similar method of proving consistency of a system of postulates, 
namely, by exhibiting a model, is also well known. 640 However, it happens 
in certain important cases that such a proof of consistency, though possible, 
is of doubtful significance, because in establishing the existence of the model 
it is necessary to use a meta-language in which equivalents (in some relevant 
sense) of the postulates and their underlying logic are already present. For 
example, the consistency of the postUlates (Ao), (A1), or (A2) may be dem-
onstrated by using the natural numbers in the obvious way to provide a 
model; but this is a line of argument which evidently would carry no weight 
at all for one who had real doubts of the consistency of ordinary arithmetic, 
and which, even if the purpose is only to verify the correct formalization of 
>3tThis method of establishing independence of postulates was used by Peano, 
Rivisla di Matema/ica, vol. I (1891), see pp. 93-94, and by Hilbert in his Grundlagen dey 
Geomelrie, first edition (1899). However, the origin of the method is to be seen still 
earlier in connection with the non-Euclidean geometry of Bolyai and Lobachevsky-
models of the postulates of this geometry, found by Eugenio Beltrami (1868) and Felix 
Klein (1871), being in effect independence examples for Euclid's parallel postulate. 
'IOCr. the first edition of Hilbert's Grundlagen d~r Geometric, pp. 19-21. 

§55] 
POSTUL.ITE THEORY 
329 
a theory already admitted informally, seems to accomplish relatively little. 
A system of postulates will be said to be complete as to provability if the 
logistic system which consists of the pastula tes together with the underlying 
logic is complete with respect to the transformation of A into -A (in the 
sense of §18). In many important cases, however, such completeness is 
unattainable, as is shown in the incompleteness theorems of Galle!, which 
were already referred to in the discussion following **546. 
A system of postulates will be said to be complete as 10 consequences if, 
in the case of every wff A of the logistic system which consists of the postu-
lates together with the underlying logic, the value of the representing form 
of A either is t for every model of the postulates or is f for every model of 
the postulates. 
The nobOll of completeness as to consequences, as thus defined, is not 
wholly free of dependence on the ch()ice of the underlying logic. But such 
independence of the underlying logic is possessed by still a different com-
pleteness notion for postulate systems, namely, that of categoricalness, due 
to Huntington and Veblen,&4.l which we go on to define. 
'We consider only the case that the undefined terms belong to the notation 
of a functional calculus of first or second order, or of a functional calculus 
of first order with equality, i.e., the undefined terms are individual constants 
or functional constants in the sense of these calculi. However, the extension 
to higher cases is straightforward (compare footnote 530), 
Two models of a system of postulates are said to be isomorphic if there is 
a one-to-one correspondence between the two domains of individuals llsed 
in the two models542 such that the values given in the two models to any 
"IE. V. Huntington, Transactions of the American JIalhematical Saciety, vol.:~,~ 1002), 
see pp, 264, 277-278,281, 283-2"'4: Oswald Veblen, ibid., vol. 5 (19fi4), see pp. 346--34 7. 
Compare further the remarks of Huntington, ibid., vol. tl (1905), pp. 209-210. The term 
categorical (now th~ usual one) appears first in the paper of Veblen, who credits t!l>: 
suggestion of it to John Dewey. 
Though the formulation of the idea of categorical ness as a concept applicabll' to postu· 
late systems generally seems to have been made first by Huntington and Veblen, results 
are found in the literature much earlier which are tantamount to the categoricalness 
of particular systems of postulates. Thus paragraph 134 of Dedekind's Was Sind u1ld 
was Sollen die Zahlen? (d. footnote 525) contains the essentials of the usual proof of 
categoricalness of Peano's postulates, similar to that which is described in exercise 55.15 
below. And the result established by Georg Cantor in the Malhcmalische Annalen, 
vol. 46 (1895), pp. 510-512, is in effect that a certain system of postulates-his well-
known characterization of the continuum-is categorical. (Dedekind speaks of "Be· 
dingungen" and Cantor of "Merkmale," rather than of postulates or axioms.) 
"·Of course it is not excluded as a special case that the two domains of individuals 
may be the same, in which case the one-to-one correspondence required is some onc-to· 
one correspondence of that domain of individuals on to itself. (We assume the term 
"one-to-one correspondence" to be familiar to the reader, but an explanation of it may 
be found, if needed, In footnotes 556, Mol.) 

, .. 
330 
~ 
FUNCTIONAL CALCULI OF SECOND ORDER [CHAP. V ~ 
'i 
particular free variable occurring in the representing forms of the postulates 
always correspond to each other according to this one-to-one correspondence. 
I.e., if in the first model the vaille a is given to an individual variable a, 
and in the second model the value at is given to a, then a must correspond to 
a' in the one-to-one correspondence between the two domains of individuals; 
and if in the first model the value ifJ is given to an n-ary functional variable 
t, while in the second model the value ifJ' is given to t, then the propositional 
functions ifJ and fIJ' must be so related that, whenever the individuals aI' al • ' 
.... an of the first domain of individuals correspond in order to the indi- . 
viduals a~, a~. ' .. , a~ of the second domain. the value ifJ(al , a2 • ••• , a.)_ 
is the same as the value t/J' (a~, a;, .. " a~). 
Then a system of postulates is said to be categorical if all its models are 
isomorphic. 
We leave to the reader the proof of the following metatheorems, which 
state some obvIOUS cunnections among the three notions of completeness of 
a postulate system: 
**554. 
Every system of postulates complete as to provability is complete· 
as to consequences. 
**556. 
Every categorical system of postulates is complete as to conse-
quences. 
**556. 
If a categorIcal system of postulates has a model We, then every 
system of postulates with the same undefined terms and the same 
underlying logic, if it is complete as to consequences and has the 
model we, must be categorical. 
Finally. before concluding this section, we have to consider one other way 
in which postulates are often used, Namely, instead of serving as basis for 
a special branch of mathematics, a system of postulates may be used in the 
course of the development of some more general mathematical theory, in . 
the role of a definition of some particular kind of structure which is to be 
considered in the context of the more general theory. 
As an illustration we may take the case of postulates for an integral 
domain. 
One system of postulates for an integral domain may be obtained from 
the postulates (Al) by omitting the postulate of mathematical induction •.. 
changing the fifth postulate to (3x)L'(x, y, z). changing the twelfth postUlate 
to (3.::c)(3y) - • .::c = y and adding the postulate Xl = xz :;::) • F(x1 } :;::) F(x.}. 
The fourth postulate then he comes non-independent and may be omitted. 

§55] 
POSHlLATE THEORY 
Thus, retaining the same definition schemata that were llsed in connection 
with (Ao), we have the following system of twelve postulates, which we shall 
call (ID): 
(3z).E(x, Y, z) 
£(X1' x2, Y1) :::> • £(X2' x3, Y2) :::> • E(YI' x3, z) :::> L'(XI' Y2' z) 
L'(x, y, z) :::> l.'(y, x, z) 
(3x)2.'(x, y, z) 
(3z)FI(x, Y, z) 
Il(xl , X2, YI) :::> • fl(x2. X 3, Y2) :::> .1l(Yl' x:l' z) :::> II(xl , Y2' z) 
Jl(x, y, z) :::> n(y, x, z) 
Jl(Xl' Y, z) :::> .n(x~, y.:1 :::> Zo(y) v Xl =:1'2 
(3x)JJ(x, y, y) 
Il(xlJ x2, Y2) :::> • Il(x1 • X3, Y3) :::> • .E(x2, X3, YI) :::> • L'(Y2' Y3' z) :::> Jl(XI' YI' z) 
(3x)(3y) ""'. x = Y 
Xl = X2 => • F(x\) :::> F(X2) 
When these postulates are used, not as basis for their own branch of 
mathematics, but in order to introduce in the context of a more general 
theory the term "integral clomain," or a llotation serving the same purp()~e, 
they must be rewritten in the form of a definition schema. It would usually 
be necessary to be able to speak not only of the individuals as forming an 
integral domain with respect to a pair of operations (in the roles of addition 
and multiplication) but also of any class of individuals as forming an integral 
domain. Thus the definition schema must introduce a notation, say id(f, g, h), 
in which f and g are ternary functional variables and h is a singulary func-
tional variable. 
And for values rfJ, !l', and €I of f, g, and h, it must be possible to understand 
id(f, g, h) as expreSSing that €I is an integral domain with respect to rfJ and !l', 
in the usual sense of those words in Informal treatments of algebra. 
As derived from the particular system of postulates (ID), this definition 
schema for id(f, g, h) is the followillg;543 
UIThe definiens has an evident relatIOnship to the representing form of the con-
junction of the postulates (ID), but differs in several ways, in particular it has one 
more free functIOnal variable. As here given, it does not parallel the pI)stulates quite 
perfectly, some obvious simphficatlOns by P anll Fl haVing been made, 

d 
;' 
330 
FUNCTIONAL CALCULI OF SECOND ORDER 
[CHAP, V 
particular free variable occurring in the represen ting forms of the postulates 
always correspond to each other according to this one-to-one correspondence. 
I.e., if in the first model the value a is given to an individual variable a, 
and in the second model the value a' is given to a, then a must correspond to 
a' in the one-to-one correspondence between the two domains of individuals; 
and if in the first model the val ue cP is given to an n-ary functional variable 
f, while in the second model the value (/J' is given to f, then the propositional . 
functions (/J and cP' must be so related that, whenever the individuals at, ai' 
.. " an of the first domain of individuals correspond in order to the indi-
viduals a~. a~, ... , a~ of the second domain, the value (/J(a1• a2 , .• " a .. ) 
is the same as the value CP' (a~, a~, ... , a:). 
Then a system of postulates is said to be categorical if all its models are 
isomorphic. 
We leave to the reader the proof of the following metatheorems, which 
state some obvious connections among the three notions of completeness of 
a postulate system: 
**554. 
Every system of postulates complete as to provability is complete 
as to consequences. 
**555. 
Every categorical system of postulates is complete as to conse-
quences. 
**556. If a categorical system of postulates has a model we, then every 
system of postulates with the same undefined terms and the same 
underlying logic, if it is complete as to consequences and has the 
model we, must be categorical. 
Finally, before concluding this section, we have to consider one other way· 
in which postulates are often used. Namely, instead of serving as basis for 
a special branch of mathematics, a system of postulates may be used in the 
course of the development of some more general mathematical theory, in 
the role of a definition of some particular kind of structure which is to be 
considered in the context of the more general theory. 
As an illustration we may take the case of postulates for an integral 
domain. 
One system of postulates for an integral domain may be obtained from 
the postulates (AI) by omitting the postulate of mathematical induction, 
changing the fifth postulate to (3x).E(x, y, z),changing the twelfth postulate 
to (3x) (3y) - • x = y and adding the postulate Xl = Xi ::> • F (Xl) ::> F (xs). 
The fourth postulate then becomes non-independent and may be omitted. 

§55] 
POSnJLiTE TlIFORY 
331 
Thus, retaining the same ddinitiuI1 schemata that Wf'[C' used in connection 
with (Ao) , we have the following system of twelve postulates, which we shall 
call (1D): 
(3z).E(:l:, y, z) 
l,'(Xj. x 2• Yl) :::> • .E(xz• x3 • Yz) ::::> .l,'(Yl' x 3, z) ::> l,'(Xl' Y2' z) 
.E(x, Y, z) ::::> .E!Y, x, z) 
(3x)2.'(x, y. z) 
(3z)n(x, y, z) 
fl(x}> X2' YIl ::::> • ll(x2' x3 • Yz) ::::> • n(y!, x 3 ' z) ::> nixl • Yz. z) 
nix, y, z) ::::> Il(y. :-c, z) 
l1(x j • y, z) ::::> • /l(x2, Y Z) ::::> 7o!Y) v XI = Xz 
(3x)rJix, y, Yi 
ll(x1J x2, yz) => • n (Xl' X 3• Y3) :::> • .E(X2, X 3 , YI) ::::> • E(yz, Y3' z) ::::> n(xl , YI' z) 
(3xH3Yi - • x = y 
\Vhen these postulates are used, not as basis for their own branch of 
mathematics, but In order to introduce in the context of a more general 
theory the term "integral domain," or a notation serving the samc purposc, 
they must be rewritten in the form of a definition schema. It would usually 
be necessary to be able to speak not only of the individuals as forming all 
integral domain 'with respect to a pair of operations (in the roles of addition 
and multiplication) but also of any class of individuals as forming an in tegral 
domain. Thus the definition schema must introduce a notation, say id (f. g, h). 
in which f and g are ternary functional variables and h is a singulary func-
tional variable. 
And for values <P, 'P, and e of f, g. and h, it must be possible to understand 
id(f, g, h) as expressing that e is an integral domain wlth respect to (J) and 'P. 
in the usual sen~e of those words in informal treatments of algebra. 
As derived from the particular system of postubtes (ID), this definition 
schema for id(f, g, h) is the followillg: 543 
'''The definiens has an evident relatlOnslllp to the representing form of the COll-
junction of the postulates (ID), hut differs ill several ways, in particular II has one 
more free functional variable. As here gIven, it does not paranel the postnlates quite 
perfectly, Rume obvious SImplificatIOn, by j) ant! F' havlTl>( b""n mad~. 

332 
FUNCTIONAL CALCULI OF SECOND ORDER [CHAP. V 
D24. 
id(f,~, h) -+ h(x) =>,. • h(y) =>1/ • h(z) => •• h(xl) =>"1 • h(Yl) =>111 • 
h(xzl =>".' h(yZ) =>1/2 ' h(xa) =>".' h(Ya) =>1/ •• (3z)[h(z)f(x, y, Z)J 
[f(Xl' X Z' yd => .f(xz, Xa. Y2) => .f(y!, Xa' Z) => f(xl' Y2' Z)J ~f(x, Y. z)::::> 
fly, X, z)] (3x)[h(x)f(x, y, z)] (3zHh(z)~(x, y, z)~ [~(xv X 2• Yl)=> • 
~(X2' X3, Y2) => '~(YI' x3, z) => ~(Xl' Y2' z)] [~(x, Y. z) => g(y, X, z)] 
[~(Xl' Y, z) => • ~(X2' y, z) => • [h(z) =>. fry, Z, z)] V • h(x) :::I", • 
h(y) =>1/' f(xl , X, Y) :::I f(X2' X, y)~ (3x)[h(x)~(x, y, y)] 
[~(XI' x2' Y2) :::I • g(x1• x3, Y3) => • f(xz, Xa' Yi) => • f(Y2' Ya, Z ) :::I 
~(Xl' Yi' zjJ (3x)(3y)(3z)(3xI):h(x)h(y)h(z)h(Xllf(x, z, xll-f(y, z, Xl); 
• [h (X) :::J" .• h(y) :::JI/ • f(xl , X, yj => f(xz• X, Y)~ :::::l • F(x!) => F F(za) 
In many informal treatments of abstract algebra in the literature, systems of. j 
postulates for a group, a ring, an integral domain, a field. etc. enter in this 1 
way-in the role uot of axioms but of defmitions which, in a corresponding 
~ 
formalized treatment, would appear as definition schemata analogous to D24. 
And the formalization of such a treatment of abstract algebra would then be 
a development within a pure functional calculus of second order, say F;P, with 
perhaps the axiom of well-ordering of the individua.ls and an axiom of infinity 
(see §§56, 57), one or both, as added axioms. Or it may well be necessary for 
the sake of some parts of the development to use a functional calculus of 
higher order than the second-this will depend on just what the content 
of abstract algebra is conceived to be. In any case, abstract algebra is thus 
formalized within one of the pure functional calculi, and in this sense we may 
say if we like that it has been reduced to a branch of pure logic. 
Many other branches of mathematics are customarily treated in a simila.r 
way, so that their formalization brings them entirely ·within one of the pure 
functional calculi. And though it is more natural or more usual in some cases 
than others, it seems clear that every branch of mathematics might be treated ~ 
in this way if we chose. For example, instead of deriving elementary number .j 
theory from the postulates (Ad in the role of axioms added to an underlying ,
logic, we might transform these postulates into a defimtion of the term "a.n 
,~ 
arithmetic" (in the formalized treatment, a definition schema), and then re-
.:1 ... 
state and re-prove all the usual theorems of elemen tary num ber theory as genera.l 1
theorems about "an arithmetic."'" 
_ 
~ 
.. 
Thus it is possible to say that all of mathematics is reducible to pure logic, 1
and to maintain that logic and mathematics should be characterized, not as 
different subjects. but as elementary and advanced parts of the same subject.'u 
"'As long as it is desired only to reproduce (in this sense) the theorems of A' within 
F~P, no added axioms are necessary. Also the theorem expressing that there exi5t at most 
one arithmetic (to within a one-to-one correspondence) requires no added axioms. But 
for sorr.e other theorems, in particular for the theorem expressing that there exist at 
least one arithmetic, an axiom of infmity and perhaps also the axiom of well-ordering 
~ t
.~ 
of the individuals will be necessary. 
j 
"'There is also another sense (that of Frege and Russell) in which it is often main-
It 
tamed that mathematics is reducible to logic. This is reserved for discussion in a later -~ 
section, But in the meantime it should be remarked that the issue is at least partly one '.; 

§55] 
EXERCISES 55 
333 
EXERCISES 55 
55.0. Extend the principles of duality, ·372-·374, to a logistic system 
obtained by adding arbitrary postulates to an applied functional calculus 
of second order as underlying logic, Carry out the proof in such a way as 
to include as a special case a proof of the principles of duality for the pure 
functional calculus of second order. 
55. Jr. Prove the following as theorems of the logistic system AO without 
making use of any of the postulates (Ao) (thus also as theorems of FIh): 
(1 ) 
(2) 
(3) 
x=x . 
x=y-::l.y=Z-::l.x=z 
X = Y -::l • Zo(x) -::l Zo(Y) 
ss.~. Prove the following as theorems of the logistic system AO, using 
only the first four of the postulates (Ao): 
(1) 
Zo(x) -::l • Zo(Y) -::l. x -
Y 
(2) 
(3) 
x = y -::l • Y = x 
55.3. Prove the following (in order) as theorems of the logistic system AO, 
using only the first five of the postulates (Ao): 
(I) 
(3x}Zo(x) 
(2) 
z} = Z2 -::l • J:(x, y, Z2) -::l l:(x, y, Z1) 
55.4. With the aid of the results of preceding exercises (if needed), prove 
the following as a theorem of N, using only the first nine of the postu-
lates (Ao): 
II(x, y, zd -::l • II(x, y. Z2) :-::l • Z1 = Z2 
55.5. With the aid of the results of preceding exercises, prove the follow-
ing as theo,rems of AG, using only the first eleven of the postulates (Ao): 
(1 ) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
Zo (Y) -::l II(x, y, y) 
Z1 = Z2 -::l .II(x, y, Z2) => Jl(x, y, zl) 
YI = Yz => • II(x, Y2' z) => fl(x, Yl' z) 
Zo{z) :-::l • IJ(x, y, z) -::l Zo(x) V Zo(Y) 
(3x)Z} (x) 
of decision as to terminology. It is also possible to hold, for example. that an axiom of 
infinity is outside the province of logic, and that logic ends and mathematics begins 
as soon as such an axiom is added. 

334 
FU.vCnONAL CALCULI OF SECOND ORDER 
~CHAP. V 
55.6. Pro\'(, the followll1g theorems of the logistic system which is ob· 
tained by adding the first elevt'll of the postulates (ID) to Flh as underl),ring 
logIc 
(1 ) 
(2) 
(8) 
E(Xl' y. z) => • E(x 2, y, z) ::::> • Xl = x2 
Zo(x) ::::> • Zt (y) ::::> - • x = y 
55.7. Show that every theorem of Al which contains no functional vari· 
abIes is also a theorem of /1.0 
55.8, In the system of pustulates (All. establish the ill dependence of the 
seventh postulate (the associative law of multiplication) bv means of the 
following independence example. The individuals are the four naturalnum· 
bers 0, 1, 2, 3, and additioll and multiplication afe as given in the following 
tables: 
+1 0 
:! 
:5 
xlO 1 2 :3 
O,n 
2 
:~ 
°1° 
0 0 0 
~\~ 
(I 3 2 
I 0 1 3 2 
:~ 0 
2jO 
:~ 2 I 
3i 3 
.) 1 ( I 
3 0 2 
;3 
(I.e .. more explicitly, in Hie replesclltillg forms of the postulates the fune· 
tiollal varidbles correspolIdi!lg to 1.: and [f an~ J;-3 and H3 rf'spectively; and 
il1 the model which CUllstrtmes the independellce example, the value of 
P is the propositional function </J such that </J(a, b, c) is t if and only if 
a ., b = c according to the first of the above tables, and the value of IP 
is the prnpositional function P such that Pta, b, c) is t if and only if a X b = c 
according to the second of the above tables.) 
55.9. In the system of postulates (Al), establish the independence of the 
eighth postulate (the commutative law of multiplication 1 by means of the 
following independence example. The individuals are 0 and all the complex 
numbers IX + pi in which IX and fJ are positive rational numbers. The sum 
is Ltken ill the usual way. A product is 0 if either factof is 0, and otherwise 
(IX + Pi) X (y + ~i) = ay + fJyi (the products rxy and py being taken in 
the usual wav). 
55.10. Establish the independence of the remaining postulates of (AI) 
by means of independence examples. 
55.11. Establish thf' independence of the postulates of (ID) by means 
of independence examples. 

§55] 
EXERCISES 5.5 
335 
55.I~. Express by means of a wff of A' that the only ternary relation, 
among natural numbers a, b, c, that satisfies the second pair of recursion equa-
tions of footnote 526 and the further condition that c is uniquely determined 
when a and b are given is the ternary relation lP such that t1l(a, b, c) holds when 
and only when a X b = c (in the sense that any ternary relatlOll among natural 
numbers satisfying the two recursion equatIOns and the further condition is 
formally equivalent to lP). 
55.][3. Prove the wff of the preceding exercise as a theorem of A'. 
(Make use of the postulate of mathematical induction.) 
§5.14. For A', suppose that the signs 0 and 1 are introduced by contex-
tual definition, according to the following definition schema. Of the signs 
ai' a2 , •• " a", let some (possibly) be O's, let others (possihly) be l's, and let 
the remainder be individual variables (not necessarily all different); let f 
be any n-ary functional variable or functional constant, let x and y be the 
first two (distinct) individual variables in alphabetic order that do not occur 
among aI' a 2, .•• , an, and let b I, b 2 , ... , bn be obtained from aI' a 2, ..• , an by 
replacing the sign 0 everywhere by x and the sign 1 everywhere by y; then 
f(a" a2, ... , afl) -+ (3x}(3y)[Zo(x)ZI(y)f(b l , b 2, ' , ., bn)J· 
For expressions which abbreVIate wffs of A' according to this defillitioll 
schema, establish as a derived rule a rule of substitution fllr individual 
variables, allowing to be substituted for an indiVIdual \'anable not only 
another individual variable but abu one of the signs (J, 1."J6 
550:[5. Prove that the system of postulLll('S (All is t'atl'.L;()nCJl. (.'';uj.:gn-
tion: In one model let (/J and tp be the values of the fUlIctional variables 
that correspond to 1.' and n respectively, and in a second model let <P' and 
'P' be the values of the functional variables that correspond to Land n re-
spectively. In the first domain of individuals there must be two unique 
individuals 0 and I. distinct from each other, such that <P(O. b, b) and 
!fJ{1, b, b) hold for all individuals b of the c!omalIl. In the second domain of 
individuals there must be two unique individ1lals 0' and I I, distinct from 
each other, such that 4>'(0', b, b) and 'P'(l', b, b) hold for all individuals 
b of the domain .. The required one-to-one correspondence between the two 
domains is that in which 0 corresponds to 0', and 1 corresponds to I', ann 
"·Compare footnote 528. 
This definition schema may be thought of as a modified form of a special case of 
Russell's contextual definition of descriptions, i.c., of his schema for contextual def-
inition of the notation (,x)A; see the American journal 0/ .\1alh~mlltics, vol. 30 (1908). 
p. 253. In this spccial case, following the remark of Herbrand in Comples Rendas dd 
Seances de ta Socleti des Sciences et des Let/res de Varsot'IP, Cl;lsse II I, '/01. 24 (1 !l31). 
p. 33, we are able to simplify the definltwns (contained In tht' schema) by taking ad-
vantage of the theorems, Zo(x)::::>. Z.(y) ::::> x = y and Z,(x'::::>. 21 (y) ::::> x = y, of A I. 
i
j

336 
FUNCTTONAL CALCULI OF SECOND ORDER [CHAP. V 
whenever a corresponds to a', and fP(a, 1, c) and fP'(a', 1', c') hold in the· 
respective domains, then c corresponds to c', The proof proceeds in the meta-
language by the method of mathematical induction.) 
55.160 Hence sho\',,' that the postulates (Ao) with Flh as underlying logic 
are complete as to consequences. 
55.l7. Show that the postulates (Ao) are not categorical because, besides 
the obvious model with the natural numbers as the individuals, there is also 
the following model. The mdividuals are the positive and negative integers 
and O. The value of the functional variable corresponding to }; is the ter-
nary relation that holds among a, b, c if and only if ja: + Ibi = Jel. And the 
value of the functional variable corresponding to Jl is the ternary relation. 
that holds among a, b, c if and only if iabl 
Ie]. 
55. I 8, The non-categoricalncss of the jJostula tes (Ao) as established in the 
preceding exercise may be thought to be of relatively trivial character, 
since there does exist a one-many correspondence between the domains of 
lIldividuals of the two models such that the values of the functional variables 
corresponding to };, and to fl, in the two models correspond to each other 
accordmg to the one-many correspondence. The second model could more-
over be excluded by taking an appropriate simple applied functional cal-
culus of first order with equality as underlying logic, and replacing "Xl = xt 
in the fourth and ninth postulates by "J(Xl' X2)'" Let the system of postu-
lates so obtained from (Ao) he called (AI)' and let the logistic system ob-
tained by adding them to the appropriate simple applied functional calculus 
of first order with equality be called ,1>/. (1) Show that the postulates (AI) 
are complete as to consequences. (2) By means of the metatheorems of 
exercise 48.22, establish the non-categoricalness of (A[), and hence also the 
non-ca tegoricalness of (Ao) 1!l a less trivial sense. 547 
.55- 11]1. Let V be a binary functional constant, and consider the system of 
postulates consisting of the slIlgle postulate (x)(y)V(x, y), added to a simple 
applied functional calculus of first order, having V as its one functional 
constant, as underlying logic. Show that this system of postulates is complete 
as to consequences but not categorical. 
55.:ii(), Show that in every model of the following system of postulates 
the domain of lI1dividuals is finite, but that there exist models with an arbi-
trarily large finite domain of individuals. There is one undefined term, a 
binary functional constant S. The underlyillg logic is an applied functional 
"'This is a special case of the result of Skol~m stated in footnote 452. His proof, by 
a different method from that suggested here, is given in Fundamenta ]\1alhemalical, 
voL 23 (1934), pp. 150-161. 

" 
§55] 
EXERCISES 55 
3:n 
calculus of first order with equality, having among its primitive symbols 
all propositional and functional variables, and 5 as its one functional 
constant. The postulates are: 
s (x, y) ::::> • S (x, z) ::> • Y = z 
F(x) ::> • F(y) ::> v [5(y, z) ::>. F(z)] ::> (y)F(y) 
5S,::U, To the postulates of the preceding exercise let the following in-
finite list of postulates be added. 
(3y)5(x, y) 
5 (xl' X 2 ) ::> • Xl =l= x 2 
5 (XI' x2) ::> • 5 (X2' Xa) ::> • XI =l= X3 
5 (Xl' X2 ) ::> • 5 (X2' x3) ::> • 5 (X3' x~) ::> • XI =l= X. 
5(x\> xa)::>. 5(x2' xJ )::>. 5'(X3' x4)::>. S(x., x:;J::>. Xl '4= X:; 
Show that the resulting system of postulates is consistent as to provability 
but not consistent as to consequences.548 
55.22, The following are informally stated postulates for parhal order, with 
a relation precedes as the one undefined term:'" 
No individual precedes itself. 
If a precedes band b precedes c, then a precedes c, 
From these a system of postulates for Simple order is obtained by adding the 
following third postulate: 640 
"'This is an adaptation of an example due to Tarski-see Monatshe/le /ur Mathe-
matill und Physik. vol. 40 (1933), pp. 97-112, By making use of the GlJdel incomplete-
nuss theorems (to be treated in a later chapter). it is also possible to find a finite 
system of postulates which is consistent as to provability without being consistent as 
,
to consequences, 
"'The name "partially ordered clas;" is taken from the German "tellwelSc geordnete 
Menge" of Felix Hausdorffs Grundziige der Mangenlehre (Leipzig, 1914), p, 139, where 
,
" the general notion of partial order (as distinguished from the treatmt'nt of particular 
cases of it) seems to have been first introduced, 
160This definition of simple order should perhaps be credited to C. S. Peirce, who. 
in the American joumal 0/ Ma/lwmallCs, voL 4 (1881), p, 86, gives a closely related 
definition. in terms of a relation analogous to ~ (rather than to < as 111 the CXCrL'lse 
above), 
A definition of simple order in terms of the relation prueties (analogous to <) IS 
given by Const, Gutberlet in the Zeilschri/I lu~ Philosoph'ie und Philosophische /(rillk, 
new series, vol. 88 (1886). pp, 183-184, The same definition is llseU aloo by Georg 
Cantor in the Mathematische Annalen. vol. 4.6 (1895), p, 496 (or see hi<. Gesammeli. 
Abhandlungen, p. 296); and it 1S probable that Gutbcrlct may haw taken the ddimtJOll 
from a manuscript of Cantor (see Gesammellr Abha1ldlungen, pp, 38~. <ld2-4J:l3). though 
his own statement about the matter is not entirely clear. Both (,utlJeriet and Cantor 
state explicitly only the last two of the three postulates given above, but the additional 
condition that no element precedes itself is tacitly intended, at least by Cantor, as IS 

! 
I, 
I! ,. 
I 
i 
I 
338 
FUNCTIONAL CALCULI OF SECOND ORDER [CHAP. V 
If a and b are any two different individuals, either a precedes b or b precedes a. 
From these in turn a system of postulates for well-ordering is obtained by 
adding the fourth postulate: "1 
In any non-empty class of llldividuais there is a first individual, i.e .• an in-
cHvidual that precedes all the others in tile class. 
(1) With a binary functional constant R denoting the relation of preceding, 
restate these postulates in the notation of an appropriate functional calculus of 
first order. (2) Hence, by the method which is used in the text to transform the 
postulates (ID) into the definition schema D24 for id(f, g. h), find expressions 
for each of the following, in the notation of the pure functional calculus of 
second order: the class lJf (of indlViduals) is partially ordered by the relation <1>; tll~ 
class lJf is simply ordered by the relation t:/J; the class ljI i~ well-ordered by the 
re/ali on rp. 
55.~3. In the case of each of the following systems of postulates found in the 
literature, restate the pustulates in the notation of an appropriate functional 
calculus (of not higher than second order), using the indicated functional con-
stants as the undefined terms: 
(1) Postulates for Euclidean plane geometry. Veblen and Young. Projectiv8 
Geometry. Volume 2, §66, pp. 144-146. 0, denoting the ternary relation among 
A. B. C, that A, B, C are in the order {A BC}; C, denoting the quaternary re-
lation among A, E, C, D, that A B 
i~ congruent to CD. (Omit the continuity 
postulate, XVII. 111 stating the postulate XVI, use may be made of the postu-
lates (A2 ), as they are stated above, but modifIed as required, in particular by 
replacing the functional constant 5 by a binary functional variable.) 
(2) The same postulates with the followil1g continuity postulate added: If K 
1S a non-empty class of points of a line a, if Band C are points of a such that 
every point X of ]{ IS in the order {X BC}. there is a point A of a SUcll that 
every point X of K distinct from A is in the order {XA C}, and no point Z of a in 
the order {ZA C} has the property that every point X of }( is in the order {X ZC}. 
(3) Postulates for (real) projective plane geometry. H. S. M. Coxeter, Tile 
Heal Profective Pla1LC, 2.21--2.25 (p. 12), :l.1l-3.16 (p. 22), and 10.11 (p. 138). 
P, denoting the class of points; L, denoting the class of lines; I, denoting the 
clear from i"l alhematische A nnalen, voL 49 (1897). p. 216 (or Gesammelte Abhandlungen. 
p. 321). 
The condition that no element precedes itself is of course replaceable by the 
condition that not both x precedes y and y precedes x. In this form the three 
postulates are given explicitly by B. 1. Gilman (a student of Peirce) in Mind. 
n.S., vol. 1 (1892), pp. 518-526; and by Giovanni Vallati in Rivisla di M alematica, 
vol. 2 (1892). p, 73. 
"lThe notion of a well-ordered class is due to Georg Cantor in Grundlagen einet' 
Aligemnnen Mannig/alligke,lslehYe, Leipzig, 1883, p. 4 (or Mathemalischc Annalen, 
vol. 21 (18S3). p. 548. or Acta Mathemai!ca, vol. 2 (1883), p. 393, or Gesammelle Ab-
handilmgen, p. 168). Cantor's definition of well-ordering is somewhat different from. 
but equivalent to, what i" now the usual definition by means of the fourth pos-
tulate above, Moreover Cantor at first merely presupposed the notion of simple 
order in giving the definition of well-ordermg. But a definition of simple order was 
supplied in 1895, as explained in the preceding footnote. 

§55] 
EXERCISES 55 
339 
relation of incidencc; S, denuting t.he quaternary relatioll of separatwll'" 
(4) P,)stLlI,1 tt's for E udidcall thrce-clnnensiollcd g'u,mNr\', Da \'id H il bert, 
Gnmdlagen dey (;eometne, seventh edition (llJ:;O), S§l-/:i, n, C, P L, and 1 as in 
parts (1) and (3), n, df'floting thl~ cia;.;" llf plan,'s; L dello\lllg tire J"tc'latJ'Hl ,)f 
incidence between points and planes; K. denuting the senary reLHlon among-
A, B, C, A', B', C, that the angle A.BC IS congruent to the <lngk ",J'B'C, 
Special attention must be givf'n to the postulate of linear complct,~ness ("Axiom 
der linearen Vollstandigkeit"), whose expres~ioll in til", notation of a functional 
calculus of no higher than second order offers some difficulty, and of which some 
restatement or modification may be necessary in order to rellder such expressiOll 
possible, 
(5) Postulates for (real) projective three-dimensional geometty, ~1<lfio Pieri, 
]I.-! emorie della Reale A ccademw dclie Srien::r di TorinO, ~er 2 vol. 4~ (PW9 j, 
pp, 1-56, J, denoting the ternary relation among a, b, C, that c is Oil the "tmight 
line joining a and b, 
(6) E. V, Huntington's postulates 1-14 for "the theory of real quantitres," 
Transactions of the American Mathematical Society, vol. 4 (1903), pp, 358-370, 
(7) Church's postulatt:s for" the 6econd ordinal class," or second number class, 
of Cantor, Tmns(lrlions of the Amencall il[alhel1wlical Society, voL 29 (El~';'), 
p, 179, 
(81 A. Lindenbaum's postlliatcs for :1 metric space,'" FltlUil"II'IlU JIll!!/(' 
mallei/c, vol. 8 (1[126), p, 211; glvell alsu bv C Kuratowskl, '{""po/utile !, flrst 
edition (IHaa), pp 82-8:1, or second etl:~.')!1 ,IU-18: p O!I, (1' .. 1' t]I\' irljrr>ductl')J\ 
of the notioll of real number, make use u1 the postulates of part \I>J of tlli:i 
exercise, or of sOllie other system of pootula tcs ,CrVill!; th,. sallle puq)()S". ) 
(9) Postulates for a complete space,55" ubtaincd from the forl'goillg by adding 
the postulate that is given by Kuratowski, T,'puluglc I, first C'dit.i'it1, p. In(l. ur 
second edition, p, 312, 
SS.Z4-. In a manl'-sorted functional calcl<lu.'&" iuf firot or highl'l ord<.'r) ',.her .. , 
are individual vanables of mon than one :;urt, Ult' dlfferullt smh iJl'lfi" (llstl:' 
guished l>y SU!-'CfSCrljJtS, and an lIlflnite lisl cJ! intilvidllcll v;[liahle" of ('<tell ."Jrt 
belllg available, Say in an Il-sorted fUllctlOnal calculus the indnlduai variables 
of the first sort are :cl , y', z" xi, "; tho:ic of the s(:cond sun are' x', y', z', :t~ 
, and so on, up to x", y", Z", x;, " 
as indiVidual variables of the nth sort, There 
'''As in part (1), the notion of an infilli('c "'qu' ll' \) of in<.iividuai, which entt'r, In 
thes" postuia.tes may be provided Jor b', mak",g us. of til(' postulates (:\2) appro-
priately modified, (Compare tht' proe,'dLiH' I" tIll' text In transformillg the postulate, 
(ID) for an inic'gral domain into a pI" 'l'nsitl,mal fc,rm ""th three in',., v"nahIcs, expres;-
ing that a class is all intt'gral dom"ia WIth rcc;pc:ct to two tC'rnary relations,) 
'''The notion of a metric space i.l.lld tllat of a compktc (or cOlupld p llle'trie) "pace 
are due to 1Iaurice Frechet, thuugh iD a diffl'.fI'lit lr:rrninology, S8t; llh theSIS in 111e 
Rendicunti dt! Circolo lV/ateml.ticv di PaLermo, vol. ~:2 (lH06), PI" 1-74, and a paper II! 
the Tyansa.:lions of I/;~ American AlaihematiCilI SOCld;:, Vol] 
Iv (191b), pp, 53-65, 
>USee a paper by Arnold Schmidt in the Alalhemalische Annale", vol. ll5 (1938), 
pp, 48~506, (Added in proof, See also improved treatments of the same topic hv Arnold 
Schmidt in the Mathonatische Annalel/. yol. 123 (ID::;l), pp. 107-200, and by Hao 
Wang ill Tile Journal 0/ Sy'n/;otic Logic, vol. 17 (llJ52), pp, I05-lItU 

340 
FUNCTIONAL CALCULI OF SECOND ORDER [CHAP. V . 
are (or may be) then n sorts of singulary functional variables, again distinguished 
by superscripts, an infinite list of each sort; thus Fl, Gl, HI, F:, ... as singulary 
functional variables of the first sot:t, F', GI, H', F~, ' .. as singulary functional 
variables of the second sort, and so on, And where a is an individual variable 
and f is a singulary functional variable, f(a) is wf if and only if f and a are of the. 
same sort. There are (or may be) n' sorts of binary functional variables, distin-
guished by superscripts thus: FI,I, GI,I, HI,I, F:,I, ... ; FI,., GI,., HI,., F!,I: and 
so on. And, for example, F"I(a l , a,) is wi if and only if a 1 is an individual 
variable of the second sort and a, is an individual variable of the first sort. 
Similarly there are (or may be) n' sorts of ternary functional variables, and so on. 
For the principal interpretation of an n-sorted functional calculus, there must 
be a non-empty domain of individuals of the first sort, which is the range of the 
individual variables of the first sort; a non-empty domain of individuals of the 
second sort, which is the range of the indIvidual variables of the second sort; 
and so on (n domains of individuals altogether). The various functional variables 
then have ranges consIsting of propositional functions in a way which will be 
obvious by analogy with the pnncipal interpretahons already given (in Chapters 
TIl and V) for the one-sorted functional calculi of first and second order. 
For an applied (as distinguished from a pure) 'II-sorted functional calculus there 
may also be individual and functional constants, each of which must belong to 
a partIcular sort in the same way as the individual and functional variables, 
Taking the remaining primItive symbols to be the eight improper symbols 
listed at the beginning of §30, we may use for an n-sorted functional calculus of. 
first order the formation rules of §30, except that 30ii is modified in the way 
indicated in the first paragraph of this exercise; the rules of inference and axiom 
schemata may then be the same as in §30, except that to -306 the requirement is 
added that b must be of the same sort as a. Ann-sorted functional calculus of 
second order may be formulated similarly, with appropriate provision added for 
quantification of functional variables. 
(1) State in full a primitive basis for an n-sorted functional calculus of second 
order, as closely as possible analogous to the primitive basis for F: given in §60, 
For a fixed k, show that those theorems of the system which contain individual 
variables of only the kth sort are (apart from trivial notational differences) the 
same as the theorems of F;. 
(2) With a two-sorted functional calculus of second order as underlying logic, 
takmg the individuals of the first sort to be the points, and the individuals of the 
second sort to be the lines, and taking as undefined terms a binary functional 
constant I denoting the relation of incIdence and a quaternary functional con-
stant S denoting the relatIon of separation, state Coxeter's postulates for pro-
jective tHane geometry (see 55.23(3)) in this notation. 
(3) Similarly, state Hilbert's postulates for Euclidean three-dimensional ge-
ometry (see 55.23 (4)). with a three-sorted functional calculus of second order as 
underlying logic, the three sorts of mdividuals being the points, the lines, the 
planes. 
(4) Similarly, state the postulates for a metric space (55.23(8)) with a two-
sorted functional calculus of second order as underlying logic, the two sorts of 
individuals being the points of the space and the real numbers. 

WELL-ORDERll\lG OF THE INDIVIDUALS 
341 
I 
§56] 
~ 
(5) The logistic system of part (2) of this exercise (i.e., the lOgIstic system 
",' 
obtained by adding the indicated postulates to the underlying logic) is in an 
appropriate sense eqUIvalent to the logistic system of 55,2.'1(3). In a like sense, 
the logistic system ()f part (3) is equivalent to that of 55.23(4), and the logistic 
system of part (4) is equivalent to that of 55.23(8). Explain in what sense the 
. equivalence holds, And state and prove a general metatheorem establishing the 
appropriate equivalence in all such cases. (Ct. the papers of footnote 554.) 
56. Well-orderin~ of the individuals. Returning to consideration of 
t the pure functional calculus of second order F~P, we now take up the question 
t 
of axioms expressible in the notation of the pure functional calculus of 
. second order, alone, which-for some purposes or in some connections-it 
i may be desirable to adjoin to F;P as additional axioms. 
f 
One such axiom, the possible addition of which to F~P w(' shall wish to con-
sider, is an axiom to the effect that the individ uals can be well-ordered. 
In order to express this, we may make use of the defimtion of well-ordering 
which was given in 55.22, writmg the conjunction of the universal closures of 
the four postulates of 55.22, replacing the undefined term" preced es" everywhere 
by the functional \'anable F·, and then prefixing the existential quantifier 
(3 F') to this conjunction. The reSUlting expression may be slmplified, however, 
by omitting the third postulate, which can he shown to be non-independent. 
Thus we obtain the axiom (w) which is written below. 
The axioms at chulce are reserved for discussion irt connection with the func-
tional calculi of higher order, although certain special cases of an axiom of choice 
can be stated already in the notation of the functional calculus of second order 
and summarized in an axiom schema'" \Ve anticipate this discussion here so 
far as to say that it will follow, from the axi()I11s of choice. not only that tile indi-
viduals can be well-ordered but also various higher domains-in particular that 
the singular.\' propositional functions (classes) of individuals can be well-
ordered, the binary propositional functions of Individuals, and so on-and con-
versely that the axioms of choice will follow from such assumptions of well-
ordering. 
However, our present axiom (w) must not be considered as representing a 
special case or a weak form of an axiom of chmce. For the effect when we add 
it as an axiom to F~P is just that we restrict the interpretation to such domains 
of individuals as are capable of being well-ordered, a procedure which should 
be acceptable even to those who distrust or prefer not to assum,~ any axiom of 
choice. 
"'The axiom schema in question is 
'x) (3f' A::> (3") (X)~t(XI' X.' ... , x,,) 
AI 
l 
) 
\ .., 
It(x, Xv x,, ... , x.1 
where x, x" x" .. '. xn arC distinct individual vanables, f is an n-ary functional variable, 
a is 'in (n + I)-ar)' functlOnal variable, and A is it wit lY,ntaming no bound occurrences 
of elther g or x. It is given by Hilbert and Aciwrm,wn, Gru'~J::iige an theol'etischen 
Logik, second edition (1938), p. 104, and third edition (1949), p. Ill; also in the paper 
of Ackermann mentIOned in the last pdrdgraph of footnote 507, 

342 
FUNCTIONAL CALCULI OF SECOND ORDER 
Thus the following aXiom oj wdl-cmlermg of the individuals-or axiom 
(W). as we shaH also call it -is to IJU cOllsidered as a possible added axiom: 
(3F) • (x)-F(x, x) • F(x, y) :::::>",v [FlY, z):::). F(x, z)] • 
G(x) :::::>Gx (3y) • G(y) • G(z) :::::>. F(y, z) v y = z 
Following a method of naming that we adopt as systematic, we call the 
resulting logistic system F;P(w) when the axiom (w) is added to the logistic 
sy"tcm F~P 
EXERCISES S6 
56.0. Restate (w) as ,w equivalent axiom in prenex normal form, with 
only four different illdividu;tl variables, one singulary functional variable. 
and one binary functional variable. 
56. I. Prow the statemellt made in the text that the third of the four 
postu.atGs for well-orderinb 
(55.2~) is non-independent. 
56.2. State and prove as a theorem of F:P(W} that the individuals can be 
simply ordered. (Use the ddmitioil of simple order gi'ven in 55.22.) 
56.3. It follows from axiom (w) that every relation between individuals 
kLS a many-one subrc1abon with the same domain e56 Expressed in the notation 
,-,I the functional calculus 'If second order, this is:567 
:3G) • G(x, zi :::),. Fk 2') • F(x, z) =>xz (3zl ) • G(x, z) E z :: = ZI 
Prove this as a theorem of I'-;P(W), 
56.4. Prove the same thc'Jrem in the l,)gistic system that is obtained by 
adJilig to F~P the axiom schema of footnote 555. 
57. Axiom of infinity. ;\ wff of one of the functional Calculi may be 
considered as an axiom 0/ infinity if it is valid in at least one infinite domain 
of individuals but is not valid ill any finite domain of individuals. 
Of the pure functional calculus of first order with equality, and therefore 
also of the pure functional calculus of first order. there is in fact no wff 
"·One relation IS said to be a subrelalion of a second one if it formally implies the 
second unl'. in the sense of form,d implication explained in §06. A relation R is said to 
be many-one if for every member a of the domain of R there is a unique corresponding 
member b of the converse domain of R such that a bears the relation R to b. Moreover 
a relatlOn is said to be one-many if its converse is many-one; and one·lo·one if both it 
and its converse are many-one. (See further the explanation oi terminology in footnote 
517.) 
mCompare Hilbert and Ackt:rmann, Grundzuge dey TheorelischeH J.Offik, second 
edition (1938). formula g on page 104, and third edition (1949). formula g on page Ill. 

§57] 
AXIOM OF INFII\lITY 
343 
which may thns be considered all :\.xiulll oj ;nfinitv ,05., Tlwri'fnH' tht' variolls 
axiolJls 01 il1fillitv whIch we dlSCllSS in tbi~ ";edi()11 arc wffs onl\' Ili till: pure 
functional calculus of :;econd order.:>59 
An effect of adjoining an axiom of infinity to 1'2P as additional ilxiom is of 
• course to restrict the interpretation to domallls of individuals which are infinite, 
We prefer to take an axiom of infinity which imposes no great fnrther restriction 
on the interprp.tation, heyond the exclusion of fillite domains of individuals. b60 
Consider for example the wff which results when we write tIlt: conjunction of 
the universal closures of the postulates (A2) of §55, replace the functional con-
stant S everywhere by the functional variable C2, and then prefix the existential 
quantifier (3C2) to this conjunction. As an axiom added to F:D, this wff would 
restrict the domain of individuals not merely to be infinite but. moreover to be 
enumerably infinite. This is too severe a restriction for wilat we regard as the 
purpose of an axiom of infinity, But a more acceptable aXIOm of Infinity, namelv 
(003) (or (004)) below, may be obtained by treating similarly four (or three) 
of tho five postulates (A.). 
Of \'arious alternative ;Ixioms of infinity which we might cOlbider adjoin-
ing to F~P as additional axioms, we list here the five following, (co 1)._\ co5l: 
(001 ) 
(002) 
(003 ) 
(3 F) (x j )(x2 ) (x3 ) (3y) • F(:rl' xzl :::. F(X2' x3 ) :=i F(XI' xa)J • 
-F(Xj, Xl! F(xl , yi 
(3F) (x)(3y)(z) • F(z, xl:=i F(z, y) • -FIX, x) F(x, y) 
(3F). (x n 32/)F(x, y) • J·(:r, fJ) :=i "" . /'(X, Zj:=i, Y = 
~ • 
F(y, x) :=i xv [F(z, x) :=i. y = Z i • (3x) (y)-F(y. x) 
668For an axiom of infinity that would be valid in an enumerably infinite domain of 
individuals, this is a corollary of exercise 48.24, Th,· same result can be obtained far an 
axiam of infinity valid ,mlv in a non-enumcrctblv infir;ik dumaiE "f ir:dividdals bv 
making use of an aX10111 o(chcJlce 111 the lneta-Ial;gllagc and ~f)llt}"\·ln;..: tlh.' !netli0d \;1 
exercise 48,22-a5 wa" dane by Leon Henkin ill hs du;sertatlull of j ~47 ar:d in the 
paper t'ited m fo"tnotc 465, (Campan, further f",)tnot;; 451.1 
"'Thert are alEo axioms of infinity which are wUs only of hinctJolial calcul! of stll! 
higher order. In p<,rticular the "Intin ax" of Pyillci/,ia AJ"t}w1>l.a/zw"~ It w<lUld bp [C· 
produced in our notation. and the three axioms of iniinity that correspmd tu Tar,;ki '" 
definitions of finiteness T, II, III in FUlldamenla }'vIa/hemal,f1u, vol. 6 (1924). pp. 45, 93. 
&6°It Immediately suggests Itself to int1Odl1"" a mor" rcstricic'd notl'JI1 of an a.1Iom 01 
infinity, defining an axiom of infinity (syntactically) as a wff which lS \'alid !l1 every 
infinitl' domain but not in any finite domain, This might Inclt'ed be done 111 a suitable 
meta-language. But from the point of view of justifying or explaining a preference for 
one proposed axiom of infinity over annther, the effect is less s:ltisfactary than might 
have been expected. For under the more restricted notion of an axiom of infimty the 
decision as to which of the wffs (<>oI) -(coG) given below actually JS to be classed as an 
axiom of infinity depends on what are taken as deflniti(!f\s of "Infw:tc" ilnd "finite" 
for the meta-language; and also on the axioms of the (ultimately formalized) meta-
language. in partiClllar on the presence and the form ofaxinms plaYing the role of axioms 
of infinity and of choice, (Compare it simililr relllark by :\lostowski, Cample, yenJus des 
Seances d~ la Societe des Sciences e/ des Let/res ell' Varso1.<ie, C!assc' Ill, vol. 31 (1938), p, 1 G.) 

344 
FUNCTIONAL CALCULI OF SECOND ORDER 
(004) 
(31-) • (x)(3y)F(x, y) • F(y, x) ::::)"'1/ [Flz, x) =>. Y = zJ • 
(3x)(y)-F(y, x) 
( 0(5) 
-(3G)(F). C;(x, y) =>xv [G(x, z):::l. Y = z] • F(x) =>", 
F(y) =>v [G(y, z) =>z F(z)] :::l (y)F(y) 
Of these, (0) 1) has an obvious relationship to the example of Bernays 
and Schonfinkel of a wff of the pure functional calculus of first order which, 
is satisfiable in an infinite domain of individuals but not in any finite 
domains ;561 (002), to SchUtte's example of such a wff of the pure functional 
calculus of first order;562 (003) and (0),1), to the Peano postulates, (A2); 
ami (005), to the postulates of exercise 55.20. 563 
(IX) 3) expresses the existence of a one-to-one corresJlondence between the in-
dividuals and a proper subclass of the individuals.u~ Therefore it may also be 
thougllt of as denved from the l'elfce-Dedekind definition of an infinite class as 
one having a one-to-one correspondence with a proper subclass.··· 
(c04) expresses the existence of a one-many correspondence of the individuals 
to a proper subclass of the indiviouals, and thus represents a modified form of the 
Peirce-Dedekind definition of an infinite class. 
It is not to be expected that these and other axioms of infinity which we 
might consider will turn out all to be equivalent to one another in the sense 
that the (material) equivalence of allY two of them is a theorem of F~. 
In fact, let B be called 'weaRer than A if A ::::) B is a theorem of F;P but 
'.IIn the paper cited in iuotnote 4Hl. Compare also exercise 43.5(2). 
"'In his paper cited in footnote 430. Compare also exercise 43.5(1). 
"'The axiom (co5) of the writer's monograph of 1944 has here been simplified in 
accordance with a suggestion made by Paul Bernays in a letter of August 31, 1945. 
The idea of the axiom, that the individuals cannot be arranged in a closed cyclic order, 
is taken irom Dedekind's second definition of finiteness, which was given in the preface 
to the second edition (1893) of his Was Sind und was Sol/en die Zahlen?, and concerning 
which see further §7 of a paper by Alfred Tarski in Fundamenla MathemaliclU, vol. 6 
(lD24), pp. 83-93. and a paper by Jean Cavailles, ibid, vol. 19 (1932), pp.143-148. 
4UOne class is said to be a wbclass of a second Dne if all its members are members of 
the second one (compare footnote 556); and if in addition there is at least one member 
of the second class which IS not a member of the first class, then the first class is said 
to be a proper subcl,~ss of the second one. By a vne-Io-one c('rrespondellce between two 
clas~es IS meant a one-to-one relation, in the sen:ie of footnote 556, having one class as 
lt~ dornam and the other class as Its converse domain. (These are terms familiar ill 
mathematical wntmg generally, such as we have often assumed to be known to tho 
reader wIthout the need for special explanation. In particular, the notion of a one-to one 
correspondence has been used in "43Y and its proof and in the definition of categorical. 
ness in §65, the notions of many-one and one-many correspondence in §23 and in 6fi,18.) 
me. S. Peirce, American Journal 0/ 111athemaiics, vol. 7 (1885), p. 202; Richard 
Dcdekind, Was Si'nd und was Sol/ell die Zahlen) (1888), paragraph 64, As Dedekind 
pomts out in the preface to his second edition. the one-to-one correspondence of an 
infinite class to a proper subclass was first exhibited by Bernard Bolzano in hi. Para-
doxien des Unendlichen (1851) and was known also to Cantor in 1878, but neither of 
these authors has the proposal to make this the definition of an infinite class. 

EXERCISES 57 
345 
B => A is 110t a theorem of F:p. Then acconiillg to a result due to Andrzej 
Mostowski666 and B. A. Trachtenbrot,567 there is no weakest axiom of in-
finity, i.e., more exactly, given any axiom of infinity, there exists a weaker 
axiom of infinity.56B 
As regards the particular axioms of infinity, (001)-(005), some of the im-
plications and equivalences which hold among them are indicated in the 
following exercises (together with similar considerations concerning a few 
additional axioms of infinity introduced in the exercise:;). These are stated 
in each case in the form that a particular axiom of infinity is a theorelll of 
the logistic system obtained from F~P by adding Olle of the othrr axioms of 
infinity, with or without also the aXlOnl of wdl-ol'llcnng of tlle 1I1l1ivi<l1l~d~. 
But in view of the deduction theorem. they could abo be put (without iIll-
portan t diiference) in the form that ccrtain im plica tiul1s a nel cq \1i valcll ces 
are theorems of F~p. 
EXERCISES 57 
57.0. Restate (005) as an equivalent axiom in prenex normal form, with 
no free variables, and with the shortest prefix that can be obtained by use of 
propositional calculus and elementary laws of quantifiers in a straight-
forward process of reduction. 
57.1. According to the result just stated (without proof) ill the text, if 
A is any axiom of infinity there exists an axiom of infinity B such that A => B 
but not B => A is a theorem of F~p. Assuming this, show that, if A is any 
axiom of infinity, there exists an axium of iufillity B such that A=:J B but 
not B => A is a theorem of F:P(w). 
S7.:Z. Restate in the notation of FiP (as closoly as possiblr) the following 
informally stated axioms of infinity: 
(006) There is a subclass of the individuaJs isomorphic to the natural numbers 
as given by the Peano postulates. 
61IComples Rendus des Seances de la ,';ocUle dfS SCI~nc"s e/ d,'s I.('II>/'s de 
VaYsolli~. 
Classe III, vo!. 31 (1938), pp. 13-20. 
mDo/ilady Akademii Nauk SSSR, vol. 70 (1950), pp. 569-5i2. 
6nBoth Mostowskl and Traehtenbrot deal with logistie systems different from F:p, 
and they treat directly the question of a strongest definition of finiteness (of a class) 
rather than that of a weakest axiom of infinity. TIl<! result stated in tIll: 1.(·xl. is thus 
not explicitly contalllcd in their papers bur must be inferred from them. Both papers 
are moreover abstracts in which proofs are not given of the results annou!lced, but what 
are perhaps suffieient indications to make possible a reconstructIOn of the proofs are 
given in Trachtenbrot's paper and in Mostowski's review of it in The ./(JIlrnal 0/ Symbolic 
Logic, vol. 15 (1050), P 229. 
"j

346 
FUNCTIOI'v'AL CALCULI OF SECOND ORDER 
[CHAP, V 
(007) If the individuals can be simply ordered, they can be put into a simple 
order in which there is no last llIdlvid ual. 50' 
(C( 8) There exists a one-many correspondence of a class of individuals to 
Itself that is not a one-to-Ollt> correspondence of that class of individ uals to itself. 
(co9) The individuals canllot be simply ordered in such a way that in every 
nOll-empty class of individuals there is both a first individual and a last individ-
ual. 570 
(0010) There exist at least two different individuals, and there exists a one-
many correspondence of the ordered pairs of individuals to the individuals. m 
(Suggestion: A correspondence between the ordered pairs of individuals and the 
indiViduals may be thought of as a ternary propositional function and thus rep-
resented by a ternary functional variable.) 
57.3. Prove each of the following as a theorem of F;P(:03): (006); 
(001), (002); (005). 
57.4. Prove (003) as a theorem of F~P(W)(:04). 
57.5. (1) Prove (009) as theorem of F~P(:05). (2) Prove (005) as a theorem 
of F~pl"'9). 
57.6. Prove 
57.7. Prove 
57.8. Prove 
( (03) 
( co5) 
( co5) 
as a theoren1 of 
as a theorem of 
as a theorem of 
I ;2p(W)(C1J5) 57~ 
2 
• 
P2Pi"'4) 
2 
• 
p2Pi OOZ) 
2 
. 
58. The predicative and ramified functional calculi of second 
order. 
Objections against the absolute notion of all-as it is involved, e.g., in the 
notion of all classes of individuals, without qualification-have already been 
discussed briefly in footnote 535. There is much difference of opinion among 
matht>maticians regarding the significance of these objections, some holding 
them to be pointless and others believing that they cast serious doubts on the 
methods used and the results obtained in large parts of classical mathematics. 
Our purpose m this section IS not to debate the question of significance but to 
make a proposed definition of these objections-or of one form of them-by 
··'Tllls aXiOm of infinity IS suggested by the definition of finiteness which was given 
by H. Weber and slightly simplified hy J Kilrschak. See Jahresbericht der Deulschen 
MaLliematlker-Vere!nigung, vol. 15 (1906), p. 177, and vol. 16 (1907), p. 425. The re-
lationship should also be noticed to (CD I), which asserts the existence of a partial order 
of the individuals In which there is no last individuaL 
""Suggested by Paul Stackel's definition of fmiteness. Jahresberichl dey Deutschen 
M alhematiker-Vereinigung. vol. 16 (t 907), p. 425. 
·71Suggested by Tarski's definition of finiteness E, in Fundamenta Malhemalicae, 
vol. 30 (1938), p. 162. As here stated, however. the axiom has been modified by using 
a one-many correspondence In place of the onc-to-one correspondence of Tarski's 
definition E . 
• 72That thiS cannot be done without \lSlll/,( aXIOm (w) follows from a result obtained 
by l\Iostowskl III his dissertation, 0 Ntezalez,wsci Defimcfi SkonczonoSci w Systemie 
Logil/!, published as a sup[Jlemcnt to Anllalt" de la Societe Polonmse de AIatMmalique, 
vol. 11 (1938), pp. 1--54. 

§58] 
RAMIFIED FUNCTIONAL CALCULI 
347 
formulating as a logistic system the weakened functional calculus of second order 
to which they lead. 
In the form in which we wish to take them here. these objectIOns may be said 
to have originated in Henri Poincare's condemnation of what he called impre-
dicative defimtions, i.e., "definitions par.. une relation entre l'objet a dMinir 
e~ tous les individus d'un genre dont I'objet a detinir est suppose faire lui-m~me 
partie (au bien dont sont supposes faire partie des /ltres qui ne peuvent etre eux 
m~mes dMinis que par I'objet a dMinir)."673 This was afterwards embodied in 
Russell's vicious-circle principle,'" that "no totality can contain members de-
fined in terms of itself," or "whatever contains an apparent variable must not 
be a possible value of that variable."'" Also \Veyl objects in a similar way to 
what he takes to be a vicious circle in classical analysis.·" 
As understood by Russell in particular (and by 'Whitehead and Russell in 
Principia Mathematica) the vicious-circle principle constitutes a restriction upon 
the possible range of a propositional or functional vanable, and hence a restnc-
tion upon substitutions for such a variable. The application of this to the func-
tional calculus of second order affects primarily the axiom schemata • 509 and 
leads first to the predicative functwnal calwlus of second order and then to the 
ramified functional calculi of second order, as these are formulated belowY' 
"'The quotation is from a paper by Poincare in ,. Scientia," vol. 12 (1912), see p. 7 
For the earliest statement of Poincare's objection against impreuicative ddinitions 
("definitions non precticatives") see the Revue de Mtlaphysiquc el de Morale, vol. 14 
(1906), p. 307. 
'''It is not certain, however, that the vicious-circle principle of Russell is the same 
thing that Poincare intended, since Poincare never made a systematic development of 
his ideas in this direction and the examples which he gives (informally) of impredicative 
definition are not sufficient to determine what would have been his verdICt regarding 
other examples of what might be considered impredicative definition. 
In a paper in the Revue de MiltaPhysique et de Moralf, voL 17 (1909). PI'. 461-482 
(afterwards reprinted as Chapter IV of Dernieres Pensties (1913)). there lS a discussion 
by Poincare of Russell's "hierarchy of types," i.e., of the (higher-order) ramified func-
tional calculus which Russell introduced as based on the V1C1ous-circie pri nciple. From 
this it is perhaps fair to infer that Poincare regarded the VIcious-circle prIncIple as belllg 
in general accord with hIS own Ideas; but that he was unwtllIng to accept WIthout re-
servations the ramified functional calculus Wh1Ch Russell proposed as embodymg it-
even if modified by omission of Russell's axioms of reducibility, discussed m our next 
section. 
Apparently Poincare (unlike \Veyl) believed or hoped that all of classical mathemat-
ics could be developed without resort to impredicative definition once the postulates 
of arithmetic, including the postulate of mathematical induction, are granted. Compare 
his paper in Acta Mathematica, vol. 32 (1909), pp. 195-200, especially §5, pp. 198-200. 
"'See the American journal ot Mathematics, vol. 30 (1908), p. 237 The term" appar-
ent variable" is used by Russell in the sense m which we have been using "bound 
variable" (cf. footnote 28), and the second quoted statement of the vicious-circle 
principle is therefore to be rendered in our terminology as follows: a wff which contains 
a bound variable must not denote one of the values in the range of that variable. 
mSee the explanation in his paper, "Der Circulus Vitiosus in deT Heut1gen Begrun-
dung der Analysis" in the jahresberichl dey Deulschen ]\falhemaliker-VerClnlgung, vol. 28 
(1919), pp. 85-92. 
"'\Ve shall not try here to decide upon or state the semantical rules for a principal 
interpretation of any of the predicative or ramified functional calculi of second ordee 
But we remark that, in order to accord WIth the motivation as just described, it is 
-

348 
FUNCTIONAL CALClJLI OF SECOND ORDER [CHAP. V 
It slj()lIld he llntlced that the functional ralcu\us of first order remains un-
affected by the vIcious-CIrcle prinCiple, 
The predicative functional calculus of second order in the formulation 
Fr has the same primitive symbols and the same wffs as the simple func-
tional calculus of second order F~, A distinction is made of pure and ap-
plied, of singulary, binary, etc., predicative functional calculi of second 
uruel in the same way as for the simple functional calculus of second order; 
hut where the term "prerlica tive functional calculus of second order" is used 
without qualification, we shall understand that propositional variables and 
functional variables of all kinus-singulary, binary, ternary, etc,-are con-
tained, with or without individual and functional constants, 
The four rules of inference *500--*503 r('main the same for F;! as for Fi. 
The axioms of F;! are gIven by the following seven axiom schemata (the 
relationship of which to the axiollis alld axiom schemata of Fi will be evi-
dent): 
A::>.B:::> A 
A ::> ~B ::> Cl ::> • A :::> B::> • A ::> C 
-A:::> -B ::> • B ::> A 
A::>" B ::> • A ::> (a)B. where a IS a variable of any kind that is not a 
free variable of A, 
(a)A::> ~~A!, where a is an individual variable, b is an individual variable 
or an indIvidual constant, and 110 free occurrence of a in A is in a wf part 
of A pf the form (b)C, 
necessary to abandon the idea that a sentence denotes one of the two truth-values t 
and f, and hence to avoid taking these two truth-valup~ as the values of the propositional 
vanables, or classes and relations in extension as values of the fUllctional varial.>les. 
The standpoint of Russell in 1908, and of 'Whitehead and Russell in the first edition of 
PrinCIpia J'.1 athemalica, is apparently best represented by supposing sentences to denote 
propositions, taking propositions as values of the propositional variables, and prop-
erties and reJations in intension as values of the functional variables, And the more 
extensional view advocated by Russell in his [nlyoduction to the Second Edition of 
Principia Ala/hematica (d, footnote 590) can perhaps be represented by means of an 
infinite Jist ot truth-values, namely. two truth-values t", and f .. for each level 111, the 
values of the propositional variables of mtll level being t .. and flO' and the values of the 
n-ary functional van abies of ",til level being functions (in extension) having the ordered 
n-tuples of individuals a, their range, and ha \'ing t .. and f", (one or both) as values, 
It must be added at once that the foregoing is not a reproduction of Russell's own 
account of semantical matters, especiolly as found in the introduction and appendices 
to the second edition of PrinCipia Mathemal>ca, But It is rather a first step of a contem-
plated attempt to fit the ramified functional calculi into our own semantical program 
and to provide for them "semanllcal rules" of a kind to which Hussell would certainly 
not consent, 

§58] 
RAMIFI ED FUNCTIONAL C ALCULl 
349 
(p)A :::> S~AI, where P IS a proposItional variable, and B cuntains no 
bound propositional or functional variables. 
(f)A:::> S~""JI[,,····JI[")AI. where f is an n-ary functional variable, and 
Xl' X 2, ... , x" are distinct individual variables, and B contains no bound 
propositional or functional variables. 
The characteristic fpature is the restriction upon substitution for propo-
sitional and functional variabks that is contained in the last two schemata, 
the restriction, namely. that B must not contain bound propositional or 
functional variahles. And indeed if this restriction were removed we would 
obtain merely another system of axioms and rules for the simple functional 
calculus of second order. 
The predicative functional calculus of second order is the same (apart 
from trivial notational differences) as tht' ramified functional calculus of 
second order and .first level, and its propositional anJ functional variables 
are said to be predlcative, or of the first te!'ei. 578 In the Llmified functional 
calculi of second order and higher levels, acldi tional propositional and func-
tional variables are introduced, of successively higher levels, the leading 
idea being that in substituting for a propositional or functiol1al variable of 
'''The lise of the word "level" here is a departurc> from the tUnTlillology of HlIs~cll 
and of Principia JU"lhcmatica. In the second-order functional calculi. what we call the 
level of a propositional or fUIlctional variable' is the same thins thelt \'\"hitchcad and 
Russell call the order. But in general. and t:sp~c"dly in connection wnh the ramlfied 
functional calculi of higher order, we understand by the level of a functional variable 
what would be called in th" terminology of Whitehead and Russell the amount by WhlCh 
the order of the functional variable exceeds the order of th,' var;atJI" of hi,c;h('st order 
which may stand in any uf the argument ptaCt's (i.e .. in any olle 01 thc' place, lItLwecll 
parentheses following the functional variable). 
We shall not use the word "order" in this connection except in the sense in which we 
speak of functional calculi of first order, of second ordef', and so on (a use of the word 
very different from that of Whitehead and Russell). Also we shall use the word "type" 
in a way which differs from the usage of Whitehead and Russell, and which is suited 
rather to the simple functional calculi than to the ramified functional calculi. Namel\"---
as will be explained more fully in Chapter VI-all the functional vana:))cs whIch appear 
In the functional calculi of first (or second) order are said to VI' of the first type-class, 
the new functional varia.bles which arc introduced in the functional calculus of third 
order arc said to be of the sr:cond type-class. and so on, a new type-class of functional 
variables being introduced in each successive functional calculus of odd order. There JS 
in our terminology no distinction of type among propositional variables, all of them 
being of the same type-though in the ramified functIOnal calculi there are propositional 
variahles of different levels. Likewise all individual variahles are of the same type 
(and of a different type from propositional and ftlflctional variables). Two functional 
variables, one m-ary and the other n-ary. are of the same tvpe. if ttl"y are both of 
the first type-class and In 
n, or if they are of the same higher t) pc-class and 
In = n and the variabk which may stand in each argument phce !. in order) aitcr 
one of them is of the same type as the variable which may stand ill the corresponding 
argument place after the other 

350 
FUNCTIONAL CALCULI OF SECOND ORDER [CHAP. V 
given level, the wff B which is substituted ma.y contain bound propositional 
and functional variables of lower levels only. Thus the ramified functional 
calculus of second order and second level, F:/2 (in our present formulation of 
it), contains propositional and functional variables of the first level and of 
the second level. Similarly F:" con tains propositional and functional vari-
ables of three different levels, and so on. The ramified functional calculus of 
Second order and level w, F~/"" contains all the propositional.and functional 
variables of all (finite) levels.' 
':. 
The primitive bases of these (and other) ramified functional calculi may 
be given simultaneously in the following way.m 
The primitive symbols are first the eight following: 
::> 
V 
fhen then: I:. arl infinite 11st of indi\'irlud.l variablel:i, the SiUlle as for F:: 
x y 
Z 
Xl 
)/1 
tl x2 
[hen then; are or may btl propositional v;¢ables of vanous levels, namely, 
"ither no propositional variable, or all propositional variables of not more 
[han a certain maximum level, or all propositional variables of all levels. 
Explicitly, the symbols admitted as propositional variables are the following, 
where the superscripts indicate the level and where for any particular level 
used the list of variables is infinite: 
pI 
ql 
rl 
Sl 
p2 
q2 
r2 
S2 
p3 ct 
r3 
S3 
pi qi 
p~ 
q~ 
p~ 
q~ 
Then for each n there are or may be n-ary functional variables of various 
levels (n = 1,2,3, ... J. Namely, there are either no n-ary functional vari-
ables, or all n-ary functional variables of not more than a certain maximum 
level, or all n-ary functional variables of all levels. The explicit symbols 
admitted as functional variables are as follows, where the first numeral in 
the superscript indicates whether the functional variable is singulary, or 
"'This formulation should be compared not only with the original formulation of 
Russell (in the paper cited in footnote 454) and that in Principia Mathematica but also 
with the formulation of Hilbert and Ackermann in Gl'undzuge tiel' TMOI'etiscMn Logik, 
first edition (1928), and that of Frederic B. Fitch in The journal 01 Symbolic Logic, vol. 
3 (1938). pp. 140-149. All of these differ from our present formulation of (say) F:laI in 
not being restricted to what we here call the second order. Fitch's formulation moreover 
contains notations and axioms which are designed to include in the system in some sense 
a formulation or partial formulation of arithmetic, so that his system is more nearly 
comparable to our AI"" (see below) than to F:'<O. 

§58] 
RAMIFIED FUNCTIONAL CALCULI 
351 
binary, or ternary, etc" and the second numeral in the superscript indicates 
the level: 
1'1/1 
Gill 
Hl/1 
FIll 
1 
Gill 
1 
F112 
G1/2 
Hl/2 
F1/2 
1 
ell2 
1 
FI/3 
G113 
HIla 
pl3 
1 
el13 
"1 
1'2/1 
G2/ 1 
H2/I 
F 2/1 
1 
('2/1 
'I 
[0'2/2 
G2/ 2 
H2/2 
[0'212 
1 
(,"2/2 
'1 
1'2/3 
G2/3 
H2J3 
},"2/3 
1 
(2/3 
'I 
F 31l, 
and so Oil. 
Then finally there may be individual ~on;:,lallts ul tullc(lonal con~t<tIIl" . , 
both-where for e~.ch functional COll"ldllt it mu~~ be giv~n what its level is 
and whether it b singulary, binary, ternary, elc. 
The formation rules are the same as for the simplt fnll..:tlOnal calculus vi 
second order, F:, with the understanding that the level of a functional 
variable or functional constant is to he ignored. ·In particular, e.g., if f is 
an n-ary functional variable or fnnctional constant, and Xl' X 2, ... , XII are 
individual variables or individual cOllstants (ur both). then f(xl , x 2' " • "' x,,} 
is wf, regardless of the level of f. 
The same abbreviations of wffs anu in particular the same definitions af(~ 
used as for F:. But in D20 and D21 the propositional variable s is replaced by 
the propositional variable Sl, of the first level. ,\nd in D22 and D2:~ the 
functional variable P is replaced by the variable Fl/l. of the first leveP80 
As a further abbreviation in writing wffs, the superscripts of the propo-
sitional and functional variables may be omitted ordinarily. In order to make 
this possible, the level which is to be given to n particular variable ITIay be 
specified in words. Or following Principia Mathemat-ica we may write an 
exclamation point after a letter to indicate that it represents a variable which 
is predicative, or of the first level. 
The four rules of inference are the same as for F~, i.e., *;'500-*503. 
The axioms are given by seven axiom schemata, closely analogous to those 
given above for the predicative functional calculus of second order. Indeed 
the first five axiom schemata are exactly the same as for F:'-except of 
course that A, B, C are now wffs of the particular ramified functional cal-
culus of second order whose axioms are being given, and in the fourth schema 
Ie°If desired, we might introduce also notations =1 and *., replacing the variable 
F in D22 and D23 by F"2. Likewise =8 and * 
a, and so on. 

if 
352 
FUNCTIONAL CALCULi OF SECOND ORDER [CHAP. V 
a is a variable of any kind belonging to the particular ramified functional 
calculus of second order (subject to the condition that a is not free in A). 
The sixth and seventh axiom schemata are modified as follows: 
(p)A::::> S~AI, where p is a propositional variable, the bound propositonal 
and functional variables of B are all of level lower than that of p, and the 
free propositional and functional variables of B are of level not higher than 
that of p. 
(f)A::::> S~xl,x., ... ,x·)A, where f is an n-ary functional variable, and 
Xl' X2, ... , Xn are distinct individual variables, and the bound proposi-
tional and functional variables of B are all of level lower than that of f, 
and the functional constants and the free propositional and functional 
variables of B are all of level not higher than that of f. 
The ramified second-order functional calculi of various levels are specified 
as follows by means of a maximum level of propositional and functional 
variables and functional constants. F~ll has all the first-level variables and 
may have first-level fUl\ctional constants, but has no variables or constants 
of higher level (thUS it differs only trivially from F~I). F~!2 has all the 
propositional and functional variables af first and second levels and may 
have functional constants of these levels, but has no variables or constants 
of higher level; and so on. F;iw has all the propositional and functional 
variables of all levels and may have functional constants of any leveL 
Of particular interest is the pure ramified functional calculus of second 
order and level w, F~/wp, having QS primitive symbols all the possible kinds of 
variables listed above, and naconstants. Also logistic systems obtained from 
F;/wp by adding one of the axioms of infinity (col)-(co4), with F taken as 
a variable of the first level, or the infinite list of axioms obtained from axiom 
(w) by taking F to be of the first level and G of all possible levels (succes-
sively), or both. 581 Also further, logistic systems obtained from F:'<oP by 
adding functional constants and postulates containing them. 
6S1That part of the system of Principia ;Wathematica which does not go beyond 
second-order functional calculus is approximately represented by the pure ramified 
functional calculus of second order and level w, with the addition of an axiom of infinity 
and the infinite list of axioms obtained from axiom (w) as described, and the further 
addition (at least for the first edition of Principia) of the axioms of reducibility given 
in §59 below. For the complete system of Principia, functional variables of higher type-
class (ei. footnote 578) added, but agatn ramified, or divided into levels; the axiom of 
infinity is restated in a different form (the "InHn ax" referred to in footnote 1550) 
requiring functional variables of higher type-class; the axioms obtained, as described in 
the text, from axiom (w) arC superseded by Russell's multiplicative axioms (equivalent to 
axioms of choice); and (at least for the first edition) axioms of reducibility with varia-
bles of higher type-class are included, in addition to those given in §159. 

I 
§58J 
RAMIFIED FUNCTIONAL CALCULI 
353 
Of this last kind is the system ui ramified second-order urithmetic, .'\ 2/w 
which we go on to formulate briefly before concluding this section.582 
The systeIll A 2iw, in its intended interpretation, probably would not be 
acceptable to the authors of Prine/j'ia JIathematica, since they require that the 
natural numbers be defined and their properties proved rather than postulated. 
On the other hand it can be thought of af; in accord with the program of \Veyl in 
Das Konlinuum,'"' or with the Ideas of POincare, both of whom accept the 
elementary methods of arithmetic, including proof by mathematical induction, 
as being (to quote Wed) cin ietzlt'S Fundument d{~s mathematischen Denhens. 
As stated, A 2/w is obtained from F:/wP by adding functional COIlstants as 
undefined terms, and postulates. The functional constants are E and II, 
ternary fUllctional constants of the first level, the same a~ the functional 
constants .E and II of the systems AO and .'\.1. The postulates are the first 
twelve postulates of Al unaltered, and an infinite list of postulates obtained 
from the thirteenth postulate of AI (the postulate of mathematical induction) 
by taking the function variable FI to be of all possible levels. successively.584 
A 2/w may be called, more fully, a furmulatlllll of the ramified second-order 
arithmetic 0/ level w; and ramifleu secund-urtier arithlllctics of [uwer levels 
may be obtained by specifying a maximum le\'('! uf propositional and func-
tional variables. For exam pie, tIll' \\'ffs uf A 2/2 arc the same as the wffs of /\,2;," 
which contain no propositional !l[ functioned variable;; of level higher th'lll 
the sccond; and the postulates of .'\2;2 are fourteen ill number, being the 
same as the postulates of A 2/w which contain no propositional or fUflctiunai 
variables of level higher than the second. 
The system of predicative second-order arithmetic, /\,21, is obtained from the 
pure predicative functional calculus ot second order, F~IP, by adding the 
undefined terms and postulates of -,\1. Thus il differs only trivially frum .\.2/1. 
For A 2! and for the various ramified second-order arithrnetics, a~ here 
formulated, including A 21W, the same definitions are used as for the corre-
sponding second-order functiona.l calculi Fil, F:/w, etc., except that the def-
'''The systems AO and A', formulat<'rI in §1i5, remain unaffected by adoptlon of the 
point of view of ramiflcation or d,V1SlOll Illto levels. 
"'Compare footnote 535. 
Weyl describes a iormulation of ramified anthmctic of second order, and of higher 
order, and holds such a system to be acimi,sible. However. the actual developments of 
thp book ar~ brgely within a predicat1vc second-order arithmetic that would seem to 
be essentially equivalent to the system A2! (sec below), though differing In detads of 
the formulation. At some places this must be extended to a predicative third-order 
arithmetic, by adding variables of the next higher type-class, but allowing them to 
appear only as free variables. 
·"Le., more> explicitly, F 1 is replaced by Flil to obtam the first postulate of t),e Ifl-
finite list, by 
F1i~ to obtain the second one, and so on. 

I, 
354 
FUNCTIONAL CALCULI OF SECOND ORDER [CHAP. V 
ini tiOH schem<,ta. D22 anJ 1)2;) are tiisCitrJeci, amI the nota tiun ~a = bJ is 
defined ra ther in the same way as was done for A 0 and iV in §55. The nota-
tions Zo(a) ami ZI (a) are also defined in the same way as for AO and Al 
EXERCISES 58 
58.0. ProVI, ;l:'i a theornn of f;! : 
Jj 
y=>.Y=X 
58. I. \Vhere F is a singulary functional variable of arbitrary level,585 
pruve as a theorem of A 2/w : 
::) F F(y). 
i.e., \\Titten more fuJy 
~(x, z. Xl) ::)ZX1 L'{y, z,~) -
• F(x) => F F(y). (Use 
the postulates of mathematical induction.) 
58.2. Where F and G are sll1g'lllary functional variables of different levels. 
show that the fullowing is J. theorem of A 2/w but not of Fii W ; 
F(x) ::) F F(y) = . G(x) ::)c G(y) 
(Suggestion: Consider an interpretation of F;'" according to which the individuals 
are the natural numbers; the values of the propositional variables are t and f. the 
same for all levels; the first-level propositional functions. i.e., the values of the 
first-level functional variables, are those which make no distinction among the 
different individuals, thus only the null class and the universal class. the null 
relation and the universal relation, and so on; the second-level propositional 
functions are those additional propositional functions which make no distinction 
among the different individuals except the distinction of odd and even; the 
third-level propositional functions are those additional propositional functions 
which distinguish the individuals as congruent to 0, 1,2, or 3 modulo 4; and so 
on'" In a manner which will nm" be familiar to the reader. the scrnantical ar-
gument so obtained can be converted into a syntactical independence proof.) 
59. Axioms of reducibility. 
B('ClUSe they wcre unable otherwise tu develop classical mathcmatics within 
thelf system in the manner which they deslred. Russell in W08. 0B7 and later 
6UThas "F" becomes in effect a syutactlcal variable, having Fld, F"', Pi', ... as 
vahlP.s; and a theorem schema summarizing an mfmite list of theorems is established. 
This I~ an instance of what the authors of Pnncipw Mathematlca calltyp:cai Ilmbiguil\'. 
Tire mfimte list oi postulates o( mathematic<1.1mdnction. of At!ro, might ah;o be con-
veniently surnrnanzed in a single postulate schema by means of typical ambiguity. 
(Compare footnote 584.) 
"'Of course not meant to be a principal interpretation but a special interpretation 
serving the purpos(' of the parti,_,uiar independence proof. 
"'In the pap'er cit('d in footnote 454. 

§59J 
AXIOIIIS OF R EDUCI HlLITY 
255 
Whitehead and l{ussell in Principia /vialht!1natua, wen: led to supplt·ment the 
ramified functional calculi by the addition not only of an axiom of infinity and 
multiplicative axioms (as explained in footnote fiRl) but also of the famous 
axioms of reducibility. The content of the axium,; of reducihility I':, for a prop-
oSItional function of arbitrary level, that ther,' exists a funn311y equl\'alent 
propositional function of the first level (the intended interpretation being such 
that the formal eq ui valence of propositional functions is not alone sllfficient to 
render them identical), This has bef'n much criticized,5MB ill particular un the 
ground that Ule effect is largely to rest<)re th" possibilItv uf illlpredicatl\'e def-
inition which the distinction of levels was designed to diuunate, Indeed, as 
many ha ve urged, '" the true chuice would seem to be betwecn the' simple 
functional calculI and the ramified functJonal calculi \\·Ithout aXIoms of reduci-
bility It is hard to think of a point of view from which the intermediate position 
represented oy the ramified functional calculi with axioms of reducibility would 
appear to be significant. And in the Introduction to the Second Edition ot Principia 
MathemaUca (l!l25), Hussell in fact recommends abandonment of the axioms of 
reducibility"o ?\'cverthcless, because of their historical importance, it ,e{,IllS 
desirable to give these aXlCJll1S here (as far as they fall within the second-<.Jrder 
functional calculi), 
Syntactically, the axioms of reducibility, intended as axioms to be added 
to F~/w, are the following doubly infinite list, where G is always a functicmul 
variable of the first It'vd, and F IS of arbItrarv high'T level: 
(3G) • F(x) =.c r;(x) 
(3G) • F(x, Y) ="·Y G(x, 1/) 
(3G) • F(x, y, z) =.tl/Z (;(x, y, z) 
"'In particular by Leon Chwistck in Przeg/qd Filozo/iczny, \'01. 24 (IHZ1), pp. 
164-171; Hilbert and Ackermann, Gnmdzuge dey Theoretische!1 Logi", first edition 
(1028). pp. 114-115; Adolf Fraenkel, Eirlleitung in <li,' Mengeniehre, third edition (1923), 
pp. 259-263; W, V. Quine in Mind, n.s" vol. 45 (1936). pp. 498-500, and in a paper in 
The Philosophy 0/ Allred Norlh Whitehead (1941), set' pp. 151-152, 
6"Chwistek in the paper cited m the precedmg footnote; F. P. f{:J.nlsey III apapcr in 
the' Proceedings 0/ Ihe London ,'{a/hemalical SOCII;/Y' , ser. ~ voL;!:; (IH26), pp. 33S<384, 
repnnted in hIS The Foundations 0/ lHathemaltcs and (,Iliff LogL(,i/ EssaY'S (19:11), pp, 
1-61; Rudolf Carnap in Abnss dey Logislli, (1929). §H. See also scattered remarks by 
Carnap and Hans Hahn in Er,~e1tntms, voL 2 (1 \J31). pp, 73, 97. 145 
690With the suggestIOn that their place could be partly ta.ken by aXiOms of "x t(:nslOuat, 
itv, expressing in the notation of the ranllfied higher-order functional calculi that for-
mally equivalent propositional functions of the Sal1lt' type and ~h .. same level are "knt!· 
cal, (Cf. footnote 577.) 
Compare also The theory 0/ constructive tY'pes, a paper In the Amlales de la Socidli 
Polonaise de Malhtfmalique, vol. 2 (1924), pp, 9-48, and voL 3 (1925), pp. 92-141, In 
which Chw;;;;tek takes what Russell describes as the heroic course of dispensing with 
the axioms of reducibility without adophnr: any substitute, thus undertaking to base 
a logistic treatment of mathematics 011 the "ystem of Pnncip,a "iJu.ti,,'malica without 
these axioms. 

356 
FUNCTIONAL CALCULI OF SECOND ORDER [CHAP. \l 
(There are also axioms of similar form intended to be added to the higher 
order functional calculi.) 
These axioms are not all indcpenden t since those which contain singulary 
functional variables call be prow·d by usmg those which contain binary 
functional variables, and so on down the list. Also among those which 
contain n-ary functional variables (with fixed n), it is obvious that one in 
which F is of lower level can be proved by using one of those in which F is 
of higher level. 
EXERCISES 59 
59.0. In the logistic sy:;;tem F;,.,(r), obtained by adding the axioms of 
reducibility to F;/w, prove 
F(x) :;;) I' F(YJ = . G(x) ::::;lG G(y), 
where F and G afe slllgulary functional variables of different levels. 
59.1. In Fil", (thus without using axioms of reducibility), prove 
(3q) • P = 
q, 
where p and q are propositional variables of different levels. 
59.2. In the logistic system obtained by adding to F~w the axioms of 
reducibility containing binary functional var:iables, prove as theorems the 
axioms of reducibility containing singulary functional variables. 
59.3. In the logistic system obtained by adding to F~'w the aXIOm 
schema of footnote 555, f alld g being taken as predicative functional 
variables, show that the axioms of reducibility are theorems. Discuss the 
question of prescribing the levels of f and g in this axiom schema so as to 
avoid obtaining from it any theorem (3G) • F(x) = 
.. G(x) in which G is of 
lower level than F. 

Index of Definitions 
This index includes references to all passages in which a new term is 
introduced or the meaning or usage of a term is explained, whether by 
definition or otherwise. Both the terms used in the meta-language and 
the characters used in the various obj cct languages are covered (excepting 
letters used as variables, and parentheses, brackets, commas); and also 
references to terminology which is employed by others but not adopted in 
this book. The numbered definitions DI-D25 pertaining to the object 
languages are indexed according to their numbers, at the proper place in 
alphabetic order (under the letter D). And designations used for particular 
logistic systems, consisting of a capital letter with superscripts or subscripts 
or both, are included in the index also, each at its proper place in alphabetic 
order. 
In order to fix the alphabetic arrangement the following special rules 
are adopted. Greek letter~ are trl'ated as coming in alphabetic order after 
all the English letters, and are arranged among themselves in their own 
alphabetic order. Arabic numerals are treated as coming after both English 
and Greek letters, and are arranged among themselves in order of increasing 
magnitude (of the corresponding numbers -
thus 0 first, then I, then 2, 
and so on). Special characters (including inverted letters treated as special 
characters) are arranged in an arbitrary order after English letters, Greek 
letters, and Arabic numerals. To the distinction between capital alld small 
letters, roman and italic letters, unaccented and accented letters no attention 
is ordinarily paid in alphabetizing; but where two entries would otherwise 
coincide in the alphabetic order, the rule is followed to put capital letters 
before small letters, and then to put roman letters before italic letters, 
and then to put unaccented letters before accented letters .. Parentheses, 
the hyphen, the solidus, exclamation point, comma, and other punctation 
marks are also ordinarily ignoreJ. in alphabetizing. but where (in spite of 
all preceding rules) two en tries would otherwise coincide in the alphabetic 
order, the entry lacking the parentheses or other punctuation mark is 
placed before the other entry. Finally, account is taken of superscripts 
and subscripts only in cases in which (in spite of all preceding rules) two 
or more entries would otherwise coincide in alphabetic order; in such cases, 

358 
INDEX OF DEFINITIONS' 
the entries are arranged in the alphabetic order of their superscripts; or 
if the superscripts are identical, or non-existent, the entries are arranged 
in the alphabet ie order of their subscripts. 
The references given in the index are by section number (indicated by 
U§"); or by the number of an axiom, rule of inference. theorem, or meta-
theorem (indicated by "t", "*", or "U" forming part of the number); 
or by numbered footnote (indicated by "n."); or by numbered exercise 
(indicated by the occurrence of a period as part of the number). Footnote 
152 of §10 (see page 70) should be consulted for an explanation of the 
system of numbering which is used in the text. And it should be noticed 
in particular how the number of any section indicates in what chapter it 
will be found, and the number of any axiom, rule, theorem, or metatheorem 
indicates in what section it will be found. As explained in footnote 152. 
exercises are placed immediately after the section that is indicated by the 
number of the exercise 
so that, e.g., 46.0 is the first exercise in the 
collection of exercises (calleu "Exercises 46") which follow §46, and 46.19 
is the twentieth ex(~rcise in the same collection. 
In searching for a reference from the index, page numbers may be 
ignored, and there may be used instead the numht'rs of chapters, sections, 
and exercise collections \\'hich are given at the top of the pages of the text. 
\Vhen the reference is to a footnote, observe that footnotes 1-149 are in 
the Introduction and that beyond that the number of the footnote indicates 
directly in what chapter it falls, numbers in the one hundreds being for 
footnotes in Chapter I, those in the two hundreds for footnotes in Chapter II. 
and so on. 
AL 55.18. 
An; §55. 
AO: §55, n. 582. See elementary 
arithmetic, Hilb(~rt arithmetic. 
Al: §55, n. 582. See elementary num-
ber theory, Hilbert arithmetic. 
A2: §55. See Peano's postulates. 
A2!; §58. 
A 2/w : §58, n. 58;), n. 584, n, 585. 
1\2/1: §58. 
A 2/2; §58. 
A3: §55. 
A': §ri5. 
(AI): 55.18. 
(Ao): §55. 
(Ai); §55. 
(A2): §55. See Peano's postulates. 
./1; n. 91. 
AI> A 2, ' .. , An r B: §13, §36, n. 343. 
! Abbreviative definition: n. 168. 
Absolute completeness: §18. 
Absolute consistency: §17. 
Absolutism: n.535. 
Absorption, laws of: 15.8. 
.'\bstraction: SO:j. 
:\ bstraction operator: §06. 

INDEX OF DEFINITIONS 
359 
Abstraktion: n.112. 
afep: §53. 
Affirmation of the consequent, law 
of: t 102, +202. 
afp: §32. 
Algebra of logic: n. 125, §29. 
Algorithm: n. 118. 
Algorithme logique: n. 125. 
Alphabetic change of bound (in-
dividual) variable, rule of: *350, 
*402, *502. 
Associated function (of a connec-
tive): §05. 
Associated function (of a constant): 
§03. 
Associated function (of a form): §03. 
Associated m-ary functions of an 
n-ary form: §oa. 
Associated natural number (of li'n): 
§54. 
Associated propositional function: 
§54. 
Aiphabetic change of bound prop-
! Associated quantifier-free formula: 
ositional and functional variables, i 
§:32. 
rule of: *515. 
Associative law of multiplication: 
Alphabetic order: §1O, §20, §30. 
Al ternation: S05. 
Analysis: n.520. 
Antecedent: §1O, n. 162, §20, §30. 
Apparent variable: n. 28, n. 575. 
Applied ftmctional calculus of first 
order: §30. 
Applied functional calculus of first 
order with equality: §48. 
Applied functional calculus of second 
order: §50. 
Argument; §03. 
Argument place: n. 578. 
Assert (a proposition): §04, n.72. 
Assert (a propositional form): §06, 
n. 106, n. 107. 
Assert (a sentence): §04, n.72. 
Assertion, law of: 12:7. 
Assertion sign: n. 65. 
Associated form (of a connective): 
§05. 
Associated formula of the extended 
proposi tiunal calculus: §53. 
Associated formula of the propo-
sitional calculus: §32. 
55.H. 
Associative laws: see complete as-
sociative laws. 
Autouymy: §08, II. 15ti. 
Axiom: §07, n. 128. 
Axiom 
of 
infinity: 
§57, 
1l.559, 
n.560. 
Axiom of well-ordering of the in-
dividuals: §56. 
Axiom schema: ~i7, §30. 
Axiom (w); §56. 
Axiomatic method: §07, n. 126, n. 
127. 
Axiomatic set theory: n. 75, n. l29, 
end of §09. 
Axioms of choice: §56, n. 555. 
Axioms of extensionality; n. 590. 
Axioms of reducibility: §59. 
Basic instance: §30. 
Bear (a relation): §04. 
Bedeuten: n.7. 
Biconditional' §05. 
Binary connect! ve: §05. 
Binary form: §02. 
Binary function: §03. 

360 
INDEX OF DEFINITIONS 
Binary functional calculus of first 
Commutative law of multiplica-
order: §30. 
tion: 55.9. 
Binary relation: n.78. 
Boolean algebra: I5.H. 
Boolean ring: 15.6, n.185, 15.7. 
Boole's law of development: ~8.1 (5). 
28.1 (6), n.237. 
Bound occurrence of a variable: 
§06, n. 117, §30, 38.B. 
Bound variable: n.28, u.36, n. 52, 
n. 64, §06, n. 96, §30, §50. 
Brackets: §05, §1O, n. 156. 
By P: §:H. n.319, §51. 
Bt: §32 (proof of **323). 
B+: §32 (proof of **323). 
C: n. m, 12.2. 
Calculus of inference: n. 125. 
Calculus of logic: n. 125. 
Calculus ratiocinator: n. 125. 
Categorical proposition: 46.22. 
Categorical syllogism: 4:6.22, n. HI. 
Categori(:al system of postulates: §5r;. 
Characteristic functIOn: 43.2. 
Characteristic 
(system of truth-
tables): n.217. 
Choice, axioms of: §56, n.555. 
Class: §04. 
Class concept: n. 17, §O4:. 
Clos!,d wfi: §50. 
Closure: §43, §54. 
Coincide in extension: §04. 
Collective name: n. tJ. 
Combinatory logic: n. 100. 
Common name: n.4. n.6. 
Commutation, law of: 12.7. 
Commutative law of equality: §48, 
t521. 
Commutative law of (material) e-
Quivalence: t 155. 
Commutative laws: see complete 
commutative laws. 
Compatibility: n. 2. 
Complete as to consequences: §55. 
Complete as to provability: §55. 
Complete associative law of (ma-
terial) equivalence: 26.0. 
Complete associative laws: compare 
also 15.5, 15.7. 
Complete commutative lawof equal-
ity: t523. 
Complete commutative law of (ma-
terial) equivalence: 15.0(7), 26.0. 
Complete commutative laws: com-
pare also 15.5, 15.7. 
Complete distributive law of con-
junction over disjunction: 15.8. 
Complete distributive law of disjunc-
tIOn over conjunction: 15.8. 
Complete distributive laws: compare 
also 15.5, 15.7. 
Complete in the sense of Post: §18. 
Complete law of double negation: 
n. 163, tIM. 
Complete self-distributive law of 
(material) implication: n.163. 
Complete system of primitive COIl-
nectives: §24. 
Complete wlth respect to a given 
transformation: § 18. 
Completeness of a logistic system: 
§ 18, §32, §54. 
CompositioIl, law of: 15.0(5). 
Concept: §Ol, n. 17. 
Concept of: §Ol, n. 21. 
Conclusion: §07, n. 162. 
Concurrent constants: §02. 

INDEX OF DEFINITIONS 
361 
Concurrent forms: ~02. 
Concurrent to a ClJl1stan t: gO:!. 
Conditional: §05. 
Cunditionecl disjunction: §2L 
Confirmation: n 2. 
Conjunction: §05, n.227, n.232. 
Conjunctive normal form: n.299. 
COll11cCti ves: n. 64, §05, n. 112. 
Connutation: n. 14. 
Connote: n. 16. 
Consequence: §55. 
Consequent: §1O, n. 162, §20, §30. 
Consistency of a logistic system: §17. 
Consistent as to consequences: §55. 
Consistent as to provability: §55. 
Consistent class of wffs: §4-5, §54. 
Consistent in the sense of Post: S17. 
Consistent with a class uf wffs: §45, 
§54. 
Consistent with respect to a given 
transformation: §17. 
Constant: n.6, §02, n.31, 11.112, 
n. 117, §lO, §:lO, II. 4-GO, §50. 
Constant function: §03. 
Contextual definition: § 55, n. 528. 
COlltinuity: 11. 102. 
Contradiction: § 15, §23. 
Contradiction, law of: ID.0(0), 2tU~1. 
COlltraposition, converse law of; 
t204 .. 
Contrapositio!1, law of: 15.0(6), 
t223, 26.13, 
Cunverse: §1O, §30. 
(<Inverse domain: n. 517. 
Con verse implication: §OB. 
COil verse Jaw of contraposition: 
COIl verse nOll-implica hOll: §05. 
l:U!lVcTSe of a function: §O:3. 
COIl \'f'rsc 
:'l~lf-distn buiive law of 
(mat('rial) implication: n. 153. 
I D: n.!H 
Decisioll problem: §l5, n. 18:~, n. 184 
§4-ti . 
Decision problem, reduction of: see 
reduction. 
Decision problem, solution in a 
special case: n.421. 
Decision problem for provability: 
SLy, n. 184. 
Decision probl'1TI for satisfiability: 
§4o. 
Decision problem for validity: §46. 
Decisioll procedure: S15. 
Declarative sentence: S04. 
Deducibility. problem: n. J 84. 
DeductioIl thr0rem: *]30, n.18I, 
~tU, n. 3:3:2, *360, *516. 
Ddinit'nclum. ~ll. 
Uefiniens: §Il. 
Definition: n. 4D, ~Il, n. 167, n. 168, 
n .. 305. 
lJdinitioll ;ichema: SIl. 
I>dinitionallv l''lllivalellt: bcgilllllH~ 
of Ch;q). r I!. 
De :'.Iorgall 
1<1\\10 ui: iii/), 11. ]R8. 
Denial of the antpccdent, law of: 
+123, t2to, §:,w. 
Denotation: §Ol. 
Denotation value: n.27. 
Denote: §Ol, n.6, 11.7, n 148. 
Denote in tbe syntactical sense: 
n.14:l. 
t204. 
Derived rule of inference: §12. 
Converse law of double negation: i Derived semantical rule: n. ]68. 
n. ]63, t222, 26.13. 
Description operator: §06. 
iij 

360 
INDEX OF DEFINITIONS 
Binary functional calculus of first 
Commutative law of multiplica-
order: §30. 
tion: 55.9. 
Binary relation: n. 78. 
Boolean algebra: 15.8. 
Boolean ring: 15.6. n.185, 15.7. 
Boole's law of development: 28.1 (5), 
28.1 (6), n. i37. 
Bound occurrence of a variable: 
§06. n. 117, ~30. 38.6. 
Bound variable: n.28, n. 36, n. 52, 
n. 64, §06, n. 95, §30. §50. 
Brackets: §05, §lO, n.1.'56. 
By P: §31, n.3I9, §51. 
Bt: §32 (proof of **323). 
B:j:: §:32 (proof of **323). 
C: n. 91, 12.2. 
Calculus of inference: n. 125. 
Calculus of logic: n. l25. 
Calculus ratiocinator: n. 125. 
Categorical proposition: 46.22. 
Categorical syllogism: 46.22, n.441. 
Categorical system of postulates: §55. 
Characteristic function: 43.2. 
Characteristic 
(system of 
truth-
tables): n. 217. 
Choice. axioms of: §56, n. 555. 
Class: §04. 
Class concept: n. 17, §04. 
Closed wff: §,,)O. 
Closure: §43, §154. 
Coincide in extension: §04. 
Collective name: n. 6. 
Combinatory logic: n. 100. 
Common name: n.4, n.6. 
Commutation, law of: 12.7. 
Commutative law of equality: §48, 
t521. 
Commutative law of (material) e-
Quivalence: tI55. 
Commutative laws: see complete 
commutative laws. 
Compatibility: n.2. 
Complete as to consequences: §55. 
Complete as to provability: §55. 
Complete associative law of (ma-
terial) equivalence: 26.0. 
Complete associative laws: compare 
also 15.5, 15.7. 
Complete commutative law of equal-
ity: t523. 
Complete commutative law of (ma-
terial) equivalence: 15.0(7). 26.0. 
Complete commutative laws: com-
pare also 15,,15, 15.7. 
Complete distributive law of con-
junction over disjunction: 15.8. 
Complete distributive law of disjunc-
tion over conjunction: 15.8. 
Complete rlistributive laws: compare 
also 15.5, 15.7. 
Complete in the sense of Post: §18. 
Complete law of double negation: 
n. 163, tIM. 
Complete self-distributive law of 
(material) implication: n. 163. 
Complete system of primitive con-
nectives: §24. 
Complete with respect to a given 
transformation: §18. 
Completeness of a logistic system: 
§18, §32. §54. 
Composition, law of: 15.0(5). 
Concept: §Ol, n. 17. 
Concept of: §Ol, n.21. 
Conclusion: §07, n. 162. 
Concurrent constants: §02. 

INDEX OF DEFINITIONS 
361 
Concurrent forms: S02. 
CUIlcLlrrent to a constant: §O1. 
COllClition,d: ~()5. 
Conditioned disjunctiun: §24. 
Confirmation: n. 2. 
Conjunction: §o;"), n.227. n.232-
Conjunctive normal form: n. 299. 
COIlnectives: n.64, g05, n. 112. 
Connotation: n. 14. 
Connote: n.16. 
Consequence: §55. 
Consequent: §lO, n. 162, §20, SilO. 
Consistency of ulogistic system: §17. 
(Ollvcrse non-implicatioll: §05. 
Cunverse of a function: §03. 
CUJ] verse sclf-distributi ve law of 
(material) implication: n. 163. 
D' n. \11. 
Decision problem:S15,n. IH3, n 184, 
§4H. 
Decision problem, reduction of: see 
reduction. 
Decision prohlem, solution in a 
special case: 11, 421. 
Decisiol1 problem for provability: 
§15, 11. 184. 
Consistent as to consequellces: §55. 
Deeisi,)]) problf,tn for satisfill.bility: 
Consistent as to provability: §.'55. 
§4(). 
Consistent class of wffs: §4{> , §54. 
Decision problem for validity: §46. 
Consistent in the sense of Post: §17. 
Decision procedure: §15. 
COllSist('l1t with a class of wffs: §45, 
Declarative sentence: §04. 
§54. 
Deducibility, problem: n. 184. 
Consistent with respect to a given I Deduction thp()[('rn: "'1:30, n. 181, 
transformailOn: §17. 
Constant: 
11. fi, §Ol, n.31, 11. 112, 
11. 117, S 10, s:30, 11. 460, 350. 
Constant function: §03. 
Contextual definition: § 55, 11. 528. 
COlltinuity: n. 102. 
Call tradiction: ~ 15, §23. 
Contradiction, law of: 15.0(ll), 26.1il. 
Contrapositioll, converse Ltw of: 
t204. 
Contraposition, law of: 15.0(6). 
t223, 26.13. 
COlI verse; §10, §30. 
CIJIlvcrse domain: n.517. 
(ul1verse implication: §05. 
Converse law of contraposition: 
t204. 
COil verse law of double negation: 
n.163, t222, 26.13. 
S2£1, n. :3:32, *:i()O, "'5lH. 
Deilllicndum: §I L 
Dchniclls: §lJ. 
Dl'finition: n. 49, §ll, n. 167, n. 168, 
n.30t). 
Ddillitiull schem,l: SU. 
, Ddinitiollally If]1l1valcl1t: bcginnlllg 
"f Chap. II I 
De MurgalJ, Jaws u[: I :i.i:), n. IS8. 
, Denial I)f the antecedent, law of: 
t 12:i. t220, §2H. 
Denotation: §Ol. 
Denota tion value: n. 27. 
Denote: §Ol. n.6, n.7, n. 148. 
Denote in tlw o;vntactical sense: 
n. 143. 
Derived rule of inference: §12. 
Derived sf'mantical rule: n. lt38. 
Description operator: §06. 
II·

362 
INDEX OF DE FnVITJONS 
Descriptions (Russell's contextual 
definition): n. 546. 
Designate: n.20. 
Designated truth-value: §19. 
Development ,law of: 28.1 (5), 28.1 (6). 
Dilemma: 15.9, n. 189, n. 190. 
Disjunction: §05, n. 227. 
Disjunctive normal form: n. 299. 
Disjunctive syllogism: 15.9, n. 189, 
n. 190, n.I91. 
Disj unctively valid: 45.5. 
Disproof: n. 2. 
Distributive laws: see complete 
distributive laws. 
Doctrinal function: n. 529, n. 537. 
Domain (of a relation): n.517. 
Domain of individuals: §43. 
Double negation, complete law of: 
n. 16:l, tiM. 
Double negation, converse law of: 
n. 163, t222, 26.13. 
Double negation, law of: t104, n. 
163, t221. 
Druckt aus: n. 16. 
Dual: §16, §37, 48.11, §51, n. 501. 
Dual of a metatheorem: n.354. 
Dual of a theorem schema: §37. 
Duality, principle of: *161, *372, 
48.11, 55.0. 
Dl, D2, D3, D4, D5, D6, D7, D8, 
D9, DIO, Dll: §Il. 
DI2: §24. 
D13, Dl4, Dl5, DI6, Dl7: §30. 
DI8, DI9: §48. 
D20, D2l: §50. 
D22, D23: §52. 
D24: §55. 
E: §48. 
E: 48.0. 
E: §48. 
E: n.91. 
Effectiveness: §07, n.119, §I2, n. 
183, n. 535. 
Elementary arithmetic: §55, n.522. 
Elementary number theory: §55, 
n. 520, n. 522. 
Elementary part: §30, 38.13, §44, 
n.423, §50. 
Elementary syntax: §08. 
Elimination problem: 52.6. 
Empty class: §04. 
Equality: n. 43, §48, §52, n. 502. 
Equality by definition: n. 168. 
Equivalence: §05, n.227. 
Equivalence of logistic systems: §23, 
n. 202. 
Erweiterter Aussagenkalkiil: n. 224. 
Excluded middle, law of: 15.0(10). 
Excluded middle, weak law of: 26.13. 
Exclusive disjunction: §05. 
Existential closure: §43, §54. 
Existential import: n. 441. 
Existential quantifier: §06. 
Expansion of a wff \v1 th respect to 
negation: §23. 
Explicative definition: n. 168. 
Exportation, law of: 15.0(3). 
Express: §Ol, n.16. 
Extended propositional calculus: 
§28. 
Extensionality, axioms of: n.590. 
External to an occurrence of a 
quantifier: §39. 
FI: §48. 
FJp: §48. 
F~P: §48. 
]71: beginning of Chap. III. 
F~: 39.11. 

INDEX OF DLFINIrIONS 
36:3 
,',1 • "<) 10 
l'gb',)" 
. 
F!h: 3!U2. 
F~: 38.9. 
Fla. 30.40. 
F~a: §55. 
Flh: §30. 
Fli; 38.6. 
F lip. '1 2 
\I 
. '± 
• 
• 
F1m : 38.10. 
F}!ll: 38.1I. 
F;,m: §40. 
F1p: §:30. 
F~P: 46.24. 
F;P: §40. 
Fl ,1: §30. 
FI,2: §30. 
F~: §50. 
Fit §58. 
F;''': §50, 
F;!1I: §58. 
F;P: §50. 
qlP: §58. 
F~p(W}: §56. 
F~i'": §58. 
F~!'"P: §58. 
F:lw(r): 59.0. 
F:,l: beginning of Chap. V, §50. 
F~ll: §58. 
Fi,2; beginning of Chap. V, §50. 
F:12: §58. 
f: §05, §lO. 
I: §1O, §28, §50(D20). 
False (proposition): §04. 
False (sentence): see true (sentence). 
Falsehood (i.e., the truth-value 
falsehood); §04. 
Falsifying assignment: §44, 
Falsifying sY'stem of truth-values: 
§46. 
Final bracket: §14. 
First level: §58, n. 578. 
First type-class: n.578, 
First-order ~lrithmetjc: §!55. 
Form: §OO, §07, n, 124-
Form: §02, n.2f), n.26, n. 117. 
Formal axiomatic method: g07. 
Formal equivalence: §06, n. 104, 
n.305. 
Formal implication: 
§06, 
n. W1, 
n. a05. 
Formal logic: §OO. 
Formaliz('d 1,\ll(Il:11;e: 
~OO. 
Formation rules: ~07. 
Formula: §07. 
Formulations of the propositional 
calculus: beginning of Chap. I, 
~2j. 
Free (lCCUlT('nce Lli a van ,lbk: §on, 
n. 117, §;30, 38.6. 
Free variable: §02, n. 28, n. 36, n. 52, 
§:lO. §50. 
Full conjunctive normal form: §29, 
n. 299. 39.8. 
Full disjuIlctive normal form: 24.9, 
II. 2:37, §29, n.299, :l9.:l. 
Full many-valued propositional cal-
culus: §29. 
Full propositional calculus: §29. 
Function: II. 26, §03, n.39. 
Function concept: §03. 
Function from ... to: §03. 
Functioll in extensioll. §03. 
Functiun of: §();3. 
Function of two arguments: §03. 
Function of two variables: n. 42. 
Functional abRtraction: SO:}. 
Functional calctd.us of first order: 
begmning of Chap. TTl. 

INDEX OF DEFINITIONS 
Functional calculus of first order 
with equality: §48. 
Functiunal calculus of second orcier: i 
I nelusive disj unction: §05. 
Inconsistent class of wffs: §45, §54. 
I nconsistent with a class of wffs: 
beginning of Chap. V. 
Functional constant: §05, §30. 
Functional variable: §30. 
Gedanke: §04. 
General name: n. 4, n. 6. 
Generalization, rule of: *301, *401, 
*501. 
Generalized upon: §30. 
Godel's completeness theort'm: §44. 
**440. 
Henkin's completeness theorem: 
§54, **546. 
Higher protothetic: n. 229. 
HiILJ\;rt arithmetic: n. 524. 
HaIr] between: §04. 
Hold for (an argument): §Oct. 
Hypothetical syllogism: 15.9. 
1: §48. 
(ID): §55. 
id: §55(D24), n.54:3. 
Idempotent laws: n. 186. 
Identity: see equality·. 
If ... then: 11.89. 
Immediate inference: n. 115. 
Immediately infer: §07. 
Imperative logic: n. 63. 
Implication: §05. 
Implicational propositional calculus: 
§2o. 
Implicative nurmal form: 15.4. 
Implies: n. 89. 
Importation, law of: 15.0(4). 
Impredicative definitiun: §58, n. 573, 
n. ;")74. 
Improper symbol: §05, n. 117, § 10, 
§30. 
§4;i, §5·1. 
I Inciepelldence example: §55. 
Independence (of axioms and prim-
itive rules of a logistic system): 
§19, n. 195, n. 4fl8. 
Independence (of postulates): §55. 
Independent: §19. 
Independent as to consequences: §55. 
InclepeJ1(lt'nt as tu provability: §5G. 
Independent connective: §24. 
Indirect proof, law of: 26.11. 
Individual constant: §30. 
Individual variable: §30. 
Individuals: §30, n. 30!!. 
Iufin ax: n.55!), 11.581. 
I Infinity, axiom of: §57, n. 559, n. 560. 
Informal axiomatic method: §07. 
Initial bracket: §14. 
Initially placed: §39. 
Instance (of a theorem schema): §33. 
Integral domain: §55. 
Intensional proposi tiollal variable: 
§04. 
Interpretation (of a logistic system): 
§07, n. 199. 
Interpretation (of a mathematical 
theury): n.536. 
Interpretation of F;P: §54. 
Intermgatlve iogle n. 63. 
Intertypical variables: n. 87. 
Intuitionism: see mathematical 1Il-
tuitionism. 
Intuitionistic functional calculus of 
first order: 38.6. 
lntuitionistic propositiunal calculus: 
§26. 

INDEX OF DEFINITIONS 
365 
Isomorphic: §55. 
Judgment: §04. 
K: n.91. 
Language: §07, n. Ill, n. U6. 
Law of affirmation of the con-
sequent: t102, ~202. 
Law of assertion: 12.7. 
Law of commutation: 12.7 
Law of composition: 15.0(5}. 
Law of contradiction: 15.0(9). 26.13. 
Law of contraposition: 15.0(6), t223, 
26.13. 
Law of denial of the antecedent: 
t 123, t220, §26. 
Law of double negation: tl04, n. 163, 
+22l. 
Law of excluded middle: 15.0(10). 
Law of exportation: 15.0(3). 
Law of importation: 15.0(4). 
Law of indirect proof: 26.11. 
Law of reductio ad absurdum: §26. 
26.13. 
Law of triple negation: 26.13. 
Laws of ahsorption: 15.8. 
Laws of De Morgan: 15.8, n.18B. 
Laws of tautology: n. I8H. 
Leading principle: 15.9 (1), 46.22. 
LeveL n. 578. 
Lexicographic order: §44, n. 410. 
Ll<: n. 365, n. :366. 
Log-ic: ~OO 
Logica I ax i UIllS' ~07. 
Logical consequence: n. 533. 
Logical form: n. 26, n. 124. 
Logical primitive symbols: §07. 
Logical syntax: §08. 
Logikkalkut: n. 125. 
Logique a£gorithmique: n. 125. 
Logische Funl,tion: n. 45S. 
Logischer Calcul: n. 125. 
Logistic: §07, n. 125. 
Logistic method: §07. 
Logistic system: §Oi. 
Lowenheim's theorem: **450. 
Major premiss: §1O, n. 162, §30. 
Many-one: n. 556. 
Many-sorted functional calculus (of 
fiTSt or higher order): 55.24. 
Many-valued function: n. 41. 
Many-valued propositional calculus: 
§I9. 
m-ary: see also n-ary. 
m-ary functional abstraction: §03. 
m-ary functional calculus of first 
order: §40. 
m-ary-n-ary operator: §06. 
Mate of a bracket: §U. 
Material equivalence: §05. 
Material implication: §05, n. 188. 
Material non-equivalence: §05. 
Material non-implication: §05. 
I Mathematical intuitionism: §26, n. 
183. n. 535. 
Mathematical induction, postulate(s) 
of: S5."). 
Mathematical logic: §Oi, Il. 125. 
Matrix: §:30. 
Ma tteL §OD. §07. 
Maximal consistent class of closed 
wff,: ~54 
Maximal c' >Ilsi~tl;ril cla:.;s of wffs. 
§45. 
Mean: n.7. 
Meaning.: n. 7, n. 13, n.20 
Meaningfulness: n. 120. 
Members of a class: §04. 
Mention of a word: §OS. 
Meta-language: §07. 

i 
I 
t , 
I 
866 
INDEX OF DEFIN1110NS 
Metamathematics: n. 110, n. 139. 
Metatheorero: §09. 
Minimal functional calculus of first 
order: 38.10, 38.11. 
Minimal propositional calculus: §26, 
n.210. 
Minimalilalkiil: n. 210. 
Minor premiss: §1O, II. Io:!, §30. 
Modal logic: n. 2. 
Model: n. '151, §55. 
Modus ponendo tollens: 15.9. 
lv!odus ponens: §1O, n. 162, 15.9. 
Modus ponens, rule of: *100, *200, 
*300, *400, *500. 
Modus toUendo ponens: 15.9. 
i'l!odus toliens: 15.l). 
:\1ultiplicative axioms: n. ;;81. 
s: n. U1. 
:\ame: §Ol, n. 4, n.7. 
Name of: §Ol. 
Name relation: §Ol. n.8. 
n-ary: see also m-ary. 
n-ary connective: §05. 
n-ary form: §02, §30, §50. 
n-ary funct ion: §03. 
n-ary functional calculus of second 
order: §50. 
Natural number: §30, n.521. 
~egation: §05, n. 227. 
Non-assertIve use of a sentence: 
n.55. 
Non-conjunction: §05, n.207. 
Non-disjunction: §05. 
Kon-equivalence: §05. 
Non-implication: §05. 
NOIHlOrma.I interpretation: 19.10, 
n. lUg. 
N on-vacuous occurrence of a quan-
tifier: §39. 
Normal form: see conjunctive normal 
form, disjunctive normal form, 
full conjunctive normal form, full 
disj uncti ve normal form, impli-
cative normal form, normal form 
(with respect to conditioned dis-
Junction). prenex normal form, 
prenex-disj unch ve normal form, 
Skolem 
normal 
form, 
Skolem 
normal form for satisfiability. 
Normal form (with respect to con-
ditioned disjunction): 24.10. 
Normal interpretation: 19.10, n. 199. 
i'{ormal system of domains: §54, 54.3. 
nth-order arithmetic: §55. 
Null class: §04, n.77. 
Null formula: §1O. 
Object language: §07. 
Oblique use of a name: §Ol. 
Occurrence as a P-constituent: §46. 
Occurrence as a truth-functional 
constituent: §46. 
Of the first level: §58. 
lOne-many: n.556. 
One-ta-one correspondence: n. 564. 
One-to-one relation: n.556. 
One-valued singulary function: §03. 
Operand: §05, §06. 
Operation: n. 112. 
Operator: n.64, §06, n. 112. 
i Operator variables: §05. 
Optative logic: n. 63. 
Order: n. 578. 
Ordered pair: n. 88. 
Ordinary use of a name: §Ol. 
Organic (axiom): §25. 
Ostensive definition: n.168. 
P: §27. See also by P, use P. 
PB: §25. 
I.·.·.' I 
I

I\,.: 2:1. f). 
P G : §25. 
PH: §26, §29. 
PH': n.267. 
Pj: 29.4. 
PL : §25. 
PL : 23.7. 
Pj: 23.8. 
1\0: §27. 
PN : §25. 
Pn : §25. 
Prz: §25. 
Pr: §29. 
Ps: 23.9. 
Pw: 12.7. 
P w: §25. 
Pr : 26.14. 
P II: §29, 29.2. 
P..l: §26. 
P1 : §lO. 
Pll: 12.2. 
P 2 : §20. 
P 2L : 23.0. 
Pi:: 26.3(2). 
P~: 26.0. 
P~: 26.3(1). 
pEl; 26.4. 
pEN; 26.4. 
P~: 18.3. 
P~: 18.4. 
P~: §26. 
p:.v: 26.19. 
P~: 26.18. 
phI{; §29. 
1':;': 26.19. 
p~l: 26.21. 
P~: §26. 
pP: §26, §29. 
P+: 19.6, §26, §29. 
INDEX OF DEFINITIONS 
367 
P;ucllth,·scs: SOil, n. RI, n.82. 
Panmthesis-free notation of Luka-
siewicz: n. 91, 12.2. 
Parity (of an occurrence of an elemen-
tary part): n. 508. 
Partial order: [if). 22. 
P·constituent: §46. 
Peano's postulates: §55, n. 525. 
Pt~gasus: n. 1 R 
Peirce's law: 12.6, n. 187. 
Perfect number: n. 317. 
Personal name: n. 18. 
Platorusm: n.535. 
POS) ti ve implicatiolla! propositional 
calculus: §2ti, ~2n 
Positive propositional calculus: §26, 
§29. 
Postulate: §07, n.128, §55. 
Postulates as added axioms of a 
logistic sY3tem: §55. 
Postulates as prl)positionaJ func-
tions: 
~55. n. 529. 
Postulate(s) of mathematical induc-
tion: §55. 
Pradikal: §49, n.458. 
P1'iidikatenkalkiil: §49. 
Prd.diA'atensym!iol: n. 458. 
Precede: 55.22. 
Predicate: S49, n. 458. 
Predicative: §58. 
I Predicative functional calculus of 
second order: §58. 
Predicati ve second-order ari thmetic: 
§58. 
Preuica ti ve third-order arithmetic: 
n. 5S3. 
Prechcati ve variables: §58. 
Prefix: §:3Sl. 
Premiss: n.3, §07, 11. 16~. 

3l)S 
INDEX OF DEFINITIONS 
Prrnex normal form: §3U. 
Prencx-disjunctive normal form: 
39.;"). 
Primitive basis: §07, n. 117. 
Primitive constant: n. 117, §IO. 
Primitive proper name: §Ol. 
Primitive semantical rule: n. 168. 
Primitive symbols: §07. 
Principal dual: §16, §37. 
Principal implication sign: §IO, §20, 
§30. 
Principal interpretation: §07. 
Principle of duality: *161, *372, 
48.11, 55.0. 
Proot; §07, n. 121, §10, n. 164. 
Proof from hypotheses: §1:3, §:)6, §51. 
Proper name: §Ol, n.4, n.6, n. 10, 
n.18. 
Proper subclass: n.5M. 
Proper symbol: §05, n. 117, §lO. 
Property: §04. 
Proposiiio mentalis: §04. 
Proposition: §04, n. 68, n. 69. 
Propositional calculus: beginning of 
Chap. I, §29. 
Propo-;itional calculus with quan-
tifters: n. 229. 
Propositional form: §04, II. 117, §1O. 
§30, §50. 
Propositional function: §04, II. 74. 
PropositIOnal variable: §04, n. 64, 
§30. 
Protothetic: §28. 
Pure functional calculus of first or-
der: §80. 
Pure functional calculus of first or-
der with equality: §48. 
Pure predicati ve fundional calculus 
of second order: §58. 
Purc ramified functional calculus of 
second order and level w: §58. 
Purely designative occurrence: n. 20. 
Quantification: §06, §49. 
Quantifier: n. M, §06, §49. 
Quantifier-free: §32. 
Quotation marks: §OS, 11.136. 
R: 11.91. 
Ramified functional calculi of second 
order: §58. 
Ramified 
functional 
calculus 
of 
second urder and level w: §58. 
Ramified second-order arithmetic: 
§58. 
Ramified second-order arithmetic of 
level w: §58. 
I Range of a class: §04. 
Range of a function: §03. 
I\.ange of a variable: §02, §43. 
Range of arguments of a function: 
§O;:l. 
Range of values of a function: §03. 
Range-members of a class: §04. 
RCdl definition: n.168. 
Real variable: n. 28. 
Recursion equations: n.526. 
Re(iucibility, axioms of: §59. 
Reductio ad absurdum, special law 
of: §26. 
Reductio ad absurdum, law of: §26. 
Reduction class: §47. 
Reduction of the decision problem: 
§47. 
Reduction of the decision problem 
for satisfiability: §47. 
Pure functional calculus of second i Reduction of the decision problem 
order: §50. 
for validity: §47. 
I
'fj 
~,' { 

INDEX OF DEFL'v'ITTONS 
H.eflexive law of equality: §48, t520. 
Reflexive law of (material) impli-
cation: tl20, t2J 1. 
Related 
rows: n.43n. 
Relation: §04. 
Relation concept: §04. 
Relation in extcnSlOn: §04. 
Relation in intension: §04. 
Relative cOllsistency: §17. 
Relative product: n. 518. 
Relevant value (of a form used as 
operand of a connective): §05. 
Representative of a wff in PI: §2:~. 
H.epresenting form: §55. 
Resultant (of a wff of F;): 62.6. 
Row-pair: n.440. 
Rule of alphabetic change of bound 
(individual) variable: *350, *402, 
*502. 
Rule of alphabetic change of bound 
proposi tional ami functional var-
ia bles: * 515. 
Rule of generalization: *301, *401, 
*501. 
Rule of inference: §07. 
1<.ulc ufmodlts ponens: *100, *200, 
*300, *400, *500. 
Rule of procedure: §07. 
Rule of substitution for individual 
variables: *;{51, *403, *50a. 
Rule of substitutivity of (ma.terial) 
equivalence: *159, *342, *513. 
i Rules of definition: n. 168. 
! S: §1O, §12, §30. 
S: SM. 
Sn: §45. 
Sw: 345. 
:;;: §30. 
s: ~:~5. 
s: S55. 
Satisfiable: §43, n. 407, §54. 
Satisfiable in a domain §43, §54. 
Satisfiablp with rc,,!,pct tcJ a system 
of dornaim: §54. 
Satisfied by (a value of a variable): 
§04. 
Satisfied by (an argument): §04. 
Satisfy (a propositional form): §04. 
Schema of proof: §3:3. 
Scope: §39. 
Secondarily satisklblc: ~54. 
St:cullllari ly \',did: 554. 
Secolldary interpretation of F;P: §54. 
Second type-class: n .. 578. 
Self-distributive law of (material) 
lHlplic,ltiuli: tlO:3, 
It. Jtj;), 
~203. 
Self-dual, §Jfl. §~7. 
SC'lllantJcal cieclSlon problem: §15, 
§+6. 
Scmantical rulcs: §07. n. 168. 
Hull' of substitution for n-ary func- ! Scmantical thcorclIl' SO~. 
tional variables: 
*:~52n' *404", 
Semantics: ~Og, n. 140. 
*510 n-
Hule of substitution for proposi tiollal 
variables: *352o, *404o, *5100 , 
Rule of substitutIOn (in the propo-
sitional calculus): * 1 01, *201. 
Rule of substitutivity of equality: 
*529. 
SI!llse: §Ol, n. U. n. 37. 
Sense of a sentence: SUl. 
Sense value: n. 27. 
Sense-concurrent: n. 30. 
Sentence: 
S04, 
11117, 
§1O. 
§:30, 
:m.lO, §50. 
Sentence connective: §05. 

370 
INDEX OF DEFINITIONS 
Sentential calculus: n.2:52. 
Sequenzen: §29, n. 295, 39.11. 
Set: §04. 
sfp: n. 318. 
Sheffer's strnke: §05, n.207. 
Simple applied functional calculus 
of first order: §30. 
Simple applied functional calculus 
of first order with equality: §48. 
Simple calculus of equality: §48. 
Simple functional calculus of secolld 
order: beginning of Chap. V, §58. 
Simple operator: §06. 
Simple order: 55.22. 
Simultaneous substitution: §12. 
Simultaneously satisfiable (class of 
wffs): §4.'), n. 415, §54. 
Simultaneously satisfiable in a do-
main: §45, §54. 
Simultaneously satisfiable with re-
spect to a system of domains: §54. 
Single-row: n. 440. 
Singular name: n.4. 
Singulary: n. 29. 
Singulary associated formula of the 
propositional calculus: n. 318. 
Singulary connective: §05. 
Singulary form: §02. 
Singulary function: §03. 
Singulary functional abstraction op-
erator: §06. 
Singulary functional calculus 
of 
first order: §30. 
§06. i 
SlJ1gulary-singulary operator: 
Sinn: n. 13, n.14. 
Skolrm normal form: §42. 
Skolem normal form for satisfiabili-
ty: §43. 
Skolem-Uiwenheim theorem: **455. 
Solution of the decision problem in 
a special case: n. 421. 
Sound interpretation: §07, n.173, 
§Hl. 
Sound language: §07. 
Special law of red1Jctio ad absurdum: 
§26. 
Special principle of duality for (ma-
terial) equivalences: * Hi5, *374. 
Special principle of duality for (ma-
terial) implications: * 164, *373. 
Specialized system of primitive con-
nectives: 24.7. 
Stand in (a relation): §04. 
Subclass: n. 564. 
Subrelation: n. 556. 
Substitution for individual variables, 
rule of: *351, *40:~, *503. 
Substitution for n-ary functional 
variables, rule of: *352", *404", 
§49. n. 461, *510". 
Substitution for propositional var-
iables, rule of: *3520, *4040, *5100 , 
Substitution (in the propositional 
calculus), rule of: *101, *201, §29. 
Substitution instance: §31, §51. 
Substitutivity of equality, rule of: 
*529. 
Substitutivity of (material) equiva-
lence, rule of: *159, *342, *513. 
Successor relation: 48.23, §55. 
Suppositio formalis: n. 134. 
Supposiiio maten:alis: n.134. 
Syllogism: 15.9, n. 189, n. 190, n. 
191, 4G.22, n.441. 
Symbolic logic: §07, n.125. 
Symmetric binary form: §03, n. 56. 
Symmetric function: §03. 
Syncategorematic: §O:3. 
. j 
.; 
IJ Ii 
i", j 
I 
. , 
':.1 
til 
,. 
, 

INDEX OF DEFlNITl0NS 
371 
Synonymous: §Ol. 
Syntactical constant: §OB, n. 133. 
Syntactical theorem: SOB. 
Syntactical vanable: §OB. 
Syntax; SOB. 
t: §05, §lO. 
t: §ll (Dl), §2B, §50(D21). 
Tautologous: 4(l.6(l). 
Tautology: §I5, §19, §23. 
Tautology, laws of: n. 186. 
Term: n.4. 
Term: 39.10. 
Ternary form: §02. 
Ternary relation: n. 78. 
Theorem: §07, §1O. 
Theorem schema: §33. 
Theoretical syntax: §08. 
Theoretische Logik: n. 125. 
Tltl'ory of deduction: n. 252. 
Theory of implication: n. 224. 
Thing: n. 9, n. 148. 
Transitive law of equality: §4B, tS22. 
Transitive law of (material) equiv-
alence: tISi. 
Transitive law of (material) im-
plication: 12.4, ~ 14l. 
Triple negation, law of: 26.13. 
True for (a system of values of the 
free variables): §04. 
True (proposition): §04. 
True (sentence): §04, §09, n. li2, 
43.2, n. 512. 
Truth (i.e., the truth-value truth): 
§04. 
Truth 
(in 
Tarski's sense): 
§09, 
n. 142, n. 143, n. 407, n. 512. 
Truth-function: §05, n. 92. 
Truth-functional bicondit ional: §05. 
Truth-iunctional conditional: §05. 
I Truth-functIOnal constituent: §46. 
Truth-functional variable: §2B. 
Truth-tahle: §15. §:?4. 
Truth-table decision procedure: §lS, 
§29. 
Truth-value: §04, §19. 
Type: n. 578. 
Type-class n.578. 
Types, theory of: n.87, n. 148. 
Typical ambiguity: n. 149, n.585. 
l'lIary: n.2H. 
'Undefined terms: §Oi. 
Uniform continuity: 11. 102. 
Universal c1\lss: §04. 
Universal closure: ~43, §54, §55. 
Universal quantifier: §O6. 
Univ()cacy: §Ol. 
Ll1S0unrJ interpretation: §07. 
1..1 nS()Unc1 lallguage: 
~()7. 
Use of a word (distinguished from 
mention): §OR. 
USC P §31, n. 324. 
Vacuous occurrence of a quantifier: 
§39. 
Valid: §43, n.407, 43.2, §53, §54. 
Valid in it domain: §43, §.'i4. 
Valid with respect to a system of 
domains: §54. 
Validity in FIb: 43.2. 
Validity in the extended proposition-
al calculus: §53. 
Validity in the pure iunctional cal-
culus of first order: §43. 
Validity in the pure functional cal-
culus of second order: §54. 
I Valuation: 45.4. 
Value for (a model): §55. 
Value for a null class of variables: 
§10, 11 312 

372 
INDEX OF DEFLVITIONS 
Value in the syntactical sense: n. 143, 
§43. 
Value of a constant: §1O, n.312. 
Value of a form: §02, n. 312. 
Value of a function: §03. 
Value of a variable: §02, §43. 
Value of a wff: §15, §23, §43, 
Value of a wff of PI: §15, 
Value of a wff of Pa: §23. 
Variable: §02, n. 24, n. 26, n. 31, ! 
l1.112, D. 117. 
Variable quantity: n, 62. 
Variant of a wit: §13, §36. 
Variant prOtJi: §13. 
Vicious-circle principle: §58, n. 574. 
(w): §56. 
Weak law of excluded middle: 
2G.13. 
\\caker than: §57. 
\Vcight of a functional variable: 
46.11 (2). 
Well-formed formula: §07, n,31O. 
Well-ordering: 55.22. 
Well-ordenng of the individuals, 
axiom of: §56. 
\vf: §1O. 
wf part: n. 200. 
wff: §10. 
wffs: §1O. 
(x): §06, §30(D13). 
20: §55, 
2 1 : §5t5. 
r: **452, §54, 
r I- B: §45. §54. 
;~1.:: §03, §06, 
ll: §30, §55, 
E: §30, §C>5. 
0: 55.14. 
O-ary connective: §24. 
O-ary-n-ary operator: n. 99. 
1: 55.14. 
-: n.43. 
=: §48(D18), §52(D22), §55, §58. 
=2: n.580. 
=3: n.580. 
=F: §48(Dl9), §52 (D23). 
=F2: n.580. 
=F3: n.580. 
f--: D, 65. 
1-: n. 55, §12, §13, §30, §36, n.343. 
-: §05, §1l(D2), §20, §:30. 
v: §05, §1l(D4). 
v: §05, n. 169, §ll (DIO). 
c: §05, §ll (D8). 
¢: §05, §ll (D3). 
:::J: §05, §1O, §20, §30. 
:::J q: §28. 
:::J",: §O(), §:i0(Dl5). 
::::J"'II: §06, §30(D15). 
::p: §05, §ll (D9). 
=: §05, §1l(Df\). 
- x: §06, §30(D16). 
=%11: §06, §30(D16). 
$: §05, §1l(D7). 
I: §05, §ll(Dll), n.207. 
I",: §30(Dl7). 
.: §06, §ll, n. 165. 
(lX): 
§06, n.546. 
V: §06, §30. 
3: §05, §30(D14). 
~: §ll. 
_: §29, :39.10. 
t: §32(proof of **323). 
t: §::32(proof of **323). 
(cel), (ce2), (ce3), (004), 
(ce5): 
§57. 
(cc6), (007), (008), (009), (0010): 
57.2. 

Index of Authors 
Ackermann, Wilhelm: n. 28, n. 125, 
n. 210, n. 299, §29, n. 430, n. 432, 
n. 435, n. 447, §49, n. 458, n. 459, 
n. 468, n. 508, n. 505, n. 507, 
n. 524, n. 555, n. 557, n. 579, 
n. 588. 
Aldrich, Henry: n.68. 
Bellmann, Heinrich: n. 299, §29, 
n. 362, §46, 48.14, §49, n. 457, 
n.477, n. 478, n.504, 52.11. 
Beltrami, Eugenio: n. 539. 
Bernays, Paul: n. 28, n. 119. n. 168, 
Il. 221, §2U, n. 246, n. 250, n. 258, 
n. 266, n. 267, n. 281, n. 292, 
n. 299, n. 351, 11. 365, n. 409, 
n. 420, §46, 46.10, §49, n. 458, 
n. 460, n. 478, n. 519, §55, n. 524, 
n. 526, n. 535, §57, n. 561, n. 563. 
Bernoulli, Jean: §03. 
Bernstein, B. A.: n,199. 
Berry, G. D. W.: n, 107, n. 140. 
Beth, E. W.: n.462. 
Boehner, Philotheus: n. 188. 
Bolyai, Janos: n.539. 
Balzano, Bernard: 11. 565. 
Boole, George: n. 125, n. 237, §29, 
n.240. 
Brouwer, L. E. J.: §26. 
Burkhardt, H.: n. 59. 
Cantor, Georg: n, 541, n. 550, n. 551, 
n.565. 
Carnap, Rudolf: n. 5, n. 17, n. 57, 
n. 70, n, 87, n. lJ.O, n. 116, §07, 
n. 131, §08, n, 139, n. 142, n. 168, 
19,10, n. ]99, n. 809, Il, 458, §49, 
n.519, n.529, n.589. 
Castillon, G. F,: n. 125, n.289. 
Cavailles, ] ean: n. 5R3. 
Cervantes, Miguel de: n. 192. 
Church, Alonzo: n, 19, n. 20, n. 100, 
n. 119, n. 140, n. 199, 19.12, 
n. 239, n. 332, n, 351, n. 420, 
n. 4fH, 55.23(7}, n. 568. 
Chwistek, Leon: n. 588, n. 589, 
Il. 5!W. 
Clairaut, 1\. C.: §03. 
Couturat, Louis: n. 125, n. 239, §2~, 
n.251. 
Coxeter, H. S, M.: 55.2a(a). 
Curry, H. B.: n. lOn, p. 377. 
Dedekind, Richard: n. 525, n. 526, 
n. 541, n. 563, §57, n. 565. 
Delbocuf, ]. R L.: n. 125. 
De Morgan, Augustus: n. 125, 11.188, 
§29, n. 240, n, 241. 
Dewey, John: n.541. 
Dienes, Z. P.: 19.12. 
Dirichlet, G. Lejeune: §03, n. 59. 
Dreben, Burton: n. 442. 
DUrr, Karl: n. 239. 
Eaton, K M.: n. 70. 
Euclid: 48.0. 
Euler, Leonhard: §oa, n. 58, n. 59, 
n.62. 
Fcys, Robert· n. 100. 
FItch, Frederic B.: n. 107, n. 579. 

374 
INDEX OF AUTHORS CITED 
Fourier, J. B. J.: n.59. 
n. 267, n. 292, n. 299. n. 8151. 
Fraenkel, Adolf; n. 1536, n. 588. 
n .. 42~. §49. n. 45S, n. 459. n. 460, 
Fr~chet, Maurice: n.553: 
n. 468, n. 478, n. lH9. §55, n, 524, 
Frege, Gottlob: §Ol. n, 5, n. 7. n. 12, 
n, 526, n, 539, n. MO, 55.23(4), 
, n 13. n. 14, n. 16, n. 17, n. 20, 
n. 555, n. 557. n. 1579. n. 588. 
§02. n, 32, n. 33, n. 37, §O3, §04, 
Huntington, E. V.: §29, n. 282, §55, 
n. 65, n. 66, n. 67. n. 71, n.H. 
n.541, 55.23(6). 
n. 103, n. 114, §08, n. 136. n. 139, [ Itelson: n.126. 
11. 225, §2~: §49, n. 502, n. 545. 
I Ja~kowski, Stanislaw, n. 177. n. 217, 
G~galkine,].].: p.185, n. 186, n. 435. 
§29, n.293, 29.4. 
Gentzen, Gerhar~: §26. n. 212, §29, 
Johansson: Ingebrigt: §26, n. 210, 
n, 270, n. 294, n. 295. n. 296. 
n. 219. 
n, 365, n. 366, n.372, n.462, n. 50!}, 
Gilman, B. 1.: n. 550. 
~;li\·('iJko. \ . n. 21O,i,lp.ln. n .. t.l.os. 
~ZB, n. 271 
ti(idel, Kutt: n. 145, n Litl, !;!ti.l:,.!, 
26.16, n. 218, §29, 11. 28'-'. n. ;)58, 
41.1, n. 430, n. 433, n. 438, n. 446, 
n. 461, §49, n. 464, n. 466, n. 473, 
11.485, §55, n. 523, 
GotIind, Erik: §29, n. 248. 
GutberId, COllst,. n, 550. 
Hahn, Hans: n. 589. 
Hankel, Hermann; §03, n,61. 
Hausdorff, Felix: n,549. 
Hempel, C. G.: n. 2, 
Henkin, Leon: n. 288, §29, §49, 
n,465,n.486,n,510, n.513,n,558. 
Herbrand, Jacques: n, 185, n, 221, 
§29, n 290, n. 430, n. 431, n. 4:~2, 
46,23, n, 442, 46.24, §47, n. 443, 
§49, n. 462, n. 464, n. 479, n. tH6, 
Hertz, Paul: n. 295. 
Heyting, Arend: §26, n, 209, n. 210, 
§2fl, n, 283. 
Hilbert, David: n. 28, n, ItO, n. lI9, 
n. 125, n, 139, n. 168, §17, §26, 
n. 210, n, 221, n. 250, §29, n. 2fi6, 
J¢rgensen, ]0rgen: n, 239, 
Kalmar, Laszlo: §29, n. 286, n. 288, 
o 430.n,433,n,445.n.446,n.447, 
11 448, II. 449, n. 450, §49, n, 472, 
il.526. 
Kemeny, John G.: §l8, n.3IE. 
Keynes, J. N,: n. 26. 
Keyser, C. J.: n. 529, n. 537. 
Kleene, S. c.: n. 119, n. 131, n. 142, 
n. 176, n. 351, n. 357, n. 461. 
Klein, Felix: n. 530. 
Kolmogoroff, A.: §26, n. 210, n. 219, 
26,20, n,357. 
Kuratowski, c.. 55.23(8), 55.23(9). 
Kurschak, J.: n .• 569. 
Lalande, Andre: n. 125. 
Lambert, J. H,: n.239. 
Langer, Susanne K.: n. 26, n. 191. 
Langford. C. H.: n. 136, §49. n, 4.71. 
Leibniz, G. W. v.: §03, n. 125, n. 239, 
n.502, 
Lesniewski, Stanislaw: n. 113, n. 168, 
§25, n. 213, n. 214, n. 228, n. 233, 
§2H, n. 250, n. 261. 
Levi, Beppo, 11. 112. 
Lewis, C. 1.: n. 239, §29, n. 249. 
Liard, Louis: n.125, 
~. 
I 
i 
II 
I 
"I 
I 

INDEX OF AUTHORS CITED 
375 
Lindenbaum, Adolf: titS.23 (S). 
n. 469, n. 502, n. 525, n. 526, 
Lobachevsky, N. I.: n.539. 
n.550, §57, n.565. 
Lorenzen, Paul: n.626. 
Pepis, J6zef: n.448, n.449. 
Lowenheim, 
Leopold: 
§47, 
§49, 
Petrus Hispanus: n, 68. 
n.455, n.475, n,504. 
I Philo of Megara: n. 188. 
Lukasiewicz, Jan: n. 91, n. 177, 
Pieri, Mario: 55.23(5), 
n. 188, 18.4, § 19, 19.8, § 28, n. 224, 
Pil'cak, B. D.: n.212. 
§29, n. 243, n. 255, n. 257, n. 263, 
Ploucquet, Gottfried: n. 125, n. 239. 
n. 265, n. 273, n. 276, n. 278, n. ~80. 
Poincare, Henri: §58, n. 573, n. 574. 
§49. 
Poretsky, Plat on . n. 125. 
MacColl, Hugh: n. 26, §29, n. 242. 
Post, E. L.: n 119. n. 193, §18, §24, 
Macfarlane, Alexander: n. 125. 
n. 206, §29, n. 274, n. 277, n. 285. 
McKinsey, J. c. c,: n. 212, n. 214, 
I 
n. 297. 
n. 217, §49, n. 467, n. 468. 
i Quine, W. V.: n. 20, n. 29. n. 90, 
MacLane, Saunders: n. 131. 
n. 107, ~08, It. 152, §15, n. Z21, 
Malcev, A.: n. 451. 
n. 244. § 20, n 287, §46, n. 427, 
Menger, Karl: n.177. 
n. 428, n. 436, §49, n. 461, Jl. 478. 
Meredith, C. A.: n. 257. 
n. 480, II. 588. 
Mihailescu, Eugen Gh.: n. 214, n. 215, 
§29, n.264. 
Mill, ]. S.: n. 6, n. 14, n. 16. 
Mitchell, O. H.: n.l03, §49, n.453. 
Morris, C. W.: n. 140. 
Mostowski, Andrzej: n. 560, §57, 
n. 666, n. 568, n. 572. 
Murphy, J. ].: n.241. 
Neumann, J. v.: n. 28, n. 112, n. ll3, 
§29, n. 250. 
Nicod, J. G. P.: n. 207, §25, §29, 
n. 247, n. 253. 
Northrop, E. P.: n.26. 
Notcutt, Bernard: n.87. 
Ockham, William of: §04, n. 188. 
Peano, Giuseppe: n. 28, §05, n. 125, 
n. 152, n.155, §29, §49, §55, n. 525, 
n.539. 
Peirce, C, S.: n. 3, n. 67, n. 103'j 
n. 125. n.187, n. 207, n. 226. n. 241, I 
§ 29, n. 277, n. 299, §49, n. 453, i 
Ramsey, F. P.: §49, n. 482, n. 589. 
Rasiawa, Helena: 25.5, §29, n. 248, 
Rescher, Nicholas: 19.12. 
Rieger, Ladislav: n. 212. 
Riemann. Bernhard: n. 41, §03, n. 60. 
Rose. Alan: n.280. 
Rose, Gene F.: n. 217. 
Rosser. J. B.: n. 100, §29, n. 351. 
Russell, Bertrand: n. 5, n. 12, n. 13, 
n. 17, n. 28, n. 55, n. 74, n. 77, 
§05, n. 92, n. 104, n. 107, n. 125, 
n. 165, n. 171, §28, n. 224, n. 225, 
n. 226, §29, n. 244, n. 245. n. 252. 
n. 297, n. 309, §49, n. 454, n. 461, 
n. 502, n. 535, n. 545, n. 546, 
n. 559, §58, n. 574, n. 575, n. 577, 
n. 578, n. 579, n. 581, n. 585, §59, 
n. 587, n. 590. 
Schmidt, Arnold: n.554. 
Scholz, Heinrich: n. 26, n. 263, §29, 
n. 268, §49, n.474. 

376 
INDEX OF AUTHORS CITED 
Schonfinkel, Moses: n. 100, n. 409, 
§46, 46.10, §49. n. 481, §57, n. 561. 
Schroder, Ernst: n. 77, n.125, n. 241, 
§29, §49, n. 503. 
Schroter, Karl: n. 177, §29, n. 268. 
Schutte, Kurt: n. 409, n. 430, n. 433, 
§57, n. 562, p. 377. 
Sheffer, H. M.: n.207, §29. 
Skolem, Thora1f: n. 430, n. 432, 
n.434,n.437,46.13,n.446,n.452, 
§49, n. 456. n. 464, n. 475, n. 483, 
n.504, n. 547. 
Slupecki, Jerzy: §29. n.279. 
Sobocinski, Boleslaw: n. 238, §29, 
n.256. 
Stackel, Paul: n. 570. 
Stamm, Edward: n.207. 
Stone, M. H.: n. 185, n. 186, n. 216. 
Suninyi, Janos: n. 446, n. 448, n. 449, 
n.450. 
Tarski, Alfred: n. 87, n. 110. n. 136, 
n. 139. §09, n. 142, n. 143, n. 146, 
n. 193, n. 212, §28, n. 224, n. 230, 
n. 233, n. 236, n. 243, §29, n. 258, 
n.291,n.314,n.400,n.462,n.529. 
n. 533,n. 548,n.559,n.563,n.571. 
Thomae, J.: n. 139. 
Trachtenbrot, B. A.: n. 450. §57, 
n.567, n. 568. 
Turing, A. M.: n. 119. 
Turquette, A. R: §29. 
Vailati, Giovanni: n. 550. 
Veblen, Oswald: n. 126, n. 127, 
n. 529, §55, n. 541, 55.23(1}. 
Venn, John: n. 125. 
Wajsberg, Mordchaj: §25, n. 210, 
§26, n. 211, n. 212, n. 219, n. 220, 
§29, n. 254, n. 259, n. 262, n. 263, 
n. 269, n. 280, n. 288, n. 289, 
n. 298, p. 377. 
Wang, Hao: n.554. 
Watts, Isaac: n. 68. 
Weber, H.: n.569. 
Wernick, William: n. 206. 
Weyl, Hermann: n. 139, n. 535, 
n. 574, §58, n. 576, n. 583. 
Whately, Richard: n.68. 
White, Morton.,,: n. 20. 
Whitehead, A. N.: n, 5, n, 65, §05, 
n. 104, n. 165, §29, n. 244. fi. 297, 
n. 309, §49, n. 470, n. 502, n. 559. 
§58, n. 577, n. 578, n. 579, n. 581, 
n.585, §59. 
Wittgenstein, Ludwig: §29, n. 275. 
Young, J. W.: n. 126, n. 127, n. 529, 
55.23(1). 
Zermelo, Ernst: §04, n. 76, n. 129, 
§OS. 
.... 

Errata 
On page 66, in line 12, read: "Else there will be simple elementary true 
propositions ... " 
On page 142 it should have been pointed out that Wajsberg's paper, cited 
in footnote 211, contains an error that is not easily set right. Howenr, the 
metatheorem that is stated in the next-to-last paragraph of tile text on page 
142, and a similar metatheorem for the formulation pi of intuitionistic func-
tional calculus of first order, were proved by Curry in the Bulletin of the 
American Mathematical Society, vol. 45 (1939), pp. 288-293, and the proof 
is reproduced by Kleene in Introduction to Metamathematics.-Since Curry',; 
proof depends on Gentzen's Hauptsatz for LJ, the remark should be made 
that it is not the use of Gentzen's Sequfnzen but the Hauptsatz itself that is 
essential, as the Sequenzen can of course be eliminated by the definitions on 
page 165 (with m = 1 for the intuitionistic case), and the II auptsatz therefore 
proved in a form that is directly applicable to formulations oj the ordinary 
kind without Sequenzen (compare Curry, loco cit., and .Kurt Schiitte in the 
Mathemlltische Annalen, vol. 122 (1950), pp. 47-65). 
On page 1 SO, the parenthetic explanation at the end of the statement of the 
meta theorem **272 must be changed to read as follows. "(i.e .. (VCr\' applica-
tion of the rule of 5ul)stitution is one of a chain of ".ucce~si\'e substitution, 
that are applied to one of the axioms of P J ." 
On page 171, add after line 2: "These substitution notations will iJe used 
not only when r, r1, r 2' ...• r" are well-formed formulas. hut when thL'Y 
are formulas consisting of variables or constant~ ~tal1ding alone. and L'vcn 
possibly in other cases also. The condition that A shall be well-formed must 
be retained, at least in the case of the dotted S." 
On page 257, in connection with case X of the decision problem, it should 
have been pointed out that this case covers only a finite number of wffs tlla t 
differ otherwise than by alphabetic changes of bound variable or transforma-
tions of the matrix by propositional calculus or both. This detracts sOI1lt'wll.lt 
from the interest of the case, as the decision problem of a finite class of wffs 
is always solvable in principle, by the trivial procedure of listing the valid 


INTRODUCTION TO MATHEMATICAL LOGIC 
Volume I 

22 
INT RODUCl1Oly' 
singulary form has not only an associated singulary function but also 
associated binary functions, associated ternary functions, and so on. 
(When, however, we speak simply of the associated function of a singu-
lary form, we shall mean the associated singulary function.) 
The notation by means of ). for the associated functions of a form, as 
introduced above for singulary functions, is readily extended to the case of 
m-ary functions,57 but we shall not have occasion to use such extension in this 
book. The passage from a form to an associated function (for which the 
A-notation provides a symbolism) we shall speak of as abstraction or, more 
explicitly, m-ary functional abstraction (if the associated function is tn-arYl. 
Historically the notion of a function was of gradual growth in mathe-
matics, and its beginning is difficult to trace. The particular word "function" 
was first introduced by G. W. v. Leibniz and was adopted from him by 
Jean Bernoulli. The notation fix), or fx, with a letter such as f in the role 
of a function variable, was introduced by A. C. Clairaut and by Leonhard 
Euler. But early accounts of the notion of function do not sufficiently sep-
arate it from that of an expression containing free variables (or a form). 
Thus Euler explains a function of a variable quantity by identifying it with 
an analytic expression,58 i.e., a form in some standard system of mathemat-
ical notation. The abstract notion of a function is usually attributed by 
historians of mathematics to G. Lejeune Dirichlet, who in 1837 was led by 
his study of Fourier series to a major generalization in freeing the idea of a 
function from its former dependence on a mathematical expression or law 
of circumscribed kind. 69 Dirichlet's notion of a function Was adopted by 
Bernhard Riemann (1851),60 by Hermann Hankel (1870),81 and indeed by 
mathematicians generally. But two important steps remained to be taken by 
"This has been done by Carnap in Noles /01' Symbolic Logic (1937) and elsewhere . 
•• " Funclio quanti/atis variabihs esl expt'essio analytica quomodocunque composila eJ; 
illa quantitate variabili el numeris seu qt.antitatibus constan/ibus. Omnis ergo expressio 
analytica, in qua praeter quantitatem variabilem,t omnes quantitates ilIam expressio-
nem componentes sunt constantes, erit funetio ipsius z ... Funclio ergo quanti/atis 
vat'iabilis ipsa nit quantitas variabiJis." lntroduclio in Analysin In/inilot'um (1748), 
p. 4; Opera, ser. 1. vol. 8, p. 18. See further footnote 62. 
"See his Werke, vol. 1, p. 135. It is not important that Dirichlet restricts his state-
ment at this particular place to continuous functions, since it is clear from other pas-
sages in his writings that the same generality is allowed to discontinuous functions. On 
page 132 of the same volume is his well-known example of a function from real numbers 
to real numbers which has exactly two values, one for rational arguments and one for 
irrational arguments. 
DIrichlet's generalization had been partially anticipated by Euler in 1749 (see an 
account by H. Burkhardt in Jahresbertchl do' Deutschen lvfalhematiker-Vere,nigutlg, 
vol. 10 part 2 (1908). pp. 13-14) and later by J. B. J. Fourier (see his Oeuvres. vol. 1, 
pp. 207, 209, 230-232). 
··Werke, pp. 3-4. 
uIn a paper reprinted in the Malhematische Annalen, vol. 20 (1882), pp. 63-112. 

§04] 
PROPOSITIONS AND PROPOSITIONAL FUNCTIONS 
23 
Frege (in his Begriflsschrift of 1879 and later publications): (i) the elimina-
tion of the dubious notion of a variable quantity in favor of the variable as 
a kind of symbol;62 (ii) the admission of functions of arbitrary range by 
removing the restriction that the arguments and values of a function be 
numbers. Closely associated ",,'ith (ii) is Frege's introduction of the prop-
ositional function (in 1879). a notion which we go on to explain in the 
next section. 
04. Propositions and propositional functions. According to gram-
marians, the unit of expression in the natural languages is the sentence, 
an aggregation of words which makes complete sense or expresses a 
complete thought. When the complete thought expressed is that of 
an assertion, the sentence is called a declarative sentence. In what follows 
we shall have occasion to refer only to declarative sentences, and the 
simple word "sentence" is to be understood always as meaning a declarative 
sentence. 63 
We shall carryover the term sentence from the natural languages 
also to the formalized languages. For logistic systems in the sense of 
§07-uninterpreted calculi-the term sentence will be introduced by special 
definition in ea.ch case, but always with the intention that the expres-
sions defined to be sentences are those which will become sentences in 
our foregoing sense under interpretations of the calculus as a formalized 
language.64 
In order to give an account of the meaning of sentences, we shall adopt a 
theory due to Frege according to which sentences are names of a certain 
kind. This seems unnatural at first sight, because the most conspicuous 
use of sentences (and indeed the one by which we have just identified or 
"The passage quoted from Euler in footnote 58 reads as if his variable qtumlit)' were 
a kind of symbol or expression. But this is not consistent with statements made else-
where in the same work which are essential to Euler's use of the notion of function 
-e.g., "5i luerit y functio quaecunque ,psius z, tum vicissim z erit /tmctlO ipstus y" 
(Opera. p. 24). "Sed omnis transformatio consistit in alio modo eandem functionem 
exprimendi, quemadmodum ex Algebra constat eandem quantitatem per plures 
diversas formas exprimi posse" (Opera, p. 32). 
"The question may be raised whether, say, an interrogative or an Imperative logIC 
is possible, in which interrogative Or imperative sentences and what they express 
(questions or commands) have roles analogous to those of declarative sentences and 
propositions in logic of ordinary kind. And some tentative proposals have in fact been 
made towards an imperative logic. and also towards an optative logic or logIC of WIshes. 
But these matters are beyond the scope of this book. 
"ef. the explanation in §02 regarding the use in connection with logistic systems of 
the terms constant, variable, form. An analogous explanation applies to a number of 
terms of like kind to be introduced below-in particular. propositional variable, prop-
ositional form, operatot', quantifier, bound variable, connective. 

