

INVENTING THE UNIVERSE 
l\ii~lliill\lHIDIH 
SSLX-5NG-VJPN 

SUNY Series in Ancient Greek Philosophy 
Anthony Preus, Editor 

INVENTING THE UNIVERSE 
Plato's Timaeus, 
The Big Bang, 
And the Problem of Scientific Knowledge 
Luc BRISSON and F. Walter MEYERSTEIN 
State University of New York Press 

Published by 
State University of New York Press, Albany 
C 1995 State University of New York 
All rights reserved 
Printed in the United States of America 
No part of this book may be used or reproduced in any manner whatsoever 
without written permission. No part of this book may be stored in a retrieval system 
or transmitted in any form or by any means including electronic, electrostatic, 
magnetic tape, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise 
without the prior permission in writing of the publisher. 
For information, address State University of New York Press, 
State University Plaza, Albany, N.Y., 12246 
Production by Marilyn P. Semerad 
Marketing by Bernadette LaManna 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Brisson, Luc. 
[Inventer l'univers. English] 
Inventing the universe : Plato's Timaeus, the big bang, and the 
problem of scientific knowledge / Luc Brisson&: F. Walter 
Meyerstein. 
p. cm. -
(SUNY series in ancient Greek philosophy) 
Includes bibliographical references and indexes. 
ISBN 0-7914-2691-2. -
ISBN 0-7914-2692-0 (pbk.) 
1. Plato. Timaeus. 2. Cosmology, Ancient. 3. Big bang theory. 
4. Cosmology. 5. Science-Philosophy. 6. Knowledge, Theory of. 
I. Meyerstein, F. Walter. II. Title. III. Series. 
B387.B7313 1995 
113--dc20 
95-18054 
OP 
10 
9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 

CONTENTS 
Acknowledgments 
vii 
Introduction: The Problem of Scientific Knowledge 
1 
Situating the problem: our essential presuppositions 
2 
The procedure followed in this analysis 
4 
The Model of the Universe in Plato's Timaeus 
The Big Bang Model of Cosmology 
8 
Algorithmic Information Theory 
12 
Notes 
14 
Part I: The Model of the Universe in the Timaeus 
17 
The date of the composition of the Timaeus 
The first twelve axioms of the cosmological model 
advanced in the Timaeus 
18 
The world soul in the Timaeus 
28 
Plato's theory of matter and the cosmological axioms 
40 
Plato's explanation of the complexity of sensible things 
56 
Experimental verification in Plato's time 
58 
Standards and instruments of measure in Plato's time 
59 
The numbering system in Plato's time 
61 
Experimentation in the Timaeus 
62 
Notes 
64 
Part II: Contemporary Big Bang Cosmology 
67 
A. The standard Big Bang model: short description 
75 
The "philosophical" presuppositions 
77 
The geometric axioms 
78 
Einstein's gravitation 
86 
Einstein's dynamic axioms: 
matter and energy in the universe 
89 

time and causality in the universe 
92 
Solving Einstein's field equations 
96 
Isotropy and homogeneity of the energy/matter content 
of the universe: the standard Friedmann-Robertson 
-Walker model 
99 
B. The relation between the model and observation 
103 
The Hubble law 
105 
Cosmic microwave background radiation 
107 
The relative abundance of light elements 
109 
Observational limits in cosmology 
110 
Problems affecting the FRW model: observations 
requiring additional axioms 
116 
The inflationary scenario 
121 
C. Modem theory of matter 
124 
The central role of the concept of symmetry 
127 
Notes 
138 
Part III: What Knowledge is Conveyed by Science? 
149 
The symbolic description of reality 
150 
Algorithmic Information Theory: some relevant aspects 
153 
The Turing machine 
157 
A definition of science 
162 
The status of the axioms in Aristotle's Posterior Analytics 173 
Final conclusions 
179 
Notes 
181 
Indices 
187 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This book is the authors' English revised version of their Inventer 
l 'Univers, first published in Paris in 1991. 
Translations of quotations from Plato's Timaeus are Comford's and 
from Aristotle's Posterior Analytics are Tredennick's, with minor 
modifications by the authors. 
Thanks are due to the following people: Michael Chase and Jeffrey 
Reid who helped with the English translation, and Anne Brisson who 
drew the Figures. 


Introduction: 
The Problem of 
Scientific Knowledge 
Knowing the universe is inventing the universe. This propo-
sition, daring in an age like ours that has witnessed such a 
prodigious accumulation of scientific knowledge, seems surprising; 
moreover, the remarkable mathematical theory put forward by 
modem science to explain the universe appears to refute it out of 
hand. And yet, a careful examination of two fundamental 
cosmological models, Plato's Timaeus and the contemporary 
standard Big Bang model, shows that the kind of knowledge called 
"scientific" ultimately rests on a set of irreducible and 
indemonstrable formulas, pure inventions of the human mind, 
retained solely through recourse to this simple operative argument: 
"it works." 
Confronted by this fact, philosophical investigation has wavered 
between two equally unpalatable solutions: 1) posing the "axiom 
that justifies all axioms," thus becoming meta-physical, non-
rational or even mythical, or 2), after having lucidly established its 
inherently impassable limits, indefatigably driven by a desire to 
understand, by a nostalgia for the absolute, transgressing these 
same limits while unceasingly attempting to reinvent a simple and 
ordered universe. 
The analysis of this perpetual renewing of the question, this 
unceasing quest, a veritable task of Sisyphus, constitutes the object 
of this book. 

2 
Inventing the Universe 
Situating the Problem: Our Essential Presuppositions 
Previous to any analysis, a certain number of premises must be 
established, 1 the rules of the game must be agreed upon. The 
essential premises and definitions we require in order to formulate 
the problem of knowledge are the following: 
1) The present analysis focuses on what in this book is called 
"scientific" knowledge. Knowledge acquired by other means or 
methods, such as knowledge acquired by way of divine revelation 
or mystical illumination, or even knowledge resulting from 
"common sense" or from habit is excluded from the analysis. We 
equally leave out the sheer accumulation of precise experimental 
data, important as it is for the scientific endeavor. We focus on 
science as knowing, not on science as doing. Our concern is 
directed exclusively at knowledge deemed to put forward the 
explanation of a fact or of a thing, the particular knowledge 
garnered by the hypothesis-deduction-testing procedure. Following 
in this Plato and Aristotle, we make a clear distinction between 
scientific knowledge (episteme) and mere opinion (doxa). 2 
This work thus deals exclusively with the type of knowledge 
which claims to propose, in a succinct and clear manner, a causal 
explanation to a determined set of phenomena that can be 
apprehended in the physical world, in nature. This scientific 
knowledge will be proved to be essentially the list of axioms and 
rules of inference supporting the formalized system in which 
consists the scientific explanatory theory put forward in each case. 
On the other hand, we do not inquire into what "is" the physical 
world where the explained phenomena are apprehended; we leave 
aside its ontological status. It suffices that such scientific 
explanations "work," that the scientific knowledge afforded by 
these axioms and by these rules of inference confers on mankind a 
considerable power over nature, the power to carry out, in certain 
cases, predictions with appropriate exactness. In short, our analysis 

Introduction: The Problem o/Scientific Knowledge 
3 
deals with this question: what can be said about scientific 
knowledge? 
2) Science explains phenomena, i.e., things and facts, pragmata 
according to Aristotle. These phenomena can be apprehended only 
by the senses and through a measuring operation. 3 Of the five 
human senses, two serve especially this function: sight and touch. 
Consequently, when in the Timaeus he wishes to evoke the material 
world, Plato speaks of a "visible and tangible" (horatos kai haptos) 
world. But it turns out that ''there is no science through sensation" 
(Aristotle, Posterior Analytics I 31, 87 b 28). Why? Because all that 
is material is found to be in time, nothing material can escape its 
never ceasing flow. Consequently, we are compelled to admit the 
crucial distinction between what "is" and what "becomes," a 
distinction which will prove fundamental when it comes to the 
elucidation of what can be said about this "scientific knowledge." 
3) From the fact that every event is always sense-perceived at a 
definite place in space and at a defmite instant in time, at some 
particular hie et nunc, follows the main characteristic of the 
material world: the material world never "is," it is always 
"becoming." In other words, the fundamental characteristic of the 
material world is kinesis, change, in the widest acceptation of the 
word. Philosophers and scientists however search for necessary 
explanations, for (universal) unchanging laws of nature, of which 
Newtonian gravitation is an example. It nevertheless turns out that 
between these two worlds, the material world of change and 
becoming and the world of being, of immutable Platonic forms or 
of mathematical theories, no logical relationship can be 
established; here lies a hiatus irrationalis! 
4) This paradoxical situation is located at the center of our 
investigation. Thinkers from Plato to Einstein have been faced by 
this paradox: no logical relationship can ever be established 
between the formal axiomatic system, the idealized construction 
that we call a "scientific explanation," and the experimental 

4 
Inventing the Universe 
information supplied by our senses, by means of a measuring 
operation.4 Einstein, in a letter to M. Solovine dated May 7, 1952, 
points out this absence of logical relationship between what he calls 
the set "S" of theoretically deduced propositions (die gefolgerten 
Siitzte) and the level "E" of sensible perception (die unmittelbaren 
Sinnes-Erlebnisse ). s 
It is precisely because the scientific method has shown itself to 
be so fruitful and powerful, especially in the twentieth century, that 
we propose to clarify the terms of the discussion that makes 
apparent a hiatus i"ationalis between the intelligible and the 
sensible. And we intend to conduct our investigation by placing on 
an equal footing the results of the most recent scientific theories 
and those, still valid and fundamental, put forward by the Greek 
philosophers. 
The Procedure Followed in this Analysis 
This book is divided into three parts, each of which proposes a 
different approach to the problem of the hiatus i"ationalis. 
Part/: The Model of the Universe in Plato's Timaeus 
Our interest in Plato's Timaeus is explained by the unique 
situation of this work in the history of Western philosophy. 
1) The authenticity of the Timaeus, a work that has reached us 
assuredly complete after more than twenty-four centuries, is 
unquestionable. Through its Latin translations, it had an influence 
on Mediaeval philosophy and, after the rediscovery of its original 
text at the time of the Renaissance, it played a crucial role in the 
thought of scientists such as Kepler and Galileo. 
2) For the first time in the history, Plato, in the Timaeus, submits 
the problem of scientific knowledge to a complete analysis, clearly 
stating that the character of necessity and ideality attributed by him 

Introduction: The Problem o/Scientific Knowledge 
5 
to a valid scientific explanation cannot follow in a non-mediated 
way from sense-perceived experiences. 
3) To solve this problem, and again for the first time in history, 
Plato applies what will become ''the" method of the scientific 
inquiry. This procedure requires as its first step the establishing of a 
list of premises or axioms. Once such a list has been drawn up, the 
scientist tries to verify if the propositions, deduced from these 
axioms according to certain precise rules of inference supposedly 
known and admitted, present a reasonable and adequate 
correspondence with sense-perceived experience. 
4) Finally, and even more astonishingly, Plato, for the first time in 
history, uses mathematics as a tool to express and to deduce the 
consequences which derive from the postulated axioms. Indeed, 
starting with Aristotle, philosophers have, for their cosmological 
speculations, clearly recognized the scope and the power of the 
scientific method, that is to say, of the logical deduction of 
propositions starting from certain previously admitted hypotheses; 
but their tool remained common language. Although one can 
adduce several reasons to explain this situation, it is nevertheless 
surprising to note that, between Plato and Galileo, that is during 
twenty centuries, no one seems to have really appreciated the 
enormous power of mathematics for manipulating abstract 
concepts, particularly when establishing cosmological models. 
Having put forward these points, we now explain the methodo-
logical procedure we will follow in the first part of this book. To 
begin with, we consider the Timaeus, and other works by Plato, not 
only as historical documents, but as texts whose complexity and 
consistency support an interpretation meeting up to date 
requirements; however, in so doing, we take all the necessary 
precautions to avoid introducing into these ancient texts manifestly 
foreign modem connotations. Consequently we consider that in the 
Timaeus Plato offers a particular "scientific" model to explain the 
universe, in accordance with the definition of science adopted in 

6 
Inventing the Universe 
this book and with the obvious caveat that we are dealing with a 
cosmological model established in the fourth century BC. 
In our analysis, we will endeavor to display the axiomatic 
structure which underlies the Timaeus. In fact, we will exhibit, as 
completely as possible, the list of axioms, or primordial 
assumptions, upon which Plato's cosmological system is ultimately 
founded. This procedure is interesting on two accounts: first, a 
relatively short list of axioms is all that Plato needs in order to 
propose a necessary and demonstrative scientific explanation of the 
ever changing phenomena observed in the material world. Second, 
in many respects this list of axioms is similar to the list of premises 
that contemporary science has also to admit; the common character 
shared by these assumptions will be brought to light by our analysis 
of contemporary Big Bang cosmology. 
Finally, we will focus on the question raised by the experimental 
verification (better: falsification) of a scientific explanation, a 
question we will address on several occasions throughout this book. 
The hiatus i"ationalis between scientific explanation ( or scientific 
theory) and sense-perceived experience is so definitive that no non-
mediated occurrence from the sense-perceptible world can modify 
the ontological and epistemological status of an idealized 
construction such as a formal axiomatic system. Experimentation is 
but a method allowing one to make a choice between different sets 
of axioms. Certainly, this method is of undeniable importance, 
considering that it allows the establishment of an empirical 
operative connection between an explanation (theory) and reality, 
the connection being expressed by "it works;" however, 
experimentation can never succeed in ascending from the particular 
to the universal. When Ptolemy added epicycles to his system in 
order "to save the phenomena" in the sky, the geocentric axiom was 
not questioned. But when Copernicus proposed a different set of 
axioms, the comparison and the choice between different 
astronomical models became possible. Let us remark furthermore 
that any question about the axioms is, in general, equivalent to the 
addition of a supplementary axiom, or, what amounts to the same, 

Introduction: The Problem o/Scientific Knowledge 
1 
represents the transition to a metasystem. We will come back to this 
matter in the final part of this book. 
On the other hand, the fact that Plato probably never thought of 
anything corresponding to an experiment, that he never conceived 
the controlled and repeatable observation of some particular 
physical arrangement depending only on a drastically reduced 
number of parameters, compared with the hypercomplexity found 
everywhere in the material world, is of no consequence, because the 
entire information content, all the "scientific knowledge" of the 
scientific explanation (theory), is enclosed in its axiom system. As 
a matter of fact, from this axiom system all the propositions 
susceptible of experimental verification can be deduced, and only 
the deduced theorems of the system permit the calculation of the 
predicted value of some physical variable that an experiment can 
measure and thereby either verify or falsify. In a word, one must 
carefully keep separate scientific knowledge from the scientific 
method of choice: the scientific method of choice is directly based 
on the technology of experimentation, whereas scientific 
knowledge is logically independent from this technology. To sum 
up, the scientific method allows a choice between competing axiom 
systems and, in general, the axiom system leading to more exact 
predictions is preferred. 
Between this scientific method and scientific knowledge, which 
ultimately reduces to the list of axioms, a positive feedback 
relationship is established. The power of prediction which derives 
from this method is considerable, explaining why, even if this 
predictive power remains incomprehensible ("extra-logical" in 
Einstein's words), its success has established it as the method par 
excellence. Nevertheless, only the list of axioms and the rules of 
inference count for our analysis, since they contain all the relevant 
information a theory can convey. 
However, Plato in the Timaeus does not admit, as scientific 
knowledge, a knowledge characterized by a purely functional 
definition of the sort: If a formal axiomatic system happens to be 
capable of producing theorems leading to sufficiently precise 

8 
Inventing the Universe 
predictions, this system is accepted as "scientific," and no further 
inquiry shall be considered necessary. For reasons we will make 
clear, Plato refuses such a type of knowledge; or, more precisely, he 
would never qualify such an endeavor as episteme. 6 A purely 
operative definition of science, a definition of science which 
renounces the critical examination of its premises, is not only 
intellectually unappealing but at the same time abandons all quest 
for certitude, even when a remarkable correspondence with the 
empirical reality may eventually be uncovered 
Yet neither Plato nor the great majority of the philosophers who 
came after him succeeded in avoiding this impasse without 
appending to their theories a set of peculiar metaphysical entities, 
the necessity of which is hard, if not impossible, to prove from 
observation and experience. This will be documented by two 
precise examples: in the first part of the book, Plato's Timaeus; in 
the second part, the contemporary Big Bang model of cosmology. 
Part II: The Big Bang Model of Cosmology 
The detailed analysis of the Timaeus offered in the first part of 
this book will give an indication of what constitutes scientific 
knowledge for Plato. Plato supposes that a benevolent demiurge has 
framed, from a few primordial and simple mathematical building 
blocks, a universe in which all phenomena find their scientific 
explanation if and only if the scientist succeeds in uncovering the 
mathematical formula utilized by the demiurge for the assembly of 
the /cosmos. In so doing, Plato hopes that the hiatus irrationalis 
could be bridged by mathematics, considered to be a purely rational 
construction. Furthermore, and since the demiurge is a benevolent 
one, he will guarantee, so far as possible, that the mathematics used 
to order the universe will be easy enough to become accessible to 
mankind. This metaphysics notwithstanding, Plato in the Timaeus 
asserts that all a human being can ever hope to know about a 
phenomenon is the mathematical formula expressing its change 
(kinesis). And, in spite of the twenty-four centuries separating them, 

Introduction: The Problem o/Scientific Knowledge 
9 
contemporary cosmology seems to follow a course in more than 
one way parallel to Plato's endeavor. 
But first this question: Why consider the Big Bang model as the 
scientific paradigm? Several reasons can be given: i) the Big Bang 
model is a cosmology and, in this sense, it is directly related to the 
Timaeus; ii) very few physical theories can claim such a wide scope 
or have attracted such a general interest; and, iii) from the 
standpoint of a philosophy of knowledge, science has nothing that 
can rival with a model purporting to describe the entire universe. 
To remain methodologically consistent, we enumerate the 
axioms and assumptions indispensable for the construction of a 
coherent mathematical model of the universe, i.e., for the standard 
Big Bang model. In so doing, we will endeavor to show that it is 
possible to analyze this model as an ordered succession of premises 
reflecting the scientist's prejudices about space, time, causality, etc. 
And the set of these axioms will allow the construction of a 
universe where the mathematics we are familiar with can perform 
the duty of structuring an explanatory system. Once the 
fundamental characteristics of this model become clear, we will 
follow with a description of those observational facts deemed to 
verify the model, as well as the most important of those which seem 
to falsify it. 
The main intention of this program is to highlight the purely 
intelligible character of the construction of the model. In fact, no 
logical connection can be established between a N-dimensional 
topological metric space and the sense-perceived ''world". 
Furthermore, if we provide a rather technical description of the Big 
Bang model, it is to exhibit clearly the following aspects, which 
seem essential to our analysis. 
I) A certain number of opposites, of which the pair 
being/becoming represents the fundamental antonymous couple of 
the Timaeus, can be found as well in the Big Bang model; this is 
shown in this Table: 

10 
Inventing the Universe 
Timaeus 
Big Bang 
Being 
Becoming 
Model 
Reality 
Original 
Copy 
Theory 
Observation 
Eternity 
Change 
Pattern 
Complexity 
Order 
Disorder 
Prediction 
Complexity 
Symmetry 
Chaos 
Symmetry 
Complexity 
2) These opposites show once again the hiatus irrationalis to 
which we have repeatedly alluded. In the Timaeus as well as in 
contemporary cosmology, a central status is accorded to the concept 
of symmetry. In the Timaeus, the contrary of symmetros is ametros, 
an epithet qualifying the chaos which is devoid of measure, which 
is not calculable as we would put it today. In fact, this is the central 
idea developed in the Timaeus: the order established by the 
demiurge in the universe becomes manifest as the symmetry found 
at its most fundamental level, a symmetry which makes possible a 
mathematical description of such an universe. The homology 
between the Platonic and the modem approach deserves to be 
highlighted. Symmetry, a concept derived from geometry, is also 
the pivotal notion around which the Big Bang model will be 
constructed. Furthermore, the opposition symmetry/complexity will 
be used by Plato, as well as by modem cosmology, to distinguish in 
their modeling of the universe three distinct domains: 
• The very large, the astronomical, the realm of the celestial 
bodies, of galaxies and of clusters of galaxies. In this domain, 
according to the description provided by both models, everything is 
symmetric, homogeneous, isotropic, simple. This is the realm of 
eternal circular motions, of mathematical physics. 

Introduction: The Problem of Scientific Knowledge 
11 
• The very small, the microscopic, the realm of the elementary 
building blocks. Here also, the models postulate symmetry and 
simplicity. This is the domain of the perfect Platonic polyhedra and 
of their mathematical interactions, the realm of the physics of 
elementary mathematical particles. 
• The sublunary world, which includes everything mankind is 
able to resolve, or analyze, into its elementary constituents. This is 
the universe of distinct galaxies, of people, of viruses. It is the 
world of the particular, of individuals. It is the realm of the 
complex. 
3) For both models the following crucial axiom must be 
admitted. The entire universe is reducible to some simple 
mathematical primordial elements, and everything happening in the 
universe, every time-dependent change (kinesis), is also reducible 
to simple 7 mathematical interactions between simple mathematical 
elements. The result will be an ordered world, a kosmos. And this 
order is the consequence of the symmetries introduced 
axiomatically in the description of the universe. 
4) Finally, contemporary cosmology adopts an attitude very 
similar to that of Plato's, in that the discovering of the 
mathematical formula ''that works" is the only objective for 
scientific research. But once a theory has been found, its axioms 
and its inference rules having been selected as those that "work" 
better than other models, nothing further can be "scientifically" said 
about the theory itself. 
This limited knowledge is certainly not what Plato considered to 
be episteme. In Plato's thought, episteme can only refer to the 
particular kind of knowledge that has as its sole object the 
intelligible Forms. This is true knowledge (alethes logos), radically 
superior in his eyes to a simple enunciation of a functional theory. 
But true knowledge is only attainable by the gods, and a few 

12 
Inventing the Universe 
selected men: the philosophers. It follows that the mathematical 
model devised by common mortals can never be more than a 
verisimilar account of reality, an eikos logos, a plausible copy of 
true reality. Modem science shales this predicament: every theory 
is at best a provisional explanation of some phenomenon, which 
remains open-ended, since a theory can only resist falsification, but 
can never be verified. 
Thus the Timaeus and the Big Bang model share a limited 
optimism about what can be attained as scientific knowledge. Based 
on the postulate proclaiming the universe to be ordered and 
reducible to a few simple elements interacting in a simple 
mathematical way, the scientist arrives only at a verisimilar image 
of episteme, he can offer but a copy of reality, hoping that the 
progress of his endeavor will lead his knowledge ever closer to 
actual reality. But even this unpretentious ideal seems to be 
severely constrained if the conclusions of the recently developed 
Algorithmic Information Theory are to be taken into account. In 
order to complete our analysis, we shall use this powerful tool 
developed by Gregory Chaitin. 
Part III: Algorithmic Information Theory 
Algorithmic Information Theory is so recent that some of the 
conclusions we derive from it may appear highly paradoxical. We 
nonetheless justify our special interest in this theory by the 
following considerations: 
I) A3 the examples of the first two parts should prove, the 
acquisition of scientific knowledge requires a previous intelligible 
operation: the physical situation under consideration must be 
expressed or formulated in a symbolic language, a language based 
on pure symbols, unrelated to any physical substratum whatsoever 
( for instance: a N-dimensional topological space, a symmetry 
group, a quantum number, etc., or more modestly, but similarly, a 

Introduction: The Problem o/Scientif,c Knowledge 
13 
distance in meters, an angle in degrees). This is the preliminary 
scientific description of the phenomenon under consideration. As 
shown by N. Wiener and C. Shannon, such description can then 
always be coded in binary language, as a sequence of binary 
symbols such as O and 1. The same remark applies to any scientific 
theory supposed to "explain" the change (kinesis) observed in the 
particular physical situation selected. 
Algorithmic Information Theory allows the mathematical 
demonstration of significant theorems pertaining to such abstract 
sequences of only Os and 1 s. Such sequences, as will be shown, can 
represent what previously has been called "scientific knowledge."8 
But more fundamental is the fact that the theory allows us to 
measure the complexity of a binary sequence. In so far as a 
scientific theory is a representation of reality, and in so far as we 
can speak about such a theory, it becomes feasible to envision this 
representation as a binary sequence of a certain length and 
complexity. At this point, questions about the complexity of a 
scientific theory, or its information content, become pertinent, and a 
much more discerning and perceptive approach to the problem of a 
scientific knowledge, of its hiatus irrationalis, becomes feasible. 
2) To reformulate the problem of scientific knowledge in the terms 
of theorems demonstrated by the Algorithmic Information Theory 
may seem odd, but the conclusions reached are even more 
surprising. We will prove that the probability for our universe being 
ordered according to some simple mathematics, and reducible to 
some simple elementary components, is infinitely small, except if a 
benevolent god has decided otherwise. We will also prove that all 
knowledge a scientific theory, such as the one developed by the 
Timaeus or by contemporary cosmology, can convey, reduces to the 
bare enunciation of such a theory, that is, to the listing of the basic 
set of its axiomatic propositions and of its admitted inference rules. 
Therefore we will prove that this constitutes a definite limit in two 
senses: anything surpassing the complexity of the theory is 
undecidable in the theory; any question requires additional axioms. 

14 
Inventing the Universe 
But should the theory be the "final" theory about which some 
physicists dream, then it is itself totally ineffable, no rational 
discomse about such a final theory is possible. 
3) Not unexpectedly, this new approach is capable of expressing, 
but this time in a rigorous mathematical manner, ideas Aristotle had 
already developed mainly in the Posterior Analytics. In fact, our 
application of the Algorithmic Information Theory will show that 
Aristotle's ideas, now expressed in the sophisticated language of 
contemporary mathematics, have lost nothing of their interest. 
NOTES 
1. As Aristotle (Posterior Analytics I 1, 71 a 1-2) has expressed it, all knowledge 
acquired "by way of argument (dianoetike) proceeds from pre-existent know-
ledge." 
2. "We suppose ourselves to possess unqualified scientific knowledge of a thing, 
or of a fact (pragma) as opposed to knowing it in the accidental way in which 
the sophist knows, when we think that we know the cause on which the fact 
depends, as the cause of that fact and of no other, and, further, that the fact 
could not be other than it is." Aristotle, Posterior Analytics I 2, 71 b 9-12. 
3. Actually, no unmediated sense-perception can become a measure. A "measure" 
already presupposes a theory. We here skip this complex problem in order to 
concentrate our investigation exclusively on what we have defined as 
"scientific knowledge." 
4. This lack of relationship caused E. Wigner to write his famous article ''The 
Unreasonable Effectiveness of Mathematics in the Natural Sciences," 
Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics 13, 1960, p. 2, where one 
can read: ''The enormous usefulness of mathematics in the natural sciences is 
something bordering on the mysterious and there is no rational explanation for 
it." 
S. Concerning how science establishes a relation between the two spheres, he 
writes: "Diese Procedur gehOrt genau betrachtet ebenfalls der extra-logischen 

Introduction: The Problem of Scientific Knowledge 
15 
Sphllre an, weil die Beziehung der in den S auftretenden Begriffe zu den 
Erlebnissen E nicht logischer Natur sind." And he concludes: "Die Quintessenz 
ist der ewig problernatische Zusammenhang alles Gedanklichen mit dem 
Erlebbaren (SiMes-Erlebnisse)" (Facsimile of this letter in Einstein, A 
Centenary Volume, A.P. French ed., London 1979, p. 271): "This procedure, 
looking more closely, belongs as well to the extra-logical (intuitive) sphere 
because the relation between the concepts intervening in S and the experiences 
E are not of a logical nature. The quintessence is the relationship of the 
eternally problematical connection between what is thought and what is 
experienced (through the senses)." 
6. As Wigner says in the article already quoted: " ... we do not know why our 
theories work so well. Hence their accuracy may not prove their truth and 
consistency." (op. cit., p. 14) 
7. "Simple" here means: accessible in principle to human investigators. 
Simplicity, a rather subjective, psychological concept, plays nevertheless a 
fundamental role in cosmology; complexity, its anathema, can, on the contrary, 
be precisely defined. 
8. Every scientific theory must be communicable, must be fonnulated in some 
inter-subjective language. Solipsistic "knowledge" is certainly not "scientific" 
knowledge. 


Part I: 
The Model of the Universe in the Timaeus 
The aim of the Tim, .. ~· is multiple, comprising a cosmological 
model and simultaneously describing the origin of mankind and the 
constitution of an ideal city which is both the critical reverse of the 
Athens in which Plato lived and the model it should follow. It is 
therefore impossible to separate neatly in the Timaeus that which 
pertains to cosmology and that which is dependent on other areas of 
knowledge: mathematics, physics, chemistry, biology, medicine, 
psychology, sociology, politics and even religion. All this is tied 
together in one dense web. None of these areas of learning displays the 
real autonomy that they have been able to gain two millennia later. A 
reading of the Timaeus can therefore only avoid anachronism if it 
recognizes from the outset this lack of autonomy. Nonetheless, the 
Timaeus is a work on cosmology, since it advances a model of the 
physical universe; it is even the first such work to have reached us in its 
entirety. What is more, for the first time, a model of the universe is 
proposed that professes to be totally mathematical. 
A further difficulty in the Timaeus ensues from the intertwining of 
mythical narrative and scientific approach, a problem indissociable from 
the status of a discourse on the origin of the sensible world. To recall the 
origin of the sensible world is to describe the coming into being of 
sensible reality, which, by definition so to speak, no human being can 
ever have experienced. The philosopher who commits himself to this 
undertaking is as unprepared as the poet, Hesiod for example, who, in 
the Theogony, must have recourse to the Muses. And Plato must first set 
forth his own fundamental epistemology. 
The Date of Composition of the Timaeus and Its Dramatic Situation 
The Timaeus appears to follow the Republic, or a dialogue 
resembling this discussion of Justice, and it is followed by the Critias, 
an unfinished dialogue meant to expand upon a Hermocrates that was 
never written. It is essentially a discussion between four characters: 
Socrates, Hermocrates, Critias, and Timaeus. 

18 
Inventing the Universe 
The project of this discussion as a whole, within which the Timaeus 
is embedded, is above all political and tackles this question: how can the 
Athenians be reformed? The answer: by reminding them of their history 
(which Hermocrates would have done), and by evoking a distant past 
(which Critias does) where the organization of their City conformed to 
the ideal described by Socrates in the Republic. To show that this ideal is 
realizable on earth, to found this political project in nature, it is 
necessary to go back to the origin of man and to the origin of the world, 
and to explain how man, this microcosm, finds bis place within the 
macrocosm, the universe which is but the sensible image of an 
intelligible model. Plato puts into the mouth of Timaeus, a citizen of 
Locri (in southern Italy) the long monologue wherein this ambitious 
program is set forth in detail. 
On what date is the discussion between Socrates, Hermocrates, 
Critias and Timaeus supposed to have taken place? If we leave aside the 
problem presented by the relationship between this discussion and the 
one recounted in the Republic, the action must be situated between 430 
and 425 BC. Socrates would then have been forty to forty-five years old 
It seems that the Timaeus and the Critias were written by Plato ten or 
twelve years before bis death, between 358 and 356 BC. Translated into 
Latin, at least in part, by Cicero (106-43 BC) and by C(h)alcidius (fourth 
cent. AD), commented by many Platonists, including Proclus (fifth cent. 
AD), the Timaeus bas reached us through papyri and manuscripts, the 
oldest of which was produced in Constantinople and goes back to the 
end of the ninth century of our era (more than a millennium after Plato's 
death). 
The First Twelve Axioms of the Cosmological Model Advanced in the 
Timaeus 
Fundamental to our analysis in this book is the following assumption: 
the cosmological model advanced by Plato is a "scientific model," in the 
strong contemporary sense of the term. It thus ensues that this 
construction, this theoretical model of the universe, must be assembled 
as a formal axiomatic system: a set of primordial propositions - the 
axioms - must first be established, and all observable manifestations of 

Part I: Plato's Timaeus 
19 
the universe must then in principle be deducible as theorems from these 
axioms. 
To be sure, Plato may not have been perfectly conscious of the fact 
that he was constructing a model based on a list of axioms and that these 
axioms have no other justification than their epistemological 
consistency. But he accepted this idea: whoever finds a different set of 
axioms, whoever could advance another model or attempt a different 
explanation, is equally entitled to be listened to; and only the model best 
fitting the data, the model that ''works best," will be chosen . 
... but if anyone should put the matter to the test and discover that it 
is not so, the prize is his with all good will. (Timaeus 54a-b) 
... but another, looking to other considerations, will judge 
differently. (Timaeus SSd) 
This truly modern feature of Plato's cosmology deserves to be 
emphasized. 
Axiom Tl 
Reality is separated into two domains: the intelligible Forms 
(ados, iua), pure, eternal, immutable and simple; and the 
complei: sensible particulars, ever-changing (kinetos) in time. 
This separation of reality into two domains corresponds to the 
distinction between being and becoming, between that which remains 
forever identical and that which never ceases becoming different, 
between that to which the predicate ''true" can be attributed and that to 
which this predicate is refused 
In the Platonic system, the intelligible Forms, generally called 
"ideas,"1 are postulated as metaphysical entities, indispensable for 
explaining the world perceived by the senses. There is no veritable 
reality in the pennanent change of .all that is in time, of all that is always 
becoming, of all that we moderns call ''material." Time is tied to change, 
but does not affect the eternal realities, which are timeless and 
changeless. As we can read in the Timaeus: 

20 
Inventing the Universe 
We must, then, in my judgment, first make this distinction: what is 
that which is always real and has no becoming, and what is that 
which is always becoming and is never real? That which is 
apprehensible by thought with a rational account is the thing that is 
always unchangeably real; whereas that which is the object of belief 
together with unreasoning sensation is the thing that becomes and 
passes away, but never has real being. (Timaeus 27d-28a) 
Only the knowledge of intelligible Forms can really be said to be ''true." 
But finite, ephemeral and limited human beings cannot in this world 
attain such a knowledge. The knowledge of these divine entities is the 
exclusive privilege of the gods and of a small number of their friends 
(Phaedrus 278d). Knowledge whose object is the world of sensible 
particulars, which Plato qualifies as "opinion" (doxa), is an inferior type 
of knowledge, since it can at best attain only verisimilitude; Here lies the 
root of the epistemological problem Plato tries to solve in the Timaeus: 
how to know truly the sensible world which is ever-changing, whereas 
true knowledge (epistemeJ can have as its objects only the intelligible 
Forms which moreover remain inaccessible to human beings? 
Axiom T2 
The Good occupies a siagular situadon among the Forms. 
The Good is one intelligible Form among others: Justice, Unity, Man, 
Animal, etc., but it plays a ciucial role within the Platonic system, 
particularly in the Timaeus. 2 This Form confers upon the other 
intelligible Forms these distinctive features: beauty, harmony, order, 
simplicity. According to the cosmological model advanced by Plato, the 
other intelligible Forms then communicate these features to the sensible 
particulars. 
Axiom T3 
In the sensible world, all that becomes becomes u the result 
ofacaue. 

Part/: Plato's Timaeus 
21 
Causality only finds an application in the sensible world, since in the 
realm of intelligible Forms, which, following axiom Tl, are eternal and 
immutable, there is no change, and, consequently, there is no cause-
effect connection in the intelligible world. And in the sensible world, 
changes amount to the relationships between elementary components 
(cf. axiom TIS infra). These elementary components are eternal and 
immutable (cf. axiom T13 to T18 infra). But all change obeys causality, 
according to axiom T3. Any change of relationship will therefore always 
be the effect of another change of relationship, antecedent in rank or in 
time. By further postulating that inter-connections between changes, 
between relationships, 
can as 
far as possible be expressed 
mathematically (cf. axiom T12 infra), Plato constructs (invents, 
according to our terminology) a causally ordered mathematical universe. 
The word "cause" (aitia), a term borrowed from the judicial 
vocabulary where it designated responsibility, 3 is used to designate this 
chain of relationships. 
Axiom T4 
The sensible world is the result of the ordering effort of a 
god. 
One of the causes of the sensible world is a god, also called "father," 
"maker'' and "demiurge," this last term being the most frequently used. 
This god does not create the world; his action is limited to the partial 
ordering of a primordial chaotic substrate ( cf. axiom T7). 
Axiom T5 
The demiurge is good (agathos). 
The goodness of the demiurge imposes upon him a certain way of 
acting (cf. axiom TIO). 

22 
Inventing the Universe 
Axiom T6 
The demiurge is not olllllipotent. 
This god is not omnipotent, for two reasons posited as axioms. The 
intelligible Forms and the lchora, the primordial stuff or the "spatial 
medium," exist independently of him (axioms Tl & T7). 2) And the 
demiurge must face anagke (axiom T8) which always resists his 
ordering effort. 4 
The Platonic demiurge is a peculiar divinity; after his ordering effort, 
he retires from the universe (Timaeus 42e). This cosmological approach 
presents a radically "materialis" character. Mankind is left alone in a 
material, ever-changing world where divine intervention subsists only in 
the form of an imperfect, partial, mathematicai order. 
Axiom 17 
The demiurge orden a primordial stuff, the klaora. 
Khora is at the same time that in which sensible particulars are 
found, i. e., space or place, and that of what they are made, i. e., 
something approximating matter. We translate lchora as "spatial 
medium." 
Khora is a hybrid entity. It is eternal, it exists even before the 
demiurge introduces, insofar as this is possible, order into it. But all that 
is found "in" the lchora, and all that is produced "from" it, the sensible 
world, is ever-changing. 
Plato acknowledged the difficulty in conceiving this "spatial 
medium;" and he was probably aware of the fact that he could not fmd a 
solution to the space/matter relationship; a problem that had to wait until 
the twentieth century to be solved. In fact, Plato asserts that we can only 
manage to conceive the lchora by a sort of "bastard reasoning." 
... lchora is everlasting, not admitting destruction; providing a 
situation for all things that come into being, but itself apprehended 
without the senses by a sort of "bastard reasoning," and hardly an 
object of belief. 

Part/: Plato's Timaeus 
23 
This, indeed, is that which we look upon as in a dream and say that 
anything that is must needs be in some place and occupy some 
room, and that what is not somewhere in earth or heaven is nothing. 
(Timaeus 52b) 
... lchora is the receptacle and the nurse of all becoming. (Timaeus 
49a) 
These quotations show how the spatial medium is at the same time "that 
in which" and "that from which" the sensible world is made. 
Axiom T8 
A cause, called anagu, perpetually resists the order which 
the demiurge attempts to introduce in the world. 
The term anaglre in ancient Greek is generally translated as 
"necessity." But the way Plato uses the term anaglre in the Timaeus 
refers to a very different meaning from the one intuitively given to 
''necessity": constraint regarded as a law prevailing through the material 
universe. Plato holds anaglre to be a "cause," but a negative one, 
qualified as an "errant cause (planomene aitia)" (Timaeus 48 a), since it 
represents a non-rational element permanently resisting the ordering 
effort of the demiurge (cf. axioms T9, TIO, Tl 1, T12) . 
.A.nag/re is indeed an inherent property of the lchora postulated in 
axiom T7. The effect of anaglre is that, in the lchora, before the 
demiurge's interventions, the four elements that are supposed to make 
up all of the sensible world (axiom T9) "behave without reason or 
measure (alogos lrai ametros)" (l'imaeus 53a). Nothing in the Timaeus 
allows us to know to what extent the demiutge, who is not omnipotent 
(axiom T6) has succeeded in imposing order on the universe . .A.nag/re 
continues to manifest itself in the sensible world as an "errant cause," 
after the demiurge retires from the world As a result, a factor of 
complexity and disorder always subsists in the universe. 
It is easy to shrug off anaglre as a myth. However, to claim that the 
entire universe must submit to simple mathematical rules accessible to 
mankind is at least as mythical. 

24 
Inventing the Universe 
Axiom T9 
Sensible particulars, including heavenly bodies, are made out 
of fov elements only: fire, air, water and earth. 
Here Plato follows the tradition inaugurated probably by 
Empedocles, and which was universally accepted until the birth of 
modern chemistry in the eighteenth century. 
Axiom TIO 
All that a benevolent demiurge (uiom TS) endeavoring to 
introduce some order illto tile /d,ora (uiom T4) can do is to 
use • 
his model a "perfect paradigm" and to attempt to 
bring it about th~t the resnlt of his efforts be the best 
possible copy (akon) of that model (uiom T6). 
In the Timaeus, one can read: 
Let us, then, state for what reason becoming and this universe were 
ordered by him who ordered them. He was good ... Desiring, then, 
that all things should be good and, so far as might be, nothing 
imperfect, the god took over all that is visible - not at rest, but in 
discordant and unordered motion - and brought it from disorder 
into order, since he judged that order was in every way the better. 
Now it was not, nor can it ever be, permitted that the work of the 
supremely good should be anything but that which is best. (Timaeus 
29e-30b) 
Now whenever the maker of anything looks to that which is always 
unchanging and uses a model of that description in fashioning the 
form and quality of his work, all that he thus accomplishes must be 
good.5 (Timaeus 28a-b) 
Plato's epistemology postulates that the knowledge leading to truth 
(episteme) can only be that knowledge whose objects are the intelligible 

Part I: Plato's Timaeus 
25 
Forms. This knowledge remains inaccessible to human beings living in 
the sensible world. They can only know the partial order, that imprint of 
the divine, which the deiniurge attempts, insofar as possible, to 
introduce into the world By reason of axiom Tl, reality has been 
separated into two unbridgeable domains; now the mathematical order 
imposed by the demiurge provides a means to fill this gap; it represents 
the epistemologically necessary participation of sensible particulars in 
the Forms . 
... [in the khora before the demiurge's intervention], these things 
were in disorder and the demiurge introduced into them all every 
kind of measure in every respect in which it was possible for each 
one to be in harmonious proportion (analoga kai summetra) both 
with itself and with all the rest. For at first they were without any 
such proportion save by mere chance, nor was there anything 
deserving to be called by the names we now use - fire, water, and 
the rest ... (Timaeus 69b-c) 
It follows from the axioms postulated thus far, that the effort of the 
demiurge consists in transforming, as far as possible, a chaotic, spatio-
material substratum. into a construction ordered according to symmetry, 
an operation that, by itself, will enable the naming of the things of the 
sensible world In order to do this, the demiurge takes as a model what 
Plato calls the ''perfect paradigm," the intelligible realm ruled by the 
Good. The universe, thus modeled, presents, as much as possible, 
beauty, symmetry, order, harmony, simplicity, etc. 
Axiom Tll 
As a copy of a perfect paradigm, t•e sensible world made by 
t•e demiurge cail be nothing other than a living thing w•ose 
body is made from the four elements (cf. mom T9) and 
whose soul (psuklae) is endowed with reason (nous), ( cf. 
momT12). 
According to axiom Tl, the sensible world undergoes perpetual 
change. And according to axiom TIO, the demiurge introduces partial 

26 
Inventing the Universe 
order into this change. Now the major cosmological problem for ancient 
Greeks was to account for what is partially ordered in the sensible 
world: the engendering of man by man, the ordered succession of the 
seasons, and above all, the most regular movement that can be observed, 
that of the heavenly bodies. Plato explains these changes by assimilating 
the sensible world to a living being. The distinctive feature of a living 
being is the autonomous principle of ordered change and movement 
(ldnesis). This autonomous source of order was called "soul (= psulche)" 
by Plato, who here again gave a new meaning to an ancient word. 
Consequently, if any kind of scientific knowledge of the sensible world 
is to be obtained, that world must be presupposed to be equally endowed 
by an autonomous principle of ordered change and movement; it must be 
an ensouled (living) entity. Since the demiurge is good (axiom TS), he 
tries to endow the sensible world with the best possible soul, a soul 
blessed with reason (nous). And it is this soul endowed with reason that 
directly explains the regular, ordered and permanent, that is to say 
"rational," movement of the heavenly bodies. 
Taking thought, therefore, be [= the demiurge) found that, among 
things that are by nature visible, no work that is without reason will 
ever be better than one that has reason, when each is taken as a 
whole, and moreover that reason cannot be present in anything 
apart from soul. In virtue of this reasoning, when he ordered the 
universe, he fashioned reason within soul and soul within body, to 
the end that the work he accomplished might by nature be as 
excellent and perfect as possible. This, then, is bow we must say ... 
that this world came to be, by the god's providence in very truth a 
living creature with soul and reason. (Timaeus 30b-c) 
Since the world possesses a rational soul, and since order, which is an 
aspect of the Good, is infinitely superior to disorder, the change that 
affects sensible particulars will be ordered there where the world soul 
imposes itselflike a "mistress and governor." (Timaeus 34c) 
Plato postulates that perfect knowledge must have as its object 
perfect being, and since the sensible world is just a copy inferior to its 
model, because the demiurge is not omnipotent (axiom T6}, he produces 
only a copy of a perfect paradigm (axiom TlO). Therefore, the 

Part I: Plato's Timaeus 
27 
knowledge of the universe framed by such a demiurge must remain 
imperfect, amounting at best to a verisimilar account, to an eikos logos. 
Axiom Tl2 
As the vehicle of reason, the world soul is mathematically 
structured. 
In the cosmology of the Timaeus, this axiom holds the place of the 
key epistemological axiom, since it secures the a priori possibility for 
any human knowledge of the universe. In Plato's epistemology, real 
knowledge (episteme) has no other objects than the intelligible Forms; it 
thus remains beyond the reach of human beings. The verisimilar account 
(eikos logos) humanity can attain is thus dependent on this astonishing 
hypothesis: the characteristica that the Good dispenses to the intelligible 
Forms, such as beauty, symmetry, order, harmony, proportion, etc. can 
be expressed in mathematical terms. Given the state of mathematics in 
Plato's time, this hypothesis is truly amazing. 
The scope of axiom T12 can only be understood if we refer to the 
role symmetry plays in Plato's cosmology. In ancient Greek, summetros, 
a word made up of metron "measure" as second term, means properly 
"with a common measure." If things have a common measure, they are 
called "commensurable;" otherwise they are incommensurable. A 
common measure allows proportion to appear. Thus things may be said 
to be in due proportion (analogoi); and if the proportion remains always 
the same, these things are symmetrical as such. If such ideas are 
accepted, "symmetrical" can become synonymous with "harmonious" 
and even more importantly with "ordered" (= kosmetos). 
In its more general acceptation. symmetry describes those aspects of 
a thing that remain unchanged, if that thing is considered from different 
points of view, for example the left side and the right side of a face, or if 
that thing undergoes certain transformations, for example a parallel 
translation or a rotation around an axis (the circle and the sphere playing 
here a crucial role). 
The essential aspect of symmetry is the following: some properties of 
a thing remain invariable throughout change, something remains 
"analogous," because proportion (= analogia in Greek, ratio in "Latin) is 

28 
Inventing the Universe 
preserved. But only the intelligible Forms, sole objects of episteme, are, 
according to Plato, unchangeable, immutable and eternal. Plato's aim, in 
the Timaeus, is to propose a cosmology which secures a verisimilar 
account (eikos logos) of the universe, since a true account (alethes 
logos) of it is out of reach. In our ever-changing sensible world, a 
verisimilar account, a partial knowledge, is possible if and only if this 
world shares the immutability of the intelligible Forms, even if oally 
partially. This Plato assumes as the key tenet of his cosmology. 
Consequently, the aim of cosmological inquiry is to uncover such 
invariable properties. Plato daringly extrapolates: these reflections of the 
divine are found in the world as symmetry, and symmetry can only be 
grasped mathematically. In this way, the entire program for science is 
outlined; it has not changed since. 
Plato's extrapolation relied on an important discovery made in his 
time. The sound of a musical string instrument remains consonant when 
the lengths of the strings are changed, if the mathematical proportion 
(analogia) between the lengths of the strings remains unchanged. The 
Pythagoreans had discovered that what remains unchanged is a 
mathematical formula giving, in terms of integers, the proportion 
between the lengths of the strings. 
One can thus predict that two different musical instruments, such as 
..4 and C, will identically produce a consonant harmonious music, if the 
lengths of their strings are in the correct mathematical proportion B. The 
participation of the sensible (material strings) in the intelligible (musical 
proportion) is thus mediated by mathematics. Plato will bestow this 
Janus-like characteristic of mathematics upon the world soul. Thereby 
mathematically expressible symmetry is promoted to the rank of the 
necessary a priori condition for any scientific knowledge of the sensible 
world. Plato puts forward one of the key tenets of contemporary physics, 
but the mythical language he employs has obscured this fact for 
centuries. 
The World Soul in the Timaeus 
The world soul is that entity which mathematically orders the 
universe, for it is destined by the demiurge to rule over the universe "as 
its mistress and governor." (Timaeus 34c) The mathematical order that 

Part/: Plato's Timaeus 
29 
governs the universe is determined by two characteristics of the world 
soul. On one hand, it participates both in being and becoming; by this 
means, it appears as the mediating agent between the eternal Forms and 
a sensible world that never ceases changing (axiom Tl). Furthermore, 
the world soul exhibits a mathematical structure; and a mathematical 
order becomes manifest only there where the soul rules. In the Platonic 
system, the soul in general, and the world soul in particular, are the 
causes of ordered movement (axiom Tl 1). In a universe governed by a 
mathematically structured soul, all change is necessarily governed, as far 
as possible, by mathematical precepts. Following this, that which at fint 
seemed to exceed all possibility of rational analysis - reality exclusively 
perceived by the senses foreign to reason, and which never ceases 
changing - becomes amenable to a verisimilar account 
The demiurge achieves his objective as follows. In the first place, he 
introduces a soul into the world's body, which, being a copy of a perfect 
original, is endowed with the most perfect form, and thus presents the 
aspect of a gigantic sphere, the sphere being the most symmetrical 
figure. Moreover, to avoid infinite regress, the world soul must be 
autonomous, that is, it must be the cause of its own movements. As a 
result, the soul is a complex construction displaying two remarkable 
features: its movements are circular, circular movement being the most 
symmetrical movement, and they obey the laws of musical harmony, 
because musical harmony can be considered an aspect of the Good ( cf. 
the "music of the heavenly spheres"). As well as being circular, the 
movements of the world soul maintain permanently a constant speed, a 
property which gives them the most perfect symmetry. Since 
immutability means perfection, this permanence and regularity, which 
are ultimately of a mathematical nature, allow the sensible world, where 
all movements are governed by the movement of the world soul, to 
partake, to a certain extent, in the eternity and the stability of the 
intelligible. 
The Substance of the World Soul 
The description of the world soul takes the form of a mythical 
narrative recording what the demiurge does. The intervention of the 
demiurge does not however violate the postulate formulated in the 

30 
Inventing the Universe 
Phaedrus (24Sc-246a) concerning the unengendered character of all 
principles, because this intervention does not imply an origin in time. It 
reveals two things: the soul is ontologically dependent upon the 
intelligible Forms, and furthermore is a reality intermediate between 
intelligible Forms and sensible particulars. 
To compose the most fundamental entity of his cosmology, Plato 
makes use of the three most general notions in his metaphysical system: 
Being, Sameness and Difference. All reality comprises these constituent 
elements as described in the Sophist (254d-2S9b). All reality "is," the 
first requirement in metaphysics. Considered in its relationship with all 
that it "is not," this Being maintains its identity, which brings about the 
second fundamental concept, Sameness. But this Being only maintains 
its identity, because it is different from all that is not itself, because it is 
Different from all the rest (a horse is, it is a horse and it is nothing else, 
for example, a cat). 
Furthermore, as the world soul must play the role of mediating agent 
between the sensible and the intelligible, its constituent elements are 
situated in it on an intermediary level between indivisibility, which 
characterizes the intelligible, and the divisibility, which characterizes the 
sensible. This is what the demiurge tries to bring about in performing 
these mixtures: 
Between the indivisible Being that is ever in the same state and the 
divisible Being that becomes in bodies (axiom Tl), he compounded 
a third form of Being composed of both. Again, in the case of 
Sameness and in that of Difference, he also on the same principle 
made a compound intermediate between that kind of them which is 
indivisible and the kind that is divisible in bodies. Then, taking the 
three, he blended them all into a unity, forcing the nature of 
Difference, hard as it was to mingle, into union with Sameness, and 
mixing them together with Being. (Timaeus 3Sa-b) 
In this difficult passage, illustrated in the following diagram, Plato 
expresses two ideas: i) the soul comprises the same constituent elements 
as any other reality: Being, Sameness, Difference; and ii) it is an 
intermediary reality between the intelligible and the sensible. 

Part I: Plato 's Timaeus 
31 
FIRST MIXTURE 
SECOND MIXTURE 
indivisible Being 
divisible Being 
} intermediate Being 
indivisible Sameness } 
intennediate Sameness 
divisible Sameness 
indivisible Difference } 
intennediate Difference 
divisible Difference 
World Soul 
From these mixtures, a concoction results which Timaeus describes as a 
mass of metal. Solidified, this mass of metal serves the demiurge as 
material for constructing the armillary sphere which displays the motor 
function of the world soul, on which all the movements of the universe, 
including those of the planets and the fixed stars, depend. 
The Mathematical Structure of the World Soul 
The world soul is framed as an armillary sphere, since, although it is 
supposed to be the principle of movement of the heavenly bodies as well 
as the principle of changes within the whole universe, its primordial 
purpose is to account precisely for the observed movements of the 
heavenly bodies, and allow a mathematical description of astronomical 
phenomena. 
The movements of the heavenly bodies seem to present two 
characteristics: permanence and regularity, characteristics known from 
the remotest antiquity and which led mankind to regard these bodies as 
divine beings, as opposed to the hypercomplex sublunary realities, 

32 
Inventing the Universe 
subject to movements apparently devoid of all regularity. To account for 
these two characteristics, Plato formulates two postulates, flowing from 
axioms TlO, Tll and T12. 1) Movements of the heavenly bodies are 
circular, thus they are permanent; 2) Movements of the heavenly bodies 
obey the laws of the various types of the mathematical proportions 
known at the time; thus, in spite of appearances, they are perfectly 
regular, i.e., mathematical. 
The demiurge, whose actions are described in terms generally applied 
to a blacksmith, laminates the mass resulting from the mixture described 
above, and transforms it into a sheet. He begins by cutting this sheet 
lengthwise into two bands, which he somewhat paradoxically calls the 
band of the "Same" and the band of the "Different" even though these 
two bands are composed of the same mixture of Being, Same and 
Different. This operation accounts for the observed dissimilarity 
between fixed stars and planets. Next, the band of the Different is 
divided by the demiurge into seven sections to explain the movement of 
the "planets" known at that time. The apparently erratic (planetes) 
movement of the planets probably explains the name Different given to 
this band, to oppose it to the band of the Same which represents the 
apparently regular movement of the fixed stars. 
Figure 1.1 
fu~·-,-,---,1 --
27--K ----J: 
same 
d1ffcn:11t 
This first operation is not sufficient. It has allowed the formation of two 
bands. But these bands must then be bent to become those circles on 
which the heavenly bodies will move with the permanence provided by 
the perfect symmetry of the circle. 
The regularity of the heavenly bodies' movement must still be 
accounted for: this is where proportion comes into play.6 

Part I: Plato's Timaeus 
33 
The band of the "Different" is therefore divided into seven parts, 
according to the following series of integers: 1, 2, 3, 4, 9, 8, 27. It may 
be observed that this series corresponds to a double geometrical 
progression expressed in powers of 2 and 3 respectively: 
20 21 22 23 
30 31 32 33 
But the mathematical explanation goes much further. 
These seven numbers represent, as we will see further on, the orbital 
radius of each of the seven planets that gravitate around the earth. The 
earth remains immobile in the center, and the number 1 corresponds to 
the distance from Earth to Moon. Between these seven numbers, two 
series of proportional means are now inserted. 
1) harmonic means 
(x - a)/(b- x) = alb; or x = 2ab/(a + b) 
2) arithmetical means 
(x - a)= (b- x) or x =(a+ b)/2 
Which produces: 
1) resulting from the insertion of the harmonic and arithmetical 
proportional means in the first geometrical progression: 
a=l 
a=2 
a=4 
b=2 
b=4 
b=8 
harmonic means 
4/3 
8/3 
16/3 
that is to say: 1, 4/3, 3/2, 2, 8/3, 3, 4, 16/3, 6, 8 
arithmetical means 
3/2 
3 
6 
2) and as results of the insertion of the harmonic and arithmetical 
proportional means in the second geometrical progression: 

34 
Inventing the Universe 
harmonic means 
arithmetical means 
a=l 
a=3 
a=9 
b=3 
b=9 
b=27 
3/2 
9/2 
27/2 
that is to say: 1, 3/2, 2, 3, 9/2, 6, 9, 27/2, 18, 27 
2 
6 
18 
Furthermore, if we consider this double series of results, we notice 
that, between the harmonic and arithmetical proportional means in each 
of the two geometrical progressions given at the outset, there exist only 
three types of interval: 4/3, 9/8, 3/2. 
I 
4/3 
3/2 
2 
8/3 
3 
4 
16/3 
6 
8 
"-v-' ~ 
--~ _....,..~ -..y.--
4/3 
9/8 
4/3 4/3 9/8 4/3 4/3 
9/8 4/3 
I 
3/2 
2 
3 
9/2 
6 
9 
27 /2 
18 
27 
..__ -.,-.._,_, ..__ __ _, .._.. --
3/2 
4/3 3/2 3/2 4/3 3/2 3/2 
4/3 
3/2 
These three types of interval correspond to the musical relationships 
already known in Plato's time: the fourth: 4/3, the fifth 3/2 and the tone 
9/8. To obtain a musically harmonious arrangement, all that had to be 
found was the octave 2/1 that tills the interval between the fourth (4/3) 
and the fifth (3/2) and the leimma (= in ancient Greek, "that which 
remains") 256/243 that fills the interval remaining between the two 
tones (9/8). Hence this table: 

a 
2a 
4a 
8a 
16a 
Part I: Plato's Timaeus 
35 
1 
9/8 
81/64 
4/3 
3/2 27/16 243/128 
2 
2 
9/4 
81/32 
8/3 
3 27/8 
243/64 
4 
4 
9/2 
81/16 
16/3 
6 27/4 
243/32 
8 
8 
9 
81/8 
32/3 
12 
27/2 
243/16 
16 
16 
18 
81/4 
64/3 
24 
27_ 
,_ • 
_, 
------- -- .__.-.,-, --
... 
if~ 256/~3 9/8 ~8 
9/8., 256/2~ 
----1.!:-- -
,..,.4/3 
-
4/3 
3/2 
---
______ _.--:.......,,... 
2/1 
Considered only from a musical point of view, the mathematical 
construction of the world soul would therefore comprise 4 octaves, a 
fifth and a tone: 
2/1 · 2/1 · 2/1 · 2/1 · 3/2 · 9/8 = 27 
However, it should be observed that Plato's intention was not to produce 
a theory of the type of music that the heavenly bodies might emit. 
Borrowing the idea of the "harmony of the spheres" perhaps from 
the Pythagoreans, Plato extrapolates. Knowing that musical harmony is 
governed by mathematical laws, he postulates that heavenly bodies, 
whose movements present the permanence and regularity that 
mathematical means provide in music, are also governed by such laws: 
the sort of mathematics that "works" so well in music, music which 
means harmony by antonomasy, should "work" just as well in 
astronomy. 
The Role of the World Soul 
The stakes are important, since the role of the world soul is to explain 
the how and why of the ordered movement of the sensible world. The 
more the world soul is governed by rigorous mathematical laws, the 
more the movements affecting the sublunar sensible world will be 

36 
Inventing the Universe 
ordered. As the above-described proportions apply to a series of integers 
that represent the orbital radius of each of the seven planets surrounding 
the earth, these proportions affect not only the arrangement of the 
heavenly bodies, but also, and above all, the speed of their revolution, 
since Plato believes that the speed of the revolution of a body varies in 
function of the length of the radius of the circle it describes. This 
permanence and this regularity are transmitted, in various degrees, by 
the heavenly bodies to sensible things, as will be shown. 
Let us go back to the working demiurge. After having cut the metal 
sheet described above, the demiurge crosses the two resulting bands 
making them coincide in their middle, as in the figure of the Greek letter 
X: 
Figure 1.2 
Next he bends these two bands and joins their extremities, thus forming 
two circles: 

Figure 1.3 
Part/: Plato 's Timaeus 
_,,_,---, 
~,,, 
' 
_,,,,,, 
Different 
,-----:;,: ..... --------..., 
_,, 
/ 
/ 
/ 
I 
/ 
I 
/' 
I 
I 
Same 
37 
On the first circle, the circle of the "Same," move the fixed stars; ·the 
whole sphere of which the sensible world consists follows this 
movement, from east to west. On the circle of the "Different," move the 
seven "planets": Moon, Sun, Mercury, Venus, Mars; Jupiter, Satum.7 
Figure 1.4 
N 

38 
Inventing the Universe 
Comments 
• AB is the Tropic of Cancer 
• CD is the Tropic of Capricorn 
• The movement of the "Same" is the movement of the world's sphere, 
going from left (= the east) to the right (= the west) on the equatorial 
plane ( = EF). 
• The Zodiac can be represented by a large band where the twelve signs 
are ordered, forming a ring that shares its center with Ecliptic (BC), and 
whose circumference follows the sphere's envelope. 
The world body thus consists of an immense sphere that contains all 
sensible reality and beyond which there is nothing. This explains the 
perpetuity of the sensible world, for nothing can come from the outside 
to disturb or destroy it. Moreover, we must imagine that the fixed stars 
are in some way fastened to the internal surface of this sphere and 
moved with it; this explains why the movement of the fixed stars and 
that of the sphere that comprises the world body are identical. 
After these manipulations, the demiurge moves on to the final 
operation, which consists in dividing the interior circle six times 
(Timaeus 36 d) in order to obtain seven unequal circles corresponding to 
the orbits of the following planets: Moon, Sun, Mercury, Venus, Mars, 
Jupiter, Saturn, the Earth remaining immobile at the center of the 
sensible world (Timaeus 40b-c). 
Figure 1.5 
from the center: 
Earth 
Moon 
Sun 
Mercury 
Venus 
Mars 
Jupiter 
Saturn 

Part/: Plato's Timaeus 
39 
The resulting construction is fitted by the demiurge into the sphere 
which encompasses the sensible world, making sure that their respective 
centers correspond perfectly (Timaeus 36d-e, cf. 34b). 
By so doing, the demiurge endows the sensible world with a principle 
that accounts for all ordered movements, whether they be of a physical 
(astronomy) or a psychical nature (knowledge). Indeed, by means of the 
circle of the "Same," the world soul establishes direct contact with the 
world of intelligible forms, and, with the circle of the "Different," it is 
put in contact with the sensible world Since it is a living thing endowed 
with reason, the sensible world can autonomously order its own 
movements (i.e., changes), in a "rational" way. 
Thus, in the Timaeus (38c-39e), Plato endeavors to put forward a 
complete astronomical system based exclusively on circular movement, 
a system that remained viable until Kepler. 8 
Corollary: The Definition of Time 
The movement of the heavenly bodies permits Plato to establish 
several standards for the measure of time. The movement of the circle of 
the Same brings about the alternation of day and night. The movement 
of the Moon produces the monthly sequence, and that of the Sun, the 
yearly sequence. But Plato is even more daring. He hypothesizes a 
temporal duration measured by the revolution of the five other planets, 
and a "great year'' corresponding to the return of all the heavenly bodies 
to their initial position (Timaeus 39c-e). 
Since in the world of Becoming, only images exist, time, which is the 
measure of Becoming must present two characteristics: it is 1) an image, 
but 2) an image ordered by numbers. As it is directly associated with the 
unceasing change of the sensible world, time becomes an object of 
knowledge only if a resemblance is found between it and an intelligible 
Form, a resemblance that can be expressed with the help of a 
mathematical relationship of the type: 
eternity/unity = time/the diversity of numbers. 
Hence this famous definition: "When he [the demiurge] ordered the 
heaven, he made, of eternity that abides in unity, an everlasting likeness 
moving according to number, that to which we have given the name 
'time'." (Timaeus 37d) Time is therefore indistinguishable from the 

40 
Inventing the Universe 
world soul, for it is engendered by the movements of all the circles of 
the world soul; it is also indistinguishable from the world body, for the 
standards of temporal measurement are provided by the revolutions of 
the heavenly bodies. It follows that the sensible world can not be 
engendered in time since it itself engenders time. Sensible world and 
time co-exist;9 there can be no time before the sensible world. 
Plato's Theory of Matter and the Cosmological Axioms IO 
An astronomical system is developed in the cosmology of the 
Timaeus. Plato's aim is to explain everything, including the underlying 
microscopic world and the complex world of human experience; hence 
the need to take into consideration not only physical phenomena but also 
biological and psychological phenomena. Consequently, a theory of 
matter must be advanced, implying new axioms. 
Let us begin by recalling an above-mentioned axiom . 
.Axiom T9 
Sensible particulan, inclading beavealy bodies, are made ap 
of four elemeats only: fire, air, water and earth. 
Greek physics was based upon this axiom. Plato wants to describe the 
origin of these elements, and moreover their mathematical origin. In so 
doing, he is aware of being truly original: 
... what I [ = Timaeus] must now attempt to explain to you is the 
distinct formation of each [ of the elements] and their origin. The 
account will be unfamiliar; but you [ = Socrates, Hermocrates, 
Critias] are schooled in those branches of learning which my 
explanations require [i.e., mathematics], and so will follow me. 
(Timaeus S3b-c) 
The astonishing modernity of this endeavor has not gone unnoticed. In 
an article published in 195S, Werner Heisenberg compares modem 
particle physics with the theory of elementary material components laid 
out in the "Timaeus: 

Part I: Plato's Timaeus 
41 
In what follows, the particular form of the philosophy of nature 
propounded by Plato in the Timaeus shall be considered, with 
special emphasis on a characteristic trait of this approach which 
resurfaces in modern atomic physics, in the theory of elementary 
particles, and which there plays an important role. The 
mathematical forms by which we nowadays represent the 
elementary particles ... are more complex than the geometric forms 
postulated by the Greeks. But essentially, in both cases these forms 
originate in certain simple mathematical basic requisites. And one 
must not forget that on this point the program of modem physics 
has yet to be completed. The similarity between Plato's ideas and 
modern atomic physics appears furthermore in a different context. 
Should one inquire in Plato's [philosophy], what is the content of 
his [geometric] forms, out of what stuff they are ultimately made, 
one gets this answer: out of mathematics. 
Heisenberg continues: 
In the final analysis, in both cases, the notion of matter is 
essentially a mathematical concept. The most fundamental kernel of 
all that is material is for us, as well as for Plato, a [mathematical] 
form, and not some material content. I I 
Heisenberg clearly saw the amazing similarity between Plato's theory of 
matter and its contemporary counterpart, and this on a fundamental 
axiomatic level. Indeed, the theory of matter in the Timaeus is based on 
the following axioms. 
Axiom TIJ 
The entire ullivene can be reduced to discrete, elementary 
compoaeats. 

42 
Inventing the Universe 
Axiom Tl4 
Such elementary components are Infinitely small and tbere-
fon "invisible." 
Axiom TIS 
Fuadameatally, these compoaeats are mathematical entities. 
Axiom Tl6 
These distinct elementary compoaeats are few in number, 
simple, indilcerniblel2 ud indestructible. 
Axiom T/7 
These eatitiet are the ultimate compoaeats of all seasible 
particulan; everytbing in the universe is made from them. 
Axiom Tl8 
In tbe universe, all observable pheaomeaa, all that Plato 
calls "change" cu be nduced to interactioa1 between the 
elemeatary components. 
Axiom Tl9 
These interactions can be described exclusively in 
mathematical terms. 

Part I: Plato 's Timaeus 
43 
Axiom T20 
No complexity factor exists associated to a given dimension-
scale. For each level, from the dimension-scale of 
microscopic realities invisible to the naked eye, to that of the 
gigantic objects of astronomy, the explanation of observable 
phenomena is oaly to be found in the elementary components 
obeying the same mathematical laws. 
Corollary to Axiom T20 
The same mathematical laws and the same elementary 
components constitute the only substratum to which even 
hyper-complex phenomena, the kind detectable at the 
humu scale, can be reduced. 
Once this is accepted, the set of phenomena described by biology, by 
physiology, by pathology and even by psychology, can be reduced to 
these components. 
As was the case with a large part of the fundamental ideas put 
forward by Plato in the Timaeus, this theory of matter was neither 
accepted nor understood over the following centuries. These ideas were 
rediscovered only in the nineteenth century, leading to the model of 
matter advanced by modem physics. 13 Plato's presuppositions reduce all 
sensible objects to "appearances" resulting from the combination of 
elementary particles, few in number, simple, and the mathematical rules 
that govern their correlations. Aristotle never accepted such a radical 
reduction. For him, in the sensible world we find not only particulars, 
but also individuals, each one characterized by its own indivisible form. 
Remaining close to tradition, Plato admits that the universe is 
constituted by four elements exclusively: fire, air, water, and earth 
(axiom T9). Having arrived at this point, he is compelled to secure the 
consistency of axiom T9 with axioms T13 through 20. This can solely be 
achieved by reducing the four traditional elements to purely 
mathematical entities, and by formulating mathematically the inter-
relationships prevailing amongst them. 

44 
Inventing the Universe 
According to axiom TIO, if fundamental elementary components of 
the universe do exist, these components must be as perfect as possible. 
This amounts to say that they can be nothing else than mathematical 
objects (axiom TIS). 
Now we must think of all these bodies [the elements] as so small 
[axiom Tl4] that a single body of any one of these kinds is invisible 
to us because of its smallness: though when a number are 
aggregated the masses of them can be seen [axiom Tl3]. And with 
regard to their numbers, their motions, and their powers in general, 
we must suppose that the god adjusted them in due proportion, 
when he had brought them in every detail to the most exact 
perfection permitted by anag/ce willingly complying with 
persuasion (Timaeus S6b-c). 
Plato's solution consists in having the four traditional elements put in 
correspondence with four of the five regular polyhedra known at his 
time, these polyhedra being considered the most perfect geometrical 
objects, in accordance with the desire of the good demiurge to make a 
world out of elements bearing the greatest resemblance to the intelligible 
forms (axiom TIO). The symmetry of these polyhedra should be noted; 
indeed they remain unchanged under rotation about several axes. 
As the next step, Plato shows how the faces of these polyhedra, 
equilateral triangles for the tetrahedron, the octahedron and the 
icosahedron and square for the cube, can be ultimately constructed using 
only two kinds of right-angled triangles, the isosceles and the scalene. 
Figure 1.6 
--------------, 
' ' ' ' ' \ 
' ' ' ' \ 
k../3/2 \ 
' ' ' \ 
\ 
'-------'----- -- ----l 

Part I: Plato 's Timaeus 
45 
These two fundamental elementary right-angled triangles are used by 
the demiurge to make up the faces of the polyhedra, the square and the 
equilateral triangle. 
Here is how a square results from the combination of four right-
angled isosceles triangles: "This body is formed by four isosceles; the 
sides of their right angles join again in a center and form a quadrangular, 
equilateral figure." (Timaeus SSb) 
Figure 1.7 
The construction of the other surface, an equilateral triangle, is more 
complicated: 
A 
Figure 1.8 
B 
D 
C 

46 
Inventing the Universe 
It has never been explained why Timaeus needed six right-angled 
isosceles triangles to make an equilateral triangle when two would have 
sufficed. 
From the equilateral triangles, the demiurge constructs three of the 
four regular polyhedra: the tetrahedron, the octahedron and the 
icosahedron, associated respectively with fire, air and water: and from 
the squares, he constructs the cube associated with earth. 
Regarding the construction of the tetrahedron, Timaeus explains: "If 
four equilateral triangles are put together, their plane angles meeting in a 
group of three make a solid angle, namely the one (180°) that comes 
next after the most obtuse of plane angles. When four such angles are 
produced, the simplest solid figure is formed, whose property is to 
divide the whole circumference into equal and similar parts." (Timaeus 
54e-55a) 
Figure 1.9 
Timaeus continues, describing the construction of the octahedron: "A 
second body is composed of the same triangles. When they are 
combined in a set of eight equilateral triangles and yield a solid angle 
formed by four plane angles the second body is complete." ( Timaeus 
55a) 

Part I: Plato's Timaeus 
47 
Figure 1.10 
The description of the icosahedron follows: "The third body is 
composed of one hundred and twenty of the elementary triangles fitted 
together, and of twelve solid angles, each contained by five equilateral 
triangular planes; and it has twenty faces which are equilateral 
triangles." (Timaeus 55a-b) 
Flpre 1.11 

48 
Inventing the Universe 
Lastly, Timaeus describes the cube: "Six quadrangles, joined together, 
produced eight solid angles, each composed by a set of three plane right 
angles. The shape of the resulting body was cubical, having six 
quadrangular equilateral planes as its faces." (Timaeus SSc) 
Figure 1.12 
,.,, 
,,, 
, 
I 
' 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I . 
,,>-
--------
And he concludes with an evocation of the dodecahedron, the regular 
polyhedron that is most closely related to the sphere: "There still 
remained one construction, the fifth; and the god used it for the whole, 
making a pattern of animal figures thereon." (Timaeus SSc) 
Consequently none of its properties is mentioned, only a fleeting 
allusion that we will not develop here. 
Here is a table summarizing all the properties of the four polyhedra 
with which the four elements are associated. 
Table 1.2 
Element 
regular solid 
number of faces 
number of triangles• 
fire 
tetrahedron 
4 equilateral triangles 
24 scalenes 
arr 
octahedron 
8 equilateral triangles 
48 scalenes 
water 
icosahedron 
20 equilateral triangles 
120 scalenes 
earth 
cube 
6 sauares 
24 isosceles 
• right-angled triangles 

Part I: Plato's Timaeus 
49 
The value of "le," (cf. Figure 1.6) taken as a unit of measure of the 
hypotenuse of each of the two fundamental right-angled triangles, 
remains undetermined ( cf Axiom T2 l: The universe is not uniform). 
Table 1.2 displays the correspondence between the elements, the 
polyhedra and their fundamentally constitutive surfaces. 
Such 
correspondences allow the formulation of laws that explain how these 
elements are transmuted one into another. This alchemy, which allows 
us to understand the generation and the corruption occurring in the 
sensible world (axioms TIS through Tl 7) is based on this 
presupposition: the two types of elementary right-angled triangles can 
neither be created nor destroyed (axiom Tl6). Consequently, in any 
transformation, the number of triangles of each sort involved in the 
reaction is conserved Moreover, only elements corresponding to 
polyhedra formed from the same sort of right-angled triangle can be 
transmuted one into another. It follows that water, air and fire can be 
transmuted one into another, but not into earth which can only undergo 
processes of decomposition and recomposition, an inference Aristotle 
violently denounced 14 
Table 1.3 describes the fundamental laws of ''transmutations," where 
the symbol .& stands for the basic equilateral triangle. 
Table 1.3 
1 [fire] = 4 .& 
2 [fire] = 2 x 4 .& = 8.& = 1 [air] 
1 [fire] + 2 [air] = 4 .& + 2 x 8.& = 20.& = 1 [water] 
2 ½ [air] = 2 ½ x 8.& = 20.& = 1 [water] 
It is interesting to realize how this solution, expressed in axiom T 19, was 
imposed upon Plato by the limits of the known mathematics of his time. 
These limits, as Plato was aware, appear clearly when considering the 
problem of the extraction of square or cube roots. The following analysis 
is based on this passage: 

so 
Inventing the Universe 
Now that which comes to be must be bodily, and so visible and 
tangible; and nothing can be visible without fire, or tangible 
without something solid, and nothing is solid without earth. 
Hence the demiurge, when he began to put together the body of 
the universe, set about making it of fire and earth. But two 
things alone cannot be satisfactorily united without a third; for 
there must be some bond between them drawing them together. 
And of all bonds the best is that which makes itself and the 
terms it connects a unity in the fullest sense; and it is of the 
nature of a continued geometrical proportion to effect this most 
perfectly. For whenever, of three numbers, the middle one 
between any two that are integer or power of an integer is such 
that, as the first is to it, so is it to the last, and conversely as the 
last is to the middle, so is the middle to the first, then since the 
middle becomes first and last, and again the last and first 
become middle, in that way all will necessarily come to play the 
same part towards one another, and by so doing they will all 
make a unity. Now if it bad been required that the body of the 
universe should be a plane surface with no depth, a single mean 
would have been enough to connect its companions and itself; 
but in fact the world was to be solid in form, and solids are 
always conjoined, not by one mean, but by two. Accordingly the 
demiurge set water and air between fire and earth, and made 
them, so far as was possible, proportional to one another, so that 
as fire is to air, so is air to water, and as air is to water, so is 
water to earth, and thus he bound together the frame of a world 
visible and tangible. (Timaeus 31 b-32b) 
In this difficult passage, two types of proportions are discussed: one 
involved in a two-dimensional world and one involved in a three-
dimensional world. 
Plato deals first with a two-dimensional world, which raises the 
problem of its area. The determination of the area of simple figures such 
as the square bad led the Greek geometers to the problem of the 
irrationals. They found that the height h of a right-angled triangle is the 
proportional mean between the segments x and y that this height 
determines on the hypotenuse. As Jr1 = xy, h = vxy, it follows that the 

Part I: Plato's Timaeus 
51 
three terms of this equation are seldom all rational numbers. This 
difficulty was, in Plato's time, linked to the problem of the duplication 
of the square, as can be seen particularly in the Meno (8la-84b), where it 
is proved that to double the area of the square with sides equal 1, a 
segment of length ..J2 was required. Square roots in Plato's time could be 
extracted, but only for numbers smaller that 17 or 19. In a three-
dimensional world however, new difficulties appear. In the quoted 
passage, Plato recalls the problem of the duplication of the volume of a 
cube, much discussed in his time. Indeed, Hippocrates of Chios (470-
400 BC) had shown that the duplication of the volume of a cube requires 
the previous determination of the two proportional means that can be 
inserted between any two numbers. But these two proportional means, 
"necessary for harmonizing these two volumes," as he puts it, are also 
cube roots and thus most often irrational quantities. And, as the problem 
of geometrically constructing such quantities had not been resolved in 
Plato's time, we understand why several lines further on he writes: " ... 
the demiurge set water and air between fire and earth, and made them, so 
far as was possible, proportional to one another." (Timaeus 32b). 
This avowal of relative impotence is understandable if one looks at 
the relationships between the volume V and the surface S of the four 
regular polyhedra (whose side is a) of Plato's world, as this table shows: 
Table 1.4 
Polyhedra 
V 
s 
Tetrahedron 
1/12 a3 -f2 = 0.l 178a3 
a2-{3 
Hexahedron 
a3 
6a2 
Octahedron 
1/3 a3-{2 = 0.4714a3 
2a2v3 
Dodecahedron 
1/4 a3 (15+ 7-v5) = 
7.663ta3 
3.../25+ I Ov5 ·a2 
Icosahedron 
5/12 a3 (3+.../5) = 
2.1817a3 
5a2"3 

52 
Inventing the Universe 
In any case, neither Plato nor any of his contemporaries would have 
grasped a single line of Table 1.4, because for them extraction of the 
cube root was impossible, and the very laborious extraction of the square 
root could only go up to 17 or 19.15 The limits of Plato's cosmological 
system are the limits of the mathematics he knew. 
In summary, up to this point, Plato has set forth in detail his overall 
cosmological theory: a benevolent demiurge, making use of the most 
symmetrical elementary components, secures a verisimilar account of 
the world by persuading anagke that these components shall be ruled by 
mathematical proportions as far as possible. 
The most complex substances result from a combination of these 
elementary components (axiom TIS), and their properties can be 
deduced from their geometrical and mathematical characteristics. 
Timaeus explains that earth (corresponding polyhedron, cube) is ''the 
most stable" element (Timaeus SSe) . 
... and of the remainder the least mobile is water, the most 
mobile is fire, and the intermediate figure is air. Again, we shall 
assign the smallest polyhedron to fire, the largest to water, and 
the intermediate to air; and again the polyhedron with the 
sharpest angles is fire, the next to air, the third to water. Now 
taking all these figures, the one with the fewest faces 
(tetrahedron) must be the most mobile, since it has the sharpest 
cutting edges and the sharpest point in every direction, and 
moreover the lightest, as being composed of the smallest number 
of similar parts; the second ( octahedron) must stand second in 
these respects, the third (icosahedron), third. Hence, in 
accordance with genuine reasoning as well as probability, 
among the solid figures we have constructed, we may take the 
tetrahedron as the element or seed of fire; the second in order of 
generation ( octahedron) as that of air; the third (icosahedron) as 
that of water. (Timaeus S6a-b) 
Timaeus relates the geometrical properties, possessed by the regular 
polyhedra to which the four elements correspond, to the physical 
characteristics that these elements present when they are perceived by 

Part I: Plato's Timaeus 
53 
the senses. But does this theory work? The entire last two thirds of the 
Timaeus represents Plato's strenuous attempt to prove that it does. 
To begin with, the following series of the properties of certain 
sensible particulars are explained by Plato in terms of the four elements 
exclusively. The fundamental idea is to establish a relation between the 
form, the size and the movement of the polyhedra and the sense-
perception to which they give rise in sense-organs presumed to be 
constituted by the same elements. Thus, Plato admits that sense-
perception can directly generate a measure, and, on this assumption, he 
proceeds to test his theory. 
Varieties of the four elements 
Varieties of.fire(= tetrahedron) 
flame 
light 
glow 
Varieties of air(= octahedron) 
aether 
mist 
darkness 
without a specific name 
Varieties of water(= icosahedron) 
i) when water is a liquid 
juices 
many without a name 
some with a name 
wine 
oil 
honey 
opos 
ii) in an intermediate state 
when melting 
water 
when freezing 
hail 
ice 
snow 
frost 
Sensible qualities u they appear 
to sense-perception 
hot 
vision 
? 
bright 
odors 
black 
sounds 
taste 
heat 
bright, smooth 
sweet 
sour & pungent 
soft 
cold 
cold 
cold 
cold 

S4 
Inventing the Universe 
iii) as a fusible solid 
gold 
adamas 
copper 
etc. 
Varieties of earth (= cube) 
i) when stnined through water 
stone 
diamond? 
ii) when deprived of moisture by air 
earth not soluble in water 
earthenware 
lava? 
earth soluble in water 
soda 
salt 
iii) bodies composed of earth and water 
glass 
wax 
incense 
yellow, heavy, soft 
black, hard 
bright, light, hard 
heavy 
transparent 
dark 
taste 
taste 
Plato must admit that sense-perception can directly generate a 
measure, since he has no theory of measurement. As a matter of fact, in 
Plato's time, no universal standard units of measure existed, by means of 
which alone a mathematical explanation of physical situations is 
possible. Therefore Plato had to resort to this artifice: since everything 
in the world, the sense-organs included, is constituted solely by 
mathematical building blocks, a mathematical interpretation of sense-
perception is, in principle, feasible. 
At this stage of the construction of the model, a last group of axioms 
is required in order to complete Plato's cosmology. 
The Cosmological Axioms 
Axiom T21 
The universe is not uniform. 

Part/: Plato's Timaeus 
ss 
The movement observed in the universe, its perpetual change, is a 
consequence of the non-uniform size of the elementary polyhedra. 
... motion will never exist in a state of homogeneity or 
uniformity. (Timaeus 57e) 
Since the fundamental magnitude "k" ( cf. Figure 1.6), the size of the 
hypotenuse, of the elementary triangles remains undetermined, it follows 
that the sizes of the elementary polyhedra that make up all sensible 
things must also be different. This lack of uniformity constitutes the 
cause of the change that always affects the sensible world, change that 
the world soul attempts to order, but only there where it rules as its 
mistress and governor. 
Axiom T22 
In the sensible world, then is no vacuum. (Tinluu S8a, cf. 
79c). 
Axiom T23 
The sphen of the world encloses all that is corporeal. The 
four elements an spnad out, within this sphere, In four 
concentric layen (T1111uu 33b, S3a, 48a-b). 
These four concentric layers are pulled by the circular movement 
which animates the entire sphere. As there is no vacuum (axiom T22), 
the elementary polyhedra cannot spread out beyond the sphere. And, in 
its interior, they can only move within the always-filled interstices 
originating from the absence of homogeneity of the polyhedra (axiom 
T21 ). Hence a chain reaction; resulting from the condensing process, 
thrusts the small bodies together into the interstices between the large 
ones (Timaeus 58b, c£ 76c and Laws X 849c). This chain reaction 
produces the following process: 
Accordingly, when the small [polyhedra] are set alongside the 
large, and the lesser disintegrate the larger, while the larger 

56 
Inventing the Universe 
cause the lesser to combine, all are changing the direction of 
their movement this way and that, towards their own regions; for 
each, in changing its size, changes also the situation of its 
region. In this way, then, and by these means there is a perpetual 
safeguard for the occurrence of that heterogeneity which 
provides that the perpetual motion of these bodies is and shall be 
without cessation. (nmaeus 58b-c) 
This double movement governs every mathematical transformation of 
one polyhedron into another. In Plato's physics such transformations 
between 
polyhedra 
can 
take 
only 
two 
well-defined 
forms: 
division/condensation and combination/disintegration ( cf. Table 1.3 
above). 
The sensible world is governed by a soul presenting a particularly 
rigorous mathematical structure; what is more, the demiurge fashioned 
the lchora mathematically, shaping the four elements as regular 
polyhedra. Hence, transformations of one polyhedron into another can 
be reduced to mathematical interactions and correlations. Change, which 
characterizes sensible things as opposed to intelligible Forms, acquires, 
thanks to mathematics, certain predicates of the intelligible world in 
which it partakes; the sensible world is thus cloaked in that permanence 
and regularity that distinguishes the intelligible world. In such a way, 
mathematics accounts for the participation of sensible things in 
intelligible Forms. 
Plato's Explanation of the Complexity of Sensible Things 
The mathematization of sensible particulars extends as well to areas 
presenting the greatest complexity, in particular the human body, of 
which Plato advances a purely mathematical description. We will only 
discuss the composition of man's body by the demiurge; but neither the 
problem of its functioning nor that of its destruction by disease will be 
dealt with 16 here. 
Like all other sensible things, the human body is made up of 
essentially two types of right-angled triangles forming the elementary 
surfaces of the four regular polyhedra corresponding to the four 
elements. For the generation of the two fundamental components of the 

Part I: Plato's Timaeus 
57 
human body, the marrow and the flesh, the demiurge uses right-angled 
triangles of two different qualities. 
On one hand, marrow, a substance in which the soul comes to anchor 
itself and which is made up of ''unwarped and smooth triangles."17 On 
the other band, flesh, a substance that corresponds to the corruptible, is 
made up of ordinary triangles. 
To make the marrow, the demiurge chooses regular and smooth 
triangles able to produce fire, water, air and earth possessing the most 
exact form. Mixing together these triangles, he composes the marrow 
with which he makes the brain, the spinal chord, and bone marrow. 
Then, watering and thinning out pure earth, passed through a screen, and 
then mixing this earth with the marrow, be makes the bony substance 
which he uses to fashion the skull, the spinal column and all the other 
bones. 
Next, using elements composed of ordinary triangles, the demiurge 
produces the flesh by mixing water, fire, and earth, to which he adds a 
leaven formed from salt and acid, themselves made from ordinary 
triangles. When the flesh dries, a film appears, the skin. Moisture, 
escaping from the holes pierced in the skin by fire and forced under the 
skin by air, takes root on the skull and produce hair. With a mixture of 
bone and flesh without leaven, the demiurge makes the sinews which be 
uses to attach the bones together. And, lastly, with a mixture of sinews, 
skin and air, he makes the nails. 
Man's body is therefore reduced to the regular polyhedra, themselves 
composed of surfaces resulting from grouping two types of right-angled 
triangles: isosceles and scalene. The mathematical properties of these 
two elementary triangles "explain" the difference between the marrow, 
anchoring point of the soul's immortality, and the flesh, a mortal 
substance. Moreover, the destruction of the human body by diseases and 
the (psychological) problems raised in the soul by its union with a 
corruptible body are similarly explained in "mathematical" terms. 
This description of the human body, which may seem so strange to 
us, appears, in the final analysis, nothing else than an extreme 
application, to the microcosm, of the above-mentioned axioms. 

58 
Inventing the Universe 
Experimental verification in Plato's time 
In the preceding sections, 23 axioms underpinning the cosmological 
model advanced by Plato in the Timaeus have been formulated; they are 
the basic postulates of Plato's mathematical model of the universe. To 
confirm his theory, Plato must establish the connection between the 
propositions deduced from these axioms and observational data. His 
theory advances a model of how the heavenly bodies move and of their 
relative distances and velocities. It has also been shown that his axioms 
allow him to establish the laws by which division and condensation, 
combination and disintegration occur in the physical world. 
Furthermore, be "deduces" from his axioms the qualities of a large 
number of substances such as ice, copper, wax, etc. And finally, be 
"deduces" a large number of properties of the human body. What is left 
to be done is to set up an experimental protocol suitable for the 
verification of this theory. But Plato only offers direct sense-perception. 
We thus ask: could be have done better? What was the status of 
experimentation in Plato's time? What technical means were available 
for such a _purpose? 
The Pythagoreans, whom Plato probably encountered on his first 
voyage to southern Italy and Sicily, had apparently succeeded in 
showing that a mathematical relationship exists between the lengths of 
the strings of a consonant lyre. These results were incorporated in 
Plato's description of the world soul. Furthermore, it seems certain that 
Eudoxus, one of Plato's disciples at the Academy, had managed to 
construct a model that described the "retrograde" movement of the 
planets with the help of two concentric spheres executing their rotation 
in opposite directions around two inclined axes; he is thus considered 
the father of mathematical astronomy. Apart from these elementary 
results, no other example of what we modems refer to as "experimental 
verification" is reported. 
In ancient Greece, experimental verification is almost never brought 
into play to confirm a mathematically formulated theory. Several 
reasons explain this situation. First, the scarcity of appropriate abstract 
units of measure, and the absence of corresponding instruments of 
measure. Another no less decisive factor has already been mentioned: 

Part I: Plato 's Timaeus 
59 
mathematics in Plato's time was in a particularly primitive state, and 
several of its essential developments were still lacking. 
Standards and instruments of measure in Plato's time 
The measuring operation is science's most fundamental practice. To 
progress, science must, at the outset, define its units of measure. The 
discovery of such units of measure for temperature, acceleration, energy, 
electrical charge, entropy, information (measured in bits), etc., and the 
perfecting of instruments enabling their measure, represented each time 
a decisive step for the development of science. 
However, in Plato's epoch, the only known standards of measure 
were those related to length, weight, volume and time. 
Measures of length 
Revealing their degree of primitiveness, the units of length were 
directly associated with parts of the human body: daktulos (the finger), 
pa/aiste (the palm). The pous (foot) was the basic unit of measure for 
length, which however could vary, for, depending on the city, feet of 
0.296 m., 0.328 m. and 0.32045 m. were used The pekhus (cubit)= 1.5 
feet and the bema (pace) = 2.5 feet are further examples. Longer length-
measures were in use, such as the stadium = 600 feet, the Olympic 
measure, which was equivalent to 192.27 m. Locally, a certain 
standardization was sought, as archaeologists have observed when 
carrying out measurements on the ruins of buildings from that time. But 
no reference to a "standard of length" has been found. 
Measures of weight 
Greek measures of weight are directly associated with commerce in 
general, and with the equally necessary weighing of precious metal 
coins. This is why the bronze weights were kept in the temple of Athena 
on the Acropolis. Ten magistrates known as metronomoi had the task of 
ensuring that these unities of weight were respected: their names can 
sometimes be found inscribed on the standard weights. Let us mention 
as units of weight: the lchalkos = 0.09 grams, the obo/os = 8 kha/koi = 

60 
Inventing the Universe 
0.72 grams; the dra/chme = 48 /chal/coi = 4.32 grams; the mna = 100 
dralchmai = 432 grams; and the ta/anton = 60 mnai = 2S.92 kilograms. 
The measuring operations were carried out on balances with a central 
pivot, a beam and two plates: in ancient Greek, the name of this less than 
accurate instrument is "talanton." 
Measures of volume 
Measures of volume, conceived exclusively for the exchange of 
merchandise, were even less accurate since they depended entirely on 
several external factors relating to the product in question. For example, 
l medimnos = S2.S3 liters of dry matter, but 1 metretes = 39.39 liters of 
liquid matter. 
Measures of time 
Nothing resembling an accurate time-measuring instrument appears 
in European history before the seventeenth century, prior to the 
invention and utilization of the pendulum. The isochronism of the 
pendulum was discovered by Galileo and developed by Christian 
Huyghens. In Plato's epoch, there existed but two time measuring 
methods: sun dials, examples of which can already be found in Egypt 
about 2000 BC, and water clocks or clepsydras, already used in Egypt 
about 1600 BC. These two instruments were particularly inadequate for 
experimentation: the first could only be used outdoors and by daylight; 
and the second provided different results according to a series of factors: 
the viscosity of the liquid used, the ambient temperature, the diameter of 
the opening through which the liquid flows, etc. 
On the other hand, the determination of the length of the solar year in 
terms of lunar months presented a daunting problem, which was 
resolved only under pope Gregory XIII in 1582. In Plato's time, months 
counted 29 or 30 days, the first day coinciding with each new moon. 
Consequently, the year was 11.25 days too short, a situation that meant 
the establishing of yearly cycles of 12 and 13 months respectively. In 
423 BC, Konon established a cycle of 19 years for a total of235 months. 
To further complicate things, years were named after the eponymous 
archon, the highest ranking magistrate in Athens. As a result, to refer to 

Part/: Plato's Timaeus 
61 
a date only several years previous, a long explanation was required, 
especially if the Olympiad, that is, the four-year interval separating the 
Olympic Games, was taken into account. 
The numbering system in Plato's time 
In written texts, the ancient Greeks used as numbers the 24 letters of 
their alphabet, to which they appended three other symbols for a total of 
3 x 9 = 27 symbols, allowing them to write numbers up to 999. To attain 
higher numbers, sub-indices were attached to these symbols. This 
enabled the Greeks to reach 900,000. For practical reasons, this system 
could generally not exceed 100,000. For higher quantities, the adjectives 
murioi, ten thousand, and the adverbs dekalcis, ten times, and eikesalcis, 
twenty times, etc. were used In ancient inscriptions another way of 
indicating numbers appears, showing similarities to the Latin numbering 
system. For example, the number 1957 was written: 
Figure 1.13 
XI:' H H H H Pl f111 
Finally, the Greeks were not aware of the zero. 
Under these circumstances, it should be obvious that, even if they did 
reach a fairly advanced level of geometry, even if they did succeed in 
accomplishing technical feats, as witnessed in their architecture, and 
their sculpture, and even if their navigational methods did require the 
use of technical procedures, primitive though they were, the Greeks of 
Plato's epoch did not have access to the tools that would have enabled 
them to define and implement experiments capable of verifying their 
hypotheses in the realm of physics. This remark notwithstanding, their 
arithmetical prowess must have been superb: to calculate the square root 
of some number using only letters and knowing nothing about the zero is 
quite an achievement. 

62 
Inventing the Universe 
Experimentation in the Timaeus 
In spite of the above arguments, two comments are warranted 
regarding the possibility of experimental verification in the Timaeus. 
First, it is evident that Plato never thought of submitting any 
particular aspect of his theory to a real test, that is, within the framework 
of a purely local experiment, controlled and repeatable. Experiment 
today presents the following characteristics: over the course of an 
experiment, a very limited number of parameters are varied while 
supposing that the rest of the universe, with its enormous complexity 
and high degree of freedom will not exert an influence on the 
experiment Wlder way: ceteris paribus, "all the rest doesn't co1D1t." To 
arrive at this ceteris paribus, all the ingenuity of the experimenter must 
be brought to bear, which sometimes leads him to construct gigantic and 
very complex instruments. This absolutely decisive procedure of 
questioning nature eluded Plato who, when he refers to a physical 
phenomenon, states: 
But any attempt to put these matters to a practical test 
(skopoumenos basanon lambanoi) would argue ignorance of the 
difference between human nature and divine, namely that 
divinity has knowledge and power sufficient to do so ... but no 
man is now, or ever will be, equal to either task. 
(Timaeus 
68d-e) 
For Plato, experimental verification therefore implies an exact 
reproduction of nature, just as impossible a task for us as for him. The 
history of science would have been radically different if Plato had used 
an experimental method enabling him to limit his research to only one 
element of reality at a time. It is interesting to note that the expression 
Plato employs to designate "experiment," is basanon lambanein, an 
expression designating the "question," the torture to which a slave was 
submitted in order to make him confess a crime of which he was 
suspected. 

Part I: Plato 's Timaeus 
63 
Secondly, a certain number of propositions, appearing in the 
Timaeus, which are based on observation and which are in principle 
testable, can be quoted: 
Of all these fusible varieties of water [ = metals, because they 
melt], as we have called them, one that is very dense, being 
formed of very fine and uniform particles, unique in its kind, 
tinged with shining and yellow hue, is gold ... . Another has 
particles nearly like those of gold, but of more than one grade; in 
point of density in one way it surpasses gold and it is harder 
because it contains a small portion of fine earth: but it is lighter 
by reason of containing large interstices. This formation is 
copper, one of the bright and solid kinds of water. The portion of 
earth mixed with it appears by itself on the surface when the two 
substances begin to be separated-again by the action of time; it is 
called verdigris. (Timaeus 59b-c) 
Sound we may define in general terms as the stroke inflicted by 
air on the brain and blood through the ears and passed on to the 
soul. ... A rapid motion produces a high-pitched sound; the 
slower the motion, the lower the pitch. If the motion is regular, 
the sound is uniform and smooth; if irregular, the sound is harsh. 
According as the movement is on a large or a small scale, the 
sound is loud or soft. Consonance of sounds must be reserved 
for a later part of our discourse. (Timaeus 67b-c) 
These examples indicate that, despite the many deficiencies on the 
technical level and lack of adequate instruments of measure, Plato, in the 
Timaeus, sets forth propositions that conflict neither with logic nor with 
sensible experience. Thus, even if observation and verification, as 
understood by moderns, were not technically possible in Plato's time, 
they were not systematically rejected. 
With these remarks, we conclude the presentation of the axiomatic 
system on which the cosmological model presented by Plato in the 
Timaeus is based In the following section, the most developed 
cosmological model, the standard Big Bang model, will be discussed 
from a perspective as similar as possible to the one developed here. 

64 
Inventing the Universe 
NOTES 
I. We prefer to translate eidm and uaa by "intelligible Forms, ff for. since Descartes. the 
English term "idea" evokes. in philosophy. a representation. For Plato. eidm and uaa 
designate a reality. the true reality. 
2. Here. we agree with F.M. Cornford: "Whereas you can always ask the reason for a 
thing's existence and the answer will be that it exists for the sake of its goodness. you 
cannot ask for a reason for goodness; the Good is an end in itself. ff (Plato and 
PanMnitMs. London 1939. p. 132). 
3. G.E.R. Lloyd. Magic, reMon and aperience. Studies in IM origin and development 
o/Greelucience, Cambridge 1979. 
4. The fact that the Platonic detniurge is not omnipotent bothered the Christians who, 
under bishop Tcmpier in Paris in the thirteenth Century, condemned these ideas as 
heretical. Let us consider, as an example, what article 93 condemns as heretical: 
Quod aliqua possunt casualiter eveoirc rapectu c:ausac primac; ct quod falsum est 
OIDDia csse praconlinala a causa prima. quia tune evenirent de necessitate. I. This 
article asserts the existence of chance. even with regard to God. and rejects the 
praeordinatlo of events by the primary Cause, for this pracordinatio would entail 
their necessity. 2. Divine Providence. which governs the entire order of natural 
causes, implies that nothing eludes his praeordinatio; consequendy, nothing is 
fortuitous with regard to God. Chance is found only at the level of secondary causes. 
Cf. Enq,lite n,r /es 219 articlu contlamnb a Paris le 7 mars 1277, text and 
commentary by Roland Bissette, Louvain/Paris 1977. 
5. The Greek word Ira/on means also "desirable" and "beautitul•• and can here be so 
translated. 
6. In a sense. all the mathematical formulae we have included represent anachronisms. 
especially because they refer to notation unknown in Plato•s time. 
7. The modern names became usual at a much later date. 
8. The Timae111 attempts to represent the movements of the heavenly bodies exclusively 
as a combination of circular movements (for a list of all the references cf. Luc 
Brisson. IA mi,_ et /'autre dons la 811vctun ontologiqw di, Tim6e "- Platon. Paris 
1974. p. 394-395); this is a project which has dominated astronomical research for 
the twenty following centuries. Mon: than ten centuries after Plato. Ptolemy could 

Part I: Plato's Timaeus 
65 
still proclaim: ''Now that we arc about to demonstrate in the case of the five planets, 
as in the case of the Sun and the Moon, that all of their phenomenal irregularities 
result from regular and circular motion - for such befit the nature of divine beings, 
while disorder and anomaly arc alien to their nature - it is proper that we should 
regard this achievement as a great feat and as the fulfillment of the philosophically 
grounded mathematical theory [of the heaven]" (Ptolemy, SynlaXu mathematica 9.2, 
in Opera omnia, J.L. Heiberg ed., vol. I, par. 2, p. 208.) Quoted by G. Vlastos, 
Plato's Universe, Oxford 1975, p. 65, n. 107. 
9. In the Timons, one must distinguish between the ''narrative" that recounts the 
ordering of the sensible world by the demiurge, and the cosmological system based 
on the axioms we have enumerated. The appearance of time and ordering of the 
sensible world, should not be interpreted temporally, as Aristotle did in his critique 
(De caelo I 3; III I). Even if a narrative implies an internal temporality in order to 
deploy itself, the Timons limits itself to describing the ontological dependency of 
time with regard to eternity. Briefly put, the origin of time is contemporaneous with 
that of the world, which, owing to this fact, cannot have a temporal origin. 
10. To speak of"matter" in Plato is a controversial task. The first Greek philosopher to 
have developed a notion corresponding to what the Latin language authors called 
materia is Aristotle, who uses, to designate this notion, the tcnn hule, which in 
ancient Greek designates, in its first meaning, "wood," and more specifically, "wood 
for construction." In the Platonic corpus, only the first meaning of this term can be 
found. In the Timaeus, the term closest to hu/e is lchora, which we translate as 
"spatial medium," because the lchora presents a spatial aspect, to the extent that it is 
that "in which" sensible things arc found, and a constitutive aspect, to the extent that 
it is that out "of which" sensible things arc made. In this perspective, matter is not 
exclusively the lchora, but a lchora organized either by chance, where anagla, rules 
unhindered, or rationally, following the demiurge's intervention. Cf. Luc Brisson, Le 
mime et l'autre dons la slnlehU'e ontologique du Timee de Platon, Paris 1974, 
chapter 3. 
11. "Im folgenden soil von der speziellen Form der Naturphilosophie die Rede sein, die 
in Platons Dialog Timaioa niedergelegt ist, und es soil ein besondercr Zug dieser 
Vorstellungswelt erOrtet werden, der im modernen Gebiet der Atomphysik, in der 
Lehrc von den Elementarteilchen, wieder aufgetaucht ist und Bedeutung gewonnen 
hat. Die matbematischen Fonnen, durch die wir heute die Elementarteilchen 
darzustellen pflegen, sind ( ... ) kompliziertcr als jene geometrischen Fonnen der 
Griechen. Grundsltztlich handelt es sich aber in beiden Flllen um Fonnen, die als 
Folge gewisser einfacher matbematischer Grundforderungen entstanden sind. Dabei 
is daran zu erinnern, dass das Program der modernen Physik an dieser Stelle noch 
nicht zu Ende getllhrt ist. Die Aehnlichkeit zwischen den Vorstellungen bei Platon 

66 
Inventing the Universe 
und der modemen Atomphysik tritt auch noch an einer anderen Stelle in 
Erscheinung. Fragt man bei Platon, welches der Inhalt seiner Formen sei. aus 
welchem Stoff also seine regullren KOrper schliesslich gemacht sein, so erhllt man 
die Antwort: aus Mathematik." Heisenberg continues: "Letzc:n Endes wird also der 
Materiebegriff in beiden Flllen auf Mathematik zurClckgeftlhrt. Der innerste Kem 
alles Stoffiichen ist tlJr uns wie tlJr Plato eine Form, nicht irgendein materieller 
Inhalt" (W. Heisenberg, "Platons Vorstellungen von den ldeinstein Bausteinen der 
Materie und die Elementarteilchen der modemen Physik." Im Umkreis der Kunst. 
Ei1111 FuachriftftJr Emil Preetoriu, Wiesbaden 1953, p. 137-140). 
12. All electrons are alike, as are protons, etc. Similarly, all the tetrahedra of fire, or all 
the cubes of earth etc. are indiscernible. Electrons differ by their energy, cubes, by 
the magnitude ("k'') of their fundamental component triangles, etc. 
13. But it should not be interpreted as 1 [fare] + 2 [air] corresponds to 1 [oxygen] + 2 
[hydrogen]• "20 [water]. Similarity is the result of pure coincidence. 
14. De caelo III 7,306 al-7. 
I 5. Table 1.4 shows that Table 1.3 is false. For example, according to the second line of 
Table 1.3, 2 particles of fire= I particle of air, while according to Table 1.4, 2 
(0.1 I 78a3) • 0.2356a3 and not 0.4714a3. 
16. Luc Brisson, Le mime et /'autre dans la strucnue ontologique du Tim" de Platon, 
Paris 1974. 
17. The Greek term astrabe, whose positive gave "strabismus" in English, refers to a 
triangle which is "not bent;" the Greek term leia refers to something which is 
"smooth" or "polished." Interpreters have not been able to explain the exact meaning 
of these terms within this context 

Part II 
Contemporary Big Bang Cosmology 
Is there such a thing as a singular, all-encompassing unique 
universe? And if so, what is its structure? is its size finite or infinite? 
did it have a beginning? is its duration eternal? and what is our place in 
it and what can we know about it? Such questions may be ranked 
among the most ancient of mankind's intellectual inquiries, and 
numerous answers have been proposed. But only in very recent times 
have these answers departed from a simple mythical narrative. 
What makes modern cosmology a scientific inquiry is its 
mathematical description of the universe, which only became possible 
after achievements of Kepler and of Galileo during the Renaissance, a 
period coincidental with the rediscovery and translation of the 
complete Platonic writings. Modern cosmology can be defined as the 
search for a mathematical formulation representing the phenomena of 
nature taken as a totality. However, cosmology is not the science of all 
that exists, but the science which collects and orders natural 
phenomena into a whole, a unity called the "universe." 
The 
cosmological enterprise is thus closely related to astronomy and 
astrophysics, as well as to the physics of elementary particles. 
The concept of totality is assumed in the idea of universe: all the 
components of the cosmos can be ordered as correlated parts of a 
unique system. Here lies a difficulty already acknowledged by 
Aristotle: science deals exclusively with the general, the universal; this 
exigency requires the possibility of repeating observations and 
experiences and of comparing their particular results. But the universe 
is unique, there is only one "observable" universe; moreover the 
human observer is "in" this universe from which he cannot escape. 

68 
Inventing the Universe 
As a result, the first and essential step in cosmology is the 
construction of a representation or model of the universe. Unavoidably, 
in this kind of representation or model of the universe what is 
supposed to be known is much larger than what is in fact known; in 
this sense, cosmology again approaches mythological narrative. In the 
last century, Auguste Comte wrote that, faced with the enormous 
complexity of natural phenomena, mankind begins by searching for 
reassurance in invented theories. Of course, science normally invents 
theories and builds models which exceed experience and which are 
presumed to allow predictions concerning the as yet unknown; in 
addition, science is totally dependent on the particular system of 
axioms assumed in each case. But no science requires such a large set 
of so daring assumptions as seem necessary to assemble the 
fundamental (mathematical) structure of the universe, a structure 
which must provide the framework for all other scientific 
constructions. 
As Jacques Merleau-Ponty points out, cesmology was, at the end 
ef the nineteenth century, still deemed an impossible science: 
"Cosmology was unmistakably excluded by Auguste Comte from the 
domain of the positive sciences, since, as was quite reasonable for his 
epoch, 'we do not even know if there is a universe,' meaning thereby 
that it was still unknown if all the cosmic systems observed or 
conjectured could be ordered in a unique system where all parts are in 
physical correlation."1 
In fact, the beginning of modern cosmology 
can be traced back to 1917, when Einstein, trying to give general 
relativity all its extension and coherence, was led to state the problem 
in radically new terms. The search for a mathematical structure 
describing the universe, a cosmic geometry capable not only of 
encompassing the idea of unity, consubstantial with the idea of 
universe, but also of taking account of the axioms of general relativity, 
led Einstein to propose the first modem mathematical model of the 
universe. 
This model assumes that knowledge of the physical universe is 
based on a system of fundamental laws formulated in mathematical 
equations relating the matter and energy content of the universe to the 

Big Bang Cosmology 
69 
cosmic geometry. But mathematical laws as such cannot be verified, 
since the differential equations by which they are expressed describe 
elementary interactions taking place in an infinitesimal region of 
space-time. In order to establish the connection of these laws with 
descriptions of systems of finite dimensions and descriptions of the 
evolution of these systems in finite times, it is necessary not only to 
detennine the numerical values of the parameters appearing in these 
equations, but also, and more importantly, to fix the initial and the 
border conditions, a central problem in cosmology. 
As it is the case for every theoretical approach, the ultimate 
foundation of the "law'' of nature is expressed in a set of a priori 
principles, that is, in a system of axioms. J. Merleau-Ponty writes: 
''The presentation of these specific principles, as provided by 
cosmologists, is a very delicate task, first of all because they are not 
always explicitly given, and maybe even not always perfectly 
conscious, and then because about these principles it is much more 
difficult to fmd a consensus."2 
The explicit listing of cosmology's 
specific principles is the task of the second part of this book. 
In order to facilitate the reading of the following sections, which 
may appear a bit too technical to a reader completely unfamiliar with 
these subjects, we start with a brief outline of some of the key tenets of 
modern cosmology, theoretical as well as observational. 
In 190S, physicists trying to explain the universe were facing 
significant problems. They had to admit the existence of an ether. This 
subtle incorporeal medium, whose existence was already assumed by 
the ancient Greeks, was supposed to permeate all space and to provide 
a material support to Newton's concept of absolute space. But this 
mysterious fluid remained beyond all experimental validation, even if 
the hypothesis of its existence allowed predictions liable to be tested 
by observation. Challenged by the failure of several experiments to 
prove the existence of the ether, scientists proposed new theories, 
grounded in turn on new axioms. 
Thus, Fitzgerald and Lorentz put forward the hypothesis that all 
bodies in uniform and rectilinear movement must be affected by a 

70 
Inventing the Universe 
contraction in their length in the direction of this movement. But 
experimental evidence did not support this idea: no shortening of 
moving bodies could be detected. In order to understand why this 
happened, a new postulate was advanced: the mass of a body in 
movement ought to change. Moreover, for each ("Galilean") frame of 
reference, a "local time" had to be defined. Lorentz and Poincare 
calculated the relations between the coordinates of space and time for a 
system moving with uniform and rectilinear velocity relative to 
another one. However, the conception of an absolute space and time, 
then prevailing, concealed the deep meaning of these "Lorentz 
transformations." Thus, at that moment, everything was prepared, yet 
nothing was understood. The solution of that quandary constitutes the 
real achievement of Einstein's theory of relativity. 
The problem Einstein faced stems from the fact that the concepts 
employed in these theories were tied to the most fundamental physical 
operation: the operation of measurement. But at that time scientists had 
not yet considered the possibility that, for moving bodies, definitions 
of spatial and temporal measures are not unambiguously stipulated, in 
so far as the basic measures of length of a rigid body or simultaneity 
between two separated events are dependent on the observer. 
Therefore, a radically new approach became inescapable. 
a) Special Relativity 
Einstein's special relativity is based on two fundamental 
postulates: 
1) The principle of relativity, already found in Galileo's works,3 
states that no experiment can measure the absolute velocity of an 
observer. In addition, this postulate requires that the laws of physics 
should be mathematically equivalent for different (Galilean, i.e., 
unaccelerated) observers; the results of any experiment performed by 
an observer should not depend on his speed relative to other observers. 
2) The universality of the speed of light, stating that the speed of 
light relative to any (unaccelerated) observer is the same regardless of 

Big Bang Cosmology 
71 
the motion of the light's source relative to the observer. It follows that 
special relativity singles out a class of preferred observers, called 
inertial or Galilean observers ( or inertial or Galilean frames of 
reference): those which are unaccelerated. 4 
Thus Einstein could show that the spatial and the temporal 
coordinates of two inertial (Galilean) observers are physically related, 
and that the mathematical expression of this relation was precisely the 
Lorentz transformation, the meaning of which could now be 
understood. Furthermore, the admission of the fundamental postulate 
of the universality of the speed of light made it possible to put spatial 
and temporal measures on the same footing. By selecting new units, 
such that the speed of light called "c" is made equal to unity, time is 
measured in meters, and the ideal clock is a light ray traveling in a 
vacuum along a rigid rod. 
Einstein's achievement made it possible to solve the problem 
confronting physicists at the beginning of the twentieth century: 
i) According the postulate of relativity, all Galilean systems are 
equivalent for the purpose of the description of motion. Following the 
Galilean transformation, 5 in order to transform the observations of an 
observer in one such system to the observations of the same 
phenomenon in the other system, a vectorial addition of speeds results. 
As a consequence, 
ii) the speed of light is differently measured in the two systems. 
But, by postulate, 
iii) the speed of light is a constant "c" in all Galilean systems, 
independent of the movement of the light's source. 
As propositions ii) and iii) are obviously contradictory, it was 
necessary to replace these two postulates by the two Einsteinian ones 
mentioned above: 
i) All Galilean inertial systems are equivalent; the formulation of 
the laws of physics is not dependent on the relative speed of the 
observers; 

72 
Inventing the Universe 
ii) Light propagates at constant speed "c" relatively to any Galilean 
system, irrespective of the motion of the light source. 
In order to prove the consistency of these two postulates, Einstein 
showed how the notion of the simultaneity of occurrence of two 
separate events, as well as the notion of the lengtb of a rigid body, 
were relative notions; as a matter of fact, he proved that the most 
fundamental measurement operations were not devoid of ambiguity! 
The consistency of these special relativity postulates (the equivalence 
of all Galilean observers and the universality of the speed of light) 
results from 
a radically new interpretation of the Lorentz 
transformation. 
b) General relativity 
Special relativity admits the equivalence of all Galilean observers 
in the formulation of the laws of physics, but singles out a preferential 
class of observers, the inertial (unaccelerated) observers, those not 
acted upon by an external force. In the case of accelerated observers 
( or frames of reference), or of observers under the effect of a 
gravitational field, a different approach has to be adopted. 
On Earth at least, no inertial frame of reference can be found, since 
all "laboratories" are situated within the terrestrial gravitational field. 
In an inertial frame of reference (or laboratory), all particles at rest stay 
at rest; however, in a terrestrial laboratory a "free" particle falls. This 
led Einstein to formulate the principle of equivalence, on which 
general relativity is grounded: the identity between inertial and 
gravitational mass. 
In the fundamental (Newtonian) law of dynamics 
F=m•a 
the inertial mass m appears, the mass which, so to speak, resists 
acceleration. 

Big Bang Cosmology 
73 
The gravitational mass M appears in Newton's law of gravitation: 
F=G•MM'lr 
The gravitational action (attraction) of the mass M' (for instance, 
the Earth) on the test particle, whose mass is M(for instance, Newton's 
famous apple), will accelerate the test particle to 
a =Flm =-G• (Mlm) •M'lr 
As Einstein noticed, experiment had shown that in the vacuum all 
test particles fall with the same acceleration. 6 Thus, in a gravitational 
field, the acceleration GM'lr1 is independent of the test particle's 
composition and mass: the value Mlm is the same for all bodies. If 
appropriate unities are chosen, this value can be set to unity; 
consequently, 
the gravitational mass Mis identical to the inertial 
massm. 
This identity of gravitational and inertial masses makes it 
impossible to distinguish locally between inertial forces of accelerated 
systems and gravitational forces due to a gravitational field. The 
principle of equivalence between gravity and acceleralion can 
accordingly be formulated in these terms: 
Locally, in a small region of space, uniform gravitational 
fields are equivalent to frames of reference that accelerate 
uniformly relative to inertial frames of reference. 7 
Stated in this way, an accelerated system can be considered similar 
to some particular inertial system, a system freely falling, when placed 
in a suitably chosen gravitational field; the classical example is 
Einstein's "freely falling elevator." But the equivalence principle 
applies only locally. Consequently, there is no global reference frame 
which is everywhere freely falling; to construct a global inertial frame 
within a gravitational field (such as the gravitational field of the Earth) 
is impossible. In order to make the laws of physics independent of the 

74 
Inventing the Universe 
laboratory, to make them coordinate invariant, Einstein was led to 
formulate the principle of general relativity: 
All fnmes of reference, whatever their motion, should be 
eqaivalent for the mathematical formulation of the laws of 
physics. 
The concept of "free observer'' is modified by this principle. The 
principle stating that all reference systems are equivalent is based on 
the conditions substantiating the Lorentz transformation. However, 
because the above mentioned equivalence principle applies only 
locally, to encompass all space by one unique ("absolute" in Newton's 
sense) inertial (Lorentz) frame of reference is impossible in a 
gravitational field. Consequently, the postulate had to be narrowed: the 
laws of physics must be the same in any local Lorentz frame of 
reference. 1 One thus places a Lorentz frame on some small part of 
space, another in the immediately adjacent part, and so on until all 
space is covered. But since it is impossible to construct, in a 
gravitational field, a global inertial reference frame, the entire structure 
of space and time must be revised. Instead of the Euclidean structure of 
space and time, a non-Euclidean geometric object, called "space-time" 
must be introduced, whose properties only observation can elucidate. 
Einstein succeeded in setting up a system of equations capable of 
correlating the matter and energy content of the universe with the 
geometrical structure of space-time. The solution of this system of 10 
non-linear differential equations makes it possible to find the metric -
the "curvature" - of space-time, a curvature precisely generated by the 
matter/energy distribution of the universe. Their solution requires the 
previous determination of the relevant initial values and the border 
conditions. 
The search for a satisfactory cosmological model is hindered by 
three main obstacles: 
i) The mathematical complexity of Einstein's system of equations: 
no unique solution giving ''the" curvature of the universe exists; 

Big Bang Cosmology 
1S 
several are possible. Thus many different universes are conceivable. 
ii) The difficulty in attaining a sufficiently accurate observational 
determination of the quantity, the composition, the properties, and the 
distribution of the matter and energy content of the universe. 
iii) The difficulty stemming from the fact that the theory predicts 
that only a small part of the universe is accessible to the human 
observer, a part that may be vanishingly small. 
In spite of these problems, the development of a sophisticated "Big 
Bang" cosmology was not precluded, as the ensuing exposition, which 
does not follow its historical unfolding, shows. Since we concentrate 
our attention on the "problem of scientific knowledge," we will, as in 
our examination of Plato's Timaeus, present the modern cosmological 
model from a viewpoint relevant to our purpose. This means that we 
will enumerate the fundamental underlying presuppositions (axioms) 
of the model. Once this axiomatic system has been expounded in 
detail, we will proceed to establish the connection of the model so 
constructed with the attainable observational facts.9 
A) The Standard Big Bang Model: A Short Description 
In this section, a mathematical model will be described, a model 
which aims to represent the universe, and to reveal what orders and 
unifies natural phenomena into one totality. Such a model, as will soon 
become apparent, requires a particularly sophisticated mathematical 
instrumentation; it is based on Einstein's general relativity, and 
represents the state of the question around the years 1940-1950. 
Elaborate additions, such as the inflationary scenario which will be 
briefly alluded to further on, may be considered as recent 
developments of the model (1981); today, the frontier of cosmological 
research centers on Grand Unified Theories, quantum gravity, super 
strings, and ''theories of everything." 
But first this question: what is a mathematical model? 

76 
Inventing the Universe 
Broadly speaking, a mathematical model is the conjunction of I) a 
specific, well defmed set of assumptions (axiomatic propositions);10 
generally, each model possesses its particular set, and 2) the total 
collection of mathematical knowledge available. Since Mathematics -
with a capital M - as well as Logic - with a capital L - can in principle 
both be applied to every scientific model, what distinguishes one 
particular model from another is the set of their specific axiomatic 
propositions. This was already clear to the Greek philosophers. 
Aristotle refers to this subject in the Posterior Analytics: 
A science is one if it is concerned with a single genus or class 
of objects which are composed of the primary elements of that 
genus [i.e., the principles] .... One science is different from 
another if their principles do not belong to the same genus, or 
if the principles of the one are not derived from the principles 
of the other. (Posterior Analytics I 28, 87a38-bl) 
In our definition of a mathematical model, another Aristotelian 
idea is implicit. If the first principles of a model are given as premises, 
the entire set of theorems mathematically or logically deducible from 
these premises, that is to say everything the model is able to give a 
description of, is already known. In other words, the totality of the 
deducible theorems is contained, potentially, in the system of 
axiomatic propositions founding the model. ( cf. Aristotle, Posterior 
Analytics I 24, 86 a 22-25). 
Thus two mathematical models are indistinguishable if the 
fundamental hypotheses of one can be deduced from those of the other, 
if the system of axiomatic propositions of one is already contained in 
the other. 
Consistent with the method sketched in the first part, we will now 
review, in as much detail as required by the intended analysis, the 
presuppositions on which the cosmological model named "standard 
Big Bang" is founded. This task will be carried out stepwise: the 
different components of the model will be added one after the other, 

Big Bang Cosmology 
77 
until the essential set of axioms on which the standard Big Bang model 
is grounded is completed. 
The "philosophical" presuppositions 
Any construction of a mathematical model rests inevitably on a 
certain number of philosophical presuppositions - one might also call 
them "prejudices." Such assumptions are not always explicitly 
fonnulated, and most of them have been passionately debated for 
centuries. Our claim is not to produce the complete list of these 
philosophical presuppositions; only the subset of the most interesting 
assumptions shared by both models analyzed in this book will be 
given. 
• An observer-independent reality does exist; the complete set of 
data that can possibly be collected from this observer-independent 
reality is called the "universe." The observer himself is however part 
of this universe. 
• The subject/object relation between a human observer and such 
an external reality does not entail a loss of crucial infonnation. In other 
words, the segmentation of the universe into a subject and its object is 
a natural one, and, when assumed, entails no irreversible destruction of 
infonnation about the external reality. A universe considered to be 
some kind of continuum, such as postulated by Pannenides, is 
excluded by this assumption. 
• For a human observer,11 sense perception provides the only 
access to reality; this means that only measurement allows a scientific 
approach of this external reality. Actually, the scope of this assumption 
is larger, since it includes, as taken for granted, that the appearances of 
the objects perceived are sufficiently stable to be distinguished and 
named (cf. Timaeus 49d-50a). To discern correlations between these 
objects (or between different states of one object), such a stability is a 
priori necessary. 
• Finally, pure reason, the intellectual activity which in human 
beings operates in total independence from any sense-perception, is apt 

78 
Inventing the Universe 
to reach a certain level of knowledge or truth. Human beings thus have 
the capacity to formulate universal principles, based on such abstract 
notions as harmony, beauty, symmetry, causality, necessity, etc. 
The geometric axioms 
In the following sections, the presuppositions specific to the 
standard Big Bang model will be listed. The construction of the model 
starts from the simplest assumption. Then, step by step, the required 
structure is built, until Einstein's field equations are reached. As it is 
extremely difficult to fmd the adequate solution for these equations, 
the process has to be reiterated, with the effect that drastic 
simplifications of the universe are now assumed to hold. These 
simplifications finally lead to the Friedmann-Robertson-Walker metric 
function. Only at this stage is the model ready to be tested by 
observation, only at this stage can the model be subjected to 
verification or falsification. 
First, a succinct list of the primordial geometric axioms on which 
the model is based will be given. They originate in Einstein's 
fundamental idea, according to which the universe is a geometric 
object: space-time.12 In this way the universe can be geometrically 
defined. 
The main feature of a geometric object is neighborhood, a rather 
complex notion, close to the idea of infmite proximity. Neighborhood 
is an essential property of objects, 13 that particular property which 
allows them to be qualified as "geometric" when, after subtracting all 
other essential or contingent qualities, only this one is retained. The 
concept of neighborhood correlations between geometrical objects 
allows us to defme continuous transformations as those which leave 
such correlations intact.14 Modem set theory has considerably 
extended and deepened this idea of a geometric object. 
In the geometric approach to Big Bang cosmology, the universe is 
identified with an arbitrary set whose elements are points of a n-
dimensional topological space, the reason being that such a topological 
space may be endowed with the necessary attributes permitting 

Big Bang Cosmology 
79 
continuous mathematical transformations to be defined. Thus, the first 
axiom of the model is: 
Axiom Bl 
The universe is a geometric object, and that geometric 
object is a topological space. 
The points of this space are called "events." Each event is 
unambiguously detennined by its space-time coordinates; each event 
happens "here and now," (hie et nunc). The universe is thus defined as 
the totality of physical events. The important consequence of this 
assumption is to establish the independence of the universe from any 
"exterior'' frame of reference. In this topological space, physical events 
are identified by their name: "the event happening here and now." 
Events, i.e., the points of the topological space modeling the 
universe, ought to remain distinct and separate; otherwise, the concept 
of a well-defmed physical event is meaningless. To achieve this end, a 
new axiom, named a "separation axiom" has to be postulated. There 
exist several separation axioms; the one chosen is: 
AxiomB2 
The standard model postulates that the event/points of the 
topological space representing the universe satisfy the 
Hausdorff sepantion uiom. 
A Hausdorff topological space is a space such that for each pair x, y of 
distinct points of that space, there exist disjoint neighborhoods of x 
andy. 
Axioms Bl & B2 
The universe is modeled by a Hausdorff topological space. 

80 
Inventing the Universe 
It is admitted that the universe does not present isolated or dis-
connected "portions" between which information conveying causal 
information cannot flow. Actually, should the universe have such dis-
connected portions, we would be forever unable to know them; thus it 
seems adequate to rule them out axiomatically. This requires that the 
topological 
space 
representing the universe 
be connected.15 
Furthermore, one also rejects out of hand any possibility of a universe 
having "edges" or some kind of boundary; anyway, what could be 
beyond such boundary? This last condition is not to be confounded 
with an infinite size; for instance, a spherical surface is finite, but has 
no edges nor boundary. We thus add 
AxiomB3 
The universe is connected and without boundary. 
The next step follows naturally. Mathematics being the primary 
tool of physics, the topological space modeling the universe must be 
provided with precisely those properties which allow us to obtain a 
knowledge of the universe by means of the mathematics currently best 
understood. Differential equations are the most suitable mathematical 
tool for the description and analysis of dynamic phenomena, that is, the 
description of the temporal change of physical situations. To assure the 
possibility of giving a meaningful definition of differential functions in 
the universe, additional conditions must be stipulated: the universe 
must be "smooth" 
everywhere. This condition, expressed mathe-
matically, is 
AxiomB4 
The geometric model representing the universe is a 
"differentiable manifold." 
A differentiable manifold is essentially a smooth topological 
space, such that an infinitesimally small region around each point of 

Big Bang Cosmology 
81 
this space resembles an Euclidean space. In this space, the parameters 
characterizing it change smoothly and continuously. 16 Moreover, the 
number of independent parameters of the manifold are called the 
"dimension of the manifold." Taking the surface of a sphere as an 
example, we see that two independent parameters suffice to identify 
each point, viz. the two polar coordinates which may be named latitude 
and longitude, or 8 and cj,. This surface is smooth, and at each point a 
''tangent" two-dimensional Euclidean space - the tangent plane - can 
be conceived. Thus the surface of the sphere is a two-dimensional 
differentiable manifold. 
Mathematically, the operation associating a set of points (of a 
manifold) with the parameters characterizing them, is equivalent to the 
"mapping"17 of the points of the manifold onto an Euclidean space, the 
dimensions of the Euclidean space being the same as the number of 
independent parameters of the manifold. For instance, the Earth, being 
approximately spherical, and which is everywhere curved, can 
nevertheless be mapped continuously into a set of two-dimensional 
Euclidean spaces: our usual maps, atlases or charts. A differentiable 
manifold is thus everywhere locally Euclidean; such a manifold is 
smooth, continuous and can be described by a number of independent 
parameters equal to its dimensions. On a larger scale, the topology of a 
n-dimensional manifold may look entirely different from an Euclidean 
space (as shown, for instance, by the round Earth and the flat maps we 
utilize); but locally, in every infinitesimally small part of its "surface" 
the manifold can be mapped onto the tangent "plane" at that point. 
Thus, at each point of the manifold, local charts (atlases) can be 
established but no unique chart can "cover" the entire manifold. In 
fact, globally any topology is possible, as long as the manifold stays 
smooth. 
Having thus defined the differentiable manifold representing the 
universe, the next step is to assign to it its dimension. Based on every 
day experience, it is postulated that: 

82 
Inventing the Universe 
AxiomB5 
Four dimensions suffice to specify any point/event of the 
manifold: three spatial parameten and one temporal. 
This manifold is therefore called "space-time." 
Axioms Bl through B5 
The univene is modeled by a 4-dimeasional differentiable 
manifold, satisfying the Hausdorff separation axiom, 
connected and without boundaries. 
The universe is thus modeled by a 4-dimensional geometric object. 
Besides the fact that such a model is particularly difficult to visualize -
it is very hard to imagine a world of four dimensions - what is most 
surprising in this approach is that time is considered to be one of its 
coordinates. In a way, everything is "frozen" in this universe: nothing 
ever changes, everything is and nothing ever becomes. An example 
often used to illustrate this situation is a reel of film. The film never 
changes, but the illusion of change can be accomplished in the usual 
way. Note however that in the film, ''time" is also measured in meters 
(or number of frames). 
These conditions are still insufficient to assure that the 
mathematics we know how to use can be applied as required. We have 
to add the condition of the convergence of the sums used to define 
multiple integrals. This is equivalent to the requirement that each point 
of the manifold be covered by only a finite number of charts. 
Mathematically this is expressed in these terms. 
AxiomB6 
The manifold is paracompact. 

Big Bang Cosmology 
83 
Adding still more conditions to assure the suitable differentiability 
of the manifold, we arrive at: 
Axioms Bl through B6 
The univene is modeled by a four-dimensional Hausdorff 
C00 manifold, connected, without boundaries and para-
compact. 
The next step consists in providing the topological space - space-
time -
with a metric function. A topological space possessing 
everywhere a metric structure is called a "metric space." The definition 
of the metric function d is as follows: 
Let E be a set. To each couple x and y of E is assigned a real 
number d(x,y), called the "distance" between x and y, satisfying the 
following conditions: 
i) d(x,y) ~ 0; 
ii) d(x,y) = 0, if and only if x = y ; 
iii) d(x,y) = d(y,x), for all x and y in E; 
iv) d(x,z) S d(x,y) + d(y,z), for all x, y, z of E. 
AxiomB7 
The topological space by which the universe is modeled is a 
metric space. 
The intuitive idea of distance can be applied, not only to Euclidean 
spaces, but to any n-dimensional manifold as well. It should be 
understood that adding a metric function to a manifold is equivalent to 
providing this manifold with a structure; otherwise the manifold is but 
a shapeless, amorphous, collection of points. The metric function 
defines the curvature of the manifold and, without a metric function, 
no unambiguous measurement can be performed on the manifold. 

84 
Inventing the Universe 
The paracompactness of the manifold established in axiom B6 is 
equivalent to the assumption that the manifold admits some positive-
definite metric, meaning that the distance function d(x,y) ~ 0 for all x, 
y. That is, the distance is always either positive or null, and two points 
at null distance are one and the same point. In general relativity, 
however, the metric function is defined as "pseudo-Riemannian." 
Such a function admits that the distance function d(x,y) can take 
positive, null or negative values. It thus becomes possible to define 
curves, the distinct points of which are separated by an invariant 
distance equal to zero. Although the distance between two such points 
is zero, they are not the same point, they remain distinct points. In 
general relativity, such null curves are precisely the paths followed by 
light rays in the four-dimensional space-time manifold thus defined. 
The path of a test particle in general relativity's space-time is called a 
"geodesic;" if this test particle is light, then this particle is called a 
"photon." Photons travel at constant speed equal c (or equal I in units 
of general relativity) in any frame of reference, and the equation 
specifying null-geodesics are the equations of the displacement of 
light-photons. Photons, and light, occupy a central place in general 
relativity: it is postulated that nothing can exceed the speed of light. 
Specifically, no causal information can be transmitted in the universe 
faster than light. This value being finite, a limit is established beyond 
which all causal interaction is forbidden. This is postulated in: 
AxiomB8 
No information (or causal action) can be transmitted faster 
than the speed of light, the value of which is constant and 
finite. 
Although time is just one of the four parameters defining space-
time, the fact that time flows incessantly and determines causality must 
be taken into account. This special character of time is the reason why 
a pseudo-Riemannian metric, instead of a positive-definite metric, is 
chosen. A pseudo-Riemannian metric is such that the manifold 

Big Bang Cosmology 
85 
acquires everywhere a "Lorentz signature" a condition more restrictive 
than axiom B6, the paracompactness of space-time; any manifold with 
a Lorentz signature is also paracompact. A Lorentz signature means 
that, everywhere in the manifold, at every local event/point, a Lorentz 
frame of reference does exist.18 This postulate implies that one can 
always find, locally, the results of Einstein's special relativity, and 
therefore also those ofNewton's physics.19 
The Lorentz signature is (-1, + 1, + 1, + 1), meaning that the 
distance function in flat space-time is of the form: 
(ds)2 = - (cdt)2 + (dx)2 + (dy)2 + (dz)2 
In Euclidean geometry, when the distance between two points is zero, 
the two points must be the same point. In the geometry of general 
relativity, in a manifold presenting everywhere a Lorentz signature, 
due to the minus sign of (cdt)2, when their interval (ds)2 is zero, two 
events may be on two different galaxies, but they are nevertheless 
separated by a null ray (a light ray). Technically, this is expressed by 
assuming that the metric function of the space-time manifold has the 
general four- dimensional form : 
[equation 1] 
(ds)2 = gij dxi dxi, (iJ = 0, 1, 2, 3) , with 
diag (-1, + 1, + 1, + 1), in local Lorentz coordinates. Since locally 
space-time is, by axiom, flat, this signature, the guarantee of a simple 
geometry, is everywhere locally true. 
The metric function gij determines the (four-dimensional space-
time) "interval" between any two events and the curvature of space-
time. 
From all this it ensues that we have to add the following axiom to 
the construction of the model: 

86 
Inventing the Universe 
AxiomB9 
Everywhere in the manifold modeling the universe there is 
defined a Lorentz signature metric. 
We now summarize the standard model's axioms listed up to this 
point: 
Axioms Bl through B9 
The universe is modeled by a Hausdorff separable, cao 
four-dimensional 
manifold, 
connected 
and 
without 
boundary. Everywhere on this manifold, a Lorentz 
sigature metric function can be defined. 
Einstein's gravitation 
In the preceding section, the geometrical presuppositions 
(axiomatic propositions) on which the Big Bang model is grounded 
were briefly enumerated. This model shows the universe to be a 
precise geometrical object, built to allow the analysis of physical 
phenomena by means of currently known mathematics. In other words, 
if the description of the universe presented by this model is realistic, 
then contemporary mathematics is the adequate instrument for 
acquiring scientific knowledge about the universe. However, the model 
is still incomplete. In the next stage, the postulates specific to 
Einstein's theory of gravitation must be introduced by presenting its 
indispensable axiomatic propositions. 
Introductory remarks 
The procedure followed in the building of the Big Bang model is 
in many aspects parallel to the method employed by Plato in the 
Timaeus, as described in the first part of this book. 

Big Bang Cosmology 
87 
Both approaches postulate a universe exhibiting properties of 
simplicity and symmetry which allow the use of contemporary 
mathematics, and both try, through their application, to achieve a 
verisimilar knowledge of physical phenomena. By postulating axioms 
TIO, Tl 1 and T12, Plato in the Timaeus assumes that a benevolent 
demiurge has, as far as possible, imposed upon the universe beauty and 
harmony, abstract properties which, it is claimed, can be 
mathematically formulated. Moreover, Plato draws the consequences 
of the axioms he admitted: since the celestial bodies are the most 
perfect beings, their motion must be the simplest and the most 
harmonious (i.e., the most symmetric), that is to say circular. The 
model of the universe built according to this axiom must include this 
solution; consequently, the world-soul in the Timaeus is manufactured 
as an armillary sphere. In Plato's time, mathematics were basically 
restricted to the geometry to which Euclid, some years later, was to 
give its final formulation, and to the arithmetic of proportions. On the 
other hand, it had already been discovered at the time that certain fixed 
arithmetical 
proportions 
could 
adequately 
describe 
acoustic 
phenomena, and this insight led Plato boldly to extrapolate from 
musical harmony to a mathematical explanatory principle applicable to 
the whole universe. 
This line of thought, which can truly said to be "revolutionary" is 
mirrored in the Big Bang model. By axiom TI, Plato did not only 
postulate causality in the universe, but he went further: those causes of 
all that becomes in the universe under the "governing" mathematical 
rule of the world-soul, are also "reasonable," "logical," and therefore 
accessible to human capabilities. Causal explanations in the universe -
if and where such explications exist - should be based on mathematics 
human scientists are supposed to be able to develop, even if such 
explanations are at best "verisimilar" (axioms Tl I and Tl2). 
Plato's insight lies at the roots of probably the most fundamental 
of all a priori assumptions admitted by modern science: nihil est sine 
ratione, so formulated by Leibniz, who called it principium grande, 
magnum et nobilissimum. According to this "on-Platonic" principle, 
everything in the universe, including the universe itself, must possess a 

88 
Inventing the Universe 
sufficient reason for its existence, and its being just as it is. In Leibniz' 
words: "We consider that no fact will be true, nor exist, nor will any 
proposition be truthful, without a sufficient reason why it is so and not 
otherwise. Even if in most cases these reasons will remain unknown to 
us."20 
This means not only that everything which becomes must of 
necessity become owing to some cause (Timaeus 28a; cf. axiom T3, a 
law which only establishes a rule of precedence}, but that, in addition, 
within the best of all possible worlds, ruled by a "pre-established 
harmony," this cause is in conformity with reason. Here again Plato's 
intuition was astonishing: the Platonic universe is far from being the 
best of all possible universes, since in the Timaeus it is stated that the 
"reasonable" causes, those that can be mathematically formulated, are 
hampered by the "errant cause," the anagke of axiom TS. As the 
demiurge is not all-powerful, reason does not pervade the universe but 
only goes "as far as possible," and an undetermined portion of the 
universe entirely escapes the mathematical domination of the world-
soul. 
Its vast scope notwithstanding, this principium grande, magnum et 
nobilissimum holds a central position in modem science. One can 
hardly imagine scientists, Einstein for instance, building mathematical 
models encompassing the entire cosmos, unless they accept at least 
some version of this principle.21 
In summary, modem cosmology basically follows the guidelines 
set up in the Timaeus. Once they have accepted that mathematics, the 
mathematics of differential equations, give an adequate description of 
a great number of physical phenomena, the proponents of the Big Bang 
model extrapolate, as audaciously as did Plato in the Timaeus, and 
provide the universe with the appropriate fundamental mathematical 
structure, but in this case the entire universe becomes accessible to 
human understanding and investigation. 

Big Bang Cosmology 
89 
Einstein's dynamic axioms: Matter and energy in the universe 
So far, we have described the topological structure assumed to 
model the geometry of the universe. On this basis, Einstein now 
established the relation between this geometry and the matter and 
energy content of the universe, following this daring idea: curvature in 
the geometry of space-time manifests itself as gravitation. 
As the equivalence between matter and energy is established by 
Einstein's famous equation 
E = m • c2 
[equation 2], 
new axioms are required if a universal validity is to be assigned to the 
relationship between geometry and matter/energy. Conceivably the 
most revolutionary idea Einstein formulated with regard to general 
relativity is that there exists a dynamic connection between such 
disparate entities as are the geometry and the matter content of the 
universe, 
a 
connection 
that 
can 
be 
precisely 
formulated 
mathematically. "The effect of geometry on matter is what we mean 
today by that old [i.e., Newtonian] word 'gravitation,' and matter in 
tum warps geometry .... Space acts on matter, telling it how to move. 
In tum, matter reacts back on space, telling it how to curve."22 It is 
precisely this close connection between matter and space-time that is at 
the root of the difficulties presented by this mathematical picture of the 
universe. The matter/energy content of the universe, a moving body for 
instance, affects space-time which curves it, but curved space-time 
affects the way bodies move in the first place, and so on ... , a hopeless 
enterprise, unless a mathematical tool is found capable of picturing this 
permanent mutual inter-relationship.23 
Such a tool are Einstein's field equations. These equations are a 
tensor system of partial differential equations relating the metric of the 
manifold, also represented by a tensor, to the tensor representing the 
energy distribution of space-time. This energy distribution is taken as 
the source of the gravitational field and is phenomenologically 
described by the energy/momentum tensor. 

90 
Inventing the Universe 
First, we summarize Einstein's key assumptions, adding these two 
new axioms: 
Axiom BIO 
The dynamical equations describing gravitation are such 
that they involve the matter/energy densities of the 
univene only through the energy/momentum tensor. 
Axiom BJ I 
The general form of the dynamical equations is a set of 
tensor equations of the form 
E = 8 n G • T [equation 3], 
where G is the gravitational constant, T the energy/momentum tensor 
and E another tensor depending only on the geometrical structure of 
the space-time manifold and its metric function. 
These tensor equations [3] are the Einstein field equations, the 
basic piece in the construction of general relativity. E is the Einstein 
tensor that is always generated directly by the local distribution of 
matter, whereas Tis a geometrical object called the energy/momentum 
tensor which acts as the source of gravity in the universe. No 
coordinates are needed to define E and none are needed to define T. 
Locality and coordinate-independence are the key features of the field 
equations. 
These axioms embody Einstein's fundamental idea that the laws of 
physics should not be dependent on the frame of reference chosen for 
their description. Mathematically, this can only be achieved through a 
tensorial approach. The dynamic laws prevailing in the universe must 
therefore take a tensorial, coordinate system-invariant form. In this 
way, the principle of scientific objectivity, known as the principle of 
invariance, finds its mathematical expression in the model. In effect, 
the tensorial formalism allows one to consider space-time locally, 
according to Einstein's dictum that physics look simple only when 

Big Bang Cosmology 
91 
analyzed locally. Everything in Einstein's theory happens locally, and 
this explains why no coordinate system is required in the definition of 
the tensors E and T. This idea is formalized by axiom B9, according to 
which, at every event/point of the manifold, a local inertial (i.e., 
Lorentz) frame of reference exists. On the other hand, there is an 
overall structure of the theory, and this attribute can manifest itself 
locally. The local manifestations of this overall structure are the 
curvature of space-time and the resulting gravitational forces. 24 
Furthermore, this tensorial structure allows automatically to reduce 
Einstein's formalism to the well tested Newtonian theory in the case of 
weak gravitational fields, as is evidently desirable. 
In fact, the Einstein field equations given by 
E = 8 1t G • T [equation 3) 
"show how the stress/energy of matter generates an average curvature 
E in its neighborhood. Simultaneously, the field equations are a 
propagation equation for the remaining, anisotropic part of the 
curvature: they govern the external space-time curvature of a static 
source (Earth); they govern the generation of gravitational waves 
{ripples in curvature of space-time) by stress/energy in motion; and 
they govern the propagation of those waves through the universe. The 
field equations even contain within themselves the equation of motion 
(Force = mass • acceleration) for the matter whose stress/energy 
generates the curvature. The field equations govern the motion of the 
planets in the solar system; the deflection of light by the sun; the 
collapse of a star to form a black hole; they determine uniquely the 
external space-time geometry of a black hole; the evolution of space-
time at the end point of collapse; the expansion and recontraction of 
the universe; and more, and more."25 

92 
Inventing the Universe 
Time and causality in the universe 
In spite of the great power of these field equations, the 
construction of the axiomatic structure of the cosmological model is 
far from complete. New axioms are needed to take into account other 
features of the universe. First, the space-time manifold must be 
endowed with properties bringing the dimension time into agreement 
with the intuitive notion of time. Thus, a one-way directionality is 
allotted to this dimension, and the so called "arrow of time," pointing 
irreversibly from past-to-present-to-future, is introduced. 
In the relativistic approach, this "common sense" assumption has 
nevertheless surprising consequences. At every point of the manifold, a 
local inertial (Lorentz) frame of reference is assumed to exist in which 
geometry is simple. This presupposition means: in any particular local 
frame of reference, observations can be made recording the location (x, 
y, z) and the time (t) of some event in such a way that the interval 
between (x1, y 1, z1) and (x2, y2, z2) is independent of time; the clocks at 
every point are synchronized and run at the same rate; and the 
geometry of space is Euclidean. If the postulate of the universality of 
the speed of light is added, 26 the interval 
[equation 4] 
(ds)1 = - (cdt)1 + (dx)1 + (dy)1 + (dz)1 
is the same for any inertial frame. (Here c is the speed of light; notice 
also the Lorentz signature -1, + 1 + 1, + 1.) 
The interval (ds)1 in equation [4] may turn out to be positive, 
negative, or equal to zero. If the interval is positive, then the events so 
separated are said to be spacelike separated and no causal interaction 
can exist between two so separated events. 27 If the interval is negative, 
one event is said to be located within the light cone of the other and, 
depending on the arbitrarily fixed direction of the arrow of time, one 
will be situated in the future light cone of the other (or, conversely, in 
its past light cone). Finally, the zero interval defines events with 

Big Bang Cosmology 
93 
lightlike or null separation. All this is illustrated in Figure 2.14, drawn 
taking the value c = I, and where for clarity's sake, only two spatial 
dimensions, x and y, are depicted. 
"Elsewhere" 
Figure 2.14 
.. l Time : t 
I 
P's world line 
According to this figure, the universe is split into three non-
overlapping zones from the point of view of some particular event 0, 
of some particular hie et nune: its past light cone represents all the 
events from which causal effects and information may be received; 
while its future light cone defines all physical events on which this 
particular hie et nune may have a causal effect, to which it may send 
information; and, outside these two cones, there is an "elsewhere" a 

94 
Inventing the Universe 
spacelike separated region of the universe, causally disconnected from 
this particular point, from which no information can be received, and 
to which no information can be sent. The track through space-time of 
one event is called its "worldline" or its "geodesic." At each point of a 
geodesic the event is described as being somewhere in space and 
somewhen in time. The tracks of light are the null geodesics, they 
follow exactly the cone itself. Distinct points on a null-geodesic are 
separated by a zero interval, i.e., their interval (ds)2 in equation [4] 
equals zero. Furthermore, events such as P lying outside the light cone 
of the "here and now 0", can eventually enter the future light cone of 
0 and causally interact with it ''then," if their respective geodesics 
should meet.28 
Two additional comments on Figure 2.14 are apposite. First, we 
can only observe what lies in our particular past light cone from our 
particular hie et mmc on the solar system; and that may turn out to be 
only a minimal fraction of the universe. Secondly, we have 
unambiguously defined the (arbitrary) past-present-future arrow of 
time only in a local inertial frame of reference. However, such a 
classification cannot be done in a continuous way on the whole 
manifold. Depending on the matter/energy distribution, and its 
resulting topology according to the field equations, it may be possible 
to have at one point a certain past-future orientation and, starting out 
from that point/event in a closed path, to return to it, having the time 
direction reversed. Such would be the case if some parts of the 
topology of the universe resemble a Moebius band. Evidently, in the 
construction of the cosmological model such a contradiction to our 
prejudices is considered to be unacceptable; it is eliminated by adding 
one more geometrical axiom to the list: 
AxiomBJ2 
The topological manifold representing the universe mut be 
time-orientable. 

Big Bang Cosmology 
95 
This means that at every event/point of space-time, in each 
particular Lorentz frame of reference, a distinct choice has been made 
as to which light cone is the future and which is the past cone, and 
moreover that this choice is continuous from event to event throughout 
space-time. 
We are still far from a complete list of axioms. The next group of 
axioms will introduce the idea of causality in the universe, in a manner 
reminiscent of Timaeus 28a.29 
In fact, the above axiomatically introduced time-orientability is not 
itself a strong enough condition to assure causality in the usual sense. 
In general relativity, causality is taken as 
the result of a signal 
emission from one event (the "cause") to another (the "effect") in a 
time-oriented universe. The fastest signal is transmitted along time-like 
(or null) pathways (geodesics).30Now, the form which these causality-
carrying pathways take in the four-dimensional manifold representing 
the universe is dependent on the intricate relationship between the 
matter/energy content of the universe and the geometrical properties of 
the topological structure resulting from Einstein's field equations 
(things appear simple only locally!). There is nothing, however, to 
prevent these pathways through space-time from forming loops, so as 
to pass more than once through the same point (or infinitely nearby). 
The result, exploited in science-fiction, allows one event to act 
causally on its own past. 
To save the essential notion of causality, one further postulate 
concerning the mathematical structure of the manifold representing the 
universe should be added. Formulated in 1969 by S. Hawking, it is 
called the "causal stability condition": a manifold M with metric g is 
said to be stably causal if there exists a (nowhere vanishing) time-like 
vector field t such that the Lorentz metric on M admits no closed time-
like curves. 
This definition introduces a new axiom. 

96 
Inventing the Universe 
AxiomBJ3 
In the univene, the condition of causal stability obtains. 
The causal stability condition requires that in the universe, at every 
point in space-time, a strictly increasing ''time" flowing only from past 
to future can be defined. But this time is not conventional time, 
because the postulated time function is not unique and because the 
space-like three-dimensional "hyper-surface," defined by the condition 
t = constant are not necessarily connected. 
Here a new concept is introduced: the possibility of constructing 
space-like three-dimensional "slices" of the four-dimensional universe-
manifold, i.e., three-dimensional sub-manifolds representing "all space 
at an instant of time." Do all types of manifolds so far considered 
admit this form of slicing? Fortunately, those which are stably causal 
do. And, furthermore, such manifolds possess "achronal" slices, that is, 
slices where no point precedes (in the sense of the flow of time) any 
other point. Precedence among events refers to the capacity of some 
event to send messages to another one; two events can thus be called 
respectively "cause" and "effect." 
Solving Einstein's field equations 
The next problem is essentially mathematical. Einstein's field 
equations are a set of partial differential equations, which describe the 
dynamic interrelation between geometry and matter, but not observable 
phenomena, which are described by the solutions of these equations. 
To be able to find these solutions, the equations must be integrated and 
this, in tum, requires the complete set of initial and boundary 
conditions. How can this be accomplished? It can be attained if and 
only if the topological structure featured by the universe is such that 
the information which may be gathered on one particular achronal 
hypersurface is sufficient to determine the entire manifold. This is 
important because human observers have access to only one achronal 
hypersurface, the one determined by our pointlike hie et nunc; 

Big Bang Cosmology 
97 
cosmologically speaking, all of human history is but a point on the 
time axis, and the entire Milky Way is but a point in space. 
Mathematically, and omitting many details, this additional 
postulate is expressed as a new axiom: 
AxiomB/4 
On the space-time manifold representing the univene 
exists an achronal slice such as S, said to be a "Cauchy 
surface" of the manifold, having the property that every 
point in the manifold is in the domain of dependence of S. 
The domains of dependence referred to in this axiom are precisely 
defined so as to separate event precedences. It follows that in the 
space-time manifold there exists an achronal surface (Cauchy surface) 
such that the information on this particular slice is sufficient for the 
determination of the physics of the entire manifold. 
To postulate a Cauchy surface (axiom Bl4) is a strong condition to 
impose on a manifold. Any manifold with a Cauchy surface is stably 
causal. The time function referred to above can now be chosen in such 
a way that any slice at t = constant will also be a Cauchy surface. But 
it must be underlined that the existence of a Cauchy surface in the 
universe-manifold is not implied by the theory; it must be postulated as 
an additional requirement. 
We close this section on Einstein's gravitation by a brief reference 
to the complex problem of singularities in space-time, which seem to 
emerge unavoidably in the solutions of Einstein's field equations. A 
singularity, in this context, is a point in space-time where certain 
parameters take unbounded, that is to say, infinite, values and where 
the geometrical approach breaks down. But, by definition, a manifold 
is necessarily smooth. This means that singularities must lie outside 
the manifold. What happens when, in a certain space-time, a time-like 
geodesic, for instance the trajectory through the manifold of a freely 
falling body, comes suddenly to an end? The body cannot disappear. 
And if it does, then where does it go? Einstein's system of field 

98 
Inventing the Universe 
equations accept a number of different solutions, in which such kind of 
singularities appear. In fact, a space-time in Einstein's theory will in 
most cases show, under a rather general set of assumptions, 
singularities of some kind. 
One such singularity occurs in the neighborhood of very strong 
gravitational sources. There the curved geometry may have the 
property of "dragging" all outgoing light rays back into the source. 
Since nothing can travel faster than light, all matter and energy within 
a 3-dimensional hyper-surface (the "horizon") is trapped and so gives 
rise to a singularity. Stars of a certain type, after exhausting their 
nuclear fuel, collapse into an extremely reduced volume: a black hole 
singularity may arise in this way. But, of course, the most famous 
singularity is the Big Bang itself. 
Singularities, then, can occur in space-time as a consequence of the 
geometrical axioms of the model.31 They are not directly observable, 
but they do exert an influence on their surroundings that may, in 
principle, be detectable.32 However, no known physical theory can 
describe what happens at the singularity itself. 
Here ends our exposition of the geometrical and dynamic 
postulates required in order to apply Einstein's theory of gravitation to 
the universe, and which constitute the basic axiom system of the 
standard Big Bang model. 
This construction was guided by two fundamental objectives: 
I. To allow the mathematics we know how to use to be applicable; 
and 
2. To give to the concepts of time, of space, and of causality a 
geometrical structure compatible with human prejudices. And this, 
basically, by strictly following the logical postulates originally 
formulated in Aristotle's Organon. 
However, in order to make sense out of what the astronomical 
observations reveal about the universe, one has still to establish the 
relation of all the enumerated axioms with this reality, a task which 
requires the prior analysis of several other questions. 

Big Bang Cosmology 
99 
Isotropy and homogeneity of the energy/matter content of the universe: 
the standard Friedmann-Robertson-Walker model 
In Einstein's general relativity the geometry of the universe cannot 
be discerned unless the energy/momentum tensor T, appearing on the 
right hand side of the field equations, has been elucidated. So just as 
the Einstein tensor E is deemed to incorporate the geometrical features 
of the universe, in a similar manner the energy/momentum tensor 
should mathematically represent its matter/energy content. Its 
construction ought to follow from experimentally gathered, empirical, 
evidence. And, ideally, one may wish to know from separate, 
independent, sets of observations the physical values which determine 
both tensors. 
What can actually be observationally inferred in the universe is the 
subject-matter of the following section. Here we first enunciate the 
next axiom: 
AxiomB/5 
The mathematical laws that have been found to apply to 
physical phenomena, as elucidated up to the present date 
by solar system-bound scientists, are valid everywhere and 
everywhen throughout the universe. 
Observational evidence has so far given no reason to doubt this 
claim and, moreover, cosmology would be an impossible task without 
this assumption. 
A second, radical, assumption is equally essential for a 
cosmological science to exist: 
AxiomB/6 
Even if its size is gigantic, the universe is supposed to have 
a simple structure. 

100 
Inventing the Universe 
The claim that these two axiomatic propositions are not 
contradicted by the available observational evidence is a matter of 
some debate. The fact that the universe is enormous relative to human 
scales is, of course,33 commonly accepted, although some models of 
"small" universes have been proposed. 34 But the assumption that the 
universe is simple is not evident, unless Leibniz' principle is taken for 
granted. 35 On the other hand, if one takes into account that the universe 
is very large, that the speed of light is finite, that the pace at which 
astronomical events generally proceed is equally finite, and that in 
general the life span of most astrophysical objects and processes is 
very long, compared to the 5,000 years of human history, it may be 
legitimate to assume that cosmologically relevant things change so 
slowly that the universe appears to us, at least dynamically, to be 
"simple." 
To build a model of the universe which is "simple," and in which 
the known laws of physics obtain everywhere ( conditions requested by 
axioms BI 5 and B 16), additional drastic simplifications must be 
introduced. As a result, the Einstein field equations will become 
mathematically more tractable,36 a necessary requisite to obtain a 
model that can be correlated with observation. These axioms 
extrapolate the vastness of the universe: 
AxiomB17 
Galaxies, as well as clusten of galuies, are considered to 
be point-like. 
AxiomBJ8 
These point-like galuies constitute a continuous fluid. 
In spite of such drastic simplifications, these hypotheses do not 
allow a complete determination of the matter/energy tensor: the 
number of independent components of this tensor is still too large to be 
unambiguously determined by such observations as are achievable 

Big Bang Cosmology 
101 
from the solar system. The incorporation of new axiomatic 
propositions proves again to be necessary. 
AxiomB/9 
The univene is isotropic about us.37 
As far as possible and feasible,38 it has been observationally 
verified that the overall distribution of galaxies and of clusters of 
galaxies is approximately similar in every direction of the sky. Of 
course, such isotropy can only be established for very large distance 
scales (about 100 Mpc; some 326 million light years), since in our 
neighborhood the universe presents a indisputable anisotropic 
("clumpy") structure. This approximate isotropy has been strongly 
contested by several authors in recent years ( 1990-1991 ), but it 
remains one of the most essential assumptions of the standard Big 
Bang model. 
Because this new hypothesis is not powerful enough to achieve our 
aim, 39 another assumption, called the "Cosmological Principle" or 
"Copernican Principle," states: 
AxiomB20 
We do not occupy a privileged position in the univene. 
Consequently, the universe ought to be isotropic for all observers, 
anywhere. This idea can be extended to the concept of isotropy about a 
world line. It means that at every moment of an observer's history, all 
his observations are isotropic. Extrapolation to isotropy about every 
world line leads to the following postulate: 
AxiomB21 
The univene is homogeneous; it is spherically symmetric 
overall.40 

102 
Inventing the Universe 
If these postulates are admitted, the Einstein field equations can be 
radically simplified, and a metric function, specific to such a universe, 
can now be formulated. The result of all these simplifications is called 
the "Friedmann-Robertson-Walker (FRW)" model of the universe, 
after the Russian physicist A.A. Friedmann, who contributed 
fundamentally to this solution in 1922, and the equally fundamental 
contributions of the Americans H.P. Robertson and A.G. Walker in 
1935, who gave the first proof that this model describes the most 
general Riemannian geometry compatible with a homogeneous and 
isotropic space-time. This FRW model is certainly not the only one 
possible. But, for the time being, it is favored by a majority of 
scientists. The resulting FRW metric function allows us to calculate 
the interval between two space-time point/events of the FRW universe; 
this interval, in spherical coordinates, is given by the formula 
[equation 5) 
ds' = -dt2 + R'(t){ dr' I 1-kr' + r2[d82 + sin'B dt/J']} 
where r, 8, and ,P are comoving spherical coordinates, which means 
that the point-like galaxies have no proper movement with respect to 
the frame of reference of the FRW universe: they move (comove) with 
the universe (and c is taken= 1). 
R(t) is an arbitrary scale factor, the "cosmic scale factor," having a 
specific meaning in this FRW model. The distance between comoving 
points in this kind of universe (galaxies and galaxy clusters) is scaled 
with R(t), as is apparent from equation [5]. The determination of its 
value in terms of the matter/energy content of the universe gives the 
dynamics of the FRW model. However, as R(t) changes with the 
matter density of the universe, the result, surprising at the time of its 
inception, is that the FRW universe is not a static universe but is 
instead a dynamic universe.41 
Let us first look at the kind of geometry which now results. As 
seen in the above-given expression for the FRW metric, i.e., in 

Big Bang Cosmology 
103 
equation [5], an arbitrary parameter k appears. This parameter is 
related to the curvature of the t = constant slices. All such slices have, 
in this spherically symmetric FRW model, constant curvature. But the 
parameter k can take three possible values: for k = 0 the three-
dimensional hypersurfaces defined by t = constant are spatially exactly 
flat, and the FRW universe is open and infinite; for all k < 0 these 
slices are negatively curved, but similarly giving FRW universes that 
are spatially open and infinite in size; finally, for k > 0 the slices have 
a positive curvature resulting in spatially closed and finite FRW 
universes. Open universes are supposed to expand forever, whereas 
closed universes are believed to eventually enter a contracting phase; 
more details will be given shortly. 
But the simplifying assumptions, so far propounded, are still not 
sufficient to decide the value of k, neither can they settle what kind of 
curvature the FRW universe has. 
On the other hand, to determine the universal scale factor R(t) of 
the FRW model it is first necessary to specify the matter/energy tensor 
T. Once again, new simplifying assumptions are postulated. We have 
mentioned above that galaxies are reduced to points and are supposed 
to constitute a continuous fluid. Now we add 
AxiomB22 
The galactic fluid behaves like a perfect fluid. 
This assumption allows the study of the galactic fluid leaving aside 
the vexing problems posed by viscosity, shear forces, thermodynamic 
nonadiabatic conditions, and so forth. 
Axioms B 1 S through B22 enable us to proceed to the final step: 
verification of the model by means of observational facts. 
BJ The Relation Between the Model and Observation 
With the help of these new postulates, one can write down an 
equation of the state of the universe, relating the pressure p of this fluid 

104 
Inventing the Universe 
to its matter/energy density p. In this equation the two matter/energy 
ingredients must be analyzed: the matter content of the "dust" of 
galaxies, and the energy contribution of the radiation present in the 
universe. 
We now obtain the following expression: 
[equation 6) 
R'(t) - (81tG/3)•pR'(t) = -k, 
the dot over R(t) indicates a derivation with respect to time t. The 
universal scale factor R(t) is not a constant value, as would be the case 
in a static universe; on the contrary, R(t) changes, as a function of the 
value t of time: this universe is a dynamic object.42 Furthermore, at 
some particular value oft, the scale factor vanishes, R(t) = 0. This 
represents a singularity of the manifold: the "Big Bang singularity." 
This particular value oft = tbig bang corresponds to a state in which the 
three-dimensional slice defined by t = tb;g banq has volume equal to 
zero, and in which the entire FRW universe 1s compressed into an 
infinitely dense (and infinitely hot) point. For unknown reasons, the 
FR W universe exploded from this "singular" state; therefore, this 
cosmological model was given the name "Big Bang." As mentioned, 
in a singularity, the laws of physics break down. Thus, the question of 
what was "before" the Big Bang loses all meaning: time and space, as 
dimensions of the universal manifold, come into existence with the Big 
Bang.43 
The actual value of R(t) can be inferred only from observation. 
Therefore, the question whether, at the present epoch, the universe is 
expanding ( open universe), or whether the universe is in a contracting 
phase ( closed universe), because the gravitational forces acting on the 
exploding matter have overcome the expansion, can be settled by 
observation only. 
But what has observation revealed? Thus far, only three major 
experimental facts connect the FRW model with observation: the 
discovery of the Hubble law relating distance with redshift, the 

Big Bang Cosmology 
l05 
detection of a cosmic microwave background radiation, and the 
theoretical analysis of the primordial nucleosynthesis of light elements 
predicting their presently observed cosmic abundance. These are the 
three most important observational facts supporting the isotropic and 
homogeneous FRW model of the universe; they strengthen the 
acceptance of this model by the majority of the scientific community. 
The Hubble Law 
The first detection of a radial velocity of a galaxy, Andromeda, 
approaching us at approximately 200 km/sec. was made in 1912 by the 
astrophysicist V. M. Slipher. A few years later, thirteen other galaxies 
were studied, all but two receding from us at roughly 300 km/sec. In 
1929, the American astrophysicist E. P. Hubble announced he had 
found that the radiation received from 36 out of 41 far away galaxies -
up to six million light-years away - was shifted towards the red end of 
the electromagnetic spectrum, showing properties that could be 
interpreted as a Doppler effect.44 This "redshift" led the astrophysicist 
to propose what is now called the Hubble law: galaxies recede from 
our observational point in a roughly linear manner with distance; in 
other words, the universe is expanding. Needless to say, this discovery 
constitutes one of the key observational supports of the model. 
The Hubble law establishes a rough direct-proportionality relation 
between the recession velocities of some galaxies, inferred from their 
respective redshift,45 and their distance form the Earth, as deduced 
from independent data. The estimation of distances for far-away 
galaxies is based on a stepwise constructed distance ladder, utilizing 
for each rung a suitable distance indicator. Primary distance indicators 
are calibrated from observations in our galaxy (the most important: the 
Cepheid variable stars); secondary indicators depen~ on the knowledge 
of the distance to some representative nearby galaxies; and tertiary 
indicators rely on such features as spiral galaxy luminosity, the 
luminosity of the brightest galaxy in a cluster, and other global 
properties of galaxies. 
Since, in the FRW model, galaxies are comoving with the t = 

106 
Inventing the Universe 
constant slices, so that they have no proper motion with respect to 
these slices, the Hubble law allows us to evaluate in a straightforward 
way the universal factor R(t) or, what amounts to the same it, allows us 
to estimate the value of the Hubble "constant," which is not actually a 
constant value, because it is found by 
[equation 8) 
H(t)= R(t)IR(t), 
the dot over R(t) again means derivation respect to time t. The value of 
this Hubble constant "today'' = Ho, is estimated to lie in the range 
between 
50 km.sec.-/ Mpc-I (the Sandage-Tammann value) and 
100 km.sec.-/ Mpc-I (the G. de Vaucouleurs value). 
This rather substantial disagreement on the value of the Hubble 
constant should not surprise us: it is a consequence of differing 
appreciations of the calibration of the distance indicators. 
The reciprocal of H is the "Hubble time," H 1. This quantity 
represents the time the "point-galaxies" of the cosmological fluid 
would have taken to attain their present separation, if they had, starting 
from a condition of infinite compactness, always maintained their 
present velocities. This gives an approximate estimate of 10-20 billion 
years for the "age of the FRW universe." The fact that the universe is 
presently expanding does not settle the question of whether it is an 
open or a closed universe, whether such expansion will continue 
forever, until the universe vanishes into ever smaller densities, or 
whether a contracting phase will end in the inverse of the Big Bang, 
the "Big Crunch." Half a century after Hubble's influential discovery, 
the other two observational facts supporting the FRW model were 
established: the cosmic microwave radiation and cosmic abundance of 
light elements. 

Big Bang Cosmology 
Cosmic Microwave Background Radiation 
107 
Cosmologists have established a detailed scenario describing the 
first minutes of the FRW universe following its explosive "creation." 
The different phases which the primordial universe went through have 
thus been described with a surprising degree of sophistication. If, in 
order to simplify their scenario, an important number of additional 
presuppositions is admitted, and if the latest refinements of elementary 
particle physics are called upon, specifically the Great Unified 
Theories (GUTs), it becomes possible for cosmologists to describe the 
evolution of the primordial FRW universe, starting I0-43 seconds after 
the Big Bang! 
In the present physical universe four types of interactions, four 
types of fundamental forces of nature, are known: 
• the gravitational interaction; 
• the electromagnetic interaction; 
• the weak interaction; 
• the strong interaction. 
According to the most recent physical theories (GUTs), the difference 
between these four forces disappears at extremely high energies, such 
as those reached in the primordial FRW universe; for these extreme 
values, supersymmetry prevails. Supersymmetry theories predict that 
at energies of 1019 GeV (I GeV = 109 electron-volts) and at 
temperatures of the order of 1032 K, all four interactions are unified 
into one primordial, unique, force.46 According to S. Hawking, at that 
time the universe may have looked like a foam of primordial small 
black holes, perpetually evaporating and reappearing. 
As this primordial FRW universe expanded, it simultaneously 
cooled and its temperature started to diminish. In this way different 
''threshold" were reached beyond which the postulated supersymmetry 
of the four interactions was "spontaneously" broken,47 and these 
interactions "decouple" one after the other. The first to decouple was 
the gravitational interaction, when the universe was barely 10-43 
seconds old. This was followed by the decoupling of the other three 
forces, a process which was completed when the universe attained the 

108 
Inventing the Universe 
age of 1 o-9 seconds. 
Under these primordial conditions, a perfect equilibrium was 
established between matter and energy. In view of the high values of 
energy and temperature prevailing at that epoch, the FRW universe 
was in a state of permanent creation and annihilation of pairs of 
particles and antiparticles; at this stage, the distinction between matter 
and energy is meaningless. But as the temperature and energy of the 
universe tapered off as a result of its expansion, stable particles 
appeared, and conventional physics began to become applicable. 
However, the density of this primordial universe was still so high that 
energy, i.e., photons, were unable to escape: all were immediately 
captured by free electrons which, at these high temperatures, are not 
integrated into atoms. Under these conditions, the universe was 
"opaque;" no photons could escape. During this photon/matter 
equilibrium, radiative energy acquired the thermal character of a black-
body, as described by Planck's law.48 
According to the standard model, approximately 100,000 years 
after the Big Bang, the cooling process had come to the point where 
matter and radiation ceased to be in thermal equilibrium ( decoupling): 
at that point, matter ceased to be ionized, the electrons joined atoms, 
the opacity dropped sharply, and radiation ceased to be in contact with 
matter. The consequence of this decoupling was the sudden 
''transparency" of the universe: photons - radiation - could now freely 
escape. 
Since this free radiation did not further interact with matter, that is, 
with free electrons, nothing could change the thermal character which 
this radiation had acquired at the time of the matter/radiation 
decoupling. It was thus possible to determine its thermal spectrum, i.e., 
the curve showing how much energy the radiation had at various 
wavelengths. This calculation was done by George Gamow in 1946. 
Since decoupling, this radiant energy, that is to say, these photons, had 
followed the expansion of the FRW universe, and thus their 
wavelength had expanded in the same proportion. This led Gamow to 
predict the existence of a presently observable "background radiation" 
presenting the spectrum of a Planck black-body at approximately 5 K. 

Big Bang Cosmology 
109 
The accidental discovery in 1965 by Penzias and Wilson of a dilute 
electromagnetic radiation, reaching us from every direction of the sky, 
and presenting a black-body spectrum of about 3 K, constitutes an 
enormous success for the predictive power of the FRW model. 
Interstellar absorption studies have shown that this 3 K radiation can 
also be found in other parts of the Milky Way. The Earth, and even our 
entire Galaxy, seem to be plunged into a freezer with the thermic 
properties of a Planck black-body at a very low temperature: 2.735 ± 
0.06 K, according to the latest measurements. This even bath of 
microwaves consists of electromagnetic radiation, with wavelengths in 
the millimeter range. 
Moreover, its isotropy is remarkable: 
measurements show this radiation to be isotropic up to about one part 
in l 0,000. Since this radiation has propagated unhindered practically 
since the Big Bang itself, it has, so to speak, imprinted upon it 
information about the space-time geometry of the FRW universe. 
A further prediction of the FRW model has been put forward. 
Similar to photons, the neutrinos, those elusive elementary particles, 
have also been subject to a decoupling process. At an epoch estimated 
to be even closer to the Big Bang, the universe becomes transparent to 
the neutrinos. This then allows us to predict that we should now be 
observing a neutrino background of a temperature of approximately 2 
K; undoubtedly, the detection of such a neutrino background would be 
interpreted as the most remarkable verification of the FRW model. 
The Relative Abundance of Light Elements 
After the primordial FRW universe had attained photon 
transparency, and matter and energy had decoupled, the presently 
known chemical elements, the primordial gases made out of these 
elements and finally the more complex structures that eventually were 
to make up the galaxies, the galaxy clusters as well as the stars, the 
planets, etc., gradually appeared. Following this scenario, the present 
abundances of the lightest chemical elements put the strongest 
constraints on the model. In effect, the FRW model predicts two 
stages: 

110 
Inventing the Universe 
• a primordial nucleosynthesis of only the light elements, and 
• a nucleosynthesis of the heavy elements, which takes place much 
later, in the interior of the stars. These heavier elements are reinjected 
into interstellar space through the supernova explosion mechanism. 
The primordial nucleosynthesis stage has been calculated in great 
detail. Barely three minutes after the Big Bang, the nuclear reactor 
"Big Bang" stopped operating, not before it succeeded in transforming 
about 25% of the mass of the universe into helium, leaving almost 75% 
of it in the form of hydrogen, plus traces of the first light elements. 
Such trace elements had, according to these calculations, the following 
relative abundances in % by mass: 
Deuterium 
Lithium 
Helium 3 
I/ 1000 
I / I 00,000,000 
I/ 1000 
It must be stressed again that there exist very strong constraints in 
these calculations, so that it is hard to arrive at different results without 
violating some fundamental postulate of the FRW model. Thus the 
experimental verification of these rates must be seen as a convincing 
support of this model. On the other hand, to measure the relative 
universal abundances of these light elements from our Earth-bound 
observation point is a demanding task.49 The recently obtained results 
from the analysis of the radiation received from diverse sources has 
given an outcome that is in a surprisingly good agreement with these 
theoretical predictions, so thus providing one of the most solid 
observational confirmations of the model. 
Observational Limits in Cosmology 
In the preceding sections, we tried to provide a brief overview of 
the FR W model, as well as of the observational facts presumed to 
validate this bold theory. In order to further elucidate the 
epistemological structure underlying the model, we will now focus on 
the problem from a different perspective. 

Big Bang Cosmology 
111 
We wish to explore the question: what definite conclusions could 
possibly be gleaned from the sole accumulation of all obtainable 
astronomical observations? In other words: what is the minimum set of 
indispensable axiomatic propositions that must be admitted a priori in 
order to make such observations meaningful? 
Although this subject will be discussed in detail in the third part of 
this book, we shall here begin by pointing out two distinct procedures 
that may be adopted by scientists. 
1) As a first step, the scientist assumes as true51 some formalized 
system of axiomatic propositions derived from generally admitted 
preconceptions or prejudices, and then tries to verify a posteriori by 
observation the solutions deduced within the framework of a 
(mathematical) theory incorporating these presuppositions as axioms; 
this was essentially the way we presented the standard model in the 
previous sections; or 
2) The scientist takes as his exclusive starting point a set of 
observationally acquired data with the purpose of finding the most 
parsimonious and simple axiomatic system by which such data, then 
considered as solutions of the (mathematical) theory incorporating 
these presuppositions, can be deduced or "explained."52 
It goes without saying that, in current scientific practice, both 
procedures are closely intertwined, which probably explains some 
frequently encountered misconceptions and confusions. 
Restricting our inquiry to the cosmological problem, we will 
explore the second alternative, basing our analysis on the interesting 
results obtained by G.F.R. Ellis and his collaborators.53 A more 
detailed and general analysis of this crucial procedure will be 
conducted in the third part. 
Suppose the measurement of all obtainable (from the solar system) 
astronomical observational quantities can be conducted with unlimited 
accuracy and that, under these circumstances, one now asks: relying 
only on such "ideal" astronomical observations, what is and what is 

112 
Inventing the Universe 
not decidable in cosmology? In other words, if one does not 
presuppose a theoretical model or, more precisely, if one does not take 
for granted that we know the dynamic laws determining the very large-
scale structure of the universe, one asks: what can be inferred from 
these ideal observations about the space-time metric and the matter 
content of the universe? That is, what could be inferred if we were in 
possession of such accurate astronomical data, without taking a priori 
for granted that the Einstein field equations correctly describe the 
dynamics of the universe, and without assuming a priori that the 
universe is isotropic and homogeneous? In summary, we ask: what are 
the minimal assumptions to be added to the set of astronomical 
observations, in order to build a consistent cosmological model? 
In the work of Ellis et al. that we have cited above the following 
minimum presuppositions are, in addition to "ideal" measurements, 
taken to hold true: 
1) our locally valid physical laws hold everywhere in the universe, 
at all points of space-time; 
2) the universe may be modeled with sufficient accuracy by a 4-
dimensional manifold (plus its metric function); 
3) the matter/energy content of the universe can be appropriately 
represented by the use of tensor calculus. In addition, it is assumed that 
at "suitably large" scales the galaxies and intergalactic matter can be 
approximated to a cosmological fluid, the galaxies reducing to points. 
Put differently, it is accepted as a postulate that the universe is 
enormously large. 
Equipped with these basic hypotheses ( cf. the complete list of 
geometrical and dynamical axiomatic propositions of the standard 
approach to cosmology), we now ask: what can be inferred from an 
ideal set of accurate astronomical observations? 
The first insight follows from the enormous size of the universe. 
Human observations, ideal or otherwise, are restricted to only one hie 
et nunc, to only one "point" of one world-line, because we are unable 
to move off the world-line of our local group of galaxies. Taking this 

Big Bang Cosmology 
113 
limitation into account, that is, our point-like observational basis in an 
enormous universe, observations that provide interesting cosmological 
information can be classified as follows: 
a) Local physical experiments. These observations lead to local 
physical laws which certainly contain some interesting information for 
cosmology, considering the axiomatic extrapolation of their range to 
universal validity. Such observations (for example, experiments to 
verify Einstein's gravitation, or experiments about the electromagnetic 
spectrum) are, moreover, repeatable. 
b) Local geophysical and astrophysical observations. These observa-
tions provide valuable information about our present situation and 
about the history of our corner of the universe. Without additional 
assumptions, this information does not, however, tell us anything about 
distant regions of the universe. Nevertheless, several methods for 
estimating the age of the Earth, of the Solar System, and of nearby 
globular clusters of stars for example, set constraints for the age of the 
universe. 
c) Extragalactic high-energy massive particles. Cosmic rays do con-
vey useful data, but do not directly give detailed information about 
distant regions: one has first to establish that they actually are extra-
galactic, and then to relate them to specific sources; both tasks are 
difficult. 
d) Astronomical observations of distant objects and of background 
radiation. 
These observations can be classified as "cosmological 
information" properly speaking, provided all the assumptions about 
the nature and the propagation of electromagnetic energy are adopted. 
In the last decades, such radiation became measurable throughout its 
entire spectrum: from the hardest gamma-rays, through X-rays, ultra-
violet, visible, infra-red, to microwave and radio frequencies. 
However, we only receive signals originating within our past light 
cone. All the "elsewhere" of the universe stays absolutely out of reach: 

114 
Inventing the Universe 
this strongly constrains our possibility of building a model of the entire 
universe based on this limited source of information. 
Ellis et al. thus arrive at the following conclusion: the analysis of 
the ideal observational data can provide us with rather little 
information about the universe, even if we restrict our ambitions to 
understanding the space-time structure only in the vicinity of our past 
light cone. In particular, we are unable to determine by direct 
observations the relationship between the radial coordinate down our 
light cone and the distance, as measured for instance by the redshift z, 
to any object we observe. 54 Furthermore, as an example of this 
observational indeterminacy, we cannot prove, based only on ideal 
observations, whether or not space-time is spherically symmetric about 
our position - even if all observations are isotropic around us. Even 
more striking: if we take for granted the universe has a FRW geometry, 
we still cannot, relying on "ideal" observations, say whether spatial 
slices (as given by the value of kin the FRW metric, cf. equation [5]) 
have zero, negative, or positive curvature. Nor do isotropic 
observations, together with the assumption of spherical symmetry, 
prove that the universe has a FRW geometry. 
It goes without saying that the material limits of what can be 
observed impose even more severe limits on what we can hope to 
prove directly from observations. Thus, relying exclusively on 
observations, and taking for granted minimal assumptions, it remains 
impossible in principle to determine major features of the space-time 
structure of our past light cone - not to mention what lies outside of 
this light cone. 
Finally, Ellis et al. look into the question of what happens if the 
whole body of postulates underlying the Einstein field equations55 is 
admitted. Here the results are more encouraging. Under these enlarged 
(more "complex") hypotheses a spherically symmetric pressure-free 
(i.e., galactic "dust'') model is spatially homogeneous, if and only if 
precisely the FRW relations obtain in this universe. And surprisingly 
the "ideal" cosmological observational data are exactly necessary and 
sufficient to determine the space-time structure of our past light cone. 

Big Bang Cosmology 
115 
There is no a priori reason why this should hold true. Space-time 
could have been underdetermined by such observations, resulting in 
the theoretical impossibility of ascertaining the geometry of our past 
light cone by astronomical observations, no matter how complete or 
accurate. This was the state of affairs before the introduction of 
Einstein's field equations as an axiom. Conversely, space-time could 
have been overdetermined, so that consistency conditions would have 
to be fulfilled between these ideal observations, if Einstein's field 
equations were to be satisfied. Neither is the case, and it has thus been 
proved that (ideal) astronomic observational data can in fact be used to 
confirm the FRW model. 
Although real observations differ altogether from ideal ones, 
analysis of an ideal model nonetheless provides a measure of the 
indispensable minimum of a priori propositions, 56 without which no 
meaning can be assigned to observationally collected information, 
even in cases where perfectly error-free data is available. 
What conclusions can be drawn from these results? It has been 
repeatedly emphasized that sense-perception data cannot lead to any 
intelligible explanation independently from a formalized axiomatic 
theory of some kind. In everyday, local, earth-bound experience, such 
a theory is a prerequisite for any meaningful interpretation of 
observational information. In cosmology the situation is more 
complicated. The object considered is our unique, irreplaceable and 
unrepeatable universe. Moreover, we have no access to any event 
outside the horizon of our past light cone, 57 which therefore constitutes 
our only source of information. That is why the building of a 
cosmological model requires, for Plato as well as for contemporary 
scientists, bold extrapolations, introduced as drastic simplifications in 
the analysis of the available observations (homogeneity, galaxies as 
points, and so forth). 
From these considerations it follows naturally that the FRW model 
is beset by very profound difficulties. Actually, such aberrations as 
have been brought to light falsify the model altogether. However, as is 
well documented, models are seldom (if ever) abandoned before a new 
and clearly better one is introduced. 58 Lacking, for the time being, any 

116 
Inventing the Universe 
such "fairer'' alternative, scientific methodology consists in proposing 
additional ad hoc postulates, without changing the fundamental set of a 
priori propositions on which the model is based ("adding epicycles"). 
Problems Affecting the FRW Model; 
Observations Requiring Additional Axioms 
The standard FRW model, based on Einstein's equations and the 
FRW symmetry (homogeneity and isotropy), explains the expansion of 
the universe, the presence of a cosmic microwave background 
radiation, and predicts with accuracy the observed light element 
abundances. It further seems to give an adequate accounting of the 
evolution of the universe starting from 0.01 sec. after the Big Bang up 
to the present day (some 10-20 billion years later). But it is not devoid 
of severe problems. 
The Horizon Problem 
The suppositions underpinning the FR W model assume a 
homogeneous space-time geometry. Such assumptions have been 
supported by the discovery of the high degree of isotropy - of the order 
of one part in I 0,000 - of the microwave background radiation. 
However, it is precisely this isotropy that lies at the heart of the 
horizon problem. 
The "horizon size" given by 1/H, where His the Hubble constant 
for some epoch at time t, calculated in equation [8] as a function of 
R(t), the scale factor which determines the intergalactic distances, is 
the distance light can travel from the beginning of the cosmological 
expansion to a specified time t. This distance, in tum, fixes the limiting 
distance, "the horizon," inside which causal interactions can take 
place. But if some region of the universe lies outside the horizon of 
some other region, at some time t after the Big Bang, then these 
regions are causally disconnected at time t: they have not yet had time 
to communicate with each other via light signals. 

Big Bang Cosmology 
117 
It can be deduced from the FR W model that matter in an 
expanding universe decelerates due to gravitational attraction. Thus, 
the ratio of the distance between objects at fixed coordinate locations 
to the horizon size also decreases with time. That is, the horizon grows 
more rapidly than the expansion rate between two objects. As a result, 
if two objects, or two regions of the universe, fall outside each other's 
horizon today, that is, if they are separated by a distance greater than 
J/Htoday, then they have always been outside each other's horizon. 
To help provide a better understanding of this important line of 
argumentation, imagine the universe as a sphere, so that one can 
symbolize, as in Figure 2.15, the universe at three different moments 
of its expansion: 
Big Bang 
,,11 .... 
~·-::::: 
/\\ 
2) Intermediate 
stage 
. .-,' 
.• . ' 
... .. ·: , 
Figure 2.15 
I) Primordial 
universe 
3) The_ present 
universe 
p1 

118 
Inventing the Universe 
At each "pole" of this spherical universe we indicate two events, 
P 1 and P 2, with their respective horizons at each epoch indicated by 
shading. The horizon of a given event is the distance from beyond 
which light signals would not yet have had time to reach a given 
event/point. In the very early (radiation dominated) universe, the state 
equations of the FRW model show that the "radius" of the universe 
grows like the square root of the time t, whereas the distance of each 
"pole" to its horizon grows in direct proportion to the time t. In 
consequence, the further we go back in time, the horizon encloses an 
ever smaller portion of the universe. It follows from Figure 2.15 that 
the events P 1 and P 2 can both be "seen" by one (Earth-bound) observer 
today only if he is situated where the shaded parts overlap. On the 
other hand, since they are at present still outside of each other's 
horizon, the events P 1 and P 2 could never have interacted causally in 
the past. They can do so only at some future time when one of them 
falls inside the horizon of the other: only at that future time, one event 
"sees" - can causally interact with - the other. 
When we measure the microwave background radiation coming 
from two regions of the sky separated by 180°, what are we really 
measuring? In the FRW model, such radiation was emitted when the 
universe was only 100,000 years old. Consequently, since this 
emission has only just reached us today, we are clearly looking at 
regions which have not yet come into each other's horizon; this will 
happen in about 10 billion years. It follows that these two regions have 
never been in causal contact. Yet their temperatures are the same, up to 
present experimental accuracy. If this is the case, how did regions 
which were never in causal contact come to have essentially exactly 
the same temperature? What is more, it can be shown that the early 
universe consisted of some I ()83 causally disconnected fragments: 
what kind of"fine-tuning" gave them all the same temperature? Unless 
one assumes that the forces which created these initial conditions 
where capable of violating the causality axioms of Einstein's relativity, 
one must accept this striking fine-tuning as some kind of initial 
condition of the Big Bang itself, or equivalently, admit to83 additional 
axioms (epicycles)! 

Big Bang Cosmology 
119 
The Flatness Problem 
According to equation [S], the FRW metric includes a parameter k, 
and the curvature of the spatial slices of the universe depends on 
whether this parameter is negative, positive, or zero. By rescaling the 
value of R(t) in the FRW metric, one can always make k =-1 (ifk<O ), 
and similarly k = 1 ( if k > 0 ); k = 0 is a limit of one of these two 
cases. How can the value of k be deduced from observation? 
If critical density is defmed as the matter/energy density of the 
universe59 resulting in k = 0, and if the ratio of this critical density to 
the density of the universe today is defined as n, then one can prove 
that in the FR W universe 
[equation 9) 
• 
'2 = 1 + k / R (t)2, 
where the dot over R(t) stands for time derivation. The time derivative 
c,f the universal scale factor R(t) decreases with time. Since 
gravitational attraction decelerates the expansion following the Big 
Bang explosion, the growth of the scale factor decreases; whether it 
will reverse its expansion into a Big Crunch or continue forever 
overcoming gravitational attraction, depends on k, that is, on '2. 
According to equation [9], after the Big Bang the value of O (for k 
= ± 1) deviates further and further from unity, and only fork exactly 
equal O will O remain constant, that is, will O remain equal to unity. 
For any value of O slightly different from unity, and fork=± 1, the 
universe would have long ago either recontracted into the Big Crunch, 
or flown away into the most tenuous densities. But, from 
observationally gathered data it has been deduced that the present-day 
value of O falls somewhere in the range between 0.01 and 10. This 
means that the present-day value of O is very close to unity and, 
furthermore, that O has remained this remarkably near to unity for the 
about 10 or 20 billion years of expansion of the universe.60 Again, this 
fact requires a surprisingly precise fine-tuning of the Big Bang: the 
initial value of O must have been equal to unity to incredible precision. 

120 
Inventing the Universe 
How did this happen? This is the flatness problem, so-called because 
for Cl = I, the universe is exactly flat. 
The Dark Matter, or Missing Matter, Problem 
Matter in the universe is matter we see, that is, matter we detect by 
its emission (or absorption) of electromagnetic radiation. Thus we 
"see" stars, galaxies, pulsars, quasars, intergalactic gas, and so forth. 
Even black holes can be "seen" by indirect evidence. All such matter is 
given the name of "luminous matter." Such matter always interacts 
with electromagnetic radiation in some way. But according the FRW 
model, this type of matter represents only a minimal fraction of the 
matter content of the universe, perhaps less than 1 % . 
In the first place, it has been known for some time that galaxies 
must contain more matter than just the luminous matter. Observations 
of spiral and elliptical galaxies can determine the rotational velocity of 
such a galaxy. Galaxies are supposed to be long-lived systems, their 
life-span being estimated to be of the order of 1 o9 years. What holds 
such a long-lived rotating system together, and stops it from flying 
apart due to its kinetic energy? As far as we know, only gravitation. In 
that case however, the rotational velocities must depend in a well-
defined manner on the radius r taken from the center of the galaxy 
where, in general, most of the luminous matter is concentrated. 
However, aberrant behavior61 is consistently observed. Only one 
explanation seems to remove this problem: that the halos of galaxies 
must contain enormous quantities of dark matter, called "dark" 
precisely because it is neither seen, nor has any interactions of this 
matter with electromagnetic radiation so far been detected. 
A further point is even more important. In relation with the flatness 
problem, we mentioned above that the value of Cl must be (almost) 
exactly unity (representing a critical density of about 12 atoms per 
cubic meter). However, the luminous matter accounts, according the 
latest estimates, only for a value of Cl of the order of 0.007 {equivalent 
to approximately 0.1 atoms per cubic meter). Dark matter in halos of 
galaxies cannot account for Cl larger than about 0.4. Another factor 

Big Bang Cosmology 
121 
must also be taken into consideration. Primordial nucleosynthesis is 
the strongest numerical validation of the FRW model. However, the 
nucleosynthesis of light elements imposes strong constraints on the 
amount of matter that can be present in the universe in baryonic form. 
Baryonic matter is ordinary matter, protons and neutrons, out of which 
matter, such as it is known in the solar system, is made of. The 
maximum value of O is of the order of 0.14, if the matter in the 
universe is exclusively in baryonic form, compatible with the 
successful predictions of the relative abundances of light elements and 
with the theory of primordial nucleosynthesis. 
The upshot of all this is that, in order to maintain the consistency 
of the FRW model with general physics, one must postulate the 
universe to be made of anywhere between 80% and 99% of some 
exotic, non-baryonic, weakly interacting (weak enough to escape 
detection so far), dark matter.62 Such exotic forms of matter have 
already been conjectured in some of the Great Unified Theories. 
Furthermore, due to other types of considerations, this dark matter is 
most probably not clustered together with the luminous matter, its 
universal distribution is different (and unknown). 
The dark matter problem becomes more acute when one adds to 
the FRW model the inflationary scenario. This scenario's strongest 
prediction is precisely that O = 1, making the eventual detection of this 
exotic but ubiquitous form of matter one of the preeminent aspirations 
of contemporary cosmology. 
The Inflationary Scenario 
The Grand Unified Theories (GUTs) predict that at very high 
energies, the four known interactions: gravitation, electromagnetism, 
the weak and the strong nuclear interactions, can all be explained by 
one unique, and hopefully simple, theory. At such high energies, which 
are unattainable in terrestrial laboratories, there would be just one type 
of symmetry group describing all matter. If the FR W model is the 
correct description of the universe, then immediately after the Big 
Bang the universe would have found itself precisely in this unifying 

122 
Inventing the Universe 
energy range. Present day matter and its four interactions are deemed 
to be the consequence of a spontaneous symmetry-breaking process, 
setting in shortly after the primeval explosion, and having random 
quantum fluctuations as its cause. It thus happened that the primordial 
universe was adopted by the GUT-theorists as their ultimate 
"laboratory." And cosmology and particle physics merged into a 
common research space; from this joint effort came inflation. 63 
Bringing these disparate research fields together is tantamount to 
incorporating their mutually independent presuppositions into the list 
of axioms underpinning the FR W model of the universe. 
Obviously, we cannot hope to summarize the inflationary scenario 
in this book. Suffice it to say that this model predicts that the universe, 
at about 1 o-35 seconds after the Big Bang, underwent a phenomenal 
expansion in an extremely short lapse of time. Between 1 o-35 seconds 
and 10-33 secs. after the Big Bang, one can construct a scenario, based 
on quantum mechanical speculations, where this exponential inflation 
can be theoretically justified. Actually, all that is required for inflation 
to become feasible is that, during this short period, the expression 
[equation 10) 
p + 3plc2 < 0 , i.e., is negative, 
where pis the density ofmatter,p is the pressure of matter, and c is the 
speed of light. This means that in such an epoch the normally attractive 
force of gravity becomes repulsive, resulting in an explosive expansion 
of the universe. 
This inflationary scenario predicts that the present density of the 
universe is such that O is almost exactly equal 1, i.e., that this density 
is at most one part in 10,000 away from the critical density. Thus, it 
must also predict that the universe is predominantly made from some 
exotic form of dark matter. The discovery of this dark matter, so far 
not accomplished, remains nevertheless the pivotal test of the model. 
Why, despite its abstruse prediction of exotic dark matter, is the 
inflationary scenario the preferred model nowadays? Mainly because 

Big Bang Cosmology 
123 
horizon and the flatness problems. During inflation the horizon grows 
so fast that it encompasses all that part of the early universe that will 
become "our'' universe after the inflationary period. This means that 
points that are outside the horizon today were inside a single horizon -
and thus causally connected - at some time in the past of the universe. 
This will then "explain" the observed isotropy of the microwave 
background radiation. But the price to pay is high: the explosive 
inflation does not produce just "one" universe. In fact, inflation 
somehow creates a conglomerate of "bubbles" and each of these gives 
rise to one separate universe. 
In the Timaeus, to the question: "Are we right, then, in describing 
the universe as one, or would it be more correct to speak of heavens 
[universes] as many or infinite in number?" Timaeus answers: "One it 
must be" (Timaeus 3 la). After inflation, some cosmologists reply 
differently. They invoke an "Anthropic Principle" (in the ''weak" 
version) in order to answer the question: which of the many universes 
is ours? by saying: precisely the one whose physical constants 
(gravitational constant, speed of light, and many others) and other 
conditions (such as size, age, etc.) can make feasible the presence in 
the universe of rational observers such as we are. Thus, paraphrasing 
the Timaeus, their response to this question is: "Precisely this 
particular one it must be."64 
Here ends our brief description of the standard FRW cosmology. 
Our goal was to parallel this model with Plato's cosmology in the 
Timaeus. To try to make this parallel complete, we conclude with a 
few glimpses at the contemporary theory of elementary particles, 
where symmetry plays a crucial role, as it was also the case in the 
Timaeus. 

124 
Inventing the Universe 
C) Modern Theory of Maner 
Reducing the "visible and tangible" world and all the phenomena 
perceived by the senses to just a few, simple, invisible and intangible 
primordial components and to their mutual interactions, is an old 
dream, a dream that still remains alive today. 
Modem physics postulates all matter to be made out of a reduced 
number of mathematically well characterized "elementary particles." 
Such particles have precise properties, and are considered to be simple, 
that is, no internal structure originating from an association of even 
more elementary particles can be discerned. They are supposed to 
interact exclusively through only four different types of forces. This 
means that all physical phenomena whatsoever can be reduced to the 
interplay of only these four types of interactions among the elementary 
particles, representing an enormous simplification and parsimony of 
description. These fundamental interactions are shown in Table 2.5: 
Table 2.S 
FORCE 
RANGE 
STRENGTH* 
ACTING ON 
Gravity 
Infinite 
6 X 10·39 
All particles 
Weak Nuclear Force 
<10·18 m 
1 X 10·5 
Leptons, 
Hadrons 
Electromagnetism 
Infinite 
1/137 
All charged 
particles 
Strong Nuclear Force 
I 0-ts 
1 
Hadrons 
* Dimensionless, intrinsic strength. 
Notes. 
• 
J0- 13m is approximately the dimension of the atomic nucleus. 
• 
Hadrons: the elementary particles such as the proton, the neutron, 
and other heavy particles. Modem theory assumes that these 

Big Bang Cosmology 
125 
particles have a deeper internal structure and are made up of even 
more elementary particles: the Quarks. 
• 
Leptons: the elementary light particles: electron, muon, neutrino. 
• 
Weak force: causes the radioactive decay of some atomic nuclei. 
• 
Strong force: holds the atomic nucleus together. 
Particles, subject to these four interactions, are in tum each 
characterized by a well defined set of quantum values describing their 
intrinsic properties, e.g.,: charge in units of the charge of the electron 
e, parity P, isospin /, baryon number B, lepton number /, spin Jin units 
of the Planck constant h divided by 2n, mass in MeV,65 average 
lifetime t in seconds, the main modes of decay of one particle into one 
- or many- other(s), etc. 
Hundreds of such fleetingly stable forms of elementary matter are 
known. Fortunately, they can be classified into a restricted number of 
"families" a brief description follows. 
l) Leptons (from the Greek leptos: fine, light-weight) are spin = ½ 
particles which include the electron and its corresponding antimatter 
particle (antiparticle) the positron, the muons and the neutrinos, all 
with their corresponding antiparticles. Leptons do not "feel" the strong 
force. Initially their masses were believed to be less than about l 00 
MeV. 
2) Hadrons (from the Greek hadros: large, heavy) include the 
mesons (from the Greek meson: between), particles with integer spin 
and masses initially believed to be between those of the leptons and the 
baryons, and the baryons (from the Greek barys: heavy, weighty), 
massive half integer spin particles subdivided in tum into nucleons, 
i.e., the proton and the neutron, and the "strange" hyperons and kaons. 
Hadrons are distinguished by the fact that they feel the strong 
interaction: this is the force which holds neutrons and protons together 
within the nucleus.66 Ordinary matter, out of which the tangible and 
visible universe is made of, includes nucleons, electrons, and neutrinos 
(plus photons, i.e., radiation); all the other particles are unstable in the 
sense that they decay very fast into these more stable particles. 

126 
Inventing the Universe 
However, the free neutron is also unstable - its lifetime is about 92S 
seconds67 -
and even the proton is predicted to be unstable, with 
lifetime of the order of 1031 - 1032 years; experiments have not yet 
detected the decay of this fundamental particle. 68 
3) The last family is constituted by particles called field quanta. 
The photon is the quanta of the electromagnetic field, for the other 
interactions, different field quanta are defmed; the gravitational field 
quanta, for instance, is the graviton. Field quanta are all bosons (see 
below); after their theoretic prediction, most of them have been 
experimentally found in particle accelerators. A recent theory has 
succeeded in "unifying" the electromagnetic interaction and the weak 
interaction: one unique theory rather adequately describes the 
"electroweak" field. Among its field quanta are the "intermediate 
vector bosons" their discovery in 1983 at the Centre Europeen de la 
Recherche Nucleaire in Geneva (CERN) represents a stupendous 
success of this theory. 
A further important subdivision of the elementary particles is into 
classes called bosons and fermions, according to whether their spin has 
an integer or a half integer value in units of Planck's constant h divided 
by 21t. Fermions obey the Pauli exclusion principle: no two fermions 
are allowed to share exactly the same quantum state. This property 
shows up in the kind of statistics or probability predictions that can be 
established, in the sense that it reflects the possibility of distinguishing 
one particle from another. The Pauli principle has wide-reaching 
consequences. Electrons are fermions, their spin is ½. In an atom, 
where electrons occupy shells according to energy (and other 
parameters), no two electrons can occupy exactly the same place on a 
shell. As shells have only limited available places, electron occupancy 
of shells follows a strict order. This intra-atomic ordering scheme leads 
precisely to Mendeleyev's periodic table of the chemical elements. It 
follows that chemistry, in the Mendeleyev picture, reduces to quantum 
mechanics, as postulated. On the other hand, photons are bosons, their 
spin is 1. They are not subject to Pauli's exclusion principle and thus 
can all occupy the same energy level. Since photons can share the 

Big Bang Cosmology 
127 
same energy state, they can be made to travel in coherent light beams 
as in a laser. 
The Central Role of the Concept of Symmetry 
The concept of symmetry which intervenes, at different levels 
(isotropy, homogeneity, perfect galaxy gas, GUTs, supersymmetry, 
symmetry breaking etc.), in the building of the mathematical theories 
modeling the universe, plays also an important role in modem particle 
physics; four classes of such symmetries will now briefly be analyzed. 
1) Continuous space-time symmetries 
The rigorous study of the notion of symmetry is the subject matter 
of a branch of mathematics called "group theory." Broadly speaking, a 
group is a collection of elements with specific interrelationships 
defined by group transformations. This notion is made non-trivial by 
the demand that repeated transforinations between elements of a group 
should be equivalent to another group transformation, that is, 
equivalent to a single transformation from the initial to the final 
element. 
Foremost amongst the continuous space-time symmetries are the 
symmetries having as their consequence the invariance of the physical 
phenomena under the operations of translation through space, 
translation through time and rotation about an axis. But the laws of 
physics should be so formulated that any physical phenomenon 
remains independent of the choice of a particular frame of reference 
(system of coordinates). This entails that in such a description the 
mathematical expression of the physical laws should be invariant under 
all these transformations. 
When a symmetry group governs a particular physical 
phenomenon, this condition requires that the mathematical expression 
of the dynamics of this phenomenon, in this case the Lagrangian 
function69 
governing it, remains invariant under the group 
transformations. A proof given in 1918 by Emmy Noether of a 

128 
Inventing the Universe 
fundamental mathematical theorem (''Noether's theorem") states that 
for every continuous symmetry of a Lagrangian, there is a quantity 
conserved by its dynamics. 70 
The application of Noether's theorem then shows that invariance 
under a translation in space implies the conservation of momentum, 
that invariance under translation in time implies the law of the 
conservation of energy, and that invariance under spatial rotations 
implies the conservation of angular momentum. Thus, the most 
fundamental conservation laws of physics are seen as consequences of 
the existence of symmetries. 
In practice, these three symmetries are duly incorporated into the 
description of the FRW universe if it is specified that the system is 
invariant under the group of "Lorentz" transformations. In fact, in the 
model generating the FRW description of the universe one can always, 
locally, construct a Lorentz invariant ftame of reference in which the 
fundamental physical laws of conservation hold. 
2) Discrete symmetries 
The continuous symmetries of the preceding paragraphs derive 
their name from the fact that they can be built up from a succession of 
infmitesimally small steps. By contrast, discrete particle physics 
symmetries cannot be so constructed, and their associated conservation 
laws do not entail such a sweeping importance. But they determine in 
many instances the allowed behavior of some particle reaction. For the 
sake of completeness, we shall briefly mention: 
Parity inversion (P), the operation under which a system is 
reflected through the origin of coordinates or, equivalently, when a 
right-handed coordinate system is reversed into a left-handed one. 
It is believed that electromagnetic force conserves parity, meaning 
that electromagnetic transitions can only occur between states of 
the same parity P. This limits the allowed transitions and in this 
way prescribes certain energy values to the photons emitted ( or 

Big Bang Cosmology 
129 
absorbed) in such a process, which in tum can be experimentally 
tested. Similarly, the strong interactions are invariant under the P 
transformation, whereas the weak interaction might violate this 
symmetry. 
• 
Charge conjugation (C), means that the laws of physics that can be 
established for a set of particles remain invariant for the same set 
of antiparticles. Only the strong and electromagnetic interactions 
are strictly invariant under the C transformation. 
• 
Time reversal (I), refers to the operation which changes the 
direction of time (the arrow of time) of some process. It states that 
a system is invariant under time reversal, if its evolution from an 
initial state to some final state can be reversed by changing the 
direction of time: it will then evolve from that final state to 
precisely the same initial state. 
• 
CPT-invariance. By operating all these three symmetries simul-
taneously, their product symmetry is obtained. Experiments have 
shown that in nature the C and the P and the product CP 
symmetries are in certain cases violated. This means that one can 
devise experiments in which nature differentiates between left or 
right (mirror images), or between particle and antiparticle. These 
deviations came as quite a surprise to the physics community. 
However, it is generally believed that the CPT symmetry is 
absolutely exact and cannot be violated under any circumstances. 
3) Dynamic symmetries 
One example is the conservation of electrical charge. These 
symmetries are formalized as shifts in phase and other manipulations 
of the Lagrangian describing the system. These invariances give rise to 
significant predictions, such as the existence of new particles and their 
corresponding electric charge, spin, and other quantum numbers. 

130 
Inventing the Universe 
4) Internal symmetries 
Particle physics was led by experiment to assign ever new 
quantum properties to the elementary components in order to find a 
representation able to describe the results of the interactions observed 
in particle accelerators. They were given whimsical names such as 
Strangeness, Chann, Color (blue, red, green, magenta, etc.), Flavor, 
and so on. Suffice it to say that the symmetry invariance approach is 
the essential tool which has allowed scientists to establish a 
classification of the ever-growing "zoo" of these presumed elementary 
particles. 
The importance of this point cannot be over-emphasized: 
symmetries are the most fundamental "explanation" for the way things 
behave (the "laws" of physics) in the universe. Symmetry manifests 
itself in that the basic mathematical description of some physical 
systems does not change under certain transformations. Thus, 
symmetry is the fundamental attribute conferring some degree of 
stability upon an ever-changing material world, and is consequently 
the feature which makes possible a scheme of classifications 
(taxonomy) of the physical world. Symmetry is that property which 
allows us to give names to things, to perform the measuring operation, 
and to allow comparisons to be established. Accordingly, for Plato the 
contrary to summetros is ametros, that disordered (complex) state 
where no measure is feasible, no comparison possible.71 
Symmetry 
in the 
modem theory of matter is treated 
mathematically by group theory, as already mentioned. Let us consider 
the rotation group as an example. 
The set R of the rotations of a system form a group, each possible 
rotation being a member of the group. Two successive rotations: R1 
followed by Ri, written as (the "product") R1Ri, are equivalent to a 
single rotation, that is, to another group element. There is an identity 
element: "no rotation," and every rotation has an inverse: "rotate 
back." The product is not necessarily commutative, since it is possible 
that R1R2 ;e Ri]l1, but the associative law always holds: Rj(Ri]liJ = 

Big Bang Cosmology 
131 
(R3Ri)R1. The rotation group is a continuous group in that each 
rotation can be labeled by a set of continuously varying parameters. 
Finally, the rotation group being a Lie group, 72 any rotation can be 
expressed as the product of a succession of infinitesimal rotations. 73 
Physics should be independent of the particular frame of reference 
chosen for observation (viz. the laboratory walls). Therefore, the 
equations expressing the dynamic behavior of a system (of particles) 
must be written in an invariant fonn, that is, they must remain 
unchanged under the symmetry operation R. More precisely, the 
probability that a system described by some set of parameters be found 
in some physical state must be unchanged by R. 
In elementary particle physics, in the particular case of 
infinitesimal rotations, one finds a quantum mechanical operator J3 
called the generator of rotations about the 3-axis ( or z-axis ). This 
operator has the property of being a "hennitian" operator, and hence 
corresponds to a quantum mechanical observable.74 Further analysis 
shows that one can identify the generator J3 of rotations about the 3-
( or z-) axis, with the third-component of the angular momentum 
operator of the system. The "eigenvalues"75 of the observable J3 are 
constants of the motion of the system if the equation of motion of the 
system is to remain unchanged by the symmetry operation. 
Thus, a symmetry of the system has led to a quantum mechanical 
conservation law, the conservation of angular momentum. Experiments 
perfonned in different orientations of some measuring apparatus 
having given the same results, it follows that the system has rotational 
symmetry, and the law of conservation of angular momentum ensues. 
Unfortunately for our exposition, quantum mechanics requires 
highly sophisticated mathematics. Therefore we drastically abbreviate. 
Physical phenomena in the quantum domain are most often 
portrayed by symmetry groups, and the key conservation laws of 
nature are shown to be a consequence of them (as requested by 
Noether's theorem). In connection with the symmetry properties 
exhibited by the spectra and reaction patterns of hadrons, a group-
theoretical approach has been developed. An important example, to 

132 
Inventing the Universe 
which we will return below, arises from the similarity in behavior of 
neutrons and protons in the nucleus of atoms, apart from their 
difference in electromagnetic properties (positive charge for the 
proton, no charge for the neutron). This similarity was formulated as 
the invariance (conservation) of a new quantum number: "isospin," 
and the associated symmetry is the isospin invariance under the group 
SU(2) (see below). In several other cases, symmetry properties are 
understood in terms of new additive quantum numbers that are 
conserved, or nearly conserved. 
We have just mentioned the rotation group R. In quantum 
mechanics, the lowest-dimension non-trivial representation of. the 
rotation group is described by the 2x2 Pauli matrices, and represents a 
spin-½ particle, with spin projections along the 3-axis either up(+½) 
or down (-½).The set of all 2x2 matrices is known as the group U(2). 
A special unitary subgroup of U(2) is a group in two dimension, the 
SU(2) group. This group applies in the case of nucleons, that is, 
protons and neutrons, and provides us with an illustrative example of 
the application of the symmetry concept in the classification of 
elementary particles. 
If we leave aside their electric charge, the proton and the neutron 
are almost identical particles differing only slightly76 in mass. Since 
the strong interaction totally ignores the effects of electric charge, from 
the standpoint of this interaction the proton and the neutron may be 
regarded as two states of the same particle: the nucleon. But they do 
have a different electric charge. Thus we must consider the nucleon as 
a particle having an internal degree of freedom with two allowed 
states: the proton and the neutron. Mathematically, this means that 
there exists a SU(2) symmetry group such that the neutron and the 
proton are the fundamental representation of this symmetry group. As 
with the Pauli matrices representing spin-½, here similar matrices are 
introduced representing the new quantum number isospin, designated 
/. The 3-axis projection of the isospin is called /3• The two possible 
''rotations in isospin space" give two symmetric base states 
(neutron/proton) for the nucleon; they are said to form a "doublet." 
And the mass difference between proton and neutron is "explained" as 

Big Bang Cosmology 
133 
the effect of electromagnetism on the two different base states of the 
nucleon. 
Higher order symmetries are described by the 3x3 matrices of the 
SU(3) group. The fundamental representation of SU(3) is a ''triplet," 
with three different base states. The numerous hadrons detected in 
particle accelerators led to the discovery of another additive quantum 
number: strangeness, designated by S. This suggested the application 
of the isospin/nucleon symmetry approach. By enlarging the new 
symmetries under isospin and strangeness with SU(3) the result was a 
"multiplet" representation. However, the SU(3) multiplet structure 
derived from linking the extra symmetry of strange and non-strange 
particles is a much more approximate one. 77 
The SU(3) multiplet structure of classification of the elementary 
particles reminds us of Mendeleyev's periodic classifications of the 
chemical elements, which led to the more fundamental underlying 
proton-neutron-electron structure of the atoms, in that this new 
classification also led to the assumption of even more elementary 
particles: the quarks. Once again, in physics, it was symmetry that 
revealed the most fundamental structures. 
According the quark model, all hadrons are made up of a small 
variety of still more primordial entities, called quarks, bound together 
in different ways. As indicated, the fundamental representation of 
SU(3) is a triplet. From the basic quark triplet, all higher order 
multiplets can be built. This provides the essential mechanism for 
constructing a taxonomic structure in which the hadrons and the 
mesons, that is the particles feeling the strong force, can be classified. 
But this classification allows us not only to predict the behavior under 
interactions of the hadrons (baryons and mesons), but it can be used to 
predict the existence of new particles, such as the 0- , identified by an 
arrow in Figure 2.16. Its discovery in 1963 at the Brookhaven National 
Accelerator Laboratory (USA) was a striking confirmation of this 
approach. 
Each quark is assigned a spin-½, a baryon number B = 1/3, and an 
electric charge in multiples of 1/3 the charge e of the electron. The 

134 
Inventing the Universe 
model further postulates that all baryons are made up of three quarks, 
and all mesons of a quark-antiquark pair. For classification purposes a 
new additive quantum number, hypercharge, written Y, is defmed as 
YaB+S, 
where Sis strangeness and B is baryonic number. 
This scheme allows a simple graphic representation of the 
multiplets. As an illustration, Figure 2.16 shows two baryon multiplets: 
the spin-½ octet and the spin-312 decuplet. The Greek capital letters in 
these diagrams represent various particles predicted and/or found to 
occur in particle accelerator experiments. We show these diagrams 
without further comment, except by stressing their evident symmetry. 
This ends our much too compendious description of the 
mathematical model of contemporary Big Bang cosmology, the most 
advanced and most successful representation of what modem physics 
has to say about the universe. It cannot be disclaimed that a 
tremendous progress has been achieved, nor can we forget that equally 
substantial problems remain to be solved. 
Up to this point, our purpose in this book was to sketch the 
axiomatic structure of two cosmological models: the model put 
forward by Plato in the Timaeus, and the contemporary Big Bang 
cosmological model, but certainly not to pass judgment upon either of 
them. As we proceeded, moreover, we tried to constantly keep in mind 
these fundamental aspects: 
• 
No "scientific" knowledge is possible independent of some 
formalized axiomatic framework. 
• Such a ftamework requires the previous precise and explicit listing 
of the admitted axioms. 
• Based on these axioms, theorems can be mathematically or 

D· 
• I 
The spin - 312 
Decupkt 
The spin - 112 
Octet 
Big Bang Cosmology 
Figure 2.16 
y = Hypcrchargc 
oo 
o • 
Y = Hypercharge 
+I 
I\ 0 
0 
13S 
D + + 
,. + 

136 
Inventing the Universe 
logically deduced; mathematics and logic are presumed to be clearly 
defmed and well known. 
• 
Only these theorems allow a connection with reality to be 
established. This means that such theorems must be capable of 
expressing the prediction of the results of some measurement to be 
performed on some physical system (for instance, the position of some 
heavenly body). 
• 
The degree of agreement between prediction and observation 
furnishes a method, called the scientific method, which allows us to 
select the most adequate system of axioms. 
• How these axioms are established by the scientist in the first place, 
whether by means of pure reasoning, aesthetics, or philosophical 
beliefs (Plato, Einstein), or by "inspired guesses" after examining 
some record of empirical measurements (Kepler), is inconsequential. 
Only the method, and the fact that "it works" are of consequence: 
axioms are established, theorems are deduced, predictions are made, 
and observations are used to sort out those axioms which are the most 
appropriate. 
But the method necessarily must make use of mathematics and 
logic. They specify the rules of inference of the theorems, starting 
from the axioms. These rules are, however, nothing but a mechanical 
way of producing the theorems from the axioms, and they apply 
similarly in all models. Consequently, the knowledge conveyed by this 
scientific method reduces to the enunciation of the a priori established 
list of axioms. 
Two further remarks are apposite here. 1) It is at the very least 
surprising that the list of axioms of the model proposed by Plato in the 
Timaeus in the fourth century BC., and the list of axioms underlying 
the contemporary Big Bang model, rely on the same abstract concepts. 
In effect, such notions as order, harmony, symmetry, measurement, 
stability, invariance, as well as the eternity and universality of the laws 
of nature, constitute the pivotal notions in both models. 2) The position 
of the axioms is enigmatic in both models. Whereas Plato appeals to 

Big Bang Cosmology 
137 
intelligible Fonns under the dominance of the Good plus a demiurge, 
which finally explains strictly nothing, contemporary cosmology does 
not seem to worry about the status of its axioms; it is enough that "they 
work." 
However, our research will not end on such a trivial conclusion. In 
the next part, based on recent theoretical developments, we will 
explain the precise import of these statements and prove why this 
conclusion is the unavoidable consequence of the scientific method. 

138 
Inventing the Universe 
NOTES 
1. H. Andrillat, 8. Hauck, J. Heidmann, A. Maeder & J. Merleau-Ponty, La cosmo-
logie "'°"'1ru, Paris 1984, p. 16. Translation is oun. 
2. Op. cit. p. 20. 
3. Galileo postulated that a body in a state of uniform motion remains in that state 
unless acted upon by some cxtcrnal agency. Therefore, "Galilean" and "inertial" 
arc synonymous terms in this context. 
4. 
According the postulates of special relativity, all inertial observers (or Galilean 
frames of reference) arc equivalent for the description of movement In such 
unaccelerated "inertial" systems ( or frames of reference, or observers: all 
synonymous terms in this context) the principle of inertia holds: all bodies not 
subjected to any force arc either permanently at rest or in uniform rectilinear 
motion. 
5. 
In two arbitrary Galilean reference systems, temporal and spatial coordinates arc 
related by the Galilean transformation: 
r' = r - (r0 + vt), \I= const. 
t'= t 
where r and r' arc the vectors pointing to the moving (point-like) body in the first 
and in the second frame of reference, " is the vector rcprcscnting the uniform 
rectilinear speed of the second frame relative to the first, and r0 is the vector 
pointing from the origin of the first frame to the origin of the second frame at the 
instant t = 0. The condition t' • t expresses the absolute character of time. 
6. 
" ... die Erfahrung [hat] uns die Existcnz eines Kraftfeldcs (nlmlich des 
Gravitationsfeld) gelchrt ( ... ), welches die mcrkwOrdige Eigcnschaft hat, alien 
KOrpcm dicsclbc Bcschlcunigung zu crtcilen." (A. Einstein, "Die Grundlagen dcr 
allgcmeincn RclativiWsthcorie." Ann. d Php. 49, 1916; (reprinted in Das 
Relativitdbprinzip. [H.A. Lorentz, A. Einstein, H. Minkowsld], Darmstadt 1982, p. 
83). Herc is our translation: "Experience has taught us the existence of a field of 
force (e.g., the gravitational field), which has the remarkable property of imparting 
to all bodies the same acceleration." 
7. This fundamental principle can also be formulated as follows: "There is no way, by 

Big Bang Cosmology 
139 
experiments confined to an infmitesimal region of space-time, to distinguish one 
local Lorentz frame from any other local Lorentz frame, in the same or any other 
region." (Misner, C.W., Thome, K.S. and Wheeler, J.A., Gravitation, San 
Francisco [Cal.] 1973, p. 386). This important book will be quoted henceforth as 
Misner et al. 
8. In a Lorentz frame of reference, ftcc particles arc observed to move in a straight 
line with constant velocity, and the speed of light c is invariant, as is the value of 
the line element defined as 
fir• -c1tJtl + fir+ dy1 + dzZ 
9. What follows leans heavily on X. Fustero and E. Verdaguer, "Standard Big Bang 
Cosmology," in Foundations of Big Bang Co,mology, F. Walter Meyerstein ed., 
Singapore 1989, p. 29-83. 
I 0. As is well known, every scientific model is based on a certain number of 
presuppositions, and all the elements of the model arc logically, i.e., 
mathematically, deduced from these presuppositions. In modern language, different 
terms arc indistinctly used in a rather careless manner: hypothesis, axiom, 
axiomatic proposition, a priori proposition, assumption, basic postulate, and so 
forth. 
11. Obviously, all the instlUmental "extensions" of the human senses must be included. 
Today, we arc capable of"sccing" the universe not only at visible wavelengths, but 
also at those of X-rays, UV, infra-red, radio, and so on. Furthermore, such indirect 
"observations" as, for instance, of elementary particle collisions in accelerators, 
which ultimately reduce to computer print-outs, must equally be included. 
12. Plus its matter and energy content But in some models this matter/energy content 
vanishes. 
13. The rigorous definition of"neighborhood" is beyond the scope of this book. 
14. For instance, one can deform, without tearing, a sphere into some elongated body, 
or a teacup into a donut (or torus), leaving invariant their neighborhood 
correlations, which thus characterize each (type of) object. This is the subject 
matter of topology. 
15. A topological space Xis connected if there arc no proper closed subsets A and B of 
X such that their intersection is the empty set, and their union is in X. In a 
connected topological space X any two points can be joined by a polygonal line 

140 
Inventing the Universe 
entirely contained in X 
16. Broadly, the notion of continuity is based on the idea that a function/ of the 
variable JC is continuous if, for any small change in JC, the corresponding change in 
/(JC) is equally small; or equivalently, in the graph y = /(JC) no kinks or breaks 
appear. 
17. If there exists a rule which assigns to each element of a set A an element of a set B, 
this rule is said to define a mappina function from A into B, written as 
f:A~B. 
18. We recall that in a Lorentz frame of reference, which is similar to a freely falling 
elevator, nothing has "weight" In such a local inertial frame, test particles or "free" 
observers, if not subject to any force, are either at rest or move in a straight line 
with unifonn velocity. "In analyzing physics in a local frame of reference, one 
wins simplicity by foregoing every reference to what is far away. ... Physics is 
simple only when viewed locally: that is Einstein's great lesson .... What is direct 
and simple and meaningful ... is the geometry of every local [Lorentz] reference 
frame." (Misneut al., p. 19) 
19. The cosmological Big Bang model is assembled so as to represent the entire 
universe. However, closer to us, at the more modest scale of the solar system, 
space-time looks Euclidean, i.e., flat, and uncurved, and Newton's theory of 
gravity has been verified with precision. Accordingly, the mathematical structure 
of Einstein's general relativity, and of the Big Bang model, must allow the 
reduction to special relativity in the case of vanishing curvature, i.e., of vanishing 
gravitational fields, and the reduction to Newton's gravitation in the limit of low 
gravitational fields, such as are found in our comer of the universe. General . 
relativity and the Big Bang model must, on the other hand, be able to resolve the 
physics in strong gravitational fields: at the center of galaxies, near a neutron star 
or a black hole, etc. 
20. "Nous considerons qu'aucun fait ne saurait se trouver vrai, ou existant, aucune 
enonciation veritable, sans qu'il y ait une raison sufficante, pourquoi ii en est ainsi 
et non pas autrement Quoique ces raisons le plus souvent ne puissent nous etre 
connues." Leibniz, Monadologie (1714) 32 (Om English translation). 
21. The interested reader will find in M. Heidegger's Der Salz 110m Grund (Stuttgart 
1957) an analysis of the problem posed by this principle along the lines here 
suggested. 

Big Bang Cosmology 
141 
22. Misner et al. p. S. 
23. Matter warps space-time, and is, in turn, influenced by its geometry. So, space-time 
is no longer Euclidean but curved. We italicize the word time to focus on the mind-
boggling fact that matter influences time itselfl How fast clocks nm depends on the 
matter/energy content of space-time, the extent to which space-time is curved by 
matter in that place where the clock is ticking. 
24. All the successful theories of fundamental physics are varieties of local gauge 
theories. In such a mathematical theory the imposition of particular space-time 
symmetries requires the existence in nature of certain forces. The above mentioned 
principle of invariance is equivalent, in general relativity, to a symmetry under 
acceleration. Since everywhere a local inertial frame of reference exists, 
accelerated observers are locally "freely falling" and observe the same phenomena, 
regardless of their acceleration. 
25. Misner et al., p. 42-43. 
26. The speed of light is postulated to be a universal constant and limit: every observer, 
everywhere and everywhen, observes the same value of the speed of light 
Furthermore, no information-carrying signal is allowed to travel faster than light 
(axiom BS). 
27. This is due to the universal, and finite, value of the speed of light Only an infinite 
speed of light can give meaning to the concept of simultaneity. Only on this 
condition would any region of the universe be in a position to receive information 
from (and send to) all simultaneous events everywhere. 
28. Space-like geodesics are those paths through space-time followed by particles 
moving faster than light (tachyons), such particles are forbidden in general 
relativity. Null geodesics are the paths of photons of light Time-like geodesics 
represent the paths of freely falling bodies. Finally, time-like curves with bounded 
acceleration are the paths along which observers (on rockets, or on the planet 
Earth) are able, in principle, to move. Such may be the path of event P in Figure 
2.14. 
29. "Everything which becomes must of necessity become owing to some cause." Note 
that, quite to the contrary of Leibniz, only the causal temporal connection counts, 
and neither existence nor truth are implied. 
30. A cause at the space-time event/point (.x, y, z, t) cannot lead to an effect at (.x~ y~ z~ 

142 
Inventing the Universe 
t') if a light signal from (x. y, z) cannot reach (x', y', z') in a time span less than It -
,,. 
31. They do not occur owing to the stringent symmetries of some models, particularly 
the standard model we are here considering. but are implied by the theory itself. 
32. For instance, a massive black hole is postulated to exist at the center of our and 
other galaxies to explain the enormous energy released there; these effects may be 
due to stars and gas falling into such a black hole. 
33. The siz.e of the universe is also enormous in the fourth dimension, that is, in the 
dimension "time." It is generally aa,epted that the "natural" time unit is the Planck-
timc: 10°"3 secs. Current models estimate the lifetime of the universe to be of the 
order of lo'O units of Planck-time. 
34. In some conceivable but especially tricky univcnal space-time geometries, the 
paths of light rays may be so complex that we would bo seeing not an enormous 
number of different galaxies but only repeated images of a small number of the 
same objects. In such a mirage-like universe we might be seeing our Milky Way 
many times over. 
35. Simplicity enjoys a special status in cosmology. For instance, in Misner et al., page 
1208 we read: "Among all the principles that one can name out of the world of 
science, it is difficult to think of one more compelling than silnplicily.,. 
36. Without such simplifications, the determination of solutions to the field equations 
becomes very complex, if not intraclablc. Differential equations such as Einstein's 
field equations represent laws of nature, but we can only observe specific solutions 
of such equations. 
37. Isotropy of the universe means that, at any event, an observer cannot distinguish 
one of his space directions from the other by any local physical measurements. 
38. The in principle observable universe may contain something like 100 billion 
galaxies, which are distant from us all the way up to our "horimn" of 10 - 20 
billion light-years away. Furth~ generally the farther away a galaxy is, the 
dimmer is its electromagnetic sipal which reaches our telescopes and, in 
consequence, the longer will be the telescope time required for its detection. And, 
of what.we could in principle observe, no more than about 1% bas actually been 
surveyed. Cf. J.O. Burns, "Very large slrUctUres in the Universe," Sc;.ntijic 
American, July 1986, pp. 30-39; and T.J. Broadhurst, G.F.R. Ellis, D.C. Koo&: 
AS. Szalay, "Large-scale distribution of galaxies at the galactic poles," Nahue 

Big Bang Cosmology 
143 
343, 1990,p. 726-728. 
39. That is to simplify sufficiently the Einstein field equations in order to derive 
observationally testable solutions. 
40. Homogeneity means, roughly speaking, that the universe is the same everywhere 
at a given moment of time. "A given moment of time" is, however, an expression 
that has no meaning in general relativity, except when one considers such 
restrictive symmetric constructions as the standard Big Bang model. 
41. Notice however that, in this FRW model, all that (dynamically) changes in the 
geometry of the FR W universe is the scale of distance R(t). All distances between 
spatial event/points on t = constant hypersurfaces expand (or contract) by the same 
scale factor. This is a consequence of the postulated isotropy and homogeneity of 
the FRW universe, and is only true in such a kind of universe. 
42. It follows from this equation that R(t) depends on p, the density of the matter of the 
universe. In the perfectly symmetric FR W universe, density, time and the universal 
scale factor are connected through this simple equation. 
43. That is, at I= t61g 6ang- usually set equal 0. 
44. The Doppler effect gives a mathematical formulation to the easily verified 
observational fact that the frequency of some wavelike signal emitted from a 
source in movement with respect to the observer appears higher (is blueshifted) in 
the case of approaching sources, whereas it appears decreased (is redshifted) in the 
case of receding sources. 
45. Redshifts are commonly designated by z, and are defined as the fractional increase 
in wavelength suffered by a photon emitted at a distant source with wavelength 11, 
and received on Earth with wavelength 11: 
z • (}.1 -A1) IA1 [equation 7). 
The ratio of R(t) at two distinct times of the history of the universe gives the ratio 
of the respective dimensions of the universe (cube root of volume) at those two 
times. It also determines the value 
/ + z. A knowledge of the red shift z 
experienced in time past by radiation received today is equivalent to the knowledge 
of the ratio between the universal scale factor R(t) at the time corresponding to z 
and the value of the scale factor today. Thus, the redshift allows estimating the 
distance from us of a given redshifted source of electromagnetic radiation. 

144 
Inventing the Universe 
46. At about lo-43 sec. after the Big Bang, temperatures may have been of the order of 
U>32 K, corresponding to densities of the order of 1093 g/cm3. By way of 
comparison, the highest temperatures that can be obtained in present-day 
laboratories arc of the order of U>8 K and the density of nuclear matter -i.e., the 
density of the nucleus of some atom- is estimated to be of the order of 2 • 1014 
g/cm3. 
47. An example of such a symmetry-breaking phase transition can be shown in water. 
After cooling, one gets ice, where the rotational symmetry of liquid water is 
"spontaneously broken" and new but more limited symmetries, such as appear in 
crystal ice, replace the previous structure. However, just as in freezing water the 
orientation of the symmetry axes of growing crystals may not coincide, and 
topological "defects" may appear, in the same manner these theories predict the 
appearance of such defects in the cooling universe. The fact that so far nothing of 
the sort bas been detected, is one of the problems of the FRW model. 
48. A black-body is a receptacle that absorbs all the radiation incident upon it, that is, 
roughly speaking, an oven. After the injection of some energy (heat), radiation in 
its interior reaches equilibrium: the walls of the oven absorb and reflect heat at 
some constant rate and a steady state ensues. If one drills a small hole (without 
disturbing the equilibrium) in the wall of the oven, the outcoming radiation carries 
energy partitioned in a specific way among the frequencies of such radiation: this 
is the spectrum of radiation of a black-body. The study of precisely this 
phenomenon led Planck in 1900 to audaciously propose the quanti7.ation of this 
process in order to arrive at a formula which no classical assumption could justify. 
49. It must be emphasized that the abundance of light elements in the universe is not 
observed, only emission lines from diverse objects such as nebulae. 
SO. Cf. "Primordial Nucleosynthesis. A critical comparison of theory and observation," 
by J. Yang, M.S. Turner, G. Steigman, D.N. Schramm, and K.A Olive, in The 
Astrophyncal Journal [The American Astronomical Society] 281, 1984, pp. 493-
51 I. 
SI. Adducing philosophical, aesthetic, common sense, or other a priori "reasons." 
52. The operation consisting in finding the minimum set of necessary a priori axioms 
required to give an explanatory sense to some collection of measurements will be 
interpreted as an "algorithmic compression" of this empirical data set This opera-
tion is almost never feasible, unless of course severe simplifications in the obser-

Big Bang Cosmology 
145 
vational data set are introduced. The FR W model construction, with itsdrastic sim-
plifications, provides a good example. 
53. G.F.R. Ellis, S.D. Nel, R. Maartens, W.R. Stoeger, and A.P. Whitman, "Ideal 
observational cosmology," Physics Reports [Review Section of Physics Letters] 
124, 1985, n°s 5 & 6, pp. 315-417. 
54. This means that we cannot establish a strict connection between redshift and 
geometry. 
55. In addition to a very crucial "no-news" assumption detennining the behavior of the 
universe model outside our past light cone. Remember that this part of the universe 
corresponds precisely to the totally unreachable "elsewhere." 
56. This minimum can be rigorously measured: the complexity of this minimum set of 
a priori propositions can in no case be inferior to the complexity of the 
observational data set; cf. the third part of this book. 
57. In the case of open universes, negatively curved or flat, which are spatially infinite, 
the infonnation containing volume of our past light cone literally represents zero 
percent of the total. Things get even worse in the inflationary scenario described 
below, where "our" universe is only one amongst many other existing universes. 
58. "If, then, anyone can claim that he has chosen one [model] that is fairer [better] for 
the construction of these bodies, he, as a friend rather than a foe, is the victor'' 
(Timaeus 54&-b) 
59. In the present universe, also called "matter dominated universe," this density can be 
measured in "atoms per cubic meter," at about 0.1 atoms of "luminous" i.e., visible· 
matter (see below) per cubic meter. By contrast, the early universe, before the 
matter/radiation decoupling epoch, is designated as the ''radiation dominated 
universe." 
60. An cnonnously large time measured in the time-scale units of particle physics: 1<>60 
units of Planck-time. 
61. Cf. V. Rubin, "The Rotation of Spiral Galaxies," Science 220, 1983, p. 1339-1344. 
62. Some dark matter candidates: massive neutrinos, weakly interacting massive 
particles (WIMPs), axions, photinos, gravitinos, mini-black holes, etc., all 
undetected so far. 

146 
Inventing the Universe 
63. Cf. L.F. Abbott and So-Young Pi, ed., lnjlalionary Co,mology, Singapore 1986. 
64. S. Hawking wrote, WJbc fact that we have oblerved the universe to be isotropic is 
only a conaequm:e of our exiltmce." C. 8. Collins ct S. W. Hawking, "Why is 
the Universe lsotropicT' The btrop/lpical JOlll7flU 180 ( 1973) 317-334. 
65. One MeV • 106 electron-Volt. Masses in particle physics are given in energy units. 
I MeV/a. • 1.78 x 10-30 kg. 
66. All protons have a positive electric charge, identical in value to the electrical - but 
negative - charge of the electron, and so in principle they should all be subject to a 
repelling Coulomb force. What makes the nuclei of atoms stable is thus the strong 
force. 
67. The neutron, when bounded in an atomic nucleus, is considered to be as stable as 
the proton. 
68. The possibility of the decay of the proton is postulated by most of the Grand 
Unified Theories. How can one measure such a long time? What is done is to 
search for such a decay event among many protons, that is, in very large volumes, 
hoping to find, statistically, one telllale proton decay event. So far, without result. 
69. The Lagrangian function is a set of second-order differential equations for a system 
of particles which relate the energy of the system to its (generalized) coordinates, 
the (generalized) forces acting in it, and time. There is only one equation for each 
of the degrees of fteedom possessed by the system. 
70. This quantity is given by the generator of the symmetry group. 
71. Symmetry is conceptually quite close to the notion of pattern. In a pattern, 
something is repeated, the same element can be discerned over and over, as if on a 
wall paper design. Cf. Hermann Weyl, SymMetry, Princeton 1952. In this book, 
Weyl defines symmetry as ... harmony of proportions," and he reminds us of the 
very revealing German word Augewogenheit (approximate meaning: well-
balanccd). In another important remark, Weyl states that the theory of relativity is 
nothing but an aspect of symmetry! In the final part of our book, still another 
crucial aspect of symmetry will be brought to light: it represents the exact opposite 
of the notion of C""'Pluity. And since complex phenomena escape rational 
analysis, symmetry remains the primary condition for any acquisition of knowledge 
about the physical world. This ab9olutely central fact was clearly pointed out by 

Big Bang Cosmology 
147 
Plato, twenty-four centuries ago. 
72. Lie groups are related to the concept of"diff'erentiable manifold" mentioned above. 
73. Plato already understood the notion of symmetry in tenns of some primordial 
mathematical group theory, although this theory was formally introduced only in 
the early nineteenth century. Nevertheless, since he wanted to give his elementary 
particles maximal symmetry, Plato made them correspond to the regular polyhedra, 
i.e., solid shapes whose sides are identical polygons. These polyhedra; as well as 
the sphere, the shape chosen for the entire universe ("spherical symmetry," as in 
FR W), have the property of remaining invariant under rotations: the sphere under 
any rotation, the cube under 90° rotations, the tetrahedron under 60" rotations, and 
soon. 
74. I.e., something measurable in the real world. 
75. In quantum mechanics, eigenvalues of the state function describing a physical 
system are the only values of a linear superposition of possibilities that can 
eventually be observed, with probabilities given precisely by that state function. 
76. Proton rest mass 
Nucleon rest mass 
= ( 1.67252 :::1: 0.00008) • I 0-27 kg. 
= (1.67482 :::1: 0.00008) • 10-27 kg. 
77. The masses of the particles in a multiplet have quite disparate values. 


Part III 
What Knowledge is Conveyed by Science? 
We, living today, have become entangled, by the peculiar 
dominance of contemporary 
science, 
in 
the 
bizarre 
misconception that science constitutes a source of knowledge, 
and that thinking must yield to the judgment of science. But 
whatever a thinker is capable of expressing can never be 
logically or empirically confirmed or refuted. Nor is it a matter 
of belief. It can only be faced in a questioning-thinking 
manner. And whatever is faced in that way is invariably that 
which is worth questioning. 
This particularly dense and poignant text by M. Heidegger, 1 here 
freely translated, aff'mns that ''true" knowledge ( episteme) can never 
issue from the natural sciences as they are nowadays understood, and 
that the only remaining available option is the unrelenting 
reformulation of the questions, the ceaseless restating of the questions 
worth asking. 
This being so, to what does the knowledge conveyed by the 
science of nature ultimately amount? Where are its limits? The ancient 
"problem of knowledge," here formulated by Heidegger in the 
terminology of traditional philosophy, constitutes the subject we will 
now address. But our strategy departs from traditional methodology in 
that we approach this question in mathematical terms derived from 
recent Algorithmic Information Theory. By this means, the questions 
worth being asked, and what is thereby questioned, will now become 
clear and precise. 

ISO 
Inventing the Universe 
The Symbolic Description of Reality 
The problem of defining what kind of knowledge is conveyed by 
the scientific approach, the problem of clarifying what is explained by 
this method and the problem of interpreting the scientific results: all 
these problems were already raised in Plato's Timaeus. In the solutions 
to this problem of knowledge as set forth by philosophers, a number of 
indispensable assumptions are in general implicitly included. 
l) 
The theoretical organization of the physical world follows a very 
specific method, an epistemology, developed for the first time in 
history by Plato and described in the Timaeus. This method is 
founded on this primordial conviction: only a mathematical or 
equivalently a logical demonstration can lead une"ingly to a 
scientific knowledge. 2 This conviction entails: 
2) 
A scientific inquiry is based on a system of assumptions, 
provisionally admitted 08 the foundation of a theoretical model of 
the physical world: the axioms. The axiomatic systems 
underlying the cosmology of Plato's Timaeus and the standard 
Big Bang model sufficiently illustrate this important point. 
3) 
It follows that an analysis of the knowledge disclosed by the 
scientific method must focus on the axiom system admitted in 
each case. But asking questions about these axioms is equivalent 
to appending additional axioms to the system. Therefore, the 
initial question can be reformulated. Instead of asking: What 
knowledge does science convey? we now ask: What knowledge 
do the axioms convey? 
4) 
Finally, to reach scientific knowledge, to put forward the 
required list of axiomatic propositions, it is necessary previously 
to have replaced concrete sense-data with their corresponding 
symbolic representation, according to theoretical rules accepted 

What Knowledge is Conveyed by Science? 
1S1 
as true and valid by scientists. A complex procedure allows 
experimentally obtained sense-data to be replaced by measures. 
5) 
The scientist's aim, when studying a particular physical system, 
is to uncover the specific correlations that may prevail amongst 
these abstract notions, the measures. For this manipulation of 
abstract symbols, mathematics are essential and irreplaceable, 
which explains why modem physical science has become 
predominantly mathematical. Clearly, the final objective of such 
research consists in finding a mathematical theory, a formal 
axiomatic system, in which proved theorems can be equated with 
predictions concerning possible measurements to be performed 
within the system under consideration. 3 
The Timaeus and the Big Bang model provide two conspicuous 
examples of this method. They make clear how such a formal 
axiomatic system is assembled, how the universe is mathematically 
invented. Underlying this method, however, are a certain number of 
crucial prejudices. Some have been already mentioned in the second 
part; here we focus on those relevant to the ensuing stage of our 
analysis: 
1) 
The world must present a sufficient degree of order so that the 
measurement operation can be performed. 4 This prejudged 
stability and invariance5 implies: 
• the possibility of distinguishing objects; 
• the possibility of naming them; and 
• the possibility of measuring. 
2) 
Names and measures are abstractions. They are not given directly 
by sense-data, in an unmediated fashion. 
3) 
The only effective method of analysis consists in translating such 
abstractions as names and measures into pure symbolic forms in 
order to operate with them mathematically. 

152 
Inventing the Universe 
4) 
As a result of the symbolic representation of sense-data, a 
mathematical theory can be established, allowing theorems to be 
mathematically deduced &om presuppositions assumed to be 
true. Such theorems relate to physical measurements. Hence, the 
theory represents a model of reality. Thanks to this "artifice," a 
mediation between sense-data and intelligible intuition can be 
established. It is further assumed that this deductive procedure 
must follow a set of rules of inference presumed to incorporate 
the basic prejudices of human logic.6 
5) 
In fact, it is admitted that the logic underlying the rules of 
inference is such that this deduction can be achieved by calculus, 
mechanically, 
unambiguously, 
and 
furthermore, 
leads 
mechanically to certainty. In modern terminology, such rules of 
inference mechanically connecting (mapping) axioms and 
theorems are called an algorithm. 
6) 
Once these prejudices are accepted, a definition of a scientific 
method, based on a formal axiomatic system, allowing us to 
invent the universe, can be reached. Succinctly, the essential 
components of this formal axiomatic system are: 
• the explanation of its symbols (the dictionary); 
• the rules governing the arrangement of these symbols into 
valid propositions (the syntax); 
• the set of valid propositions a priori admitted as true (the 
axioms); 
• the rules of inference (the algorithm) by which valid propo-
sitions of the system can be arranged into additional valid 
(true) propositions (the theorems); 
• a decision procedure establishing which of the valid propo-
sitions is true and which is false (i.e., a mechanical procedure 
determining whether a proof of a theorem follows from the 
admitted rules or not).7 

What Knowledge is Conveyed by Science? 
153 
Two theoretical systems, as far apart in time as the Timaeus and 
the Big Bang, will now be studied: Aristotle's Posterior Analytics, and 
Algorithmic Information Theory. For the last, we rely entirely on the 
work of Gregory J. Chaitin.8 
Algorithmic Information Theory: Some Relevant Aspects9 
In the preceding discussion on cosmological models, we have 
time and again stressed that what really matters in any such 
construction are not the particular coincidences linking the theoretical 
predictions (i.e., the theorems) of such models with observationally 
collected data but, on the contrary, the set of their axioms, the list of 
their a priori assumed propositions. 
This claim can be rigorously proved when reformulated in terms 
of the Algorithmic Information Theory. In fact, this approach leads 
directly to G6del' s famous "incompleteness theorem," providing 
evidence that the incompleteness phenomenon discovered by G6del is 
natural and widespread rather than pathological and unusual, that it 
applies each time the deductive method is employed, and thus can not 
so easily be swept under the rug. IO 
06del showed that, in any axiomatic formal system capable of 
deducing the theorems of arithmetic, there are theorems that are true 
but that can never be proved or disproved in this system; that is, they 
are undecidable. I I 
Algorithmic Information Theory represents a 
spectacular 
extension of G6del's theorem. In the "algorithmic" version, G6del's 
theorem becomes: 
If a theorem of some formal axiomatic system contains more 
information than the set of axioms of such a system, then it is 
impossible for the theorem to be derived from these axioms; such a 
theorem is then undecidable (in this system). 
Paraphrasing Aristotle, we may say that all the information, all the 
theorems that can be mechanically (algorithmically) inferred within a 

154 
Inventing the Universe 
theoretical model, appear to be entirely contained as a potentiality in 
the axiom system of this model; the development of the theory starting 
from the axiom system does not add any new information! On the 
other hand, all the uncountable infinite propositions containing more 
information than a particular axiom system can never be proved by that 
system; these questions simply cannot be answered by that system, and 
remain undecidable. By the same token, any extrapolation going 
beyond the information content of the axioms is either undecidable or 
must be added as a new axiom, without proof. In other words, any 
question about the axioms can only be answered in a metasystem, a 
system enlarged by at least that question. Questions about axioms are 
in this context "unscientific," since they do not belong to the scientific 
theory being considered. Moreover, a mechanical decision procedure, 
establishing which of the valid propositions of a formal system are true 
and which are false, cannot exist. 
In summary, formal axiomatic systems such as cosmological 
models and physical theories are limited; they are incomplete, in that 
an indefinite number of pertinent valid questions remains undecidable. 
How to measure the power of a formal axiomatic system or, more to 
the point, how to measure its degree of incompleteness, is the next 
question to be elucidated. 
A formal axiomatic system is judged to be equivalent to the sum 
of all its possible theorems, deduced from its axioms following its 
admitted rules of inference. And the basic contention of Algorithmic 
Information Theory is that one can study these systems considering the 
axiom system as the program of some kind of computer, to be defmed, 
such that if one runs the axiom system as an input program, this 
computer will produce as its output, using the rules of inference as its 
algorithm, the whole theory, that is, all its potentially provable 
theorems. 
Turning the question around, we assume as given some set of 
provable theorems of a theory .12 In terms of Algorithmic Information 
Theory, this set of theorems can be considered to be the output of some 

What Knowledge is Conveyed by Science? 
155 
computer to which the respective formal axiomatic system (axioms 
plus rules) has been given as input. It now becomes possible to focus 
on one individual object: that particular output, the set of theorems, 
which, if coded in binary digits (bits),13 will be some string of O's and 
l's. The question then becomes: given one particular string of O's and 
l's, which we now assimilate to theorems of some theory in the above 
sense, what is the size in bits of the shortest program for generating it 
as output in the described manner? What is the shortest program for 
calculating this string? Or, what is the most compact formal axiomatic 
system from which these theorems can be deduced? If an answer to 
these questions can be found, and assuming the rules of inference as 
known, one can evaluate the minimum of a priori information that 
must be accepted without proof for some theoretical construct, a result 
of obvious importance. 
To proceed, a certain number of definitions are necessary. 
The algorithmic information content J(X) of an individual object X 
(some string of O's and l's) is defined to be the size of the smallest 
program outputting ( calculating) X 
The joint information J(X, J? of two objects X and Y is defined to 
be the size of the smallest program able to calculate X and Y 
simultaneously. 
And the mutual information content l(X·J? measures the 
commonality of the two objects: it is defined as the extent to which 
knowing Xhelps one to calculate Y. 
The next two notions will play a fundamental role in our 
discussion. They are algorithmic randomness and algorithmic 
independence. These concepts are quite close to the intuitive notions of 
disorder, lack of any discernible pattern, chaos, and totally unrelated 
objects, respectively. 
We now consider some string N-bits long. Most of such strings 
have an algorithmic information content J(X) approximately equal to N 
plus the algorithmic information contained in the number N itself 
which is of the order of /ogiJv. That is, to output such a string on a 

156 
Inventing the Universe 
computer, one generally needs an input program essentially equivalent 
to the bit-length of the string itself. No string N bits long can have a 
greater algorithmic information content, i.e., greater than N + (order 
of)logiN. A few strings, however, may have a substantially smaller 
information content: they are the strings which have some regular, 
repetitive pattern, some symmetry. N-bits long strings with information 
content of about N are said to be algorithmically random. This 
definition applies identically to infmitely long strings. For instance, the 
number 1t is the extreme opposite of an algorithmically random string: 
it takes only a small program to calculate the infinite digits of x, 
although the task takes infmite time. This factor is of no relevance 
here, due to the type of computer used, as will be described below. 
But, if one asks what is the nth digit in the decimal expansion of x, a 
program much shorter than n can give an exact result in fmite time.14 
It follows that an algorithmically random N-bits long string is a 
string lacking any kind of pattern, such that to create such a string in a 
computer requires an input program approximately similar in size to 
that of the string itself. This means that if one has such an N-bits long 
string and wishes to predict the N+ 1 bit, one cannot predict it with a 
probability better than ½, the probability of guessing the outcome of 
the toss of a fair coin. Alternatively stated, any additional bit one adds 
to the string requires exactly one bit of program. In contrast, if the 
string can be algorithmically compressed into a (substantially) shorter 
program, that is, if its algorithmic information content J{X) is much 
smaller than N, which will be the case of a string which shows some 
pattern, as for instance 
001 I 1001110011100111.. ... 
which can be algorithmically compressed into a short program of the 
type 
"repeat 00 I 11 x-times," 
then the prediction of the N+ 1 bit can be made with much greater 
accuracy ( certainty, in this case). On the other hand, it is evident that 

What Knowledge is Conveyed by Science? 
157 
the probability of an infinite sequence obtained by independent tosses 
of a fair coin to be algorithmically random is equal 1. 
To recapitulate, algorithmically random strings are sequences that 
cannot 
be 
algorithmically 
compressed 
into 
input 
programs 
substantially shorter than the sequence itself. Algorithmically random 
strings contain incompressible, irreducible information. It follows that 
the concept of algorithmic information closely corresponds to the 
concept of complexity: the algorithmic information content l(X) of a 
sequence of binary symbols (bits) measures the complexity of this 
sequence. 
Algorithmic 
information 
content and 
(algorithmic) 
complexity of some binary string are synonymous terms in this 
context. What specifically makes Algorithmic Information Theory 
pertinent to our investigation is the equivalence between a formal 
axiomatic system and an algorithm. More precisely, since the 
particular computer here used can be mathematically defined, it 
becomes rigorously possible to consider the axioms and the rules of 
inference of a formal axiomatic system to be encoded as a single finite 
binary string, constituting the input of this computer. And the 
algorithmic complexity of a formal axiomatic system determines the 
limit of the complexity of the theorems that can be deduced. 
The Turing Machine 
We now must define the "computer" on which the above 
described operations, in particular the algorithmic compression, are 
implemented. This Gedan/cenexperiment is called a "universal Turing 
machine,"15 created by the British mathematician Alan Turing in the 
1930s. 
The Turing machine is based on the idea that any method is an 
algorithm, a set of instructions expressed in some formally defined 
language, which enable a machine to mechanically carry out some 
program. This imaginary machine can be considered to be, at the most 
fundamental level, the embodiment of mathematical reasoning, but it 
also marks off the limits of computability. Actually, given a large but 
finite amount of time, a Turing machine is capable in principle of 

158 
Inventing the Universe 
performing any computation that can be done on any modern 
computer, no matter how powerful. Moreover, combining "simple" 
Turing machines into a "univenal" Turing machine, this imaginary 
machine can in principle carry out any task that can be explicitly 
described. Such a univenal Turing machine can simulate any operation 
performed on any particular Turing machine. Consequently, what a 
Turing machine cannot compute may represent an ultimate limit of the 
power of mathematics. 
A simple Turing machine is schematically shown in the Figure 
3.17. In a way, it reminds us of a typical typewriter. It incorporates a 
moving printing head that prints discrete symbols, for instance O's or 
l's, one at a time, on a infinitely long printing tape, marked off into 
discrete frames or segments. Only one symbol is allowed in each 
frame. The printing head can carry out two other functions: it can 
remove or erase one symbol at a time &om the tape, and it can "read," 
or register the symbolic content of each frame, one frame at a time. In 
this way the symbols on the tape can be considered to be the input to 
the machine. 
Furthermore, the machine can assume any one of a finite number 
of states, according to the configuration of the machine, here 
considered as a sort of "black box" for which no mechanical descrip-
tion is given. It is only required that each state be described in terms of 
the effect that state has on the activity of the machine. Thus, the Turing 
machine functions in discrete, instantaneous steps, and each sequential 
step is determined by the current state of the machine plus the symbol 
(in our example: a O or a 1) that occupies the frame currently scanned. 
These two initial conditions determine at each discrete step a set of 
three instructions: 
First, the machine is instructed what to do with the symbol on the 
frame being currently scanned: it may leave it unchanged, or replace it 
and print another symbol. 
Second, depending on the scanned symbol and the current state of 
the machine, the next state is designated: the machine may change to 
another of its limited set of states or remain unchanged. 

What Knowledge is Conveyed by Science? 
159 
Figure3.17 
,... 
0 I I I I 0 Io Io I I I I I 0 0JII0IUIII II II I 10111010101 I 101 
List of stares 
Symbol on tape 
Stare ---------,--- ----- -
0 
I 
I 
I 
s, 
Instruction I 
I 
Instruction 2 
~ 
Instruction 3 
I 
Instruction 4 
s' 
Instruction 5 
Instruction 6 
s; 
Instruction 7 
I 
Instruction 8 
Instruction 9 
I 
Instruction 0 
I 
I 
Example: 
Present State S3; Symbol on tape 0. 
Instruction 5: Erase and er int I ; 
Go to left; 
Chan11e to Stare s,. 
Third, the printing head is instructed to move either to the frame on the 
left or on the right, or not to move at all. 
These instructions, contained in a finite list of states, are all that is 
needed to perform any possible kind of computation, since any 
particular Turing machine, having just a limited (finite) list of states 
and a limited alphabet of symbols, can itself be encoded on a tape as an 
input sequence of O • s and 1 's of a universal Turing machine; this 
universal Turing machine will then perform in a way identical to that 
particular machine. 

160 
Inventing the Universe 
Algorithmic Information Theory presumes the existence of such a 
"computer:" the symbols that are printed at some point in time on the 
tape are the program, and running this tape will produce some output, 
if - and this is a crucial aspect - the computer ever halts. Suppose that 
the "program" on the tape is created arbitrarily, by tossing each time a 
fair coin and so creating an input string of O's and l's. What is the 
probability that, given such arbitrary input, the Turing machine will 
halt after some finite time? Turing proved this question to be 
undecidable: it is impossible to give a concrete answer to this question. 
In Algorithmic Information Theory, the undecidable question: What is 
the probability that a computer given an arbitrary input will eventually 
stop and produce some output? has the answer: This probability is Cl. 
This probability, called Q by Chaitin, plays a fundamental role in 
Algorithmic Information Theory.16 Because it can be shown that Q is 
an algorithmically random ("incompressible") real number which has 
no compact computable description, that is, one cannot find a program 
capable of outputting the first N bits of Q in a time TN, whatever N. 
Put differently, Q is equivalent to an infinite set of independent 
mathematical facts (i.e., each single O or 1 of its binary expression is 
an 
independent 
mathematical 
element), 
and 
this 
irreducible 
mathematical information cannot be compressed into any finite 
algorithm. Since Q measures the probability that a universal Turing 
machine, given an input string generated by independent tosses of a 
fair coin, will halt, the question: Will the machine halt? is strictly 
speaking senseless. The only option left is to run that program on the 
machine and wait ... This is "algorithmic undecidability". 
According to theorems proved in Algorithmic Information 
Theory, the following assertions, directly pertinent to our analysis, can 
be put forward: 
• Given some sequence, such as an N-bits long string of O's and 
l's, one can never prove the randomness of such a string. Such a string 
may be created by arbitrary tosses of a fair coin, but it may also 
correspond to the symbolic description of some physical situation. 

What Knowledge is Conveyed by Science? 
161 
Whatever the origin of the string, the question: is such a string 
algorithmically random? is undecidable. On the other hand, one can 
show that such a sequence is non-random only by discovering a short 
algorithm to generate it. Lacking this short algorithm, either the 
sequence is totally devoid of any pattern, and therefore algorithmically 
incompressible, or one must keep trying, hoping eventually to fmd one. 
But no proof of randomness is possible. 
• If one picks any arbitrary infinite sequence, for instance, the 
binary infinite expansion of some arbitrary real number in the interval 
between zero and one, this number will be, with probability equal to 
unity, that is with certainty, algorithmically random. 
• If one asks, what is the probability that some finite binary string 
can algorithmically be compressed by just 10 bits, the answer is that 
about 999 strings out of 1000 cannot be compressed even by such a 
meager amount! This means that the immense majority of the possible 
sequences are not algorithmically compressible, and cannot be 
generated by an algorithm containing less infonnation than the 
sequence itself.17 
• From the last observation, one might deduce that it is the easiest 
thing in the world to exhibit a specimen of a long series of random 
digits, in order to print a truly algorithmically random number. 
However, the contrary is the case. It is impossible to do so, a 
consequence of the theorem which states that one can never prove 
some sequence to be algorithmically random, that such a question is 
undecidable. 
• To come back to the main line of our argumentation: suppose we 
now consider a fonnal axiomatic system to be a computer program for 
listing its. complete set of theorems, and suppose we wish to measure 
its size in bits. A crude measure of the size in bits of a fonnal 
axiomatic system is the amount of computer space it takes to specify a 
proof-checking algorithm and how to apply it to all possible proofs, 
which is approximately the amount of space it takes to be very precise 
about the dictionary, the syntax, the axioms and the rules of inference. 
This can be considered to be roughly proportional to the number of 
pages it takes to present the fonnal axiomatic system in a textbook.18 

162 
Inventing the Universe 
• Based on this complexity measure of a formal axiomatic system, 
the following incompleteness theorem can be proved. Consider an N-
bit formal axiom system. Then there is a computer program of size N 
which does not halt, whose output is undecidable. But one cannot 
prove this undecidability within the axiomatic system. Moreover, 
within an N-bit axiomatic system, it is not even possible to prove that a 
particular object has algorithmic information content greater than N, 
even though almost all objects have this property. Put more generally: 
the information content (the complexity) of the output of some 
program of complexity N-bits, corresponding to the theorems 
deducible ftom an axiom system, cannot be greater than N-bits, which 
means that they cannot contain more information than the axiomatic 
system itself. This fundamental conclusion is just G&lel's theorem, 
and Turing's halting theorem, in its more general algorithmic form. 
Armed with these insights provided by Algorithmic Information 
Theory we now return to our subject and analyze their application to 
our discussion. 
A definition of science 
We start by asking the question: what is science? 
From our specific viewpoint, a scientist starts, by means of the 
defmition of abstract concepts of measuring standards and the 
consequent possibility of application of the measurement operation, by 
reducing his observations of some local physical situation or 
arrangement to a quantitative description. This description is then 
translated into a purely symbolic formulation such as a sequence of 
binary digits, O's and 1 's. That such a reduction of sense-experienced 
reality to some sequence of symbols is always possible is the essential 
presupposition of our analysis. Moreover, such sequence may 
presumably be very large.19 
The scientist then examines increasingly larger segments20 of this 
enormous sequence, with the aim of fmding the shortest possible 
computer program which may compute some, possibly infinite, binary 
sequence whose initial segment reproduces to acceptable accuracy the 

What Knowledge is Conveyed by Science? 
163 
"observed" segment. This computer program, this algorithm, is the 
scientific theory, that is, the corresponding formal axiomatic system, 
and the output of such a program is a verisimilar account in the 
Platonic sense. However, to the extent that the scientist has been able 
to algorithmically compress the "observed" sequence into his 
"program", into his theory, predictions (theorems) can be advanced, 
and experimental tests can be performed. They will show the 
coincidence to some acceptable degree of accuracy between segments 
of the two strings: the string "theorems", that is, the predicted 
quantitative measures, and the string "reality", that is, the actually 
observed measures. It then becomes feasible to choose among 
competing theories on the base of the best fit between theorems and 
observation. These ideas are illustrated in Figure 3 .18. 
Figure3.18 
O.bserved reality: measurements 
1110111110111111101011101010101111 111011101010111 
Experiment 
' 
De1ree of coincidence 
Theorem 
Input -
Theory 

164 
Inventing the Universe 
Note: In many descriptions of the Turing machine, only a 
single tape is shown. Here, to make things clear, the tape is 
split into two separate tapes. Initially, only the theory is 
printed on the lower tape. After some time-lapse21 and after 
the machine has finished scanning the entire theory-tape, it 
will print the "result" on the theorems-tape. The observed 
reality-tape represents real measurements which, as assumed, 
are always expressible in binary code. The degree of 
coincidence between a segment of the theorem-tape and the 
chosen segment of the measurement-tape is what confirms or 
refutes the theory. 
Scientific theories will thus be selected following at least three 
criteria: 
1) 
shortness of program, that is, extent of algorithmic compression 
of some particular sequence, of some chosen segment of the 
"observations" string, the shortest algorithm being preferred; 
2) 
degree or accuracy of coincidence between the predicted and the 
empirically observed values; 
3) 
length of the sequence for which some degree of coincidence can 
be established, i.e., the scope of the exterior reality encompassed 
or "explained" by that theory. 
In keeping with this "algorithmic" definition of science, some 
additional remarks and some preliminary conclusions can be put 
forward. 
1) Measurability 
In science, and more precisely in physics, a theory culminates in 
the formulation of some system of differential equations, such as 
Einstein's field equations described in the second part. The problem 
then becomes to implement the theory, that is, to solve these equations. 
This requires the previous determination of initial and boundary 
conditions which in turn can only be obtained from experiment, from a 

What Knowledge is Conveyed by Science? 
16S 
measurement. In other words, the measurable numbers of the theory 
must be computable in the algorithmic sense. Clearly, it must be 
feasible to generate them mechanically by means of some machine, be 
it a computer coupled to a measuring device outputting a number, or a 
Turing machine. But we have seen that most numbers are algorith-
mically random. What happens now? We quote without further 
comment R. Geroch and J.R. Hartle:22 
Imagine a physical theory whose prediction, for the result of 
some particular experiment, is the non computable number K. 
... There exists no algorithm to determine whether a given 
number is within [some arbitrary value]£ of K- for this is the 
essence of K's being non computable. Of course, it is 
nonetheless possible to test the theory - and to do so to 
arbitrary accuracy. The point is only that the test cannot be 
earned out mechanically: each new level of accuracy will 
require new ideas for the testing procedure. On the other hand 
[they continue], imagine that one had access to experiments in 
the physical world, but lacked any physical theory whatsoever. 
Then no number could be shown to be measurable .... It is only 
a theory that can guarantee [the measurability of some 
number]. 
2) Universal Turing Machines 
To show that some binary string presents an algorithmic 
complexity of m bits, it is necessary to have at one's disposal axioms 
with complexity of at least m + c bits, where c is a constant 
independent of the axioms; nothing less will do. Therefore, within the 
framework of some specific formal axiomatic system, it is not possible 
to prove that some string is of complexity greater than some fixed 
value. A fortiori, it is impossible to prove if an infinite - or very long -
string is compressible or not. All these ascertainments are based on the 
use of universal Turing machines in the proof of the theorems. It is 
however not excluded that, for a specific very long but finite string, an 

166 
Inventing the Universe 
equally specific Turing machine can be constructed with its finite list 
of states so designed, that by simply pressing a button, or writing a 1 as 
input, this machine outputs the entire string. Based on the definition of 
algorithmic information content or algorithmic complexity, it seems 
that this string has minimum complexity: the program outputting that 
string on a Turing machine is only one bit long - even if the string is 
very long and algorithmically random, i.e., of maximal complexity! 
And since this operation can be repeated for every string, where does 
this manifest contradiction leave our definitions? What happens, in 
fact, is that the complexity of the string has now been incorporated into 
the "hardware" of the specific machine: the more complex the string, 
the more states must be included in its list. In the worst case, the entire 
string is included, plus the instruction: "copy this string when the input 
is 1." The specific machine ceases to act as a computer and reduces to 
a Xerox machine. By introducing universal machines we recover our 
initial definitions. In effect, the universal machine must equally be able 
to output the string in question. One must write on the input string of 
the universal machine the specific program of the specific machine, 
that is, only 1, but furthermore, one must write the complete 
description of that particular machine. And that description will be, if 
our initial string is of some complexity x, at least ~ long as x bits. In 
consequence, the minimum program of the universal machine for 
outputting the initial string will correctly reflect by its length, which 
now includes the description of the specific machine, the complexity of 
this string. 
3) The Brain and Machine-Language 
Could our brain resemble such a specific Turing machine, 
designed (by evolution) to interpret as simple some enormously 
difficult tasks, whereas othen are considered to be of unlimited 
complexity? It can be shown that in our brains the portion allocated to 
the recognition of human faces is comparatively very large, 
representing our capacity of instantly differentiating such subtle, but 
vitally important, expressions as love, hostility, respect, etc. Face-

What Knowledge is Conveyed by Science? 
167 
recognition seems to be incorporated in the brain's "hardware," so that 
it appears (to us) easy and simple to accomplish what is in essence an 
incredibly difficult task. Such considerations lead to the question: 
which is the particular Turing machine we ought to select in order to 
apply Algorithmic Information Theory to the special case of the 
"problem of knowledge"? In other words, what is under these 
circumstances the appropriate machine-language? Chaitin suggests a 
modified version of LISP. Actually, the only condition we demand 
from the Turing machine is to represent a mechanical procedure to 
infer, in some formal system, the theorems &om the axioms, that its 
list of states be capable of encoding, in some way we have not 
established, what corresponds to the currently known mathematics and 
logic. It remains an open possibility that, if in the future a different 
mathematics or logic can be found, a different universe might be 
invented. 23 
4) What can we know? 
Our approach takes for granted that - at least in principle - it 
should always be possible to encode the sense-data observationally 
gleaned &om the physical world on some, presumably gigantic string 
of O's and l's; and that what is usually called ''the explanation" of 
those observations is conceivable if and only if this string can be 
compressed into a substantially shorter algorithm. But Algorithmic 
Information Theory proves that it is impossible to ascertain a priori if 
the requested compression is feasible. In fact, the irreducibly 
undecidable character of this probability is reflected in that horrendous 
number Q. Consequently, when analyzing a set of observations &om 
nature, that is, when studying some selected parcel of the universe, it is 
impossible to establish if eventually an explanatory theory will . be 
found before a theory having the required predictive power has 
effectively been validated. In other words: there is no method for 
mechanically answering this question: what can be known? The only 
remaining alternative, as pointed out by Heidegger, consists in 
reposing the questions, suggesting some new axioms, and then finding 

168 
Inventing the Universe 
out if the theorems deducible from them are adequate, that is, if "it 
works." 
Nothing then allows us to contend that the universe, or a part of it, 
is ordered and symmetric before the algorithmic compression of the 
string describing it has been achieved. But the probability of achieving 
a compression of only 10 bits is just one in a thousand. More precisely, 
the probability that a string n-bits long can be algorithmically 
compressed into a n - k bits algorithm has shown to be of the ( order of) 
(½)It; hence this probability decreases exponentially as k increases. 
Since the number of existing possible programs of n - k bits length 
decreases exponentially with k, a shorter string cannot be assigned to 
the immense majority of the 2° possible strings representing the 
descriptions of some physical situation: in other words, these strings 
cannot be compressed, and so can never be "explained." Consequently, 
the descriptions encoded as incompressible strings are algorithmically 
random, devoid of any order or symmetry. 
Complex problems, for instance those found in biology, 
inescapably require gigantic strings for their complete description. 
Evolution has shaped the biosphere by acting for four billion years on 
hundreds of chemical reactions taking place every minute in almost 
every cubic centimeter on the surface of the Earth. To arrive at an 
"explanatory theory" taking account of this process, the "mega-string" 
representing it must be compressed to some size manageable by 
humans; say, the size in bits of ten thousand text books. Immediate 
corollary: this is so highly improbable to be considered strictly 
impossible. In other words, when contemplating the complexity of the 
phenomena occurring in our "sublunary" world, the string necessary 
for its complete description is so gigantic, and our human capacity so 
limited, that an explanatory theory globally accounting for our 
complex world must be considered absolutely unattainable. 
Experience has shown that locally, specific, isolated phenomena 
can be approximated by mathematical theories, sometimes even with 
astonishing precision. But a global approach, as required for instance 
by cosmology, can never escape these conclusions unless, of course, 
the simplicity, the order, and the symmetry are a priori postulated to 

What Knowledge is Conveyed by Science? 
169 
be the result of some pre-established fundamental mathematical 
harmony pervading the world (the result of the intervention of a 
considerate demiurge?): only then might the compression of this string 
to human-manageable sizes become feasible. Indeed, this is exactly 
how the Big Bang model was formulated in the first place. Arguments 
purporting to support the conviction of a universal order such as ''the 
sun rises daily" are worthless in this context, which derives as much 
from Hume's remarks as from the neglect of the obvious scale 
differences between a human day and astronomic time. 
In the Timaeus, it is presupposed that a benevolent demiurge puts 
up his best effort to introduce order into the world (Timaeus 29c-30d). 
In the same vein, it is conceivable that some all-powerful divinity 
might have conveniently arranged the bits of this "sublunary 
mega-string" precisely suiting the capabilities of the present human 
mind. Or less contrived, as Aristotle believed, the universe may be 
teleologically ruled, and everything in nature happens with some 
purpose in view (Physics II 8, 198 b 16), - this purpose being precisely 
the compressed algorithm we have been looking for: in this universe 
nature never acts in vain (De caelo I 4, 271 a 33). So many things are 
"explained" if this is accepted, the world becomes so nice and clear, 
that, not surprisingly, most philosophers have followed Aristotle: 
Descartes, Newton, Leibniz, Kant, etc. In more recent times, a 
contested and somewhat dubious "Anthropic Principle" has been 
evoked, asserting that the universal mega-string is not algorithmically 
random simply because "we are here to observe the universe." Finally, 
it might be assumed that an universal evolutionary process, allowing at 
the present epoch the appearance of conscious "ordered" observers, 
must necessarily entail a sufficient degree of "harmony and 
proportion" at least in our comer of the universe, and at time-scales 
compatible with human observational possibilities. But this assumption 
only displaces the problem: if a compression by only 10 bits is already 
so highly improbable, and if all teleological or similar arguments are 
discarded as unscientific, one must now explain this astonishingly 
selective universal evolutionary process, this "fine tuning" to precisely 
our present-day proficiency. 

170 
Inventing the Universe 
5) What do we know? 
But modern science has repeatedly and astoundingly shown that 
in many situations an algorithmic compression is feasible, that a 
fonnal axiomatic system, a theory, is capable of outputting a 
significant string of data whose predicted numerical values are in 
adequate agreement with observation and experimentation. In some 
cases, this agreement is impressive. A frequently adduced illustration 
is the value of the magnetic field of the electron, the experimental 
result being greater by a factor of exactly 1.001159652188 ::t: 
0.000000000004 
than 
the 
value 
predicted 
by 
quantum 
electrodynamics!24 And despite its disturbing remaining problems, the 
Big Bang model can also claim to have observationally verified certain 
key predictions, as we have pointed out. In all such instances, in what 
exactly does the knowledge thus acquired consist? 
A theory is equivalent to the shortest algorithm into which the 
symbolic string describing some particular parcel of the universe has 
been compressed, provided that it agrees reasonably well with 
predicted observations, provided that "it works." Should that theory be 
amenable in its turn to further algorithmic compression, resulting in .a 
still shorter algorithm, then this further compressed theory will be 
considered to be "the" theory, since it can output the initial longer 
theory just as well. If the compression results in the minimal 
algorithm, then the infonnation content of that maximally compressed 
string contains all the infonnation of the theory, that is, contains 
potentially all its theorems and consequently contains all the 
predictions amenable to verification that this theory can ever establish. 
Theorems containing more infonnation than the minimal algorithm can 
never be proved in the framework of the theory: they are undecidable 
and correspond to questions about the axioms, and are therefore 
equivalent to additional new independent axioms. 
Let us now assume that an algorithmic compression of the 
symbolic description of a segment of nature has been successfully 
accomplished and that a theory has been established: in what does the 
knowledge gained by this procedure consist? 

What Knowledge is Conveyed by Science? 
171 
The extent of such knowledge reduces to a (compressed) 
algorithm, to a formal axiomatic system. Until further compression is 
achieved, one considers the binary string representing this system as 
the shortest possible one, or the minimal algorithm. Regardless of the 
fact that such an assumption can never be proved, if in its present 
formulation the algorithm cannot be further compressed, if it is 
considered to be the shortest possible one, then inescapably it follows 
from Algorithmic Information Theory that this string, this algorithm, 
this theory, is -
by definition! 
-
algorithmically random, 
incompressible, strictly irreducible and devoid of any order or 
symmetry. No logic, no Turing machine, can deduce our theory froni a 
more concise, more compact theory, or from more fundamental 
principles. The only possible manipulation consists in copying the 
theory, like in a Xerox machine, since the minimal program for 
outputting the theory has approximately its same length in bits. No 
logical analysis of such a theory is ever possible, and the only 
attainable operation reduces to its simple enunciation. 
This surprising conclusion is the direct corollary stemming from 
our definitions. The shortest algorithm, the most compact program is 
necessarily algorithmically random. Otherwise, this shortest program 
would admit a compression into an even shorter one: a manifest 
contradiction. What does "algorithmically random" mean? It means 
that the theory, expressed as a binary string of O's and I's, is such that 
if one arbitrarily picks one bit, the chance of hitting a O or a I is ½, and 
if you want to bet on whether the next bit is a O or a 1, there is no 
procedure more effective than tossing a fair coin. Since, considered in 
the light of Algorithmic Information Theory, formal axiomatic systems 
are algorithmically random, they are irreducible to any compact 
description, and cannot become the object of a rational analysis; they 
cannot be reduced to more primordial or simple elements, but can only 
be enunciated. 
Anything surpassing the algorithmic information content of the 
system, any theorem surpassing its complexity, cannot be deduced by 
the theory. Incorporating new information in a theory is equivalent to 
adding axioms. This is what usually happens when aberrant 

172 
Inventing the Universe 
observations, counter-evidences or anomalies not predicted by the 
theory are incorporated in the theory: this can only be accomplished by 
adding ad hoc axioms. 25 When formal axiomatic systems, such as 
some mathematical theories modeling the physical universe, are 
supposed to represent a "final" or "universal" law of nature, they are 
not amenable to further rational analysis; besides, they are incomplete 
in GOdel's and Chaitin's sense, in that an infinity of their perfectly 
well-constructed propositions cannot be deduced by them. They can 
only be justified by their "success," defined as the capacity of such a 
system to generate a set of empirically testable predictions reasonably 
coincident with actual experimentally measured quantities, as 
illustrated in Figure 3.18. Any justification of some formal axiomatic 
.system, beyond this operative "success," requires a wider meta-system, 
capable in its tum of outputting the system in question. Such meta-
systems are, among others, all sorts of ad hoc omnipotent divinities. 
Consistency requires that this variety of meta-systems be nothing but 
irreducibly random contraptions; since they are, by definition, 
incompressible, one must accept the utter impossibility of their rational 
analysis: no logical language can speak about them, and they are 
ineffable. Moreover, there seems to be no acceptable alternative in 
sight, since the underpinning structure of Algorithmic Information 
Theory is shared by elementary mathematics; hence, to contest the 
validity of its startling conclusions is equivalent to contesting the 
validity of mathematics and logic, sapping the very foundations of our 
most fundamental tools of rational analysis. 25 
The random character of axiomatic systems sets a limit to the 
reduction of our knowledge of reality to some primordial, simple and 
hopefully compact mathematical explanation of nature, the dream of 
some contemporary physicists. A more modest ideal may consist in 
splitting the description of the (infinite? continuous?) universe into a 
finite number of partial algorithmically compressible fragments. In this 
scenario, our knowledge of the universe reduces to a finite set of 
axiomatic propositions, selected exclusively in view of their "success," 
but unassailable by any further analysis. These partial fragments 
remain algorithmically independent: the joint information l(X J? of the 

What Knowledge is Conveyed by Science? 
173 
theories "explaining" two segments X and Y is /(X) + /(Y), and their 
muJual information content /(X· Y,) shows that to know X does not help 
at all to calculate Y. A disturbing consequence of this independence is 
that, in this scenario, the sciences describing different portions of the 
universe may be based on mutually contradictory statements, and the 
consistency of the scientific corpus may be lost. 
This, then, is the answer to the question: what do we know? if 
Algorithmic Information Theory is accepted as a valid tool for this 
analysis. And we emphasize: to reject this approach on the ground of 
preconceived convictions is to question mathematics (and logic) itself. 
All the same, let us not forget that G6del' s theorem, proving that 
arithmetic is incomplete, dates only from 1931. If such recent work has 
now shown beyond doubt that the set of primordial axioms founding 
our preeminent tool of analysis remains uncertain, then it may not be 
too surprising to state that the method first introduced in the Timaeus 
and adopted by all modem scientists after Galileo, the method 
underlying the Big Bang model, may also now found to be limited, that 
at most, only a partial, fragmentary knowledge is attainable. This 
frontier, here only sketched and vaguely perceived, can indeed 
illustrate the limits of what we possibly can and what we effectively do 
know. 
But are the assertions deriving from Algorithmic Information 
Theory really so unconventional, have they in fact never been 
maintained in the course of history? The contrary seems to be the case: 
certain texts by Aristotle present a surprising homology with the 
conclusions just enunciated. We end our book by glancing at 
Aristotle's Posterior Analytics. 
The Status of the Axioms in Aristotle's Posterior Analytics 
Acquisition of knowledge is dealt with in different parts of the 
extensive Aristotelian corpus. To avoid misunderstandings, we first 
outline the method we will adhere to in the following interpretation of 

174 
Inventing the Universe 
Aristotle's Posterior Analytics. 
I. 
We refrain from reading into Aristotle's texts concepts and 
intentions which only modem investigation has developed, but do not 
reject the use of such modem concepts and meanings as instruments of 
elucidation of the same texts, insofar as they allow a finer analysis of 
his thoughts. 
2. 
We also refrain from settling in any way apparent or real 
discords detected by some authors in Aristotle's doctrine. 
3. 
We consider Aristotle's investigations in the Posterior 
Analytics to be a significant contribution to the analysis of the problem 
of scientific knowledge, a contribution still providing valuable insights 
to a contemporary reader. 
4. 
Passages quoted are for the most part very short excerpts, 
chosen because they represent some particular aspect of the problem. 
The only merit of this rather fragmentary approach is to avoid 
commentaries of unwieldy length. 
We begin by briefly recasting Aristotle's investigations in the 
light of Algorithmic Information Theory. 
In the two Analytics, Aristotle studies the conditions for the 
proper acquisition of scientific knowledge. "In the Prior Analytics 
Aristotle has stated and developed his theory of syllogism .... He now 
(in the Posterior Analytics) turns to the problem of knowledge: what it 
is, how it is acquired, how guaranteed to be true, how expanded and 
systematized."26 
First it must be clearly settled that: "Scientific knowledge cannot 
be acquired by sense-perception" (Posterior Analytics I 31, 87 b 28, cf. 
also I 88 a 9); and that: scientific knowledge is gathered by applying 
the syllogistic method, that is, by logically deducing (mechanically, 
with a Turing machine, for instance) consequences from certain first 
premises. But are these first premises true? Either they in tum are 
deduced from other first premises, and this then goes on ad infinitum, 
or such axioms are to be given a particular status. "Axioms," "first 
principles," "primary premises," are Aristotle's terms, which are 
homologous to "axiomatic formal systems," while "deduction" is what 

What Knowledge is Conveyed by Science? 
17S 
a Turing machine performs. A Turing machine's "list of states" is 
homologous to the rules of a correct syllogistic system. And 
"conclusions" or ''theorems" is what scientific knowledge is all about. 
Taken together, these deliberations show that if the initial 
premises are true, and "the notion[s] reached by demonstrative 
knowledge are also necessarily true" (Posterior Analytics I 4, 73 a 22), 
then, inescapably, the status of the axioms in Aristotle's theory of 
knowledge becomes crucial. 
The opening sentence of the Posterior Analytics focuses directly 
on the problem outlined: "All teaching (didask:alia) and learning 
(mathesis) that involves the use of reason proceeds from preexistent 
knowledge" (Posterior Analytics I 1, 71 a 1-2). This previous 
knowledge may relate to the existence of some thing or fact, or to the 
definition or meaning of some term. He goes on: "We consider we 
have unqualified knowledge of anything when we believe that we 
know (i) ... the cause (aitia) from which the fact results, and (ii) that 
the fact cannot be otherwise" (Posterior Analytics I 2, 71 b 9-1-2). 
Science, that is, knowledge gleaned from the deductive method, has to 
ascertain that the cause attributed to a fact is truly its cause and must 
necessarily produce that fact as its effect. 
This necessity is explicitly acknowledged by Aristotle: "If 
knowledge is such as we have assumed, demonstrative knowledge 
must proceed from premises which are true, primary, immediate, better 
known than, prior to, and causative of the conclusion" (Posterior 
Analytics I 2, 71 b 19-23). He goes on to list the characteristics of the 
premises: "The premises, then, must be true statements; because it is 
impossible to know that which is contrary to fact, e.g., that the 
diagonal of a square is commensurate with the sides. They must be 
primary and indemonstrable, because otherwise we shall not know 
them unless we have proofs of them" (Posterior Analytics I 2, 71 b 2S-
28). It follows that primary premises and principles must be identical 
notions: ''To argue from primary premises is to argue from appropriate 
first principles (arche); for by primary premise and first principle I 
mean the same thing'' (Posterior Analytics I 2, 72 a 5-7). This leads 
Aristotle to speak of the axioms: "I apply the term 'thesis' to an 

176 
Inventing the Universe 
immediate indemonstrable first principle of syllogism the grasp of 
which is not necessary for the acquisition of certain kinds of 
knowledge; but that [first principle] which must be grasped if any 
knowledge is to be acquired, I call an 'axiom' (axioma)" (Posterior 
Analytics I 2, 72 a 15-17). Aristotle thus defines axiom as a 
indemonstrable first principle absolutely indispensable for the 
acquisition of scientific knowledge. Thus, if the first principles are 
indemonstrable, and if everything that can claim to be a scientific 
knowledge is nothing but a deduction from these first principles, then 
no scientific knowledge can be acquired unless these first principles 
are somehow uncovered through other means. 
Aristotle readily admits this predicament. "We, however, hold 
that not all knowledge is demonstrative; the knowledge of immediate 
premises is not by demonstration" (Posterior Analytics I 3, 72 b 18-
20). Next a key result, fundamental for all scientific endeavor, is 
propounded. If such an (a priori true) axiom system is ''universal" 
(katholikos), then the consequences deduced from it must be eternal, 
i.e., universal laws of nature: "It is also evident that if the premises of 
the syllogism are universal, the conclusion of a demonstration ... in the 
strict sense, must be eternal" (Posterior Analytics I 8, 75 b 21-24). 
Aristotle goes on to say: "It is difficult to be certain whether one 
knows or not; for it is difficult to be certain whether our knowledge is 
based upon the principles appropriate to each case - it is this that 
constitutes true knowledge - or not'' (Posterior Analytics I 9, 76 a 26-
28, our emphasis). 
In term of Algorithmic Information Theory, Aristotle's insights 
can be reformulated as shown: 
Algorithmic compression: "It may be assumed that, given the 
same conditions, that form of demonstration [i.e., science] is superior 
to the rest which depends upon fewer postulates or hypotheses or 
premises." (Posterior Analytics I 25, 86 a 33-35) 
Algorithmic information content. "The clearest indication that the 
universal demonstration is more authoritative is that when we 
comprehend the former of ... two premises we have knowledge in a 
sense of the latter as well, and comprehend it potentially" (Posterior 

What Knowledge is Conveyed by Science? 
177 
Analytics I 24, 86 a 22 -25). When some system possesses universal 
algorithmic information content, it contains any particular system 
"potentially." 
Algorithmic independence: "One science is different from another 
if their principles do not belong to the same genus, or if the principles 
of the one are not derived from the principles of the other" (Posterior 
Analytics I 28 87a 39 b I). Algorithmic independence is assimilated by 
Aristotle to the impossibility of the metabasis eis allo genos. 21 And he 
states: "Nor can a proposition of one science be proved by another 
science, except when the relation is such that the propositions of the 
one are subordinate to those of the other" (Posterior Analytics I 7, 75b 
10-15). 
But what about the possibility of knowing the axioms themselves? 
As noted by H. Tredennick, the translator of Posterior Analytics: 
There remains the question for whose answer Aristotle has 
repeatedly - by dramatic instinct - whetted our appetite: How 
do we apprehend the first principles themselves, which are not 
susceptible of demonstration? Is it by scientific knowledge -
the same kind of knowledge by which we cognize 
demonstrable facts - or by a different faculty? If it is by a 
different faculty, how is it acquired? Still dramatic, Aristotle 
postpones his climax by taking the second point first. ... The 
faculty by which we know the [ axioms themselves], since it 
cannot be either science or inferior to science, must be the only 
other intellectual faculty that is infallible, viz., nous or 
intuition, 28 which supervenes upon our logical process as a 
direct vision oftruth.29 
In fact, in the last paragraph of the last page of Posterior Analytics, 
Aristotle writes: 
Now of the intellectual faculties that we use in the pursuit of 
truth some (e.g., scientific knowledge and intuition) are always 

178 
Inventing the Universe 
true, whereas others (e.g., opinion and calculation) admit 
falsity; and no other kind of knowledge except intuition is 
more accurate than scientific knowledge. ... It follows that 
there can be no scientific knowledge of the first principles; and 
since nothing can be more infallible than scientific knowledge 
except intuition, it must be intuition that apprehends the first 
principles. This is also evident not only from the foregoing 
considerations but also because the starting point of a 
demonstration is not iaelf a demonstration, and the starting 
point of scientific knowledge is not itself scientific knowledge" 
(Posterior Analytics II 19, 100 b 5-17; our emphasis). 
Resorting to the nous is Aristotle's own way of answering the 
question: how do we acquire knowledge of the first principles, if they 
cannot be deduced from any more fundamental assumptions? 
Scientific knowledge has been found to be the outcome of a 
logical deductive process, starting from certain premises or axioms. In 
so far as these axioms are assumed to be true, the "mechanical" 
deductive procedure arrives at true conclusions, with certainty, that is, 
with probability equal one. But no science can say anything about its 
axioms, about these premises; in this sense, they remain ineffable. But 
neither Plato nor Aristotle accept this limit. For Plato as well as for 
Aristotle, the ultimate objective of philosophical endeavor is not the 
procurement of scientific knowledge, but the acquisition of ''true" 
knowledge (episteme), which can only be knowledge of the first 
causes. 
Their objective was to fmd episteme, the science by which the 
first causes of all reality could be uncovered. Their aim was truth 
(aletheia), not certainty. But they found that this aim was not 
attainable either by science, experience, or faith. The sole road leading 
to but never arriving at episteme and a/etheia is the road pursued by 
the philosopher: the unrelenting. ceaseless re-posing of the questions 
worth asking. 
In this way, the greatest philosophical systems and Algorithmic 
Information Theory converge on the same ''tragic" - in the Greek 

What Knowledge is Conveyed by Science? 
179 
sense - trait of the human condition: the Sisyphean everlasting pursuit 
of this episteme. But, nothing prevents us from "imagining a happy 
Sisyphus," as A. Camus so poignantly envisioned.lo 
Final Conclusions 
If scientific knowledge is that kind of knowledge that rests on a 
mathematical theory, to what then, finally, does this kind of knowledge 
amount? Is there a clear-cut answer to this question? Or is it only 
possible to establish the limits of any pursuit of scientific knowledge? 
We have attempted to examine in what terms this problem is analyzed 
by Plato in the Timaeus, by Aristotle in Posterior Analytics, by 
contemporary Big Bang cosmology, and by Algorithmic Information 
Theory. 
This analysis has shown the following conclusion to be 
unavoidable: 
1) 
Scientific knowledge ultimately rests on a set of axiomatic 
propositions, propositions which however elude any subsequent 
scientific analysis. 
2) 
No "mechanical" method leads une"ingly to these 
propositions; they can only be uncovered by intuition, insight, or 
inspired guesses, of course after hard work. Thus no method for 
scientific discovery exists. 
3) 
The validation of these axiomatic propositions is purely 
operative; they are retained if the model that can be achieved by their 
use is found to be adequate, if "it works", the way the Street Plan of 
New York adequately models ("speaks about"31) the infinite 
complexity of the city of New York. 
4) 
The list of axiomatic propositions contains all the 
information of the theory admitting such axioms. 
S) 
Questions about these propositions are meaningless within 
the theory. 
6) 
Each such question is tantamount to an additional axiom. 
7) 
No list of axioms can ever be claimed definitive, no 
''mechanical" method can answer the question: is this theory the 

180 
Inventing the Universe 
definitive one or can more primordial axioms be found? 
However, the two most disturbing conclusions resulting from this 
research are: 
8) If a priori sweeping statements such as a pre-established 
harmony are ruled out, no theory can ever be in a position to compress 
the complexity of the universe into manageable propositions. 
9) 
About a theory that "does work" nothing meaningful, except 
that "it works," can be said; the theory can only be enunciated or 
copied. 
''That whereof one cannot speak, thereof one must be silent. ,,32 
Wittgenstein's final statement in his Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus 
finds application here, because we are finally led to conclude that 
10) It is impossible to "speak scientifically'' about scientific 
knowledge. In this sense, scientific knowledge reduces to ... silence. 
Questioning the foundations of its most successful and undisputed 
activity, mankind encounters his fmiteness. No one has so clearly seen 
in recent times the inherent absurdity of this permanent knocking one's 
head against clearly perceived unsurpassable limits as Albert Camus, 
who stated precisely that the outstanding characteristic of the absurd 
consists in reason lucidly acknowledging its own limits.33 

What Knowledge is Conveyed by Science? 
181 
NOTES 
I. The text we translated is: "Wir Heutigen sind durch die eigentilmliche Vorherr-
schaft der neuzeitlichen Wissenschaften in den seltsamen Irrtum verstrickt, der 
meint, das Wissen lasse sich aus der Wissenschaft gewinnen und das Denken 
unterstehe der Gerichtsbarkeit der Wissenschaft. Aber das Einzige, was jeweils ein 
Denker zu sagen vermag, lllsst sich logisch oder empirich weder beweisen noch 
widerlegen. Es ist auch nicht die Sache eines Glaubens. Es lllsst sich nur fragend 
denkend zu Gesicht bringen. Das Gesichtete erscheint dabei stets als das 
Fragwiirdige." M. Heidegger, "Wer ist Nietzsches Zarathustra?" Vortriige und 
Aufsiitze, Pfullingen 1954, p. 118-119. 
2. In contrast, Kant admits as a valid source of knowledge the purely rational (i.e., 
sense-independent) ascertainment of a priori synthetic judgments, directly 
prescribing universal laws to the physical world. 
3. This method is at present the exclusive privilege of the physical sciences, such as 
cosmology. Biology, including genetics, as well as most human sciences, can - so 
far - only hope to achieve a similar status sometime in the future; at present, their 
predictions are at best "statistically significant," never universal "laws" of nature. 
4. Some key aspects of the measuring operation, as pointed out by David Bohm in 
Wholeness and the Implicate Order, London 1980, deserve to be mentioned: 1) 
The intimate relation of the concept of measure with the concept of limit or 
boundary: "In the modem usage of the word 'measure,' the aspect of quantitative 
proportion or numerical ratio tends to be emphasized much more heavily than it 
was in ancient times. Yet even here the notion of boundary or limit is still present, 
though in the background. Thus, to set up a scale (e.g., of length) one must 
establish divisions which are in effect limits or boundaries of ordered segments" (p. 
119). 2) A concept deeper, more fundamental, and much more complex than 
measure is the concept of order: "The notion of order is so vast and so immense in 
its implications that it cannot be defined in words" (p. 115). 3) The notion of order 
similarly presupposes the concept of limit: "It is significant to note that in ancient 
times the most basic meaning of the word 'measure' was 'limit' or 'boundary"' (p. 
118). Indeed, the Greek word metron means "measure" and also "the point where 
the measure is completed," the "end" or "aim," i.e., a limit. 4) Measuring as 
performed in experiments, presupposes limits of (stable) objects and some 
hierarchy of ordered structures. But, "it is important to add here that order is not to 
be identified with predictability. Predictability is a special kind of order such that 
a few steps determine the whole order" (p. 118, our emphasis). 

182 
Inventing the Universe 
5. Cf. Kant's Beharrlichuit, Plato's summetria. This prejudice also explains the 
uncomfortable feeling provoked by the idea of a dynamic, changing universe. 
6. For instance, a reductio ad absurchlm is accepted as a valid proof. 
1. if such a mechanical procedure exists. But for all formal systems of interest. no 
such procedure is available! (see below) 
8. Gregory J. Chaitin, Algorithmic Information Theory, Cambridge 1987; Inform-
ation. Randomness & Incompleteness. Papers on Algorithmic Information Theory, 
Singapore 1987. 
9. The following paragraphs are based on several works by Gregory J. Chaitin, with 
particular emphasis on his article "GOdel's Theorem and Information," 
International Journal of Theoretical Physics 22, 1982, p. 941-954, reprinted in 
Information. Randomness & Incompleteness, pp. 55-65. 
10. Cf. Gregory J. Chaitin, "Information-theoretic Limitations of Formal Systems," 
Journal of the Association for Computing Machinery 21, 1974, p. 403-424, 
reprinted in Information. Randomness & Incompleteness, p. 165-190. 
I I. GOdel's theorem can also be expressed as follows: a formal axiomatic system 
sufficiently complex to be able to deal with elementary number theory, that is, with 
I, 2, 3, 4, 5, ... plus addition and multiplication, can not be complete, even if it can 
be shown to be consistent: there will always remain some undecidable valid 
propositions which neither are true nor false. It follows that it is impossible to 
establish the internal logical consistency of a very large class of deductive systems 
- arithmetic, for example - and so no irreproachable warranty can be given that all 
of mathematics is entirely free from internal contradictions. This famous theorem 
ended the efforts of Whitehead and Russell in their Principia Mathematica, 
attempting to show that mathematics is reducible to logic, and put an end to the 
ambitious program of D. Hilbert which aimed at treating all of mathematics as a 
formal, self-contained axiom system. It was presented in 1931 in Monatshefte far 
Mathematik und Physik under the title "Ober formal unentscheidbare Slltze der 
Principia Mathematica und verwandter Systeme I." At the time, GOdel was 25 
years old. 
12. Equivalently, a set of effective measurements or observations correlating to 
possible predictions. i.e., theorems, of the theory. We followed this method when 
we analyzed what all possible ideal cosmological measurements can tell us about 
the universe; cf. the second part. 

What Knowledge is Conveyed by Science? 
183 
13. bit, standing for "binary digit", is the elementary unit of information, it 
corresponds to the maximum information that one symbol can transmit. Generally, 
in binary notation, two symbols are used: 0 and 1. 
14. To calculate 1t, here are some formulas: 
7t/4 = 1/1 - 1/3 + 1/5 - 1n + ...... , or 
1t12 = I0 00 dx/1 + x2• 
15. Cf. J.E. Hopcroft, "Turing Machines," Scientific American, May 1984, p. 86-98, 
and J.L. Gersting, Mathematical Structures for Computer Science, New York 
1983, chapter 9. 
16. Cf. Gregory J. Chaitin, "A Theory of Program Size Formally Identical to 
Information Theory," Journal of the Association for Computing Machines 22, 
1975, p. 329-340, reprinted in Information, Randomness & Incompleteness, 
Singapore 1987, p. l07-122. 
17. Let us prove this seemingly incredible statement. Suppose one asks: how many n-
bits sequences are generated by input programs not longer than n - JO bits? By 
simply adding all the possible strings smaller than n - JO bits, we obtain that there 
exist no more than 21 + 22 + ... + 2n-JJ programs of length less than n - JO bits. 
This sum does not exceed in-10• It follows that fewer than 2n-JO programs have 
length less than n - JO bits. These 2"·10 programs generate at most 2n-JO sequences. 
But there exist 2" sequences n-bits long, and so one concludes that programs of 
length n - JO bits only account for about one n-bit sequence in every thousand 
(since in-10 I 2" = 1 I 1024). This then shows that even such a modest compression 
as that involving only IO bits is highly improbable, simply because the number of 
possible strings is so much greater than the number of compressed input strings 
that may output them. Thus, unless a pre-established symmetry is postulated, the 
probability of an arbitrary long but finite string being algorithmically random 
approaches certainty. 
18. Similarly, Aristotle's Organon proposes an algorithm capable of deciding 
mechanically (hence "organon", that is, instrument) whether some proposition 
appertaining to the formal axiomatic system "the common language" is true or 
false, and moreover specifies the rules showing how to apply it to all possible 
cases. As J. Montserrat-Torrents puts it: "Inasmuch as a genetic kinship connects 
mind, language and reality, the study of the logical structure of the linguistic 

184 
Inventing the Universe 
expressions referring to reality can give valid infonnation about the rational 
structure of the physical world." (J. Montserrat-Torrents, "Epistemological notes 
on Greek cosmologies", in Foundations of Big Bang Cosmology, F. Walter 
Meyerstein ed., Singapore 1989, p. 7). Thus it may not be too remote from the 
truth to conclude that the N-bits size of the formal system represented by the 
ancient Greek language, its algorithmic complexity, is measured by the N-bits of 
length of the Organon. This in tum measures all that such a formal system can say 
about the physical world. However, please carefully note that we have equated 
language with formal system. We are not unaware of the fact that the possibilities 
of a language allow it to transcend completely its strict formal constraints; poetry is 
one example. But, until further notice. no scientific knowledge of the physical 
world derives from poetry. 
19. A cosmological theory should intend, at least as its ultimate objective, to explain 
all such observations as can be collected. But there are billions of stars in our 
galaxy, and billions of galaxies, and so on. (Cf. the second part.) 
20. In this procedure, it is tacitly assumed that the segmentation of the undoubtedly 
gigantic, or maybe even infinite, sequence truly representing the universe, can be 
done without irreversible loss of information about the universe. Following once 
more the Platonic approach as outlined in the Timaeus, where this assumption is 
clearly accepted, such a priori supposition is the fundamental tenet on which the 
entire idea of reductionism ultimately rests. 
21. If the machine halts. that is, if the calculation is successful. 
22. R. Geroch and J.B. Hartle, "Computability and Physical Theories," in Between 
Quantum and Cosmos, W.H. Zurek et al. ed., Princeton N.J. 1988, pp. 549-566. 
23. In IBM Research Report RC 19324, dated Dec. 12th, 1993, Gregory J. Chaitin, in 
a remarkable development, presents the software for a Universal Turing Machine 
that is easy to program and runs very quickly. This provides a new foundation for 
Algorithmic Information Theory. Now it is possible to write down executable 
programs that embody the constructions in the proofs of the theorems. Algorithmic 
Information Theory goes, 
in 
this way, 
from 
dealing 
with 
idealized 
Gedankenexperimente to being a theory about practical down-to-earth machines 
that one can actually construct and work with. 
24. Quoted in S. Weinberg, Dreams of a Final Theory, New York. 1992, p. 115. 
25. Beliefs, intimate convictions, prejudices, etc., are unaffected by these conclusions. 

What Knowledge is Conveyed by Science? 
185 
26. H. Tredennick, Introduction to Aristotle, Posterior Analytics, translated and com-
mented by H. T., Loeb Classical Library, Cambridge Mass./London, 1960, p. 5. 
21. Metaphysics V 28, 1024 b 14-15; X 4, 1055 a 6-7; X 7, 1057 a 26-28; XIII 9, 1085 
a 16-19, 35 - b 4; Prior Analytics l 30, 46 a 17 ff.; Topica VIII 12, 162b 5-7; De 
caelo l 1, 268a 30 - b3. 
28. Intuition, noun: Immediate apprehension by the mind without reasoning. "The 
Concise Oxford Dictionary". 
29. H. Tredennick, Introduction to Aristotle, Posterior analytics, translated and com-
mented by H. T., Loeb Classical Library, Cambridge Mass./London, 1960, p. 17. 
30. "II faut imaginer Sisyphe heureux", Albert Camus, Le mythe de Sisyphe [1942), 
Paris 1964, p. 166. 
31. "The laws of physics, with all their logical apparatus, nevertheless speak, however 
indirectly, about the objects of the world" (L. Wittgenstein, Tractatus Logico-
Philosophicus [1921, 1922], 6.3431, transl. by D.F. Pears & B.F. McGuinness, 
London 1961 ); in a similar manner, the Street Plan of New York "speaks" about 
New York. 
32. "Worilber man nicht sprechen kann, darilber muss man schweigen", L. 
Wittgenstein, Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, prop. 7. 
33. Albert Camus, Le mythe de Sisyphe, "L'absurde, c'est la raison lucide qui constate 
ses limites", p. 70. 


INDEX OF PROPER NAMES 
Abbott, L.F., 146 n. 63 
Andrillat, H., 138 n. 1 
Aristotle, passim 
Bohm,D., 181 n.4 
Brisson, L., 64 n. 8, 65 n. 10, 66 n. 16 
Broadhurst, T J., 142 n. 38 
Bums, J.O., 142 n. 38 
Camus, A., 185 n. 30, n. 33 
C(h)alcidius, 18 
Chaitin, GJ., 12, 182 n. 8, n. 9, n. 10, 
183 n. 16 
Cicero, 18 
Collins, C.8., 146 n. 64 
Comte, A., 68 
Copernicus, 6 
Cornford, F.M., 64 n. 2 
Critias 17, 18 
Descartes, R., 64 n. 1, 169 
Einstein, A., passim 
Ellis, J.F.R., 142, n. 38, 145 n. 53 
Empedocles, 24 
Euclid,87 
Eudoxus,58 
Fitzgerald, G.F., 69 
French, A.P., 15 n. 5 
Friedmann, A.A., 78,101 
Fustero, X., 139 n. 9 
Galileo, G., 67 
Gamow, G., 108 
Gcroch, R., 184 n. 22 
Gersting, J.L., 183 n. 15 
Godel, K., 182 n. 9, n. 11 
Gregory Xlll [Pope], 60 
Hartle, J.B., 184 n. 22 
Hauck, 8., 138 n. 1 
Hawking, S., 107, 146 n. 64 
Heiberg, J.L., 65 n. 8 
Heidegger, M., 140 n. 21, 181 n. 1 
Heidmann, J., 138 n. 1 
Heisenberg, W., 66 n. 11 
Hermocrates, 17, 18 
Hesiod, 17 
Hilbert, D., 182 n. 11 
Hippocrates of Chios, 51 
Hissette, R., 64 n. 4 
Hopcroft, J.E., 183 n. 15 
Hubble, E.P., 105,106 
Hume, D., 169 
Huygens, Chr., 60 
Kant, E., 169, 181 n.2, 182 n. 5 
Kepler, 39, 67 
Konon,60 
Koo, D.C., 142 n. 38 
Leibniz, 140 n. 20, 141 n. 29, 169 
Lloyd, G.E.R., 64 n. 3 
Lorentz, H.A., 69, 138 n. 6, 139 n. 8 
Maartens, 145 n. 53 
Maeder, A.,138 n. 1 
Mendcleyev, 126 

188 
Inventing the Universe 
Merleau-Ponty, J., 138 n. 1 
Meyerstein, F.W., 139 n. 9, 183-
184 n. 18 
Minkowski, H., 138 n. 6 
Misner, C.S., 138 n. 7, 140 n. 18, 
141 n. 22, n. 25, 142 n. 35 
Moebius, 94 
Montserrat-Torrens, J., 183 n. 18 
Muses, 17 
Nel, S.D., 145 n. 53 
Newton,69,89, 169 
Noether, E., 128 
Olive, K.A., 144 n. 50 
Parmenides, 77 
Penzias, A., 108 
Planck, M., 144 n. 48 
Plato, passim 
Poincare, H., 70 
Proclus, 18 
Ptolemy, 6, 65 n. 8 
Pythagoreans, 28, 58 
Robertson, H.P., 78, 101 
Rubin, V., 145 n. 61 
Russell, B., 182 n. 11 
Shannon, C., 13 
Schramm, D.N., 144 n. SO 
Slipher, V., 105 
So-Young Pi, 146 n. 63 
Socrates, 17-18 
Solovine, M., 4 
Steigman, D.N., 144 n. 50 
Stoeger, W.R., 145 n. 53 
Szalay, A.S., 142 n. 38 
Tempier [Bishop], 64 n. 4 
Thorne, K.S., 138 n. 7 
Timaeus, 17, 18 
Tredennick, H., 185 n. 26 
Turing, A., 157 
Turner, M.S., 144 n. 50 
Verdaguer, E., 139 n. 9 
Vlastos, 0., 6S n. 8 
Walker, A.O., 78, 101 
Weinberg, S., 184 n. 24 
Weyl,H., 146n. 71 
Wheeler, J.A., 138 n. 7 
Wiener, N., 13 
Wigner, E., 15 n. 4, 16 n. 6 
Wilson, R.W., 108 
Whitehead, A.N., 182 n. 11 
Wittgenstein, L., 185 n. 32 
Yang, J., 144 n. 50 
Zurek, V.H., 184 n. 22 

GENERAL INDEX 
Absurd, 180 
Age of the universe, 106, 113, 119 
Aitia, 21 
Algorithm, 161, 164 
Anagke, 22, 23, 88 
Analogia, 27-28 
Anthropic principle, 123, 169 
Ausgewogenheit, 146 n. 71 
Axiom, 1-4, 150-153, 153-155, 173-
178, 139 n. 10 
Baryon, 125 
Being / Becoming l 0 
Big Bang [standard model], passim 
Big Crunch, 106, 119 
Bit, 183 n. 13 
Black-body, cf. Planck 
Black hole, 142 n. 32 
Boson, 126 
Boundary [of the universe], 79-80 
Cauchy [surface of], 97 
Cause, cf. Aitia 
causality, causal explanation, 20-21, 
86-87 
causal stability condition, 95-96 
CERN [Geneva], 126 
Chaitin's probability, 160 
Change, cf. Kinesis 
Circle, 64 n. 8 
Complexity, 
algorithmic, 157-162 
factor,43 
of the sensible world, 166 
Components, elementary, 41-48 
Compression, algorithmic, 167-169 
Computer, cf. Turing Machine 
Connected, 139 n. 15 
Consistency, logical, 182 n. 11 
Content 
algorithmic information, 155, 157 
mutual information, 155 
Contraction, cf. Expansion, 105-106 
Copy, cf. Eilcon 
Cosmological or Copernican principle, 
101 
Cosmology, 67-68 
Curvature, cf. Spacetime 
Decoupling [radiation/matter], 108-109 
Demiurge, 
not omnipotent, 22 
benevolent, 21 
Density [critical/present], 119-120 
Dependence, domain of, 97 
Different, cf. Same 
Circle, 36 
Kind,30 
Component of the world soul, 31 
Differential equations, 80 
Dimensions, of a manifold [number of], 
80-81 
Distance function, 83-84 
Doppler effect, 143 n. 44 
Doxa, cf. Episteme 
Eidos, cf. Idea, 64 n. 1 
Eilcon, cf. Copy, 24 

190 
Inventing the Universe 
Eilcos logos, cf. Verisimilar explanation, 
27 
Einstein's 
field equations, 74-75, 91 
gravitation, 98-99 
Elements 
light elements [relative abundance 
of], 109-110 
the four elements in Timaeus, 46-
48 
Elevator [free falling], 73 
Elsewhere, 93 
Episteme, cf. Doxa, 24-25, 178 
Equation of state of the universe, 104 
Equivalence, principle of, 74 
Ether, 69 
Event, 79, 94 
Expansion of the universe, 105-106 
Experimentation, 62-63 
Extrapolation 
Plato, 34-35 
Contemporaries, 123 
Fermions, 126 
Field quanta, 126 
Flatness problem, 119-120 
Fluid, galactic, I 03 
Function 
metric, IOl-l03 
state, 147 n. 75 
Forces, I 07-108 
Formal axiomatic system, 153-154 
Forms [intelligible], 19-20 
Future, 93 
Galaxies, cf. Galactic fluid, 100 
Galilean [observers, systems], 138 n. 3, 
n.4,n.5 
Geodesic, cf. Worldline 
Geometric object, 78-79 
Godel [incompleteness theorem], 153, 
182 n. II 
Good, the, 20 
Gravitation 
Einsteinian,98 
repulsive [in inflationary scenario], 
122 
universal [Newtonian], 72-73 
Hadron, 125 
Harmony of the spheres, 35 
Hermitian, aperator, cf. Quantum 
mechanics, Observable, 131 
Hiatus irrationalis, 4 
Homogeneity, 143 n. 40 
Horizon 
problem, 116 
dimension, 116-119 
Hubble 
constant, l05-I 06 
law, 105-106 
time, 106 
Huie, 65 n. 10 
Hyperc:harge, 134 
Hyper-surface, 95 
ldea,64n.1 
Idea [Platonic], 19-20 
Independence, algorithmic, 155 
Inertial [system], cf. Galilean system, 
138 n.5 
Inference, rules of, 2, 152 
Inflationary scenario, 121 
Information 
cf. Causality, 84-85 
joint, 155 
Initial condition, 69, 96 
Input, cf. Program, 154 
Instrument, of measurement [in ancient 
Greece], 59-61 
Interactions, 107 
Interval, cf. Separation, Distance func-
tion, 92-94 
Space-like 92 
Time-like 92 
Light-like, null, 92-93 

Indices 
191 
Intuition[= Nous], 185 n. 25 
Invariance, 
principle of, 127 
Isospin, 133 
Isotropy, 100-103, 130, 142 n. 37, 
143 n.41 
Khora, 22, 65 n. 10 
Kinesis, 3 
Knowledge, scientific, 149-180 
Lagrangian, 127-128 
Lepton, 125 
Laws 
mathematical, 43, 68 
physical, 99, 128 
Lie [group], 147 n. 72 
Light, 
lightcone future/past, 93-94 
speed of, 141 n. 26 
constency of the speed of, 71, 
139 n. 8, 141 n. 26 
USP, 167 
List of states [Turing machine], 159-
160 
Lorentz 
frame of reference, 140 n. 18 
signature, 85 
transformation, 71, 72, 74, 128 
Manifold, differential, 80-81 
Mas., 
inertial, 73-74 
gravitational, 73-74 
Mathematics 
in Plato's time, 58-59 
in the Timaeus, 49-52 
modem, 67-69, 149-150 
in relation with symmetry, cf. Sym-
metry 
Matter 
in modem physics, 124-127 
according to Plato, 65 n. 10 
khora, 65 n. 10 
luminous, 120 
matter/energy, 139 n. 12 
dark [or missing], 120-121 
Meson, 125 
Measurability, 164-165 
Measure, 
standard of measure in Plato's time, 
59-61 
instruments of, 59-61 
operation of, 151, 181 n. 4 
Method 
scientific, 157-158 
syllogistic, 174-176 
Metric function, 101-103 
Metron, Summetros, Ametros, 27-28 
Model[ofthe universe], 68-69, 75-77, 
98-99 
Myth, 17, 65 n. 9 
Neighborhood, 78 
Neutrino, 108-1()1) 
Neutron, 125, 146 n. 67 
Noether's theorem, 127-128 
Number 
algorithmically random, 160-162, 
183 n. 16, n. 17 
non-calculable, 160, 164 
in ancient Greece, 61 
Nous, cf. Intuition, 25-26, 177-178 
N ucleosynthesis, 1QIJ-110 
Observable, 147 n. 74 
Observer, free, 72-73 
Observation 
in a,;tronomy, 110-115 
in ancient Greece, 58-59 
for theory testing, 98-99 
Omega,cf.il 
Order, 27-28, 150-153 
Orga,1011, 183 n. 18 
Orientability, time-, 94-95 

192 
Inventing the Universe 
Paracompact, 82 
Particle, elementary, 124-127 
Pattern, 146n. 71 
Pauli 
matrices of, 132-134 
exclusion principle, 126 
Perfect paradigm [in the Timaeus], 24 
Photon, 84 
Planck 
black-body, 144 n. 48 
time, 142 n. 33, 145 n. 60 
Polyhedra, cf. Platonic elements, 44-48 
Prediction, cf. Theorem 
Premises, 174-175 
Presuppositions, cf. Axioms 
Problems afflicting the FRW model, 
116-123 
Program[= input], 154 
Proton, disintegration of, 125, 146 n. 66 
Quantum mechanics, 131-134 
Quarks, 133-134 
Radiation, 3 K microwave background, 
106-109 
Randomness, algorithmic, 155 
Reality, independent of observer, 77, 
150 
Rea'IOn 
as property of world soul, 25-27 
principle of sufficient reason, 87 
Redshift, cf. Hubble law, 105-106, 
143 n. 45 
Reductionism, 184 n. 20 
Relativity [theory of] 
special, 70-72 
general, 72-75 
Rotation [group], 130 
Same, cf. Difterent, 29-30 
Scale factor [co.,;mic/universal], 102, 
143 n. 41 
Scenario, inflationary, 121-123 
Science, 149-180 
Scientific, cf. Knowledge, 
objectivity, 90 
Sense-perception, 77 
Separation, 
Hausdorfrs separation axiom, 79 
Simplicity, 99 
Simultaneity, 141 n. 27 
Singularity, 96-99, 142 n. 31 
Slice, achronal, 95-96 
Smooth, 80 
Space [absolute, Newtonian] 
n-dimensional topological, 69-70 
Spacetime, 78 
curvature, 88-89 
Standards of measure [in ancient 
Greece], 59-6 l 
String, 
of Os and ls, 155 
algorithmically random, cf. Random-
ness, 155 
algorithmically compressible, 
cf.Compression, 155-157 
Subject / object, 77 
Syllogistic method, 173-176 
Symbolic description [ of reality], 150-
153 
Symmetry, 
importance of, 127-131, 146n. 71 
breaking, 107, 144 n. 47 
classes of, 127-131 
System, 
Galilean, 70 
formal axiomatic, 152-153, 182 n. 11 
Tachyon, 141 n. 28 
Tensor calculus, 90-92 
Theorem, 152-153 
Theory, 
Algorithmic Information Theory, 
153-155 
Great Unified Theories, 121-122 
scientific, 162-163, 179-180 

Indices 
193 
Time 
Plato's definition, 39-40 
arrow of, 92-94 
orientability, 94-95 
Topology, 79 
Totality, 67-68 
Transmutation, of elements in the 
Timaeus, 49-52 
Triangles [elementary, in the Timaeus], 
44-45 
right-angled, 44-4S 
equilateral, 45 
Turing machine, 157-162 
Undecidability, 153-154 
Uniformity, lack of, 54-55 
Universe 
open/closed, 101-103 
definition, 67-69, 77-78 
primordial [opacity/transparence ], 
106-109 
Vacuum,55 
Verification, experimental, 58-59, 150-
153 
Verisimilar [explanation], 27 
World soul, 
Components, 29-31 
Roles, 35-39 
Mathematical structure, 31-3S 
World line, 141 n. 28 
World sphere, 37-39, 101-103 
n. 119ff. 



ISBN 0-7914-2691-2 
; I 
111111 
. 
0 0 0 
o, 
• , 0791 ,,..,, 
11 

