
Language and Superdiversity 
 

OXFORD STUDIES IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS
General Editors:
Nikolas Coupland
Copenhagen University, University of Technology, Sydney, and Cardiff University
Adam Jaworski
University of Hong Kong
Recently Published in the Series:
Sociolinguistic Variation: Critical Reflections
Edited by Carmen Fought
Prescribing under Pressure: Parent-Physician Conversations and Antibiotics
Tanya Stivers
Discourse and Practice: New Tools for Critical Discourse Analysis
Theo van Leeuwen
Beyond Yellow English: Toward a Linguistic Anthropology of Asian Pacific America
Edited by Angela Reyes and Adrienne Lo
Stance: Sociolinguistic Perspectives
Edited by Alexandra Jaffe
Investigating Variation: The Effects of Social Organization and Social Setting
Nancy C. Dorian
Television Dramatic Dialogue: A Sociolinguistic Study
Kay Richardson
Language Without Rights
Lionel Wee
Paths to Post-Nationalism
Monica Heller
Language Myths and the History of English
Richard J. Watts
The “War on Terror” Narrative
Adam Hodges
Digital Discourse: Language in the New Media
Edited by Crispin Thurlow and Kristine Mroczek
Leadership, Discourse and Ethnicity
Janet Holmes, Meredith Marra, and Bernadette Vine
Spanish in New York
Ricardo Otheguy and Ana Celia Zentella
Multilingualism and the Periphery
Sari Pietikäinen and Helen Kelly-Holmes
Discourses in War and Peace
Edited by Adam Hodges
Legal-Lay Communication: Textual Travels in the Law
Edited by Chris Heffer, Frances Rock, and John Conley
Speaking Pittsburghese: The Story of a Dialect
Barbara Johnstone
The Pragmatics of Politeness
Geoffrey Leech
Language and Superdiversity: Indonesians Knowledging at Home and Abroad
Zane Goebel
 

1
Language and Superdiversity 
INDONESIANS KNOWLEDGING 
AT HOME AND ABROAD
Zane Goebel
 

1
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of
Oxford. It furthers the University’s objective of excellence in research,
scholarship, and education by publishing worldwide.
Oxford  New York
Auckland  Cape Town  Dar es Salaam  Hong Kong  Karachi
Kuala Lumpur  Madrid  Melbourne  Mexico City  Nairobi
New Delhi  Shanghai  Taipei  Toronto
With offices in
Argentina  Austria  Brazil  Chile  Czech Republic  France  Greece
Guatemala  Hungary  Italy  Japan  Poland  Portugal  Singapore
South Korea  Switzerland  Thailand  Turkey  Ukraine  Vietnam
Oxford is a registered trademark of Oxford University Press
in the UK and certain other countries.
Published in the United States of America by
Oxford University Press
198 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016
© Oxford University Press 2015
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in
a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the prior
permission in writing of Oxford University Press, or as expressly permitted by law,
by license, or under terms agreed with the appropriate reproduction rights organization.
Inquiries concerning reproduction outside the scope of the above should be sent to the
Rights Department, Oxford University Press, at the address above.
You must not circulate this work in any other form
and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer.
Cataloging-in-Publication Data is on file at the Library of Congress.
ISBN  978–0–19–979542–0 (pbk)
ISBN  978–0–19–979541–3 (hbk)
9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1
Printed in the United States of America
on acid-free paper
 

CONTENTS
List of Diagrams  vii
List of Figures and Tables  ix
List of Extracts  xi
Acknowledgments  xiii
Map  xv
Transcription Conventions  xvii
	 1.	 Orientations  1
1.1.	 Introduction  1
1.2.	 Communities and Competence  2
1.3.	 Television, Demeanor, and Change  6
1.4.	 Knowledging and Conviviality in Superdiversity  8
1.5.	 The Multiple Functions of Talk and the Mundane  11
	 2.	 The Semiotic Figurement of Communities in Indonesia  13
2.1.	 Introduction  13
2.2.	Communities and Enregisterment  15
2.3.	The Creation of Ethnicity in the Nineteenth Century  18
2.4.	Widening Social Domains in the Late Colonial Period  23
2.5.	Discourses of Nationalism in the Late Colonial Period  25
2.6.	The Japanese Occupation  32
2.7.	 The Soekarno Period  34
2.8.	The New Order Period  42
2.9.	 Conclusion  51
	 3.	 Representing Ethnicity and Social Relations on Television  53
3.1.	 Introduction  53
3.2.	Approaching Television  56
3.3.	 Television in Indonesia  58
3.4.	 A Multimodal Approach to Comedic Soaps  60
3.5.	 The Comedic Soap Noné  62
3.6.	 The Comedic Soap Si Kabayan  74
3.7.	 Representing Diversity: Si Doel Anak Sekolahan  85
3.8.	 Conclusion  100
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

vi	
Contents
	 4.	 Ethnicity during a Decade of Political Reform and Decentralization  104
4.1.	 Introduction  104
4.2.	Tensions Around the Idea of Ethnicity  105
4.3.	 Economic Crisis, Decentralization, and the Rise of Adat   108
4.4.	 Violent Ethnic Others: Conflict and Displacement  114
4.5.	 Recirculating Stereotypes via Other Forms of Localism  116
4.6.	 Conclusion  122
	 5.	 The Anchoring of Alternation to Place  125
5.1.	 Introduction  125
5.2.	The Data  127
5.3.	 Anchoring Medium to Locale  128
5.4.	 Soaps, Stylized Alternation, and Place  135
5.5.	 Conclusion  141
	 6.	 Representing and Authorizing Linguistic Superdiversity  143
6.1.	 Introduction  143
6.2.	Alternation, Knowledging, and Authorizing the Everyday  145
6.3.	 Representing Mobility and Diversity  155
6.4.	 Representing the Doing of Unity in Superdiversity  161
6.5.	 Conclusion  170
	 7.	 Talk and Conviviality among Indonesians in Japan  173
7.1.	 Introduction  173
7.2.	 Conviviality and Small Talk  174
7.3.	 Methods and Participants  177
7.4.	 Talk, Conviviality, and Meaning  180
7.5.	 Identities, Togetherness, and Meaning Revisited  191
7.6.	 Conclusion  199
	 8.	 Knowledging, Conviviality, Community, and Togetherness in Difference  201
8.1.	 Introduction  201
8.2.	Community and Communicative Competence  202
8.3.	 Social Identification, Conviviality, and Community  205
8.4.	 Doing Togetherness in Difference and Knowledging  214
8.5.	 Conclusion  227
	 9.	 Conclusion  230
9.1.	 Introduction  230
9.2.	 Ideologies, Communities, Competence, and Superdiversity  237
Glossary  243
References  245
Index  265
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

LIST OF DIAGRAMS
5.2.1	 Television stations recorded and medium representations in 2009  127
7.3.1	 Transnational Indonesians watching television  179
8.3.1	 Transnational Indonesians watching television and doing 
community  206
8.4.1	 Transnational Indonesians watching television and doing 
togetherness  214
 


LIST OF FIGURES AND TABLES
Figures
3.5.1	 Signs of place  64
3.5.2	 Signs of social relations  64
3.5.3	 Proxemics, body orientation, and unfamiliars  72
3.5.4	 Proxemics, body orientation, and unfamiliars  72
4.3.1	 Indonesian administrative hierarchy prior to May 1998  110
5.3.1	 Subtitles as pointing to localness  131
5.3.2	 Subtitling localness  132
5.3.3	 Anchoring place through the use of a map  133
5.3.4	 Anchoring place through the use of a map and text  133
5.3.5	 Anchoring place through text in news reports  135
6.4.1	 Representing Chinese-ness: Babah Liong with son  165
6.4.2	 Representing Chinese-ness: Babah Liong with Melani  165
 7.6.1	 Meaning across time  200
Tables
7.3.1	 Participant backgrounds  179
8.3.1	 Participant backgrounds  205
 
 


LIST OF EXTRACTS
2.5.1	 Associating linguistic forms with place in the novel Sitti Nurbaya  26
2.5.2	 Outsider’s reported talk in the novel Si Doel Anak Betawi  28
2.5.3	 Insider’s reported talk in the novel Si Doel Anak Betawi  29
3.5.1	 The reading of a will  63
3.5.2	 Indonesian and unfamiliars  65
3.5.3	 Indonesian, other reference, and unfamiliarity  66
3.5.4	 Talking about the material world  66
3.5.5	 Names, gestures, facial expressions, and familiarity  69
3.5.6	 Prosody and familiars  69
3.5.7	 Sundanese usage, co-occurrence, and familiarity  70
3.5.8	 A grandmother’s warning  73
3.6.1	 Proximity, Sundanese, and close interpersonal relations  75
3.6.2	 Indonesian, strangers and interactional flatness  77
3.6.3	 Familiars, animated talk, and Sundanese usage  79
3.6.4	 Age mates talking about personal life-worlds  81
3.7.1	
Being emotional and speaking Betawi  87
3.7.2	 Building inter-group friendship through talk about personal 
life-worlds  90
3.7.3	 Engaging in adequation  93
3.7.4	 Representing knowledging  95
3.7.5	 Knowledging and authentic social types  98
4.5.1	 Celebrity fans posting on representations of ethnicity  120
4.5.2	 Blogging and complaining about ethnic representations  121
5.3.1	 Anchoring medium through story introduction  129
5.3.2	 Interacting with locals and codeswitching  130
5.3.3	 Sign alternation as the medium and linking medium to ideology  134
5.4.1	 Soaps, signs of place, and local mediums  136
5.4.2	 Stylized alternation anchored to Sundanese locales  138
5.4.3	 Stylized alternation anchored to Javanese locales  140
6.2.1	 That’s what Sundanese call munjungan  146
6.2.2	 I also know and can speak some Javanese  149
6.2.3	 The authorization of adequating foreigners and mixing  151
6.3.1	 Soap representations of the voices of poor mobile workers  156
6.3.2	 Soap representations of the ethnic voices of affluent migrants  157
6.3.3	 Using ethnic voices across lines of difference  159
6.4.1	 Representing superdiverse neighborhoods  162
 

xii	
List of Extracts
6.4.2	 Representing older layers of diversity: Chinese-ness in Jakarta  166
6.4.3	 Representing habitual linguistic superdiversity in Jakarta  169
7.4.1	 From hearer-ship to engaged listening  181
7.4.2	 From engaged listening to discourses of sameness  182
7.4.3	 Repetition and the linking of language with place  184
7.4.4	 Teasing and conviviality  187
7.4.5	 From the serial: Another warning from Grandmother  188
7.4.6	 Negotiating meanings and conviviality  189
7.5.1	 Jointly constructing the meaning of cipoa  192
7.5.2	 Naming languages, native speakership, and pursuing social 
sameness  194
7.5.3	 It’s uncommon Sundanese spoken by the elderly  195
7.5.4	 The grandmother is just so Sundanese  197
8.3.1	 Indexing membership in a public  207
8.3.2	 Indexing participation in an ethnic community of practice  208
8.3.3	 Solidifying participation in an ethnic community of practice  209
8.3.4	 Identifying and evaluating medium usage  210
8.4.1	 Recognizing signs and their associated medium  215
8.4.2	 Iteung isn’t very Sundanese  217
8.4.3	 Were the protests because these two characters weren’t Sundanese?  219
8.4.4	 Wow, these guys have very noticeable accents  220
8.4.5	 Knowledging and pursuing sameness in opinion  222
8.4.6	 Alignment repetition  224
8.4.7	 Knowledging as positive evaluation  226

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
During the six years that I have been working on this research I have built up 
many debts. In this brief acknowledgment to the many people who have helped 
and supported me through this project, I offer my sincere thanks. I am very grate­
ful to the series editors, Adam Jaworski and Nik Coupland, for initially giving 
the go ahead to my original book proposal. There are many people whom I would 
like to thank by name here, especially in the large community of Indonesians 
studying in Nagoya, Japan, whose permission, patience, help, and friendship 
made this research possible. However, some members of each group indicated 
on their consent forms that they preferred to remain anonymous, while others 
were happy for me to use their real names. Thus, for all participants I discuss 
in ­chapters 7 and 8, I have decided to use pseudonyms, as well as change some 
identifying information.
The initial research was made possible by a number of institutional grants 
from Nagoya University between 2008 and 2010 and a grant from the Japanese 
Society for the Promotion of Science (Grant No. C20520380). While in Japan, 
I was ably assisted by a team of Indonesian research assistants, including Eni, 
Riris, Inu, and Puji. To them I offer my sincere thanks. I am also grateful to the 
Institute for Human Security at La Trobe University for providing me with some 
teaching relief in 2011 to help me write ­chapter 2. I am also extremely grateful 
to the Faculty of Humanities and Social Sciences more generally for providing 
me with funding for a research assistant in 2011 to help me get through the data 
that I present in ­chapters 5 and 6. I would also be remiss not to thank Eni (my 
partner), who not only acted as a research assistant in Japan, but was willing to 
continue acting in this capacity while in Australia. Indeed, without her support, 
patience, and good humor and that offered by our two sons and our respective 
extended families, this book would not have been possible.
Some of this book builds on and refines my earlier work. With recourse to a 
wide range of secondary sources written by area specialists from various disci­
plinary backgrounds, ­chapters 2 and 4 significantly expand on ideas I first started 
writing about in Goebel (2008, 2010b). Chapter 3 fleshes out ideas I started to 
pursue in Goebel (2011b), while also incorporating current thinking in the area 
of language alternation and superdiversity. Chapters  7 and 8 expand analysis 
and arguments presented in Goebel (2011a, 2011c, 2012a, 2012b, 2013) by linking 
them with some of the book’s main themes, namely, knowledging, superdiver­
sity, togetherness talk, and the multiple functions of talk. The arguments pre­
sented in these chapters have also benefited from the generous feedback offered 
 

xiv	
Acknowledgments
by conference audiences and anonymous reviewers of earlier material. Special 
thanks also needs to go to a number of journal editors, panel organizers, and 
panel participants for their feedback and encouragement, especially Asif Agha, 
Paul Manning, Alexandra Jaffe, Srikant Sarangi, Kuniyoshi Kataoka, Keiko 
Ikeda, Masataka Yamaguchi, Niko Besnier, and Jan Blommaert.
In its rewritten form, this book has benefited greatly from the feedback and 
guidance offered by Adam Jaworski, two anonymous reviewers, and Catherine 
Coyne. I am also indebted to copyeditor Bonnie Kelsey, and Brian Hurley and 
Hallie Stebbins at Oxford University Press, who expertly guided me through the 
whole process. As always, all errors and omissions remain my sole responsibility.
Zane Goebel
Melbourne, Australia, May 2014

The Indonesian archipelago 
Source: Adapted from Norton Ginsburg, 1968, Southeast Asia. Chicago: Denoyer-Geppert Company. Accessed May 4, 2014, at http://www.davidrumsey.com.
 


TRANSCRIPTION CONVENTIONS
Orthographic conventions are as similar as possible to the standard Indonesian 
spelling system set out by the Indonesian Department of Education and Culture 
(1993). Unless otherwise indicated in my analysis, I use the following transcrip­
tion conventions:
Plain font
Indicates forms stereotypically associated 
with Indonesian.
Italics
Indicates ambiguous forms that are stereo­
typically associated with both Indonesian 
and regional languages.
Bold
Indicates forms stereotypically associated 
with Sundanese.
bold Small caps
Indicates forms stereotypically associated 
with Betawi.
BOLD CAPS
Indicates forms stereotypically associated 
with Javanese.
BOLD ITALICS CAPS
Indicates forms stereotypically associated 
with English.
BOLD UNDERLINED CAPS
Indicates forms stereotypically associated 
with Chinese.
bold italic Small caps
Indicates forms stereotypically associated 
with Japanese.
. between words
Indicates a perceivable silence.
Brackets with a number (.4)
Indicates length of silence in tenths of a 
second.
=
Indicates no perceivable pause between 
speaker turns.
[
Indicates start of overlapping talk.
‘ after a word
Indicates final falling intonation.
? after a word
Indicates final rising intonation.
+ surrounding an utterance/word
Indicates raising of volume.
 
 

xviii	
Transcription Conventions
A hatch # surrounding an 
utterance/word
Indicates lowering of volume.
> at the start and end of an 
utterance
Indicates utterance spoken faster than 
previous one.
< at the start and end of an 
utterance
Indicates utterance spoken slower than 
previous one.
: within a word
Indicates sound stretch.
CAPS
Indicates stress.
Brackets with three? (i.e., ???)
Indicates word that could not be 
transcribed.
In extract words inside ()
Indicates a multimodal description.
In English gloss words inside []
Indicates implied talk or words used to 
make the gloss readable.
In English gloss words inside (())
Indicates implied background knowledge.
underline
Indicates the repetition of words or utter­
ances between adjacency pairs.
broken underline
Indicates that the word or utterance was 
repeated in prior talk, although it may not 
always be in the immediately preceding 
turn.
Double underline
Indicates laughing while speaking.
Providing glosses of transcripts that are in other languages is always problem­
atic, especially when what is represented is a conversation accompanied by multi-
modal information. In the following chapters there are many transcripts of this 
kind and I have tried to balance this challenge with typesetting constraints. The 
outcome of this is a compromise where glosses of transcripts cannot be inter­
preted as line for line equivalents.

Language and Superdiversity


1
1
Orientations
1.1  Introduction
In introductory and even advanced social-scientific accounts of Indonesia, we 
are told that Indonesia is made up of a population of over 240 million people 
who inhabit many of this archipelago nation’s 18,000 islands (e.g., Cribb & Ford, 
2009; Vickers, 2005). According to demographers, linguists, and political scien­
tists, Indonesia’s growing population is made up of hundreds of ethnic groups 
and their languages, all of the world’s major religions, and a highly mobile and 
rapidly urbanizing population (e.g., Bertrand, 2003; Sneddon, 2003; Suryadinata, 
Arifin, & Ananta, 2003). In many domains within Indonesia, the ideology that 
language and ethnicity are geographically anchored to place continues to be a 
powerful way for understanding diversity in Indonesia.
The main aim of this book is to understand how this view of diversity has 
become so common and how a focus upon this can inform scholarship on super­
diversity. I do this by detailing how ideologies about ethnicity came into existence 
in Indonesia, how these ideologies have been reproduced, and how they figure in 
everyday talk among a group of transnational Indonesians living in Japan. In 
examining how multiculturalism and multilingualism are imagined, represented, 
and enacted, I argue that it appears that language mixing is becoming institu­
tionalized in Indonesia. I will show that this tendency sits in constant tension 
with other institutional and representational practices that reproduce ideolo­
gies about language that anchor it to place, forming ethnolinguistic communi­
ties in Indonesia. As with so much scholarship on language ideologies that tie 
the emergence and reproduction of them with ideas of modernity and capitalism 
(Errington, 2001; Heller, 2011; Inoue, 2006), it is a story that starts in the colonial 
era when a handful of islands were becoming the Dutch East Indies.
The tensions between ideas about compartmentalized multiculturalism and 
multilingualism on the one hand, and hybrid identities and codemixing on the 
other, can be regularly seen in everyday face-to-face talk in Indonesia, especially 
in urban areas that are characterized by diverse and transient neighborhoods 
(Goebel, 2010b). In many ways, these practices sit in direct contrast to other 
 
 

2	
Language and Superdiversity
ideologies, especially Indonesia’s state ideology about “unity in diversity,” and 
the ideology that a standardized variety of Indonesian is the medium in which 
everyday acts of unity in diversity are carried out. The doing of unity in diversity 
can, of course, be interactionally achieved in many ways. A finding of the research 
reported in this book is that an unintended consequence of the processes that 
helped to sediment indexical relationships among language, place, and person 
to form “ethnicity” also facilitated a new way of representing and doing unity in 
diversity. In the following sections, I expand on each of these themes (ideology 
construction and reproduction, representational practices, and sociability) and 
the theories used to explore them, while introducing the chapters that engage 
with these themes.
1.2  Communities and Competence
The idea of community can be examined from four viewpoints. In line with 
work on membership category analysis (Antaki & Widdicombe, 1998), the first 
type of community is the outcome of situated face-to-face interaction. Another 
type of community is formed through a series of interactions across time in a 
locale. These types of communities are formed through the structuration process 
described in Gidden’s (1984) and resemble a “community of practice” (Barton & 
Tusting, 2005; Eckert & McConnell-Ginet, 1999; Holmes & Meyerhoff, 1999; 
Wenger, 1998). As Bourdieu’s (1984) work points out, the existence of multiple 
communities of practice (COP) also enables distinctions between different 
COP. The practice of making such distinctions helps to sharpen the boundar­
ies between each COP (e.g., Barth, 1969; Bucholtz & Hall, 2004). “Publics” are 
another type of community that lives in the imaginations of media professionals, 
writers, and bureaucrats (Anderson, 2006 [1991, 1983]; Ang, 1996; Livingstone, 
2005), and they are also constituted through acts of media consumption in liv­
ing rooms and elsewhere, as well as lesson consumption in classrooms, lecture 
theaters, and other teaching venues. One of my concerns in this book is to show 
how each of these senses of community is produced, interrelated, and invoked in 
Indonesia and among transnational Indonesians living in Japan.
As we would expect, criteria for membership in each of these communities 
are different. In face-to-face interaction, there is a range of competences that can 
be involved, and these will be determined by membership in a particular COP. 
Sharing ways of speaking and the communicative competence (CC) associated 
with these ways of speaking are primary indicators of membership in a COP. In 
this case, CC is typically developed in a specific locale among a stable and often 
small, isolated population (Hymes, 1972a, 1972b; Ochs, 1988; Schieffelin, 1990; 
Wenger, 1998). These locales become a place where what is considered normative 
and deviant in interactional terms is regimented (Goebel, 2010b). In cases where 
there are members from multiple COP, membership in one COP or another is 
 

	
Orientations	
3
often determined through distinctions made between different ways of speaking 
(Bourdieu, 1984; Irvine, 2001). These ways of speaking and the locales that they 
are associated with thus represent a center within a system of multiple centers or 
a center within a “polycentric system” (e.g., Blommaert, 2010, 2013b; Blommaert, 
Collins, & Slembrouck, 2005a).
While there are often a limited number of members in a particular COP, 
publics typically have many more members. Membership in a public can be 
seen through competence to comprehend semiotic forms but often not to per­
form them. In this sense, the types of CC we find in a COP differ from the types 
of CC we find in a public. We can get a better sense of these differences if we 
start by looking at some of the groundbreaking language socialization studies of 
the late 1970s and early 1980s (e.g., Ochs, 1988; Schieffelin, 1990). These studies 
were often conducted in isolated communities. Those studied were a few nov­
ices involved in language socialization activities at any given moment—that is, 
a one-to-few participation framework (Agha, 2007). Those with the authority to 
model ways of speaking for these novices were also limited to older siblings, par­
ents, elders, healers, and missionaries. Communicative competence in these types 
of COP was thus locally determined and reproduced. While it may have been 
straightforward to define the competences that one needed to be seen as a com­
munity member in these settings, an increasingly mobile and connected world 
has brought into focus distinctions in the ways of speaking of members from 
different COP, while also inviting scholars to reexamine the notion of CC (e.g., 
Blommaert et al., 2005a; Blommaert, Collins, & Slembrouck, 2005b; Kramsch & 
Whiteside, 2008; Warriner, 2010). Even so, a number of these studies were similar 
in their underlying assumptions about community and CC, namely that mobile 
persons were originally part of a community that was anchored to a locale, and 
members became communicatively competent through participation in one- 
to-one and one-to-few participation frameworks.
These small-scale language socialization settings and the CC developed 
within them contrast with large-scale language socialization situations where 
novices can range from a classroom full of students to a television audience. 
In this sense, large numbers of novices create a quantitatively different par­
ticipation framework, namely a “one-to-many participation framework” Agha 
(2007: 74–77). The role of institutions is also different. For example, the insti­
tutions of family, extended family, clan, and so on that have in the past been 
primary socialization settings have increasingly been replaced by government 
institutions, the mass media, and so on (e.g., Giddens, 1990). The increasing 
role of government institutions and government-sponsored institutions has also 
meant a change in ideas relating to authority. For example, nowadays, those who 
have formal education often have more authority in terms of the ability to influ­
ence another’s life trajectory than siblings, parents, elders, and so on. Authority is 
also much more dispersed, with many institutions having the authority to model 
and normalize particular ways of speaking (e.g., family and elders versus schools 

4	
Language and Superdiversity
and media institutions). In terms of how those in positions of authority interact 
with novices, one-to-many participation frameworks are also increasingly com­
mon. In addition, while in small communities, linguistic forms are imbued with 
cultural value through interaction with siblings, parents, and elders (e.g., honor­
ific forms, terms of address for elders, etc.), in larger urban contexts, government 
institutions and the mass media do much of this work (e.g., Agha, 2007; Inoue, 
2006; Jaffe, 2003).
The ubiquitous nature of mass-mediatized semiotic forms in everyday life 
thus invites us to understand how publics are formed, the types of CC associated 
with these publics, and how these competences are used in face-to-face interac­
tion to claim or disavow membership in locally emergent COP and other COP. 
In ­chapters 2–6, I examine how ethnic publics were formed and reproduced in 
Indonesia, starting from the early Dutch colonial period. To do this, I draw upon 
ideas about technology, circulation, and enregisterment before turning to how 
publics are invoked in face-to-face talk in ­chapters 7–8.
Studies of enregisterment examine how cultural value is associated with par­
ticular signs and social types over different timescales, and how the resultant 
constellation of signs—referred to as a semiotic register—are repeated across 
social domains to form situational, local, and stereotypical communities that 
have particular ways of speaking (Agha, 2007). In all cases, knowledge of par­
ticular registers becomes a defining feature of what it means to be a communi­
catively competent member of each of these communities (Hymes, 1972a, 1972b). 
As Agha (2007) points out, those registers that are situational or remain largely 
local are typically recirculated in one-to-few participation frameworks, while 
those that become widely known are often recirculated via one-to-many partici­
pation frameworks.
One-to-many participation frameworks are characterized by “one-way” 
types of communicative practices, in which one person—usually some “exem­
plary social type”—teaches or models ways of speaking to a large number of oth­
ers, as in school classrooms, lecture theaters, television programs being viewed 
in multiple spaces, and so on. The ability and authority to not only model ways 
of speaking, but to also influence a person’s life trajectory comes from a com­
plex system of credentialism that has legitimized these exemplary social types 
as determiners and disseminators of social value (e.g., Agha, 2007; Bourdieu, 
1991; Briggs, 2005; Inoue, 2006). In this sense, semiotic content that circulates 
in one-to-many participation frameworks also has some type of institutional 
authority. In the case of teachers, this situation is repeated on a mass scale in 
many corners of the world where curriculum and teacher training are standard­
ized. I use “massification” as a working definition of the repetition of settings that 
involve one-to-many participation frameworks.
As Agha’s (2007) work reminds us, while exemplary social types may act as 
models of ways of speaking and interacting, much of the semiotic content found 
in one-to-many participation frameworks provides competence to recognize this 

	
Orientations	
5
semiotic content, rather than to reproduce it. In cases where it is drawn upon or 
emulated, typically it consists of fragments or imperfect copies. Dispersed and 
multiple living quarters furnished with televisions, radios, magazines, newspa­
pers, and computers represent other examples where one-to-many participation 
frameworks help to produce competence to comprehend semiotic content. The 
contexts surrounding the consumption of these semiotic forms are different from 
one-to-few participation frameworks because mutual orientation to semiotic 
form or content is often not a possibility (Agha, 2007: 74–77). Often, cases of 
contestation and the seeking of clarification about semiotic content happen in 
another time and place. When television and radio are concerned, this type of 
orienting behavior can take the form of letters to the editor, radio talkback ses­
sions, parodies, and so on (e.g., King & Wicks, 2009; Loven, 2008; Miller, 2004). 
In cases when people emulate represented semiotic forms, usually this is also tem­
porally and spatially distant from the initial representation (e.g., Cutler, 1999).
Repetition across multiple social domains creates not only possibilities of 
recognition and emulation of signs by a certain population; it also creates pos­
sibilities of evaluation. I refer to some instances of recognizing and evaluating 
signs at the interaction level as “knowledging.” I return to this idea of knowl­
edging in section 1.4. Large-scale repetition of one semiotic register inhabited 
by exemplary authoritative figures also creates a center of normativity that is 
often referred to and positively evaluated vis-à-vis another locale-specific reg­
ister or registers. These types of distinctions (Bourdieu, 1984, 1991) set up what 
Blommaert (2005, 2008, 2010, 2013b) refers to as “orders of indexicality” whereby 
“standard languages” and their speakers occupy the top of this order while ver­
nacular languages and their speakers sit below.
While part of ­chapter 2 is concerned with how the mobility of a primarily 
privileged and educated few figured in the construction and repetition of ideas 
of ethnicity, another part is concerned with the conditions that enabled the cir­
culation of people and ideas. Thus, my accounts of the formation of ideas about 
communities of ethnic social types rely upon a close reading of historical, politi­
cal, and economic accounts of Indonesia. I am especially interested in accounts 
that describe how different waves of technology facilitated, as well as came about 
through, the need to move and connect experts in the form of bureaucrats, sol­
diers, union bosses, political leaders, teachers, and so on throughout Indonesia 
on an increasingly larger scale.
While I  take into account Castells’s (1996:  5–13) cautions against mak­
ing claims about technological determinism, I argue that since the nineteenth 
century, waves of new infrastructure have contributed to the speeding up of 
the circulation of ideas and people, often on a much larger scale. I  refer to 
this increase of people and idea movement throughout the archipelago as 
“up-scaling.” These new waves of infrastructure contributed and keep contrib­
uting to a compression of time and space (Harvey, 1989). This time-space com­
pression in turn produced increasing levels of diversity along with new forms 

6	
Language and Superdiversity
of sociability. In section 1.4, I  relate these outcomes to more recent discus­
sions about superdiversity (e.g., Blommaert & Rampton, 2011; Vertovec, 2007; 
Williams & Stroud, 2013).
I point out that up-scaling created new social domains for contact with and 
commentary about “the other.” Such commentaries have been shown to be cru­
cial for the formation and reproduction of semiotic registers and the stereotypes 
that are associated with these registers (e.g., Agha, 2007; Inoue, 2006). Following 
Agha (2007), I term these commentaries “metasemiotic commentaries” rather 
than “metalinguistic” or “metapragmatic” because they can include commen­
tary on a whole host of signs rather than just linguistic ones. As I move through 
time, I connect the enregisterment of ethnic stereotypes with local, national, and 
global political and economic events. These events helped to index ethnic social 
types with different cultural value. This ranged from the positive associations of 
the early to mid-1990s to the negative ones associated with the period between 
the early 1950s and the early 1980s (­chapter 2) and from 1999 onward (­chapter 4). 
As the Indonesian developmentist state and its apparatus unraveled in the late 
1990s, so too did many of the so-called harmonious interethnic relations that 
existed in many of Indonesia’s provinces. As I point out in ­chapter 4, these events 
helped to associate ethnicity with a new type of cultural value. In particular, 
the stereotype of “ethnic troublemaker” also became linked to the stereotype of 
“victim of earlier development policy” and “empowered community supported 
by global actors.”
1.3  Television, Demeanor, and Change
While ­chapters 2 and 4 only briefly discuss specific contexts and their connec­
tions with circulating ideas about ethnicity, I narrow my focus to the uptake of 
these ideas through a further examination of televised representations of ethnic­
ity in Indonesia in ­chapters 3, 5, and 6. This seems important because though the 
study of televised representations is not new (e.g., Garrett & Bell, 1998; Johnson 
& Ensslin, 2007; Loven, 2008), little work has been done that investigates how 
such televised representations figure in adding embodied elements to circulating 
ideas about social types. In this book, I seek to develop this line of scholarship 
by using work on multimodality and “demeanor” (Goffman, 1967) to examine 
how ideas about ethnic social types have been indexically linked with an embod­
ied image through television representations. In doing so, I seek to contribute to 
some of the discussions on language ideology formation by furthering the mul­
timodal nature of such studies. Indeed, with a few recent exceptions (Bucholtz, 
2011; Bucholtz & Lopez, 2011; Mendoza-Denton, 2011), most studies that look 
at how language ideologies are constructed and reproduced typically use and 
focus upon printed sources (e.g., Agha, 2003, 2011; Inoue, 2006; Inoue, 2011; 
Miller, 2004).
 

	
Orientations	
7
Chapter 3 starts to flesh out these ideas by focusing on television represen­
tations of ethnicity in the mid-to-late 1990s. I argue that these representations 
have helped form indexical links among particular ways of interacting, social 
relations, and ethnic social types. In so doing, I draw upon work on enregis­
terment discussed in ­chapter 2 to examine how these demeanors are repeated 
across several soap operas over time, while also starting to discuss how these 
representational practices relate to semiotic change more generally. In particu­
lar, I point to two contrasting processes of enregisterment. On the one hand, 
there are representational practices that continue to index linguistic forms with 
place and person that reproduce ideologies relating to ethnic communities and 
their languages. On the other hand, I show how some of these representations 
also question ideologies that have the formula of “Place + Person + Linguistic 
Signs = Ethnicity and Ethnic Language.” Both practices, however, can also be 
viewed as evidence of semiotic change, especially when compared with the ethnic 
social types that had been circulating prior to the emergence of comedic soaps.
The delinking of place, person, and linguistic sign is done through the 
frequent representations of migrants and city dwellers engaging in a type of 
language alternation referred to as “alternation as the medium” (Gafaranga 
& Torras, 2002). In these representations, medium alternation resembles the 
following pattern (adapted from Auer, 1995): AB1 AB2 AB1 AB2 (the upper­
case letters represent a particular medium and the numbers indicate speakers 
1 and 2). I see these practices as alternation as the medium rather than crossing, 
which is the use of linguistic forms not normally associated with the speaker 
(Rampton, 1995). This is so because descriptions of televised representations of 
crossing elsewhere in the world are typically associated with liminality and spec­
tacular performances (e.g., Androutsopoulos, 2007; Jaffe, 2000; Kelly-Holmes 
& Atkinson, 2007; LeCompte & Schensul, 1999), while the soaps examined here 
represent instances of alternation as typically unspectacular, mundane, and 
often habitual. In doing so, these televised representations also appear to be 
an example of the institutional authorization of code-mixing. This sits in con­
trast to other institutional practices in Indonesia and elsewhere in the world 
where the idea of multilingualism is commonly institutionalized and ideologized 
as a monolingual ability in two or more languages (Creese & Blackledge, 2011; 
Heller, 2007; Moyer, 2011).
The practice of representing ethnic social types who habitually engage in 
alternation became quite common on Indonesian television by the mid-1990s. 
These representations of alternation also provided alternate models of the 
doing of unity in diversity. These models sat in contrast to the state ideology 
that linked Indonesian to the doing of unity in diversity. In adding to work on 
linguistic diversity (Blommaert, 2010; Blommaert & Rampton, 2011; Jørgensen, 
Karrebæk, Madsen, & Møller, 2011), in ­chapters 5 and 6, I revisit Indonesian 
television to point out that representations of alternation were ubiquitous across 
a range of genres and television channels by 2009. In ­chapters 7 and 8, I move 

8	
Language and Superdiversity
to looking at how televised representations are interpreted by viewers. In doing 
so, I  explore the links among watching, talking, processes of enregisterment, 
and meaning-making. In particular, I point out that viewers’ prior participation 
in authorized one-to-many participation frameworks (e.g., schooling, televised 
representations of ethnic social types) have enabled them to not only recognize 
ethnic stereotypes, but also to evaluate these ethnic stereotypes. I refer to this as 
“knowledging” and I expand on this concept below.
1.4  Knowledging and Conviviality in Superdiversity
Since submitting my first draft of this book in 2011 and then a revision in May 
2012, the term “superdiversity” has continued to rapidly gain currency in socio­
linguistics. Often attributed to Steven Vertovec (2007), the term is used as an 
alternative to terms like “multiculturalism” and “diversity.” These terms are 
associated with simplistic notions of community, identity, and language along 
with ideologies that equate one with another, such as a language with a specific 
community (Arnaut & Spotti, 2014). In discussions about superdiversity, com­
plexity is seen as the necessary starting point for understanding language prac­
tices along with the need for a new vocabulary set (Blommaert, 2013a). There are 
a number of themes covered in work on superdiversity, although here I focus on 
just two.
First, scholars generally agree that a characteristic of superdiversity is that 
intercultural contact occurs in more social domains and more frequently than 
in the past (Blommaert & Rampton, 2011; Vertovec, 2007). Typically, this is a 
result of the settlement of mobile or displaced persons in neighborhoods already 
associated with diversity and multiple languages. In such contexts, interaction 
among these strangers—who share few semiotic resources—is characterized by 
the use of just enough of another’s language to be (mis)understood, to perform 
particular identities, or to enact particular positions vis-à-vis other participants 
(Blommaert, 2013a, 2013b; Blommaert & Varis, 2011). Notions like “bilingual” or 
“multilingual” do not adequately describe or account for this use of multiple lin­
guistic fragments that are often not the first, second, third, fourth, etc., language 
of the participants, but rather part of a truncated repertoire that is a situationally 
constituted and emergent semiotic system (Blommaert, 2013a, 2013b; Blommaert 
& Backus, 2011; Goebel, 2010b). Superdiversity can thus be tentatively defined as 
a setting constituted by strangers from multiple backgrounds who never share the 
same language but only some semiotic fragments. These fragments are used in 
interaction to build common ground as part of efforts to create convivial social 
relations.
In ­chapters 2 and 4, we will see how different waves of technology, capital­
ism, and nation-building activities over the last 150 years related to the emer­
gence of an uncountable number of locale-specific participant constellations, 
 

	
Orientations	
9
each with their own emergent semiotic registers. The emergence of this type of 
diversity also brought with it many opportunities to comment on such diversity. 
Chapters  3 and 6 add to work on linguistic superdiversity (Blommaert, 2010; 
Blommaert & Rampton, 2011; Jørgensen et al., 2011) by showing how superdi­
versity is represented on television, in this case, Indonesian television. In doing 
so, I point out that these representations provide models of the doing of unity in 
diversity that sit in contrast to the state ideology that links Indonesian usage to 
the doing of unity in diversity. There are, of course, other unintended outcomes 
of these practices, and part of the task of ­chapters 3 and 6–8 is to look at this 
hitherto underexplored area of superdiversity.
In these four chapters, I focus on the effect of increasing circulation and 
consumption of registers found in one-to-many participation frameworks (e.g., 
schooling, television and radio programming, etc.). In particular, I  suggest 
that a further layer of linguistic diversity is added through participation in 
schooling and through the consumption of television programs, movies, radio 
programs, music, religious texts, Internet content, and so on. This extra layer 
is made up of “competence to comprehend” (Agha, 2007) and “competence 
to evaluate” semiotic fragments that do not normally form part of a person’s 
habitually used semiotic repertoire. These two competences are added to a 
host of other competences, which together make up a person’s “communicative 
competence” (Hymes, 1972a, 1972b). In ­chapter 8, I suggest that this ability to 
comprehend or evaluate semiotic fragments that do not normally form part of 
a person’s habitually used semiotic repertoire—which I refer to as “knowledg­
ing”—also needs to be included in discussions about communicative compe­
tence. This is so because so much of a person’s language socialization involves 
schooling and the consumption of semiotic forms from television and radio 
programming, films, the Internet, and other forms of one-to-many participa­
tion frameworks (Goebel, 2013).
While knowledging has parallels with other terms, such as “polylanguaging” 
(Jørgensen et al., 2011), “crossing” (Rampton, 1995), and “symbolic competence” 
(Kramsch, 2006; Kramsch & Whiteside, 2008), I argue that it needs to be treated 
separately for a number of reasons. First, knowledging is different because of 
the way in which we learn to associate semiotic forms with other. Accounts of 
polylanguaging describe performances without explaining how people learn the 
semiotic forms that help make up their performance. While access to one-to-
many participation frameworks is partially used to account for performances of 
crossing—as in Cutler’s (1999: 433–434) account of the role of the consumption 
of music videos and films in providing models of speech for her participant to 
emulate—in accounts of crossing and symbolic competence, participants’ histo­
ries of interaction in one-to-one or one-to-few participation frameworks are used 
to account for their ability to engage in crossing and other mixed language prac­
tices. In contrast, the ability to engage in knowledging is solely an outcome of 
involvement in one-to-many participation frameworks. Second, polylanguaging, 

10	
Language and Superdiversity
crossing, and symbolic competence are primarily concerned with performance, 
while knowledging focuses primarily, though not exclusively, on the receptive 
aspect of CC.
The idea of knowledging dovetails with another common question posed 
by those working in the area of superdiversity, namely how do people from 
very different backgrounds and with very different semiotic systems go about 
getting along (Ang, 2003; Goebel, 2010a, 2010b; Smets, 2005; Vertovec, 2007; 
Werbner, 1997; Wise, 2005). Knowledging as a social practice that engenders 
the doing of togetherness can be found in television representations and in 
actual face-to-face talk. In adding to work on superdiversity and the doing 
of togetherness, I  focus on television representations of knowledging and 
their relationship to the doing of togetherness in difference in ­chapters 3 and 
6. Knowledging is part of a type of sociability that is already well embedded 
in television producers’ imaginations about their audiences. This is so because 
these media professionals produce such representations while seeming to 
expect their audiences to understand them.
In ­chapters 7 and 8, I continue to explore the links among knowledging, the 
doing of togetherness, and superdiversity by seeking to understand how a group 
of Indonesian sojourners from different backgrounds do togetherness while in 
Japan. The doing of togetherness in superdiverse settings is increasingly referred 
to as “conviviality” (Blommaert, 2013b; Williams & Stroud, 2013). The need to 
be convivial relates to the conditions of superdiversity, which often require and/
or produce conviviality as a necessary interactional practice that helps in secur­
ing some goods, service, or employment in a setting, while producing locally 
emergent norms for interaction. While thus far, the idea of conviviality has been 
explored in fleeting interactional moments across lines of difference (Williams 
& Stroud, 2013), the idea of conviviality seems to also imply a move toward 
habitual use of particular semiotic features that help in establishing common 
ground among strangers. That the fleeting and the habitual are so semiotically 
and temporally different invites a more nuanced account of the range of language 
practices that can be described as convivial, and ultimately requires some sort of 
semantic distinction.
In adding to the work on superdiversity, I make this distinction in ­chapters 7 
and 8 through my examination of the communicative practices of a group of 
Indonesian sojourners living in Japan. I use the term “conviviality” to refer to the 
doing of togetherness in difference in INITIAL face-to-face encounters, while 
I use the term “togetherness in difference” to refer to subsequent practices of 
CONTINUING to build common ground among the same group of people. In 
both chapters, we will see a whole gamut of language practices being used to 
build and reproduce conviviality and togetherness in difference. Some of these 
ways of speaking are often referred to as “small talk” in the literature. In both 
chapters, I  am especially concerned with non-minimal responses, repetition, 
teasing, and the pursuit of social sameness.

	
Orientations	
11
1.5  The Multiple Functions of Talk and the Mundane
In looking at how a specific group of Indonesian sojourners goes about engaging 
in knowledging to build and reproduce convivial relations through talk, I also 
engage with a number of other areas. The first relates to the multiple functions 
and outcomes of talk. For example, we know that talk can contribute to the simul­
taneous development of identities and epistemologies (Goebel, 2010b; Wortham, 
2006). In line with Bakhtin’s (1981) and Vološinov’s (1973 [1929]) ideas about the 
multiple meanings inherent in discourse, I add to this literature by teasing out the 
multiple and often simultaneous functions of talk that are evident in this group of 
Indonesians’ talk while they watch comedic soaps.
In addition to building convivial relations, in ­chapter 7, I show how talk 
also relates to ongoing social identification and the assigning of meaning to an 
unknown word across two temporally adjacent speech situations. In particular, 
I examine the tensions around how this group jointly constructs the meaning of 
televised signs, while also contributing to the reification of one of the meanings of 
these signs, which in this case is a word. In ­chapter 8, I continue this theme, this 
time by following the talk of a different group across the course of two weeks. In 
so doing, I place my analysis into my earlier discussions about community and 
enregisterment by showing how this group of Indonesians interactionally indexes 
their participation in a number of communities while viewing television or while 
being interviewed.
In ­chapter 9, I conclude by pointing out some of the contributions that this 
study might make to sociolinguistics and Indonesian studies. In addition to 
engaging with sociolinguistic scholarship on language ideologies, superdiversity, 
community, and communicative competence, I also point out that for Indonesian 
area specialists, this book presents a story of the continued changing nature of 
the idea of ethnicity and how signs associated with this register are mobilized to 
do situated relationship work. The idea of ethnicity and its relationship with lan­
guage has shown an ability to endure in the imagination and everyday activities of 
Indonesians. In some settings and under certain conditions, this idea can become 
associated with extreme difference and conflict (­chapters  2 and 4). Even so, 
I hope that ­chapters 7 and 8 will show that an unintended consequence (Giddens, 
1990) of the circulation of ideas of ethnicity is that it also enables the doing of 
togetherness through knowledging. While convivial talk is a hitherto road less 
traveled in studies of communal relations in Indonesia, nevertheless, what I offer 
in this book can complement the study of unity in diversity in Indonesia.
Finally, since the implementation of decentralization around 2001, 
we have seen a rise in the “symbolic” or “social” value (Bourdieu, 1991) of 
ethnicity, ethnic languages, and the mixing of ethnic languages with 
Indonesian. Evidence of this revaluation process is presented in ­chapters 3–6. 
In sociolinguistics-speak, this revaluing is an example of the reconfigura­
tion of existing “orders of indexicality” (Blommaert, 2005, 2007, 2010). This 
 

12	
Language and Superdiversity
revaluation process contests and reformulates hierarchies of language. For 
example, in the early 1990s, Indonesian was at the top; some ethnic languages 
such as Javanese, Sundanese, and Balinese were below it; and a mixing of 
Indonesian and ethnic languages was at the bottom. Since then, the increased 
presence of regional languages in the media, schools, and as topics of political 
discourse has created tensions in this hierarchy. Ethnic languages have edged 
closer to equality with Indonesian, and representations of language mixing are 
now commonplace. This revaluation that has been achieved through school­
ing and media has enabled the appropriation and mobilization of emblems of 
ethnicity. In the case I present here, I focus on the appropriation and mobiliza­
tion of fragments of ethnic languages used together (often in the same utter­
ance) with Indonesian. In ­chapter 3 and ­chapters 6–8, I point out that those 
who appropriate and mobilize these emblems are often those with no primor­
dial claim to them. In doing so, I link a general process of appropriation and 
mobilization or “recontextualization” (Bauman & Briggs, 1990) of emblems of 
ethnicity to how recontextualization matters in political contexts too, such as 
in the political campaigning reported by Aspinall (2013).

13
2
The Semiotic Figurement of 
Communities in Indonesia
2.1  Introduction
Taking inspiration from scholarship in the broad area of language ideologies, 
this chapter looks at how ideas about the links among social types, regions, and 
linguistic forms have been circulated from colonial times until the early 1990s, 
forming what can be described as ethnolinguistic stereotypes. In building on my 
earlier work, which tended to oversimplify this picture (Goebel, 2008), I align 
with four sets of related ideas. The first is that tracing historical circulation 
of sign usage helps us understand how, over time, particular social types have 
become associated with a named language or a named register (Agha, 2007a; 
M. Inoue, 2006). In tracing the beginnings of this language ideology, I draw upon 
Errington’s (2001a) insights about colonial linguistics, which discussed how early 
missionary work in Indonesia helped to erase and order linguistic diversity by 
naturalizing ethnicity as a category of personhood. In line with their mission to 
convert people within their territories, missionaries made written descriptions of 
previously indistinguishable languages, and assigned these languages to a named 
ethnic or tribal group, which often coincided with the territorial proclivities of 
missionaries rather than the speakers of these languages (Errington, 2001a). 
Through schooling and other processes, language became a widely recognized 
emblem of ethnicity in Indonesia.
The second set of ideas relates to trying to understand how this associa­
tion process also involves a way of looking at what constitutes a language (Agha, 
2007b; Errington, 2001a; Heryanto, 2007). For example, language planning and 
schooling in Indonesia has emphasized Indonesian as “a language” that is made 
up of certain syntax, words, morphological patterns, and so on that sit in con­
trast to these ethnic languages that also consist of certain syntax, words, and 
morphological patterns (e.g., Abas, 1987; Alisjahbana, 1976; Dardjowidjojo, 1998; 
Moeliono, 1986; Nababan, 1985, 1991). This perspective privileges an observer’s 
view rather than a participant’s and is grounded in a particular ideological view 
 
 

14	
Language and Superdiversity
of what constitutes a language. While such a view recognizes multilingual­
ism, typically the “multi” refers to multiple bounded languages, rather than 
the type of language mixing characteristic of everyday talk. In other words, in 
many respects, institutional ideologies of language in Indonesia are like those 
reported and critiqued elsewhere in the world (e.g., Blommaert & Rampton, 2011; 
Moyer, 2011).
The third set of ideas I align with is the general thrust of work in linguistic 
anthropology and the anthropology of migration that emphasizes diversity over 
simplification and focuses on superdiversity, multiple truncated competences, 
and the social value of the linguistic repertoires associated with these compe­
tences (Blommaert, 2010; Vertovec, 2007). Diversity and multiple truncated rep­
ertoires are a result of mobility and are an increasingly normal state of affairs in 
many settings. Not all repertoires are equal, however, and some linguistic rep­
ertoires have more symbolic value than others (Bourdieu, 1991). The different 
social values attached to different languages create what Blommaert refers to as 
“orders of indexicality” where the social value of a language changes as it moves 
from one setting or center to another (Blommaert, 2005, 2007, 2008, 2010). The 
fourth set of related ideas concerns the relationships between different waves of 
technology and how they have contributed to the up-scaling of the circulation 
of people—that is, the comprehension of time and space (Harvey, 1989)—while 
also creating new social domains for contact with and commentary about “the 
other” (Appadurai, 1996; Gershon, 2010). In doing so, I draw upon the work of 
economic historians of Indonesia who have convincingly argued for a perspec­
tive that looks at the interdependent nature of state formation and technological 
innovation.
In addition to pointing to some patterns, in what follows, I also flesh out the 
diversity and potential lives of many yet-to-be-researched sign systems, many of 
which are new centers with the potential to reconfigure existing orders of indexi­
cality. I am especially concerned with pointing out how different waves of technol­
ogy have contributed to the naturalization of links between linguistic signs, place, 
and person to form imagined communities of ethnic social types, while exploring 
how these processes contribute to superdiversity. For example, plantations, or the 
more recent settlement zones (created through internal government-sponsored 
migration) have produced new social domains for encounters with the other, 
and with it, many locally emergent sign systems and associated stereotypes. In 
linguistic-speak, mobility created new centers characterized by the emergence of 
a new language along with the norms of usage.
Following Agha (2007a), and wherever stylistically possible, I prefer to use 
“semiotic register” rather than “language” because it is underpinned by an idea 
of unlimited diversity rather than the relatively closed system implied by the word 
“language.” A semiotic register, on the other hand, can be defined as a potentially 
unlimited constellation of signs—linguistic and nonlinguistic—that help consti­
tute social types and their ways of speaking, while enabling one sign to implicate 

	
The Semiotic Figurement of Communities in Indonesia	
15
a register and its associated social type(s). In this sense, one sign used and ratified 
by two participants can be referred to as a language, as pointed out by Tannen 
(1989) in relation to married couples. Taking this approach avoids the slippery 
slope of trying to define a language, which is primarily an imagined object that 
is still too frequently essentialized and associated with a specific group of people 
living in a particular place and time. This also highlights the idea that there can 
be as many semiotic registers as pairs of speakers.
Thus, a major aim of this chapter is to point to the possibilities of a diverse, 
expanding, and sometimes overlapping mass of semiotic registers. In showing 
how the emergence of these registers is reliant upon the facilitation of people 
interacting with others from different backgrounds, I also describe how some 
registers have become more enduring and more socially valued. I  start by 
fleshing out work on semiotic register formation (section 2.2), before taking 
a historical perspective that covers much of the colonial period (1800s–1942), 
the Japanese occupation (1942–1945), the Soekarno period (1945–1966), 
and most of the Soeharto period (1966 to the mid-1990s), respectively, 
sections 2.3 to 2.8.
2.2  Communities and Enregisterment
Across the humanities and social sciences, community is commonly discussed as 
both an imagined and real entity that is typically inhabited by exemplary social 
types, whether they be ethnic, gendered, classed, national, and so on (Anderson, 
2006 [1991, 1983]; Appadurai, 1996; Z. Bauman, 2001; Gumperz, 1982; Hymes, 
1972a; Labov, 1972; Putnam, 2000; Wenger, 1998). Concerns over whether com­
munity should be seen as real or imaginary tend to boil down to older debates 
over the relationship between action and social structure. Some people working 
in fields such as interactional sociolinguistics, conversation analysis, and edu­
cational ethnography discuss communities (as one type of identity), meanings, 
and social structures as things that are not fixed but rather negotiated and con­
structed in talk in a particular setting (Antaki & Widdicombe, 1998; Schegloff, 
1991; Stevens & Hall, 1998; Wenger, 1998).
Even so, ideas about community and other identities do become sedimented 
in the minds of people, and these ideas are often used in face-to-face interac­
tion. The sedimentation process became one of the focuses of Giddens (1984) and 
Bourdieu (1984), who argued that the routinization of social practices over space 
and time helped to produce knowledge about communities, identities, and the 
languages associated with them. Work by Goffman (1983), Bauman and Briggs 
(1990), Silverstein and Urban (1996), and others has shown us how this knowledge 
can be appropriated and reused in other settings.
Agha (2007a) has offered a recent clarification of these circular relation­
ships. He starts from single communicative events and emphasizes that within 
 

16	
Language and Superdiversity
these semiotic encounters, signs only become signs if those used by a sender 
are recognized by the receiver. In cases where receiver and sender interact 
with new participants using previously ratified signs and where negotiation 
of the meaning of these signs has some fit with prior meanings of these signs, 
then this series of interactions can be seen as a series of “speech chains” that 
figure in the widening of the social domain of a sign or signs (Agha, 2007a). 
If persons who have some link to the original interaction and signs interact 
with others while reusing these signs, then this allows for the formation of 
communities of practice (Wenger, 1998) or what Bourdieu (1984) terms fields 
within a larger habitus. As work on superdiverse settings has shown, this has 
typically resulted in locally emergent semiotic registers where insiders have 
different levels of competence in their ability to perform and comprehend 
signs (Blommaert et al., 2005a, 2005b; Goebel, 2010b). Within these types of 
settings, norms also emerge around how to use signs associated with these 
communities (Goebel, 2010b). This emergent normativity becomes one local 
“center” of normativity within a “polycentric” system (Blommaert, 2010, 
2013b; Blommaert et  al., 2005a). In other words, this center of normativity 
sits within a constantly changing system made up uncountable and constantly 
changing centers of normativity.
In addition to face-to-face encounters, signs can be repeated and circu­
lated by other means in other social domains. For example, work in linguistic 
anthropology has shown how signs are repeated and circulated in one-to-many 
participation frameworks, such as school classrooms or mass-produced texts 
and artifacts like dictionaries, grammars, television shows, and so on (e.g., 
Agha, 2007a; Briggs, 2005; M. Inoue, 2006; Johnstone, Andrus, & Danielson, 
2006; Miller, 2004). These are examples of the types of “discourses” discussed 
in Foucault (1978). One-to-many participation frameworks are different from 
one-to-few participation frameworks in a number of important ways, each of 
which help in making the semiotic forms that are mediated within these frame­
works more widely recognized.
First and most obvious, is that sign repetition in one-to-many participa­
tion frameworks is, by definition, on a larger scale than in a one-to-few par­
ticipation framework. Second, as Agha (2007a) points out, the way meaning 
is contested is different from how it is done in a face-to-face encounter, and 
often contestation is done in another time and space. For example, orienting 
behavior to semiotic forms that are mediated in one-to-many participation 
frameworks takes the form of letters to the editor, radio talkback sessions, 
parodies, curriculum and policy reviews, memos, and so on (e.g., King & 
Wicks, 2009; Loven, 2008; Miller, 2004). These types of commentaries are 
termed “metasemiotic” commentaries because they not only comment on 
the language being used, but also on the user and/or associated signs (Agha, 
2007a). Just as importantly, the act of commenting not only recirculates signs, 
but it also helps these signs to become associated with other signs, moral 

	
The Semiotic Figurement of Communities in Indonesia	
17
dispositions, places, times, and so on. In short, these signs are imbued with 
symbolic value (Bourdieu, 1991), that is, they are “enregistered” (Agha, 2003, 
2007a; Silverstein, 2003) and form centers of normativity that typically are 
more socially valued than local emergent centers of normativity, such as the 
norms that emerge through interactions among migrants in urban neighbor­
hoods (Goebel, 2010b).
Third, while familial elders, older siblings, or kin have authority to model 
ways of speaking in one-to-few participation frameworks, in one-to-many par­
ticipation frameworks, authority is dispersed both spatially and across time 
with one person being socialized by many different teachers, all of whom act 
as models of ways of speaking. People represented on television, radio, and the 
Internet (e.g., celebrities, athletes, politicians, scientists, and so on) also have 
some authority because they are represented as being experts of some type. 
Typically, speaking figures heavily in this doing of expertise, and thus these 
experts are also modeling particular ways of speaking that also become indexed 
with authority.
Whether and to what extent semiotic registers, social types, and communi­
ties are widely recognizable is also reliant upon changes in infrastructure that 
facilitate the up-scaling of people and idea circulation. By infrastructure, I am 
especially concerned with transport, communications, and large institutions 
(e.g., schools and universities, census offices, medical establishments, banks, and 
so on). Although changes in infrastructure can also mean a decrease in avail­
able infrastructure as found after war or economic depression, nevertheless, as 
Harvey (1989) and later Eisenlohr (2009, 2010) point out, in many cases, changes in 
infrastructure have also brought with them reduction in time and space between 
people or representations of difference and their reception. As those working on 
linguistics and media ideologies have pointed out (Barker, 2008; Gershon, 2010; 
M.  Inoue, 2006; Weidman, 2010), the waves of new infrastructure introduced 
since the nineteenth century have facilitated the up-scaling of sign repetition, 
created new social domains for encounters with difference, and created or facili­
tated new forms of sociability.
Changes in infrastructure and the resultant up-scaling of the circulation of 
people that often accompanies these processes also help in the creation of multiple 
semiotic registers, social types, and communities. Thus, while there will always 
be dominant semiotic registers within a system of such registers—especially 
those that are authorized by schools and the mass media—there will also, neces­
sarily, be competing semiotic registers. This is so because people participate in 
different speech chains, go to different schools, engage with mass-mediatized 
messages in different ways, and so on. In short, they have different trajecto­
ries of socialization (Bourdieu, 1984; Wortham, 2006) that create sociolinguistic 
diversity.
As work in sociolinguistics has continued to tell us, sociolinguistic diver­
sity does not mean that different semiotic registers have the same social value 

18	
Language and Superdiversity
(Hymes, 1996; Labov, 1972; Philips, 1983). Indeed, as Bourdieu (1991) pointed 
out, these registers are hierarchically ordered. Blommaert (2005, 2007, 2008, 
2010) refers to this ordering as “orders of indexicality.” While a diverse popula­
tion with fragmented understandings of more widely circulating semiotic regis­
ters and their social value is the norm, in any interaction, participants’ familiarity 
with a semiotic register and its associated signs enables them to engage in prac­
tices of social differentiation whereby signs are perceived as similar to or different 
from ones that they have encountered in the past (e.g., Bucholtz & Hall, 2004a; 
Irvine, 2001; Tannen, 1993). In this sense, changes in infrastructure also set up the 
conditions for engaging in discourses about signs, stereotypes, and community.
In summary, the social domain of a sign that was ratified in a face-to-face 
speech chain can be repeated locally to form a local semiotic register and ideas 
about the normative use of signs associated with this register. This register can 
become more widely recognized through the circulation of fragments of this 
register in one-to-many participation frameworks: frameworks that are often 
facilitated by changes in infrastructure. This process also associates symbolic 
value with the register and its speakers, often to the extent that it becomes a 
widely recognized center of normativity. Typically, there are many simultane­
ous processes that produce multiple and hierarchically ordered semiotic reg­
isters, and populations that have varying levels of competence to perform or 
comprehend signs from these registers. For the linguistic anthropologist, this 
creates the desire to characterize this diversity in fine detail while also trying to 
avoid overgeneralization or essentialization of the community being described. 
In what follows, I try to walk this tightrope in the Indonesian context. On the 
one hand, I sketch out how linguistic forms, place, and person have been linked 
over the last 150 years or so to form ethnic stereotypes of differing social value. 
On the other, I point to the multitude of settings that were also likely to be sites 
of locally emergent semiotic registers, ironically creating the types of diversity 
and complexity that colonialists sought to understand and simplify (Errington, 
2001). The formation of these spaces as sites has been facilitated by the same 
technological changes that have helped enregister ethnicity in Indonesia. I do 
this as a way of introducing the reader to the types of competence that the 
Indonesians that we will meet in subsequent chapters draw upon when inter­
preting televised sign representations.
2.3  The Creation of Ethnicity in the Nineteenth Century
While categories of difference among people living in the Indonesian archi­
pelago existed well before the nineteenth century—especially through contact 
among royal courts, among merchants, traders, sailors, soldiers, pirates, and 
between royalty and their citizens (e.g., Goethals, 1959; Hefner, 2001; Ricklefs, 
1981)—it seems that only after the arrival of the Dutch did ideas of ethnic 
 

	
The Semiotic Figurement of Communities in Indonesia	
19
difference start to circulate on a much larger scale throughout Indonesia. With 
each successive introduction of technology and/or political regime, there was 
a tendency toward increased circulation of people and ideas. This increased 
circulation directly influenced the rate and frequency of encounters with dif­
ference throughout the archipelago. In turn, this helped increase the circula­
tion of ideas linking region, linguistic form, and person, while also creating 
new social domains and semiotic registers with differing social value. As will 
become apparent below, some of these associations solidified, while the mean­
ings of some of these constellations were also multi-accentuated, in Vološinov’s 
(1973 [1929]) sense.
Missionaries, colonial administrators, schoolteachers, medical personal, 
and scholars from the early to the late nineteenth century all contributed to the 
construction of ideas of language as emblematic of ethnicity in the then Dutch 
East Indies. Errington (2001: 20–24) points out that the (proto)linguistic work 
of missionaries helped to simplify and categorize linguistic diversity. This was 
done through written codifications that ethnolinguistically homogenized those 
living within the boundaries of a territory so that they became a tribe or ethnic 
group. In so doing, groups of linguistic forms and relationships became lan­
guages that where emblematic of ethnicity. This process also contributed to the 
social stratification of populations along the lines of literate versus non-literate 
(Errington, 2001: 25). This valuing of the indigenous Indies population along 
literate lines also coincided with, drew upon, and fed into another process of 
racial classing that emerged in one-to-few participation frameworks in Europe 
and the Dutch East Indies from the nineteenth century onward (Stoler, 1995b). 
This process of categorizing people emerged as part of discourses about how 
to police sexual relations in populations as a way of protecting European and 
Dutch bourgeois moral sensibilities and ideas about cultural purity and identity 
(Stoler, 1995b).
While language was not always seen as a locally important index of ethnic 
group membership in the Dutch East Indies (Davidson & Henley, 2007), in many 
cases, the production and distribution of print-based texts and schooling helped 
construct and spread notions that regional languages consisted of linguistic 
signs spoken by a community in a specific geographic space (Moriyama, 2005b). 
The spread of this ideology through schooling (one process of enregisterment) 
occurred at different rates across the archipelago. Moriyama (2005b: 2–5), for 
example, notes that the need to manage and administer coffee plantations in the 
western part of Java led to the introduction of Dutch-based literacy and school­
ing practices and machine-printed material at a much earlier time than in other 
parts of the Dutch East Indies.
In his study of the role of print literacy in the “modernization” of West Java, 
Moriyama (2005b) documents how the standardization of a regional language 
(Sundanese) and Malay, and the introduction of bilingual schools for the indig­
enous local elites figured in the preparation of local administrators who could 

20	
Language and Superdiversity
fulfill an increasing need for mediators between the colonial administration 
and local populations. He points out how close collaboration between colonial 
administrators, European scholars, and local indigenous elites figured in the pro­
motion of roman script over local Javanese and Arabic scripts, how Sundanese 
as found in print literature was a European construction that perpetuated 
place-based language ideologies, and how roman script and literacy increasingly 
became associated with morality, knowledge (in the case of Malay), and making 
money (Moriyama, 2005b).
As noted earlier, an important ingredient in the creation of semiotic regis­
ters is the creation of contrasts or distinctions (Bourdieu, 1984: 77). For exam­
ple, the enregisterment of a language as standard-like and “good” typically 
requires many examples or commentaries about what is seen as substandard 
and bad, or just different. In the archipelago that was to eventually be known 
as the Dutch East Indies, there were many semiotic registers to choose from. 
There were various registers associated with Dutch. There were also various 
registers associated with literary Malay, as well as varieties of Malay associ­
ated with local communities. The semiotic registers that became socially val­
ued ended up being called local languages, local varieties of spoken Malay 
(which were also to be found in written form in newspapers), and a variety of 
literary Malay.
Moriyama’s (2005b) close documentation of language ideologies of par­
ticular administrators, educators, and scholars highlights how the links among 
ethnic group, language, culture, and geographic space were reproduced. These 
ideologies were so strong that by the late nineteenth century, Dutch colonial 
administrators had divided the archipelago into distinct ethnic groups (e.g., 
Sundanese, Javanese, Madurese), each with their own languages, cultures, and 
literary traditions (de Jong, 2009; Moriyama, 2005b: 3–18; Quinn, 1992: 2). For 
example, by 1872, the colonial administration had standardized Javanese (a 
variety from Solo), Sundanese (a variety from Bandung), and Batak (a variety 
from Mandeheling in Sumatra), and designated one of these along with Malay 
as the languages of education in their indigenous bilingual schools (Moriyama, 
2005b: 23). These ideas were also in the process of becoming enshrined in law 
through the Dutch idea of adat, which encompassed ideas about custom, law, 
tradition, and territory (Burns, 2004; Fasseur, 1994).
While registers such as Sundanese were used in the earlier years of schooling 
(from around the age of ten years old) or in travelogues, as in the case of Javanese 
(Quinn, 1992:  6–8), increasingly, Malay was the register of school textbooks 
in the later years of schooling (Moriyama, 2005b: 75). Along with codification 
through a dictionary completed in 1877, the enregisterment of a form of spoken 
Malay from Riau continued through subsequent use of this variety in school text­
books, especially in the fields of math and geography (Moriyama, 2005b: 71–72; 
Sneddon, 2003: 87). In a sense, this was helping to link “advanced” knowledge 
with registers of Malay. At the same time, regional languages continued to be 

	
The Semiotic Figurement of Communities in Indonesia	
21
associated with the local through the use of school readers that had content pri­
marily about the local.
While advanced knowledge, making money, privilege, and local elite initially 
had associations with Malay, by the late 1800s, increasing numbers of schoolchil­
dren from a commoner background (i.e., not royal or wealthy) were allowed to 
enter Dutch schools (Moriyama, 2005b: 56–59). As Stoler (1995b) points out, these 
changes in schooling practices were in part driven by anxieties about the dangers 
that uneducated, poor, uncultured, and mixed-blood people posed to the colony. 
The point of this aside is that Malay was already losing its association with elite 
royal populations through a more heterogeneous make-up of schooling popula­
tions. In short, Malay was being revalued from the language of a privileged few 
to the language of a wider population while continuing to sit in a hierarchy with 
Dutch at the top, followed by Malay, and then ethnic languages, each with their 
own centers of normativity that prescribed and evaluated usage.
Schooling not only increased numbers of literate Malay-speaking indig­
enous colonial subjects, but in a real sense, it also helped in the imagination of a 
community of such social types who could buy and read newspapers (Anderson, 
2006 [1991, 1983]). Even so, one of the differences between these subjects and 
the texts that they were imagined to read was that most of the newspapers that 
emerged across the archipelago from 1856 onward tended to use a register of 
Malay based on a local spoken register, rather than the type of literary Malay 
that was eventually to become the standard in colonial schools and documents 
(Cohen, 2006: 182; Moriyama, 2005b: 88; Sneddon, 2003: 89).
During the period between 1902 and 1910, the colonial regime standard­
ized orthography and produced a grammar based on a literary form of Malay 
(Errington, 1998a:  273–274, 2000:  207–208; Moriyama, 2005b; Sneddon, 
2003:  92; Teeuw, 1994). As this group of scholars has pointed out, material 
based on this literary standard was then disseminated through schools and in 
colonial training manuals, novels, and short stories that were published by the 
colonial publisher Balai Pustaka. This process contributed to further differen­
tiation within a system of semiotic registers. For example, in contrast to liter­
ary Malay circulated by colonial machinery, the rapidly expanding newspaper 
industry also circulated written registers that were based on local spoken reg­
isters of Malay (Sneddon, 2003: 97). While the school textbooks on geography 
discussed by Moriyama may have alluded to “the other” in other parts of the 
Dutch East Indies, the travelogues discussed by Quinn imbued these places 
with social types including “others” who were different from the authors of 
these travelogues. The Javanese travelogues mentioned by Quinn emerged in 
the mid-1860s and were often about travels within the island of Java or to other 
parts of the archipelago.
Such travels were enabled through the building of road, rail, tram, telephone, 
telegraph, and electricity networks in Java between 1810 and 1900 (Ả Campo, 
2002; Dick, 1996; Mrázek, 2002). In addition, while other forms of oceangoing 

22	
Language and Superdiversity
transport were certainly available before steamship companies began establishing 
inter-island networks in the 1850s (Ả Campo, 2002; Reid, 1988), it seems worthy 
of note that the emergence of fiscal arrangements (in the form of banks, trad­
ing houses, insurance companies, and currency exchange treaties) and multiple, 
speedy time-regulated systems of transportation and communication described 
by Dick (1996) facilitated these travelogues. More generally, these new transpor­
tation systems sped up encounters with difference throughout the archipelago. 
Indeed, it seems that this time-regulated system of transport and the emergence 
of an increasingly dense road and rail system provided the conditions and infra­
structure that enabled the setting-up of a plantation economy by the mid-1800s, 
the establishment of private mining companies, such as Billiton by the 1850s, the 
territorial defense of the Dutch East Indies from British incursions, and the sub­
jugation of indigenous populations throughout the archipelago by the outbreak 
of World War I (Ả Campo, 2002; Dick, 1996).
In summary, there were a number of interrelated processes that facilitated 
the (re)circulation of signs and semiotic registers during this period. On the one 
hand, infrastructure facilitated the circulation of people, social categories, and 
means for population surveillance at increased rates and on a larger scale, while 
creating new social domains for encounters with difference. In these encoun­
ters, there was a need to use any fragments of what one thought the other might 
know in terms of language:  typically, fragments from some local register of 
Malay. The local character and forms associated with this semiotic register 
were repeated in local newspapers whose numbers were to increase remark­
ably in the future. For example, Sneddon (2003: 97) points out that between 
1918 and 1925, newspaper titles increased from forty to over 200. On the other 
hand, encounters with difference together with the dissemination of ideas that 
indexed language with region (e.g., via schooling and travelogues) helped in the 
formation of other semiotic registers associated with local culture and, ulti­
mately, ethnicity.
Contrasts between these registers helped to further their solidification. For 
example, differentiations between spoken and literary registers of Malay were to 
be found in newspaper commentaries about theater actors’ language use (Cohen, 
2006). Contrasts between Malay and local languages could be found in novels 
published by Balai Pustaka and the types of nationalist discourses that were to 
emerge by the early 1920s, both of which are discussed in the next section. This 
contrast was also increasingly one of social value, with the increasingly routin­
ized circulation of literary and spoken Malay being positively associated with 
modernity, education, new “Western” knowledge, and the local (in the case of 
spoken and newspaper forms), while other languages were not only associated 
with regions and ethnicity, but with what were seen as “old” and “outdated” 
ways of thinking and being. In short, there was the emergence of two local orders 
of indexicality (Malay and ethnic languages), each with their own centers of 
normativity.

	
The Semiotic Figurement of Communities in Indonesia	
23
2.4  Widening Social Domains in the Late Colonial Period
Semiotic registers that had within their category of signs linguistic forms, region, 
and ethnicity continued to be recirculated in the early twentieth century. Among 
other things, this occurred as a byproduct of continued colonial practices that 
related to the administration and running of a plantation economy. Importantly, 
the mediation of these practices and discourses was made possible through the 
continued introduction of wave after wave of new technology during this period, 
each of which seemed to recirculate ideas relating to ethnicity and language, 
while also speeding up the rate at which encounters with sameness and difference 
occurred.
As with other European colonies (Weidman, 2010), we might expect that 
each type of technology also facilitated distinct encounters with sameness and 
difference. For example, Mrázak (2002: 17–18) points out that after World War 
I, lorries, motor vehicles, and buses that were increasingly common in Java 
also increased the speed in which encounters happened compared with older 
horse-and-cart technologies. This was also the case for electric trams in the 
cities, steam-powered boats and trains, and, importantly, their stations and 
stops. In addition, traveling theaters, circuses, radio, phonograph, and colonial 
expeditionary engineering surveys were all sites of encounters with sameness 
and difference (Cohen, 2006; Mrázak, 2002; Suryadi, 2006). These encounters 
resulted in metasemiotic commentaries of one type or another, which recircu­
lated ideas about the links among linguistic forms, place, and social type.
In the case of the traveling theaters of the late nineteenth and early twenti­
eth centuries, they not only regularly attracted audiences from all walks of life, 
but they also attracted commentaries and debates about social types and their 
language use (Cohen, 2006). Newspapers increasingly had commentaries about 
the (in)appropriateness of performers’ language usage, commentaries about 
these shows’ representation of ethnic and stratifiable “others,” and commentar­
ies about the moral characteristics of their audiences (Cohen, 2006). The promo­
tion of phonographic “indigenous” music by traveling intellectuals also attracted 
commentaries in newspapers that linked these songs with regions and ethnic 
social types (Suryadi, 2006: 296). Thus, with the creation of new social domains 
(e.g., theaters, spaces for listening to and discussing music, and so on), there was 
a recirculation of ideas about ethnic social types speaking particular languages, 
while associating these social types with other semiotic forms, such as clothing 
and music.
An increase in discourses of difference through encounters with the “eth­
nic other” also increased in line with the increase of train and tram passengers. 
Between 1901 and 1909, there were in the vicinity of 900,000 passengers using 
these networks. An increasing number of passengers were also Muslims (Mrázek, 
2002:  10–13). Some of their travel was to attend meetings in mosques about 
religion and nationalism that may have also involved those from linguistically 
 

24	
Language and Superdiversity
different areas of Java and the archipelago. By 1932, the first indigenous radio 
station was established, and by 1941, there were twenty local radio stations with 
subscriber numbers growing to 100,000 (Mrázek, 2002: 165–182). These stations 
often played material associated with the ethnic other. For example, Mrázek 
(2002: 186–189) points out that in 1942, the sounds of Javanese shadow puppets 
and gamelan music performances were regularly aired on radio.
In addition to being dependent on telecommunications and transporta­
tion infrastructure, the running of a plantation economy was dependent on 
non-European labor and often systems of forced labor. Where Sumatran planta­
tions were concerned, contract labor was imported from Java from 1905 until 
the end of the colonial period (Hardjono, 1977). For example, in 1905, just 155 
Javanese families were moved to Lampung in South Sumatra, but by 1941, there 
were nearly 174,000 government- sponsored migrants from Java who were living 
in this area, and 23,600 living in Sulawesi (Hardjono, 1977: 16–18). In another 
area, the northeast coast of Sumatra, the population of Javanese migrant work­
ers brought to work on the tea, rubber, and palm oil plantations increased ten­
fold from 50,000 in 1911 to 500,000 in 1930 (Stoler, 1995a:  30–35). As Stoller 
(1995a: 35–36) notes, many of the workers who were able to escape the exploitive 
indentured labor system did not return to Java. Instead, they lived and worked 
in marginal positions on the peripheries of these plantations, in nearby villages, 
or in the newly emerging towns and cities. Typically, they worked as unskilled 
laborers or sharecroppers for indigenous Malays, Bataks, or Chinese traders 
(1995a: 35–36).
In addition to aiding in the genesis of new locally emergent semiotic regis­
ters among people within these contact settings (Errington, 2001: 29), we might 
expect that the type of encounters between local indigenous populations and con­
tract laborers may have also led to the production of discourses of difference. For 
example, the fights that broke out between Javanese migrants and Chinese con­
tract laborers over Javanese women tricked into prostitution (Stoler, 1995a: 31–33) 
helped associate these registers with appropriate or normative ways of interaction 
in these communities. These conflictual interactions may well have resulted in 
the recirculation of ethnic stereotypes too. Whatever the case, the rapid increase 
in these migrant populations would have also significantly increased the visibility 
of difference, while also requiring the development of numerous local registers 
for communication that were based on fragments of linguistic forms used and 
ratified in these locales. While locally valued, these emergent registers were at 
the bottom of an emerging hierarchy of registers (e.g., Dutch, Malay, ethnic lan­
guages, local mixed language).
In summary, what seems to become clear is that with the introduction of 
each technology, new social domains emerged. Even so, it seems that each of 
these new sites had several factors in common. First, each new site facilitated 
encounters with difference. Second, the rate at which this occurred seemed to 
also increase. Third, each of these encounters had the potential to generate 

	
The Semiotic Figurement of Communities in Indonesia	
25
local registers, local centers of normativity, and discourses of difference, which 
in many cases would have helped recirculate ideologies that linked linguistic 
forms with conduct, region, ethnic social type, and social value. While these 
are questions awaiting future research, based on what we know about pro­
cesses of enregisterment more generally (section 2.2), we can assume that the 
make-up of each semiotic register that resulted from these processes would 
have been quite different in each locale. For example, where indentured labor­
ers were concerned, their discourses of difference may not have followed the 
language-ethnicity discourses being propagated by the Dutch colonial regime, 
those found in elite schools, or those found among transnational university stu­
dents. In the following section, I look at some of these discourses as a way of 
tracing how signs from some of the emerging semiotic registers discussed thus 
far were recirculated during this late colonial period via oral and print-based 
mediums.
2.5  Discourses of Nationalism in the Late Colonial Period
A close reading of the work of Indonesia area specialists highlights the existence 
of many other social domains where such discourses of difference circulated, 
including schools and foreign universities. Elson (2008: 7–18) observes that during 
the period from 1912 to 1922, a handful of Dutch intellectuals, Dutch-educated 
Indonesians, Indonesian student groups studying abroad, and political parties 
started to discuss different unification systems, ethnic groups, and independence. 
In the case of overseas students, these discussions were made possible through 
the formation of self-help groups. Through interactions with other students, 
these sojourners discovered that there were other groups living in the Dutch East 
Indies (Elson, 2008: 21). Ethnicity as a category was thus reproduced through 
such dialogues, which differentiated ethnic states and regional-based ethnic 
groupings from the idea of Indonesia.
By 1920, these students, who were from royal and privileged backgrounds 
and typically knew both Dutch and Malay, were also involved in writing for 
and publishing their own journals (Elson, 2008:  25–26). In much of the writ­
ing found in these journals, the terms “Indonesia” and “Indonesians” started 
to be used, and these were contrasted with ethnic groups, such as Javanese, 
Minahasen, and so on. Although from 1912 on, there were many ethnic asso­
ciations formed—including associations of people from Ambon, Sumatra, 
Jakarta, Sunda, and Madura—nevertheless, by 1920, thinking and writing about 
ethnic groups gave way to ideas about “one people” and “one nation” through 
discourses that noted the need to put an independent Indonesia on the politi­
cal agenda (Elson, 2008: 31–32). In so doing, a new hierarchy was being created 
whereby citizens of an imagined Indonesia would become more socially valued 
than its ethnic components.
 

26	
Language and Superdiversity
As Elson (2008: 38–46) goes on to note, these ideas were more widespread 
than in just intellectual circles, and by 1918, ideas about different ethnic groups 
were circulating in newspapers, while at the same time, Indonesia was constructed 
as a grouping of ethnic regions. These ideas could also start to be found across 
the political spectrum with figures from the nascent Indonesian communist party 
(PKI) also reproducing ethnic social types through writings that noted that a 
new Indonesian state would best be built upon autonomous local communities 
(Elson, 2008: 51).
Ideas linking ethnic social types, region, and language could also be 
found in some of Indonesia’s first “modern” novels, which were published by 
small private publishers and the colonial publisher Balai Pustaka. One such 
novel—which according to Teeuw (1972:  117)  later became the most loaned 
library book in pre-World War II Dutch East Indies—was Sitti Nurbaya written 
by Marah Roesli and published in 1922. In terms of ethnicity, the heroes of the 
story, Samsu and Sitti, were geographically anchored to an area called Minang, 
located in Sumatra. While most of their represented talk among themselves and 
with other characters was in literary Malay (as would be expected given Balai 
Pustaka’s explicit goal of standardizing and propagating this register), there 
was some use of other linguistic forms that were anchored to place throughout 
the story.
For example, at the start of the story, eighteen-year-old Samsu grumbles at 
his carriage driver Ali, who is late picking up Samsu and Sitti on this occasion. 
Ali replies as follows (note that the orthography is not in use today; now the older 
forms “dj” and “nja” are respectively “j” and “nya”; boldface highlights the forms 
to be analyzed):
Extract 2.5.1  Associating linguistic forms with place in the novel Sitti Nurbaya
Engku muda djanganlah marah! Bukannja sengadja hamba terlambat.
Young boss don’t be mad. I [your humble servant] wasn’t purposely late.
(Roesli, 1965 [1922]: 6)
Roesli footnotes the term of address, engku muda, as a local term of address for 
persons of high social position or title. We can also see the use of the self-effacing 
term of reference, hamba, which although not specifically Minang, was different 
from other terms of reference used in other parts of Indonesia. Both terms of 
address and reference used above were also regularly differentiated from how 
Samsu and Sitti addressed each other. Typically, reference to the co-present other 
would be through the use of a shortened first name, kau or a suffixed form mu, 
while self-reference was aku or a suffixed form ku. Just as importantly, ethnic 
social types were explicitly tied to language in one of Samsu’s letters to Sitti. 
In one of these letters, which was written when he first started studying at the 
Javanese Doctor School in Jakarta, he notes that there are Sundanese, Javanese, 

	
The Semiotic Figurement of Communities in Indonesia	
27
Batak, Ambonese, Pelembangese, Madurese, Menadonese, and Jakartan stu­
dents who sing all types of songs in all type of languages (Roesli, 1965 [1922]: 108). 
In addition to helping to enregister local ethnic languages through metasemiotic 
commentary, the primary use of Malay in the novel also helped to regiment its 
superior position to ethnic registers.
Signs from semiotic registers associated with ethnic social types continued 
to circulate in the 1920s and 1930s. This helped solidify these registers while also 
being indexed with new signs, especially nationalism (in the case of Indonesian) 
and a bounded geographic area increasingly talked about as Indonesia. At the 
same time, slightly negative associations were being made with regional ethnic 
registers and their speakers. Elson (2008: 59–64), for example, points out that 
from 1926 onward, more radical nationalist anti-colonial groups had solidified, 
and part of their discourse related to the way provincialism held back unity and 
an independent Indonesia. These groups became political parties whose mem­
bership increased toward 20,000 by the mid-1930s (Elson, 2008: 84–85). We might 
expect that with increases in membership and meetings there was also a widening 
of the social domain of these discourses.
At one such meeting—the 1928 Youth Congress—participants proposed that 
Indonesian should be the language of Indonesia and put it forth as the language 
of a growing anti-colonial movement and an independent Indonesian state (e.g., 
Abas, 1987; Alisjahbana, 1976; Anwar, 1980; Dardjowidjojo, 1998; Foulcher, 2000). 
Just as important, this pledge contrasted with an implied set of regional registers 
and their associated ethnic social types. At subsequent congresses and meetings 
involving some of the participants of the 1928 Congress, a register of Malay was 
increasingly seen as the appropriate means of public address (Foulcher, 2000). In 
1938, the Greater Indonesia Party (PARINDRA) instructed its members to use 
only Indonesian when making public statements (Mrázek, 2002: 33). Of course, 
this distinction implied regional registers and thus also indirectly helped recircu­
late the idea of regional registers being spoken by ethnic social types. In addition, 
this distinction also helped to further regiment hierarchical relations between 
Malay and ethnic languages while also regimenting their relationships to differ­
ent centers of normativity, in this case Indonesian with a privileged nationalist 
thinking elite and ethnic languages with those who were uneducated, indifferent, 
or against a unified non-Dutch Indonesia.
As Elson (2008: 65–66) points out, and as represented in Roesli’s (1965 [1922]) 
novel, schooling opportunities in Jakarta also brought together people from 
throughout the archipelago. In these settings, the routinization of encounters 
with difference may have also contributed to the recirculation of ideas relating to 
Indonesian as the language of a nascent Indonesia and ethnic social types speak­
ing a multitude of registers found in the regions. These settings would have also 
required the use and ratification of fragments of Malay and local registers among 
those of differing backgrounds. While we don’t have any evidence of actual con­
versations in these school settings, reference to some of the novels of the early 1930s 

28	
Language and Superdiversity
provides some representations of language use in these settings. For example, in the 
novel Si Doel Anak Betawi (Aman, 1971[1932]), the young male hero of the story, 
Doel, finally gets his wish to go to primary school. In this novel, Doel not only com­
ments to his parents that the other kids are Sundanese and Javanese, but he talks of 
these kids using Indonesian with a Sundanese accent (Aman, 1971[1932]: 102–105), 
and he actually reports the Sundanese talk (in bold) of a Sundanese female student 
when speaking with his Javanese teacher, as in extract 2.5.2.
Extract 2.5.2  Outsider’s reported talk in the novel Si Doel Anak Betawi
“Abdi gaduh adi tilu, entjik”
I have three siblings, miss (to the teacher)
(Aman, 1971[1932]: 104)
This particular story and the linguistic forms found within it deserve some 
more attention because of how it reproduces ethnic stereotypes, models distinc­
tion, and regiments hierarchical relations between local ethnic languages and 
Malay. Loven (2008: 17–18) points out that this Balai Pustaka novel was written 
by Aman, who migrated from West Sumatra to Jakarta and worked at Balai 
Pustaka. Aman was fascinated by the different lifestyle and language of his 
“Betawi” neighbors and noted that the source of his story was observations of 
one of his neighbor’s children and their language usage (Loven, 2008). Indeed, 
Aman (1971[1932]:  5)  specifically notes in his foreword to the novel that the 
dialogue involving the hero of the story, Doel, was in what he termed “Betawi 
language,” and that he did this as a way of acquainting readers from outside of 
Batavia (now Jakarta) with the language of the Betawi community. In so doing, 
he not only recirculated ideas about the associations among linguistic forms, 
social types, and a specific geographical space, but he also differentiated Malay 
from a local named language (Betawi).
For example, he provides the following orthographic conventions: An open 
“a” becomes an “e” so that a word like ketawa (to laugh) becomes ketawe; the 
use of suffix “kan” becomes “in” so that sediakan (to prepare) becomes sedi­
ain; the verbal prefix “ber” becomes “be”; the time adverbial udah (already) 
becomes ude; and so on. There also appears to be specific vocabulary that is 
also regularly used in represented dialogues. These include words, such as the 
negator tidak/tak, which becomes kagak, and kin terms, such as Babe (father), 
Engkong (grandfather), Njak (Mother), and Mpok (older sister). Characters are 
indexically anchored to this neighborhood through reference to birth or their 
status as original inhabitants of this neighborhood, and all are represented as 
speaking in Betawi. I have reproduced an example of this below in extract 2.5.3 
(which still uses the orthography described in the introduction to extract 2.5.1). 
In extract 2.5.3, Doel is represented as speaking with his mother (Betawi forms 
are in bold small caps).

	
The Semiotic Figurement of Communities in Indonesia	
29
Extract 2.5.3  Insider’s reported talk in the novel Si Doel Anak Betawi
Nyak
1
2
Doeoel! Doel Hamiiid! Eh, kemane lagi 
die? Barusan disini.
Doel! Doel Hamid! Gee where is
he now? [He] was just here.
Doel
3
Ja Njak!
Yes Mum!
Nyak
4
5
6
Kemane lu? Udah sejak njak manggil, 
lu diam-diam adje. Pulang dulu dahar 
nasi, nasi udah njak sediain!
Where are you? I have been calling 
[you], but you just haven’t ans­
wered. Come home now and eat
some rice, I’ve already prepared it!
(Aman, 1971[1932]: 9)
Just as important, and in line with broader colonial policy on the need to imbue 
characters with colonial-sanctioned ideas about morality (Moriyama, 2005b), the 
characters in the story are associated with particular types of demeanors (Goffman, 
1967), as well as economic abilities, social practices, and educational backgrounds. 
For example, Doel, his neighborhood peers, his late father, and his grandfather are 
all represented as hard-working, quick-tempered, and never afraid of getting into a 
fight. Doel and his late father are additionally represented as social types who are 
valorous, especially when defending their friends’ honor. Doel’s grandfather is rep­
resented as an “old-fashioned” Muslim and an “unkind” and “stingy” social type 
who will not allow his daughter to work in a shop where men come to buy goods. 
This is despite him not being willing to support his daughter financially after her 
husband’s death. All people living within this neighborhood are also represented 
as poor and uneducated, but reasonably pious Muslims. This is especially the case 
for Doel, his parents, and grandparents. Both Doel and his mother are also repre­
sented as persons who obeyed the wishes of their parents even when these wishes 
were unreasonable.
There are a number of other contrasts throughout the story that also build 
upon emerging ethnic social types. For example, during the fasting month, Doel 
is represented as diligently fasting and studiously reading the Al-Quran while 
other Muslim neighbors do not. Doel’s stepfather is also described as an outsider 
who speaks Malay, but whose accent is hard to place, possibly from Banjarmasin 
or Medan. The attitude of Doel’s stepfather also contrasts markedly with that of 
his deceased biological father and his grandfather. The former encourages and 
supports Doel in his wishes to attend school, while the latter two see no utility 
in attending school. In summary, the association of place, morality, education, 
and economics with persons who speak in particular registers (in contrast to oth­
ers who speak only in Malay registers) helped in the recirculation of ideas about 
ethnic social types who speak in regional registers. Social differentiation and 

30	
Language and Superdiversity
the regimentation of social value to create orders of indexicality were achieved 
through the storytelling mechanisms used by the author whose representation of 
everything but the speech of characters was done in Malay.
This way of representing difference can also be found in other novels from 
the late colonial period. Brief reference to Teeuw’s (1994) work on literature dur­
ing this period shows at least three novels. The novel Kintamani, written by Iman 
Supardi and published by a private publishing house in 1932, is about a romance 
between a Javanese boy and a Balinese girl (Teeuw, 1994: 77). Many of the novels 
written in the 1920s and 1930s also had Minang people traveling to Java and/or 
marriage between people from different regions, as in the novel Salah Asuhan, 
written by Abdul Muis and published in 1928 (Teeuw, 1994: 69–71).
While it is clear that regional language and Malay language newspapers 
and magazines were circulating in areas such as Minangkabau in West Sumatra 
(Biezeveld, 2007: 212), more research is required to establish whether the type of 
regional language schoolbooks found in earlier colonial times continued to be 
used during this late colonial period. What is much clearer is that Malay and its 
association with modernity was continuing to be circulated not just via novels 
and newspapers, but also throughout the bureaucracy in the form of manuals and 
census practices (Sneddon, 2003: 97). While continuing to have less social value 
than Malay and those who spoke Malay (e.g., bureaucrats), the idea of ethnic­
ity and by extension ethnic languages was further enregistered through census 
practices, such as the 1930 census that divided the population into sixteen ethnic 
groups, others, and Chinese (Suryadinata et al., 2003: 12).
Ideas about ethnic social types and their associated semiotic registers con­
tinued to be recirculated throughout the late 1930s through discourses about how 
to best go about forming a new nation. Elson (2008: 66–67) points out that by 
this time, it became increasingly clear to nationalist leaders that regional orga­
nizations were a manifestation of colonial policies of divide and rule. Yet, as 
he notes, there were also fears of unequal treatment at the hands of a Javanese 
majority in a new Indonesia. Citing a Minahasan reporter writing in 1938, Elson 
(2008: 68–70) points out how this reporter wrote about the importance of main­
taining Minahasan language as a way of distinguishing Minahasans and their 
history from other Indonesians. At the same time, there were also calls for a feder­
alist model that would recognize the differences within Indonesia and allow each 
region to govern itself. Groups of intellectuals and members of a literary move­
ment (Pujangga Baru) also engaged in dialogue about how to make an Indonesian 
culture (Elson, 2008:  72). This, of course, allowed for essentializing contrasts 
between “Indonesian culture” and “regional culture,” which also fit with the more 
general creation of orders of indexicality. Some Islamic movements were also 
active in talking about an Indonesian unity that was above place-based group­
ings. For example, in Islamic schools in Aceh, a conscious decision had been made 
to use a register of Malay as the language of schooling rather than another local 
register (Elson, 2008: 82).

	
The Semiotic Figurement of Communities in Indonesia	
31
Just as important, the large internal structural changes that were occurring 
in the Netherlands East Indies economy as a result of the 1930s depression also 
changed the way labor moved throughout the archipelago. Dick (2002: 160) points 
out that during the depression years, there was a collapse in the plantation indus­
tries of copra, sugar, tea, and rubber. Such a collapse would have slowed down 
the encounters with difference that characterized the earlier years of these indus­
tries described in the previous sections. At the same time, the textile industry 
in Java was booming, with some factories in Surabaya employing as many as 
4,000 women by 1938 (Dick, 2002: 160–161). Similarly, in West Java during the 
late 1930s, the setting-up of automobile, shoe, tire, electrical goods, and food fac­
tories described by Dick (2002: 160–161) may well have brought together workers 
from different areas of Java, especially given the provision of transport infra­
structure described in previous sections.
Like religious settings where religious scholars and leaders from throughout 
the archipelago met, these sites also produced labor movements that organized 
(Ford, 2008), perhaps with some members from around the archipelago coming 
together for congresses, meetings, and so on. Such settings would have repre­
sented new sites for encounters with difference. These encounters were all poten­
tial sites for the recirculation of the social types and semiotic registers discussed 
thus far. Such contact may have produced new locally emergent semiotic registers 
and centers of normativity that sat in contrast to the multiple centers of norma­
tivity associated with ethnic languages and varieties of Malay. As with contact 
among plantation workers in the early 1900s, however, this aspect of diversity 
requires future research.
In concluding this section, I should point out that speaking a regional lan­
guage during the late colonial period was not always the only index pointing to 
an ethnic social type. The anthropologist de Jong (2009) points out that in places 
such as Sulawesi, ethnic groupings were in a continuous state of flux and were 
religiously based. For example, he points out that Calvinist missionaries in coop­
eration with the colonial administration and elites from areas of Central Sulawesi 
helped in the formation of one ethnic group based on Christianity. I should also 
point out that apart from the library-borrowing figures provided by Teeuw (1972), 
we know little about how readers interpreted the novels discussed in this section. 
While searches for commentaries about these novels in newspaper archives held 
in the Netherlands and Indonesia might go some way toward seeing whether and 
to what extent signs associated with these social types and semiotic registers were 
recirculated, this interesting aspect will have to be left until funding and time 
permit. Even so, I hope that my account so far paints a complex picture of the 
processes and infrastructure involved in the enregisterment of several competing 
semiotic registers and their associated social types. I also hope it has pointed out 
some of the continuities with earlier colonial times, especially the continuing asso­
ciation of linguistic forms with region and ethnic social type, Malay with knowl­
edge, regime, and state, and the hierarchical ordering of these semiotic registers.

32	
Language and Superdiversity
2.6  The Japanese Occupation
During the Japanese occupation, the idea of ethnic social types from the colonial 
period was recirculated (e.g., T. Inoue, 1986: 203). The policies, practices, and dis­
courses of the Japanese and Indonesians working with them helped to recirculate 
ideas that associated language with region and ethnic social types, on the one 
hand, and nation with Indonesian on the other. As in the earlier colonial years, 
this was not in any way uniform and was partly a result of the Dutch East Indies 
being occupied by different sections of the Japanese military, with Sumatra and 
Java being controlled by different chapters of the army while the eastern parts of 
Indonesia were under the auspices of the navy (Elson, 2008; Reid & Akira, 1986; 
Ricklefs, 1981).
While variability in Japanese regulations about people movement did 
initially cause problems for students from the outer islands to continue or 
commence their education in Java, with the help of some Japanese adminis­
trators, this movement was facilitated in the later parts of the war (Shigetada, 
1986: 264–265). In addition, as with the transmigration programs undertaken 
from 1905, the Japanese also moved approximately 150,000 Javanese around the 
archipelago (Colombijn, 1996: 394; Shizuo, 1986: 249–250), as well as approx­
imately 2.6 million Javanese within the island of Java itself (Dick, 2002: 166; 
Shigetada, 1986: 258). Many of them were Indonesian women who were tricked 
or forced into being prostitutes for the Japanese army, and it was not uncom­
mon to find Javanese teenage girls across the archipelago in places like Ambon 
(Vickers, 2005: 89–90). This system of forced labor and the circulation of people 
that it involved also resulted in interactions among insiders and outsiders, which 
may have produced metasemiotic commentaries about sameness and differ­
ence, as well as routinizing settings where local semiotic registers could emerge 
through interaction among those who may have only shared fragments of each 
others’ semiotic repertoires.
There were also increases of between 25 and 30 percent in rural to urban 
migration during the Japanese occupation (Dick, 2002: 167). This was due pri­
marily to the better conditions in the cities, which included regular meals and 
escape from forced labor (Dick, 2002:  167). According to Japanese sources, 
indigenous leaders from all around the archipelago were also located in Java 
(Shunkichiro, 1986: 117). As the war drew to a close, Japanese administrators 
sought to actively encourage Indonesian independence. This was facilitated by 
helping independence leaders, such as Soekarno and Hatta, travel to the outer 
islands, with Soekarno famously giving a speech in Bali where he noted that 
he was half Balinese (Shibata, 1986). These activities, the movement of people 
between areas, and the attractiveness of Jakarta, Semarang, and Surabaya as sites 
of political power all represent settings where there was potential for encounters 
with difference, the emergence of local semiotic registers, and metasemiotic com­
mentaries about such encounters.
 

	
The Semiotic Figurement of Communities in Indonesia	
33
While these localized registers emerged, other Japanese policies and prac­
tices helped to circulate the idea of ethnicity more widely. For example, the 
administrative rule of thumb was to use existing organizations and structures, 
while also respecting local customs, religions, and feudal dynasties (Shunkichiro, 
1986). Indeed, while they were opposed to most things Dutch, ironically, they 
tended to recirculate ideas of adat that closely resembled those of the Dutch 
(Bourchier, 2007: 116). These ideas linked adat with history, customs, locale, and 
authenticity (Bourchier, 2007: 116). It is also worthwhile pointing out that some 
of the short stories and novels published during this period reproduced ideas of 
region-based ethnic social types. For example, a book titled Djangir Bali, written 
by Nur St. Iskander and published as a serial in the newspaper Pandji Pustaka in 
1942 (Teeuw, 1994: 108), presents a romance between two characters from differ­
ent ethnic groups.
Japanese education policies also played a major role in the recircula­
tion of associations between Indonesian and nationalism. For example, the 
Japanese banning of the public use of Dutch thrust Malay into prominence 
in public domains such as administrative reports, newspapers, and schooling 
(Alisjahbana, 1975 [1961]: 65; Sneddon, 2003: 111). Indeed, while the Japanese 
wanted Japanese taught and used for all communication, in the short term, 
it was communicatively expedient to use Malay. At the same time, access to 
schooling was expanded. For example, in places under navy control, such as 
Sulawesi and Bali, schools were opened to all levels of society and resulted in 
large increases in student numbers when compared to pre-occupation Indonesia 
(Okada, 1986: 154; Suzuki, 1986). In army-controlled Sumatra, however, educa­
tion seemed more selective, with only certain students being allowed to study in 
Japanese-sponsored schools (Otsuka, 1986). The use of Malay for propaganda 
and as a language of instruction in some schools together with the increased 
use of Indonesian flags, the broadcast of an Indonesian anthem through local 
loudspeakers, and the circulation of newspapers written in local Malay con­
tinued to associate Malay with nationalism and ideas of a nation and a place 
called Indonesia (Elson, 2008: 101–103; Ricklefs, 1981: 190). Without archival 
research of newspapers published in this period or interviews with those who 
listened to or read these mediatized messages, it is hard to determine whether 
and to what extent there were actually readers and listeners. Indeed, given that 
competence to comprehend the different registers of Malay was fragmented 
and truncated—and primarily limited to intellectuals and those who acted as 
intermediaries between locals and the Dutch in prewar Indonesia—the social 
domain of these texts would have been quite small.
Leaving aside the important issue of reception, political discourses also 
continued to play a role in the recirculation of signs and their associated semi­
otic registers, especially those linking regional registers with ethnic social types 
and Malay with nationalism. As Elson (2008: 103) point outs, after September 
1944, the Japanese premier announced Japan’s intentions to grant Indonesia 

34	
Language and Superdiversity
independence. These discourses and those that recirculated ideas about regions 
and Indonesia were repeated through deliberations at the committee for the 
investigation of independence (PBUPK) in May 1945, when they talked about 
whether an independent Indonesia should be a federation of regions (Elson, 
2008: 105–106). News of the declaration of Indonesian independence on August 
17, 1945 (an Indonesia that was to be made up of Java and the regions) was quickly 
circulated throughout the archipelago via the telegraph and radio network that 
had become heavily utilized during the Japanese occupation (Vickers, 2005: 97).
The 1945 constitution, which was drawn up during this period, respected 
and protected the traditions and rights of the regions (Elson, 2008: 114). This not 
only authorized links between a new named language, Indonesian, and a new 
Indonesia, but it also authorized links among ethnic social types, regions, and 
certain linguistic forms. For example, ­chapter 11 of the constitution was about 
regional governments; ­chapter 15 (article 36) was about the national language; 
and an addendum to article 36 related to the preservation of regional languages. 
The constitution also legalized an order of indexicality whereby regional lan­
guages were subordinate to the national language. Although these ideas were 
now enshrined constitutionally, it was only in force for around half of the period 
that Soekarno was president of Indonesia. More specifically, the Indonesian con­
stitution was in force for the period between 1945 and 1949, and then not in force 
for ten years until 1959 (Ellis, 2002: 8).
2.7  The Soekarno Period
Similar to the time periods discussed in the previous sections, the period between 
1945 and 1966 was characterized by changes in technology, infrastructure, and 
political relations, all of which figured in the recirculation of ideas linking linguis­
tic forms with social types, place, and ultimately the formation and reproduction 
of orders of indexicality. This period has been characterized as one when infra­
structure actually deteriorated in comparison to the prewar period (Colombijn, 
1996; Ricklefs, 1981). Colombijn (1996: 394–395) points out that in West Sumatra, 
transport infrastructure declined and 80 percent of plantations closed down. At 
the same time, there was little investment in shipping and heavy industry, and this 
did not change until the mid-1960s (Dick, 2002: 188–189). Even so, these changes 
did create new social domains for encounters with difference and for the recircu­
lation of ideas that linked region, language, and ethnic social types. As we will 
see, however, ideas about ethnicity were constructed and evaluated differently 
than in the past. In this section, I roughly follow the periodization used by many 
historians who generally break the time between 1945 and 1966 into three peri­
ods: the revolutionary period (1945–1949), parliamentary democracy (1950–1958), 
and guided democracy (1959–1966).
 

	
The Semiotic Figurement of Communities in Indonesia	
35
During the four-year period in which many autonomous groups of Indonesians 
fought their former colonial masters for a new independent Indonesia, there were 
changes in infrastructure that also changed the patterns of population circulation 
and ultimately the circulation of ideas and discourses about sameness and differ­
ence. Large-scale people movement among the islands was restricted because most 
of the modern ships used for inter-island trade had been sunk by the Allies during 
the war (Dick, 2002: 168). The only large-scale contact among peoples during this 
period were skirmishes in Sulawesi between Indonesian Republican soldiers and 
pro-Dutch Ambonese soldiers (Ricklefs, 1981: 221). As Dick (2002: 169) points out, 
the closing of factories and the reduction in the use of road and rail due to sabotage 
and movements of Indonesian independence fighters also meant that these sites 
were less likely to be sites of encounter, as they had been in pre-World War II times. 
This pattern continued due to increasing perversions in foreign exchange, black 
market operations, and a decreasing taxation base (Dick, 2002: 174–175). While 
there was a push for large industrialization projects such as cement factories, cot­
ton spinning, and rubber re-milling, many of the migrants entering cities went into 
petty trade and hawking (Dick, 2002: 177). Although this produced different social 
domains for encounters with difference, the routinization of these types of encoun­
ters among particular groups of participants would also have produced locally 
emergent semiotic registers, together with commentaries about such registers and 
their speakers.
In the social domain of elite political discourses, ideas about what form 
a post-Japanese Indonesia would take came from Indonesian nationalists and 
the Dutch who wanted to re-colonize Indonesia. In so doing, there was often 
a recirculation of older ideas about regions and, with this, ideas about eth­
nic social types. One concrete manifestation of this ideology could be seen in 
the formation of the Komite National Indonesia Pusat (Central Indonesian 
National Committee), which was charged with advising President Soekarno 
and his cabinet. According to Kahin (1970 [1952]:  140), this committee 
included leaders of ethnic groups from the regions outside of Java because of 
concerns about representation. In addition, the predecessor of this committee, 
the Independence Preparatory Committee, decreed on August 19, 1945, that 
Indonesia be divided into eight provinces. These events and the subsequent 
administrative and military units that emerged as a result of this decree also 
contributed to the recirculation of earlier ideas relating to region (Kahin, 1970 
[1952]: 141).
Similarly, the burgeoning number of political parties that formed at the 
end of 1945 often did so along religious grounds, which also indexed region 
and ethnicity. For example, the Christian parties had strong bases of support 
in Sumatra, Flores, Timor, and Ambon (Kahin, 1970 [1952]: 158). As issues of 
representation within the Central Indonesian National Committee reemerged in 
late 1946, Soekarno oversaw a fivefold increase in the number of members from 

36	
Language and Superdiversity
the outer islands (Kahin, 1970 [1952]: 200–201). This helped keep ideas of region 
and ethnicity circulating in bureaucratic domains while also strengthening these 
regions as normative centers within a polycentric system. Large-scale encounters 
with difference also occurred in late 1947 as an estimated six million refugees 
from both West and East Java fled from Dutch military forces to republican-held 
areas in Central Java (Kahin, 1970 [1952]: 221; Vickers, 2005: 108). The routiniza­
tion of encounters that would have accompanied this type of people displacement 
would also have produced many locally emergent semiotic registers along with 
metasemiotic commentaries about these encounters.
Between 1947 and 1948, the Dutch helped establish many states—including 
West Borneo, Madura, East Java, Pasunden, South Sumatra, and East Sumatra— 
which were to become part of a Dutch federal system of government (Legge, 
1961: 4). The Dutch described Irian Jaya as having very different people than 
in other areas of the Dutch East Indies, and this was the basis for not includ­
ing this area in any settlement with the Indonesian revolutionary government 
(Elson, 2008: 145). While within the revolutionary government there were differ­
ences of opinion and levels of resolve to include Irian in a new Indonesia (Elson, 
2008: 146), what is important here is that these discussions helped to contrib­
ute to the recirculation of ideas linking language, region, ethnic social type, and 
difference.
In Yogyakarta, the sultan was promoting the use of Indonesian rather than 
Javanese as the language of official communication (Ricklefs, 1981: 208), which 
also reproduced orders of indexicality, with Indonesian sitting above Javanese. 
Legge’s (1961: 29) account of governance also shows that in bureaucratic and legal 
domains, the promulgation of Law 22 of 1948, which related to powers of gov­
ernance and autonomy at the provincial, kabupaten (district), and desa (village) 
levels, also helped keep the idea of “regions” and “local” circulating. Indeed, it 
was specifically designed to accommodate feelings of regional and cultural iden­
tity, while reducing grounds for fearing Javanese dominance in the fledgling state 
(Legge, 1961: 35).
As anti-Dutch sentiment rose throughout Indonesia in the 1950s, an increas­
ing number of Dutch-owned businesses were taken over by local trade unions 
(Dick, 2002: 184). By 1958, over one thousand businesses had been taken over 
by primarily communist-dominated trade unions. The military fearing this eco­
nomic dominance took over these enterprises, which essentially finished a process 
of nationalization (Dick, 2002: 185). In so doing, the army often inserted “ethnic 
others” into the local milieu of these enterprises (Ricklefs, 1981: 249). The major­
ity of army officers, for example, were primarily from small cities around Java 
(Crouch, 1988: 36–37; Rinakit, 2005: 16). In West Java, the presence of army and 
air force personnel in villages also produced encounters in which villagers com­
mented upon the odd behaviors of these outsiders (Palmer 1959: 48). Similarly, 
in places like Central Java, the presence of teachers and doctors described by 
Geertz (1960) may also have invited such metasemiotic commentaries.

	
The Semiotic Figurement of Communities in Indonesia	
37
New social domains for encounters with difference were also created 
in areas outside of Java with the increased presence of administrative and 
military units from Java (Legge, 1961:  39; Skinner, 1959:  4–5). These new 
social domains would have not only provided occasions for the recirculation 
of ideas about region, ethnic social types, and difference, but also the con­
ditions necessary for the routinization of social interaction and with it the 
production of many locally emergent semiotic registers. For example, on the 
island of Sumbawa, the presence of bureaucrats from the central govern­
ment helped set up a contrast between local and national (Goethals, 1959: 19). 
This distinction foregrounded regional-ethnic identity as compared with the 
Indonesian-speaking outsider bureaucrats, who made claims to a new type 
of identity: that of a modern Indonesian bureaucrat bent on developing the 
“underdeveloped” areas of Indonesia (Goethals, 1959: 19). In so doing, orders 
of indexicality were also being formed and reproduced in areas outside of the 
administrative and political center. The effects were similar in many ways to 
those found in Java, where an Indonesian-speaking elite positioned and evalu­
ated themselves as exemplary models of Indonesian-ness while ethnic others 
were the opposite.
In addition to encounters with Javanese bureaucrats and military personnel, 
a fledgling transmigration program was also increasing the presence of outsiders 
in the outer islands. This program was an attempt to cope with the overpopula­
tion problems experienced in Java and Bali where populations had grown by over 
25 percent in ten years (Ricklefs, 1981: 225). While Hardjono (1977: 22–30) has 
characterized this program as largely unsuccessful and overoptimistic in terms 
of targets (often in the millions), nevertheless, between 1950 and 1965, there were 
nearly 400,000 farmers from Bali and Java who were moved to other areas of the 
archipelago under this scheme. As with the late colonial period, this transmi­
gration would have created new social domains for encounters with difference 
and potentially for the (re)circulation of ideas about ethnic social types and the 
conditions necessary for the emergence of local semiotic registers. Similarly, 
rural-urban migration also created many opportunities for encounters with the 
other, and thus settings in which new local semiotic registers could emerge.
By the early 1950s, conflicts between the central government in Jakarta 
and its counterparts in the regions were increasingly frequent. These conflicts 
emerged around issues of how exports and imports were to be taxed (Dick, 
2002:  180), and around issues of Islam and political representation (Ricklefs, 
1981: 235). Within the regions, the sentiment ranged from a feeling of neglect by 
the center (Elson, 2008: 187) to suspicions of those in Jakarta and Java using this 
income for expanding the bureaucracy in Jakarta and for luxury consumption 
(Dick, 2002: 180). These sentiments developed into calls for regional autonomy 
and splits within the army in places such as the Mollucas, Sulawesi, and Sumatra 
(Dick, 2002: 180). With the covert support of the U.S., which feared the growth of 
the Indonesian communist party in Java, these splits developed into a full-blown 

38	
Language and Superdiversity
rebellion by 1958 (Dick, 2002: 181). Calls for separatism also arose in Padang 
(Sumatra), although this was due to a fear of being overrun by Toba Bataks who 
were migrating from North Sumatra rather than because of unequal taxation 
arrangements (Elson, 2008:  167). This rebellion produced many refugees who 
settled across the archipelago taking up jobs as petty traders, food stall opera­
tors, and restaurant owners (Hedman, 2008b:  9–10). Similarly, in 1957, South 
Kalimantan was split in two—becoming South and Central Kalimantan—in 
order to diffuse separatist calls by Dayaks who felt that they were being over­
whelmed by lowland Muslims (Miles, 1976).
Meanwhile, the Darul Islam movement, which consisted of loosely organized 
but connected rebellions that pushed for an Islamic state in West Java, Aceh, 
and South Sulawesi, also required military intervention from Jakarta (Ricklefs, 
1981). In many cases, soldiers from Java were sent to these outer islands to quell 
the rebellions with force (Bruner, 1959: 52; Elson, 2008: 196; Ricklefs, 1981: 251). 
At the same time that military “others” entered primarily rural areas of West 
Java, the number of refugees who fled from these areas of conflict to urban areas 
increased, with numbers fluctuating between 50,000 to 300,000 persons a year 
between 1951 and 1962 (Hedman, 2008b: 9). Similarly, the Darul Islam movement 
in Sulawesi and Aceh displaced a further 350,000 people between 1953 and 1955 
(Hedman, 2008b: 9). All of these mobilizations, confrontations, and displace­
ments created further social domains for contact with difference on a large scale, 
while also attaching negative traits to the ethnic other.
For example, within village communities in Java, there was a strong sense 
of fear about escalation of these interethnic conflicts and tensions, and a fear of 
the ethnic other (C. Geertz, 1959; Palmer, 1959). During the early 1950s, inter­
ethnic conflicts were also developing in the major cities of Java where migrants 
were increasingly competing for scarce government jobs, with charges of ethnic 
favoritism and corruption being raised against different groups (Ricklefs, 1981; 
Skinner, 1959: 7–10; Vickers, 2005). It was thus not surprising to hear of villagers 
who perceived the city as a place of conflict where ethnic ties were to be used to 
get white-collar jobs (Palmer, 1959: 48–49).
This fear of the ethnic other, interethnic conflict, military mobilization, 
and people displacement was a constant theme in the 1960s. In the mid-1960s, 
Javanese soldiers were mobilized in the campaign for Irian Jaya and in the con­
frontation with Malaysia in Kalimantan (Ricklefs, 1981:  258–264). The con­
frontation with Malaysia, which was largely run from the cities of Sambas and 
Pontianak in West Kalimantan, set the stage for future conflict between indig­
enous Dayak and Indonesians of Chinese ancestry, and also conflict between 
Dayaks and Madurese migrants (Davidson, 2008). As Davidson points out, in 
the aftermath of the Malaysian confrontation, Indonesians of Chinese ancestry 
were forcibly moved by the military with the help of Dayak paramilitary forces 
that were trained to help in the confrontation period. The empty spaces left by 
the 75,000 people who were moved from rural areas to the city to help counter a 

	
The Semiotic Figurement of Communities in Indonesia	
39
perceived communist rebellion were then occupied by Madurese migrants, who 
from 1967 onward had frequent conflicts with local Dayaks over land and eco­
nomic rights (Davidson, 2008).
Ideas about language and ethnic social types also continued to circulate 
within political parties and the bureaucracy during the 1950s, although the 
social value of ethnicity seemed to be contested. For example, regional lead­
ers saw shared language as a sign of ethnic group membership that could be 
used to gather support for their efforts to gain more autonomy vis-à-vis the 
Jakartan political elite, while the Jakartan political elite (including Soekarno 
and then-Colonel Soeharto) saw ethnicity as a threat to the fledgling Indonesian 
state (Elson, 2008: 179–180; Feith, 1962: 522). Indeed, regionalism and ethnic­
ity were matters for serious and sustained debate within the central government 
during the 1950s (Legge, 1961: 3). Within the provisional constitution of 1950, 
for example, a wide ranging autonomy was given to the regions (Legge, 1961: 9). 
In 1956, sustained debate culminated in Law 1 of 1957 that related to revisions 
of earlier regional autonomy legislation and laws (Legge, 1961: 60–61). This law 
remained in force until 1959 when Soekarno instigated a period of guided democ­
racy (Elson, 2008: 218), which included the stationing of more Javanese bureau­
crats in the regions (Legge, 1961: 60–61).
Liddle’s (1972) account of the party system in northern Sumatra in the early 
to mid-1960s also shows how ideas of ethnicity, language, and religion were not 
only recirculated as part of party politics, but how these ideas became associ­
ated with particular political parties. For example, the modernist Islamic party, 
Masjumi, attracted many South Tapanuli Bataks, the Christian party (Parkindo) 
attracted and represented the interests of the North Tapanuli Bataks, while PNI 
and PKI attracted many of the Javanese migrants. As the Indonesian communist 
party continued its rise to political ascendency in Java in the early and mid-1960s, 
ideas about ethnicity and region were also circulated through its congresses and 
in literature published by those associated with the party. For example, in his 1964 
book, the party leader, Aidit, pointed out that a unitary communist Indonesia 
would be made up of many nationalities (Elson, 2008: 202). The Islamic politi­
cal party, Masyumi, and the nationalist party, PNI, regularly held all-Indonesia 
congresses (Ricklefs, 1981) that also represented another social domain in which 
contact with difference and the ethnic other was becoming routinized.
As with the prewar period, literature and the arts continued to circulate 
ideas that associated regions, linguistic forms, and ethnic social types. For exam­
ple, there were regionally based novels and those that had the hero(ine) traveling 
throughout the archipelago, such as the 1955 novel by I Made Widadi, Kembali 
kepada Tuhan, which has the hero traveling in Bali, Lombok, and Timor (Teeuw, 
1996). There were also novels that used regional languages when representing the 
talk of some of the characters, such as Firman Muntaco’s series of newspaper 
short stories set in Jakarta in the 1950s and republished in the early 1960s as 
Gambang Djakarté (Tadmor, 2009). In addition, although the amount of novels 

40	
Language and Superdiversity
written in a regional language, such as Javanese and Sundanese, decreased dur­
ing the Soekarno period (Quinn, 1992; Teeuw, 1996), what did circulate neverthe­
less explicitly linked language, region, and ethnicity.
Indeed, within some organizations—such as the Peoples’ Cultural 
Institution (LEKRA), which supported socialist- and communist-leaning arts in 
their broadest sense—there was support for regional literature, arts, and culture 
(and support for research into these areas), along with regular dialogue among 
artists from around the archipelago (Foulcher, 1986). In addition, there was the 
formation in 1947 of a government-sponsored language center that was even­
tually to be housed at the University of Indonesia in Jakarta (Dardjowidjojo, 
1998: 39–40). Under the direction of various ministries with education and cul­
ture in their portfolios, this language center was responsible for the planning and 
circulation of regional languages, such as Javanese, Sundanese, and Madurese. 
In short, regional literature, regular meetings among artists and writers, and aca­
demic research in these areas represented further social domains in which ideas 
about the links among linguistic forms, region, and ethnic social types were recir­
culated during the Soekarno era. Of course, normative prescriptions about what 
represented good language and, by extension, exemplary social types who spoke 
good language may well have varied from one center to another (e.g., grassroot 
LEKRA circles and elite higher education).
The import of these ideas would have also been strengthened through 
contrasts with an emergent national language, Indonesian, which increasingly 
circulated as school participation rates increased, both in Islamic (pesantren 
and madrasah) and government schools (Ricklefs, 1981: 226; Soedijarto et al., 
1980: 62). Increases in school participation rates were impressive despite issues 
of uniform access to schooling throughout the archipelago (Bruner, 1959:  53; 
H. Geertz, 1959: 28; Goethals, 1959: 20; Palmer, 1959: 47–48). While absentee­
ism and statistic reliability invite caution when viewing these figures (Soedijarto 
et al., 1980), between 1945 and 1960, the number of primary school and lower sec­
ondary school students increased from 2.5 million to 8.9 million and 90 thousand 
to 670 thousand, respectively (Bjork, 2005: 54).
Such massification also helped in the circulation of ideas about Indonesian 
and its relationship with Indonesia. Where schools and resources were available 
and where there were actually students, these schools represented two new social 
domains. The first was encounters among students or among students and teach­
ers where new semiotic registers would have emerged. The second was one where 
ideas about ethnic social types, region, and difference were circulated, often 
implicitly through discourses of nationalism. Palmer (1959:  48), for example, 
points out that tolerance of other groups was promoted in schools through chil­
dren’s performances of other ethnic groups’ dances. In Bali and Sumatra, on 
the other hand, it was distinctions between local ways of doing and being and 
newly introduced ideas of Indonesian ways of doing and being that helped in 
the circulation of ideas about ethnic social types (H. Geertz, 1959). Ideas about 

	
The Semiotic Figurement of Communities in Indonesia	
41
Indonesian and its relationship to the nation also circulated on a mass scale from 
the mid-1950s through other forms of schooling, such as the grassroots literacy 
work of an increasingly popular and well-funded Indonesian communist party. 
This type of work was carried out primarily in rural East and Central Java among 
those who were nominally Muslim (Ricklefs, 1981: 236–237).
The import of ideas about the links among linguistic forms, region, and 
ethnic social types were also recirculated in the print media, especially as the 
circulation of Indonesian language newspapers, novels, serialized short stories, 
and poetry increased (Dardjowidjojo, 1998; Ricklefs, 1981; Teeuw, 1996). In the 
six-year period between 1950 and 1956, daily newspaper circulation increased 
from 500,000 to close to one million, and periodical circulation trebled to over 
three million (Ricklefs, 1981: 226), although from 1959 to 1961, newspaper cir­
culation dropped to around 700,000 as political censorship increased (Ricklefs, 
1981: 255).
A language center based in Jakarta was charged with the planning and cir­
culation of a standard written Indonesian, with much of its activity focusing on 
the standardization of orthography, the creation of a grammar, and the coining 
of new vocabulary (Dardjowidjojo, 1998), while dictionaries, novels, and seri­
als were sponsored and written by private individuals or enterprises (Sneddon, 
2003: 117; Teeuw, 1996: 11). Although this language center and other centers that 
followed developed close to 400,000 new vocabulary items, these items were 
only circulated among intellectuals and those interested in language and culture 
(Sneddon, 2003: 118), the end result being that few of these new forms found their 
way into regular usage.
Since Indonesian independence, radio was also becoming an increasingly 
important medium for the circulation of ideas about Indonesia, with over a 
million licensed radios in operation by 1965 (Sen & Hill, 2000: 82). This figure 
massively increased in the Soeharto years, when there were around 32 million 
radio sets sold by 1995 (Sen & Hill, 2000: 91). While sports were still some­
thing done by urbanites in the 1950s (Vickers, 2005: 129), two events figured in 
their increasing popularity. First, there was the regularization of interprovin­
cial sports competitions (PON) that started in 1948 and were held every four 
years from 1953 onward (Wikipedia, 2011). The circulation of athletes in inter­
provincial competitions represented one further social domain for encounters 
with difference and the circulation of ideas about regions, language, and eth­
nic social types. Second, the 1962 Asian Games held in Jakarta and aired as 
Indonesia’s first television broadcast helped repeat ideas of sports competition 
involving the ethnic other and ideas of unity in diversity (Kitley, 2000: 23–24; 
Sen & Hill, 2000:  82), while also creating a new social domain for this rep­
etition. As Kitley (2000: 24–25) points out, the then-minister for information, 
Maladi, argued that television could help facilitate national unity, and this idea 
of television as a vehicle for national unity continued during the New Order 
period (sections 2.8 and 3.3).

42	
Language and Superdiversity
As in the 1940s and 1950s, conflict also displaced and moved people through­
out the archipelago. With reference to scholarship on more recent conflict-based 
displacement (e.g., Herriman, 2010; Min, 2006; Sidel, 2008), it seems likely that 
discourses about difference circulated during some of Indonesia’s darkest days 
in 1965–1966 when half a million or more Indonesians died through animosi­
ties between communist party sympathizers and right-wing Islamic and mili­
tary forces (Cribb, 1990; Elson, 2008; Ricklefs, 1981; Vickers, 2005). The number 
of people displacements during this period is unknown (Hedman, 2008b: 16), 
though we can be much more certain that settlement in new areas produced 
locally emergent semiotic registers.
In sum, changes in technology, political and bureaucratic discourses and poli­
cies, encounters with the other through sporting events, conflict, migration, trans­
migration, and the introduction of schooling all figured in the creation of new 
social domains for the recirculation of ideas that associated language, region, and 
ethnic social types. Just as important, many of these social domains represented 
settings in which local semiotic registers emerged, contributing to an increase in 
centers of normativity and ultimately to sociolinguistic diversity within the archi­
pelago. During this period, ethnicity was also associated with positive in-group 
membership among people living in the islands around Java. However, for many 
living in Java, ethnicity and the ethnic other had become associated with a nega­
tive trait: that of a “troublemaker.” The circulation of these registers in particular 
social domains also formed and reproduced many centers of normativity while 
also (re)producing hierarchical relations among these registers.
In closing this section, I want to point out that much of the political work 
done during this whole period was around the notion of how to unify and keep 
unified such a diverse nation. Although these ideas had many similarities with 
the earlier nationalist thought of the 1920s and ’30s, as Elson (2008:  105–108) 
points out, the idea of “unity in diversity” became institutionally enshrined in the 
state ideology of Pancasila (the Five Principles), which was formulated during the 
Japanese occupation. These Five Principles included (1) unity of the Indonesian 
nation; (2) humanitarianism; (3) a nation governed by representation, delibera­
tion, and consensus; (4) social justice; and (5) belief in one supreme god (Elson, 
2008: 105–108). While this ideology meant different things at different times dur­
ing the Soekarno period, in the New Order period that followed, this ideology 
was espoused as the only national ideology by the Soeharto government (Elson, 
2008: 242–243).
2.8  The New Order Period
The New Order period (1966–1998) was named as such because of the new ide­
ologies espoused by Soeharto and his followers that contrasted with Soekarno’s 
anti-West and socialist-leaning proclivities. Rejoining Western bodies, such as 
 

	
The Semiotic Figurement of Communities in Indonesia	
43
the IMF, World Bank, and the United Nations, was seen as necessary given the 
dire condition of the Indonesian economy (Ricklefs, 1981). This period can be 
characterized as one concerned primarily with “development” where there was 
large up-scaling in the mechanisms that facilitated the circulation of ideas link­
ing language, region, and ethnic social types. In particular, transmigration proj­
ects, economic migration, investment in education, factories, transportation, and 
communications all facilitated the repetition of ideologies that had been con­
structed in the colonial period and recirculated in various forms until the start 
of the New Order period. In short, during the 1966–1998 period, linguistic forms 
became tightly associated with particular regions and equated with ethnic social 
types to the extent that when Indonesians talked of themselves as speaking a 
regional language, such as Javanese, Sundanese, or Balinese, this also frequently 
pointed to the same ethnic identity.
Similarly, although ethnicity was a taboo topic due to the separatism efforts 
of the late 1950s, people also talked of themselves as being Javanese, Sundanese, 
Balinese, and so on, which typically also pointed to an ability to use the regional lan­
guage of the same name. At the same time, centers of normativity were strengthened 
with a clear bias toward those found within the island of Java. The indexical order that 
emerged during this period had Indonesian at the top, followed by a Yogyakartan 
variety of Javanese, Sundanese, and Balinese, followed by other regional languages 
spoken outside of Java, and then mixed language. As will be shown in ­chapters 7 and 
8, these ideologies had become so widespread that those socialized during this period 
were able to perform and comprehend signs that had become associated with other 
ethnic social types. As with previous sections, here I take a roughly chronological 
view of some of the most important social domains that (re)emerged during the New 
Order period to figure in the circulation of these ideologies.
During the initial period of the New Order regime in the mid-1960s, percep­
tions about communism contributed to the continued circulation and association 
of negative traits with ethnicity (Schefold, 1998). For example, groups of people 
in places remote to central authority were constructed as ethnic social types with 
weak social organizations and strange primitive ways of life that could easily fall 
prey to communism. Some means of addressing this perceived communist threat 
in its neighborhood were military operations in West Kalimantan between 1967 
and 1973, and the invasion of East Timor in 1975 (Hedman, 2008b: 16; Ricklefs, 
1981:  278). In addition to the displacement of over 400,000 people in West 
Kalimantan and East Timor between 1967 and 1979 (Davidson, 2008; Robinson, 
2008), military operations involving the mass mobilization of soldiers created 
new social domains for encounters with difference and the recirculation of ideas 
about ethnic social types. After the initial invasion of East Timor, some 40,000 
Indonesian troops were deployed between 1977 and 1979 (Hedman, 2008b: 17). 
This pattern of conflict and military and civilian movement was repeated in the 
late 1980s and early 1990s in Aceh, where a small independence movement was 
countered with some 12,000 troops (Hedman, 2008b: 19).

44	
Language and Superdiversity
Another means of addressing what was seen as negative aspects of ethnicity 
and of continuing population growth came in the form of a reinvigorated trans­
migration policy. Between 1969 and 1974, this program moved nearly 200,000 
people from Java, Madura, Bali, and Lombok to the outer islands that were per­
ceived as sparsely populated and underdeveloped (e.g., Hardjono, 1977; Hoey, 
2003; Hoshour, 1997; Schefold, 1998). The primary receiving areas included 
Sumatra, Kalimantan, Sulawesi, Maluku, and the recently incorporated Irian 
Jaya (e.g., Hardjono, 1977; Hoey, 2003; Hoshour, 1997; Schefold, 1998). While 
transmigration had been seen as an ambitious but failed project in the early 
years of the Indonesian nation and during the Soekarno regime (Dawson, 
1992), between 1973 and 1974, the new regime had managed to move well over 
100,000 people, about the same number of people moved in the 1950–1966 period 
(Hardjono, 1977: 32–33). This figure increased to around 800,000 between 1979 
and 1990 (Dawson, 1992). As with earlier people movement (section 2.4), trans­
migrants regularly needed to interact with locals to trade, work, and as part of 
their daily lives (Dawson, 2008). In this sense, interactions in local markets with 
traders, government officials, and so on represented sites for interacting with the 
ethnic other and thus also sites for the (re)production of ideologies about ethnic­
ity and language. At the same time, they were also sites for the creation of new 
languages and norms for social conduct (semiotic registers).
In some places, such as South and Central Kalimantan, this transmigra­
tion program helped turn “host” communities into minority communities, with 
migrants from Java and Madura representing the third or fourth largest ethnic 
group by the time of the 2000 census (Suryadinata et al., 2003: 24). In other places, 
such as Aceh and Irian Jaya, significant numbers of ethnic others were found by 
the time of the 2000 census (Suryadinata et al., 2003: 15–29). In Maluku and East 
Timor, the coming of the ethnic other also brought significant changes in the 
religious make-up of populations and in the make-up of the military and the 
bureaucracy (Elson, 2008: 253; Sidel, 2008: 39; Suryadinata et al., 2003: 110–116). 
As is highlighted in ­chapter 4, these demographic and political changes all helped 
to set the stage for conflict in the late 1990s.
While transmigration was designed to develop the so-called underdeveloped 
and under-populated peripheries, it also was thought of as a further avenue for 
national integration, with transmigrants helping to “civilize” other groups of 
people living in the outer islands (Lenhart, 1997). At the same time, there were 
also other approaches to the populations living in the outer islands during the 
1970s and early 1980s. These might be thought of as positively evaluating ethnic­
ity, although they were motivated by other fears, this time of Islamic fundamen­
talism and Islamic opposition to an increasingly corrupt government (Ricklefs, 
1981: 277; Schefold, 1998:273; Vickers, 2005: 177–178). For example, rather than 
encouraging the proselytization of members of these groups who entered into 
interethnic marriages with transmigrants, more leeway was given for members 
of these groups to continue to practice indigenous religious beliefs. In this way, 

	
The Semiotic Figurement of Communities in Indonesia	
45
ethnicity was again valued, although if only as a counterweight to the perceived 
threat of Islamic fundamentalism.
In addition to transmigration, an increasingly mobile bureaucracy also aided 
in the circulation of people throughout the archipelago and with it encounters 
with difference. Essentially, this reproduced the social domains for encounters 
with difference established in the early 1950s. Along with transmigration, this 
system of transferring bureaucrats and government workers such as healthcare 
personnel (Alesich, 2008) continued until the end of the New Order period. The 
movement of bureaucrats, transmigration, and spontaneous migration continued 
to contribute to the development of many new locally emergent semiotic registers 
and to diversity in Indonesia more generally. For example, in some cases, these 
registers and associated social types were less based upon language-ethnicity 
relationships and more upon interpersonal ties at the neighborhood level (Goebel, 
2010b).
Transmigration was a component of a series of five-year economic develop­
ment plans, REPELITA, which sought to develop not only Java but the outer 
islands. Indeed, in addition to having land available for appropriation, the suc­
cess of the transmigration project was partly dependent on the availability and 
development of appropriate infrastructure. The 1970s, 1980s, and early 1990s 
were periods of rapid industrialization and heavy investment and growth in man­
ufacturing, construction, mining, transportation, communication, and service 
industries (Booth & McCawley, 1981; Dick, 1996; McCawley, 1981; Thee Kian 
Wie, 2002). Dick (1996: 28) points out that during this period, inter-island trade 
rapidly developed in the archipelago. Other transport infrastructure projects that 
facilitated encounters with difference included the increased use of airplanes, 
the finishing of the trans-Sumatran highway in 1985, investment in railways and 
roads, and the expansion of inter-island passenger ferries between 1983 and 1994 
(Colombijn, 1996: 396; Cribb & Ford, 2009a: 17; Thee Kian Wie, 2002: 209). Much 
of the land used for these projects was obtained under questionable circum­
stances and often without real permission from traditional landowners, which 
sowed the seeds for future interethnic conflict in the late 1990s (Katoppo, 2000; 
Kusumaatmadja, 2000; Sangkoyo, 1999).
Where air travel is concerned, by 1994, there were regular weekly return 
flights to Jakarta from the cities of Medan, Pekanbaru, Palembang, Tanjung 
Pinang, and Batu Besar (Colombijn, 1996:  396). This period was also one of 
increasingly sophisticated and regular census practices. These census exercises 
provided another social domain for the recirculation of ideas about the rela­
tionship among linguistic forms, region, and ethnic social types. For example, 
although census exercises prior to 1998 did not ask for information on ethnicity, 
census documents still had questions asking which regional language respon­
dents spoke (see, e.g., Muhidin, 2002; Suryadinata et al., 2003). In a sense, this 
represented the recirculation of implicit and government-authorized discourses 
about regional language-speaking ethnic social types.

46	
Language and Superdiversity
Demographers commenting on the late 1960s and early 1970s have pointed 
out that as transportation infrastructure and trade links developed among 
Indonesian provinces, there was substantial economic and education-related 
migration from some of the outer islands to Java (Suharsono & Speare, 1981). 
The so-called green revolution in agriculture that wasn’t fully felt in Indonesia 
until the mid-1970s also meant that formerly labor-intensive rice harvesting could 
now be done with fewer people, pushing landless laborers to the cities (Vickers, 
2005: 192), whose populations nearly doubled between 1970 and 1990 (G. Jones 
& Hull, 1997: 2). Unemployment in rural areas together with the lure of job and 
education opportunities resulted in large numbers of migrants moving from rural 
areas to the cities of Jakarta, Surabaya, Semarang, and Medan. Indeed, within 
these cities, rural-urban migration contributed to between 3 and 30 percent of 
their population growth (Suharsono & Speare, 1981: 297).
While some of these migrants settled and lived in urban neighborhoods 
(Bruner, 1974), many were short-term residents seeking education and work 
opportunities (Suharsono & Speare, 1981). Some of these migrants ended up 
working in the large factories that emerged across Indonesia’s cities (Suharsono 
& Speare, 1981: 302). Others obtained work in an ever-expanding bureaucracy; 
this sometimes reproduced local ethnic cleavages in cities like Medan (Bruner, 
1974). These migrants also often set up self-help and other associations (Goebel, 
2000). In some areas, such as Bandung, historical migration of Javanese to this 
Sundanese heartland had resulted in new ways of emphasizing distinction, 
including an increase in the growth of Sundanese societies and groups (Bruner, 
1974). As with earlier periods, however, these neighborhoods, factories, govern­
ment offices, secondary and higher education institutions, and transport hubs all 
became sites of encounter with the other. In so doing, they also became poten­
tial sites for the (re)circulation of ideas about the links among linguistic forms, 
region, and ethnic social types. At the same time, these encounters also produced 
many local semiotic registers for communication among those of different back­
grounds (Goebel, 2010b).
With memories of the regional tensions of the late 1950s still in mind (see 
section 2.7), the Suharto government also moved to look at identity, ethnic and 
otherwise, as multiple so that Indonesians were Indonesian citizens first and mem­
bers of ethnic and religious groups second. Although these moves were meant to 
downplay ethnicity, they nevertheless assisted in the recirculation of ideologies 
that linked regions to ethnic social types. For example, the 1978 introduction of 
education programs for public servants about the state ideology, Pancasila, recir­
culated ideas about regions and ethnic groups through discourses relating to the 
need for inter-region harmony (Elson, 2008: 248–249). In a 1983 Department of 
Information publication, there was also explicit mention of ethnicity and the need 
for ethnic groups to be attached to the larger Indonesia (Elson, 2008: 253). This 
idea was exemplified in the motto “Unity in Diversity” that accompanied the state 
ideology plaque found in many government offices and schools during this period.

	
The Semiotic Figurement of Communities in Indonesia	
47
While the meaning of adat (customs, laws, and social structures) via its 
links with locale were recirculated through political debates about the natural­
ness of parliamentary democracy and the Indonesian-ness of guided democracy 
in the Soekarno era (Bourchier, 2007: 117–120), during the late 1970s and early 
1980s, there was a move away from ethnicity as grounded in adat to ethnicity as 
grounded in budaya (culture). In addition to being anchored to linguistic forms, 
the new formulation was also associated with houses, artifacts, dress, and per­
formance (with much continuity from earlier times). In this sense, adat became 
linked to art and display (Erb, 2007), while being delinked from “traditional” 
forms of social structures, laws, and regulations (de Jong, 2009). Where regional 
nongovernment radio was concerned, there were also new regulations that stip­
ulated that programming should originate locally, be about regional cultures, 
be appropriate to local conditions, and be in a regional language (Sen & Hill, 
2000: 86). As Sen and Hill (2000: 93–94) note, the government radio broadcaster 
(RRI) aired news in twelve regional languages and village agricultural programs 
in forty-eight regional languages.
The strengthening of associations of ethnicity with material signs and cul­
tural performances continued with the marketing and commoditization of eth­
nicity for domestic and international tourists (Adams, 1984; Erb, 2007; Hooker, 
1993; Parker, 2002). During the early 1990s, the sale of taped ethnic music record­
ings was around 15  percent of overall music sales in Indonesia (Sen & Hill, 
2000: 170). For example, one Sundanese language recording, Kalangkang, sold 
over two million copies, and with the massive pirate industry, it may well have 
sold a further ten million copies (Sen & Hill, 2000: 170–171). Within other areas 
of Indonesia, some cottage industries recorded music for local audiences. This 
music included Western songs in a local language as well as local music (Sen & 
Hill, 2000: 173–174).
This marketing and commoditization process is perhaps best exempli­
fied by the Mini Indonesia theme park in Jakarta that opened in 1975 (Vickers, 
2005: 167) and was initially conceptualized as a model of unity in diversity. Taman 
mini Indonesia, as it is locally known, is in the shape of Indonesia and populated 
by houses, architecture, and distinctively dressed performers of named ethnic 
groups from around the archipelago (Hoon, 2006). In places such as Central Java, 
performances of high Javanese, which had in the past been indexically associated 
with royal courts and the “best” of refined Javanese culture, were increasingly 
becoming commoditized as a paid-for status- enhancing addition to wedding cer­
emonies (Errington, 1998b). In short, in addition to the domestication of ethnic­
ity, ethnicity was commoditized in a way that strengthened indexical links among 
linguistic forms, regions, and ethnic stereotypes, while at the same time adding 
attire, housing, custom, music, and economic value to the semiotic registers asso­
ciated with these stereotypes.
At the same time, Indonesian as the national language of Indonesia was 
vigorously planned based on Western models of development and nationalism, 

48	
Language and Superdiversity
resulting in a semiotic register that included notions, such as development, 
truth, objectivity, evaluation, education, power, and so on (e.g., Errington, 
1998a, 1998b, 2000). Just as important was Indonesian’s role as a language of 
national unity by way of its function as a mediator of social relations among 
geographically dispersed ethnic groups with their own languages (e.g., Abas, 
1987: 116; Dardjowidjojo, 1998; Lowenberg, 1990). This process of institutional­
izing Indonesian as an exemplar of unity in diversity—via its role as a language of 
wider communication among those who are “ethnolinguistically different”—also 
allowed for the association of the “the other” or “stranger” with performances 
of Indonesian usage. In short, this implicit institutionally authorized metasemi­
otic commentary recirculated ideas that indexed linguistic forms with region and 
ethnic social type while indexing Indonesian with the idea of the doing of unity 
in diversity.
Although the quality of schooling and attendance rates were as variable 
in the New Order period as in earlier times, nevertheless, between 1975 and 
1990, there was significant massification of education (Bjork, 2005; Soedijarto 
et al., 1980; Thee Kian Wie, 2002). For example, the number of primary school 
students in 1990 (24 million) was nearly three times that of 1960 (8 million), 
while the number of lower secondary school students had also increased from 
1.9 million to over 5.5 million in this same period (Bjork, 2005: 54). During this 
period, successive central and regional government departments attempted to 
teach regional languages in primary and secondary schools (e.g., Arps, 2010; 
Lowenberg, 1992; Nababan, 1991; Soedijarto et  al., 1980). While the success 
of such efforts was patchy (e.g., Arps, 2010; Kurniasih, 2007), these schooling 
practices (re)produced two social domains; the first was one that involved the 
recirculation of ideas linking linguistic forms to region and ethnic social types, 
and the second was one that involved the emergence of a local semiotic register.
In the case of the first social domain, Parker (2002) has observed that by 
the third grade of primary school, children can identify all the provinces in 
Indonesia along with their capital cities. This knowledge, together with the label­
ing processes that go with teaching, textbooks, and timetabled subjects, (re)cre­
ates a social domain for discourses of sameness and difference underpinned by 
children’s understanding of linguistic forms as part of a whole language that is 
named and tied to particular geographical regions and signs from these regions, 
such as car license plates, architecture, and so on. Within this social domain, chil­
dren can name the languages that they speak and imagine themselves as members 
of a particular group of people who are defined as such by way of residence and 
language usage (Nababan, 1991).
In other words, children’s exposure to such discourses about regions, lan­
guages, and their users was another social domain in which ideas linking par­
ticular linguistic forms, regions, and ethnic social types were recirculated. 
These links are also implicitly repeated through the learning of Indonesian at 
school, especially when Indonesian is portrayed as the language of unity and 

	
The Semiotic Figurement of Communities in Indonesia	
49
communication among geographically dispersed ethnic groups with their own 
languages. For example, the propagation of Indonesian at schools as the lan­
guage of national unity also brings into focus further criteria for defining com­
munication with members of other ethnic groups as “a communicative practice 
requiring Indonesian.” That is to say, Indonesian is required for communication 
with the ethnic other.
During this period, hierarchical relations solidified among Indonesian, eth­
nic languages, and mixed languages. Through its role as the language of educa­
tion, development, and government, Indonesian sat at the top of this hierarchy, 
while some varieties of ethnic languages (e.g., Javanese from the royal centers of 
Yogyakarta and Solo) sat below Indonesian and were seen as important by way of 
their inclusion in the school curriculum (Dardjowidjojo, 1998; Errington, 1998a, 
2000; Lowenberg, 1992; Nababan, 1985, 1991). Other ethnic languages sat below 
these standardized varieties and became marginalized and endangered (Florey, 
1990; Kuipers, 1998). There were multiple, often overlapping, reasons for this, 
including their association with perceived backwardness, inadequate curricu­
lum material, the value of Indonesian as a symbol of social mobility, mixed mar­
riages, and so on (Jukes, 2010). During this period, the mixing of Indonesian with 
ethnic languages was also stigmatized (Errington, 1998b; Goebel, 2000), though 
as we will see in ­chapter 3, there were some institutional exceptions.
Spaces within schools and universities also produced a second type of 
social domain where interaction between those who were from different back­
grounds required the establishment of a local semiotic register, as found in local 
Indonesian neighborhoods (Goebel, 2010b). Universities had another interest­
ing mechanism for facilitating interaction across lines of difference. This sys­
tem called kerja kuliah nyata (KKN; practical life experience classes), which 
started in 1971, was formalized by the 1990s and continues to the present day 
(Prastowo & Suyono, 2007). To graduate, all university students are required 
to complete KKN, which involves living in a rural village or poor community, 
often outside their home province, for a number of months. During this period, 
students learn from, help, and teach locals. My experience of KKN came sec­
ondhand through accounts from Indonesian university students in Semarang, 
my Indonesian brother-in-law’s three-month stint in Bali, and my partner’s 
neighbor’s interaction with KKN students from Bandung. My brother-in-
law, for example, was raised in Cirebon where he learned a local variety of 
Sundanese and Javanese. He then went to Semarang to complete a university 
diploma. In the process, he was a co-participant in the production of a local 
variety of Javanese, shared by him and his friends. He then went to a village 
in Bali to do his KKN where he again become involved as an ethnic other in 
the creation of a local semiotic register with locals in Bali. Similarly, in rural 
Cirebon, students from Bandung universities—who are often themselves from 
all over Indonesia—came to live in a farming village to learn from a local farm­
ing guru whose crops had never failed.

50	
Language and Superdiversity
As with the Soekarno period, the printing and distribution of novels was a 
social domain in which ideas about the relationship among ethnic social types, 
regions, and linguistic forms also continued to circulate. There was the continu­
ing publication of novels and serialized novels wherein the hero(ine) traveled 
throughout the archipelago, together with novels that were published in regional 
languages (Quinn, 1992; Teeuw, 1996). While only 500 Javanese novels were pub­
lished in the 1980s, the introduction of other written genres, such as magazines 
and serialized novels published within them, helped take their place (Quinn, 
1992: 28–30). In terms of the social domain of these Javanese language maga­
zines, Quinn (1992: 38–39) points out that there were around 140,000 subscribers, 
with magazines regularly passing through the hands of neighbors and relatives. 
This trend away from printed books and toward magazines, radio, television, and 
the Internet could also be seen in the production and consumption of Indonesian 
language texts (Sen & Hill, 2000).
The introduction of television and the creation of a government broadcaster 
(TVRI) in 1962 also rapidly introduced a new social domain for the recircula­
tion of ideas linking linguistic forms, regions, and ethnic social types, and for 
encounters with sameness and difference via televised representations. In the 
next chapter, I  take a look at how television entered the lives of Indonesians 
from 1962 to 1998. While television was seen as one of the major tools for help­
ing to unify Indonesia by representing an imagined and united community of 
Indonesian speakers from diverse backgrounds (Kitley, 2000), I am especially 
concerned with how the ethnic comedies that emerged in the earlier 1990s helped 
to associate embodied language with ethnic social types, as well as outsiders and 
hybrid social types.
In summarizing this section, we can say that during the New Order period, 
there was a massification and up-scaling of the mechanisms that facilitated the 
circulation of ideas linking language, region, and ethnic social types. For exam­
ple, transmigration projects, migration, investment in education, factories, trans­
portation, and communications all facilitated the repetition of ideologies that had 
been constructed in the colonial period and recirculated in various forms until the 
start of the New Order period. At the same time, other social domains that had 
been sites for regular encounters with Indonesians from throughout the archipel­
ago during the Soekarno years, such as labor and literacy movements associated 
with the PKI (Ford, 2008; Foulcher, 1986), had been domesticated, monitored, 
changed, or eradicated during the New Order period. Even so, from 1966 to 1998, 
linguistic forms became tightly associated with particular regions and equated 
with ethnic social types to the extent that when Indonesians spoke of themselves 
as speaking a regional language, such as Javanese, Sundanese, and Balinese, this 
also frequently pointed to the same ethnic identity and stereotypical dress, hous­
ing, etc. The number of ethnic languages that had institutional centers of nor­
mativity also increased with at least forty-eight regional languages circulating in 
one-to-many participation frameworks like schools, radio, and television. At the 

	
The Semiotic Figurement of Communities in Indonesia	
51
same time, speaking Indonesian had become tightly associated with a whole host 
of ideas, but especially “Indonesian citizen,” “knowledge,” “education,” “develop­
ment,” and doing “unity in diversity.” In broad terms, the different social domains 
in which registers of Indonesian, ethnic registers, and mixed registers circulated 
also helped to regiment an order of indexicality where Indonesian was at the top, 
followed by some ethnic languages (e.g., Javanese, Sundanese, and Balinese), with 
other ethnic registers and mixed registers at the bottom.
2.9  Conclusion
Taking inspiration from a broad range of work, this chapter has been concerned 
with understanding the processes that have helped to index linguistic signs with 
signs of place and person to form ethnic social types in Indonesia over a period 
of about 150 years. I was especially interested in the role that new waves of tech­
nology had in these processes. On the one hand, I pointed out that these pro­
cesses figured in the construction of regional languages, Indonesian, and their 
stereotypical speakers, while on the other hand, and in line with arguments put 
forward by those working in semiotic theory (Agha, 2007a), I suggested that these 
processes also produced an infinite number of registers in places receiving large 
numbers of migrants. As much of the writing in other areas of the humanities 
and social sciences has led us to expect, different waves of technology tended to 
up-scale and massify the circulation of people and ideas, while at the same time 
creating new domains for interaction with, and commentary about, the other.
Indonesian and regional languages were constructed as written entities made 
up of syntactic relations and words that underwent frequent (re)codification in 
word lists, dictionaries, and grammars that were produced by an academic elite 
and media professionals, and consumed in educational domains, by music lovers, 
and to a much lesser extent by television audiences (Kitley, 2000; Rachmah, 2006). 
While linguistic forms continued to be the most readily recognizable emblem of 
ethnicity, through the commoditization of ethnicity, other semiotic forms became 
new emblems that could index ethnic identity. A  register of Malay eventually 
became a register of Indonesian, with the most widely circulating reproductions 
being found in the social domains of schools, bureaucracies, radio, television, and 
print media. While there were many genres, what seemed to be common to all 
was the use of literary written models for contexts that also involved the speaking 
of Indonesian. Another enduring theme was that this register of Indonesian was 
associated with the idea of a standard, new knowledge, education and develop­
ment, authority (whether personal, bureaucratic, or political), expertise, nation­
hood, and the upper echelons of Indonesian society, while also being associated 
with citizens who could do unity in diversity through the use of Indonesian.
In contrast to the early colonial institutionalization of a diversity that included 
just a handful of regional languages, by the 1990s, there were forty-eight regional 
 

52	
Language and Superdiversity
languages with institutionally supported centers that utilized one-to-many partici­
pation frameworks such as schools and media broadcasts. By the 1990s, there were 
also clear hierarchical relations within this polycentric system. Through its role as 
the language of education, development, and government, Indonesian sat at the top 
of this hierarchy, while some varieties of ethnic languages became standardized 
and valued (e.g., Javanese from the royal centers of Yogyakarta and Solo vis-à-vis 
Javanese from the peripheries) but sat below Indonesian. Other ethnic languages, 
especially those found in the islands outside of Java, became marginalized and/or 
endangered, while the mixing of Indonesian with ethnic languages was stigmatized.
Where interactional practice is concerned, the picture is one of increased inter­
action among strangers in an increasingly diverse and expanding set of domains. 
This superdiverse situation also required the development of local semiotic reg­
isters that were typically fragments of other local registers, and the more widely 
circulating ones. In a sense, an unintended consequence of the ideas and practices 
of development was increasing levels of diversity as people and ideas about “the 
other” circulated at ever-increasing rates and at ever-increasing scales, especially as 
one-to-many participation frameworks became the exemplary domains for learn­
ing and entertainment. An irony of this process, especially for those involved in lan­
guage planning and the standardization of a national language, was that although 
Indonesian was strongly championed as the language that would assist in national 
development and unity, nevertheless, the people contact and idea circulation that 
were part of this development process ensured continued linguistic fragmentation 
whereby the language of interethnic encounters rarely matched national ideologies.
In taking a historical look at political, economic, and social events in 
Indonesia, I hope to have contributed to work on superdiversity (e.g., Blommaert 
& Rampton, 2011; Vertovec, 2007). In particular, while work on superdiversity pro­
vides fine-grained descriptions of semiotic practices in face-to-face encounters, we 
know less about the genesis and processes that produce superdiversity, especially 
in non-European contexts. In this chapter, I have mapped some of the conditions 
that have produced superdiversity in Indonesia, while showing how it sits in ten­
sion with standardizing processes that are outcomes of one-to-many participation 
frameworks (e.g., schooling and television programming consumption).
Finally, I should point out that while there were few examples of actual sign 
usage in this chapter, in the following chapters, I start to focus on televised rep­
resentations of sign usage. More specifically, I examine how televised representa­
tions of ethnic social types have contributed to the indexing of linguistic forms 
to embodied practice. I also provide some examples of representations of inter­
actions among ethnic social types (especially in urban settings) that mirror and 
model the unintended consequences of the massification and up-scaling of people 
and idea circulation. In particular, these examples of semiotic practice show that 
doing unity in diversity is not always characterized by Indonesian usage. Indeed, 
it seems that models of the doing of unity in diversity regularly include the use of 
fragments of semiotic registers associated with ethnic languages.

53
3
Representing Ethnicity and 
Social Relations on Television
3.1  Introduction
This chapter has three main aims. The first is to look at how personhood and 
social relations are represented in Indonesian comedic soap operas that were pro­
duced in the mid-to-late 1990s. These comedic soap operas were different from 
the genre of dramatic soap operas because they were not always set in the big 
city, and they did not always represent and imagine the lifestyles and language 
use of an Indonesian-speaking upper middle class (Rachmah, 2006). The second 
aim is to explore the relationships between ethnic stereotypes of the past and 
comedic televised representations. In doing so, I hope to contribute to an area of 
scholarship on language ideologies described in section 2.2. In particular, I seek 
to further the multimodal dimension of some of this scholarship by using televi­
sion soaps as my data. While soaps are a relatively underutilized type of data in 
the study of language ideology formation—with most studies typically relying 
on archival, written, and printed sources (e.g., Agha, 2011a; Inoue, 2011; Miller, 
2004)—their make-up provides rich metasemiotic commentaries that help in 
the construction of social types. The third aim is to start to develop a frame­
work for understanding the type of language alternation practices found within 
these soaps.
In addressing these three aims, I undertake a multimodal analysis of inter­
actions from three soap operas to explore how the televised representation of 
signs reproduces and reconfigures the semiotic registers described in ­chapter 2. 
In particular, I examine how the co-occurrence of specific words with embodied 
language (e.g., gesture, facial expressions, and prosody) and other signs—such 
as those of place (e.g., architecture, landscape), space (e.g., inside houses, prox­
emics in interaction), and situated activity (e.g., driving a taxi as opposed to being 
chauffeured)—help to produce ethnic social types with viewable and hearable 
“demeanors” (Goffman, 1967) that have varying degrees of interactional history 
and thus varying degrees of common ground (Enfield, 2006; Hanks, 2006). The 
 
 

54	
Language and Superdiversity
lamination of demeanor and interactional history onto preexisting ethnic social 
types produces semiotically denser stereotypes.
There are also representations of social types who can engage in practices 
that resemble but are different in a number of respects from “crossing” (Rampton, 
1995). Drawing upon Rampton’s definition of crossing and later revisions of this 
term in discussions of “styling the other” (Rampton, 1999), here I define crossing 
as the use of linguistic forms or formulaic utterances that are typically not asso­
ciated with the person using them through reference to the language habitually 
used by them with their grandparents, parents, and siblings. Crossing typically 
occurs as part of artful performances (often invoking another’s identity) during 
liminal moments. Performances of crossing regularly attract commentaries by 
ratified participants in the communicative event in which crossing occurs. I sug­
gest that representations of crossing-like practices in the soaps that we examine 
seem to offer an alternate model to the state ideology of doing unity in diversity 
through the use of Indonesian.
In carrying out my analysis, it will become clear that some of the constructed 
dialogues found in these recorded broadcasts are characterized by crossing and 
other language alternation practices. The classification of such practices is by 
no means straightforward. Accordingly, I  start to flesh out a system for cat­
egorizing televised language alternation practices. This seems timely for two 
reasons. First, as noted above, the type of alternation found in these soaps is 
rather different from the type of alternation found in accounts elsewhere in the 
world. For example, much of this work has pointed to a global trend around 
the commoditization and popularization of multilingualism in the media (e.g., 
Androutsopoulos, 2007; Jaffe, 2000; Johnson & Ensslin, 2007b; Johnson & 
Milani, 2010; Kelly-Holmes & Atkinson, 2007; LeCompte & Schensul, 1999). 
What seems common in these studies is that representations of language alter­
nation typically occur in liminal or spectacular interactional moments, simi­
lar in some respects to the situations where the practice of crossing (Rampton, 
1995) can be found. In contrast to these studies, however, in this chapter, we find 
that representations of language alternation are typically unspectacular, mun­
dane, and often habitual.
Second, despite an increasing interest in the media by sociolinguists (e.g., 
Agha, 2011b; Bell & Gibson, 2011; Gershon, 2010; Richardson, 2010)  and a 
mountain of work on language alternation and code-switching more generally, 
there is little if any work that focuses on issues around the classification of 
representations of language alternation. My approach draws upon my earlier 
work on language alternation (Goebel, 2010), work on code-switching, espe­
cially Gafaranga’s and Torras’s (2002) and Auer’s (1995) ethnomethodologi­
cal approach to language alternation, and reflections on ethnomethodological 
approaches more generally (e.g., Francis & Hester, 2004; Liddicoat, 2007; 
Moerman, 1988; ten Have, 2007). For example, some treatments of ethnometh­
odology suggest that in order to carry out ethnomethodological analysis, the 

	
Representing Ethnicity and Social Relations on Television	
55
researcher needs to use external material accessed as part of their long period 
of immersion with those being studied (Francis & Hester, 2004). Thus, my 
representation and categorization of talk draw upon conversation-external 
information, such as that presented in ­chapter 2, my research assistant’s clas­
sification of signs, my own knowledge about these signs, and a number of 
dictionaries.
In section 3.2, I start by grounding my analysis in the scholarly discussions 
surrounding television, while arguing that practices of representation directly 
contribute to what is often termed “language change.” Section 3.3 presents a 
short history of television in Indonesia as a way of contextualizing the represen­
tation practices that are discussed in sections 3.5 to 3.7. Section 3.4 develops my 
earlier work on analyzing television representations (Goebel, 2008, 2011). This 
approach is a synthesis of scholarship in the broad fields of talk in interaction, 
ethnography of communication, semiosis, multimodality, and common ground 
(e.g., Agha, 2007a; Antaki & Widdicombe, 1998; Enfield, 2006; Goodwin, 2006; 
Hanks, 2006; Hymes, 1974; Kress & Van Leeuwen, 2001; Norris, 2004; Scollon & 
Scollon, 2003). Sections 3.5 to 3.7 introduce and then provide a multimodal anal­
ysis of three comedic soaps. Sections 3.5 and 3.6 provide examples of habitual 
language alternation, which, I argue, helps naturalize this practice. Section 3.7 
also has examples of this type of alternation, but it has as well a representation 
of migrants and the big city. These representations contain examples of language 
alternation that resemble “adequation.” Following Bucholtz and Hall (2004), 
I define adequation as the habitual pursuit of semiotic sameness in face-to-face 
interactions.
Some of the representations analyzed in section 3.7 also provide examples 
of what I referred to in ­chapter 1 as “knowledging.” In brief, part of my defini­
tion of knowledging was that it related to a competence to recognize and under­
stand signs that were indexical of “the other.” I argued that this competence was 
gained through participation in one-to-many participation frameworks (e.g., 
schooling, consumption of newspapers, radio, and television) at multiple sites 
and across a person’s lifespan. In some cases, this competence is manifested 
through performance, such as evaluations of televised ethnic representations, as 
in the cases we examine in later chapters. In this chapter, however, we will typi­
cally just examine cases of recognition by characters in a soap opera. Even so, 
what makes this interesting is that this practice is being modeled at all, especially 
given the widely circulating ideology that Indonesian is the language of inter­
ethnic interaction. In other words, in contrast to the state ideology of unity in 
diversity where Indonesian is the language of doing togetherness, in these rep­
resentations, unity is done through using and understanding fragments of what 
are commonly referred to as regional languages. In a sense, we are seeing the 
representation of the unintended consequences of processes of enregisterment, 
processes that have been pushed along by technological innovation and ideolo­
gies about development.

56	
Language and Superdiversity
3.2  Approaching Television
As Richardson (2010) points out, television is an area that has received sustained 
attention from a broad range of disciplines including cultural studies, linguistics, 
and anthropology. Much of the scholarship in the broad area of cultural studies 
focuses on television representations and how they are perceived (e.g., Ang, 1996; 
Hall, 2006 [1980]; Liebes & Katz, 1990; Morley, 1986). Some of this scholarship 
was in reaction to quantitatively driven work, which imagined audiences and con­
sumption behavior while ignoring important factors, such as sociocultural con­
text, gender, and so on. According to Ang (1996), this reactionary scholarship 
followed the ethnographic turn in many other humanities areas and focused on 
the local consumption of television, while keeping in mind that the interpreta­
tion of participants’ viewing practices needed to consider broader ideological cur­
rents. Echoing Vološinov’s (1973 [1929]) insights, a common theme to this work 
and also work coming out of the anthropology of the media was that the meaning 
of representations was situated and open to multiple interpretations by viewers 
(e.g., Ang, 1996; Ginsburg, Abu-Lughod, & Larkin, 2002; Liebes & Katz, 1990; 
Spitulnik, 1996).
Linguists from a wide range of paradigms have also had a keen interest in 
television. For example, some linguistic anthropologists and those working in 
social semiotics have focused on the representations themselves and their rela­
tionship to wider sociopolitical contexts (e.g., Fairclough, 1995; Meek, 2006). 
Another focus has been on the practices of producers, directors, financiers, 
actors, editors, advertisers, government departments, and so on and their roles 
in formulating how language and social relations are represented (e.g., Garrett 
& Bell, 1998; Johnson & Ensslin, 2007a; Kress & Van Leeuwen, 2001; Loven, 
2008). Other streams of research have been concerned with audience engage­
ment with and interpretation of these representations (e.g., Kulick & Willson, 
2004 [1994]; Richardson, 1998), and how such representations are reused or 
repeated in other mediums (e.g., Clarke & Hiscock, 2009; King & Wicks, 2009), 
whether and to what extent representations of language use might relate to 
language change among viewers (Stuart-Smith, 2006; Stuart-Smith, Timmins, 
Pryce, & Gunter, n.d.), and how we might characterize and research television 
dialogue (Richardson, 2010).
I have two main points of departure from the above-mentioned work. First, 
I  am interested in exploring how television creates personas that have both 
demeanors and interactional histories. This creation of semiotically dense ste­
reotypes raises the question of how television representations might relate to dis­
cussions about semiotic change. Second, I draw upon work on enregisterment 
discussed in ­chapter 2 to look at how similarities among different soaps show 
how embodied language and interactional history have become widely circulat­
ing emblems of ethnic identity. I have discussed the theory behind this last point 
 

	
Representing Ethnicity and Social Relations on Television	
57
in ­chapter 2, so in the rest of this section, I want to begin to theorize the relation­
ship between television representations and semiotic change.
The relationship between television representations and semiotic change has 
started to be explored by variationist sociolinguists, such as Stuart-Smith (2006, 
n.d.), who have set out to question assumptions that television has limited, if 
any, influence on language change among viewers (e.g., Chambers, 1998; Labov, 
2001). Here I  want to pursue a much more modest argument by pointing out 
that research on the practices of producers, directors, financiers, actors, editors, 
and so on shows that this group of media professionals plays a role in language 
change (or more precisely semiotic change), albeit only sign usage as represented 
on television.
As these studies have shown, such media professionals decide which signs 
and which practices will be foregrounded, backgrounded, co-occurring, and so 
on (e.g., Loven, 2008; Richardson, 2010). Richardson (2010: 45–46) notes that 
while television professionals try to represent “realistic” dialogues, typically, 
everyday features of conversation (e.g., overlap, false starts) are kept to a mini­
mum or included to achieve a purpose, such as using overlap to show urgency 
in contrast to the everyday occurrence of overlap documented in the work of 
conversation analysts. In this sense, language change or, more precisely, semi­
otic change is achieved through the erasing of some of the features of everyday 
interaction.
Similarly, Richardson (2010: 110) points out that in contrast to the fine-grained 
conversational work people do in everyday interaction to manage social rela­
tions, typically, television drama foregrounds conflict and impolite behavior 
(Richardson, 2010: 110). Again, in these types of television representations, the 
erasure of “polite” behavior is an example of semiotic change that has been the 
outcome of media professionals’ work. While these representations are designed 
to elicit reactions from an audience (Richardson, 2010: 128), another outcome of 
these representational practices is the association of a whole host of signs with 
social types to produce new social types, another example of semiotic change.
In the case at hand, recognizable emblems of identity associated with ethnic 
stereotypes (e.g., the formula of person, linguistic form, and place) are laminated 
with nonverbal signs and an interactional history to form semiotically denser eth­
nic stereotypes. The lamination of nonverbal signs to personas engaged in situated 
interaction helps to construct a “demeanor” (Goffman, 1967: 78). Representations 
of characters who share “common ground” create an image of interactional his­
tory that also projects the social relations that should exist between people dis­
playing particular demeanors. Common ground can be defined as knowledge 
about referents in interaction that is jointly established as either shared or not 
among a participant constellation (Enfield, 2006; Hanks, 2006). Before taking a 
look at how semiotic density is constructed on television, I wish to look at televi­
sion in Indonesia as a way of contextualizing these representations.

58	
Language and Superdiversity
3.3  Television in Indonesia
The introduction of television and the formation of a government broadcaster, 
TVRI, in 1962 rapidly introduced a new social domain for the recirculation 
of a number of ideas. On the one hand, television circulated representations 
of encounters with sameness in the form of encounters with other Indonesian 
speakers. This (re)linked ideas of “Indonesian” with “Indonesian citizen” and 
“unity in diversity.” On the other hand, television also circulated representations 
of encounters with difference, which (re)linked linguistic forms, regions, and 
ethnic social types. Putting aside the important question of reception (which is 
discussed in ­chapters 7 and 8), this section takes a brief look at the history of tele­
vision in Indonesia. I point out that while the majority of programming was in 
Indonesian, nevertheless from the early 1990s onward, a series of events resulted 
in increasing amounts of regional languages finding their way into programming, 
especially in the area of soap opera.
The rate at which television entered the lives of Indonesians across the archi­
pelago can be categorized into a number of stages. The first was the setting-up of 
regional infrastructure that enabled local production, programming, and broad­
casting. According to Kitley (2000: 38), after the initial setup of a broadcasting 
unit in Jakarta in 1962, regional stations were setup in Yogyakarta, Central Java 
(1965), Medan, North Sumatra (1970), Ujung Pandang/Makassar, South Sulawesi 
(1972), Balikpapan, East Kalimantan (1973), Palembang, South Sumatra (1974), 
Surabaya, East Java (1978), and Manado, North Sulawesi (1978). The launch of 
the Palapa satellite in 1975 fueled an increase in television ownership and, by 
1978, there were 900,000 registered television sets in Java and a further 200,000 in 
the outer islands (Kitley, 2000: 47).
As Ida’s (2006) and Loven’s (2008) studies of television reception have 
shown, in low-income neighborhoods, one television could attract a large audi­
ence including neighbors and family. Thus, the 1.1 million television sets may 
well have translated into five to ten million viewers. Indeed, I recall that during 
my time living in my partner’s village in West Java in the early 1990s, her parents’ 
small black-and-white television attracted audiences of well over twenty viewers 
in the late afternoons and evenings. I experienced a similar mass audience when 
doing my Ph.D. fieldwork in a low-income neighborhood of Semarang between 
1996 and 1998. Programming also expanded in the sole television station, the 
government-owned-and-operated TVRI, although not at the rate of television 
purchases (Kitley, 2000:  42–62). For example, in 1979, TVRI broadcast from 
Monday to Saturday for 7.5 hours each day and Sunday was 6.5 hours (Kitley, 
2000: 40).
During the early years, television was seen as a facilitator of education, espe­
cially for the teaching of the national language. Even so, there were some excep­
tions, such as the children’s show Si Unyul (Unyul), which was broadcast between 
1981 and 1993. This program had one of the main characters speaking Indonesian 
 

	
Representing Ethnicity and Social Relations on Television	
59
differently from other characters. This character, Bu Bariah (Mrs. Bariah), explic­
itly grounded her difference in terms of region through her commentaries about 
herself as someone hailing from Madura in East Java (Kitley, 2000: 112–137). 
According to Kitley, the only other notable exception to Indonesian language 
broadcasts was a series titled Lenong Rumpi, which had some local content and 
fragments from a regional language (Kitley, 2000: 98). In both cases, however, 
television became a new one-to-many participation framework that (re)cir­
culated two sets of ideas. On the one hand, Si Unyul and Lenong Rumpi were 
representations that recirculated ideas about the relationship among linguistic 
forms, regions, and ethnic social types. On the other, the use of Indonesian on 
television helped solidify ideas about what Indonesian was, while continuing to 
link it with the nation, development, advanced knowledge, education, and politi­
cal power. This was so because the majority of programming was in Indonesian 
and typically either educational or about ceremonies involving politicians and 
bureaucrats.
With the entry of commercial television in the early 1990s, local content and 
discourses about regional languages became increasingly common. For example, 
Sen and Hill (2000: 119) noted that the emergence of the first private television 
stations in Indonesia in 1990 was accompanied by programming and operating 
rules that stated that the language used by such stations should be standard 
Indonesian with regional languages being used only when suitable. During the 
period in which these authorized commentaries circulated, the entry of five new 
television stations in the period of 1990–1993 made it increasingly difficult for 
these stations to gain and maintain market share (Kitley, 2000: 150–153; Sen & 
Hill, 2000: 123–124). One of the ways in which private and public stations tried 
to do this was to include more local content, including increasing amounts of 
interaction in an imagined local language, especially in comedic soaps locally 
referred to as sinetron (e.g., Kitley, 2000; Loven, 2008; Rachmah, 2006; Sen & 
Hill, 2000).
In a bid to stem the tide of foreign films and unwanted Western influence on 
Indonesians, in late 1996, the government also ratified a law that would foster 
local content over international content (Kitley, 2000: 298). Televised represen­
tations of the local also occurred at a time of economic development (Vickers, 
2005) and cheaper access to television sets that fueled a rapid increase in tele­
vision ownership across Indonesia in the mid-1990s (Kitley, 2000), albeit typi­
cally in the middle-income segments of Indonesia society (Goebel, 2000). While 
the Asian economic crisis that hit Indonesia in mid-1997 and the rapid inflation 
that accompanied this crisis decreased Indonesians’ ability to buy televisions, it 
did accentuate a move toward more local content. As Ida (2008: 97) notes, the 
economic crisis meant that local soap operas were much cheaper than foreign 
imports and broadcast content moved from 90 percent foreign in 1997 to 67 per­
cent local in 1999, although the percentage of locally produced content dropped 
to 63 percent by 2001.

60	
Language and Superdiversity
In sum, until the early 1990s, the New Order government’s ideology about 
television was its function as a disseminator of Indonesian and of representations 
of Indonesians doing togetherness by using Indonesian. The emergence of new 
television stations in the early 1990s and the financial crisis that started in 1997 
helped to provide an alternate to this ideology as regional languages increas­
ingly found their way into television programming. This type of programming 
highlighted localism, ethnicity, and ethnic languages, while standing in contrast 
to the New Order’s ideas about the importance of downplaying ethnicity and 
difference. In addition, some of this new programming modeled new ways of 
doing unity in diversity. From section 3.5 onward, I take a detailed look at some 
of the soaps from this period. Before doing so, however, I flesh out my approach 
to analyzing these soaps.
3.4  A Multimodal Approach to Comedic Soaps
When I recorded the three television serials that I present below, I did not record 
them with the intention of using them in the type of analysis undertaken here. 
The first one, an episode from Noné titled “Cipoa” (“Con Artist”), was recorded 
in Darwin at the then-Northern Territory University in 1995. The other two, Si 
Kabayan (Kabayan) and Si Doel Anak Sekolahan (Doel an Educated Lad), were 
recorded in Cirebon and Semarang in 1996 and 1998, respectively. Although the 
last serial was recorded as part of a larger linguistic-anthropological fieldwork 
project conducted in Semarang from December 1995 until August 1998 (Goebel, 
2000), I didn’t pay much attention to this data until much later (Goebel, 2008, 
2010). Indeed, for a long time afterward, all of these serials were used as teach­
ing material to help learners of Indonesian become acquainted with the type of 
variation that they would encounter in Indonesia (Black & Goebel, 2002, 2004; 
Goebel, 2002). In this sense, the three serials I use here were not originally gath­
ered as part of an ongoing project that looked at the representation of ethnic 
social types. Even so, as I became increasingly interested in processes of enreg­
isterment, I was drawn to televised representations of sign usage as one of the 
mechanisms that figured in the repetition of signs and the stereotypes that they 
helped construct.
In looking at these representations in more detail, two main methods seemed 
especially suited to the task. These include those offered in the broad field that 
looks at face-to-face interaction and embodied interaction (e.g., Antaki & 
Widdicombe, 1998; Goodwin, 2006; Gumperz, 1982; Haviland, 2004; Kendon, 
1985; Tannen, 1984) and the ethnography of communication (e.g., Hymes, 1972). 
This combination is by no means new and has been fruitfully tried and tested 
by many scholars working in fields like language socialization and sign usage in 
interactions among those from different backgrounds (e.g., Ochs, 1988; Philips, 
1983; Wortham, 2006).
 

	
Representing Ethnicity and Social Relations on Television	
61
Although Hymes’s (1972) framework has been critiqued due to a lack 
of attention to interpretation processes relating to “norms” (e.g., Gumperz, 
1982), nevertheless, his notions of speech events, speech situations, and his 
SPEAKING framework provide a useful guide for the systematic docu­
mentation of sign usage. SPEAKING is an acronym covering the minimal 
types of data that Hymes suggested are needed to understand what makes 
up participants’ communicative competence. These include (S)  Situation, 
(P)  Participants, (E) Ends, (A) Act sequence, (K) Key, (I) Instrumentalities 
(or modes in the sense of those working in the area of multimodal interaction 
analysis), (N)  Norms, and (G)  Genre. In particular, it enables comparisons 
among each set of signs and a way of talking about how—when viewed as 
a whole social practice—these signs construct demeanors. Drawing on eth­
nomethodological insights allows us to provide a fine-grained description of 
represented conversational practices. Combining this analysis with Hymes’s 
framework also allows us to see how such sign usage relates to other signs 
within a particular televised serial. In this sense, the methodology presented 
here falls within the type of multimodal analysis found in the work of Scollon 
and Scollon (2003) and Norris (2004).
While my analysis will focus on the use of multiple signs, I also need to be 
clear about two issues. First, I need to point out some of my ideological biases 
relating to transcription and classification (e.g., Ochs, 2006 [1979]). In particular, 
I need to provide a note about initial transcription procedures and how this fig­
ured in my classification of linguistic signs in these serials. Initial transcription 
was carried out by two Indonesian research assistants, both of whom reported 
to be from Sundanese-speaking West Java. Indeed, I chose them because their 
language background would enable them to transcribe the speech in two of the 
serials that I present here. I asked them to put in bold any forms that they consid­
ered were regional languages. Thus, part of my categorization of linguistic forms 
relied upon native-speaker judgments.
This presents some challenges insofar as while I draw upon Gafaranga 
and Torras’s (2002) methods for helping categorize language alternation, I also 
relied upon conversation external judgments, the co-occurrence of other signs, 
my own knowledge of linguistic signs, and a number of dictionaries. While 
acknowledging that this approach has the potential to reproduce the ideolo­
gies I  am trying to unpack, I  need a starting point and thus beg the read­
er’s indulgence for the moment. Second, many Indonesian words have been 
adopted from what has been labeled “Javanese” and “Sundanese,” and the 
reverse is also true (e.g., Errington, 1998; Poedjosoedarmo, 1982). Indonesian 
also shares word order and affixation patterns with many local registers, 
such as those referred to as Javanese and Sundanese (e.g., Errington, 1998; 
Poedjosoedarmo, 1982).
Although Agha’s (2007a, 2007b) work and my discussion in ­chapter 2 imply 
a need to write about language in semiotic terms, here and in the following 

62	
Language and Superdiversity
chapters, I substitute more accurate descriptions, such as “linguistic signs stereo­
typically associated with Indonesian,” “linguistic signs stereotypically associated 
with ngoko and krámá Javanese,” “linguistic signs stereotypically associated with 
Sundanese,” and “linguistic signs stereotypically associated with Betawi” for 
shorter ones: respectively, “Indonesian,” “ngoko Javanese,” “krámá Javanese,” 
Sundanese, and Betawi. I use the term “medium,” in Gafaranga and Torras’s 
(2002) sense, to generally refer to Indonesian, ngoko Javanese, and krámá Javanese 
as defined above. This helps me separate linguistic sign usage in actual interac­
tional practice from ideologies about such signs, which are often referred to as 
“language.” I also prefer to use “medium” rather than “regional language” when 
looking at represented interactional practices because it does not presuppose 
the link between geographic place and language. In the context of the following 
analysis, it also allows the idea of “region” to emerge from the co-occurrence of 
signs of place and through the frames of difference set up by their contrast with 
other sets of signs.
3.5  The Comedic Soap Noné
Although not the first broadcast to include local content, the broadcast of the 
soap opera Noné (Missy) occurred at a particular historical juncture where rein­
terpretation of media laws, the emergence of new television stations, and the need 
to obtain market share all figured in a push for an increase in the use of signs 
stereotypically associated with regional languages in soap operas more generally 
(e.g., section 3.3). The data that I analyze is drawn from an episode titled “Cipoa” 
(“Con Artist”) that was broadcast nationally in 1995 during the mid-afternoon 
time slot, which scholars of Indonesian media characterize as less popular 
because it attracts less advertising revenue (Loven, 2008; Rachmah, 2006). This 
comedic soap opera was broadcast by the commercial semi-educational televi­
sion station TPI, one of the five commercial stations (Indosiar, SCTV, RCTI, and 
ANTV) that came online after television was deregulated in Indonesia in 1990 
(Kitley, 2000).
This particular comedic soap is notable because of some characters’ frequent 
alternation between Indonesian and Sundanese fragments and because of the 
representation of other signs that anchored this story geographically to West 
Java, an area associated with an imagined community of Sundanese speakers. 
This soap is also interesting because of the celebrity status of main actor, Nike 
Ardilla, who is represented as a speaker of Sundanese. She was a well-known 
and loved celebrity who was not only a pop singer but also a television and movie 
star. As a celebrity, Nike Ardilla fits into the category of an authorized speaker 
of this medium, which, as we will see in ­chapter 8, is a status bestowed upon her 
by viewers of this soap.
 

	
Representing Ethnicity and Social Relations on Television	
63
In representing the visual and spoken elements of these televised repre­
sentations, I use a screenshot (frame) to exemplify embodied language usage, 
and starting from extract 3.5.4, a new frame is placed to the left of the dia­
logue where changes in gesture, posture, and facial expression co-occur with 
a change in participant constellations and/or a new speaker turn. The first 
extract of talk that I analyze (extract 3.5.1) is of an elderly woman narrating a 
letter that is read by the main character Dewi. One of my research assistants 
indicated that the two forms aer (water) on line 5 were Sundanese, which is 
indicated by bold font. (When necessary, I point to transcription conventions 
as I move through the analysis, but a full list of conventions can be found at 
the beginning of the book.) When talking with my other research assistant, 
however, she noted that the first instance was somewhere between Indonesian 
and Sundanese pronunciation, while the second occurrence was Indonesian 
pronunciation. Although the difference here is slight, the point here is that 
this pronunciation presents a sign that indexes the language background of the 
serial and the setting.
Extract 3.5.1  The reading of a will
Dewi’s grandmother
  1
  2
  3
  4
  5
  6
  7
  8
  9
10
11
12
13
14
dewi (1.7) kalau kamu baca surat ini 
(1.3) mungkin nenek sudah menjadi 
tanah (1.8) jangan menangis (1.8) 
nenek tidak mungkin hidup lagi (1.1) 
meskipun aer matamu sebanyak aer 
mata waduk jatiluhur (1.5) senyumlah 
(1.1) pandanglah mataku (2.0) kamu 
harus berjuang seperti raden ajeng 
kartini . atau dewi sartika (1.1) karena 
semua wanita . harus sadar . bahwa 
mereka harus bangkit dan berhasil 
(1.0) kamu tidak boleh malas (0.9) 
+janji+ (1.8) bagus (10.0) nenek 
wariskan kepadamu . sebuah rumah
Dewi, if you are reading this letter, [then] 
maybe Grandma has already become
dust. Don’t cry.
It’s impossible for Grandma to live again. 
Even if your tears are as much as the water 
in lake Jatiluhur. Please smile.
Look into my eyes. You
have to struggle like Princess Ajeng
Kartini or Dewi Sartika. Because
all women must be aware that
they must develop and be successful.
You aren’t allowed to be lazy.
Promise! Good. Grandma
bequeaths you a house.
After Dewi finishes reading the letter that was written and narrated by her 
grandmother, the scene cuts to Dewi arriving at her inherited house. The 
house’s colonial styling, expansive yards, and specific type of foliage may 
point to a place somewhere in mountainous areas of Indonesia. The scene 
then moves to another young woman who is riding in a taxi, which eventually 
stops in the driveway of Dewi’s newly acquired house. These signs together 
with the exchanges that follow between the taxi driver and the passenger 

64	
Language and Superdiversity
(Susi), Susi and Dewi, and Dewi and the taxi driver all provide signs that 
may or may not disambiguate earlier signs about setting and which medium 
is being used.
In the talk that accompanies extract 3.5.2, the young woman (Susi) refers 
to the man (Ucup) as Mang (Uncle) and the man refers to Susi as Neng (Miss). 
The occurrence of another medium within a primarily Indonesian conversation 
may present signs of difference, but in isolation, these fragments may leave open 
the question as to just which medium. However, recourse to co-occurring signs 
enables the anchoring of these forms with geographic place. For example, the 
taxi’s number plate is prefixed with a “D” meaning it is from Bandung, West 
Java, and the name of the taxi company, “Bandung Taxi Company,” is at the 
bottom of the driver’s door (figure 3.5.1). This sign of place not only anchors 
the whole serial to West Java, but it also presupposes a number of indexical 
relationships. For example, it points to the potential that those in the coming 
story may be of Sundanese ethnicity and by extension through indexical links 
among place, person, and language, Sundanese speakers who when involved in 
co-ethnic interaction stereotypically use ethnic languages if they are known to 
each other.
Just as important, representations of subsequent interactions may also pro­
vide further signs that help anchor these fragments with geographic place, while 
indexing embodied behaviors with particular mediums. Consider for example, 
the interaction that occurs around figure 3.5.2. In this interaction, Susi moves 
away from her interaction with Mang Ucup to ring the doorbell of the house. 
In doing so, this provides potential signs as to what the relationship might be 
between her and the occupant of the house. For example, we might read an unfa­
miliar or stranger relationship between Susi and the house’s occupant because 
Susi has no key and rings the doorbell. Such a reading, however, is ambiguous 
without recourse to the interaction that ensues.
There are also other signs that offer particular readings about other aspects 
of character identities. For example, in the talk surrounding figure 3.5.1, Mang 
Ucup and Susi try to establish how Susi will pay for the fare. She offers a large 
FIGURE 3.5.1  Signs of place
FIGURE 3.5.2  Signs of social relations

	
Representing Ethnicity and Social Relations on Television	
65
bill, which Mang Ucup says that he can’t change, and that he doesn’t earn that 
much in a day. Then Susi offers foreign currency—which Ucup doesn’t want—so 
Ucup asks for her stuffed toy, which Susi notes is worth more than his taxi. All of 
this talk and the material artifacts involved offer readings of a “well-to-do” Susi. 
For such an identity to solidify, however, requires further interactional work.
Extract 3.5.2  Indonesian and unfamiliars
Susi
1
2
3
>ada orangnya nggak 
sih di situ?> (1.1) 
[ +heh+
Is anyone there or 
not?
Heh!
Dewi
4
[ ya (1.3)
Yeah.
After ringing the doorbell again, Susi uses Indonesian in summoning the occu­
pant. The occupant, Dewi, appears to orient to this Indonesian usage in line 4 
with ya (yes). This co-occurs with long inter-turn pauses signaled by the number 
in seconds and tenths of seconds within parentheses (lines 2 and 4). The rep­
resentation of this way of speaking with a potential stranger also models this 
social relationship and the ways of speaking that are appropriate to this type of 
social relationship. However, without recourse to subsequent interactions, such 
a reading is still only tentative. As the interaction unfolds, however, this stranger 
relationship continues to solidify.
At the start of this interaction, the door is opened as Susi asks again if any­
body is at home (lines 5–6) in extract 3.5.3 below. The talk continues to be in 
Indonesian:  notably without any terms of address or personal introduction. 
Inter-turn pause length also continues to be quite long, ranging from half a sec­
ond to two seconds. In the two frames to the left of the text, we can also see that 
in terms of facial expressions, Dewi doesn’t smile, as she does in her interactions 
in extracts 3.5.5 onward. What seems to be occurring across interactional time is 
the linking of unfamiliarity and the lack of smiles with Indonesian. We can also 
see that in terms of dress, Susi’s leather coat and her expensive stuffed toy are 
noticeably different from that of Dewi, who is wearing a T-shirt and a sarong with 
a batik design. These differences may add to the potential differences in social 
status that seem to be implied through Susi’s talk in lines 8–14 and the absence of 
introductions or terms of address.

66	
Language and Superdiversity
Extract 3.5.3  Indonesian, other reference, and unfamiliarity
Susi
  5
  6
 >ada orangny nggak 
 di situ?> (0.6)
Is anyone there or 
not?
Dewi
  7
ada (1.0)
Yes there is.
Susi
  8
  9
10
panggil (0.4) > eh 
ada uang kecil 
nggak?> (0.5)
Call [the house 
owner] eh, haven’t 
got any change 
[have you]?
Dewi
11
12
13
14
+ha+ (0.5) kamar 
kecil’ (0.4) >ada tu 
di dalam> . masuk 
aja (2.0)
What, is there a 
bathroom, yeah 
there is one inside, 
just come inside.
Indeed, as we will see, Susi initially assumes that Dewi is a maid. We can see some of this 
through what appears to be a false start (line 8) where Susi tells Dewi to call (panggil) 
someone (perhaps the house owner) before asking for change. What seems to be occur­
ring across interactional time is both the solidification of stranger identities—which 
also help reproduce associations between Indonesian and unfamiliarity—and the 
emergence of classed identities based upon possession of material goods and money. 
After being invited inside (lines 13-14), Susi proceeds to comment on the aesthetics of 
the inside of the house primarily in Indonesian (extract 3.5.4).
Extract 3.5.4  Talking about the material world
Susi
15
16
17
18
19
wadu::h’ (0.3) +oh MY 
GOD+ (0.3) bagus juga 
ini rumah ya? . ya tapi 
mesti diganti lagi sama 
barang barang yang 
Wow, oh MY 
GOD this 
house is great 
yeah. But 
[we] need to 
change some 
of the things 
[furnishings)] 
with more 
TRENDY ones. 

	
Representing Ethnicity and Social Relations on Television	
67
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
lebih TRENDI’ (1.2) 
susi nggak suka sama 
warna warna kayak gini 
 
(0.3) kurang aktif (0.4) 
ya? . kita kan artis mesti 
GLAMOR gitu’ . eh 
(0.3)
Susi [i.e. “I”] 
doesn’t like 
colors like this, 
they are not 
active enough. 
Yeah if its
artists like 
us, right!
Yes, [we] need 
[to be] 
GLAMOROUS 
right.
27
28
29
tolong dong dibayarin 
taksi dulu . +itu tu+ 
yang di luar ya? (9.0)
Eh, please pay 
the taxi first, 
that one, the one 
outside,
yeah.
In the above talk, we see that Susi identifies herself as an artist (at this stage, 
this might mean either screen or music). While artists who practice tradi­
tional forms of entertainment could have associations with moral deficiencies 
(Hanan, 1993), people like Susi who practiced more contemporary styles of 
music were often associated with a lack of morality because of the scantily 
dressed youths found in Western MTV music videos of the 1990s (Kitley, 2000; 
Rachmah, 2006). One interesting aspect of this talk, which only comes out 
through comparison with subsequent talk, is that the topic of above talk is 
primarily about the material world (lines 15–25). In short, because this talk 
is also primarily in Indonesian, Indonesian also becomes linked with talk 
about the material world. This talk also helps to further disambiguate the 
“stranger” relationship between Dewi and Susi insofar as Susi appears unfa­
miliar with the house. In addition, while there are two mediums used in this 
talk—linguistic signs associated with English (bold italic caps) and those 
associated with Indonesian—most of Susi’s talk is in Indonesian. In using 
primarily an Indonesian medium between strangers, the association between 
Indonesian and strangers also solidifies.
Even so, Susi’s use of English also invites analysis. From a microanalytic 
point of view, such usage might initially fit into three categories found in the 
literature on language alternation (Auer, 1995; Gafaranga & Torras, 2002; 
Rampton, 1995). The first is “alternation as the medium,” which resembles the 
following pattern (adapted from Auer, 1995): AB1 AB2 AB1 AB2 (the uppercase 
letters represent a particular medium and the numbers indicate speakers 1 and 2). 

68	
Language and Superdiversity
Often, alternation as the medium has associations with habitualness, and indi­
vidual moves from one medium to the other often do not have indexical mean­
ings, but rather the overall pattern can index a particular community of practice 
(e.g., Alvarez-Cáccamo, 1998; Franceschini, 1998; Goebel, 2010; Swigart, 1992). 
The second and third could be code-switching or crossing, which are typically 
liminal with the alternation carrying further indexical meanings. These types of 
alternation can be illustrated with the pattern A1 A2 B1 A1 A2 (adapted from 
Auer, 1995).
In examining talk between Susi and Dewi throughout this soap, it becomes 
clear that alternation between English and Indonesian is not habitual, and indeed 
it only occurs on this occasion. Thus, this rules out alternation as the medium. It 
seems that this usage resembles code-switching in the sense offered by Gafaranga 
and Torras (2002) because it engenders a sense of “interactional otherness” in 
comparison to Susi and Dewi’s other talk, which is in Indonesian. In supporting 
the interpretation that the use of English-like words has some sort of meaning, 
I suggest that it contributes to a solidification of Susi’s moneyed-class identity 
insofar as English usage may suggest an ability to engage in overseas travel, to 
study overseas, or to take special courses within Indonesia. All of these practices 
are expensive and, during the mid-1990s, out of reach of the type of low-income 
Indonesians who made up the majority of Indonesia’s population. As the interac­
tion continues, Susi’s moneyed-class identity appears to further solidify together 
with Susi’s interpretation of Dewi as a maid. Susi’s interpretation of “maid” is 
made more explicit when Susi asks Dewi to go and pay the taxi (lines 27–29). 
Interaction between Dewi and Ucup contrasts markedly with other interactional 
pairs, such as Susi and Ucup, and Susi and Dewi. This too helps solidify their 
emerging identities.
In extract 3.5.5, we see that Mang Ucup appears to recognize Dewi, as evi­
denced through reference to her name, as she is standing at the door. Looking 
at the two frames to the left of the text, we can also see that Ucup’s facial 
expression, which ends in a smile, is reciprocated by Dewi when she appears 
to also recognize Mang Ucup. In other words, the smile appears to become a 
mutually recognized and ratified sign of familiar interpersonal relations. This 
embodied language co-occurs with increased body movement (e.g., the move­
ment of Dewi’s arm into a pointing gesture) and the use of Sundanese frag­
ments (in bold font) as their medium. In so doing, it begins to link this medium 
with embodied signs.

	
Representing Ethnicity and Social Relations on Television	
69
Extract 3.5.5  Names, gestures, facial expressions, and familiarity
Ucup
30 neng dewi? (1.1) 
Miss Dewi?
Dewi
31
32
mang (1.0) heh (1.0) 
mang (1.0)
Uncle? Huh! Uncle?
The sign usage in extract 3.5.5 also contrasts considerably with the earlier inter­
action between Susi and Dewi, which was not characterized by the use of terms 
of address, names, and smiles as it is here. In short, what we have here is the 
representation of an intimate type of social relationship that has also been geo­
graphically anchored to a particular region through sign usage. As with the 
previous interaction, however, the identities that such sign usage point to are 
still ambiguous, but as we follow the interaction, an increasingly close, intimate 
interpersonal social relationship emerges through the co-construction of com­
mon ground (in this case, knowledge of personal names), as in the following 
extracts.
Extract 3.5.6  Prosody and familiars
Ucup
33
34
neng dewi (0.3) 
+neng+ hehe (0.5)
Miss Dewi. Miss! 
Laughs.
(continued)

70	
Language and Superdiversity
Dewi
35
36
mang . +mang [ a::: 
mang+
Uncle, Uncle, a::: 
Uncle
In extract 3.5.6, we see that Ucup appears to be sure that the young woman is 
in fact the Dewi that he knows through the use of her name again. This also 
co-occurs with further smiling, Ucup jumping up and down and waving his arm 
(the first frame to the left of the text), continued use of Sundanese terms of address 
(in bold font), together with raised volume (indicated by the “+” surrounding an 
utterance or word) and laughter (line 34). Dewi orients to this sign usage by con­
tinuing to use the same medium (primarily terms of address), smiling, running 
toward Ucup (the second frame to the left of the text), and raising the volume of 
her talk (lines 35–36). In doing so, the identity of “familiars” continues to solid­
ify. The co-occurrence of these new embodied behaviors is also linked or indexed 
with the medium being used. This medium usage becomes even heavier as the 
interaction ensues, as can be seen in extract 3.5.7. This medium usage co-occurs 
with the continued use of embodied language, including smiling, laughter, and 
pointing at each other, as can be seen in the three frames to the left of the text.
Extract 3.5.7  Sundanese usage, co-occurrence, and familiarity
Ucup
37
38
39
                      [ > 
(laugher) ini teh neng 
dewi téa>=
Laughter. You’re 
Miss Dewi
aren’t you?
Dewi
40
41
                  = >+ ya mang 
[ (laughter)+>
Yes Uncle.
Ucup
42
43
44
45
[ >+euluh euluh euluh 
mani sudah besar begini 
ah+> . masih ingat ka 
mang coba . he. =
Gee gee gee
wow you’re already 
grown
up. Do [you] still 
remember 
Me, try [and 
remember].
Extract 3.5.6  (Continued)

	
Representing Ethnicity and Social Relations on Television	
71
Dewi
46
47
48
49
50
51
                              = >+ya 
masih atuh ini teh 
mang+> ma::ng 
>kéheula kéheula 
kéheula kéheula> . 
ma:::ng >mang ucup =
Yeah
of course you [are]
Uncle, Uncle,
hang on, hang on,
hang on, hang on,
Uncle, Uncle 
Ucup.
Ucup
52
53
                                    =
>+ wah betul+> =
Wow right.
Both
54
55
                             =
simultaneous laughter =
Simultaneous 
laughter.
Ucup
56
57
                                     = 
damang neng’=
How are [you] 
Miss?
Dewi
58
59
                        = +SAÉ? 
mang+
GOOD,
Uncle.
In beginning  my analysis, we can start by comparing these participants’ use 
of social space with the use of social space by two other pairs, Susi-Ucup or 
Susi-Dewi (figures 3.5.3 and 3.5.4). There appears to be much less space between 
Dewi and Ucup (extract 3.4.7) when compared with the pairs Susi-Ucup or 
Susi-Dewi (figures 3.5.3 and 3.5.4). This difference in the use of social space is also 
mirrored in how they orient their bodies. For example, by comparing the frames 
in extract 3.5.7 and figures 3.5.3 and 3.5.4, we can see that Dewi and Ucup directly 
face each other, while the pairs of Susi-Ucup and Susi-Dewi do not.
In the interaction represented in extract 3.5.7, Dewi repeats Ucup’s propensity 
for jumping up and down (the second frame). This potentially indicates a mutual 
recognition of this activity as a sign of familiar interpersonal relations. Just as 
important, we also see mutual orientation to a new set of signs from lines 37–59. 
These include overlap (the start of which is indicated by a square bracket “[“), 
latching (i.e., no perceivable pause between turns indicated by “=”), rapid speech 
(indicated by a “>” surrounding words/utterances), and touch (the last frame).
We also see that Dewi confirms that she is indeed the Dewi that Ucup 
thinks he knows (lines 40–41) and that Dewi is able to remember Ucup’s name 

72	
Language and Superdiversity
(line 51). In line 57, Sundanese is used to ask about personal life-worlds as com­
pared with earlier Indonesian usage that was about the material world (extract 
3.5.4). All of this sign usage helps further solidify the identities of Dewi and 
Ucup. In this case, it is now clear that they are Sundanese-speaking familiars 
whose affective stance toward each other can be characterized as one of rap­
port (in the sense offered by Tannen, 1984, 1989) or intimacy. It is also appar­
ent here that Sundanese and Indonesian are alternated on lines 38–39, 40, 
42–44, 44–45, and 47–48 within an intonational unit (i.e., where there is a pause 
between utterances). That both engage in alternation that involves Sundanese 
fragments, both here and elsewhere in the soap, suggests some sort of habitu­
alness, while contrasting with sign usage in the participant constellations of 
Susi-Dewi and Mang-Susi. There is also Ucup’s lowering of his body (the last 
frame of extract 3.5.7) and Dewi’s use of what can be classified as a “politeness” 
form—saé (good/well), which are all signs of hierarchical social relationships. 
(To keep from making my analysis too complex, however, I will not analyze this 
usage here.)
As the story continues, another young woman, Ayu, arrives responding 
to the same “room for rent” advertisement that attracted Susi. In contrast to 
Susi, she introduces herself to Dewi. In so doing, she makes it clear that they 
are strangers. She, like Susi, is represented as a city woman who is lazy and 
lacking in morals. In thinking about whether she should invite either of these 
Indonesian-speaking women to rent a room, an image of her grandmother reap­
pears for the third time in the show. Her grandmother is pictured sweeping the 
yard in a traditional kebaya and frequently using Sundanese fragments (in bold), 
as illustrated in extract 3.5.8.
FIGURE 3.5.3  Proxemics, body orientation, 
and unfamiliars (Susi and Ucup)
FIGURE 3.5.4  Proxemics, body orientation, 
and unfamiliars (Susi and Dewi)

	
Representing Ethnicity and Social Relations on Television	
73
Extract 3.5.8  A grandmother’s warning
Dewi’s grandmother
  1
  2
  3
  4
  5
  6
  7
  8
  9
10
11
12
13
14
dewi? (0.8) uang teh perlu (0.5) tapi 
kamu jangan jadi mata duitan (0.7) 
+kalo bangun tidur . >jangan suka 
bengong> (0.9) sok beberes . 
bebersih+ (0.9) kalo pekarangan sudah 
bersih . baru kamu boleh mengerjakan 
yang lain? (1.4) yeuh . kalo pekarangan
itu bersih . itu hiji tanda . bahwa 
kehidupan kamu juga bersih . +ngarti+ 
(0.8) +aeh aeh . >jangan seperti orang 
lain> . atuh? . +>baru pegang sapu 
sudah merasa capai>+ (1.0) yeuh (1.0) 
+>sok geura beberes . geura sasapu . 
jung>+
Dewi, money is important. But
don’t you become obsessed with it.
When you get up in the 
morning, don’t
be lazy. Tidy up,
clean up! If everything is already
tidy then you can do
other things. Go on! If the yard is 
clean, that is a sign that you 
are also a
clean-living person. [You] 
understand! Oh my, oh my don’t be 
like other people, really! [They] have 
just picked up the broom and 
already feel tired. Go on,
tidy up, do the sweeping, sweeping, 
hurry up!
In the above represented talk, we can see Dewi’s grandmother’s Sundanese 
usage co-occurs with her animated way of speaking (some of which can be seen 
through my representation of prosody, volume, and pause), all of which con­
trast sharply with the ways of speaking between the unfamiliars represented 
in this soap (Susi-Ucup, Susi-Dewi, Ayu-Dewi), while mirroring the ways of 
speaking between familiars (Ucup and Dewi). For example, there are regular 
changes in tempo that can be seen by looking at the use of “>” in the extract. 
Dewi’s grandmother also frequently varies her volume (see, for example, my 
use of “+,” which represents rising volume). While nowhere in the serial do 
characters explicitly note where this story is set, we do get some insights into 
character identities.
For example, after briefly leaving the house with Ucup and his taxi, Susi 
comes back. At this time, Ucup provides Dewi with an alternative to having 
to get paying housemates to help her look after her large house and gardens. 
He suggests that as a way of repaying his debt to Dewi’s grandmother (who 
put him through driving school), he could live there and help look after the 
house and grounds. In this sense, he provides a commentary about the type 
of intimate social relationship that exists, which has thus far been represented 
only through sign usage. By the end of the comedic soap, it also becomes clear 
that both young women are not who they claim to be and instead of being 
well-moneyed, generous, and good tenants, they are represented as people who 
only pretend to be like this. The grandmother refers to this undesirable trait as 

74	
Language and Superdiversity
cipoa. What is also interesting here is that the alternation engaged in by Dewi’s 
grandmother adds to our earlier interpretation of this practice as habitual 
between intimates.
In summary, we can say that the mediums discussed thus far were associ­
ated with region, social types, and specific types of interpersonal relationships. 
This process was one that relied not only upon narrative progression and explicit 
commentaries about social relationships, but also upon contrasts of sign usage 
from one speech event to the next. In doing so, these encounters indexed a new 
set of signs with semiotic register users and usage that can be equated with 
demeanor. On the one hand, Indonesian speaking was being indexed to stranger 
relationships, city folk, worldliness, and those with access to substantial financial 
resources. On the other hand, the use of Sundanese was indexed to local poor folk 
(Mang Ucup, the taxi driver). In short, we are seeing the modeling of orders of 
indexicality with Indonesian sitting above regional languages. Even so, it is also 
interesting to point out that in the case of Sundanese usage, we are also seeing 
the authorization of models of language alternation. This is so because what is 
represented is the use of Sundanese fragments alternated with Indonesian in a 
habitual way in settings associated with intimates.
In the following sections, I focus on series that were seen as more popular. 
In line with scholars of the Indonesian media (Loven, 2008; Rachmah, 2006), 
I define popular here as simply occupying a prime-time slot (between 6–9 p.m.) 
and as being part of a sequel (in the case of films) or a new season (in the case 
of soaps). In the first of these, Si Kabayan, there are also explicit statements by 
characters as to the geographic anchoring of the story.
3.6  The Comedic Soap Si Kabayan
The persona of Si Kabayan has been circulating on television and in feature-length 
films since the early 1970s, and in short stories and novels since the 1930s. Typically, 
the narrative revolves around the daily life of Kabayan, his friends, love interest, 
and potential in-laws. The television rendition that I look at here is from the series 
Si Kabayan, which was broadcast nationally by the commercial broadcaster SCTV 
in early 1996. The episode I focus on is titled “Bukan Impianku Bag: 1” (“It wasn’t 
my dream: Part 1”). As with “Noné,” what is striking in this episode and serial is the 
contrast in Sundanese usage among Kabayan and his peers and Indonesian usage 
among a stranger, Kabayan, and other characters. From a purely quantitative view, 
for example, over 20 percent of the tokens Kabayan used were Sundanese, while the 
stranger used only Indonesian. What I will do in the rest of this section is show how 
this usage co-occurs with proximity, gesture, facial expressions, and prosody and 
interactional histories to produce semiotically denser models of Sundanese-ness and 
of Indonesian-speaking strangers.
The first interaction that I look at, extract 3.6.1, occurs after two scenes. The 
first scene is of a group of children observing the main character, Kabayan, kneeling 
 

	
Representing Ethnicity and Social Relations on Television	
75
and practicing what he wants to say to his girlfriend’s father. His talk is peppered 
with Sundanese tokens. The scene then moves to a house and its surrounds where 
a male, the father in question, has finished exercising to the astonishment of two 
female onlookers (his wife and daughter) who are sweeping the yard and drying 
rice cakes. Bold indicates Sundanese, plain font indicates Indonesian, and bold 
italics indicate ambiguous forms (i.e., those that could be either Indonesian or 
Sundanese).
Extract 3.6.1  Proximity, Sundanese, and close interpersonal relations
Abah
  1
  2
  3
  4
kenapa ambu .
melihatnya sampai 
melongo begitu (0.5) 
kaya? melihat kebo’
What’s up Mum? 
Gawking at me like 
that,
as if you were 
looking at
a buffalo.
Ambu
  5
  6
  7
  8
  9
he::ran . abah teh udah 
puluhan tahun? tidak 
pernah olahraga (0.5) 
>naha ayeuna olahraga 
deui atuh’>
[I]‌ don’t understand. 
Dad 
[you] haven’t done 
any
exercise for years, 
why
are [you] now  
taking up
exercise again?
(Talk deleted: Abah explains that what he is doing is Taiso, which the Japanese 
taught him during the occupation. Abah then notes that Ambu can also do this 
as well, although it is a dance version, which he parodies.)
Ambu
10
11
12
13
+bo::hong iteung . 
bohong+ >si abah mah 
biasa aja> lah’ . sok aya 
aya waé
[He’s] fibbing 
Iteung,
[He’s] fibbing, it’s 
just
like [your] dad, 
[he’s]
always talking 
nonsense
(Source: Petet, 1996)

76	
Language and Superdiversity
The first onlooker is referred to with the term Ambu (Mother) on line 1, while 
the other is referred to in the subsequent talk with Iteung (a person’s name) on 
line 10. Although the forms in bold font are not explicitly named as Sundanese, 
they are potential indexes of ethnicity by way of their being spoken in a setting 
that also presupposes close interpersonal relations. For example, the physical 
location of the interaction—which is in the front yard of a house surrounded by 
gardens—hints at potential family and thus intimacy. Such a reading is further 
supported with recourse to signs of speaker age, where both speakers seem to be 
of the same age and much older than Iteung (the person in the middle). Together 
and over the course of the interaction, this set of signs starts to provide “indexical 
focus” (Agha, 2007a: 24) that not only frame the interaction as intimate, but also 
as potentially ethnic because intimacy can presuppose ethnicity.
As their talk continues, we also see Iteung and Ambu move their bodies 
so that they are standing side-by-side. This closeness also co-occurs with some 
touching and the mention of a proper name, Iteung, which also presupposes some 
level of familiarity (i.e., a shared interactional history). They then face each other 
while laughing and proceed to carry out the highly animated talk in lines 11–13. 
It is animated in relation to the prior talk because of regular touching between 
Ambu and Iteung (frame 3) as Ambu refutes Abah’s parody of her. Ambu also 
raises her voice (indicated by the “+” signs surrounding the text) and changes 
her tempo (indicated by “>” signs surrounding the text). As with the interactions 
described in section 3.5, it is also worthwhile to point out that the topic of talk and 
Abah’s decades of physical inactivity (lines 6–10) are about personal life-worlds, 
which also presuppose a history of close interpersonal relations (i.e., to say that 
someone hasn’t exercised for ten years presupposes that you have known them for 
ten years). All of these signs continue to provide an indexical focus that points to 
intimate social relations between the participants. The import of this representa­
tion is how it adds other signs to the doing of intimate social relations and thus 
also increases the semiotic density of these models of personhood and the social 
relations that exist between them.
As with interactions between Dewi and Ucup in section 3.5, we also see 
that much of the talk represented here can be characterized as alternation as the 
medium and indeed, in interactions between locals, this is typically the pattern 
throughout this soap. As the story continues, these interactions and the linguistic 
signs described thus far begin to be anchored with geographical region. In extract 
3.6.2, which represents a stranger’s entrance into a rural setting, we see that this 
stranger’s semiotic practices are interactionally “flat” when compared with inter­
actions between those who have been represented as intimate. This interaction is 
preceded by a shot of Kabayan lying down in a field tending his buffalo and then 
the buffalo returning to Kabayan’s home. As the story cuts to Kabayan’s home, 
we find one of his friends, Diran, and two strangers, a driver of a car sporting a 
Bandung license plate, and a well-dressed and well-fed man who is standing and 
holding a briefcase in Kabayan’s front yard.

	
Representing Ethnicity and Social Relations on Television	
77
Extract 3.6.2  Indonesian, strangers, and interactional flatness
Diran
  1
  2
  3
mau cari siapa pak (1.1) 
barangkali bisa saya 
bantu (1.2)
Who are you 
looking for 
Sir? Maybe 
I can help.
Stranger
  4
  5
  6
  7
  8
  9
10
11
begini pak (1.4) saya 
datang ke mari (0.5) 
maksudnya mau menemui
dan membawa saudara 
kabayan (0.8) tadi:: . kata 
tukang warung:: . 
>rumahnya di sini> . 
katanya .
It is like this 
Sir, I came 
here with the 
purpose of 
meeting and 
accompanying 
Mr.
Kabayan 
[to… ]. 
Earlier
the stall own­
er said his 
[Kabayan’s] 
house is
here.
Diran
12
iya . betul pak (0.3)
Yes, that is 
right Sir.
Stranger
13
he he he he’ (0.5)
Laugh.
Diran
14
15
16
membawa . >maksud 
bapak . kabayan mau 
dibawa ke mana> .
To accom­
pany, what 
do
you mean 
Kabayan will 
be brought 
where?
(continued)

78	
Language and Superdiversity
Stranger
17
18
19
20
21
o:::h . bukan membawa 
(0.5) maksud saya:? .
saya hanya ingin 
menemuinya’ (0.6) ada 
masalah penting (1.0)
Oh [I]‌ don’t  
mean bring 
[as a prisoner] 
what I 
mean is that 
I only wish 
to meet with 
him. There
is an important 
matter.
Diran
22 
23 
24 
25
itu tadi . kerbaunya baru 
saja masuk (0.5) biasanya 
. kabayan di belakangnya 
pak .
Earlier his 
buffalo just 
came home, 
usually 
Kabayan is 
right behind 
him, sir.
(Source: Petet, 1996)
By taking a comparative perspective of the above embodied talk with that 
represented in extract 3.6.1 and section 3.5, there are a number of similari­
ties and differences. First of all, we see that although the represented space 
is a house, at least one of the people does not belong to this intimate setting. 
This is so because Diran’s act of asking “who are you looking for” together 
with his use of the terms for you (“Pak” instead of Pak + name) presuppose 
unfamiliar social relations. Second, unfamiliarity with locality is explicitly 
stated by the stranger in lines 8–11, when he checks whether the person he 
is looking for lives at the house. In this sense, participants are represented 
as jointly establishing that they do not share common ground about locale. 
As the interaction unfolds, there is also a notable difference in proximity 
between speakers (compare, for example, the last frame of extract 3.6.1 with 
the frames in 3.6.2).
We also do not see any of the body language (touching and smiling), ani­
mated talk (e.g., laugher and changes in volume and tempo), or use of emphatic 
forms, such as teh, atuh, and mah (lines 5, 9, and 11) found in the earlier interac­
tion represented in extract 3.6.1. The difference in the use of space, gesture, touch, 
and facial expressions also co-occurs with patterns of pause that are typically 
longer than those found in extract 3.6.1. The talk itself is also very much about 
Extract 3.6.2  (Continued)

	
Representing Ethnicity and Social Relations on Television	
79
the material world and the whereabouts of one person (Kabayan) and contains 
no talk that indicates a sharing of common ground (e.g., about locale). Taken 
together, all of these signs help to provide an indexical focus that points toward a 
stranger relationship among these participants.
This stranger relationship is further supported by the existence of another 
sign, namely the car license plate (see the first frame in extract 3.6.2), which helps 
anchor the interaction to a region, in this case somewhere in West Java, which is 
stereotypically known as a Sundanese-speaking area. More specifically, the “D” on 
the car license plate in ­figure 2 indicates “registered to the Bandung area of West 
Java.” This plate helps to solidify the emergent stranger identities through a num­
ber of other indexical relationships. On the one hand, it anchors the whole serial 
to West Java and thus these speakers as potentially of Sundanese ethnicity and, by 
extension through indexical links among place, person, and language, Sundanese 
speakers. Second, and following on from this, co-ethnic speakers stereotypically 
use ethnic languages if they are known to each other. That they do not seem to 
speak in the same way as those in extract 3.6.1 points to unfamiliar social relations.
After the initial conversation, Diran and the stranger sit down in front of the 
house pictured in extract 3.6.2 to wait for Kabayan. Diran then introduces himself 
as Kebayan’s good friend, which anchors Diran to the location. The stranger intro­
duces himself and notes that he is a lawyer. This talk further reinforces stranger 
social relations because the act of introducing oneself makes it clear that they are 
strangers. As the talk proceeds, it becomes clear that they are strangers who do not 
live in the same locale because the stranger names his place of origin (Bandung, 
which is a big city rather than a rural village like the one represented here). Their 
talk also continues to be similar to their earlier talk, both in form and content, 
and it contrasts with the talk in extract 3.6.3, which occurs after Diran says he will 
go and look for Kebayan. Once out of sight, Diran proceeds to run to the house 
represented in extract 3.6.1. Diran’s approach and talk with Iteung and her mother 
(referred to as Ambu) are represented in extract 3.6.3 and are again characterized 
by the interactional patterns and Sundanese usage found in extract 3.6.1.
Extract 3.6.3  Familiars, animated talk, and Sundanese usage
Diran
  1
  2
  3
tulung (1.5) tulung (0.6) 
nyi iteung . tulung .
ambu (1.4) tulung (6.7)
Help! Help 
Miss Iteung. 
Help Mrs. 
Help!
(continued)

80	
Language and Superdiversity
Ambu
  4
(Running to the front of 
their house where Diran 
has sat down on the bench 
in front of the house)
ada +apa+ (0.5)
What is up?
Iteung
  5 kenapa kang diran? =
What is the 
matter 
Brother 
Diran?
Ambu
  7
  8
  9
10
11
                                   = 
eleuh eleuh .+ kunaon 
kunaon + .
+ Iteung + ambilkan aer 
cepetan =
Gee, gee, what 
is the
matter? What 
is the
matter?
Itueng quick go 
and fetch
some water.
Iteung
13                = iya (1.1)
Yes.
Ambu
14 kunaon pak (1.4)
What is the 
matter Sir?
(Source: Petet, 1996)
Extract 3.6.3  (Continued)

	
Representing Ethnicity and Social Relations on Television	
81
There are a number of distinctive features that contrast with the previous inter­
action between Diran and the lawyer from Bandung (extract 3.6.2) and Diran 
and the two women in extract 3.6.3. First of all, Diran’s level of familiarity with 
locale and those who inhabit this locale is presupposed by Diran’s knowledge of 
how to get from Kabayan’s house to Itueng’s house. This familiarity with locale 
and those who inhabit it is further solidified through the use of personal names 
(Iteung and Diran) in lines 2 and 5, respectively. In contrast to the interaction 
represented in extract 3.6.2, we can also see large differences in distance between 
speakers and the use of gesture and touch. In the last three frames of the inter­
action in extract 3.6.3, all three participants are spatially close and Ambu fre­
quently touches Iteung and Diran. This use of space, gesture, and touch also 
co-occurs with changes in prosodic patterns (in this case, increased volume in 
lines 8–10) and emphatic particles (e.g., eleuh in line 8). As with the earlier inter­
actions, there are examples of alternation as the medium (lines 5 and 10–11), as 
well as whole turns that are in Sundanese (lines 1–3 and 8–9). Together, all of 
these signs provide an indexical focus that points toward familiar social relations 
among these participants.
As with extract 3.6.1, these participants go on to talk about personal 
life-worlds; in this case, they are puzzling over why the lawyer from extract 3.6.2 
wants to see Kabayan and how this might relate to previous events and interac­
tions at the local level. Again, this talk about local history also continues to point 
to familiar social relations among these participants by way of them sharing com­
mon knowledge about events within the locale. This focus on personal life-worlds 
in interactions among Sundanese- speaking intimates is very much foregrounded 
in the following interaction that occurs after three scenes (1. Kabayan, Iteung, 
Diran, and another friend of Kabayan, Armasan, meeting with the lawyer at 
Kabayan’s house; 2. Iteung’s mother and father discussing with Iteung Kabayan’s 
suitability to be her husband given his million-dollar inheritance; and 3. Kabayan 
worrying deeply over needing to leave his village, friends, and animals to organize 
his inheritance in the big city). In extract 3.6.4, the scene now cuts to Iteung where 
she is spatially located back in her yard at home where she is preparing and eating 
spicy fruit salad with some of her neighbors, who are age mates and friends.
Extract 3.6.4  Age mates talking about personal life-worlds
Iteung’s Friend 1
  1
  2
ih (0.5) kamu mah mani 
resep nya nyi (0.4)
Wow you are so 
happy
younger sister 
aren’t you?
Iteung
  3 resep apa (0.4)
Why am [I]‌ 
happy?
(continued)

82	
Language and Superdiversity
Iteung’s Friend 1
  4
  5
  6
  7
  8
  9
10
11
heueuh eta (0.4) >pan 
kang kabayan teh 
sebentar lagi> . punya 
pabrik tekstil? . PAST:I 
>nanti teh kamu kalo 
kawin> . >kacipta tujuh 
hari tujuh malam> . 
+euy+ (0.5)
Yeah, that mat­
ter right? 
Older brother 
Kabayan
will soon own a 
textile
factory. Later 
if you
marry him, I 
can imagine 
[there will be a 
wedding 
ceremony that 
lasts]
seven days and 
seven
nights, right!
Iteung’s Friend 2
12
13
14
15
16
iya yah . >pasti bakal ada 
golek asep sunarya> (0.7) 
#ih# (0.4) kamu mah 
beruntung nyi . pilihan 
kamu TEPAT? (0.5)
Yeah, right? 
There will 
surely be a puppet 
performance by 
Asep
Sunarya (a 
famous
puppeteer). 
Wow, you 
are so lucky 
younger sister. 
You made the 
right choice.
Iteung’s Friend 1
17
18
19
20
21
sebetulnya’ . kamu teh 
milih kang kabayan (0.5) 
+apanya nyi+ (while 
smiling and raising 
eyebrows) (0.5)
Actually [to be 
honest]
why did you 
choose older
brother 
Kabayan, 
younger sister?
Extract 3.6.4  (Continued)

	
Representing Ethnicity and Social Relations on Television	
83
Iteung
22 emang apanya gitu’ (0.6) Why do [you] 
think?
Iteung’s Friend 1
23
24
25
26
27
28
>yang jelas mah . kang 
kabayan teh . jaba 
bageur .
jaba pinteur . jab::a >
(0.4) eh . ai sekarang teh 
ditambah lagi? (0.3)
What is clear is 
that older
brother 
Kabayan is not 
just nice and 
polite,
but also smart, 
and also
… ah ah now in 
addition
Iteung Friend 2
29 ditambah apa gitu =
What else?
Iteung’s Friend 1
30
31
32
                                 =
+beunghar+ (0.6) kaya 
(0.3)
Rich, rich.
Iteung
33
34
35
y:a >kalo memang 
jodoh> . mau bilang 
apalagi atuh =
Yes if [he] is 
indeed my
destined 
partner, then
what can I say, 
right.
Iteung’s friends
36
37
38
                    = adu:::h.
(followed by a spoken 
version of a whistle)
That’s great.
(Source: Petet, 1996)

84	
Language and Superdiversity
As with extracts 3.6.1 and 3.6.3, locale presupposes intimacy insofar as it is in 
Iteung’s neighborhood. That participants seem to know about Iteung’s history 
(lines 1–11), Kabayan’s name (line 24), and Kabayan’s characteristics (lines 
24–31) also presupposes that the two other participants are locals and thus 
have some degree of shared interactional history. In contrast to talk about the 
world in extract 3.6.2, in extract 3.6.4, the whole conversation is about personal 
life-worlds—in this case, Iteung’s love interest, Kabayan, and why she chose 
him. The discussion about personal life-worlds continues well after line 38 when 
Iteung is asked when she will marry him, as well as the dangers of letting him go 
to the big city before getting married.
Participants also appear to be age mates who wear similar clothing (e.g., 
T-shirts and batik dresses) that is different from Iteung’s mother’s clothing. 
Sameness in clothing choices further points to similarities among these three 
women and thus to potentially intimate social relations. Although the par­
ticipants do not use personal names, they do use terms of other reference, nyi 
“younger sister” (lines 2, 15, and 19) and kamu “you” (lines 1, 8, 14, 16, 17), which 
are also stereotypically linked with intimate personal relations. The social activ­
ity of chatting while eating together also points to the existence of intimate social 
relations among these three women. In short, in this extract, there are many signs 
that produce an indexical focus that points toward intimate social relations that 
are occurring in a Sundanese-speaking locale.
Importantly, these social relations, the participants, and the linguistic forms 
they use are also linked with demeanors through the co-occurrence of other 
signs. For example, in their talk, we also see many of the features found in the 
embodied talk represented in extracts 3.6.1 and 3.6.3, including changes in the 
prosodic features of the talk, the frequent use of smiles and body language, and 
the frequent use of emphatic particles. For example, there are regular changes 
in tempo of talk (indicated by the “>” surrounding talk) in lines 4–14, 23–26, 
and 33–35. In addition, there is regular stressing of words (indicated by CAPS) 
as in lines 7 and 16, together with the raising of volume of talk (indicated by “+” 
surrounding talk) in lines 11, 19, and 30. In terms of facial expressions, the three 
women regularly move between smiles and other facial expressions. These facial 
expressions sometimes co-occur with other embodied language. For example, 
in reaction to her friends’ teasing in lines 36–38 and their subsequent teasing 
about when Iteung will marry Kabayan, Iteung stands up and stamps her feet 
and insists that she doesn’t yet have any plans or a set date to marry Kabayan. 
As with the earlier interactions between intimates, their talk is characterized by 
alternation as the medium with most Sundanese fragments typically being kin 
terms or affective particles.
In sum, taken together, all of these signs help to further differentiate interac­
tion among Indonesian-speaking strangers and Sundanese-speaking familiars, while 
laminating them with particular demeanors and interactional histories. These repre­
sentations continue to situate linguistic sign usage as emblematic of ethnicity (in this 

	
Representing Ethnicity and Social Relations on Television	
85
case, Sundanese-ness) while also being indexed with other signs to form denser semi­
otic models of ethnicity. Just as important, the representations examined here also 
repeat many of the signs associated with the ethnic stereotypes found in other come­
dic soap operas, including the ones discussed in the previous section and the ones 
discussed in the next section. Typically, representations of Sundanese usage have 
been representations of Sundanese fragments used in alternation with Indonesian. 
Producers of soaps, such as those who produced Si Doel (discussed below), note that 
this strategy provides enough fragments to give a local flavor but not so much as to 
make it difficult for an Indonesian audience to follow (see, e.g., Loven, 2008). While 
this tends to authorize alternation as a common and natural interactional practice, it 
also provides an example of a producer’s role in semiotic change.
In closing this section, I should point out that much of this comedic soap was 
about rural-urban differences. For example, there is overlap between the represen­
tation of ways of speaking of ethnic intimates who live in a rural area and speak an 
ethnic language with their representation as mostly poor and not sophisticated in 
their views about the world. This representation of ethnicity and ethnic language 
users contrasts markedly with the entry of a wealthy urban lawyer who speaks 
Indonesian. In a sense, these types of representation also help to reinforce orders 
of indexicality where Indonesia is at the top followed by ethnic languages.
3.7  Representing Diversity: Si Doel Anak Sekolahan
Up to this point, I have explored continuities between televised representations 
of sign usage and users and how this relates to the reproduction of semiotic reg­
isters and associated stereotypes where language use continues to be emblematic 
of ethnicity. I have paid particular attention to how linguistic signs are indexed 
with embodied language on the one hand and interactional history on the other 
to reproduce ethnic stereotypes while adding semiotic density to these stereo­
types. Although the types of television representation described in sections 3.5 
and 3.6 no doubt also provide insights into the diversity found in Indonesia, in 
this section, I look at a more explicit representation of diversity as it relates to 
migrants living in the city. In particular, I show how representations of sign usage 
and users can also contribute to the production of what might be seen as a com­
peting semiotic register where ethnic languages aren’t always emblems of ethnic­
ity. Associated with this competing register are migrants or ethnic others who 
are represented as learning local ways of speaking to the extent that they can 
engage in practices of “crossing” (Rampton, 1995), “adequation” (Bucholtz & 
Hall, 2004), and “knowledging” (Goebel, 2013).
Although I  defined these terms in section 3.1, it is worth repeating these 
definitions here. Crossing is the non-habitual performance of linguistic forms 
or formulaic utterances that are typically not associated with the person using 
them through reference to their ethnolinguistic background. Adequation is the 
 

86	
Language and Superdiversity
habitual pursuit of semiotic sameness in face-to-face interactions, while knowl­
edging is the ability to recognize and evaluate linguistic forms stereotypically 
associated with another ethnic group that is not one’s own. Representations of 
these three practices also seem to offer an alternate model to the state ideology of 
doing unity in diversity through the use of Indonesian.
I focus upon a long-running popular series, Si Doel Anak Sekolahan (Doel 
an Educated Lad) originally broadcast by RCTI at the local level in Jakarta 
(Sen & Hill, 2000: 123), but later broadcast nationally by SCTV. Like the serial 
Si Kabayan, Si Doel is based upon an interpretation of an earlier novel titled 
Si Doel Anak Betawi (Doel a Betawi Lad) and a number of earlier television seri­
als and feature-length films (e.g., Loven, 2008), some of which I discussed in sec­
tion 2.3. I recorded this particular episode in mid-1998. This serial is different 
from “Noné” and Si Kabayan because it offers representations of sign usage and 
users that both reproduce the idea of ethnic social types who speak a certain 
ethnic language, act in certain ways, and are geographically anchored, while also 
offering representations of those who engage in adequation, which tends to sit in 
contrast to this first semiotic register.
This series is also different insofar as the music accompaniment—a song 
that starts with Anak Betawi… (A child of the Betawi area… )—and the 
co-occurring Betawi fragments, panorama shots showing skyscrapers (mainly 
found in Jakarta), shots of Jakarta’s famous port (Sunda Kelapa), and other 
landmarks suggest that what follows is ethnic and geographically anchored in 
Jakarta. It is also striking in that the producer, Rano Karno, reported specifically 
producing this series to convince older Indonesians of Betawi background that 
education is important:
Lewat Si Doel Anak Sekolahan, misi yang ingin saya sampaikan pada 
orang-orang tua Betawi yang masih kolot itu, bahwa sekolah penting demi 
mengangkat harkat dan martabat keluarga. Saya ingin memperkenalkan 
kepada Indonesia, bahwa inilah kultur masyarakat Betawi yang sebenarnya 
(Tabloid Jelita/Dv/Idh, [n.d.]).
[What I wanted to convey via Si Doel Anak Sekolahan to Betawi elders, who 
were still traditional in outlook, is that schooling is important for raising 
family welfare and prosperity. I wanted to show Indonesians that this was 
the true authentic culture of the Betawi.] (Author’s translation)
Both the semiotic framing of the show and the above commentary provide 
implicit and explicit commentaries about ethnic social types as linked with par­
ticular social practices and particular geographic spaces.
The following scene, which is taken from the third season from the episode 
entitled “Meniti Batas Mimpi” (“Walking along the Edge of a Dream”), occurs 
after a brief argument between Doel (the main character) and his uncle Mandra. 
Doel, Mandra, and Doel’s sister Atun all live with Doel’s mother Leala. In this 

	
Representing Ethnicity and Social Relations on Television	
87
interaction, Mandra is inside their home and getting ready to go and ask for his 
girlfriend’s hand in marriage. After finding out that Mandra hasn’t yet asked 
his girlfriend’s parents if they are prepared to meet them, Leala (Mandra’s older 
sister) tells Mandra what he should do.
Extract 3.7.1  Being emotional and speaking Betawi
Leala
  1
  2
  3
  4
  5
  6
eh (0.3) >guwé
ngomong> bukan soal 
pakean lu::’ (0.5) yang 
guwé maksud tuh . 
>elu tuh (0.3) yang 
kagak tau aturan> (0.6)
Heh, I’m not 
talking about 
your clothes, 
what i mean, 
is you don’t 
understand 
the etiquette 
[involved in 
asking for 
someone’s 
hand
in marriage]
Mandra
  7
  8
>kagak tau aturan 
+bagaimana+?> (0.6)
What do [you] 
mean [I]‌ 
don’t 
understand?
Leala
  9
10
11
12
13
>lah . iya dong> (0.5) 
elu ngajak guwé 
ngelamar ke si munaroh? 
(0.3) >di sana dah tahu:> 
. belon?
Yeah [you 
don’t
understand] 
silly. You 
asked me to 
come with you 
to propose to 
Munaroh. Do
they know 
[that we are 
coming] or 
not?
(continued)

88	
Language and Superdiversity
Mandra
14
15
16
17
ya::? . +udah jelas 
TAHU:: . dong + . >+kan 
saya dah boleh MESEN> 
sama si munaroh’ (0.7)
Yeah [they] 
already know, 
I’ve already 
asked 
Munaroh 
to ask, you 
know.
Leala
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
(cut to Doel who is 
outside cleaning his 
motorbike before cut 
back to Leala) >#mesen 
munaroh#> (0.5) enak 
ajé elu (0.5) 
NGELAMAR . kayak 
orang beli karcis .
>+bisa dipesen+> .
(abruptly turns away and 
goes behind curtain)
Asked
Munaroh [to 
do it]? You are 
just too much! 
A marriage 
proposal like 
buying a
ticket,
as if it can be 
ordered!
This interaction shares many of the features represented in interactions among 
intimates in the previous two sections. For example, we have the co-occurrence 
of Betawi fragments (bold small caps) with facial expressions, regular changes in 
the prosodic features of the talk, and discussions of personal life-worlds. More 
specifically, extract 3.7.1 shows characters using a large range of muscle move­
ments around the eyes, forehead, and mouth. Often, these expressions co-occur 
with verbal features including stress (indicated by CAPS) or increased volume 
(indicated by “+” surrounding the talk), as in lines 8, 14–16, and 24. These pro­
sodic features also occur together with regular changes in tempo: for example, 
the speeding up of speech (indicated by “>” surrounding the talk) in lines 1–2, 
4–6, 7–9, 11–12, 15–17, 21–23, and 26. Just as important, these features also occur 
in talk that is peppered with Betawi fragments: typically, terms for I (guwé) and 
you (elu). As with representations of medium usage in the previous sections, we 
can also see that alternation as the medium is represented as the way in which 
participants interact. In so doing, this can also be seen as authorizing alternation.
Extract 3.7.1  (Continued)

	
Representing Ethnicity and Social Relations on Television	
89
Leala abruptly turns away from Mandra after line 26 and moves away from 
him. Mandra follows her, addresses Leala as mpok (older sister), while rais­
ing his voice further. Leala then responds in a softer voice and in talk now 
peppered with Betawi fragments. She says that the correct way to ask for 
Munaroh’s hand in marriage is to first go and ask her father when his family 
might be ready to receive a visit from Mandra and Leala about the proposed 
marriage. Mandra feels that this way is just too complicated. Following this, 
the story briefly cuts to Doel, who is still outside cleaning his motorbike. He 
is shown to be now intently listening while shaking his head as Leala scolds 
Mandra for not listening to an elder’s advice. Mandra then notes that Munaroh 
has been previously married so this is not like her first marriage. Leala, who 
has recently lost her husband, suddenly emerges now screaming at Mandra who 
hastily steps back from the curtain and sits down before asking for forgive­
ness. Immediately afterward, this whole interaction—which has been visibly 
and audibly one of conflict—is then metapragmatically framed as such by Doel, 
who directly scolds his uncle for arguing with Leala, saying that she deserves 
respect as Mandra’s older sister.
In short, up to this point, the characters have not only been represented as 
ethnic social types geographically anchored to a particular place, but also as 
Betawi-speaking social types with particular demeanors made up of a complex 
mix of facial expressions, prosodic patterns, body language, and views about 
how interpersonal relationships should be conducted. The discussion of personal 
life-worlds, in this case, Mandra’s wedding plans, also presupposes shared com­
mon knowledge about referents (e.g., Munaroh and where she lives) and thus also 
points to shared interactional histories between Leala and Mandra. The combi­
nation of demeanors and interactional histories thus adds semiotic density to the 
Betawi stereotypes represented here.
In the scene that follows the above interaction, we see the development of 
a friendship between two young women who both see themselves as romantic 
prospects for Doel. There is Sarah, who in season one and two was introduced 
as an anthropology student from a wealthy cosmopolitan background (Loven, 
2008). Through her anthropological study of a Betawi community in Jakarta, 
she becomes increasingly infatuated with Doel, who is also represented as poor 
but also the first in his family to get a university education. Although it is increas­
ingly Sarah who becomes the object of Doel’s affections, in the past, he has had a 
romantic interest in Zaenab, the daughter of a wealthy Betawi neighbor.
In this particular interaction, Zaenab, who has just found out that her mother 
is not her biological mother, is found by Sarah wandering aimlessly on a road. Sarah 
invites Zaenab to spend the night at her house, and in the morning, she offers Zaenab 
some clean clothes to wear before they engage in some more intimate talk about per­
sonal life-worlds and their conversation from the night before (extract 3.7.2). What 
is interesting in this extract is that their developing relationship is represented in a 
semiotically different way from other interethnic relationships in this series. In so 

90	
Language and Superdiversity
doing, it also provides representations of the diversity of ways of speaking that can 
develop between those from different backgrounds. At the same time, these repre­
sentations also provide contrasts that help regiment an order of indexicality where 
cosmopolitan, educated, and wealthy Indonesians speak Indonesian, while poorer 
and uneducated Indonesians speak an ethnic language (e.g., Mandra and Leala).
Extract 3.7.2  Building inter-group friendship through talk 
about personal life-worlds
Sarah
  1
  2
kok belum ganti baju:: 
nab (0.7) heuh (0.4)
Gee [you] 
haven’t yet 
changed 
your blouse 
Nab, yeah!
Zaenab
  3
  4
  5
  6
ah . iya . >nanti deh sar> 
(Sarah walks over to sit 
down on the floor with 
Zaenab) (4.4)
Ah, yes, [I’ll 
do] it later 
Sar.
Zaenab
  7 sar =
Sar.
Sarah
  8
  9
10
      = heeh (while sitting 
and turning to look at 
Zaenab) (3.4)
Yes.
Zaenab
11
12
13
maaf ya (1.2) aku: .
>selalu aja ngerepotin 
kamu> (0.4)
Sorry 
yeah. I’m
just always 
imposing 
on
you.
Sarah
14
15
16
17
#ngerepotin apa si::h’# 
(while touching Zaenab
on the shoulder and 
smiling) (2.2)
[You] 
haven’t put 
me out
at all.

	
Representing Ethnicity and Social Relations on Television	
91
Zaenab
18
19
20
21
iya: ngerepotin kamu’ 
(0.5) ngelibatin kamu ke 
masalah pribadi aku:’ 
(1.4)
Yeah 
imposing 
on you, 
involving 
you in my 
own 
personal 
problems.
Sarah
22 #ngak apa apa kok’# (3.4)
It’s no prob­
lem at all, 
really.
Zaenab
23
24
25
26
da::n (0.5) makasih juga 
yah (0.6) >semalem kamu 
mau dengerin cerita 
aku:’> (1.7)
And, thanks 
also for 
last 
night when 
you listened 
to my story.
Sarah
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
#udah deh na:b . kamu
tuh sekarang ngak usah 
mikir yang ngak ngak 
lagi::# (0.3) yah (1.1)
#yang jelas sekarang . 
kamu tuh musti tabah dan 
tega:r’# (said while
stroking Zaenab’s 
shoulders and back) (3.3)
Please don’t 
worry Nab,
now you 
don’t need 
to
worry about 
what-ifs 
anymore, 
yeah?
What is 
clear now 
is that
you need to 
be strong 
and 
persistent.

92	
Language and Superdiversity
The embodied encounter represented in extract 3.7.2 above is also interesting 
when compared with the encounters represented in extracts 3.7.3, 3.7.4, and 3.7.5 
(which we will look at shortly). What stands out here is the lack of Betawi frag­
ments, the high use of truncated names not preceded by a kin term, the facial 
expressions, touch, the maternal prosody of Sarah’s talk, the discussion of per­
sonal life-worlds, the social activity being engaged in, and the use of personal 
space. For example, in contrast to earlier interactions among strangers where 
facial expressions were fairly unchanging, Sarah (the person on the left) shows a 
large range of muscle movements around the eyes, forehead, and mouth. Often, 
these expressions co-occur with touch as in lines 14–17, 23, and 27–35 and ver­
bal features including a drop in volume (indicated by “#” surrounding the talk). 
These prosodic signs also occur in talk that is characterized by frequent self ref­
erences and other references. Typically, terms for “I” are aku (e.g., lines 6, 20, and 
26), while terms for “you” are either kamu (e.g., lines 13, 18-19, 24, 27, and 32) or a 
truncated form of the person’s name (e.g., lines 2–3, 7, and 27).
Sarah and Zaenab’s talk is also very much about personal life-worlds as can 
be seen through discussions of clothing and adoption. Indeed, as their talk con­
tinues, it is primarily about life-worlds, including what each other has learned 
about life and how to cope with its ups and downs. In this sense, they are not 
only sharing personal life-worlds, but establishing the common ground needed 
to further build positive interpersonal relations. Similarly, the talk occurs within 
the intimate and personal social practice of getting ready within one’s home (e.g., 
Zaenab changing her blouse), and both Sarah and Zaenab’s bodies are spatially 
very close throughout the whole interaction. It is also interesting to note that after 
Sarah takes Zaenab to her grandfather’s house, she then visits Zaenab’s mother 
to tell her where her daughter is. During this talk, she frames her and Zaenab’s 
relationship as “good friends.” In short, the interaction represented in extract 
3.7.2 contrasts with the interactional flatness seen in other interactions character­
ized by Indonesian usage. This is done by mirroring the types of features used 
in intra-ethnic encounters (e.g., extracts 3.5.5–3.5.7, 3.6.1, 3.6.3, 3.6.4, and 3.7.1).
The features used in the above interaction, which is represented as between 
people of different ethnic backgrounds, can be further contrasted with the follow­
ing two extracts. The first has a migrant, Karyo, engaging in adequation, while the 
second is a representation of both knowledging and social differentiation through 
the use of Javanese in a setting where the use of Betawi is common. The first scene 
occurs after that represented in extract 3.7.2 and is preceded by a shot of Karyo 
raising a birdcage up a pole beside Leala’s house. He then moves to Leala’s nearby 
warung (a small canteen type of construction selling food and home necessities), 
where Karyo starts his conversation with Leala. I don’t focus on the visual aspects 
here becvause they are basically just Karyo talking while walking toward the 
warung with Leala inside and out of sight. The rest of the interaction occurs with 
Karyo facing the front counter of the warung, but barely visible in the shadows. 
What is interesting here, however, is his ability to comprehend linguistic signs 
associated with Betawi social types and also use some of these forms.

	
Representing Ethnicity and Social Relations on Television	
93
Extract 3.7.3  Engaging in adequation
Karyo
  1
  2
mak nyak . bang mandra sudah jalan 
toh’ (0.4)
Mum, Older brother Mandra has 
already gone heh?
Leala
  3
u:::+dah+ (0.5)
Yeah.
Karyo
  4
kok tumben loh pagi pagi’ (0.5)
Gee that’s unusual [for him to get 
up] so early.
Leala
  5
iyé mau ke rumahnya munaroh’ (1.3)
Yeah, [he] wants to go to 
Munaroh’s house.
Karyo
  6
ke rumah munaroh .
To Munaroh’s house?
Leala
  7
iya =
Yeah.
Karyo
  8
      = ngelamar ya’ (0.3)
[He] wants to propose [marriage] 
yeah?
Leala
  9
10
ng::gak . >cuma mau nanyain . kapan 
lamarannya bisa diterimé::> gitu:’=
No, [he] only wants to ask when 
[is the best time to propose so 
that] it is accepted [by his girl­
friend’s parents].
Karyo
11
12
                                                           = o:h . 
>jadi belum ya mak ya>‘ =
Oh
so not yet heh Mum yeah?
Leala
13
14
                                            = ya belon 
dong . (laugh) (0.4)
No of course not yet.
Karyo
15
atun ada mak .
Is Atun around Mum?
Leala
16
ada noh lagi sarapan’
Yeah, there having breakfast.
(Source: Karno, 1998)

94	
Language and Superdiversity
What sets this extract apart from the previous extracts is that Karyo is portrayed 
as an ethnic Javanese who on occasion uses and is spoken to in Betawi in an inter­
ethnic interaction where we might expect to hear Indonesian. For example, Karyo 
uses the kin terms mak (mum) and bang (older brother) in lines 1, 12, and 15. We 
also see that he appears to comprehend the Betawi fragments spoken by Leala 
(e.g., lines 6 and 12). This representation suggests that accommodating to one’s 
new linguistic environment is not unusual and perhaps desirable. It is important 
to note here that such usage is situational. In other parts of the serial, Karyo uses 
and is spoken to in Indonesian in interaction with those he doesn’t have close 
social relations. He only appears to use Betawi fragments when interacting with 
familiars. Thus, while Karyo’s Betawi usage here is situational, by looking at 
wider interactional patterns, we find it also represents a habitual pursuit of semi­
otic sameness through the alternation of Betawi and Indonesian. In other words, 
what we see here resembles adequation (e.g., Bucholtz & Hall, 2004) carried out in 
a way that actually denaturalizes the type of language-ethnicity links described 
thus far. It is also important to point out that this representation alternation in an 
interethnic interaction among participants who have little formal education also 
sets up a further contrast with earlier and later participant constellations. This 
contrast also helps reproduce another register to be situated within the orders of 
indexicality discussed thus far, though its placement within this hierarchy can 
only be implied with reference to the stigmatization of mixed languages more 
generally (e.g., section 2.8).
Representations of knowledging as a social practice are also found in sub­
sequent interactions and episodes where we see Karyo interacting with Atun 
(his Betawi girlfriend) and other Betawi in utterances containing Javanese 
fragments. These are examples of knowledging insofar as Atun is represented 
as someone who understands and follows Javanese talk. In other words, she 
is represented as someone who has an ability to comprehend linguistic signs 
associated with Javanese. Taken together with Karyo’s practice of engag­
ing in adequation, we can say that in these contexts, identity relates less to an 
essentialized ethnic identity and more to a situated “community of practice” 
(Wenger, 1998), where new ways of speaking and new identities develop simulta­
neously in an ongoing interaction. Ethnic social types are thus represented here 
as situated rather than static. Just as important, the interaction represented 
in extract 3.7.3 provides an example of doing unity in diversity that starts to 
contrast with earlier models whereby social relations among those from differ­
ent backgrounds were ideologized as being conducted in Indonesian, though it 
is important to note that this type of activity seems only to be engaged in by 
poorer and “uneducated” folk.
Extracts 3.7.4 and 3.7.5 provide striking representations of Mandra’s abil­
ity to comprehend linguistic signs. The scene occurs at the end of this episode. 
It is preceded by Mandra meeting with his girlfriend Munaroh, who tells him 
that they had best wait to get married until he has a more secure job. Mandra 

	
Representing Ethnicity and Social Relations on Television	
95
then returns home early, and feeling depressed, he goes to lie down under a 
jackfruit tree outside Leala’s house. When asked what is up, he says nothing 
to his sister Leala, his niece Atun, or his nephew Doel. Karyo then enters the 
scene while Mandra is examining a small jackfruit. After asking how he is 
and not getting an answer, Karyo briefly teases Mandra about the size of his 
lips before asking how his marriage proposal went. Upon hearing that it was 
unsuccessful, Karyo comforts him by saying that his day has been bad too 
because his lack of a Jakartan identity card had led to an unsuccessful credit 
application.
Extract 3.7.4  Representing knowledging
Karyo
  1
  2
  3
  4 
MAS (0.8) OPO 
SAMPEYAN juga punya 
TOH? . >KTP Jakarta’>? 
=
OLDER 
BROTHER, 
DO YOU also 
have one?
A Jakartan 
identity card.
Mandra
  5 = (nods head) =
Yes.
Karyo
  7
  8
                         = bene::r 
(0.3)
Really?
Mandra
  9 (Nods head) =
Yes.
Karyo
10
11
12
                       = (laughs) . 
>boleh ndak> . kalo saya 
pinjem’ =
What do [you] 
think if I 
borrow [your 
KTP]
Mandra
13
14
               = (Looks up and 
sighs) =
(continued)

96	
Language and Superdiversity
Karyo
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
          = buat ngajuin 
#KREDIT# (0.7) nanti 
kalo kriditnya kelua:r .
(while touching Mandra 
on the shoulder) 
SAMPEYAN TAK 
KASIH #KOMISI::?# =
to put in a 
finance 
application. 
Later if it is 
successful
I’LL GIVE 
YOU  [a]‌ 
commission.
Mandra
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
                                       = 
(turns gaze toward Karyo 
and then takes out his 
wallet from his back 
pocket and proceeds to 
take out his identity card 
“KTP”) =
Karyo
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
               = ha:duh (2.1)
ha:: la::h ini? . >ktp 
Jakarta yang
TAK cari cari (while
patting Mandra’s ktp). ya
 ini loh MAS> . +a: 
WIS?+ . KELAKON 
kredit AKU MAS . SI:P .
Wow, this is 
it, the
Jakartan iden­
tity card that
 I’VE been 
looking for
Ya this is the 
one
 OLDER 
BROTHER, 
yes! I’ve 
already
GOT finance 
OLDER 
BROTHER, 
GREAT!
Extract 3.7.4  (Continued)

	
Representing Ethnicity and Social Relations on Television	
97
37
38
39
e::::h . waduh? . 
GANTENGÉ 
PHOTONÉ (1.7)
Eh, wow [You 
are really] 
HANDSOME 
IN THE 
PHOTO.
(Source: Karno, 1998)
What sets this extract apart from the previous one is that now Karyo is using lin­
guistic fragments that are stereotypically associated with Javanese (in bold caps) 
in his encounter with Mandra. Mandra is also represented as comprehending 
these fragments by his responses in lines 5 and 22–28. As with earlier represen­
tations, this talk is characterized by alternation as the medium, at least on the 
part of Karyo. What also stands out here is that while Karyo referred to Mandra 
as Bang Mandra (older brother Mandra) in his earlier conversation with Leala 
(extract 3.7.3, line 1), when talking with Mandra here, he chooses the Javanese 
form for older brother, mas (lines 1, 34, and 36) and the second- person pronoun 
sampeyan (lines 2 and 20).
Taken together with Karyo’s alternation practices, we are also starting 
to see the modeling of representations of diversity from a number of perspec­
tives. First, we see that Jakarta is made up of migrants, and second, that such 
migrants have several different types of linguistic competence including the 
ability to engage in knowledging. In a sense, this representation offers a model 
of doing unity in diversity or togetherness that doesn’t exclusively involve 
Indonesian. There are also many similarities with previous representations of 
ethnic social types and interactions among those who are intimate, especially 
the use of space, facial expression, gesture, touch, prosody, and talk about 
personal life-worlds. For example, in addition to the use of Javanese frag­
ments, Karyo and Mandra are seated close together, Karyo touches Mandra’s 
shoulder (lines 18–19), and Karyo’s facial expressions and gestures change 
in each frame. Indeed, Karyo uses many of the features that were found in 
the intra-ethnic encounters examined in sections 3.5 and 3.6. These features 
include stress and volume (lines 16 and 21), tempo (e.g., changes in speed of 
delivery in lines 1–3 and 29–34), and vowel elongation (lines 7, 17, and 21).
It is also interesting to highlight the social practice engaged in by Karyo, 
where his talk is something like “preparing to ask a big favor” and “asking a big 
favor.” Karyo starts this sequence by explaining his problems (i.e., not having a 
Jakartan identity card), then asking if Mandra has a Jakartan identity card, fol­
lowed by the promise of some money. The combination seems to work because 
Mandra hands over his Jakartan identity card. As we follow the interaction, how­
ever, things turn sour (extract 3.7.5).

98	
Language and Superdiversity
Extract 3.7.5 Knowledging and authentic social types
Karyo
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
#loh# (2.7) (while 
slapping Mandra on the 
shoulder) +is::+ (0.8) 
+>ini masa berlakunya . 
sudah ABIS gini>+ loh 
(0.5)
+>SAMPEYAN ni PIYÉ 
TOH>+ (1.9) (Mandra 
turn away and is slapped
again on the shoulder by
Karyo)
What!
Hey!
This card 
is expired, 
you
know.
WHAT IS 
UP WITH 
YOU!
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
+>ini loh MBOK diliat
tu>+ (while pointing to
card) (0.7)
+masa BERLAKU+ .
lima februari . sembilan
tujuh . +>berarti telat 
setau::n>+ (0.7)
+>SAMPEYAN KUDU
ngurus ke kelurahan lagi
ini>+ . +>sudah ndak 
laku::?>+ =
Here have a 
look! 
DIDN’T 
[you] see 
this!
Valid until 
the 5th of 
February 
97, that 
means it
has [already 
been
expired] for 
one year!
YOU MUST 
go to the
 local 
government 
office
again. [This 
one] is 
already 
expired!

	
Representing Ethnicity and Social Relations on Television	
99
Mandra
62
63
64
65
66
                = (turns gaze 
toward Karyo) >sini> 
(grabs grabbing card from 
Karyo’s hand) (1.1)
>emangnya guwa 
Give 
it here!
It doesn’t 
mat­ter, 
I’m not
67
68
69
70
71
 pendatang kayak elu?> 
(0.6)
(waving hand and card 
toward his chest)+>guwa 
betawi asli:?>+ (0.9)
a new­
comer 
like you!
I’m
a genuine 
Betawi!
72
73
74
75
76
78
79
80
>biar gak punya ktp . juga 
gak apa apa . ngak bakal 
ditangkap> . (pointing to 
Karyo) >emangnya kayak 
elu> . +>ditangkep lu>+ 
>kalo ngak punya ktp 
jakarta> . +tolol+ (while 
hitting Karyo on the
knee)
 Even if [I]‌ 
don’t have 
an
 identity 
card it is 
OK. I’ll
 never be 
arr­ested 
[by the
 police]. Not 
like you. 
 You’ll be 
arrested if 
you
 don’t have 
a Jakartan 
 identity 
card, idiot!
(Source: Karno, 1998)

100	
Language and Superdiversity
In the above interaction, Karyo continues to use Javanese (bold), as in lines 
46–47, 51, and 58. Mandra continues to be represented as a Betawi-speaking 
social type (lines 66–71), who nevertheless understands the gist of what is being 
said from his responses from line 62 onward. While thus far, we have seen that 
some forms of touch, gesture, facial expression, and prosody are characteristic of 
friendly social relations between intimates, here we also get to see not-so-friendly 
relations between intimates, where intimate can be defined as “a relationship 
developed over frequent and sustained interactions.” In this case, the relationship 
is not just framed through reference to prior interactions between the two, but 
also through the metapragmatic commentary of Mandra who positions Karyo 
as a non-Betawi outsider (lines 62–78) who is also an idiot (line 78). Despite this 
characterization, we also see that Karyo is represented as someone who under­
stands Betawi fragments (bold small caps), in this case, the use of terms for “I” 
and “you” (lines 66–67, 70, and 76).
In sum, the extracts in this section have shown not only how embodied fea­
tures and interactional histories are attached to Betawi and Javanese stereotypes 
to produce denser stereotypes, but they have also provided representations of the 
semiotic diversity to be found in the city. Part of the model offered in these repre­
sentations was an apparent ability to comprehend and/or use languages that are 
not one’s own. Importantly, these examples model the doing of unity in diversity, 
which can also be achieved through the use of fragments of a regional language. 
These practices of adequation and knowledging thus far seem to be reserved for 
interactions among those from the low socioeconomic segments of Indonesian 
society. This helps place alternation between ethnic languages and Indonesia on 
a par with or below the use of ethnic languages in an emergent indexical order 
that has Indonesian at the top.
3.8  Conclusion
This chapter sought to explore how personhood and social relations were rep­
resented in Indonesian comedic soap operas in the mid-to-late 1990s. This was 
done with an eye to identifying continuities between these representations and 
the circulating ideologies about ethnicity and the broader indexical orders dis­
cussed in ­chapter 2, while contributing to some of the scholarship on language 
ideology formation. Taking inspiration from work on media and television 
more generally (section 2.2), I went on to point out that these comedic rep­
resentations were the outcome of particular historical circumstances as they 
related to the emergence of television and local soaps (section 3.3). In general, 
television programming was produced by and for an emerging middle-income 
Indonesia. After outlining my multimodal approach (section 3.4), in sec­
tions 3.5 to 3.7, I analyzed three comedic soaps. In particular, I showed how 
the co-occurrence of lexical items with embodied language (e.g., proxemics, 
 

	
Representing Ethnicity and Social Relations on Television	
101
gesture, facial expressions, activity type, and prosody) and common ground 
helped to laminate ethnic stereotypes with viewable and hearable “demean­
ors” (Goffman, 1967) and interactional histories.
Through these televised representations, the ethnic stereotypes dis­
cussed in ­chapter  2 were linked with signs of place and intimate interper­
sonal social relations in all three soaps. In contrast, representations of the 
Indonesian-speaking subject became indexed with facial expressions and 
prosody, although these typically become signs of a lack of intimate interper­
sonal social relations. The locally emergent registers that developed as part of 
contact between those of different backgrounds described in ­chapter 2 were 
also laminated with many of the signs found in representations of intra-ethnic 
interactions, while also helping to index interactional practices in settings 
characterized by diversity with social types who can engage in adequation. 
At the same time, the representation of poor, rural, and uneducated personas 
who typically spoke ethnic languages was regularly contrasted with wealth­
ier, urban, and educated types who spoke Indonesian. In so doing, these rep­
resentations also helped to regiment centers of normativity associated with 
Indonesian and ethnic languages, while modeling and/or reproducing the 
emergent orders of indexicality described in ­chapter 2.
Fragments of local mediums were commonly found in all three soaps, 
although this was typically alternated with Indonesian in a way I  refer to as 
“alternation as the medium.” This representation of alternation thus also appears 
to be authorizing mixing in settings that do not have a close fit with descriptions 
of alternation elsewhere in the world, which are typically in the form of cross­
ing (e.g., Androutsopoulos, 2007; Jaffe, 2000; Kelly-Holmes & Atkinson, 2007; 
LeCompte & Schensul, 1999). In contrast to crossing, which is typically repre­
sented as part of liminal and spectacular performances, the instances of alterna­
tion I have examined are typically unspectacular, mundane, and often habitual. 
For a number of political and economic reasons (section 3.3), this practice of rep­
resenting ethnic social types who habitually engaged in alternation had become 
quite common on Indonesian television by the mid-1990s. Indeed, as television 
moved into the late 1990s and early 2000s, this practice continued as comedic 
soaps became increasingly popular (Loven, 2008; Rachmah, 2006).
The work in this chapter contributes to some of the discussions on language 
ideology formation by furthering the multimodal nature of such studies. More 
specifically, with a few recent exceptions (Bucholtz, 2011; Bucholtz & Lopez, 2011; 
Mendoza-Denton, 2011), most studies that look at how social types and social 
relations are constructed while being associated with particular signs typically 
use and focus on printed sources (e.g., Agha, 2003, 2011a; Inoue, 2006; Inoue, 
2011; Miller, 2004). Yet printed sources can only represent certain modes of com­
munication in comparison to the wider array of signs represented in moving 
picture formats, which constitute an increasingly ubiquitous one-to-many par­
ticipation framework. In addition, the extra modes found in soap format also 

102	
Language and Superdiversity
offer implicit metasemiotic commentaries that help in the construction of social 
types, such as the introductory song and pictures to the comedy Si Doel, which 
indexed the comedy as local and ethnic.
Some of the representations analyzed in section 3.7 also modeled a practice 
I refer to as “knowledging.” Part of what constitutes knowledging is what Agha 
(2007a) refers to as competence to comprehend semiotic fragments that do not nor­
mally form part of a person’s habitually used semiotic repertoire. Knowledging 
has parallels with other terms, such as “polylanguaging” (Jørgensen, Karrebæk, 
Madsen, & Møller, 2011), “symbolic competence” (Kramsch, 2006; Kramsch & 
Whiteside, 2008), and “crossing” (Rampton, 1995). However, polylanguaging 
describes performances of knowledging but does not account for them.
Work on crossing does to a limited extent account for an ability to engage 
in knowledging (Cutler, 1999), but it does not treat knowledging as some­
thing separate from crossing. As with polylanguaging, work on crossing typi­
cally focuses on the performance aspect. If we turn to the idea of symbolic 
competence (SC), there are also some clear differences when compared with 
knowledging. The most obvious is that symbolic competence is accounted for 
by participation in one-to-few participation frameworks, whereas an abil­
ity to engage in knowledging is best accounted for with reference to partici­
pation in one-to-many participation frameworks. Put slightly differently, SC 
is developed in very similar ways to how communicative competence (CC) is 
reported to be developed in studies of language socialization in small group 
settings (e.g., Ochs, 1988; Schieffelin, 1990). The difference between CC and 
SC is that work on SC shows how some of these competences are brought to 
and applied in new settings by mobile participants. Knowledging, on the other 
hand, usually involves exposure to modeling practices that are carried out by 
non-familial experts of some sort or another (as compared with elders and older 
siblings), and it is often done simultaneously in multiple sites (e.g., in school or 
when watching television, etc). In a sense, the ability to engage in knowledging 
represents a semiotic reflex of the unintended consequences of increases in the 
circulation of people and ideas in Indonesia.
Representations of knowledging also provided models of the doing of unity 
in diversity that sit in contrast to the state ideology that links Indonesian to the 
doing of unity in diversity. In adding to work on superdiversity and polylan­
guaging (Blommaert, 2010; Blommaert & Rampton, 2011; Jørgensen et al., 2011), 
in ­chapter 6, I revisit these ideas and show that the types of representations of 
diversity and knowledging that were starting to become part of Indonesian 
mediascapes by the mid-to-late 1990s were by 2009 ubiquitous across a range of 
genres and television stations. In ­chapters 7 and 8, we will also see that the doing 
of unity in diversity through knowledging is also common in face-to-face unme­
diatized interactions.

	
Representing Ethnicity and Social Relations on Television	
103
Richardson’s (2010) insight that media professionals erase or foreground 
polite behaviors led me to suggest that these professionals are agents of semi­
otic change. The lamination of demeanors and interactional histories onto 
preexisting ethnic stereotypes is another example of semiotic change. In com­
parison to ethnic social types who spoke particular ethnic languages and 
hailed from a particular region, in these soaps, they now audibly spoke and 
visually acted in particular ways that had a semiotic fit with their represented 
interactional histories. The representations of adequation and knowledging 
also contribute to semiotic change through the modeling and authorization of 
new hybrid social types (e.g., Karyo using Betawi and Mandra understanding 
Javanese in section 3.7). Even so, as with ethnic languages and their stereo­
typical speakers, hybrid social types who mix tend to be those from the lower 
levels of Indonesian society, thus helping to reinforce orders of indexicality 
where Indonesian is at the top, followed by ethnic languages, and finally mixed 
languages. More generally, such soaps also provide explicit representations 
that seem to naturalize the types of diversity found in Indonesia’s cities. These 
themes will be taken up further in ­chapters 5 and 6. Finally, because this book 
is also very much concerned with ideas of circulation and the widening of the 
social domain of ideas about ethnic stereotypes, we should also ask how such 
representations are interpreted by Indonesians. In ­chapters 7 and 8, I address 
questions of audience interpretation.

104
4
Ethnicity during a Decade of Political Reform  
and Decentralization
4.1  Introduction
As highlighted in ­chapters 2 and 3, by the mid-to-late 1990s, there was a widely 
circulating ideology that Indonesia was made up of ethnic communities that 
resided in certain areas. Membership in these communities was indexed by 
emblems such as linguistic forms, attire, dress, housing, food, music, religion, 
and so on. While ideologies about ethnicity were largely associated with positive 
social relations and recirculated in a myriad of social domains across the archi-
pelago, the idea of the “ethnic other” was also increasingly indexed with negative 
traits from the mid-1990s onward. Continuing to draw inspiration from work on 
language ideologies and enregisterment, the main aim of this chapter is trace how 
the idea of ethnicity became associated with these negative traits. In exploring 
this issue, I am especially interested in tracing how and why these ideologies were 
circulated, while also showing how these processes have tended to reproduce and 
reify earlier ideologies about ethnicity.
In section 4.2, I trace how the circulation of ideologies about ethnicity relates 
to the appropriation of land for logging, mining, and transmigration projects on 
the islands outside of Java. The economic migrants that these projects attracted 
were increasingly perceived as unwelcome ethnic and religious others by indig-
enous populations in Kalimantan, Sulawesi, Aceh, and Irian Jaya. They were 
unwelcome because they were perceived as not only taking part in the illegal or 
unfair appropriation of indigenous land, but also because they did not wish to 
assimilate into local ways. Similarly, in areas that had high levels of work-related 
in-migration, such as Bali, these ethnic and religious others were also unwelcome 
newcomers who were increasingly associated with criminality.
As I point out in section 4.3, these issues were compounded by the severe 
economic downturn that started in 1997 and continued for over ten years, pro-
ducing millions of unemployed Indonesians. This downturn tended to shrink the 
number and size of social domains where interactions among those of differing 
 
 

	
Ethnicity during a Decade of Political Reform and Decentralization	
105
backgrounds had occurred during the relatively prosperous years of the early-to-
mid-1990s. For example, many working in factories, offices, malls, street kiosks, 
and so on in the large cities had little or no work and, when possible, returned 
home. In a real sense, opportunities for intercultural dialogue decreased. This 
economic uncertainty produced social unrest across Indonesia leading to the fall 
of the Soeharto regime. In its place came cases of localism and the politicization 
of ethnicity, which picked up steam through political and fiscal decentralization.
Decentralization together with feelings of localism turned into interethnic or 
interreligious conflicts between “indigenous locals” and (trans)migrants in places 
such as Kalimantan, Sulawesi, Maluku, Aceh, and Irian Jaya. While each conflict 
had specific local reasons, some of the recurring and interrelated causes of this 
violence included land rights and just compensation for land used in transmigra-
tion, logging, and mining projects; elite power struggles that followed the politi-
cal and fiscal decentralization of 2001; an increasingly fragmented and weakened 
central government; and the revival of ideas of tradition. What is important for 
this chapter and this book is that these conflicts not only facilitated the recircula-
tion of ideologies about ethnicity, but the massive population displacements that 
were part of these conflicts also created new social domains for encounters with 
the ethnic other. Section 4.4 takes up these issues.
While ethnic conflict and scrambles for political power were also part of 
numerous “tradition” revivalist movements, these movements also involved 
more benign discourses of tradition that related to language and cultural loss, as 
well as revival. Some of these discourses morphed into more concrete practices 
including increasing amounts of locally produced television media, pop, and art-
work; renewed local language curriculum in a number of regions; and Ph.Ds. 
aimed at documenting endangered languages. These discourses and practices 
also recirculated ideologies of ethnicity, while helping to reproduce links with 
linguistic signs. At the same time, this revaluing of ethnicity and ethnic languages 
also helped to produce new centers of normativity that at the same time helped 
to reconfigure existing orders of indexicality. This reconfiguration involved 
increases in the social domains where ethnic language use was valued. In section 
4.5, I examine these issues in further detail before I conclude by fleshing out the 
interrelationships among each of these issues with an eye to showing how these 
events and processes have helped maintain the circulation of ideologies about 
ethnicity and the signs associated with them. In particular, I argue that while 
ideas of the hybrid social types still circulated, older ideas about ethnicity seemed 
to get the most attention.
4.2  Tensions Around the Idea of Ethnicity
This section seeks to connect broader global and economic events with their 
local consequences, especially as they relate to an increasing tendency to index 
 

106	
Language and Superdiversity
negative signs with ethnicity. These processes and the politicization of ethnic-
ity helped to set the scene for large-scale interethnic and interreligious conflicts 
that occurred between 1999 and 2005. I will point out that some of the recurring 
causes of these tensions related to land rights and just compensation for land 
used in transmigration, logging, and mining projects. Before 1998, these tensions 
were primarily local and emerged through face-to-face interactions or alterca-
tions between locals and outsiders at the local level. In this sense, the circulation 
of negative associations with ethnic social types was also primarily local and on 
a small scale (i.e., it occurred in one-to-few participation frameworks).
With the introduction of new foreign investment, mining, and forestry laws 
in 1967 (Laws 1, 5, and 11), the state appropriated large tracts of land in places 
such as Kalimantan, Sulawesi, Aceh, and Irian Jaya/Papua (Resosudarmo, 
2005: 2–3). While land rights and just compensation were already well-known 
problems by the early 1960s (Hardjono, 1977:  39), these appropriations typi-
cally delivered few socioeconomic benefits for locals (Henley & Davidson, 2007; 
Resosudarmo, 2005). Sangkoyo (1999: 173), for example, points out that in the 
twenty years between 1973 and 1993, land appropriation actually helped increase 
the landless poor in Indonesia by about two million people.
These land appropriations also produced environmental degradation and an 
influx of outsiders seeking work and business opportunities (Henley & Davidson, 
2007; Resosudarmo, 2005). For example, between 1970 and 2000, some 780,000 
people had come to Irian Jaya/Papua (220,000 as transmigrants), changing the 
demographics to the extent that outsiders now constituted roughly 35 percent 
of the overall population (Chauvel, 2008). In the cities, migrants made up nearly 
70  percent of the population. There was resentment toward both groups of 
migrants, but especially toward economic migrants, who were primarily from 
South Sulawesi and Moslem. This resentment emerged for a number of reasons. 
On the one hand, migrants were employed in industry instead of the locals whose 
land had been appropriated for these industrial projects. On the other hand, 
migrants rarely interacted with locals and tended to view them as primitive and 
backward.
A similar situation occurred in Aceh where over 180,000 transmigrants had 
arrived from Java and Bali since 1975 (Aspinall, 2008). These transmigrants 
were typically settled in “homogenous” villages. Despite many of these migrants 
marrying locals and having children in Aceh, they were seen as outsiders who 
were getting the best jobs in industries that were built on locals’ land without 
appropriate compensation. At the same time, these transmigrants were also 
perceived as major contributors to environmental degradation and economic 
recession (Aspinall, 2008). Increased funding for development projects in West 
Kalimantan also brought with it large numbers of Madurese economic migrants 
(Davidson, 2008). This exacerbated preexisting tensions and conflict between 
Dayak locals and Madurese migrants that had emerged out of the confronta-
tion with Malaysia in the 1960s. These conflicts were typically blamed on these 

	
Ethnicity during a Decade of Political Reform and Decentralization	
107
migrants’ perceived unwillingness to assimilate and interact in locally appropri-
ate ways (Davidson, 2008).
In Central Sulawesi, the situation was different, but tensions between insiders 
and outsiders were also on the rise. Sidel (2008) points out that lowland wealthy 
Bugis Moslems moved to upland Christian areas of Poso to buy land for farming 
because prices for copra and coffee began to boom. This influx of Moslem outsid-
ers was also fed through the staffing of government offices by outsiders and an 
influx of landless and unemployed youths who were the victims of the economic 
and environmental crisis that befell Indonesia from 1997 onward (Sidel, 2008). 
In Maluku, one of the islands to the southeast of Sulawesi, in-migration also 
brought with it changes in religious demographics and tensions over land rights 
and religious issues (Sidel, 2008). In Bali, tensions also arose for different, but 
related, reasons (Vickers, 2002; Warren, 2007). Warren (2007) notes that these 
tensions came about due to investment in the building of large hotels despite pop-
ular protests, the large influx of migrant workers, the disempowerment of local 
customary laws vis-à-vis local government laws, and instances of crime that were 
blamed on outsiders.
At the same time that these tensions arose around issues of land rights, 
economic rights, and negative perceptions of outsiders, international conserva-
tion movements funded and assisted a new cadre of student activists in form-
ing local NGOs in Kalimantan (Katoppo, 2000; Kusumaatmadja, 2000). By the 
mid-1990s, these NGOs had successfully raised local and international atten-
tion around issues of land rights and just compensation for land used in trans-
migration, logging, and mining projects (Henley & Davidson, 2007; Katoppo, 
2000; Kusumaatmadja, 2000; Resosudarmo, 2005). In effect, these movements 
had helped strengthen and circulate ideas about local identities, while contrast-
ing them with outsiders. The issue of the local was also coming to the fore in 
the field of political contests. For example, during the early-to-mid-1990s, there 
were increased disaffections with the central government’s choices of outsiders 
as regents (bupati) and district-level bureaucrats (camat) despite local candidates 
being locally favored (Malley, 2003:  108). This disaffection could be found in 
places such as West Sumatra, Southeast Sulawesi, Central Kalimantan, North 
Sumatra, East Kalimantan, East Sumba, Irian, and what used to be called East 
Timor (now Timor Lesté). In a real sense, locality was also being associated with 
local identities.
In summary, before 1998, tensions about ideologies of identity revolved 
around issues of insiders and outsiders and in many senses were an outcome 
of state developmentist policies. These policies directly contributed to massive 
influxes of outsiders—including economic migrants, transmigrants, administra-
tors, police, and military personnel—over a short period of time. As Inoue (2006), 
Coppel (1983), and Collins and colleagues (2000), among others, have pointed 
out, such rapid increases in the visibility of strangers or outsiders are one of the 
preconditions for the construction of social types with negative characteristics. 

108	
Language and Superdiversity
These tensions were primarily local and sometimes emerged through face-to-face 
interactions or altercations between locals and outsiders. In this sense, the circu-
lation of negative associations with certain identities was primarily local and on 
a small scale. These identities related primarily to earlier ideologies of ethnicity 
that were grounded in locale. However, the effects of an ongoing currency cri-
sis, an extended drought, rising dissatisfaction with the New Order government 
from all levels of Indonesian society, and the decentralization of power and fis-
cal arrangements from 1999 helped set the stage for the circulation of ideologies 
about ethnicity on a much larger scale.
4.3  Economic Crisis, Decentralization, and the Rise of Adat
The end of the Cold War in the early 1990s had a number of implications for the 
way Indonesia handled issues of development and governance. During the Cold 
War, there were agreements about allowing import protectionism in exchange 
for a staunchly non-communist regime, but by the early 1990s, this gave way to 
increased pressures from the U.S. and other countries for trade liberalization and 
human rights (Vickers, 2005). This occurred in a context where the Indonesian 
development program had already produced disparities between urban and rural 
areas, as well as between the rich and the poor (Vickers, 2005). These disparities 
were especially felt in the regions outside of Java (Henley & Davidson, 2007).
By 1998, the economic growth rates of earlier years had dramatically 
dropped. There were several reasons for this, including a rapid decrease in the 
exchange rate for the Indonesian rupiah, which decreased from 2,300 rupiah per 
U.S. dollar to around 10,000 rupiah per dollar between 1996 and 1998 (Ikhsan, 
2003). This plummeting exchange rate was compounded by a severe El Niño 
drought that brought crop failure and the need to import food, falling oil prices 
that reduced government revenues, an International Monetary Fund (IMF) 
push to reduce fuel subsidies, and a doubling of inflation rates (Thee Kian Wie, 
2001). These events crippled most businesses with foreign loans, resulting in 
bankruptcy, business closures, a doubling of the unemployment rate, and a dou-
bling of the number of people living under the poverty line (Ikhsan, 2003). If 
they could afford the increasingly expensive bus fares, many of the construction 
and finance workers who lost their jobs in the big cities returned to their villages 
(Booth, 2000; Silvey, 2004). On the one hand, this mass exodus made cities, such 
as Jakarta, less diverse and reduced the social domains where interaction across 
lines of difference could occur. On the other hand, as found in the novels of the 
early twentieth century, homecomings to rural areas, such as where my partner’s 
parents lived, were often accompanied by stories of encounters with difference, 
thus recirculating ideologies of ethnicity.
During this period, demonstrations about rising costs of living and the need 
for political reform became common and often violent (Mietzner, 1999). These 
 

	
Ethnicity during a Decade of Political Reform and Decentralization	
109
demonstrations were supported by layers of Indonesian society that had previ-
ously been apolitical. This visible loss of support for the government came with a 
loss of support from different factions within the military and from Islamic orga-
nizations. The end result was the resignation of President Soeharto in May 1998 
after his thirty-two-year reign as the head of government (Mietzner, 1999). His vice 
president, B. J. Habibie, was installed as Indonesia’s third president. Very soon 
after Soeharto’s resignation, media censorship laws were increasingly ignored, and 
there were increasing numbers of calls for independence coming from many of the 
regions outside of Java (Aspinall & Fealy, 2003; Bourchier, 2000; McGibbon, 2003).
While these calls for independence were linked with the development prac-
tices noted in the previous section, it was also the case that with Soeharto gone, the 
vast patronage networks that had been set up during his reign started to unravel 
(Bourchier, 2000). This resulted in many local struggles for power and resources, 
which were often linked with calls for independence (Bourchier, 2000; Lindsey, 
2001). In the islands outside of Java, some of these struggles involved military offi-
cers who—with a weakened central command—started to act autonomously, some-
times instigating or supporting interethnic and interreligious violence (Mietzner, 
2001). Seeking to differentiate himself from the former regime, while hoping to keep 
Indonesia as a united nation, President Habibie instigated a wide range of reforms in 
1999 (Elson, 2008: 281). These reforms included new press freedom laws, free politi-
cal parties, new election procedures, decentralization legislation, and a referendum 
for East Timor (Aspinall & Fealy, 2003; Chauvel, 2001; Elson, 2008; Kitley, 2001).
Of particular relevance was the introduction of two new laws in May 1999, 
Laws 22 and 25, which devolved political and fiscal powers to the third level of 
government shown in ­figure 4.3.1. While this third level initially included 360 
cities and districts, the number would swell to nearly 490 in the years to come 
(Bünte, 2009: 116). More specifically, Law 25 related to a new system of fiscal 
arrangements whereby districts and cities were to receive a much larger share of 
revenues earned within their borders (Aspinall & Fealy, 2003: 3). Law 22 devolved 
authority to these districts and cities in the areas of education, health, environ-
ment, labor, public works, and natural resource management, while the central 
government retained authority in the areas of foreign policy, defense, security, 
monetary policy, the legal system, and religious affairs (Aspinall & Fealy, 2003: 3).
It is important to note here that decision-makers chose to focus on autonomy 
at the district and city level rather than at the provincial level (level two) because 
it would set up districts as competitors for resources, while not making them 
large enough to think of separatism (Aspinall & Fealy, 2003: 4). This approach 
was seen as especially important because of the history of separatist movements 
(see, e.g., ­chapter 2) and the recent separatist calls (Aspinall & Fealy, 2003: 4). Put 
in semiotic terms, these political discourses about regions and ethnicity helped 
reproduce categories of ethnicity and their linguistic and social practices, while 
anchoring them to region. While these discourses primarily circulated among 
bureaucrats and politicians, nevertheless, they also helped to highlight and 

110	
Language and Superdiversity
Level 1: Central Government
Level 2: Provinces (propinsi)
Level 3: Regencies (kabupaten) and cities (kota)
Level 4: Districts (kecematan)
Level 5: Sub-districts (Kelurahan)
Level 6: Neighborhood (rukun warga)
Level 7: Ward (Rukun Tetangga)
FIGURE 4.3.1  Indonesian administrative hierarchy prior to May 1998
recirculate ideologies of ethnicity and associated emblems of ethnicity in several 
social domains.
For example, in the provincial city of Bandung, West Java, the decentral-
ization of decision-making affected issues of town planning, which increasingly 
involved citizen groups (Antlov, 2003). In rural areas, decentralization at the 
village level meant that there were now 10–13 elected members coming together 
in the 52,000 or so villages across the archipelago with an estimated number of 
meetings around 520,000 in 1999 alone (Antlov, 2003). In addition, there was the 
development of networks and associations of village councils that acted collec-
tively to pressure district-level politicians (Antlov, 2003).
Large federations also formed, such as a number of farmer federations in 
West Java (Antlov, 2003). Some of these were the product of the unification of 
smaller federations, as in Solo where some twenty associations of marginalized 
groups made up of pedicab drivers, prostitutes, domestic workers, hawkers, and 
so on unified to become an association claiming 20,000 members (Antlov, 2003). 
This expansion of networks mirrored the nationwide explosion in the number 
of trade unions, which before 1998 were strictly controlled and few in number 
(Ford, 2004, 2008). Within unions, there were opportunities to attend training, 
national forums, and congresses, which in the case of national congresses, were 
attended by Indonesians from throughout the archipelago (Ford, 2008: 21–27), 

	
Ethnicity during a Decade of Political Reform and Decentralization	
111
thus increasing opportunities for interactions with ethnic others. These new 
social domains were not just a result of local pressures, however. As Ford (2008) 
points out, many of these unions were supported by the International Labor 
Organization (ILO) and the IMF.
During this time, there was an increase in other types of NGOs that had 
similar influences on people and idea circulation. In some cases, NGO litera-
ture directly contributed to the (re)anchoring of social types with region and 
language. For example, during the 1999 election campaign, NGOs concerned 
with women’s rights published posters on voting in a regional language in South 
Sulawesi (Baso & Idrus, 2002: 202), thus reproducing the idea that linguistic 
forms were linked with region, and by indexical association, emblematic of 
ethnicity. In semiotic and interactional terms then, all of these new organiza-
tions and their activities represented new social domains for encounters with 
sameness and difference, which all potentially involved the recirculation of 
ideologies about ethnicity.
The promise of decentralization also brought with it some unintended con-
sequences that also contributed to the recirculation of ideologies about social 
types and their association with region and ethnicity. For example, Quinn (2003) 
notes that Javanese-speaking Banten, which was originally part of the province 
of Sundanese- speaking West Java, successfully became a new province in 2000. 
The reasons for this were based on economic grounds, claims of religious, lin-
guistic, and cultural differences, and claims about political underrepresentation 
at the provincial level. The emergence of a new province with a revalued ethnolin-
guistic identity represents an emergent center of normativity that helped recon-
figure existing orders of indexicality. In essence, within this new province, Banten 
Javanese was vying for co-equal status with other varieties of Javanese. While 
future research is required on how this new social value is manifest in schooling 
practices in Banten, reference to research in Banyuwangi (Arps, 2010) suggests 
that should Banten Javanese enter the school curriculum, then there is potential 
for a widening of the social value of Banten Javanese throughout this province.
The antecedent discourses about Banten identity and the subsequent grant-
ing of provincial status impacted on the way other areas thought about their 
identity and political status. This new province was seen by some as a threat 
to Sundanese identity, whose territory no longer encompassed all of West Java, 
and not even the most western parts (Quinn, 2003). This led to calls for a name 
change of the province to something that included the term “Sunda.” This in 
turn raised eyebrows in the area of Cirebon, which is part of West Java but has 
many Javanese speakers. Calls for new provincial status and district status also 
came from towns within Java, such as Solo in Central Java, and from the island 
of Madura located above Surabaya in East Java (Quinn, 2003).
In the outer islands too, there were calls for new provinces and districts, as 
well as increasingly strong calls for political recognition and land rights, which 
helped to recirculate ideologies of ethnicity at the national and local level. Within 

112	
Language and Superdiversity
districts in Riau in Sumatra, for example, there were new tensions over which 
groups were entitled to political power and economic spoils and whether this 
province should be split (Ford, 2003). This atomization of territory was com-
mon to the extent that by mid-2003, the number of districts had gone from 360 
to 416, and the number of provinces had increased from twenty-seven to thirty 
(Jones, 2004). By early 2007, this number had increased to 487 districts (Bünte, 
2009: 116). This territorial fragmentation continues, as pointed out by Aspinall 
(2011, 2013). NGOs that had a history of working on land rights issues played a 
role in this atomization helping to produce numerous adat communities. Eight 
hundred representatives of these communities came together in 1999 at the first 
Aliansi Masyarakat Adat Nusantara (Alliance of Adat Communities of Indonesia) 
conference (Acciaioli, 2007).
This body started to act as a mediator between government and adat com-
munities about issues of land rights, compensation, and environmental degrada-
tion (Katoppo, 2000). For example, these groups aided in the local registration of 
tracts of land on the part of a community, and these maps became (re)associated 
with adat communities across the archipelago (Kusumaatmadja, 2000: 207). In 
so doing, old ideologies linking region to person and language were being repro-
duced. In some cases, this was more explicit than others. For example, some 
branches of Aliansi Masyarakat Adat Nusantara (AMAN) in Sulawesi defined an 
adat community as a group of people willing to follow guidelines put forth by 
elders (Acciaioli, 2007: 301). As many elders have limited ability in Indonesian, 
local language is thus implied in these types of formulations. In addition to help-
ing recirculate ideologies of ethnicity via media reports of this conference and via 
the work of AMAN branches pursuing land rights, face-to-face encounters among 
conference attendees may also have reproduced ideas of difference and ethnicity.
From 1999 onward, adat had a very fluid and situation-specific meaning, 
including history, land, law, authenticity, community, harmony, order, justice, 
and/or a combination of these (Henley & Davidson, 2007; Tyson, 2010). Ultimately, 
as these and other scholars explain, in the period from 1999 onward, the term 
adat became associated with two sets of meanings. The first, which had loose 
associations with law and justice, developed as an alternative to law and justice 
associated with an increasingly dysfunctional military and police force, as well 
as militias that had developed initially as peacekeepers but eventually morphed 
into partisan troublemakers (Crouch, 2003; Henley & Davidson, 2007). In this 
sense, adat was a way of negotiating the insecurity of a turbulent and unpre-
dictable present and future through recourse to practices of the past (Henley & 
Davidson, 2007). Second, there was the meaning recirculated by AMAN, which 
emphasized rights to territory based on historic links (Bourchier, 2007). The idea 
of historical rights to territory was used by one group—often but not always one 
associated with elites—to marginalize, victimize, or appropriate resources from 
another group (Biezeveld, 2007; Henley & Davidson, 2007; Jones, 2004; Li, 2007; 
Ramstedt, 2009; Sakai, 2003; Tyson, 2010; Van Klinken, 2007b).

	
Ethnicity during a Decade of Political Reform and Decentralization	
113
Such marginalization occurred between those living within close proximity 
of one another (Resosudarmo, 2005: 7; Warren, 2007: 186). Fox and colleagues 
(2005: 94–95) provide examples of disputes over fishing grounds erupting between 
two sub-districts within a single district in Pontianak in Kalimantan. In Bali, 
tensions were just as much about differences in social practices in the north and 
south, with hierarchy and Hinduism dominating in the south, while the north had 
a much longer history of pluralism (Ramstedt, 2009: 357–358). There were also 
tensions among different strata within Bali, with elites lamenting that decentral-
ization had produced fragmented communities and fragmented notions of what 
it meant to be Balinese (Ramstedt, 2009: 329–330).
In other places, such as Sambas in West Kalimantan, local Malays felt dis-
advantaged by the way adat had been mobilized by internationally funded Dayak 
groups to gain greater economic spoils and political representation (Davidson, 
2008). In particular, there was a revival of sultanates and sultans as a way of claim-
ing authenticity and entitlement, especially because it added to political candidates’ 
chances if they had a link with these “old” sultanates (Van Klinken, 2007b). Unlike 
Dayak movements, the Malay movement had no support from AMAN, but it did 
draw upon some of the meanings associated with adat, especially tradition, authen-
ticity, and entitlement (Van Klinken, 2007b). As Davidson (2008) points out, ulti-
mately, this contest led to tensions between Malay groups and Dayak groups, but 
more important, it created major problems for Madurese migrants (see section 4.4).
As Henley and Davidson (2007) point out, from 1999 onward, adat also 
increasingly became an issue of insiders and outsiders. Crouch (2003: 30), for exam-
ple, points out that with the granting of special autonomy to Irian Jaya/Papua in 
2001, the new local parliament passed legislation that made it necessary to seek 
permission at the local level before any further transmigrants would be allowed 
to enter Irian. In West Sumatra, Aceh, Kalimantan, Sulawesi, and the Moluccas, 
distinctions about land rights were made on the basis of whether one was “ethni-
cally” local and behaved in accordance with local customs or whether someone 
had migrated several generations earlier (Aragon, 2008; Aspinall, 2008; Biezeveld, 
2007; Bouvier & Smith, 2008; Davidson, 2008; Sidel, 2008; von Benda-Beckmann 
& von Benda-Beckmann, 2009). As we shall see in the next section, in many cases, 
lack of indigeneity, inauthenticity, and/or difference in social practices became 
reasons for forcibly displacing these migrants. In other cases, from 1999 to around 
2004, indigeneity became the criterion for hiring in local governments (Aspinall & 
Fealy, 2003: 6; Carnegie, 2010: 130; van Klinken, 2007a: 7).
In linking the above discussion with the circulation of ideologies relating to eth-
nicity, it is important to point out that these contestations over land, rights, authen-
ticity, and so on regularly attracted the gaze of local and national media, as well as 
major political figures. Discourses about the potential problems of decentralization 
including localism, adat, and ethnopolitics circulated in 2001 and 2002 in local and 
national newspapers (Aspinall & Fealy, 2003: 7). Often, these stories were reports 
of presidential or vice presidential opinions (Aspinall & Fealy, 2003: 7) that leant 

114	
Language and Superdiversity
authority to such discourses. Local issues often found themselves on the national 
stage, as Erb (2007: 268) points out in relation to adat disputes in Flores. In places 
such as Bali, there also seemed to be some audience for these news reports. For 
example, migrants complained that media reports relating to the push to strengthen 
Bali adat privileged Balinese while marginalizing migrants (Warren, 2007: 174).
In summary, economic and political crisis, decentralization, and adat reviv-
alism all helped recirculate older ideologies that linked region to ethnicity. As 
in other places around the world (Collins et al., 2000; Poynting, Noble, Tabar, 
& Collins, 2004), the preexistence of stereotypes coupled with economic and 
political uncertainty, a highly visible group of outsiders, and media reportage 
about rights and entitlement assisted in the assigning of negative associations to 
ethnic social types in certain areas of Indonesia. One outcome of these interre-
lated processes was that deviance was increasingly mapped onto people who were 
migrants, replacing earlier, more neutral readings of ethnicity. The consequences 
of this were the worst cases of communal violence and population displacement 
since the events surrounding regime change in 1965–1966 (van Klinken, 2007a).
4.4  Violent Ethnic Others: Conflict and Displacement
Hedman (2008b: 4) points out that by 2001, Indonesia had the world’s highest num-
ber of refugees due to conflict, numbering around 1.4 million people. Among other 
things, this circulation of people also helped to recirculate ideologies about ethnicity 
in new social domains and on a large scale. In this section, I look at scholarship on 
this topic to highlight some of these social domains, as well as to point out some of 
the discourses that these people movements created in their new, temporary homes.
In 1999, a long history of animosity between Dayak groups and Madurese 
economic migrants in West Kalimantan erupted yet again into violence that con-
tinued sporadically to 2001 (Davidson, 2008). As part of this violence, around 
50,000 people were displaced. Many of them were moved to various holding 
camps in Pontianak or boated to Madura and Surabaya in East Java. These refu-
gees received little local support, and in the media they were increasingly blamed 
for crimes that occurred in the cities that had become their temporary homes 
(Davidson, 2008). In 2001, close to 150,000 Madurese living in Central Kalimantan 
were displaced (Bouvier & Smith, 2008: 231). Dayak groups that participated in this 
large-scale forced displacement of primarily Madurese economic migrants were 
media-literate, networked and financed by the Ford Foundation (Bouvier & Smith, 
2008:  244). This allowed them to more effectively circulate stereotypes about 
Madurese who had none of these advantages and could not counter these negative 
stereotypes effectively (Bouvier & Smith, 2008: 244). At subsequent peace confer-
ences that were held in Jakarta and East Java, organizers focused on intercultural 
differences and the lack of assimilation on the part of Madurese, while neglecting 
the role of political elites, military, and criminals (Bouvier & Smith, 2008: 246).
 

	
Ethnicity during a Decade of Political Reform and Decentralization	
115
During the same period, hundreds of thousands of people were displaced in 
North Maluku, Maluku, and Central Sulawesi because of interreligious violence 
(Sidel, 2008: 29). In Ambon, the capital of Maluku, for example, around 70,000 
people had fled by March 1999. By the end of 2000, nearly double that number 
were seeking refuge in other areas of Maluku, while tens of thousands were seek-
ing refuge in other parts of Indonesia (Sidel, 2008: 49). As Sidel (2008: 49) points 
out, this flood of people brought with it stories and rumors that helped start 
interreligious violence in the areas where they had sought refuge. In the nearby 
island of Lombok, an Islamic rally led to some of the radical attendees attack-
ing Christian homes, businesses, schools, and churches (Sidel, 2008: 52). Three 
thousand Christians fled to neighboring Bali, Manado, and Papua.
This large-scale circulation of refugees, paramilitary, and military personnel 
was common throughout the archipelago during this period, resulting in the cre-
ation of new social domains for encounters with difference and new opportunities 
for the generation of stories about such encounters. This was especially the case in 
places with long histories of separatist movements, such as Aceh, East Timor, and 
Irian Jaya. Aspinall (2008) points out that between 1999 and 2003, around 130,000 
Javanese and those of Javanese descent were forced to leave Aceh by the free Aceh 
movement (GAM) or its sympathizers. This displacement of people and people 
movement was to pale in significance to what occurred as a result of the December 
2004 tsunami. In the aftermath of this disaster, 500,000 people were displaced and 
tens of thousands of volunteers from around the archipelago came to the aid of 
survivors (Hedman, 2008a). In East Timor after the UN sanctioned and observed 
the Independence vote in 1999, the actions of paramilitary militias (which were 
trained by the Indonesian military) displaced some 400,000 East Timorese people 
(Robinson, 2008). Of these, 250,000 moved across the border to West Timor or to 
neighboring islands (Robinson, 2008: 99–100). In Irian, people displacement was 
also common as were clashes between locals and migrants, although typically this 
was on a smaller scale in comparison to Aceh and East Timor.
As in earlier times (see ­chapter 2), Indonesian military personnel who were 
involved in people displacement were drawn primarily from Java or from regions 
other than where conflict was occurring. For example, the military crackdown in 
1999 involved primarily troops from Java (Bourchier, 2000). In 2001–2002, an esti-
mated 22,000 military personnel and a further 11,000 police were deployed to Aceh 
(Crouch, 2003). Similarly, in places were communal violence was occurring, such 
as Poso, some 4,000 troops and police were deployed (Crouch, 2003). In addition to 
military personnel, there were also paramilitary personnel who moved throughout 
the archipelago and were often recruited in Java to provide medical, communica-
tions, and paramilitary support (Crouch, 2003; Sidel, 2008). For example, the radi-
cal Islamic group Laskar Jihad, which formed in 2000 (and was supported by some 
elements within the military), sent between 3,000 and 4,000 of their members to 
areas of interreligious conflict, including Maluku, Poso (Central Sulawesi), Aceh, 
Irian Jaya/Papua, East Kalimantan, and South Sulawesi (Crouch, 2003; Sidel, 2008).

116	
Language and Superdiversity
Encounters between locals and personnel from the military and police also 
helped recirculate ideologies of ethnicity and difference. For example, in 2003, a 
reporter who traveled with the military reported that soldiers complained that 
people they talked to in Aceh always answered in a local language and wouldn’t 
use Indonesian unless forced (Aspinall, 2008: 141). Such reports point to different 
views about orders of indexicality, with soldiers of the Indonesia state trying to 
regiment Indonesian at the top of the hierarchy while locals appeared to place 
their local language at the top.
As with the struggles over resources noted in section 4.3, from 1999 onward, 
the separatist conflicts in Aceh, Irian, and East Timor (now Timor Lesté) also 
attracted increasing media attention, especially as new freedom-of-the-press laws 
came into effect (Kitley, 2001; Sen & Hill, 2000). For example, between November 
2003 and September 2004, the escalation of military operations in Aceh produced 
almost daily news reports of separatist (GAM) casualties (Aspinall, 2005: 28). 
Presidents, vice-presidents, and parliamentarians also frequently commented in 
the media about these conflicts (Chauvel, 2001). This increased level of reporting, 
often authorized by those with the highest authority in the land, thus helped to 
further recirculate ideologies linking ethnicity with regions.
To summarize this section, the most important points are that population 
displacement and military involvement across the archipelago created many 
new social domains for encounters with difference and for the generation of 
stories about such encounters. Such encounters occurred in refugee camps, 
in interactions among military personnel, aid workers, locals, and refugees. 
During this time, there was also a large increase in the mediatization of con-
flicts involving those of different ethnic backgrounds, at both the local and 
national levels. As with earlier times, registers associated with ethnic social 
types were regaining negative associations through both one-to-many partici-
pation frameworks and one-to-few participation frameworks (e.g., face-to-face 
talk). In addition, further unintended consequences of earlier developmen-
tist nation-building ideas and processes continued to work against ideas of 
unity in diversity (e.g., ­chapter  2). In the following section, I focus on some 
language-specific examples of the impact of decentralization and adat move-
ments from the early 2000s onward.
4.5  Recirculating Stereotypes via Other Forms of Localism
In this section, I look at some of the other social domains where ideologies about 
ethnicity were circulated as a reflex of regionalism and practices relating to ongoing 
decentralization. I point out that, in the period from 1999 onward, there was a recir-
culation of ideas about ethnic social types mentioned in section 2.8 and ­chapter 3. 
In particular, it seems that in the areas of education and the media, decentralization 
clearly helped to strengthen associations among region, language, and ethnicity in 
some places. This helped create emergent centers of normativity that in turn helped 
 

	
Ethnicity during a Decade of Political Reform and Decentralization	
117
to reconfigure existing orders of indexicality. In this section, I start by looking at 
some education and training practices before moving to the media and the Internet.
A close reading of Arps’s (2010), Moriyama’s (2005, 2012), Quinn’s (2012), and 
Ramstedt’s (2009) work suggests that since decentralization, the rise of regionalism 
and adat has facilitated the recirculation of links among language, region, and ethnic-
ity in East Java, West Java, and Bali. These links have been authorized through policy 
documents, seminars, the production of grammars, dictionaries, school textbooks, 
and the contrasting of different varieties of language with those being used/proposed 
in local school curriculums. Arps (2010) for example, points to efforts in standardizing 
and including in local school curriculums a Javanese dialect in the Banyuwangi area 
of East Java. Ramstead (2009: 360) points out that the governor of Bali allocated a 
budget for local languages, customs, and knowledge systems to be included in school 
curriculums from 2004 onward. Moriyama (2005) points out that in 2003, some gov-
ernment offices within West Java introduced laws mandating the use of Sundanese in 
the office. During fieldwork in Semarang in 2003–2004, I also read newspaper articles 
about similar initiatives in district government offices within Central Java.
Part of the justification around the use of Sundanese and Javanese in govern-
ment offices related to the fear of losing a particular honorific variety of the lan-
guage. While this fear of loss is typically articulated by older-generation speakers 
who are in senior and/or powerful positions—a situation common to discourses 
surrounding language change more generally (Aitchison, 1996; Blommaert, 2010; 
Inoue, 2006)—these fears of loss also came at a time when Indonesia started to 
seriously invest in improving the skills of its academic workforce and requiring 
Indonesian academics to engage in global academic discussions through the use 
of English. For example, in 2007 the Indonesian Directorate General of Higher 
Education (DIKTI) decreed that all university lecturers should have a minimum 
of a master’s qualification (Direktorat Jenderal Pendidikan Tinngi, 2010a, 2010b).
DIKTI has facilitated this policy by offering large amounts of funding for com-
pleting master’s and doctorate studies. In turn, this impetus has provided resources 
to primarily mid-career academics to study endangered local languages and, in 
so doing, reproduce language-region-ethnicity links. However, whether or to what 
extent scholarly theses will translate into district-level policies and school curricu-
lums, as was the case in Arps’s (2010) study, is still an open question. For example, 
Sudarkam Mertono’s (2014) Ph.D. work suggests that while language loss is impor-
tant in places like Palu, Sulawesi, decentralization of education hasn’t meant that 
local languages uniformly enter the curriculum. Instead, it appears that local lan-
guages compete for a place in the curriculum with international languages and IT.
As in the 1990s, the circulation of authorized discourses linking languages 
to regions and ethnic social types continued via the mass media. Moriyama 
(2005: 6) observes that where print media is concerned, there appears to be an 
increase in Sundanese language magazines. Media professionals involved in the 
setting-up of regional television stations across Indonesia articulated hopes that 
such stations might also increase interethnic understanding and ease the inter-
ethnic tensions that had emerged in Indonesia (Loven, 2008: 45). The increase in 

118	
Language and Superdiversity
regional television stations was facilitated by a new broadcasting bill (No. 32/2002, 
Article 36, point 2) that stipulated that 60 percent of television broadcasts should 
be local (Rachmah, 2008: 97). By 2004, there were sixty private local stations, and a 
further fifty-three had filed applications to start broadcasting (Rachmah, 2006: 42).
As with the content found in the broadcasts of the mid-to-late 1990s, some 
of the language used was local, again helping to reproduce the idea that language 
was emblematic of ethnicity and region. For example, Rachmah (2006: 82), Yuyun 
Surya (2006), and Moriyama (2005) report that news programs were broadcast in 
a local language, and Ida reports of soap operas being dubbed in a local language 
rather than Indonesian. Barkin (2008) points out that travel shows became increas-
ingly popular from 2000 onward. A common theme from the producers’ perspec-
tive was the need to have a focus on “exoticism” as a way of highlighting differences 
between the viewer and the travel location. In some cases, this involved asking 
locals to put on “authentic” clothes (Barkin, 2008). As with the commoditization 
of ethnicity that had been occurring in the 1990s, this practice linked region, cloth-
ing, and social practice. Similarly, among the many different genres of soap operas, 
comedies often exploited ethnic differences (Rachmah, 2006: 67–68). As we shall 
see in ­chapters 5 and 6, these comedies also continued the practice of representing 
the local through the use of fragments of local languages. Even so, in ­chapter 6, we 
will also see a number of examples that index ethnic difference while showing that 
doing unity in diversity doesn’t necessarily mean a need to use Indonesian.
At the same time, concern for market share continued to influence content 
in ways different from the 1990s. For example, Rachmah (2006: 43–44) notes that 
television station managers’ rhetoric relating to having varied programming that 
catered to a heterogeneous market did not match their actual practices. Instead, 
“sell-well” programs were imitated by other television stations producing homo-
geneous programming. This practice, the fact that one production house produced 
80 percent of local soap operas, and patterns of media ownership that had three sta-
tions owned by one company often led to very similar content across several televi-
sion stations at various times of the day and week (Rachmah, 2006: 51–58, 101–102). 
In ­chapter 5, we will see that trends toward homogeneous programming seemed to 
continue into 2009 when we look at the content of eleven television stations.
During the mid-to-late 2000s, media news reports also helped to recirculate 
ideologies about ethnicity. For example, between 2006 and 2008, the introduction 
of anti-pornography legislation attracted much controversy because of fears that it 
would criminalize expressions of local ethnicity while authorizing Islamic-influenced 
dress codes (Bush, 2008: 178). Controversy surrounding Inul, a female dangdut singer, 
whose onstage moves offended various Islamic groups and older famous male dang-
dut singers, also ended up creating regional rivalries (Heryanto, 2008: 23). In particu-
lar, after being involved in a demonstration against new anti-pornography legislation, 
one Jakarta-based group purporting to also be Betawi (Forum Betawi Rempug) went 
to Inul’s business address and residence to intimidate her and demand that she leave 
Jakarta. Her supporters in East Java responded by threatening to force Betawi living 
in Surabaya to leave (Heryanto, 2008: 23).

	
Ethnicity during a Decade of Political Reform and Decentralization	
119
The rise of regionalism and decentralization also had other less dramatic, yet 
important effects on the circulation of people and ideas. Mietzner (2009: 139) notes 
that the election campaign for governor in North Sulawesi was in part run on can-
didates’ credentials for being good conflict mediators who were well positioned to 
handle the ethnic and religious heterogeneity in the province. In Irian Jaya/Papua, 
decentralization had brought with it increases in spending on infrastructure, includ-
ing bureaucracies, schools, and hospitals (McGibbon, 2003:  201). Although these 
bureaucracies were local and often locally staffed, there were still many cases of inter-
action across differences. For example, while during the New Order period, medically 
trained midwives often came from Java or from the big cities, in the decentralized 
period, midwives came from small cities in the outer islands. These midwives were 
transferred to other areas within their districts (Alesich, 2008). Often, these transfers 
were to districts where the language was different and where establishing trusting rela-
tionships required some knowledge of local practices (Alesich, 2008). The midwives 
were transferred every five years and, in many ways, they can be held up as exemplars 
of multicultural and multilingual Indonesians living in and creating superdiversity.
Thus far, I have covered just a few of the most obvious social domains where 
ideas about ethnic stereotypes can be recirculated. Notably, I haven’t spent any 
time on the role of the Internet. This is so because scholarship on the Internet 
has not been able to keep abreast of the many ongoing changes. Here, I will just 
sketch out a few of these changes. During my fieldwork in the mid-1990s, this 
technology was primarily used by a small number of affluent urban Indonesians 
who had fixed telephone lines in their homes. Hill and Sen (2005: 56) point out 
that even in 2000, only 3.6 percent of Indonesia’s population had phone lines, and 
of the seven-and-a-half million telephones, nearly half were in Jakarta, with few 
in rural areas and places outside of Java. With the emergence of Internet cafes in 
the late 1990s, access to the Internet became less reliant upon fixed phone lines 
and increasingly affordable to a wider section of society (Hill & Sen, 2005).
By 2009, the burgeoning urban mobile phone usage that was evident dur-
ing my 2004 fieldwork in Semarang (Central Java) had also become common in 
rural West Java. Some phone companies even offered access to the Internet via 
these mobiles, although at a price that could be afforded only by affluent people 
in these rural areas. By 2009, there were magazine and television advertisements 
for phones and phone services that offered direct access to the Internet, although 
these goods and services seemed primarily aimed at those living in Jakarta. By 
2012, youths in rural West Java also had access to the Internet via their mobile 
phones. They, like their urban contemporaries, thus also became potential pro-
ducers and consumers of ethnic stereotypes in multiple emergent social domains, 
such as celebrity fan sites of the type exemplified in extract 4.5.1.
Extract 4.5.1 presents an example of one such domain. It is taken from a section 
on entertainment from the forum Lautan Indonesia (Indonesian Seas). This forum 
had a total of ten brief posts about the soap opera Jiran, which we will be introduced 
to in section 5.4. Extract 4.5.1 is the fourth commentary made on August 11, 2009. 
The commentaries that precede it were all made on August 10. Those making the 

120	
Language and Superdiversity
posts discussed their excitement and anticipation upon seeing the trailer; one joked 
about Titi Kamal who plays the main character as crying a bucketful of tears in the 
first ten minutes while pondering what type of dance other characters were doing 
in a particular scene. Another applauded the setting, which was also in Malaysia, 
while pondering whether it might attract protests from Malaysians.
Extract 4.5.1  Celebrity fans posting on representations of ethnicity
Patzzi
  1
  2
  3
seru episode pertama..jiran logatnya sunda 
abis . . . tikam meski perannya mewek n 
teraniaya tapi bisa beda dari muslimah
The first episode was exciting. 
Jiran has a very Sundanese 
accent. As usual, Titi 
Kamal’s role is a sobbing 
and tortured one, but it can 
be differentiated from her 
other role as Muslimah [in 
the soap titled Muslimah].
Meme koe
  4
  5
  6
  7
  8
  9
10
11
12
13
^gua sempat nonton sbntar . . . scene merit 
tokoh yg diperankan Titi & Didi disaksikan  
cowo yg suaminya tokoh yg diprenkan Titi  
trus scene Didi ketuk pintu kamar titi minta  
siap2 ke mau plg ke kampungnya 
(Malaysia ya??).
Iya oatzz . . . logatnya titi sunda bgt
btw, nama peran titi di sini apa?? 
hehehe . . . good luck buat sinetron Jiran. 
[original text]
I had a chance to watch for a 
while. The marriage scene 
where the people played 
by Titi and Didi were wit-
nessed by the husband of 
the actress played by Titi. 
And the scene [when] Didi 
knocked on Titi’s door and 
asked if [she] was ready to 
go home to his home (in 
Malaysia, right??)
Iya???. Titi’s accent is very 
Sundanese. By the way, what 
is the name of the charac-
ter played by Titi? Hehehe. 
Good luck for the soap 
Jiran.
Source: www.lautanindonesia.com/forum/index.php?topic=43128.50.  
Accessed on January 31, 2012.
In this Internet domain, it is representations of an ethnic stereotype by a particular 
actor that attracts commentary while also recirculating emblems of ethnicity, in this 
case, accent. In lines 1 and 2, Pattzi positively evaluates Jiran’s Sundanese accent. 
This post by Pattzi gets a response from Meme koe some two hours later on the 

	
Ethnicity during a Decade of Political Reform and Decentralization	
121
same day (lines 4–12). This response is also positive and ratifies Pattzi’s comment 
about Jiran’s Sundanese ability (line 10). In another commentary (extract 4.5.2), it 
is the Sundanese-ness of the soap as a whole, rather than the language practices of 
a particular actor, that appear to be evaluated. This commentary titled Sinetron 
Jiran Hina Orang Sunda (The soap Jiran denigrates Sundanese) was posted on 
a magazine-like blog spot jurnalbogor (Bogor Journal) on September 4, 2009, by 
Jayadi (electronic identity) and apparently authored by Kosasih Kadra (line 26).
Extract 4.5.2  Blogging and complaining about ethnic representations
  1
  2
  3
  4
  5
  6
  7
  8
  9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
Saya sangat prihatin ketika mengamati 
tayangan sinetron JIRAN di Indosiar, 
dimana pemain utamanya adalah Jiran dan 
Pendi yang di simbolkan sebagai orang 
Sunda yang digambarkan sangat bodoh, 
dungu dan nyaris tanpa moral. Mem-blow 
up karakter seperti itu sah-sah saja sebagai 
arena hiburan.
Tapi yang sangat disayangkan adalah 
adanya upaya penistaan dan pendiskreditan 
terhada etnis Pasundan yang begitu 
menonjol.
Terusterang saya sebagai orang Sunda 
merasa tidak nyaman dan menganggap hal 
tersebut sebagai pelecehan. Dan tentu saja 
kita berharap hendaknya para produser 
tidak hanya berorientasi hiburan dan rating 
atau prof it semata, tetapi juga 
pertimbangkan perasaan, kultur dan budaya 
Sunda secara adil dan proporsional. 
Pertimbangkanlah perasaan kami warga 
Pasundan atau etnis manapun yang 
dijadikan obyek cerita. Lebîh arif lagi 
apabila tayangan tersebut dihentikan dan 
direvisi. [original text]
Kosasih Kadra
I was very concerned when 
I was looking at the soap Jiran 
on Indosiar where the main 
actors, Jiran and Pendi, are 
represented as Sundanese who 
are very backward, idiotic and 
almost without any morals. To 
exaggerate characters is fine in 
the entertainment arena.
But what is very unfortunate 
are the efforts to denigrate and 
discredit Sundanese, which is 
very obvious.
To be frank, as a Sundanese 
myself I feel uncomfortable 
and consider this matter as an 
insult. And indeed we hope 
that the producer doesn’t only 
focus on entertainment and 
profit, but also a consideration 
of the Sundanese sensitivi-
ties  and culture in a fair and 
proportional way.
 Please consider our feeling as 
Sundanese or in fact any other 
ethnicity that becomes the 
focus of a story. It would be 
even better if you stop this soap 
and revise it. 
Kosasih Kadra
Source: http://www.jurnalbogor.com/?p=50136.  
Accessed on January 31, 2012.

122	
Language and Superdiversity
In extract 4.5.2, it is the social traits of the characters that attract commentary. 
This commentary is from someone who self-identifies as a Sundanese (line 13) and 
then as a member of a community of Sundanese social types (lines 21 and 22). The 
commentary focuses upon a number of related issues. The first relates to the neg-
ative representation of Sundanese intelligence and morality (lines 4–6). Second, 
the author sees these representations as a direct attempt to denigrate those of 
Sundanese ethnicity (lines 10–12). This idea of a community of Sundanese social 
types is further solidified through their membership in a wider community of eth-
nic social types (lines 21 and 22). While there is no mention of episodes or specific 
language and social practices, with reference to the first episode (see section 5.4), 
we can guess that these impressions relate to a number of indexical associations. 
For example, in the first episode, we were introduced to Jiran’s husband who 
had a propensity to drink, gamble, associate with thugs, and eventually sell his 
wife. All of these characters were represented as speaking a medium other than 
Indonesian. The speech was associated with Sundanese provenance through a 
number of mechanisms, including the speaking of subtitled language by multiple 
characters living, working, and socializing in the same area and a number of cars 
with license plates that point to a setting in and around the city of Bandung in 
West Java, and finally to a character’s reference to Jiran as Sundanese.
In closing this section, we can say that many of the stereotypes, social domains, 
and representation practices described in section 2.8 and ­chapter 3 were also pres-
ent in the period from 1999 onward. On the one hand, decentralization has clearly 
helped to strengthen associations among region, language, and ethnicity in some 
places, especially in the broad area of language education. In some cases, televi-
sion news broadcasts, which in New Order Indonesia were in Indonesian, can now 
also be found in regional languages, and ethnic comedies are still a popular form 
of television entertainment. Political discourses too often indirectly or directly 
point to the existence of ethnic social types, thus reproducing this category of 
personhood. In short, in some places, the revaluing of local ethnic languages had 
gained powerful institutional support and the one-to-many participation frame-
works characteristic of such institutions represented new centers of normativity. 
In turn, the existence of these new and emergent centers helped to reconfigure 
hierarchical relations between Indonesian and ethnic languages.
4.6  Conclusion
As many Indonesianists have pointed out, the period from 1999 onward was one 
of major change. During this period, ideologies of ethnicity continued to cir-
culate in one-to-many participation frameworks and one-to-few participation 
frameworks. Ideologies that linked languages with regions were recirculated via 
schools (Arps, 2010), the media, and government artifacts such as census forms 
that now included ethnic categories (Suryadinata, Arifin, & Ananta, 2003). 
 

	
Ethnicity during a Decade of Political Reform and Decentralization	
123
During this period, the social value of ethnicity along with ethnic languages 
underwent some major semiotic reconfiguration in the wake of major social, 
political, and economic changes. In many areas of the archipelago, negative 
traits were increasingly indexed with ethnicity (especially those who were seen 
as migrants), the ideology of ethnicity as a particular social category became 
strongly (re)linked to region, and new centers of normativity emerged that helped 
to contest and reconfigure older orders of indexicality.
In exploring the genesis of what amounted to the criminalization of certain 
ethnic groups, in section 4.2, I started by looking at state developmentist policies 
of the New Order period. These policies directly contributed to massive influxes 
of outsiders over a short period of time to the islands outside of Java. These out-
siders were primarily economic migrants, transmigrants, administrators, police, 
and military personnel. I pointed out that such rapid increases in the visibility 
of outsiders were one of the preconditions for the construction of social types 
with negative characteristics. These tensions were primarily local and some-
times emerged through face-to-face interactions or altercations between locals 
and outsiders. In this sense, the circulation of negative associations with certain 
identities was primarily local and small scale, typically circulating in one-to-few 
participation frameworks.
While tensions between locals and migrants were initially locale-specific, 
their co-occurrence with an ongoing currency crisis, rapid political change, 
decentralization, tradition revivalist movements, and increasing media coverage 
about rights and entitlement assisted in the mapping of deviance onto migrants 
more generally (section 4.3). One serious consequence of this process was some 
of the worst cases of communal violence and population displacement seen in 
Indonesian since the mid-1960s. In section 4.4, I described how this population 
displacement and military involvement across the archipelago created many new 
social domains for encounters with difference and the generation of stories about 
such encounters. Such encounters occurred in refugee camps and in interac-
tions among military personnel, aid workers, locals, and refugees. During this 
time, there was also a large increase in the mediatization of conflicts involving 
those of different ethnic backgrounds, at both the local and national levels. In 
a real sense, and as with earlier times, registers associated with ethnicity were 
now regaining negative associations not just in the regions but also in Java where 
there were almost daily newspapers reports of violence perpetrated by one ethnic 
group against another.
In the final section (4.5), I pointed out that in a number of regions in Indonesia, 
decentralization has also clearly helped to strengthen associations among region, 
language, and ethnic social type while reconfiguring existing orders of indexical-
ity. As in the past, one-to-many participation frameworks, such as school class-
rooms, television, and radio, all assisted this process, which also helped to revalue 
ethnic languages vis-à-vis Indonesian. Ethnic comedies that had their beginnings 
in the early 1990s continued past representation practices and continued to be 

124	
Language and Superdiversity
broadcast on a national scale, as we will see in ­chapters 5 and 6. In particular, 
we shall see that there were representations of ethnic social types speaking eth-
nic languages, as well as hybrid social types who engaged in knowledging more 
generally.
In relating ­chapter 4 to discussions about superdiversity, what seems strik-
ing is that while superdiversity was primarily a benign and unintended outcome 
of processes of massification during the New Order period, it also helped set 
the scene for the creation of even more diversity. As economic and political con-
ditions deteriorated, areas with large populations of migrants became plagued 
by interethnic conflict resulting in the displacement of millions of Indonesians 
throughout the archipelago. In doing so, diversity was layered upon diversity, 
especially in cities receiving refugees. At the same time, this situation set the 
scene for the creation of further diversity and further cycles of displacement. For 
example, locals often unjustly blamed refugees for local crime and forced them 
to relocate yet again.

125
5
The Anchoring of Alternation to Place
5.1  Introduction
In this chapter, I  start to examine some of the 400 hours of television that 
I recorded in 2009. Drawing on the theoretical orientations laid out in ­chapters 2 
and 3, I highlight how representation practices in this television footage have 
continuities with past practices. In particular, I focus on the tension between 
how these representations help to naturalize language alternation on the one 
hand, while continuing to “anchor” (Irvine, 2005) this alternation to locale. 
In so doing, this practice recirculates older ideas about ethnic social types, 
their language practices, and their links to place. In effect, these practices have 
reproduced while also altering some of the signs found in semiotic registers 
from the past. While I point out that this recirculation occurred across a num-
ber of genres including soap operas, variety shows, on-the-spot news reports, 
and commercials, I focus primarily on news reports, children’s shows, and soap 
operas.
What is striking about this data is that this alternation was represented 
as habitual across many genres, time slots, and television stations. Although 
this represents a continuity with the practices described in ­chapter  3, the 
increase in genres containing alternation produces multiple centers of norma-
tivity that challenge and reconfigure existing orders of indexicality. The rep-
resentation of habitual alternation also offers a different case of the type of 
alternation found in accounts elsewhere in the world. For example, where tele-
vision representations are concerned, alternation typically occurs in liminal 
or spectacular moments (e.g., Androutsopoulos, 2007; Jaffe, 2000; Johnson 
& Ensslin, 2007b; Johnson & Milani, 2010; Kelly-Holmes & Atkinson, 2007; 
LeCompte & Schensul, 1999). Just as important, the mixing in my data offers 
a different case from other cases where multilingual practices are ideologized 
in institutions. This is so because what is typically found in institutional ide-
ologies about multilingualism is the idea that it equals talk being carried out 
in two or more neatly bounded languages, where one utterance is one lan-
guage and the next utterance is another, rather than one utterance containing 
 
 

126	
Language and Superdiversity
fragments from multiple languages (e.g., Creese & Blackledge, 2011; Heller, 
2007; Moyer, 2011).
More specifically, in section 5.2, I introduce the data gathered while point-
ing out that in all of the eleven television stations, recorded alternation between 
Indonesian and other mediums could be found on any day of the week and in 
any time slot. In section 5.3, I turn to news reports and children’s variety shows 
that contained unscripted dialogue that was framed in a way that fits ideas about 
reported speech. I start by showing how this reported speech is characterized by 
alternation. Participants do not make commentaries about each other’s alterna-
tions, nor do they engage in medium repair. This suggests a type of habitualness 
that is further foregrounded through the existence of a community of speakers 
engaging in similar alternation practices. I argue that while these representation 
practices helped to naturalize alternation, paradoxically, the use of linguistic 
signs that anchored them to place also reproduced older place-based language 
ideologies.
The signs that helped to anchor this alternation to place included explicit 
commentary by a narrator or newsreader, subtitle-like text, the use of maps, 
subtitles, communities of speakers using similar mediums in a particular set-
ting, the explicit naming of a language, and the use of other signs of place 
(e.g., car license plates). These other signs that help anchor linguistic signs to 
place can be viewed as metapragmatic commentaries (Jaworski, Coupland, & 
Galasiński, 2004; Johnson & Ensslin, 2007a) or, more accurately, “metasemi-
otic commentaries” (Agha, 2007a) about the linguistic forms being used, the 
choice of the latter term being motivated by the multimodal nature of these 
commentaries.
In section 5.4, I point out alternation practices similar to those described in 
section 5.3. With reference to other represented signs, I argue that this alterna-
tion is represented as part of more habitual social relations between characters. 
These other represented signs include subtitling practices and the presence of 
a community of speakers who apparently share the same ways of speaking. As 
with the conclusions reached in relation to televised talk in section 5.3, I point 
out that these soaps help naturalize alternation while assisting in the reproduc-
tion of older associations between medium and place. I also point out that there 
are instances when the use of fragments from different mediums is much less 
than what is found in the subtitled cases. I differentiate these cases (extracts 
5.4.2 and 5.4.3) by referring to them as “stylized alternation.” In the concluding 
section, I point out that while the type of analysis I carry out in this chapter is 
different from the one used in ­chapter 3, it represents a move toward foreground-
ing the importance of engaging with ideas about semiotic registers versus ideas 
of language (Agha, 2007a, 2007b). In doing so, I model a method for examining 
such ideas in practice. For the case at hand, I suggest that this type of minimal 
multimodal analysis can assist in teasing out the tensions and multiple messages 
inherent in any representation (Johnstone, 2011).

	
The Anchoring of Alternation to Place	
127
AUGUST 2009
Sun
Mon
Tue
Wed
Thur
Fri
Sat
1
2
3
4
5
TRANS7 
10am–1am 
1.75 hours
6
TRANS7 
5am–1am 
1.3 hours
7
TRANS7 
6am–1am 
2.8 hours
8
TRANS 
5am–1am 
1.1 hours
9
RCTV
10am–12pm
2.5 hours
10
RCTI 
6am–1am 
2.5 hours
11
RCTI 
6am–1am 
3.25 hours
12
RCTI 
5am–1am 
3.4 hours
13
GlobalTV 
6am–1am 
2 hours
14
GlobalTV 
5am–1am 
3.8 hours
15
SCTV 
6am–1am 
2.1 hours
16
ANTV 
8pm–1am 
1 hour
17
ANTV 
5am–1am 
0.75 hour
18
SCTV 
3am–1am 
0.9 hour
19
Indosiar 
6am–1am 
1.9 hours
20
Indosiar 
5am–1am 
2 hours
21
TransTV 
6am–1am 
2 hours
22
TransTV 
3am–1am 
5 hours
23
TVOne 
4pm–1am 
2 hours
24
TVOne 
5am–4pm
0.5 hours
25
TPI 
4am–1am 
3.75 hours
26
27
28
29
30
31
DIAGRAM 5.2.1  Television stations recorded and medium representations in 2009
5.2  The Data
My data consists of around 400 hours of recordings that were made in August 
2009 in Cirebon, West Java. These television broadcast recordings covered a sam-
ple of eleven of the twelve television stations that were broadcasting at the time. 
Of these eleven stations, one was local (RCTV), while the rest were Jakarta-based 
commercial broadcasters. I recorded each station for a minimum of a day, and 
often up to four days when broadcast reception was good. These recordings were 
made starting at around five in the morning and usually finishing at one the fol-
lowing morning. Thus, while what I present here is not a perfect sample, nev-
ertheless, it does provide enough data to point out some patterns of broadcast 
content and representational practices.
Diagram 5.2.1 provides a calendar-type summary of which television broad-
casts were recorded, along with information on when they were recorded and how 
much content contained linguistic fragments that are stereotypically associated with 
regional languages (in italics), which I have been referring to as “medium” in previ-
ous chapters. In the fifteen-hour period between 10 a.m. and 1 a.m. on August 5th, 
I identified around 1.75 hours of talk that contained alternation between Indonesian 
and fragments of regional languages. As can be seen in this diagram, the representa-
tion of these mediums was common on any day of the week. While some material, 
such as on-the-spot interviews found in news timeslots, contained whole utterances in 
 

128	
Language and Superdiversity
these mediums, typically, the soap operas, variety shows, and commercials only con-
tained a couple of fragments, usually kin terms or short utterances. When compared 
with Kitley’s (2000) reports of language use in the early days of Indonesian televi-
sion (i.e., when Indonesian was the primary language found in such representations; 
section 3.3), we can see a clear move away from the use of Indonesian on television. 
In addition, ethnic comedies are no longer the sole genre that represents language 
alternation, as was the case in the 1990s (sections 3.4–3.7). In ­chapter 4, I noted that a 
reconfiguration of older orders of indexicality was underway, and the data I present 
in this chapter provides some linguistic evidence of this reconfiguration.
As I moved through these recordings, it was also evident that while this 
type of material could be found in almost any timeslot between five in the morn-
ing and one the next morning, the representation of alternation as the medium 
was most common in the timeslots between 7–11 a.m., 12–3 p.m., and 5–11 p.m. 
As can be seen from diagram 5.2.1, programming containing these mediums 
was more common on some stations and on particular days. For example, on 
Friday, GlobalTV had the most representations of these mediums. This was 
perhaps because Friday was imagined to be a day with a potentially larger audi-
ence as it was a short working day for many of Indonesia’s majority Moslem 
population.
As with data in ­chapter 3, my initial classification of linguistic sign repre-
sentations was carried out by an Indonesian research assistant. I checked these 
classifications drawing upon my knowledge of Indonesian and other mediums 
gained through fieldwork and other visits to Central and West Java since the early 
1990s. However, as pointed out in section 3.4, there are a number of factors that 
complicate this categorization. For example, I pointed out that Indonesian words 
have been adopted from what has been labeled “Javanese” and “Sundanese,” and 
the reverse is also true. Indonesian also shares word-order and affixation patterns 
with many of these mediums, especially Javanese and Sundanese. Similarly, as 
found in sections 3.5–3.7, kin terms and pronouns from these mediums are often 
found in otherwise Indonesian utterances, as are question words, demonstra-
tives, and particles used to indicate affective stance. In the rest of this chapter, 
I will engage with these problems using a minimal type of multimodal analysis 
of televised talk.
5.3  Anchoring Medium to Locale
In this section, I focus on children’s shows and news broadcasts. I show how rep-
resentation practices help anchor medium to place, which in turn reproduces the 
idea of language as emblematic of ethnicity. Some of the mechanisms that facili-
tate this anchoring are explicit commentaries about place by a narrator or news-
reader, the use of subtitle-like texts that state place, the use of maps, the subtitling 
of talk, and the presence of a community of speakers whose speech also requires 
 

	
The Anchoring of Alternation to Place	
129
subtitles. The representational practices also help frame this talk as a type of 
reported speech, although typically this is a report of the actual talk, rather than 
a report that constructs talk, as found in analysis of reported talk elsewhere (Holt 
& Clift, 2007; Tannen, 1989).
The first extracts and figures I look at are drawn from a couple of children’s 
shows, Cita-Citaku (My Dreams, extract 5.3.1) and Si Bolang Bocah Petualang 
(Bolang the Adventurous Child, extract 5.3.2). These shows were screened in the 
1 p.m.–3 p.m. slot on Trans7. During the three days from which I have footage, there 
were seven different stories that were anchored to Ohoidertawun in Maluku, Bogor 
and Sumadang in West Java, and Semarang and Bantul in Central Java. There were 
a number of mechanisms that helped anchor the story and linguistic signs to a par-
ticular region, including explicit mention by the child of where they were or through 
the presentation of a map of Indonesia that pinpointed where the story occurred. 
After these initial anchoring processes, the stories are then typically narrated by 
a child in Indonesian. This practice contrasts with interactions between groups of 
local children or local children and local adults, which are carried out in a local 
medium. These conversations are either accompanied by subtitles or translated by 
the narrator.
At the start of extract 5.3.1, the narrator Bambang is shown lying down on 
the front porch of his house while drawing. As with my earlier transcripts, my 
initial classification relies on my own judgments, those of my research assistant, 
and sometimes a number of dictionaries. (This same caveat applies to all other 
transcripts in this chapter and the next.)
Extract 5.3.1  Anchoring medium through story introduction
Bambang
1
2
3
4
5
aku sedang melukis pemandangan di 
desaku (0.8) oh ya . namaku bambang (0.8) 
lengkapnya . bambang nuriswanto (0.4)
saat ini . aku duduk di kelas enam . sd jati 
sari . semarang jawa tengah
I’m drawing the scenery in my 
village, oh yes, my name is 
Bambang, [my] full name [is] 
Bambang Nuriswanto. At the 
moment I’m in Grade 6 at the 
Jati Sari Primary School in 
Semarang, Central Java.
Source: Trans7, Cita-citaku, Thursday, August 6, 2009 (2–3 p.m.)
As can be seen in extract 5.3.1, the narrator Bambang anchors the story and 
interactions within it to place by naming where he goes to school:  “Jati Sari 
Primary School in Semarang, Central Java” (lines 4–5). This narration, which is 
in Indonesian (plain font), is contrasted with interaction between Bambang and 
his friend Eko, who is introduced as a local via reference to him attending the 
same school as Bambang (line 9 in extract 5.3.2). The talk in extract 5.3.2 occurs 
immediately after the talk in extract 5.3.1.

130	
Language and Superdiversity
Extract 5.3.2  Interacting with locals and codeswitching
Eko
  6 he bang .
Hi Bang (shortened form of 
Bambang).
Bambang
  7 hou .
Hi.
Eko
  8 RENÉ ko .
COME HERE Ko (short-
ened form of name, Eko).
Bambang
  9 eh. itu kan eko . teman sekolahku .
He, that [person] you know, 
is Eko my school friend.
Eko
10 lagi OPO KOWÉ =
WHAT ARE YOU DOING 
at the moment?
Bambang
11                                = nggambar =
Drawing.
Eko
12
13
                                                     = nggambar 
OPO =
WHAT ARE YOU drawing?
Bambang
14            = nggambar OPO KI =
WHAT AM [I]‌ drawing?
Eko
15
16
17
                                                 = KOWÉ
WIS DIENTENI eki BAI wili . NING 
lapangan
Wili AND Eki [are] 
WAITING FOR YOU  
AT the field.
Source: Trans7, Cita-citaku, Thursday, August 6, 2009 (2–3 p.m.)
In extract 5.3.2, the two friends are interacting in a local medium, in this case, a 
local Javanese medium (bold caps). This localness is signaled through the use of 
subtitles (figure 5.3.1), which point to the talk being in a different medium from 
what has just occurred (e.g., lines 1–5 in extract 5.3.1 and line 9 in extract 5.3.2). 
We can also see that from lines 10 to 17, Bambang and Eko alternate between 
ambiguous forms, that is, forms that can be either classified as Indonesian or 
Javanese (italics) and Javanese. We also see that one participant orients to 
another’s medium choice at each transition-relevance place (TRP) (i.e., they 
ratify this alternation by engaging in alternation themselves). Following con-
versation analysis understandings of TRPs (Liddicoat, 2007), I see these TRPs 
as signaled through the utterance being intonationally complete, complete as 

	
The Anchoring of Alternation to Place	
131
FIGURE 5.3.1  Subtitles as pointing to localness
Source: Trans7, Cita-Citaku, August 6, 2009 (1–2 p.m.)
a social action, and grammatically complete. That change in speaker does not 
occur with medium repair (i.e., a move back to an Indonesian medium) points 
to the habitualness of this type of alternation between these boys. According 
to Gafaranga and Torras (2002), this type of alternation can be classified as 
“alternation as the medium.” This type of alternation can be represented with 
the following pattern (adapted from Auer, 1995):  AB1 AB2 AB1 AB2 where 
the uppercase letters represent a particular medium and the numbers indicate 
speakers 1 and 2.
Alternation as the medium sits in contrast to Bambang’s alternation between 
Indonesian (line 9) and their local medium (which is alternation as the medium). 
This interactional otherness is further indexed by way of its co-occurrence with 
a change in activity type (narration > interaction) and participant constellation 
(Bambang and the audience > Bambang and Eko). This alternation thus seems 
to assist in the signaling of “change in activity type” and “change in participant 
constellation.” Accordingly, the type of alternation on line 9 fits Gafaranga and 
Torras’s (2002) idea of codeswitching, which was characterized in ­chapter 3 as 
A1 A2 B1 A1 A2, where the uppercase letters represent a particular medium and 
the numbers indicate speakers 1 and 2 (adapted from Auer, 1995). Just as impor-
tant, I also suggest that the anchoring to place helps associate the exchange in 
lines 10 onward with a particular place. In doing so, it also adds information 

132	
Language and Superdiversity
about the provenance of the local medium. This metasemiotic commentary 
helps reproduce and set up contrasts between two semiotic registers. The first 
register is made up of ethnicity, a local medium, and local life-worlds, while the 
second is made up of the voice of a reporter who reports about a life-world in 
Indonesian.
The practice of subtitling was common in other children’s programs, includ-
ing Si Bolang Bocah Petualang (Bolang the Adventurous Child), as can be seen in 
figure 5.3.2. As with Cita-Citaku, in Si Bolang Bocah Petualang, all of the stories 
are introduced as being in a particular area. In Si Bolang Bocah Petualang, how-
ever, the narrator is a cartoon character (Bolang). For example, in the first adven-
ture, the cartoon character introduces the first destination as Ohoidertawun 
within the province of Maluku. This is followed by actual children introducing 
themselves in a local medium, as in figure 5.3.2.
The subtitle reads “I’m Puing a kid from Ohoidertawun, [I’m] happy to meet 
you.” (I haven’t produced an extract here as it is in a local medium that neither I nor 
my research assistant is familiar with.) The children in this story are shown engaging 
in fishing and boating. At the end of this first story, a series of maps are shown. Figure 
5.3.3 is of the map before the island of Maluku starts to turn red and then grow. The 
map represented in figure 5.3.3 is then followed by a large shot of the island with the 
cartoon character in a glider superimposed over it with the text “Maluku.”
Bolang is then shown flying across the archipelago to a new place, this time Petir 
Village in the Darmaga district of Bogor, West Java (figure 5.3.4). There are then a 
number of shots of a rural setting that are accompanied by a type of flute music 
that is commonly associated with West Java and Sundanese personhood (similar 
in many ways to the types of music found in the Si Kabayan series discussed in 
­chapter 3). Bolang then introduces the place and a new set of children, who are again 
shown interacting in a local medium while catching birds and playing tug-of-war in 
an agricultural land. Many of these exchanges are also accompanied by subtitles.
In all of the children’s’ shows discussed thus far, a further mechanism that 
helps reproduce associations between linguistic signs and place is the movement 
from one story to the next. Often, each story occurs in a different part of Indonesia 
FIGURE 5.3.2  Subtitling localness
Source: Trans7, Si Bolang Bocah Petualang,  
August 6, 2009 (1–2 p.m.)

	
The Anchoring of Alternation to Place	
133
and is inhabited by local medium-speaking Indonesians whose mediums are dif-
ferent from one setting to the next, as are the social practices engaged in by each 
group of children. These contrasts thus also help to indirectly reproduce ideas 
that these local mediums are also spoken by local social types from a particular 
region. The mechanisms described so far for anchoring linguistic signs to place 
and person could also be found in other genres, such as human interest stories 
and on-the-spot news reports. For example, human interest stories that looked at 
the life of impoverished young and elderly Indonesians often grounded the story 
to place in introductory narratives (which were subtitled), or by highlighting that 
the person had lived in a particular place all of their life. In the series Minta 
Tolong (Asking for Help) (RCTI) and Dengarlah Aku (Listen to Me) (Trans7), 
interviews were subtitled, which also helped to associate this local medium with 
the place where the interaction occurred. Similarly, some news broadcast pro-
grams were entirely in a local medium, as in the case of RCTV Cirebon.
On-the-spot news reports were also another common language practice 
that helped reproduce links between linguistic signs and region. Extract 5.3.3 is 
a report about a public transport minibus that caught fire. This talk occurs after 
shots of a burning public minibus are shown, and the newsreader’s report notes 
that the bus caught fire after breaking down. Here the driver, who appears to 
be in his late fifties or early sixties, is being interviewed by a series of reporters.
FIGURE 5.3.3  Anchoring place through  
the use of a map
Source: Trans7, Si Bolang Bocah Petualang, 
August 6, 2009 (1–2 p.m.)
FIGURE 5.3.4  Anchoring place through  
the use of a map and text
Source: Trans7, Si Bolang Bocah Petualang, 
August 6, 2009 (1–2 p.m.)

134	
Language and Superdiversity
Extract 5.3.3  Sign alternation as the medium and linking medium to ideology
Reporter 1
1
mati TEKO KENÉ pak . mati =
[It] broke down HERE Sir?
Minibus driver
2
                                                    = mati .
[It] broke down [here].
Reporter 2
3
ONO:: . ONO punumpangÉ pak =
WERE THERE, WERE 
THERE passengers, Sir?
Minibus driver
4
5
                                                        = ORA
ONO RA pak =
THERE
WEREN’T, NONE Sir
Reporter 2
6
                         = ORA ONO .
THERE WEREN’T.
Reporter 3
7
OPO pak gara garaNÉ pak =
WHAT Sir WAS THE cause, Sir?
Minibus driver
8
9
                                                = RA ngerti
aku pak . gara garaNÉ IKU mas
I DON’T know Sir, THE cause
Younger Brother.
Source: GlobalTV, Berita Global, Friday, August 14, 2009 (4–5 p.m.)
In starting our analysis, we can see that the talk consists of both ambiguous forms (ital-
ics) and Javanese forms (bold caps). Each participant appears to orient to each other’s 
utterance at each TRP (i.e., they continue to alternate between ambiguous forms and 
Javanese forms rather than change into another medium such as Indonesian). This 
suggests that this alternation is classifiable as alternation as the medium. In this sense, 
alternation as the medium becomes the local medium. As with the previous extracts, 
signs of place not only anchor this local medium to place, but they also suggest the 
provenance of this local medium. For example, the presence of a number of reporters 
who all seem to speak the same medium as the bus driver suggests that they are from 
the same place and are part of the same community of speakers.
Just as important, as with the majority of these types of news story, the story 
is introduced by the newsreader as occurring in a particular place. In the case 
at hand, this is Probolinggo, East Java, which has been historically linked to 
Javanese-speaking social types. The place is again repeated by a text at the bottom 
of the screen that reads “Probolinggo, Jawa Timur” (see figure 5.3.5) followed by 
two more mentions of place by the on-the-spot reporter, first in the introduction to 
the story and second as the reporter signs off. In a sense, alternation is naturalized 
through the existence of a community of speakers who habitually alternate between 
Javanese and ambiguous forms, and through the practice of noting the location of 
an event. At the same time, however, they also seem to help reproduce older ideolo-
gies where language, in this case, fragments of Javanese, is linked to region.

	
The Anchoring of Alternation to Place	
135
In summary, so far we have looked at how linguistic signs are anchored to 
place through a number of practices that are a type of metasemiotic commentary. 
Typically, a number of these practices co-occurred in a way that helped solidify 
the provenance of the local talk. These practices included explicit commentary 
by a narrator, newsreader, or a subtitle-like text, and the use of maps, subtitles, 
and communities of speakers using similar mediums in a particular setting. As 
with many of the examples in ­chapter 3, most of the talk examined here could be 
characterized as alternation as the medium. Participants oriented to this alterna-
tion without engaging in medium repair, and this suggests a type of habitualness 
that was further foregrounded through the existence of a community of speakers 
engaging in similar alternation practices. I suggested that while these representa-
tion practices helped to naturalize alternation, paradoxically, the use of signs that 
anchored linguistic signs to place also reproduced older language-place ideologies. 
The practice of medium alternation and the anchoring of this alternation to place 
were pervasive in other genres, especially soaps. This talk was often scripted or at 
the very least performed, and in the next section, I examine some examples of this.
5.4  Soaps, Stylized Alternation, and Place
As with the 1990s, representations found in a number of the 2009 soap operas also 
reproduced links between linguistic signs and regions. Unlike the subtitled interac-
tions in children’s programs or between reporter and victim in on-the-spot news 
stories, however, typically, these links were less explicit and relied on other modes. 
For example, the use of vehicles and their license plates often anchored the story and 
thus the dialogue to a certain region. On other occasions, this type of sign of place is 
reinforced by the representation of all the cast speaking a local medium or through 
other narrative devices that help establish a character’s background. Typically, and 
in line with Richardson’s (2010) observations about television dramatic dialogue in 
general, these signs are scripted to occur in the early part of the story to help quickly 
create a setting. In this section, I continue to point out the ubiquitous nature of 
FIGURE 5.3.5  Anchoring place through text 
in news reports
Source: GlobalTV, Berita Global, August 14,  
2009 (4–5 p.m.)
 

136	
Language and Superdiversity
representations of medium alternation, while also drawing out the tensions between 
this increasingly common way of representing interaction and older ideologies that 
link linguistic forms to place, person, and a named language. At the same time, 
I want to reiterate some earlier observations by Loven (2008) and Richardson (2010) 
that point out that even within soaps and dramas, the level of scripting and styliza-
tion varies from scene to scene, with actors having a lot of freedom to improvise in 
their performances. In what follows, I start with what appears to be a less scripted 
and stylized performance before contrasting it with more stylized performances.
Extract 5.4.1 is taken from the first episode of the soap Jiran, which was 
produced by Sorayaintercine Films and broadcast on Indosiar. Sundanese is in 
bold, Indonesian is in plain font, and italics indicate ambiguous forms that can be 
classified as either Sundanese or Indonesian. This particular interaction occurs 
at the very start of the episode and is set in a marketplace surrounded by greenery 
and mountains, all of which point to a rural setting. Jiran is working carrying the 
goods of wholesalers and shoppers in the market.
Extract 5.4.1  Soaps, signs of place, and local mediums
Male client 1
  1
atos rapih neng .
[You’re] already done 
Younger Sister?
Jiran
  2
Iya .
Yes.
Male client 1
  3
tah ieu nya (giving Jiran money) (5.0)
Here is [your pay].
Jiran
  4
  5
  6
nuhun (16.0) (while walking towards next
customer who arrives in a van with a D 
number plate visible)
Thanks.
Jiran
  7
akang (0.5) mau dibawakan . barangnya =
Older brother, can I carry 
your goods for you?
Male client 2
  8
  9
10
11
12
                                                                       =
oh tiasa atuh neng tiasa . eh antosan nya 
. yeuh bayaran anu ayeuna neng . (gives 
money) dua rebu . tah ku akang
ditambihan deui sarebu (0.5)
Oh of course [you] can 
Younger Sister, yes [you] 
can. Eh, wait a moment 
OK,  Here is the payment 
for now Younger  Sister, 
two thousand (rupiah). 
Here, Older Brother 
will give you one more 
thousand.

	
The Anchoring of Alternation to Place	
137
Jiran
13
nuhun kang =
Thanks Older Brother.
Male client 2
14
15
16
                     = neng . tong hilaf enjing ka
dieu deui nya . sok atuh angkut barang
barangna . hati hati nya neng nya
Younger sister, don’t forget 
to come back here tomor-
row OK. Please take the 
goods, be careful OK 
Younger Sister OK.
Source: Jiran, Sorayaintercine Films, broadcast on Indosiar
The subtitling of the talk represented in extract 5.4.1 signals that it is not 
Indonesian, as is the rest of the interaction that occurs in the market. If we look 
at the dialogue, we can see that all participants orient to each other’s usage, 
which for clients 1 and 2 is primarily in a Sundanese medium peppered with some 
Indonesian and ambiguous forms. There does not appear to be any medium repair 
(i.e., where participants move from one medium to another). In a sense, this type 
of alternation is represented as habitual, and we can thus characterize it as alter-
nation as the medium. While this representation helps to naturalize alternation, 
as with extract 5.3.3, other signs also help to reproduce older associations between 
linguistic signs and place. In this case, the talk is anchored to region by the pres-
ence of a number of small vans and trucks that have a highly visible “D” preceding 
a series of numbers on their license plates. This prefix is the one used for Bandung, 
located in West Java. The anchoring of this dialogue to region and implicitly to 
Sundanese-ness is also reinforced by the occurrence of other dialogues in this set-
ting that are also subtitled. This suggests a community that speaks the same local 
medium.
As the story continues, other characters are introduced, including Jiran’s 
money- hungry husband, who has a drinking and gambling problem, and his 
friend, who has just returned from working in Malaysia. In their interactions 
and interactions with other locals, they also use Sundanese. However, increas-
ingly, this usage is just fragments stereotypically associated with Sundanese, as 
in extract 5.4.2. In these instances, no subtitles appear. As the story continues, 
we find out that Jiran’s husband is paid to have Jiran marry a wealthy young 
Malaysian sultan on a contract basis. Jiran and her husband go to the city where 
all the cars, motorcycles, and buses have license plates with a “D” prefix, which 
suggests that this part of the story is now set in Bandung, the capital of West 
Java. Any ambiguity about the actual name of the medium is removed (at least 
for those who watch the whole episode) in the last few minutes when a servant 
of the sultan explains to two of his other wives that Jiran addressed them with 
the term Teteh because it is a term of address used in Indonesia, and specifically 
Sundanese for “older sister.” In the episode that I recorded in August 2009,  none 
of the explicit signs found in extract 5.4.1 were present. In this setting, Jiran’s 
husband (Pendi) is at a telephone exchange trying to call Jiran while speaking 

138	
Language and Superdiversity
to himself and to the service officer. As with extract 5.4.1, Sundanese is in bold, 
ambiguous forms are in italics, and Indonesian is in plain font.
Extract 5.4.2  Stylized alternation anchored to Sundanese locales
Pendi
  1
  2
  3
  4
  5
  6
  7
  8
  9
10
11
12
13
eh . gancang atuh subhan di angkat
 teleponna . heeh ini mah darurat . sia teh 
jeung noan tidak angkat telepon . aing teh 
lagi butuh uang untuk kimoterapi si putri 
(dials another telephone number)(12.0)
ah sarua waé . sengaja apa si subhan teh 
(1.0) tidak mau angkat telepon dari urang 
(3.0)
ah si brengsek mah si subhan . si jiran
mah sama waé (2.0) di sini mah lagi perlu 
uang banyak buat bayar kimoterapi si putri .
belum buat makan . belum buat kartu uh 
(slams down telephone) (3.0)
Eh. quickly come on Subhan 
pick up the phone. Heeh, 
this is an emergency right 
here right now. What are you 
doing, [you] aren’t picking up 
the phone. Here I am really 
needing money for Putri’s 
chemotherapy.
Ah it’s just the same [no 
answer], are you doing it 
on purpose Subhan, [you] 
don’t want to answer a call 
from me.
Ah that Subhan is an idiot. 
That Jiran is also the same. 
Here [I]‌ need a lot of money 
to pay for Putri’s chemo-
therapy, not to mention 
food, not to mention playing 
cards.
Telephone booth attendant
14
15
(stands up) atuh kang . jangan di banting 
banting teleponnya .
Gee Older Brother, don’t slam 
the phone.
Pendi
16
17
ieu mah telepon blegug. teu bisa
nyambung nyambung .
This telephone sucks, it 
doesn’t ever connect.
Telephone booth attendant
18
19
20
telepon sananya yang blegug . telepon sini 
teh . bener semua . ini telepon baru semua 
akang . huh dasar
It’s the receiving telephone 
that sucks, the phones here 
are really good, they are all 
new Older Brother, huh fool.
Source: Jiran, Sorayaintercine Films, broadcast on Indosiar, Thursday,  
August 20, 2009 (7–8 p.m.)

	
The Anchoring of Alternation to Place	
139
As with the talk in extracts 5.3.2 to 5.3.5, there is a lot of medium alternation, 
although this time, the amount of Sundanese is much less than in the first episode 
(see extract 5.4.1). Both participants orient to this type of alternation and there is no 
medium repair, which implies that this alternation is habitual and thus can also be 
classified as alternation as the medium. As with the other representations we have 
looked at, there is also a broad range of word classes, many of which have Indonesian 
cognates and most of which neatly fit the word order found in Indonesian talk. For 
example, there are affective particles (atuh), focus/emphasis particles (mah, teh), 
terms of address (akang and the shortened form kang, “older brother”), terms for 
self (aing and urang, “I”) and other references (sia, “you”), modifiers (waé, “just”), 
negators ([hen]teu, “no”), question words (naon, “what”), conjunctions (jeung, 
“with”), and adjectives (gancang, “quickly” and blegug, “sucks”).
Unlike the talk represented in extract 5.4.1, no subtitles accompany this 
talk. This talk and setting are contrasted with the prior Malaysian setting pri-
marily by way of participants being involved (e.g., Jiran, the sultan, his other 
wives, and servants) and the subtitles that go with the dialogue that is repre-
sented as occurring in Malaysia (and contains Malay and English mediums). 
In a sense, the medium being used in the telephone booth is anchored to place 
by a movement to a rural setting together with the movement from subtitled to 
no subtitles. When the alternation in extract 5.4.2 is analyzed in light of these 
contrasts, it seems that this type of representation is part of the producer’s tool-
kit for quickly providing a change in geographic setting and participant back-
grounds. When compared with the talk of clients 1 and 2 in extract 5.4.1, this 
talk seems much more stylized insofar as it assumes that the use of fragments 
or “just enough” (Blommaert & Varis, 2011) linguistic forms will be sufficient 
to invoke a change in place. In a sense, we are also getting a glimpse of the pro-
ducer’s and actors’ perception of their imagined audience’s ability to engage in 
knowledging. In other words, and in line with Bell and Gibson’s (2011) work, 
we can suggest that the success of such stylized alternation is dependent on the 
imagined audience’s knowledge of the “voices” (Hill, 1995) of widely circulating 
Sundanese stereotypes.
The occurrence of stylized alternation was very common in the Indonesian 
television soaps that I  recorded in August 2009. Over the three-week period, 
there were the following soaps that had these types of representation: dramas 
set in Indonesian and Malaysia: Tangisan Isabela (Isabela’s Tears) and Amira [a 
woman’s name] (Indosiar) and Maharani [a woman’s name] (TPI); the comedy 
Suami-Suami Takut Istri (Husbands Afraid of Their Wives) (TransTV); the dra-
mas Bunda (Mother) and Dimas dan Raka [two men’s names] (TPI) and Inayah [a 
woman’s name] (Indosiar). Extract 5.4.3 represents one more example of stylized 
alternation, although there are even fewer local fragments.
This extract is taken from the soap Inayah produced by Sorayaintercine 
Films and broadcast on Indosiar. The story revolves around the main character 
Kadjeng Doso, his many wives, and the family intrigues that occur as some of his 

140	
Language and Superdiversity
wives attempt to get their hands on his gold. In this clip, one of the wives, Shinta, 
and her brother Tedi have just located Kadjeng Doso’s treasure, which they plan 
to steal.
Extract 5.4.3  Stylized alternation anchored to Javanese locales
Shinta
1
ayo . fotoin dulu sama emas emas IKI =
Come on, photograph me 
with THIS gold.
Tedi
2
3
                                                                  = oh 
IYO . kenang kenangan YO mbak =
Oh YES, a souvenir YES 
Older Sister.
Shinta
3
                                                            = IYO
YES.
Source: Inayah, Sorayaintercine Films, broadcast on Indosiar,  
Wednesday, August 19, 2009 (8–9 p.m.)
In the above talk, there is no medium repair (i.e., both participants orient to 
each other’s alternation between Javanese forms [bold caps] and Indonesian ones 
[plain font]). This thus falls into the category of alternation as the medium while 
also suggesting habitualness. This habitualness is reinforced through the actors’ 
usage of alternation as a medium in other settings. As with extract 5.4.1, this epi-
sode also explicitly anchors this medium to Yogyakarta in Central Java through a 
car license plate that is prefixed by “AB.” In addition to these Javanese fragments, 
pronunciation is stereotypically Javanese. Typically, all participants in the story 
also use one or both features, although where lexicon is concerned, there is typi-
cally only a few fragments of this medium in each utterance, including adverbs 
indicating the stage of completion of an action, interrogatives, demonstratives, 
affect particles, and kin terms. As with my analysis of extract 5.4.1, the repre-
sentation of multiple participants who are not related yet use these same features 
also points to a local community that uses a local medium, all of which assists in 
the anchoring of story to place.
In summary, as with other televised talk examined thus far, much of the dia-
logue in soaps was also characterized by alternation as the medium. The habitu-
alness of such alternation was assisted by a number of other signs, including the 
use of subtitles and the presence of a community of speakers who apparently 
share the same ways of speaking. Where the use of subtitles was concerned, this 
typically occurred at the start of a soap or prior to a change in setting. Both prac-
tices typically assisted in the anchoring of a participant constellation to a locale 
and a local medium (e.g., extract 5.4.1). There were also instances where the use 
of fragments from a medium was much less frequent than what was found in the 
subtitled cases. I differentiated these cases (extracts 5.4.2 and 5.4.3) by referring 

	
The Anchoring of Alternation to Place	
141
to them as “stylized alternation.” As with the conclusions reached in relation to 
televised talk in section 5.3, what we are seeing here is the naturalization of alter-
nation as the medium. Yet, this sits in tension with the occurrence of other signs, 
such as car license plates, subtitles, and dialogue, which help to reproduce older 
associations between medium and place. In short, representations of alternation 
as the medium are increasingly becoming a new imagined version of Sundanese 
and Javanese.
5.5  Conclusion
In this chapter, I started to analyze some of the 400 hours of television that 
I  recorded in 2009. Drawing upon the theoretical orientations laid out in 
­chapters 2 and 3, I focused upon the tension between how televised representa-
tions helped to naturalize alternation as the medium on the one hand, while 
continuing to anchor this alternation to locale. While I pointed out that these 
practices occurred across a number of genres including soap operas, vari-
ety shows, on-the-spot news reports, and commercials, I  focused primarily 
on news reports, children’s shows, and soaps. What was striking about these 
representations of alternation as the medium was that it was represented as 
habitual across many genres, time slots, and television stations. In a sense, 
alternation as the medium continues to offer an alternative case to the type of 
alternation found elsewhere in the world, where alternation typically occurs 
in liminal or spectacular moments. Moreover, that these representations were 
institutionally authorized also seems to sit in contrast to the institutionaliza-
tion of alternation practices in other parts of the world, where multilingual-
ism is compartmentalized as the ability to monolingually speak two or more 
languages.
The habitualness of these practices was also assisted via anchoring practices, 
which I argued also assisted in the recirculation of older ideas about ethnic social 
types, their language practices, and their link to place. Anchoring was achieved 
through explicit commentary by a narrator or newsreader, or by metasemiotic 
commentaries, such as maps, subtitles, communities of speakers using similar 
mediums in a particular setting, the explicit naming of a language, car license 
plates, and so on. I  differentiated between two types of alternation practices 
found in soaps, where the first contained large amounts of a local medium, while 
the second, which I refer to as stylized alternation, contained just a couple of 
fragments from a local medium.
In concluding, I wish to make four points. The first relates to the type 
of minimal multimodal analysis that I  have used from section 5.3 onward. 
While this approach is different from the one used in ­chapter 3, nevertheless, 
it represents a move toward foregrounding the importance of engaging with 
ideas about semiotic registers versus ideas of language (Agha, 2007a, 2007b). 
 

142	
Language and Superdiversity
In particular, it offers a method for looking at language ideology formation 
through a multimodal lens. In doing so, it extends scholarship on language 
ideology formation in a number of ways. Similar to my analysis in ­chapter 3, 
the analysis presented here contributes to a scarce literature that is starting 
to focus on the role of non-print-based mediums (e.g., television and movies) 
in the formation and reproduction of language ideologies, especially those 
relating to stereotypes and their associated semiotic registers (Bucholtz, 2011; 
Bucholtz & Lopez, 2011; Mendoza-Denton, 2011).
Second, and again in line with points made in the conclusion to ­chapter 3, 
the extra modes found in the soap format help us to extend our analysis of the 
use of metasemiotic commentaries that can help assign cultural value to particu-
lar linguistic signs. In the case presented here, the idea of cultural value relates 
to ideas of ethnic identity, and the metasemiotic commentaries that are used 
to help index this value include subtitle-like text, maps, subtitles, communities 
of speakers using similar mediums in a particular setting, the explicit naming 
of a language, the use of signs of place (car license plates), and so on. Third, 
as the modeling of alternation as the medium becomes increasingly ubiquitous 
on Indonesian television, there is a clear reconfiguration or revaluation of eth-
nic languages vis-à-vis Indonesian, especially when compared with representa-
tions during the first twenty-five years of Indonesian television when Indonesian 
was the sole medium. Finally, the representation of multiple semiotic registers 
in multiple social domains points more generally toward the diversity found in 
Indonesia, which is the topic of the next chapter.

143
6
Representing and Authorizing  
Linguistic Superdiversity
6.1  Introduction
This chapter shows how representations of linguistic diversity and knowledging 
that were starting to become part of Indonesian mediascapes in the early 1990s 
were by 2009 ubiquitous across a range of television stations and genres. We will 
see that this authorization of alternation and diversity also often sits in contrast 
to the practices described in ­chapter 5 where linguistic forms were anchored to 
ethnic social types and/or region. In this sense, these representational practices 
not only denaturalize the language-place-ethnicity links that I have described 
throughout this book, but they also provide insights into one of the unex-
pected consequences of the long-term processes of enregisterment described in 
­chapters 2–4, namely the addition of one further layer of linguistic diversity to 
an already diverse situation. In addition, these representational practices have 
also modeled and authorized the doing of unity in diversity on a larger scale than 
in the 1990s. In particular, and in contrast to ideologies about doing unity in 
diversity, unity is done through the use of fragments of what are often referred to 
as “regional languages.” (I have referred to these throughout this book as “medi-
ums” in order to deemphasize the idea of language and foreground the idea of 
semiotic register.) More generally, the representations I will be looking at mirror 
the doing of social relations in settings typically described as “superdiverse” (e.g., 
Blommaert & Rampton, 2011; Vertovec, 2007).
A major aim of this chapter is to contribute to discussions about superdi-
versity more generally. While superdiversity is something that has been around 
for a long time (Vertovec, 2007), what is important is that complexity and diver-
sity are increasingly acknowledged as the necessary starting points for under-
standing the interface between human social relations and language practices. 
There are a number of themes covered in work on superdiversity, although here 
I just focus on two that are relevant to the ideas and arguments put forth in 
 
 

144	
Language and Superdiversity
previous chapters. First, scholars generally agree that a characteristic of super-
diversity is that intercultural contact occurs in more social domains and more 
frequently than in the past (Blommaert & Rampton, 2011; Vertovec, 2007). 
Typically, the settlement of mobile or displaced persons is in neighborhoods 
already associated with diversity and multiple languages. In a sense, this helps 
layer diversity over diversity (e.g., Blommaert, 2010; Blommaert & Rampton, 
2011; Rampton, 2011; Vertovec, 2007). We have seen how this has occurred 
across the Indonesian archipelago for the last 150 years or so, and how it relates 
more generally to the emergence of an uncountable number of locale-specific 
emergent semiotic registers.
Even so, an under-theorized area of work on superdiversity is the effect of 
increasing circulation and consumption of registers found in one-to-many par-
ticipation frameworks. In particular, we can say that a further layer of diversity 
is added through the consumption of different types of mediums, such as tele-
vision programs, movies, radio programs, music, religious texts, Internet con-
tent, and so on. Consumption of these mediums adds to the multiple repertoires 
and truncated competences that people develop through face-to-face interac-
tions (e.g., Blommaert & Backus, 2011; Blommaert, Collins, & Slembrouck, 
2005; Jørgensen, Karrebæk, Madsen, & Møller, 2011). In short, consumption 
of television and other media enables people to develop varying degrees of 
competence to comprehend and an ability to engage in knowledging. The idea 
of knowledging brings us back to a second observation relating to studies of 
superdiversity, namely that the condition of superdiversity requires new ways 
of understanding how people from very different backgrounds and with very 
different semiotic systems go about getting along (Ang, 2003; Goebel, 2010a, 
2010b; Smets, 2005; Vertovec, 2007; Werbner, 1997; Wise, 2005). With an under-
standing of the mechanisms that enable people to engage in knowledging, we 
can come to a more nuanced understanding of people’s actual interactional 
practices that involved knowledging. This topic will become part of the discus-
sion in ­chapters 7 and 8.
The Indonesian soaps that we will examine provide examples of superdi-
verse Indonesian neighborhoods, while also modeling interactional practices in 
such settings. We will see that ideas about superdiversity seem to have entered 
into the imaginations of those who produce these television shows in such a 
way that knowledging on the part of characters within television shows is rep-
resented as everyday and mundane, while also implying that the producers of 
these shows imagine their audiences to also engage in knowledging. More spe-
cifically, section 6.2 focuses on understanding representations of alternation 
practices that are stylized and those that resemble adequation. As with some of 
the representations found in the soaps described in ­chapter 5, alternation often 
involves fragments that have associations with ethnic communities and locales. 
Typically, these fragments are terms for self and other reference, terms for 

	
Representing and Authorizing Linguistic Superdiversity	
145
thanking, and affective particles. In contrast to the televised material covered 
in ­chapters 3 and 5 where we had the representation of multiple voices anchored 
to different parts of Indonesia, in the talk I examine in section 6.2, these voices 
are now represented as spoken in settings associated with the city. I also exam-
ine an interesting case of a foreigner engaging in practices of adequation, which 
included appropriating and using Indonesian voices and voices associated with 
ethnic social types.
In section 6.3, I examine how mobility and diversity are represented through 
the use of a few fragments from widely circulating semiotic registers associated 
with the voices of imagined ethnic communities. I provide examples of interac-
tions among those who are represented as sharing similar trajectories and similar 
ethnic voices. I also provide examples of the use of ethnic voices across lines of 
difference where participants are represented as understanding each other’s talk. 
The representations in this section also differ in important ways from the repre-
sentations found in section 6.2. First, there are no metasemiotic commentaries 
that anchor linguistic signs to geographic space or a named language. Second, 
as with the representations discussed in ­chapters 3 and 5, here the representation 
of linguistic diversity is also done in a non-spectacular way, suggesting habitual-
ness across a number of social domains inhabited by social types from multiple 
backgrounds. In this sense, alternation as the medium is presented as common, 
as well as institutionally authorized.
In section 6.4, I look at representations of doing unity in diversity, which 
are done in similar ways to the representation of diversity that we examine in 
section 6.3. In concluding, I bring these sections together by relating them back 
to my discussion on superdiversity, especially the issue of understanding how 
one-to-many participation frameworks help to increase linguistic diversity. As 
we will see in ­chapters 7 and 8, recourse to the notion of one-to-many participa-
tion frameworks enables a more nuanced understanding of the linguistic prac-
tices of a group of transnational Indonesians living in Japan.
6.2  Alternation, Knowledging, and Authorizing the Everyday
This section focuses on understanding representations of alternation practices 
that are stylized and those that resemble adequation. As with some of the repre-
sentations found in the soaps described in ­chapter 5, alternation often involves 
fragments that have associations with ethnic communities and locale. I point out 
that these practices are accountable with reference to notions of enregisterment. 
In contrast to the material examined in the previous chapter, the talk I examine 
here is represented as spoken in settings associated with the city. In looking at all 
of these practices, I suggest that what we are also seeing is an authorization of 
superdiversity where models of doing unity in diversity are increasingly ones that 
 

146	
Language and Superdiversity
involve fragments of regional languages, rather than Indonesian as was common 
in the New Order period.
Extract 6.2.1 is taken from the quiz show Siapa Lebih Berani (Who Is Braver), 
which was aired each day between seven and eight in the morning on RCTI. Like 
many of the same genre, this show has household items and cash as prizes. This 
show elicits participants for subsequent shows by advertising for them during 
each show. Teams of around twenty participants are chosen and then presented 
with general-knowledge questions and survey results. This show is often themed, 
and on this occasion, contestants are wearing pajamas, dressing gowns, hair 
rollers, and other things stereotypically associated with the practice of sleeping. 
During this episode, there are five groups of around fifteen to twenty partici-
pants. Midway into the quiz, the hosts announce which members of the group 
have won household items because their individual guesses about survey results 
were closest to the actual results. At the end of each sequence of prize- giving, 
one member from each group is selected to compete for the major prize, which is 
a television.
While the female presenter, Alya Rohali, uses fragments of many mediums 
throughout the show, her usage increases as she greets each of these five people. 
As can be seen in extract 6.2.1, she refers to herself and addresses some of the cho-
sen contestants with Sundanese fragments (in bold), while also speaking to the 
male host using Betawi fragments more generally (bold small caps). This interac-
tion occurs after the male host invites the winner from group A.
Extract 6.2.1  That’s what Sundanese call munjungan
Alya
  1
ayo sayang =
Come on honey.
Helmy
  2
                    = ayo .
Come on.
Alya
  3
gué jadi ingat masa kecil gué =
It makes me remember the 
time i was young like her].
Helmy
  4
  5
                                                = gué juga
=
Me too.
Alya
  6
= mirip kan . ok silahkan . ayo
Similar right! OK please go 
ahead, please go ahead.
Lines deleted. Helmy goes through list of winners for group B before  
announcing the next contestant.

	
Representing and Authorizing Linguistic Superdiversity	
147
Alya
  7
mangga neng . ke depan ya
Please younger sister, to the 
front.
Lines deleted. Helmy announces next contestant, who comes down and greets 
Helmy and shakes hand without doing so with Alya.
Helmy
  8
siapa nama elu =
What is your name?
Contestant
  9
10
                            = nando (shakes Helmy’s
hand and walks straight to podium) =
Nando.
Alya
11
12
                                                               =
cuekin gué mutus (1.1) awas ya =
Ignore [me] i will ignore [you], 
look out.
Helmy
13
                                                      = ya =
Yes, [look out].
Alya
14
15
                                                               = soal 
kamu saya susahin =
I’ll make your questions hard.
Helmy
16
17
                                  = dia . dia soalnya tidak  
melayani tanté . nggak tanté lah ya .
She, the issue is she doesn’t 
respond [if called] Auntie, 
it’s not Auntie OK 
[everyone].
Alya
18
teteh . gila
[Everyone call me] Older  
sister, got it.
Lines deleted. Contestant from group D is called up. He first greets Helmy and 
then Alya.
Contestant
19
halo tanté =
Hi Auntie.
Alya
20
21
                  = munjungan . kata orang  
sunda munjungan
[That greeting he just per-
formed] is a greeting which 
Sundanese call munjungan.
Source: Siapa Lebih Berani broadcast on RCTI, Tuesday,  
August 11, 2009 (7–8 a.m.)

148	
Language and Superdiversity
In the above extract, Alya alternates between Indonesian and a number of widely 
circulating forms that are stereotypically associated with Sundanese (lines 7, 18, 
20, 21). This alternation is marked for a number of reasons. First, the primary 
medium seems to be Indonesian forms alternated with forms stereotypically 
associated with being Betawi or living in Jakarta (lines 3 and 12). Typically, these 
Betawi forms (bold small caps) are terms of self and other reference. For example, 
on line 12, Alya moves between the form gué (I) stereotypically associated with 
talk about oneself, personal life-worlds, and intimate interaction among either 
Betawi social types or city social types of similar status and age, and saya (I) on 
line 15, which is more commonly associated with social relations among unfamil-
iars, those where there are inequalities in status, and official contexts associated 
with schooling and expertise.
Second, Alya also uses a number of terms associated with Sundanese (7, 18, 
20, 21). In cases where there is potentially an interactional slot where a contestant 
could become the next speaker, as in line 7, her alternation is not reciprocated 
and her co-host then moves on to announcing the next contestant in Indonesian. 
Similarly, her play with the idea that Auntie (Tanté) should be replaced with 
Older Sister (Teteh) on line 18, presumably because she felt that she was not yet 
old enough to be an Auntie, is not oriented to by the next contestant on line 18 
who also uses the term tanté. While what we are seeing here seems to resemble 
medium repair, Alya’s continual use of words associated with Sundanese and 
her metapragmatic description of some of these words as Sundanese, as in her 
commentary about the provenance of the word munjungan (lines 20 and 21), sug-
gests she is engaging in a practice that resembles the stylized alternation dis-
cussed in section 5.4.2.
What makes her alternation above even more interesting is a comparison 
with her performance the following day, when she uses a form stereotypically 
associated with intimate social relations among Javanese (in bold caps). On this 
occasion, the groups are much more mixed in terms of age, although much more 
homogeneous in terms of gender. There are three groups of women (whose ages 
appear to range between early twenties and forties), a group of younger men 
(perhaps in their twenties and thirties), and a mixed group of people in their late 
teens and early twenties. Of interest is the later part of the show, where all five 
group representatives are brought to the front and invited to guess the identity 
of a famous person. One contestant, Agus, presses the buzzer and the following 
interaction ensues (extract 6.2.2). Indonesian is in plain font and Javanese is in 
bold caps.

	
Representing and Authorizing Linguistic Superdiversity	
149
Extract 6.2.2  I also know and can speak some Javanese
Agus
  1
mel lisen =
Mel Lisen
Helmy
  2
                 = mel salah .
Mel is wrong.
Alya
  3
SOPO sih agus . [ melan SOPO
WHO do [you] think it is Agus? 
Melan WHO?
Helmy
  4
  5
  6
  7
                              [ mel SOPO . ngerti 
bukan mel shandy [ chintami sini aja
(saying while summoning chintami with 
hand)
Mel WHO? [I]‌ understand, 
it’s not Mel Shandy. Chintami 
come here
please.
Agus
  8
                                 [ melan =
Melan.
Alya
  9
10
                                                  = melan apa
mican
Melan or
Mican?
Talk deleted (A number of wrong guesses until the correct one. Then nine new 
questions all in Indonesian. This is followed by a commercial break before the 
next round of short questions)
Agus
11
surabaya =
Surabaya (name of capital city 
of East Java).
Helmy
12
                 = surabaya =
Surabaya.
Alya
13
                                      = surabaya =
Surabaya.
Helmy
14
15
                                                           = betul
ya
Correct, yes [correct].
Source: Siapa Lebih Berani broadcast on RCTI, Tuesday,  
August 12, 2009 (7–8 a.m.)
In the above extract, Alya alternates from Indonesian to a widely circulating 
form that is stereotypically associated with Javanese (line 3). This alternation 
is marked in this show because it sits in contrast to the primary medium in the 
preceding and subsequent talk, which is Indonesian. Indeed, as can be seen 
in lines 9, 14, and 15, Alya and Helmy repair this medium by reverting back 

150	
Language and Superdiversity
to Indonesian in their subsequent talk with Agus. As with extract 6.2.1, the 
above talk also suggests that the presenters imagine their audience as having 
some familiarity with the mediums used. When taken together with her previ-
ous performance, we get a picture of a person who appears to either engage 
in a type of stylized alternation for the fun of it or perhaps to orient to the 
particular ethnic identities of contestants. For example, although no talk made 
these identities explicit here, they may well have been built up to in the off-air 
interactions between hosts and contestants. Although this last point is purely 
speculation, what is clear is that this type of stylized alternation is an insti-
tutionally authorized practice. This representation of addressing both a local 
audience (the contestants) and a national one in Indonesian and fragments from 
a number of other mediums (typically associated with regional languages) gives 
further weight to circulating models for the doing of unity in diversity that don’t 
exclusively involve Indonesian. Indeed, it seems to assume that those who may 
not speak Sundanese or Javanese may nevertheless understand bits and pieces 
of these registers.
Just as important, although there are some aspects of the last two extracts 
that resemble contexts where crossing is found (i.e., liminal moments, during 
performances, at initial stages of an interaction), what sets this apart from the 
type of crossing described in Rampton (1995) is that these people do not know 
each other. It is also likely that those whose linguistic forms are being appropri-
ated will find out about this type of appropriation (e.g., the potential for some of 
the contestants or audiences being Javanese or Sundanese). As noted above, it 
also resembles but is not the same as the stylized alternation discussed in section 
5.4. This is so because alternation is either not oriented to by the person being 
addressed or there is no interactional slot for such orientation (e.g., Alya’s com-
ment about munjungan on lines 20 and 21 of extract 6.2.1). Knowledging thus 
seems a better way of describing Alya’s practice here insofar as she appears to 
be using her knowledge of fragments of widely circulating mediums to perform 
her alternation. This interpretation also fits with what we know of Alya who was 
born in 1976 and was thus potentially a participant in processes of enregisterment 
that facilitated the circulation of this type of knowledge (e.g., ­chapters 2 and 3).
While we know nothing about Alya’s interlocutors’ backgrounds, other 
genres provided much richer representations. Often, as with the one I focus on 
in extract 6.2.3, these representations seem to sit in contrast to the processes 
of enregisterment described so far (i.e., the anchoring of language to a social 
type living in a particular region). For example, in the case I examine below, 
Sacha Stevenson, who self-identifies as a Canadian, appropriates not only an 
Indonesian voice but also a Javanese one. Extract 6.2.3 is taken from the skit that 
occurred in the comedy entitled Acara Saatnya Kita Sahur, which I awkwardly 
translate as A Show for Us while We Are Eating prior to the Daily Fast. This show 
was aired on TransTV each day during the fasting month between three and four 
in the morning.

	
Representing and Authorizing Linguistic Superdiversity	
151
The interaction represented in extract 6.2.3 occurs between two people who 
are friends of a third person, Komeng, who has phoned them and asked them 
to get his suitcase, which he has left behind. These two people are standing and 
practicing English with the aid of dictionaries in an airport waiting room some-
where in America. Their wordplay and mixing of English and Indonesian are 
interrupted when an unknown young woman, Sacha, arrives unexpectedly. The 
two men act confused and start using fragments of English before then suggest-
ing that Sacha may be Spanish and thus needs to be addressed with an appropri-
ate term for “you.” This linking of nationality to linguistic form continues to 
include Italian, French, German, Arabic, and Dutch, often with the actors using 
the forms and saying she must be French, Dutch, and so on. After engaging in 
self-repair (of each medium), the two give up in despair and start speaking what 
is later named as Javanese. Until this use of Javanese (in bold caps), Sacha acts 
increasingly confused but says nothing.
Extract 6.2.3  The authorization of adequating foreigners and mixing
Participant 1
1
ORA usah =
DON’T worry about [it].
Participant 2
2
                   = ah =
Ah.
Participant 1
3
4
                             = WIS lah . aku . aku RA 
ngerti mesti diapain =
[We’re] DONE. I, I DON’T 
know what [we] should do.
Participant 2
5
                                   = SAMI KARO aku =
[That] IS THE SAME AS Me.
Participant 1
6
7
                                                                       =
[ aku
I.
Participant 2
8
[ MBUH RAK ngerti =
DON’T KNOW, DON’T know.
Participant 1
9
10
                                     = MBOTEN
NGERTOS lah . capai lah =
[I]‌ DON’T
KNOW, [I’m] tired of this.
Participant 2
11
12
                                               = MULIH
MULIH . MONGGO MONGGO =
[Let’s] GO,
[Let’s] GO, EXCUSE ME 
[Mrs.] EXCUSE ME.
(continued)

152	
Language and Superdiversity
Participant 1
13
14
15
                                                            = WIS
kita MULIH WAÉ YO . MONGGO
capai aku (0.5)
We are DONE, [let’s] JUST 
GO COME ON, EXCUSE 
ME [Mrs.], I’m tired [of this]
Sacha
16
17
18
o::::::h SAMPEAN IKI NGOLEKI kopor 
TOH (0.5) KOPERÉ ONO NING
KONO .
Oh, YOU ARE LOOKING 
FOR a suitcase 
RIGHT? THE  
SUITCASE OVER 
THERE.
Participant 1
19
wa:::h o::::::::h bulé apa =
Wow! What sort of white  
foreigner is this?
Participant 2
20
21
                                        = ya ngomong
kalau bisa ngomong jawa . ngomong (0.8)
Yeah say so
if you can speak Javanese,  
say so.
Participant 1
22
ini mah . ini mah . bulé istrinya pak LIK
This is, this is, this white 
foreigner is our YOUNGER 
UNCLE’S wife.
Talk deleted
Sacha
23
24
IKI OPO (pointing to chocolate that 
Participant 1 wiped on her mouth) =
WHAT IS THIS?
Participant 1
25
26
26
                                                             = IKI
OPO . haha IKI OPO . WIS PANGANÉ 
PANGANÉ
WHAT IS THIS?
(Laughs). WHAT IS THIS? 
ITS FOOD, 
ITS FOOD.
Source: TransTV, Acara Saatnya Kita Sahur,  
Saturday, August 23, 2009 (3–4 a.m.)
There are a number of striking features of the talk in extract 6.2.3. First, we see 
that alternation is common (e.g., lines 3, 4, 13–15, and 22) with the two males 
alternating among forms stereotypically associated with Javanese (bold font), 
forms stereotypically associated with Indonesian (plain font), and ambiguous 
forms (italics). They also do not engage in medium repair. Thus, this practice can 
be characterized as alternation as the medium and habitual. As with ­chapters 3 
Extract 6.2.3  (Continued)

	
Representing and Authorizing Linguistic Superdiversity	
153
and 5 and extracts 6.2.1 and 6.2.2, this alternation is publically authorized by 
way of its being broadcast nationally on television. In so doing, the one-to-many 
participation framework of television helps to naturalize language alternation, 
while also naturalizing superdiversity more generally.
Second, we have a person, Sacha, whose white Caucasian appearance has 
the actors orienting to her perceived difference through talk that associates her 
with all types of foreigners. Nevertheless, this framing as foreign is thrown into 
disarray as she speaks Javanese to these two actors. In so doing, she performs 
what might on the surface look like crossing. This is so because her Javanese 
usage is not initially reciprocated, but rather attracts metasemiotic commentary 
(line 19) as participant 1 wonders just what type of white foreigner she might 
be. What makes Sacha’s use of Javanese different from crossing is that after ini-
tially showing surprise—which is initially done in Indonesian and thus a type 
of medium repair—shortly thereafter, Sacha continues in Javanese on line 23. 
Her usage is subsequently reciprocated by participant 1 on line 25. While this 
alternation is not habitual in the same sense as the interaction between partici-
pants 1 and 2, nevertheless, the subsequent orientation to this usage from line 
22 onward suggests that her ability to use Javanese is not only ratified but also 
locally accountable. For example, her unusual ability is quickly explained by 
noting that she is the wife of someone they refer to as Pak Lik (younger uncle) 
on line 22.
It is these actors’ explanation that moves what might have otherwise fit into 
the category of crossing into a practice associated with adequation. This is done 
by linking Sacha’s ability with her everyday activities and life-world of being the 
wife of someone whom they know is Javanese. The Javanese-ness of her husband 
is made explicit by indexical links with the Javanese kin term Pak Lik (younger 
uncle) when referring to the non-present spouse on line 22. In this sense, it also 
pushes the boundaries of normal definitions of crossing because Sacha is rep-
resented as someone authorized to speak Javanese. Indeed, this representation 
fits with more common practices of adequation found among internal migrants 
in Indonesia (Goebel, 2010b). Finally, as with the naming practices discussed 
above and in ­chapter 5, Sacha’s talk and the other actors’ talk is given the name 
“Javanese” (line 22) and by extension anchored to Java, thus reproducing older 
ties between language and region.
The language practices exemplified in extracts 6.3.1 and 6.3.2 were quite 
common in a number of other genres including travel shows and culinary 
shows and across a number of broadcasters. As with the above interactions 
and with some of the representations found in the soaps described in ­chapter 5, 
these were typically terms of self and other reference, terms for thanking, and 
affective particles. Unlike other analyses of these types of genre (Jaworski, 
Thurlow, Lawson, & Yälnne-McEwen, 2003), however, crossing does not 
seem to be an appropriate way of categorizing the alternation practices found 
in these Indonesian genres or the talk represented in extracts 6.2.1–6.2.3. 

154	
Language and Superdiversity
Instead, we can account for this type of stylized alternation with reference to 
knowledging (i.e., participation in processes of enregisterment that occurred 
on a mass scale from 1966 onward). As with the television representations 
analyzed in ­chapters 3 and 5, the representations of alternation in this sec-
tion are also institutionally authorized insofar as an institution, in this case, a 
government-sanctioned television station, is broadcasting models of language 
and social relations.
In summary, in contrast to the televised material covered in ­chapter 5, 
where we had the representation of multiple voices anchored to different parts 
of Indonesia, in the extracts above, these voices are represented as spoken in 
settings associated with the city. As with section 3.7, we also were provided 
with models of doing unity in diversity that involved the use of fragments 
of regional languages rather than solely Indonesian. We also had foreigners 
engaging in practices of adequation, which included appropriating and using 
Indonesian voices and voices associated with ethnic social types. This prac-
tice was quite common with celebrities, such as Sacha Stevenson, appearing in 
other shows that were aired in primetime (in the 8–9 p.m. timeslot), such as the 
comedy O.K.B (Orang Kaya Baru, or The New Rich). On this occasion, Sacha 
performed in an Indonesian voice while also noting to her surprised interlocu-
tors that she could also do so in Betawi if they wished. In a sense, what we 
are seeing in the above extracts are authorized representations of adequation 
and linguistic superdiversity. In the following sections, I address the theme of 
superdiversity.
While representations of alternation and adequation are a reflection of 
what was happening on the ground in the mid-1990s (Goebel, 2010b), and most 
likely during the colonial period as well (see ­chapter 2), these representations, 
as well as the processes of enregisterment that I have discussed thus far, have 
helped set up the conditions for these practices. In this chapter, this has meant 
that both actors and producers have represented this practice as everyday and 
normal while imagining their audiences as having an ability to comprehend 
linguistic fragments from mediums that they would not normally speak. In a 
sense, processes of enregisterment have helped produce a new form of socia-
bility, which in turn contributed to even more linguistic diversity (i.e., when 
people engage in knowledging or adequation) in settings already characterized 
by linguistic diversity. Finally, the authorization of alternation and adequation 
also suggests the continued emergence of a center of normativity that began in 
the late 1990s with representations in soaps such as Si Doel. The authorization 
of these practices also suggests a continued reconfiguration of orders of indexi-
cality, with Indonesian losing ground in the social domain that involves doing 
unity in diversity.

	
Representing and Authorizing Linguistic Superdiversity	
155
6.3  Representing Mobility and Diversity
Most of this book has alluded to a diverse range of ethnic social types found 
throughout the Indonesian archipelago. These social types and their voices 
have typically been anchored to regions through the representation of identifi-
able signs, such as car license plates, buildings, and other metasemiotic com-
mentaries. In the previous section and section 3.7, we also saw that there were 
representations that pointed to mobility, the type of ethnolinguistic diversity one 
finds in Jakarta, and models of doing togetherness using fragments of mediums 
other than Indonesian. In this section, I want to examine how representations of 
migrants and their linguistic practices can help contribute to an increase in the 
social value of linguistic diversity. We will see that, typically, the representation 
of linguistic diversity is done in non-spectacular ways, suggesting habitualness 
across a number of social domains that are inhabited by social types from both 
poor and affluent backgrounds.
These cases differ from the other extracts of talk in section 6.2 insofar as 
they are anchored to the city as a locale. As with the representations examined 
in much of this book, many of these interactions are characterized by alterna-
tion that is semiotically linked with everyday mundane interactions and social 
relations. Typically, ethnic voices are represented by the use of linguistic frag-
ments that are associated with ethnic social types from the imagined heartlands 
of Sundanese speakers, Betawi speakers, Javanese speakers, and so on. While 
there are many genres that contained these types of linguistic practices, in this 
section, I focus on soap operas.
The first one is Indahnya warna pelangi (How Beautiful Are the Colors of the 
Rainbow), which was aired by Trans7. The central theme of this soap was a politi-
cal message about the need to follow one’s own preferences in the upcoming elec-
tions and not those of one’s boss, spouse, friend, or financial patron. In addition 
to this explicit political message, which was aired during the run-up to the 2009 
presidential elections, there are a number of other interesting things happening 
in this soap. For example, as with many of the other representations we have 
examined, this soap was anchored to Jakarta by way of car license plates and 
via travel to other places where the medium being used was different. Extract 
6.3.1 was taken from this soap and occurs at the very beginning when a boy on a 
bicycle delivers papers to an affluent household where the household’s driver is 
washing one of their many cars and the household’s gardener is nearby working 
on a hedge. When the paperboy arrives, the older driver asks the gardener to get 
the paper, but the gardener says he can’t because he has dirty hands. The driver 
then asks the paperboy to put the paper on the fence.
 

156	
Language and Superdiversity
Extract 6.3.1  Soap representations of the voices of poor mobile workers
Driver
1
2
jang . sok jang tolong taro sana dulu jang
=
Son. Please son help put [the 
newspaper] there for the 
moment son.
Paper boy
3
4
= ya pak (proceeds to place paper on top of 
fence and then walks back to bicycle)
Yes Sir.
Driver
5
makasih ya jang ya
Thanks yeah, son, OK.
Source: Trans7, Indahnya warna pelangi,  
Friday, August 7, 2009 (9–10 a.m.)
In the above talk, we see that the driver speaks to the paperboy alternating 
between fragments of Sundanese (in bold) and Indonesian (plain font) in lines 
1 and 5. We also see that the paperboy apparently understands these fragments 
through his ratification of the driver’s request (lines 3 and 4). Jakartan suburbia 
is thus represented as not only a diverse place, but one where alternation as the 
medium is common and where understanding this type of alternation is normal. 
This practice was common within this soap, especially in interactions among the 
driver, the gardener, and the maid. In these interactions, talk was often peppered 
with linguistic fragments stereotypically associated with Sundanese-ness, includ-
ing kin terms (kang, “older brother”), particles indicating stance (teh, mah), and 
so on. In this sense, this alternation is also represented as a habitual practice in 
certain social domains among certain participant constellations.
As with the representations of talk discussed in ­chapter 5, here the representa-
tion of alternation sets up three tensions. On the one hand, in general, this alterna-
tion between Indonesian and Sundanese helps to further denaturalize ideologies 
that link region to linguistic signs and ethnic community. On the other hand, the 
frequent representations of multiple social types who engage in alternation as the 
medium among themselves tend to reproduce ideologies about social types belong-
ing to communities of ethnic social types who use ethnic languages. Third, that 
these representations are broadcast to a linguistically diverse audience presup-
poses or imagines that all viewers are familiar with fragments from these mediums.
The practice of alternation was not just one that associated the city with 
ethnic voices from low-income migrant social types. In extract 6.3.2, we will see 
these people’s employers alternating in other social domains; in this case, alterna-
tion involves fragments of Javanese (in bold caps) in interactions among family 
members in their home during meals. In the talk that precedes extract 6.3.2, the 
husband and wife (who are the employers of the domestic help involved in extract 
6.3.1) are in the process of discussing which presidential candidate is best and 
how each platform relates to the provision of free education.

	
Representing and Authorizing Linguistic Superdiversity	
157
Extract 6.3.2  Soap representations of the ethnic voices of affluent migrants
Bapak
  1
  2
  3
  4
  5
  6
  7
bukannya iklannya yang ada di mana mana 
(0.4) apa mungkin . anak seorang sopir
angkot bisa menjadi seorang pilot . kalau
sekolah gratis cuma sampai smp . lah untuk
masuk sma . dan sekolah pilotnya . SOPO
SING bayar DIDOL angkut pun . nggak
bakalan nutup ma
Isn’t it that [free education] 
is [just] in advertisements 
that can be found any-
where? Is it possible that 
the child of minibus driver 
can become a pilot. [At the 
moment] schooling is free 
only until junior high. So 
for senior high and pilot 
school  WHO IS IT THAT  
will pay? Even SELLING 
the minibus won’t be enough 
to pay the fees, Mum (here 
a term used to refer to his 
wife).
Mama
  8
  9
bapak ini keterlaluan banget sih ya . bener 
bener nggak punya etiketa (0.5)
You are a bit over the top 
you know, you really don’t 
have any etiquette.
Bapak
10 loh . kok mama jadi marah beneran
Wow, gee Mum you are 
actually angry.
Source: Trans7, Indahnya warna pelangi,  
Friday, August 7, 2009 (9–10 a.m.)
As can be seen in the talk in lines 5 and 6, there are a number of fragments ste-
reotypically associated with Javanese (bold caps). As with extract 6.3.2, here 
it appears that Mama understands such usage though she does not engage in 
alternation. In a sense, this practice also resembles the type of stylized alterna-
tion discussed in section 5.4, though here it seems to function as a quick way 
of providing character background. For example, together with the use of other 
linguistic fragments associated with Javanese (such as the kin terms Mas, “older 
brother,” and Pak Dé, “older uncle”), this use of fragments was enough to help 
portray the family’s background, with the father being a Javanese migrant who 
had settled and obviously done well in Jakarta.
The above type of representation of migrants living, working, or study-
ing in Jakarta was very common in soaps across all broadcasters and across 
most timeslots. For example, GlobalTV aired Bukan Sinetron (This Is Not 
a Soap) in the 6–7  p.m. timeslot. This particular soap represented the main 
characters as migrants who typically used Indonesian and Javanese fragments 

158	
Language and Superdiversity
among themselves, such as endi, “where,” opo, “what,” wis, “already,” and so 
on. Typically, these fragments were mixed with Indonesian in a way that repre-
sented alternation as the medium. While extracts 6.3.1 and 6.3.2 represent talk 
from soaps where ethnic voices were found in different social domains within 
the city—for example, the boss spoke Javanese while the domestic help spoke 
Sundanese—there were also soaps, comedy sketches, and live televised comedy 
performances that brought different ethnic social types together within one set-
ting. In these settings, the doing of unity in diversity or togetherness contin-
ued to be represented by a combination of Indonesian and regional languages, 
rather than just Indonesian.
In these settings, actors used their ethnic voices with those who were rep-
resented as not being of the same ethnic social type as they. In other words, 
these voices were shown to be used across lines of difference, as was the case 
with extracts 3.7.4 and 3.7.5. Extract 6.3.3 provides an example of this type 
of representation. The extract is taken from the comedic soap OB (Office 
Boy), which is set in an office in Jakarta. Some of the main actors have voices 
associated with ethnic social types from West Java (Sundanese) and Jakarta 
(Betawi). In the extract below, Ipul is interacting with two others (Susi and 
Saodah). Ipul is represented as a Sundanese through his use of linguistic 
fragments stereotypically associated with Sundanese-ness (in bold), Susi and 
Saodah are represented as having links with either the city or Betawi social 
types by their usage of linguistic fragments stereotypically associated with 
Betawi social types (bold small caps). Forms that are ambiguous in terms 
of being classifiable as Indonesian or Betawi are in italics. This interaction 
occurs after one of the office staff asks Susi to guard the female toilet door 
while he is using the women’s toilet (the men’s toilet is engaged). Susi is get-
ting bored with waiting when Ipul walks up the corridor and the following 
conversation ensues.

	
Representing and Authorizing Linguistic Superdiversity	
159
Extract 6.3.3  Using ethnic voices across lines of difference
Susi
  1
o:: lama banget sih pak hendra .
Gee, why is Pak Hendra tak-
ing so long?
Ipul
  2
  3
(???) (???) (while humming and playing 
with his hair and approaching Susi) .
(???) (???)
Susi
  4
  5
a:: ha ha (slaps Ipul on the arm) kebetulan 
lu datang ha . gantiin gué ya .
A [here is someone to take my 
place] as it happens 
you have come by, replace me 
yeah!
Ipul
  6
Eh . gantiin naon teh .
Eh replace what Older Sister?
Susi
  7
  8
  9
10
ndak jangan kebanyakan nanya (while 
grabbing shirt and moving around Ipul and
pushing him in front of toilet door) nah lu 
diam aja di sini . berdiri di sini . ya =
Stop, don’t ask too many 
questions.
Now, you just stay
here, stand here, OK?
Ipul
11
12
13
                                                             = 
(doesn’t say anything and looks at Susi 
with confused expression) =
(No affirmative response)
Susi
14
15
16
17
18
                                              = ntar kalau 
misalnya ada cewek yang mau masuk . 
jangan dikasih . ngerti kagak . ya itu pun 
kalau lu kagak mau dimarahin . ngerti 
nggak (0.5)
Later, if for example a
woman comes to use  
the toilet,
don’t let them in. Understand 
or not? That is
if you don’t want to get in  
trouble. [Do you] understand 
or not?
Ipul
19
enya enya atuh enya =
Yes, yes, OK, yes.
Susi
20
21
                                   = bagus (puts up 
thumb and walks off) (0.6)
Great.
(continued)

160	
Language and Superdiversity
Ipul
22
(puts up thumb) alus enya (3.9)
Ok, great yes.
Saodah
23
24
(exits a door located nearly opposite the 
toilet door guarded by Ipul)
(exits a door located nearly 
opposite the
toilet door guarded by Ipul)
Ipul
25
26
27
wah ah (puts up two hands) punten teh . 
kata teh susi nggak ada yang boleh masuk 
(0.7)
Gee, I’m sorry Older Sister, 
Older Sister  Susi said that no 
one is allowed to go in.
Saodah
28
29
30
e:: siapa juga yang mau masuk . gué justru 
mau minta lu pijitin gué . badan gué
udah pegel semua nih
What? Who wants to go in?  
i actually 
want you to give me a mas-
sage. my whole body
is very stiff.
Ipul
31
e:: tapi kata teh Susi (while pointing)
Oh, but Older sister Susi said.
Saodah
32
33
(Grabs Ipul and pushes him in front of her 
through the door into the common room.)
(Grabs Ipul and pushes him in 
front of her
through the door into the 
common room.)
Source: RCTI, OB (“Shift 2”), Monday, August 10, 2009 (3–4 p.m.)
In the above talk, we see that all the actors use and expect each other to 
understand linguistic fragments that are associated with particular imag-
ined ethnic communities. Susi and Saodah are represented as communicating 
across lines of difference while understanding Sundanese forms. For example, 
Susi is represented as understanding Ipul’s use of Sundanese interogatives 
(naon), kin terms (teh, the shortened form of teteh), and the word enya (“yes”) 
in lines 7–10, 19 and 20. Similarly, Soadah is shown as understanding Ipul’s 
Sundanese usage in lines 28–30. In short, Susi and Soadah are represented 
as able to engage in a form of knowledging. On the other hand, Ipul is repre-
sented as understanding forms associated with Betawi. For example, in line 
6, Ipul is shown to understand local terms for self and other reference (lu 
and gué), while he is also represented as understanding Sodah’s use of terms 
for self and other reference in lines 28 and 29. Ipul’s practice is a little dif-
ferent from Susi’s and Soadah’s, however, insofar as his residence in Jakarta 
implies that he has learned these forms through local interactions rather than 
Extract 6.3.3  (Continued)

	
Representing and Authorizing Linguistic Superdiversity	
161
through participation in one-to-many participation frameworks (e.g., school-
ing, media consumption) that have enabled the large-scale circulation of frag-
ments of other mediums. In other words, he is represented as engaging in 
adequation while Susi and Soadah are represented as engaging in knowledg-
ing. Both cases, however, present models of doing unity in diversity that do 
not exclusively require Indonesian.
In summarizing this section, we have seen that the representation of mobility 
and diversity is done through the use of a few fragments from widely circulating 
semiotic registers associated with the voices of imagined ethnic communities. 
I provided examples of interactions among those who were represented as shar-
ing similar trajectories and similar ethnic voices (e.g., extracts 6.3.1 and 6.3.2), 
and representations of the use of ethnic voices across lines of difference where 
participants were represented as understanding each other’s talk (extract 6.3.3). 
The representations in this section also differ in important ways from the rep-
resentations found in extracts 6.2.1 and 6.2.2. First, there were no metasemiotic 
commentaries that anchored linguistic signs to geographic space or to a named 
language. Second, as with the representations discussed in ­chapters 3 and 5, here 
the representation of linguistic diversity is also done in a non-spectacular way, 
and it is done among those who already know each other, suggesting habitual-
ness across a number of social domains inhabited by social types from multiple 
backgrounds.
Alternation could be further differentiated when we started to account 
for abilities to engage in alternation. On the one hand, there were those whose 
backgrounds suggested that interaction in one-to-few participation frameworks 
enabled them to habitually engage in alternation. I referred to this as adequa-
tion. On the other hand, there were those who still habitually engaged in alter-
nation, but their ability to do so was more appropriately accounted for in terms 
of their participation in one-to-many participation frameworks. In this sense, 
alternation is represented as natural and thus provides one further repetition 
of the idea that alternation is normal. These representation practices also pro-
vide further support for the idea that orders of indexicality are in the process of 
being reconfigured, with alternation increasingly competing for coequal status 
with Indonesian in settings involving the doing of unity in diversity. Indeed, the 
type of representation found in extract 6.3.3 was common in many of the soaps 
in my database. In the following section, I focus on just one of these soaps to 
flesh out how linguistic superdiversity is also being naturalized through such 
representations.
6.4  Representing the Doing of Unity in Superdiversity
In this final section, I want to look at representations of not only talk across 
lines of difference, but also representations of habitual use of features associated 
with the multiple voices of imagined communities of ethnic social types. I refer 
 

162	
Language and Superdiversity
to these representations of social life in Jakarta as representations of linguis-
tic superdiversity. In doing so, I continue to point out how this practice sits in 
contrast to other models of doing unity in diversity that are linked solely with 
Indonesian. I focus on an episode (“Banyak orderan banyak masalah,” “Plenty of 
Orders, Plenty of Problems”) from the comedic soap Bukan Romeo Juliet (It’s Not 
Romeo and Juliet), which was broadcast on ANTV.
This comedy is geographically anchored to Jakarta via shots of the mul-
tiple elevated highways found only in Jakarta, the skyscrapers lining the sky-
line, and the streets full of cars with “B” license plates. There are also other 
signs that anchor this story to place. These include the occasional appear-
ance of bajai, two-person taxis powered by motorcycle engines (which are 
found only in Jakarta), music that has interdiscursive links with ethnic com-
edies anchored to Jakarta, such as Si Doel and Bajai Bajuri (Bajuri’s Bajai; 
see section 3.7), and of course the representation of multiple unrelated peo-
ple all using linguistic forms stereotypically associated with Betawi ethnic 
social types. The talk in extract 6.4.1 occurs as Sutini is tending her coffee 
shop and Melani arrives. Sutini remembers that Melani is the ex-girlfriend 
of the boy next door, and the following talk ensues. As with the previous 
extracts, Javanese is in bold caps, ambiguous forms (i.e., those that are both 
Indonesian and Javanese) are in italics, English is in uppercase bold italics, 
and Indonesian is in plain font.
Extract 6.4.1  Representing superdiverse neighborhoods
Melani
  1
MORNING mbak sutini (while smiling) =
MORNING Sister Sutini.
Sutini
  2
  3
  4
                                                                    =
(while smiling) e::: GOOD MORNING . 
(while pointing) u:::m mbak melani kan =
Oh, GOOD MORNING,  
um [you are] Sister Melani 
right?
Melani
  5
  6
  7
                                                                    =
(while putting two thumbs up and smiling)
betul (0.5)
Yes.
Sutini
  8
  9
lah . (while smiling) mesti ke sini cari mas
alung =
So, [you] must have come here 
looking for Brother
Alung.

	
Representing and Authorizing Linguistic Superdiversity	
163
Melani
10
11
           = iya dong (while smiling) . habis 
aku [ kangen sih mba::k =
Of course.
I miss [him] so much, you 
know, Sister.
Sutini
12
13
14
15
        [ (stops smiling) = lo::h mba::k.
YOU kan udah tahu . kalau MISALÉ mas 
alung dah ada GIRLFRIENDnya . [ nanti 
MISALÉ rebut lagi kaya waktu itu PIYÉ
What Sister? 
YOU already know right, that
FOR EXAMPLE Brother
Alung already has a 
GIRLFRIEND. Later if
FOR EXAMPLE, [you both] 
fight again like before, 
THEN WHAT?
Melani
16
17
18
                                                            [
(smile turns to sad face as she turns body 
away from Sutini and sits down) (2.0)
(Is represented as being upset 
about what
Sutini has said.)
Sutini
19
20
(confused look) aduh mbak . maksud I AM
nggak gitu loh . a:: ndak usah =
Gee Sister, I didn’t mean
it like that. Um [you] don’t 
need
Melani
21
22
= udah udah . ndak apa apa mbak . ndak 
apa apa (1.1)
[It’s] ok. [It’s] ok, [it’s] alright 
Sister, 
[it’s] alright
Source: ANTV, Bukan Romeo Juliet, Sunday, August 16, 2009 (8–9 p.m.)
The talk in extract 6.4.1 is striking for a number of reasons. First, we see that 
both Melani and Sutini are represented as using and understanding fragments of 
English (e.g., lines 1, 3, 13–22). This practice is typically in the form that resembles 
alternation as the medium (i.e., it occurs with fragments of other mediums within 
an intonational unit and usually does not result in a change of medium). Second, 
Sutini also uses fragments that are stereotypically associated with Javanese (bold 
caps) in lines 13 and 15. As with her use of English, her usage is represented as 
being understood by Melani. In addition, we see that her usage of Javanese forms 
co-occurs with Indonesian and English within the same intonation unit (e.g., lines 
13–15). In other words, this alternation can be categorized as alternation as the 
medium, though this usage does result in a medium change by Melani in line 21.
As Sutini continues, she uses other Javanese forms, as well as some English 
with another neighbor, who also works as the local neighborhood security guard, 

164	
Language and Superdiversity
although this time, English fragments are by themselves within an intonational 
unit. Sutini continues to interact with the rest of the cast, including Wan Abud 
and Babah Liong, who are both keen to date her. Wan typically uses Indonesian 
mixed with a few Betawi terms of other reference (e.g., enté, “you”). Sutini is repre-
sented as understanding such usage, although she does not use these forms. This 
contrasts with Wan’s talk with his family. In these situations, he typically also 
uses other Betawi forms, including kenapé (“why”), bagaimané (“how about”), 
kagak (“no/not”), sané (“there”), and combinations of these forms. Wan Abud 
and his family are also linked to Betawi social types by his family’s surround-
ings and practices. For example, his house door is of the slat type associated 
with Betawi, as is the green color of the doors that is also indexically linked with 
Islam. Wan and his family are also represented as Moslems by their greetings. 
As pointed out in ­chapter 3, by themselves, such signs are ambiguous, but when 
they co-occur with the other signs, they produce an indexical focus that points 
to Wan and his family as Betawi social types. In short, as the story unfolds, we 
are provided with pictures of different participant constellations with habitual 
patterns of sign exchange.
As with extract 6.3.3, we can also differentiate Sutini’s ability to under-
stand Betawi forms from Melani’s ability to understand Javanese forms. 
Living in Jakarta in a neighborhood inhabited by Betawi social types implies 
that Sutini is being represented as someone who has learned to comprehend 
these forms from participation in local social life. Melani, on the other hand, 
seems to be represented as engaging in knowledging. That is, she is more 
likely to have learned to understand Javanese through participation in the 
type of one-to-many participation frameworks described in ­chapters 2 and 
3.  Where the use of English fragments is concerned, as a low-income stall 
owner, Sutini’s ability to use English fragments is locally accountable in terms 
of the ubiquitous character of English in Indonesians’ everyday life (e.g., 
English medium films and television programming), some school English sub-
jects, and perhaps some study in one of the many short English courses found 
throughout Indonesia. As someone represented as much better off economi-
cally, Melani’s ability to understand English forms is locally accountable by a 
trend whereby overseas study options are often taken by Indonesians who can 
afford them or who are lucky enough to get scholarships (see also section 4.5). 
As with the representations analyzed in section 3.7 and extract 6.3.3, here we 
are also seeing models of doing unity or togetherness that do not exclusively 
involve Indonesian.
This soap is exemplary in its representation of complexity because, in 
addition to having Javanese migrants who speak Javanese and English and 
understand Betawi, there are also representations of those of Chinese ances-
try who use many different ways of speaking. In this soap, there are in fact 
three types, all of which have received sustained attention in the literature on 

	
Representing and Authorizing Linguistic Superdiversity	
165
Chinese Indonesians (e.g., Coppel, 1983; Goebel, 2009, 2010b; Hoon, 2006; 
Purdey, 2006; Suryadinata, 2004a, 2004b; Wolff & Poedjosoedarmo, 1982). 
These three types include (1) those who have been referred to locally and in 
the literature as peranakan (Chinese Indonesians who have lived in Indonesia 
for many generations) (in this case, Melani is represented as peranakan; she 
is seated in ­figure 6.4.1); (2) those who have been referred to locally and in the 
literature as totok (Chinese who are first- generation migrants to Indonesia) 
(in this case, Babah Liong, who is the man standing in ­figure  6.4.1); and 
(3) the children of totok Indonesians (in this case, Alung who is the son of 
Babah Liong; see ­figure 6.4.2). Representations of these social types rely on 
emblems that have indexical links with them. At the same time, such repre-
sentations help recirculate these emblems and their indexical links to these 
social types.
For example, as can be seen in ­figures 6.4.1 and 6.4.2, Babah Liong (Mr. 
Liong) is visually represented as a totok Chinese in a number of ways. These 
include his dress and appearance (e.g., a thin moustache, a colorful cap, and a 
pigtail), his work activity (as a shop owner), his workplace (which doubles as his 
home), and furnishings (including a picture of a dragon in his shop, a table with 
a candle below this dragon, another table draped with a red cloth in his guest 
room, and red walls and drapes. He is also frequently referred to as babah, a 
term stereotypically used for addressing older Indonesians of Chinese ancestry.
Just as important, we hear Babah Liong and Melani engaging in a number 
of language practices that offer noticeable contrasts. For example, when speak-
ing with his son’s former girlfriend Melani (who is represented as a peranakan), 
Babah Liong uses Indonesian that is disfluent and grammatically, morphologi-
cally, and phonologically marked, as in extract 6.4.2 below. This interaction 
occurs after Melani asks for a bit more advice from Sutini about how to handle 
her love life (discussed in extract 6.4.1 above), though she does not wait to listen 
to the response. Instead Melani leaves Sutini’s coffee shop to visit the home of 
her ex-boyfriend Alung, where she meets Alung’s father, Babah Liong. Forms 
FIGURES 6.4.1 AND 6.4.2  Representing Chinese-ness: Babah Liong with son and Melani
Source: ANTV, Bukan Romeo Juliet, Sunday, August 16, 2009 (8–9 p.m.)

166	
Language and Superdiversity
associated with Chinese-ness are in underlined bold caps, and forms associated 
with Indonesian are in plain font.
Extract 6.4.2  Representing older layers of diversity: Chinese-ness in Jakarta
Babah Liong
  1
  2
  3
  4
  5
  6
  7
melani . kalau lu olang masih . suka ma si
alung . coba kamu kembali lagi . terus 
kamu belusaha . jangan putus asa::h . 
OWEH yakin kok alung masih suka sama
kamu . [ dan yang lebih penting . itu 
bagaimana caranya . si alung bisa jauh ama 
si zaenab dan putus . terus ah . OWEH
Melani if you a person still 
likes Alung,
it is enough to come 
back. And
you try, don’t give up,
I’M certain that Alung 
still likes
you. And even more 
important is
what is the way Alung can be 
separated
from Zaenab and break up. 
And ah, I
Melani
  8
  9
10
11
             [ (starts to move body away from 
Babah Liong then puts up hand) SUK SUK 
(takes deep breath) um . um boleh melani 
ditinggal sendirian nggak SUK .
FATHER, FATHER,
um, um, may I be left alone
or not FATHER?
Babah Liong
12
13
14
15
a::h . ah bisa . dan OWEH yakin . kamu 
mungkin mau befikir yang jerni . telus .
a::h . [ menyusun bagaimana kata kata  
melaih si alung
Ah, ah yes, and I am 
certain, you
maybe want to think 
clearly, and
ah about how to best put 
your words to win 
back Alung.
Melani
16
17
         [ (starts shaking head and puts up 
hand) bukan .
No.
Babah Liong
18
huh .
What?
Melani
19
ah bukan itu SUK .
Ah, not that FATHER.

	
Representing and Authorizing Linguistic Superdiversity	
167
Babah Liong
20
ah ah .
Yes, go on.
Melani
21
22
ah. soalnya dari tadi . melani . um maaf 
SUK ya .
Ah, the problem is that ear-
lier, I, um forgive [me]
 FATHER yeah
Babah Liong
23
ah ah .
Yes, go on.
Melani
24
25
26
kaya . ah ada hawa hawa gimana gitu SUK 
ya . ada kaya yang lupa . gosok gigi (puts 
hand over mouth) =
It’s like, ah there is a smell 
or something you know 
FATHER,
yeah it is like
someone forgot to clean their 
teeth.
Babah Liong
28
29
30
31
                                 = (looks around with a
confused look) ah siapa ya . cuma bedua 
[ (points back and forth to himself and 
Melani)
Ah who could it be, yeah? It 
is just the two
of us.
Melani
32
33
[ (low laugh while pointing at Babah Liong 
and nodding head)
It is you.
Babah Liong
34
35
36
[ (puts hand up to mouth and smells breath) 
ah . ya OWEH . OWEH sudah seminggu . 
tidak gosok gigi .
Ah, yes ME. It’s been a week 
since I last
brushed my teeth.
Source: ANTV, Bukan Romeo Juliet, Sunday, August 16, 2009 (8–9 p.m.)
There are interesting aspects of this talk that point to linguistic superdiversity 
via characters’ competence to comprehend and their use of a diverse set of semi-
otic features. Starting with terms of self and other reference, we can see that in 
comparison to extract 6.4.1 where Melani used the terms Mbak (sister) and aku 
(I), here Melani uses suk (father/elder) for other references (lines 9, 11, 19, and 
24) and her own name for self reference (lines 10 and 21), while also understand-
ing lu (you) and terms for I (oweh) on lines 1, 4, 7, 12, and 35. Just as often as 
not, we can also see that these kin terms are used within an intonation unit with 
features associated with Indonesian, thus pointing to alternation as the medium. 

168	
Language and Superdiversity
As with many of the previous representations we have examined, here alterna-
tion and superdiversity are being naturalized through institutionally authorized 
representations.
In contrasting intonation units, we also see that Babah Liong’s talk is repre-
sented as rather different from Melani’s, insofar as sometimes his talk is not gram-
matically complete in an intonation unit. For example, we could expect his talk in 
lines 1 and 2 (“kalau lu olang masih . suka ma si alung”) to occur without the pause 
after masih. When compared with Sutini’s and Melani’s talk in extract 6.4.1 and 
Melani’s talk here, we are left with an impression of disfluency. We also see that on 
occasion, Babah Liong’s talk is marked by word repetition. For example, in line 
1, he uses a term of address lu (you) and then the person classifier orang. In this 
soap, he is the only person represented as engaging in this type of repetition. In 
addition, he is represented as pronouncing the liquid alveolar /r/ differently from 
Melani and Sutini. For example, Melani consistently trills her /r/ in the words send-
irian (line 11) and dari (line 21), as does Sutini in the words cari (line 8) and rebut 
(line 15) in extract 6.4.1. Babah Liong, on the other hand, is represented as either 
deleting /r/ altogether in words such as be//fikir, “to think” (line 13) and be//dua, 
“us/together” (line 29), or lateralizing /r/ to become /l/ in words like olang (line 1), 
belusaha (line 3), telus (line 13), and melaih (line 15). Alone, each of these features 
are quite ambiguous, but when taken together with the visual representations, the 
practices engaged in by Babah Liong, and the narrative, we see the construction 
and reproduction of a Chinese social type who is represented as being very differ-
ent from other Indonesians in the soap.
As we shall see below, in representations of talk with his son Alung (extract 
6.4.3), we can also say that these representations also position Babah Liong 
as an exemplar of the type of superdiversity one finds in mega-cities such as 
Jakarta. In this extract, we see Babah Liong now fluently speaking with his son 
using a mix of Sundanese, Javanese, and Indonesian. In this setting, Melani 
has returned after being escorted out by Alung, who is worried that his new 
love, Zaenab, may mistakenly think that he is still dating Melani. However, as 
with Melani’s earlier visit (extract 6.4.2), Alung’s father, Babah Liong, encour-
ages Melani to stay and talk with Alung because he will benefit financially 
from his son’s marriage to her. (Earlier, Babah Liong also made it clear to 
Alung that he did not like him dating Zaenab.) Some of the unspoken reasons 
here also include Babah Liong’s competition with Zaenab’s father for the affec-
tions of Sutini, whom we met in extract 6.4.1. As Babah Liong goes back into 

	
Representing and Authorizing Linguistic Superdiversity	
169
his shop hopefully leaving Alung and Melani to rekindle their romance, the 
following talk ensues.
Extract 6.4.3  Representing habitual linguistic superdiversity in Jakarta
Alung
1
mel . nggapain di sini .
Mel, why are you here (again)?
Melani
2
3
(smile changes to shocked look and moves
body away from Alung)
Babah Liong
4
5
6
7
(comes back through curtain separating his
shop and sitting room) hei gélo . kalau
ngomong dengan awéwé . (points at
Alung) [ SING sopan atuh sia
Hey dummy, if
you talk with a woman you 
(do it)
WITH etiquette, ok!
Alung
8
9
             [ (moves body backward, then nods 
and moves shoulder down while smiling.)
Yes.
Source: ANTV, Bukan Romeo Juliet, Sunday, August 16, 2009 (8–9 p.m.)
The talk in extract 6.4.3 exemplifies linguistic superdiversity in Indonesia for a 
number of reasons. First, we see that Babah Liong, who through his usage is rep-
resented as a recent migrant to Indonesia, uses linguistic signs from three differ-
ent semiotic registers, including Javanese, Sundanese, and Indonesian. Second, 
we see that he uses these forms within an intonational unit, thus representing 
alternation as the medium. Third, his usage here is not primarily Indonesian and 
disfluent, as in his interactions with Melani and Sutini (e.g., extracts 6.4.1 and 
6.4.2) and other neighbors. Fourth, he habitually speaks with his son using these 
features. The contrasts in usage among different participant constellations also 
helps add to the idea that each participant constellation has some sort of habitual 
register usage. In short, Babah Liong is represented as a social type who uses 
different sets of fragments from different semiotic registers depending on partici-
pant constellation. As with Sutini, here Babah Liong’s alternation and linguistic 
superdiversity are more generally represented as common and everyday.
In sum, we have seen that the representation of linguistic superdiversity is 
done in similar ways to the representation of diversity that we examined in sec-
tion 6.3. In the case of mediums other than Indonesian, typically, this is done 
through the use of a few fragments or features from widely circulating semiotic 
registers associated with the voices of social types belonging to imagined ethnic 
communities. In the case of the ability to use or understand English fragments, 
this was locally accountable by what we know about the ubiquitous nature of 

170	
Language and Superdiversity
English in Indonesians’ everyday lives, and for the more privileged segments of 
Indonesian society, by their ability to pay to study abroad. Differences in tra-
jectories of socialization also helped differentiate practices of adequation from 
practices of knowledging. Adequation was typically associated with learning 
locally, while an ability to engage in knowledging was more likely to be an out-
come of participation in the types of one-to-many participation frameworks 
described in ­chapters 2 and 3.
Both representations of diversity and superdiversity were rather common 
in my 2009 database and could be found in a range of soaps and other genres. 
For example, I identified similar practices in the long-running comedy sketch Sri 
Mulat, which was aired on Global TV in the 9–10 p.m. slot; the comedy sketch 
Acara Bebas Stres Seger, aired on ANTV in the 7–8 p.m. slot; the comedy series 
Lupa Lupa Ingat, aired on TPI in the 7–8 p.m. slot; the music show Acara Inbox, 
aired on SCTV in the 8–9 a.m. slot; the celebrity gossip show Obsesi, aired on 
Global TV in the 9–10 a.m. slot; and so on. As with section 6.3, the representa-
tions in this section are also different than those discussed in section 6.2 because 
there were no metapragmatic commentaries that anchored linguistic signs to geo-
graphic space or a named language. However, in some cases, as with Babah Liong 
and Wan Abud’s family, these signs were anchored via their association with 
metasemiotic commentaries, such as those offered through the co-occurrence 
of other visual signs, such as dress, appearance, furnishings, activity type, and 
so on. Even so, Babah Liong was not represented as Sundanese or Javanese, and 
Sutini’s Javanese-ness was only implied by her habitual usage of Javanese frag-
ments. Finally, some of the representations in this section added to what seems 
to be the continued institutional modeling of a type of sociability wherein talk 
involving those from different backgrounds is rarely conducted in a medium that 
is exclusively Indonesian. That these representations also presupposed an audi-
ence that understood them also helps to circulate ideas about the commonness or 
naturalness of linguistic superdiversity.
6.5  Conclusion
In this chapter, I started to more directly engage with scholarship on superdiver-
sity by showing how representations of linguistic superdiversity and knowledging 
that were starting to become part of Indonesian mediascapes in the early 1990s 
(­chapter 3) were by 2009 ubiquitous across a range of television stations and genres. 
In doing so, I pointed out how the representation of alternation and superdiver-
sity contrasted with the representation practices described in ­chapter 5, where 
linguistic forms were anchored to ethnic social types and/or region. I suggested 
that the representational practices examined in this chapter not only denaturalize 
the language/ethnicity links that I have described throughout this book, but they 
also provide insights into the outcomes and enabling potentials of processes of 
 

	
Representing and Authorizing Linguistic Superdiversity	
171
enregisterment (i.e., one-to-many participation frameworks and the up-scaling of 
people and idea mobility described in ­chapters 2–4). In particular, I point out that 
in contrast to the New Order period, the doing of unity in diversity is no longer an 
activity that is ideologized as something done solely in Indonesian. Alternation 
and adequation are increasingly common in representations of doing unity in 
diversity. These representations thus point to a process of revaluing whereby the 
make-up of orders of indexicality is changing domain by domain.
More specifically, section 6.2 focused on understanding representations 
of alternation practices that were stylized and those that resembled adequa-
tion. I pointed out that alternation often involved fragments that had associa-
tions with ethnic communities and locale. I suggested that these practices were 
accountable with reference to notions of enregisterment. Participation in pro-
cesses of enregisterment that occurred on a mass scale from 1966 onward also 
provided the fragmented competence needed to engage in acts of knowledging 
described in this chapter and in ­chapter 3. In contrast to the televised material 
covered in ­chapters 3 and 5 where we had the representation of multiple voices 
usually anchored to different parts of Indonesia, in the talk I examined in section 
6.2 onward, these voices were now represented as spoken in settings associated 
with the city.
In section 6.3, I examined how mobility and diversity are represented through 
the use of fragments that are associated with widely circulating semiotic registers 
that have voices of imagined ethnic communities within their constellation of 
signs. I provided examples of interactions among those who were represented as 
sharing similar trajectories and similar ethnic voices, and representations of the 
use of ethnic voices across lines of difference where participants were represented 
as understanding each other’s talk. In section 6.4, I went on to look at representa-
tions of superdiversity. In contrast to the representations examined in section 6.3, 
typically, representations include a number of fragments. Each individual frag-
ment had an association with a widely circulating semiotic register that in turn 
had associations with the voices of social types belonging to imagined ethnic 
communities. I pointed out that in cases involving representations of the social 
pursuit of linguistic sameness (adequation), this was typically associated with 
learning locally, while an ability to engage in knowledging was more likely to 
be an outcome of participation in the processes of enregisterment described in 
­chapters 2 and 3.
In engaging with some of the common themes surrounding the theorizing 
and study of superdiversity (Blommaert, 2010; Blommaert & Rampton, 2011; 
Rampton, 2011; Vertovec, 2007), we can say that work on superdiversity has typi-
cally been concerned with the type of diversity found in one-to-few participation 
frameworks. Here I have extended this scholarship by looking at representations 
of superdiversity in one-to-many participation frameworks. In addition, and 
again as with my observations in ­chapter  5, the long-term unintended conse-
quence of processes of enregisterment in Indonesia is that they have enabled the 

172	
Language and Superdiversity
layering of diversity over diversity, in this case, by facilitating a new type of socia-
bility that I have described as adequation and knowledging. This type of socia-
bility seems to already be part of television producers’ imaginations about their 
audiences because they produce such representations as mundane and everyday 
and expect their audiences to understand them.
Another contribution to scholarship on superdiversity relates to how people 
do togetherness in difference in superdiverse settings (Ang, 2003; Goebel, 2010a, 
2010b; Smets, 2005; Vertovec, 2007: 1045; Werbner, 1997; Wise, 2005). Typically, 
work to date focuses on doing togetherness in difference in face-to-face encounters, 
rather than representations of such encounters, which has been the focus of this 
chapter. Indeed, a primary focus here is how Indonesian television has provided 
models of people doing unity in diversity. In many ways, these representations 
are quite accurate portrayals of what happens on the ground in some places in 
Indonesia. As we will see in ­chapters 7 and 8, representations of knowledging also 
resemble the type of practices Indonesians engage in when involved in face-to-face 
interaction. For example, in ­chapter 8, we find Indonesians using their knowledge 
of ethnic stereotypes and the linguistic signs associated with them to evaluate par-
ticular representations of ethnic stereotypes. Often these evaluations sit in con-
trast to how another co-present viewer, who has socially identified him/herself as a 
member of the represented group, evaluates these representations.

173
7
Talk and Conviviality among Indonesians in Japan
7.1  Introduction
The central aim of this chapter relates to understanding how a group of transna-
tional Indonesians from different backgrounds do togetherness while in Japan. 
In adding to more general scholarship about how people do togetherness in 
difference in settings characterized by diversity (e.g., Ang, 2003; Brettell, 2003; 
Vertovec, 2007; Werbner, 1997; Wise, 2005), I focus on the communicative prac-
tices that figure in the building and reproduction of what have been described as 
convivial relationships (Blommaert, 2013b; Williams & Stroud, 2013). The idea of 
conviviality relates to fleeting interactional moments across lines of difference. 
The need to be convivial, it is suggested, relates to the conditions of superdiver-
sity, which often require and/or produce conviviality as a necessary interactional 
practice that helps in securing some good, service, or employment in a setting 
where norms for how to interact are locally emergent.
Even so, theorization about the idea of conviviality seems to also imply 
the habitual use of communicative practice across lines of difference. That the 
fleeting and the habitual are so semiotically and temporally different invites a 
more nuanced account of the range of language practices that can be described 
as convivial and ultimately requires some sort of semantic distinction, which 
I make in section 7.2. In short, here I use conviviality to refer to the pursuit of 
common ground in fleeting moments of interaction among strangers, while I use 
the term “togetherness in difference” to refer to subsequent practices of con-
viviality among those who have just become acquainted. In this chapter, I focus 
on how conviviality is interactionally achieved among a group of transnational 
Indonesians living in Japan during two temporally close speech situations. In 
contrast, in ­chapter 8, I examine how language practices figure in the building 
of togetherness in difference across a number of temporally distant speech situa-
tions. Section 7.3 introduces some of these Indonesians and provides some back-
ground as to why conviviality is necessary for what is largely a struggling group 
of postgraduate students and their families.
 
 

174	
Language and Superdiversity
In both chapters, we will see a whole range of language practices being used 
to build and reproduce positive interpersonal relationships. Some of these ways of 
speaking are often referred to as “small talk” in the literature. In this chapter and 
in ­chapter 8, I am especially concerned with non-minimal responses, repetition, 
and teasing. I draw out the relationship between these practices and conviviality 
in section 7.2. We also know that the type of talk we will examine here has multiple 
functions. For example, we know that talk can contribute to the simultaneous devel-
opment of identities and epistemologies (Wortham, 2006). In line with Bakhtin’s 
(1981) and Vološinov’s (1973 [1929]) ideas about the multiple meanings inherent in 
discourse, this chapter adds to this literature by teasing out the multiple functions 
of talk in a particular setting. In addition to showing how talk figures in the building 
of convivial relations in sections 7.4 and 7.5, I also show how talk relates to ongoing 
social identification and the assigning of meaning to an unknown word.
7.2  Conviviality and Small Talk
Anthropologists and cultural studies scholars have made strong arguments about 
the need to focus on the communicative practices of mobile and displaced persons 
as a way of understanding how togetherness in difference is done in settings char-
acterized by diversity (e.g., Ang, 2003; Brettell, 2003; Vertovec, 2007; Werbner, 
1997; Wise, 2005). Sociolinguists have provided us with the tools to examine how 
togetherness and/or conflict are achieved in face-to-face talk across lines of dif-
ference (e.g., Gumperz, 1982; Rampton, 1995; Tannen, 1984). Rampton’s (1995) 
work on crossing and more recent accounts of similar practices (e.g., Blommaert 
et al., 2005a, 2005b; Goebel, 2010b; Kramsch & Whiteside, 2008; Williams & 
Stroud, 2013) provide exemplary approaches for investigating how the doing of 
togetherness in difference can be manifested linguistically in face-to-face inter-
actions in settings where multiple mediums are commonly used.
In looking at performances of linguistic superdiversity in standup comedy 
and hip hop performances, Williams and Stroud (2013) emphasize that these 
performances help to transcend ideas that linguistic features belong to any 
group in particular and help to model a particular type of sociability they refer 
to as “conviviality.” They see conviviality as the productive points of contact 
between mobile and often displaced persons (i.e., those who inhabit and consti-
tute a superdiverse setting) during the course of their mundane everyday activi-
ties. They emphasize that the idea of “productive” encompasses not just positive 
interpersonal relations but the struggles, contestations, and negotiations that 
produced these positive relations. While the idea of conviviality seems to involve 
face-to-face interaction and longer-term social relations, I want to suggest that it 
needs to be differentiated from subsequent and emergently habitual practices of 
conviviality, which I refer to as the doing of togetherness in difference. In doing 
so, I want to emphasize a move from fleeting interaction to longer-term social 
 

	
Talk and Conviviality among Indonesians in Japan	
175
relationships. This is because the idea of conviviality, as developed by Williams 
and Stroud (2013), seems to be built on fleeting moments of interaction and does 
not follow up on subsequent interaction in a number of ways.
First, their work focuses on the production of linguistic superdiversity by 
standup comedians and hip hop performers, and thus we do not get to see how 
these practices of conviviality are interpreted by audiences. Second, for many 
reasons, people do go beyond fleeting interactions to regular habitual interac-
tion that can lead to long-term social relationships (Goebel, 2010b). In multilin-
gual settings where there are habitual social relations, there can be a move from 
engaging in crossing in face-to-face interaction to adequation (i.e., the linguis-
tic pursuit of social sameness; Bucholtz & Hall, 2004a). In this sense, crossing 
and conviviality can be seen as interrelated practices, as well as precursors to 
more habitual conviviality where crossing becomes so common that talk is best 
described as language alternation as the medium (e.g., Alvarez-Cáccamo, 1998; 
Gafaranga & Torras, 2002) and ultimately can be considered as a new locally 
emergent semiotic register, as discussed in ­chapters 2 and 3. In other words, in 
cases of habitual interaction, some of the defining features of crossing disappear, 
and habitual crossing is better defined as something like adequation.
Convivial relations can be interactionally achieved via a whole gamut 
of practices. Classic anthropological and sociological works show that con-
vivial relations are built through practices of reciprocity (e.g., Goffman, 1971; 
Malinowski, 1996 [1922]; Mauss, 1966 [1925]). Within anthropology, the idea of 
reciprocity continues to be used to understand convivial practices across lines of 
difference, as can be seen in Wise’s (2009) work. In this work, Wise suggests that 
the giving and receiving of food, offers of assistance, recipes, lessons, and so on, 
build convivial relations because these practices represent an important display 
of mutual recognition. If we look at some of the work on small talk, we also see 
that reciprocity seems to be an underlying feature of displays of recognition.
Studies of small talk show that recognition is done through the giving and 
receiving of compliments, the exchange of a joke for laughter (Ryoo, 2005), rep-
etition (Tannen, 1989), the pursuit of sameness in states of being (Ryoo, 2005), 
teasing (Strachle, 1993), non-minimal responses (McCarthy, 2003), and so on. 
McCarthy’s (2003) work, for example, shows how a single response token (e.g., 
“yes”) indexes hearer-ship while the use of non-minimal responses (e.g., “yes, yes, 
heem”) can index engaged listening. The former practice can be seen as display-
ing a basic type of conviviality, while the latter starts to move conviviality toward 
relationships more commonly labeled as friendships, or what I referred to earlier 
as togetherness in difference.
Non-minimal responses are part of larger set of interactional practices referred 
to as repetition and more recently the “social pursuit of sameness” (Bucholtz & 
Hall, 2004b). As Tannen (1989), Berman (1998), Bjork-Willen (2007), and others 
have shown, repetition of others’ words, utterances, or embodied practices can 
index and produce positive interpersonal social relations. When interactants know 

176	
Language and Superdiversity
little about each other, showing that you have similar linguistic repertoires, dispo-
sitions, opinions, and so on seems to not only provide interactional recognition of 
the other, but also tacit approval of their ways of speaking, while also establishing 
common ground on which future interactions can be based (Enfield, 2006). Enfield 
(2006: 422) defines common ground as “knowledge openly shared by specific pairs, 
trios, and so forth.” Common ground is achieved through participants’ ability 
to jointly agree on referents in interaction (Enfield, 2006; Hanks, 2006). These 
referents have typically been the subject of prior interaction. Even so, humans’ 
pro-social proclivities (e.g., Boyd & Richerson, 2006; Enfield, 2006; Levinson, 
2006; Liszkowski, 2006; Tomasello, 2006) also help those who do not have a history 
of prior interaction to nevertheless move toward sharing common ground.
Like practices of reciprocity, the interactional pursuit of common ground 
is both a form of conviviality and an investment in future social relationships 
(Blommaert, 2012; Enfield, 2006, 2009). In transnational settings and those char-
acterized by diversity, the pursuit of conviviality is typically done among strang-
ers rather than kin (Bunnell, Yea, Peake, Skelton, & Smith, 2012; Wise, 2009) and 
is ultimately about securing resources needed to survive in a new environment 
(Blommaert, 2013b). Knowledge about housing options, employment options, the 
least expensive or best shops, and so on (e.g., common ground) can only be estab-
lished if such strangers can successfully interactionally negotiate what constitutes 
conviviality. In what follows, I suggest that the type of small talk discussed earlier 
seems to help establish common ground while also acting as a form of conviviality 
among strangers.
As the building block of social relationships more generally, talk is also a major 
factor for the doing of identity work. While there have been a plethora of book-length 
treatments and articles on identity in the last twenty-five years or so (e.g., Antaki & 
Widdicombe, 1998; Auer, 2008; Georgakopoulou, 2007; Le Page & Tabouret-Keller, 
1985), Wortham’s (2006) work requires special mention. On the one hand, he has 
shown the utility of tracing participants, signs, and meanings across speech situa-
tions. The importance of viewing someone’s interactional trajectory also underpins 
why I think conviviality in fleeting moments needs to be differentiated from more 
habitual types of conviviality. On the other hand, Wortham has shown how social 
identification is intimately tied to other activities, such as learning. Here I draw upon 
these insights to show how conviviality is intimately tied with the social identification 
of participants over time and the assigning of meaning to a particular linguistic form.
Throughout this book, I have looked at the semiotic make-up of ethnicity 
(e.g., language, place, and social practice) and how this make-up has changed 
and been revalued over time. Another more modest aim of this chapter is to pro-
vide a situated interactional example of this process by focusing on how just one 
word becomes indexed with a named ethnic language. I will draw upon Vološinov 
(1973 [1929]), who pointed out that while words and utterances do have some 
brought-along meanings, often meanings are constantly negotiated and contested 
among participants involved in interactions. Vološinov (1973 [1929]: 81) referred 
to the multi and dialogical nature of word meaning as “multiaccentuality.” In 

	
Talk and Conviviality among Indonesians in Japan	
177
drawing out the tension between multiaccentuality and fixedness, I draw upon 
the work on enregisterment discussed in ­chapter 2 to show how particular asso-
ciations can become enregistered over a number of speech situations while high-
lighting how this all relates to broader revaluing processes.
7.3  Methods and Participants
The data that I use in this and the next chapter is drawn from a project that didn’t 
start out as one that was interested primarily in conviviality and small talk. Instead, 
I was interested in how Indonesians interpreted and talked about televised rep-
resentations of ethnicity. Although an anthropological study of television view-
ing in Indonesia would have been ideal, without leave from university teaching 
and administration in Japan, I could not make the long-term time commitment 
that such a study required. Instead, I drew upon work on language attitudes and 
ideologies in interactional sociolinguistics and social psychology (Lambert, 1986 
[1967]; Rampton, 1995; Tannen, 1993) to set up a type of focus group study that 
would enable me to gain insights into participants’ ideologies about sign usage 
through the use of audio-video recordings. In this sense, my methods differ from 
that used in much of the work on small talk and social relations, which focused 
on less laboratory-type contexts. Even so, this type of context offers a number of 
opportunities to focus on how people do conviviality through talk.
Importantly, although most of these participants knew each other to varying 
degrees through their involvement in support networks, bringing them together 
in this setting required talk that would build and/or reproduce interpersonal rela-
tions, as well as talk that would figure in the social identification of participants. 
In looking at the backgrounds of the seventeen participants in this study, I’ll 
start by pointing out some of the similarities in their trajectories of socialization 
before moving on to the differences. These Indonesians were all from a highly 
mobile middle-income population. They were primarily graduate students and/
or the spouses of graduate students studying at a university in Nagoya. Many had 
lived abroad on several occasions with their parents when they were younger and 
some had lived abroad later in life while pursuing graduate degrees.
Most had lived in at least two Indonesian provinces where they had learned 
local semiotic registers, frequently referred to as named regional languages 
(bahasa daerah). All participants had a trajectory of socialization that included 
repeated exposure to fragments of these registers and their associated signs, as well 
as exposure to a semiotic register that has become associated with a named lan-
guage, Indonesian. Some of the primary contexts in which this occurred included 
interactions with other Indonesians from a different background—though as 
I have shown elsewhere, this set of semiotic registers is locale-specific (Goebel, 
2010b)—and through their participation in the Indonesian education system. 
Typically, this started with primary school in the early 1970s and ended with 
graduation from an Indonesian university in the mid-1980s.
 

178	
Language and Superdiversity
While this group of Indonesians clearly fits into what is essentially 
middle-class Indonesia, nevertheless, like many postgraduate students across the 
world, they were not wealthy and lived frugal lives while in Nagoya. Although many 
benefited from the increased push by the Indonesian government to increase the 
number of postgraduates working in government offices and universities (see sec-
tion 4.5), typically, their scholarships were small by Japanese standards, with most 
taking on part-time jobs to support themselves and their families. As I became 
part of the Indonesian network in Nagoya, because of my long-term interest in 
Indonesia and also because of my Indonesian spouse, I learned that most of these 
Indonesian students lived in the old, yet-to-be-made-earthquake-proof public 
housing located on the outer fringes of Nagoya. In many ways, a comfortable life 
in Nagoya was made possible by the support networks that had emerged through 
their own and their predecessors’ efforts. One such network was the Nagoya 
branch of the Indonesian Student Union of Japan (PPI Japan).
This network provided lists of people who knew Japanese; lists of people who 
knew the least expensive places to buy furniture, clothes, appliances; informa-
tion about where and when houses may become vacant; and how to work with 
(or around) bureaucracy to ensure that you had a place to live. This network 
also organized access to labor and vehicles for moving furniture and so on for 
new arrivals and for those returning; monthly worship gatherings; practice ses-
sions for cultural performances at multicultural festivals; the Saturday school for 
Indonesian children; committees that facilitate these support activities; and so on.
These Indonesians all voluntarily responded to an advertisement seeking 
participants for this study, which was advertised as being concerned with how 
people understood representations of characters and events in soap operas. With 
the help of a couple of Indonesian research assistants, we divided respondents into 
viewing groups of four to five people and invited them to attend four viewing and 
interview sessions over four weeks. Each viewing session lasted between one and 
two hours. Sessions started with some informal chatting to participants about the 
research project and questions about participants’ backgrounds. Following this, 
a comedic soap opera or film was screened (lasting twenty-five to ninety minutes).
These sessions were audio-recorded. In order to help me transcribe partici-
pants’ talk, I also videotaped them while they watched the screenings. Following 
the screening, I  interviewed participants. Questions included those that had 
arisen as a result of participants’ talk during the viewing session, whether they 
had seen the soap or film before, what they thought about it, what they thought 
the relationships were between characters and why they thought so, and where 
they thought the characters were from and why. What I will present in my analy-
sis is the talk that occurred between one of the four groups of participants during 
their first viewing session. During this screening, they watched an episode – Cipoa 
(Con Artist) – from the comedic soap opera Noné, which was discussed in section 
3.5. A summary of participant backgrounds is presented in table 7.3.1.
This group of participants consisted of five people, myself, and an 
Indonesian research assistant. Diagram 7.3.1 shows where each participant 

	
Talk and Conviviality among Indonesians in Japan	
179
Table
        Recorder
Slamet
Zane
Indonesian 
RA
Desi
Lina
Table
Table
Handy-
cam
Television
Gun
+
young son
DIAGRAM 7.3.1  Transnational Indonesians watching television
TABLE 7.3.1
Participant backgrounds
Name
Age
Relationship with  
other participants
History of mobility
Education
Language  
abilities
Years
Place 
Desi (S)
35
Familiar
27
3
5
Bandung
Solo
Japan
MA
Indonesian
Sundanese
Japanese
English
Lina
23
Familiar 
(Slamet’s 
spouse)
8
3
9
1
1.5
0.5
Pekan Baru
Jakarta
Padang
Japan
Padang
Japan
BA
Indonesian
Japanese
Slamet
33
Familiar  
(Lina’s spouse)
21
5
0.5
2
4
0.5
Irian
Bandung
Jakarta
Japan
Padang
Japan
MA
Javanese
Indonesian
English
Gun (S)
37
Familiar
19
6
4
8
Cirebon
Bandung
Jakarta
Japan
PHD
Javanese
Sundanese
Indonesian
Japanese
English
RA
39
Familiar
27
10
2
Solo
Jakarta
Japan
BA
Javanese
Indonesian
Japanese
Me
41
Familiar with  
RA only.
35
3.5
0.5
2
Australia
Semarang
Cirebon
Japan
PHD
Indonesian
Javanese
Sundanese
English

180	
Language and Superdiversity
was seated (all names are pseudonyms). All of these participants knew each 
other through their interactions within the Indonesian community in Nagoya. 
However, Slamet and Lina, a husband and wife couple, had only recently 
arrived in Japan and were not well acquainted with the other participants who 
had all lived in Nagoya for a number of years. Gun had brought his little boy 
along, and he sat on Gun’s lap during the screening and subsequent interview. 
As can be seen in table 7.3.1, most participants were highly multilingual. With 
the exception of Desi and my research assistant, they were also rather mobile. 
Participants were also of similar age (the exception being Lina), and all were 
highly educated.
In sum, we can say that the research design of the project brought together 
a number of groups of Indonesians to view recordings of televised Indonesian 
comedies. This context represents one further setting where participants needed 
to build and/or reproduce convivial relations. It is important not to under-
play this aspect, especially given that as transnationals, each person needed to 
get along with other Indonesians in Nagoya in order to access the informal sup-
port networks there.
7.4  Talk, Conviviality, and Meaning
Throughout the viewing of this soap opera, the use of non-minimal responses 
(e.g., “yes, yes, heem”) and repetition figured in the building and reproduc-
tion of common ground and convivial relations among this group. At the 
same time, their talk also categorized the represented semiotic world and 
the audience in terms of ethnolinguistic identities. We also see how the 
social domain of the meanings of a word, cipoa, widens through repetitions 
of prior utterances by an increasingly large number of participants over 
interactional time.
The first extract of talk that I analyze occurs after an elderly woman has 
narrated a letter that is being read by the main character Dewi. As noted in 
my earlier analysis of this dialogue (extract 3.5.1), this piece of talk is one of 
the first signs that index the language background of the serial and the setting 
as one stereotypically associated with Sundanese-ness. Even so, as we will see, 
understandings about the provenance of a linguistic form, the story’s setting, 
and so on are negotiated and emergent. The talk in extract 7.4.1 occurs after 
a series of images that show a house situated on expansive grounds. (As the 
analysis proceeds, I will introduce any new transcription conventions, though 
the majority of conventions remain the same as those used in the previous 
chapters.)
 

	
Talk and Conviviality among Indonesians in Japan	
181
Extract 7.4.1  From hearer-ship to engaged listening
Gun (S)
1
vila ya (1.0) vilanya si nike (1.0)
It’s a villa yeah? Its Nike’s villa.
Slamet
2
vila (0.8)
[Yes] a Villa.
Desi (S)
3
kaya rumah di kuningan [ laughs
Like houses in Kuningan.
All
4
                                             [ (laugh) =
(Laugh).
Desi (S)
5
6
                                                             = 
kuningan sih (??? ???) =
[In?] Kuningan (??? ???)
Gun (S)
7
                                      = heem . ya:: gitu.
Heem, yeah like that.
About a minute after seeing the images of the house and yard, we see that the 
topic of residence is ratified by three participants through repetitions (indicated 
by an underline) of vila (“villa”) and its rephrasing as rumah (“house”) in lines 
1–3. In engaging in repetition (or the reciprocal exchange of linguistic forms), 
each participant is showing the other that they recognize the referent (villa), and 
thus they also begin to start sharing common ground. We also see that in lines 3 
and 6, Desi notes that the house is like those found in Kuningan (an area located 
in West Java). The repetition that occurs on lines 1–3 and 6 shows how common 
ground and hearer-ship are established. Gun’s non-minimal response in line 7 
shows that he has recognized the referent (Kuningan) and is listening to Desi 
with his first “heem.” The subsequent use of ya gitu (“yeah, like that”) repeats this 
information in a way that suggests engaged listening.
While the establishment of common ground and the use of non-minimal 
responses suggest a reproduction of convivial relations, we need to see how 
the interaction proceeds. (For Gun and Desi, I use “reproduction” rather than 
“build” because these two participants know each other through engagement in 
Indonesian community activities over the previous two years, though as we will 
see, they are uncertain about whether they are members of the same ethnic com-
munity.) This interaction is also interesting because it shows how they categorize 
the semiotic world through the ratification of what houses in Kuningan look like 
on line 7. Even so, at this stage, the social domain of the meaning of signs of place 
seems to be limited to Desi and Gun. We need to follow their talk to see whether 
and to what extent the social domain of place as a sign for understanding other 
content expands over interactional time.
Following the talk in 7.4.1, participants don’t say much until the first adver-
tisement break that occurs nearly ten minutes later. Some of the signs that these 

182	
Language and Superdiversity
participants have access to before their next extended conversation include a 
taxi, which drives into the driveway of Dewi’s newly acquired house, and the 
exchanges that follow between the taxi driver and the passenger (Susi), Susi and 
Dewi, and Dewi and the taxi driver (see, e.g., extracts 3.5.5 to 3.5.7). These signs 
may or may not disambiguate earlier signs about setting. For example, there is the 
text “Bandung Taxi Company” on the taxi door and the taxi also has a license 
plate prefixed by the letter “D” (see ­figure 3.5.1). For those who notice these signs, 
they may recognize them as pointing to a setting in West Java, in particular, the 
capital city of Bandung.
As noted in section 3.5, there are also marked contrasts in linguistic signs 
exchanged in interactions between different participant pairs. For example, in 
the speech event involving Dewi and Susi, they exchange linguistic forms ste-
reotypically associated with Indonesian. In contrast, in the interaction between 
Dewi and the taxi driver that immediately follows, participants exchange 
many forms stereotypically associated with Sundanese, together with embod-
ied ways of speaking not used in the earlier interaction (see section 3.5 for a 
multimodal analysis of these representations). Shortly thereafter, there are 
some brief exchanges between Susi and Ucup, Dewi and Ucup, and finally an 
advertisement before the participants in the viewing session start to talk again  
(extract 7.4.2).
Extract 7.4.2  From engaged listening to discourses of sameness
Desi (S)
  1
  2
apa sih . judulnya . +judulnya apa sih . 
judulnya apa sih+ =
So what is the title? So what is the
title? So what is the title?
Lina
  3
  4
                                = apa tadi judulnya
=
What was the title earlier?
Research Assistant
  5
= ci . cipoa =
Ci, Cipoa.
Desi (S)
  6
                    = +judulnya+ =
The title.
Zane
  7
                                             = cipoa=
Cipoa.
Research Assistant
  8
  9
                                                          =
cipoa =
Cipoa.
Desi (S)
10
= cipoa itu apa ya (0.7)
What is [the meaning of] Cipoa?

	
Talk and Conviviality among Indonesians in Japan	
183
Gun (S)
11
12
13
itu (while turning gaze toward Desi
and smiling) bukan bahasa sunda
bukan =
That isn’t Sundanese is it?
Desi (S)
14
15
16
            = (while moving body forward
and turning gaze toward Gun) ya apa
sih (0.6) cipoa itu (0.5)
Yeah so what does this 
[potentially
Sundanese] term Cipoa mean?
Slamet
17
nggak tahu =
[I]‌ don’t know.
Desi (S)
18
                     = pak gun  =
Mr. Gun?
Gun (S)
19
20
                                         = nggak tahu 
(artinya?) cipoa . cipoa =
[I] don’t know (the meaning?) of
cipoa, cipoa.
Desi (S)
21
                                         = (laughs)(2.3)
Laughs.
In this interaction, there is the continued use of repetition, which helps partici-
pants align with each other on a number of topics while also establishing further 
common ground (e.g., the title of the serial in lines 1–9 and the meaning of the 
word cipoa from lines 10–20). We also see that Gun’s earlier attempt at indexing 
engaged listening (extract 7.4.1, line 7) is being reciprocated through the emer-
gence of a type of discourse of sameness between Desi and Gun. In particular, 
we see that while Gun’s gaze direction and question left some ambiguity as to 
whether the question was addressed to the group or someone whom he thought 
knew Sundanese (lines 11–13), nevertheless, we see that Desi self-selects, suggest-
ing that she was the target of the question. In doing so, she changes her body 
position so that she can see around Lina and Slamet to look at Gun and ask again 
about the meaning of this potentially Sundanese term (lines 14–15). In terms 
of discourses of sameness, what this interactional work appears to be doing is 
creating common knowledge about participants’ ethnolinguistic identities. For 
example, in asking Desi about provenance (lines 11–13), Gun appears to be say-
ing “you are Sundanese and may know” while also implying “you are of the same 
ethnolinguistic background as me.” Taking a sequential view, it also appears that 
Desi ratifies this categorization by checking whether Gun (as opposed to Slamet 
and Lina whom she looks around) can provide a meaning for the term (lines 
14–16 and 18).
In terms of the multiple functions of talk, what we also get from the talk 
in extract 7.4.2 is a tiny glimpse into Gun’s expectations about the relationship 

184	
Language and Superdiversity
between words and signs of place (i.e., houses in Kuningan) and how these are 
used together to evaluate the ethnolinguistic provenance of a new word (line 
11). While, the word cipoa was initially semantically empty in Vološinov’s (1973 
[1929]: 88) terms, now and in this context, it starts to gain a potential meaning 
for two participants, while others are given a lesson or reminder that words in 
general are associated with particular places. In this case, apart from the earlier 
mention of place (Kuningan), we are unsure what triggers a potential ethnolin-
guistic meaning for Gun (line 11) and Desi (lines 15, 16, and 18), but we can sug-
gest that it may also have been the house architecture, the vehicle signage, the 
agreed- upon potential West Java setting (extract 7.4.1), and/or the Sundanese 
usage in the interaction between the characters. Whatever the case, they have 
started to build common ground about ideas of Sundanese-ness.
While the social domain of cipoa as having an ethnolinguistic meaning 
appears to be only as wide as Gun and Desi, this topic will be revisited a number 
of times and by other participants throughout the viewing session and the inter-
view, thus establishing further common ground among participants. As we will 
see, repetition also becomes important in other ways, especially as the repetition 
of others’ utterances increases in a way that appears to help build convivial rela-
tions. The use of repetition in the talk that follows (extract 7.4.3) also co-occurs 
with the activity of determining the provenance of the term cipoa. This talk fol-
lows directly after the talk represented in extract 7.4.2.
Extract 7.4.3  Repetition and the linking of language with place
Zane
22
tukang bohong apa =
Is it con artist?
Research Assistant
23
                                   = tukang bohong =
Con artist.
Zane
24
25
                                                                   =
tukang bohong kayanya =
Maybe it’s like con artist.
Desi (S)
26
27
                                            =+bahasa
sunda?+ (0.8) e::h? =
Is it Sundanese?
Really
Zane
28
29
                                 = kurang tahu
saya (1.0)
I’m not sure.
Gun (S)
30
31
mungkin bandung mungkin ya . daerah 
daerah sunda gitu’ .
Maybe its Bandung, maybe. A 
Sundanese area, yeah.

	
Talk and Conviviality among Indonesians in Japan	
185
Desi (S)
32
[ kayanya nama daerah ya
Yeah, it’s like a place name.
Slamet
33
34
[ settingnya bandung itu . settingnya
(2.0) bisa nama daerah juga ya =
The setting is Bandung, the set-
ting. It
can be a place name yeah.
Desi (S)
35
36
                                                      = saya
kira =
I
think so.
Slamet
37
         = cipoa =
Cipoa.
Desi (S)
38
                        = heeh (0.7)
Yeah.
Slamet
39
(??????) =
Research Assistant
40
              = nama daerah itu pak .
It’s a place name Mr. Zane.
Zane
41
oh nama daerah . ya .
Oh a place name, yeah.
Desi (S)
42
nggak tau tuh
I don’t know.
In the above talk, we can see that repetition continues to function as a way of 
establishing topic (lines 30–34). Just as important, we also see that although 
the topic of provenance has been established by Gun and Desi (lines 30–32), 
Slamet  also repeats this information (lines 33–34). This informational redun-
dancy suggests that repetition is doing something else. As with my earlier inter-
pretations of a non-minimal response (extract 7.4.1) and discourses of sameness 
(extract 7.4.2), this repetition appears to be part of ongoing relationship-building 
efforts, this time on the part of Slamet, who can be seen to be aligning with both 
Gun and Desi. In lines 35 and 36, we also see that Desi repeats, via her agreement 
(saya kira), the earlier series of repetitions involving herself, Gun, and Slamet 
(lines 30–34). This suggests that she is reciprocating Slamet’s interpersonal 
relationship work.
It is also interesting to note that in addition to repetition between utter-
ances, we also now start to see repetition that does not always immediately fol-
low a preceding turn (i.e., it is temporally distant). These instances are indicated 
by a broken underline. For example, although Desi, who is pursuing a master’s 
degree in Japanese language, uses some Japanese (e.g., the use of “eh” in line 27 
that is in bold italic small caps), her whole utterance repeats what Gun said in  

186	
Language and Superdiversity
extract 7.4.2 in lines 11–13. This repetition can also be seen as part of ongoing 
efforts by Desi and Gun to align with each other’s stances toward the meaning 
of the word cipoa. In so doing, their alignment solidifies some common ground 
between them while adding to their earlier pursuits of social sameness, this time, 
sameness in their evaluations of provenance.
At the same time, this talk seems to contribute to the building of convivial 
relations in this setting. Just as important, this repetition also again foregrounds 
Desi’s claims as someone who is entitled or able to evaluate what is Sundanese 
and what is not. In so doing, she is also further strengthening her ethnolinguistic 
identity claims made in extract 7.4.2. In this case, something like “I can evaluate 
this term’s provenance because I am Sundanese.” In so doing, she continues to 
engage in the pursuit of social sameness by implying that she is also the same 
ethnic social type as Gun, namely a Sundanese.
In focusing more squarely on the multiple and often simultaneous functions 
of talk, we can see that working out provenance is intimately tied to identity work 
(in this case, claims about native speakership and entitlement to evaluate terms) 
and relationship work (getting along). For example, after my attempt at assign-
ing a meaning relating to a personal trait (line 22), cipoa’s provenance is again 
questioned. In repeating Gun’s uncertainty about cipoa’s provenance (extract 
7.4.2, lines 11–13), Desi directs the question to me (lines 26 and 27), a question 
that I am unable to answer. Gun then suggests it is a term found in Bandung or a 
Sundanese area (lines 30 and 31). In doing so, cipoa is not only again linked with 
a named language, but also with the region that is stereotypically linked with 
this language. Apart from Lina, one of these links appears to be repeated by all 
participants from line 31 onward. In this sense, the social domain of one of the 
meanings attached to cipoa appears to widen to include Desi, Slamet, Gun, my 
research assistant, and myself. In this case, a place name rather than the earlier 
ethnolinguistic meaning.
After the talk represented in extract 7.4.3, there was no more extended 
conversation about the word cipoa until the end of the serial. Before looking at 
this talk, I take a look at one of the few extended conversations that occurred 
among this group before the serial ended. This piece of talk is interesting inso-
far as it provides examples of the building of common ground and the use of 
non-minimal responses and teasing to build and reproduce convivial relations 
among several of the participants. This talk begins with a discussion about the 
actors’ spouses.

	
Talk and Conviviality among Indonesians in Japan	
187
Extract 7.4.4  Teasing and conviviality
Gun
  1
  2
ini namanya siapa (glancing toward
Desi) =
What’s her name?
Desi
  3
           = dian nitami (0.8)
Dian Nitami.
Gun
  4
(???) (4.4) suaminya anjasmara nih =
(???) her husband is 
Anajsmara, yeah?
Desi
  5
  6
                                                             =
iya . >iya huuh> (0.5) dian nitami (7.6)
Yeah, yes, yes, Dian Nitami.
Gun
  7
tapi udah itu kan . udah cerai ini =
But [they] are already, already 
divorced, right?
Desi
  8
  9
10
                                                           =
(looking toward Gun) e:h . ngga::k .
[ masih
What? No [they] are
still [together].
Slamet
11
[ (looking toward Gun) nggak =
No.
Gun
12
13
                                                     = (looks
toward Desi) eh masih [ (laughs)
Oh still [together].
Desi
14
15
                                        [ awet . awet
(0.4)
Still together, still together.
Slamet
16
17
(after glancing away looks back at
Gun) jangan bikin gosip pak =
Don’t spread gossip Pak [Gun].
Gun
18
19
                                                   = (looks
at Slamet) +hehehe+ [ hehe
Laughs.
Slamet
20
                                     [ hehehehe
Laughs.

188	
Language and Superdiversity
In this interaction, we can see participants showing that they share some com-
mon ground and are thus the same at some level. In particular, we see that 
after Desi mentions the actress’s name on line 3 (Dian Nitami), both Gun and 
Slamet demonstrate that they share some knowledge about this actress and her 
spouse (lines 4 and 11). As in the previous extract, there are also instances of 
non-minimal responses. The first instance of a non-minimal response is found 
in line 6 where Desi answers Gun’s question (line 4) with three “yes” responses. 
The first seems to be a response signaling hearer-ship, while the second “iya 
huuh,” although seemingly redundant, may in fact be signaling engaged listen-
ing. Similarly, while both Desi and Slamet answer Gun’s question about whether 
the actress playing Ayu is already divorced in lines 8–10, we also see that in 
line 14, Desi rephrases her answer. This answer repeats what has already been 
said (“awet awet,” which literally means “to last long,” but here it means some-
thing like “still together”). In so doing, her talk is again more than required 
and invites us to interpret this repetition as helping to build convivial relations, 
this time with Slamet, who has aligned with Desi on the question of whether the 
actor is divorced or not.
We also see that although Desi aligns with Slamet, Slamet is also quick to try 
and build convivial relations with Gun by teasingly accusing him of spreading 
gossip (lines 16 and17). The teasing touches on multiple ideologies about gossip 
and piousness. For example, Gun arrived a little earlier than the other partici-
pants and was finishing his afternoon prayers when other participants arrived. 
Performing his prayers indexed not only his Islamic identity, but also his pious-
ness. Engaging in gossip, which is categorized as sinful, is thus part of the joke. 
The other part is that while gossip can often be meant to be heard by the person 
being gossiped about, in this setting, the people being gossiped about would be 
very unlikely to hear it. Gun appears to orient to this joke by his loud laughter 
(indicated by a “+” surrounding the hehe) and his gaze (lines 18 and 19). Again, 
given that this sequence is not informational, it seems to invite an interpretation 
of another local strategy for producing convivial relations. After this sequence, 
participants don’t say much until the end of the serial when Dewi’s grandmother 
makes her fourth and final appearance to give Dewi the following warning 
(extract 7.4.5).
Extract 7.4.5  From the serial: Another warning from grandmother
1
2
3
4
hati hati dewi (0.8) orang suka 
cipoa::? . +untuk menutupi 
kekurangan kekurangannya yang 
besar’+
Be careful Dewi, those who like
to cipoa do so to cover up
their gross inadequacies.

	
Talk and Conviviality among Indonesians in Japan	
189
At this stage, one of the viewers, Slamet, reiterates that the grandmother is a 
ghost before then hearing the word cipoa. Upon hearing this term, he then initi-
ates the talk represented in extract 7.4.6.
Extract 7.4.6  Negotiating meanings and conviviality
Slamet
  1
  2
  3
neneknya hantu (1.8) +oh+ (1.8) oh
(looks at Desi) cipoa itu bahasa ini deh . 
sunda kayaknya (0.8)
Her grandmother is a ghost. Oh. 
Oh it
looks like cipoa is Sundanese.
Desi
  4 nggak tahu =
[I]‌ don’t know.
Slamet
  5                     = cipoa . orang suka cipoa =
A person who likes to cipoa.
Desi
  6
  7
  8
                                                                   =
tiga puluh tiga tahun jadi orang sunda
baru denger (laughs) =
[I’ve] been a Sundanese for  
thirty-three
years and [I’ve] just heard [this 
word].
Slamet
  9
10
11
12
                                     = cari di ini
(looks at Desi) . (turns back to look at
Slamet) apa kamus bahasa Indonesia
sama anu . kamus .
Look in this,
what is it the Indonesian 
dictionary
and the um, dictionary.
Lina
13
14
orang suka cipoa:: katanya .
[ suka bohong apa (1.0)
She said “Those who like to 
cipoa have a
tendency to tell white lies all the 
time, or something like that.”
Slamet > Gun
15
16
[ bahasa indonesia . kamus besar 
bahasa indonesia =
Indonesian, the Large 
Authorative 
Indonesian dictionary.
Desi
17                                = bohong =
To tell white lies.
Lina
18
19
                                                 = untuk
menutupi kekurangannya =
To
hide their inadequacies.
(continued)

190	
Language and Superdiversity
Desi
20
21
                                              = menipu .
eh =
To deceive,
eh?
Slamet
22      = cipoaé apa ya (1.75)
What does cipoa mean?
Lina
23
24
25
suka:: berdusta mungkin .
ndak tahu itu (1.2) ah omong kosong
(0.9)
Maybe [someone] who regularly 
deceives,
[someone who] doesn’t know, 
[or] talks rubbish.
Slamet
26 [ bahasa
It’s language.
Zane
27
28
[ mudah mudahan tidak begitu
membosankan =
Hopefully this hasn’t been too
boring.
Desi
29
30
                           = nggak . bagus (while 
laughing) [ lucu
No, it was good,
it was funny.
Slamet
31
32
                  [ bahasa sunda . bahasa
sunda kuno (2.7) bahasa sunda kuno
It was Sundanese,
old Sundanese, old Sundanese.
In the above talk, we can see that the provenance of the term cipoa again becomes 
a topic as Slamet suggests cipoa is Sundanese (lines 2 and 3). Desi doesn’t align 
fully with Slamet’s interpretation through her self-identifying as a Sundanese 
who has never heard the term (lines 7 and 8). While her comment repeats her 
uncertainty about provenance, which she shared with Gun (extracts 7.4.2 and 
7.4.3), we can see that this talk also represents a point in which explicit social 
identification occurs through Desi’s claims to native speakership. This social 
identification occurs as part of another sequence where participants assign an 
ethnic meaning to the word cipoa. We also see that Slamet, although not mak-
ing native-speaker claims, defers to kamus besar (“Authorative Dictionary”; 
lines 9–12 and 15–16) where he notes we may find this term. (Kamus besar claims 
authority by being both written and endorsed by the government-funded lan-
guage center in Jakarta.)
In other words, he still holds onto the idea that the provenance of the term 
is Sundanese despite Desi’s claims of not knowing it. His position on this does 
not change as the viewing session is brought to a close, and he notes that it is old, 
archaic Sundanese in lines 31–32. In short, the social domain of one of the mean-
ings associated with the word cipoa—namely its potential Sundaneseness—now 
Extract 7.4.6  (Continued)

	
Talk and Conviviality among Indonesians in Japan	
191
seems to have widened from Gun and Desi to include Slamet. In the early part of 
the interview that follows immediately after this viewing session (extract 7.5.2), 
however, Desi takes up the theme of archaic-ness in a way that suggests align-
ment with Slamet on a number of levels.
Lina also offers a meaning for cipoa that doesn’t relate to provenance, but 
rather to morality, especially a tendency to tell white lies or not be entirely hon-
est (lines 13 and 14). This interpretation is oriented to by Desi in her repetition of 
bohong, “to tell white lies or not be entirely honest” (line 17), and her upgrade of 
this term to menipu, “to deceive” (line 20), which Lina ratifies through her expan-
sion of the meaning to “someone who doesn’t know or talks rubbish” (lines 23 
and 24). In short, the social domain of the meaning of cipoa as relating to a moral 
trait also widens from me (extract 7.4.3) to include Desi and Lina. This sequence 
also appears to be similar to earlier instances of repetition insofar as they func-
tion to establish common ground but also as a type of non-minimal response. In 
other words, the repetition from line 15 onward seems to be doing more than just 
repeating the meaning of the term as something to do with dishonesty. Instead, 
this repetition seems to be contributing to the building of convivial relations, this 
time between Desi and Lina, who to this point have not interacted much.
In addition to showing how the word cipoa gains two separate meanings for 
the pairs Slamet and Desi and Lina and Desi, this talk offers a number of other 
insights. First, it foregrounds Desi’s and Slamet’s expectations about the associa-
tion between linguistic forms and place. In particular, we see that their talk here 
repeats earlier talk (extracts 7.4.1–7.4.3) that anchored the actors to a particular 
place in West Java and suggested that the term cipoa was Sundanese. Second, it 
highlights the idea that native speakers are those who can be associated with a 
particular place (Desi’s comment on lines 7 and 8; Slamet’s attempt to get a judg-
ment from another “native speaker”; Gun on lines 10–12, 15 and 16).
In summary, during this viewing session, we saw how one group of transna-
tional Indonesians built common ground and ultimately convivial relations through 
the use of repetition, non-minimal responses, and teasing. I also pointed out the mul-
tiple functions of their talk. For example, I showed that this interpersonal relation-
ship work was intimately and often simultaneously tied to working out the meaning 
of an unfamiliar word and establishing ethnolinguistic identities as a way of adding 
expertise to judgments about the meaning of the word. As we follow the participants’ 
talk in the interview that was conducted directly after this viewing session, the mean-
ing of cipoa solidifies along with participant identities and interpersonal relations.
7.5  Identities, Togetherness, and Meaning Revisited
In the rest of my analysis, I focus on talk that occurred in the interview that 
immediately followed the viewing session. We see here that as participants move 
into a different speech situation (e.g., from a viewing session to an interview), 
 

192	
Language and Superdiversity
they continue to engage in the building of convivial relations using the features 
of talk discussed thus far. This practice is facilitated by the common ground 
already established during the viewing session. What is also striking about this 
talk is that, while thus far, the meaning of cipoa has been multiaccentuated, in 
the interview that followed, the meanings of the word cipoa became increasingly 
shared among participants, especially the meanings that related to a moral trait 
and provenance. The transcript below represents responses to my fourth ques-
tion, which I formulated while listening to participants talk during the viewing 
session.
Extract 7.5.1  Jointly constructing the meaning of cipoa
Zane
  1
  2
tadi itu . nanya nanya masalah cipoa?
(0.6)
Earlier, there were questions 
about cipoa.
Desi
  3
hm [ m =
Yes.
Lina
  4
[ hmm =
Yes
Zane
  5
  6
  7
= itu. memang (0.5)
seperti di::: (0.5) saya juga kurang tahu 
tadi itu .
Indeed,
it was like in, I also wasn’t sure
earlier.
Desi and Lina
  8
[ laughter
Laughter.
Zane
  9
10
[ kayak? . orang bohong . suka apa . 
gimana gitu? =
It was like someone frequently 
tells white lies, or likes to, 
whatever, you know?
Slamet
11
12
                       = dijelaskan terakhir itu 
ya .
It was explained at the end 
yeah?
Lina
13
heem. orang cipoa suka apa (0.6)
Yes, person with the character-
istic of cipoa likes to um . . .
Slamet
14
[ nutupi
To hide.

	
Talk and Conviviality among Indonesians in Japan	
193
Lina
15
16
[ apa ya . yang menutupi 
kekurangannya =
What was it, yeah. [Someone] 
who hides
their inadequacies.
Desi
17
                             = kekurangan (???) =
Inadequacies (???).
Slamet
18
19
                                                               =
jadi cipoa #mungkin# =
Becomes [someone called] 
cipoa, maybe.
Desi
20
                                        = berarti (0.6)
Which means . . .
Lina
21
jadi cipoa itu seperti apa ya =
So cipoa is like what, yeah?
The importance of the above talk is threefold. First, although there are no 
non-minimal responses, the use of repetition here again seems interesting 
insofar as it is frequently used to show hearer-ship and the establishment of 
common ground (lines 14–17). Second, we also see how the establishment of 
common ground widens the social domain of one meaning of the word cipoa, 
in this case, “to lie and cover up personal inadequacies,” from three partici-
pants (me, Desi, and Lina) to now also include Slamet (lines 14 and 19). Third, 
and related to the first two points, as in the case of their earlier talk about 
“place name” and “language name,” the meaning of the word cipoa has been 
jointly achieved. Even so, this aspect of cipoa’s meaning does not appear to 
solidify further as participants start to again focus on the term’s provenance 
and commonness. Extract 7.5.2 represents this talk that follows immediately 
after the previous extract.

194	
Language and Superdiversity
Extract 7.5.2  Naming languages, native speakership, and pursuing  
social sameness
Desi
22
23
24
= sebenarnya bukan yang jelas . (starts
looking at Gun) kayaknya bukan
bahasa sunda itu . [ kayanya istilah
Actually, it is not clear. 
It appears that it isn’t 
Sundanese, it appears like a 
term . . .
Gun
25
                                 [ kayaknya (???)
That’s what it appears like 
(???).
Slamet
26
27
28
29
30
                                 [ kayaknya .
kayaknya kalau kita buka kamus besar 
kayaknya ada itu . cipoa itu (0.5) tapi 
bahasa yang jarang dipakai kayaknya . 
tidak [ umum #jadi#
It’s like, it’s like if we opened 
the authorative dictionary, 
it’s like the term cipoa would 
be there. But it’s like lan-
guage that is rarely used, so 
it’s not common.
Desi
31
            [ bahasa karuhun =
Ancestor’s language.
Lina
32
33
                                            = bahasa tidak 
[ umum
Language [which] isn’t
common.
Slamet
34
35
[ jangan suka cipoa (1.1) #untuk
menutupi kekurangannya# (1.8)
Don’t cipoa to
cover up inadequacies.
In keeping with her earlier position on the provenance of cipoa (e.g., extract 7.4.3 
in lines 23 and 24 and extract 7.4.6 in lines 7 and 8), Desi reiterates that the term 
is probably not Sundanese (lines 23 and 24), a position Gun appears to ratify 
(line 25). In doing so, she appears to be also identifying Gun as someone with 
native-speaker expertise like herself. When viewed together with earlier instances 
of repetition, this pursuit of social sameness seems to also add to the building 
of convivial relations between these two participants. Slamet, however, does not 
fully align with this suggestion. Instead, in lines 26–30, he reiterates his earlier 
position (see extract 7.4.6) about its probable existence in a dictionary and that 
it is probably an uncommon or archaic form. In doing so, he adds “uncommon” 
to the term’s ever-expanding meanings. The social domain of this meaning also 
seems to widen to include Desi and Lina, who appear to ratify this meaning on 
line 31 and lines 32 and 33, respectively.

	
Talk and Conviviality among Indonesians in Japan	
195
This time, however, his suggestion of cipoa being an uncommon Sundanese 
form is ratified by Desi on line 31. In this sense, it represents an occasion when 
Desi and Slamet, who have earlier disagreed on provenance, now achieve some 
common ground. After again reiterating one of the term’s meanings as relating 
to a negative personal trait (lines 34 and 35), in the talk that follows immediately 
afterward, Desi repeats her alignment with Slamet and Lina around the “archaic-
ness” or “uncommonness” of the term cipoa (extract 7.5.3). This repetition seems 
to be going beyond conversational alignment by repeating the concept that “we 
have aligned/agreed on this topic” to do conviviality.
Extract 7.5.3  It’s uncommon Sundanese spoken by the elderly
Zane
36
37
38
jadi ada? . yang bahasa bahasa lain yang 
tadi #juga# . mungkin ndak (1.0) [ ndak 
  
mengerti gitu .
So is there other language 
from
earlier that maybe [you] 
didn’t, didn’t
understand, you know?
Slamet
39
                                                           [ heem
Yes.
Desi
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
mungkin kan . kalau di bahasa sunda itu
pak Zain’ . ah bahasa sunda itu ada istilah
bahasa karuhun ya . >bahasa karuhun 
itu> bahasa yang tidak digunakan sehari 
hari:: . tapi sebenarnya orang orang tua 
di:: . tanah jawa barat itu menggunakan 
gitu’ .
Maybe, right, if it is 
Sundanese
Mr. Zane, ah Sundanese has 
a term 
bahasa karuhan yeah. Bahasa 
karuhan means a language 
that isn’t used
daily, but actually the elderly 
in West Java use it, you 
know.
Slamet
47
[ heem
Yes.
Desi
48
49
50
51
[ mungkin. generasinya saya . pak gun 
#gitu# tidak begitu mengena::l . (looks
and points open hand at Gun) +eh+ 
>orang sunda> bukan .
Maybe my generation [and] 
Mr. Gun’s
don’t really know the
[language or its words]. Oops!
[You’re] Sundanese aren’t 
[you]?
(continued)

196	
Language and Superdiversity
Gun
52
heem =
Yes.
Slamet
53
54
           = orang [ sunda tapi tidak pernah di 
sunda #dia# (said while smiling)
[He’s] Sundanese but rarely 
lives in
Sunda. (a joke pointing to 
Gun’s near decade-long 
stay in Japan)
Lina
55
                            [ (????????????)
(Unclear utterance. Each 
three question marks indi-
cated a word.)
Desi
56
                            [ (??????) ya . heeh (1.4)
(??????) yes, yes.
As noted in the introduction to this extract, this talk is interesting because of 
the continued use of certain features that contribute to the building of convivial 
relations among participants. In particular, we see Desi again pursuing social 
sameness by literally asking Gun “are you the same as me” in lines 50 and 51: eh 
orang sunda bukan (“You’re Sundanese aren’t you”). In lines 53 and 54, Slamet 
teases Gun, this time about his ambiguous native-speaker credentials, given his 
near decade-long stay in Japan. This is a further example of how teasing is used 
to build convivial relations among a group of relative strangers. We also see that 
Desi is repeating Slamet’s earlier suggestion that the word cipoa is old or archaic 
in lines 42–46, 48 and 49. In so doing, she repeats her earlier alignment with 
Slamet about the archaic-ness of the form, while repeating Lina’s earlier contri-
bution about the form’s uncommonness. In doing so, the social domain of old 
and/or archaic Sundanese as one meaning of the word cipoa has now widened to 
include Slamet, Desi, and Lina.
In addition to highlighting a return to the activity of working out the prove-
nance of the term cipoa, we also see how ideas about place and native speakership 
fit into explanations about provenance. For example, Desi tries to gain alignment 
from Gun (lines 48 and 49) before checking his native-speaker credentials (lines 
50 and 51). In doing so, we get to see again the importance that Desi places on 
native speakership when talking about language. In this instance, it appears that 
her explanation of the term cipoa rests on both the identity that has emerged over 
interactional time (i.e., her identity as a native speaker of Sundanese) and her 
wish to have another native speaker (in this case, Gun) align with her ideas about 
Extract 7.5.3  (Continued)

	
Talk and Conviviality among Indonesians in Japan	
197
why she does not know this term. We also see that Desi has clear ideas about 
the links between Sundanese and a specific region, by her reference to elderly 
Sundanese speakers living in West Java (line 45).
In the next extract, we see that Slamet, who has actually lived and studied for 
five years in Bandung (stereotypically a heartland of Sundanese speakers), now 
also appears to be authorized by Desi to explain aspects of Sundanese-ness. In 
these interactions, we are also provided with some of the signs on which Desi and 
Slamet base their judgments about provenance. The talk in extract 7.5.4 follows 
directly after extract 7.5.3.
Extract 7.5.4  The grandmother is just so Sundanese
Desi (S)
57
58
59
60
jadi e:: . >buat generasi saya tida::k> 
tidak mengenal bahasa #itu# (0.6) tetapi 
karena yang menjadi neneknya inisangat 
sunda . [ sundanese banget gitu ya’ .
So er for my generation [I]‌ 
don’t, don’t
know that language. But 
because the
grandmother is very
Sundanese, very Sundanese, 
you know.
Slamet
61
              [ hmmm (while nodding head)
Yeah.
Zane
62
gi. gimana [ a apa . apa yang? . misalnya
(False start), why, what, what 
is it, for example?
Desi (S)
63
64
                    [ (orang sunda?) (1.0) +dari 
dialek+ . dari dialek . dari mis[ al kan
((Sundanese?)) From [the] 
dialect, from 
the dialect,from for example, 
right.
Lina
65
                                                    [ logat =
Accent.
Desi (S)
66
67
68
                                                                =
logat dari bicara itu (0.5) banyak bahasa 
sunda keluar . dari . dari (0.5)
The speaking accent, a lot of 
Sundanese
also came with it. From, from
(continued)

198	
Language and Superdiversity
Slamet
69
psik psikologinya . (looking at Desi)
Psch, their psychology.
Desi (S)
70
[ heeh
Yes
Slamet
71
72
[ ah bukan psikologi apa namanya .
(looks at Desi) filsafat hidupnya:: =
Ah not their psychology, 
what is it, their
philosophy of life.
Desi (S)
73
74
75
76
                                                           =
filsafat hidupnya itu:? . jadi kalau
membersihkan halaman rumah? . maka:? . 
(looks at Slamet and smiles) >apa lagi>
Their philosophy of life. So if
you clean your yard, then . . .
what else Slamet?
In extract 7.5.4, we see the continued use of repetition as a way of showing 
hearer-ship, establishing reference, and establishing common ground. For 
example, Lina and Desi align on the topic of accent in lines 65–67, and Desi and 
Slamet align on the topic of the philosophy of life (lines 72 and 73). When viewed 
in relation to the prior talk in extract 7.5.3—where “archaic” becomes a ratified 
meaning of the word cipoa between these two—we can say that this talk repeats 
much of the earlier talk. It also adds to their earlier alignment in a way that builds 
on the relationship work that has occurred throughout the whole session (view-
ing and interview). What appears even more striking is that while Desi contested 
Slamet’s knowledge about things Sundanese (extract 7.4.6, lines 7 and 8), here she 
has made a number of concessions that have helped to build common ground 
between the two while also building convivial relations between Desi and Slamet.
In particular, although Desi continues to foreground her expertise and iden-
tity as a Sundanese through her positive evaluation of the authenticity of the tele-
vised representations of Sundanese-ness that she had just watched (lines 59 and 
60), nevertheless, she also ratifies Slamet’s comments about things Sundanese. 
For example, after Slamet seeks approval from Desi in lines 69 and 72, Desi rati-
fies his contribution through the use of “heeh” (line 70), as well as repetition and 
expansion (lines 74–76). In particular, Slamet goes on to explain that the reason 
for classifying cipoa as uncommon and archaic relates to the old-fashioned social 
practices engaged in by the old woman represented in the soap. In this case, it 
is her philosophy of life, which Slamet discusses at length after being invited to 
do so by Desi (in line 76). Without providing a transcript of the rest of the talk, 
Slamet notes that this philosophy relates to something like a clean environment 
around the home and means that we have a clean spirit and healthy life.
In summary, in yet another speech situation, we see the continued use of 
features that seem to be used for the building of convivial relations among this 
Extract 7.5.4  (Continued)

	
Talk and Conviviality among Indonesians in Japan	
199
group of Indonesians, including the use of repetition (both temporally close 
and temporally distant), teasing, and the social pursuit of sameness. These 
features are intimately tied to the establishment of common ground (personal 
ethnic backgrounds, provenance, archaic-ness, and traditional philosophies of 
life), the social identification of participants, and the assigning of meaning to an 
unfamiliar word.
7.6  Conclusion
This chapter looked at how a group of transnational Indonesians who were 
studying in Japan did conviviality through talk. I drew upon some of the schol-
arship on common ground and small talk discussed in section 7.2 to focus on 
a specific type of talk that occurred in two temporally close speech situations. 
I showed that repetition was the primary way in which participants went about 
establishing reference and common ground. While some common ground was 
emergent, nevertheless, the agreement on referents formed the basis for sub-
sequent convivial talk. In explaining the importance of this type of mundane 
talk, I suggested that we need to keep in mind the wider context in which these 
Indonesians find themselves and the research design of this project that brought 
together transnational Indonesians. Although it was certainly not a type of con-
text one finds in other studies of small talk or doing togetherness in difference, 
nevertheless, the bringing together of this group created a setting where they 
needed to build and reproduce interpersonal relationships that would enable 
them to access the important informal support networks that existed in Nagoya 
(section 7.3).
In relating my discussion to scholarship on how people from diverse back-
grounds do togetherness in difference (e.g., Ang, 2003; Brettell, 2003; Vertovec, 
2007; Werbner, 1997; Wise, 2005), I focused on recent work on superdiversity 
and the idea of conviviality as both an outcome and requirement for this condi-
tion (Blommaert, 2013b; Williams & Stroud, 2013). In showing how conviviality 
is established in face-to-face interaction, I tried to add to earlier studies of con-
viviality that were primarily concerned with performance (Williams & Stroud, 
2013), rather than performance and its reception (as found in face-to-face talk). 
A concrete example of the outcome of small talk across two temporally close 
speech situations (a viewing session and an interview) was the convivial rela-
tionship that developed between Desi and Slamet. In particular, though he was 
not a native speaker in the terms defined by Desi, nevertheless by the end of 
the session, Slamet was authorized by Desi to talk about the Sundanese-ness 
of a particular character. This practice of commenting upon or evaluating rep-
resented ethnic social types was actually quite common among the seventeen 
Indonesians involved in this study. In the following chapter, I  focus on this 
aspect, which is a part of the practice of knowledging that has been discussed 
in previous chapters.
 

200	
Language and Superdiversity
Finally, in examining these Indonesians’ talk, I  also touched on my dis-
cussion of the multiple functions of talk. For example, in sections 7.4 and 7.5, 
I pointed out how interpersonal relationship work was intimately tied to work-
ing out the meaning of an unfamiliar word (cipoa), as well as establishing ethno-
linguistic identities. In doing so, I also pointed to the tensions around how this 
group jointly constructed the meaning of televised signs, while also contribut-
ing to the reification of one of the meanings of these signs. In relating this to 
arguments laid out by Vološinov (1973 [1929]) and Agha (2007a), sections 7.4 and 
7.5 provided an example of the circularity involved in the action, structure, and 
meaning nexus. This was done by following how knowledge of structure (semiotic 
registers) can inform action to make meaning while contributing to a new struc-
ture (the meaning of cipoa that relates to deviance). Thus, while multiaccentuality 
was clearly a feature of participants’ talk, we also saw how the social domain of 
one particular meaning could widen through face-to-face interactions over time, 
as illustrated in figure 7.6.1.
Extract 7.4.3
Me=personal trait
Desi=not
Sundanese
Gun=place name
Desi=place name
Slamet=place
name
Extract 7.4.5
Slamet=Sundanese
Desi=Sundanese?
Desi-personal trait
Lina=personal trait
Extract 7.5.1
Slamet=personal trait
Lina=personal trait
Desi=personal trait
Lina=personal trait
Extract 7.4.2
Slamet=uncommon
Desi=Archaic
Lina=uncommon
Extract 7.5.3
Desi=uncommon
Sundanese
Slamet=uncommon
Sundanese
Extract 7.5.4
Desi=old Sundanese
Slamet=old
Sundanese
cipoa
Extract 7.4.2
Desi=not
Sundanese
Gun=not
Sundanese
FIGURE 7.6.1  Meaning across time

201
8
Knowledging, Conviviality, Community, and 
Togetherness in Difference
8.1  Introduction
In this chapter, I expand on the themes of knowledging and conviviality that 
were introduced in previous chapters. I continue to use the frame of television 
viewing discussed in ­chapter 7. In contrast to that chapter, however, I follow a 
different group of Indonesians over the course of two weeks: this provides some 
more insights into how togetherness is reproduced over longer timescales. I sug-
gest that this is important because it helps differentiate conviviality as a fleeting 
social practice among strangers from conviviality as an outcome of face-to-face 
interactions over longer periods of time. Borrowing from Ang (2003), I refer to 
the latter practice as “doing togetherness in difference.” I suggest that practic-
ing togetherness in difference is consequential for this group of transnational 
Indonesians because it ensures access to important resources from within the 
wider Indonesian community living in Japan. In turn, such access enables these 
Indonesians to cope with the demands of a transnational lifestyle.
In looking at knowledging and the doing of togetherness in difference, I place 
my analysis into broader discussions about community and communicative compe-
tence (CC). What is especially interesting is that long-term processes of enregister-
ment of the type discussed in ­chapters 2 to 6 have enabled this group of Indonesians 
to interactionally index their participation in a particular Indonesian public that 
can recognize, evaluate, and use signs associated with ethnic communities of prac-
tice (COP) that they do not belong to or identify with. I argue that these practices 
suggest a need to revisit notions of CC, which have to date presupposed that it is 
learned locally, often in a geographically isolated space. In contrast, the CC we see 
here is acquired from multiple dispersed sources, typically institutions that have 
different concepts of expertise and authority from those found in geographically 
isolated communities. I discuss ideas around community and CC in section 8.2.
In section 8.3, I  focus on how these Indonesians go about engaging in 
social identification, knowledging, and the doing of conviviality through the 
 
 

202	
Language and Superdiversity
identification of represented signs. In doing so, I will show how this relates to 
simultaneously indexing participation in a number of communities. In section 
8.4, I continue this process, but focus on how participants increase their practices 
of evaluating sign representations. I suggest that these practices are part of a 
gamut of other forms of talk that help to do togetherness in difference among this 
group of Indonesians. In concluding, I point out that for sociolinguistics (broadly 
defined), an ability to delineate communities and practices that enable convivial-
ity, such as knowledging, can provide a more nuanced approach to work on talk 
in superdiverse settings.
8.2  Community and Communicative Competence
The idea of community and the types of competences one needs to display and 
enact community have typically been discussed from four different viewpoints. 
These include emergent communities or identities that are the outcome of situ-
ated face-to-face interaction (Antaki & Widdicombe, 1998; Bucholtz & Hall, 
2004). A series of interactions across time in a locale produces another type of 
community that is often referred to as a “community of practice” (COP; Barton 
& Tusting, 2005; Eckert & McConnell-Ginet, 1999; Holmes & Meyerhoff, 1999; 
Wenger, 1998). The existence of multiple COPs also enables distinctions among 
them (Bourdieu, 1984). The practice of making such distinctions helps to sharpen 
the boundaries between each of them (e.g., Barth, 1969; Bucholtz & Hall, 2004; 
Irvine, 2001). Publics or audiences represent another type of community. Publics 
and audiences not only live in the imaginations of media professionals, writers, 
and bureaucrats (Anderson, 2006 [1991, 1983]; Ang, 1996; Livingstone, 2005), but 
they are also constituted through acts of media consumption in living rooms and 
elsewhere, as well as lesson consumption in classrooms, lecture halls, and other 
teaching venues.
There are a number of overlaps between the terms “publics” and “audiences.” 
For example, in the media and sociological literature (e.g., Dayan, 2005; Kitley, 
2000; Livingstone, 2005), publics seem to be differentiated from audiences because 
of a public’s ability to debate the meaning of semiotic representations in the media 
through interactions among strangers who are typically not spatially or tempo-
rally co-present. Yet work in linguistic anthropology and sociolinguistics (e.g., 
Loven, 2008; Miller, 2004) shows us that audiences too are constituted by spatially 
and temporally separated strangers who interact with each other when contesting 
the meaning of certain representations (e.g., letters to the editor and subsequent 
responses to such letters, posts to fan websites and subsequent comments on these 
posts). Thus, when I use the term “publics,” it also covers “audiences” (i.e., strang-
ers who become connected by responding to representational practices).
Criteria for membership in a public differ somewhat from criteria for 
membership in COPs and other interactionally constituted communities. In 
 

	
Knowledging, Conviviality, Community, and Togetherness in Difference	
203
face-to-face interactions, for example, there will be a range of competences that 
can be involved, and these will be determined by membership in a particular COP. 
In COPs, sharing ways of speaking and the CC associated with these ways of 
speaking are primary indicators of membership, and they are typically developed 
in a specific locale among a stable and often small, isolated population (Hymes, 
1972a, 1972b; Ochs, 1988; Schieffelin, 1990; Wenger, 1998). In cases where there 
are members from multiple COPs, membership in one COP or another is often 
determined by distinctions made between different ways of speaking (Bourdieu, 
1984; Irvine, 2001).
While there are often a limited number of members in a particular COP, 
publics typically have many more members. This is so because one-to-many par-
ticipation frameworks help to circulate ways of speaking—albeit with much more 
fragmented models—to many more people. As linguistic anthropologists and 
sociolinguists have engaged with each of these notions, they have provided ways 
of understanding the relationships and overlaps among the communities and 
the competences involved (Agha, 2007; Cody, 2011; De Fina, 2003; Inoue, 2006; 
Wortham, 2006). My point of departure is to draw on notions of participation 
frameworks and enregisterment (Agha, 2007) together with work on semiosis and 
intertextuality (Agha, 2007; Bakhtin, 1981; Bauman & Briggs, 1990; Silverstein 
& Urban, 1996; Wortham, 2006). In doing so, I discuss the relationships among 
these different types of communities together with the different types of CC that 
are developed by their members, while also relating the ideas of conviviality and 
knowledging to concepts about publics.
Semiosis can be defined as the appropriation and reuse of a sign or set 
of signs from one context in another context. Rampton’s (1995) account of 
youths engaging in crossing represents one example of semiosis whereby the 
words of ethnic others from one COP are appropriated and reused to build 
another COP among a peer group. We can also see relationships between COPs 
and publics if we turn to Rampton’s (2006) later work and work by Cutler 
(1999: 433–434). Both show how their subjects appropriate and reuse the voices 
of different publics to do face-to-face interactional work that helps to consti-
tute emergent COPs.
In turning our focus back to the idea of CC, we can also see that the types of 
competence in a COP and a public can be quite different. Many of the ground-
breaking language socialization studies of the late 1970s and early 1980s (e.g., 
Ochs, 1988; Schieffelin, 1990)  were often conducted in isolated communities. 
Typically, those studied were a few novices involved in language socialization 
activities at any given moment (i.e., a one-to-few participation framework). 
Authority to model ways of speaking for these novices was also limited to older 
siblings, parents, elders, healers, and missionaries. Communicative competence 
in these types of COPs were locally determined and reproduced.
While it may have been straightforward for the above-mentioned scholars 
to define the competences that one needed to be seen as an authentic community 

204	
Language and Superdiversity
member in these settings, an increasingly mobile and connected world has 
brought into focus distinctions in the ways of speaking of members from dif-
ferent COPs while also inviting scholars to reexamine ideas of CC. A common 
theme in scholarship that engages with ideas around mobility is the need to 
understand how histories of mobility figure in a person’s ability to understand, 
differentiate, and use semiotic fragments from whole genres that are indexically 
associated with ways of speaking in other communities (e.g., Blommaert, Collins, 
& Slembrouck, 2005a; Blommaert, Collins, & Slembrouck, 2005b; Kramsch & 
Whiteside, 2008; Warriner, 2010). Even so, a number of these studies were similar 
in their underlying assumptions about community and CC, namely that mobile 
persons were originally part of a community that was anchored to a locale, and 
members became communicatively competent through participation in one-to-
one and one-to-few participation frameworks.
These small-scale language socialization settings and the CC developed 
within them contrast with large-scale language socialization situations where 
novices can range from a classroom full of students to a television audience. 
In this sense, large numbers of novices create a quantitatively different par-
ticipation framework, namely a one-to-many participation framework (Agha, 
2007: 74–77). Another difference from earlier studies of CC is that now, mes-
sage forms and content—part of what made up “act sequence” in Hymes’s 
(1972a:  59–60) SPEAKING model—are multiple, dispersed, and accessed 
through participation in daily life in urban neighborhoods, government institu-
tions (e.g., schools, correction facilities, hospitals, welfare offices, etc.), when lis-
tening to radio, when viewing televisions, computer screens, and so on. The role 
of institutions is also different. For example, the institutions of family, extended 
family, clan, and so on that have in the past been primary socialization settings 
have increasingly been replaced by government institutions, mass media, and so 
on (e.g., Giddens, 1990).
The increasing role of government institutions and government-sponsored 
institutions has also meant a change in ideas relating to authority. Now, author-
ity to influence another’s life trajectory has increasingly moved from siblings, 
parents, and elders to those with formal education. Authority is also much more 
dispersed, with many institutions having the power to model and normalize par-
ticular ways of speaking (e.g., family and elders versus schools and media insti-
tutions). In terms of how those in positions of authority interact with novices, 
one-to-many participation frameworks are also increasingly common. Finally, 
while in small communities, linguistic forms are imbued with cultural value 
through interactions with siblings, parents, and elders (e.g., honorific forms, 
terms of address for elders, etc.), in larger urban contexts, government institu-
tions and the mass media do much of this work (e.g., Agha, 2007; Inoue, 2006; 
Jaffe, 2003). The results of such processes are different centers of normativity, 
with institutions and their actors typically being at the top of the indexical order 
created by such processes (Blommaert, 2010; Bourdieu, 1991).

	
Knowledging, Conviviality, Community, and Togetherness in Difference	
205
8.3  Social Identification, Conviviality, and Community
In this section, I focus on how participants go about socially identifying them-
selves and how this relates to conviviality and membership in different types 
of communities. Although only one participant, Nuraeni, works at producing 
an interactional identity as someone of Sundanese ethnicity, the rest of the 
group’s talk shows that they have knowledge and an apparent entitlement to 
comment about things Sundanese. Over the course of the viewing and inter-
view session, this group indexes their membership in an ethnic COP, a locally 
emergent COP, and a public, as well as the wider community of transnational 
Indonesians living in Japan. What I present below is talk that was recorded as 
part of the research project described in ­chapter 7, although it is talk among 
a different group of participants. To present a temporal view of how talk fig-
ures in the building of convivial social relations in this group, I follow their 
talk across the first two viewing and interview sessions. During this session, 
I played an episode titled Cipoa (Con Artist), the same comedic soap discussed 
in section 3.5. Table 8.3.1 summarizes some self-reported information from 
these participants.
TABLE 8.3.1
Participant backgrounds
NAME
(age)
HISTORY OF MOBILITY
LANGUAGES
(reported)
Place of residence
Start year  
of residence
Years
there
Endang
(34)
Kendal (Central Java)
Semarang (Central Java)
Yogyakarta (Central Java)
Kendal (Central Java)
Batam, (island located between 
Sumatra and Singapore)
Purwokerto (Central Java)
Jakarta
Japan
1976
1979
1983
1989
1992
1995
2002
2008
2
5
7
3
3
7
6
0.8
Javanese
Indonesian
English
Farid
(27)
Padang (West Sumatra)
France
Padang
Japan
1982
1986
1991
2008
5
5
17
0.8
Minang,
French
Indonesian
English
Fatimah
(28)
Surabaya (East Java)
Japan
1981
2008
27
0.8
Javanese,
Banjar
Indonesian
Japanese
Nina
(25)
Yogyakarta (Central Java)
Japan
Yogyakarta (Central Java)
Japan
1984
2005
2006
2007
22.5
0.5
1
1
Javanese
Indonesian
English
Japanese
Nuraeni
(28)
Bandung
France
Bandung (West Java)
Japan
1981
1984
1989
3
5
20
0.83
Sundanese
French
Indonesian
English
 

206	
Language and Superdiversity
These participants were all newcomers to Japan and relative strangers. 
Indeed, it was the first time that Farid had met Nuraeni and Nina, and only 
Endang and Nuraeni had occasion to meet more regularly through the weekly 
involvement of their children in the Saturday school set up by and for the 
Indonesian community living in Nagoya. It was also the case that as the only 
Christian in this group, Endang was not involved in monthly Islamic prayer 
sessions and gatherings. Even so, like other non-Muslims, she and her fam-
ily did participate in religious festivities tied to the end of the Islamic fast-
ing month that were held by the Indonesian community at Nagoya. It is also 
important to point out that this group may or may not have known about each 
other’s linguistic and ethnic backgrounds, and only Nuraeni reported having 
any knowledge of Sundanese.
At the first session, all five participants were present. Diagram 8.3.1 
shows where each participant was seated in the classroom that was used dur-
ing this viewing session. (I have also included Nuraeni’s daughter who spent 
some of the viewing session sitting with Endang.) As pointed out in section 
3.5 and in the introduction to extract 7.4.1, in the first two minutes of the 
soap, there was a short monologue by one character in the national language, 
Indonesian, that included one accented word, which may or may not have 
provided participants with a clue about the language setting of the serial. 
Participants then recognize one of the actors and provide her name. Shortly 
thereafter, the episode title Cipoa appears on the screen, and the talk repre-
sented in extract 8.3.1 follows.
Indonesian RA
Zane
Farid
Nina
Fatimah
Endang
Nuraeni
Nuraeni’s 
child
Table
Table
Recorder
Recorder
Table
Handy-
cam
Television
DIAGRAM 8.3.1  Transnational Indonesians watching television and doing community

	
Knowledging, Conviviality, Community, and Togetherness in Difference	
207
Extract 8.3.1  Indexing membership in a public
Endang
  1
cipor =
Cipor.
Nuraeni
  2
          = cipoa =
Cipoa.
Endang
  3
                        = cipor =
Cipor.
Fatimah
  4
  5
                                      = cipo (0.5) ah
(0.5) eh bukan ya .
Cipo, ah,
eh, no right?
Endang
  6
ci . cipor gitu (0.5) sungai por gitu =
Ci, like Cipor, like the river Por.
Nina
  7
  8
                                                            =
cipoa apa ci por . artinya apa .
Is it cipoa or cipor, what’s the 
meaning?
Endang
  9
ci . por =
Cipor.
Fatimah
10
            = ci =
Ci.
Nuraeni
11
                    = sungai por =
The river Por.
Nina
12
13
                                            = artinya 
apa mbak =
Sister [Endang] what does it 
mean?
Fatimah
14
                  = sungai por gitu =
Like the river Por.
Endang
15
16
                                                 = iya .
kali (laughs) (1.0)
Yeah,
a river.
Fatimah
17
kayak cirebon gitu (laughs) cipoa =
Like Cirebon yeah? Cipoa.
Nina
18
19
                                                           =
kayak nama tempat =
Like a place name?

208	
Language and Superdiversity
In the above transcript, we see that participants are establishing common ground 
among themselves by trying to assign meaning to an apparently unfamiliar word, 
cipoa. There are two things of interest in this talk. First, we get a little bit of an 
insight into the extent to which participants who have not identified themselves as 
Sundanese speakers nevertheless display familiarity with this medium. For example, 
only Nuraeni has claimed an ability in Sundanese (table 8.3.1), which is a semiotic 
register where the prefix “ci” is found in place names. Second, we also see that it is 
actually a participant from a non-Sundanese background (Endang) who tells Nina 
about the meaning of this prefix (line 6), rather than Nuraeni. Put in terms of knowl-
edging, we are seeing Endang and Fatimah displaying knowledge of linguistic fea-
tures associated with a particular ethnic community (in lines 9 and 14–17). Put in 
terms of a public, we are seeing Endang and Fatimah demonstrating their knowledge 
of what the prefix “ci” means, in this case, “river,” which indexes their participation 
in a community of Indonesians who know these types of things. As the actors’ names 
appear on the screen, Nuraeni notes that one of the actors, Nike Ardila, is from the 
same neighborhood as she, namely Bandung (the capital city of West Java and the 
stereotypical Sundanese-speaking heartland), as can be seen in extract 8.3.2.
Extract 8.3.2  Indexing participation in an ethnic community of practice
Nuraeni
1
2
3
(looks at Fatimah, smiles and touches chest 
rapidly) eh satu . satu kampung . satu
kampung [ makanya dikenali .
Heh, the same, the same 
neighborhood
[as me], the same neighbor-
hood [as
me], that is why I recognize 
[her].
Endang
4
                  [ oh ya]
Oh yeah.
Nuraeni
5
6
bandung . bandung . he he he [ he (breaths 
in) .
Bandung, Bandung ((laughs)).
Endang
7
8
                                                     [ ciamis
bukan =
 Ciamis right?
Nuraeni
9
            = cipoa kan he he he
Cipoa right? ((laughs))
The importance of extract 8.3.2 is that in identifying her place of origin as Bandung 
(lines 2, 3, and 5), Nuraeni also implicitly identifies herself as a Sundanese speaker. 
It is also worthwhile noting that Nuraeni’s embodied language (e.g., her gestures, 
smiles, and laughter on lines 1–3, 5, and 9) has an affective character. This may be 
a sign of her positive alignment toward both the actor and the place (Bandung) 

	
Knowledging, Conviviality, Community, and Togetherness in Difference	
209
that she comments upon, although at this stage, this alignment is still ambiguous. 
By identifying herself as belonging to a particular geographical community, her 
talk by way of indexical links among region, language, and ethnic social type also 
presupposes membership in a particular ethnic COP.
In a sense, Nuraeni’s talk has differentiated her from the public inhabited by 
Endang and Fatimah (extract 8.3.1, line 11) by associating herself with the ethnic 
community being represented. In other words, she is starting to index her member-
ship in an ethnic COP, though without ratification by other co-present participants, 
this claim is still ambiguous. Nuraeni’s self-identification continues in extract 8.3.3 
through her recognition and translation of linguistic forms that others do not know. 
The talk in extract 8.3.3 occurs after a conversation between the main character (Dewi) 
and the taxi driver (this represented dialogue was analyzed in sections 3.5.5–3.5.7). In 
this televised conversation, there are many Sundanese forms, although interestingly 
it is only sabaraha (“how much”) that gets any attention. When an advertisement 
break occurs, Nina asks about the meaning of this word, as in extract 8.3.3.
Extract 8.3.3  Solidifying participation in an ethnic community of practice
Nina
  1
apa .
What?
Farid
  2
sabaraha =
How much?
Nina
  3
  4
                = [ sabaraha (while turning 
toward Nuraeni)
How much?
Nuraeni
  5
  6
  7
  8
  9
                    [ (turns toward Farid and 
Nina) sabaraha tu . berapa (while still 
looking at Farid and Nina points and 
smiles) ha ha ngerti . nggak ngerti ya 
[ ha ha
Sabaraha means “how much.”
((laughs)) understand, [you 
both] don’t understand do you? 
((laughs))
Farid
10
11
[ (shakes head from side to side while 
smiling)
No.
In extract 8.3.3, Nuraeni not only offers the Indonesian equivalent berapa (line 6) of 
the word in question (sabaraha), but then goes on to jokingly pointing to Nina and 
Farid while saying “you don’t understand do you” (lines 8 and 9). These two acts fur-
ther identify Nuraeni as a speaker of the medium being used in the serial. At the same 
time, she also positions Farid and Nina as having no competence in this medium. Put 
in terms of community, here Nuraeni is simultaneously indexing her membership in 
a particular ethnic COP that is knowledgeable about these linguistic signs while also 

210	
Language and Superdiversity
suggesting that Farid and Nina must not be part of that community. With reference 
to long-term relationships among linguistic forms, region, and essentialized ethnic 
identities, we might also suggest that Nuraeni is also inferring that both Nina and 
Farid have different ethnic identities from the one being represented in the serial.
As this social identification ensues, there is also some interpersonal 
relationship- building. In particular, Nuraeni’s identification of Farid and Nina 
as not able to understand the medium being represented is framed as teasing by 
her laughter surrounding the utterance that co-occurs with her waving her fin-
ger up and down and smiling at Nina and Farid. Nina aligns by smiling, while 
Farid appears also to do so by nodding his head while smiling. In a sense, we 
are starting to see the emergence of a local COP through the pursuit of convivial 
practices of the type described in ­chapter 7. While the medium that Farid and 
Nina supposedly do not understand has not yet been explicitly named by any as 
Sundanese, some five minutes later, Nuraeni identifies the medium as Sundanese, 
as in extract 8.3.4. This talk occurs after an elderly woman appears for the third 
time and again talks with Dewi, this time using many Sundanese forms and a 
heavy accent (see extract 3.5.1, which examines this bit of represented talk).
Extract 8.3.4  Identifying and evaluating medium usage
Farid
  1
  2
(while laughing and looking toward 
Nuraeni) [ +translation please+ (laughs)
Translation please.
Nuraeni
  3
  4
  5
                 [ aduh resep iyeuh . bahasa
sundana (while pointing to self with
hand laughing and [gazing at Nina)
Wow this Sundanese is good
[which is my language].
Nina
  6
  7
  8
                                 [ (gazing at Nuraeni 
and Fatimah and laughing) ya aku juga 
nggak ngerti (laughs) =
Yeah, I also don’t
understand.
Endang
  9
10
                                      = (while gazing 
toward others and smiling) sunda téa =
It’s Sundanese?
Nuraeni
11
12
                                                                  =
sunda
Sundanese.
On line 1, we can see that the old woman’s monologue has led Farid to loudly 
ask for a translation while also laughing. (The increase in volume is indicated by 
“+,” and laughter while talking is indicated with a double underline.) Nina aligns 
with Farid’s claim of not understanding by her explicit note of “not understand-
ing also” (lines 7 and 8). In doing so, she is also establishing common ground 

	
Knowledging, Conviviality, Community, and Togetherness in Difference	
211
with Farid by pursuing social sameness about their states of knowledge of things 
Sundanese. While Nuraeni offers no translation and laughs herself—which 
appears to ratify the jovialness of Farid’s request—she does evaluate the rep-
resented signs as “good Sundanese” (lines 3 and 4). These turns achieve three 
things. First, Farid and Nina continue to build on their emerging identities as 
not members of Nuraeni’s ethnic COP, which has now been named. Second, 
Farid and Nina are also engaged in building convivial relations between them-
selves. Third, Nuraeni’s evaluation also continues to index and solidify her 
emerging identity as a speaker of the medium being represented and a member 
of a Sundanese COP.
The way Nuraeni evaluates this representation is also important in that it 
simultaneously adds weight to her earlier claims of being Sundanese. For example, 
while her earlier talk was in Indonesian, she now uses linguistic signs stereotypi-
cally associated with Sundanese (resep, iyeuh, and the suffix na) while pointing 
to herself. In this case, we are seeing Nuraeni performing Sundanese-ness while 
simultaneously evaluating other’s usage of signs associated with Sundanese-ness, 
all of which help solidify her emerging identity as a Sundanese speaker and mem-
ber of an ethnically Sundanese COP.
It is also important to note here that Nuraeni’s identity work sits in contrast 
to Endang’s, who builds on her earlier claims (extract 8.3.1) that she is familiar 
with Sundanese through her performance of one linguistic sign, téa (line 10). In 
terms of publics, we are seeing Endang showing not only membership in a public 
that recognizes forms associated with a particular ethnic COP, but also member-
ship in an Indonesian public that can use some of these forms. In engaging in 
crossing, Endang is also doing unity in diversity in a medium that is not solely 
Indonesian. Endang’s performance also appears to be ratified by Nuraeni, who 
has earlier built up an identity as a native speaker of this medium. This ratified 
act of crossing can be seen as the linguistic pursuit of sameness with Nuraeni, 
which may be building and/or reproducing convivial relations between the pair. 
It also appears to be the case that the earlier teasing of Farid by Nuraeni in regard 
to his inability to comprehend Sundanese is used as a resource by Farid to joke 
with Nuraeni. In this case, he uses gaze, smiling, and laughter to frame his utter-
ance “translation please” in line 2 as a joke. This sequence builds on earlier strat-
egies for building convivial relations between these two participants, who before 
this research session had never met.
Thus far we have seen Nuraeni’s identity as a Sundanese and speaker of 
Sundanese solidify over the course of the viewing session. Nina and Farid, on 
the other hand, have emerged as not knowledgeable about Sundanese and not the 
same ethnic social types as Nuraeni. Fatimah appears to be someone who has some 
knowledge of the signs that index Sundanese and Sundanese-ness. Endang too has 
emerged as someone who can use some Sundanese, and her crossing practices 
thus far seem to have been positively received by Nuraeni. In addition to Nuraeni 
and Endang, convivial relations seem to be emerging among Nuraeni, Farid, and 
Nina by their teasing and laughing. In the interview that followed, participants’ 

212	
Language and Superdiversity
identities solidified further. I will just summarize this interview here so that I can 
move on to the following week’s session with this group of participants.
At the start of the interview, I asked a general question about what they 
thought of the serial. Nuraeni began by noting that it was very Sundanese and 
made her feel like she was back home watching in Bandung. After I asked her 
for examples of what made it very Sundanese, she pointed out a number of the 
Sundanese tokens used and followed these by translations into Indonesian. These 
acts of evaluation and translation helped to further index her membership in an 
ethnically Sundanese COP, as well as her identity as a speaker of Sundanese. 
However, Nina’s earlier identity as someone “not competent in Sundanese” 
tended to be more fluid. For example, Nina noted that the main character Dewi 
(Nike Ardila) was very Sundanese. She added that the prefix Ci in Cipoa also 
helped her identify the serial as being set in West Java. Thus, here Nina’s acts of 
evaluation and grammatical explanation show that she is at least familiar with 
some of the signs associated with Sundanese-ness. Here she is aligning with an 
Indonesian public that can recognize and/or evaluate the authenticity of repre-
sentations of Sundanese-ness. As in the previous chapter, this ability to engage in 
this type of knowledging is explainable in terms of her participation in the autho-
rized processes of enregisterment that occurred from the start of the New Order 
period in 1966 and continued until the time of this recording (e.g., ­chapters 2–6).
Farid also noted that the actors’ accents had helped him identify the medium 
being represented as Sundanese. In other words, through his talk, Farid also 
aligned with an Indonesian public that could recognize members from an ethnic 
COP. These claims initiated a discussion about which characters used Sundanese. 
The discussion included all participants, and the upshot of this was that it con-
tinued to solidify Nina’s identity as someone who can recognize linguistic signs 
associated with Sundanese. Fatimah added that a number of the particles used 
were ones commonly heard and identified as Sundanese. While the provenance of 
these terms was then debated, all agreed that the pronunciation identified them 
as Sundanese. Again, this talk helped to index Farid’s, Fatimah’s, Endang’s, and 
Nina’s participation in an Indonesian public from the New Order period.
Shortly thereafter, I  asked whether and to what extent people outside of 
Sundanese-speaking areas might be able to identify the medium used and under-
stand the story. Farid, Endang, Fatimah, and Nina started by suggesting that they 
wouldn’t, but then went on to say that many were familiar with Sundanese because the 
national broadcaster, TVRI, had screened many previous films and serials that were 
very Sundanese, including the television and wide-screen versions of Si Kabayan, 
which I will focus on shortly. Indeed, the non-Sundanese participants’ abilities to 
comprehend signs of Sundanese-ness seem to be evidence of this circulation.
After I  asked about the relationship between the taxi driver and Dewi, 
Nuraeni’s identity as a Sundanese speaker continued to solidify as she explained 
that the co-occurrence of body language, facial expressions, and Sundanese 
forms all pointed to an intimate relationship. Nina, Endang, and Fatimah 
compared these features to what happened in interactions between Javanese 

	
Knowledging, Conviviality, Community, and Togetherness in Difference	
213
speakers. In doing so, Nina, Endang, and Fatimah also began to socially iden-
tify themselves as knowledgeable about Javanese, an identity that solidified in 
the rest of the interview as they identified the other characters in the film by com-
paring social practices and pronoun usage with Javanese usage. The interview 
ended after all participants further solidified their positions as being “knowl-
edgeable about Sundanese” through their discussion of how Sundanese forms 
are widely known. Importantly, their continual indexing of their membership in 
an Indonesian public that recognizes members of other ethnic COPs can also be 
seen as the social pursuit of sameness where they have created further common 
ground among themselves based upon knowledge about signs associated with 
Sundanese and Sundanese-ness. This pursuit of sameness contributes to the 
construction of an emergent COP through practices of conviviality.
In summary, this section introduced another group of transnational 
Indonesians who had volunteered to be part of a wider project that initially set out 
to look at how television representations were understood. In this viewing and inter-
view session, they watched the same comedic soap, Cipoa, as the group discussed 
in ­chapter 7. Unlike the group we met in ­chapter 7, however, nearly all were relative 
strangers. Most had lived in Nagoya for only about six months. Although only one 
person, Nuraeni, reported being Sundanese, nevertheless, all participants engaged 
in the recognition of representations of Sundanese. In addition, some started to 
evaluate these representations. Both this recognition and evaluation indexed their 
participation in a community of Indonesian citizens (i.e., a public) knowledgeable 
about things ethnic. I suggested that this knowledge was gained through involve-
ment in the processes of enregisterment described in ­chapters 2–6. For Nuraeni, 
her commentaries and later performance of Sundanese pointed to her membership 
in an ethnically Sundanese COP. One participant, Endang, also used fragments of 
linguistic forms associated with Sundanese. In so doing, she not only indexed her 
membership in an Indonesian public that could recognize members of other ethnic 
groups, but she also engaged in crossing to do unity in diversity, which contrasted 
with ideologies about Indonesian as the language of doing unity in diversity.
Endang’s crossing had multiple meanings, and in this setting, it was part of a 
broader pattern of convivial talk. I pointed out that, more generally, the way all 
participants posted and aligned to comments, and the regular occurrence of teasing 
and laughter suggested that these convivial practices were part of building mem-
bership in a locally emergent COP, as well the wider Indonesian community living 
in Nagoya. As discussed in ­chapter 7, conviviality was important because of the 
need to access the support networks that existed for these sojourners in Nagoya 
(section 7.3). In a real sense, the pursuit of convivial relations in the here and now 
also indexed participation in this wider community of sojourners, who engaged in 
togetherness on a much larger scale and in many more social domains. As we will 
see in the following section, the pursuit of convivial relations among members of this 
group was an ongoing project, and in the following week’s viewing and interview 
sessions, we see more of this type of conversational work along with some interest-
ing knowledging practices.

214	
Language and Superdiversity
8.4  Doing Togetherness in Difference and Knowledging
In the previous section, I focused on commentaries that occurred as participants 
viewed television and on post-viewing interviews. Conviviality was interactionally 
achieved by establishing common ground about place and participant background, 
while social identification was interactionally achieved by the positioning of self and 
other as competent or incompetent in Sundanese and by explicit self-identification. 
In comparison, there was only one instance of social identification that was achieved 
through the evaluation of represented sign usage (extract 8.3.4). This situation con-
trasts considerably with the talk that I examine in this section. This talk occurred in 
the second viewing session held the following week when Nuraeni (the person who 
has built up a Sundanese identity) and the others all comment on the authenticity of 
represented ethnic social types. In doing so, we are again seeing four of the partici-
pants engage in what I refer to as knowledging. As with the previous section and the 
last chapter, this commentary was also very much tied to the building of convivial 
relations among this group of Indonesians. In contrast to ­chapter 7, however, here 
I argue that what we are seeing is an example of togetherness in difference because 
participants have come together again in a different time and place. Indeed, unlike 
other groups were there was often someone who did not attend viewing sessions, on 
this and following occasions, participants continued to attend viewing sessions. At 
this session, all five participants were present. Nuraeni had also brought her two 
young daughters. Diagram 8.4.1 shows where each participant was seated. During 
this second session, I played an episode from the comedic soap Si Kabayan, which 
Me
Farid
Nina
Fatimah
Nuraeni
       Table
Recorder
     Table
Recorder
Table
Endang
     Television
Handy-
cam
Nuraeni;s 
infant
Nuraeni’s 
Child
DIAGRAM 8.4.1  Transnational Indonesians watching television and doing togetherness
 

	
Knowledging, Conviviality, Community, and Togetherness in Difference	
215
had been brought up in the previous week’s interview (I discussed this episode of Si 
Kabayan in section 3.6). While I was setting up the audio recorders and television, 
the participants engaged in quite a bit of jovial talk. As the introduction to the serial 
began, accompanied by shots of the main characters and a number of rural settings, 
the following conversation ensued (extract 8.4.1).
Extract 8.4.1  Recognizing signs and their associated medium
Endang
  1
kabayan (0.9)
It’s Kabayan.
Fatimah
  2
oh kabayan =
Oh, it’s Kabayan.
Farid
  3
                     = heeh (0.8)
Yeah.
Endang
  4
ini sunda téa (18)
It’s Sundanese, right?
Nuraeni
  5
sctv (0.9)
((The television station)) SCTV.
Endang
  6
sctv (1.1)
SCTV.
Nuraeni
  7
ah si kabay [ an
Hey, it’s Kabayan.
Endang
  8
                     [ kabayan (3.2)
It’s Kabayan.
Nina
  9
sunda lagi sih (4.3)
Gee, it’s Sundanese again.
Farid
10
teh melulu . kopi sekali sekali =
((literally)) Always tea, what 
about coffee occasionally. 
((but better translated as “The 
same thing again, what about 
variety.”))
Nuraeni
11
12
13
                                                    = butuh
translater (said while smiling and pointing
to Nina and Endang) =
Do you need
a translator?
Nina
14
15
                                      = iya aku nggak 
ngerti
Yeah, I don’t
understand.

216	
Language and Superdiversity
At the start of the viewing session and after seeing the title on the screen and hearing 
the song accompanying it, Endang and Fatimah point out that the serial is Kabayan 
(lines 1 and 2). Endang then goes on to point out that it is Sundanese (line 4). While it is 
possible that the Sundanese-ness of Kabayan was established in the viewing session in 
the previous week when Kabayan and his Sundanese-ness happened to be discussed, 
what seems to be more noteworthy is how Endang performs this recognition, which is 
done through the use of téa (a linguistic form associated with Sundanese). This prac-
tice is an example of crossing. In other words, here Endang has shown that she has 
some knowledge of linguistic signs associated with Sundanese by her performance, 
despite earlier reporting no competence in Sundanese. Although neither Nuraeni 
nor anyone else ratifies this usage, Endang’s use of téa seems to have links with the 
interpersonal relationship work that occurred between Endang and Nuraeni in the 
previous week (extract 8.3.4, line 10). In other words, given that the Sundanese-ness 
of Kabayan was established in the previous viewing session, this sequence seems to 
continue convivial talk as Endang and Nuraeni repeat known information.
As the main character Kabayan is talking using some Sundanese, Nuraeni smiles 
and points to Nina and Endang and asks them if they need a translator (lines 11 and 
12). Although she does so in jest, this move also achieves three other things. First, it 
establishes links with the talk in the previous week (see section 8.3), when Nuraeni 
established her expertise and background as a speaker of Sundanese. Second, it iden-
tifies Fatimah and Nina as not competent in Sundanese, despite their obvious recog-
nition of this serial as Sundanese (lines 4 and 9) and their interactional work in the 
previous week. Even so, Nina aligns with Nuraeni’s talk on lines 14 and 15 with her 
comment: “yeah, I don’t understand.” In doing so, Nina appears to be modifying 
the identity she established through her conversational activity in the previous week.
Third, Nuraeni’s teasing on lines 11–13 also mirrors the strategies she used to 
build convivial relations with Farid in the previous week. Indeed, this talk seems 
to repeat much of the content about translation and translators, as well as Nina’s 
response to the joke (lines 14 and 15), which is nearly an exact copy of her response 
to this activity in the previous week (see extract 8.3.4, line 4). As in ­chapter 7, in 
this interaction, we can also see that repetition—indicated by underline—seems 
to be important in establishing common ground and convivial relations. Of spe-
cial interest is how Nina’s affective stance toward the television show, in this case 
one of disappointment (line 9), is repeated on line 10 by Farid. In aligning with this 
stance and doing it in a poetic way, Farid’s response also seems to be doing posi-
tive interpersonal relationship work. Importantly, all of this talk also indexes the 
different senses of community that emerged in the previous week. These include:
1.	 An Indonesian public: Those who have the ability to recognize signs asso-
ciated with different ethnic COPs (Endang in line 4, Nina in line 9, and 
Farid in line 10), as well as use fragments of them (in this case, Endang’s 
talk in line 4), though her usage is not ratified here.
2.	 A member of an ethnically Sundanese COP: Those who not only can rec-
ognize these signs but are acknowledged by others as authentic speakers 

	
Knowledging, Conviviality, Community, and Togetherness in Difference	
217
of the particular community whose signs are being used (in this case, 
Nuraeni, whose claim to authenticity in lines 11–13 is ratified by Nina in 
lines 14 and15). This recognition and usage also simultaneously presup-
poses that others belong to different ethnic COPs.
3.	 An emergent COP: The emergent COP made up by this particular group 
of Indonesians who have been building convivial relations in a research 
setting over a couple of weeks through the use of small talk, repetition, 
pursuits of sameness, teasing, and joking.
4.	 The wider community of Indonesians living and studying in Nagoya who 
need to access support networks.
After this bit of talk, Nuraeni’s identity as a speaker of Sundanese further solidi-
fies by her answering of questions about some unfamiliar words and offering their 
Indonesian equivalents. The setting then moves to a house and yard with three other 
characters. At this stage, Nina, Nuraeni, and Endang jointly identify the actor play-
ing one of these characters, Iteung, as somebody they don’t know. While establishing 
further common ground among participants, this act of identification also shows 
their familiarity with the characters, previous versions of the story, and potentially 
their knowledge about semiotic representations associated with these characters. 
This is shortly followed by a dialogue between two elderly characters, Abah and 
Ambu (see extract 3.6.1), and then between Iteung and Abah. After Iteung finishes 
talking, Nina initiates comments about the authenticity of the actor playing Iteung 
(extract 8.4.2).
Extract 8.4.2  Iteung isn’t very Sundanese
Nina
  1
  2
  3
  4
(While turning to look at Nuraeni and 
touching her on the arm) si iteungnya 
nggak [ sunda . nggak [ nggak begitu sunda 
sih?
Iteung
isn’t Sundanese, isn’t isn’t 
very Sundanese, yeah?
Endang
  5
            [siapa sih (0.8)
Who is she?
Nuraeni
  6
  7
                                      [ (while shaking 
head) nggak juga =
No, not at all.
Endang
  8
  9
                               = ngomongnya nggak 
sunda ya =
Her speech isn’t
Sundanese, is it.
Nina
10
                 = heeh =
Yeah.
Endang
11
                              = agak kejawaan
It’s rather Javanese.

218	
Language and Superdiversity
In the above extract, we can see that after seeking agreement from Nuraeni (lines 
1 and 2) and getting it in lines 6 and 7, Nina then evaluates one of the characters, 
Iteung, in a way that questions the ability of the actor playing Iteung to faithfully 
represent Sundanese-ness (lines 2–4). This is despite Nina’s earlier comments 
that she doesn’t understand Sundanese, Nuraeni’s earlier positioning of her as 
“not competent in Sundanese,” and Nina’s own claims and self-reports about 
having no competence in Sundanese. In terms of knowledging, Nina’s evaluation 
is demonstrating a familiarity with signs of Sundanese-ness. Nuraeni aligns with 
Nina’s opinion (lines 6 and 7), and this suggests that such evaluations are inter-
actionally appropriate.
The talk in extract 8.4.2 is also telling because it highlights a need to inter-
pret Nina’s talk in terms of her membership in an Indonesian public that can 
recognize and evaluate representations of ethnic others. Indeed, if we only paid 
attention to Nina’s history of participation in one-to-one or one-to-few par-
ticipation frameworks and her own statements about her lack of competence in 
Sundanese (i.e., her socialization in a particular place and her lack of mobility 
within Indonesia), it would be hard to account for her talk here unless we con-
sider her involvement in one-to-many participation frameworks (i.e., her social-
ization through schooling and consumption of mass-mediated representations of 
the ethnic other).
In addition to continuing to index her membership in a particular 
Indonesian public, we also see Nina continue to pursue social sameness with 
Nuraeni (this time in opinions about authenticity). This practice can be seen 
as further positive interpersonal relationship work that simultaneously points 
to membership in an emergent COP and the wider Indonesian community liv-
ing in Nagoya. We see that this entire interaction is characterized by this type 
of work. For example, after Nina’s comment is ratified by Nuraeni (the per-
son whose identity as a speaker of Sundanese has emerged across a number 
of speech situations), we see that Endang also notes that Iteung’s talk is not 
Sundanese. She is thus also simultaneously indexing membership in the same 
communities as Nina.
We also see that although Nina has already pointed out the inauthenticity 
of the television representations of Sundanese-ness in lines 1–3, nevertheless, 
she repeats this information by her agreement with Endang’s comment in lines 
8 and 9. This part of the sequence achieves two things. First, it is evidence 
of Endang continuing to build convivial relations with Nuraeni by way of 
agreeing with her evaluation (i.e., building common ground), and by extension 
agreeing with Nina’s original evaluation. At the same time, this talk contin-
ues to index Endang’s membership in the same three communities as earlier. 
Second, we can see that Nina also continues to build convivial relations with 
Endang through her pursuit of sameness in opinion (line 10). As the characters 
are introduced, these types of evaluations become quite frequent, as we can 
see extract 8.4.3.

	
Knowledging, Conviviality, Community, and Togetherness in Difference	
219
Extract 8.4.3  Were the protests because these two characters weren’t Sundanese?
Nuraeni
1
2
3
kalau nggak salah kan . awal awalnya 
sempat diprotes (0.4) karena nggak
ada logat sundanya =
If [I’m] not mistaken, right, at 
the early stages
there were protests  
because there wasn’t 
a Sundanese accent.
Endang
3
                                   = oh gitu =
Is that right.
Fatimah
4
5
6
                                                    = (moving 
body and gaze toward Nuraeni) atau ini 
yang:: karena nggak ada logat sundanya =
Or is it these two who don’t have a
Sundanese accent.
Nuraeni
7
8
                                                                    = 
iya kali
Yes, maybe.
In lines 1–3, Nuraeni recalls that maybe it was this episode that attracted pro-
tests because Iteung’s accent wasn’t Sundanese. Although I did not ask about 
what type of protest, I assume that this was in the form of letters to the sta-
tion, a common practice in Indonesia, as pointed out by Loven (2008). Note that 
to this point, the discussion has only been about Iteung, and Nuraeni hasn’t 
evaluated other actors’ accents as inauthentic. This is important because while 
Fatimah’s background and self-reports about her linguistic abilities do not sug-
gest any competence in Sundanese, she nevertheless goes on to ask whether the 
protests might relate to two new characters who have just appeared on the screen 
and started speaking (lines 4–6). In doing so, she is evaluating these new char-
acters’ accents while identifying herself as someone who is familiar with signs of 
Sundanese-ness. In short, she is engaging in knowledging.
By engaging in knowledging, Fatimah is also demonstrating her member-
ship in the same Indonesian public inhabited by Nina and Endang. At the same 
time, Fatimah is also pursuing sameness with Nina’s, Endang’s, and Nuraeni’s 
earlier opinions about authenticity. In short, conviviality is being pursued by 
indexing her membership in the same locally emergent COP inhabited by all par-
ticipants, as well as the wider community of Indonesians living in Nagoya. That 
Nuraeni’s talk on lines 7 and 8 seems to ratify Fatimah’s claim helps smooth the 
way for further talk of this type. Shortly thereafter, Endang comments about the 
speech of one of the characters who was the object of discussion in lines 4 and 5 
in extract 8.4.3.

220	
Language and Superdiversity
Extract 8.4.4  Wow, these guys have very noticeable accents
Endang
  1
lho kok ini medok ngomongnya (0.8)
Wow, gee his speech is really 
accented.
Farid
  2
[ tamu
[He is] an outsider.
Nina
  3
[ pak ini ya =
This one [on the screen now] 
yeah?
Endang
  4
                    = itu tamu ya? =
He is an outsider is he?
Farid
  5
                                              = tamu:: =
Yeah an outsider.
Endang
  6
  7
                                                               =
wong itu petugas desa kok . medok (1.1)
Gee, that person, the village 
official, [his] speech is very 
accented.
Nuraeni
  8
iya =
Yeah.
Nina
  9
      = heeh bener (1.5)
Yes, yes.
Farid
10
11
ya kan pegawai desa kan . kan belum tentu 
dari desa:: [ setempat
Yeah, right a village official 
right, doesn’t necessarily have 
to be from the village where 
they work right.
Nina
12
                   [ oh iya dimutasi [ mutasi
Oh yeah, [they] can be  
transferred, transferred.
Farid
13
14
                                                 [ heeh kan 
dimutasi =
Yes, [they can be] transferred, 
right!

	
Knowledging, Conviviality, Community, and Togetherness in Difference	
221
Endang
15
16
                 = bukannya . pega . orang situ 
biasanya =
Aren’t officials usually from 
there [the
village that they work].
Farid
17
18
                 = bersedia ditempatkan di mana 
saja (laughs) (0.5) pns kan . bisa siapa saja
Prepared to move anywhere. 
Civil servants can be anyone 
[from anywhere], right!
In the talk represented in extract 8.4.4, we can see that the representation of one of 
the characters, Diran, has resulted in further commentary. Although participants 
approach the issue of authenticity from different angles, their talk suggests that it 
is a mismatch between the semiotic anchor of geographic place and other repre-
sented signs. In terms of knowledging, we continue to see Farid, Nina, and Endang 
showing their knowledge about signs associated with other ethnic COPs by engag-
ing in an evaluation of the authenticity of represented sign usage. For example, 
Endang’s comment about the thickness of the character’s accent in lines 1, 6, and 7 
shows that she has clear ideas about what this character’s accent should sound like 
given the Sundanese setting of the soap. In explaining this mismatch (lines 2, 10, 
11, 13, 14, 17, and 18), Farid is also showing that he knows what should be the case 
and why it isn’t on this occasion. For example, he explains that this is a result of 
the well-known practice of moving civil servants around Indonesia (see ­chapter 2). 
Nina aligns with Farid’s position that this mismatch is due to the character being 
an outsider (line 12).
By engaging in these knowledging practices, Endang, Nina, and Farid also 
index their membership in the particular Indonesian public that they have inter-
actionally inhabited during the course of two viewing sessions. By continuing 
to pursue sameness in activity type (i.e., questioning the authenticity of repre-
sentations), they are also pursuing conviviality and thus indexing participation 
in the other two communities that they have interactionally inhabited over the 
course of two viewing sessions. More generally, we also see that the achievement 
of common knowledge and ultimately convivial relations is also done through 
non-minimal responses in talk between Nuraeni and Nina. For example, in 
line 9, Nina uses heeh (yes) to show hearer-ship or alignment, while her sec-
ond yes (bener) shows engaged listening. Similarly, we see that Farid also uses 
non-minimal responses in lines 13 and 14 in a way that also suggests a continu-
ation of convivial talk with Nina. In this case, the heeh (yes) on line 13 shows 
hearer-ship, while the use of kan dimutasi (lines 13 and 14), which is basically a 
longer form of saying yes, repeats the heeh and thus shows engaged listening.
In the rest of the viewing session, participants continue to engage in these sorts of 
commentaries in a way that supports their earlier positions relating to the inauthen-
ticity of social type representation. For example, Nina, Endang, and Fatimah point 
to Iteung’s face, which they note is Javanese-looking. In this sense, they continue to 

222	
Language and Superdiversity
index their membership in the same three communities that they have interactionally 
inhabited to date. Nuraeni also indexes her membership in their locally emergent COP 
and the wider community of Indonesians living in Nagoya through her reiteration 
that Iteung’s accent is also not Sundanese. In short, her repetition continues to build 
convivial relations with members of this group by showing that they hold the same 
opinion as Nuraeni. Nuraeni also continues her practice of providing further transla-
tions for Sundanese words and grammatical explanations about the functions of cer-
tain Sundanese forms. In doing so, she continues to show her expertise in Sundanese, 
which continues to index her participation in an ethnically Sundanese COP.
During the interview that followed this viewing session, I delved further into 
the extent of these participants’ familiarity with television and film versions of Si 
Kabayan, finding that all participants had rather in-depth knowledge about the series 
of actors who had played Iteung and other characters. In addition to comparing the 
authenticity of portrayals in earlier versions of Si Kabayan, participants made com-
parisons with other actors’ portrayals in other ethnic teledramas, which also indexed 
their membership in the same three communities that they had inhabited during the 
viewing session. In what follows, I present some examples of these practices.
Extract 8.4.5  Knowledging and pursuing sameness in opinion
Zane
  1
  2
itu jugu lumayan (0.7) banyak ketawa
juga =
There was actually a fair bit 
of laughter
 also.
All
  3
= laughter =
Laughter.
Nina
  4
  5
= tapi yang ini aktingnya 
mereka kaku =
But there is this, their acting
is strange.
Zane
  6
                        = kaku =
Strange?
Nina
  7
  8
  9
10
11
                                      = apa jadi
maksudnya kadang . ah kita ngerti
mereka mau buat
kesannya sunda . tapi sundanya kok .
agak (0.6) [ nggak luwes . gitu
What is it,
what [I]‌ mean is sometimes, 
um we know
they want to give [us] a
Sundanese experience, but 
gee the Sundanese
is not very  
natural, you know.

	
Knowledging, Conviviality, Community, and Togetherness in Difference	
223
Nuraeni
12
                  [ agak dipaksakan =
A bit forced/overdone.
Zane
13
                                                   = oh =
I see.
Fatimah
14
15
                                                             =
bukan sunda banget =
Not especially Sundanese.
Endang
16
17
18
                                     = itu yang nggak itu
. itu . iteung sama si . armasan itu .
kalo aku liat [ sih
Which ones weren’t,
Iteung and Armasan,
In my opinion.
Nina
19
20
                        [ si iteung sama si 
[ armasan
[Yes], Iteung and
Armasan.
Nuraeni
21
[ armasan lumayan ah .
Armasan was alright.
Farid
22
heem =
Yeah.
Endang
23
           = [ tapi . agak ini juga .
But rather [strange] as well.
In the above extract, we see that Nina discusses how unnatural representations of 
Sundanese-ness have been in the soap they just watched. In particular, she notes 
that the actors’ attempts at providing a Sundanese experience were not really 
natural (lines 4, 5, 9, and 11). Her position is ratified by Nuraeni in line 12, and 
also by Fatimah (in line 15). Endang and Nina then take the lead again in singling 
out Iteung and another character as especially inauthentic (lines 16–20 and 23). 
In so doing, these three participants continue to engage in knowledging in a way 
that demonstrates an ability to recognize and evaluate ethnic social types. In 
doing so, they index their participation in the Indonesian public that they have 
interactionally inhabited across two viewing sessions.
As with their previous talk, the responses to these evaluations can be con-
sidered as evidence of continued efforts to build and reproduce convivial rela-
tions, which also indexes continued membership in their local emergent COP 
and the wider community of Indonesians living in Nagoya. The pursuit of con-
viviality can be seen if we examine how a series of repetitions that unfold in this 
sequence contribute to establishing sameness in participants’ opinions and thus 
further common ground. For example, we see that in line 12, Nuraeni aligns 
with Nina’s opinion of representations not being very natural (line 11). Similarly, 
Endang aligns with these two opinions through a paraphrase (line 15) that sum-
marizes Nuraeni and Nina’s position. We also see Nina (lines 19 and 20) aligning 

224	
Language and Superdiversity
with Endang’s opinion on just exactly who was the most unnatural (lines 17 and 
18). Farid, who doesn’t say much in this sequence, also aligns with Nuraeni’s 
opinion (line 21)  about one of the characters, Armasan, as being reasonably 
authentic (line 22). While in line 21, Nuraeni initially challenges one of the evalu-
ations relating to Armasan (Kabayan’s close friend in the serial), shortly after-
ward, Nuraeni ratifies the evaluation of Iteung’s authenticity in lines 27–29 of 
extract 8.3.6 below. This extract represents the talk that directly follows after 
extract 8.4.5.
Extract 8.4.6  Alignment repetition
Nina
24
             [ iteung yang jelas =
 It was obvious [with]  
Iteung.
Endang
25
26
                                             = iteung tuh 
. jelas jelas =
 [With] Iteung
 it is really obvious.
Nuraeni
27
28
29
                   = iteung yang paling kaku . 
ekspresinya juga enga::k .
[ nggak ini . ya .
 Iteung is the strangest.
 Her gestures and facial 
expression also
aren’t,  aren’t [appropri-
ate] yeah.
Endang
30
31
[ iya kalau ekspresinya juga . mungkin 
masih baru . pendatang baru kali . ya (0.6)
Yeah, also her gestures 
and facial
expression, maybe she 
is a newcomer, maybe, 
yeah?
Zane
32
Heem . jadi kaku gimana . maksudnya =
I see. So what do you 
mean by strange?
Endang
33
34
                                                                    =
nggak seperti orang sunda =
Not like a Sundanese.
Nuraeni and Nina
35
36
                                               = heem 
(while nodding heads) =
Right.
Zane
37
38
                                       = heem (0.6)
[ jadi se]
I see.
So

	
Knowledging, Conviviality, Community, and Togetherness in Difference	
225
Endang
39
[ untuk logatnya =
Their accent.
Nuraeni
40
41
                              = logatnya juga (0.5)
itu ah: (retrieves pen dropped by child) .
Also their accent. That
In the above extract, we see that Nina and Endang point out that the character 
Iteung is the most obvious example of an inauthentic portrayal of Sundanese-ness 
(lines 24–26). Nuraeni ratifies this evaluation by pointing out that Iteung’s por-
trayal is yang paling kaku “the strangest” (lines 27 and 28). We can also see 
that Nuraeni goes on to evaluate Iteung’s embodied language (i.e., her gestures 
and facial expressions) as strange (lines 28 and 29). Nuraeni’s focus on Iteung’s 
embodied language (expresi) in lines 28 and 29 offers an extra dimension to her 
evaluation (re her use of juga, “also”) along with her differentiation of logat from 
expresi in line 40. In so doing, she seems to front her expertise by being able to 
make such distinctions. Nuraeni thus continues to foreground her expertise as a 
Sundanese speaker by her ability to differentiate signs of Sundanese-ness, while 
continuing to index her membership in an ethnically Sundanese COP. Nina and 
Endang’s contribution, on the other hand, continues to engage in knowledging 
that demonstrates membership in the Indonesian public that can recognize and 
evaluate ethnic social types.
That their evaluations are also ratified by Nuraeni—who has con-
sistently indexed her participation in the community of Sundanese being 
evaluated—suggests a continuation of the positive interpersonal relation-
ship work that has occurred during this session and the previous one. Indeed, 
if we look at this talk more closely, we find that there is also a continuation 
of features used to pursue conviviality. These include the use of repetition 
and the pursuit of sameness in opinions. For example, we see repetition as 
showing both hearer-ship and agreement about evaluations between the 
pairs Nina-Endang (lines 24–26), Nuraeni-Endang (lines 28–30), and among 
Endang-Nuraeni-Nina (lines 34 and 35). What moves this repetition from 
a type of “showing hearer-ship” to engaged listening, at least for Nina and 
Endang, is that it repeats much of the content and much of the alignment 
already established in the talk represented in extract 8.4.5 in lines 16–19. This 
alignment repetition (which occurred across both temporally close speaker 
turns and those separated by other talk) displays common ground and indexes 
their continued membership in their locally emergent COPs and the wider 
community of Indonesians living in Nagoya.
While evaluations thus far have been critical and have primarily questioned 
the authenticity of particular actors’ performances of the ethnic other, this group 
of participants showed that knowledging can also involve positive evaluations 
of ethnic representations. In particular, as the interaction proceeds, the other 

226	
Language and Superdiversity
participants continue to index their membership in the communities they have 
interactionally inhabited thus far. This is done through the recognition and posi-
tive evaluation of ethnic social type representations. As can be seen in the talk 
that follows directly after extract 8.4.6, Endang and Nina go on to highlight the 
Sundanese-ness of three of the characters.
Extract 8.4.7  Knowledging as positive evaluation
Zane
39
kalau si abah (0.8)
What about Abah?
Endang
40
abah mah . [ sunda banget =
Well Abah, [is] very 
Sundanese.
Nuraeni
41
42
                    [ (nods head while gazing at
me) abah sunda =
Yes,
Abah is Sundanese.
Nina
43
            = heeh =
Yes.
Endang
44
                         = sama . sapa =
as is who [else]?
Nina
45
46
                                                                    =
kabayan [ kabayan
Kabayan, Kabayan.
Endang
47
48
                [ ambunya itu . kabayan itu
 sunda banget
Ambu [and]
Kabayan [are] very 
Sundanese.
After my prompt in line 39, we see that in contrast to previous negative evalua-
tions, now Endang positively evaluates some characters’ represented sign usage. 
For example, Abah is seen as “very Sundanese” ion line 40, as are Ambu and 
Kabayan (lines 45–47). Interestingly, Endang again appears to engage in cross-
ing by her use of the form mah (line 40), which is associated with Sundanese. 
Nuraeni also appears to ratify this usage and evaluation (line 41). In line 43, Nina 
also repeats the topic/opinion alignment displayed by Nuraeni and Endang in 
lines 40 and 41. Similarly, in lines 46 and 47, we see Endang aligning with Nina’s 
opinion in line 45. Again, Nina’s and Endang’s knowledging practices co-occur 
with the building of convivial relations through the pursuit of common ground, 
which in this case is sameness in opinions. In doing so, as with earlier examples, 
they continue to index their membership in the three communities that they have 
interactionally inhabited over the course of two viewing sessions.

	
Knowledging, Conviviality, Community, and Togetherness in Difference	
227
In the following two weeks, participants continued to engage in this type 
of sociability, which was characterized by participants’ positive and negative 
evaluations of televised sign representations. For example, when I screened an 
extremely popular ethnic serial, Si Doel Anak Sekolahan (Doel an Educated Lad), 
which was set in a Betawi-speaking area of Jakarta, it was not uncommon for 
those who had spent no time living in Jakarta (Nina, Nuraeni, Fatimah, and 
Farid) to make comments relating to the authenticity of represented signs and 
sign users.
In summary, this section followed the group of participants introduced in 
section 8.3 in their interactions a week later as they again view an Indonesian 
comedic soap and are interviewed afterward. What was especially interesting 
during this week was how those who had not been socially identified as mem-
bers of an ethnically Sundanese COP in the previous week (in this case, only 
Nuraeni) nevertheless engaged in evaluating representations of Sundanese social 
types. In engaging in these types of knowledging practices, they indexed their 
membership in a particular Indonesian public and two other communities. In 
doing so, they also exemplify Indonesian citizens who are multicultural and mul-
tilingual and who can sometimes index and do unity in a medium other than 
Indonesian. Nuraeni was different from other members of this group because she 
made more nuanced evaluations of Sundanese-ness. For example, she identified 
particular facial expressions and body language as Sundanese. As in the previ-
ous section and last chapter, however, all participants’ evaluations were also very 
much tied with the building of convivial relations among this group of trans-
national Indonesians. This was done through teasing, various forms of conver-
sational alignment that established common ground (e.g., alignment in activity 
types [evaluation], alignment in opinions, alignment repetition), non-minimal 
responses, and crossing. This conversational work related to the ongoing con-
struction of a local COP. At the same time, this type of interactional work con-
tinues to point to their membership in the wider community of transnational 
Indonesians living, working, and studying in Nagoya.
8.5  Conclusion
In this chapter, I continued to engage with the themes of knowledging and conviv-
iality by examining interactions among a different group of research participants 
across a larger timescale. In so doing, I placed my analysis into broader discus-
sions about community and its relationship with CC. Many of these Indonesians 
(Nina, Farid, Endang, and Fatimah) had competence to comprehend signs asso-
ciated with ethnic communities of practice that they did not identify with. On 
many occasions, some of these Indonesians also evaluated representations of the 
ethnic other or even appropriated and used (i.e., engaged in crossing) some of 
the linguistic forms associated with ethnic others. In displaying these types of 
 

228	
Language and Superdiversity
competence, they also displayed membership in a particular type of community, 
in this case, an Indonesian public that had been socialized during a particular 
historical period when links among linguistic forms, place, and person had been 
circulated on a mass scale to form ethnic communities of practice. Put more 
directly in terms of CC, although the group of Indonesians discussed here came 
from very different parts of Indonesia and had very different patterns of mobil-
ity, they nevertheless displayed similar types of CC, which can only be accounted 
for with reference to notions of enregisterment.
I suggest that the case at hand has implications for how we think about 
CC more generally. Indeed, that so much of language socialization involves 
schooling and the consumption of semiotic forms from television and radio pro-
gramming, films, the Internet, and other forms of one-to-many participation 
frameworks invites us to reevaluate our understanding of CC (Goebel, 2013). 
This is so because studies of CC continue to have the underlying assumption that 
it is learned locally, often in a geographically isolated space, and that it is then 
brought into other contexts. In contrast, the CC we have seen here is acquired in 
multiple dispersed institutional settings.
Interactionally displaying membership in a particular Indonesian public (i.e., 
engaging in knowledging) also became a resource that was used with a whole 
range of other conversational features to index membership in two other types 
of communities. Both were related to the notion of conviviality. The first was the 
locally emergent COP that was developing among this group of research partici-
pants, while the second was the wider community of Indonesians living in Nagoya, 
Japan. Engaging in knowledging, repetition, non-minimal responses, teasing, 
pursuits of sameness in opinions, etc. all helped to further build convivial rela-
tions among this group of Indonesians. In contrast to the type of conviviality dis-
cussed in ­chapter 7, however, in this chapter, we have seen how convivial relations 
continue to be built and reproduced over two temporally and spatially distinct 
speech situations. In ­chapter 7, I referred to this as togetherness in difference and 
suggested that it helps extend the ideas around conviviality discussed in Williams 
and Stroud (2013) and Blommaert (2013a, 2013b). In particular, I suggested that 
taking this approach differentiates conviviality as a fleeting social practice from 
conviviality as the outcome of face-to-face interactions across longer timeframes.
I suggested that the practices that made up part of these Indonesians’ efforts 
to build convivial relations related to the need to access important support net-
works in Nagoya. This need mirrored what we find in other settings, especially 
those couched in terms of superdiversity, because one feature of such settings is 
the need to access goods, services, and jobs. In engaging in talk that produced 
these convivial relations, this group of Indonesians thus also indexed their partic-
ipation in the broader Indonesian community and associated support networks in 
Nagoya. For the diverse field that is referred to as sociolinguistics (e.g., Bucholtz 
& Hall, 2008), I suggest that an ability to delineate different types of communi-
ties and the competences and communicative practices associated with them can 

	
Knowledging, Conviviality, Community, and Togetherness in Difference	
229
provide a more nuanced approach to the study of talk in superdiverse settings. In 
particular, superdiverse contexts are settings where interactional alignment with 
many communities may be the order of the day. What I have shown here is one 
approach to identifying such alignments.
That some acts of knowledging resembled crossing requires further atten-
tion, especially given that I  continue to refer to these practices as knowledg-
ing rather than crossing. There are four main reasons for this. First, accounts 
of crossing typically focus on “performances” of features of other’s mediums. 
Knowledging primarily involves comprehension and evaluation of features of 
other’s mediums rather than a performance using these features. Second, work 
on crossing often accounts for or implies that competence to engage in crossing 
was gained via participation in face-to-face interactions (i.e., one-to-few partici-
pation frameworks; e.g., Blommaert et al., 2005b; Kramsch & Whiteside, 2008; 
Rampton, 1995). After looking at participants’ backgrounds, it is clear that the 
ability to engage in crossing was not gained via involvement in one-to-few par-
ticipation frameworks, but rather through involvement in one-to-many partici-
pation frameworks.
Third, while those who engage in knowledging seem to be entitled to evalu-
ate representations of “otherness,” this is usually not a performance of otherness 
through the borrowing of linguistic signs associated with this other. Fourth, the 
practice of knowledging discussed in this book also differs from crossing because 
crossing occurs in liminal moments and can be flagged by commentaries, laugh-
ter, or pauses, all of which were not part of the interactional practices of this 
group of Indonesians. For example, the practice of knowledging seemed to be 
habitual among my group (e.g., they did this in each of the four viewing sessions 
that they attended), and it was ratified as appropriate.
For those with a keen interest in Indonesia, we can also add that while 
most of this knowledging was typically done in Indonesian (which among other 
things is an index of being an Indonesian citizen), these practices also demon-
strate that the state ideology of unity in diversity can also be enacted through 
recognition and evaluation of signs associated with other ethnic communities, 
rather than just Indonesian. In some ways, an unintended outcome of processes 
of enregisterment that occurred between 1966 and 2009 (see ­chapters 2–6) is that 
Indonesians can now also index their Indonesian-ness by knowing about or even 
speaking fragments of the ethnic “voices” (Hill, 1995) of other Indonesians (e.g., 
Cole, 2010).

230
9
Conclusion
9.1  Introduction
This book has examined how a social category, ethnicity, has been semiotically 
constructed and recirculated in Indonesia since Dutch colonial times and how 
signs or emblems from this construct are drawn upon in the talk of transnational 
Indonesians studying in Japan. While the daily challenges of eking out a liveli-
hood as a student were perhaps not so different in 2008 compared to the early 
twentieth century, what was different was that these students now brought with 
them a deep knowledge of ethnic stereotypes and the emblems associated with 
them. These Indonesians used their knowledge of such emblems along with other 
interactional practices to establish and maintain important convivial relations. 
The concepts of ethnicity and convivial social relations in transnational spaces 
are two of the main themes of this book and represent points of engagement with 
scholarship in the areas of language ideologies and superdiversity. In what fol-
lows, I summarize the main arguments put forward in each chapter. In section 
9.2, I tie these arguments together while highlighting how this work can contrib-
ute to sociolinguistics more generally.
Taking inspiration from scholarship in the broad area of language ideolo-
gies, ­chapter 2 examined how ideas about social types, regions, and linguistic 
forms have been circulated from colonial times until the early 1990s, forming 
what can be described as imagined communities of ethnic social types. In build-
ing on my earlier work, I aligned with three sets of related ideas. The first related 
to how tracing histories of sign circulation helps us understand how a particular 
“language” has become associated with particular types of speakers and particu-
lar values over time. The second set of ideas I aligned with revolved around ideas 
of complexity and superdiversity. The third related set of ideas concerned the 
relationships between different waves of technology and how they have contrib-
uted to the massification and up-scaling of the circulation of ideas and people, 
while also creating new social domains for contact with and commentary about 
the “other.”
 
 

	
Conclusion	
231
More specifically, in ­chapter 2, I argued that new waves of technology figured 
in the construction of regional languages, Indonesian, and their imagined com-
munities of speakers on the one hand, and a nearly infinite number of local lan-
guages and their situated communities on the other. Situated in this sense refers 
to both a community that is sedimented over time through habitual interactions 
in a particular locale (Bourdieu, 1977; Giddens, 1984; Wenger, 1998), and more 
fleeting communities found in transient settings (Goebel, 2010b). The groups of 
sign constellations—referred to as semiotic registers (Agha, 2007)—that became 
regional languages were typically made up of a formula of region + person + 
linguistic form = regional ethnic language. Ideas about regional languages were 
produced by academic elites and media professionals. These ideas became widely 
known through their consumption in increasingly common one-to-many partici-
pation frameworks. These participation frameworks included school classrooms 
and mediated communication. In the former, the teacher represented the one and 
the pupils the many, while in the latter (e.g., television, radio, newspapers, novels, 
magazines), the program, the newspaper article, etc. were the one and the readers 
and audience the many.
A register of Malay eventually became a register of Indonesian, with the 
most widely circulating reproductions being found in the social domains of 
schools and bureaucracies, radio, television, and print media. As literary written 
models of Malay became part of the spoken repertoire of exemplary Indonesians, 
over time, Indonesian also became associated with new knowledge, education, 
development, expertise, citizenship, nationhood, and authority (whether per-
sonal, bureaucratic, or political). The idea of a citizen who could do unity was 
exemplified by the Indonesian-speaking subject.
Where interactional practice was concerned, I painted a picture of increased 
interaction among strangers in an increasingly diverse and expanding set of 
domains that led to the creation of new sign constellations (semiotic registers). In 
concluding ­chapter 2, I pointed out that where interaction across lines of differ-
ence occurred, it usually involved mobile, educated, and affluent city types who 
typically engaged in such interactions on a regular basis. Often, members of this 
same group of Indonesians subsequently produced representations of such inter-
actions in travelogues, novels, radio shows, and television programs. With the 
formation of multiple semiotic registers came the formation of multiple centers 
of normativity relating to what was good language. The existence of multiple cen-
ters each with different social values helped in the creation of what Blommaert 
(2005, 2008, 2010, 2013) refers to as “orders of indexicality.” The orders of indexi-
cality that emerged typically had Indonesian at the top of the hierarchy followed 
by some ethnic languages (e.g., Javanese), then other ethnic languages, and finally 
mixed languages. The same processes that enabled the creation of these orders 
also set up the conditions for their reconfiguration, a point I explored in the fol-
lowing chapters.

232	
Language and Superdiversity
Chapter 3 sought to examine how personhood and social relations were repre-
sented in Indonesian comedic soap operas in the mid-to-late 1990s. I did this with 
an eye to identifying continuities between these representations and the circulating 
ideologies about communities of ethnic social types discussed in ­chapter 2. Taking 
inspiration from work on media and television more generally, I pointed out that 
these comedic representations were the outcomes of particular historical circum-
stances as they related to the emergence of television and local soaps. In looking 
at these television representations, I took a multimodal approach that helped to 
show how the co-occurrence of specific words with signs of place, proxemics, ges-
tures, facial expressions, topics, activity types, and prosody helped to produce 
dense semiotic models of ethnicity with “demeanors” (Goffman, 1967) and inter-
actional histories. For example, ethnic social types were linked with signs of place, 
emotional social types, and close social relations in all three soaps, while the reg-
ister that had “Indonesian” within its constellation of signs typically lacked these 
signs of rapport and involved interactions among strangers. On the other hand, 
the register(s) that were associated with diversity, mobility, and the city became 
associated with social types who could engage in register alternation as part of a 
more long-term local process of becoming an insider, while also mirroring much 
of the embodied language found in intra-ethnic interactions. These representa-
tions of register alternation also can be considered as part of a reconfiguration of 
orders of indexicality because they started to be represented as commonplace and 
not stigmatized in one social domain, television.
In thinking about how these representations helped to associate particu-
lar demeanors with social types, I also engaged with work on the relationship 
between television representations and language change. Following up on 
Richardson’s (2010) observation that media professionals erase or foreground 
“polite” and “impolite” behavior in television dramatic dialogue, I  suggested 
that this could more generally be couched in terms of semiotic change. More 
specifically, I  argued that the construction of social types’ demeanors can be 
viewed as evidence of semiotic change, especially when compared with the ethnic 
social types that had been circulating prior to the emergence of televised come-
dic soaps. In short, in comparison to the imagined communities of ethnic social 
types who spoke another language and lived in a particular region, these social 
types now audibly spoke and visually acted in particular ways.
What was very common across all three soaps was alternation between frag-
ments of a named regional language and Indonesian. This alternation resembled 
what has been described in the codeswitching literature as “alternation as the 
medium” (Alvarez-Cáccamo, 1998; Franceschini, 1998; Gafaranga & Torras, 
2002). I argued that this representation of alternation authorized mixing in set-
tings that do not have a close fit with descriptions of television representations 
elsewhere in the world. In the literature, instances of alternation are associated 
with liminality and spectacular performances (e.g., Androutsopoulos, 2007; 
Jaffe, 2000; Kelly-Holmes & Atkinson, 2007; LeCompte & Schensul, 1999), while 

	
Conclusion	
233
in the soaps examined here, instances of alternation were unspectacular, mun-
dane, and habitual.
These representations of alternation also provided models of the doing of 
unity in diversity that sat in contrast to the state ideology, which linked Indonesian 
to the doing of unity in diversity. I pointed out that this type of representation 
had, since the early 1990s, become increasingly common on Indonesian televi-
sion. In a real sense, these soaps were starting to naturalize the type of diver-
sity found in Indonesia’s cities. This increasingly naturalized picture of diversity 
included the “competence to comprehend” (Agha, 2007) fragments of languages 
that one did not speak. This competence was an unintended consequence of the 
increasing circulation and consumption of ideas about ethnicity found in one-to-
many participation frameworks (e.g., schooling, television and radio program-
ming, etc.), at least in the imaginations of the television producers who created 
soaps based in urban areas. I referred to the practice of comprehending frag-
ments of others’ regional languages in interaction as “knowledging.”
Chapter 4 focused on a period of rapid change when ethnicity increasingly 
became indexed with negative traits. From 1999 onward, ideologies of ethnicity 
continued to circulate in similar social domains as in the past. For example, peo-
ple still circulated in transport hubs, shopping malls, schools, and universities. 
Universities continued to send their students on field placements to other regions 
as part of their university education. Representations of ethnic social types con-
tinued too, and ideologies linking linguistic form to region were recirculated via 
schools and government artifacts (e.g., census forms that now included ethnic 
categories).
In exploring what amounted to the criminalization of certain ethnic social 
types during this period, I started by looking at state developmentalist policies 
of the earlier New Order period (1966–1998). These policies directly contributed 
to massive influxes of outsiders—including economic migrants, transmigrants, 
administrators, police, and military personnel—over a short period of time to 
the islands outside of Java. I pointed out that the rapid increases in the visibility 
of outsiders contributed to the creation of the “right” conditions for the construc-
tion of social types with negative characteristics. These tensions were primarily 
local and sometimes emerged in face-to-face interactions or altercations between 
locals and outsiders. In this sense, the circulation of negative associations with 
certain identities was primarily local and on a small scale.
However, from early 1997 onward, the effects of an ongoing currency crisis, 
rapid political change, decentralization, and the emergence across Indonesia of 
movements whose focus was on the revival of “local” traditions all helped to recir-
culate older ideologies that linked region to ethnic social type on a much larger 
scale. As in other places around the world (Collins, Noble, Poynting, & Tabar, 
2000; Poynting, Noble, Tabar, & Collins, 2004), the preexistence of stereotypes 
coupled with economic and political uncertainty, a highly visible group of outsid-
ers, and media reportage about rights and entitlement assisted in the association 

234	
Language and Superdiversity
of negative traits with ethnic social types in certain areas of Indonesia. One out-
come of these interrelated processes was that deviance was increasingly lami-
nated onto people who were migrants, replacing earlier, more neutral readings of 
ethnicity. The consequences of this were the worst cases of communal violence 
and population displacement seen in Indonesian since the mid-1960s.
Conflict-based displacement and the involvement of military and other out-
siders (e.g., aid agencies) created many new social domains for encounters with 
difference and for the generation of stories about such encounters. During this 
time, there was also a large increase in the mediatization of conflicts involv-
ing those of different ethnic backgrounds, at both the local and national lev-
els. In a real sense, and as with earlier times, registers associated with ethnic 
social types were now regaining negative associations. This was not just in the 
regions, but also in Java where almost daily reports of violence perpetrated by 
one ethnic group against another could be found in national newspapers. In a 
number of regions in Indonesia, political and fiscal decentralization brought with 
it increased emphasis on the teaching of ethnic languages and use of ethnic lan-
guages in the media. These practices helped to strengthen existing associations 
among language, group, and region, and with them ideas relating to language as 
emblematic of ethnicity, while also contributing to an ongoing reconfiguration of 
existing orders of indexicality.
In ­chapter 5, I turned my attention to some of the 400 hours of television 
that I recorded in 2009. Drawing upon the theoretical orientations laid out in 
­chapters 2 and 3, I focused on the tension between how televised representations 
helped to naturalize language alternation on the one hand, while continuing 
to anchor it to locale. While I pointed out that language alternation occurred 
across a number of genres including soap operas, variety shows, on-the-spot 
news reports, and commercials, I focused primarily on news reports, children’s 
shows, and soaps. What was striking about this alternation was that it occurred 
in non-liminal and non-spectacular moments and was represented as habitual 
across many genres, timeslots, and television stations.
The habitualness of this alternation was also assisted via anchoring mecha-
nisms, which I argued also assisted in the recirculation of older ideas about com-
munities of ethnic social types, their language practices, and their link to place. 
Anchoring was achieved through explicit commentary by a narrator or news-
reader, or by metasemiotic commentaries such as maps, subtitles, communities 
of speakers using similar mediums in a particular setting, the explicit naming 
of a language, the use of signs of place (e.g., car license plates), and subtitle-like 
texts. I pointed out two types of alternation practices found in soaps: the first 
contained large amounts of a local medium, while the second, which I refer to as 
“stylized alternation,” contained just a couple of fragments from these mediums 
(often referred to as regional languages). I argued that the increasingly ubiqui-
tous nature of ethnic registers and register alternation on Indonesian television 
also pointed to a reconfiguration or revaluation of ethnic registers vis-à-vis 

	
Conclusion	
235
Indonesian, especially when compared with representations during the first 
twenty-five years of Indonesian television when Indonesian was the sole medium.
Chapter  6 continued to focus on television representations that were 
recorded in 2009. Following up on the theme of diversity introduced in ­chapter 5, 
I showed how representations of linguistic diversity and the practices of alterna-
tion and knowledging that were emerging on Indonesian television by the late 
1990s (­chapter 3) were by 2009 ubiquitous across a range of television stations 
and genres. I pointed out that this authorization of diversity also often sat in con-
trast to the practices described in ­chapter 5 where linguistic forms were anchored 
to ethnic social types and/or region. These representational practices not only 
denaturalized the language ethnicity links that I described throughout the book 
and with it imagined communities of ethnic social types, but they also demon-
strated that the doing of unity in diversity in Indonesia is no longer an activity 
that is ideologized as something done solely in Indonesian. The representation of 
alternation and knowledging thus points to a process of revaluing whereby the 
make-up of orders of indexicality is changing domain by domain.
More specifically, I focused on understanding representations of language 
alternation practices that typically involved the use of fragments of Indonesian 
and fragments of regional languages. In contrast to the televised material covered 
in ­chapters 3 and 5—where there were representations of multiple voices usually 
anchored to different parts of Indonesia—in the talk examined in this chapter, 
these voices were now represented as spoken in settings associated with the city. 
In examining how mobility and diversity are represented through the use of frag-
ments associated with the voices of imagined ethnic communities, I provided 
examples of interactions among those who were represented as sharing similar 
ethnic voices and interactions across lines of difference. As with the represen-
tational practices described in section 3.7, interactions across lines of difference 
typically had participants understanding each other’s talk. In short, they were 
represented as engaging in knowledging as part of wider conversational efforts 
to do togetherness. The doing of togetherness or conviviality through knowledg-
ing and a range of other conversational practices becomes the central focus of my 
final two chapters.
Chapter 7 looked at how a group of transnational Indonesians who were 
studying in Nagoya, Japan, built convivial relations through talk. In engag-
ing with more general literature on the doing of togetherness and conviviality, 
I focused on a specific type of talk referred to as “small talk.” This small talk 
included features, such as non-minimal responses, teasing, and repetition, and 
helped to establish common ground among participants. The pursuit of common 
ground also included the pursuit of social sameness at a number of levels, includ-
ing opinions about the authenticity of televised representations. In focusing on 
the building of convivial relations across two temporally close speech situations, 
I linked this type of mundane talk with a number of other contexts: the wider 
context in which these Indonesians found themselves and the research design of 

236	
Language and Superdiversity
this project, which brought together these transnational Indonesians. Although 
this is certainly not a type of context one finds in other studies of small talk 
(Coupland, 2003, 2000)  or ethnographic studies of doing togetherness in dif-
ference (Wise, 2005), nevertheless, the bringing together of this group created 
another setting where these Indonesians needed to (re)produce interpersonal 
relationships that would enable them to (re)access the important informal sup-
port networks that existed in Nagoya.
In looking at these transnational Indonesians’ talk, I  also engaged with 
scholarship in two other areas. The first area relates to the multiple functions of 
talk, such as how talk can contribute to the simultaneous development of identi-
ties and epistemologies (Goebel, 2010b; Wortham, 2006). In line with Bakhtin’s 
(1981) and Vološinov’s (1973 [1929]) ideas about the multiple meanings inherent in 
discourse, ­chapter 7 also added to this literature by teasing out the multiple func-
tions of talk in a particular setting. For example, in addition to building conviv-
ial relations, I showed how talk also related to ongoing social identification, the 
assigning of meaning to an unknown word, and the tensions between meaning as 
fixed and meaning as negotiated.
Chapter  8 continued to use the frame of television viewing discussed in 
­chapter  7, although my data was drawn from the talk that occurred between 
another group of Indonesians who were involved in the project described 
in ­chapter 7. In contrast to ­chapter 7, I follow this group across the course of 
two weeks, which provided some more insights into how conviviality was built 
and reproduced over longer timescales. In so doing, I placed my analysis into 
broader discussions about community and its relationship with communicative 
competence. The Indonesians discussed in ­chapter 8 all had competence to com-
prehend signs associated with ethnic communities of practice that they did not 
identify with, and on many occasions, some of the these Indonesians also evalu-
ated representations of the ethnic other or even appropriated and used some of 
the linguistic forms associated with ethnic others. In displaying these types of 
competence, they also displayed membership in an Indonesian public that had 
been socialized during a particular historical period when links among linguistic 
forms, place, and person had been circulated on a mass scale to form ethnic com-
munities of practice. Put more directly in terms of communicative competence 
(CC), although the Indonesians discussed here came from very different parts of 
Indonesia and had very different patterns of mobility, they nevertheless displayed 
similar types of CC, which can only be accounted for with reference to notions 
of enregisterment.
Interactionally displaying membership in a particular Indonesian public 
(i.e., engaging in knowledging) also became a resource that was used with a whole 
range of other conversational features to index membership in two other types 
of communities. Both were related to the notion of conviviality. The first was 
the locally emergent community of practice (COP) that was developing among 
this group of research participants, while the second was the wider community 

	
Conclusion	
237
of Indonesians living in Nagoya, Japan. Engaging in knowledging, repetition, 
non-minimal responses, teasing, pursuits of sameness in opinions, etc. all helped 
to further build convivial relations among this group of Indonesians. In contrast 
to the type of conviviality discussed in ­chapter 7, I examined how convivial rela-
tions continued to be built and reproduced over two temporally and spatially 
distinct speech situations. I referred to this as “togetherness in difference.” I sug-
gested that the practices that made up part of these Indonesians’ efforts to build 
convivial relations related to the need to access important support networks in 
Nagoya.
9.2  Ideologies, Communities, Competence, and Superdiversity
A major aim of this book was to contribute to discussions about linguistic 
superdiversity and language ideologies. I engaged with the interrelated nature 
of these two areas in a number of ways. First, I extended the argument implicit 
in Rampton (2011) about the need to take a historical look at the development 
of linguistic superdiversity. Drawing inspiration from ideas about space-time 
compression discussed by Harvey (1989) and the relationship of technology 
to language and social life (Eisenlohr, 2010; Weidman, 2010), I  focused on 
how new waves of technology and the intensification of schooling practices 
produced large increases in the circulation of people and ideas in Indonesia, 
which in turn had a number of unintended consequences. One unintended 
outcome was the construction and reproduction of language ideologies about 
ethnolinguistic communities across the archipelago over a time span of about 
150 years.
Related to the development of language ideologies about ethnicity was the 
development of knowledge about ethnic others that could be used to establish 
positive interpersonal relations among strangers in transnational settings. The 
third outcome was the emergence of an uncountable number of locale-specific 
languages. In a sense, while I have mapped some of the conditions that have 
engendered superdiversity in Indonesia, I have also highlighted how this process 
also “sets up” and “sits in constant tension with” standardizing processes that 
are the outcomes of schooling, television programming, and other one-to-many 
participation frameworks.
The fleshing-out of a historical account of how linguistic superdiversity has 
emerged in Indonesia can add a comparative viewpoint to discussions about the 
emergence of superdiversity in Europe (e.g., Blommaert, 2010; Blommaert & 
Rampton, 2011; Rampton, 2011; Vertovec, 2007). For example, one characteristic 
of linguistic superdiversity in European settings is the settlement of people with a 
wide range of linguistic repertoires in an area already populated by people with 
an equally wide but different linguistic repertoire. In Indonesia, we have seen 
how the consumption of commentaries about the other—typically circulated on 
 

238	
Language and Superdiversity
a mass scale in newspapers, radio, television, and schools—have over time helped 
to add “competence to comprehend, evaluate, and perform ethnic otherness” to 
Indonesians’ linguistic repertoires. I  referred to competence to comprehend, 
evaluate, and perform ethnic otherness as “knowledging.”
In ­chapters 3, 5, and 6, I was interested in showing how television program-
ming helped to build, reproduce, and change ideologies about ethnic social 
types. The work in these chapters contributes to some of the discussions on lan-
guage ideology formation by furthering the multimodal nature of such stud-
ies. More specifically, with a few recent exceptions (Bucholtz, 2011; Bucholtz 
& Lopez, 2011; Mendoza-Denton, 2011), most studies that look at how social 
types and social relations are constructed, while being associated with particu-
lar signs, typically use and focus upon printed sources (e.g., Agha, 2003, 2011a; 
Inoue, 2006; Inoue, 2011; Miller, 2004). Yet printed sources can only represent 
certain modes of communication in comparison to the wider array of signs rep-
resented in film formats, which have become a ubiquitous one-to-many partici-
pation framework. In addition, the extra modes found in the soap format also 
offer implicit metasemiotic commentaries that help in the construction of social 
types as ethnic.
Another contribution of this book to scholarship on linguistic superdiversity 
relates to how people do togetherness in difference in superdiverse settings (Ang, 
2003; Goebel, 2010a, 2010b; Smets, 2005; Vertovec, 2007: 1045; Werbner, 1997; 
Wise, 2005). While work to date focuses on doing togetherness in difference in 
local encounters, I have shown how Indonesian television models such encoun-
ters. In examining the modeling of these encounters, I made two observations. 
The first related to how this modeling helped to authorize codemixing, while the 
second was that the modeling of such encounters also modeled a new type of 
sociability that was based on knowledging practices.
In carrying out my analysis of constructed dialogues in television repre-
sentations, I found that language alternation was very common. Despite an 
increasing interest in the media in sociolinguistics (e.g., Agha, 2011b; Bell & 
Gibson, 2011; Gershon, 2010; Richardson, 2010) and a mountain of work on 
language alternation and codeswitching more generally, I could find little work 
that focused on issues around the classification of representations of language 
alternation. I thus needed to develop an approach to this type of alternation. 
In theoretical terms, I built on my earlier work in this area (Goebel, 2010b), 
work on codeswitching, especially Gafaranga and Torras’s (2002), Auer’s 
(1995) ethnomethodological approach to language alternation, and reflections 
on ethnomethodological approaches more generally (e.g., Francis & Hester, 
2004; Liddicoat, 2007; Moerman, 1988; ten Have, 2007). Most of the alterna-
tion I examined could be classified as “alternation as the medium” (Gafaranga 
& Torras, 2002). Alternation as the medium resembled the following pattern 
(adapted from Auer, 1995): AB1 AB2 AB1 AB2 (uppercase letters represent a 
particular medium and the numbers indicate speakers 1 and 2).

	
Conclusion	
239
Alternation as the medium is a different type of language alternation from 
what is found in accounts of television representations elsewhere in the world (e.g., 
Androutsopoulos, 2007; Jaffe, 2000; Johnson & Ensslin, 2007; Johnson & Milani, 
2010; Kelly-Holmes & Atkinson, 2007; LeCompte & Schensul, 1999), and indeed 
in accounts of the institutionalization of multilingualism more generally. On the 
one hand, these institutionally authorized representations contrast with com-
monly found ideologies of multilingualism where multilingualism is constructed 
as the ability to monolingually speak two or more languages (e.g., Heller, 2007). 
On the other hand, accounts of the commoditization of multilingualism in the 
media elsewhere typically represent language alternation as occurring in liminal 
or spectacular interactional moments (e.g., Androutsopoulos, 2007; Jaffe, 2000; 
Johnson & Ensslin, 2007; Johnson & Milani, 2010; Kelly-Holmes & Atkinson, 
2007; LeCompte & Schensul, 1999). Yet in the television representations exam-
ined here, language alternation was typically unspectacular, mundane, and often 
habitual. The televised modeling of alternation as the medium and language 
alternation more generally as habitual also pointed to some other presumptions 
on the part of media professionals about a type of sociability characterized by 
knowledging practices. In particular, these representations of alternation and 
knowledging showed that these interactional practices were already part of tele-
vision producers’ imaginations, as well as part of their expectations about their 
audiences’ competence to comprehend.
The modeling of knowledging practices brings us back to another observa-
tion relating to studies of superdiversity, namely that the condition of superdiver-
sity requires new ways of understanding how people from different backgrounds 
with different semiotic systems go about getting along (Ang, 2003; Goebel, 2010a, 
2010b; Smets, 2005; Vertovec, 2007; Werbner, 1997; Wise, 2005). I argued that by 
understanding the mechanisms that enable people to engage in knowledging, we 
can come to a more nuanced understanding of people’s actual interactional prac-
tices that involve knowledging. As we found, knowledging was part of a variety of 
ways in which a group of transnational Indonesian strangers interactionally did 
togetherness in difference (Ang, 2003).
In discussing how these Indonesians did togetherness through talk, I focused 
on recent work on the idea of conviviality and its relationship to superdiversity 
(Blommaert, 2013; Williams & Stroud, 2013). I suggested that a more nuanced 
account of positive interpersonal relations could be had if we differentiated con-
viviality from the doing of togetherness in difference. The reason for adding a 
further set of terms is that although Williams and Stroud (2013) infer that con-
viviality relates to face-to-face interaction and longer-term social relations, the 
data they present is made up of fleeting moments and does not follow up on sub-
sequent interaction. In line with scholarship on the need to follow interactions 
across time (Ochs, 1988; Wortham, 2006), using the concept of togetherness in 
difference is a way of terminologically recognizing the differences in the semiotic 
and temporal make-up of a fleeting moment versus a series of interactions.

240	
Language and Superdiversity
The idea of community and the types of competences one needs to display 
and enact it were major focuses of ­chapter 8. I suggested that an ability to delin-
eate different types of communities and the competences and communicative 
practices associated with them can provide a more nuanced approach to the study 
of talk in superdiverse settings where interactional alignment with many commu-
nities is the order of the day. We know that in situated interaction, people can 
not only display membership in a particular COP by using features indexically 
associated with that community (Antaki & Widdicombe, 1998), but the ongoing 
talk can also create a locally emergent COP (Goebel, 2010b; Wortham, 2006). 
In this book, I have also shown how publics (as another type of community) are 
inhabited and invoked in locally emergent COPs.
Criteria for membership in a public differ somewhat from criteria for mem-
bership in a COP and other interactionally constituted communities. In face-to-
face interaction, for example, there will be a range of competences that can be 
involved, and these will be determined by membership in a particular COP. In 
a COP, sharing ways of speaking and the CC associated with them are primary 
indicators of membership, and they are typically developed in a specific locale 
among a stable and often small, isolated population. While there are often a lim-
ited number of members in a particular COP, publics typically have many more 
members. This is so because one-to-many participation frameworks help to cir-
culate ways of speaking—albeit much more fragmented models—to many more 
people.
That so much of a person’s language socialization involves schooling and the 
consumption of semiotic forms from television and radio programming, films, 
the Internet, and other forms of one-to-many participation frameworks invites 
us to reevaluate our understanding of CC (Goebel, 2013). Indeed, what is com-
mon for those thinking about CC is that these studies are typically carried out 
in small, geographically isolated communities. Many of the groundbreaking lan-
guage socialization studies of the late 1970s and early 1980s (e.g., Ochs, 1988; 
Schieffelin, 1990)  were often conducted in isolated communities and involved 
studying just a few novices involved in language socialization activities at any 
given moment (i.e., one-to-one or one-to-few participation frameworks). Those 
with the authority to model ways of speaking for these novices were also limited 
to older siblings, parents, elders, healers, and missionaries.
Although it may have been straightforward for the above-mentioned scholars 
to define a community, its members, and the competences that one needed to be 
seen as an authentic community member in these settings, an increasingly mobile 
and connected world has invited scholars to reexamine ideas of CC along with 
related ideas about community. A common theme in scholarship that engages 
with these ideas is the need to understand how histories of mobility figure in a 
person’s ability to understand and use semiotic fragments of whole genres that 
are indexically associated with particular languages (e.g., Blommaert, Collins, 
& Slembrouck, 2005a; Blommaert, Collins, & Slembrouck, 2005b; Kramsch & 

	
Conclusion	
241
Whiteside, 2008; Warriner, 2010). While much of this work continued to focus 
on CC developed through participation in one-to-one or one-to-few participa-
tion frameworks, some work on “crossing” or “styling the other” pointed to how 
involvement in one-to-many participation frameworks could feed into perform-
ing ways of speaking typically associated with others (e.g., Cutler, 1999; Rampton, 
1995; Rampton, 2006). For example, Rampton (2006) and Cutler (1999: 433–434) 
partly interpret their subjects’ abilities to style the other with reference to their 
consumption of music and television. One point of departure in this book has 
been to highlight how some of the abilities associated with performances of 
crossing and styling the other might be incorporated into a definition of CC given 
the pervasiveness of one-to-many participation frameworks in social life.
For an Indonesianist audience, this book has been a story of continued 
change in the semiotic make-up of ethnicity and how emblems from these semi-
otic configurations are mobilized during everyday social practices. The idea of 
ethnicity and its links with semiotic forms has shown an ability to endure in the 
imagination and everyday activities of Indonesians. In ­chapters 2 and 4, I high-
lighted many gaps in what we know about multiple local instances of language 
evolution in Indonesia and thus provide areas for future research. At the same 
time, I pointed out that in some settings and under certain conditions, the idea of 
ethnicity can become associated with extreme difference and conflict, resulting 
in massive occurrences of population displacement and death in Indonesia. Even 
so, I hope that ­chapters 7 and 8 have shown that another unintended consequence 
of the circulation of ideas of ethnicity is the doing of togetherness or unity in 
diversity through knowledging.
While the study of togetherness talk is a hitherto road less traveled in stud-
ies of communal relations in Indonesia, nevertheless, what I offer here and else-
where (Goebel, 2009, 2010a, 2010b) suggests some additional tools for the study of 
communal relations. For example, understanding how doing unity in diversity is 
represented in areas that have experienced extended and repeated occurrences of 
conflict (e.g., South Sulawesi, Maluku, Aceh, Central and West Kalimantan, and 
Papua) may provide further insights into social relations. Similarly, looking at 
whether, to what extent, and how members of communities in these post-conflict 
zones do togetherness through talk may provide insights into communal rela-
tions more generally, especially if viewed in relation to ideologies of ethnicity and 
interaction with the ethnic other.
Finally, while sociolinguistics has long been used to study politics elsewhere 
in the world, little of this type of work has been done in Indonesia (some notable 
exceptions being Errington, 1985, 1998a, 1998b, 2000, 2001; Kuipers, 1998). I thus 
wonder whether looking at the relationships between emblems of identity and 
orders of indexicality, and how these orders have been reconfigured in Indonesia 
might provide productive points of engagement with Indonesianists who are 
seeking new ways to understand political change in contemporary Indonesia 
(e.g., Aspinall, 2013; Ford & Pepinsky, 2013).


243
GLOSSARY
Adequation: The habitual pursuit of semiotic sameness in face-to-face interaction.
Centers of normativity:  Participant constellations that form and reproduce rules for 
social interaction including language use. While these centers are emergent, their 
relationship and involvement with one-to-many participation frameworks (e.g., 
schools, media) determine whether and to what extent a center becomes more 
enduring.
Common ground: Knowledge about referents in interaction that is jointly established as 
either shared or not among a participant constellation.
Communicative competence: The ability to interactionally negotiate appropriate ways of 
interacting according to participant relations, topic, participant goals, emotional 
states, and so on.
Conviviality: The use of semiotic forms to establish and build positive social relations in 
encounters among strangers with different trajectories of socialization. Often this 
involves the cooperative seeking of common ground that is ultimately tied to the 
need to survive in a new environment.
Crossing: The practice of using linguistic forms or formulaic utterances typically not 
associated with the person using them. Crossing usually occurs as part of artful 
performances of identity or parodies of others during liminal moments, and it reg-
ularly attracts commentaries by ratified participants in the communicative event 
that involves crossing.
Enregisterment: The historical association of cultural value with particular semiotic fea-
tures or social types.
Knowledging: The practice of recognizing and evaluating emblems of identity relating to 
the “other,” whether ethnic, classed, gendered, etc. The ability to engage in knowl-
edging is gained through participation in schooling, the consumption of media, and 
other one-to-many participation frameworks.
Massification:  Increases in the circulation of knowledge about semiotic features in 
one-to-many participation frameworks that have some type of institutional 
authority.
Metasemiotic commentary:  Commentaries about a range of multimodal signs rather 
than just linguistic ones.
New Order: The period between 1966 and 1998 when President Soeharto and his regime 
were in control of Indonesia.
Old Order: The period between 1945 and 1965 when President Soekarno and his regime 
were in control of Indonesia.
One-to-few participation framework: A constellation of people where there is one expert 
or model social type and a few novices or students.
 
 

244	
Glossary
One-to-many participation framework:  A  constellation of people where there is one 
expert or model social type and many novices.
Orders of indexicality: Hierarchical relationships between different semiotic registers 
with different emergent centers of normativity.
Polycentricity: Multiple centers of normativity.
Semiotic register: A group of semiotic features that have become tightly associated with 
each other over time to the extent that the occurrence of one feature can invoke 
other features. This term covers what is commonly referred to as “language” and 
“dialect,” but also includes the indexical relationships that linguistic signs have 
with speakers, social practices, ideas about morality and epistemology, and so on.
Superdiversity: The condition that can be found throughout the world where multiple 
strangers from multiple backgrounds come into contact to pursue economic, spir-
itual, and social objectives. Because these strangers do not share trajectories of 
socialization and do not share the semiotic resources that are often referred to as a 
language, they use fragments of semiotic resources to pursue their goals. In doing 
so, they also develop new semiotic registers that are linked to new identities and 
norms, which contribute further to the diverse nature of a setting and enable further 
social distinction between those who are old-timers and those who are newcomers.
Transmigration: An Indonesian government-sponsored program whereby people from 
the islands of Java and Bali are relocated and settled in other areas of Indonesia.
Up-scaling: Increases in people and idea movement that are facilitated by the introduc-
tion of new communication or transportation technologies.

245
REFERENCES
Ả Campo, J. N. F. M. (2002). Engines of empire: Steamshipping and state formation in 
colonial Indonesia. Hilversum: Verloren.
Abas, H. (1987). I ndonesian as a unifying language of wider communication: A historical 
and sociolinguistic perspective. Canberra: Pacific Linguistics.
Acciaioli, G. (2007). From customary law to indigenous sovereignty: Reconceptualizing 
masyarakat adat in contemporary Indonesia. In J. Davidson & D. Henley (Eds.), 
The revival of tradition in Indonesian politics: The deployment of adat from colonial-
ism to indigenism (pp. 295–318). London: Routledge.
Adams, K. (1984). Come to Tana Toraja, “land of the heavenly kings”: Travel agents as 
brokers in ethnicity. Annals of Tourism Research, 11, 469–485.
Agha, A. (2003). The social life of cultural value. Language & Communication, 23(3–4), 
231–273.
Agha, A. (2007a). Language and social relations. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Agha, A. (2007b). The object called “language” and the subject of linguistics. Journal of 
English Linguistics, 35(3), 217–235. doi: 10.1177/0075424207304240
Agha, A. (2011a). Commodity registers. Journal of Linguistic Anthropology, 21(1), 22–53.
Agha, A. (2011b). Meet mediatization. Language & Communication, 31(3), 163–170. 
doi: 10.1016/j.langcom.2011.03.006
Aitchison, J. (1996). The language web:  The power and problem of words. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Alesich, S. (2008). Dukun and bidan: The work of traditional and government midwives 
in Southeast Sulawesi. In M. Ford & L. Parker (Eds.), Women and work in Indonesia 
(pp. 61–81). London: Routledge.
Alisjahbana, S.  T. (1975 [1961]). Indonesia:  social and cultural revolution. 
Melbourne: Oxford University Press.
Alisjahbana, S. T. (1976). Language planning for modernization: The case of Indonesian 
and Malaysian. The Hague: Mouton and Co.
Alvarez-Cáccamo, C. (1998). From ‘switching code’ to code-switching. In P. Auer (Ed.), 
Code-switching in conversation:  Language, interaction and identity (pp. 29–48). 
New York: Routledge.
Aman. (1971[1932]). Si Doel anak djakarta (8th ed.). Jakarta: Balai pustaka.
Anderson, B. (2006 [1991,  1983]). Imagined communities:  reflections on the origin and 
spread of nationalism (revised ed.). London: Verso.
Androutsopoulos, J. (2007). Bilingualism in the mass media and on the internet. In M. Heller 
(Ed.), Bilingualism: A social approach (pp. 207–230). Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Ang, I. (1996). Living room wars: Rethinking media audiences for a postmodern world 
London: Routledge.
Ang, I. (2003). Together-in-difference:  Beyond diaspora into hybridity. Asian Studies 
Review, 27, 141–154.
 

246	
References
Antaki, C., & Widdicombe, S. (Eds.). (1998). Identities in talk. London: Sage.
Antlov, H. (2003). Not enough politics! Power, participation and the new democratic 
polity in Indonesia. In E. Aspinall & G. Fealy (Eds.), Local power and politics in 
Indonesia: Decentralisation and democratisation (pp. 72–86). Singapore: Institute of 
Southeast Asian Studies.
Anwar, K. (1980). Indonesian:  The development and use of a national language. 
Yogyakarta: Gadjah Mada University Press.
Appadurai, A. (1996). Modernity at large:  Cultural dimensions of globalization. 
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Aragon, L. (2008). Reconsidering displacement and internally displaced persons from 
Poso. In E.-L. Hedman (Ed.), Conflict, violence, and displacement in Indonesia (pp. 
173–205). Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Arnaut, K., & Spotti, M. (2014). Superdiversity discourse. Working Papers in Urban 
Language and Literacies. Paper 22 (Universiteit Gent, University at Albany, 
Tilburg University, King’s College London).
Arps, B. (2010). Terwujudnya Bahasa Osing di Banyuwangi dan peranan media elek-
tronik di dalamnya (selayang padang, 1970–2009). In M. Moriyama & M. Budiman 
(Eds.), Geliat bahasa selaras zaman:  Perubahan bahasa–bahasa di Indonesia 
pasca–Orde Baru (pp. 225–248). Tokyo:  Research Institute for Languages and 
Cultures of Asia and Africa, Tokyo University of Foreign Studies.
Aspinall, E. (2005). Politics:  Elections and the end of the political transition. In B. 
Resosudarmo (Ed.), The politics and economics of Indonesia’s natural resources (pp. 
13–30). Singapore: ISEAS.
Aspinall, E. (2008). Place and displacement in the Aceh conflict. In E.-L. Hedman (Ed.), 
Conflict, violence, and displacement in Indonesia (pp. 119–146). Ithaca:  Cornell 
University Press.
Aspinall, E. (2011). Democratization and ethnic politics in Indonesia:  Nine theses. 
Journal of East Asian Studies, 11, 289–319.
Aspinall, E. (2013). A nation in fragments: Patronage and neoliberalism in contempo-
rary Indonesia. Critical Asian Studies, 45(1), 27–54.
Aspinall, E., & Fealy, G. (2003). Introduction:  Local power and politics in 
Indonesia: Decentralisation and democratisation. In E. Aspinall & G. Fealy (Eds.), 
Local power and politics in Indonesia:  Decentralisation and democratisation (pp. 
1–11). Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies.
Auer, P. (1995). The pragmatics of code-switching: A sequential approach. In L. Milroy 
& P. Muysken (Eds.), One speaker, two languages: Cross-disciplinary perspectives on 
code-switching (pp. 115–135). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Auer, P. (Ed.). (2008). Style and social identities. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Bakhtin, M. (1981). The dialogic imagination: Four essays (C. Emerson & M. Holquist, 
Trans.). Austin: University of Texas Press.
Barker, J. (2008). Playing with publics: Technology, talk and sociability in Indonesia. 
Language & Communication, 28, 127–142.
Barkin, G. (2008). The foreignizing gaze:  Producers, audiences, and symbols of the 
‘traditional.’ In M. Hobart & R. Fox (Eds.), Entertainment media in Indonesia (pp. 
1–19). London: Routledge.
Barth, F. (Ed.). (1969). Ethnic groups and boundaries: The social organization of cultural 
difference. Bergen: Universitets Forlaget.

	
References	
247
Barton, D., & Tusting, K. (Eds.). (2005). Beyond communities of practice:  Language, 
power and social context. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bauman, R., & Briggs, C. (1990). Poetics and performance as critical perspectives on 
language and social life. Annual Review of Anthropology, 19, 59–88.
Bauman, Z. (2001). Community: Seeking safety in an insecure world. Cambridge: Polity.
Bell, A., & Gibson, A. (2011). Staging language: An introduction to the sociolinguistics of per-
formance. Journal of Sociolinguistics, 15(5), 555–572. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9841.2011.00517.x
Berman, L. (1998). Speaking through the silence: Narratives, social conventions, and power 
in Java. New York: Oxford University Press.
Bertrand, J. (2003). Language policy in Indonesia: The promotion of a national language 
amidst ethnic diversity. In M. E. Brown & S. Ganguly (Eds.), Fighting words: Language 
policy and ethnic relations in Asia (pp. 263–290). Cambridge: MIT Press.
Biezeveld, R. (2007). The many roles of adat in West Sumatra. In J. Davidson & D. 
Henley (Eds.), The revival of tradition in Indonesian politics: The deployment of adat 
from colonialism to indigenism (pp. 203–223). London: Routledge.
Bjork-Willen, P. (2007). Participation in multilingual preschool play: Shadowing and 
crossing as interactional resources. Journal of Pragmatics, 39(12), 2133–2158.
Bjork, C. (2005). Indonesian education:  Teachers, schools, and central bureaucracy. 
New York: Routledge.
Black, P., & Goebel, Z. (2002). Multiliteracies and the teaching of Indonesian. Babel, 
37(1), 22–26, 38.
Black, P., & Goebel, Z. (2004). Nobody’s a native speaker of everything: Teaching dialec-
tal variety and code choice. Kajian Sastra: Jurnal Bidang Kebahasaan, Kesusastraan 
dan Kebudayaan, 28(1), 1–12.
Blommaert, J. (2005). Discourse. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Blommaert, J. (2007). Sociolinguistics and discourse analysis: Orders of indexicality and 
polycentricity. Journal of Multicultural Discourses, 2(2), 115–130.
Blommaert, J. (2008). Grassroots literacy: Writing, identity and voice in Central Africa. 
Abingdon, Oxon: Routledge.
Blommaert, J. (2010). The sociolinguistics of globalization. Cambridge:  Cambridge 
University Press.
Blommaert, J. (2012). Complexity, accent and conviviality:  Concluding comments. 
Tilburg Papers in Culture Studies, 26, 1–14.
Blommaert, J. (2013a). Complexity, accent and conviviality:  Concluding comments. 
Applied Linguistics, 34(6), 613–622.
Blommaert, J. (2013b). Ethnography, superdiversity and linguistic landscapes: Chronicles 
of complexity. Bristol: Multilingual Matters.
Blommaert, J., & Backus, A. (2011). Repertoires revisited: ‘Knowing language’ in super-
diversity. Working Papers in Urban Language and Literacies, 67, 1–26.
Blommaert, J., Collins, J., & Slembrouck, S. (2005a). Polycentricity and interactional 
regimes in ‘global neighborhoods.’ Ethnography, 6(2), 205–235.
Blommaert, J., Collins, J., & Slembrouck, S. (2005b). Spaces of multilingualism. 
Language & Communication, 25(3), 197–216.
Blommaert, J., & Rampton, B. (2011). Language and superdiversity. Diversities,13(2), 1–21.
Blommaert, J., & Varis, P. (2011). Enough is enough: The heuristics of authenticity in 
superdiversity. Working Papers in Urban Language and Literacies 76 (London, 
Albany, Gent, Tilburg) [Tilburg Papers in Culture Studies 2, Tilburg University].

248	
References
Booth, A. (2000). The impact of the Indonesian crisis on welfare: What do we know two 
years on? In C. Manning & P. Van Diermen (Eds.), Indonesia in transition: Social 
aspects of reformasi and crisis (pp. 145–162). London: Zed Books.
Booth, A., & McCawley, P. (1981). The Indonesian economy since the mid-sixties. In A. 
Booth & P. McCawley (Eds.), The Indonesian economy during the Soeharto era (pp. 
1–22). New York: Oxford University Press.
Bourchier, D. (2000). Habibie’s interregnum: Reformasi, elections, regionalism and the 
struggle for power. In C. Manning & P. Van Diermen (Eds.), Indonesia in transi-
tion: Social aspects of reformasi and crisis (pp. 15–38). London: Zed Books.
Bourchier, D. (2007). The romance of adat in the Indonesian political imagination and 
the current revival. In J. Davidson & D. Henley (Eds.), The revival of tradition in 
Indonesian politics:  The deployment of adat from colonialism to indigenism (pp. 
113–129). London: Routledge.
Bourdieu, P. (1977). Outline of a theory of practice. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bourdieu, P. (1984). Distinction:  A  social critique of the judgement of taste. 
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Bourdieu, P. (1991). Language and symbolic power. Cambridge: Polity Press in associa-
tion with Basil Blackwell.
Bouvier, H., & Smith, G. (2008). Spontaneity, conspiracy, and rumor: The politics of 
framing violence in Central Kalimantan. In E.-L. Hedman (Ed.), Conflict, violence, 
and displacement in Indonesia (pp. 231–248). Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Boyd, R., & Richerson, P. (2006). Culture and the evolution of the human social instincts. 
In N. Enfield & S. Levinson (Eds.), Roots of human sociality: Culture, cognition and 
interaction (pp. 453–477). Oxford: Berg.
Brettell, C. (2003). Anthropology and migration: Essays on transnationalism, ethnicity, 
and identity Walnut Creek: Altamira Press.
Briggs, C. (2005). Communicability, racial discourse, and disease. Annual Review of 
Anthropology, 34(1), 269–291.
Bruner, E. (1959). The Toba Batak village. In W. Skinner (Ed.), Local, ethnic, and national loy-
alties in village Indonesia: A symposium (pp. 52–64). New Haven: Yale University Press.
Bruner, E. (1974). The expression of ethnicity in Indonesia. In A. Cohen (Ed.), Urban 
ethnicity (pp. 251–280). London: Tavistock.
Bucholtz, M. (2011). Race and the re-embodied voice in Hollywood film. Language & 
Communication, 31(3), 255–265.
Bucholtz, M., & Hall, K. (2004a). Language and identity. In A. Duranti (Ed.), A compan-
ion to linguistic anthropology (pp. 369–394). Oxford: Blackwell.
Bucholtz, M., & Hall, K. (2004b). Theorizing identity in language and sexuality research. 
Language in Society, 33(4), 469–515.
Bucholtz, M., & Hall, K. (2008). All of the above: New coalitions in sociocultural lin-
guistics. Journal of Sociolinguistics, 12(4), 401–431.
Bucholtz, M., & Lopez, Q. (2011). Performing blackness, forming whiteness: Linguistic 
minstrelsy in Hollywood film. Journal of Sociolinguistics, 15(5), 680–706.
Bunnell, T., Yea, S., Peake, L., Skelton, T., & Smith, M. (2012). Geographies of friend-
ships. Progress in Human Geography, 36(4), 490–507.
Bünte, M. (2009). Indonesia’s protracted decentralization:  Contested reforms and 
their unintended consequences. In M. Bunte & A. Ufen (Eds.), Democratization in 
post-Suharto Indonesia (pp. 102–123). London: Routledge.

	
References	
249
Burns, P. (2004). The Leiden legacy: Concepts of law in Indonesia. Leiden: KITLV Press.
Bush, R. (2008). Regional sharia regulations in Indonesia: Anomaly or symptom? In G. 
Fealy & S. White (Eds.), Expressing Islam: Religious life and politics in Indonesia 
(pp. 174–191). Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies.
Carnegie, P. (2010). The road from authoritarianism to democratization in Indonesia. 
New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Castells, M. (1996). The rise of the network society. Cambridge: Blackwell.
Chambers, J. (1998). TV makes people sound the same. In L. Bauer & P. Trudgill (Eds.), 
Language myths (pp. 123–131). London: Penguin.
Chauvel, R. (2001). The changing dynamics of regional resistance in Indonesia. In 
G. Lloyd & S. Smith (Eds.), Indonesia today: Challenges of history (pp. 146–160). 
Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies.
Chauvel, R. (2008). Refuge, displacement, and dispossession: Responses to Indonesian 
rule and conflict in Papua. In E.-L. Hedman (Ed.), Conflict, violence, and displace-
ment in Indonesia (pp. 147–172). Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Clarke, S., & Hiscock, P. (2009). Hip-hop in a post-insular community:  Hybridity, 
local language, and authenticity in an online Newfoundland rap group. Journal of 
English Linguistics, 37(3), 241–261.
Cody, F. (2011). Echoes of the teashop in a Tamil newspaper. Language & Communication, 
31(3), 243–254.
Cohen, M. (2006). The Komedie Stamboel:  Popular theater in colonial Indonesia, 
1891–1903. Athens: Ohio University Press.
Cole, D. (2010). Enregistering diversity: Adequation in Indonesian poetry performance. 
Journal of Linguistic Anthropology, 20(1), 1–21.
Collins, J., Noble, G., Poynting, S., & Tabar, P. (2000). Kebabs, kids, cops and crime: Youth, 
ethnicity and crime. Sydney: Pluto Press.
Colombijn, F. (1996). The development of the transport network in West Sumatra from 
pre-colonial times to the present. In J. Lindblad (Ed.), Historical foundations of a 
national economy in Indonesia, 1890s–1990s (pp. 385–400). Amsterdam: Koninklijke 
Nederlandse Akademie van Wetenschappen Verhandelingen.
Coppel, C. (1983). Indonesian Chinese in crisis. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Coupland, J. (2003). Small talk:  Social functions. Research on Language & Social 
Interaction, 36(1), 1–6.
Coupland, J. (Ed.). (2000). Small talk. London: Longman.
Creese, A., & Blackledge, A. (2011). Separate and flexible bilingualism in complementary 
schools: Multiple language practices in interrelationship. Journal of Pragmatics, 
43(5), 1196–1208.
Cribb, R. (1990). Introduction: Problems in the historiography of the killings in Indonesia. 
In R. Cribb (Ed.), The Indonesian killings of 1965–1966: Studies from Java and Bali 
(pp. 1–43). Clayton, Victoria: Centre of Southeast Asian Studies, Monash University.
Cribb, R., & Ford, M. (2009a). Indonesia as an archipelago: Managing islands, managing 
the seas. In R. Cribb & M. Ford (Eds.), Indonesia beyond the water’s edge: Managing 
and archipelagic state (pp. 1–27). Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies.
Cribb, R., & Ford, M. (Eds.). (2009b). Indonesia beyond the water’s edge: Managing and 
archipelagic state. Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies.
Crouch, H. (1988). The army and politics in Indonesia (revised ed.). Ithaca:  Cornell 
University Press.

250	
References
Crouch, H. (2003). Political update 2002: Megawati’s holding operation. In E. Aspinall & 
G. Fealy (Eds.), Local power and politics in Indonesia: Decentralisation and democra-
tisation (pp. 15–34). Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies.
Cutler, C. (1999). Yorkville crossing:  White teens, hip hop and African American 
English. Journal of Sociolinguistics, 3(4), 428–442. doi: 10.1111/1467-9481.00089
Dardjowidjojo, S. (1998). Strategies for a successful national language policy:  The 
Indonesian case. International Journal of the Sociology of Language, 130, 35–47.
Davidson, J. (2008). Violence and displacement in West Kalimantan. In E.-L. Hedman 
(Ed.), Conflict, violence, and displacement in Indonesia (pp. 61–85). Ithaca: Cornell 
University Press.
Davidson, J., & Henley, D. (Eds.). (2007). The revival of tradition in Indonesian poli-
tics: The deployment of adat from colonialism to indigenism. London: Routledge.
Dawson, G. (1992). Development planning for women in the Indonesian transmigration 
program. Clayton: Monash Development Studies Centre, Monash University.
Dawson, G. (2008). Keeping rice in the pot: Women and work in a transmigration settle-
ment. In M. Ford & L. Parker (Eds.), Women and work in Indonesia (pp. 41–60). 
London: Routledge.
Dayan, D. (2005). Mothers, midwives and abortionists: Genealogy, obstetrics, audiences 
and publics. In S. Livingstone (Ed.), Audiences and publics: When cultural engage-
ment matters for the public sphere (pp. 43–76). Bristol: Intellect.
De Fina, A. (2003). Identity in narrative: A study of immigrant discourse. Amsterdam: John 
Benjamins.
de Jong, E. (2009). Reshaping Tana Toraja: A century of decentralization and power 
politics in the highlands of South Sulawesi. In C. Holtzappel & M. Ramstedt (Eds.), 
Decentralization and regional autonomy in Indonesia: Implementation and challenges 
(pp. 256–292). Singapore and Leiden:  Institute of Southeast Asian Studies and 
International Institute for Asian Studies.
Departemen Pendidikan dan Kebudayaan. (1993). Tata bahasa baku bahasa Indonesia 
[Standard Indonesian grammar]. Jakarta: Balai Pustaka.
Dick, H. (1996). The emergence of a national economy, 1808–1990s. In J. Lindblad (Ed.), 
Historical foundations of a national economy in Indonesia, 1890s–1990s (pp. 21–51). 
Amsterdam: Koninklijke Nederlandse Akademie van Wetenschappen Verhandelingen.
Dick, H. (2002). Formation of the nation-state: 1930s–1966. In H. Dick (Ed.), The emer-
gence of a national economy:  An economic history of Indonesia, 1800–2000 (pp. 
153–193). Crows Nest: Allen & Unwin.
Direktorat Jenderal Pendidikan Tinngi. (2010a). Latar Belakang Beasiswa BPPS, SU.
Direktorat Jenderal Pendidikan Tinngi. (2010b). TOR Beasiswa LN. http://www.dikti.
go.id/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=782
Eckert, P., & McConnell-Ginet, S. (1999). New generalizations and explanations in lan-
guage and gender research. Language in Society, 28(2), 185–201.
Eisenlohr, P. (2009). Technologies of the spirit:  Devotional Islam, sound reproduc-
tion and the dialectics of mediation and immediacy in Mauritius. Anthropological 
Theory, 9(3), 273–296.
Eisenlohr, P. (2010). Materialities of entextualization:  The domestication of sound 
reproduction in Mauritian Muslim devotional practices. Journal of Linguistic 
Anthropology, 20(2), 314–333.

	
References	
251
Ellis, A. (2002). The Indonesian constitutional transition: Conservatism or fundamental 
change? Singapore Journal of International & Comparative Law, 6, 1–37.
Elson, R. (2008). The idea of Indonesia: A history. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Enfield, N. (2006). Social consequences of common ground. In N. Enfield & S. Levinson 
(Eds.), Roots of human sociality: Culture, cognition and interaction (pp. 399–430). 
Oxford: Berg.
Enfield, N. (2009). Relationship thinking and human pragmatics. Journal of Pragmatics, 
41(1), 60–78.
Erb, M. (2007). Adat revivalism in Western Flores. In J. Davidson & D. Henley (Eds.), 
The revival of tradition in Indonesian politics: The deployment of adat from colonial-
ism to indigenism (pp. 247–274). London: Routledge.
Errington, J. (1985). Language and social change in Java: Linguistic reflexes of moderniza-
tion in a traditional royal polity. Athens: Ohio University Press.
Errington, J. (1998a). Indonesian(’s) development: On the state of a language of state. 
In B. B.  Schieffelin, K. A.  Woolard & P. V.  Kroskrity (Eds.), Language ideolo-
gies: Practice and theory (pp. 271–284). New York: Oxford University Press.
Errington, J. (1998b). Shifting languages: Interaction and identity in Javanese Indonesia. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Errington, J. (2000). Indonesian(’s) authority. In P. V. Kroskrity (Ed.), Regimes of lan-
guage: Ideologies, polities, and identities (advanced seminar series) (pp. 205–227). 
Santa Fe: School of American Research.
Errington, J. (2001a). Colonial linguistics. Annual Review of Anthropology, 30, 19–39.
Errington, J. (2001b). State speech for peripheral publics in Java. In S. Gal & K. 
Woolard (Eds.), Languages and publics:  The making of authority (pp. 103–118). 
Manchester: St. Jerome.
Fairclough, N. (1995). Media discourse. London: Arnold.
Fasseur, C. (1994). Cornerstone and stumbling block:  Racial classification and the 
late colonial state in Indonesia. In R. Cribb (Ed.), The late colonial state in 
Indonesia: Political and economic foundations of the Netherlands Indies 1880–1942 
(pp. 31–56). Leiden: KITLV Press.
Feith, H. (1962). The decline of constitutional democracy in Indonesia. New York: Cornell 
University Press.
Florey, M. (1990). Language shift: Changing patterns of language allegiance in Western 
Seram, Ph.D. diss., University of Hawaii.
Ford, M. (2003). Who are the Orang Riau? Negotiating identity across geographic 
and ethnic divides. In E. Aspinall & G. Fealy (Eds.), Local power and politics in 
Indonesia: Decentralisation and democratisation (pp. 132–147). Singapore: Institute 
of Southeast Asian Studies.
Ford, M. (2004). A challenge for business? Developments in Indonesian trade unionism 
after Soeharto. In M. C. Basri & P. van der Eng (Eds.), Business in Indonesia: New chal-
lenges, old problems (pp. 221–233). Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies.
Ford, M. (2008). Indonesia: Separate organizing within unions. In K. Broadbent & M. 
Ford (Eds.), Women and labour organizing in Asia: Diversity, autonomy and activism 
(pp. 15–33). London: Routledge.
Ford, M., & Pepinsky, T. (2013). Beyond oligarchy? Critical exchanges on political power 
and material inequality in Indonesia. Indonesia, 96, 1–9.

252	
References
Foucault, M. (1978). The history of sexuality (Volume 1: An introduction) (R. Hurley, 
Trans.). New York: Pantheon Books.
Foulcher, K. (1986). Social commitment in literature and the arts:  The Indonesian 
“Institute of People’s Culture”1950–1965. Melbourne:  Centre of Southeast Asian 
Studies, Monash University.
Foulcher, K. (2000). Sumpah Pemuda:  The making and meaning of a symbol of 
Indonesian nationhood. Asian Studies Review, 24(3), 377–410.
Fox, J., Adhuri, D., & Resosudarmo, I. A. P. (2005). Unfinished deifice or pandora’s box? 
Decentralization and resource management in Indonesia. In B. Resosudarmo (Ed.), The 
politics and economics of Indonesia’s natural resources (pp. 92–108). Singapore: ISEAS.
Franceschini, R. (1998). Code-switching and the notion of code in linguistics: Proposals 
for a dual focus model. In P. Auer (Ed.), Code-switching in conversation: Language, 
interaction and identity (pp. 51–72). New York: Routledge.
Francis, D., & Hester, S. (2004). An invitation to ethnomethodology: Language, society 
and interaction. London: Sage.
Gafaranga, J., & Torras, M.-C. (2002). Interactional otherness: Towards a redefinition of 
codeswitching. The International Journal of Bilingualism, 6(1), 1–22.
Garrett, P., & Bell, A. (1998). Media and discourse: A critical overview. In A. Bell & P. 
Garrett (Eds.), Approaches to media discourse (pp. 1–20). Oxford: Blackwell.
Geertz, C. (1959). The Javanese village. In W. Skinner (Ed.), Local, ethnic, and 
national loyalties in village Indonesia: A symposium (pp. 34–41). New Haven: Yale 
University Press.
Geertz, C. (1960). The religion of Java. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Geertz, H. (1959). The Balinese village. In W. Skinner (Ed.), Local, ethnic, and national loy-
alties in village Indonesia: A symposium (pp. 24–33). New Haven: Yale University Press.
Georgakopoulou, A. (2007). Small stories, interaction and identities. Amsterdam: John 
Benjamins.
Gershon, I. (2010). Media ideologies: An introduction. Journal of Linguistic Anthropology, 
20(2), 283–293.
Giddens, A. (1984). The constitution of society:  Outline of the theory of structuration. 
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Giddens, A. (1990). The consequences of modernity. Cambridge: Polity and Blackwell.
Ginsburg, F., Abu-Lughod, L., & Larkin, B. (2002). Introduction. In F. D. Ginsburg, L. 
Abu-Lughod & B. Larkin (Eds.), Media worlds: Anthropology on new terrain (pp. 
1–36). Berkeley: University of California Press.
Goebel, Z. (2000). Communicative competence in Indonesian: Language choice in inter-ethnic 
interactions in Semarang, Ph.D. diss., Northern Territory University, Darwin.
Goebel, Z. (2002). When do Indonesians speak Indonesian? Some evidence from 
inter-ethnic and foreigner-Indonesian interactions and its pedagogic implications. 
Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural Development, 23(6), 479–489.
Goebel, Z. (2008). Enregistering, authorizing and denaturalizing identity in Indonesia. 
Journal of Linguistic Anthropology, 18(1), 46–61.
Goebel, Z. (2009a). Semiosis, interaction and ethnicity in urban Java. Journal of 
Sociolinguistics, 13(4), 499–523.
Goebel, Z. (2009b). Semiotic registers, televised signs and reflexivity: Ethnic personhood 
in Indonesia. Paper presented at the the American Anthropological Association’s 
108th Annual Meeting: The End/s of Anthropology, Philadelphia.

	
References	
253
Goebel, Z. (2010a). Identity and social conduct in a transient multilingual setting. 
Language in Society, 39(2), 203–240.
Goebel, Z. (2010b). Language, migration and identity: Neighborhood talk in Indonesia. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Goebel, Z. (2011a). Competence and communities: Investigating competence to com-
prehend using television. Paper presented at the Japanese Society for Language 
Sciences, Kansai University, Osaka.
Goebel, Z. (2011b). Enregistering identity in Indonesian television serials: A multimodal 
analysis. In K. O’Halloran & B. Smith (Eds.), Multimodal studies: Exploring issues 
and domains (pp. 95–114). London: Routledge.
Goebel, Z. (2011c). Talking about mediated representations: Exploring ideologies and 
meanings. Text & Talk—An Interdisciplinary Journal of Language, Discourse & 
Communication Studies, 31(3), 293–314.
Goebel, Z. (2012a). Enregisterment, communities, and authenticity:  Watching 
Indonesian teledramas. Journal of Linguistic Anthropology, 22(2), 1–20.
Goebel, Z. (2012b). Indonesians doing togetherness in Japan. Paper presented at the 
American Association for Applied Linguistics Conference, Boston.
Goebel, Z. (2013). Competence to comprehend and knowledging. Language & 
Communication. 33(4), 366–375.
Goethals, P. (1959). The Sumbawan village. In W. Skinner (Ed.), Local, ethnic, and 
national loyalties in village Indonesia: A symposium (pp. 12–23). New Haven: Yale 
University Press.
Goffman, E. (1967). Interaction ritual: Essays on face–to–face behavior. New York: Anchor.
Goffman, E. (1971). Relations in public:  Microstudies of the public order. New  York:   
Basic Books.
Goffman, E. (1983). The interaction order. American Sociological Review, 48, 1–17.
Goodwin, C. (2006). Human sociality as mutual orientation in a rich interactive environ-
ment: Multimodal utterances and pointing in aphasia. In N. Enfield & S. Levinson 
(Eds.), Roots of human sociality (pp. 96–125). London: Berg.
Gumperz, J. (1982). Discourse strategies. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hall, S. (2006 [1980]). Encoding/decoding. In M. Durham & D. Kellner (Eds.), Media 
and cultural studies: Key words (pp. 163–173). Oxford: Blackwell.
Hanan, D. (1993). Nji Ronggeng: Another paradigm for erotic spectacle in the cinema. 
In V. Hooker (Ed.), Culture and society in New Order Indonesia. New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Hanks, W. (2006). Joint commitment and common ground in a ritual event. In N. Enfield 
& S. Levinson (Eds.), Roots of human sociality: Culture, cognition and interaction 
(pp. 299–328). Oxford: Berg.
Hardjono, J. M. (1977). Transmigration in Indonesia. Kuala Lumpur and London: Oxford 
University Press.
Harvey, D. (1989). The condition of postmodernity: An enquiry into the origins of cultural 
change. Oxford: Blackwell.
Haviland, J. B. (2004). Gesture. In A. Duranti (Ed.), A companion to linguistic anthropol-
ogy (pp. 197–221). Oxford: Blackwell.
Hedman, E.-L. (2008a). Back to the barracks:  Relokasi pengungsi in post-tsunami 
Aceh. In E.-L. Hedman (Ed.), Conflict, violence, and displacement in Indonesia (pp. 
249–273). Ithaca: Cornell University Press.

254	
References
Hedman, E.-L. (2008b). Introduction: Dynamics of displacement in Indonesia. In E.-
L. Hedman (Ed.), Conflict, violence, and displacement in Indonesia (pp. 3–28). 
Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Hefner, R.  W. (2001). Introduction:  Multiculturalism and citizenship in Malaysia, 
Singapore, and Indonesia. In R. W.  Hefner (Ed.), The politics of multicultural-
ism:  Pluralism and citizenship in Malaysia, Singapore, and Indonesia (pp. 1–58). 
Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.
Heller, M. (2007). Bilingualism as ideology and practice. In M. Heller (Ed.), 
Bilingualism: A social approach (pp. 1–22). Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Heller, M. (2011). Paths to post-nationalism: A critical ethnogaphy of language and iden-
tity. New York: Oxford University Press.
Henley, D., & Davidson, J. (2007). Introduction:  Radical conservatism—the pro-
tean politics of adat. In J. Davidson & D. Henley (Eds.), The revival of tradition 
in Indonesian politics: The deployment of adat from colonialism to indigenism (pp. 
1–49). London: Routledge.
Herriman, N. (2010). The great rumor mill:  Gossip, mass media, and the ninja fear. 
Journal of Asian Studies, 69(3), 723–748.
Heryanto, A. (2007). Then there were languages:  Bahasa Indonesia was one among 
many. In S. Makoni & A. Pennycook (Eds.), Disinventing and reconstituting lan-
guages (pp. 42–61). Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
Heryanto, A. (2008). Pop culture and competing identities. In A. Heryanto (Ed.), 
Popular culture in Indonesia: Fluid identities in post-authoritarian politics (pp. 1–36). 
London: Routledge.
Hill, D., & Sen, K. (2005). The Internet in Indonesia’s new democracy. London: 
Routledge.
Hill, J. (1995). The voices of Don Gabriel: Responsibility and self in a modern Mexicano 
narrative. In D. Tedlock & B. Mannheim (Eds.), The dialogic emergence of culture 
(pp. 97–147). Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
Hoey, B. A. (2003). Nationalism in Indonesia: Building imagined and intentional com-
munities through transmigration. Ethnology, 42(2), 109–126.
Holmes, J., & Meyerhoff, M. (1999). The community of practice: Theories and method-
ologies in language and gender research. Language in Society, 28(2), 173–183.
Holt, E., & Clift, R. (2007). Reported talk:  Reporting speech in interaction. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hooker, V. (Ed.). (1993). Culture and society in New Order Indonesia. Kuala Lumpur: 
Oxford University Press.
Hoon, C.-y. (2006). Assimilation, multiculturalism, hybridity: The dilemmas of the eth-
nic Chinese in post-Suharto Indonesia. Asian Ethnicity, 7(2), 149–166.
Hoshour, C. A. (1997). Resettlement and the politicization of ethnicity in Indonesia. 
Bijdragen tot de Taal, Land-en Volkenkund, 153(4), 557–576.
Hymes, D. (1972a). Models of the interaction of language and social life. In J. Gumperz 
& D. Hymes (Eds.), Directions in sociolinguistics: The ethnography of communication 
(pp. 35–71). New York: Holt, Rinehart, & Winston.
Hymes, D. (1972b). On communicative competence. In J. B. Pride & J. Holmes (Eds.), 
Sociolinguistics: Selected readings (pp. 269–293). Harmondsworth: Penguin Books.
Hymes, D. (1974). Foundations in sociolinguistics:  An ethnographic approach. 
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.

	
References	
255
Hymes, D. (1996). Ethnography, linguistics, narrative inequality: Toward an understanding 
of voice. Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis.
Ikhsan, M. (2003). Economic update 2002: Struggling to maintain momentum. In E. 
Aspinall & G. Fealy (Eds.), Local power and politics in Indonesia: Decentralisation 
and democratisation (pp. 35–62). Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies.
Inoue, M. (2006). Vicarious language:  Gender and linguistic modernity in Japan. 
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Inoue, M. (2011). Stenography and ventriloquism in late nineteenth century Japan. 
Language & Communication, 31(3), 181–190.
Inoue, T. (1986). Rural mobilization in East Sumatra. In A. Reid, O. Akira, J. Brewster 
& J. Carruthers (Eds.), The Japanese experience in Indonesia: Selected memoirs of 
1942–1945 (pp. 191–216). Athens: Ohio University Center for International Studies, 
Center for Southeast Asian Studies.
Irvine, J. (2001). “Style” as distinctiveness: The culture and ideology of linguistic differ-
entiation. In P. Eckert & J. Rickford (Eds.), Style and sociolinguistic variation (pp. 
21–43). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Irvine, J. (2005). Knots and tears in the interdiscursive fabric. Journal of Linguistic 
Anthropology, 15(1), 72–80.
Jaffe, A. (2000). Comic performance and the articulation of hybrid identity. Pragmatics, 
10(1), 39–59.
Jaffe, A. (2003). “Imagined competence”: Classroom evaluation, collective identity, and 
linguistic identity in a Corsican bilingual classroom. In S. Wortham & B. Rymes 
(Eds.), Linguistic anthropology of education (pp. 151–184). Westport: Praeger.
Jaworski, A., Coupland, N., & Galasiński, D. (Eds.). (2004). Metalanguage: Social and 
ideological perspectives. Berlin: Mouton, Walter de Gruyter.
Jaworski, A., Thurlow, C., Lawson, S., & Yälnne-McEwen, V. (2003). The uses and rep-
resentations of local languages in tourist destinations: A view from British TV holi-
day programs. Language Awareness, 12(1), 5–29.
Johnson, S., & Ensslin, A. (2007a). Language in the media: Theory and practice. In S. 
Johnson & A. Ensslin (Eds.), Language in the media (pp. 3–22). London: Continuum.
Johnson, S., & Ensslin, A. (Eds.). (2007b). Language in the media. London: Continuum.
Johnson, S., & Milani, T. (Eds.). (2010). Language ideologies and media discourse: Texts, 
practices, politics. New York: Continuum.
Johnstone, B. (2011). Dialect enregisterment in performance. Journal of Sociolinguistics, 
15(5), 657–679.
Johnstone, B., Andrus, J., & Danielson, A. (2006). Mobility, indexicality, and the enreg-
isterment of “Pittsburghese.” Journal of English Linguistics, 34(2), 77–104.
Jones, G., & Hull, T. (1997). Introduction. In G. Jones & T. Hull (Eds.), Indonesia assess-
ment: Population and human resources (pp. 1–15). Singapore and Canberra: Institute of 
Southeast Asian Studies, NUS; and Research School of Pacific and Asian Studies, ANU.
Jones, S. (2004). Political update 2003: Terrorism, nationalism and disillusionment with 
reform. In M. C. Basri & P. van der Eng (Eds.), Business in Indonesia: New chal-
lenges, old problems (pp. 23–38). Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies.
Jørgensen, J. N., Karrebæk, M. S., Madsen, L. M., & Møller, J. S. (2011). Polylanguaging 
in superdiversity. Diversities,13(2), 22–37.
Jukes, A. (2010). Someone else’s job: Externalizing responsibility for language main-
tenance. Paper presented at the fourteenth foundation for endangered language 

256	
References
conference:  Reversing language shift:  How to re-awaken a language tradition, 
September 13–15, Carmathan, Wales.
Kahin, G. (1970 [1952]). Nationalism and revolution in Indonesia. Ithaca:  Cornell 
University Press.
Karno, R. (1998). Si Doel anak sekolah. Jakarta: Karnog Film.
Katoppo, A. (2000). The role of community groups in the environment movement. In C. 
Manning & P. Van Diermen (Eds.), Indonesia in transition: Social aspects of refor-
masi and crisis (pp. 213–219). London: Zed Books.
Kelly-Holmes, H., & Atkinson, D. (2007). ‘When Hector met Tom Cruise’: Attitudes to 
Irish in a radio satire. In S. Johnson & A. Ensslin (Eds.), Language in the media (pp. 
173–187). London: Continuum.
Kendon, A. (1985). Some uses of gesture. In D. Tannen & M. Saville-Troike (Eds.), 
Perspectives on silence (pp. 215–314). New York: Ablex.
King, R., & Wicks, J. (2009). “Aren’t we proud of our language?”: Authenticity, com-
modification, and the Nissan Bonavista television commercial. Journal of English 
Linguistics, 37(3), 262–283.
Kitley, P. (2000). Television, nation, and culture in Indonesia. Athens: Ohio University Press.
Kitley, P. (2001). After the bans: Modelling Indonesian communications for the future. 
In G. Lloyd & S. Smith (Eds.), Indonesia today: Challenges of history (pp. 256–269). 
Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies.
Kramsch, C. (2006). From communicative competence to symbolic competence. Modern 
Language Journal, 90(2), 249–252.
Kramsch, C., & Whiteside, A. (2008). Language ecology in multilingual settings: Towards 
a theory of symbolic competence. Applied Linguistics, 29(4), 645–671. doi: 10.1093/
applin/amn022
Kress, G., & Van Leeuwen, T. (2001). Multimodal discourse: The modes and media of 
contemporary communication London: Hodder Education.
Kuipers, J. (1998). Language, identity and marginality in Indonesia: The changing nature 
of ritual speech on the island of Sumba. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kulick, D., & Willson, M. (2004 [1994]). Rambo’s wife saves the day:  Subjugating 
the gaze and subverting the narrative in a Papua New Guinea swamp. In K. 
Askew & R. Wilk (Eds.), The anthropology of the media: A reader (pp. 270–285). 
Oxford: Blackwell.
Kurniasih, Y. K. (2007). Local content curriculum 1994: The teaching of Javanese in 
Yogyakarta schools. Paper presented at the First International Symposium on the 
Languages of Java (ISLOJ), August 15–16, Graha Santika Hotel, Semarang.
Kusumaatmadja, S. (2000). Through the crisis and beyond: The evolution of the envi-
ronment movement. In C. Manning & P. Van Diermen (Eds.), Indonesia in transi-
tion: Social aspects of reformasi and crisis (pp. 205–212). London: Zed Books.
Labov, W. (1972). Sociolinguistic patterns. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Labov, W. (2001). Principles of linguistic change, vol. 2: Social factors. Oxford: Blackwell.
Lambert, W. E. (1986 [1967]). A social psychology of bilingualism. In J. Holmes (Ed.), 
Sociolinguistics: Selected readings (pp. 336–349). Harmondsworth: Penguin Books.
Le Compte, M., & Schensul, J. (1999). Designing and conducting ethnographic research. 
New York: Altamira Press.
Legge, J. (1961). Central authority and regional autonomy in Indonesia: A study in local 
administration, 1950–1960. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.

	
References	
257
Lenhart, L. (1997). Orang Suku Laut ethnicity and acculturation. Bijdragen tot de Taal, 
Land-en Volkenkund, 153(4), 577–604.
Le Page, R. B., & Tabouret-Keller, A. (1985). Acts of identity: Creole-based approaches to 
language and ethnicity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Levinson, S. (2006). On the human “interaction engine.” In N. Enfield & S. Levinson 
(Eds.), Roots of human sociality:  Culture, cognition and interaction (pp. 39–69). 
Oxford: Berg.
Li, T. (2007). Adat in Central Sulawesi: Contemporary deployments. In J. Davidson & D. 
Henley (Eds.), The revival of tradition in Indonesian politics: The deployment of adat 
from colonialism to indigenism (pp. 337–370). London: Routledge.
Liddicoat, A. (2007). An introduction to conversation analysis. London: Continuum.
Liddle, R. W. (1972). Ethnicity and political organization: Three East Sumatran cases. 
In C. Holt (Ed.), Culture and politics in Indonesia (pp. 126–178). Ithaca: Cornell 
University Press.
Liebes, T., & Katz, E. (1990). The export of meaning: Cross-cultural readings of Dallas. 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Lindsey, T. (2001). The criminal state:  Premanisme and the new Indonesia. In G. 
Lloyd & S. Smith (Eds.), Indonesia today:  Challenges of history (pp. 283–297). 
Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies.
Liszkowski, U. (2006). Infant pointing at 12 months: Communicative goals, motives, and 
social-cognitive abilities. In N. Enfield & S. Levinson (Eds.), Roots of human social-
ity: Culture, cognition and interaction (pp. 153–178). Oxford: Berg.
Livingstone, S. (2005). On the relation between audiences and publics. In S. Livingstone 
(Ed.), Audiences and publics: When cultural engagement matters for the public sphere 
(pp. 17–41). Bristol: Intellect.
Loven, K. (2008). Watching Si Doel: Television, language, and cultural identity in contem-
porary Indonesia. Leiden: KITLV Press.
Lowenberg, P. (1990). Language and identity in the Asian state: The case of Indonesia. 
Georgetown Journal of Languages and Linguistics, 1(1), 109–120.
Lowenberg, P. (1992). Language policy and language identity in Indonesia. Journal of 
Asian Pacific Communication, 3(1), 59–77.
Malinowski, B. (1996 [1922]). The essentials of the Kula. In R. J. McGee & R. L. Warms 
(Eds.), Anthropological theory:  An introductory history (pp. 157–172). Mountain 
View: Mayfield.
Malley, M. (2003). New rules, old structures and the limits of democratic decen-
tralisation. In E. Aspinall & G. Fealy (Eds.), Local power and politics in 
Indonesia: Decentralisation and democratisation (pp. 102–118). Singapore: Institute 
of Southeast Asian Studies.
Mauss, M. (1966 [1925]). The gift: Forms and functions of exchange in archaic societies (I. 
Cunnison, Trans.). London: Cohen and West Ltd.
McCarthy, M. (2003). Talking back: “Small” interactional response tokens in everyday 
conversation. Research on Language & Social Interaction, 36(1), 33–63.
McCawley, P. (1981). The growth of the industrial sector. In A. Booth & P. McCawley (Eds.), 
The Indonesian economy during the Soeharto era (pp. 62–101). New York: Oxford 
University Press.
McGibbon, R. (2003). Between rights and repression:  The politics of special auton-
omy in papua. In E. Aspinall & G. Fealy (Eds.), Local power and politics in 

258	
References
Indonesia: Decentralisation and democratisation (pp. 194–216). Singapore: Institute 
of Southeast Asian Studies.
Meek, B. A. (2006). And the Injun goes “How!”: Representations of American Indian 
English in white public space. Language in Society, 35(1), 93–128.
Mendoza-Denton, N. (2011). The semiotic hitchhiker’s guide to creaky voice: Circulation 
and gendered hardcore in a Chicana/o gang persona. Journal of Linguistic 
Anthropology, 21(2), 261–280.
Mietzner, M. (1999). From Soeharto to Habibie:  The Indonesian armed forces and 
political Islam during the transition. In G. Forrester (Ed.), Post-Soeharto 
Indonesia: Renewal or chaos? (pp. 65–104). Bathurst: Crawford House.
Mietzner, M. (2001). Abdurrahman’s Indonesia: Political conflict and institutional crisis. 
In G. Lloyd & S. Smith (Eds.), Indonesia today: Challenges of history (pp. 29–44). 
Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies.
Mietzner, M. (2009). Indonesia and the pitfalls of low-quality democracy: A case study 
of the gubernatorial elections in North Sulawesi. In M. Bunte & A. Ufen (Eds.), 
Democratization in post-Suharto Indonesia (pp. 124–149). London: Routledge.
Miles, D. (1976). Cutlass and crescent moon: A case study of social and political change in 
outer Indonesia. Sydney: Centre for Asian Studies, University of Sydney.
Miller, L. (2004). Those naughty teenage girls: Japanese kogals, slang, and media assess-
ments. Journal of Linguistic Anthropology, 14(2), 225–247.
Min, S. S. (2006). ‘Eventing’ the May 1998 affair: Problematic representations of violence in 
contemporary indonesia. In C. Coppel (Ed.), Violent conflicts in Indonesia: Analysis, 
representation, resolution (pp. 39–57). Abingdon, Oxon: Routledge.
Moeliono, A. M. (1986). Language development and cultivation: Alternative approaches in 
language planning. Canberra: Pacific Linguistics.
Moerman, M. (1988). Talking culture:  Ethnography and conversation analysis. 
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Moriyama, M. (2005a). Language change and regional literature after Soeharto. Paper 
presented at the Indonesia Culture Workshop: Arts culture and political and social 
change since Soeharto, School of Asian Languages and Studies, University of 
Tasmania, Launceston.
Moriyama, M. (2005b). Sundanese print culture and modernity in nineteenth-century West 
Java. Singapore: National University of Singapore Press.
Moriyama, M. (2012). Regional languages and decentralization in post-New Order 
Indonesia: The case of Sundanese. In K. Foulcher, M. Moriyama & M. Budiman 
(Eds.), Words in motion: Language and discourse in post-New Order Indonesia (pp. 
82–100). Tokyo: Research Institute for Languages and Cultures of Asia and Africa, 
Tokyo University of Foreign Studies.
Morley, D. (1986). Family television:  Cultural power and domestic leisure. 
London: Comedia/Routledge.
Moyer, M. (2011). What multilingualism? Agency and unintended consequences of 
multilingual practices in a Barcelona health clinic. Journal of Pragmatics, 43(5), 
1209–1221. doi: 10.1016/j.pragma.2010.08.024
Mrázek, R. (2002). Engineers of happy land:  Technology and nationalism in a colony. 
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Muhidin, S. (2002). The population of Indonesia: Regional demographic scenarios using a 
multiregional method and multiple data sources. Amsterdam: Rozenberg Publishers.

	
References	
259
Nababan, P. W. J. (1985). Bilingualism in Indonesia: Ethnic language maintenance and 
the spread of the national language. Southeast Asian Journal of Social Science, 
13(1), 1–18.
Nababan, P. W. J. (1991). Language in education: The case of Indonesia. International 
Review of Education, 37(1), 113–131.
Norris, S. (2004). Analyzing multimodal interaction:  A  methodological framework. 
London: Routledge.
Ochs, E. (1988). Culture and language development: Language acquisition and language 
socialization in a Samoan village. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ochs, E. (2006 [1979]). Transcription as theory. In A. Jaworski & N. Coupland (Eds.), 
The discourse reader. London: Routledge.
Okada, F. (1986). Dotō no naka no koshū. In A. Reid, O. Akira, J. Brewster & J. 
Carruthers (Eds.), The Japanese experience in Indonesia:  Selected memoirs of 
1942–1945 (pp. 129–158). Athens: Ohio University Center for International Studies, 
Center for Southeast Asian Studies.
Otsuka, T. (1986). Sumatora jōkyū gakkō no kotodomo. In A. Reid, O. Akira, J. Brewster 
& J. Carruthers (Eds.), The Japanese experience in Indonesia: selected memoirs of 
1942–1945 (pp. 1–5). Athens:  Ohio University Center for International Studies, 
Center for Southeast Asian Studies.
Palmer, A. (1959). The Sundanese village. In W. Skinner (Ed.), Local, ethnic, and 
national loyalties in village Indonesia: A symposium (pp. 42–51). New Haven: Yale 
University Press.
Parker, L. (2002). The subjectification of citizenship: Student interpretations of school 
teachings in Bali. Asian Studies Review, 26(1), 3–37.
Petet, H. D. (1996). Si Kabayan. Jakarta: SCTV television studio.
Philips, S. U. (1983). The invisible culture: Communication in classroom and community on 
the Warm Springs Indian reservation. New York: Longman.
Poedjosoedarmo, S. (1982). Javanese influence on Indonesian. Canberra:  Pacific 
Linguistics.
Poynting, S., Noble, G., Tabar, P., & Collins, J. (2004). Bin Laden in the sub-
urbs: Criminalising the Arab other. Sydney: Institute of Criminology.
Prastowo, J., & Suyono, E. A. (Eds.). (2007). Kuliah kerja nyata: Pembelajaran pemberdy-
aan masyarakat (KKN PPM) perguruan tinggi di Indonesia. Jakarta: Direktorat 
jenderal pendidikan tinggi departemen pendidikan nasional.
Purdey, J. (2006). Anti-Chinese violence in Indonesia, 1996–1999 Singapore: National 
University of Singapore Press.
Putnam, R. D. (2000). Bowling alone. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Quinn, G. (1992). The novel in Javanese. Leiden: KITLV Press.
Quinn, G. (2003). Coming apart and staying together at the centre: Debates over pro-
vincial status in Java and Madura. In E. Aspinall & G. Fealy (Eds.), Local power 
and politics in Indonesia:  Decentralisation and democratisation (pp. 164–178). 
Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies.
Quinn, G. (2012). Emerging from dire straits: Post-New Order developments in Javanese 
language and literature. In K. Foulcher, M. Moriyama & M. Budiman (Eds.), 
Words in motion: Language and discourse in post-New Order Indonesia (pp. 65–81). 
Tokyo: Research Institute for Languages and Cultures of Asia and Africa, Tokyo 
University of Foreign Studies.

260	
References
Rachmah, I. (2006). Watching Indonesian sinetron: Imagining communities around the 
television, Ph.D. diss., Curtain University, Perth.
Rachmah, I. (2008). Consuming Taiwanese boys culture:  Watching Meteor Garden 
with urban Kampung women in Indonesia. In A. Heryanto (Ed.), Popular 
Culture in Indonesia:  Fluid Identities in post-authoritarian politics (pp. 93–110). 
London: Routledge.
Rampton, B. (1995). Crossing:  Language and ethnicity among adolescents. 
London: Longman.
Rampton, B. (1999). Styling the other:  Introduction. Journal of Sociolinguistics, 3(4), 
421–427.
Rampton, B. (2006). Language in late modernity:  Interaction in an urban school. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Rampton, B. (2011). From ‘multi-ethnic adolescent heteroglossia’ to ‘contemporary 
urban vernaculars.’ Language & Communication, 31(4), 276–294.
Ramstedt, M. (2009). Regional autonomy and its discontents:  The case of post-New 
Order Bali. In C. Holtzappel & M. Ramstedt (Eds.), Decentralization and regional 
autonomy in Indonesia: Implementation and challenges (pp. 329–379). Singapore and 
Leiden:  Institute of Southeast Asian Studies and International Institute for Asian 
Studies.
Reid, A. (1988). Southeast Asia in the age of commerce, 1450–1680. New Haven: Yale 
University Press.
Reid, A., & Akira, O. (1986). Introduction. In A. Reid, O. Akira, J. Brewster & J. 
Carruthers (Eds.), The Japanese experience in Indonesia:  Selected memoirs of 
1942–1945 (pp. 1–5). Athens: Ohio University Press.
Resosudarmo, B. (2005). Introduction. In B. Resosudarmo (Ed.), The politics and eco-
nomics of Indonesia’s natural resources (pp. 1–9). Singapore: ISEAS.
Richardson, K. (1998). Signs and wonders:  Interpreting the economy through televi-
sion. In A. Bell & P. Garrett (Eds.), Approaches to media discourse (pp. 220–250). 
Oxford: Blackwell.
Richardson, K. (2010). Television dramatic dialogue:  A  sociolinguistic study. 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Ricklefs, M. C. (1981). A history of modern Indonesia since c.1300. Basingstoke: Macmillan.
Rinakit, S. (2005). The Indonesian military after the New Order/Sukardi Rinakit. 
Copenhagen and Singapore: NIAS and ISEAS.
Robinson, G. (2008). People power: A comparative history of forced displacement in 
East Timor. In E.-L. Hedman (Ed.), Conflict, violence, and displacement in Indonesia 
(pp. 87–118). Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Roesli, M. (1965 [1922]). Sitti Nurbaja:  Kasih tak sampai (11th ed.). Jakarta:  Balai 
Pustaka.
Ryoo, H.-K. (2005). Achieving friendly interactions:  A  study of service encounters 
between Korean shopkeepers and African-American customers. Discourse and 
Society, 16(1), 79–105.
Sakai, M. (2003). The privatisation of Padang Cement: Regional identity and economic 
hegemony in the new era of decentralisation. In E. Aspinall & G. Fealy (Eds.), Local 
power and politics in Indonesia: Decentralisation and democratisation (pp. 148–163). 
Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies.

	
References	
261
Sangkoyo, H. (1999). Limits to order: The internal logic of instability in the post-Soeharto 
era. In G. Forrester (Ed.), Post-Soeharto Indonesia: Renewal or chaos? (pp. 170–180). 
Bathurst: Crawford House.
Schefold, R. (1998). The domestication of culture: Nation-building and ethnic diversity 
in Indonesia. Bijdragen tot de Taal, Land-en Volkenkund, 154(2), 259–280.
Schegloff, E.  A. (1991). Reflections on talk and social structure. In D. Boden & D. 
Zimmerman (Eds.), Talk and social structure: Studies in ethnomethodology and con-
versation analysis (pp. 44–70). Cambridge: Polity.
Schieffelin, B. (1990). The give and take of everyday life: Language socialization of Kaluli 
children. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Scollon, R., & Scollon, S. W. (2003). Discourses in place: Language in the material world. 
London: Routledge.
Sen, K., & Hill, D. T. (2000). Media, culture and politics in Indonesia. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Shibata, Y. (1986). Shibata shirei chōkan no shuki. In A. Reid, O. Akira, J. Brewster 
& J. Carruthers (Eds.), The Japanese experience in Indonesia: Selected memoirs of 
1942–1945 (pp. 278–287). Athens: Ohio University Press.
Shigetada, N. (1986). Shōgen:  Indoneshia dokuritsu kakumei—aru kakumeika no 
hanshō. In A. Reid, O. Akira, J. Brewster & J. Carruthers (Eds.), The Japanese 
experience in Indonesia: Selected memoirs of 1942–1945 (pp. 254–275). Athens: Ohio 
University Press.
Shizuo, M. (1986). Jawa Shūsen Shoriki. In A. Reid, O. Akira, J. Brewster & J. Carruthers 
(Eds.), The Japanese experience in Indonesia: Selected memoirs of 1942–1945 (pp. 
219–250). Athens: Ohio University Press.
Shunkichiro, M. (1986). Jawa senryō gunsei kaikoroku. In A. Reid, O. Akira, J. Brewster 
& J. Carruthers (Eds.), The Japanese experience in Indonesia: Selected memoirs of 
1942–1945 (pp. 114–125). Athens: Ohio University Press.
Sidel, J. (2008). The manifold meanings of displacement: Explaining inter-religious vio-
lence, 1999–2001. In E.-L. Hedman (Ed.), Conflict, violence, and displacement in 
Indonesia (pp. 29–59). Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Silverstein, M. (2003). Indexical order and the dialectics of sociolinguistic life. Language 
& Communication, 23, 193–229.
Silverstein, M., & Urban, G. (Eds.). (1996). Natural histories of discourse. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Silvey, R. (2004). Gender, socio-spatial networks, and rural non-farm work among 
migrants in West Java. In T. Leinbach (Ed.), The Indonesian rural economy: Mobility, 
work and enterprise (pp. 134–151). Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies.
Skinner, W. (1959). The nature of loyalties in rural Indonesia. In W. Skinner (Ed.), Local, 
ethnic, and national loyalties in village Indonesia:  A  symposium (pp. 1–11). New 
Haven: Yale University Press.
Smets, P. (2005). Living apart or together?: Multiculturalism at a neighbourhood level. 
Community Development Journal, 41(3), 293–306.
Sneddon, J. (2003). The Indonesian language:  Its history and role in modern society. 
Sydney: University of New South Wales Press.
Soedijarto, Moleong, L., Suryadi, A., Machmud, D., Pangemanan, F., Tangyong, A., & 
Thomas, R. M. (1980). Indonesia. In T. N. Postlethwaite & R. M. Thomas (Eds.), 

262	
References
Schooling in the ASEAN region:  Primary and secondary education in Indonesia, 
Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore and Thailand (pp. 48–96). Oxford: Pergamon.
Spitulnik, D. (1996). The social circulation of media discourse and the mediation of 
communities. Journal of Linguistic Anthropology, 6(2), 161–187.
Stevens, R., & Hall, R. (1998). Disciplined perception: Learning to see in technoscience. 
In M. Lampert & M. Blunk (Eds.), Talking mathematics in school: Studies of teach-
ing and learning (pp. 107–149). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Stoler, A. L. (1995a). Capitalism and confrontation in Sumatra’s plantation belt, 1870–1979 
(2nd ed., with a new preface). Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Stoler, A.  L. (1995b). Race and the education of desire:  Foucult’s history of sexual-
ity and the colonial order of things (2nd ed., with a new preface). Durham: Duke 
University Press.
Strachle, C. (1993). “Samuel?” “Yes, Dear?”:  Teasing and conversational rapport. 
In D. Tannen (Ed.), Framing in discourse (pp. 210–230). New  York:  Oxford 
University Press.
Stuart-Smith, J. (2006). The influence of media on language. In C. Llamas, P. Stockwell 
& L. Mullany (Eds.), Routledge companion to sociolinguistics (pp. 140–148). 
London: Routledge.
Stuart-Smith, J., Timmins, C., Pryce, G., & Gunter, B. (n.d.). Accent change: Is television 
a contributory factor in accent change in adolescents? Report: Economic and social 
research council award R000239757. Retrieved June 30, 2011.
Sudarkam, M. (2014). The decentralization of schooling in Palu, Central Sulawesi, 
Indonesia, Ph.D.  diss., Department of Asian Studies, La Trobe University, 
Melbourne.
Suharsono, & Speare, A. (1981). Migration trends. In A. Booth & P. McCawley (Eds.), 
The Indonesian economy during the Soeharto era (pp. 289–314). New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Suryadi,. (2006). The ‘talking machine’ comes to the Dutch East Indies: The arrival 
of Western media technology in Southeast Asia. Bijdragen tot de Taal, Land-en 
Volkenkund, 162(2/3), 269–305.
Suryadinata, L. (Ed.). (2004a). Chinese Indonesians: State policy, monoculture and multi-
culture. Singapore: Eastern Universities Press.
Suryadinata, L. (Ed.). (2004b). Culture of the Chinese Minority in Indonesia. 
Singapore: Marshall Cavendish.
Suryadinata, L., Arifin, E., & Ananta, A. (2003). Indonesia’s population: Ethnicity and reli-
gion in a changing political landscape. Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies.
Suzuki, S. (1986). Toishi no uta–aru kyōikujin no aruita michi. In A. Reid, O. Akira, J. 
Brewster & J. Carruthers (Eds.), The Japanese experience in Indonesia: Selected mem-
oirs of 1942–1945 (pp. 161–171). Athens: Ohio University Center for International 
Studies, Center for Southeast Asian Studies.
Swigart, L. (1992). Two codes or one? The insiders’ view and the description of 
codeswitching in Dakar. In C. Eastman (Ed.), Codeswitching (pp. 83–102). Clevedon, 
Avon: Multilingual Matters.
Tabloid Jelita/Dv/Idh. (n.d.). Rano Karno: Si Doel adalah konsep pembangunan Jakarta. 
Retrieved from http://news.indosiar.com/news_read.htm?id=60553 on June 8, 2007.

	
References	
263
Tadmor, U. (2009). Voices from the past: Betawi dialects in Firman Muntaco’s Gambang 
Djakarté. Paper presented at the the Thirteenth International Symposium on 
Malay/Indonesian Linguistics (ISMIL 13), June 6–7, Senggigi, Lombok.
Tannen, D. (1984). Conversational style: Analyzing talk among friends. Norwood: Ablex.
Tannen, D. (1989). Talking voices: Repetition, dialogue, and imagery in conversational 
discourse. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Tannen, D. (1993). What’s in a frame?: Surface evidence for underlying expectations. In D. 
Tannen (Ed.), Framing in discourse (pp. 14–56). New York: Oxford University Press.
Teeuw, A. (1972). The impact of Balai Pustaka on modern Indonesian literature. Bulletin 
of the School of Oriental and African Studies, 35(1), 111–127.
Teeuw, A. (1994). Modern Indonesian literature I. Leiden: KITLV Press.
Teeuw, A. (1996). Modern Indonesian literature II (2nd ed.). Leiden: KITLV Press.
ten Have, P. (2007). Doing conversation analysis: A practical guide (2nd ed.). London: Sage.
Thee Kian Wie. (2001). Reflections on the New Order ‘miracle.’ In G. Lloyd & S. Smith 
(Eds.), Indonesia today: Challenges of history (pp. 163–180). Singapore: Institute of 
Southeast Asian Studies.
Thee Kian Wie. (2002). The Soeharto era and after: Stability, development and crisis, 
1966–2000. In H. Dick (Ed.), The emergence of a national economy: An economic his-
tory of Indonesia, 1800–2000 (pp. 194–243). Crows Nest: Allen & Unwin.
Tomasello, M. (2006). Why don’t apes point? In N. Enfield & S. Levinson (Eds.), Roots 
of human sociality: Culture, cognition and interaction (pp. 506–524). Oxford: Berg.
Tyson, A. D. (2010). Decentralization and adat revivalism in Indonesia: The politics of 
becoming indigenous. Hoboken: Taylor & Francis.
van Klinken, G. (2007a). Communal violence and democratization in Indonesia: Small 
town wars. London: Routledge.
van Klinken, G. (2007b). Return of the sultans: The communitarian turn in local politics. 
In J. Davidson & D. Henley (Eds.), The revival of tradition in Indonesian politics: The 
deployment of adat from colonialism to indigenism (pp. 149–169). London: Routledge.
Vertovec, S. (2007). Super-diversity and its implications. Ethnic and Racial Studies, 
30(6), 1024–1053.
Vickers, A. (2002). Bali merdeka? Internal migration, tourism and Hindu revivalism. In 
M. Sakai (Ed.), Beyond Jakarta: Regional autonomy and local society in Indonesia 
(pp. 80–101). Adelaide: Crawford House.
Vickers, A. (2005). A history of modern Indonesia. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Vološinov, V. N. (1973 [1929]). Marxism and the philosophy of language (L. Matejka & I. 
R. Titunik, Trans.). New York: Seminar Press.
von Benda-Beckmann, F., & von Benda-Beckmann, K. (2009). Rentralization and 
decentralization in West Sumatra. In C. Holtzappel & M. Ramstedt (Eds.), 
Decentralization and regional autonomy in Indonesia: Implementation and challenges 
(pp. 293–328). Singapore and Leiden:  Institute of Southeast Asian Studies and 
International Institute for Asian Studies.
Warren, C. (2007). Adat in Balinese discourse and practice: Locating citizenship and 
the commonweal. In J. Davidson & D. Henley (Eds.), The revival of tradition in 
Indonesian politics:  The deployment of adat from colonialism to indigenism (pp. 
170–202). London: Routledge.

264	
References
Warriner, D. (2010). Communicative competence revisited: An ethnopoetic analysis of 
narrative performances of identity. In F. Hult (Ed.), Directions and prospects for 
educational linguistics (pp. 63–77). New York: Dordrecht and Springer.
Weidman, A. (2010). Sound and the city: Mimicry and media in South India. Journal of 
Linguistic Anthropology, 20(2), 294–313.
Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Werbner, P. (1997). Introduction: The dialectics of cultural hybridity. In P. Werbner & T. 
Modood (Eds.), Debating cultural hybridity. Multi-cultural identities and the politics 
of anti-racism. (pp. 1–28). London: Zed Books.
Wikipedia. (2011). Pekan Olahraga Nasional. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pekan_
Olahraga_Nasional. Accessed on May 26, 2011.
Williams, Q., & Stroud, C. (2013). Multilingualism in transformative spaces: Contact 
and conviviality. Language Policy, 12(4), 289–311.
Wise, A. (2005). Hope and belonging in a multicultural suburb. Journal of Intercultural 
Studies, 26(1–2), 171–186.
Wise, A. (2009). Everyday multiculturalism: Transversal crossings and working class 
cosmopolitans. In A. Wise & S. Velayutham (Eds.), Everyday multiculturalism (pp. 
21–45). New York: Palgrave MacMillan.
Wolff, J., & Poedjosoedarmo, S. (1982). Communicative codes in Central Java. 
New York: Cornell University Press.
Wortham, S. (2006). Learning identity: The joint emergence of social identification and 
academic learning. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Yuyun W. I. Surya. (2006). The construction of cultural identity in local television sta-
tions’ programs in Indonesia. Paper presented at Media:  Policies, cultures and 
futures in the Asia Pacific region, November 27–29, Curtain University, Perth.
Zohra A.  Baso, & Nurul Ilmi Idrus. (2002). Women’s activism against violence in 
South Sulawesi. In K. Robinson & S. Bessell (Eds.), Women in Indonesia: Gender, 
equity and development (pp. 198–208). Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian 
Studies.

265
INDEX
Ả Campo, Joseph  21–22
Abas, Hasan  13, 27, 48
Acciaioli, Greg  112
Adams, Kathleen  47
Adequation
definition  55, 243
mediated representations of  85–86,  
92–94, 100–103, 144–145, 153–154, 161, 
169–171, 175
Alesich, Simone  45, 119
Agha, Asif  3–5, 13–17, 51–55, 61, 101–102, 126, 
141, 200, 203–204, 231, 233, 238
Alisjahbana, Sutan Takdir  13, 27, 33
Alvarez-Cáccamo, Celso  68, 175, 232
Aman  28–29
Anderson, Ben  2, 15, 21, 202
Androutsopoulos, Jannis  7, 54, 101, 125,  
232, 239
Ang, Iem  2, 10, 56, 144, 172–174, 199, 202, 
238–239
Antaki, Charles  2, 15, 55, 60, 176, 202, 240 
Antlov, Hans  110
Anwar, Khaidir  27
Appadurai, Arjun  14–15
Aragon, Lorraine  113
Arps, Ben  48, 111, 117, 122
Arnaut, Karel  8
Aspinall, Ed  12, 106, 109, 112–116, 241
Auer, Peter  7, 67–68, 131, 176, 238
Bakhtin, Mikhail  11, 174, 203, 236
Barker, Joshua  17
Barkin, Gareth  118
Barth, Fredrik  2, 202
Barton, David  2, 202
Bauman, Richard  12, 15, 203
Bauman, Zygmunt  15
Bell, Allan  6, 56
Berman, Laine  176
Bertrand, Jacques  1
Biezeveld, Renske  30, 112–113
Bjork, Christopher  40, 48
Bjork-Willen, Polly  175
Blommaert, Jan  3, 7–11, 14, 16, 102, 117, 144, 
171, 173, 176, 199, 204, 237, 239–240
Booth, Anne  45, 108
Bourchier, David  33, 47, 109, 112, 115
Bourdieu, Pierre  2–5, 11, 14–18, 20,  
202–204, 231
Bouvier, Hélène  113–114
Brettell, Caroline  173–174, 199
Briggs, Charles  4, 12, 15–16, 203
Bruner, Edward  38, 40, 46
Bucholtz, Mary  2, 6, 18, 55, 85, 94, 101, 142, 
175, 202, 228, 238
Bunnell, Tim  176
Bünte, Marco  109, 112
Burns, Peter  20
Bush, Robin  118
Carnegie, Paul  113
Castells, Manuel  5
Centers of normativity  16–17, 21–22, 25, 27, 31, 
42–43, 50, 101, 105, 116, 123, 125, 204, 231
Chambers, Jack  57
Chauvel, Richard  106, 109, 116
Clarke, Sandra  56
Codeswitching (see also language alternation) 
54, 68, 131–132, 232, 238
Cody, Francis  203
Cohen, Matthew  21–23
Cole, Debbie  229
Collins, Jock  107, 114, 233
Colonial linguistics  13
Common ground
and conviviality  10, 173, 176, 181, 191, 198, 
216, 218, 226
definition of  57, 176
interactional pursuit of  8, 180–188, 191–193, 
195, 198–199, 208, 211, 213–214, 216–218, 
223, 225–227, 235
and non-minimal responses  181, 186, 191
and positive interpersonal relations  92
and repetition  180–181, 183–184, 191, 193, 
225, 227, 235
and semioitic density  53–54, 101
televised representations of  69, 78, 79
Communicative competence (CC)
and communities of practice  2–3,  
201–204, 240
and community  2–3, 11, 201–204, 236, 
227–228, 236, 240
 

266	
Index
Communicative competence (CC) (Cont.)
and crossing  228
definition of  10, 102, 201, 204, 240–241, 243
development of  204, 240–241
and publics  2–4
and symbolic competence  102
Community
adat  112
and authenticity  112
and competence to comprehend  227–228
denaturalization of  156
definitions of  2–3, 11, 15, 204, 231
and enregisterment  11, 209–213, 218
ethnic  62, 89, 122, 156, 208–209, 236
imagined  21, 62
and indexicality  218–219, 225, 227, 240
interactional construction of  210, 213, 
216–217, 223
and language  28, 62, 208–209
and mobility  3, 240
and subtitling practices  126, 128, 137
and territory  19, 89, 112, 141, 209
Community of practice (COP)
and communicative competence  2–3, 
201–204, 240
definition of  2–3
and distinction  2–3, 202–203
emergent  217–218, 222–223, 225, 228
ethnic  205, 208–213, 216–217, 221, 225, 227
and identity  94
interactional production of  205, 208–209, 
213, 217, 236
and language alternation  68,
and publics  3, 240
Competence to comprehend  33, 102, 144
and communities of practice  227, 236
definition of  3, 5, 9
and knowledging  102, 238–239
and publics  3
and superdiversity  167–168, 233
Conviviality
and common ground  173–174
and communicative competence  173, 236
and communities of practice  213, 219,  
228, 236
and crossing  175, 211
definition of  10
and doing togetherness in difference  10, 
173–175, 201, 228, 235, 237
interactional achievement of  195, 214, 221, 
223, 225, 235
and knowledging  201–203, 236
and repetition  195, 223, 225
and small talk  174, 235
and superdiversity  173, 176, 199, 239
Coppel, Charles  107, 165
Coupland, Justine  236
Creese, Angela  7, 126
Cribb, Robert  1, 42, 45
Crouch, Harold  36, 112–113, 115
Crossing
and adequation  153, 175
and language alternation  7, 54, 68, 101,  
153, 175
and communicative competence  228, 241
and communities of practice  203, 228
and conviviality  175, 211, 213, 227, 228
definition of  7, 54, 85, 101, 153, 229
and knowledging  9, 102, 216, 226, 228–229
and styling the other  241
and televised representations of  101, 150, 153
unity in diversity  213
Dardjowidjojo, Soenjono  13, 27, 40–41, 48–49
Davidson, Jamie  19, 38–39, 43, 106–108, 
112–114
Dawson, Gaynor  44,
Dayan, Daniel  202
Decentralization
and adat  113, 117, 223
of education  117, 234
and ethnic languages  11, 111, 114, 116–117, 
123–124, 234
and ethnicity  11, 111, 114, 117, 123–124, 234
and ethnopolitics  113
and communities of practice  110, 113
and ideas about community  110, 113
and infrastructures of superdiversity  119
legislation  109
and mobility  119
political and fiscal  105, 108, 234
and televised representations  
of ethnicity  123
and territory  11, 111, 114, 116–117, 123–124
De Fina, Anna  203
de Jong, Edwin  20, 31, 47
Dick, Howard  21–22, 31–32, 34–38, 45
Eckert, Penelope  2, 202
Eisenlohr, Patrick  17, 237
Ellis, Andrew  34
Elson, Robert  25–27, 30, 32–34, 36–39, 42, 44, 
46, 109
Enregisterment
and communicative competence  4, 171,  
228, 236
and communities of practice  4, 201
definition of 4
and demeanor  7, 56
and distinction  20

	
Index	
267
and emblems of identity  56
and ethnic languages  19–20
and ethnicity  19–20, 104
and indexicality  4, 11, 229
and infrastructures of  5, 31, 55
and interaction  11, 54
and knowledging  154, 171, 212
and language alternation  145
and language ideology  20
and Malay  20
and participation frameworks  4, 203, 212
and sociability  154
and stereotypes  6–7, 19
and television representations  154
and up-scaling  170
and unintended consequences  143, 229
Enfield, Nicholas  53, 55, 57, 176
Erb, Maribeth  47
Errington, J. Joseph  1, 13, 18–19, 21, 24, 47–49, 
61, 241
Ethnicity
and adat  47, 113, 117
and centers of normativity  22, 43, 105, 123
changing configurations of  6–7, 11, 123–124, 
143, 170, 176, 230, 234, 241
commodification of  47, 51, 118
and communities of practice  44–45
and conflict  106, 234, 241
construction of  2, 13, 22, 34, 51, 132, 230
and demeanor  232
and distinction  22, 25, 85, 112
emblems of  11–12, 19, 39, 51, 84–85, 110, 121, 
128, 234, 241
enregisterment of  18, 25, 30, 33, 39, 45, 51, 
104, 170
ideas about  6, 11, 25, 33–34, 39, 45, 111–112
and ideology  1, 7, 104–105, 111–112
and indexicality  2, 76, 79, 85, 105
and infrastructure  5, 108, 110–111, 116, 233
and interaction  11–12, 176, 241
and intimacy  76
and language  1, 7, 19, 23, 40, 45, 64, 84, 94, 
105, 110, 116, 128
and language documentation  117
and the management of diversity  19
and the mass media  47, 60, 112–113, 118
and orders of indexicality  22, 43, 85, 100, 
105, 234
and politics  35–36, 39, 105–106, 111
and regionalism  39, 111, 116
and registers of  11, 23, 44
and semiotic density  85, 232
and schooling  13, 117
and social value  6–7, 11–12, 34, 39, 42–45, 
104, 106, 114, 123–124, 176, 233
television representations of  7, 60, 76, 118, 
132, 177
and territory  1, 7, 19, 23, 25, 26, 39–40, 64, 
110, 116
and unity in diversity  2, 46, 48, 60, 94, 110, 
112–113, 235, 241
and up-scaling  110, 116
Fairclough, Norman  56
Fasseur, Cornelis  20
Feith, Herbert  39
Florey, Margaret  49
Ford, Michele  1, 31, 45, 50, 110, 112
Foucault, Michel  16
Foulcher, Keith  27, 40, 50
Fox, James  113
Franceschini, Rita  68, 232
Francis, David  54–55, 238
Gafaranga, Joseph  7, 54, 61–62, 67–68, 131, 
175, 232, 238
Garrett, Peter  6, 56
Geertz, Clifford  36, 38
Geertz, Hildred  40
Georgakopoulou, Alexandra  176
Gershon, Ilana  14, 17, 54, 238
Giddens, Anthony  3, 11, 15, 204, 231
Goebel, Zane  1–2, 8–11, 13, 16–17, 45–46, 49, 
54–55, 59–60, 68, 85, 144, 153–154, 165, 
172, 174–175, 177, 228, 231, 236, 238–241
Goffman, Erving  6, 15, 29, 53, 57, 101, 175, 232
Goodwin, Charles  55, 60
Gumperz, John  15, 60–61, 174
Hall, Stuart  56
Hanan, David  67
Hanks, William  53, 55, 57, 176
Harvey, David  5, 14, 17, 237
Haviland, John  60
Hedman, Eva-Lotta  38, 42–43, 114–115
Hefner, Robert  18
Heller, Monica  1, 7, 126, 239
Henley, David  19, 106–108, 112–113
Herriman, Nicholas  42,
Heryanto, Ariel  13, 118
Hill, David  41, 47, 50, 59, 86, 116, 119
Hill, Jane  139, 229
Hoey, Brian  44
Holmes, Janet  202
Holt, Elizabeth  129
Hooker, Virginia  47
Hoon, Chang-yau  47, 165
Hoshour, Cathy  44
Hymes, Dell  2, 4, 9, 15, 18, 55, 60–61,  
203–204

268	
Index
Identity
emblems of  57, 241
ethnic  36–37, 43, 46, 50–51, 56–57, 111, 142, 
186, 205, 211–213, 216–217
and governmentality  19
and knowledging  212
theories of  8, 15, 176
ideologies of  107, 111
interactional emergence of  54, 65–70, 94, 
176, 186–188, 196–198, 205, 211–213, 
216–217
Indexical relations  2, 6–7, 17, 27, 64, 74, 79, 81, 
105–106, 164–165, 233, 240
and anchoring  28
and Chineseness  165
and community  212–227, 237, 240
and conviviality  131, 183, 213–229
and demeanor  74, 101
and enregisterment  6–7, 17, 27–28, 52, 70, 79, 
85, 105–106, 233
and ethnicity  19, 22, 28, 31, 35, 47–48, 51, 55, 
64, 76, 79, 85, 102, 105–106, 111, 142
and focus  76, 79, 81, 84
and Indonesian  27, 48, 118, 227
and interaction  11, 175, 188, 205, 209, 
211–229, 237
and knowledging  55, 201, 204, 208, 211
and language alternation  68, 131
and linguistic forms  19, 22, 28, 31, 47, 51, 
63–64, 79, 111, 141
and semiotic density  85, 101
and territory  19, 22, 27–28, 35, 47–48, 51, 64, 
79, 111, 141
and unity in diversity  118, 227
Infrastructure
and changes in  18, 34
and circulation of ideas  5, 17, 22, 58
and circulation of people  5, 17, 22, 24, 31, 
35, 45–46
and community  18
and enregisterment  18, 31, 34, 58
and social interaction  17, 22, 24, 31, 35, 46
and time-space compression  5, 17, 22
and up-scaling  17, 43–48
Inoue, Miyako  1, 4, 6, 13, 16–17, 53, 101, 107, 
117, 203–204, 238
Inoue, Tetsuro  32
Irvine, Judith  3, 18, 125, 202–203
Jaffe, Alexandra  4, 7, 54, 101, 125, 204,  
232, 239
Jaworski, Adam  126, 153
Johnson, Sally  6, 54, 56, 125–126, 239
Johnstone, Barbara  16, 126
Jones, Gavin  46
Jones, Sidney  112
Jørgensen, J. Normann  7, 9, 102, 104
Jukes, Anthony  49
Kahin, George  35–36
Katoppo, Aristides  45, 107, 112
Kelly-Holmes, Helen  54, 101, 125, 232, 239
Kendon, Adam  60
King, Ruth  5, 16, 56
Kitley, Philip  41, 50–51, 58–59, 62, 67, 109, 116, 
128, 202
Knowledging
definition of  5, 9–10, 55, 102, 229
and communicative competence  9, 55,  
102, 203
and conviviality  10–11, 201–203, 226, 228, 237
and crossing  9, 102, 229
and enregisterment  10, 92, 94, 100, 102, 
138–139, 144, 150, 160–164, 170–171, 212
infrastructures of  144, 170–171
in interaction  11, 144, 208, 218–223, 238
and language alternation  150, 154, 160–164
and polylanguaging  9, 102
and superdiversity  10, 144, 154, 239
and symbolic competence  102
televised representations of  10, 92, 94, 100, 
102, 138–139, 144, 150, 160–164, 235
and togetherness in difference  10–11, 97, 
201, 227, 235, 241
and unity in diversity  86, 92, 97, 102, 227, 
239, 241
Kramsch, Claire  3, 9, 102, 174, 202, 229, 240
Kress, Gunther  55–56
Kuipers, Joel  49, 241
Kulick, Don  56
Kurniasih, Yacinta  48
Kusumaatmadja, Sarwono  45, 107, 112
Labov, William  15, 18, 57
Lambert, Wallace  177
Language alternation (see also codeswitching)
and adequation  55
approach to  54–55, 238
authorization of models of  74, 153
classification of  54–55
and codeswithing  54
and ethnomethodology  54
habitual  55, 126, 239
and medium  7, 67, 175, 239
naturalization of  125, 234
representations of  53–54, 74, 234–235, 238
Language ideology
formation processes  6, 13, 54, 100–101,  
142, 238
methods for investigating  141, 238

	
Index	
269
Legge, John  36–37, 39
Lenhart, Lioba  44
Le Page, Robert  176
Levinson, Stephen  176
Li, Tania  112
Liddicoat, Anthony  54, 130, 238
Liddle, R. William  39
Liebes, Tamar  56
Lindsey, Tim  109
Livingstone, Sonia  2, 202
Loven, Klarijn  5–6, 16, 28, 56–59, 62, 74, 
85–86, 89, 101, 117, 136, 202, 219
Lowenberg, Peter  48–49
Malinowski, Bronislaw  175
Malley, Michael  107
Massification
definition of  4
and enregisterment  50
of schooling  40, 48, 50
and superdiverstiy  124
Mauss, Marcel  175
McCarthy, Michael  175
McCawley, Peter  45
McGibbon, Rodd  109, 119
Meek, Barbara  56
Mendoza-Denton, Norma  6, 101, 142, 238
Mietzner, Marcus  108–109, 119
Metasemiotic commentary  6, 14, 27, 48, 51, 
73, 86, 121–122, 126, 132, 135, 141–142, 148, 
153, 214, 221, 230, 234, 243
Miles, Douglas  38
Miller, Laura  5–6, 16, 52, 101, 202, 238
Min, Sai Siew  42
Moeliono, Anton  13
Moerman, Michael  54, 238
Moriyama, Mikihiro  19–21, 29, 117–118
Morley, David  56
Moyer, Melissa  7, 14, 126
Mrázek, Rudolf  21, 23–24, 27
Muhidin, Salahudin  45
Multiaccentuatuality  19, 176–177, 200
Nababan, P.  13, 48–49
Norris, Sigrid  55, 61
Ochs, Elinor  2–3, 60–61, 102, 203, 239–240
Okada, Fumihide  33
one-to-few participation frameworks
and communicative competence  3, 102, 203, 
228–229, 240–241
and cultural value  4
definition of  4–5
and registers  4
and role of institutions  3–5
and socialization  3
and superdiversity  171
one-to-many participation frameworks
and authority  4, 17
commonness of  52, 59, 101, 204, 231,  
238, 241
and communicative competence  3, 4, 9, 102, 
164, 203–204, 218, 228–229, 240–241
and cultural value  4
definition of  4–5, 16
and diversity  9
and infrastructure  18, 50–52
and knowledging  8
and registers  4
and role of institutions  3–5, 124
and standardization  52, 237
and superdiversity  144–145, 153, 171
Orders of indexicality
during colonial period  22, 30
definition of  5, 11, 18
modelling of  74, 85, 90, 94, 101, 154
during New Order period  51, 74, 85, 90,  
94, 101
during post New Order period  105, 111, 116, 
123–124, 154, 161
during Soekarno period  34, 36–37
reconfiguration of  11, 14, 105, 111,  
116–117, 123–124, 154, 161, 171, 232, 
234–235, 241
regimentation of  90, 103, 231
Otsuka, Tadashi  33
Palmer, Andrea  36, 38, 40
Parker, Lyn  47–48
Philips, Susan  18, 60
Poedjosoedarmo, Soepomo  61, 165
Polycentricity  3, 16, 36, 52
Polylanguaging  9, 102
Poynting, Scott  114, 233
Prastowo, Joko  49
Purdey, Jemma  165
Putnam, Robert  15
Quinn, George  20–21, 40, 50, 111, 117
Rachmah, Ida  51, 53, 59, 62, 67, 74, 101, 118
Rampton, Ben  7, 9, 54, 67, 85, 102, 144, 150, 
171, 174, 177, 203, 229, 237, 241
Ramstedt, Martin  112–113, 117
Recontextualization  12
Reid, Anthony  22, 32
Resosudarmo, Ida  106–107, 113
Richardson, Kay  54, 56–57, 103, 135, 232, 238
Ricklefs, Merle  18, 32–44
Rinakit, Sukardi  36

270	
Index
Robinson, Geoffrey  43, 115
Roesli, Marah  26–27
Ryoo, Hye-Kyung  175
Sakai, Minako  112
Sangkoyo, Hendro  45, 106
Sen, Krishna  41, 47, 50, 59, 86, 116, 119
Schefold, Reimar  43–44
Schegloff, Emanuel  15
Schieffelin, Bambi  2–3, 102, 203, 240
Scollon, Ron  55, 61
Semiotic density
definition of  57
and television  76, 85, 89
Semiotic register
and centers of normativity  5, 31, 231
and communicative competence  16–18
definition of  4, 14–15, 20
and demeanor  74
and distinction  18, 74, 132
and diversity management  18
emergent  9, 24–25, 31–32, 35–37, 40, 42, 
45–46, 48–49, 175
and enregisterment  4, 20, 22, 47–48, 231
fragments of  14, 169, 171
and language  14–15, 126, 141
and norms for social conduct  44
and participation frameworks  18
reconfiguration of  53, 74, 86, 125
and social types  15, 17, 21, 23
and social value  17, 20, 47, 169
and stereotypes  6, 47, 85, 142
and superdiversity  9, 142–144
Shibata, Yaichiro  32
Shigetada, Nishijima  32
Shizuo, Miyamoto  32
Shunkichiro, Miyoshi  32–33
Sidel, John  42, 44, 107, 113, 115
Silverstein, Michael  15, 17, 203
Skinner, William  37–38
Smets, Peer  10, 144, 172, 238–239
Sneddon, James  1, 20–22, 30, 33, 41
Soedijarto  40, 48
Spitulnik, Debra  56
Stoler, Ann  19, 21, 24
Strachle, Carolyn  175
Stuart-Smith, Jane  56–57
Sudarkam, Mertono  117
Suharsono  46
Superdiversity
and adequation  171
authorization of  145, 153–154, 168
and common ground  8
and communicative competence  9, 11, 144, 
154, 167
and community  11, 228
and competence to comprehend  9, 144, 154, 
167, 238
and complexity  8, 143
and conviviality  8, 10, 144, 173–175, 199, 
228, 239
definition of  8, 144
and displacement  124
and diversity management  52
and economic migrants  124
and enregisterment  154, 237–238
and infrastructures of  8, 124
and interactional practice  10, 144, 167
and knowledging  9, 102, 144, 154, 171, 
173–174, 237–238
and language ideologies  8, 237
and linguistic repertoire  14, 144, 165–169, 
173–174, 237
mass mediated representations of  9, 102, 
144, 153–154, 161–162, 168–170, 239
and metasemiotic commentaries  6, 9, 14, 
237–238
and naturalization of  153–154, 168, 170
and one-to-many participation frame-
works  144–145, 171
and refugees  124
and theory  171–172
and time-space compression  14, 237
and togetherness in difference  10, 172–175, 
199, 238–239
and truncated competence  14, 144, 165–169, 
173–174
understanding the emergence of  52, 124, 
230, 237
and up-scaling  6, 9, 14, 119, 124, 230, 237
Suryadi  23
Suryadinata, Leo  1, 30, 44–45, 122, 165
Suzuki, Seihei  33
Swigart, Leigh  68
Tadmor, Uri  39
Tannen, Deborah  15, 18, 60, 72, 129,  
174–175, 177
Teeuw, Andries  21, 26, 30–31, 33, 39–41, 50
ten Have, Paul  54, 238
Thee Kian Wie  45, 48, 108
Time-space compression  5, 14, 17, 237
Togetherness in difference (see also unity  
in diversity)
approaches to the study of  174
and communicative competence  201, 228
and community  201
and conviviality  10, 173–175, 201, 228,  
235, 237
definition of  10, 173, 201, 228

	
Index	
271
and enregisterment  201
and interactional practice  199
and knowledging  10–11, 97, 201, 227,  
235, 241
and linguistic repertoires  202
and superdiversity  10, 172–175, 199, 238–239
television representations of  10, 238
understanding the emergence of  199, 201, 
214, 236–237, 239
Transmigration
and conflict  105–106
definition of  32, 244
during colonial period  24–25
during Japanese occupation  32
during New Order  43–45, 104
resistance to  107
during Soekarno period  37
Unity in diversity
and interactional practice  11, 211, 213, 229
and knowledging  102, 241
and Indonesian  2, 48, 51, 54, 94, 97, 100, 102, 
155, 158, 161–162, 170–171, 213
and language of  2, 9, 48, 51–52, 55, 86, 94, 
97, 100, 143
and language alternation  7, 55, 86, 97, 100, 
143, 145, 150, 158, 162, 171, 213, 229, 233
marketed models of  47
and state ideology  2, 42, 46, 55, 86, 100, 102, 
116, 213, 229, 233, 235
televised models of  7, 9, 55, 60, 86, 94, 97, 
100, 145, 150, 161, 172, 233, 235
Up-scaling
definition of  5, 244
and enregisterment  6, 170
and ethnicity  110, 116
and infrastructure  17, 43–48, 50, 230
and meta-semiotic commentary  6, 230
and one-to-many participation 
frameworks  170
and superdiversity  6, 9, 14, 119, 124, 230, 237
and time-space compression  14
van Klinken, Gerry  112–114
Vertovec, Steven  6, 8, 10, 14, 52, 143–144, 
171–174, 199, 237–239
Vickers, Adrian  1, 32, 34, 36, 38, 41–42, 44, 
46–47, 59, 107–108
Vološinov, Valentin  11, 19, 56, 174, 176, 184, 
200, 236
von Benda-Beckmann, Franz  113
Warren, Carol  107, 113–114
Warriner, Doris  3, 204, 241
Weidman, Amanda  17, 23, 237
Wenger, Etienne  2, 15–16, 94, 202–203, 231
Werbner, Pnina  10, 144, 172–174,  
199, 238–239
Williams, Quentin  6, 10, 173–175, 199, 228, 239
Wise, Amanda  10, 144, 172–174, 176, 199, 236, 
238–239
Wolff, John  165
Wortham, Stanton  11, 17, 60, 174, 176, 203, 
236, 239–240
Yuyun W. I. Surya  118
Zohra A. Baso  111














