


OTHER BOOKS BY PARKER J. PALMER
The Courage to Teach
The Courage to Teach: A Guide for Reflection and Renewal
(with Rachel Livsey)
The Active Life
To Know As We Are Known
The Company of Strangers
The Promise of Paradox
Caring for the Commonweal (coeditor)
Parker J. Palmer
Author of The Courage to Teach






Gratitudes
1. Listening to Life
II. Now I Become Myself
III. When Way Closes
IV. All the Way Down
V. Leading from Within
VI. There Is a Season
Notes
The Author
For Heather Marie Palmer my granddaughter
May you always treasure true self .. .

With the exception of Chapter I, every chapter in this book
originally appeared as an essay in some other publication
during the past decade. I have rewritten all the essays, most
of them substantially. My aim has been to create a real
booknot just a collection of articles about vocation, but a
coherent exploration of a subject that engages many of us
for the better part of our lives.
I mention the provenance of these pieces partly because I
believe in truth in labeling and partly because the people
who invited me to write the original essays, with all the trust
that implies, are valued partners in my own vocation.
Chapter II, "Now I Become Myself," was originally given
as the G. D. Davidson Lecture at Warren Wilson College in
Swannanoa, North Carolina, and published by the college as
a pamphlet.' The unusual charge that accompanies the
lectureship helped frame this book: reflect on your life story
through the concept of vocation-"including lessons learned
from disappointments and failures as well as successes"-and
do so in a way that might speak to younger as well as older
adults. I am grateful to my friend Doug Orr, president of the
college, for extending the invitation; to Don and Ann
Davidson for endowing a lectureship that invites this sort of
reflection; and to the entire Warren Wilson community for
receiving my words with such deep hospitality.

Chapter III, "When Way Closes," was originally written
for Weavings, a quarterly journal of spirituality, at the
request of its editor, John Mogabgab.2 John, my good
friend for many years, is one of the best companions a
person could have along the way, and Weavings-the journal
he has raised up from its infancy-is widely regarded as one
of the finest periodicals of its kind.
Chapter IV, "All the Way Down," was originally written
for a special issue of Weavings on the theme of the
"wounded healer" in memory of Henri Nouwen.' Henri was
a treasured friend and mentor to both John Mogabgab and
me, and this chapter is testimony to the transcendent power
of friendship. It explores my experience with depression, a
subject I could not have dealt with so openly except for the
support of friends still living and the spirit of a friend now
gone.
Chapter V, "Leading from Within," was originally given
as a speech for the Indiana Office of Campus Ministries,
which published it as a pamphlet.' I am grateful to my friend
Max Case, executive director, for his invitation and
encouragement. Indeed, I am grateful to the many campus
ministers, priests, and rabbis across the country who helped
me take first steps toward my calling thirty years ago, at a
time when few in the academy were willing to entertain
spiritual questions, at least not in public-a situation that is,
blessedly, different today.
Chapter VI, "There Is a Season," was written at the

request of Rob Lehman, president of the Fetzer Institute and
my good friend and co-conspirator in vocation, to help
dedicate Fetzer's retreat center, Seasons. The Institute
published this essay as a pamphlet that is placed in the
bedrooms at Seasons to invite guests into reflection.' I think
of that pamphlet as Fetzer's equivalent of the Hilton's
"pillow mints"-and I think of Rob Lehman as a pioneer in
empowering so many of us to explore the complex
connections between inner and outer life.
Special thanks go to Sarah Polster, my editor at
JosseyBass. She was the first to see that the question of
vocation was at the heart of many of the essays I have
written in recent years and to believe in their potential to
become a real book. Her skillful editing has helped bring
these essays together in a fabric more tightly woven than I
could have achieved on my own.
My thanks also go to the other members of the Jossey-
Bass staff who have been such superb partners in
publishing: Carol Brown, Joanne Clapp Fullagar, Paula
Goldstein, Danielle Neary, Johanna Vondeling, and Jennifer
Whitney.
Much of the personal journey I trace in this book was
made in the company of, and with the support of, members
of my family, past and present. I did not include them in my
narrative simply because their stories belong to them alone;
the only tale I know how to tell, or have a right to tell, is my
own. But I thought of my family often and with deep

gratitude as I was writing about the parts of the journey we
shared.
To Sally Palmer, Brent Palmer, Todd Palmer, and Carrie
Palmer: thank you for all the love you have given me along
the way.
To Heather Palmer: thank you for the new love and
laughter you have brought into my life-though I'd be
grateful if you would stop reminding me to eat my
vegetables!
To Sharon Palmer: thank you for your gifted editing that
is vital to my vocation as a writer and for the love that
sustains me as I learn how to let my life speak.



-William Stafford, "AsK ME"'
"Ask me whether what I have done is my life." For some,
those words will be nonsense, nothing more than a poet's
loose way with language and logic. Of course what I have
done is my life! To what am I supposed to compare it?

But for others, and I am one, the poet's words will be
precise, piercing, and disquieting. They remind me of
moments when it is clear-if I have eyes to see-that the life I
am living is not the same as the life that wants to live in me.
In those moments I sometimes catch a glimpse of my true
life, a life hidden like the river beneath the ice. And in the
spirit of the poet, I wonder: What am I meant to do? Who
am I meant to be?
I was in my early thirties when I began, literally, to wake
up to questions about my vocation. By all appearances,
things were going well, but the soul does not put much
stock in appearances. Seeking a path more purposeful than
accumulating 
wealth, 
holding 
power, 
winning 
at
competition, or securing a career, I had started to understand
that it is indeed possible to live a life other than one's own.
Fearful that I was doing just that-but uncertain about the
deeper, truer life I sensed hidden inside me, uncertain
whether it was real or trustworthy or within reach-I would
snap awake in the middle of the night and stare for long
hours at the ceiling.
Then I ran across the old Quaker saying, "Let your life
speak." I found those words encouraging, and I thought I
understood what they meant: "Let the highest truths and
values guide you. Live up to those demanding standards in
everything you do." Because I had heroes at the time who
seemed to be doing exactly that, this exhortation had
incarnate mean ing for me-it meant living a life like that of
Martin Luther King Jr. or Rosa Parks or Mahatma Gandhi or

Dorothy Day, a life of high purpose.
So I lined up the loftiest ideals I could find and set out to
achieve them. The results were rarely admirable, often
laughable, and sometimes grotesque. But always they were
unreal, a distortion of my true self-as must be the case when
one lives from the outside in, not the inside out. I had
simply found a "noble" way to live a life that was not my
own, a life spent imitating heroes instead of listening to my
heart.
Today, some thirty years later, "Let your life speak"
means something else to me, a meaning faithful both to the
ambiguity of those words and to the complexity of my own
experience: "Before you tell your life what you intend to do
with it, listen for what it intends to do with you. Before you
tell your life what truths and values you have decided to live
up to, let your life tell you what truths you embody, what
values you represent."
My youthful understanding of "Let your life speak" led
me to conjure up the highest values I could imagine and
then try to conform my life to them whether they were mine
or not. If that sounds like what we are supposed to do with
values, it is because that is what we are too often taught.
There is a simplistic brand of moralism among its that wants
to reduce the ethical life to making a list, checking it twice-
against the index in some best-selling book of virtues,
perhaps-and then trying very hard to be not naughty but
nice.

There may be moments in life when we are so unformed
that we need to use values like an exoskeleton to keep us
from collapsing. But something is very wrong if such
moments recur often in adulthood. Trying to live someone
else's life, or to live by an abstract norm, will invariably fail-
and may even do great damage.
Vocation, the way I was seeking it, becomes an act of
will, a grim determination that one's life will go this way or
that whether it wants to or not. If the self is sin-ridden and
will bow to truth and goodness only under duress, that
approach to vocation makes sense. But if the self seeks not
pathology but wholeness, as I believe it does, then the
willful pursuit of vocation is an act of violence toward
ourselves-violence in the name of a vision that, however
lofty, is forced on the self from without rather than grown
from within. True self, when violated, will always resist us,
sometimes at great cost, holding our lives in check until we
honor its truth.
Vocation does not come from willfulness. It comes from
listening. I must listen to my life and try to understand what
it is truly about-quite apart from what I would like it to be
about-or my life will never represent anything real in the
world, no matter how earnest my intentions.
That insight is hidden in the word vocation itself, which is
rooted in the Latin for "voice." Vocation does not mean a
goal that I pursue. It means a calling that I hear. Before I can
tell my life what I want to do with it, I must listen to my life

telling the who I am. I must listen for the truths and values at
the heart of my own identity, not the standards by which I
must live-but the standards by which I cannot help but live
if I am living my own life.
Behind this understanding of vocation is a truth that the
ego does not want to hear because it threatens the ego's turf:
everyone has a life that is different from the "I" of daily
consciousness, a life that is trying to live through the "I"
who is its vessel. This is what the poet knows and what
every wisdom tradition teaches: there is a great gulf between
the way my ego wants to identify me, with its protective
masks and self-serving fictions, and my true self.
It takes time and hard experience to sense the difference
between the two-to sense that running beneath the surface of
the experience I call my life, there is a deeper and truer life
waiting to be acknowledged. That fact alone makes "listen
to your life" difficult counsel to follow. The difficulty is
compounded by the fact that from our first days in school,
we are taught to listen to everything and everyone but
ourselves, to take all our clues about living from the people
and powers around us.
I sometimes lead retreats, and from time to time
participants show me the notes they are taking as the retreat
unfolds. The pattern is nearly universal: people take copious
notes on what the retreat leader says, and they sometimes
take notes on the words of certain wise people in the group,
but rarely, if ever, do they take notes on what they

themselves say. We listen for guidance everywhere except
from within.
I urge retreatants to turn their note-taking around, because
the words we speak often contain counsel we are trying to
give ourselves. We have a strange conceit in our culture that
simply because we have said something, we understand
what it means! But often we do not-especially when we
speak from a deeper place than intellect or ego, speak the
kind of words that arise when the inner teacher feels safe
enough to tell its truth. At those moments, we need to listen
to what our lives are saying and take notes on it, lest we
forget our own truth or deny that we ever heard it.
Verbalizing is not the only way our lives speak, of course.
They speak through our actions and reactions, our intuitions
and instincts, our feelings and bodily states of being,
perhaps more profoundly than through our words. We are
like plants, full of tropisms that draw us toward certain
experiences and repel us from others. If we can learn to read
our own responses to our own experience-a text we are
writing unconsciously every day we spend on earth-we will
receive the guidance we need to live more authentic lives.
But if I am to let my life speak things I want to hear,
things I would gladly tell others, I must also let it speak
things I do not want to hear and would never tell anyone
else! My life is not only about my strengths and virtues; it is
also about my liabilities and my limits, my trespasses and
my shadow. An inevitable though often ignored dimension

of the quest for "wholeness" is that we must embrace what
we dislike or find shameful about ourselves as well as what
we are confident and proud of. That is why the poet says,
"ask me mistakes I have made."
In the chapters to come, I speak often of my own
mistakes-of wrong turns I have taken, of misreadings of my
own reality-for hidden in these moments are important clues
to my own vocation. I do not feel despondent about my
mistakes, any more than the poet does, though I grieve the
pain they have sometimes caused others. Our lives are
"experiments with truth" (to borrow the subtitle of Gandhi's
autobiography), and in an experiment negative results are at
least as important as successes.' I have no idea how I would
have learned the truth about myself and my calling without
the mistakes I have made, though by that measure I should
have written a much longer book!
How we are to listen to our lives is a question worth
exploring. In our culture, we tend to gather information in
ways that do not work very well when the source is the
human soul: the soul is not responsive to subpoenas or
cross-examinations. At best it will stand in the dock only
long enough to plead the Fifth Amendment. At worst it will
jump bail and never be heard from again. The soul speaks
its truth only under quiet, inviting, and trustworthy
conditions.
The soul is like a wild animal-tough, resilient, savvy, self-
sufficient, and yet exceedingly shy. If we want to see a wild

animal, the last thing we should do is to go crashing through
the woods, shouting for the creature to come out. But if we
are willing to walk quietly into the woods and sit silently for
an hour or two at the base of a tree, the creature we are
waiting for may well emerge, and out of the corner of an
eye we will catch a glimpse of the precious wildness we
seek.
That is why the poem at the head of this chapter ends in
silence-and why I find it a bit embarrassing that as this
chapter ends, I am drawing the reader not toward silence but
toward speech, page after page of speech! I hope that my
speech is faithful to what I have heard, in the silence, from
my soul. And I hope that the reader who sits with this book
can hear the silence that always surrounds us in the writing
and reading of words. It is a silence that forever invites us to
fathom the meaning of our lives-and forever reminds us of
depths of meaning that words will never touch.

A VISION OF VOCATION
With twenty-one words, carefully chosen and artfully
woven, May Sarton evokes the quest for vocation-at least,
my quest for vocation -with candor and precision:

What a long time it can take to become the person one
has always been! How often in the process we mask
ourselves in faces that are not our own. How much
dissolving and shaking of ego we must endure before we
discover our deep identity-the true self within every human
being that is the seed of authentic vocation.
I first learned about vocation growing up in the church. I
value much about the religious tradition in which I was
raised: its humility about its own convictions, its respect for
the world's diversity, its concern for justice. But the idea of
"vocation" I picked up in those circles created distortion
until I grew strong enough to discard it. I mean the idea that
vocation, or calling, comes from a voice external to
ourselves, a voice of moral demand that asks us to become
someone we are not yet-someone different, someone better,
someone just beyond our reach.
That concept of vocation is rooted in a deep distrust of
selfhood, in the belief that the sinful self will always be
"self- ish" unless corrected by external forces of virtue. It is
a notion that made me feel inadequate to the task of living
my own life, creating guilt about the distance between who I
was and who I was supposed to be, leaving me exhausted as
I labored to close the gap.
Today I understand vocation quite differently-not as a
goal to be achieved but as a gift to be received. Discovering
vocation does not mean scrambling toward some prize just
beyond my reach but accepting the treasure of true self I

already possess. Vocation does not come from a voice "out
there" calling me to become something I am not. It comes
from a voice "in here" calling me to be the person I was
born to be, to fulfill the original selfhood given me at birth
by God.
It is a strange gift, this birthright gift of self. Accepting it
turns out to be even more demanding than attempting to
become someone else! I have sometimes responded to that
demand by ignoring the gift, or hiding it, or fleeing from it,
or squandering it-and I think I am not alone. There is a
Hasidic tale that reveals, with amazing brevity, both the
universal tendency to want to be someone else and the
ultimate importance of becoming one's self: Rabbi Zusya,
when he was an old man, said, "In the coming world, they
will not ask me: `Why were you not Moses?' They will ask
me: Why were you not Zusya?"'=
If you doubt that we all arrive in this world with gifts and
as a gift, pay attention to an infant or a very young child. A
few years ago, my daughter and her newborn baby came to
live with me for a while. Watching my granddaughter from
her earliest days on earth, I was able, in my early fifties, to
see something that had eluded me as a twenty-something
parent: my granddaughter arrived in the world as this kind
of person rather than that, or that, or that.
She did not show up as raw material to be shaped into
whatever image the world might want her to take. She
arrived with her own gifted form, with the shape of her own

sacred son]. Biblical faith calls it the image of God in which
we are all created. Thomas Merton calls it true self. Quakers
call it the inner light, or "that of God" in every person. The
humanist tradition calls it identity and integrity. No matter
what you call it, it is a pearl of great price.
In those early days of my granddaughter's life, I began
observing the inclinations and proclivities that were planted
in her at birth. I noticed, and I still notice, what she likes and
dislikes, what she is drawn toward and repelled by, how she
moves, what she does, what she says.
I am gathering my observations in a letter. When my
granddaughter reaches her late teens or early twenties, I will
make sure that my letter finds its way to her, with a preface
something like this: "Here is a sketch of who you were from
your earliest days in this world. It is not a definitive picture-
only you can draw that. But it was sketched by a person
who loves you very much. Perhaps these notes will help you
do sooner something your grandfather did only later:
remember who you were when you first arrived and reclaim
the gift of true self."
We arrive in this world with birthright gifts-then we spend
the first half of our lives abandoning them or letting others
disabuse its of them. As young people, we are surrounded
by expectations that may have little to do with who we
really are, expectations held by people who are not trying to
discern our selfhood but to fit us into slots. In families,
schools, workplaces, and religious communities, we are

trained away from true self toward images of acceptability;
under social pressures like racism and sexism our original
shape is deformed beyond recognition; and we ourselves,
driven by fear, too often betray true self to gain the approval
of others.
We are disabused of original giftedness in the first half of
our lives. Then - if we are awake, aware, and able to admit
our loss -we spend the second half trying to recover and
reclaim the gift we once possessed.
When we lose track of true self, how can we pick up the
trail? One way is to seek clues in stories from our younger
years, years when we lived closer to our birthright gifts. A
few years ago, I found some clues to myself in a time
machine of sorts. A friend sent me a tattered copy of my
high school newspaper from May 1957 in which I had been
interviewed about what I intended to do with my life. With
the certainty to be expected of a high school senior, I told
the interviewer that I would become a naval aviator and then
take up a career in advertising.
I was indeed "wearing other people's faces," and I can tell
you exactly whose they were. My father worked with a man
who had once been a navy pilot. He was Irish, charismatic,
romantic, full of the wild blue yonder and a fair share of the
blarney, and I wanted to be like him. The father of one of
my boyhood friends was in advertising, and though I did
not yearn to take on his persona, which was too buttoned-
down for my taste, I did yearn for the fast car and other

large toys that seemed to be the accessories of his selfhood!
These self-prophecies, now over forty years old, seem
wildly misguided for a person who eventually became a
Quaker, a would-be pacifist, a writer, and an activist. Taken
literally, they illustrate how early in life we can lose track of
who we are. But inspected through the lens of paradox, my
desire to become an aviator and an advertiser contain clues
to the core of true self that would take many years to
emerge: clues, by definition, are coded and must he
deciphered.
Hidden in my desire to become an "ad man" was a
lifelong fascination with language and its power to
persuade, the same fascination that has kept me writing
incessantly for decades. Hidden in my desire to become a
naval aviator was something more complex: a personal
engagement with the problem of violence that expressed
itself at first in military fantasies and then, over a period of
many years, resolved itself in the pacifism I aspire to today.
When I flip the coin of identity I held to so tightly in high
school, I find the paradoxical "opposite" that emerged as the
years went by.
If I go farther back, to an earlier stage of my life, the clues
need less deciphering to yield insight into my birthright gifts
and callings. In grade school, I became fascinated with the
mysteries of flight. As many boys did in those days, I spent
endless hours, after school and on weekends, designing,
crafting, flying, and (usually) crashing model airplanes

made of fragile balsa wood.
Unlike most boys, however, I also spent long hours
creating eight- and twelve-page books about aviation. I
would turn a sheet of paper sideways; draw a vertical line
down the middle; make diagrams of, say, the cross-section
of a wing; roll the sheet into a typewriter; and peck out a
caption explaining how air moving across an airfoil creates
a vacuum that lifts the plane. Then I would fold that sheet in
half along with several others I had made, staple the
collection together down the spine, and painstakingly
illustrate the cover.
I had always thought that the meaning of this paperwork
was obvious: fascinated with flight, I wanted to be a pilot, or
at least an aeronautical engineer. But recently, when I found
a couple of these literary artifacts in an old cardboard box, I
suddenly saw the truth, and it was more obvious than I had
imagined. I didn't want to be a pilot or an aeronautical
engineer or anything else related to aviation. I wanted to be
an author, to make books-a task I have been attempting
from the third grade to this very moment!
From the beginning, our lives lay down clues to selfhood
and vocation, though the clues may be hard to decode. But
trying to interpret them is profoundly worthwhile-especially
when we are in our twenties or thirties or forties, feeling
profoundly lost, having wandered, or been dragged, far
away from our birthright gifts.
Those clues are helpful in counteracting the conventional

concept of vocation, which insists that our lives must be
driven by "oughts." As noble as that may sound, we do not
find our callings by conforming ourselves to some abstract
moral code. We find our callings by claiming authentic
selfhood, by being who we are, by dwelling in the world as
Zusya rather than straining to be Moses. The deepest
vocational question is not "What ought I to do with my
life?" It is the more elemental and demanding "Who am I?
What is my nature?"
Everything in the universe has a nature, which means
limits as well as potentials, a truth well known by people
who work daily with the things of the world. Making
pottery, for example, involves more than telling the clay
what to become. The clay presses back on the potter's
hands, telling her what it can and cannot do-and if she fails
to listen, the outcome will be both frail and ungainly.
Engineering involves more than telling materials what they
must do. If the engineer does not honor the nature of the
steel or the wood or the stone, his failure will go well
beyond aesthetics: the bridge or the building will collapse
and put human life in peril.
The human self also has a nature, limits as well as
potentials. If you seek vocation without understanding the
material you are working with, what you build with your life
will be ungainly and may well put lives in peril, your own
and some of those around you. "Faking it" in the service of
high values is no virtue and has nothing to do with vocation.
It is an ignorant, sometimes arrogant, attempt to override

one's nature, and it will always fail.
Our deepest calling is to grow into our own authentic
selfhood, whether or not it conforms to some image of who
we ought to be. As we do so, we will not only find the joy
that every human being seeks-we will also find our path of
authentic service in the world. True vocation joins self and
service, as Frederick Buechner asserts when he defines
vocation as "the place where your deep gladness meets the
world's deep need"3
Buechner's definition starts with the self and moves
toward the needs of the world: it begins, wisely, where
vocation begins-not in what the world needs (which is every
thing), but in the nature of the human self, in what brings
the self joy, the deep joy of knowing that we are here on
earth to be the gifts that God created.
Contrary to the conventions of our thinly moralistic
culture, this emphasis on gladness and selfhood is not
selfish. The Quaker teacher Douglas Steere was fond of
saying that the ancient human question "Who am l?" leads
inevitably to the equally important question "Whose am l?"-
for there is no selfhood outside of relationship. We must ask
the question of selfhood and answer it as honestly as we
can, no matter where it takes us. Only as we do so can we
discover the community of our lives.
As I learn more about the seed of true self that was
planted when I was born, I also learn more about the
ecosystem in which I was planted-the network of communal

relations in which I am called to live responsively,
accountably, and joyfully with beings of every sort. Only
when I know both seed and system, self and community,
can I embody the great commandment to love both my
neighbor and myself.
JOURNEY INTO DARKNESS
Most of us arrive at a sense of self and vocation only after a
long journey through alien lands. But this journey bears no
resemblance to the trouble-free "travel packages" sold by
the tourism industry. It is more akin to the ancient tradition
of pilgrimage-"a transformative journey to a sacred center"
full of hardships, darkness, and peril.'
In the tradition of pilgrimage, those hardships are seen not
as accidental but as integral to the journey itself.
Treacherous terrain, bad weather, taking a fall, getting lost-
challenges of that sort, largely beyond our control, can strip
the ego of the illusion that it is in charge and make space for
true self to emerge. If that happens, the pilgrim has a better
chance to find the sacred center lie or she seeks. Disabused
of our illusions by much travel and travail, we awaken one
day to find that the sacred center is here and now-in every
moment of the journey, everywhere in the world around us,
and deep within our own hearts.
But before we come to that center, full of light, we must
travel in the dark. Darkness is not the whole of the
storyevery pilgrimage has passages of loveliness and joy-
but it is the part of the story most often left untold. When we

finally escape the darkness and stumble into the light, it is
tempting to tell others that our hope never flagged, to deny
those long nights we spent cowering in fear.
The experience of darkness has been essential to my
coming into selfhood, and telling the truth about that fact
helps me stay in the light. But I want to tell that truth for
another reason as well: many young people today journey in
the dark, as the young always have, and we elders do them
a disservice when we withhold the shadowy parts of our
lives. When I was young, there were very few elders willing
to talk about the darkness; most of them pretended that
success was all they had ever known. As the darkness began
to descend on me in my early twenties, I thought I had
developed a unique and terminal case of failure. I did not
realize that I had merely embarked on a journey toward
joining the human race.
The story of my journey is no more or less important than
anyone else's. It is simply the best source of data I have on a
subject where generalizations often fail but truth may be
found in the details. I want to rehearse a few details of my
travels, and travails, extracting some insights about vocation
as I go. I do so partly as an offering of honesty to the young
and partly as a reminder to anyone who needs it that the
nuances of personal experience contain much guidance
toward selfhood and vocation.
My journey into darkness began in sunlit places. I grew
up in a Chicago suburb and went to Carleton College in

Minnesota, a splendid place where I found new faces to
wear-faces more like my own than the ones I donned in
high school, but still the faces of other people. Wearing one
of them, I went from college neither to the navy nor to
Madison Avenue but to Union Theological Seminary in
New York City, as certain that the ministry was now my
calling as I had been a few years earlier about advertising
and aviation.
So it came as a great shock when, at the end of my first
year, God spoke to me-in the form of mediocre grades and
massive misery-and informed me that under no conditions
was I to become an ordained leader in His or Her church.
Always responsive to authority, as one was if raised in the
fifties, I left Union and went west, to the University of
California at Berkeley. There I spent much of the sixties
working on a Ph.D. in sociology and learning to be not quite
so responsive to authority.
Berkeley in the sixties was, of course, an astounding mix
of shadow and light. But contrary to the current myth, many
of us were less seduced by the shadow than drawn by the
light, coming away from that time and place with a lifelong
sense of hope, a feeling for community, a passion for social
change.
Though I taught for two years in the middle of graduate
school, discovering that I loved teaching and was good at it,
my Berkeley experience left me convinced that a university
career would be a cop-out. I felt called instead to work on

"the urban crisis." So when I left Berkeley in the late sixtiesa
friend kept asking me, "Why do you want to go back to
America?"-I also left academic life. Indeed, I left on a white
horse (some might say a high horse), full of righteous
indignation about the academy's corruption, holding aloft
the flaming sword of truth. I moved to Washington, D.C.,
where I became not a professor but a community organizer.
What I learned about the world from that work was the
subject of an earlier book.' What I learned about vocation is
how one's values can do battle with one's heart. I felt
morally compelled to work on the urban crisis, but doing so
went against a growing sense that teaching might be my
vocation. My heart wanted to keep teaching, but nay ethics-
laced liberally with ego-told me I was supposed to save the
city. How could I reconcile the contradiction between the
two?
After two years of community organizing, with all its
financial uncertainties, Georgetown University offered me a
faculty post-one that did not require me to get off my white
horse altogether: "We don't want you to be on campus all
week long," said the dean. "We want you to get our students
involved in the community. Here's a tenure-track position
involving a minimum of classes and no requirement to serve
on committees. Keep working in the community and take
our students out there with you."
The part about no committees seemed like a gift from
God, so I accepted Georgetown's offer and began involving

undergraduates in community organizing. But I soon found
an even bigger gift hidden in this arrangement. By looking
anew at nay community work through the lens of education,
I saw that as an organizer I had never stopped being a
teacherI was simply teaching in a classroom without walls.
In fact, I could have done no other: teaching, I was
coming to understand, is my native way of being in the
world. Make me a cleric or a CEO, a poet or a politico, and
teaching is what I will do. Teaching is at the heart of my
vocation and will manifest itself in any role I play.
Georgetown's invitation allowed me to take my first step
toward embracing this truth, toward a lifelong exploration of
"education unplugged."
But even this way of reframing my work could not alter
the fact that there was a fundamental misfit between the
roughand-tumble of organizing and my own overly
sensitive nature. After five years of conflict and competition,
I burned out. I was too thin-skinned to make a good
community organizer-my vocational reach had exceeded
my grasp. I had been driven more by the "oughts" of the
urban crisis than by a sense of true self. Lacking insight into
my own limits and potentials, I had allowed ego and ethics
to lead me into a situation that my soul could not abide.
I was disappointed in myself for not being tough enough
to take the flak, disappointed and ashamed. But as pilgrims
must discover if they are to complete their quest, we are led
to truth by our weaknesses as well as our strengths. I needed

to leave community organizing for a reason I might never
have acknowledged had I not been thin-skinned and
burned-out: as an organizer, I was trying to take people to a
place where I had never been myself-a place called
community. If I wanted to do community-related work with
integrity, I needed a deeper immersion in community than I
had experienced to that point.
I am white, middle-class, and male-not exactly a leading
candidate for a communal life. People like me are raised to
live autonomously, not interdependently. I had been trained
to compete and win, and I had developed a taste for the
prizes. But something in me yearned to experience
communion, not competition, and that something might
never have made itself known had burnout not forced me to
seek another way.
So I took a yearlong sabbatical from my work in
Washington and went to a place called Pendle Hill outside
of Philadelphia. Founded in 1930, Pendle Hill is a Quaker
living-and-learning community of some seventy people
whose mission is to offer education about the inner journey,
nonviolent social change, and the connection between the
two. It is a real-time experiment in Quaker faith and practice
where residents move through a daily round of communal
life: worshiping in silence each morning; sharing three
meals a day; engaging in study, physical work, decision
making, and social outreach. It is a commune, an ashram, a
monastery, a zendo, a kibbutz-whatever one calls it, Pendle
Hill was a life unlike anything I had ever known.'

Moving there was like moving to Mars-utterly alien but
profoundly compelling. I thought I would stay for just a
year and then go back to Washington and resume my work.
But before my sabbatical ended, I was invited to become
Pendle Hill's dean of studies. I stayed on for another decade,
living in community and continuing my experiment with
alternative models of education.
It was a transformative passage for me, personally,
professionally, and spiritually; in retrospect, I know how
impoverished I would have been without it. But early on in
that passage I began to have deep and painful doubts about
the trajectory of my vocation. Though I felt called to stay at
Pendle Hill, I also feared that I had stepped off the edge of
the known world and was at risk of disappearing
professionally.
From high school on, I had been surrounded by
expectations that I would ascend to some sort of major
leadership. When I was twenty-nine, the president of a
prestigious college visited me in Berkeley to recruit me for
his board of trustees. He was doing it, he joked, because no
one on that board was under sixty, let alone thirty; worse
still, not one of them had a beard, which I could supply as
part of the Berkeley uniform. Then he added, "In fact, I'm
doing this because some day you'll be a college president-of
that I'm sure-and serving as a trustee is an important part of
your apprenticeship." I accepted his invitation because I felt
certain that he was right.

So half a dozen years later, what was I doing at Pendle
Hill, a "commune" known to few, run by an offbeat
religious cony munity that most people can identify only by
their oatmealwhich, I hasten to add, is not really made by
Quakers?
IT tell you what I was doing: I was in the craft shop
making mugs that weighed more and looked worse than the
clay ashtrays I made in grade school, and I was sending
these monstrosities home as gifts to my family. My father,
rest his soul, was in the fine chinaware business, and I was
sending him mugs so heavy you could fill them with coffee
and not feel any difference in weight!
Family and friends were asking me-and I was asking
myself-"Why did you get a Ph.D. if this is what you are
going to do? Aren't you squandering your opportunities and
gifts?" Under that sort of scrutiny, my vocational decision
felt wasteful and ridiculous; what's more, it was terrifying to
an ego like mine that had no desire to disappear and every
desire to succeed and become well known.
Did I want to go to Pendle Hill, to be at Pendle Hill, to
stay at Pendle Hill? I cannot say that I did. But I can say
with certainty that Pendle Hill was something that I couldn't
not do.
Vocation at its deepest level is not, "Oh, boy, do I want to
go to this strange place where I have to learn a new way to
live and where no one, including me, understands what I'm
doing." Vocation at its deepest level is, "This is something I

can't not do, for reasons I'm unable to explain to anyone
else and don't fully understand myself but that are
nonetheless compelling."
And yet, even with this level of motivation, my doubts
multiplied. One clay I walked from Pendle Hill through the
woods to a nearby college campus, out for a simple stroll
but carrying my anxiety with me. On some forgotten whim,
I went into the college's main administration building.
There, in the foyer, hung several stern portraits of past
presidents of that institution. One of them was the same man
who, as president of another institution, had come out to
Berkeley to recruit me for his board of trustees-a man who,
in nay imagination, was now staring down at me with a
deeply disapproving look on his face: "What do you think
you're up to? Why are you wasting your tithe? Get back on
track before it is too late!"
I ran from that building back into the woods and wept for
a long time. Perhaps this moment precipitated the descent
into darkness that has been so central to my vocational
journey, a descent that hit bottom in the struggle with
clinical depression that I will write about later in this book.
But whether that is the case or not, the moment was large
with things I needed to learn-and could learn only by going
into the dark.
In that moment, all the false bravado about why I had left
academic life collapsed around me, and I was left with
nothing more than the reality of my own fear. I had insisted,

to myself as well as others, that I wanted out of the
university because it was unfit for human habitation. It was,
I argued, a place of corruption and arrogance, filled with
intellectuals who evaded their social responsibilities and yet
claimed superiority over ordinary folks-the very folks whose
lack of power and privilege compelled them to shoulder the
responsibilities that kept our society intact.
If those complaints sound unoriginal, it is only because
they are. They were the accepted pieties of Berkeley in the
sixties, which-for reasons I now understand-I eagerly
embraced as my own. Whatever half-truths about the
university my complaints may have contained, they served
me primarily as a misleading and self-serving explanation of
why I fled academic life.
The truth is that I fled because I was afraid-afraid that I
could never succeed as a scholar, afraid that I could never
measure up to the university's standards for research and
publication. And I was right-though it took many years
before I could admit that to myself. Try as I may, try as I
might, I have never had the gifts that make for a good
scholar-and remaining in the university would have been a
distorting denial of that fact.
A scholar is committed to building on knowledge that
others have gathered, correcting it, confirming it, enlarging
it. But I have always wanted to think my own thoughts
about a subject without being overly influenced by what
others have thought before me. If you catch one reading a

book in private, it is most likely to be a novel, some poetry,
a mystery, or an essay that defies classification, rather than a
text directly related to whatever I am writing at the time.
There is some virtue in my proclivities, I think: they help
me keep my thinking fresh and bring me the stimulation that
comes from looking at life through multiple lenses. There is
non-virtue in them as well: laziness of a sort, a certain kind
of impatience, and perhaps even a lack of due respect for
others who have worked these fields.
But be they virtues or faults, these are the simple facts
about my nature, about my limits and my gifts. I am less
gifted at building on other people's discoveries than at
tinkering in my own garage; less gifted at slipping slowly
into a subject than at jumping into the deep end to see if I
can swim; less gifted at making outlines than at writing
myself into a corner and trying to find a way out; less gifted
at tracking a tight chain of logic than at leaping from one
metaphor to the next!
Perhaps there is a lesson here about the complexity, even
duplicity, we must embrace on the road to vocation, where
we sometimes find ourselves needing to do the right thing
for the wrong reason. It was right for me to leave the
university. But I needed to do it for the wrong reason-"the
university is corrupt"-because the right reason-"I lack the
gifts of a scholar"-was too frightening for me to face at the
time.
My fear of failing as a scholar contained the energy I

needed to catapult myself out of the academy and free
myself for another kind of educational mission. But because
I could not acknowledge my fear, I had to disguise that
energy as the white horse of judgment and self-
righteousness. It is an awkward fact, but it is true-and once I
could acknowledge that truth and understand its role in the
dynamics of my life, I found myself no longer embarrassed
by it.
Eventually, I was able to get off that white horse and take
an unblinking look at myself and my liabilities. This was a
step into darkness that I had been trying to avoid-the
darkness of seeing myself more honestly than I really
wanted to. But I am grateful for the grace that allowed me to
dismount, for the white horse I was riding back then could
never have carried me to the place where I am today:
serving, with love, the academy I once left in fear and
loathing.
Today I serve education from outside the institutionwhere
my pathology is less likely to get triggered-rather than from
the inside, where I waste energy on anger instead of
investing it in hope. This pathology, which took me years to
recognize, is my tendency to get so conflicted with the way
people use power in institutions that I spend more time
being angry at them than I spend on my real work.
Once I understood that the problem was "in here" as well
as "out there," the solution seemed clear: I needed to work
independently, outside of institutions, detached from the

stimuli that trigger my knee-jerk response. Having done just
that for over a decade now, my pathology no longer
troubles me: I have no one to blame but myself for whatever
the trouble may be and am compelled to devote my energies
to the work I am called to do!
Here, I think, is another clue to finding true self and
vocation: we must withdraw the negative projections we
make on people and situations-projections that serve mainly
to mask our fears about ourselves-and acknowledge and
embrace our own liabilities and limits.
Once I came to terms with my fears, I was able to look
back and trace an unconscious pattern. For years, I had been
moving away from large institutions like Berkeley and
Georgetown to small places like Pendle Hill, places of less
status and visibility on the map of social reality. But I
moved like a crab, sideways, too fearful to look head-on at
the fact that I was taking myself from the center to the
fringes of institutional lifeand ultimately to a place where all
that was left was to move outside of institutions altogether.
I rationalized my movement with the notion that small
institutions are more moral than large ones. But that is
patently untrue-both about what was animating me and
about institutions! In fact, I was animated by a soul, a "true
self," that knew me better than my ego did, knew that I
needed to work outside of institutional crosscurrents and
constraints.
This is not an indictment of institutions; it is a statement of

my limitations. Among my admired friends are people who
do not have my limits, whose gifts allow them to work
faithfully within institutions and, through those institutions,
to serve the world well. But their gift is not mine, as I
learned after much Sturm and Drang-and that is not an
indictment of Inc. It is simply a truth about who I am and
how I am rightfully related to the world, an ecological truth
of the sort that can point toward true vocation.
SELFHOOD, SOCIETY, AND SERVICE
By surviving passages of doubt and depression on the
vocational journey, I have become clear about at least one
thing: self-care is never a selfish act-it is simply good
stewardship of the only gift I have, the gift I was put on
earth to offer to others. Anytime we can listen to true self
and give it the care it requires, we do so not only for
ourselves but for the many others whose lives we touch.
There are at least two ways to understand the link
between selfhood and service. One is offered by the poet
Rumi in his piercing observation: "If you are here
unfaithfully with its, you're causing terrible damage." If we
are unfaithful to true self, we will extract a price from others.
We will make promises we cannot keep, build houses from
flimsy stuff, conjure dreams that devolve into nightmares,
and other people will suffer-if we are unfaithful to true self.
I will examine that sort of unfaithfulness, and its
consequences, later in this book. But a more inspiring way
of understanding the link between selfhood and service is to

study the lives of people who have been here faithfully with
its. Look, for example, at the great liberation movements
that have served humanity so well-in eastern Europe, Latin
America, and South Africa, among women, African
Americans, and our gay and lesbian brothers and sisters.
What we see is simple but often ignored: the movements
that transform us, our relations, and our world emerge from
the lives of people who decide to care for their authentic
selfhood.
The social systems in which these people must survive
often try to force them to live in a way untrue to who they
are. If you are poor, you are supposed to accept, with
gratitude, half a loaf or less; if you are black, you are
supposed to suffer racism without protest; if you are gay,
you are supposed to pretend that you are not. You and I
may not know, but we can at least imagine, how tempting it
would be to mask one's truth in situations of this sort-
because the system threatens punishment if one does not.
But in spite of that threat, or because of it, the people who
plant the seeds of movements make a critical decision: they
decide to live "divided no more." They decide no longer to
act on the outside in a way that contradicts some truth about
themselves that they hold deeply on the inside. They decide
to claim authentic selfhood and act it out-and their decisions
ripple out to transform the society in which they live,
serving the selfhood of millions of others.
I call this the "Rosa Parks decision" because that

remarkable woman is so emblematic of what the undivided
life can mean. Most of us know her story, the story of an
African American woman who, at the time she made her
decision, was a seamstress in her early forties. On December
1, 1955, in Montgomery, Alabama, Rosa Parks did
something she was not supposed to do: she sat down at the
front of a bus in one of the seats reserved for whites-a
dangerous, daring, and provocative act in a racist society.
Legend has it that years later a graduate student came to
Rosa Parks and asked, "Why did you sit down at the front of
the bus that day?" Rosa Parks did not say that she sat down
to launch a movement, because her motives were more
elemental than that. She said, "I sat down because I was
tired." But she did not mean that her feet were tired. She
meant that her soul was tired, her heart was tired, her whole
being was tired of playing by racist rules, of denying her
soul's claim to selfhood.'
Of course, there were many forces aiding and abetting
Rosa Parks's decision to live divided no more. She had
studied the theory and tactics of nonviolence at the
Highlander Folk School, where Martin Luther King Jr. was
also a student. She was secretary of the Montgomery chapter
of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored
People, whose members had been discussing civil
disobedience.
But in the moment she sat down at the front of the bus on
that December day, she had no guarantee that the theory of

nonviolence would work or that her community would back
her up. It was a moment of existential truth, of claiming
authentic selfhood, of reclaiming birthright giftedness-and in
that moment she set in motion a process that changed both
the lav and the law of the land.
Rosa Parks sat down because she had reached a point
where it was essential to embrace her true vocation-not as
someone who would reshape our society but as someone
who would live out her full self in the world. She decided, "I
will no longer act on the outside in a way that contradicts
the truth that I hold deeply on the inside. I will no longer act
as if I were less than the whole person I know myself
inwardly to be."
Where does one get the courage to "sit down at the front
of the bus" in a society that punishes anyone who decides to
live divided no more? After all, conventional wisdom
recommends the divided life as the safe and sane way to go:
"Don't wear your heart on your sleeve." "Don't make a
federal case out of it." "Don't show them the whites of your
eyes." These are all the cliched ways we tell each other to
keep personal truth apart from public life, lest we make
ourselves vulnerable in that rough-and-tumble realm.
Where do people find the courage to live divided no more
when they know they will be punished for it? The answer I
have seen in the lives of people like Rosa Parks is simple:
these people have transformed the notion of punishment
itself. They have come to understand that no punishment

anyone might inflict on them could possibly be worse than
the punishment they inflict on themselves by conspiring in
their own diminishment.
In the Rosa Parks story, that insight emerges in a
wonderful way. After she had sat at the front of the bus for a
while, the police came aboard and said, "You know, if you
continue to sit there, we're going to have to throw you in
jail."
Rosa Parks replied, "You may do that. . .," which is a very
polite way of saying, "What could your jail of stone and
steel possibly mean to me, compared to the self-imposed
imprisonment I've suffered for forty years-the prison I've
just walked out of by refusing to conspire any longer with
this racist system?"
The punishment imposed on us for claiming true self can
never be worse than the punishment we impose on
ourselves by failing to make that claim. And the converse is
true as well: no reward anyone might give us could possibly
be greater than the reward that comes from living by our
own best lights.
You and I may not have Rosa Parks's particular battle to
fight, the battle with institutional racism. The universal
element in her story is not the substance of her fight but the
selfhood in which she stood while she fought it-for each of
us holds the challenge and the promise of naming and
claiming true self.

But if the Rosa Parks story is to help us discern our own
vocations, we must see her as the ordinary person she is.
That will be difficult to do because we have made her into
superwoman-and we have done it to protect ourselves. If we
can keep Rosa Parks in a museum as an untouchable icon of
truth, we will remain untouchable as well: we can put her up
on a pedestal and praise her, world without end, never
finding ourselves challenged by her life.
Since my own life runs no risk of being displayed in a
museum case, I want to return briefly to the story I know
best-my own. Unlike Rosa Parks, I never took a singular,
dramatic 
action 
that 
might 
create 
the 
energy 
of
transformation around the institutions I care about. Instead, I
tried to abandon those institutions through an evasive,
crablike movement that I did not want to acknowledge, even
to myself.
But a funny thing happened on the way to my vocation.
Today, twenty-five years after I left education in anger and
fear, my work is deeply related to the renewal of educational
institutions. I believe that this is possible only because my
true self dragged me, kicking and screaming, toward
honoring its nature and needs, forcing me to find my
rightful place in the ecosystem of life, to find a right relation
to institutions with which I have a lifelong lover's quarrel.
Had I denied my true self, remaining "at my post" simply
because I was paralyzed with fear, I would almost certainly
be lost in bitterness today instead of serving a cause I care
about.

Rosa Parks took her stand with clarity and courage. I took
mine by diversion and default. Some journeys are direct,
and some are circuitous; some are heroic, and some are
fearful and muddled. But every journey, honestly
undertaken, stands a chance of taking us toward the place
where our deep gladness meets the world's deep need.
As May Sarton reminds us, the pilgrimage toward true self
will take "time, many years and places." The world needs
people with the patience and the passion to make that
pilgrimage not only for their own sake but also as a social
and political act. The world still waits for the truth that will
set us free-my truth, your truth, our truth-the truth that was
seeded in the earth when each of us arrived here formed in
the image of God. Cultivating that truth, I believe, is the
authentic vocation of every human being.

WAY WILL OPEN
By the time I began my sabbatical at Pendle Hill-the year
that stretched into a decade-I had been in Washington, D.C.,
for five years, growing more fearful every clay that I was
living a life not my own. I was thirty-five years old and had
a Ph.D. and decent references, so finding a new job would
have been no great problem, not in that place and time. But
I wanted more than a job. I wanted deeper congruence
between my inner and outer life.
I had worked in Washington as both a community
organizer and a professor, an activist and an intellectual-
without feeling at home in either of those worlds. If you buy
the scurrilous notion that "those who can, do, and those who
can't, teach" (which I may have half-believed at the time,
mired as I was in a slough of despond) you will understand
why it felt like I had exhausted all possible vocations!

If I were ever to discover a new direction, I thought, it
would be at Pendle Hill, a community rooted in prayer,
study, and a vision of human possibility. But when I arrived
and started sharing my vocational quandary, people
responded with a traditional Quaker counsel that, despite
their good intentions, left me even more discouraged. "Have
faith," they said, "and way will open."
"I have faith," I thought to myself. "What I don't have is
time to wait for `way' to open. I'm approaching middle age
at warp speed, and I have yet to find a vocational path that
feels right. The only way that's opened so far is the wrong
way."
After a few months of deepening frustration, I took my
troubles to an older Quaker woman well known for her
thoughtfulness and candor. "Ruth," I said, "people keep
telling me that `way will open.' Well, I sit in the silence, I
pray, I listen for my calling, but way is not opening. I've
been trying to find my vocation for a long time, and I still
don't have the foggiest idea of what I'm meant to do. Way
may open for other people, but it's sure not opening for me."
Ruth's reply was a model of Quaker plain-speaking. "I'm
a birthright Friend," she said somberly, "and in sixty-plus
years of living, way has never opened in front of me." She
paused, and I started sinking into despair. Was this wise
woman telling me that the Quaker concept of God's
guidance was a hoax?
Then she spoke again, this time with a grin. "But a lot of

way has closed behind me, and that's had the same guiding
effect."
I laughed with her, laughed loud and long, the kind of
laughter that comes when a simple truth exposes your heart
for the needlessly neurotic mess it has become. Ruth's
honesty gave me a new way to look at my vocational
journey, and my experience has long since confirmed the
lesson she taught me that day: there is as much guidance in
what does not and cannot happen in my life as there is in
what can and doesmaybe more.
Like many middle-class Americans, especially those who
are white and male, I was raised in a subculture that insisted
I could do anything I wanted to do, be anything I wanted to
be, if I were willing to make the effort. The message was
that both the universe and I were without limits, given
enough energy and commitment on my part. God made
things that way, and all I had to do was to get with the
program.
My troubles began, of course, when I started to slain into
my limitations, especially in the form of failure. I can still
touch the shame I felt when, in the summer before I started
graduate school at Berkeley, I experienced my first serious
comeuppance: I was fired from my research assistantship in
sociology.
Having been a golden boy through grade school, high
school, and college, I was devastated by this sudden turn of
fate. Not only was my source of summer income gone, but

my entire graduate career seemed in jeopardy; the professor
I had come to Berkeley to study with was the director of the
project from which I had been fired. My sense of identity,
and my concept of the universe, crumbled around my feet
for the first, but not last, time. What had happened to niv
limitless self in a limitless world?
The culture I was raised in suggested an answer: I had not
worked hard enough at my job to keep it, let alone succeed.
I regret to report that there is some truth in that answer.
Another research assistant and I had made frequent,
disrespectful, and (apparently) audible jokes about the
project on which we were working. We goofed off so much
that our supervisor got bent out of shape, as perhaps did
some of the data we were punching into IBM counter-sorter
cards.
My associate and I had rationalized our behavior with the
juvenile notion that the project was a joke long before we
started making jokes about it. Today, thirty years later, my
inner adolescent-which is less wise but more tenacious than
the infamous "inner child"-still clings to the belief that we
may well have been right! Whatever merit this twisted
rationale may have, it is true that I did not work hard
enough to keep that job, and so I lost it.
LEARNING OUR LIMITS
But that truth does not go deep enough-not if I am to
discover the meaning of "way closing" behind me. I was
fired because that job had little or nothing to do with who I

am, with my true nature and gifts, with what I care and do
not care about. My resort to adolescent rebellion reflected
that simple fact.
I apologize, belatedly, for my immaturity, for the grief I
gave my supervisor, and for whatever damage I may have
done to the data. None of that is to my credit. But I was
laughing to keep myself sane. Perhaps the research I was
doing was what a good sociologist "ought" to do, but it felt
meaningless to me, and I felt fraudulent doing it. 't'hose
feelings were harbingers of things to come, things that
eventually led me out of the profession altogether.
Obviously, I should have dealt with my feelings more
directly and exercised more self-control. Either I should
have quit that job under my own steam or settled in and
done the work properly. But sometimes the "shoulds" do not
work because the life one is living runs crosswise to the
grain of one's soul. At that time in my life, I had no feeling
for the grain of my sou] and no sense of which way was
crosswise. Not knowing what was driving me, I behaved
with 
blind 
but 
blissful 
unconsciousness-and 
reality
responded by giving me a big and hard-to-take clue about
who I am: way closed behind me.
Neither that job nor anv job like it was in the cards for
me, given the hand I was dealt at birth. That may sound like
sinfully fatalistic thinking or, worse, a self-serving excuse.
But I believe it embodies a simple, healthy, and life-giving
truth about vocation. Each of us arrives here with a nature,

which means both limits and potentials. We can learn as
much about our nature by running into our limits as by
experiencing our potentials. That, I think, is what Ruth and
life were trying to teach the.
It would be nice if our limits did not reveal themselves in
such embarrassing ways as getting fired from a job. But if
you are like me and don't readily admit your limits,
embarrassment may be the only way to get your attention. I
go on full alert only when I am blocked or get derailed or
flat-out fail. Then, finally, I may be forced to face my nature
and find out whether I can make something of both my gifts
and my limitations.
It is important to distinguish between two kinds of
limitations: those that come with selfhood and those that are
imposed by people or political forces hell-bent on keeping
us "in our place." I do not ask everyone who gets fired to
conclude that it was the work of a gracious God offering
clues to one's true vocation. Sometimes it is the work of a
pathological boss or a corporate culture, getting rid of
people whose propensity for truth-telling threatens the status
quo. Sometimes it is the result of an economic system that
robs the poor of their jobs so that the rich can get richer still.
Like everything else in the spiritual life, getting guidance
from way closing requires thoughtful discernment.
Our problem as Americans-at least, among my race and
gender-is that we resist the very idea of limits, regarding
limits of all sorts as temporary and regrettable impositions

on our lives. Our national myth is about the endless defiance
of limits: opening the western frontier, breaking the speed of
sound, dropping people on the moon, discovering
"cyberspace" at the very moment when we have filled old-
fashioned space with so much junk that we can barely
move. We refuse to take no for an answer.
Part of me treasures the hopefulness of this American
legacy. But when I consistently refuse to take no for an
answer, I miss the vital clues to my identity that arise when
way closes-and I am more likely both to exceed my limits
and to do harm to others in the process.
A few years ago, I was introduced at a conference as a
"recovering sociologist." The line got a good laugh, but it
also snapped me back to my ignominious failure in the
summer before I began graduate school. My sou] needed to
recover from the misfit between sociology and itself. But
before that could happen, my ego needed to deal with its
shame. I had to get through graduate school and prove,
however briefly, that I could succeed as a professor of
sociology-even though that path took me directly into
vocational despair.
The despair that took me from teaching sociology at
Georgetown to the community at Pendle Hill contained a
call to vocational integrity. Had I not followed my despair,
and had Ruth not helped me understand it, I might have
continued to pursue a work that was not mine to do, causing
further harm to myself, to the people and projects with

which I worked, and to a profession that is well worth
doing-by those who are called to do it.
THE ECOLOGY OF A LIFE
Despite the American myth, I cannot be or do whatever I
desire-a truism, to be sure, but a truism we often defy. Our
created natures make us like organisms in an ecosystem:
there are some roles and relationships in which we thrive
and others in which we wither and die.
It is clear, for example, as I enter my sixties, that I cannot
and will not be president of the United States, even though I
grew up surrounded by a rhetoric that said that anyone (read
any white male") could rise to that lofty role. I no longer
grieve this particular limitation, for I cannot imagine a
crueler fate for someone with my nature than to be president
of anything, let alone a nation-state. Still, encouraged by the
myth of the limitless self, I spent many years trying to deny
this ecological truth. Here is a story to prove it.
During my tenure as dean at Pendle Hill, I was offered the
opportunity to become the president of a small educational
institution. I had visited the campus; spoken with trustees,
administrators, faculty, and students; and had been told that
if I wanted it, the job was most likely mine.
Vexed as I was about vocation, I was quite certain that
this was the job for me. So as is the custom in the Quaker
community, I called on half a dozen trusted friends to help
me discern my vocation by means of a "clearness

committee," a process in which the group refrains from
giving you advice but spends three hours asking you
honest, open questions to help you discover your own inner
truth.' (Looking back, of course, it is clear that my real intent
in convening this group was not to discern anything but to
brag about being offered a job I had already decided to
accept!)
For a while, the questions were easy, at least for a
dreamer like me: What is your vision for this institution?
What is its mission in the larger society? How would you
change the curriculum? How would you handle decision
making? What about dealing with conflict?
Halfway into the process, someone asked a question that
sounded easier yet but turned out to be very hard: "What
would you like most about being a president?"
The simplicity of that question loosed me from my head
and lowered me into my heart. I remember pondering for at
least a full minute before I could respond. Then, very softly
and tentatively, I started to speak: "Well, I would not like
having to give up my writing and my teaching.... I would
not like the politics of the presidency, never knowing who
your real friends are.... I would not like having to glad-hand
people I do not respect simply because they have money....
I would not like ..."
Gently but firmly, the person who had posed the question
interrupted me: "May I remind you that I asked what you
would most like?"

I responded impatiently, "Yes, yes, I'm working my way
toward an answer." Then I resumed my sullen but honest
litany: "I would not like having to give up my summer
vacations.... I would not like having to wear a suit and tie all
the time.... I would not like ..."
Once again the questioner called me back to the original
question. But this time I felt compelled to give the only
honest answer I possessed, an answer that came from the
very bottom of my barrel, an answer that appalled even me
as I spoke it.
"Well," said I, in the smallest voice I possess, "I guess
what I'd like most is getting my picture in the paper with the
word president under it."
I was sitting with seasoned Quakers who knew that
though my answer was laughable, my mortal soul was
clearly at stake! They did not laugh at all but went into a
long and serious silence-a silence in which I could only
sweat and inwardly groan.
Finally my questioner broke the silence with a question
that cracked all of us up-and cracked me open: "Parker," he
said, "can you think of an easier way to get your picture in
the paper?"
By then it was obvious, even to me, that my desire to be
president had much more to do with my ego than with the
ecology of my life-so obvious that when the clearness
committee ended, I called the school and withdrew my

name from consideration. Had I taken that job, it would
have been very bad for me and a disaster for the school.
The ecological theory of life, the theory of limits, works
wonderfully well with situations like this: my nature makes
me unfit to be president of anything, and therefore-if I stay
true to what I know about myself-I will die having avoided a
fate that for me would be worse than death.
But what happens to the theory of limits when what I
want to do is not to get my picture in the paper but to meet
some human need? What happens to that theory when my
vocational motive is virtuous, not egotistical: to be a teacher
from whom students can learn or a counselor who helps
people find themselves or an activist who sets injustice
right? Unfortunately, the theory of limits can work as
powerfully in these cases as it does with my presidential
prospects. There are some things I "ought" to do or be that
are simply beyond my reach.
If I try to be or do something noble that has nothing to do
with who I am, I may look good to others and to myself for
a while. But the fact that I am exceeding my limits will
eventually have consequences. I will distort myself, the
other, and our relationship-and may end up doing more
damage than if I had never set out to do this particular
"good." When I try to do something that is not in my nature
or the nature of the relationship, way will close behind me.
Here is one example of what I mean. Over the years, I
have met people who have made a very human claim on me

by making known their need to be loved. For a long time,
my response was instant and reflexive, born of the "oughts"
I had absorbed: "Of course you need to be loved. Everyone
does. And I love you."
It took me a long time to understand that although
everyone needs to be loved, I cannot be the source of that
gift to everyone who asks me for it. There are some relations
in which I am capable of love and others in which I am not.
To pretend otherwise, to put out promissory notes I am
unable to honor, is to damage my own integrity and that of
the person in need-all in the name of love.
Here is another example of violating one's nature in the
name of nobility, an example that shows the larger dangers
of false love. Years ago, I heard Dorothy Day speak.
Founder of the Catholic Worker movement, her long-term
commitment to living among the poor on New York's Lower
East Side-not just serving them but sharing their condition-
had made her one of my heroes. So it carne as a great shock
when in the middle of her talk, I heard her start to ruminate
about the "ungrateful poor."
I did not understand how such a dismissive phrase could
come from the lips of a saint-until it hit me with the force of
a Zen koan. Dorothy Day was saying, "Do not give to the
poor expecting to get their gratitude so that you can feel
good about yourself. If you do, your giving will be thin and
short-lived, and that is not what the poor need; it will only
impoverish them further. Give only if you have something

you must give; give only if you are someone for whom
giving is its own reward."
When I give something I do not possess, I give a false
and dangerous gift, a gift that looks like love but is, in
reality, loveless-a gift given more from my need to prove
myself than from the other's need to be cared for. That kind
of giving is not only loveless but faithless, based on the
arrogant and mistaken notion that God has no way of
channeling love to the other except through me. Yes, we are
created in and for community, to be there, in love, for one
another. But community cuts both ways: when we reach the
limits of our own capacity to love, community means
trusting that someone else will be available to the person in
need.
One sign that I am violating my own nature in the name
of nobility is a condition called burnout. Though usually
regarded as the result of trying to give too much, burnout in
my experience results from trying to give what I do not
possessthe ultimate in giving too little! Burnout is a state of
emptiness, to be sure, but it does not result from giving all I
have: it merely reveals the nothingness from which I was
trying to give in the first place.
May Sarton, in her poem "Now I Become Myself," uses
images from the natural world to describe a different kind of
giving, grounded in a different way of being, a way that
results not in burnout but in fecundity and abundance:

When the gift I give to the other is integral to my own
nature, when it comes from a place of organic reality within
me, it will renew itself-and me-even as I give it away. Only
when I give something that does not grow within me do I
deplete myself and harm the other as well, for only harm
can come from a gift that is forced, inorganic, unreal.
THE GOD OF REALITY
The God I know does not ask us to conform to some
abstract norm for the ideal self. God asks us only to honor
our created nature, which means our limits as well as
potentials. When we fail to do so, reality happens-God
happens-and way closes behind us.
The God I was told about in church, and still hear about
from time to time, runs about like an anxious schoolmaster
measuring people's behavior with a moral yardstick. But the
God I know is the source of reality rather than morality, the
source of what is rather than what ought to be. This does not
mean that God has nothing to do with morality: morality and

its consequences are built into the God-given structure of
reality itself. Moral norms are not something we have to
stretch for, and moral consequences are not something we
have to wait for: they are right here, right now, waiting for
us to honor, or violate, the nature of self, other, world.
The attempt to live by the reality of our own nature,
which means our limits as well as our potentials, is a
profoundly moral regimen. John Middleton Murry put this
truth into words that challenge the conventional concept of
goodness to its core: "For a good man to realize that it is
better to be whole than to be good is to enter on a strait and
narrow path compared to which his previous rectitude was
flowery license."'
The God whom I know dwells quietly in the root system
of the very nature of things. This is the God who, when
asked by Moses for a name, responded, "I Am who I Am"
(Exodus 3:14), an answer that has less to do with the moral
rules for which Moses made God famous than with
elemental "isness" and selfhood. If, as I believe, we are all
made in God's image, we could all give the same answer
when asked who we are: "I Am who I Ain." One dwells with
God by being faithful to one's nature. One crosses God by
trying to be something one is not. Reality-including one's
own-is divine, to be not defied but honored.
Lest this theologizing become too ethereal, I want to give
an example of how honoring one's created nature can
support morality in practice. I sometimes lead workshops for

teachers who want to become better at their craft. At a
certain point, I ask them to write brief descriptions of two
recent moments in the classroom: a moment when things
went so well that you knew you were born to be a teacher
and a moment when things went so poorly that you wished
you had never been born!
Then we get into small groups to learn more about our
own natures through the two cases. First, I ask people to
help each other identify the gifts that they possess that made
the good moment possible. It is an affirming experience to
see our gifts at work in a real-life situation-and it often takes
the eyes of others to help us see. Our strongest gifts are
usually those we are barely aware of possessing. They are a
part of our Godgiven nature, with us from the moment we
drew first breath, and we are no more conscious of having
them than we are of breathing.
Then we turn to the second case. Having been bathed
with praise in the first case, people now expect to be
subjected to analysis, critique, and a variety of fixes: "If I
had been in your shoes, I would have ... ," or, "Next time
you are in a situation like that, why don't you ... ?" But I ask
them to avoid that approach. I ask them instead to help each
other see how limitations and liabilities are the flip side of
our gifts, how a particular weakness is the inevitable trade-
off for a particular strength. We will become better teachers
not by trying to fill the potholes in our souls but by knowing
them so well that we can avoid falling into them.

My gift as a teacher is the ability to "dance" with my
students, to teach and learn with them through dialogue and
interaction. When my students are willing to dance with nee,
the result can be a thing of beauty. When they refuse to
dance, when my gift is denied, things start to become
messy: I get hurt and angry, I resent the students-whom I
blame for my plight-and I start treating them defensively, in
ways that make the dance even less likely to happen.
But when I understand this liability as a trade-off for my
strengths, something new and liberating arises within me. I
no longer want to have my liability "fixed"-by learning how
to dance solo, for example, when no one wants to dance
with me-for to do that would be to compromise or even
destroy my gift. Instead I want to learn how to respond more
gracefully to students who refuse to dance, not projecting
my limitation on them but embracing it as part of myself.
I will never be a good teacher for students who insist on
remaining wallflowers throughout their careers-that is
simply one of my many limits. But perhaps I can develop
enough self-understanding to keep inviting the wallflowers
onto the floor, holding open the possibility that some of
them might hear the music, accept the invitation, and join
me in the dance of teaching and learning.
TURNING AROUND TO DISCOVER THE WORLD
When way closes behind us, it is tempting to regard it
simply as the result of some strategic error: had I been
smarter or stronger, that door would not have slammed shut,

so if I redouble my efforts, I may be able to batter it down.
But that is a dangerous temptation. When I resist way
closing rather than taking guidance from it, I may be
ignoring the limitations inherent in my nature-which
dishonors true self no less than ignoring the potentials I
received as birthright gifts.
As Ruth taught me, there is as much guidance in way that
closes behind us as there is in way that opens ahead of us.
The opening may reveal our potentials while the closing
may reveal our limits-two sides of the same coin, the coin
called identity. In the spiritual domain, identity is coin of the
realm, and we can learn much about our identity by
examining either side of the coin.
As often happens on the spiritual journey, we have
arrived at the heart of a paradox: each time a door closes,
the rest of the world opens up. All we need to do is stop
pounding on the door that just closed, turn around-which
puts the door behind us-and welcome the largeness of life
that now lies open to our souls. The door that closed kept its
from entering a room, but what now lies before its is the rest
of reality.
That paradox takes me back to Pendle Hill and the
moment when Ruth taught me the meaning of "way
closing." As I sat there fretting about the doors that had
slammed in my face, I was sitting in the very place where
my world would soon open wide.
Had I been able to see my own future at that moment, I

would have laughed even harder than I did when Ruth's
words exposed my inner mess. My future had already
arrived, and its name was Pendle Hill-the place where my
yearlong sabbatical stretched on for a decade, where I
deepened my experiment with alternative education and
started learning a new way to teach, where my struggle to
understand myself and the world drew me into the writing
that has become so central to my vocation.
My anxiety about way not opening, the anxiety that kept
me pounding on closed doors, almost prevented me from
seeing the secret hidden in plain sight: I was already
standing on the ground of my new life, ready to take the
next step on my journey, if only I would turn around and
see the landscape that lay before me.
If we are to live our lives fully and well, we must learn to
embrace the opposites, to live in a creative tension between
our limits and our potentials. We must honor our limitations
in ways that do not distort our nature, and we must trust and
use our gifts in ways that fulfill the potentials God gave us.
We must take the no of the way that closes and find the
guidance it has to offer-and take the yes of the way that
opens and respond with the yes of our lives.

A PERSONAL PREFACE

-From THE INFERNO OF DANI'E, Robert Pinsky, trans.'
Midway in my life's journey, "way closed" again, this
time with a ferocity that felt fatal: I found myself in the dark
woods called clinical depression, a total eclipse of light and
hope. But after I emerged from my sojourn in the dark and
had given myself several years to absorb its meaning, I saw
how pivotal that passage had been on my pilgrimage toward
selfhood and vocation. Though I recommend it to no one-
and I do not need to, for it arrives unbidden in too many
livesdepression compelled me to find the river of life hidden
beneath the ice.
Still, I was unable to write about my depression for a very
long time; what I learned and how I learned it remained raw
to the touch. Then I was invited to contribute to a journal on
the theme of the "wounded healer" in memory of Henri
Nouwen, who was my mentor and my friend. If I were to
honor Henri's life in a manner true to his spirit, I had no
choice but to write about my own deepest wound.
Henri himself spent time on the dark side of the moon,
and he talked and wrote openly about it.' But during the
years when lie and I saw a great deal of each other, I rarely
spoke to him about my own darkness; even in his gracious
presence, I felt too ashamed. I am no longer ashamed, but I

still find depression difficult to speak about because the
experience is so unspeakable. Yet Henri's spirit continues to
call me and many others to more openness and
vulnerability, more shared humanity and mutual healing,
even-and perhaps especially-when the subject is so difficult
that words seem to fail.
My only real fear about publishing these reflections is that
someone may take the wrong counsel from them.
Depression comes in many forms. Some are primarily
genetic or biochemical and will respond only to drugs; some
are primarily situational and will respond only to inner work
that leads to self-knowledge, choices, and change; some lie
in between.
Though I needed medication for brief periods to stabilize
my brain chemistry, my depression was largely situational. I
will tell the truth about it as far as I am able. But what is true
for me is not necessarily true for others. I am not writing a
prescription-I am simply telling my story. If it illumines your
story, or the story of someone you care about, I will be
grateful. If it helps you or someone you care about turn
suffering into guidance for vocation, I will be more grateful
still.
THE MYSTERY OF DEPRESSION
Twice in my forties I spent endless months in the snake pit
of the soul. Hour by hour, day by day, I wrestled with the
desire to die, sometimes so feeble in my resistance that I
"practiced" ways of doing myself in. I could feel nothing

except the burden of my own life and the exhaustion, the
apparent futility, of trying to sustain it.
I understand why some depressed people kill themselves:
they need the rest. But I do not understand why others are
able to find new life in the midst of a living death, though I
am one of them. I can tell you what I did to survive and,
eventually, to thrive-but I cannot tell you why I was able to
do those things before it was too late.
Because of my not knowing, perhaps I have learned
something about the relation of depression to faith, as this
story may illustrate. I once met a woman who had wrestled
with depression for much of her adult life. Toward the end
of a long and searching conversation, during which we
talked about our shared Christian beliefs, she asked, in a
voice full of misery, "Why do some people kill themselves
yet others get well?"
I knew that her question came from her own struggle to
stay alive, so I wanted to answer with care. But I could
come up with only one response.
"I have no idea. I really have no idea."
After she left, I was haunted by regret. Couldn't I have
found something more hopeful to say, even if it were not
true?
A few days later, she sent me a letter saying that of all the
things we had talked about, the words that stayed with her

were "I have no idea." My response had given her an
alternative to the cruel "Christian explanations" common in
the church to which she belonged-that people who take their
lives lack faith or good works or some other redeeming
virtue that might move God to rescue them. My not
knowing had freed her to stop judging herself for being
depressed and to stop believing that God was judging her.
As a result, her depression had lifted a bit.
I take two lessons from that experience. First, it is
important to speak one's truth to a depressed person. Had I
offered wishful thinking, it would not have touched my
visitor. In depression, the built-in bunk detector that we all
possess is not only turned on but is set on high.
Second, depression demands that we reject simplistic
answers, both "religious" and "scientific," and learn to
embrace mystery, something our culture resists. Mystery
surrounds every deep experience of the human heart: the
deeper we go into the heart's darkness or its light, the closer
we get to the ultimate mystery of God. But our culture wants
to turn mysteries into puzzles to be explained or problems to
be solved, because maintaining the illusion that we can
"straighten things out" makes us feel powerful. Yet
mysteries never yield to solutions or fixes-and when we
pretend that they do, life becomes not only more banal but
also more hopeless, because the fixes never work.
Embracing the mystery of depression does not mean
passivity or resignation. It means moving into a field of

forces that seems alien but is in fact one's deepest self. It
means waiting, watching, listening, suffering, and gathering
whatever self-knowledge one can-and then making choices
based on that knowledge, no matter how difficult. One
begins the slow walk back to health by choosing each day
things that enliven one's selfhood and resisting things that
do not.
The knowledge I am talking about is not intellectual and
analytical but integrative and of the heart, and the choices
that lead to wholeness are not pragmatic and calculated,
intended to achieve some goal, but simply and profoundly
expressive of personal truth. It is a demanding path, for
which no school prepares us. I know: I had to walk that path
a second time because what I learned about myself the first
time frightened me. I rejected my own knowing and refused
to make the choices it required, and the price was a second
sojourn in hell.
FROM THE OUTSIDE LOOKING IN
It is odd that some of my most vivid memories of depression
involve the people who came to look in on me, since in the
middle of the experience I was barely able to notice who
was or was not there. Depression is the ultimate state of
disconnection-it deprives one of the relatedness that is the
lifeline of every living being.
I do not like to speak ungratefully of my visitors. They all
meant well, and they were among the few who did not avoid
me altogether. But despite their good intentions, most of

them acted like Job's comforters-the friends who came to
job in his misery and offered "sympathy" that led him
deeper into despair.
Some visitors, in an effort to cheer me up, would say, "It's
a beautiful day. Why don't you go out and soak up some
sunshine and look at the flowers? Surely that'll make you
feel better."
But that advice only made me more depressed.
Intellectually, I knew that the day was beautiful, but I was
unable to experience that beauty through my senses, to feel
it in my body. Depression is the ultimate state of
disconnection, not just between people but between one's
mind and one's feelings. To be reminded of that
disconnection only deepened my despair.
Other people came to me and said, "But you're such a
good person, Parker. You teach and write so well, and
you've helped so many people. Try to remember all the
good you've done, and surely you'll feel better."
That advice, too, left me more depressed, for it plunged
me into the immense gap between my "good" persona and
the "bad" person I then believed myself to be. When I heard
those words, I thought, "One more person has been
defrauded, has seen my image rather than my reality-and if
people ever saw the real me, they would reject me in a
flash." Depression is the ultimate state of disconnection, not
only between people, and between mind and heart, but
between one's self-image and public mask.

Then there were the visitors who began by saying, "I
know exactly how you feel...." Whatever comfort or counsel
these people may have intended to speak, I heard nothing
beyond their opening words, because I knew they were
peddling a falsehood: no one can fully experience another
person's mystery. Paradoxically, it was my friends'
empathetic attempt to identify with me that made me feel
even more isolated, because it was overidentification.
Disconnection may be hell, but it is better than false
connections.
Having not only been "comforted" by friends but having
tried to comfort others in the same way, I think I understand
what the syndrome is about: avoidance and denial. One of
the hardest things we must do sometimes is to be present to
another person's pain without trying to "fix" it, to simply
stand respectfully at the edge of that person's mystery and
misery. Standing there, we feel useless and powerless,
which is exactly how a depressed person feels-and our
unconscious need as Job's comforters is to reassure
ourselves that we are not like the sad soul before us.
In an effort to avoid those feelings, I give advice, which
sets me, not you, free. If you take my advice, you may get
well-and if you don't get well, I did the best I could. If you
fail to take my advice, there is nothing more I can do. Either
way, I get relief by distancing myself from you, guilt free.
Blessedly, there were several people, family and friends,
who had the courage to stand with me in a simple and

healing way. One of them was a friend named Bill who,
having asked my permission to do so, stopped by my home
every afternoon, sat me down in a chair, knelt in front of
me, removed my shoes and socks, and for half an hour
simply massaged my feet. He found the one place in my
body where I could still experience feeling-and feel
somewhat reconnected with the human race.
Bill rarely spoke a word. When he did, he never gave
advice but simply mirrored my condition. He would say, "I
can sense your struggle today," or, "It feels like you are
getting stronger." I could not always respond, but his words
were deeply helpful: they reassured me that I could still be
seen by someone-life-giving knowledge in the midst of an
experience that makes one feel annihilated and invisible. It
is impossible to put into words what my friend's ministry
meant to me. Perhaps it is enough to say that I now have
deep appreciation for the biblical stories of Jesus and the
washing of feet.'
The poet Rainer Maria Rilke says, "love ... consists in this,
that two solitudes protect and border and salute each other."'
That is the kind of love my friend Bill offered. He never
tried to invade my awful inwardness with false comfort or
advice; he simply stood on its boundaries, modeling the
respect for me and my journey-and the courage to let it
bethat I myself needed if I were to endure.
This kind of love does not reflect the "functional atheism"
we sometimes practice-saying pious words about God's

presence in our lives but believing, on the contrary, that
nothing good is going to happen unless we make it happen.
Rilke describes a kind of love that neither avoids nor
invades the soul's suffering. It is a love in which we
represent God's love to a suffering person, a God who does
not "fix" us but gives us strength by suffering with us. By
standing respectfully and faithfully at the borders of
another's solitude, we may mediate the love of God to a
person who needs something deeper than any human being
can give.
Amazingly, I was offered an unmediated sign of that love
when in the middle of one sleepless night during my first
depression, I heard a voice say, simply and clearly, "I love
you, Parker." The words did not come audibly from without
but silently from within, and they could not have come from
my ego, which was too consumed by self-hatred and despair
to utter them.
It was a moment of inexplicable grace-but so deep is the
devastation of depression that I dismissed it. And yet that
moment made its mark: I realized that my rejection of such a
remarkable gift was a measure of how badly I needed help.
FROM THE INSIDE LOOKING OUT
Acknowledging my need for professional help was not easy.
I had believed that going into therapy was a sign of
weakness and that weakness was bad. But once I got past
that barrier, I ran into another one: since professional has
come to mean a person with a bagful of techniques and

fixes, it is not always easy to find a professional who fulfills
the original meaning of the word-a person grounded in a
profession of faith, faith in the nature of ultimate reality, in
the matrix of mercy in which our lives are embedded.
I had abortive meetings with two psychiatrists whose
reliance on drugs and whose dismissive attitude toward the
inner life would have made me angry enough to get well
simply to spite them had I not been terminally depressed!
But finally, blessedly, I found a counselor who understood
what was happening to me as I needed to understand it-as a
spiritual journey.
Of course, it was not the sort of spiritual journey I had
hoped some day to take, not an upward climb into rarefied
realms of light, not a mountaintop experience of God's
presence. In fact, mine was a journey in the opposite
direction: to an inner circle of hell and a face-to-face
encounter with the monsters who live there.
After hours of careful listening, my therapist offered an
image that helped me eventually reclaim my life. "You seem
to look upon depression as the hand of an enemy trying to
crush you," he said. "Do you think you could see it instead
as the hand of a friend, pressing you down to ground on
which it is safe to stand?"
Amid the assaults I was suffering, the suggestion that
depression was my friend seemed impossibly romantic,
even insulting. But something in me knew that down, down
to the ground, was the direction of wholeness, thus allowing

that image to begin its slow work of healing in me.
I started to understand that I had been living an
ungrounded life, living at an altitude that was inherently
unsafe. The problem with living at high altitude is simple:
when we slip, as we always do, we have a long, long way to
fall, and the landing may well kill us. The grace of being
pressed down to the ground is also simple: when we slip and
fall, it is usually not fatal, and we can get back up.
The altitude at which I was living had been achieved by at
least four means. First, I had been trained as an intellectual
not only to think-an activity I greatly value-but also to live
largely in my head, the place in the human body farthest
from the ground. Second, I had embraced a form of
Christian faith devoted less to the experience of God than to
abstractions about God, a fact that now baffles me: how did
so many disembodied concepts emerge from a tradition
whose central commitment is to "the Word become flesh"?
Third, my altitude had been achieved by my ego, an
inflated ego that led me to think more of myself than was
warranted in order to mask my fear that I was less than I
should have been. Finally, it had been achieved by my
ethic, a distorted ethic that led me to live by images of who I
ought to be or what I ought to do, rather than by insight into
my own reality, into what was true and possible and life-
giving for one.
For a long time, the "oughts" had been the driving force
in my life-and when I failed to live "up" to those oughts, I

saw myself as a weak and faithless person. I never stopped
to ask, "How does such-and-such fit my God-given nature?"
or "Is such-and-such truly my gift and call?" As a result,
important parts of the life I was living were not mine to live
and thus were doomed to fail.
Depression was, indeed, the hand of a friend trying to
press ine down to ground on which it was safe to stand-the
ground of my own truth, my own nature, with its complex
mix of limits and gifts, liabilities and assets, darkness and
light.
Eventually, I developed my own image of the
"befriending" impulse behind my depression. Imagine that
from early in my life, a friendly figure, standing a block
away, was trying to get my attention by shouting my name,
wanting to teach me some hard but healing truths about
myself. But 1-fearful of what I might hear or arrogantly
trying to live without help or simply too busy with my ideas
and ego and ethics to botherignored the shouts and walked
away.
So this figure, still with friendly intent, came closer and
shouted more loudly, but I kept walking. Ever closer it
came, close enough to tap me on the shoulder, but I walked
on. Frustrated by my unresponsiveness, the figure threw
stones at my back, then struck me with a stick, still wanting
simply to get my attention. But despite the pain, I kept
walking away.
Over the years, the befriending intent of this figure never

disappeared but became obscured by the frustration caused
by my refusal to turn around. Since shouts and taps, stones
and sticks had failed to do the trick, there was only one
thing left: drop the nuclear bomb called depression on me,
not with the intent to kill but as a last-ditch effort to get me
to turn and ask the simple question, "What do you want?"
When I was finally able to make that turn-and start to absorb
and act on the self-knowledge that then became available to
me-I began to get well.
The figure calling to me all those years was, I believe,
what Thomas Merton calls "true self." This is not the ego
self that wants to inflate us (or deflate us, another form of
self distortion), not the intellectual self that wants to hover
above the mess of life in clear but ungrounded ideas, not the
ethical self that wants to live by some abstract moral code. It
is the self planted in us by the God who made us in God's
own imagethe self that wants nothing more, or less, than for
us to be who we were created to be.
True self is true friend. One ignores or rejects such
friendship only at one's peril.
THE WAY TO GOD IS DOWN
When I was finally able to turn around and ask, "What do
you want?" the answer was clear: I want you to embrace this
descent into hell as a journey toward selfhood-and a journey
toward God.
I had always imagined God to be in the same general

direction as everything else that I valued: up. I had failed to
appreciate the meaning of some words that had intrigued me
since I first heard theirs in seminary -Till ich's description of
God as the "ground of being." I had to be forced
underground before I could understand that the way to God
is not up but down.
The underground is a dangerous but potentially lifegiving
place to which depression takes us; a place where we come
to understand that the self is not set apart or special or
superior but is a common mix of good and evil, darkness
and light; a place where we can finally embrace the
humanity we share with others. That is the best image I can
offer not only of the underground but also of the field of
forces surrounding the experience of God.
Years ago, someone told me that humility is central to the
spiritual life. That made sense to me: I was proud to think of
myself as humble! But this person did not tell me that the
path to humility, for some of us at least, goes through
humiliation, where we are brought low, rendered powerless,
stripped of pretenses and defenses, and left feeling
fraudulent, empty, and useless-a humiliation that allows us
to regrow our lives from the ground up, from the humus of
common ground.
The spiritual journey is full of paradoxes. One of them is
that the humiliation that brings us down-down to ground on
which it is safe to stand and to fall - eventually takes us to a
firmer and fuller sense of self. When people ask me how it

felt to emerge from depression, I can give only one answer:
I felt at home in my own skin, and at home on the face of
the earth, for the first time.
Florida Scott Maxwell put it in terms more elegant than
mine: "You need only claim the events of your life to make
yourself yours. When you truly possess all you have been
and done ... you are fierce with reality."' I now know myself
to be a person of weakness and strength, liability and
giftedness, darkness and light. I now know that to be whole
means to reject none of it but to embrace all of it.
Some may say that this embrace is narcissistic, an
obsession with self at the expense of others, but that is not
how I experience it. When I ignored my own truth on behalf
of a distorted ego and ethic, I led a false life that caused
others painfor which I can only ask forgiveness. When I
started attending to my own truth, more of that truth became
available in my work and my relationships. I now know that
anything one can do on behalf of true self is done ultimately
in the service of others.
Others may say that "embracing one's wholeness" is just
fancy talk for permission to sin, but again my experience is
to the contrary. To embrace weakness, liability, and
darkness as part of who I am gives that part less sway over
me, because all it ever wanted was to be acknowledged as
part of my whole self.
At the same time, embracing one's wholeness makes life
more demanding-because once you do that, you must live

your whole life. One of the most painful discoveries I made
in the midst of the dark woods of depression was that a part
of me wanted to stay depressed. As long as I clung to this
living death, life became easier; little was expected of me,
certainly not serving others.
I had missed the deep meaning of a biblical teaching that
I had always regarded as a no-brainer: "I set before you life
or death, blessing or curse. Therefore, choose life"
(Deuteronomy 30:19). Why, I wondered, would God waste
precious breath on saying something so obvious? I had
failed to understand the perverse comfort we sometimes get
from choosing death in life, exempting ourselves from the
challenge of using our gifts, of living our lives in authentic
relationship with others.
I was finally able to say yes to life, a choice for which I
am grateful beyond measure, though how I found that yes
remains a mystery to me. At one fork in the long road back
to wholeness-when I was in fact walking along a country
road past a freshly plowed field-I found a poem taking form
within me. I offer it, along with my unknowing, as a token
of hope to anyone who may be enduring the harrowing of
depression.
HARROWING



BACK TO THE WORLD
From the depths of depression, I turn now to our shared
vocation of leadership in the world of action. This may seem
more like a leap than a turn, but none of the great wisdom
traditions would look upon this segue with surprise. Go far
enough on the inner journey, they all tell us-go past ego
toward true self-and you end up not lost in narcissism but
returning to the world, bearing more gracefully the
responsibilities that come with being human.
Those words are more than a device to weave these
chapters together-they are a faithful reflection of what
happened to me once I passed through the valley of
depression. At the end of that descent into darkness and
isolation, I found myself reengaged with community, better
able to offer leadership to the causes I care about.
"Leadership" is a concept we often resist. It seems
immodest, even self-aggrandizing, to think of ourselves as

leaders. But if it is true that we are made for community,
then leadership is everyone's vocation, and it can be an
evasion to insist that it is not. When we live in the close-knit
ecosystem called community, everyone follows and
everyone leads.
Even I-a person who is unfit to be president of anything,
who once galloped away from institutions on a high
horsehave come to understand that for better or for worse, I
lead by word and deed simply because I am here doing
what I do. If you are also here, doing what you do, then you
also exercise leadership of some sort.
But modesty is only one reason we resist the idea of
leadership; cynicism about our most visible leaders is
another. In America, at least, our declining public life has
bred too many self-serving leaders who seem lacking in
ethics, compassion, and vision. But if we look again at the
headlines, we will find leaders worthy of respect in places
we often ignore: in South Africa, Latin America, and eastern
Europe, for example, places where people who have known
great darkness have emerged to lead others toward the light.
The words of one of those people-Vaclav Havel,
playwright, dissident, prisoner, and now president of the
Czech Republic-take us to the heart of what leadership
means in settings both large and small. In 1990, a few
months after Czechoslovakia freed itself from communist
rule, Havel addressed a joint session of the U.S. Congress:
"The communist type of totalitarian system has left both our

nations, Czechs and Slovaks. . . . . legacy of countless dead,
an infinite spectrum of human suffering, profound economic
decline, and, above all, enormous human humiliation. It has
brought its horrors that fortunately you have never
known...." (I think we Americans should confess that some
in our country have known such horrors.)
It has [also] given us something positive: a special
capacity to look, from time to time, somewhat further
than those who have not undergone this hitter
experience. Someone who cannot move and live a
normal life because he is pinned under a boulder has
more time to think about his hopes than someone who
is not trapped in this way.
What I an trying to say is this: we must all learn Many
things from you, from how to educate our offspring
and how to elect our representatives to how to organize
our economic life so that it will lead to prosperity and
not poverty. But this doesn't have to be merely
assistance from the well-educated, the powerful, and
the wealthy to those who have nothing to offer in
return.
We too can offer something to you: our experience and
the knowledge that has come from it.... The specific
experience I'm talking about has given me one
certainty: Consciousness precedes Being, and not the
other way around, as Marxists claim. For this reason,
the salvation of this human world lies nowhere else

than in the human heart, in the human power to reflect,
in human modesty, and in human responsibility.
Without a global revolution in the sphere of human
consciousness, nothing will change for the better ... and
the catastrophe toward which this world is headed,
whether it be it ecological, social, demographic or a
general breakdown of civilization, will be unavoidable.'
The power for authentic leadership, Havel tells us, is
found not in external arrangements but in the human heart.
Authentic leaders in every setting-from families to
nationstates-aim at liberating the heart, their own and
others', so that its powers can liberate the world.
I cannot imagine a stronger affirmation from a more
credible source of the significance of the inner life in the
external affairs of our time: "Consciousness precedes Being"
and "the salvation of this human world lies nowhere else
than in the human heart." Material reality, Havel claims, is
not the fundamental factor in the movement of human
history. Consciousness is. Awareness is. Thought is. Spirit
is. These are not the ephemera of dreams. They are the inner
Archimedean points from which oppressed people have
gained the leverage to lift immense boulders and release
transformative change.
But there is another truth that Havel, a guest in our
country, was too polite to tell. It is not only the Marxists
who have believed that matter is more powerful than
consciousness, that economics is more fundamental than

spirit, that the flow of cash creates more reality than the flow
of visions and ideas. Capitalists have believed these things
too-and though Havel was too polite to say this to us,
honesty obliges us to say it to ourselves.
We capitalists have a long and crippling legacy of
believing in the power of external realities much more
deeply than we believe in the power of the inner life. How
many tinges have you heard or said, "Those are inspiring
notions, but the hard reality is ..."? How many times have
you worked in systems based on the belief that the only
changes that matter are the ones you can measure or count?
How many times have you watched people kill off creativity
by treating traditional policies and practices as absolute
constraints on what we can do?
This is not just a Marxist problem; it is a human problem.
But the great insight of our spiritual traditions is that
weespecially those of us who enjoy political freedom and
relative affluence-are not victims of that society: we are its
cocreators. We live in and through a complex interaction of
spirit and matter, of the powers inside of us and the stuff
"out there" in the world. External reality does not impinge
upon us as an ultimate constraint: if we who are privileged
find ourselves confined, it is only because we have
conspired in our own imprisonment.
The spiritual traditions do not deny the reality of the outer
world. They simply claim that we help make that world by
projecting our spirit on it, for better or for worse. If our

institutions are rigid, it is because our hearts fear change; if
they set us in mindless competition with each other, it is
because we value victory over all else; if they are heedless
of human wellbeing, it is because something in us is
heartless as well.
We can make choices about what we are going to project,
and with those choices we help grow the world that is.
Consciousness precedes being: consciousness, yours and
mine, can form, deform, or reform our world. Our
complicity in world making is a source of awesome and
sometimes painful responsibility-and a source of profound
hope for change. It is the ground of our common call to
leadership, the truth that makes leaders of its all.
SHADOWS AND SPIRITUALITY
A leader is someone with the power to project either shadow
or light onto some part of the world and onto the lives of the
people who dwell there. A leader shapes the ethos in which
others must live, an ethos as light-filled as heaven or as
shadowy as hell. A good leader is intensely aware of the
interplay of inner shadow and light, lest the act of leadership
do more harm than good.
I think, for example, of teachers who create the conditions
under which young people must spend so many hours:
some shine a light that allows new growth to flourish, while
others cast a shadow under which seedlings die. I think of
parents who generate similar effects in the lives of their
families or of clergy who do the same to entire

congregations. I think of corporate CEOs whose daily
decisions are driven by inner dynamics but who rarely
reflect on those motives or even believe they are real.
We have a long tradition of approaching leadership via
the "power of positive thinking." I want to counterbalance
that approach by paying special attention to the tendency we
have as leaders to project more shadow than light.
Leadership is hard work for which one is regularly criticized
and rarely rewarded, so it is understandable that we need to
bolster ourselves with positive thoughts. But by failing to
look at our shadows, we feed a dangerous delusion that
leaders too often indulge: that our efforts are always well
intended, our power is always benign, and the problem is
always in those difficult people whom we are trying to lead!
Those of us who readily embrace leadership, especially
public leadership, tend toward extroversion, which often
means ignoring what is happening inside ourselves. If we
have any sort of inner life, we "compartmentalize" it,
walling it off from our public work. This, of course, allows
the shadow to grow unchecked until it emerges, larger than
life, in the public realm, a problem we are well acquainted
with in our own domestic politics. Leaders need not only the
technical skills to manage the external world but also the
spiritual skills to journey inward toward the source of both
shadow and light.
Spirituality, like leadership, is a hard thing to define. But
Annie Dillard has given us a vivid image of what authentic

spirituality is about: "In the deeps are the violence and terror
of which psychology has warned us. But if you ride these
monsters down, if you drop with them farther over the
world's rim, you find what our sciences cannot locate or
name, the substrate, the ocean or matrix or ether which
buoys the rest, which gives goodness its power for good,
and evil its power for evil, the unified field: our complex
and inexplicable caring for each other, and for our life
together here. "]'his is given. It is not learned.."--
Here Dillard names two crucial features of any spiritual
journey. One is that it will take us inward and downward,
toward the hardest realities of our lives, rather than outward
and 
upward 
toward 
abstraction, 
idealization, 
and
exhortation. The spiritual journey runs counter to the power
of positive thinking.
Why must we go in and down? Because as we do so, we
will meet the darkness that we carry within ourselves-the
ultimate source of the shadows that we project onto other
people. If we do not understand that the enemy is within, we
will find a thousand ways of making someone "out there"
into the enemy, becoming leaders who oppress rather than
liberate others.
But, says Annie Dillard, if we ride those monsters all the
way down, we break through to something precious-to "the
unified field, our complex and inexplicable caring for each
other," to the community we share beneath the broken
surface of our lives. Good leadership comes from people

who have penetrated their own inner darkness and arrived at
the place where we are at one with one another, people who
can lead the rest of its to a place of "hidden wholeness"
because they have been there and know the way.
Vaclav Havel would be familiar with the journey Annie
Dillard describes, because downward is where you go when
you spend years "pinned tinder a boulder." That image
suggests not only the political oppression under which all
Czechs were forced to live but also the psychological
depression Havel fell into as he struggled to survive tinder
the communist regime.
In 1975, that depression compelled Havel to write an
open letter of protest to Gustav Husak, head of the
Czechoslovakian Communist party. His letter-which got
Havel thrown in jail and became the text of an underground
movement that fomented the "Velvet Revolution" of 1989-
was, in Havel's own words, an act of "autotherapy," an
alternative to suicide, his expression of the decision to live
divided no more. As Vincent and Jane Kavaloski have
written, Have] "felt that he could remain silent only at the
risk of `living a lie,' and destroying himself from within."'
That is the choice before us when we are "pinned under a
boulder" of any sort, the same choice Nelson Mandela made
by using twenty-eight years in prison to prepare inwardly
for leadership instead of drowning in despair. Under the
most oppressive circumstances, people like Mandela, Havel,
and uncounted others go all the way down, travel through

their inner darkness-and emerge with the capacity to lead
the rest of us toward community, toward "our complex and
inexplicable caring for each other."
Annie Dillard offers a powerful image of the inner
journey and tells us what might happen if we were to take it.
But why would anybody want to take a journey of that sort,
with its multiple difficulties and dangers? Everything in us
cries out against it-which is why we externalize everything.
It is so much easier to deal with the external world, to spend
our lives manipulating material and institutions and other
people instead of dealing with our own souls. We like to talk
about the outer world as if it were infinitely complex and
demanding, but it is a cakewalk compared to the labyrinth
of our inner lives!
Here is a small story from my life about why one might
want to take the inner journey. In my early forties, I decided
to go on the program called Outward Bound. I was on the
edge of my first depression, a fact I knew only dimly at the
time, and I thought Outward Bound might be a place to
shake up my life and learn some things I needed to know.
I chose the weeklong course at Hurricane Island, off the
coast of Maine. I should have known from that name what
was in store for me; next time I will sign tip for the course at
Happy Gardens or Pleasant Valley! Though it was a week of
great teaching, deep community, and genuine growth, it was
also a week of fear and loathing.
In the middle of that week, I faced the challenge I feared

most. One of our instructors hacked me up to the edge of a
cliff 110 feet above solid ground. He tied a very thin rope to
my waist-a rope that looked ill-kempt to me and seemed to
be starting to unravel-and told me to start "rappelling" down
that cliff.
"Do what?" I said.
"Just go!" the instructor explained, in typical Outward
Bound fashion.
So I went-and immediately slammed into a ledge, some
four feet down from the edge of the cliff, with bone-jarring,
brain-jarring force.
The instructor looked down at me: "I don't think you've
quite got it."
"Right," said I, being in no position to disagree. "So what
am I supposed to do?"
"The only way to do this," he said, "is to lean back as far
as you can. You have to get your body at right angles to the
cliff so that your weight will be on your feet. It's
counterintuitive, but it's the only way that works"
I knew that he was wrong, of course. I knew that the trick
was to hug the mountain, to stay as close to the rock face as
I could. So I tried it again, my way-and slammed into the
next ledge, another four feet down.

"You still don't have it," the instructor said helpfully.
"OK," I said, "tell me again what I am supposed to do."
"Lean way back," said he, "and take the next step."
The next step was a very big one, but I took it-and,
wonder of wonders, it worked. I leaned back into empty
space, eyes fixed on the heavens in prayer, made tiny, tiny
moves with my feet, and started descending down the rock
face, gaining confidence with every step.
I was about halfway down when the second instructor
called up from below: "Parker, I think you'd better stop and
see what's just below your feet." I lowered my eyes very
slowly-so as not to shift my weight-and saw that I was
approaching a deep hole in the face of the rock.
To get down, I would have to get around that hole, which
meant I could not maintain the straight line of descent I had
started to get comfortable with. I would need to change
course and swing myself around that hole, to the left or to
the right. I knew for a certainty that attempting to do so
would lead directly to my death-so I froze, paralyzed with
fear.
The second instructor let me hang there, trembling, in
silence, for what seemed like a very long time. Finally, she
shouted up these helpful words: "Parker, is anything
wrong?"

To this day, I do not know where my words cane from,
though I have twelve witnesses to the fact that I spoke them.
In a high, squeaky voice, I said, "I don't want to talk about
it."
"Then," said the second instructor, "it's time that you
learned the Outward Bound motto."
"Oh, keen," I thought. "I'm about to die, and she's going
to give me a motto!"
But then she shouted ten words I hope never to forget,
words whose impact and meaning I can still feel: "If you
can't get out of it, get into it!"
I had long believed in the concept of "the word become
flesh," but until that moment, I had not experienced it. My
teacher spoke words so compelling that they bypassed my
mind, went into my flesh, and animated my legs and feet.
No helicopter would come to rescue me; the instructor on
the cliff would not pull me tip with the rope; there was no
parachute in my backpack to float me to the ground. There
was no way out of my dilemma except to get into it-so my
feet started to move, and in a few minutes I made it safely
down.
Why would anyone want to embark on the daunting inner
journey about which Annie Dillard writes? Because there is
no way out of one's inner life, so one had better get into it.
On the inward and downward spiritual journey, the only
way out is in and through.

OUT OF THE SHADOW AND INTO THE LIGHT
If we, as leaders, are to cast less shadow and more light, we
need to ride certain monsters all the way down, explore the
shadows they create, and experience the transformation that
can come as we "get into" our own spiritual lives. Here is a
bestiary of five such monsters. The five are not theoretical
for me; I became personally acquainted with each of them
during my descent into depression. They are also the
monsters I work with when I lead retreats where leaders of
many sorts-CEOs, clergy, parents, teachers, citizens, and
seekers-take an inward journey toward common ground.
The first shadow-casting monster is insecurity- about
identity and worth. Many leaders have an extroverted
personality that makes this shadow hard to see. But
extroversion sometimes develops as a way to cope with self-
doubt: we plunge into external activity to prove that we are
worthy-or simply to evade the question. There is a well-
known form of this syndrome, especially among men, in
which our identity becomes so dependent on performing
some external role that we become depressed, and even die,
when that role is taken away.
When we are insecure about our own identities, we create
settings that deprive other people of their identities as a way
of buttressing our own. This happens all the time in families,
where parents who do not like themselves give their
children low self-esteem. It happens at work as well: how
often I phone a business or professional office and hear,

"Dr. Jones's office-this is Nancy speaking." The boss has a
title and a last name but the person (usually a woman) who
answers the phone has neither, because the boss has decreed
that it will be that way.
There are dynamics in all kinds of institutions that deprive
the many of their identity so the few can enhance their own,
as if identity were a zero-sum game, a win-lose situation.
Look into a classroom, for example, where an insecure
teacher is forcing students to be passive stenographers of the
teacher's store of knowledge, leaving the teacher with more
sense of selfhood and the vulnerable students with less. Or
look in on a hospital where the doctors turn patients into
objects-"the kidney in Room 410"-as a way of claiming
superiority at the very time when vulnerable patients
desperately need a sense of self.
Things are not always this way, of course. There are
settings and institutions led by people whose identities do
not depend on depriving others of theirs. If you are in that
kind of family or office or school or hospital, your sense of
self is enhanced by leaders who know who they are.
These leaders possess a gift available to all who take an
inner journey: the knowledge that identity does not depend
on the role we play or the power it gives us over others. It
depends only on the simple fact that we are children of God,
valued in and for ourselves. When a leader is grounded in
that knowledge, what happens in the family, the office, the
classroom, the hospital can be life-giving for all concerned.

A second shadow inside many of us is the belief that the
universe is a battleground, hostile to human interests. Notice
how often we use images of warfare as we go about our
work, especially in organizations. We talk about tactics and
strategies, allies and enemies, wins and losses, "do or die." If
we fail to be fiercely competitive, the imagery suggests, we
will surely lose, because the world we live in is essentially a
vast combat zone.
Unfortunately, life is full of self-fulfilling prophecies. The
tragedy of this inner shadow, our fear of losing a fight, is
that it helps create conditions where people feel compelled
to live as if they were at war. Yes, the world is competitive,
but largely because we make it so. Some of our best
institutions, from corporations to change agencies to
schools, are learning that there is another way of doing
business, a way that is consensual, cooperative, communal:
they are fulfilling a different prophecy and creating a
different reality.
The gift we receive on the inner journey is the insight that
the universe is working together for good. The structure of
reality is not the structure of a battle. Reality is not out to get
anybody. Yes, there is death, but it is part of the cycle of
life, and when we learn to move gracefully with that cycle, a
great harmony conies into our lives. The spiritual truth that
harmony is more fundamental than warfare in the nature of
reality itself could transform this leadership shadow-and
transform our institutions as well.

A third shadow common among leaders is "functional
atheism," the belief that ultimate responsibility for
everything rests with us. This is the unconscious,
unexamined conviction that if anything decent is going to
happen here, we are the ones who must make it happen-a
conviction held even by people who talk a good game about
God.
This shadow causes pathology on every level of our lives.
It leads us to impose our will on others, stressing our
relationships, sometimes to the point of breaking. It often
eventuates in burnout, depression, and despair, as we learn
that the world will not bend to our will and we become
embittered about that fact. Functional atheism is the shadow
that drives collec tive frenzy as well. It explains why the
average group can tolerate no more than fifteen seconds of
silence: if we are not making noise, we believe, nothing
good is happening and something must be dying.
The gift we receive on the inner journey is the knowledge
that ours is not the only act in town. Not only are there other
acts out there, but some of them are even better than ours, at
least occasionally! We learn that we need not carry the
whole load but can share it with others, liberating its and
empowering them. We learn that sometimes we are free to
lay the load down altogether. The great community asks us
to do only what we are able and trust the rest to other hands.
A fourth shadow within and among us is fear, especially
our fear of the natural chaos of life. Many of us-parents and

teachers and CEOs-are deeply devoted to eliminating all
remnants of chaos from the world. We want to organize and
orchestrate things so thoroughly that messiness will never
bubble up around us and threaten to overwhelm us (for
"messiness" read dissent, innovation, challenge, and
change). In families and churches and corporations, this
shadow is projected as rigidity of rules and procedures,
creating an ethos that is imprisoning rather than
empowering. (Then, of course, the mess we must deal with
is the prisoners trying to break out!)
The insight we receive on the inner journey is that chaos
is the precondition to creativity: as every creation myth has
it, life itself emerged from the void. Even what has been
created needs to be returned to chaos from time to time so
that it can be regenerated in more vital form. When a leader
fears chaos so deeply as to try to eliminate it, the shadow of
death will fall across everything that leader approaches-for
the ultimate answer to all of life's messiness is death.
My final example of the shadows that leaders project is,
paradoxically, the denial of death itself. Though we
sometimes kill things off well before their time, we also live
in denial of the fact that all things must die in due course.
Leaders who participate in this denial often demand that the
people around them keep resuscitating things that are no
longer alive. Projects and programs that should have been
unplugged long ago are kept on life support to
accommodate the insecurities of a leader who does not want
anything to die on his or her watch.

Within our denial of death lurks fear of another sort: the
fear of failure. In most organizations, failure means a pink
slip in your box, even if that failure, that "little death," was
suffered in the service of high purpose. It is interesting that
science, so honored in our culture, seems to have
transcended this particular fear. A good scientist does not
fear the death of a hypothesis, because that "failure" clarifies
the steps that need to be taken toward truth, sometimes more
than a hypothesis that succeeds. The best leaders in every
setting reward people for taking worthwhile risks even if
they are likely to fail. These leaders know that the death of
an initiative-if it was tested for good reasons-is always a
source of new learning.
The gift we receive on the inner journey is the knowledge
that death finally comes to everything-and yet death does
not have the final word. By allowing something to die when
its time is due, we create the conditions under which new
life can emerge.
INNER WORK IN COMMUNITY
Can we help each other deal with the inner issues inherent in
leadership? We can, and I believe we must. Our frequent
failure as leaders to deal with our inner lives leaves too
many individuals and institutions in the dark. From the
family to the corporation to the body politic, we are in
trouble partly because of the shadows I have named. Since
we can't get out of it, we must get into it-by helping each
other explore our inner lives. What might that help look

like?
First, we could lift up the value of "inner work." That
phrase should become commonplace in families, schools,
and religious institutions, at least, helping its understand that
inner work is as real as outer work and involves skills one
can develop, skills like journaling, reflective reading,
spiritual friendship, meditation, and prayer. We can teach
our children something that their parents did not always
know: if people skimp on their inner work, their outer work
will suffer as well.
Second, we could spread the word that inner work,
though it is a deeply personal matter, is not necessarily a
private matter: inner work can be helped along in
community. Indeed, doing inner work together is a vital
counterpoint to doing it alone. Left to our own devices, we
may delude ourselves in ways that others can help us
correct.
But how a community offers such help is a critical
question. We are surrounded by communities based on the
practice of "setting each other straight"-an ultimately
totalitarian practice bound to drive the shy soul into hiding.
Fortunately, there are other models of corporate discernment
and support.
For example, there is the Quaker clearness committee
mentioned earlier in this book. You take a personal issue to
this small group of people who are prohibited from
suggesting "fixes" or giving you advice but who for three

hours pose honest, open questions to help you discover
your inner truth. Communal processes of this sort are
supportive but not invasive. They help us probe questions
and possibilities but forbid us from rendering judgment,
allowing us to serve as midwives to a birth of consciousness
that can only come from within.'
The key to this form of community involves holding a
paradox-the paradox of having relationships in which we
protect each other's aloneness. We must come together in
ways that respect the solitude of the soil], that avoid the
unconscious violence we do when we try to save each other,
that evoke our capacity to hold another life without
dishonoring its mystery, never trying to coerce the other into
meeting our own needs.
It is possible for people to be together that way, though it
may be hard to see evidence of that fact in everyday life.
My evidence comes in part from my journey through
clinical depression, from the healing I experienced as a few
people found ways to be present to me without violating my
soul's integrity. Because they were not driven by their own
fears, the fears that lead us either to "fix" or abandon each
other, they provided me with a lifeline to the human race.
That lifeline constituted the most profound form of
leadership I can imagine-leading a suffering person back to
life from a living death.
Third, we can remind each other of the dominant role that
fear plays in our lives, of all the ways that fear forecloses the

potentials I have explored in this chapter. It is no accident
that all of the world's wisdom traditions address the fact of
fear, for all of them originated in the human struggle to
overcome this ancient enemy. And all of these traditions,
despite their great diversity, unite in one exhortation to those
who walk in their ways: "Be not afraid."
As one who is no stranger to fear, I have had to read
those words with care so as not to twist them into a
discouraging counsel of perfection. "Be not afraid" does not
mean we cannot have fear. Everyone has fear, and people
who embrace the call to leadership often find fear
abounding. Instead, the words say we do not need to be the
fear we have. We do not have to lead from a place of fear,
thereby engendering a world in which fear is multiplied.
We have places of fear inside of us, but we have other
places as well-places with names like trust and hope and
faith. We can choose to lead from one of those places, to
stand on ground that is not riddled with the fault lines of
fear, to move toward others from a place of promise instead
of anxiety. As we stand in one of those places, fear may
remain close at hand and our spirits may still tremble. But
now we stand on ground that will support us, ground from
which we can lead others toward a more trustworthy, more
hopeful, more faithful way of being in the world.

FROM LANGUAGE TO LIFE
Throughout this book, I have looked at selfhood and
vocation through metaphorical lenses, from the "seed" of
true self that is planted in the world at our birth to the
"journey" we take through darkness toward the light. I end
with yet another metaphor, looking at selfhood and vocation
through the turning of the seasons.
The seasonal metaphor deepens our understanding of the
others. Seeds move through their life stages in an endless
cycle of seasons-and the cycle of seasons reminds us that
the journey never ends. Our lives participate in the myth of
eternal return: we circle around and spiral down, never
finally answering the questions "Who am l?" and "Whose
am l?" but, in the words of Rilke, "living the questions"
throughout our lives.'
The seasonal metaphor also gives our inquiry new scope.
It takes the quest for selfhood and vocation out beyond its
origins in the depths of the inner life, out beyond the human

community and its call to leadership, into the world of
nature, that most vast of all the visible worlds in which our
lives are embedded.
Metaphors are more than literary devices, of course: most
of us use metaphors, albeit unconsciously, to name our
experience of life. But these personal metaphors do much
more than describe reality as we know it. Animated by the
imagination, one of the most vital powers we possess, our
metaphors often become reality, transmuting themselves
from language into the living of our lives.
I know people who say, "Life is like a game of
chancesome win, some lose." But that metaphor can create a
fatalism about losing or an obsession with beating the odds.
I know other people who say, "Life is like a battlefield-you
get the enemy, or the enemy gets you." But that metaphor
can result in enemies around every corner and a constant
sense of siege. We do well to choose our metaphors wisely.
Seasons is a wise metaphor for the movement of life, I
think. It suggests that life is neither a battlefield nor a game
of chance but something infinitely richer, more promising,
more real. The notion that our lives are like the eternal cycle
of the seasons does not deny the struggle or the joy, the loss
or the gain, the darkness or the light, but encourages us to
embrace it all-and to find in all of it opportunities for
growth.
If we lived close to nature in an agricultural society, the
seasons as metaphor and fact would continually frame our

lives. But the master metaphor of our era does not come
from agriculture-it comes from manufacturing. We do not
believe that we "grow" our lives-we believe that we "make"
them. Just listen to how we use the word in everyday
speech: we make time, make friends, snake meaning, make
money, make a living, make love.
I once heard Alan Watts observe that a Chinese child will
ask, "How does a baby grow?" But an American child will
ask, "How do you make a baby?" From an early age, we
absorb 
our 
culture's 
arrogant 
conviction 
that 
we
manufacture everything, reducing the world to mere "raw
material" that lacks all value until we impose our designs
and labor on it.
If we accept the notion that our lives are dependent on an
inexorable cycle of seasons, on a play of powers that we can
conspire with but never control, we run headlong into a
culture that insists, against all evidence, that we can make
whatever kind of life we want, whenever we want it. Deeper
still, we run headlong into our own egos, which want
desperately to believe that we are always in charge.
We need to challenge and reform these distortions of
culture and ego-reform them toward ways of thinking and
doing and being that are rooted in respect for the living
ecology of life. Unlike "raw material" on which we make all
the demands, this ecology makes demands on us even as it
sustains our lives. We are here not only to transform the
world but also to be transformed.

Transformation is difficult, so it is good to know that there
is comfort as well as challenge in the metaphor of life as a
cycle of seasons. Illumined by that image, we see that we
are not alone in the universe. We are participants in a vast
communion of being, and if we open ourselves to its
guidance, we can learn anew how to live in this great and
gracious community of truth. We can, and we must-if we
want our sciences to be humane, our institutions to be
sustaining, our healings to be deep, our lives to be true.
AUTUMN
Autumn is a season of great beauty, but it is also a season of
decline: the days grow shorter, the light is suffused, and
summer's abundance decays toward winter's death. Faced
with this inevitable winter, what does nature do in autumn?
It scatters the seeds that will bring new growth in the spring-
and scatters them with amazing abandon.
In my own experience of autumn, I am rarely aware that
seeds are being planted. Instead, my mind is on the fact that
the green growth of summer is browning and beginning to
die. My delight in the autumn colors is always tinged with
melancholy, a sense of impending loss that is only
heightened by the beauty all around. I am drawn down by
the prospect of death more than I am lifted by the hope of
new life.
But as I explore autumn's paradox of dying and seeding, I
feel the power of metaphor. In the autumnal events of my
own experience, I am easily fixated on surface appearances-

on the decline of meaning, the decay of relationships, the
death of a work. And yet if I look more deeply, I may see
the myriad possibilities being planted to bear fruit in some
season yet to come.
In retrospect, I can see in my own life what I could not
see at the time-how the job I lost helped me find work I
needed to do, how the "road closed" sign turned me toward
terrain I needed to travel, how losses that felt irredeemable
forced me to discern meanings I needed to know. On the
surface, it seemed that life was lessening, but silently and
lavishly the seeds of new life were always being sown.
This hopeful notion that living is hidden within dying is
surely enhanced by the visual glories of autumn. What artist
would ever have painted a season of dying with such a vivid
palette if nature had not done it first? Does death possess a
beauty that we-who fear death, who find it ugly and
obscene-cannot see? How shall we understand autumn's
testimony that death and elegance go hand in hand?
For me, the words that cone closest to answering those
questions are the words of Thomas Merton: "There is in all
visible things ... a hidden wholeness."' In the visible world
of nature, a great truth is concealed in plain sight:
diminishment and beauty, darkness and light, death and life
are not opposites. They are held together in the paradox of
"hidden wholeness."
In a paradox, opposites do not negate each-they cohere in
mysterious unity at the heart of reality. Deeper still, they

need each other for health, as my body needs to breathe in
as well as breathe out. But in a culture that prefers the ease
of either-or thinking to the complexities of paradox, we
have a hard time holding opposites together. We want light
without darkness, the glories of spring and summer Without
the demands of autumn and winter-and the Faustian
bargains we make fail to sustain our lives.
When we so fear the dark that we demand light around
the clock, there can be only one result: artificial light that is
glaring and graceless and, beyond its borders, a darkness
that grows ever more terrifying as we try to hold it off. Split
off from each other, neither darkness nor light is fit for
human habitation. But if we allow the paradox of darkness
and light to be, the two will conspire to bring wholeness and
health to every living thing.
Autumn constantly reminds me that my daily dyings are
necessary precursors to new life. If I try to "make" a life that
defies the diininishments of autumn, the life I end up with
will be artificial, at best, and utterly colorless as well. But
when I yield to the endless interplay of living and dying,
dying and living, the life I am given will be real and
colorful, fruitful and whole.
WINTER
The little deaths of autumn are mild precursors to the rigor
mortis of winter. 'rhe southern humorist Roy Blount has
opined that in the Upper Midwest, where I live, what we get
in winter is not weather but divine retribution. He believes

that someone here once did something very, very bad, and
we are still paying the price for that transgression!
Winter here is a demanding season-and not everyone
appreciates the discipline. It is a season when death's victory
can seem supreme: few creatures stir, plants do not visibly
grow, and nature feels like our enemy. And yet the rigors of
winter, like the diminishments of autumn, are accompanied
by amazing gifts.
One gift is beauty, different from the beauty of autumn
but somehow lovelier still: I am not sure that any sight or
sound on earth is as exquisite as the hushed descent of a sky
full of snow. Another gift is the reminder that times of
dormancy and deep rest are essential to all living things.
Despite all appearances, of course, nature is not dead in
winter-it has gone underground to renew itself and prepare
for spring. Winter is a time when we are admonished, and
even inclined, to do the same for ourselves.
But for me, winter has an even greater gift to give. It
comes when the sky is clear, the sun is brilliant, the trees are
bare, and first snow is yet to come. It is the gift of utter
clarity. In winter, one can walk into woods that had been
opaque with summer growth only a few months earlier and
see the trees clearly, singly and together, and see the ground
they are rooted in.
A few years ago, my father died. He was more than a
good man, and the months following his death were a long,
hard winter for me. But in the midst of that ice and loss, I

came into a certain clarity that I lacked when he was alive. I
saw something that had been concealed when the luxuriance
of his love surrounded me-saw how I had relied on him to
help me cushion life's harsher blows. When he could no
longer do that, Iy first thought was, "Now I must do it for
myself." But as time went on, I saw a deeper truth: it never
was my father absorbing those blows but a larger and
deeper grace that he taught me to rely on.
When my father was alive, I confused the teaching with
the teacher. My teacher is gone now, but the grace is still
there-and my clarity about that fact has allowed his teaching
to take deeper root in me. Winter clears the landscape,
however brutally, giving us a chance to see ourselves and
each other more clearly, to see the very ground of our
being.
In the Upper Midwest, newcomers often receive a classic
piece of wintertime advice: "The winters will drive you
crazy until you learn to get out into them." Here people
spend good money on warm clothing so that they can get
outdoors and avoid the "cabin fever" that comes from
huddling fearfully by the fire during the hard-frozen
months. If you live here long, you learn that a daily walk
into the winter world will fortify the spirit by taking you
boldly to the very heart of the season you fear.
Our inward winters take many forms-failure, betrayal,
depression, death. But every one of them, in my experience,
yields to the same advice: "The winters will drive you crazy

until you learn to get out into them." Until we enter boldly
into the fears we most want to avoid, those fears will
dominate our lives. But when we walk directly into them-
protected from frostbite by the warm garb of friendship or
inner discipline or spiritual guidance-we can learn what they
have to teach us. Then we discover once again that the cycle
of the seasons is trustworthy and life-giving, even in the
most dismaying season of all.
SPRING
I will wax romantic about spring and its splendors in a
moment, but first there is a hard truth to be told: before
spring becomes beautiful, it is plug ugly, nothing but mud
and muck. I have walked in the early spring through fields
that will suck your boots off, a world so wet and woeful it
makes you yearn for the return of ice. But in that muddy
mess, the conditions for rebirth are being created.
I love the fact that the word humus-the decayed vegetable
matter that feeds the roots of plants-comes from the same
root that gives rise to the word humility. It is a blessed
etymology. It helps me understand that the humiliating
events of life, the events that leave "mud on my face" or that
"make my name mud," may create the fertile soil in which
something new can grow.
Though spring begins slowly and tentatively, it grows
with a tenacity that never fails to touch me. The smallest and
most tender shoots insist on having their way, coming up
through ground that looked, only a few weeks earlier, as if it

would never grow anything again. The crocuses and
snowdrops do not bloom for long. But their mere
appearance, however brief, is always a harbinger of hope,
and from those small beginnings, hope grows at a geometric
rate. The days get longer, the winds get warmer, and the
world grows green again.
In my own life, as my winters segue into spring, I find it
not only hard to cope with mud but also hard to credit the
small harbingers of larger life to come, hard to hope until
the outcome is secure. Spring teaches me to look more
carefully for the green stems of possibility: for the intuitive
hunch that may turn into a larger insight, for the glance or
touch that may thaw a frozen relationship, for the stranger's
act of kindness that makes the world seem hospitable again.
Spring in its fullness is not easy to write about. Late
spring is so flamboyant that it caricatures itself, which is
why it has long been the province of poets with more
passion than skill. But perhaps those poets have a point.
Perhaps we are meant to yield to this flamboyance, to
understand that life is not always to be measured and meted
as winter compels us to do but to be spent from time to time
in a riot of color and growth.
Late spring is potlatch time in the natural world, a great
giveaway of blooming beyond all necessity and reason-
done, it would appear, for no reason other than the sheer joy
of it. The gift of life, which seemed to be withdrawn in
winter, has been given once again, and nature, rather than

hoarding it, gives it all away. There is another paradox here,
known in all the wisdom traditions: if you receive a gift, you
keep it alive not by clinging to it but by passing it along.
Of course, the realists will tell its that nature's profligacy
always has some practical function, and that may well be so.
But ever since I read Annie Dillard on the immoderation of
trees, I have had to wonder. She begins with a mental
exercise to help its understand how superfluous in design an
ordinary tree can he-if you doubt it, she suggests, try to
make a faithful scale model of the next tree you see. Then,
taunting the realists, she writes: "You are God. You want to
make a forest, something to hold the soil, lock tip solar
energy, and give off oxygen. Wouldn't it be simpler just to
rough in a slab of chemicals, a green acre of goo?"'
From autunm's profligate seedings to the great spring
giveaway, nature teaches a steady lesson: if we want to save
our lives, we cannot cling to them but must spend them with
abandon. When we are obsessed with bottom lines and
productivity, with efficiency of time and motion, with the
rational relation of means and ends, with projecting
reasonable goals and making a beeline toward them, it
seems unlikely that our work will ever bear full fruit,
unlikely that we will ever know the fullness of spring in our
lives.
And when did we start to misuse that beeline metaphor?
Just watch the bees work in the spring. They flit all over the
place, flirting with both the flowers and their fates.

Obviously, the bees are practical and productive, but no
science can persuade me that they are not pleasuring
themselves as well.
SUMMER
Where I live, summer's keynote is abundance. The forests
fill with undergrowth, the trees with fruit, the meadows with
wild flowers and grasses, the fields with wheat and corn, the
gardens with zucchini, and the yards with weeds. In contrast
to the sensationalism of spring, summer is a steady state of
plenty, a green and amber muchness that feeds us on more
levels than we know.
Nature does not always produce abundance, of course.
There are summers when flood or drought destroy the crops
and threaten the lives and livelihood of those who work the
fields. But nature normally takes us through a reliable cycle
of scarcity and abundance in which times of deprivation
foreshadow an eventual return to the bountiful fields.
This fact of nature is in sharp contrast to human nature,
which seems to regard perpetual scarcity as the law of life.
Daily I am astonished at how readily I believe that
something I need is in short supply. If I hoard possessions, it
is because I believe that there are not enough to go around.
If I struggle with others over power, it is because I believe
that power is limited. If I become jealous in relationships, it
is because I believe that when you get too much love, I will
be shortchanged.

Even in writing this essay, I have had to struggle with the
scarcity assumption. It is easy to stare at the blank page and
despair of ever having another idea, another image, another
illustration. It is easy to look back at what one has written
and say, "That's not very good, but I'd better keep it,
because nothing better will come along." It is difficult to
trust that the pool of possibilities is bottomless, that one can
keep diving in and finding more.
The irony, often tragic, is that by embracing the scarcity
assumption, we create the very scarcities we fear. If I hoard
material goods, others will have too little and I will never
have enough. If I fight my way up the ladder of power,
others will be defeated and I will never feel secure. If I get
jealous of someone I love, I am likely to drive that person
away. If I cling to the words I have written as if they were
the last of their kind, the pool of new possibilities will surely
go dry. We create scarcity by fearfully accepting it as law
and by competing with others for resources as if we were
stranded in the Sahara at the last oasis.
In the human world, abundance does not happen
automatically. It is created when we have the sense to
choose cornmunity, to come together to celebrate and share
our common store. Whether the scarce resource is money or
love or power or words, the true law of life is that we
generate more of whatever seems scarce by trusting its
supply and passing it around. Authentic abundance does not
lie in secured stockpiles of food or cash or influence or
affection but in belonging to a community where we can

give those goods to others who need them-and receive them
from others when we are in need.
I sometimes speak on college campuses about the
importance of community in academic life, one of the most
competitive cultures I know. On one such occasion,
following my talk, a man stood in the audience, introduced
himself as occupant of the "Distinguished Such-and-Such
Chair of Biology," and began what I thought-given his
rather pompous selfintroduction-would surely be an attack.
Instead, he said simply, "Of course we must learn to live in
community with each other. After all, it is only good
biology." Biology, the discipline that was once driven by
anxious metaphors like "survival of the fittest" and "nature
red in tooth and claw," now has a new metaphor-
community. Death has not ceased, of course, but now it is
understood as a legacy to the community of abundant life.
Here is a summertime truth: abundance is a communal
act, the joint creation of an incredibly complex ecology in
which each part functions on behalf of the whole and, in
return, is sustained by the whole. Community doesn't just
create abundance-community is abundance. If we could
learn that equation from the world of nature, the human
world might be transformed.
Summer is the season when all the promissory notes of
autumn and winter and spring come due, and each year the
debts are repaid with compound interest. In summer, it is
hard to remember that we had ever doubted the natural

process, had ever ceded death the last word, had ever lost
faith in the powers of new life. Summer is a reminder that
our faith is not nearly as strong as the things we profess to
have faith in- a reminder that for this single season, at least,
we might cease our anxious machinations and give
ourselves to the abiding and abundant grace of our common
life.

Gratitudes
1. Parker J. Palmer, Seeking Vocation in Darkness and Light
(Swannanoa, N.C.: Warren Wilson College, 1999).
2. Parker J. Palmer, "On Minding Your Call-When No One
Is Calling," Weavings, May-June 1996, pp. 15-22.
3. Parker J. Palmer, "All the Way Down: Depression and the
Spiritual Journey," Weavings, Sept.-Oct. 1998, pp. 31-
41.
4. Parker J. Palmer, Leading from Within: Reflections on
Spirituality and Leadership (Indianapolis: Indiana
Office of Campus Ministry, 1990).
5. Parker J. Palmer, Seasons (Kalamazoo, Mich.: Fetzer
Institute, n.d.).
Chapter I
I. William Stafford, "Ask Me," from The Way It Is: New t''
Selected Poems (St. Paul, Minn.: Graywolf Press,

1998), p. 56.
2. Mohandas K. Gandhi, An Autobiography, or the Story of
My Experiments with Truth (Ahmedabad, India:
Navajivan Press, 1927).
Chapter II
1. May Sarton, "Now I Become Myself," in Collected
Poems, 1930-1973 (New York: Norton, 1974), p. 156.
2. Martin Buber, Tales of the Hasidim: The Early Masters
(New York: Schocken Books, 1975), p. 251.
3. Frederick Buechner, Wishful Thinking: A Seeker's ABC
(San Francisco: HarperSanFrancisco, 1993), p. 119.
4. Phil Cosineau, The Art of Pilgrimage (Berkeley: Conari
Press, 1998), p. xxiii.
5. Parker J. Palmer, The Company of Strangers: Christians
and the Renewal of America's Public Life (New York:
Crossroads, 1981).
6. See Howard H. Brinton, The Pendle Hill Idea: A Quaker
Experiment in Work, Worship, Study (Wallingford,
Pa.: Pendle Hill, 1950), and Eleanor Price Mather,
Pendle Hill: A Quaker Experiment in Education and
Community (Wallingford, Pa.: Pendle Hill, 1980).
7. Rumi, "Forget Your Life," in The Enlightened Heart, ed.

Stephen Mitchell (New York: HarperCollins, 1989), p.
56.
8. Rosa Parks, Rosa Parks: My Story (New York: Dial
Books, 1992), p. 116.
Chapter III
1. For details on the conduct of a clearness committee, see
Rachel Livsey and Parker J. Palmer, The Courage to
Teach: A Guide for Reflection and Renewal (San
Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1999), pp. 43-48.
2. May Sartori, "Now I Become Myself," in Collected
Poems, 1930-1973 (New York: Norton, 1974), p. 156.
3. Quoted in Elizabeth Watson, This I Know Experimentally
(Philadelphia: Friends General Conference, 1977), p.
16.
Chapter IV
1. Robert Pinsky, Canto I from The Inferno of Dante: A
New Verse Translation (New York: Noonday Press,
1994), canto 1:1-7.
2. See, for example, Henri J. M. Nouwen, The Inner Voice
of Love: A Journey Through Anguish to Freedom
(New York: Doubleday, 1996).
3. See, for example, John 13.

4. Rainer Maria Rilke, Letters to a Young Poet, trans. M. D.
Herter Norton (New York: W. W. Norton &
Company, 1993), p. 59.
5. Florida Scott Maxwell, The Measure of My Days (New
York: Penguin Books, 1983), p. 42.
Chapter V
Vaclav Havel, speech delivered to joint meeting of the U.S.
Congress. From The Art of the Impossible by Vaclav
Havel; trans. Paul Wilson et al. (New York: Alfred A.
Knopf, Inc., 1997), pp. 17-18.
2. Annie Dillard, Teaching a Stone to Talk (New York:
HarperCollins, 1982), pp. 94-95.
3. Vincent Kavaloski and Jane Kavaloski, "Moral Power and
the Czech Revolution," Fellowship, Jan.-Feb. 1992, p.
9.
4. See Livsev and Palmer, The Courage to Teach: A Guide
for Reflection and Renewal, pp. 43-48.
Chapter VI
1. Rainer Maria Rilke, Letters to a Young Poet, trans. M. I).
Herter Norton (New York: Norton, 1993), p. 35.
2. Thomas Merton, "Hagia Sophia," in A Thomas Merton
Reader, ed. Thomas P. McDonnell (New York:

Doubleday, 1989), p. 506.
3. Annie Dillard, Pilgrim at Tinker Creek (New York:
Harper's Magazine Press, 1974), pp. 129-130.

Parker J. Palmer is a writer, teacher, and activist who works
independently 
on 
issues 
in 
education, 
community,
leadership, spirituality, and social change. His work spans a
wide range of institutions-colleges and universities, public
schools, community organizations, religious institutions,
corporations, and foundations. He serves as senior associate
of the American Association of Higher Education and senior
adviser to the Fetzer Institute and is the founder of Fetzer's
Teacher Formation Program for K-12 teachers.
Palmer 
travels 
widely 
domestically 
and 
abroad-
conducting 
workshops, 
delivering 
lectures, 
leading
retreatsand has often been cited as a master teacher. His
work has been featured by the New York Times, the
Chronicle of Higher Education, Change magazine, Christian
Century, CBS-TV news and the Voice of America. The
Danforth Foundation and the Lilly Endowment have
supported his work with major grants. In 1993, he won the
national award of the Council of Independent Colleges for
Outstanding Contributions to Higher Education. In 1998,
"The Leadership Project," a national survey of ten thousand
administrators and faculty, named Palmer one of the nation's
"most influential senior leaders" in higher education and one
of the ten key "agenda-setters" of the past decade, declaring:
"He has inspired a generation of teachers and reformers with
evocative visions of community, knowing, and spiritual

wholeness."
His writing has been recognized with five Honorary
doctorates, two Distinguished Achievement Awards from
the National Educational Press Association, an Award of
Excellence from the Associated Church Press, Critic's
Choice citations from Commonweal and Christian Century
magazines, selection by several book clubs, and translation
into several languages. His publications include ten poems,
more than one hundred essays, and several widely used
hooks, including The Promise of Paradox, The Company of
Strangers, To Know As We Are Known, The Active Life,
and The Courage to Teach.
Palmer received his B.A. degree in philosophy and
sociology from Carleton College, where he was elected to
Phi Beta Kappa and was awarded a Danforth Graduate
Fellowship. After a year at Union Theological Seminary, he
studied sociology at the University of California at Berkeley,
where he received his M.A. and Ph.D. degrees with honors.
He is a member of the Religious Society of Friends (Quaker)
and lives in Madison, Wisconsin.

This page constitutes a continuation of the copyright page.
"Ask Me" copyright  1977, 1998 by the Estate of William
Stafford. Reprinted from THE WAY IT IS: NEW &
SELECTED POEMS by William Stafford with the
permission of Graywolf Press, Saint Paul, Minnesota.
"Now I Become Myself," from COLLECTED POEMS,
1930-1993 by May Sarton. Copyright  1993, 1988, 1984,
1980, 1974 by May Sarton. Reprinted by permission of W.
W. Norton & Company, Inc.
From THE ART OF THE IMPOSSIBLE by Vklav Havel;
trans., Paul Wilson et al. Copyright  1997 by Vaclav Have]
and Paul Wilson. Reprinted by permission of Alfred A.
Knopf, Inc.
Excerpt from Canto I from THE INFERNO OF DANTE: A
NEW VERSE TRANSLATION by Robert Pinsky. Copyright
1994 by Farrar, Straus & Giroux, Inc. Translation copyright
 1994 by Robert Pinsky. Reprinted by permission of
Farrar, Straus & Giroux, Inc.




Table of Contents
Gratitudes
1. Listening to Life
II. Now I Become Myself
III. When Way Closes
IV. All the Way Down
V. Leading from Within
VI. There Is a Season
Notes
The Author

