LESNIEWSKI'S SYSTEMS 
PROTOTHETIC 

NIJHOFF INTERNATIONAL PHILOSOPHY SERIES 
Volume 54 

Lesniewski' s Systems 
Protothetic 
Edited by 
lAN T.I. SRZEDNICKI - General Editor 
University of Melbourne, Australia 
and 
ZBIGNIEW STACHNIAK - Volume Editor 
York University, Canada 
SPRINGER -SCIENCE+BUSINESS MEDIA, B.V. 

Library of Congress CataIoging-in-Publication Data 
ISBN 978-94-010-6419-4 
ISBN 978-94-011-5736-0 (eBook) 
DOI 10.1007/978-94-011-5736-0 
Printed an acid-free paper 
AII Rights Reserved 
© 1998 Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 
Origina11y published by Kluwer Academic Publishers in 1998 
Softcover reprint ofthe hardcover Ist edition 1998 
No pari of the material protected by this copyright notice may be reproduced 
or utilized in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, 
including photocopying, recording or by any information storage and 
retrieval system, without written permission from the copyright owner. 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
EDITOR'S FOREWORD 
I. PETER M. SIMONS 
Nominalism in Poland 
II. V. FREDERICK RICKEY 
A Survey of Lesniewski's Logic 
III. ALFRED TAJTELBAUM-TARSKI 
On the Primitive Term of Logistic 
N. BOLESLAW SOBOCINSKI 
An Investigation of Protothetic 
V. JERZY SLUPECKI 
St. Lesniewski's Protothetics 
VI. BOLESLAW SOBOCINSKI 
On the Single Axioms of Protothetic 
VII. V. FREDERICK RICKEY 
Axiomatic Inscriptional Syntax. 
Part II: The Syntax of Protothetic 
VIII. AUDOENUS LE BLANC 
Investigations in Protothetic 
PROTOTHETIC BIBLIOGRAPHY 
AUTHOR INDEX 
vii 
1 
23 
43 
69 
85 
153 
217 
289 
299 
309 

EDITOR'S FOREWORD 
This edition of papers concerning Lesniewski's logical system Protothetic 
completes the four volume project - The LeSniewski Collection - a collected 
edition of Lesniewski's papers and major contributions to LeSniewski's sys-
tem of the foundations of mathematics. The three volumes published so far 
are: 
(1) LeSniewski's Systems. Ontology and Mereology 
Edited by J.T.J. Srzednicki, Y.F. Rickey, and J. Czelakowski. Nijhoff 
International Philosophy Series, 13 (1984). 
(2) S. LeSniewski's Lecture Notes in Logic 
Edited by J.T.J. Srzednicki and Z. Stachniak. Nijhoff International Phi-
losophy Series, 24 (1988). 
(3) Stanislaw LeSniewski: Collected Works 
Edited by J.T.J. Srzednicki, S.J. Surma, and D. Barnett with an Annotated 
Bibliography by Y.F. Rickey. Nijhoff International Philosophy Series, 44 
(1992). 
I. 
In the period between the two world wars, Stanislaw Lesniewski (1886-
1939), one of the founders and a prominent member of the Warsaw School 
of Logic, created a system of the foundations of mathematics comprising 
three deductive theories: Protothetic, Ontology, and Mereology. The point of 
departure for the construction of this system was his study oflogical paradoxes 
and, in this context, a distinction between the distributive and collective 
interpretations of a class. This distinction between the two interpretations 
was reflected in the development of two deductive theories, the theory of 
collective classes, which he eventually called Mereology, and the theory of 
distributive classes, called Ontology. Finally, in order to combine Mereology 
and Ontology into a logically rigorous system, he constructed Protothetic -
the system of "first principles." Lesniewski's ambition was 
not to add one more calculus to the variety already invented, nor even to prove general 
metatheorems about alternative formal calculi, in the interests of "comparative logic"; it was 

viii 
EDITOR'S FOREWORD 
instead to perfect a universally valid classical system of logic and foundations of mathematics, 
in which he could rigorously formulate generalizations expressible only in the metalanguages 
of systems poorer in means of expression, [, , . 1 and on which he could rely as a true instrument 
of deduction and scientific investigation (Luschei, 1962, p. 24). * 
This program was initiated by Lesniewski in 1914 with his studies on a 
general theory of sets (later to be named 'Mereology'). The first version of 
Mereology appeared in print in 1916 under the title Podstawy Og6lnej Teoryi 
Mnogosci. 1. ** 
In 1919, Ldniewskijoined the University of Warsaw as a professor of the 
philosophy of mathematics. He met a group of gifted mathematicians, Zyg-
munt Janiszewski, Stefan Mazurkiewicz, Waclaw Sierpinski, whose research 
interests, like those of Lesniewski, were focused on the foundations of mathe-
matics. In 1920 this group, joined by Jan Lukasiewicz, founded the mathemat-
ical journal Fundamenta Mathematicae with Mazurkiewicz and Sierpinski as 
editors, and Lesniewski and Lukasiewicz as members of the editorial board. 
The name, scope, and membership of the editorial board of the journal ade-
quately reflected the research activities of the Warsaw schools of mathematics 
and logic during the first decade of the journal's existence. 
The construction of Ontology in the period between 1919-1921, marked 
the next step in the formation of LeSniewski's system of the foundations of 
mathematics, although it was not until 1930 that Ontology appeared in print 
(cf. LeSniewski, 1930). 
The construction of Protothetic began in 1922 and went quickly through 
numerous improvements and modifications, to be concluded in 1923. By then, 
Lesniewski's system of the foundations of mathematics was formally ready 
and, to quote Jordan, it was the 
most thorough, original, and philosophically significant attempt to provide a logically secure 
foundation for the whole of mathematics (cf. Jordan, 1945). 
Even such a critic of the importance of LeSniewski's contribution to modem 
logic as Grzegorczyk admitted that 
Lesniewski's treatment of logic was in his times the most exact; it was simpler than Prin-
cipia [Mathematical and had it been published simultaneously with the second edition of the 
Principia, it would have played a considerable part in the development of logic (Grzegorczyk, 
1955, p. 78). 
The roots of Protothetic can already be found in Lesniewski's early writings 
between 1912 and 1914. The "deductions" in his 1916 work on the general 
theory of sets are based on his logical intuitions which eventually were cap-
tured in the axioms and directives of Proto the tic and Ontology. In 1921, having 
developed his systems of Mereology and Ontology, Lesniewski was ready to 
* For complete publication information for this and other works cited in Editor's Foreword, 
see the Protothetic Bibliography at the end of this volume. 
** Cf. Stanislaw Lesniewski, Foundations of a General Theory of Sets. I. Prace Polskiego 
Kola Naukowego w Moskwie, Sekcya Matematyczno-Przyrodnicza, No.2, Moskwa, 1916 [in 
Polish]. 

EDITOR'S FOREWORD 
" ",j~\';l4 h:vii <&>'1#, P .. ,..lt"'1' 
t4~t' wrffi:ini~wli(t : .w~-dr:Wltluwal~ nb 
h ·,wyjni.k~w.\~:~~ '".'" 
... 
. 
OtT cl~:u.~ : K.~t:3.d)iili;ki~::· ~1h.'Wd~ . ~n.. 
~{~l~q<~ua .·'i::. ~~~~~*1l~'~~i~·:: .. ~~ib~¢1&:~ 
~h:tt$11J jl!~~~lkmt", 11'4,i1l; tbJ, 
fJOJ;ICWA.. 
l~A P. fO(>I;i,""~~> 
The title page of Podstawy Og61nej Teory; MnogoscL I. 
ix 
search for a general system of "first principles." Dissatisfied with the existing 
proposals (e.g., theories of deduction by J.G.P. Nicod or A.N. Whitehead 
and B. Russell), he embarked on constructing the calculus of propositions 
that would be based on a minimal set of primitive symbols, with rigorous 
directives of procedure, and the simplest possible axiom-system. Lesniewski 
carefully designed Protothetic to be general and universally valid, consistent, 
decidable, complete, expressively powerful, logically economic, pure, and 
elegant, in other words - perfect. In 1922, Alfred Tarski provided Lesniewski 
with just what was needed. He demonstrated (in his doctoral dissertation writ-
ten under Lesniewski's supervision) that the "ordinary" theory of deduction 
can be based on the sign of equivalence as the sole primitive term. He proved 
that the logical product, and, hence, all the familiar functions of propositions, 

x 
EDITOR'S FOREWORD 
can be defined in terms of equivalence, the universal quantifier, and variable 
propositional functors. 
Lesniewski began the development of Protothetic by constructing a weaker 
system 6 (which is a complete two-valued equivalential system). In 1922 he 
began the task of formulating the directives for Protothetic from the perspec-
tive of his theory of semantic categories. 
Testing and modifying various details of these directives lasted several years. But by 1922 
the directives were precise enough to fonn the basis of a considerable amount of axiomatic 
research (Lesniewski, 1929; cf. Lesniewski, 1992, p. 422). 
Still in 1922, Protothetic underwent several transformations. First, 6 was 
strengthened to the system 61, and later to 62, which is 
one of the many possible mutually equivalent systems of the theory that I name protothetic 
(Lesniewski, 1938a; cf. McCall, 1967, p. 122). 
62, in turn, was succeeded by a more elegant system 63. Finally, in 1923, 
Lesniewski proposed the directives for the system 65, the most mature of 
the different dialects of Protothetic. In the years 1923-1927 the directives of 
65 were polished and supplemented with forty-nine "terminological expla-
nations." Concerning the formalization of Protothetic, Lesniewski remarked 
that 
Having no predilection for various 'mathematical games' that consist in writing out according 
to one or another conventional rule various more or less picturesque fonnulae which need 
not be meaningful, or even - as some of the 'mathematical gamers' might prefer - which 
should necessarily be meaningless, I would not have taken the trouble to systematize and to 
often check quite scrupulously the directives of my system, had I not imputed to its theses a 
certain specific and completely detennined sense, in virtue of which its axioms, definitions, 
and final directives (as encoded for (
5), have for me an irresistible intuitive validity. I see no 
contradiction, therefore, in saying that I advocate a rather radical 'fonnalism' in the construction 
of my system even though I am an obdurate 'intuitionist' (Lesniewski, 1929; cf. Lesniewski, 
1992, p. 487). 
Satisfied with the directives and general properties of 65, Lesniewski 
focused his attention on the problem of simplification of the single axiom of 
65. His collaboration with Mordchaj Wajsberg in the years 1923-1926, and 
later with Boleslaw Sobocinski in the years 1937-1938, resulted in a signifi-
cant simplification of the axiom. In 1945, Sobocinski found the single axiom 
for 65 consisting of 54 symbols (when written in the authentic Lesniewski 
symbolism), which still remains the shortest known single axiom for this 
system.* 
In the meantime, an implicational version of Protothetic appeared with the 
name 64. Its axiomatization is the result of a fruitful collaboration between 
Lesniewski and Tarski. A number of "computative" or "algorithmic" dialects 
* Lesniewski in (1929) and (1938a) discusses the details concerning the search for the 
shortest single axiom of Protothetic until 1937; Sobocinski (1960) describes this search until 
the discovery of the shortest known single axiom in 1945. 

EDITOR'S FOREWORD 
U,q,yJ:: 
(i)H,pJ~lH(ft}),;)·H?}:H¥J",1(f(\hj):, 
U)qSl 
Nt!tnl(l1t), 
N1fr'{q}trt):, 
. 
{j}~\rt ~t (if)) ~Jiq; v, "" (,t~ {rtt{tcb}.Eq), . ., 
(t)tff~f(qi: 
One of the pages of Choynowski' s lecture notes taken during the course 
From the Foundations of Protothetic in 1932-1933. 
xi 
of Protothetic were also developed between 1924 and 1935 (see Le Blanc, 
1991). 
From the very beginning, Protothetic attracted considerable attention from 
Lesniewski's colleagues and students. Lesniewski discussed the directives 
for Protothetic in detail in his lectures at the University of Warsaw, starting 
with his course on the Foundations of Logistic in the 1924125 academic 
year. Lecture notes taken by Mieczyslaw Choynowski during the course 
From the Foundations of Protothetic in the academic year 1932-1933 have 
survived, giving a unique insight into the logical structure and successive 
developments of this system (cf. Lesniewski, 1988). In 1937, Lukasiewicz 
created a journal - Collectanea Logica - that was devoted exclusively to 
logic. (Sobocinski was the managing editor.) The founders hoped that the 

xii 
EDITOR'S FOREWORD 
role and the international stature of this new journal would be analogous to 
Fundamenta Mathematicae. Among the eleven papers of the first volume 
of the journal, eight, written by Lesniewski, Sobocinski, and Slupecki, were 
devoted to Protothetic. Unfortunately, the first and only volume of Collectanea 
Logica, which was ready to appear, was destroyed during the first days of 
World War II. The documents which could have been used to reconstruct the 
volume perished during the Warsaw uprising in 1944.* 
The postwar history of Protothetic begins with the heroic effort of former 
colleagues and students of Lesniewski, especially Hii, Kotarbinski, Lejewski, 
Sobocinski, and Slupecki, to continue LeSniewski's work, to reconstruct and 
salvage his logical contributions, and to make them widely known. Tadeusz 
Kotarbinski was the first person to attempt to publish the collected works 
of Lesniewski, a task which he was unable to complete. He knew that some 
of the notes taken during Lesniewski's lectures circulated in Warsaw during 
the war and were an important source of knowledge about Lesniewski's 
work. These notes represented the missing link between a few papers that 
Lesniewski managed to publish and the wealth of results he left unpublished. 
Kotarbinski collected some of the notes which survived the war and gave 
them to Slupecki with the task of reconstructing Lesniewski's logical systems. 
Slupecki's articles on Protothetic (see paper V in this volume) and Ontology, 
which appeared in volumes I and II of the newly created Polish journal Studia 
Logica, proved to be among the most influential papers in the development 
and further studies of Lesniewski 's systems. The most important lecture notes 
collected by Kotarbinski were published by Kluwer Academic Publishers in 
1988 (cf. LeSniewski, 1988). 
Boleslaw Sobocinski's involvement in the study of Protothetic goes back 
to his prewar investigations concerning the axiomatic foundations of this 
system (cf. Sobocinski, 1939; see also paper IV in this volume). After the 
war he continued his research on Protothetic and devoted his first postwar 
publications to this system (cf. the Protothetic Bibliography). His paper 'On 
the single axioms of protothetic' (paper VI in this volume) is regarded as 
one of the most important papers concerning Protothetic. Another work, 'An 
investigation of Proto the tic ' (paper IV in this volume), in addition to important 
technical contributions to Protothetic, gives a unique account of the ill-fated 
Collectanea Logica. At the same time, he lectured on logic attracting students 
and researchers to the logical ideas of LeSniewski. In 1960, Sobocinski created 
the Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic making it an important forum for 
promoting research investigations concerning Lesniewski's system of the 
foundations of mathematics. 
* For more information on Collectanea Logica and its fate, see Sobocinski (1949) (also 
paper IV in this volume). 

EDITOR'S FOREWORD 
xiii 
II. 
This volume is a collection of the major contributions to Protothetic. The 
title Lesniewski's Systems: Protothetic is not intended to suggest that all 
important papers devoted to Protothetic are included here, for many have 
been left out, either because they were similar in content to those included in 
the present volume or simply because they were too numerous to be included 
in a single volume. Also excluded are Lesniewski's own papers dealing with 
Protothetic, since they appear in Lesniewski (1992). The papers included in 
this volume are arranged by dates of publication. Those by Peter Simons on 
nominalism in Poland and by Frederick Rickey on the logical systems of 
Lesniewski, which open the volume, are the only exceptions to this order. 
Simons' paper discloses LeSniewski's philosophical commitments regarding 
his system of the foundations of mathematics, while Rickey's work surveys the 
most important technical contributions to Lesniewski's system. Both papers 
provide a philosophical and historical context for the technical contributions 
reported in the remaining papers of this volume. 
Alfred Tarski's paper 'On the primitive term of logistic' is a new English 
translation of his doctoral thesis that was originally published in Polish in 
Przeglt{d Filozoficzny under the title '0 wyrazie pierwotnym logistyki' (cf. 
Tarski, 1923b). The well-known translation by J. H. Woodger, which is also 
entitled 'On the primitive term of logistic', in the collection Tarski (1956), 
is a compilation of three papers: Tarski (1923a, 1923b), and (1924). In the 
present version, we aimed at a literal translation of the Polish original rather 
than a smooth one based on Tarski's other publications. We tried to retain 
Tarski's individual style as well as the lay-out of the Polish publication. 
Boleslaw Sobocinski's paper 'An investigation of Proto the tic ' was intended 
to appear under the title 'Z badan nad prototetyk",' in Vol. 1 of Collectanea 
Logica. Its English translation, preceded by the 21-page long introduction 
which discusses the origins and fate of Collectanea Logica as well as the 
contents of its first volume, was eventually published in 1949 (cf. Sobocinski, 
1949). Another English translation from the Polish original by Z. Jordan 
appeared in 1967 in McCall's Polish Logic (see McCall, 1967). In this volume 
we include an edited version of Sobocinski (1949), in which the part of the 
introduction that is devoted to Collectanea Logica joins Jordan's translation. 
To retain Sobocinski's individual style only the necessary editorial alterations 
have been made. 
The Protothetic Bibliography included in this volume lists only works in 
which Protothetic is explicitly discussed. Papers on subjects related to Pro-
tothetic, such as equivalential calculi, calculi with variable functors, theories 
of definitions, quantification, syntactic categories, etc., are excluded. Many of 

xiv 
EDITOR'S FOREWORD 
these exclusions can be found in Rickey's 'An Annotated Lesniewski Bibli-
ography' included in Lesniewski (1992).* 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The editors of this volume are indebted to many individuals for their help 
during the editorial work. We wish to thank V. Frederick Rickey for many 
valuable suggestions concerning the contents of the volume. We thank Cynthia 
Bearlin, Ewa Stachniak, David Tremaine, and Michael Wharton for their 
generous help during the translation and edition of the material. Our gratitude 
is also due to Jaroslaw Malik for his many hours devoted to the preparation 
of the Protothetic Bibliography. Special thanks go to Maja S.M. de Keijzer of 
Kluwer Academic Publishers for her continuous assistance in the preparation 
of this volume, for her valuable support, and for her guidance through all the 
stages of the editorial process. 
Finally, we would like to thank Jan Tarski and the following institutions 
and publishers for granting their reprint permissions for papers included in 
this volume: the Institute of Philosophy and Sociology of the Polish Academy 
of Sciences, The Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic, Oxford University 
Press, and Rodopi. We have done our utmost to contact the copyright owners 
of all the material reprinted in this volume. In some cases, however, locating 
the copyright owner proved to be an impossible task after all these years. If 
you are a copyright owner whom we have failed to reach, then please contact 
Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
ZBIGNIEW STACHNIAK 
* An updated version of 'An Annotated Lesniewski Bibliography' is available from V.F. 
Rickey of the Department of Mathematics and Statistics at Bowling Green State University, 
Ohio, U.S.A. 


PETER M. SIMONS 
NOMINALISM IN POLAND * 
Several prominent Polish philosophers were nominalists. This paper concen-
trates mainly on the views of Lesniewski and Kotarbiiiski, in the belief that 
their views are the most interesting in themselves, the most historically impor-
tant, and present most clearly the difficulties and challenges that nominalism 
has to face. But first, some terminological clarifications. 
1. THE SEVERAL SENSES OF THE TERM 'NOMINALISM' 
The term 'nominalism' as used in twentieth-century philosophy has a number 
of distinct but connected senses. In the first and traditional sense, nominal-
ism is the doctrine that everything that exists is particular, that there are no 
universals. The opposite to this is realism with respect to universals, whether 
of a strong (Platonistic) or a moderate (Thomistic) sort. Nominalism in this 
sense subsumes conceptualism, the doctrine that universals exist as concepts 
in the mind, which was the most common form of nominalism in antiquity 
and the Middle Ages. The name 'nominalism' is not inappropriate because 
it was held that concepts are mental names. A second and more restricted 
meaning of 'nominalism' takes universals to be words properly so called, as 
distinct from concepts. This kind of nominalism, sometimes called extreme 
nominalism, can be found in Roscelin and Hobbes. A third meaning extends 
the denial of universals to a denial of all abstract entities. This is the sense 
employed by Quine and Goodman in their essay "Steps Toward a Construc-
tive Nominalism"l which begins with the trenchant statement "We do not 
believe in abstract entities". The fourth sense of the term 'nominalism' is due 
to Goodman, who wrote, some years after his joint essay with Quine, and in 
partial revision of it, "Nominalism for me consists specifically in the refusal 
to recognize classes".2 
Let us summarize these four meanings: 
Nu There are no real (mind-independent) universals. 
Nu+ There are no real universals. Universals are in fact words. 
* Bibliographical Note. Reprinted from Polish Scientific Philosophy: The Lvov-Warsaw 
School. F. Coniglione, R. Poli, and J. Wolenski, editors. Poznan Studies in the Philosophy of 
the Sciences and the Humanities, Vol. 28, Editions Rodopi B. v., by permission of Rodopi. 
 J. T. J. Srzednicki et al. (eds.), Leśniewski’s  Systems  Protothetic
© Kluwer Academic Publishers 1998

2 
PETER M. SIMONS 
Na There are no abstract entities. 
Ne There are no classes. 
If we want descriptive labels for three of these positions we can call 
Nu 'particularism', Na 'concretism' and Ne 'individualism'. The mnemonic 
letters used here and below for identifying theses serve not only as aides 
memoire: if we read 'Nx' as 'there are no xs', 'Ex' as 'there exist xs', 'Axy' 
as 'All xs are ys' and 'Sxy' as 'xs and ys are the same' (i.e. all xs are ys and 
all ys are xs), logical relations among the theses may be read off their names 
and those of the additional assumptions to follow. 
Under the generally accepted additional assumptions 
Aua Real universals are abstract entities 
Aea Classes are abstract entities 
this gives the following pattern of entailments among the nominalistic theses: 
Nu+ 
No 
Nu 
Nc 
From an ontological point of view the thesis Nu+ is not importantly different 
from Nu. Particularists (nominalists in the sense of Nu) are compelled to offer 
some explanation for the widespread (and in their opinion erroneous) view 
that there are real universals, and must attempt to explain how generality 
arises, either as a conceptual or as a linguistic phenomenon, or in some other 
terms. Nu+ embodies one such explanation. Since it is a specification of Nu, 
we shall focus mainly on the latter and henceforth, unless explicitly stated 
otherwise, we shall understand 'universal' to mean 'real, mind-independent 
universal'. Under certain additional assumptions, the relationships among Nu, 
Na and Ne are simplified. Under the assumption 
Aeu All classes are universals 
Ne entails Nu. Under 
Aue All universals are classes 
Nu entails Ne, so under the conjunction of Aeu and Aue (Seu), Nu and Ne are 
equivalent. Under 
Aae All abstract entities are classes 
Na and Nc are equivalent, both entailing Nu; under 
Aau All abstract entities are universals 

NOMINALISM IN POLAND 
3 
Nu and N a are equivalent, both entailing Nc, so under any of the combinations 
of theses entailing 
Sacu Abstract entities, classes, and universals are the same 
all three nominalistic theses are equivalent. 
So much for conceptual geography. It is important to distinguish the differ-
ent senses of nominalism because not all people who have been called 'nomi-
nalists' agree in what they reject. Goodman and Quine originally pleaded for 
Na, but their views diverged afterwards, Quine embracing classes (affirming 
Ee, the contradictory of Ne) and effectively accepting Aue, discarding all but 
extensional universals, but regarding some classes (the singletons with con-
crete members) as concrete. Goodman later accepted universal and abstract 
entities, but continued to reject classes. However, it not infrequently hap-
pens that nominalists either embrace Na from the start, or are not especially 
concerned to distinguish the different theses. There are various possible com-
binations of acceptance and rejection, provided one does not subscribe to 
the simplifying assumption Sacu. For instance, one may accept universals 
and reject classes. It may be worth noting that even the generally accepted 
assumptions Aua and Aca have not always been accepted, at least according 
to the letter. The former was seemingly rejected by William of Champeaux, 
the latter by Lesniewski. We circumvent the problem by stipulating that 'uni-
versal' and 'class' be so understood that the supplementary theses Aua and 
Aca are analytically true. 
2. LESNIEWSKI VERSUS TWARDOWSKI 
Twardowski, the father of modern Polish philosophy, accepted what he called 
'general objects'. In his Zur Lehre vom Inhalt und Gegenstand der Vorstel-
lungen, Twardowski upholds, in the final chapter, the view that even general 
ideas have their own peculiar objects, general objects, which are distinct from 
the objects of singular ideas, individual objects, as Twardowski calls them. 3 
Twardowski's arguments for general objects are not especially convincing: he 
appears to think it is fairly straightforward to show that common prejudices 
against them stem from misleading psychology and theory of language, it 
being possible to expose the prejudices provided our descriptive psychology 
of general ideas is properly executed. Positively, Twardowski puts forward 
several theses concerning general objects: 
Tw 1 There are general objects 
Tw2 General objects are the objects of general ideas (presentations) 
Tw3 General objects are not intuitable 
Tw4 General objects are distinct from the objects of singular presentations 
(individual objects), which are intuitable 
Tw5 The apprehension of general objects is invariably accompanied by singu-
lar auxiliary intuitions of individual objects of the kind which the general 

4 
PETER M. SIMONS 
object represents (which is mainly why general ideas have received less 
attention than they deserve) 
Tw6 General objects do not exist (not in contradiction with Tw I!) 
Tw7 The object of a general presentation is part of the objects of these singular 
presentations 
Tw8 A general object is a unity consisting of constituents common to several 
presentations. 
Historically speaking these theses are, as Twardowski readily admits, not 
especially novel. The main difference between this theory and Plato's theory 
of Ideas lies in thesis Tw6. Twardowski, before Meinong, and influencing 
the latter, held that every idea (presentation) has an object, but that not all 
objects exist. Twardowski's embryonic theory of general objects presages 
Meinong's more fully developed theory of incomplete objects, which was to 
emerge rather later. Obviously Twardowski, like Meinong, had in mind the 
controversy between Locke and Berkeley about abstract ideas. Twardowski 
transposed the psychological-semantic dispute (back) into an ontological key, 
and the result was to recall the nominalism/realism debate. 
Lesniewski studied with Twardowski in Lwow and obtained his doctorate 
under him in 1912. At that time Meinong's work was also becoming known 
in Lwow through the offices of Jan Lukasiewicz, who had visited Meinong in 
Graz as a fellowship scholar and had heard Meinong lecture about incomplete 
objects.4 Lukasiewicz was at this time inclined to take incomplete objects 
seriously, and suggested that they might provide a counterexample to the 
ontological principle of excluded middle.s 
OEM For all objects A and all properties P: A has P or A has non-P where 
non-P is the property obtained from P by property-negation. 
If the general triangle has neither equilaterality nor non-equilaterality, it would 
be a counterexample to OEM. Lukasiewicz was careful to distinguish OEM 
from the logical principle of excluded middle: 
LEM For all p: either p or not-po 
Lesniewski too was concerned in his early work to distinguish these two, in 
the belief that OEM was true but LEM false. His reason for the latter belief is 
rather odd: he thought that both positive and negative existential statements 
are false.6 Lesniewski argued against attempts to show OEM is false on the 
basis of there being general objects. He defines a general object as one which 
represents a number of other objects in having as its properties all and only 
those properties common to all the objects in question. If we suppose a number 
of objects AI, A2, ... , and a property P such that some of the objects have P 
and others do not, then the general object A representing AI, A2, ... cannot 
have P, for some of the Ai do not have P, but neither can it have not -P, for 
some of the Ai have P and hence do not have not-p.7 The only way for an 
object to represent other objects without contradiction is for it to represent 
only itself, in which case it is no general object.8 

NOMINALISM IN POLAND 
5 
The questionable assumption in this reasoning has been exposed by Guido 
Kling.9 Lesniewski assumes that there is no problem in taking a general object 
to share some of its material properties with the individuals it represents, 
an assumption which most advocates of realism with respect to universal 
would reject, mindful of the havoc wreaked by Plato's Third Man, which is 
predicated on this assumption. Twardowski's thesis Tw8 is close to the posi-
tion Lesniewski criticizes, and it is not implausible to suppose Twardowski 
believed it, taking the 'parts' in Tw7 to be properties. Tw8 does not, however, 
say exactly that the general object has all and only those properties all its 
individuals have, so Lesniewski does not refute Twardowski to the letter. It 
is indeed reasonable to expect a general object to have numerous properties 
its individuals do not have, such as being abstract, having more than one 
instance, not existing, being general, and so on. Lesniewski's argument suc-
ceeds in refuting one theory of general objects, but it is unlikely to be one 
seriously entertained by the advocate of general objects. If Lesniewski took 
himself to have refuted general objects once and for all, he was mistaken. 
Nevertheless, his "proof" raises wider questions for adherents of general and 
other abstract objects. What and whither are the characteristics of abstract 
objects? If abstract objects are indeterminate with respect to certain proper-
ties and not with respect to others, what principles govern this? Are we led to 
accept objects which do not exist, but are nevertheless objects? All of these 
are difficult issues for the proponent of abstract objects. 
3. LESNIEWSKI VERSUS SET THEORY 
If LeSniewski's critique of Twardowski lands him implicitly in the camp 
of particularism (Nu), his criticisms of set theory mark him clearly as an 
individualist (Nc). It is well known that LeSniewski was preoccupied with 
the paradoxes of mathematical logic, in particular Russell's Paradox, and 
attempted to expose what he considered to be the faulty assumptions in the 
reasoning leading to the paradox. 10 Lesniewski's analysis ofthe term 'class' 
led him to the conclusion that if the term 'class' refers to a single object, then 
every class is a member of itself, where 'member of' is taken to mean 'proper 
part of or identical with'. Russell's paradox cannot, that is, be constructed 
within that theory of classes according to which a class is the concrete whole 
of which its members are parts. Either a class exists, in which case it is 
a member of itself, or, if a class is not member of itself, there is no such 
class. This is the collective or mereological sense of 'class'. There is another, 
distributive sense of 'class' according to which to say that A is a member of 
the class of bs is to say no more or less than that A is a b. The latter form 
of expression is one with which Lesniewski deals in his Ontology, and it 
too makes no assumptions about the existence of abstract classes as rejected 
in Nc. Originally, under the influence of Mill, Lesniewski had regarded a 

6 
PETER M. SIMONS 
simple sentence of the fonn 'A is b' as true iff the object denoted by 'A' has 
the property connoted by 'is b'. II But he soon rejected both properties and 
connotation and came to regard 'A is a b' as true if and only if the object 
denoted by 'A' is one of the one or more objects denoted by 'b'. We need 
only accept the medieval doctrine that a name may signify many individuals. 
Something akin to Lesniewski's distinction between the collective and dis-
tributive senses of 'class' had already been recognized by Frege,12 except 
that Frege - to his cost - had taken classes as abstract objects quite seri-
ously, which, in conjunction with other principles of his logic, led precisely 
to Russell's Antinomy. Lesniewski, who was willing enough to agree with 
Frege's criticisms of Schroder, and himself belaboured the point that there 
can be no null class, a class made up of or composed of nothing at all,13 turns 
against Frege's idea that classes are the extensions of concepts, because - a 
typical Lesniewskian statement - he finds himself utterly unable to understand 
what might be meant by 'extension of a concept', nor is his understanding 
improved when Frege talks of the 'value-course of a function' instead. And 
even if Frege's conception made sense, the revision made to Frege's system in 
the light of Russell's Antinomy would abrogate the previous sense and return 
us to ignorance. 
The way round Russell's problem which soon gained the approval of most 
mathematicians was that of Zennelo, who, starting probably from Cantor 
rather than Frege, restricted the principles of set-fonnation sufficiently to 
(presumably) exclude paradoxes like that of Russell. Zermelo's conception 
of set, however, likewise completely eludes LeSniewski's grasp. 14 
Finally, Whitehead and Russell attempt to use class symbolism in Principia 
Mathematica while not accepting classes into their ontology. Lesniewski's 
main complaint here is that Whitehead and Russell, by confusing use and 
mention, do not make it clear whether it is classes themselves or just class-
symbols that are incomplete symbols, and he finds nothing clear enough to 
enable him to tell whether the classes Whitehead and Russell think do not 
exist are the same as his own classes, or mereological wholes. Lesniewski 
apparently does not penetrate far enough into the ontology of PM to see that 
class terminology is brought in on the back of an ontology of propositional 
functions, doubtless items which Lesniewski would likewise have failed to 
understand. 
Lesniewski claims his own mereological view of sets is in agreement with 
that of Cantor. 15 It is true that some of Cantor's examples fit Lesniewski's 
understanding, but it is very doubtful whether Lesniewski would be happy 
with sets of objects such as numbers and order-types, which "arise" by abstrac-
tion, as in Cantor. One may also be forgiven for feeling that Lesniewski's 
analysis of Russell's Antinomy slides past the problem without addressing 
directly the issues which led to it in the first place. Whichever Lesniewskian 
sense of 'member' we take, whether the sense of 'is part of or identical with', 
or 'is one of', the result is left-reflexive and transitive: that is, taking' E' to 

NOMINALISM IN POLAND 
cover either sense, we have 
Refl 
Trans 
VxVy(x E y ---+ x E x} 
VxVyVz((x E y & y E z} ---+ x E z}. 
7 
The conception of set which gave rise to the paradox, as well as its successors 
as found in Zermelo and in Russell's type theory, are neither reflexive nor 
transitive. It is all very well for Lesniewski to complain that he does not 
understand what 'member' means unless it means what he thinks it means. 
Lesniewski's alternative to set theory is based on the (justified) assumption: 
"If you follow me in what you mean by 'member' and 'set', you won't get 
into logical trouble". That is true, but the proponents of inconsistent set theory 
were doing more than trying to stay out of trouble (which is why they got 
into it in the first place): they were trying to provide a logical foundation for 
mathematics, some of them with a view to showing at least part of math-
ematics to be just logic. Lesniewski's weaker system may, or, more likely, 
may not be adequate to that purpose; we have no explicit statement by him 
in this regard. Like Frege, whom he admired more than any other logician, 
Lesniewski is a very uncharitable interpreter of other philosophers and logi-
cians, which makes it hard for him to see beyond their shortcomings to the 
often interesting and fruitful theories they were trying to articulate, and which 
it is often possible to express in ways which avoid the mistakes which irritat-
ed Lesniewski. Zermelo's set theory is perhaps the best example. Considered 
purely as a mathematical theory, without philosophical pretensions, it has 
been and continues to be extraordinarily fruitful, in a way which it must be 
admitted LeSniewski's logic has not, for all that a minority (myself included) 
would prefer that logic, including the logic of mathematics, be done more in 
the manner and conviction of Lesniewski. It was perhaps difficult at the time 
for logicians to develop any firm intuitions about the nature of sets. Over the 
decades since then, something of a consensus has emerged that Zermelo's 
cumulative conception of sets is not unintuitive, albeit that it does not have 
the transparency one might wish for and so would still probably not satisfy 
Lesniewski's requirement for intuitive content. Nevertheless, it is in his own 
positive contribution rather than in his criticisms of others that the chief value 
of Lesniewski's work lies, and to this we now tum. 
4. NOMINALISM AND LESNIEWSKI'S LOGIC: SEMANTICS 
As an upholder of both Nu and Nc one might well have expected Lesniewski 
to round his position out and accept Na, that there are no abstract entities at 
all. Surprisingly perhaps, he does not do so: despite his deprecatory remarks 
about the writings of many of those who do believe in various kinds of abstract 
entity, he does not commit himself to concretism. It appears that he was not 
completely satisfied beyond doubt that there are no abstract entities, citing 

8 
PETER M. SIMONS 
the objects of dreams and after-images as examples. 16 Whether or not these 
are good candidates for the title 'abstract entity', they were enough to give 
him pause. 
While Lesniewski was not prepared to commit himself, he was certainly 
not prepared to let logic make commitments for him, and he elevated the 
ontological neutrality of logic to the status of a regulative principle. Frege 
criticized and abandoned Kant's view that existence statements are synthetic, 
and in his logic purported to demonstrate the existence of infinitely many 
"logical objects", mainly the concept extensions Lesniewski (and he was 
not alone) found so puzzling. The manifest failure of Frege's logic was a 
salutary lesson that such extravagance could be dangerous. Theorem *24.52 
of Principia Mathematica, which states that the class of all individuals has 
a member, likewise offends against the ontological neutrality of logic, and 
Russell later described it as embodying a "defect in logical purity". 17 No one 
seriously denies that at least one individual exists, but that this should not 
follow from logic alone seems a reasonable requirement. 
Lesniewski's system of the foundations of mathematics comprised three 
theories: protothetic, Ontology, and mereology. While presumably not made 
with a view to completing Frege's or Russell's logicist programme, it was 
nevertheless intended to provide a suitable language for the formulation of 
mathematical theories. In his lectures in Warsaw, some of which have since 
been published,18 LeSniewski formulates Peano arithmetic in the language 
of Ontology. It is Ontology which provides the framework for any theory 
which, unlike protothetic, deals with a particular subject matter. Lesniewski 
himself regarded logic as comprising protothetic and Ontology, mereology 
being already an extra-logical theory. In protothetic it is acceptable to quantify 
propositional variables and variables of propositional functors, to any finite 
degree, which makes protothetic equivalent in expressive potential to a theory 
of propositional types. Likewise in Ontology not only nominal variables are 
quantified, but also predicate variables and variables of any higher order. 
Indeed, apart from the universal quantifier and punctuation marks, all symbols 
of Ontology are categorematic and can be replaced by variables which can be 
quantified, which means that Ontology is equivalent in expressive potential 
to simple type theory. 
If we accept Quine's views on quantification, to quantify variables is to 
tum them into variable names and to be ontologically committed to whatever 
entities the variables range over. To quantify predicate variables for instance 
is to "countenance" attributes (properties and relations). If we apply Quine's 
view to Lesniewski's logic, Lesniewski is ontologically committed to an 
infinite hierarchy of abstract entities. When Quine visited Warsaw in 1933, 
he tells us, 
With Lesniewski I would argue far into the night, trying to convince him that his system of 
logic did not avoid, as he supposed, the assuming of abstract objects. 19 

NOMINALISM IN POLAND 
9 
Quine's attempts to persuade Lesniewski were clearly unsuccessful. One of 
the chief difficulties facing those accustomed to standard predicate logic who 
try to understand Lesniewski's logic is the interpretation of the quantifiers, 
about which much has been written. The problem can be appreciated without 
first ascending to higher orders. There is a theorem of Ontology written 
:la· '" ex(a) 
which is sometimes read as 'there is something that does not exist' or 'some 
things do not exist' . Now although there is no strict incompatibility between 
accepting non-existents and denying the existence of abstract entities, so 
that it is possible to be a Meinongian nominalist, everything we know about 
Lesniewski tells us this reading cannot embody his view of what the formula 
means. A more accurate though still approximate rendering would be 'for 
some a, there exist no a's'. Clearly then 'for some' cannot mean 'there exist'. 
Because of the way Lesniewski conceived his logical systems, he did not 
pose the question of their interpretation in the way a modem logician would. 
Lesniewski's systems arose as a regimented extension of natural language, and 
were never without an interpretation, having inherited their basic meaning-
fulness from natural language. Nevertheless, natural languages do not contain 
quantifiers binding variables, so their meaning is not directly inherited, and 
we are entitled to ask what they mean and whether they indeed embody onto-
logical commitment to abstract entities. There is no direct answer forthcoming 
from Lesniewski's writings. Quine took away from Warsaw the impression 
that Lesniewski's quantification was substitutiona1.2o Thus a sentence of the 
form :IX . A is true iff some sentence obtained by substituting for' X' in 'A' 
is true, where 'X' may belong to any admissible syntactic category. Quine's 
own view is that substitutional quantification involves indirect ontological 
commitment to ex~ressions or to natural numbers, within which syntax may 
be arithmeticized, 1 I do not imagine Lesniewski would have agreed with 
this. 
An alternative explanation of Lesniewskian quantification, due to Kling 
and Canty, is that Lesniewski is committed neither to objects in a domain of 
quantification nor expressions substitutable for variables, but to extensions 
of expressions.22 This is no clearer than the term 'extension', to which, we 
noted, Lesniewski took exception. If extensions are taken, as they usually 
are, to be sets, this is quite unacceptable to Lesniewski, the upholder of Nc. 
There are other ways to construe extensions, e.g. as functions, but they all 
seem to end up hypostatizing extensions as some kind of abstract entity. Is it 
then, as Quine believed, impossible to interpret the higher-order quantifiers 
of Lesniewski's logic without explicitly or implicitly accepting that there are 
abstract entities of some sort or other? 
Let us first jettison one piece of unnecessary ballast. Quine's view that in 
quantifying variables from categories other than that of names we somehow 
nominalize these variables may safely be rejected. Not only does it involve, 

10 
PETER M. SIMONS 
as Prior puts it, "a quite eccentric account of namehood",23 it also makes 
nonsense of the idea that variables can be congruously replaced by constants 
of non-nominal categories. The problem of having to assume abstract entities 
to account for non-nominal quantification remains to be solved even if we 
allow that predicate-variables, sentence-variables, etc. are not nominal, since 
the question is whether they can be accorded semantic values without being 
assigned abstract entities as their semantic values. The fact that Lesniewski's 
quantification of nominal variables is non-standard is what helped people to 
realize that the usual objectual interpretation does not suit his system, but even 
if Lesniewski had used perfectly normal nominal quantification the question 
of ontological commitment would have arisen for higher-order quantification. 
If a non-objectual interpretation can work there, it can work at the level of 
nominal quantification, whether standard or not, as well. 
I believe that Lesniewski was quite right to resist Quine in their 1933 
discussions, though I have no idea whether or not Lesniewski would have 
approved of the explanation I shall attempt. 
Note first that officially Lesniewski has only one variable binder, the uni-
versal quantifier, and that he regards this as syncategorematic. I do not think 
he needed to accept this. We can distinguish many universal quantifiers, 
assigning each one its own category, depending on the categories of variables 
it binds. There will be typical or categorial ambiguity among these many 
quantifiers. Further, there are two aspects to each quantifier: its role as a 
variable binder, which it shares with other quantifiers of the same category 
(e.g. the dual, particular quantifier), and the aspect of meaning which makes 
it the universal and not some other quantifier of this category. It is clearer if 
we separate these roles. There is a precedent in the writings of Church and 
Ajdukiewicz:24 take the variable-binding role to be performed by an abstrac-
tion operator, and let a universal functor perform the role distinguishing the 
universal meaning. Instead of 
VXYZ ... (A) 
we write 
II(>'XYZ ... (A)), 
it being understood that the II and the >. are of appropriate category. Here I 
would differ again from Church, Prior and others, who regard the abstractor 
>. as syncategorematic.25 I think we can accept many abstractors of different 
categories, but we have to accept that these are not functors but operators, 
and that their effect is syntactically and semantically quite different from that 
of functors. By virtue of binding variables, they can reach arbitrarily deep 
inside their matrices and be nested to arbitrary degrees of complexity, so 
that their syntactic and semantic role is quite unlike that of a functor, which 
simply adds an extra layer of syntactic structure and spits out a semantic 
output value for each semantic input value. That being said, I do not think it 

NOMINALISM IN POLAND 
11 
is the variable binding role of quantifiers or other operators which leads to 
the issue of whether we need abstract entities in our semantic analysis. The 
semantic values possessed by complex expressions formed using abstractors 
are no different in kind from those of simple expressions of the same category. 
The difference in the semantics of the quantified sentence Va . F (a) and the 
related functor-predicate sentence II(F) is an inessential kink only: it is the 
difference between the latter and II()..a· F(a)). Assuming (as I think we must) 
that Lesniewski subscribes to Frege's principle that the semantic value of a 
compound expression depends functionally on the semantic values of its com-
ponent expressions, we have then to ask whether the semantic values of II and 
F (for some fixed predicate F) require us to accept certain abstract entities. If 
we replaced the general nominal variable' a' by the singular nominal variable 
'x' we know that one would answer in the negative: all we need assume for 
the truth or otherwise of this sentence are individuals, of which the sentence 
matrix F (x) is true or false. Because of his way of understanding quantifiers, 
Lesniewski does not have this way available to him. Nevertheless, a semantic 
account of names excludes their namehood if it leaves out of account that they 
do, or at least may, name individuals, not, after all, a controversial assump-
tion. Suppose, again truly, that some individuals are named. Note further that 
for Lesniewski names are not confined to singular denoting names: there are 
empty names like 'Pegasus', which name no individual, and plural names 
(usually, but necessarily, complex), like 'Benelux' or 'Russell and White-
head', which name more than one individual. There is also a name, defined 
by Lesniewski, usually written either 'V' or 'ob', which names every individ-
ual. So, it turns out, every individual has a name, though the overwhelming 
majority of individuals do not have their own singular or proper names. But 
for any collection of individuals, there could be a name naming just them and 
nothing else. Given a fixed domain of individuals then, we automatically have 
a fixed range of ways in which names could name, where two ways of naming 
count for Lesniewskian purposes as the same when the same individuals are 
named. The possible semantic values for Lesniewskian names are therefore 
not individuals but possible ways of naming (zero or more) individuals. In 
putting it this way, to avoid commitment to abstract entities one seems forced 
to accept modal discourse. I think this modal component in the metalanguage 
is probably unavoidable, but accepting modal facts does not run against Na. 
Now consider a monadic predicate F. Its (presumed fixed) semantic value 
is not an entity, but a way of yielding truth or falsehood when input a certain 
way of naming. Assuming neither ways of naming nor being true or false 
are themselves entities, just shorthand for telling us what certain expressions 
do, how they work, the semantic value of a functor like F is not an entity 
either. The only entities required are the individuals (if any) which delimit 
the possible semantic values of names. (If there are no individuals, there is 
only one way a name can name, namely emptily!) Among the possible ways 
a predicate can mean is the following: it yields a true sentence no matter 

12 
PETER M. SIMONS 
how the name means that completes it. Label this way a predicate can mean 
'U'. Now consider 11. It yields truth when taking a predicate whose value 
is U, otherwise it yields falsehood. That is why it is called the universal 
quantifier (functor). But this way for such a functor to mean is just one of the 
many which are appropriate to its category: that of its dual, for instance, is 
another. So we may also quantify variables of the category of 11, introduce 
higher-order universal quantifier functors, and so on. At each stage the range 
of possible ways expressions may mean is fixed by there being a domain of 
individual nameables, the ways other functors may mean being determined by 
these and by the fact that sentences are allowed only the two values true and 
false. Of course the whole language is extensional, though its metalanguage 
is ostensibly and probably inevitably modal. 26 
There is another and more familiar way to tell the story. One starts with 
a set (possibly empty) of individuals, and two abstract objects called the 
True and the False. Names are assigned subsets of the domain, predicates are 
assigned functions from such subsets to the truth-values, higher-order functors 
are assigned higher-order functions, and so on. From a combinatorial point of 
view the two stories are interchangeable, but from an ontological point of view 
they are worlds apart. The more familiar one employs the machinery of sets 
and/or functions. It is mathematically handy and ontologically extravagant. 
The first version takes pains to distinguish names from non-names and entities 
from possible roles. Of course in talking about it, even now, I am compelled 
by the English language to use nominal expressions like 'possible roles'. I do 
not think we need take seriously the idea that there are abstract entities named 
by such abstract nouns. If Olivier can play Hamlet and can play Othello, (but 
not Ophelia or Desdemona) we may say there are at least two Shakespearian 
roles he can play and two he cannot, but I cannot take seriously the idea that 
in so counting (which is a form of quantifying of course) we are ontologically 
committed to abstracta called Shakespearian roles. The nominalizations are 
much too far from grass-roots talk about what Olivier can or cannot do for 
them to be taken ontologically seriously. 
5. NOMINALISM AND LESNIEWSKI'S LOGIC: SYNTAX 
There is another respect in which Lesniewski's logic is nominalistic which is 
less controversial and can be dealt with more briefly. It would be of no avail to 
attempt to avoid commitment to abstracta in logic and in the semantics oflogic 
if the language oflogic were itself composed of abstracta. Lesniewski's views 
on the constituents of language are anchored to terrafirma. Expressions, their 
components and the wholes they constitute are one and all concrete entities: 
marks on paper, blackboards, etc., or certain noises, perhaps also covert 
neuro-physiological events, though I know of no place where LeSniewski 
considers the latter. Tokens, not types, are the stuff that language is made of. 

NOMINALISM IN POLAND 
13 
Lesniewski is thus led to fonnulate his metalogic in a way which expressly 
takes this point of view into account. The tenninological explanations in 
which he describes his logical syntax and presents the directives of his logical 
system27 refer only to actual marks and otherwise use general tenns covering 
expressions. Lesniewski does not, as is common metalogical practice, assume 
there are infinitely many expressions of every category available. A system 
of logic for him is no less concrete than any other chunk of language, and 
his job as a metalogician is to produce objects which are the beginnings 
of logical systems and issue instructions ("directives") on how to go about 
extending or adding to systems like the one in question. A logical system is 
not something abstract: it is a concrete collection of signs which grows as its 
master adds new signs to it according to the directives. In practice, this has 
no restrictive effect on the logician at all. Whereas a Platonist logician thinks 
of himself as creating tokens corresponding to types of expression which 
already exist as abstract entities, the role of the tokens being the didactic 
one of putting us in cognitive contact with the pre-existing types which fonn 
the logical system proper, LeSniewski takes the more down-to-earth view 
of taking the logician to create the logical system itself. This approach to 
the syntax of logical systems is known as 'inscriptional syntax' and has 
been sporadically developed in Lesniewski's wake.28 That Platonistic syntax 
has been overwhelmingly preferred by logicians and mathematicians is due 
probably more to its greater simplicity and ease of pedagogic transmission 
than to principled objections to the inscriptional approach. Platonists will not 
in any case scruple to accept expression types alongside other abstracta. It 
may be that an adequate metalogical account of inscriptional syntax requires 
a modal idiom, since one thinks in tenns of how a system can be extended 
(even if it actually is not). Again, while I think there are problems involved 
in working this out, it does not of itself commit the Lesniewskian to abstract 
entities, albeit that it must be admitted that most Lesniewskians are at least 
as opposed to modal talk as they are to abstracta. 
6. KOTARBINSKI 
Kotarbinski's ontological views were more extreme than those of Lesniewski. 
He believed that everything is an object with physical characteristics located 
in time and space. Since time, space, and properties are among the items 
Kotarbinski denies exist, we have to rephrase this to avoid apparent reference 
to them, and say his view is that 
Everything is an object which is somewhere, somewhen, and physically somehow or other. 
This view went under several names at different times: reism, because every-
thing is a thing (res), concretism, because everything is concrete, nothing is 
abstract, and pansomatism, because everything is a body. To contrast his view 
with that of the later Brentano, who was also apparently a reist, but believed in 

14 
PETER M. SIMONS 
the existence of souls, res cogitantes, Kotarbinski sometimes called his view 
'materialistic reism', and to contrast it with Lesniewski's view that there are 
(or might be) images which are not spatio-temporal, he also called it 'radical 
realism' . We shall stick to 'reism' . Reism implies all the forms of nominalism 
considered in Section 1. Kotarbinski himself confined 'nominalism' to Nu, 
seconding Lesniewski's argument against general objects: 
Concretism ... joined the current of nominalism, if by nominalism we mean the view that 
universals do not exist. An essential point in this borrowed proof (sc. that of Lesniewski 
against general objects) was the assumption that each object of a given set of objects has a 
specific property of its own, and hence a universal can by definition have neither that property 
nor its negation, which runs contrary to the law of excluded middle, and indirectly contrary to 
the law of contradiction.29 
Reism goes beyond Nu: 
Not only do properties not exist, but neither do relations, states of things, or events, and the 
illusion of their existence has its source in the existence of certain nouns, which suggest the 
erroneous idea of the existence of such objects, in addition to things. 30 
Kotarbinski goes further than Lesniewski is prepared to go, denying the 
existence of images: 
People commonly think that when recall something or when they dream of something, then 
images come into being, which they call inner images ... Now reism dared to storm the strong-
hold of that doctrine, without availing itself of Lesniewski's assistance, since that assistance 
was in this matter refused ... immanent images do not exist at all, since they exist neither in a 
person's head nor outside his head ... concretism attempts to handle immanent images in the 
same way as it handles properties, relations, states of things, events and universals: whenever 
reference is apparently made to them, it is in fact things that are meant.3l 
Kotarbinski found he had no need to construct a logic adequate to express 
his viewpoint, since LeSniewski, having taken care that his logic carried no 
ontological commitment, had already delivered him the instrument he needed: 
Reism, having found the fine invention represented by Lesniewski's Ontology, had no need to 
make its own instruments in the field of formal logic, but obtained them ready-made from a 
firm that enjoyed an excellent reputation.32 
Finally, Kotarbinski was prepared to deny that there are classes, at least 
abstract classes which cannot be interpreted in either of the senses discerned 
by Lesniewski. Thus embracing Nu and Nc, and affirming that everything is 
concrete and spatio-temporal, Kotarbinski accepted Na. 
In what it denies, Kotarbinski's reism goes well beyond the demands of 
Na, the denial of abstract objects, since events and states may certainly be 
regarded as concrete individuals in the manner of Davidson. Kotarbmski 
called states of affairs (things) 'static facts' and events 'kinetic facts',33 and 
since it is common to consider facts abstract this may explain his view. 
However, events should be distinguished from facts if the latter are taken to 
be abstract. It also stretches the term 'body', perhaps beyond its elastic limit, 
if like Kotarbinski we call flames 'bodies', 34 or be prepared nowadays to 
accept some of the objects quantum theory tells us exist, but which are very 

NOMINALISM IN POLAND 
15 
unlike what otherwise pass for bodies. Even the most recherche objects of 
quantum theory nevertheless have physical characteristics and are in space 
and time, even if their location is not such a straightforward affair as that of 
a lump of rock. 
Kotarbinski's views developed in stages, the most critical stage being when 
his views on the status of sentences denying that there are objects of this or 
that category came under fire from Ajdukiewicz.35 Ostensibly, reism is an 
ontological thesis about what there is, but Kotarbinski always combined it 
with a semantic thesis to the effect that nouns apparently referring to objects 
he denies exist are not genuine nouns but pseudo-nouns or onomatoids, and 
that the sentences in which they occur can in principle be replaced by syn-
onymous sentences in which apparent reference to such entities disappears. 
Here is a sample of such paraphrastic reductions:36 
Roundness is an attribute of spheres 
Spheres are round 
The relationship of seniority holds between John and Peter 
John is older than Peter 
The state of affairs that London lies on the Thames obtains 
London lies on the Thames 
John made ajoumey from London to New York 
John travelled from London to New York 
The class of mammals is included in the class of vertebrates 
Every mammal is a vertebrate 
The motion of this vehicle is rapid 
This vehicle is moving rapidly 
The greenness of this leaf is light 
This leaf is light green 
The number of M's is even 
M's are pairwise numerous. 
Kotarbinski is bound to admit that the elimination of onomatoids from math-
ematical theories like set theory is a problem which he has not solved,37 and 
he is likewise forced to accept that reism takes on the status of a perpetual 
programme, that of taking up the challenge to eliminate all terms except those 
denoting concrete individuals.38 

16 
PETER M. SIMONS 
The final example above indicates some of the difficulty. A paraphrase 
into ordinary language will often fail because there are no expressions of 
ordinary language into which the paraphrase can go, it being precisely the 
way of ordinary language to use nominalizations to express complex ideas. It 
is more promising to look to a language like that of Lesniewski's Ontology 
as a source of suitable sentences. The following will do for 'the number of 
M's is even': 
~R(Vab(Rab --+ (a c: M & b c: M & Rba & a i- b & Vc(Rac --+ b = c)) 
& Va(a c: M --+ ~b(Rab))) 
Note the need to quantify a relational variable: evenness is not first-order 
definable. Thus the success of Kotarbinski's attempt to eliminate onomatoids 
from even simple arithmetic turns on whether higher-order quantification in 
Lesniewski's Ontology (or some equally powerful system) can be interpreted 
without invoking abstract objects. Kotarbinski was aware of the problem of 
ontological commitment associated with quantification binding variables of 
higher order, but his remarks on the question are sketchy and unhelpful. 39 
It is doubtful whether Kotarbinski's reism can provide an adequate account 
of simple predication. Of a true simple predication like 'This leaf is green' 
the question must be raised - assuming we are not idealists - in virtue of 
what the sentence is true, or, to put it another way, what in the world makes it 
true? Kotarbinski's answer is drawn from his understanding of Ldniewski's 
Ontology: 'This leaf is green' is true because the individual named by 'this 
leaf' is one of the individuals named by 'green' (or perhaps 'green object'). 
This is unsatisfactory, because it offers us no account as to why this leaf 
is named by 'green'. Presumably it is not a matter of whim or convention. 
Again, if Kotarbinski replies that it is because the leaf really is green, he has 
not answered the query. What makes the leaf green, better, in what does the 
leaf's being green consist? This is the request for a fundamentum in re for 
the leaf's being green.40 Colours being in fact not just a matter of objects but 
also of our visual and cortical make-up, the answer is likely to be extremely 
complicated, much more complicated than the sentence. Nevertheless, even 
for predications to which the answer is straightforward, we shall need to 
invoke entities which, while particular, are not concrete things like the leaf, 
but individual accidents.41 A nominalistic account of predication will be 
forced to go beyond reism. 
There is another problem facing reism which falls in the same area. Pre-
sumably part of what makes it correct to say just of things that are spherical 
that they are spherical, whereas things shaped otherwise are not, is that spher-
ical things are all similar to one another. But just to say this is too little, 
since everything is similar to everything else. We have to be told in what 
respect spheres are similar to one another, namely, in shape.42 If we wish to 
avoid reference to abstract shapes, or to universal sphericity, we had better 
accept individual accidents, "thin" individuals, inhering in concrete things, 

NOMINALISM IN POLAND 
17 
to provide the basis for similarities in different respects. A red sphere, a 
green sphere, a red cube and a green cube can then be sorted into similarity 
classes appropriate to the predicates of shape and colour, by invoking individ-
ual moments of redness, sphericity etc., or other moments accounting for a 
sphere's being spherical, a red thing's being red, etc. Again, reism's ontology 
is simply too spartan to provide the resources for a nominalistic account with 
any hope of success. 
Another problem faced by reism, which for reasons of space I shall not 
follow up, is how to give an account of propositional attitudes. This has a 
bearing on the nominalism issue, in that any solution favouring an ontology 
of abstract propositions entails rejecting Na. 
7. TARSKI 
It may come as something of a surprise to see Tarski's name included in a 
discussion of Polish nominalism. A glance at Tarski's bibliography reveals 
that he worked in many areas of mathematics where it would be naturally 
assumed no nominalist would care or dare to tread, such as set theory, large 
cardinal theory, infinitary logic. Tarski was of course taught by Lesniewski 
and Kotarbinski, but he went his own way in logic and one might expect him 
to do so in philosophy as well. No one who knows Tarski's views only from 
what he published would discover that he was a nominalist. So let us quote 
from the recollections of Patrick Suppes, who knew Tarski: 
As is evident to anyone who has read any significant part of Tarski's published writings, he 
was extraordinarily cautious and careful in giving any direct philosophical interpretation of his 
work. In contrast, he was in conversation willing to express a much wider range of philosophical 
opinions - I know this from my own experience and also from reports of colleagues. On the 
basis of his extensive publications in set theory, it might be expected that he would be a Platonist 
as far as the foundations of mathematics are concerned - to my knowledge he never committed 
himself in print on this issue. But certainly in conversation he often expressed skepticism of 
Platonism and would set forth views that would be con~enial to formalism in the philosophy 
of mathematics and nominalism in general philosophy. 4 
More succinctly, according to Henry Hii:, Tarski was a reist.44 Whether the 
latter is true I cannot tell, but it is made less probable neither by the testimony 
of Suppes,4S nor by the fact that Tarski dedicated the collection of English 
translations of his early essays to Kotarbinski, nor by his effort to make 
Kotarbinski's work better known.46 At all events, we cannot expect to find a 
systematic discussion of nominalism in Tarski. Nevertheless, there are hints 
in his early works, before he turned almost completely to mathematics, that he 
attempted to avoid positions irrevocably incompatible with nominalism. The 
big truth paper for instance, where Lesniewski's influence is evident in several 
places, shows how to define not 'truth' but 'is a true sentence of language 
L' for suitable L. Where Tarski makes metalogical assumptions which are 
uncongenial from the point of view of inscriptional syntax, e.g. in supposing 

18 
PETER M. SIMONS 
that expressions are classes of tokens rather than individual tokens,47 or that 
there are infinitely many expressions,48 he is almost apologetic and suggests 
the problem may be got round with more effort. Tarski also indicates at one 
point that one reason for being dissatisfied with the idea of admitting semantic 
concepts as primitive is that "it would then be difficult to bring ... into 
harmony with the postulates of the unity of science and of physicalism".49 
Physicalism is not the same as nominalism, but it is often regarded as likewise 
incompatible with Platonism. 
So while we can find no argued defence of nominalism in Tarski, the fact 
that he was apparently a nominalist is of significance for two reasons. The 
first is historical: it suggests that the influence of Tarski's teachers, especially 
Kotarbinski, was more long-lived than the published works would allow us 
to infer. The second has to do with the psychology of mathematics. Many of 
the great mathematicians and logicians have been Platonists, and their firm 
belief in the existence and independence of the objects they were investigating 
perhaps helped to give them the stamina and confidence they needed to press 
on and achieve their results. Frege, Cantor and Godel may serve as recent 
examples. Among the Poles, we find Lukasiewicz is a Platonist. 50 Great 
mathematicians and logicians who are nominalists are rarer, and Tarski serves 
as an excellent modem example to put alongside Leibniz. 
8. CONCLUSION 
The influence of Lesniewski and Kotarbinski goes beyond Tarski of course. 
Another of their students, Czeslaw Lejewski, is a staunch defender of a 
reism which is committed to unverifiable theses which even Kotarbinski 
was reluctant to accept.51 Lejewski has also, more than any other follower 
of Lesniewski, gone out of his way to show how to accommodate within 
Ontology talk which is ostensibly about abstract entities like classes,52 and 
to furnish language within which a Lesniewskian nominalist can carry on 
a dialogue with his Platonist opponent.53 No doubt there are other Polish 
nominalists whose thinking was influenced by Lesniewski and Kotarbinski. A 
more exhaustive cataloguing of the extent of Polish nominalism is something 
I shall not undertake here, because what is important is not a head-count 
but the issue of principle: does Polish nominalism contribute essentially to 
answering the question whether nominalism is correct? My answer is plainly 
that it does, and the main problem which needs to be overcome is the one at 
the heart of the discussions between Quine and Lesniewski: can a powerful 
higher-order logical language avoid commitment to abstract entities? Thanks 
to the work of Lesniewski, Kotarbinski, their associates and students, we are 
closer to an answer than before. 

NOMINALISM IN POLAND 
19 
NOTES 
l Goodman and Quine (1947), p. 105 (reprint p. 173). 
2 Goodman (1972), p. 156. Cf. p. 157: "Nominalism as I conceive it ... does not involve 
excluding abstract entities". Goodman rejects classes not because they are abstract but because 
one can generate more than one entity from the same basic individuals, e.g. {a, b}, {{a}, {b}}, 
{ {a, b}} are three entities all generated from a and b (cf. ibid., 171). It is this appearance of 
new entities from old, as if by magic, to which Goodman objects. 
3 Twardowski (1894), ch. 15, pp. 102-111; (1977), pp. 97-105. 
4 Lukasiewicz (1987a), p. 112. Lukasiewicz reported on Meinong's work in Lw6w in a lecture 
whose summary was published as Lukasiewicz (1909). 
5 Cf. Lukasiewicz (191Oa, 1987b). 
6 That negative existentials are all false is asserted in Lesniewski (1911); that positive exis-
tentials are also false is asserted in Lesniewski (1913a). Cf. Kiing (1967), p. 103. 
7 Lesniewski (1913a), pp. 319-320. 
8 For a reconstruction cf. Luschei (1962), pp. 308-310. 
9 Kiing (1967), p. 104. 
lO Cf. Lesniewski (1914), pp. 182-189; (1983), pp. 14-17. 
II Cf. Lesniewski (1913b), p. 497; (1968), p. 26. Cf. Kotarbinski (1966), p. 430. 
l2 The distinction is made in Frege's 1895 review of Schroder's Vorlesungen zur Algebra der 
Logik, cf. Frege (1984), p. 21Off. 
l3 Lesniewski (1927), pp. 192-196; (1983), pp. 18-20. 
l4 Ibid., pp. 201-202; (1983), p. 22. 
l5 Ibid., p. 190; (1983), p. 17. 
l6 Personal communication from Czeslaw Lejewski. It is confirmed by what Kotarbinski writes 
about Lesniewski's refusal to help him argue against images (see below). 
l7 Russell (1919), p. 203. 
l8 Lesniewski (1988). Cf. esp. ch. 4, "Primitive Terms of Arithmetic", pp. 129-152. 
19 Quine (1985), p. 104. 
20 Quine (1969), p. 63. 
2l Ibid., p. 107. 
22 Cf. Kiing and Canty (1970), Kiing (1977). 
23 Prior (1971), p. 165. 
24 Church (1932), Ajdukiewicz (1935). 
25 Church (1940), p. 57; Prior (1971), p. 46. 
26 Cf. Kiing (1967), p. 182: "The formal structures represented by an extensional system must 
have an intensional background". Accepting modal discourse does not of itself commit one to 
possibilia, but there is a special problem for the concretist: finding an acceptable account of the 
meaning of modal operators which does not involve substituting abstracta (such as universals) 
for possibilia. Concretists tend not to be possibilists, but there is no strict incompatibility 
between the two positions. Like most concretists, I should like to think one could account for 
the meaning of modal discourse without possibilia. Cf. Simons (1985), pp. 214-215. 
27 Cf. Lesniewski (1929), pp. 59-77; (1930), pp. 115-128. 
28 Cf. Luschei (1962), pp. 167-288; Rickey (1972-1973). 
29 Kotarbinski (1966), p. 430. The first concurrence with Lesniewski's argument is in Kotar-
binski (1920). It should be noted that Kotarbinski's understanding of 'concretism' is narrower 
than that proposed in Section 1 above, since it is possible to accept concreta that are not 
individual things in Kotarbinski's sense. 
30 Kotarbinski (1966), p. 430. 
3l Ibid., p. 432. 
32 Ibid. 
33 Ibid, p. 430. 
34 Ibid., p. 434. 

20 
PETER M. SIMONS 
35 Cf. Lejewski (1979). 
36 The paraphrases all come from Kotarbinski (1958a); (1966), pp. 429-437. 
37 Kotarbinski (1966), pp. 436-437. 
38 Ibid., p. 435; "In its mature form, concretism absolutely insists on its programme only." 
39 Cf. Kotarbinski (1965), pp. 236-238. Kotarbinski merely begs the question, saying that 
since existence in the primary (philosophical) sense means being able to act on something else, 
it is clear that the particular quantifier does not express existence. 
40 Cf. Kung (1967), pp. 173, 186. 
41 Cf. Mulligan, Simons and Smith (1984), where accidents are called 'moments'. 
42 Goodman calls this "the difficulty of imperfect community": Goodman (1977), p. 119. 
43 Suppes (1988), p. 81. 
44 Personal communication. 
45 Suppes (1988), p. 80 mentions that Tarski often referred to the influence of Kotarbinski in 
conversation. According to Jan Tarski (personal communication), Tarski always had a photo-
§,raph of Kotarbinski in his study. 
6 Tarski assisted in the translation of Kotarbinski (1955), and it was at Tarski's insistence that 
this translation was included in his own Collected Papers. 
47 Tarski (1956), p. 156 n. 
48 Ibid., p. 174 n. 
49 Ibid., p. 406. 
50 Cf. Lukasiewicz (1970), pp. 241, 249. 
51 Cf. Lejewski (1976). Lejewski told me that when Kotarbinski received a copy of this he 
replied that he was not prepared to go as far. 
52 Lejewski (1985). 
53 Lejewski (1974). 
REFERENCES 
Ajdukiewicz, K. (1935). 'Die syntaktische Konnexitat', Studia Philosophica 1, 1-27. English 
translation Ajdukiewicz (1967). 
Ajdukiewicz, K. (1967). 'Syntactic Connection', translated by H. Weber, in McCall (ed.) 
(1967),207-231. 
Bochenski, J.M., Church, A. and Goodman, N. (1956). The Problem of Universals. A Sympo-
sium, University of Notre Dame Press, Notre Dame, Indiana. 
Church, A. (1932). 'A Set of Postulates for the Foundations of Logic', Annals of Mathematics 
2nd ser. 33, 346-366. 
Church, A. (1940). 'A Formulation of the Simple Theory of Types', Journal of Symbolic Logic 
5,56-68. 
Frege, G. (1984). Collected Papers on Mathematics, Logic, and Philosophy, Blackwell, Oxford. 
Goodman, N. (1956). 'A World of Individuals'. In Bochenski, Church and Goodman (1956), 
13-31. Reprinted in Goodman (1972), 155-172. Page references are to the reprint. 
Goodman, N. (1972). Problems and Projects, Bobbs-Merrill, Indianapolis. 
Goodman, N. (1977). The Structure of Appearance, 3rd ed., Reidel, Dordrecht. 
Goodman, N. and Quine, W.V. (1947). 'Steps Toward a Constructive Nominalism', Journal of 
Symbolic Logic 12,105-122. Reprinted in Goodman (1972),173-198. 
Kotarbinski, T. (1920). 'Sprawa istnienia przedmiotow idealnych (The Question of the Exis-
tence ofIdeal Objects)', Przegla,d Filozojiczny XXIII, 149-170. Reprinted in Kotarbinski 
(1958b), Vol. 2,7-39. 
Kotarbiriski, T. (1929). Elementy teorii poznania, logiki formalnej i metodologii nauk, Os so-
lineum, Lwow. English translation in Kotarbinski (1966). Reprinted 1990. 

NOMINALISM IN POLAND 
21 
Kotarbinski, T. (1935). 'Zasadnicze mysli pansomatyzmu', Przegla,4 Filozojiczny XXXVIII, 
283-294. English translation in Kotarbinski (1955). 
Kotarbinski, T. (1955). 'The Fundamental Ideas of Pansomatism', translated by A. Tarski and 
D. Rynin. Mind LXIV, 488-500. 
Kotarbinski, T. (1958a). 'Fazy rozwojowe konkretyzmu (The Developmental Stages of Con-
cretism)" Studia Filozojiczne 4,3-13. English translation in Kotarbinski (1966), 429--438. 
Kotarbinski, T. (1958b). «')Ibor pism (Selected Writings), 2 vols., PWN, Warsaw. 
Kotarbinski, T. (1965). Le[ons sur l'histoire de la logique, translated by A. Posner, PWN, 
Warsaw. 
Kotarbinski, T. (1966). Gnosiology. The Scientific Approach to the Theory of Knowledge, 
translated by O. Wojtasiewicz, Pergamon, Oxford. 
Kung, G. (1967). Ontology and the Logistic Analysis of Language, Reidel, Dordrecht. 
Kling, G. (1977). 'The Meaning of the Quantifiers in the Logic of Lesniewski' , Studia Logica 
XXXVI, 309-322. 
Kling, G. and Canty, J.T. (1970). 'Substitutional Quantification and Lesniewskian Quantifiers', 
Theoria XXXVI, 165-182. 
Lejewski, C. (1974). 'A System of Logic for Bicategorial Ontology', Journal of Philosophical 
Logic 3, 265-283. 
Lejewski, C. (1976). 'Outline of an Ontology', Bulletin of the John Rylands University Lihrary 
of Manchester 59,127-147. 
Lejewski, C. (1979). 'On the Dramatic Stage in the Development of Kotarbinski's Pansoma-
tism', in Weingartner and Morscher (eds.), 197-214. 
Lejewski, C. (1985). 'Accommodating the Infonnal Notion of Class within the Framework of 
Lesniewski's Ontology', Dialectica 39, 217-241. 
Lesniewski, S. (1911). 'Przyczynek do analizy zdan egzystencjalnych', Przegl{{d Filozojiczny 
XIV, 329-345. English translation 'A Contribution to the Analysis of Existential Proposi-
tions' in Lesniewski (1992), 1-19. 
Lesniewski, S. (1912). 'Pr6ba dowodu ontologicznej zasady sprzecznosci', Przegl{{d Filo-
zojiczny XV, 206--226. English translation 'An Attempt at a Proof of the Ontological 
Principle of Contradiction' in Lesniewski (1992), 20--46. 
Lesniewski, S. (1913a). 'Krytyka logicznej zasady wy1'lczonego srodka', Przegl{{d Filozojiczny 
XVI, 315-322. English translation 'The Critique of the Logical Principle of the Excluded 
Middle' in Lesniewski (1992), 47-85. 
Lesniewski, S. (1913b). 'Czy prawdajest tylko wieczna czy tei: i wieczna i odwieczna?', Nowe 
Tory 18,493-528. English translations: [1] Lesniewski (1968), and [2] 'Is All Truth Only 
Etenal or Is It Also True without a Beginning' in Lesniewski (1992), 86--114. 
Lesniewski, S. (1914). 'Czy klasa klas, nie podporz'ldkowanych sobie, jest podporzqdkowana 
sobie?', Przegla,4 Filozojiczny XVII, 63-75. English translation 'Is the Class of Classes 
Not Subordinated to Themselves, Subordinated to Itself?' in Lesniewski (1992), 115-128. 
Lesniewski, S. (1927). '0 podstawach matematyki 1', Przegl{{d Filozojiczny XXX, 164-206. 
English translations: [I] in Lesniewski (1983), 7-24, and [2] 'On the Foundations of 
Mathematics' in Lesniewski (1992), 174-226. 
Lesniewski, S. (1929). 'Grundzlige eines neuen Systems der Grundlagen der Mathematik', 
Fundamenta Mathematicae 14, 1-81. English translation 'Fundamentals of aNew System 
of the Foundations of Mathematics' in Lesniewski (1992), 410-605. 
Lesniewski, S. (1930). 'Uber die Grundlagen der Ontologie', Comptes rendus des Seances 
de la Societe des Sciences et des Lettres de Varsovie, Classe III 23, 111-132. English 
translation 'On the Foundations of Ontology' in Lesniewski (1992), 606--628. 
Lesniewski, S. (1968). 'Is Truth Eternal or Is It Eternal and Since Eternity?', The Polish Review 
8,23--43. 
LeSniewski, S. (1983). 'On the Foundations of Mathematics', translated by Y.F. Sinisi, Topoi 
2,7-52. 

22 
PETER M. SIMONS 
Lesniewski, S. (1988). S. LeSniewski's Lecture Notes in Logic, edited by J.TJ. Srzednicki and 
Z. Stachniak, Kluwer, Dordrecht. 
Lesniewski, S. (1992). Stanislaw Lesniewski: Collected Works, edited by S.J. Surma, J.T.J. 
Srzednicki and D.1. Barnett, with an annotated bibliography by V.F. Rickey, Kluwer, 
Dordrecht. 
Lukasiewicz, J. (1909). '0 pogla.dach filozoficznych Meinonga (On Meinong's Philosophical 
Views)', Przegla,4 Filozojiczny XII, 559. 
Lukasiewicz, J. (191Oa). '0 zasadzie wyla.czonego srodka', przegla,4 Filozojiczny XIII, 372-
373. English translation in Lukasiewicz (1987b). 
Lukasiewicz, J. (191Ob). 0 zasadzie sprzecznosci u Arystotelesa. Studium krytyczne (On the 
Principle of Contradiction in Aristotle. A Critical Study), Polska Akademia Umiej~tnosci, 
Krakow. Reprint in Lukasiewicz (1987a). 
Lukasiewicz, J. (1970). Selected Works, edited by L. Borkowski, North-HollandIPWN, 
Amsterdam-Warsaw. 
Lukasiewicz, J. (1987a). 0 zasadzie sprzecznosci u Arystotelesa, edited by J. Wolenski, PWN, 
Warsaw. 
Lukasiewicz, 1. (1987b). 'On the Principle of the Excluded Middle', translated by 1. Wolenski 
and P.M. Simons, History and Philosophy of Logic 8, 69. 
Luschei, E.C. (1962). The Logical Systems of Lesniewski, North-Holland, Amsterdam. 
McCall, S. (ed.) (1967). Polish Logic 1920-1939, Clarendon Press, Oxford. 
Mulligan, K., Simons, P.M. and Smith, B. (1984). Truth-Makers', Philosophy and Phenom-
enological Research 44,278-321. 
Prior, A.N. (1971). Objects of Thought, edited by P.T. Geach and A.J.P. Kenny, Clarendon 
Press, Oxford. 
Quine, W. V. (1969). Ontological Relativity and Other Essays, Columbia University Press, New 
York. 
Quine, W.V. (1985). The Time of My Life. An Autobiography, The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Rickey, V.F. (1972-1973). 'Axiomatic Inscriptional Syntax', Notre Dame Journal of Formal 
Logic XIII (1972), 1-33, XIV (1973), 1-52. 
Russell, B.A.W. (1919). Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy, George Allen & Unwin, 
London. 
Simons, P.M. (1985). 'A Semantics for Ontology', Dialectica 39, 193-216. 
Suppes, P. (1988). 'Philosophical Implications of Tarski's Work', Journal of Symbolic Logic 
53,80-91. 
Tarski, A. (1956). Logic, Semantics, Metamathematics. Papers from 1923 to 1938, translated 
by J.H. Woodger, Clarendon Press, Oxford; 2nd ed., edited by J. Corcoran, Hackett, 
Indianapolis (1983). 
Twardowski, K. (1894). Zur Lehre vom Inhalt und Gegenstand der Vorstellungen, Holder, 
Vienna. Reprinted: Philosophia, Munich (1982). English translation in Twardowski (1977). 
Twardowski, K. (1977). On the Content and Object of Presentations, translated by R. Gross-
mann, Nijhoff, The Hague. 
Weingartner, P. and Morscher, E. (eds.) (1979). Ontologie und Logik (Ontology and Logic), 
Duncker & Humblot, Berlin. 

V. FREDERICK RICKEY* 
A SURVEY OF LESNIEWSKI'S LOGIC** 
Dedicated to my teacher 
Professor Boleslaw Sobociliski 
on his seventieth birthday 
In the period between the two world wars the eminent Polish logician Sta-
nislaw Lesniewski (1886--1939) created a hierarchy of logical systems which 
are unparalleled for their generality, precision, and intuitive foundations. By 
way of a careful and insightful analysis of the Russell Antinomy he came 
to distinguish between two notions of class, the distributive class and the 
collective class. Investigation of these concepts led to the creation of his 
systems of Ontology and Mereology, respectively. Then, in order to secure 
the foundations of these systems, he created the most fundamental system, 
Protothetic. 
We intend to survey the most important technical contributions to these 
three disciplines. The restriction to technical results is necessary to restrict 
this paper to manageable proportions. Moreover, the non-technical aspects 
of Lesniewski's systems are more accessible. There is no doubt that the 
philosophical aspect of Lesniewski's work is extremely important and inter-
esting. This, together with historical matters, is enthusiastically discussed in 
Luschei's book (1962) on The Logical Systems of Lesniewski. Applications 
to philosophy and linguistics are also omitted. Hopefully, all of these matters 
will receive full consideration at this conference.:I: 
As with any survey, this paper is biased by my own background and 
particular interests; of course, it is influenced by those areas which I know 
best. I studied with Sobocmski from 1962 to 1968, and so am well acquainted 
with his work and with his views concerning the Lesniewskian systems; 
hopefully, I represent his views accurately here. In this paper the work of 
* This work was partially supported by the Faculty Research Committee of Bowling Green 
State University. 
** Bibliographical Note: This paper originally appeared in Studia Logica XXXVI (1977), 
407-426, by permission of the Institute of Philosophy ancl Sociology of the Polish Academy 
of Sciences. 
t [Ed. Note: The author refers to XXllnd Conference on the History of Logic, July 5-9, 
1976, Krak6w, Poland.] 
 J. T. J. Srzednicki et al. (eds.), Leśniewski’s  Systems  Protothetic
© Kluwer Academic Publishers 1998

24 
V. FREDERICK RICKEY 
Sobocinski and his students will receive most of my attention. The work 
of the young Polish logicians - especially Iwanus and Kubinski - will not 
receive the attention it deserves, for I do not know their work as well as I 
would like to. In the spirit of an international meeting it is perhaps fitting if I 
tell you what is happening in my country and you tell me what is happening 
in yours. 
The plan of this paper will be to consider the three systems separate-
ly. But before that is done, one point about the origin of the systems must 
be discussed. In 1911 Lesniewski learned of the Russell Antinomy through 
Lukasiewicz's book (1910) on the Principle of Contradiction in Aristotle. 
This had a profound effect on Lesniewski. To understand this let me give the 
definition of Antinomy which Lesniewski adopted from Leonard Nelson: An 
Antinomy is a contradiction which arises from axioms, which we believe to 
be correct, by the use of deductive rules, which we believe to be valid. The 
problem is not just the contradiction. The real problem is the psychological 
one caused by the realization that something is wrong with one's foundational 
beliefs and also that part of one's intellectual heritage must be repudiated. 
Russell and Zermelo were only concerned about eliminating the contradic-
tion; they were not concerned with what caused the contradiction. This is 
where Lesniewski made an important and lasting contribution. He felt that 
the Antinomy must be solved, i.e., one must analyze carefully the axioms and 
deductive rules which were involved in the derivation of the contradiction and 
decide what mistake is inherent in them. Then, on the basis of this experience, 
new axioms and rules must be chosen. This was a long and painful process 
for Lesniewski. 
Lesniewski made three different analyses of the Antinomies before he 
found an entirely satisfactory one. In the process he made the distinc-
tion, which is usually credited to Ramsey, between logical and semantical 
Antinomies, but did not publish it. Also in the early twenties, he was the 
first to make the distinction between language and metalanguage. I would 
like to discuss these matters carefully here, but this would take us too far 
afield. Lesniewski's three analyses of the Russell Antinomy are discussed 
in Luschei (1962), Sinisi (1976) and Sobocinski (l949b), respectively. The 
paper of Sobocinski contains the definitive analysis and is worthy of careful 
consideration. 
I believe that there is one thing lacking in the Nelson definition of an 
Antinomy. That is that it fails to account for the intellectual culture of the 
time when it was discovered. The logical climate today is very different from 
the early decades of this century. Our logical sophistication has modulated 
the effect of the Russell Antinomy. Today our students are not upset by it. 
Thus, today the Russell Antinomy is not a true Antinomy in the sense of 
Nelson. It is a mere paradox, i.e., something which is other than it seems. 
Consequently, I advocate amending the definition of Antinomy to account for 

A SURVEY OF LESNIEWSKI'S LOGIC 
25 
the historical setting of its discovery and to realize that, hopefully, what was 
once an Antinomy will not always remain so. 
I. PROTOTHETIC 
Protothetic was formulated by Lesniewski in 1923. In the previous two years 
earlier versions of the system underwent a complicated series of changes 
before they evolved into the system which Lesniewski called 65, and which 
we call, simply, Protothetic. For the history and some of the details of these 
changes see Lesniewski (1929c) and (l938a) and Sobocinski (1960). 
Lesniewski's aim was to construct an extension of the propositional calcu-
lus which is as strong as possible. In fact, Protothetic is often characterized 
as a generalization of the propositional calculus wherein there are quantifiers 
binding variables of all semantic categories. 
The theory of semantic categories was originated by Lesniewski in 1922, 
but the idea stems from his work in 1912-1914. While the theory of semantic 
categories is similar to, but not identical with, the simple theory of types, 
it is intuitively much closer to the "parts of speech" of traditional grammar. 
Lesniewski found his semantic categories so intuitively appealing that he 
would feel himself obligated to accept them even if the Antinomies had not 
been discovered. As is customary today we shall use the notion of Ajdukiewicz 
(1935) to identify the different semantical categories. In Protothetic the cate-
gory S of sentences is basic and the higher categories or types are generated 
using the following rule: If a, /31, ... ,/3n are types, then a/ /31 ... /3n is a type. 
It is the type that takes n arguments of types /31 , ... , /3n respectively and gives 
a value of type a. In Protothetic quantification is allowed over each of the 
types which is generated from S according to this rule, once the types have 
been introduced via definition. This includes quantification of the types of the 
many link functors, i.e., over those types where a is different from S. As a 
word of warning, I should add that very often in the literature the semantical 
categories are not correctly characterized. 
Protothetic can be characterized as a system containing 
1. the propositional calculus 
2. the law of bivalency for propositions, i.e., the thesis 
[J] : f(O}·f(I}. :J ·[P]·f(P}, 
plus enough rules to make the system strongly complete. These rules are 
the rules of detachment, substitution, definition, distribution of quantifiers, 
and extensionality. Protothetic is strong enough to contain the usual laws of 
quantifiers and bivalency for each semantical category. 
Probably the most important lesson to be learned from Lesniewski is his 
utmost regard for precision. Nowhere is this better illustrated than in his 
formulation of the rule of procedure of Protothetic (1929c) and Ontology 

26 
v. FREDERICK RICKEY 
(1930). There is no other system of logic for which the rules have been so 
carefully and precisely formulated. The rules of procedure for Protothetic 
have been simplified considerably by myself in Rickey (1973). Reportedly, 
Hii worked on this problem earlier, but nothing was published. It would be 
very nice to have a simple presentation of the rule of procedure for Protothetic, 
for this is one of the most difficult things about the system. Machover (1966) 
hints that his notion of contextual determinacy can provide one. I tried to take 
up his idea, but am not satisfied with the results. For someone interested in the 
terminological explanations which lead up to the rule of Protothetic, I suggest 
that they first study them for the propositional calculus as in Lesniewski 
(1931) and Rickey (1975). 
Among the rules for Protothetic I consider the rule of definition to be the 
most important. This rule plays a crucial and creative role in the development 
of the system. Unfortunately, the strength of this rule is not well understood, 
let alone carefully studied. I consider this a very promising area for research. 
Lesniewski (1929c) was the first to give a correct presentation of the rule 
of substitution in logics with more than one type of variable. This is not 
generally known and often, e.g. Church (1956), statements to the contrary are 
made. 
The first paper on Protothetic is Tarski's doctoral thesis under Lesniewski; 
incidentally, Tarski was the only person who received a Ph.D. degree from 
Lesniewski. The most important result of Tarski (1923) is the definition of 
conjunction in terms of equivalence. He gave two definitions: 
[pq] :: p. q. ==: .[1] : .p ==: [r].p == f(r). == .[r].q == f(r) 
and 
[pq] : .p. q. ==: [1] : p == ·f(P) == f(q)· 
As is evident, these definitions are given in the propositional calculus extended 
with quantifiers and variable functors. The latter is also based on what Tarski 
called the law of substitution or what we call extensionality for the category 
of propositions, i.e., 
[Pqf] : p == q. => ·f(P) == f(g)· 
The latter definition is called an extensional definition of conjunction, because 
without extensionality the usual laws of conjunction cannot be derived. 
Many simplifications of these definitions have been given by Sobocinski 
(1949a), but he has been unable to use any of them to simplify the axiom of 
Protothetic. The most intuitive, but not the shortest, of these is 
[pq] : .p. q. ==: [1] : f(Pq)· == ·f(l1), 
where here, and elsewhere, 1 is an abbreviation of [u].u :==: [u].u. We could 
give a definition of 1, but we prefer to avoid unnecessary definitions for it 
makes the deductions easier. 

A SURVEY OF LESNIEWSKI'S LOGIC 
27 
The importance of these definitions is that they made Protothetic possible; 
i.e., it is possible to base a propositional logic with quantifiers on equivalence 
as sole primitive. This was the goal of Lesniewski, for he objected to stating 
definitions with a special definition symbol, and then not counting it among 
the primitive terms of the theory. 
Perhaps the best introduction to Protothetic is given by Slupecki (1953). In 
reading this paper one should keep in mind that it is based on the late Mr. J erzy 
Billich's notes of Lesniewski's lecture course entitled "On Certain Problems 
of Protothetic", which was given at Warsaw University in 1932-1933.* I do 
not know whether this was an elementary or advanced course, but I suspect 
the former. This suspicion is supported by reading Lesniewski (1938a) where 
it is mentioned that at that same time considerable work was being done on 
simplifying the axioms of Protothetic. 
Slupecki considers four systems, none of which is equivalent to the full 
system of Protothetic 65. The main deficiency of these systems is that they 
do not contain all of the semantical categories of Protothetic. Slupecki claims 
that the system E of Elementary Protothetics contains only the types 8 and 
818n . Thus he omits the many link functors altogether (although on page 66 
he uses the type (818)18, and on page 70 the type (818)/(8188)8**; 
there are other examples also). If Slupecki's treatment of the semantical 
categories is considered to be in error and if the rules are strengthened then 
he has the full system of Protothetic. These systems do, however, have certain 
pedagogical advantages in that they are less complex and hence, presumably, 
more understandable. My view is that such systems are worthy of further 
study. If more light is shed on such subsystems it will help us to understand 
the full system better. However, in such work it is very important to make 
it clear exactly what system is being considered. It is especially necessary 
to carefully specify what deductive rules are being used. This is not done in 
Slupecki's papers nor in many other papers. 
The most valuable feature of this paper is that it gives many examples 
of deductions in Protothetic. This is the only paper that provides a variety 
of elementary examples. (The papers of LeSniewski (1938b) and Sobocinski 
(1960) provide more complicated examples.) To mention just one example, a 
proof is given that the following theses of extensionality are equivalent: 
[pq] : .p == q. ==: [J] : f(p)· == ·f(q) 
[pqrs]:.p == q.r == s. ==: [fl: f(pr). == ·f(qs). 
Neither of these is admitted according to the rule of extensionality, for they 
are provable from the axiom of Protothetic. It would be interesting to know 
all of the dependencies which exist between the different theses of extension-
ality. To put it the other way around, I know of no categories for which the 
* [Ed. Note: These lecture notes were published in 1988 by Kluwer Academic Publishers 
(see LeSniewski (1988) in the Protothetic Bibliography, pp. 3-28).] 
** [Ed. Note: Cf. paper V in this volume, pp. 106 and 110.] 

28 
V. FREDERICK RICKEY 
extensionality theses have been proven to be non-equivalent. If this question 
were answered, it might be possible to simplify the rule of extensionality. 
System S is based on the rule of verification. Some instances of this are: 
[1] : f(O)·f(I). == ·[P]·f(p) 
[F] : F(Vr}.F(Fl}.F(As}.F(N}. == .[f].F(f}. 
Some ideas about how this rule can be formulated are given by Slupecki in 
Chapter 10. 
Lesniewski states that in order to formulate this rule "I needed a compli-
cated apparatus of numerous terminological explanations" (1938a, p. 122). 
Lesniewski abandoned the rule of verification for the rule of extensionali-
ty because the rule of extensionality is easier to formulate. There could be 
some value in reconstructing the formulation of the rule of verification, for 
to do so one would have to specify in advance how each constant function in 
each seman tical category could be defined. This could provide an interesting 
normal form theorem. 
This valuable and interesting paper of Slupecki also contains (p. 75)* the 
germ of what Sobocinski (1960) calls Metatheorem L. Slupecki says that a 
system of axioms for (elementary) Protothetic should contain the proposition-
al calculus and the law of bivalency. The only item missing is that the four 
laws of logical conjunction should also be provable. It would be interesting 
to know if the result as stated is a complete characterization of the system E 
of elementary Protothetics. 
As was mentioned above, considerable effort has gone into simplifying the 
axioms of Protothetic. The shortest known single axiom for Protothetic is the 
following: 
[Pq] :: p == q. ==: ·[f] : .f(Pf(p[u].u)). ==: [r] : f(qr). == .q == p. 
This was discovered by Sobocinski in 1945 and published in Sobocinski 
(1953) and then with full details in Sobocinski (1960). Observe thatthis axiom 
contains (1) symmetry for equivalence and (2) the law of extensionality in 
the form 
[f] : f(Pf(P[u].u)). == .[r]·f(qr). 
A variant of this, namely, 
[f] : f(f(O)). == .[r]·f(r) 
was shown by Lukasiewicz (1951) to imply the full propositional calculus. 
In the spring of 1965 Sobocinski taught a course entitled "Advanced Propo-
sitional Calculus." This course dealt mainly with Protothetic. The interesting 
* [Ed. Note: Cf. paper V in this volume, p. 115.] 

A SURVEY OF LESNIEWSKI'S LOGIC 
29 
and difficult deductions from Sobocinski's 1945 axiom were presented. These 
deductions are published in Sobocinski (1960), which is, in my opinion, the 
most important paper concerning Protothetic. Unfortunately, only three parts 
of this paper have been published, but the contents of the other two were 
presented in this course. With Sobocinski's permission, I will outline these 
results here. 
If one accepts (1) (a fragment of) the equivalential calculus, (2) extensional 
reasoning for the category of propositions as a rule, i.e., if <1»(1) and <1»(0) 
are true, then [P].<1»(P) is true, and (3) the four laws of conjunction, i.e., 
0.0 = 0, 0.1 = 0, 1.0 = 0, 1.1 = 1, together with rules of detachment, 
substitution, quantifiers, definition, but not extensionality, then one can derive 
the following: 
(1) The full bi-valued propositional calculus. If one starts with the definition 
[Pq] : p. q = p. = .p ::J q 
then it is not too difficult to derive the Tarski-Bernays axioms for impli-
cation, the law of bivalency, the rule of detachment for implication, and 
the usual laws involving negation. 
(2) Extensionality as a law: 
[Pqf] : p = q. ::J ·f(p) = f(q)· 
(3) The usual laws of quantifiers. These are summed up in the following 
thesis: 
[fp] : .[x] : p ::J f(x) :=: p ::J [x]·f(x), 
where x belongs to any category whatsoever, including those not belong-
ing to Protothetic. Thus, in any system based on Protothetic the usual 
quantifier rules hold. In particular the w-order functional calculus can be 
built up within Protothetic without any additional axioms. All that need 
be added is a new type 1 of individuals and a new constant f of type 
S/l. 
(4) A metarule which permits the alphabetic variation of bound variables. Of 
course we are speaking of interior quantifiers; the rule of quantification 
permits the relettering of the variables in the main general quantifier. 
As I understand it, the above are the principle results which are to be 
included in the completion of Sobocinski's paper on single axioms of Proto-
thetic. In his course on Protothetic a number of other interesting topics were 
discussed and some of them are now considered. 
A proof of the strong completeness of Proto the tic was discussed. By strong 
completeness we mean that if a is any sentence expressed in the vocabulary 
that has been introduced into a given development of Protothetic, and if a has 
no free variables, then either a or '" a is provable. 

30 
V. FREDERICK RICKEY 
The completeness theorem sketched in Slupecki (1953) is deficient in that 
the higher semantical categories are not considered. It would be nice to have 
a complete proof published. 
Lesniewski developed computable Protothetic to provide an easy com-
pleteness proof for Protothetic. Such systems are very intuitive and easy to 
work with. Unfortunately, Lesniewski (1938a) contains the only published 
discussion of this interesting topic.* Sobocinski sketched a system of com-
putable Protothetic based on equivalence and the false proposition A. The 
single axiom is A == A and there are nine rules: four to describe the truth table 
for equivalence, three involving definitions, and two involving generalization. 
In some 24 steps the law of extensionality for propositions can be derived. I 
believe that further research in this area would be most interesting. 
A great deal of time was spent discussing systems of many valued Pro-
tothetics. For finite valued logics one writes rules describing each position 
in the matrix. Then the development proceeds as in computable Protothetic. 
Unfortunately, this work is much too complicated to discuss here. I will only 
note that Scharle (1971) has shown that many valued Protothetics are also 
strongly complete. 
In this short chapter the most important results have been mentioned, but 
there are other areas related to Protothetic which have not been mentioned 
even though they are interesting. I think especially of work on the equivalential 
calculus and work on the propositional calculus with variable functors. 
There are many promising areas of research, but one of the things that 
would be nicest to have is a presentation of Protothetic which is accessible to 
beginners. I am not thinking of just an introductory paper, although this too 
would be useful, but of a system of Protothetic which is simple to understand 
and easy in development. As to research areas, subsystems of Protothetic 
seem most inviting to me: What if the rule of extensionality is deleted? What 
if only propositional variables are allowed? What is the structure of Slupecki 's 
Elementary Protothetic? I invite you to continue. 
II. ONTOLOGY 
Lesniewski's Ontology is the most general theory of connections between 
names, and for this reason is sometimes called a calculus of names. Struc-
turally, but not historically, it is based on Protothetic. Ontology is obtained 
from Protothetic by adding a new primitive semantical category N, that of 
names, a new primitive symbol c of type S / N N, a single new axiom, and two 
new rules, the rules of Ontological definitions and Ontological extensionality. 
In 1921 Lukasiewicz prompted Lesniewski to create Ontology when 
Lukasiewicz expressed his dissatisfaction with the way the cupola "is" is 
* [Ed. Note: Further discussion concerning the systems of computable Protothetic can be 
found in Le Blanc (1991) in the Protothetic Bibliography.] 

A SURVEY OF LESNIEWSKI'S LOGIC 
31 
used by Peano and in set theory. Lukasiewicz asked Lesniewski how he used 
the word "is." Lesniewski replied that he used the word in the sense of ordi-
nary (Polish) language. Then, in one of Lukasiewicz's few careless uses of 
language, he makes one of the most radically nominalistic statements ever 
made: "Some time later Lesniewski told me that he had found the required 
axiom sitting on a bench in the Warsaw-Saxon Park" (Lukasiewicz, 1953, 
p.78). 
Now that the issue of nominalism has come up, let me remark that 
Lesniewski was a nominalist and that he interpreted his theories that way.* 
But that is no reason that we must interpret, say, Ontology nominalistically. 
There is absolutely nothing wrong with thinking of the names of Ontology as 
naming some kind of abstract entities. This does not affect the theory in the 
least. There is one point, however, where it seems to me that Lesniewski's 
nominalistic viewpoint is useful, and perhaps even crucial. That is in the for-
mulation of the rules of the system. Since the systems contain definitions as 
theses of the system and since definitions are ordered by the order that they 
are introduced into the system, it seems to me that the inscriptional view of 
syntax is the proper one. I have argued this point in Rickey (1972). If some-
one has a way of formulating a rule of definition without using inscriptional 
syntax I would be most interested in seeing it. 
The axiom that Lesniewski found for Ontology is the following intuitive 
one: 
[Aa] : .A c; a. =: [:JB]. B c; A: 
[BG] : B c; A. G c; A. ::J . B c; G : 
[B] : B c; A. ::J . B c; a. 
This says that A is a if and only if A is unempty, A is unique, and anything 
which is A is a. Here the variables represent names, be they empty, singular, 
or general, i.e., whether they denote zero, one, or many individuals. The use 
of the word "name" in Ontology is nicely explained by use of Lejewski's 
ontological diagrams (1958). 
The epsilon of Ontology has precisely the same meaning as the Polish 
"jest" or Latin "est," but it does not agree with the ambiguous English "is." 
This causes confusion for English speaking people. To avoid such problems 
one must use the English "is" in the technical sense specified in Ontology. 
The simplifications of this axiom are not nearly so complicated as those 
for Protothetic. By 1929 the axiom had been simplified to 
[Aa] : A c; a. == . [:JB]. A c; B. B c; a. 
This work is due to Lesniewski, Sobocinski and Tarski. It is nicely set out 
in Sobocinski (1934). It should be remarked that the rule of extensionality 
* [Ed. Note: Cf. paper I in this volume.] 

32 
v. FREDERICK RICKEY 
must be used to prove these two axioms equivalent. This axiom still stands 
today as the shortest for Ontology. It probably is the shortest, but no one 
has attempted a proof of this as Lukasiewicz did for the implicational and 
equivalential calculi. Ontology also has the property that many of the terms 
definable in it can act as primitive terms. For some of these separate axioms 
have been given by Lejewski (1958). 
Lesniewski published very little on Ontology. In Chapter XI of 0 pod-
stawach matematyki (1927) the intuitive foundations of Ontology are dis-
cussed and in Ober die Grundlagen der Ontologie (1930) the deductive rules 
are formalized. But nowhere are any deductions published. Lesniewski's two 
papers on the axiomatization of group theory (1929a, 1929b) do contain nice 
examples of the way that Lesniewski presented his proofs. The natural deduc-
tion technique that Lesniewski used seems to me to be one of the nicest in 
existence. Someone should adapt it to first order logic so that it can be more 
widely appreciated. Lesniewski did, however, lecture on Ontology a num-
ber of times (see Slupecki, 1955, pp. 7-8, and Lesniewski, 1927, Ch. XI, 
pp. 159-160). 
For years the best informal outline of Ontology was in Kotarbinski (1929), 
yet this was very informal. 
The first really useful paper on Ontology is Slupecki's paper on "S. 
Lesniewski's Calculus of Names" which was published in 1955. This paper 
is based on notes of a lecture course given by Lesniewski in 1929-1930 enti-
tled "An Outline of Elementary Ontology." It is not at all clear how closely 
Slupecki follows the notes.* 
In this paper a system of "Elementary Ontology" is presented. It is based 
on the long axiom of Ontology, but the deductive rules are not very carefully 
described. Consequently, I am not sure if I am interpreting him correctly. Only 
nominal variables occur in Elementary Ontology and the only constants which 
occur are those from the propositional calculus and those of types N INk and 
SINk (although a footnote on page 11 indicates otherwise). Because of this 
restriction the rule of definition must be severely limited. He also puts on the 
restriction that the definiens must occur in primitive notation. This seems like 
a harmless restriction, and may indeed be alright here, but in general this is 
a true restriction. As an example, if this restriction to primitive notation is 
made, then Sobocinski's deductions (1960) from his axiom of Protothetic fail 
at D2, where the definiens is not, and necessarily so, in primitive notation. 
This limitation of the semantic categories necessitates that the rule of 
extensionality be excluded entirely from Elementary Ontology. This raises an 
interesting point. Sobocinski, in his lectures, calls Elementary Ontology that 
part of Ontology which can be derived without use of the rule of extensionality. 
I suspect the notion is garbled in Slupecki's paper; indeed his restriction 
on the types is quite artificial. In Chapter III on non-elementary Ontology 
* [Ed. Note: These lecture notes were published in 1988 by Kluwer Academic Publishers 
(see Lesniewski (1988) in the Protothetic Bibliography, pp. 29-58).] 

A SURVEY OF LESNIEWSKI'S LOGIC 
33 
Slupecki does use the rule of extensionality, but then only for types S / N k 
and N / N k • This is an error on his part, for he says that Ontology has no 
functor forming functors (p. 9), whereas it certainly does and indeed he uses 
the type (S / N) / N (p. 51). This confusion raises the question of the role that 
the rule of extensionality plays in Ontology. It would be interesting to know 
the exact differences between the two systems of "Elementary" Ontology. 
These faults notwithstanding, Slupecki's paper is a very important one, for 
it contains a good deal of information about Ontology that is not otherwise 
available, among which is the following: 
1. Derivation of the most basic consequences of the axiom regarding exis-
tence and uniqueness. 
2. The development of syllogistic within Ontology. 
3. The distinction between equality and identity. 
4. The algebra of names, i.e., theorems involving intersection, union and 
nominal negation. 
5. Derivation, without the rule of extensionality, of the law of extensionality 
for individuals, i.e., 
[AB<I>] : A = B. :J .<I>{A}. == .<I>{B}. 
Here "=" denotes identity; i.e., A and B are both individual names and 
both names denote the same thing. 
6. A proof that Ontology contains creative definitions. 
7. The consistency proof of Ontology of Kruszewski (1925). In this proof 
E is interpreted as conjunction. Then the axiom of Ontology becomes 
a theorem of Protothetic. He does not verify that the rules of Ontology 
become derived rules of Protothetic. 
On Slupecki's paper is based the important work of Iwanus "On 
Lesniewski's Elementary Ontology" (1973). He views Ontology as a first 
order theory, i.e., as based on the predicate calculus without equality. In this 
theory if one starts with the long axiom of Ontology then there are only two 
creative definitions, those of union and nominal negation. This work raises 
several interesting questions: How does this presentation of Ontology based 
on first order logic compare with Slupecki's system of Elementary Ontology? 
Is this result true in Elementary Ontology? Then there is the most interesting 
question of all: What definitions are creative in Ontology? I have conjec-
tured that there are infinitely many. While speaking of creative definitions I 
should mention an unpublished distinction of Sobocinski. He distinguishes 
between weak creativity and strong creativity. A definition is weakly creative 
if its creativity can be avoided by a reformulation of the rule of substitution. 
Other creative definitions are strongly creative. For example, to obtain p == q 
from f(P) one cannot substitute, as in Principia Mathematicae, "- == q," for 
Lesniewski's systems do not contain incomplete symbols. One must intro-
duce the many link definition [pq] : p == q. == . 9{q)(P) and then substitute 
9{q) for f (observe that they are both of type S/ S) in f{p) to obtain 9{q)(P)· 

34 
V. FREDERICK RICKEY 
Then by use of the definition one obtains p == q. This is an example of a 
weakly creative definition. Clearly, Ontology contains infinitely many such. 
The question is whether Ontology contains infinitely many strongly creative 
definitions. 
Lejewski's paper "On Lesniewski's Ontology" (1958) contains a very nice 
introduction to Ontology. He discusses some of Lesniewski's views about 
his systems. In particular he mentions that Lesniewski intended his systems 
to be interpreted systems and that he did not believe that formalization of 
the systems destroyed this interpretation. Consequently, Lesniewski could 
describe himself as being simultaneously a confirmed intuitionist and a radical 
formalist. Unfortunately, from his published works, only the latter shows 
through. Lejewski's paper contains a very interesting "Ontological Table" 
which is designed to convey to the reader the intuitions underlying Ontology 
and the precise meanings in which the terms of Ontology are used. By means 
of this table Lejewski carefully distinguishes between the various functors 
of inclusion, exclusion, identity, and existence which Ontology contains. He 
also gives axioms for Ontology based on a variety of primitive terms. 
More recently, there have been two books which provide good introductions 
to Ontology. They are Kung (1967) and Henry (1972). But a comprehensive 
introduction to Ontology does not yet exist. 
In his thesis Canty (1969a, 1969b) shows that Gbdel's incompleteness 
theorem is applicable to Ontology, if Ontology is strengthened by an axiom 
stating that there are infinitely many individuals. Canty needs this axiom to 
prove the analogues of the Peano postulates in Ontology. But there is a stronger 
reason that Canty does not mention but that Sobocinski once remarked to me: 
If there are precisely n individuals then Ontology is strongly complete. If 
however we add to Ontology an axiom saying that there are finitely many 
individuals, then the system is not strongly complete, for we cannot prove that 
there are two individuals, i.e., [:3AB].A -I- B, nor can we prove its negation. 
These facts certainly must be known, but I do not remember ever seeing them 
in the literature. 
In his thesis Davis (1975) has done some very interesting work on the axiom 
of choice in Ontology. He has shown that in Ontology it can he expressed in 
either of the following equivalent forms: 
[:31] : .[aA] : A E a. ~ .f(a) E a 
[:31]: .[aO]: O{a}. ~ .O{f(O)}. 
The second of these is the more interesting, for the type T of a is (if we 
ignore the parentheses) ambiguous, and so represents the axiom of choice for 
an arbitrary type. We shall refer to it as ACT' It is really surprising that the 
axiom of choice can assume such a simple form. The first of these forms also 
generalizes to higher types if the E is taken to be a higher epsilon. 
This work has been followed up in the dissertation of Kowalski (1977). He 
shows that the axiom of choice, Zorn's lemma, and the well ordering principle 

A SURVEY OF LESNIEWSKI'S LOGIC 
35 
are equivalent in Ontology. But most importantly he formulates, in the style 
of Lesniewski, a rule which permits the addition of each of the theses ACT' T 
any type, to Ontology. It should be remarked that if T is a purely Protothetical 
type, i.e., if its Ajdukiewicz symbol involves only S, then ACT is provable in 
Protothetic. 
An obvious interesting line of research is open and is being actively pursued 
by several people: What dependencies and independencies exist between the 
various ACT? On the dependencies side it seems that choice propagates 
downward among the types. As yet no work has been done on adapting 
forcing techniques to Ontology. 
I have attended several courses of Sobocinski which dealt mainly with 
Ontology. These courses contained a great wealth of unpublished material. 
They begin with the basic deductions which are done in a much nicer fashion 
and in much greater detail than in the literature. It is shown that syllogistic 
and Boolean algebra form subsystems of Ontology. Relations, functions, and 
equinumerosity are discussed in careful detail. An elementary course would 
terminate in the proof of the Schroder-Bernstein theorem, as a corollary of the 
theorem of the mean: [abcde] : a C b.b C c.d C e.a 00 d.c 00 e. ::J .[3n].d C 
n.n C e.b 00 n, where a 00 d means that a and d are equinumerous. 
More advanced courses contain information about higher epsilons, vari-
ous definitions of finite and infinite and their equivalence, ordered and well 
ordered sets, comparison of Ontology and set theories, and many other topics. 
I regret to say that more details will have to await a monograph on the subject. 
In concluding this chapter let me say that, in my opinion, Ontology is the 
most interesting of Lesniewski's systems. I maintain that it is a very intuitive 
system, but then I was raised on it, rather than on the first order language of 
ZFC. The most promising area of research is metalogical investigations of 
Ontology. Since the system contains many distinctive features - the seman-
tical categories, definitions, and extensionality - such work will be difficult, 
but rewarding. 
III. MEREOLOGY 
Historically, Mereology is the first of LeSniewski's systems, having been 
developed in the period from 1914 to 1916. Structurally it is the last, for it 
is based on both Protothetic and Ontology. Etymologically, Mereology is the 
study of parts of things and so most naturally it is built on the single primitive 
term pr of type N / N as in A c pr( B), which is read" A is part of B." We now 
give Lesniewski's original (1916) axiomatization of Mereology (except that 
we formalize it and drop the redundant clause [3B].B c a from the definition 
of class): 
Ml. 
[ABC]: Acpr(B). Bcpr(C).::J. Acpr(C) 
M2. 
[AB]: A c pr(B). ::J . '" (B c pr(A)) 

36 
V. FREDERICK RICKEY 
M3. 
[AB]: Acpr(B). => . B c B 
01. 
[AB]: .Acel(B). =:: AcA: Acpr(B). V.A = B 
02. 
[Ab]: .AcKI(b). =:: AcA: [C]: Ccb. =>. Ccel(A): 
[D]: Dcel(A). => .[3EF].Ecb.Fcel(D).Fcel(E) 
M4. 
[ABa]: Ac Kl(a). B c Kl(a). => . A = B 
M5. 
[Ab]: Acb. => .[3B]. BcKI(b). 
These axioms say that pr is transitive (MI), anti symmetric (M2), and that 
only individuals have parts (M3). Then, and this is very distasteful, there are 
definitions of element and collective or mereological class. The final axioms 
say that classes are unique (M4) and that we can form the class of things 
denoted by any unempty name. 
The unhappiness about having definitions among the axioms is not just 
esthetic; it could be that these definitions are creative (in this case they 
are not). For example, in the case of the propositional calculus, see my 
paper (Rickey, 1975). This matter as well as the other esthetic concerns 
of Lesniewski regarding axiom systems are discussed in an interesting and 
readable - but apparently little read - paper of Sobocinski (1955). Some of 
these ideas seem to be related to Goodman's notion of simplicity of primitive 
terms (1951). It is rather amazing that these esthetic concerns, e.g., minimizing 
the number of semantical categories that occur in an axiom system, or insisting 
on organic axioms, have in fact led to very simple axiom systems. I have often 
wondered if these esthetic criteria could be turned into theorems. But this is 
probably hopeless. 
The literature for Mereology is richer than for the other systems. This 
is probably because Lesniewski published more on this system than on his 
other two systems. His publications on Mereology (1916, 1927) are both long 
works with considerable detail. They were both published in his pre-symbolic 
period, but his language is so precise that one can immediately translate his 
proofs to formal ones. 
The best introduction to Mereology is Sobocmski's paper "Studies in 
Lesniewski's Mereology" (1954). In this paper he defines the most com-
monly used terms of Mereology and discusses their intuitive meaning. He 
also indicates which of them can serve as primitive terms of Mereology. This 
theme is taken up in greater detail in Welsh (1971), who is a student of Clay. 
Sobocinski also discusses other axiomatizations of Mereology. Grzegorczyk 
discovered the first single axiom of Mereology in 1946. By taking advantage 
of this result which Sobocinski learned from Hii:, he was able to find the 
following axiom which is based on el as its sole primitive: 
[AB] :.: Acel(B). =::: BcB:: [fa]:: [c]: .Ccf(a). =:: [D]: Dca. =>. 
Dcel(c): [D]: Dcel(c). => .[3EF].Eca. Fcel(E). 
F cel(D) : .B cel(B). B ca: . => . Acel(f(a)). 

A SURVEY OF LESNIEWSKI'S LOGIC 
37 
Many axiomatizations of Mereology have been given (see Lejewski, 1954, 
1955, 1963 and 1967). 
In the first axiom system for Mereology Kl( a) is essentially the least upper 
bound of the a's. Part of the definition of Kl, viz., [D] : Dca. ::J . D cel(A) 
says that Kl( a) or A is an upper bound for the a's. To say it is least requires 
[D] : Dca. ::J . Dcel(B) : ::J. Acel(B). 
These can be put together into 
[Aa]:: AcKI(a). =: .AcA: .[B]: .[D]: Dca.::J. Dcel(B):=. 
Acel(B) 
or more compactly 
M6. 
[Aa]:: AcKI(a). =: .AcA: .[B]: a c el(B). = .Acel(B). 
Tarski showed this for strong inclusion (C::) and then Lejewski strengthened 
it to weak inclusion (c) in 1960, when he was at Notre Dame. Note that this 
suffices as a new definition of Kl in terms of el. However, Clay (1966) has 
shown that if M6, the short definition of Kl, replaces D2 in the axiom system, 
then a weaker system is obtained. Investigations of the connections between 
Mereology and the theory ofleast upper bounds are made in Kubinski (1971). 
Mereology was used by Tarski (1929) to form a foundation for the geometry 
of solids. He takes the notion of a solid sphere as primitive. Then, with some 
rather ingenious definitions, he is able to define concentric spheres. Finally, 
a point is considered to be a distributive class of concentric spheres. The 
axiomatization of Mereology given by Tarski is deficient in that M3 is not 
provable from his axioms. Thus his remark in footnote 2, p. 25 is incorrect. 
The definitions given by Tarski have been simplified by Jaskowski (1948) and 
even more by Clay (unpublished). Moreover, this idea has been extensively 
developed by Sullivan (1971-1973b). 
Another paper on the Mereological foundations of geometry is that of 
Glibowski (1969). At the Notre Dame Logic Seminar in 1969 I discussed this 
paper and indicated several ways that it could be improved. I provided a new 
primitive term for the system which replaced the two that he had and also 
showed how the axiom of continuity could be stated in Mereology (Glibowski 
stated that it couldn't be). But the suggestion that I made that turned out to 
be useful was that I suggested Atomistic Mereology be used as a base for 
Geometry. To obtain Atomistic Mereology one first defines atom: 
[A]: .Acatm. =: [B]: Bcel(A).::J.B = A: AcA 
and then adds an axiom which states that every object is a class of atoms: 
[A]: AcA.::J .[:3a].a C atm.AcKI(a). 

38 
V. FREDERICK RICKEY 
Finally, I defined the tenn 
[AB] : Acatm(B).:::: .Acatm.Acel(B). 
Then I showed that this tenn could be used as a primitive for Atomistic 
Mereology by proving the theorems: 
[A a] : .AcKI(a).::::: AcA: [B]: Bcatm(A).:::: .[3c].Bcatm(c).cca 
[A] : A c atm. :::: .A c atm(A) 
[AB] : .A c el(B). ::::: A c A : [C] : C c atm(A). ::) .C c atm(B). 
This definition of class is exactly analogous to my definition of Klass in 
my system of inscriptional syntax (Rickey, 1972). It was only at this time 
that I realized that Atomistic Mereology is a subsystem of my system of 
inscriptional syntax. The effect of this was that it prompted Sobocinski's work 
on the axiomatization of Atomistic Mereology (l971a, 1971 b, 1971 c). This 
then inspired the work on Atomistic and Atomless Mereology by Lejewski 
(1973) and Clay (1975). 
A subject which is always said to be "akin" to Mereology is the Calculus of 
Individuals of Leonard and Goodman (1940). The exact relationship between 
these two theories should be carefully explored, although it is fairly clear that 
the Calculus of Individuals is a subsystem of Mereology. 
Up to this point I have concentrated on the best papers regarding 
Lesniewski's systems, but now I wish to consider one bad paper. This is 
the paper of Grzegorczyk (1955) on "The Systems of Lesniewski in Relation 
to Contemporary Logical Research." On the fonnal side there are a number of 
errors: his treatment of the semantical categories is almost entirely incorrect. 
He characterizes Ontology as the theory of atomic and complete Boolean 
algebra; this totally disregards the higher types of Ontology. His axiomati-
zation of Mereology is incorrect. Not only does he completely ignore the 
Ontological base but also he give it the weakest possible logical base by 
making it an elementary theory. He says that the models of Mereology are 
the models of complete Boolean algebra with zero deleted. Clay (197 4a) has 
carefully discussed this statement and shown where it is incorrect. Luschei 
(1962) has also written a condemnation of this paper. But the real problem 
is not the incorrect results it contains, but the views it purports. To mention 
but one point he says that "LeSniewski's systems are almost entirely unsuited 
for metalogical investigations owing to the fact that they are presented not as 
completed systems but as systems developing in the course of time." I would 
argue that this property of the system provides a rather interesting object 
of study. It is true that first order model theory has been most extensively 
developed; one reason is that it is the easiest to do. In the Model Theory book 
of Chang and Keisler they list model theory for second order logic as an open 
problem worthy of study. Surely then, model theory for Ontology is worthy 
of study. 

A SURVEY OF LESNIEWSKI'S LOGIC 
39 
I would say that the model theoretic aspects of Mereology are the most 
promising line of research. The consistency of the system with respect to the 
real number system has been demonstrated by Clay (1968).* Lejewski (1969) 
gave a consistency proof based on Protothetic. Clay has also given a number 
of models for Mereology in his papers, e.g., (1971, 1974b). Further work in 
this area should produce valuable and interesting results. 
REFERENCES 
Ajdukiewicz, Kazimierz (1935). 'Die Syntaktische Konnexitat', Studia Philosophica I, 1-27. 
Canty, John Thomas (1969a). 'The Numerical Epsilon', Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic 
X,47-63. 
Canty, John Thomas (1969b). 'Lesniewski's Terminological Explanations as Recursive Con-
cepts', Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic X, 337-369. 
Chang, C.C. and Keisler, H.J. (1973). Model Theory, North-Holland Pub!. Co. 
Church, Alonzo (1956). Introduction to Mathematical Logic, Princeton University Press. 
Clay, Robert E. (1966). 'On the Definition of Mereological Class', Notre Dame Journal of 
Formal Logic VII, 359-360. 
Clay, Robert E. (1968). 'The Consistency of Lesniewski's Mereology Relative to the Real 
Number System', Journal of Symbolic Logic 33, 251-257. 
Clay, Robert E. (1971). 'A Model for Lesniewski's Mereology in Functions', Notre Dame 
Journal of Formal Logic XII, 467-478. 
Clay, Robert E. (1974a). 'Relation of Lesniewski's Mereology to Boolean Algebra', Journal 
of Symbolic Logic 39, 638-648. 
Clay, Robert E. (1974b). 'Some Mereological Models', Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic 
XV, 141-146. 
Clay, Robert E. (1975). 'Single Axioms for Atomistic and Atomless Mereology', Notre Dame 
Journal of Formal Logic XVI, 345-351. 
Davis, Charles c., Jf. (1975). 'An Investigation Concerning the Hilbert-Sierpinski Logical 
Form of the Axiom of Choice', Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic XVI, 145-184. 
Glibowski, Edmund (1969). 'The Application of Mereology to Grounding of Elementary 
Geometry', Studia Logica XXIV, 109-129. 
Goodman, Nelson (1951). The Structure of Appearance, Cambridge, MA. 
Grzegorczyk, Andrzej (1955). 'The Systems of Lesniewski in Relation to Contemporary 
Logical Research', Studia Logica III, 77-95. 
Henry, Desmond Paul (1972). Medieval Logic and Metaphysics: A Modern Introduction, 
Hutchinson University Library. 
Iwanus, Boguslaw (1973). 'On Lesniewski's Elementary Ontology', Studia Logica XXXI, 
73-125. 
Jaskowski, Stanislaw (1948). 'Une modification des definitions fondamentales de la geometrie 
des corps de M.A. Tarski' , Annales de la Societe Polonaise de Mathematique 21, 298-301. 
Kotarbinski, Tadeusz (1929). Elementy teor)i poznania, logiki formalne) i metodologji nauk 
(Elements of Epistomology, Formal Logic, and Methodology), Ossolineum, Lwow. 
Kowalski, James G. (1977). 'Lesniewski's Ontology Extended with the Axiom of Choice', 
Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic XVIII, 1-78. 
Kruszewski, Z. (1925). 'Ontologja bez aksjomatow', Przegla,d Filozojiczny XXVlll, 136. 
Kubinski, Tadeusz (1971). 'A Report on Investigations Concerning Mereology', Acta Univer-
sitatis Wratislaviensis No. 139, Prace Filozoficzne VIII, 47-68. 
* [Ed. Note: Lesniewski's proof of this fact can be found in S. Lesniewski's Lecture Notes 
in Logic, pp. 109-125 (see Lesniewski (1988) in the Protothetic Bibliography).] 

40 
V. FREDERICK RICKEY 
Kling, Guido (1967). Ontology and the Logistic Analysis of Language, The Humanities Press. 
Lejewski, Czeslaw (1954). 'A Contribution to Lesniewski's Mereology', Polskie Towarzystwo 
Naukowe na Obczyinie. Rocznik 5, 43-50. 
Lejewski, Czeslaw (1955). 'A New Axiom of Mereology', Polskie Towarzystwo Naukowe na 
Obczyinie. Rocznik 6,65-70. 
Lejewski, Czeslaw (1958). 'On Lesniewski's Ontology', Ratio (Oxford) 1, 150-176. 
Lejewski, Czeslaw (1963). 'A Note on a Problem Concerning the Axiomatic Foundations of 
Mereology', Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic IV, 135-139. 
Lejewski, Czeslaw (1967). 'A Single Axiom for the Mereological Notion of Proper Part', Notre 
Dame Journal of Formal Logic VIII, 279-285. 
Lejewski, Czeslaw (1969). 'Consistency of Lesniewski's Mereology', Journal of Symbolic 
Logic 34,321-328. 
Lejewski, Czeslaw (1973). 'A Contribution to the Study of Extended Mereologies', Notre 
Dame Journal of Formal Logic XIV, 55-67. 
Leonard, Henry S. and Goodman, Nelson (1940). 'The Calculus of Individuals and Its Uses', 
Journal of Symbolic Logic 5, 45-55. 
Lesniewski, Stanislaw (1916). Podstawy ogolnej teoryi mnogosci. I. (Foundations of a General 
Theory of Sets), Prace Polskiego Kola Naukowego w Moskwie, Moscow. 
Lesniewski, Stanislaw (1927). '0 podstawach matematyki (On the Foundations of Mathe-
matics)" Przegla,d Filozoficzny XXX (1927),164-206; XXXI (1928), 261-291; XXXII 
(1929),60-101; XXXIII (1930),77-105 and XXXIV (1931),142-170. 
Lesniewski, Stanislaw (1929a). 'Uber Funktionen, deren Felder Gruppen mit Rlicksicht auf 
diese Funktionen sind', Fundamenta Mathematicae XIII, 319-332. 
Lesniewski, Stanislaw (1929b). 'Uber Funktionen, deren Felder Abelsche Gruppen in bezug 
auf diese Funktionen sind', Fundamenta Mathematicae XIV, 242-251. 
Lesniewski, Stanislaw (1929c). 'Grundzlige eines neuen Systems der Grundlagen der Mathe-
matik', Fundamenta Mathematicae XIV, 1-81. 
Lesniewski, Stanislaw (1930). 'Uber die Grundlagen der Ontologie', Comptes rendus des 
Seances de La Societe des Sciences et des Lettres de Varsovie, Classe III 23, 111-132. 
Lesniewski, Stanislaw (1931). 'Uber Definitionen in der sogenannten Theorie der Deduktion', 
Comptes rendus des Seances de la Societe des Sciences et des Lettres de Varsovie, Classe 
1II 24,289-309. 
Lesniewski, Stanislaw (1938a). 'Einleitende Bemerkungen zur Fortsetzung meiner Mitteilung 
u. d. T. "Grundzlige eines neuen Systems der Grundlagen der Mathematik"', Collectanea 
Logica I (Offprint 1938), 1-60. 
Lesniewski, Stanislaw (1938b). 'Grundziige eines neuen Systems der Grundlagen der Mathe-
matik, § 12', Collectanea Logica I (Offprint 1938),61-144. 
Lukasiewicz, Jan (1910). 'Uber den Satz des Widerspruchs bei Aristoteles', Bulletin Interna-
tional de l'Academie des Sciences de Cracovie, Classe de philologie, Classe d'histoire et 
de philosophie, 15-38. 
Lukasiewicz, Jan (1951). 'On Variable Functors of Propositional Arguments', Proceedings of 
the Royal Irish Academy 54, sect. A, 25-35. 
Lukasiewicz, Jan (1953). 'Symposium: The Principle of Individuation I', Aristotelian Society, 
Supp. Vol. 27, 69-82. 
Luschei, Eugene C. (1962). The Lagical Systems of LeSniewski, North-Holland Publ. Co. 
Machover, M. (1966). 'Contextual Determinacy in Lesniewski's Grammar', Studia Logica 
XIX, 47-57. 
Rickey, V. Frederick (1972). 'Axiomatic Inscriptional Syntax, Part I: General Syntax', Notre 
Dame Journal of Formal Logic XIII, 1-33. 
Rickey, V. Frederick (1973). 'Axiomatic Inscriptional Syntax, Part II: The Syntax of Proto-
thetic', Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic XIV, I-52. [Paper VII in this volume -
Ed.] 

A SURVEY OF LESNIEWSKI'S LOGIC 
41 
Rickey, V. Frederick (1975). 'Creative Definitions in Propositional Calculi', Notre Dame 
Journal of Formal Logic XVI, 273-294. 
Scharle, Thomas W. (1971). 'Completeness of Many-Valued Protothetic', Journal of Symbolic 
Logic 36, 363-364. 
Sinisi, Vito F. (1976). 'Lesniewski's Analysis of Russell's Antimony' , Notre Dame Journal of 
Formal Logic XVII, 19-34. 
Slupecki, Jerzy (1953). 'St. Lesniewski's Protothetics', Studia Logica 1,44--112. [Paper V in 
this volume - Ed.] 
Slupecki, Jerzy (1955). 'So Lesniewski's Calculus of Names', Studia Logica III, 7-73. 
Sobocinski, Boleslaw (1934). '0 kolejnych uproszczeniach aksjomatyki "ontologji" prof. St. 
Lesniewskiego', Fragmenty Filozojiczne I, 143-160. 
Sobocinski, Boleslaw (1949a). An Investigation of Protothetic, Cahiers de l'Institut d'Etudes 
Polonaises en Belgique, no. 5, Bruxelles. [Paper IV in this volume - Ed.] 
Sobocinski, Boleslaw (1949b). 'L' analyse de I' antinomie Russellienne par Lesniewski' ,Metho-
dos 1 (1949), no. 1,94--107; no. 2, 220-228; no. 3,308-316; 2 (1950), 237-257. 
Sobocinski, Boleslaw (1953). 
'Z badan nad 
aksjomatyk~ prototetyki Stanislawa 
Lesniewskiego', Polskie Towarzystwo Naukowe na Obczyinie. Rocznik 4, 18-20. 
Sobocinski, Bo1eslaw (1954). 'Studies in Lesniewski's Mereology', Polskie Towarzystwo 
Naukowe na Obczyinie. Rocznik 5, 34--48. 
Sobocinski, Boleslaw (1955). 'On Well Constructed Axiom Systems', Polskie Towarzystwo 
Naukowe na Obczyinie. Rocznik 6, 54--65. 
Sobocinski, Boleslaw (1960). 'On the Single Axioms of Protothetic I, II, III', Notre Dame 
Journal of Formal Logic I (1960), 52-73; II (1961), 110-126 and 129-148. [Paper VI in 
this volume - Ed.] 
Sobocinski, Boleslaw (1971a). 'Lattice-Theoretical and Mereological Forms of Hauber's Law', 
Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic XII, 81-85. 
Sobocinski, Boleslaw (1971b). 'Atomistic Mereology I, II', Notre Dame Journal of Formal 
Logic XII, 89-103 and 203-213. 
Sobocinski, Bo1eslaw (1971c). 'A Note on an Axiom-System of Atomistic Mereology', Notre 
Dame Journal of Formal Logic XII, 249-25l. 
Sullivan, Theodore F. (1971). 'Affine Geometry Having a Solid as Primitive', Notre Dame 
Journal of Formal Logic XII, 1-6l. 
Sullivan, Theodore F. (1972). 'The Name Solid as Primitive in Projective Geometry', Notre 
Dame Journal of Formal Logic XIII, 95-97. 
Sullivan, Theodore F. (1973a). 'The Geometry of Solids in Hilbert Spaces', Notre Dame 
Journal of Formal Logic XIV, 575-580. 
Sullivan, Theodore F. (1973b). 'Tarski's Definition of Point in Banach Spaces', Journal of 
Geometry 3,179--189. 
Tarski, Alfred (1923). '0 wyrazie pierwotnym logistyki (On the Primitive Term of Logistic)" 
Przeglap Filozojiczny XXVI, 68-89. [Paper III in this volume - Ed.] 
Tarski, Alfred (1929). 'Les fondements de la geometrie des corps', Ksilfga Pamilttkowa Pier-
wszego Polskiego Zjazdu Matematycznego, supplement to Annales de la Societe Polonaise 
de Mathematique, Krak6w, 29--33. 
Welsh, Paul J., Jr. (1971). Primitivity in Mereology, Ph.D. dissertation, University of Notre 
Dame. 

ALFRED TAJTELBAUM-TARSKI 
ON THE PRIMITIVE TERM OF LOGISTIC * 
Doctoral Dissertation 1 
INTRODUCTION 
The considerations carried out in the present work belong to the area of 
logistic; the sentences on which I based these considerations are generally 
accepted among researchers working in this field of knowledge. I do not, 
however, carry out my considerations on the basis of any specific system of 
logistic; in particular, I do not make my reasonings dependent on the best 
known theory of logical types by Russell. Although it is not possible, as I 
see it, to develop a consistent system of logistic without this or that theory 
of types, among all the theories of types which could be constructed2 there 
unquestionably exist those according to which my arguments, in their present 
general form, are faultless. One such theory was developed by S. Lesniewski 
during his lectures on the foundations of arithmetic at the University of 
Warsaw (in 1920-1921).3 
The main objective of the present work is to settle the following problem: 
is it possible to construct a system of logistic with the sign of equivalence as 
the sole primitive term (in addition, of course, to the quantifiers4)? 
This problem seems interesting to me for the following reasons. It is known 
that one can construct a system of logistic by means of only one primitive term 
by following the footsteps of Russells and adopting the symbol of implication 
as such a term; by making use of the idea of Sheffer,6 who adopts the sign of 
rejection as the sole primitive term, the sign introduced by him specifically 
for this purpose; or, finally, by using the unpublished results of Lukasiewicz? 
* Bibliographical Note. This paper appeared in print in Polish under the title '0 wyrazie 
pierwotnym logistyki', Przeglqd Filozojiczny XXVI (1923), 68-89, by permission of Jan 
Tarski. Translated by Z. Stachniak. 
 J. T. J. Srzednicki et al. (eds.), Leśniewski’s  Systems  Protothetic
© Kluwer Academic Publishers 1998

44 
ALFRED TAJTELBAUM-TARSKI 
However, for the goal just stated to be indeed attainable, i.e., to construct 
the whole system in terms of only one primitive term, definitions should 
be formulated using (apart from variables) only this primitive term, terms 
previously defined, and the term which a given definition introduces to the 
system; we must not, however, use any constant term which does not belong 
to any ofthese three categories.8 From this standpoint, in my opinion, the sign 
of equivalence has a significant advantage over the terms used by the authors 
cited above; this sign, when adopted as primitive, permits strict compliance 
with the rule in question while, at the same time, it grants definitions a natural 
and convenient form of equivalences. 
The theorem, which I will prove in Section 1 of this article, namely: 
[p, q] :: p.q. == ... [j] ... p ==: [r].p == f(r). == .[r].q == f(r), 9 
gives an affirmative answer to the question raised above. In fact, it can serve 
as a definition of the sign of logical product in terms of the sign of equivalence 
and the universal quantifier. As soon as we are allowed to use the sign oflogical 
product, defining other terms of logistic does not present any difficulties, as 
it is evident, for instance, from the following sentences: 
Vr == . [P].p == p, 
Fl == .[p].p,1O 
[P] :rv (p) == .p == Fl, 
[p, q] ... p ::J q. ==: p == .p.q, 
[p,q] :pVq. ==. rv (p)::J q. 
It will be seen from the considerations carried out in Section 2, that my 
results could be considerably simplified on the basis of such a system of 
logistic which would contain the following sentence among its postulates or 
theorems: 
[p, q, Jl : p == q.f(p). ::J f(q)· 
This sentence, however, can be neither proved nor disproved on the basis of 
any of the systems of logistic known from the literature. This fact motivated 
me to further studies of the sentence in question; in particular, it motivated 
me to search for other sentences equivalent to it. I will present the results of 
these studies in Sections 3-6 of this work. 
1. FUNDAMENTAL THEOREM 
I begin by introducing a few definitions, Def.I-3, which I will be using in this 
and the following sections. Then, I will prove a number oflemmas, Th. 1-10, 

ON THE PRIMITIVE TERM OF LOGISTIC 
45 
and finally the fundamental theorem of this work, Th. 11. The proofs I give 
are, naturally, incomplete; they can be regarded as commentaries explain-
ing the course of reasoning. The structure of these commentaries, partially 
modeled after the structure of proofs in Whitehead and Russell's Principia 
Mathematica, does not, I think, require more detailed explanations. 11 
Def.1. [P] : vr(p) == .p == p 
Def. 2. [P] : as(p) == p 
Def.3. [P] : Jl(p) == .p =="" (P) 
For reasons of symmetry, we could also introduce the following definition: 
Def. 2'. [p].ng(p) =="" (P), 
which would, however, be useless, since the term 'ng' would have the same 
meaning as the negation symbol' , .... ,' already occurring in logic. 
Th. 1. [p].vr(p) 
Th.2. [P] : [q].p == vr(q). ::) p 
Com. 
[P].' .Hp. ::): 
(1) 
p == .[q].vr(q) : 
Ts 
Th.3. [p, q] : p ::) .p == vr(q) 
Com. 
(1) 
[P] : Hp. ::) . 
vr(q). 
Ts 
Th.4. [P] : [q].p == vr(q). == p 
(Def.l) 
(1, Th.l) 
(Th.l) 
(Hp, 1) 
(Th. 2, Th. 3) 

46 
ALFRED TAJTELBAUM-TARSKI 
Tho 50 [p, q] :: [f].·.p ==: [r].p == f(r). == .[r].q == f(r).·. :J q 
Com. 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
[p, q] :: Hp.·. :J .'. 
p ==: [r].p == vr(r). == .[r].q == vr(r).·. 
[r].p == vr(r). == p : 
[r].q == vr(r). == q : 
p ==.p == q: 
p==p. == q: 
p==p. 
Ts 
Tho 60 [Pl. '" ([q].p == as(q)) 
Com. 
[Pl· 
(1) 
'" (p =='" (P)). 
(2) 
'" ([q].p == q). 
'" ([qJ.p == as(q)) 
Tho 70 [p,q] : [rJ.p == as(r). == .[rJ.q == as(r) 
Com. 
(1) 
(2) 
[p,q] : 
'" ([rJ.p == as(r)). 
'" ([rJ.q == as(r)) : 
[r].p == as(r). == .[r].q == as(r) 
(Tho 4) 
(Tho 4) 
(1,2,3) 
(4)12 
(5,6) 
(1) 
(1, Defo 2) 
(Tho 6) 
(Tho 6) 
(1,2) 

ON THE PRIMITIVE TERM OF LOGISTIC 
47 
Th. 8. [p, q] :: [J] ... p ==: [r].p == f(r). == .[r].q == f(r).·. :J p 
Com. 
[p, q] :: Hp.·. :J .'. 
(1) 
P ==: [r].p == as(r). == .[r].q == as(r).·, 
Ts 
(1, Th. 7) 
Th.9. [p, q] :: [f].·.p ==: [r].p == f(r). == .[r].q == f(r).·, :J .p.q 
(Th. 8, Th. 5) 
Th.l0. [p, q, f] :: p.q. :J .'.p ==: [r].p == f(r). == .[r].q == f(r) 
Com. 
[p, q, f] :: Hp. :J .'. 
(1) 
p. 
(2) 
q. 
(Hp) 
(3) 
p==q.'. 
(1,2) 
(4) 
[r] : p == r. == .q == r.·. 
(3) 
(5) 
[r] : p == f(r). == .q == f(r).·. 
(4) 
(6) 
[r].p == f(r). == .[r].q == f(r).·. 
(5) 
Ts 
(1,6) 
Th.ll. [p, q] :: p.q == .·.[f].·.p ==: [r].p == f(r). == .[r].q == f(r) 
(Th. 10, Th. 9) 
2. TRUTH-FUNCTIONS AND THE LAW OF SUBSTITUTION 
In their work mentioned above, Russell and Whitehead call a function f a 
truth-/unction13 if its argument is a sentence and if it satisfies the condition: 
(a) [p, q] : p == q.f(p). :J f(q)· 

48 
ALFRED TAJTELBAUM-TARSKI 
I will call the sentence: 
(A) [p, q, f] : p == q·f(p)· ::J f(q), 
which expresses the fact that every function f has the property mentioned 
above, the law of substitution. 
In definition 4, I am introducing the symbol 'fJ p'; by virtue of this definition, 
the expression 'fJp{f}' has the same meaning as 'f is a truth-function'. 
Definition 5 makes it possible to replace the law of substitution by a single 
term 'Sb'. Among the theorems proved in this section, Th. 17 plays an 
important role; it demonstrates that in the system of logistic, which contains 
the law of substitution among its postulates or theorems, there exists another 
sentence: 
[p, q] ... p.q. ==: [f] : p == ·f(p) == f(q), 
simpler than Th. 11, which can also serve as the definition of the sign of 
logical multiplication in terms of the sign of equivalence and the universal 
quantifier. 
From Th. 20 it follows that to define the sign of logical sum in the system 
of logistics that contains the law of substitution, an analogous sentence can 
be used: 
[p, q] ... p V q. ==: [::3f] : p == ·f(p) == f(q)·* 
The remaining theorems of this section serve as lemmas. 
Def. 4. [f],·.fJp{f} ==: [p, q] : p == q·f(p)· ::J f(q) 
Def. 5. Sb == .[f].fJp{f} 
Th. 12. [fl· ·.fJp{f} ==: [p, q] : p == q. ::J .f(p) == f(q) 
Th.13.Sb==: [P,q,f] :p==q.j(p). ::Jf(q) 
Th. 14. Sb ==: [p, q, fl : p == q. ::J .f(p) == f(q) 
Th.15. Sb == "'[p, q, fl : p.q. ::J ·f(p) == f(q)··· 
(Def.4) 
(Def. 5, DeC. 4) 
(Def. 5, Th. 12) 
[p, q, f] :"-J (p). rv (q). ::J .f(p) == f(q) 
(Th.14) 
The theorems just stated demonstrate that the law of substitution is equivalent 
to the logical product of two sentences, the first of which could be called the 
law of substitution for true sentences, while the second one the law of substi-
tutionfor false sentences. I cannot solve the problem, arising at this point, of 
* [Ed. Note: The quantifier '[b, d]' originally occurring in this definition has been replaced 
by '[p, q]'.J 

ON THE PRIMITIVE TERM OF LOGISTIC 
49 
whether either of these two sentences alone is equivalent to the general law 
of substitution. 
Th. 16. [p, q, f] : p.q. ::) ·f(p) == f(q) :::) ... [p, q] ... p.q. ==: 
[j] : p == ·f(p) == f(q) 
Com. 
Hp :::) :-: 
(1) 
[p, q] :: p.q. ::) ... 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(2) 
(d) 
(e) 
(f) 
(g) 
(h) 
(i) 
G) 
(k) 
(1) 
p.q: 
[J]·f(P) == f(q)··· 
[J] : p == ·f(p) == f(q):-: 
[p, q] :: [J] : p == ·f(p) == f(q) :::) ... 
[J] : p == ·f(p) == f(q)··· 
p == .vr(p) == vr(q) : 
vr(p) == vr(q). 
Ts 
p: 
p == .as(p) == as(q) : 
p ==.p == q: 
p ==p. == q: 
q. 
p.q:-: 
(Hp, a) 
(a, b) 
(d) 
(Th.l) 
(e, f) 
(d) 
(h, Def. 2) 
(i) 
(j) 
(g, k) 
(1-c, 2-1) 
Th.17. Sb::) ... [p, q] ... p.q. ==: [J] : p == ·f(p) == f(q) 
(Th. 15, Th. 16) 
Th.18. [p, q, j] :'" (p). '" (q). ::) ·f(p) == f(q) :::) ... [p, q] ... '" (p). 
'" (q). ==: [J] :'" (p) == ·f(p) == f(q) 
(Th.l, Def. 2) 
I am omitting the proof of Th. 18 which is fully analogous to that of Th. 16. 
Th.19. [p, q, f] :'" (p). '" (q). ::) ·f(P) == f(q) :::) ... [p, q] ... 
p V q. ==: [3f] : p == ·f(p) == f(q) 
(Th.18) 

50 
ALFRED TAJTELBAUM-TARSKI 
Th. 20. Sb :J ... [p, q] ... p V q. ==: [3f] : p == .f(P) == f(q) 
(Th.IS, Th.19) 
Theorems 16 and 19 can easily be inverted. Hence, it can be directly concluded 
that the sentence: 
[p, q] ... p.q. ==: [I] : p == ·f(P) == f(q) 
not only follows from the law of substitution for true sentences but is equiv-
alent to it. Similarly, the sentence: 
[p, q] ... p V q. ==: [31] : p == ·f(p) == f(q) 
is equivalent to the law of substitution for false sentences, while the logical 
product of the two above mentioned sentences is equivalent to the general 
law of substitution. 
3. INDEPENDENCE OF THE LAW OF SUBSTITUTION OF THE AXIOMS OF 
LOGISTIC; THE LAW OF THE NUMBER OF FUNCTIONS 
Regarding the question of whether every function whose argument is a sen-
tence is a truth-function, or, in other words, whether the law of substitution 
is a true sentence, Russell and Whitehead give a negative answer using in 
their justification arguments of merely intuitive nature. 14 Their answer does 
not seem to me quite convincing, especially since Lesniewski constructed 
a general method which makes it possible to eliminate from a language all 
functions which are not truth-functional. 15 
On the other hand, there seems to be no doubt that the law of substitution 
can be neither proved nor refuted on the basis of any of the systems of logistic 
known from the literature. Moreover, one can even "prove" the independence 
of this sentence of the known systems of axioms of logistic, e.g. of the 
system of axioms of Russell and Whitehead 16 - "prove" in the way one 
typically proves in mathematics the independence of a certain sentence of 
other sentences, i.e., by means of a suitably selected interpretation. However, 
I will not present my "proof' here, as it is based on hitherto unpublished 
results of Lukasiewicz's investigations concerning the three-valued logic, 
and its demonstration would present serious technical problems. 
From what has been said above, it is clear that anyone who regards the law 
of substitution as a true sentence and wants to introduce it into the system of 
logistic, must admit as an axiom either the law itself or any other sentence 
which, together with other axioms of the system, can be used to prove the 
law of substitution. For exactly this reason, I find theorems (which I will 
state in the sequel of the present work) which establish equivalence between 
the law of substitution and certain other sentences, interesting. I think that 
such theorems can be helpful in the construction of the system of logistic, 
strengthened in the way described above, to the same extent as, for example, 

ON THE PRIMITIVE TERM OF LOGISTIC 
51 
theorems concerning the equivalent forms of Euclid's postulate are helpful in 
research on the foundations of geometry.* 
The theorems which I have just mentioned are sometimes direct con-
clusions of logically stronger theorems which establish the necessary and 
sufficient conditions for a function f to be a truth-function. For instance, as 
it follows from Th. 40 of this section, the following condition is of this kind: 
(b) [P].f(P) == vr(p). V .[P].f(P). == as(p). V .[P].f(P) ==""' (P). V . 
[P]·f(p) == fl(P). 
An immediate conclusion from Th. 40 is Th. 42, from which it follows that 
the law of substitution is equivalent to the sentence: 
(B) [f] : [P].f(P) == vr(p). V .[P].f(P) == as(p). V .[P].f(P) ==""' (p). V . 
[P]·f(p) == fl(p). 
Due to its intuitive content, this sentence can be called the law of the num-
ber offunctions, for it states that every function whose argument is a sentence 
is equivalent, for every value of the argument, to one of the following four 
functions: vr, as, "', fl. 
Def. 6. [f,g]··· = {j,g} == .[P].f(P) == g(p) 
Th. 21. Vr 
Th.22. '" (FI) 
Theorems 21 and 22 immediately follow from the definitions of the terms 
'Vr' and 'FI' given in the Introduction. 
Th. 23. [P] : p == .p == Vr 
Th.24. [P] :'" (P) == .p == FI 
Th.25. [P] : p == Yr. V .p == FI 
Com. 
[P] : 
(1) 
pV '" (P) : 
(Th.21) 
(Th.22) 
* [Ed. Note: Tarski presumably refers to the famous Euclid's fifth postulate (of parallels).] 

52 
(2) 
(3) 
ALFRED TAJTELBAUM-TARSKI 
p:J .p == Vr: 
'" (P) :J .p == FI : 
p==Vr.V.p==FI 
Th.26. [p, fJ : 1}p{f}·f(Vr)·f(FI). :J f(P) 
Com. 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
[p, fJ.·.Hp. :J: 
p == V r. V .p == FI : 
p == Vr. :J f(P) : 
p == Fl. :J f(P) : 
Ts 
Th.27. [JJ : 1}p{f}·f(Vr)·f(Fl). :J ={f,vr} 
Com. 
(1) 
(2) 
[fJ···Hp. :J: 
[PJ·f(P) : 
[PJ.f(P) == vr(p) : 
Ts 
Th.2S. [fJ: 1}p{f}.f(Vr). '" (J(FI)).:J ={f,as} 
Com. 
(1) 
[fJ :: Hp. :J .'. 
[PJ : p:J . 
(a) 
(b) 
p== Vr. 
f(P)··. 
(Th.23) 
(Th.24) 
(1,2,3) 
(Th.25) 
(Def. 4, Hp) 
(Def. 4, Hp) 
(1,2,3) 
(Th.26) 
(1, Th.1) 
(Def. 6, 2) 
(Th.21) 
(Def. 4, Hp, a) 

(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(c) 
(d) 
ON THE PRIMITIVE TERM OF LOGISTIC 
[P] :"-' (p) :) . 
p == Fl. 
"-' (f(P)).'. 
[P].p == f(p) : 
[P].f (p) == as(p) : 
Ts 
Th.29. [f]: '!9p{f}. "-' (f(Vr))·f(Fl).:) ={f,"-'} 
53 
(Th.22) 
(DeC. 4, Hp, c) 
(I-b,2-d) 
(DeC. 2,3) 
(DeC. 6, 4) 
(Th. 21, DeC. 4, Th. 22, DeC. 6) 
The proof of this theorem, analogous to the proof of the previous theorem 
(Th. 28), does not present any difficulties. 
Th. 30. [Pl. "-' (f l (p)) 
(DeC. 3)* 
Th. 31. [p, f] : '!9p{f}. "-' (f(Vr)). "-' (f(Fl)). :) "-' (f(P)) 
(Th. 25, DeC. 4) 
The proof is fully analogous to that of Th. 26. 
Th.32. [J]: '!9p{f}. "-' (f(Vr)). "-' (f(Fl)).:) ={f,fl} 
(Th. 31, Th. 30, DeC. 6) 
The proof is fully analogous to that of Th. 26. 
Th.33. [J] : '!9p{f} :) . = {f, vr} V = {f, as} V = {f, "-'} V = {f, fl} 
Com. 
[fl···Hp :): 
(1) 
f(Vr)·f(Fl). V ·f(Vr). "-' (f(Fl)). V . 
"-' (f(Vr)).f(Fl). V . "-' (f(Vr)). "-' (f(Fl)) : 
Ts 
(Hp, Th. 27, Th. 28, Th. 29, Th. 32, 1) 
* [Ed. Note: The quantifier '[I)' originally occurring in theorem 30 has been replaced by 
'[P)'.] 

54 
ALFRED TAJTELBAUM-TARSKI 
Th. 34. {j p{ vr } 
Com. 
(1) 
[p, q] : p == q.vr{p). ~ vr{q).·. 
{jp{ vr} 
Th. 35. {j p{ as } 
Com. 
(1) 
[p, q] : p == q.as{p). ~ . 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
p==q.p. 
q. 
as(q).· . 
{jp{ as} 
Th. 36. {j p{ rv } 
Com. 
(1) 
[p, q] : p == q. rv (p). ~rv (q).'. 
'!9p{rv} 
Th. 37. {jp{fl} 
Com. 
(1) 
[p, q] : p == q.fl{p). ~ fl(q).·. 
'!9p{fl} 
Th. 38. [f, g] : = {g, f}. {j p{f}. ~ 79 p{g } 
Com. 
[J,g] :: Hp. ~ .'. 
(Th.l) 
(Def.4, 1) 
(Def.2) 
(a) 
(Def. 2, b) 
(Def. 4, I-c) 
(Def.4, 1) 
(Th.30) 
(Def.4, 1) 

ON THE PRIMITIVE TERM OF LOGISTIC 
(1) 
[r].g(r) == f(r).·, 
(2) 
[p, q] : p == q.g(p). =:> • 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
Ts 
p == q·f(p)· 
f(q)· 
g(q) ... 
55 
(Def.6) 
(1) 
(Def. 4, Hp, a) 
(1, b) 
(Def. 4, 2-c) 
Th.39. [f]: ={j,vr} V ={j,as} V ={j,rv} V ={j,fl}. =:> '!9p{j} 
(Th. 38, Th. 34, Th. 35, Th. 36, Th. 37) 
Th.40. [f]: '!9p{f} ==. ={j,vr} V ={j,as} V ={j,rv} V ={j,fl} 
(Th. 33, Th. 39) 
Th. 41. Sb == .[f]. ={j,vr} V ={j,as} V ={j,rv} V ={j,fl} 
(Th. 40, Def. 5) 
Th. 42. Sb ==: [f] : [P]·f(p) == vr(p). V .[P].f(p) == as(p). V ·[P]·f(p) 
=='" (p). V .[P].f(p) == fl(p) 
(Th. 41, Def. 6) 
4. THE LAW OF DEVELOPMENT 
The main theorems of this section are Th. 49 and Th. 50. In the first of these 
theorems, I give a new necessary and sufficient condition for a given function 
to be a truth-function, that is: 
(c) [P].·.f(p) ==: f(Vr).p. V .f(Fl). rv (p). 
Th. 50, which directly follows from Th. 49, expresses the fact that the law 
of substitution is equivalent to the sentence: 
(C) [p, fl···f(p) ==: f(Vr).p. V ·f(Fl). '" (p). 
In this last sentence, we can easily recognize the law of development well 
known from the algebra of logic. 17 
Th. 43. [p, f].·.'!9p{j}.f(p). =:>: f(Vr).p. V .f(Fl). rv (p) 

56 
Com. 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
ALFRED TAJTELBAUM-TARSKI 
[p, fJ···Hp. :): 
p = V r. V .p = Fl : 
p = Vr. :) .f(Vr}.p: 
p = Fl. :) .f(Fl}. '" (P) : 
Ts 
Th.44. [p, fJ : '!9p{J}·f(Vr}.p. :) f(p} 
Th.45. [p, fJ : '!9p{J}·f(Fl}. '" (p). :) f(p} 
(Th.25) 
(Def. 4, Hp, Th. 23) 
(Def. 4, Hp, Th. 24) 
(1,2,3) 
(Def. 4, Th. 23) 
(Def. 4, Th. 24) 
Th.46. [p, fJ.·.'!9p{J} : f(Vr}.p. V .f(Fl}. '" (p) ::) f(P} (Th. 44, Th. 45) 
Th.47. [JJ :: '!9p{J} :) ···[PJ···f(p} =: f(Vr}.p. V ·f(Fl}. '" (p) 
(Th. 43, Th. 46) 
Th.48. [fJ :: [PJ···f(p) =: f(Vr).p. V ·f(Fl}. '" (P) ... :) '!9p{J} 
Com. 
[fJ:-:Hp.·. :):: 
(1) 
[p, qJ ... p = q·f(P)· :): 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
Ts 
p = 
q·f(P) : 
f(Vr}.p. V .f(Fl}. '" (P) : 
f(Vr}.q. V .f(Fl}. '" (q) : 
f(q} :: 
(Hp, a) 
(b, a) 
(Hp, c) 
(Def.4, I-d) 
Th. 49. [Jl :: '!9p{J} = .·.[PJ.·.f(P} =: f(Vr}.p. V ·f(Fl). '" (P) 
(Th. 47, Th. 48) 
Th. 50. Sb = ... [p, fJ.·.f(p} =: f(Vr}.p. V .f(Fl}. '" (P) (Th. 49,* Def. 5) 
* [Ed. Note: Th. 39 originally appearing in the text has been replaced by Th. 49.] 

ON THE PRIMITIVE TERM OF LOGISTIC 
57 
5. THE FIRST THEOREM ON THE BOUNDS OF A FUNCTION 
Apart from the law of development, truth-functions satisfy many other laws 
concerning functions known from the algebra of logic. In particular, I will 
prove theorems 53, 55, and 56, according to which every truth-function sat-
isfies the following conditions: 
(d) [P].f(P). == ·f(Vr)·f(Fl), 
(e) [3p].f(P). == .f(Vr) V f(Fl), 
or, in equivalent formulations: 
[P] : f(Vr)·f(Fl). :J f(P), 
[P] : f(p) :J ·f(Vr) V f(Fl), 
so, also the condition: 
(t) [P] : f(Vr)·f(Fl). :J f(p) :J .f(Vr) V f(Fl). 
The above theorems, however, express only necessary conditions for a 
given function to be a truth-function; it is impossible to prove that these 
conditions are sufficient. One can even "prove" the independence of these 
sentences, which express the fact that the above conditions are sufficient, of 
the axioms of logistic; I will not give any "proofs" here for the reasons already 
explained in Section 3. 
I will demonstrate, however, that if every function (whose argument is a 
sentence) satisfies condition (d) or (e), hence also (t), then every function is a 
truth-function, and so the law of substitution holds true. This will enable me 
to prove in theorems 59, 61, and 62, that the law of substitution is equivalent 
to any of the following sentences: 
(D) [f] : [P]·f(p)· == .f(Vr)·f(Fl), 
(E) [f] : [3p]·f(p). == .f(Vr) V f(Fl), 
(F) [p, f] : f(Vr)·f(Fl). :J f(P) :J .f(Vr) V f(Fl).* 
I will call sentence (F), known from the algebra oflogic, 18 thejirst theorem 
on the bounds of a function - ''first'' because of some theorem from the next 
section. By way of analogy, the sentence (D) could be called thejirst theorem 
* [Ed. Note: The quantifier '[P)' originally occurring in fonnula (F) has been replaced by 
'[p,j)' .J 

58 
ALFRED TAJTELBAUM-TARSKI 
on the lower bound of a function while sentence (E) - the first theorem on the 
upper bound of a function. 19 
Th. 51. [J].·.[P].f(P). = ·f(Vr)·f(Fl) :=: [P] : f(Vr)·f(Fl). ~ f(p) 
Com. 
[f]·· . 
(1) 
[P]·f(P)· = ·f(Vr)·f(Fl) :=: [P]·f(P)· ~ ·f(Vr)·f(Fl) : 
f(Vr)·f(Fl). ~ ·[P]·f(P)··· 
(2) 
[P].f(P). ~ ·f(Vr)·f(Fl).·. 
(3) 
[P].f(P). = ·f(Vr)·f(Fl) :=: f(Vr)·f(Fl). ~ ·[P]·f(P)··· 
(1,2) 
[P]·f(P)· = ·f(Vr)·f(Fl) :=: [P] : f(Vr).f(Fl). ~ f(P) 
(3) 
Th.52. [f].·.[3p].f(P). = .f(Vr) V f(Fl) :=: [P] : f(P) ~ ·f(Vr) V f(Fl) 
The proof is similar to that of the previous theorem. 
Th.53. [J] ... t?p{f} ~: [P].f(P). = ·f(Vr).f(Fl) 
Th.54. [p, f] : t?p{f}.f(P). ~ .f(Vr) V f(Fl) 
Th.55. [J] ... t?p{f} ~: [3p].f(P). = .f(Vr) V f(Fl) 
(Th. 26, Th. 51) 
(Th.31) 
(Th. 54, Th. 52) 
Th.56. [f].·.t?p{f} ~: [P] : f(Vr)·f(Fl). ~ f(P) ~ ·f(Vr) V f(Fl) 
(Th. 26, Th. 54) 
Th. 57. [p, q,g] :: [J] : [r]·f(r). = .f(Vr).f(Fl).·.g(Vr, Vr). 
g(Vr, Fl).g(Fl, Vr).g(Fl, Fl).·. ~ g(p,q) 
Com. 
[p,q,g] :: Hp.·. ~: 
(1) 
[r].g(Vr, r). = .g(Vr, Vr).g(Vr, Fl) : 
(2) 
[r].g(Vr, r) : 
(1, Hp) 

ON THE PRIMITIVE TERM OF LOGISTIC 
(3) 
g(Vr,q): 
(4) 
[r].g(FI, r). = .g(FI, Vr).g(FI, FI) : 
(5) 
[r].g(FI, r) : 
(6) 
g(FI, q) : 
(7) 
[r].g(r, q). = .g(Vr, q).g(FI, q) : 
(8) 
[r].g(r, q) : 
Ts 
Th. 58. [f] : [P]·f(P)· = ·f(Vr}·f(FI). :::> .[J].'Dp{f} 
Com. 
Hp::::>:: 
(1) 
[f]··· 
(a) 
Vr = Vr.f(Vr). :::> f(Vr) : 
(b) 
f'V (Vr = FI): 
(c) 
Vr = FI.f(Vr). :::> f(FI) : 
(d) 
FI = Vr.f(FI). :::> f(Vr) : 
(e) 
FI = Fl.f(Fl). :::> f(FI).·. 
59 
(2) 
(Hp) 
(4, Hp) 
(5) 
(Hp) 
(7,3,6) 
(8) 
(Th. 21, Th. 22) 
(b) 
(b) 
(f) 
[p, q] : p = q·f(p)· :::> f(q) :: 
(Th. 57, a, c, d, e) 
Ts 
Th. 59. Sb =: [f] : [P].f(p). = .f(Vr).f(FI) 
(Def. 4, I-f) 
(Th. 53, Th. 58, Def. 5) 
Th.60. [f] : [P]·f(p)· = ·f(Vr).f(FI) :=: [f] : [3p]·f(p)· 
= ·f(Vr) V f(FI) 
Com. 
(1) 
[f] : [P]·f(P)· = ·f(Vr)·f(FI) ::::> ... 
(a) 
[f] : [Pl· f'V (f(P)). = . f'V (f(Vr)). f'V (f(FI)).·. 

60 
ALFRED TAJTELBAUM-TARSKI 
(b) 
[fJ: [3pJ·f(p)· := ·f(Vr) V f(Fl) :: 
(2) 
[fJ : [3pJ.f(p). := .f(Vr) V f(Fl) :~ ... 
(c) 
(d) 
[jJ : [3pJ. rv (J(p)). := . ,.... (J(Vr))V ,.... (J(Fl)).·. 
[jJ : [PJ·f(p)· := ·f(Vr)·f(Fl) :: 
[jJ : [PJ·f(p)· := ·f(Vr)·f(Fl) ::=: [jJ : [3pJ·f(P)· := . 
(a) 
(c) 
f(Vr) V f(Fl) 
(I-b,2-d) 
Th. 61. Sb:=: [jJ : [3pJ.f(p). := ·f(Vr) V f(Fl) 
(Th. 59, Th. 60) 
Th. 62. Sb:=: [p, fJ : f(Vr)·f(Fl). ~ f(p) ~ .f(Vr) V f(Fl) 
(Th. 59, Th. 61, Th. 51, Th. 52) 
In addition to the properties of functions which have been investigated in this 
section, one can investigate more general properties: 
(g) [qJ : [PJ·f(p)· := ·f(q)·f(rv (q)), 
(h) [qJ : [3pJ·f(p). := .f(q) V f(rv (q)), 
(i) [p,qJ: f(q)·f(,.... (q)). ~ f(p) ~ ·f(q) V f(rv (q)). 
By applying proof methods similar to those used by us before, we can 
easily arrive at a number of theorems analogous to theorems 53, 55, 56, 59, 
61, and 62, proved in this section. Conditions (g), (h), and (i) constitute, 
therefore, the necessary conditions for a given function to be a truth-function, 
and the corresponding sentences (G), (H), and (I), which attribute the above 
stated conditions to every function, are equivalent to the law of substitution. 
6. THE SECOND THEOREM ON THE BOUNDS OF A FUNCTION 
With the help of Th. 47, I shall now prove (theorems 65, 66, and 67) that 
every truth-function f possesses the following properties: 
(k) [PJ.f(p). := f(J(Fl)), 
(1) [3pJ·f(p)· := f(J(Vr)), 
or, in equivalent formulations: 
[PJ·f(J(Fl)) ~ f(p), 

ON THE PRIMITIVE TERM OF LOGISTIC 
61 
[P]·f(P) ~ f(f(Vr)), 
and, hence, the property: 
(m) [P].f(f(Fl)) ~ f(P) ~ f(f(Vr)). 
The above conditions, like conditions (d), (e), and (f) of Section 5, are only 
necessary for a function f to be a truth-function. Furthermore, in contrast to 
considerations of the preceding section, I cannot even prove that the law of 
substitution is equivalent to any of the following sentences, which express the 
fact that every function satisfies condition (k) or (1): 
(K) [f] : [P]·f(P)· := f(f(Fl)), 
(L) [f] : [:3p]·f(P)· := f(f(Vr)). 
However, we shall see from theorems 75 and 76 that the law of substitution 
is equivalent to the logical product of sentences (K) and (L), and, hence, to 
the sentence: 
(M) [p, f]·f(f(Fl)) ~ f(P) ~ f(f(Vr)). 
Sentence (M) is known in the algebra of 10gic20; I shall call it the second 
theorem on the bounds of a function. By analogy, sentences (K) and (L) will 
be given the names: the second theorem on the lower bound of a function and 
the second theorem on the upper bound of a function. 
Th. 63. [f]···[P]·f(P)· := f(f(Fl)) ::= ·[p]·f(f(Fl)) ~ f(P) 
Th.64. [f].·.[:3p].f(P). := f(f(Vr)) ::= ·[P]·f(P) ~ f(f(Vr)) 
I omit the proofs of these theorems as they are analogous to the proof ofTh. 51. 
Th. 65. U]···'l?p{f} ~: [P]·f(p). := f(f(Fl)) 
Com. 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
[fl:-:Hp ~:: 
[P].·.f(P) :=: f(Vr).p. V ·f(Fl). '" (P) :: 
f(f(Fl)) :=: f(Vr).f(Fl). V .f(Fl). '" (f(Fl)).·. 
f(f(Fl)) := ·f(Vr)·f(Fl) : 
(Th.47) 
(1) 
(2) 

62 
ALFRED TAJTELBAUM-TARSKI 
Ts 
Th.66. [J] ... 'l9p{f} :J: [~p].f(p). == f(f(Vr)) 
(Th. 53, Hp, 3) 
(Th. 47, Th. 55) 
The proof is similar to that of the preceding theorem. 
Th. 67. [J] : 'l9p{f} :J ·fp]·f(f(Fl)) :J f(p) :J f(f(Vr)) 
(Th. 65, Th. 66)* 
Th. 68. [j] : fp].f(p)· == f(f(Fl)) ::J: fp,f] :'" (p) :J .f(p) == f(Fl) 
Com. 
Hp ::J::: 
(1) 
fp, f]:-: 
(a) 
[~g] :: 
(a) 
[r].·.g(r) ==:'" (r). :J .f(r) == f(FI) ::21 
«(3) 
g(FI) ==:'" (Fl) :J .f(Fl) == f(Fl).·. 
(a) 
(,) 
'" (Fl) :J .f(Fl) == f(Fl) : 
(8) 
g(Fl).· . 
«(3,,) 
(c) 
g(g(Fl)) ==:'" (g(Fl)) :J .f(g(Fl)) 
== f(Fl).·. 
(a) 
(0 
'" (g(Fl)) :J ·f(g(Fl)) == f(Fl) : 
(8) 
(''7) 
g(g(Fl)) : 
(c,O 
('l9) 
[r].g(r) : 
(Hp, "7) 
(t) 
g(p):-: 
('!9) 
(b) 
'" (p) :J .f(p) == f(Fl) ::: 
(a-a, i) 
Ts 
(I-b) 
Th.69. [f] : [~p]·f(p)· == f(f(Vr)) ::J: [J] : fp]·f(p)· == f('" (f(Vr))) 
Com. 
Hp::J .'. 
(1) 
[f] : [~p]. '" (f(p)). =='" (f('" (f(Vr)))).·. 
Ts 
(l) 
* [Ed. Note: In the Polish original, the references to theorems 65 and 66 are absent.] 

ON THE PRIMITIVE TERM OF LOGISTIC 
63 
Th.70. [f] : [P].J(P). == f('" (J(Vr))) :::J: [p, J] : p::J .J(P) == f(Vr) 
The proof, analogous to that of Th. 68, does not present any difficulties. 
Th. 71. [f] : [:3p]·f(P)· == f(J(Vr)) :::J: [p, J] : p ::J .J(p) == J(Vr) 
(Th. 69, Th. 70) 
Th.72. [f] : [P]·f(P)· == J(J(Fl)) :::J: [p, q, J] :'" (P). '" (q). ::J . 
Com. 
Hp:::J ... 
(1) 
[p, q, f] :rv (p). rv (q). ::J . 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
Ts 
rv (p). rv (q). 
J(P) == f(Fl). 
J(q) == J(Fl). 
f(P) == J(q) ... 
f(P) == f(q) 
(Th. 68, Hp, a) 
(Th. 68, Hp, a) 
(b, c) 
(1-d) 
Th.73. [J] : [:3p]·f(P)· == f(J(Vr)) :::J: [p, q, f] : p.q. =) .J(P) == J(q) 
(Th.71) 
The proof is quite similar to that of the preceding theorem. Th. 72 demon-
strates that the law of substitution for false sentences foHows from sentence 
(K), while Th. 73 shows that the law of substitution for tme sentences follows 
from sentence (L). 
Th.74. [1] : [P]·f(P)· == f(J(Fl)) : [:3p]·f(P)· == f(J(l/r)) :::J Sb 
(Th. 72, Th. 73, Th. 15) 
Th. 75. Sb ==: [J] : [P].J(P). == f(J(Fl)) : [:3p].J(P). == J(J(Vr)) 
(Th. 65, Th. 66, Def. 5, Th. 74) 
Th. 76. Sb == .[p, f].f(J(Fl)) ::J f(P) ::J J(J(Vr)) 
(Th. 75, Th. 63, Th. 64) 

64 
ALFRED TAJTELBAUM-TARSKI 
By putting together the main results obtained in Sections 3-6, we can con-
clude that the following sentences are equivalent: 
(A) [p, q, f] : p = q.f(p). ::J f(q) 
(the law of substitution), 
(B) [I] : [P]·f(P) = vr(p). V ·[P].f(P) = as(p). V ·[P]·f(P) = 
'" (P). V .[P]·f(P) = fi(P) 
(the law of the number off unctions), 
(C) [p, f]···f(P) =: f(Vr).p. V .f(Fi). '" (P) 
(the law of development), 
(D) [f] : [P]·f(P)· = ·f(Vr)·f(Fi) 
(the first theorem on the lower bound of a function), 
(E) [f] : [3p]·f(p)· = .f(Vr) V f(Fi) 
(the first theorem on the upper bound of a function), 
(M) [p, fl.f(J(Fi)) ::J f(P) ::J f(f(Vr)) 
(the second theorem on the bounds of a function). 
ANNEX 
To conclude the present work, I would like to briefly present the results, 
analogous to those presented in Sections 3-6, which were obtained when 
investigating functions of more than one argument or functions whose argu-
ments are not sentences. 
l. Functions of Several Arguments 
One can state and prove a number of theorems, similar in their intuitive content 
to those which I presented in the preceding sections, for functions of more 
than one argument; furthermore, the proofs do not differ in any significant 
way. 
For example, if we limit ourselves to functions of two arguments and if, 
by the analogy to Def. 4, we shall call such a function f a truth-function, 
provided that it satisfies the condition: 
(ad [p, q, r, s] : p = q.r = s.f(P, r). ::J f(q, s), 
then we can easily prove that the following conditions are the necessary con-
ditions for a given function f to be a truth-function: 
(bd [P,q]·f(P,q)·V: 
[p,q] : f(P,q) = .p V q: V : [p,q] : f(P,q) = . '" (P) V q: V : [p,q] : 

ON THE PRIMITIVE TERM OF LOGISTIC 
65 
f(p,q) == .pV ""' (q): v: [p,q] : f(p,q) ==. ""' (p)v ""' (q): V. 
[p, q]·f(p, q) == p. V .[p, q]·f(p, q) == q.V : [p, q] : f(p, q) == .p == 
q : V : [p, q] : f(p, q) == .p ==""' (q) : V : [p, q].f(p, q) ==""' (q). V . 
[P,q]·f(p,q) ==""' (p).v: [p,q] : f(p,q) == .p.q: v: [p,q] : f(p,q) ==. 
""' (p).q : V : [p,q] : f(p,q) == .p. ""' (q) : V : [p,q] : f(p,q) == . 
""' (p). ""' (q) : V. 
[p, q]. ""' (J(P, q)), 
(cd [p, q]···f(p, q) ==: f(Vr, Vr).p.q. V .f(Vr, Fl).p. ""' (q). V . 
f(Fl, Vr). ""' (p).q. V .f(Fl, Fl). ""' (p). ""' (q), 
(d)) [p, q].f(p, q). == ·f(Vr, Vr)·f(Vr, Fl).f(Fl, Vr).f(Fl, Fl), 
(e)) [3p,q].f(p,q). == .f(Vr, Vr) V f(Vr,Fl) V f(Fl, Vr) V f(Fl, Fl). 
Conditions (a))-(e)) are the counterparts of conditions (a)-(e) listed above. 
I am not stating the counterparts of conditions (k)-(m), since they would be 
quite complicated, and I do not find them interesting. 
Conditions (d)) and (e)) are only the necessary conditions for a function f 
to be a truth-function; the remaining conditions are both necessary and suffi-
cient. Sentences (A))-(E)), stating that every function f satisfies conditions 
(a))-(e)), are equivalent; we could name them in the way analogous to that 
of sentences (A)-(E), that is: the law of substitution (for functions of two 
arguments), the law of the number offunctions of two arguments,22 etc. 
It is worth noting that sentences (A) )-(E)) are equivalent not only among 
themselves but also equivalent to the above stated sentences (A)-(E). In 
particular, it is easy to prove the equivalence of sentences (D) and (Dd; 
Th. 57 may serve as one of the lemmas in the proof of such a theorem. 
In fact, without leaving the domain of functions of two arguments, it is not 
difficult to construct yet another series of sentences, equivalent to sentence 
(A) - the law of substitution - and, as far as their content is concerned, to 
some extent intermediate between the sentences of the preceding sections and 
those which have just been mentioned. 
Here are some examples: 
(A') [p, q, r, f] : p == q.f(p, r). ::) f(q, r), 
(D') [p, f] : [q]·f(P, q). == .f(p, Vr)·f(p, Fl). 
II. Functions, Whose Arguments Are Not Sentences 
Many issues emerge, analogous to those resolved above, in the study of 
functions whose arguments are not only sentences but also logical functions. 

66 
ALFRED TAJTELBAUM-TARSKI 
Let us restrict ourselves to the consideration of only one particular case: 
to functions of one argument whose arguments are not sentences but those 
functions whose properties we studied in Sections 3-6. 
By analogy with the terminology of Russell and Whitehead,23 we shall call 
such a function <p extensional if it satisfies the condition: 
(a2) [f,g] : = {f,g}·<p{j}· :J <p{g}. 
By Th. 38, {) p is an example of such a function. The sentence: 
(A2) [j, g, <p] : = {j, 9 }.<p{f}. :J <p{g}, 
as it seems, cannot be proved on the ground of any of the known systems of 
logistic, even after the addition of the law of substitution. 
It is very easy to give a series of conditions, either only necessary or 
necessary and sufficient, for a given function <p to be extensional- conditions, 
which correspond to conditions (b )-(f) from the previous sections; it is equally 
easy to formulate sentences, equivalent to (A2), which correspond to sentences 
(B)-(F). The proofs of the corresponding theorems, however, require the 
acceptance of the sentence (A) - the law of substitution - as a hypothesis; 
they do not differ significantly from the proofs of Sections 3-6, but the role 
analogous to that of Th. 25 is played now by the law of the number of 
functions: 
[fl. ={j,vr} V ={f,as} V ={j,"-'} V ={j,fl}, 
which follows, as we know, from the accepted hypothesis. 
I shall give here the main sentences equivalent to sentence (A2): 
(C2) [j,<P] ... <P{f} ==: <p{vr}. ={j,vr}. V .<p{as}. 
= {j, as}. V .<p{ "-'}. = {j, "-'}. V .<p{jl}. = {j, fl}, 
(D2) [<p] : [f]·<p{j}· == .<p{ vr }.<p{ as }.<p{ "-' }.<p{fl}, 
(E2) [<p] : [3f].<p{j}· == .<p{vr} V <p{as} V <p{"-'} V <p{jl}, 
(N) [<p].·.[3g] : [f].<p{j} == g(j(Vr}, f(Fl}}. 
Sentence (N) does not have an exact counterpart in the preceding series 
of sentences. From this sentence one can easily derive the sentence (B2) -
the law of the number of functions, which I am not stating here for technical 
reasons, as it must contain sixteen logical components, and as its formulation 
would be very laborious without the help of auxiliary definitions. 

ON THE PRIMITIVE TERM OF LOGISTIC 
67 
NOTES 
I Volume IV of the journal Fundamenta Mathematicae (Warszawa, 1922) contains my paper 
'Sur Ie terme primitif de laLogistique', the content of which covers, more or less, Sections 1-2 
of the present paper; the subsequent sections of this paper (Sections 3-6) correspond roughly 
to the paper 'Sur les truth-functions au sens de MM. Russell et Whitehead', which will appear 
in volume V of the journal mentioned above. * 
2 The possibility of constructing different theories of logical types was already anticipated 
by the inventor of the first of them - Russell. Cf. A.N. Whitehead and B. Russell, Principia 
Mathematica, Cambridge 1910, Vol. I, p. vii. 
3 One way in which LeSniewski's theory of types affected the lay-out of this work is that for 
functions, whose arguments are not sentences, I am using distinct parentheses. Cf. Def. 4 in 
Section 2 and Def. 6 in Section 3. 
4 I am using the term 'quantifier' in the sense of Peirce ([cf.] 'On the Algebra of Logic', 
American Journal of Mathematics VII, 1885, p. 197), who denotes with this term the symbols 
'II' (universal quantifier) and '~' (particular quantifier), representing abbreviations of the 
expressions: 'for every signification of terms ... ' and 'for some signification of terms ... '. ** 
5 See B. Russell, The Principles of Mathematics, Cambridge, 1903, pp. 16-18. 
6 See H.M. Sheffer, 'A set of five postulates for Boolean algebras with application to logical 
constants', Transactions of the American Mathematical Society 14, 1913. See also B. Russell, 
Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy, London-New York, 1920, p. 144 and following. 
7 In his work, written approximately at the same time as the work of Sheffer mentioned above 
but independently from it, Lukasiewicz shows that, in addition to the signs of implication and 
rejection, other logistic terms possess the required property: each of them can be adopted in 
the system of logistic as the sole primitive term. The sign of equivalence is not among them. 
8 Russell and Whitehead chose the opposite approach in the work cited above: by giving 
definitions the form 'A = B D f', they use a symbol which occurs neither in axioms nor 
theorems of their system. 
9 In this work I adopt the symbolism of Russell and Whitehead with some minor modifications; 
in particular, instead of expressions of the form '<j;x' I write: '<j;(x)'. 
10 I am using the symbols 'Vr' and 'Ft' instead of '1' and '0' - the terms occurring, for 
instance, in E. Schroder's Vorlesungen fiber die Algebra der Logik, I Band, Leipzig 1890, 
p. 188. See also L. Couturat, [ ... L'algebre de La logique, Paris, 1905, p. 18.] 
11 In the proofs of theorems which have the form of a conditional sentence, the term 'Hp' 
replaces the antecedent (hypothesis) while the term 'Ts' the consequent (thesis) of a theorem.::: 
12 
To pass from (4) to (5), I am using the following theorem communicated to me by 
Lukasiewicz: 
[p,q,rj.·.p =:o.q =:0 r :=:o:p =:0 q. =:0 r. 
I will not give a proof, quite easy in fact, of this theorem which expresses an interesting prop-
erty of equivalence (this theorem is analogous to the laws of associativity for logical addition 
and multiplication). 
13 A.N. Whitehead and B. Russell, op. cit., pp. 120-121. The Polish termfunkcja prawdzi-
wosciowa was used for the first time by E. Zylinski in his lecture (0 przedstawiainosci 
funkcyj prawdziwosciowych jednych przez drugie) delivered during the first Polish Philosoph-
ical Congress in Lw6w, May [ ... 1923]. 
14 Cf. A.N. Whitehead and B. Russell, op. cit., pp. 120-121. 
* [Ed. Note: Tarski's paper 'Sur Ie terme primitif de la Logistique' appeared in 1923.] 
** [Ed. Note: Peirce gives the interpretation of the expressions 'Ilixi' and '~iXi' on 
pp. 194-195 of his paper.] 
::: [Ed. Note: In addition, the term 'Com' is the abbreviation of the word 'Commentary'.] 

68 
ALFRED TAJTELBAUM-TARSKI 
15 These results of Lesniewski have not yet been published. 
16 Cf. A.N. Whitehead and B. Russell, op. cit., pp. 98-1Ol. 
17 Cf. L. Couturat, op. cit., p. 31; E. SchrOder, op. cit., p. 409, 44+. 
18 Cf. L. Couturat, op. cit., p. 38; E. SchrOder, op. cit., p. 427, 48+. 
19 Lukasiewicz called attention to the fact that the attribution of properties (d) and (e) to 
every function, or analogous properties to functions of several arguments, and, therefore, the 
acceptance of sentences (D) and (E) as true, allows considerable simplifications during the 
construction of the system of logistic. Cf. I. Lukasiewicz, 'Logika dwuwartosciowa', Ksit;ga 
fcamil\tkowa ku uczczeniu Kazirnierza Twardowskiego, Lwow 1921, p. 199.* 
o Cf. L. Couturat, op. cit., p. 39 (Remarque).** 
21 The auxiliary definition, which I am using in the present proof, may seem superfluous. I 
have adopted this approach, however, for a better clarity of the proof. 
22 In his work, mentioned by me in Note 7, Lukasiewicz proves the laws of the number of 
functions - sentences (B) and (BI) - basing his arguments on some assumptions of intuitive 
nature and concerning functions. Symbolic counterparts of these assumptions could be, as it 
seems, the sentences: 
(P) [p, fl : f(P) == f(Vr). V ·f(P) == f(Fl), 
(PI) [P,q,fl: f(P,q) == f(Vr, Vr). V ·f(P,q) == f(Vr, Fl). V .f(p,q) == 
f(Fl, Vr). V .f(P,q) == f(Fl,Fl), 
both of which are equivalent, as it can be easily verified, to the law of substitution. 
23 Cf. A.N. Whitehead and B. Russell, op. cit., p. 22. 
* [Ed. Note: Cf. I. Lukasiewicz, 'Two-Valued Logic', przeglap Filozojiczny XXIII (1921), 
pp. 189-205.] 
** [Ed. Note: Tarski refers here to Remarque 1°.] 

BOLESLAW SOBOCINSKI 
AN INVESTIGATION OF PROTOTHETIC * 
INTRODUCTION 
This paper was already published in Polish, in 1939, as an offprint from the 
first volume of Collectanea Logica. I am publishing it for the second time, in 
English, for the following reasons. 
In 1937, in Poland, at the suggestion of Jan Lukasiewicz, we founded Col-
lectanea Logica, a periodical devoted to logic, its history, and its applications. 
It was to be issued as one large volume each year, and would be international 
in character, containing papers written in Polish, English, French, German, 
Italian, and Latin. J. Lukasiewicz was the editor of Collectanea Logica, and I 
was its managing editor. The organization of the periodical and the technical 
difficulties caused by the typesetting of complicated logical symbolism were 
the reasons why the printing of the first volume, begun in 1938, advanced 
rather slowly. Nevertheless, on the first of September 1939, the first part of 
the volume, which would have had 500 pages, was printed; the second part 
was already collected and in proof. Moreover, the first five papers from the 
first part were already published as offprints. At the siege of Warsaw, in 
September 1939, the printing-house ofthe periodical was completely burned 
down, together with all the prepared type-blocks and offprints. All the final 
proofs of the first volume, most of the prepared offprints, and the archives of 
the periodical escaped in my fiat. All was destroyed in August 1944 during 
the Warsaw Uprising. In that way, the desire of Polish logicians to create an 
important international periodical devoted to logic and related sciences, com-
parable with Fundamenta Mathematicae (a well-known Polish mathematical 
publication), could not be realized. Even if the type-blocks for the first vol-
ume could be reproduced, it would be impossible to realize this plan at the 
present time, because of the political situation in Poland, and the dispersion 
of the periodical's organizers caused by the war. It will be best, perhaps, to 
give a short description of what would have been published there, as most 
* Bibliographical Note. This paper appeared in print in Cahiers de l'lnstitut d'Etudes 
Polonaises en Belgique 5, 1-44. Bruxelles, 1949. 
 J. T. J. Srzednicki et al. (eds.), Leśniewski’s  Systems  Protothetic
© Kluwer Academic Publishers 1998

70 
BOLESLAW SOBOCINSKI 
of these works and their results have not yet appeared elsewhere; moreover, 
even these papers which escaped as offprints are not generally available. 
Volume I of Collectanea Logica contained the following papers: 
I. Stanislaw Lesniewski, Einleitende Bemerkungen zur Fortsetzung mein-
er Mitteilung u.d.T. "Grundziige eines neuen Systems der Grundlagen 
der Mathematik" [, pp. 1-60]. 
II. Stanislaw Lesniewski, Grundziige eines neuen Systems der Grundlagen 
derMathematik, §12 [, pp. 61-144]. 
III. Jan Lukasiewicz, Der Aquivalenzenkalkiil [, pp. 145-169]. 
IV. Boleslaw Sobocinski, Z badan nad prototetykl\; (An Investigation of 
Protothetic) [, 171-177]. 
V. Boleslaw Sobocinski, Aksjomatyzacja konjunkcyjno-negacyjnej teorii 
dedukcji (Axiomatization of a Conjunctive-Negative Calculus of Pro po-
sitions) [, 179-193]. 
VI. Inocenty M. Bochenski, La logique de TMophraste [, 195-304]. 
VII. Boleslaw Sobocinski, 0 aksjomatykach prototetyki (On the Axiom-
Systems of Protothetic). 
VIII. Stanislaw Lesniewski, 0 pewnymjedynym aksjomacie prototetyki (On 
a Certain Single Axiom of Protothetic). 
IX. Boleslaw Sobocinski, 0 roznych systemach prototetyki (On Different 
Systems of Protothetic). 
X. Jerzy Slupecki, Przyczynek do prototetyki (A Contribution to Protothet-
ic). 
XI. Boleslaw Sobocinski, Uwagi w zwi¥ku z pracl\; p. J. Slupeckiego: 
"Przyczynek do prototetyki" (Remarks Concerning the Paper of J. 
Slupecki: "A Contribution to Protothetic").* 
Of these eleven papers, the first five were published as offprints,l and only 
a few of I and II (published in 1938) were sent to some people and institutions 
by St. LeSniewski shortly before his death. Offprints of the papers III, IV, 
and V were published just before the war, and could be distributed by their 
authors only to very few people. Most of the copies of I-V were destroyed. 
Luckily, one of the proofs of paper VI escaped the destruction, so that its 
author could reconstruct and publish it in 1947.2 The manuscripts and proofs 
of VII-XI were completely destroyed. 
Of the papers mentioned, only that of I. Bochenski was concerned with the 
history of Greek logic. I will not give any account of it here, since it has been 
* [Ed. Note: English translations of papers I, III, and IV appeared in McCall (1967); II was 
reviewed by Quine in the Journal of Symbolic Logic 5 (1940), p. 84; V appeared in English in the 
Journal of Computing Systems I (1954), 229-242; VI appeared in Collectanea Friburgensia, 
Nouvelle Serie Fasc. 32, Fribourg en Suisse, 1947. Most of the results of papers VII, IX, 
and XI are probably included in Sobocinski (1954) and Sobocinski (1960) in the Protothetic 
Bibliography.] 

AN INVESTIGATION OF PROTOTHETIC 
71 
published in the meantime. Papers III and V were devoted to the calculus of 
propositions. 
In his paper III,3 J. Lukasiewicz provided a historical account of the axiom-
atization of the equivalential calculus of propositions,4 and proved that each 
of the eleven-letter theses: 
(1) EEpqEErqEpr5 
(2) EEpqEEpr Erq 
(3) EEpqEErpEqr 
can be taken as the sole axiom of this theory. He also proved that no other 
eleven-letter thesis and no shorter one has the property in question*; in other 
words, each of the theses mentioned above can be considered as a shortest 
single axiom of the theory.6 
In my paper V,7 I showed that the complete system of the calculus of propo-
sitions can be based on the primitive terms 'conjunction' and 'negation', i.e. 
'K' and 'N', and on two rules: 
(a) the usual rule of substitution of the calculus of propositions, 
and 
(b) the rule of detachment adjusted to the above primitive terms: 
If we have in the system two theses of the forms 'N K aN (3' and 
'a' , then we can add to the system the thesis of the form '(3'.8 
Finally, we have four independent axioms of this theory, viz.: 
(1) NKNKNprKNKNqrKNKpqr 
(2) NKNpKpq 
(3) NKNpKqKrp 
(4) NKNKpqNNKpNNq. 
* [Ed. Note: This remark by Sobocinski is not exactly correct. While Lukasiewicz indeed 
proved that any single axiom for the equivalential calculus must consist of at least eleven 
symbols, he did not claim, however, that the three axioms discovered by him are the only eleven-
letter single axioms for the calculus. In fact, there are other such axioms; for more discussion 
see Kalman, I.A., 'A Shortest Single Axiom for the Classical Equivalential Calculus', Notre 
Dame Journal of Formal Logic XIX (1978), pp. 141-144.] 

72 
BOLESLAW SOBOCINSKI 
This system is worth noting since all of its theses are valid in Heyting's 
intuitionistic logic and because of certain connections between this system 
and the Boolean algebra of solids?'IO 
All the other papers were concerned with protothetic. Protothetic is a 
deductive theory constructed by the late Stanislaw LeSniewski. 11 As we 
know, he based the whole system of contemporary mathematics on three 
deductive theories, protothetic, ontology, and mereology, which he conceived 
and constructed. 12 [ ... ]* 
I will neither describe the characteristic features of these theories nor 
comment on the theoretical basis of St. Lesniewski's system. I will only state 
that: 
1. The precision and the conciseness of the formalization, symbolism, and 
the formulation of the rules of procedure for the above theories are unpar-
alleled among the known deductive systems. 
2. The principles on which these theories are based differ in many respects 
from those that were usually accepted before the discovery of the Rus-
sell Antinomy. They allow, nevertheless, to formulate and prove all the 
theorems of classical logic. 
3. There are straightforward proofs that these theories and the entire system 
are consistent, and, consequently, that no known logical antinomy can be 
reconstructed in them. 13 
St. LeSniewski presents the main features of his system of the founda-
tions of mathematics in his works: LeSniewski (1927, 1929) and (1930).14 
He gives there the theoretical foundations of his three deductive theories, 
the history of their origin, the description of their symbolism, first axiom-
systems, and concise formulation of rules of procedure of protothetic and 
ontology.15 These rules are expressed in the symbolism of a metasystem. In 
the treatise Lesniewski (1927), a large number of theorems are derived from 
the axioms of mereology. However, St. LeSniewski gives no systematic proofs 
of theorems valid in protothetic or ontology l6; he presents neither the proof 
of completeness of protothetic nor the consistency proofs for any of these 
theories or his entire system. 
St. Lesniewski's papers I and II, which were published as offprints from 
volume I of Collectanea Logica, are the continuations of Lesniewski (1929). 
The first of them contains supplements and explanations of subjects described 
in Lesniewski (1929), an account of the construction of the so-called compu-
tative system of protothetic, and the history of the successive simplifications 
of the axiom-system of protothetic based on 'equivalence' as the only primi-
tive term. This historical account ends in the year 1926, when St. LeSniewski 
proved that the thesis: 
* [Ed. Note: The following four paragraphs of the rough description of protothetic, ontology, 
and mereology are omitted here.] 

AN INVESTIGATION OF PROTOTHETIC 
(A) [jpqrst]:-:p == q. ==:: [g].·.f(Pf(P[u].u)). == .·.[u].f(qu). ==: 
g(r == s. == tq). == .g(s == t. == rp)17 
can be taken as the sole axiom of this system. 
73 
In the second paper, St. LeSniewski showed how all the theses of the calcu-
lus of propositions can be deduced from the original axioms [of protothetic] 
with the help of the concisely formulated rules of procedure. IS 
These original axioms are: 
I. [pqr].·.p == r. ==.q ==p:==.r == q 
II. [pqr].·,p == .q == r :==: p == q. == r 
III. [gp]:·:[f] :: g(pp). == ,·.[r] : f(rr). == .g(pp) :==: [r] : f(rr). == . 
g(p == .[q].qp) ::== .[q].g(qp). 
My papers IV, VII, and IX presented the results of several years of research 
on protothetic. In the first one, Sobocmski (1939a), I gave a number of 
interesting theses of protothetic which were unknown at that time (the full 
translation of the paper is given in this publication). The subject-matter of this 
paper is related to papers Tarski (1923a, 1923b, 1924), in which it is proved 
that conjunction can be defined in terms of equivalence. To understand the 
theorems given in my treatise, and appreciate their significance, it is not 
necessary to be acquainted with protothetic. It is enough to be familiar with 
elementary calculus of propositions, properties of the universal quantifiers, 
and variable functors of propositional arguments. 
My two large papers (VII and IX) were concerned with subjects close-
ly related to the inner structure of protothetic. I established a number of 
connections and dependencies between different theses in this hitherto little 
investigated theory. 19 In the first of them, I gave an account of my successive 
results concerning the simplification of the axiom of protothetic, based on the 
primitive term 'equivalence', results which I obtained in the years 1937-1938. 
My next important result concerning the structure of protothetic was closely 
related to the above treatises as well as to the following theorem established 
by St. Lesniewski: 
an axiom-system of protothetic yields a complete system, when, using its rules of procedure, 
one can prove: 
(1) all theses of the complete equivalential calculus of propositions, 
(2) the following laws of the calculus of propositions (the so-called four laws of the logical 
product): 
(a) 1.1 == 120 
(b) 0.0 == 0 
(c) 0.1 == 0 
(d) 1.0 == 0, 

74 
BOLESLAW SOBOCINSKI 
(3) that if F(p) is a meaningful formula in this system and if the formulas F(O) and F(I) can 
be proved in the system, then one can add to the system, as its thesis, the formula [P).F(p) 
(the so-called law of bivalence).21 
In 1938, in connection with my inquires regarding the axiomatic basis of 
protothetic, I proved that the condition (2) of St. Lesniewski's theorem is 
superfluous because it results from the conditions (1) and (3). Moreover, in 
the condition (1), it is possible to replace the theory of equivalential calculus 
of propositions by some of its fragments. 
These inquiries resulted in the proof that the thesis: 
(B) [Jpq]:-:f(pf(p[u].u)). ~:: [r] :: f(p ~ q. ~ qr). ~ .'.p ~ q. ~: 
r ~ q. ~ .p ~ r,22 
much shorter than the above mentioned thesis (A), can be taken as the sole 
axiom of protothetic. 
In the second paper (IX), I presented the solutions to a number of problems 
posed by St. LeSniewski or by myself, regarding the structure of different 
systems of protothetic. All these systems are equivalent to the one generally 
used*; they differ only as far as the primitive terms or the rules of procedure 
are concerned. 23 
In 1938, St. Lesniewski, starting from the results presented in my paper VII, 
obtained a new and shorter single axiom of protothetic, based on the term 
'equivalence', showing that it can be the thesis: 
(C) [pqJ::p ~ q. ~ :-:[J]:-:f(qf(q[u].u)). ~:: [r] :: f(pr). ~ .·.r ~: 
q ~ .r ~ p.24 
Mortal illness prevented him from writing a paper on this subject. This 
result, which I edited, was to be published as paper VIII. 
The short notes (X and XI) by Dr. Jerzy Slupecki and myself would have 
contained a certain contribution to the investigations reported in paper VII, 
and a certain suggestion of mine based on it. 
The study of protothetic advanced considerably after 1939. For instance, at 
the end of 1945, using rather complicated and difficult deductions, I proved 
that the following thesis: 
(D) [pq] :: p ~ q. ~ .·.[fl.·.f(pf(p[u].u)). ~: [r] : f(qr). ~ .q ~ p 
can be taken as the sole axiom of protothetic, based on the primitive term 
'equivalence'. It is the shortest known axiom of this theory and probably it 
* [Ed. Note: Sobocinski presumably refers to the system 6 5.] 

AN INVESTIGATION OF PROTOTHETIC 
75 
is the shortest of all such axioms.25 This result is closely connected with my 
deductions which were to be published in papers VII and IX. 
AN INVESTIGATION OF PROTOTHETIC* 
While investigating various problems of protothetic, I observed that a number 
of theorems which, as far as I could ascertain, remained unknown at that 
time (December 1935), were theses of protothetic. 26 As this finding is closely 
associated with the theorem of Dr. Alfred Tarski concerning the definability, 
in protothetic, of conjunction in terms of equivalence,27 I have decided to 
publish the theses discovered by myself. 
Editorial and space-saving considerations compel me to use a slightly 
modified form of the symbolism of Peano and Russell instead of the original 
symbolism of protothetic. This notation should be easy to follow for anyone 
familiar with the usual symbolism of Peano and Russell and with the con-
tributions Lesniewski (1929, 1930), Sobocinski (1934), and Tarski (1923a, 
1923b, 1924). However, to avoid any misunderstanding, all the more impor-
tant theorems which occur in this contribution will be given in endnotes in 
the original symbolism of protothetic.28 For the reasons already mentioned 
I have also decided to present the discovered theorems without proofs, for 
I assume that every reader familiar with elementary logic can easily prove 
them by the truth table method.29 
As we know, Alfred Tarski proved the following two theses of protothetic: 
A. [pq] :: p.q. :== ••• [f] ... p :==: [r].p :== f(r). :== .[r].q :== f(r) 
B. [pq] ... p.q. :==: [f] : p :== .f(P) :== f(q),30 
each of which can be accepted in protothetic as the definition of the connective 
'.' by means of the connective ':=='. In their efforts to establish and simplify the 
axiom system of protothetic, Professor Stanislaw Lesniewski and Dr. Mord-
chaj Wajsberg discovered numerous modifications of theses A and B; but 
these modifications, which, with one exception, remained unpublished, keep 
the characteristic features of Tarski's theorem. 31 On the other hand, although 
the theorems I have discovered are based on Tarski' s idea that in protothetic 
conjunction can be defined by means of equivalence, the universal quantifier, 
and variable propositional functors, they differ significantly from theorems A 
and B as well as from all their known modifications. The theorems discovered 
by myself are as follows: 
* Bibliographical Note. This part of the paper is reprinted from Polish Logic 1920-1939, 
McCall, S., editor. Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1967, by permission of Oxford University Press. 

76 
BOLESLAW SOBOCINSKI 
Gt. [pq]: p.q. == .[J].f(pq) == f(ql)32 
G2. [pq]: p.q. == .[J].f(pq) == f(lp) 
G3. 
[pq]: p.q. == .[f].f(qp) == f(pl) 
G4. 
[pq]: p.q. == .[f].f(qp) == f(lq) 
G5. 
[pq]: p.q. == ·[f].f(Pp) == f(ql) 
G6. [pq]: p.q. == ·[fl.f(pp) == f(lq) 
G7. 
[pq]: p.q. == .[J].f(qq) == f(pl) 
GS. [pq]: p.q. == ·[J].f(qq) == f(lp) 
G9. 
[pq]: p.q. == .[f].f(pq) == f(11)33 
GlD. [pq] : p.q. == .[J].f(qp) == f(l1) 
GIL [pq] : p.q. == .[f].f(lp) == f(ql)34 
G12. [pq] : p.q. == ·[J]·f(1q) == f(pl). 
It should be noted that Theorems G I-G 12 can be written in a modified form 
by substituting everywhere for the sign' l' one of the expressions: 'p == p', 
'q == q', 'p == q', or 'q == p'. It can be seen that the fundamental difference 
between Theorems A and B on the one hand and Theorems GI-GI2 on the 
other is twofold. First, in Theorems G I-G 12 the variable functor 'f' is a 
propositional functor of two arguments instead of one. Second, while in each 
of Theorems GI-GI2 the expression in the scope of the inside quantifier 
is an equivalence, neither of whose arguments is an equivalence, in Tarski's 
theorems one of the arguments of the equivalence occurring after the inside 
quantifier is also an equivalence. 
Having discovered Theorems GI-GI2, I noted that in protothetic we are 
able to construct in a similar fashion theorems which within this system 
can be accepted as the definitions of three other propositional functors of 
two arguments, namely the functors defined by means of the expressions 
'I"V (p V q)', 'I"V (p ::J q)', and 'I"V (p V I"V q)'. 
If the symbolic expression 'p 0 q', equivalent to 'I"V (p V q)', is introduced, 
so that 
[pq] :po q. ==.I"V (pVq)35 

AN INVESTIGATION OF PROTOTHETIC 
77 
becomes a valid theorem, the following theses of protothetic can be estab-
lished: 
Dl. [pq] : p 0 q. == .[J].f(pq) == f(qO)36 
D2. 
[pq] : p 0 q. == .[J].f(Oq) == f(pO) 
D3. 
[pq] : p 0 q. == .[J].f(Op) == f(qO) 
D4. 
[pq] : p 0 q. == .[J].f(qp) == f(OO) 
D5. 
[pq] : p 0 q. == .[J].f(pq) == f(OO) 
D6. 
[pq] : po q. == .[J].f(qq) == f(Op) 
D7. 
[pq] : p 0 q. == .[J].f(qq) == f(pO) 
D8. 
[pq] : p 0 q. == .[J].f(pp) == f(Oq) 
D9. [pq]: p 0 q. == .[J].f(pp) == f(qO) 
DI0. [pq] : p 0 q. == .[j].f(qp) == f(Oq) 
Dll. [pq] : p 0 q. == .[J].f(qp) == f(pO) 
D12. [pq] : p 0 q. == .[J].f(pq) == f(Op). 
If we regard the new symbolic expression 'p -0 q' as equivalent to '", (p =:> 
q)' and accept the proposition 
[pq] : p -0 q. == . '" (p ::J q)37 
the following theorems become theses of protothetic: 
El. [pq] : p -0 q. == .[fl.f(Pq) == f(IO)38 
E2. [pq] : p -0 q. == .[J].f(qp) == f(OI) 
E3. [pq] : p -0 q. == .[j].f(lq) == f(pO) 
E4. [pq] : p -0 q. == .[j].f(Op) == f(ql). 
If the new symbolic expression 'p 0- q', equivalent to '", (p V '" q)', and 
the proposition 
[pq] : p 0- q. == . '" (p V '" q)39 

78 
BOLESLAW SOBOCINSKI 
are accepted, the following theses should be included in protothetic: 
Fl. [pq] : po- q. == .[J].f(Pq) == f(01)40 
F2. [pq] : p 0- q. == .[J].f(qp) == f(10) 
F3. [pq] : po- q. == ·[J].f(lp) == f(qO) 
F4. [pq] : po- q. == .[J].f(Oq) == f(pl). 
It should be observed that a modified form of Theorems EI-F4 can be 
obtained by the substitution of either 'p == p' or 'q == q' for' 1 ' . 
NOTES 
I In the Bibliographical Abbreviations, these papers are referred to as Lesniewski (1938a, 
1938b), Lukasiewicz (1939) and Sobocmski (1939a, 1939b). 
2 Cf. Bochenski (1947). 
3 Cf. Lukasiewicz (1939). 
4 It is a calculus of propositions based on the single primitive term 'equivalence'. The first 
axiom-system of this theory and the proof of its completeness was given by St. Lesniewski; 
cf. LeSniewski (1929, 1938a) and Lukasiewicz (1939). 
5 In this paper, I write theses of the calculus of propositions in the known symbolism of J. 
Lukasiewicz. An account of this notation is given in the papers: Lukasiewicz (1939, 1948), 
Lukasiewicz-Tarski (1930). Cf. also Feys (1944), pages 193-196. I will only mention that the 
symbol 'E' corresponds to '=', and, further, that the symbols 'K' and 'N' correspond to ',' (or 
'&') and '",', respectively. 
6 Curiously, even the thesis: 
EEpqEEqrErp 
does not possess this property. 
7 Cf. Sobocinski (l939b). 
8 It corresponds exactly to the usual rule of detachment formulated in terms of implication: 
If expressions of the form 'Ca(3' and 'a' are accepted as theses, then one can add to the system 
the thesis of the form '(3'. 
This correspondence is a simple consequence of the well-known equivalence of the expressions 
'Ca(3' and 'NKaN(3'. 
9 The first fact was noted by 1. Lukasiewicz, the second observation was made by Dr. Adolf 
Lindenbaum, a lecturer of mathematics at the University of Warsaw, who was killed by the 
Germans in Wilno, in 1941. 
As far as I could ascertain, I was the first to investigate the conjunction-negation calculus of 
propositions. All expositions of the calculus of propositions which I am familiar with, contain 
at least the thesis' N KpNp' or 'N K Npp' of this theory. (Cf. Whitehead-Russell, 1925.) 
10 My papers Sobocinski (l939a, 1939b) were reviewed by Heinrich Scholz (a professor at 
the University of MUnster, Germany) in Zentralblatt flir Mathematik in 1940 and 1941. [Cf. 
Band 23, pp. 97-98 and p. 289 - Ed.] 
II Stanislaw Lesniewski, born March 18, 1886, died May 13, 1939; professor of the philosophy 
of mathematics at the University of Warsaw. [Concerning LeSniewski's date of birth, see 

AN INVESTIGATION OF PROTOTHETIC 
79 
Luschei (1962), note 16 - Ed.] 
12 The names of these theories are of Greek origin. Protothetic is a theory on which other 
theories must be based; its name derives from the word '7rpWros'. Ontology contains only one 
primitive term, the copula 'is' (Latin 'est', Greek' furl'); its name derives from the participle 
of the word '€illm', which is 'all'. 'Mereology' derives from the word 'p,ipos' - a part. It is 
obvious that the name 'ontology', as used by St. Lesniewski, is only a homonym of 'ontology' 
which is a part of Metaphysics (cf. Lesniewski, 1927, Chapter XI). 
In St. Lesniewski's system, protothetic is not based on any earlier theory. When construct-
ing proofs in other deductive theories, we must use only theses of protothetic (for instance in 
ontology), only theses of protothetic and ontology (for instance in mereology or in arithmetic), 
only theses of all three theories (for instance in certain systems of geometry), and so on. In 
this way a certain hierarchy of deductive theories is created in which protothetic takes the 
first place, ontology the second, mereology, arithmetic, and theories of groups the third, some 
s.rstems of geometry the fourth, and so on. 
I 
A number of loose but important remarks explaining certain properties of St. Lesniewski's 
system [of the foundations of mathematics] can be found in the works Tarski (1933, 1936). 
14 In Chapters I-III of Lesniewski (1927), St. Lesniewski outlined his criticism of the earlier 
systems of the foundations of mathematics; in Chapters IV-X he presented his system of 
mereology; in Chapter XI he presented the theoretical foundations of ontology. In the paper 
Lesniewski (1929), one can find the description of the origin and the development of pro-
tothetic and concisely formulated rules of procedure of this theory. The paper Lesniewski 
(1930) presents the fundamentals of ontology, its axiomatization, and its rules of procedure. 
The question of rules of procedure of St. Lesniewski's system, difficult at first sight, was very 
clearly explained by him in his paper Lesniewski (1931). 
15 In St. Lesniewski's system all theories based on protothetic and ontology (viz. of the third 
and higher orders, cf. note 12) have their rules of procedure exactly analogous to the rules of 
ontology. For this reason mereology does not require a separate formulation of such rules. 
16 There is only one paper in which one can find some of the theorems of ontology deduced 
from its axiom, namely my treatise Sobocinski (1934). Cf. also Sobocinski (1949). 
17 Cf. Lesniewski (1929, 1938a). In the original symbolism of proto the tic this thesis has the 
form: 
clpqr,,"' 1 (I(pq)cg"' 1 (I (pI"'-""' "' ))1 (c ""' I(qu)' 
1 (g (I (1(,,),)q)g(HI(")')p)) )) ')' 
and is composed of 82 signs. Thesis A, as well as further theses, are written using a slightly 
modified symbolism of Peano-Russell. 
18 Lesniewski deduced Lukasiewicz's well-known axioms of the calculus of propositions: 
(1) CCpqCCqrCpr 
(2) CCNppp 
(3) CpCNpq 
(cf. for instance Feys, 1944, p. 27). Then he offered a simple proof that every thesis which can 
be deduced from theses (1)-(3) with the help of the usual rules of procedure of the calculus of 
propositions, can be also inferred from them using the rules of procedure of protothetic. 
19 The present knowledge of the inner structure of protothetic is much less advanced than our 
knowledge of propositions, which we attained thanks to the work carried out by J. Lukasiewicz, 
by his school, and by other investigators. 

80 
BOLESLAW SOBOCINSKI 
20 For the sake of clarity, I use the symbol 'I' for '[u].u == u', and the symbol '0' for '[u].u' 
(see, for instance, Lesniewski, 1929, pp. 12-13). 
21 In view of condition 3, if, for instance, we have already in the system the theses: 
(a) 0 :::> 0 
(b) I :::> 1, 
then we can add to this system the thesis: 
(c) [P].p :::> p. 
This law has its origin in the bivalence of protothetic, which means that in protothetic, as well 
as in the ordinary calculus of propositions, each proposition is either true or false. 
22 In the original symbolism of protothetic this thesis has the form: 
LlpqJ' , (I (pfCr-cUJ' U')) L'J' , H, (,(pq)q H 
+(pq), (I(,q)I(p,))) ) ') , 
and is composed of 66 signs. This thesis, in contrast with the above thesis A, is not organic. 
For the meaning ofthe tenn 'organic', cf. Lukasiewicz-Tarski (1930), p. 8 (Satz 9), where 
the definition of the term 'single axiom', continuously used through this paper, is also given 
(cf. op. cit., p. 7, Satz 8). Cf. also Lukasiewicz (1939). 
23 In his papers Lesniewski (1929, 1938a), St. Lesniewski frequently writes about systems of 
protothetic that can be constructed using primitive tenns other than 'equivalence', and, in this 
context, about an appropriate fonnulation of the rules of procedure. 
24 In the original symbolism of protothetic this organic thesis has the fonn: 
(f (qf(<iL uJ' u')) L' J' , (f(Pc) 
'(,I(ql(..,,)))) ') ')' 
and is composed of 62 signs. 
25 In the original symbolism of protothetic this organic thesis has the form: 
and is composed of 54 signs. 
26 For infonnation about protothetic see Lesniewski (1927,1929, 1930). The expression 'the-
sis' as used in this paper means 'theorem valid in protothetic'. 
27 See Tarski (1923a, 1923b, 1924), and also Lesniewski (1929), pp. 11 ff. 
28 Cf. Sobocinski (1934), p. 155, footnote 2. 
29 See Tarski (1923b), pp. 75 ff., and Tarski (1924). 
30 See Tarski (l923b), pp. 73 and 75, and Tarski (1923a), pp. 199-200. 

AN INVESTIGATION OF PROTOTHETIC 
81 
31 The thesis which was published is to be found in LeSniewski (1929), p. 32. 
32 It should be observed that if in the system of protothetic which Lesniewski called 6 5 
one of the theses given here were to be accepted as a definition, then, in accordance with the 
directive accepted in system 6 5 , the definiens should be written on the left-hand side and the 
definiendum on the right-hand side of the equivalence. See Lesniewski (\ 929), pp. 54 and 76, 
point I of the directive, and p. 70, terminological explanation T.E. XLIV. 
In the original symbolism of protothetic the thesis corresponding to G 1 is written as follows: 
33 In the original notation of protothetic the thesis corresponding to G9 is written as follows: 
34 In the original notation of protothetic the thesis corresponding to Gil is written as follows: 
35 The sign '0' is taken from the original notation of protothetic. The functor '0' is one of 
the two propositional functors of two arguments, each of which is sufficient to define in the 
theory of deduction all the remaining functors. This proposition has been proved by Henry 
M. Sheffer; see Sheffer (1913). Moreover, Professor Eustachy Zylinski has proved that out of 
sixteen possible binary connectives only these two propositional functors of two arguments 
have the characteristic in question. See Zylinski (1925, 1927). 
The truth-functional behaviour of this functor can be described by means of the matrix 
method in the following way: 
o 0 
o 
1 
0 
o 0 
For the matrix method see Lukasiewicz-Tarski (1930), §1, Definition 3, p. 4. 
36 In the original symbolism of protothetic the thesis corresponding to D 1 is written as follows: 
37 The sign '-0' is taken from the original notation of protothetic. With the aid of the matrix 
method the truth table of '-0' can be presented as follows: 
-0 
0 
o 
0 
0 
o 

82 
BOLESLAW SOBOCINSKI 
38 The thesis corresponding to EI is written in the original symbolism of protothetic as 
follows: 
39 The sign '0-' is taken from the original notation of protothetic. The truth table of '0-', 
presented be means of the matrix method, is as follows: 
0-
0 
o 
0 
I 
o 0 
40 In the original symbolism of protothetic the thesis corresponding to F I is written as follows: 
REFERENCES 
Bochenski, Inocenty M. (1947). 'La logique de Theophraste' , Collectanea Friburgensia. Nou-
velle Serie Fasc. 32, Fribourg en Suisse, 195-304. 
Feys, Robert (1944). Logistiek. Geformaliseerde Logica, Antwerp (Dutch). 
Lesniewski, Stanislaw (1927). '0 podstawach matematyki (On the Foundations of Mathe-
matics)" Przegla,4 Filozojiczny XXX-XXXIV [: XXX (1927), 164-206; XXXI (1928), 
261-291; XXXII (1929),60-101; XXXIII (1930), 77-105; XXXIV (1931), 142-170]. 
Lesniewski, Stanislaw (1929). 'Grundziige eines neuen Systems der Grundlagen der Mathe-
matik', Fundamenta Mathematicae XIV, 1-81. 
Lesniewski, Stanislaw (1930). Uber die Grundlagen der Ontologie, Comptes rendus des 
Seances de la Societe des Sciences et des Lettres de Varsovie, Classe III 23, 111-132. 
Lesniewski, Stanislaw (1931). 'Uber Definitionen in der sogenannten Theorie der Deduktion', 
Comptes rendus des Seances de la Societe des Sciences et des Lettres de Varsovie, Classe 
III 24, 289-309. 
Lesniewski, Stanislaw (l938a). 'Ein1eitende Bemerkungen zur Fortsetzung meiner Mitteilung 
u.d.T. "Grundziige eines neuen Systems der Grundlagen der Mathematik"', Collectanea 
Logica I (offprint), 1-60. 
Lesniewski, Stanislaw (1938b). 'Grundziige eines neuen Systems der Grundlagen der Mathe-
matik, §12', Collectanea Logica I (offprint), 61-144. 
Lukasiewicz, Jan (1939). 'Der Aquivalenzenkalkiil', Collectanea Logica I (offprint), 145-169. 
Lukasiewicz, Jan (1948). 'The Shortest Axiom of the Implicational Calculus of Propositions', 
Proceedings of the Royal Irish Academy 52, Section A, no. 3, 25-33. 
Lukasiewicz, Jan and Tarski, Alfred (1930). 'Untersuchungen iiber den Aussagenkalkiil', 
Comptes rendus des Seances de la Societe des Sciences et des Lettres de Varsovie, Classe 
III 23, 30-50. 
Sheffer, Henry Maurice (1913). 'A Set of Five Independent Postulates for Boolean Alge-
bras, with Application to Logical Constants', Transactions of the American Mathematical 
Society 14,481-488. 
Sobocinski, Boleslaw (1934). '0 kolejnych uproszczeniach aksjomatyki "Ontologji" prof. St. 
Lesniewskiego (On the Successive Simplifications of the Axiom-System of Lesniewski's 
Ontology)" Fragmenty Filozojiczne 1, Volume in commemoration of fifteen years' teach-
ing at the University of Warsaw by Professor Tadeusz Kotarbinski, 143-160. 

AN INVESTIGATION OF PROTOTHETIC 
83 
Sobocinski, Boleslaw (1939a). 'Z badan nad prototetyk<\ (An Investigation of Protothetic), , 
Collectanea Logica I (offprint), 171-177. 
Sobocinski, Boleslaw (1939b). 'Aksjomatyzacja konjunkcyjno-negacyjnej teorii dedukcji 
(Axiomatization of the Conjunctive-Negative Theory of Deduction)', Collectanea Logica 
I (offprint). 
Sobocinski, Boleslaw (1949). 'L'anaIyse de l'antinomie Russellienne par Lesniewski', Meth-
ods 1,94-107,220-228,308-316, and 2 (1950), 237-257. 
Tajtelbaum, Alfred (1923a). 'Sur Ie terme primitif de la Logistique', Fundamenta Mathemati-
cae IV, 196--200. 
Tajtelbaum-Tarski, Alfred (1923b). '0 wyrazie pierwotnym logistyki (On the Primitive Term 
of Logistic)" Przegla,d Filozojiczny XXVI, 68-89. lCf. paper III in this volume - Ed.] 
Tajtelbaum-Tarski, Alfred (1924). 'Sur les truth-functions au sens de MM. Russell et White-
head', Fundamenta Mathematicae V, 59-74. 
Tarski, Alfred (1933). Poje,cie Prawdy w Je,zykach Nauk Dedukcyjnych (The Concept of Truth 
in the Languages of the Deductive Sciences)" Prace Towarzystwa Naukowego Warsza-
wskiego, WydziallIl Nauk Matematyczno-Fizycznych 34, Warszawa, vii + 116 pp. 
Tarski, Alfred (1936). 'Der Wahrheitsbegriff in den formalisierten Sprachen', Studia Philo-
sophica 1,261--405. 
Whitehead, Alfred North and Russell, Bertrand (1925). Principia Mathematica, ed. 2, Vol. I, 
Cambridge. 
Zylinski, Eustachy (1925). 'Some Remarks Concerning the Theory of Deduction' , Fundamenta 
Mathematicae VII, 203-209. 
Zylinski, Eustachy (1927). '0 przedstawialnosci funkcji prawdziwosciowych jednych przez 
drugie (On the Representation of Truth-Functions by Other Truth-Functions)" Przegla,d 
Filozojiczny XXX. 

JERZY SLUPECKI 
ST. LESNIEWSKI'S PROTOTHETICS * 
FOREWORD** 
In this paper I am discussing one of the three logical systems formulated 
by the late Professor Stanislaw Lesniewski, Ph.D., namely, that which he at 
first named logistics and later prototheticsl ; on the two other systems, i.e. 
ontology and mereology I am working at present. As Professor Lesniewski's 
manuscripts were destroyed during the Warsaw Uprising in 1944, the main 
source for this paper constitute the notes taken by students on his lectures, in 
the first place by the late Mr. Jerzy Billich of the Warsaw University.:j: The 
initiative of collecting those notes which escaped destruction and of arrang-
ing systematically the result of Professor Lesniewski's research work, was 
taken by Professor Tadeusz Kotarbiriski, who asked me as one of Professor 
Lesniewski's students to work on these notes. Professor Lesniewski left a 
great part of the results of his research work unpublished. Those which he did 
publish are often fragmentary and thus do not represent a complete picture of 
the systems he created. Besides, some of his papers are styled in an extremely 
difficult manner, while some others are at present almost unavailable. These 
are the reasons that Professor Lesniewski's works are not much known, even 
in this country, and therefore subject to falling into oblivion, notwithstanding 
* Bibliographical Note. This paper originally appeared in Studia Logica I (1953). 44-112, 
by permission of the Institute of Philosophy and Sociology of the Polish Academy of Sciences. 
** In the period between the two world wars, the work of Stanislaw Lesniewski (1886-1939) 
had considerable influence on the development of logic in Poland. Many logicians accepted 
Lesniewski's conceptions enthusiastically whereas mathematicians adopted mostly a critical 
attitude. Lesniewski himself published but little, and it is therefore difficult to form an opinion 
of his logical systems on the basis of his few printed works. 
With a view to enabling students of logic to become acquainted with, apd to evaluate the 
works of Lesniewski, the editors of Studia Logica have decided to publish an extensive report 
on his lifework written by Professor Slupecki and compiled from notes taken of Lesniewski's 
lectures. This report has been divided into parts of which the first is given below and the 
remaining parts will appear in subsequent volumes of Studia Logica - The Editors. 
:t [Ed. Note: These lecture notes were published in 1988 by Kluwer Academic Publishers 
(see Lesniewski (1988) in the Protothetic Bibliography).) 
 J. T. J. Srzednicki et al. (eds.), Leśniewski’s  Systems  Protothetic
© Kluwer Academic Publishers 1998

86 
JERZY SLUPECKI 
the fact that according to unanimous opinion of those who know them, they 
are of lasting value. 
This paper does not bear the character of a historical study on Professor 
Lesniewski's system as the notes on which it is based were not written 
by himself. Moreover, the exposition of protothetics given here deviates in 
many points from that contained in those notes. This seemed to be indicated, 
in the first place, for didactic reasons, my aim being to make this paper 
comprehensible also to non-specialists,2 although it has, of course, been 
taken for granted that the reader is familiar with the fundamental branches of 
mathematical logic. 
I have taken account of all the results contained in the notes with the 
exception of a few which I consider either unessential or indeed obsolete. 
In order to make the exposition of protothetics both concise and complete I 
was bound to amplify considerably the material found in the notes. However, 
all the results given here and not contained in the notes were undoubtedly 
known to Professor Lesniewski. The paper includes no results of my own but 
a considerable part of the proofs has been entirely worked out by myself. I 
mention this so that I alone should be held responsible for any inaccuracies 
and errors which may have occurred. 
This paper is not written with that exactitude which Professor Lesniewski 
always observed in his lectures and publications. This reservation, howev-
er, refers only to the meta-logical considerations whereas in the proofs of 
theorems of the system I have strictly followed the proofs found in the notes. 
The lectures "On Certain Problems of Protothetics", the notes of which 
form the basis of this paper, were delivered by Professor Lesniewski at the 
Warsaw University during the academic year 1932-1933. The subject-matter 
of this paper is discussed in a more detailed way in Section 2. 
1. SEMANTIC CATEGORIES OF EXPRESSIONS OF PROTOTHETICS 
I shall outline here the theory of the division of expressions appearing in 
Lesniewski's logical systems. The classes of that division are called semantic 
categories. The notes3 contain a remark stating that this division is analogous 
to the division of expressions of everyday language into parts of sentences. 
It is also connected by certain analogies with the theory of types. Just as the 
latter, the division of expressions into semantic categories prevents logical 
antinomies. From a formal point of view, the theory of the division of logical 
expressions into semantic categories is simpler than the ramified theory of 
types, but on the other hand it is richer than the so-called simple theory of 
types. The essential difference between these two theories consists in the fact 
that the theory of types systematizes such objects as individuals, classes and 
relations, whereas the theory of semantic categories systematizes expressions 
of logic, i.e., elements of language.4 

ST. LESNIEWSKI'S PROTOTHETICS 
87 
A precise discussion of Lesniewski's theory requires a fixed symbolism and 
regular reference to such symbolism.5 Here, however, we shall describe the 
theory in general and that description will be independent of the symbolism 
used in various systems of logic. This will somewhat impair the precision 
of our remarks, but on the other hand will make them more intuitive. In this 
way, too, we shall show a way of applying Lesniewski's theory to non-logical 
languages. 
Among logical expressions we distinguish two basic semantic categories: 
the category of propositions and the category of names. The former includes 
not only propositions in a narrower sense, i.e., expressions in which there 
appear no free variables, but also all the expressions containing free variables 
which change into propositions if proper constant terms are substituted for 
these variables. Thus in particular, the variables of the propositional calcu-
lus belong to the category of propositions. Analogous remarks refer to the 
expressions belonging to the semantic category of names. 
All logical expressions which do not belong to one of these basic categories 
and which are neither quantifiers nor parentheses, are given the common 
name of June tors. In Lesniewski's theory, no semantic category is assigned to 
quantifiers and to parentheses.6 The constants of propositional calculus (the 
symbols of implication, conjunction, negation, etc.) as well as the symbols a, 
i, e, 0 of Aristotle's syllogistics can be quoted as examples offunctors. Every 
functor together with its arguments forms an expression which belongs either 
to the category of propositions or to the category of names. In the former case 
it is called proposition-forming, in the latter, name-forming.* 
The semantic category of a functor, variable or constant, depends on 
whether it is a proposition-forming or a name-forming functor, on the number 
of its arguments, and on the semantic categories of these arguments. Thus, 
for example, two functors of two arguments belong to the same semantic 
category if and only if both of them are either proposition-forming or name-
forming; if their first arguments belong to the same semantic category; and if 
their second arguments belong to the same semantic category. 
Further remarks will refer to the semantic categories of the expressions of 
protothetics. These categories include the category of propositions and the 
categories of those proposition-forming functors of which all the arguments 
belong to the semantic category of the expressions of protothetics. Thus, 
the categories of the functors of the propositional calculus (regardless of the 
number of their arguments), and the categories of those functors the arguments 
of which are functors of the propositional calculus or propositions, etc., belong 
to the semantic categories of the expressions of protothetics. 
The notion of the semantic categories of the expressions of protothetics 
enables us to characterize the theorems of that system. 
* [Ed. Note: For a clarification of this part of the exposition of Lesniewski's theory of 
semantic categories, see Lejewski (1956) in the Protothetic Bibliography.] 

88 
JERZY SLUPECKI 
The theorems of protothetics may contain: constant or variable expressions 
belonging to any semantic category of the expressions of protothetics, quan-
tifiers binding variables belonging to those categories, and parentheses. No 
other expressions appear in the theorems of protothetics. 
We must also introduce the notion of the order of a functor belonging to a 
semantic category of the expressions of protothetics. 7 
Every functor whose all arguments, regardless of their number, belong to 
the category of propositions, is a functor of the first order. 
Every functor of which one argument at least is a functor of the n - I-st 
order and none of the arguments is a functor of an order higher than n - 1 is 
a functor of the n-th order (where n > 1). 
2. PROBLEMS DISCUSSED IN THIS PAPER 
This paper deals with three systems of protothetics. The primitive term of 
the first two is implication, of the third - equivalence. The systems having 
implication as their primitive term will be called 8 and 8\, and the system 
having equivalence as its primitive term will be called 82. The merit of 
the third system consists in the fact that definitions, which in Lesniewski's 
systems are always theorems, can in this system be formulated by means of 
the primitive term, in a way which is generally (e.g., in mathematics) used to 
formulate those definitions which are theorems. For this reason the research 
work conducted by Lesniewski and his students in the last years before World 
War II was concentrated mostly on this system. However, the systems having 
implication as their primitive term are, from a formal point of view, simpler 
than 82, and that is why they have been worked out in more detail than the 
latter. Consequently, we devote to them no less attention than to 82. 
It is obvious that in 8 and 8\ we are able to define equivalence. 
Thus the expression defining that term can in these systems be used as a 
scheme of definitions. Since this expression, however, has a rather complicat-
ed structure, we shall note definitions in the form of two implications: simple 
and converse. This method of noting definitions will enable us to base the 
systems 8 and 8\ on a simple and easily comprehensible axiom. 
In the notes we find a remark stating that protothetics is a generalization 
of the propositional calculus. This generalization can be achieved gradual-
ly. The simplest generalization consists in adding to the expressions of the 
propositional calculus quantifiers binding propositional variables. A system 
of the propositional calculus enriched by quantifiers and having implication 
as its primitive term is discussed in Section 5. 
A further generalization of the propositional calculus is the system which 
Lesniewski called a slightly enlarged theory of deduction and which in this 
paper is referred to as elementary protothetics. In the theorems of that system 
appear constant and variable functors of the first semantic order only, and 
also quantifiers binding propositional variables and functorial variables.s 

ST. LESNIEWSKI'S PROTOTHETICS 
89 
In Sections 6 and 8 the characteristic theorems of elementary protothetics 
are discussed. Since variables representing functors do appear in these theo-
rems, we can express by means of them those properties of the theorems of the 
propositional calculus which are usually spoken of in the meta-system. The 
only axiom of that system of elementary protothetics which has implication 
as its primitive term is given in Section 9. 
In order to pass from elementary protothetics to systems the theorems of 
which contain expressions belonging to all those semantic categories which 
we can define starting from the category of propositions, we must add new 
rules of inference to those used in elementary protothetics. This role can be 
played by both the rule of verification and the rule of extensionality. These 
rules are discussed in Sections 10 and 12. By choosing one or the other 
we obtain two different but equivalent systems of protothetics, both of them 
having implication as their primitive term. The proof of the equivalence of 
these two systems is given in Section 12. Since one and the same theorem 
is the axiom of both these systems, to prove their equivalence it suffices to 
show that the rules of inference of one of these systems may be derived from 
the rules of inference and the theorems of the other system. We are proving 
also (see Section 13) that given any proposition noted in terms of protothetics 
either that proposition or its negation is a theorem of both these systems. 
Hence we are proving that both these systems are complete. 
The last section deals with that system of protothetics which uses equiv-
alence as its primitive term. We are showing here: (1) that conjunction and 
implication may be defined in terms of equivalence, (2) that the proposition 
which is the only axiom of 8 and of 8 1 is a theorem of 82, and (3) that the 
rules of inference of 8 and of 81 may be derived from the rules of inference 
and the theorems of 82. 
The system of axioms of 82, as given in this paper, consists of four propo-
sitions. Lesniewski and his students were building theorems equivalent to this 
system of axioms. The problem of finding such theorems, though important 
for formal reasons, is of but little interest from the intuitive point of view. 
That is why we are not considering it in this paper. 
3. THE SYMBOLISM USED BY LESNIEWSKI 
Lesniewski in his works used either a symbolism of his own9 or a symbolism 
modelled on that of Pea no and Russell. 10 In Lesniewski's original symbolism, 
as in the symbolism without parentheses of Lukasiewicz, functors always 
precede their arguments. However, parentheses form a part of Lesniewski's 
symbolism and are playing there an essential role. Namely, in conformity 
with the rules of that symbolism - the arguments of two functors are put in 
parentheses of the same form if and only if these functors belong to the same 
semantic category or to the same order, provided that all the arguments of 

90 
JERZY SLUPECKI 
both these functors belong to the same semantic category. Thus arguments of 
the functors of implication, conjunction and negation are put in parentheses 
of the same form. Expressions governed by a quantifier are in Lesniewski's 
symbolism put in parentheses of a special form. 
For technical reasons, however, in some of his works Lesniewski did not 
use his original symbolism but one modelled on that of Peano and Russell 
replacing, among other things, parentheses by sets of dots. Yet the arguments 
of functors of semantic orders higher than the first were always put by him in 
parentheses having that form which is characteristic of the semantic category 
of these functors. Further, in his symbolism the functors of an order not lower 
than the second always precede their arguments. 
We shall use here that symbolism using, however, parentheses in the place 
of sets of dots so that in the symbolism used in this paper the dot will appear 
only as the sign of conjunction. An expression governed by a quantifier will 
be put in brackets. 
(In Lesniewski's systems, theorems do not contain free variables. However, 
in the case of variables bound by quantifiers standing at the beginning of a 
theorem the same rules of substitution are valid as in the case of free variables. 
For this reason the variables bound by quantifiers standing at the beginning of 
a theorem will be called free, whereas variables governed by inner quantifiers 
will be given the name of bound variables. 
In Lesniewski's symoblism, variables have no special forms of their own. 
A symbol appearing in a theorem is a variable if it is equiform to any symbol 
contained in the brackets of a quantifier which is a part of the theorem in 
question.) 
4. RULES OF INFERENCE IN PROTOTHETICS 
The respective rules of inference of the three systems of protothetics discussed 
in this paper are not identical. They have, however, many common features. 
Moreover, the formulation of certain rules in Lesniewski's systems differs 
obviously from the formulation of analogous rules in logical systems of other 
authors. 
The fact that definitions are theorems of a given system is characteristic of 
all the systems of Lesniewski. As mentioned above, the definitions occurring 
in the system of protothetics are written either in the form of an equivalence 
or in the form of two implications. If at a certain stage of building a system 
of protothetics we have all theorems of the propositional calculus at our 
disposal, then it makes no difference which of these two methods of writing 
definitions we use, since two implications which jointly define a certain term 
and the equivalence which could be used to define this term are inferentially 
equivalent. The structure of definitions which can be added to the systems 
of protothetics is restricted by certain rules. According to one of them, for 

ST. LESNIEWSKI'S PROTOTHETICS 
91 
example, all symbols and only those which occur in the definiendum as free 
variables appear in the definiens too as free variables. These rules will not 
be discussed here in detail since they do not differ essentially from the rules 
to which the notation of definitions is subjected in all systems of logic. It 
should be added that in Lesniewski's systems definitions make it possible to 
introduce into a system expressions belonging to new semantic categories, not 
represented in that system before. This is the only method of introducing into 
a system expressions belonging to new semantic categories, not represented 
in the axioms. 
Since in LeSniewski's systems definitions are theorems, their role is not 
limited to the shortening of expressions, but they are indispensable for proving 
numerous theorems. Thus in his systems definitions do not satisfy the condi-
tions of non-creativity; they satisfy, however, the condition of translatability 
as proved by Lemma 10 in Section 13. 
In Lesniewski's systems, the rule of substitution does not permit to replace 
complex expressions by other expressions, but only to replace free variables, 
representing functors of any semantic category, by constants or variables of 
the same semantic category. In spite of this limitation, the rule of substitution 
used in his systems, taken together with the rule of definition, makes it 
possible to obtain in those systems all the theorems which result from an 
accepted theorem on the strength of functional substitution. 11 This will be 
illustrated by the following example: 
From the axiom of complete induction: 
(a) [J]{j(0)· [x]{j(x) ::J f(seqx)}::J [y]{j(y)}} 
we obtain by applying functional substitution the proposition 
(b) (0+ 1 > 0)· [x]{(x+ 1 > x) ::J (seqx+ 1 > seqx)} ::J [y]{y+ 1 > y}. 
We now introduce into the system of arithmetic the following definition: 
(c) [x]{j*(x) == (x + 1 > x)}. 
By substituting in (a) the functor f*, defined above, for the variable f, we 
obtain 
(d) f*(0) . [x]{j*(x) ::J f*(seqx)} ::J [y]{j*(y)}. 
By substituting in (c) 0 for the variable x and applying the following 
theorem ofthe propositional calculus: 
[p,q,r,s]{(p == q). (p. r::J s)::J (q. r::J s)}, 

92 
JERZY SLUPECKl 
we obtain from (d) the proposition 
(e) (0 + 1 > 0) . [x]{j*(x) ::J f*(seqx)} ::J [y]{f*(y)}. 
By eliminating in an analogous way the expressions f*(x), f* (seq x) and 
f*(y) from (e) we obtain (b). 
By substituting in any theorem certain expressions for its free variables 
we can increase or reduce the number of non-equiform free variables of that 
theorem. In the former case we write the added variables within the brackets 
of the general quantifier standing at the beginning of the theorem; in the latter 
case we omit within the brackets of that quantifier those variables which after 
the substitution cease to appear in the theorem as free variables. We proceed 
in the same way when by adding a quantifier to the antecedent or to the 
consequent of a theorem we have reduced the number of its non-equiform 
free variables. 
The common trait of the rules of detachment, used in those systems of 
protothetics which have implication as their primitive term and in that system 
which has equivalence as its primitive term, consists in the fact that these 
rules can be applied only to those implications or equivalences which are not 
preceded by quantifiers. This again will be illustrated by an example. 
Let the proposition [P]{ a} be a theorem of 8,81 and 82; the proposition 
[P]{ a ::J fJ} a theorem of 8 and 8 112; and the proposition [P]{ a := fJ} a 
theorem of 8 2. \3 
A secondary rule of 8 and 8 1 permits to distribute a general quantifier 
preceding an implication; a primary rule of 8 2 permits to distribute a general 
quantifier preceding an equivalence. Hence [P] {a} ::J [P] {fJ} is a theorem of 
8 and of 8 1, and [P]{ a} := [P]{fJ} is a theorem of 82. The rule of detachment 
may be applied to both these propositions. 
An exact statement of the rules of inference for protothetics is given in 
Lesniewski (1929). 
5. PROPOSITIONAL CALCULUS WITH QUANTIFIERS 
Implication is the sale primitive term of the system with which we shall deal 
here. 14 Negation will be defined by means of that term and the general quan-
tifier. Since equivalence is not at our disposal, we write this definition in the 
form of two implications: 
Dl. (a) [P]{ ,,-,(p) ::J (p::J [P]{p})} , 
(fJ) [P]{ (p ::J [P]{p}) ::J "-' (p)}. 
The consequent [P] {p} of the implication p ::J [P] {p}, which is the definiens 
ofDl is, of course, a false proposition. Consequently, this implication is true 

ST. LESNIEWSKI'S PROTOTHETICS 
93 
if its antecedent is false, and false if its antecedent is true. Thus the expression 
which defines negation satisfies the conditions characteristic of that function. 
Having defined negation we can with its help, and with the help of implication, 
define all constant terms of the propositional calculus. 
The following propositions: 
AI. [p,q,r]{(p::) q) ::) ((q::) r) ::) (p::) r))}; 
A2. [p, q]{ q ::) (p ::) q)}; 
A3. [p,q]{((p::)q) ::)p) ::)p} 
are the axioms of the system. 
These are the axioms (in the literature of the subject they are quoted as the 
axioms of Tarski-Bernays) of the propositional calculus which has the sign 
of implication as its only constant term. IS 
In proving the theorems of the system under discussion the following rules 
of inference may be used: (1) the rule of substitution, with restrictions analo-
gous to those adhered to in the functional calculus; (2) the rule of detachment; 
(3) two rules for using the general quantifier: the first allows to add the general 
quantifier to the antecedent of an implication,16 the second to add it to the 
consequent of an implication, provided that the antecedent does not contain 
a free variable having the same form as the variable bound by this quantifier. 
The last two rules are analogous to the rules for using the quantifier in the 
functional calculus. In building the system we are applying also the rule per-
mitting to add definitions. 
THEOREM. All theorems of the propositional calculus which has implication 
and negation as its primitive terms resultfrom the axioms Al-3. 
Proof To prove this theorem it suffices to show that the propositions: 
AI'. [P]{(""'(p) ::) p) ::) p}; 
A2'. [p, q]{p ::) (,...,(P) ::) q)} 
result from these axioms, since these propositions, together with AI, form 
the system of axioms in Lukasiewicz's propositional calculus. 
Since the following four propositions are theorems of the propositional 
calculus which has implication as its primitive term, they result from Al-3: 
TI. [p,q,r]{((q::) p) ::) p) ::) ((q::) r) ::) ((r::) p) ::) p))}; 
T2. [P]{p ::) p}; 

94 
JERZY SLUPECKI 
T3. [p,q,r]{(r => q) => ((p => r) => (p => q))}; 
T4. [p,q,r]{(p => (q => r)) => (q => (p => r))}. 
Further theorems, which along with implication include negation, require 
proofs. These proofs will not be given here in a complete form. In simpler 
cases we limit ourselves to noting - on the right of a theorem which is being 
introduced into the system - the numbers of those theorems from which it 
results. In more complicated cases we add brief explanations. 
T5. [P]{("'(P) => p) => pl· 
(T1; A3; DI, {3) 
To obtain T5 we substitute in Tl for the variables q and r the expressions 
p => [P]{p} and "'(p), respectively, and in A3 we substitute [P]{p} for q. 
Next, we apply twice the rule of detachment. The theorem thus obtained is 
equiform to AI'. 
T6. [q]{[p]{p} => q}. 
(T2) 
We have applied here the rule of adding the quantifier to the antecedent 
and the rule of substitution. 
T7. [p,q]{(p => [P]{p}) :J (p => q)}. 
T8. [p, q]{ "'(P) :J (p:J q)}. 
T9. [p, q]{p :J ("'(P) :J q)}. 
The theorem thus obtained is equiform to A2'. 
(T3; T6) 
(AI; Dl, a; T7) 
(T4; T8) 
We have thus proved that the axioms of the propositional calculus which 
has implication and negation as its primitive terms result from AI-3. 
6. CHARACTERISTIC THEOREMS OF ELEMENTARY PROTOTHETICS 
We shall now discuss the intuitive meaning of several characteristic theo-
rems of elementary protothetics.17 To formulate them we shall need the terms 
defined in the following definitions having the forms of equivalences: 
Dl. [p]{as (P) == p}; 
D2. [P]{ vr (p) == (p == p)}; 
D3. [PllfZ (p) == (p == "'(p))}; 

ST. LESNIEWSKI'S PROTOTHETICS 
D4. 1 == [P]{p == p}; 
D5. 0 == [P]{p}. 
95 
DI-3 define functors of the propositional calculus. The other two defin-
itions do not belong to that calculus and define constants whose semantic 
category is that of propositions. The symbols: as, vr,fl are abbreviations of 
the terms: assertio, verum, andfalsum. 18 
The following theorem is called the law of extensionality: 
(a) [f,p, q]{(P == q) :J (f(P) == f(q))}· 
In conformity with this theorem we conclude that two propositional func-
tions are equivalent if their arguments are equivalent. Propositional functions 
which satisfy (a) are called truth-functions. Thus the law of extensionality 
states that all functions of one argument of elementary protothetics are truth-
functions. 
(b) [f]{[P]{f(p) == as (P)} V [P]{f(p) == vr(p)} V [P]{f(P) ==fl (p)}V 
[P]{f(P) == ",(P)}}. 
This law is called the law of the quantity of functions; it states that any 
propositional function of one argument is equivalent to one of the four func-
tions: as (p), vr (P), fl (P) or "'(p), so that these functions exhaust all the 
alternatives of the propositional functions of one argument. 
(c) [f,p]{f(p) == (f(I) . p V f(O) . "'(P))}. 
This is the law of development; it states that any propositional function 
f (P) after the substitution for p of any true proposition is equivalent to the 
expression f (1), and after the substitution of any false proposition, to the 
expression f(O). 
(d) [f,p]{f(l) . f(O) :J f(P)}. 
This is the law of verification; it states that any function of one argument 
of elementary protothetics which is satisfied by the expressions 1 and 0 is 
satisfied by any proposition. 
(e) [J]{[P]{f(P)} == f(l) . f(O)}. 
This theorem will be called the law on the limit of a function. 19 It can be 
used for defining the general quantifier by means of conjunction and of the 

96 
JERZY SLUPECKI 
terms 1 and O. 
(t) [], q]{(P]{](P)} == ](q) . j("'(q))}. 
This theorem is called generalized law on the limit of a function. It states 
that a propositional function of one propositional argument is satisfied by any 
proposition if and only if it is satisfied by any two contradictory propositions. 
Theorems (a)-(t) describe the properties of functions of one argument of 
elementary protothetics. They can be generalized so as to include functions 
of more arguments. The theorems which are generalizations of the proposi-
tions (a)-(t) will be discussed in Section 8. 
7. PROOF OF THE EQUIVALENCE OF PROPOSITIONS (aHt) FROM SECTION 6 
Two propositions a and f3 are said to be equivalent in a certain system, if the 
proposition a == f3 can be obtained from theorems of that system by means 
of its rules of inference strengthened as follows. The rules of substitution, of 
adding definitions to the system and of the use of quantifiers are extended so 
as to cover expressions of semantic categories which are not represented in 
the axioms of the system. 
We shall show that the propositions (a)-(t) from Section 6 are equivalent20 
in the system discussed in Section 5. When proving equivalences built of any 
two propositions from among (a)-(t), Section 6, we may refer to any theorems 
of that system and use its rules of inference strengthened as specified above. 
Consequently, in the proofs given here we do not refer to the specific axioms 
of any system of elementary protothetics; it is also for this reason that the 
axiom of that system of elementary protothetics which has implication as its 
primitive term will be given only in Section 9. 
First of all, we shall prove those theorems which are easily obtainable from 
D1-5, Section 6. 
Tl. (p,q]{vr(p) == vr(q)}. 
T2. (p, q]{fl (P) ==fl (q)). 
T3. (p, q]{(P == q) ::J (as (P) == as (q))). 
(D2, Section 6) 
(D3, Section 6) 
(D 1, Section 6) 
The proofs of Tl-3 are based, respectively, on the following theorems of 
the propositional calculus: 
(p,q,r,s]{(r == (p ==p)). (s == (q == q))::J (r == s)}; 
(p, q, r, s]{(r == (p == ",(P))) . (s == (q == "'(q))) ::J (r == s)}; 

ST. LESNIEWSKI'S PROTOTHETICS 
(p, q, r, s]{(r == p) . (s == q) => ((p == q) => (r == S))}. 
T4. (p]{vr(p)}. 
T5. (P]{I"V(fI(P))}. 
T6. 1. 
T7. I"V(O). 
97 
(D2, Section 6) 
(D3, Section 6) 
(D4, Section 6) 
(D5, Section 6) 
In the proof of T7 we are applying the proposition 1"V((P]{p}) which is a 
theorem of the propositional calculus with quantifiers. 
T8. 1"V(1 == 0). 
T9. (P]{(P == 1) V (p == O)}. 
(T6; T7) 
(T6; T7) 
Subsequent theorems will be needed to show the equivalence of the law 
of extensionality (a, Section 6) and the law of the quantity of functions (b, 
Section 6). Their proofs are rather elaborate. If a theorem is an implication, 
its proof will be noted in suppositional form. 
In a suppositional proof the antecedent of the theorem to be proved is 
written first; if this antecedent is a conjunction, we write all its factors in a 
column. These factors are called assumptions of the proof Other expressions 
are added to the proof if they may be obtained by applying the rule of 
detachment from expressions appearing earlier in the proof, from theorems 
and from definitions of the system. 
The proof is completed when an expression equiform to the consequent 
of the theorem to be proved has been added. All expressions of the proof 
are written in a column and numbered on the left, with the exception of the 
last expression of the proof, which is given no number. At the right of every 
expression of the proof which is not an assumption, we give in parentheses the 
numbers of the expressions of the proof or of the theorems and of definitions 
of the system from which this expression results. We do not, however, give 
references to those theorems of the propositional calculus with quantifiers 
which are indispensable for the proof. We also do not specify the substitu-
tions performed in the course of the proof; in more complicated cases we do 
so in a commentary added to the proof. The dots which follow the expressions 
of proofs are symbols of conjunction. The last assumption is followed by the 
symbol of implication. 
TIO. [f,q,r]{(p]{f(p) == vr(p)} => (f(q) == f(r))}. 

98 
JERZY SLUPECKI 
Proof (1) [P]{f(p) := vr(p)} :::> 
(2) f(q) := vr(q). 
(3) f(r) := vr(r). 
f(q) := f(r) 
(1) 
(1) 
(T1; 2; 3) 
We shall explain in more detail how the expression (2) is obtained from the 
expression (1). The following proposition is a result of substitution applied 
to T2, Section 5: 
[P]{(f(p) := vr(p)) :::> (f(p) := vr(p))}. 
By applying first the rule of adding the quantifier to the antecedent of an 
implication, and subsequently the rule of substitution, we obtain: 
(a) [q]{[P]{f(p) := vr(p)} :::> (f(q) := vr(q))}. 
By detaching (1) from the expression obtained from (a) by cancelling the 
quantifier standing at its beginning we obtain (2). In further proofs we shall 
often obtain expressions in an analogous way but without giving detailed 
explanations. We must draw attention to the fact that (2) was not obtained 
from (1) by substitution, although the variable q appears in (2) in those places 
where the variable p appeared in (1).21 In similar cases we shall say that a 
variable has been replaced by another variable or expression. 
On the example of the proof of T lOwe shall explain how a suppositional 
proof can be transformed into a complete one. For this purpose let us note 
that we can obtain the proposition 
(b) [r]{[p]{f(p) := vr(p)} :::> (f(r) := vr(r))} 
in a way similar to that in which we obtained the proposition (a). 
Let us further note that the proposition 
(c) [j, q, r]{ (f(q) := vr (q)) . (f(r) := vr (r)) :::> (f(q) := f(r))} 
is obtained by applying the rule of detachment to Tl and to a proposition 
which is a result of substitution applied to the following theorem of the 
propositional calculus: 
[p,q,r,s]{(p:= q):::> ((r :=p). (s:= q):::> (r:= s))}. 
By substituting in the following theorem of the propositional calculus: 
[p, q, r, s]{(P :::> q) :::> ((p :::> r) :::> ((q. r :::> s) :::> (p:::> s)))} 

ST. LESNIEWSKI'S PROTOTHETICS 
99 
the expressions (1), (2), (3) and the last expression of the proof of TIO for 
the variables p, q, rand s, respectively, and by detaching successively the 
propositions (a), (b) and (c), we obtain TIO.22 
TI1. [j,q,r]{[p]J(p) =11(p)} ~ (f(q) = f(r))}. 
Proof (1) [P]{f(p) =11 (p)} ~ 
(2) f(q) =11 (q). 
(3) f(r) =11 (r). 
f(q) = f(r) 
TI2. [j,q, r]{[p] {f(p) = as(p)}· (q = r) ~ (f(q) = f(r))}. 
Proof (1) [P]{f(p) = 
as (p)}. 
(2) q = r ~ 
(3) f(q) = 
as (q). 
(4) f(r) = as (r). 
(5) as(q) = as(r). 
f(q) = f(r) 
TI3. [j,q,r]{[p]{f(p) = ,..,.,(p)}. (q = r) ~ (f(q) = f(r))}. 
Proof (1) [P]{f(p) = ,..,.,(p)}. 
(2) q = r ~ 
(3) f(q) = 
,..,.,(q) 
(4) f(r) = 
,..,.,(r). 
(5) ,..,.,(q) = rv(r). 
f(q) = f(r) 
(1) 
(1) 
{T2;2;3} 
(1) 
(1) 
(T3; 2) 
(3; 4; 5) 
(1) 
(1) 
(2) 
(3; 4; 5) 
TI4. [j, r, s, t]{[P, q]{(p = q) ~ (f(p) = f(q))}·f(r)·,..,.,(r)·f(s)·s ~ f(t)}. 

100 
JERZY SLUPECKl 
Proof (1) [p, q]{(p == q) ::) (f(p) == f(q))}· 
(2) f(r). 
(3) f'J(r). 
(4) f(s). 
(5) s ::) 
(6) s == f'J(r). 
(3; 5) 
(7) f(f'J(r)). 
(1;6;4) 
(8) (r == t) ::) f(t). 
(1; 2) 
(9) (f'J(r) == t) ::) f(t). 
(1; 7) 
f(t) 
(8; 9) 
In the last line of the proof we refer to the following theorem of the 
propositional calculus: 
[p,r, t]{((r == t) ::) p). ((f'J(r) == t) ::) p) ::) p}. 
In conformity with TI4, any truth-function which is satisfied by a certain 
false proposition and by a certain true proposition is satisfied by any propo-
sition. 
TI5. [1, r, s, t]{[P, q]{(p == q) ::) (f(p) == f(q))} . rv(f(r)) . r· 
rv(f(s)) . rv(s) ::) rv(f(t))}. 
Proof (1) [p,q]{(p == q) ::) (f(p) == f(q))}· 
(2) f'J(f(r)). 
(3) r. 
(4) rvf(s)). 
(5) rvS ::) 
(6) r == rv(s). 
(3; 5) 

ST. LESNIEWSKI'S PROTOTHETICS 
(7) ,-v(f(,-v(s))). 
(8) (s == t) :::> ,-v(f(t)). 
(9) (,-v(s) == t) :::> ,-v(f(t)). 
,-v(f(t)) 
101 
(1; 6; 2) 
(1; 4) 
(1; 7) 
(8; 9) 
In conformity with T15, any truth-function which is not satisfied by a cer-
tain true proposition nor by a certain false proposition, is not satisfied by any 
proposition. 
T16. [j, s, t]{[P, q]{(p == q) :::> (f(p) == f(q))} . f(s) . ,-v(8) . ,-v(t) :::> f(t)}. 
Proof (1) [p,q]{(p == q) :::> (f(p) == f(q))}· 
(2) f(s). 
(3) ,-v(s). 
(4) ,-v(t) :::> 
(5) s == t. 
(3; 4) 
f(t) 
(1; 5; 2) 
T17. [j,s,t]{[p,q]{(p == q):::> (f(p) == f(q))}:::> ,-v(f(s)· ,-v(8)' 
,-v(t) . ,-v(f(t)))}. 
(T16) 
In proving T17 we base ourselves on the following theorem of the propo-
sitional calculus: 
[p,q,r,s]{(p' q. r:::> s) == ,-v(p. q. r· ,-v(s))}. 
T18. [j, s, t]{[P, q]{(P == q) :::> (f(P) == f(q))}· ,-v(f(8)) . s· t :::> ,-v(f(t))}. 
Proof (1) [p, q]{(p == q) :::> (f(p) == f(q))}· 
(2) ,-v(f(s)). 
(3) s. 
(4) t :::> 

102 
(5) 8 == t. 
r-v(f(8)) 
JERZY SLUPECKI 
(3; 4) 
(1;5;2) 
T19. [j, 8, t]{[P, q]{(p == q) :) (f(p) == f(q))} :) r-v(r-v(f(8)) . 8' t· f(t))}. 
(T1S) 
According to T17 and T19, no truth-function assumes different logical 
values when applied to two propositions having the same logical value. 
T20. [j, r, 8, t, u]{[P, q]{(P == q) :) (f(p) == f(q))} . r-v(f(8) == as (8))' 
r-v(f(r) == vr(r))· r-v(f(t) == r-v(t)) :) (f(u) ==Jl(u))}. 
Proof (1) [p,q]{(p == q) :) (f(p) == f(q))}· 
(2) r-v(f(8) == as (8)). 
(3) r-v(f(r) == vr(r)). 
(4) r-v(f(t) == r-v(t)) :) 
(5) r-v(f(8) == 8). 
(2; D 1, Section 6) 
(6) f(8)' r-v(8) V r-v(f(8)) . 8. 
(7) f(t) . t V r-v(f(t)) . ",(t) 
(5) 
(4) 
(S) f(8) . r-v(8) . f(t) . t V f(8) . r-v(8) . ",(f(t)) . r-v(t)V 
r-v(f(8)) . 8' f(t) . t V r-v(f(8)) . 8 . r-v(f(t)) . ",(t). 
(6; 7) 
(9) r-v(f(r)). 
(3; T4) 
(10) r-v(f(8) . r-v(8)' r-v(f(t))· ",(t)). 
(T17; 1) 
(11) r-v(",(f(8)) . 8' f(t) . t). 
(T19; 1) 
(12) f(8) . r-v(8) . f(t) . t :) f(r). 
(T14; 1) 
(13) r-v(f(8) . "'(8)' f(t) . t). 
(12; 9) 
(14) r-v(f(8)) . 8' r-v(f(t)) . r-v(t). 
(S; 13; 10; 11) 

ST. LESNIEWSKI'S PROTOTHETICS 
(15) "-'(f(8))' s· ,,-,(f(t)) . ,,-,(t) =:l "-'(f(u)). 
(16) "-'(f(u)). 
f(u) =-fl (u) 
103 
(TI5; 1) 
(15; 14) 
(16; T5) 
In obtaining the expressions (6), (7) and (8) we based ourselves respectively 
on the following theorems of the propositional calculus: 
[p, q]{ "-'(p =- q) =:l (p. "'(q) V "-'(p) . q)}; 
[p, q]{ "'(p =- rv(q)) =:l (p. q V rv(p). "'(q))}; 
[p,q,r,8]{(p' ,,-,(q) V ",(p). q). (r· 8 V ",(r)· "'(8)) =:l 
(p. rv(q) . r· 8 V p' rv(q). ",(r)' "-'(S) V 
rv(p) . q' r· 8 V "'(p) . q' ",(r)· "-'(8))}. 
T21. [J, r, 8, t, u]{[P, q]{(p =- q) =:l (f(p) =- f(q))} =:l ((f(s) =- as (8))V 
(f(r) =- vr(r)) V (f(t) =- ,,-,(t)) V (f(u) =-fl (u)))}. 
(T20) 
T22. [J]{[P,q]{(p =- q) =:l (f(p) =- f(q))} =:l ([P]{f(p) =- as (p)}V 
[P]{f(p) =- vr(p)} V [P]{f(p) =-fl(p)} V [P]{f(p) =- rv(p)})}. (T2l) 
Here we have applied four times the following theorem of elementary 
protothetics: 
[J, g]{[P, q]{f(p) V g(q)} =:l ([P]{f(p)} V [q]{g(q)})}. 
This theorem, analogous to a theorem of the functional calculus, is obtained 
from theorems of the propositional calculus by applying the rules for using 
the general quantifier. 
T23. [J]{([P]{f(p) =- as(p)} V [P]{f(p) =- vr(p)} V [P]{f(p) =-fl(p)}V 
[P]{f(p) =- "-'(p)}) =:l [p,q]{(p =- q) =:l (f(p) =- f(q))}}· 
(TI2; TIO; TIl; TI3) 
T24. [J,p, q]{ (p =- q) =:l (f(p) =- f(q))} =- [f]{[P]{f(p) =- as (p)} V 
[P]{f(p) =- vr(p)} V [P]{f(p) =-fl(p)} V [P]{f(p) =- "'(p)}}. 
(T22; T23) 
We have thus proved the equivalence of the law of extensionality and the 
law of the quantity of functions. We shall prove in turn the equivalence of the 

104 
JERZY SLUPECKI 
law of extensionality and the law of development (c, Section 6). 
T25. [f, r]{[p, q]{(P == q) => (f(P) == f(q))} . f(l) . r => f(r)}. 
Proof (1) [p,q]{(p == q) => (f(P) == f(q))}· 
(2) f(I). 
(3) r. 
(4) 1 == r. 
(T6; 3) 
f(r) 
(1;4;2) 
T26. [f,r]{[p,q]{(p == q) => (f(P) == f(q))}· f(O)· rv(r) => f(r)}. 
Proof (1) [p,q]{(p == q) => (/(P) == f(q))}· 
(2) f(O). 
(3) rv(r) => 
(4) 0 == r. 
f(r) 
(T7; 3) 
(1;4;2) 
According to T25, any truth-function which is satisfied by 1 is satisfied by 
any true proposition; according to T26, any truth-function which is satisfied 
by 0 is satisfied by any false proposition. 
T27. [/, r]{[p, q]{(P == q) => (f(p) == f(q))} . (/(1) . rV 
f(O) . rv(r)) => f(r)}. 
(T25; T26) 
T28. [/,r]{[p,q]{(p == q) => (f(p) == f(q))}·f(r) => (f(I)·rVf(O)·rv(r))}. 
Proof (1) [p,q]{(p == q) => (f(P) == f(q))}· 
(2) f(r) => 
(3) r => f(1). 
(4) rv(r) => f(O). 
(1;T6;2) 
(1; T7; 2) 

ST. LESNIEWSKI'S PROTOTHETICS 
1(1) . r V 1(0) . ""(r) 
105 
(3; 4) 
In the last line of the proof we have applied the following theorem of the 
propositional calculus: 
[p,q,r]{(r =>p). (",,(r) =>q) => (p·rVq·",,(r))}. 
T29. [/,r]{[p,q]{(p == q) => (/(P) == I(q))} => (/(r) == (/(1)· rV 
1(0) . ""(r)))}. 
(T27; T28) 
T30. [/,p,q]{[r]{/(r) == (/(1). r V 1(0)· ""(r))}' (p == q) => 
(/(P) == I(q))}· 
Proof (1) [r]{/(r) == (/(1) . r V 1(0) . ""(r))}. 
(2) p == q => 
(3) 1(P) == (/(1) . p V 1(0) . ",,(P)). 
(1) 
(4) I(q) == (/(1) . q V 1(0) . ""(q)). 
(1) 
(5) (/(1). p V 1(0) . ""(P)) == (/(1) . q V 1(0) . ",,(q)). 
(2) 
I(p) == I(q) 
(3; 4; 5) 
T31. [j,p, q]{(p == q) => (/(P) == I(q))} == [/,p]{/(P) == (/(1) . pV 
1(0) . ""(p))}. 
(T29; T30) 
We have thus shown the equivalence of the law of extensionality and the 
law of development. Subsequent theorems will be necessary to prove the 
equivalence of the law of extensionality and the law of verification (d, Sec-
tion 6). 
T32. [I, r]{[p, q]{(P == q) => (/(P) == I(q))} . 1(1) . 1(0) => I(r)}. 
Proof (1) [p,q]{(p == q) => (/(P) == I(q))}· 
(2) 1(1). 
(3) 1(0) => 
(4) (r == 1) => I(r). 
(1; 2) 

106 
JERZY SLUPECKI 
(5) (r == 0) ::) f(r). 
(1; 3) 
f(r) 
(T9;4;5) 
In the last line of the proof we have applied the following theorem of the 
propositional calculus: 
[p, q]{ (p V q) . (p ::) r) . (q ::) r) ::) r}. 
We introduce an auxiliary definition necessary for the proof of further the-
orems: 
Dl. [p,q]{<I>(q)(p) == [J]{(p == q) ::) (f(p) == f(q))}· 
Definitions of this type are characteristic for protothetics. The functor <I> (q), 
defined in D 1, is a proposition-forming functor of one propositional argument 
p. This functor depends on the propositional parameter q, which is placed in 
parentheses differing in shape from all parentheses used so far. Propositional 
parameters of functors of a propositional argument will always be placed in 
parentheses of that shape. 
T33. [p,q]{<I>(p)(q) == <I>(q)(P)}. 
(Dl) 
To obtain this theorem we have substituted in D 1 the variables q and p for 
the variables p and q, respectively, thus changing not only the argument of 
the functor defined in Dl but its parameter as well. 
T34. <I>(I)(I). 
(Dl) 
T35. <I>(O)(O). 
(Dl) 
T36. <I>(1)(0). 
(Dl; T8) 
T37. <I>(0)(1). 
(Dl; T8) 
T38. [P]{ <I>(P)(P)}. 
(Dl) 
T39. [P]{ <I>(P)(r-v(p))}. 
(Dl) 
T40. [f,q,r]{[J,p]{f(I)· f(O) ::) f(p)}· (q == r) ::) (f(q) == f(r))}. 
Proof (1) [J,p]{f(I) . f(O) ::) f(p)}· 
(2) q == r ::) 

ST. LESNIEWSKI'S PROTOTHETICS 
(3) <1:>(1)(1'). 
(4) <1:>{1')(1). 
(5) <1:>{O)(1'). 
(6) <1:>{1')(O). 
(7) <1:> { 1')( q). 
f(q) == f(1') 
107 
(1; T34; T36) 
(T33; 3) 
(1; T37; T35) 
(T33;5) 
(1;4;6) 
(Dl; 7; 2) 
The expression (3) has been obtained from (1) by replacing in the latter 
the variable f by <1:>(1) and by performing twice the operation of detachment. 
The expressions (5) and (7) have been obtained in an analogous way. 
T41. [j,p, q]{(P == q) ::J (f(P) == f(q))} == [f,p]{(f(1) . f(O) ::J f(P)}· 
(T32; T40) 
T41 states the equivalence of the laws of extensionality and verification. 
T42. [J]{[P]{f(P)} ::J f(l) . f(O)}. 
Proof (1) [P]{f(P)} ::J 
(2) f(I). 
(3) f(O). 
(1) 
(1) 
f(1) . f(O) 
(2; 3) 
T43. [f,p,q]{(P == q) ::J (f(P) == f(q))} == [f]{[P]{f(P)} == f(I)· f(O)}. 
(T41; T42) 
In the proof we have applied the following theorem of the propositional 
calculus: 
[p, q, 1']{(p == (q ::J 1')) . (1' ::J q) ::J (p == (q == 1'))}. 
T43 states the equivalence of the law of extensionality and the theorem on 
the limit of a function. Our aim now is to show the equivalence of the law 
of extensionality and the generalized theorem on the limit of a function (f, 
Section 6). 

108 
JERZY SLUPECKI 
T44. (j, r, s]{[f,p, q]{f(q) . j("'(q)) => f(pn . (r == s) => (f(r) == f(s)n· 
Proof (1) [f,p, q]{f(q) . f(",(q)) => f(pn· 
(2) r == s => 
(3) c'P{s)(r). 
(1; T38; T39) 
f(r) == f(s) 
(Dl; 3; 2) 
T45. [j,r,s]{[p,q]{(p == q) => (f(p) == f(q)n· f(r)· f(",(r)) => f(sn· 
Proof (1) [p,q]{(p == q) => (f(r) == f(q)n· 
(2) f(r). 
(3) f(",(r)) => 
(4) (r == s) => f(s). 
(5) (",(r) == s) => f(s). 
f(s) 
(1; 2) 
(1; 3) 
(4; 5) 
In the proof we have applied the theorem of propositional calculus quoted 
in the remark explaining the last line of the proof of T14. 
T46. (j,p, q]{(p == q) => (f(p) == f(q)n == 
(j,p,q]{f(q)' f("'(q)) => f(pn· 
(T44; T45) 
T47. (j, q]{[p]{f(pn => f(q) . f("'(q)n· 
Proof (1) [p]u(pn => 
(2) f(q). 
(1) 
(3) f("'(q)). 
(1) 
f(q) . f("'(q)) 
(2; 3) 
T48. [j,p, q]{(p == q) => (f(p) == f(q)n == (j, q]{[p]U(pn == 
f(q) . f("'(q)n· 
(T46; T47) 

ST. LESNIEWSKI'S PROTOTHETICS 
109 
In the proof we have applied the theorem of the propositional calculus 
quoted in the remark explaining the proof of T43. 
T48 states the equivalence of the law of extensionality and the generalized 
theorem on the limit of a function. We have thus proved that in the system 
discussed in Section 5 the law of extensionality is equivalent to any of the 
propositions (b)-(f), Section 6, and so we have proved that in that system all 
the propositions (a)-(f), Section 6, are equivalent. 
8. PROPERTIES OF PROPOSITIONAL FUNCTIONS OF 
MORE THAN ONE ARGUMENT 
All the functions which appear in theorems discussed in Sections 6 and 7 
are functions of one propositional argument. Analogous theorems are valid 
for functions of more than one argument. We shall now give theorems whose 
intuitive meaning is quite close to the intuitive meaning of the pro~ositions 
(a)-(f), Section 6, and in which functions of two arguments appear. 3 
The law of extensionality for functions of two arguments: 
(a') [j,p,q,r,s]{(p == r)· (q == s) =:> (f(P,q) == f(r,s))}. 
Let 
iI,12,···,iI6 
be a sequence of all different functors of two arguments belonging to the 
propositional calculus. The scheme of definition for the expressions of that 
sequence has the form: 
[p, q]{fi(P, q) == (fj(p) . q V fdp) . "'(q))} 
i= 1, ... ,16; 
j,k= 1,2,3,4, 
where iI, 12, h, f4 are as, vr,fl, and "', respectively. 
The law of the quantity of functions of two arguments has the form: 
(b') [J]{[P, q]{J(p, q) == iI (p, q)} V [p, q]{f(p, q) == 12(p, q)} V ... V 
[p, q]{f(p, q) == J16(p, q)}}. 
The law of development of functions of two arguments: 
(c') [J,P, qlU (p, q) == (f (1,1) . p. q V f(l, 0) . p. ",(q) V J (0,1) . r-v(p) . qV 
J(O,O) . "'(p) . ",(q))}. 
The law of verification offunctions of two arguments: 

110 
JERZY SLUPECKI 
(d') [j,p,q]{J(I, 1). f(I,O)· f(O, 1). f(O, 0) :J f(P,q)}. 
The theorem on the limit of functions of two arguments: 
(e') [j]{[P,q]{J(p,q)} == f(l, 1)· f(1,O)· f(O, 1)· f(O,O)}. 
The generalized theorem on the limit offunctions of two arguments: 
(f') [j, r, s]{[P, q]{f(P, q)} == f(r, s) . f(r, rv(s)) . f(rv(r), s)· 
f(rv(r), rv(s))}. 
Like the propositions (a)-(t), Section 6, the propositions (a')-(f') are equiv-
alent in the system discussed in Section 5, and the proofs of those equivalences 
are analogous to the proofs given in Section 7; moreover, each proposition 
from among (a')-(f') is equivalent in that system to its corresponding propo-
sition from among (a)-(t), Section 6. 
We shall now, by way of example, give the proofs of the equivalence of the 
propositions (a) and (a'), and (d) and (d').* We shall need for that purpose the 
following auxiliary definitions: 
Dl. [j,p,q]{xf--f,p--1(q) == f(p,q)}· 
D2. [f,p,q]{'l{Jf--f,p--1(q) == f(q,p)}.24 
Tl. (f, r, s, t, u]{(f,p, q]{ (p == q) :J (f(P) == (f(q))} . (r == t) . (s == u) :J 
(f(r, s) == f(t, u))}. 
Proof (1) (f,p, q]{(p == q) :J (f(P) == f(q))}· 
(2) r == t. 
(3) s == u :J 
(4) 'l{Jf--f,s--1(r) == 'l{Jf--f,s--1(t). 
(5) f(r, s) == f(t, s). 
(6) xf--f, t--1(s) == xf--f, t--1{u). 
(7) f(t, s) == f(t, u). 
(1; 2) 
(4; D2) 
(1; 3) 
(6; Dl) 
* [Ed. Note: The equivalence of (c) and (c/), (e) and (e/), and of (f) and (f') is demonstrated 
in Chikawa (1967); cf. the Protothetic Bibliography.] 

ST. LESNIEWSKI'S PROTOTHETICS 
111 
f(r, s) == f(t, u) 
(5; 7) 
D3. [I,p,q]{w{=f~(p,q) == (f(p) == vr(q))}. 
D3 includes the expression vr (q) in order that the same free variables 
might appear both in the definiendum and in the definiens. 
T2. [I,p,q]{w{=f~(p,q) == f(p)}· 
(D3; T4, Section 7) 
T3. [I,p, q]{[J, r, s, t, u]{(r == t) . (s == u) :J (f(r, s) == f(t, u))}· 
(p == q) :J (f(p) == f(q))}· 
Proof (1) [I, r, s, t, u]{(r == t) . (s == u) :J (f(r, s) == f(t, u))}. 
(2) P == q :J 
(3) w{=f~(p,p) ==w{=f~(q,q)· 
f(p) == f(q) 
(1; 2) 
(3; T2) 
To obtain (3) we have replaced in (1)25 the variables rand s by the variable 
p, the variables t and u by the variable q, and the variable f by the expression 
w{=f~· 
T4. [J,p,q]{(p == q) :J (f(p) == f(q))} == [I,p,q,r,s]{(p == r)· (q == s) :J 
(f(p, q) == f(r, s))}. 
(T1; T3) 
We have thus proved the equivalence of the propositions (a) and (a'); we 
shall in tum prove the equivalence of (d) and (d'). 
T5. [I, q, r]{[J,p]{!(I) . f(O) :J f(p)} . f(q, 1) . f(q, 0) :J '1fJf--f, r-1(q)}. 
Proof (1) [I,p]{f(l) . f(O) :J f(p)}· 
(2) f(q, 1). 
(3) f(q,O) :J 
(4) xf--f, q-1(l). 
(5) xf--f, q-1(O). 
(Dl; 2) 
(Dl; 3) 

112 
JERZY SLUPECKI 
(6) x"f, q-j(r). 
0; 4; 5) 
(7) f(q, r). 
(Dl; 6) 
1/;"f, r-j(q) 
(D2; 7) 
T6. [f, q, r]{[f,p]{J(I). f(O) => f(P)}· f(l, 1). f(l, 0). f(O, 1). f(O, 0) => 
f(q, r)}. 
Proof (1) [f,p]{f(l) . f(O) => f(P)}· 
(2) f(l, 1). 
(3) f(I,O). 
(4) f(O, 1). 
(5) f(O,O) => 
(6) 1/;"f, r-j(l). 
(7) 1/;"f,r-j(O). 
(8) 1/;"f, r-j(q). 
f(q,r) 
T7. [f,r]{[J,p,q]{f(1, 1)· f(l,O). f(O, 1)· f(O,O) => 
f(P, q)} . f(l) . f(O) => f(r)}. 
(T5; 1; 2; 3) 
(T5; 1;4;5) 
(1;6;7) 
(D2; 8) 
Proof (1) [f,p, q]{f(1, 1) . f(l, 0) . f(O, 1) . f(O, 0) => f(P, q)}. 
(2) f(I). 
(3) f(O) => 
(4) w~f=}(I, 1). 
(5) w~f=}(I,O). 
(6) w~f=}(O, 1). 
(T2; 2) 
(T2; 2) 
(T2; 3) 

ST. LESNIEWSKI'S PROTOTHETICS 
113 
(T2; 3) 
(7) wf: f =HO, 0). 
(8) wf:f~(r,r). 
(1; 4; 5; 6; 7) 
f(r) 
(T2; 8) 
T8. [f,p]{f(1)·f(0) :J f(P)} == [f,p,q]{f(1, 1)·f(1,0)·f(0, 1)'f(0,0):J 
f (p, q)}. 
(T6, T7) 
T8 asserts the equivalence of the propositions (d) and (d'). 
The following two propositions are the respective laws of extensionality 
for functions of n and of n + 1 arguments: 
(g) [pI, ... , Pn, ql, ... ,qn]{ (PI == qd ..... (Pn == qn) :J 
(f(PI,'" ,Pn) == f(ql,'" qn))}; 
(h) [PI, ... ,Pn+t, ql,···, qn+l]{(P1 == qd ..... (Pn+l == qn+d :J 
(f(PI,'" ,Pn+d == f(qI,'" qn+d)}· 
The propositions (g) and (h) are equivalent. When proving this we shall 
use the following definitions analogous to 01-3: 
05. [f,PI,'" ,Pn+I]{'l/Jf-f,Pn+1 -j(PI,'" ,Pn) == f(PI,'" ,Pn+I)}; 
06. [f,PI,'" ,Pn+I]{wf:f~(PI"" ,Pn+I) == (f(Ph'" ,Pn) == 
vr(pn+d)}· 
T9. [f,rl,'" ,rn+I,sl,··· ,sn+I]{[f,PI,'" ,Pn,qI,··· ,qn] 
{(PI == qd ..... (Pn == qn) :J (f(PI,'" ,Pn) == f(qI,". ,qn))}' 
(rl == st}· .. . ·(rn+l == sn+d :J (f(rt, ... , rn+d == f(SI,"" sn+d)}· 
Proof (1) [f, PI, ... ,Pn, ql, ... ,qn]{ (PI == qI) ..... (Pn == qn) :J 
(f(pt, ... ,Pn) == f(qI, ... ,qn))}' 
(2) (rl == st) ..... (rn+l == sn+t) :J 
(3) ¢f-f,rn+l-j(rt, ... ,rn) ==¢f-f,rn+I-j(sI, ... ,Sn)' (1;2) 

114 
JERZY SLUPECKI 
(3; D5) 
(5) xf-f, 81 -1(82, ... ,8n, rn+d == xf-f, 81 -1(82, ... , 8n+I). 
(1; 2) 
(5; D4) 
(4; 6) 
TID. [j,Ph··· ,Pn+l]{ w~ f =HPI, ... ,Pn+d == f(PI, ... ,Pn)}. 
(D6; T4, Section 7) 
This theorem is analogous to T2. 
TIL [j,PI, ... ,Pn, qI, ... ,qn]{[f, rl, ... ,rn+l, 81, ... ,8n+d 
{(rl == 8d··· .·(rn+1 == 8n+I) :J (f(rl, ... , rn+l) == f(81, ... , 8n+d)}· 
(PI == qI) ..... (Pn == qn) :J (f(PI, ... ,Pn) == f(ql, ... , qn))}. 
Proof (1) [f, rI,··· ,rn+I, 81,···, 8n+d{(rl == 8I) ..... 
(rn+1 == 8n+d :J (f(rl, ... ,rn+J) == f(81, .. ·, 8n+d)}· 
(2) (PI == qJ) ..... (Pn == qn) :J 
(3) w~f=HpI,· .. ,Pn,Pn) ==W~f~(qI, ... ,qn,qn) 
(1;2) 
f(PI, ... ,Pn) == f(ql, ... , qn) 
(3; TID) 
TI2. [f,PI, ... ,Pn, qI,···, qn]{(PI == qJ) ..... (Pn == qn) :J 
(f(PI, ... ,Pn) == f(ql, ... ,qn))} == 
[j,PI, ... ,Pn+l, ql, ... , qn+l]{ (PI == qI) .... . 
(Pn+I ==qn+I):J (f(PI,···,Pn+J) ==f(ql, ... ,qn+I))}. 
(T9;TIl) 
We have thus proved the equivalence of propositions (g) and (h), and the 
proof was obviously analogous to the proof of the equivalence of (a) and (a'). 
We now formulate the theorem which we have proved only for certain 
cases; the proofs for the remaining cases, however, are analogous: 
THEOREM. The laws of extensionality, quantity of junctions, development 
and verification as well as both theorems on the limit of ajunction,formulated 

ST. LESNIEWSKI'S PROTOTHETICS 
115 
for functors of any number of propositional arguments, are equivalent in the 
system discussed in Section 5. 
9. THE AXIOM OF THE SYSTEM OF ELEMENTARY PROTOTHETICS WHICH HAS 
IMPLICATION AS ITS PRIMITIVE TERM 
The notes contain the following remark: a set of axioms of any system of 
elementary protothetics should satisfy two conditions: 
1. all theorems of the propositional calculus should result from these axioms 
(since elementary protothetics is a generalization of the propositional calculus 
with quantifiers); 
2. the following proposition: 
AI. [f,q]{f([P]{p::J p}) ::J (f([P]{p}) ::J f(q))} 
should result from these axioms. 
In the systems of elementary protothetics which have implication as their 
primitive term the valid rules of inference are those of the system discussed 
in Section 5, strengthened as specified at the beginning of Section 7. 
THEOREM 1. All theorems of the propositional calculus may be deduced 
from Al by applying the rules of inference used in the systems of elementary 
protothetics which have implication as their primitive term. 26 
Proof From the theorem formulated in Section 5 it follows that in order to 
prove Theorem 1 it suffices to show that AI-3, Section 5, may be deduced 
from AI. 
The definitions needed when proving this will be noted in the form of two 
implications. 
DI. (0) [p]{as(p)::J p}; 
((3) [P]{p::J as (p)}. 
TI. [P]{[P]{p} ::J as (p)}. 
(Dl, (3) 
We have applied here the rule of adding the general quantifier to the 
antecedent of an implication. 
When noting further theorems we shall use the following abbreviations: 
instead of [P]{p ::J p} 
instead of [P]{p} 
we shall write 1, 
we shall write O. 
The abbreviation of Tl has the form: 

116 
JERZY SLUPECKI 
TI'. [P]{O:J as (p)}. 
In certain cases, however, it will be convenient to give the full form of a 
theorem along with its abbreviation. 
Using the above abbreviations we shall give Al the following form: 
AI'. [f, q]{f(I) :J (f(0) :J f(q))}.27 
T2. 0 :J as (1). 
T3. 1 :J as (1). 
D2. (a) [q]{ a(q) :J (q :J as (q))); 
(/3) [q]{(q:J as (1)) :J a(q)}. 
T4. a(I). 
T5. a(O). 
T6. [q]{a(q)}. 
T7. [q]{q:J as (I)}. 
T8. as (l). 
T9. 1. 
(Tl) 
(DI, /3) 
(D2, /3; T3) 
(D2, /3; T2) 
(AI'; T4; T5) 
(D2, a; T6) 
(T7) 
(Dl, a; T8) 
When written without abbreviations, this theorem has the form: 
T9'. [P]{p :J pl· 
(T9) 
TlO. [P]{[P]{p} :J pl· 
(T9') 
TlO'. [P]{O:J pl. 
(TlO) 
Tll. O:J (1 :J 0). 
(TlO') 
Tl2. [P]{[P]{p :J p} :J (p:J p)}. 
(T9') 
Tl2'. [P]{I :J (p :J p)}. 
(Tl2) 
T13. 1 :J (1 :J 1). 
(Tl2') 

ST. LESNIEWSKI'S PROTOTHETICS 
03. (a) [q]{,8(q):J (q :J (1 :J q))}; 
(,8) [q]{(q:J (1 :J q)) :J ,8(q)}. 
T14. ,8(1). 
T1S. ,8(0). 
T16. [q]{,8(q)}. 
TI7. [q]{q:J (1 :J q)}. 
T18. [P]{I :J (0 :J p)}. 
T19. 1 :J (O:J 1). 
T20. 0 :J (0 :J 0). 
04. (a) [q]{-y(q):J (q :J (O:J q))}; 
(,8) [q]{(q:J (O:J q)) :J ,(q)}. 
T21. ,(1). 
T22. ,(0). 
T23. [q]{-y(q)}. 
T24. [q]{q:J (O:J q)}. 
OS. (a) [P,q]{8(q)(p):J (q:J (p:J q))}; 
(,8) [p,q]{(q:J (p:J q)) :J 8(q)(P)}. 
T2S. [q]{8(q)(I)}. 
T26. [q]{8(q)(0)}. 
T27. [p, q]{ 8(q)(p)}. 
T28. [p,q]{q:J (p:J q)}. 
117 
(03, ,8; T13) 
(03, ,8; T1l) 
(AI'; TI4; T1S) 
(03, a; TI6) 
(TI7; TlO') 
(TIS) 
(TlO') 
(04, ,8; T19) 
(04, ,8; T20) 
(AI'; T2I; T22) 
(04, a; T23) 
(OS, ,8; T17) 
(OS, ,8; T24) 
(AI'; T2S; T26) 
(05, a; T27) 
The theorem obtained is equiform to A2, Section S. Our aim is to obtain a 
theorem which would be equiform to AI, Section S. 

118 
JERZY SLUPECKI 
T29. [p,q]{q::J (p::J p)}. 
(T28; T9') 
T29'. [q]{q::J I}. 
(T29) 
T30. [p, q, r]{r ::J (q ::J (p ::J p))}. 
(T28; T29) 
T31. [p,q,r]{r::J (q::J (p::J q))}. 
(T28) 
T32. (O::J 0) ::J ((0 ::J 0) ::J (0 ::J 0)). 
(T28) 
T33. (1 ::J 0) ::J ((0 ::J 0) ::J (1 ::J 0)). 
(T28) 
T34. (O::J 1) ::J (( 1 ::J 0) ::J (0 ::J 0)). 
(T30) 
T35. (O::J 0) ::J ((0 ::J 1) ::J (0 ::J 1)). 
(T29) 
T36. (1 ::J 1) ::J (( 1 ::J 0) ::J (1 ::J 0)). 
(T29) 
T37. (1 ::J 0) ::J ((0 ::J 1) ::J (1 ::J 1)). 
(T30) 
T38. (O::J 1) ::J ((1 ::J 1) ::J (0 ::J 1)). 
(T28) 
T39. (1 ::J 1) ::J ((1 ::J 1) ::J (1 ::J 1)). 
(T28) 
T33-38 are all the possible expressions which may be obtained from AI, 
Section 5, by substituting for the variables the expressions 1 and O. Thus 
they are the zero-one tests of that axiom. By using several times AI' and the 
definitions analogous to DI-4, we easily obtain: 
T40. [p,q,r]{(p::J q)::J ((q::J r)::J (p::J r))}. 
This theorem is equiform to AI, Section 5. 
All the zero-one tests of the following proposition: 
T41. [p,q,r]{(p::J (q::J r)) ::J (q::J (p::J r))} 
are results of substitution applied to T9', T30 and T31. Hence T41 may be 
deduced from AI. 
T42. [p, q]{p ::J ((P ::J q) ::J q)}. 
T43. [P]{((O ::J p) ::J q) ::J q}. 
(T4I; T9') 
(T42; TIO') 

ST. LESNIEWSKI'S PROTOTHETICS 
119 
All the zero-one tests of A3, Section 5, are results of substitution applied 
to T43 and T29, so that this axiom results from AI. We have proved that all 
the propositions A 1-3, Section 5, result from AI, and hence we conclude that 
Theorem 1 is true. 
DEFINITION. The system of elementary protothetics which has implication 
as its sole primitive term, which has the proposition Al as its sole axiom, 
and in which the rules of inference of the system discussed in Section 5, 
strengthened as specified at the beginning of Section 7, are valid, shall be 
called system E. 
It follows easily from Theorem 1 and the theorem formulated in Section 8 
that all the theorems discussed in Sections 6 and 8 are theorems of E. 28 The 
following theorem, the proof of which we omit, is also true: 
THEOREM 2. The system E is a complete system. 
10. THE SYSTEM OF PROTOTHETICS IN WHICH THE 
RULE OF VERIFICATION IS VALID 
There exist propositions which contain only expressions belonging to the 
semantic categories characteristic of protothetics but which do not belong to 
the system E29 and which, as it seems, do not result from its theorems in 
spite of the fact that from the intuitive point of view we would undoubtedly 
include those propositions in the class of true propositions. 
The following propositions can be given as examples: 
(1) [I, g, <p]{[P, q]{I(P, q) == g(p, q)} :::) (<p(f) == <p(g))}; 
(2) [J, <p]{ <p( as) . <p( vr) . <pUI) . <p(rv) ::J <p( 1 ) VO 
In order to enlarge the system E so that it should include as its theorems 
the propositions (1) and (2), as well as all those propositions of protothetics 
which are undoubtedly true, it is necessary either to add new axioms to the 
axiom of the system E or to adopt new rules of inference. The first method, 
as it seems, would not suffice to solve the problem in question since there 
are always propositions which contain expressions of semantic orders higher 
than the semantic order of any expression contained in the axioms; such 
propositions, consequently, do not result from those axioms. On the contrary, 
the other method makes it possible to solve our problem. 
The rule which was at first adopted by LeSniewski was the rule of verifi-
cation, which is a generalization of a rule formulated in Lukasiewicz (1921). 
Lukasiewicz's rule allows to add to the system of the propositional calcu-
lus any proposition which fulfills the following condition: both expressions 

120 
JERZY SLUPECKI 
resulting from that proposition if we substitute in it for one of its proposition-
al variables the respective values 1 and 0, are theorems of that system. The 
generalized rule refers not only to propositional variables, but to variables of 
all those semantic categories which are proper to protothetics. 
The system which has implication as its sole primitive term, of which the 
system E is a part, and in which all the rules of inference of E, strengthened 
as specified at the beginning of Section 7, as well as the rule of verification are 
valid, is historically the first system of protothetics. It will be called system 
S. The proof of its completeness will be given in Section 12. 
In order to be able to formulate precisely the rule of verification we shall 
define the notion of a verifier of a variable of a given semantic category.3l 
This definition will have an inductive form, the induction referring to the 
semantic order of the variable in question. 
The verifiers of a propositional variable are the expressions 1 and 0.32 
By way of example, we shall in a more detailed way discuss the verifiers of 
a variable 1, which represents functors of one propositional argument. There 
are four such verifiers: h, 12, h, 14. We characterize them assuming that the 
following propositions are true: 
(3) h(I), h(O); 
(4) 12(1), "'(12(0)); 
(5) "'(h(I)), h(O); 
(6) "'(J4(1)), ",(J4(0)). 
Each pair of propositions (3)-(6) shall be called the characteristic of that 
verifier which appears in it. The definitions of those verifiers will be given 
the following form: 
01. [p]{1l(P) == ((P == 1) V (P == O))}; 
02. [p]{12(P) == (P == I)}; 
03. [p]{h(P) == (P == O)}; 
04. [p]{14(P) == "'((P == 1) V (P == O))}. 
When comparing the definitions of the verifiers h, 12 and h with their 
characteristics we note that the expression p == 1 is the definiens or, in 
case of this definiens being an alternative, a part of the definiens of any of 
those definitions, if and only if the proposition having 1 as its argument is 
not negated in the characteristic of the verifier which is being defined. An 

ST. LESNIEWSKI'S PROTOTHETICS 
121 
analogous remark may be made with respect to the expression p == O. As 
regards the verifier /4 let us note that its characteristic contains only negated 
propositions, and its definition has to the right of the symbol of equivalence 
the negation of the alternative of the expressions p == 1 and p == O. 
When giving a general definition of a verifier we must speak of expres-
sions of any semantic category. Consequently, we are not allowed to use 
parentheses which determine the semantic category of functors. We shall use, 
however, ordinary parentheses, but we must bear in mind that the parenthe-
sized expressions must not necessarily belong to the semantic category of 
propositions. 
Before discussing the verifiers of a variable belonging to any semantic 
category, we shall give a scheme for definitions of the equivalence of two 
functors belonging to an arbitrarily chosen, but one and the same for both 
functors, semantic category: 
No assumptions are made here concerning the semantic category of the 
variables ~ I, ... , ~n. The definition of the equivalence of two functors belong-
ing to a given semantic category can be written in the correct notation. For 
example, the definition of the equivalence of two functors of one propositional 
argument has the following form: 
[J,g]{== (I,g) == [P]{/(p) == g(p)}}. 
The functor defined by D5 will be called the sign of inteifunctorial equiv-
alence. 
It can easily be noticed that the functors /1,'" ,/4, defined by Dl-4, are 
equivalent to the functors vr, as, rv andfl, respectively. 
Further remarks in this section will be limited to functors of two arguments. 
The generalization of those remarks, so that they might be applied to functors 
of any number of arguments, does not involve any essential difficulties. 
Let 'P be a variable of any semantic order representing functors of two 
arguments. Let / and 9 be the arguments of the functor 'P. Let the respective 
verifiers of the variables 'P, / and 9 form the sequences: 
(7) 'PI,·· . ,'PI; 
(9) gl, ... ,gn' 
The characteristic of an arbitrarily chosen verifier 'Pi belonging to the 
sequence (7) is a system of m.n propositions, anyone of which has the form 

122 
JERZY SLUPECKI 
where Ij and 9k are any verifiers of the variables I and 9, and for each pair of 
verifiers, the first of which belongs to (8) and the second to (9), exactly one 
of the propositions (10) belongs to the characteristic of the verifier <Pi. We are 
assuming that the propositions belonging to this characteristic are true. 
The characteristic of any functor <Pi of two arguments I and 9 can be noted 
in the form of a table analogous to tables characterizing the properties of 
functors of the propositional calculus: 
<Pi I 91 
92 
9n 
II 
0 
h 
1m 
1 
The first column of the table contains all the verifiers of the variable I, 
and the uppermost line, all the verifiers of the variable 9. The symbols 1 
and 0, appearing in the table by way of example, show that the propositions 
<Pi (fm, 91) and "'(<Pi (fl, 92)) are true. 
We shall now discuss the form of the definition ofthe verifier <Pi. If its char-
acteristic contains more than one non-negated proposition, then the definiens 
is an alternative of propositions of type: 
This alternative has as many components as there are non-negated proposi-
tions in the characteristic of <Pi, and to each ofthose propositions there corre-
sponds a proposition of type (11) which contains the same verifiers belonging 
to the sequences (8) and (9) as does the given non-negated proposition of the 
characteristic. 
If the characteristic of <Pi contains only one non-negated proposition, then 
the definiens is a proposition of type (11) and contains the same verifiers 
belonging to (8) and (9) as does the non-negated proposition of the charac-
teristic. 
If the characteristic of <Pi includes negated propositions only, then the 
definiens is the negation of the alternative of all propositions of type (11). 
The verifier can be defined in the following abbreviated form: 
The expressions 1 and 0 are the verifiers of a propositional variable, and 
functors defined by definitions having the structure specified above are the 
verifiers of the functorial variable <po Those definitions contain verifiers of 

ST. LESNIEWSKI'S PROTOTHETICS 
123 
arguments of the Junctor cpo Those arguments are of lower semantic orders 
than the variable cpo 
We shall now state two theorems on verifiers. 
THEOREM 1. The equivalence of two equiform verifiers and the negation of 
the equivalence of two non-equiform verifiers of one and the same variable 
result from the theorems of elementary protothetics on the strength of the 
rules of inference of that system, strengthened as specified at the beginning 
of Section 7. 
Proof In the case of equiform verifiers, the definiens of 05 is a result of 
substitution applied to the proposition [P]{p == p}, which is a theorem of 
elementary protothetics. Hence in that case Theorem 1 is true. 
If the non-equiform verifiers are 1 and 0, Theorem 1 results from the fact 
that the expression "'(1 == 0) is a theorem of elementary protothetics (T8, 
Section 7). Let us assume now that our theorem is true for the non-equiform 
verifiers of the variables f and 9 which are arguments of the variable functor 
cpo Let the terms of the sequence (7)-(9) be all the verifiers of the variables cP, 
f and g, respectively. Let CPr and CPs be any non-identical terms of (7). For the 
time being we assume that the characteristics of both these verifiers contain 
non-negated propositions. 
From the structure of the definitions of verifiers we conclude that there 
exists an expression of type (11) which appears in the definiens of one of 
these verifiers and does not appear in the definiens of the other verifier. 
We may assume that this expression appears in the definiens of the verifier 
CPr, and that it contains the expressions fj and gk of the sequences (8) and 
(9). Hence, from the inductive hypothesis and from the fact that the theorem 
is true for equiform functors, it follows that the expressions CPr (fj, gk) and 
"'( CPs (fj, gk)), are theorems of the system S. Therefore, the expression 
"'( CPr (fj, gk) == CPs (fj , gk)) 
is a theorem of that system, and consequently also the expression 
"'([1, g]{ CPr (f, g) == CPs(f, g)}). 
From the above and from 05 we conclude that the expression "'(CPr == CPs) 
is a theorem of the system S. In case of the characteristic of one of the verifiers 
CPr and CPs containing solely negated propositions, the above reasoning is not 
subject to any essential change. 
THEOREM 2. Every proposition occurring in the characteristic of a verifier 
of a Junctorial variable of any semantic category results from theorems of 
elementary protothetics on the strength of the rules of inference valid in that 
system, strengthened as specified at the beginning of Section 7. 
Proof Taking into account the structure of the definitions of verifiers (of 
which 01-4 are examples) and Theorem 1 we obtain easily Theorem 2. For 

124 
JERZY SLUPECKl 
the proof the following propositions of the propositional calculus are required: 
[PI, ... ,PkHpi :J (PI V .,. V Pk)} 
i = 1, ... ,k; 
[PI, ... ,PkH rv{pI) ... , . rv{Pk) :J rv{P1 V ... V Pk)}. 
We now formulate the rule of verification: 
Let a be any proposition of protothetics. If every proposition obtainable 
from a by substituting in a for a certain of its free variables representing 
functors the verifiers of this variable is a theorem of the system S, then a is 
also a theorem of S. 
The following is a generalization of the rule of verification. 
THEOREM 3. If every proposition obtainable from any proposition a belong-
ing to protothetics by substituting in a for all or some of its free variables 
(representing either functors or propositions) their verifiers is a theorem of 
the system S, then the proposition a is also a theorem of that system. 
Proof From the theorem given in Section 8 it follows that the rule of 
verification may be generalized so as to cover propositional variables. When 
continuing the proof we apply induction on the number of those free variables 
for which their verifiers have been substituted in a. For the proof certain 
auxiliary definitions are required. 
11. THEOREMS WHICH ARE GENERALIZATIONS OF THE 
LAWS OF ELEMENTARY PROTOTHETICS 
Each of the theorems of elementary protothetics discussed in Sections 6 and 8, 
with the exception of the law of development and the generalized theorem on 
the limit of a function, can be generalized so that in the generalized theorems 
functors of higher orders appear in place of functors of the first semantic order. 
The terms applied when referring to theorems of elementary protothetics will 
also be used for the corresponding generalized theorems. 
As in the preceding section, the remarks made in this section will refer to 
functors of two arguments only. Let <p be a variable functor of two arguments, 
belonging to any semantic category. Let f and 9 be the arguments of <po Let 
further the sequences (7)-(9), Section 10, be the sequences of all the verifiers 
of the variables <p, f and g, and let f', g' be variables of the same semantic 
category as f and g. 
The law of extensionality: 
(a) [f, 1', g, g', <pH U == 1') . (g == g') :J (<pU, g) == <pU', g'))}. 

ST. LESNIEWSKI'S PROTOTHETICS 
125 
The law of the quantity of Junctions: 
(b) [tp]{[I,g]{tp(f,g) == tpl(f,g)} V ... V [I,g]{tp(f,g) == tpl(f,g)}}. 
The law of verification: 
The theorem on the limit of a Junction: 
Proposition (2), Section 10, is the correct notation of the law of verifi-
cation formulated for those functors whose sole argument is a functor of 
one propositional argument. We also give the correct notation of the law of 
extensionality for these functors: 
[I,!',tp]{== (I,I'):J (tp(f') == tp(f))}. 
The proofs of the theorems given below will be limited to the case of 
functors of two arguments. A generalization of those proofs does not involve 
any essential difficulties. 
THEOREM 1. The law of extensionality formulated for Junctors of any seman-
tic category is a theorem of S. 
Proof Let us substitute in the proposition (a) for the variables I, f', 9 and 
g' any of their verifiers. If the verifiers substituted for I and I' or the verifiers 
substituted for 9 and g' are not equiform, then on the strength of Theorem 1, 
Section 10, we conclude easily that the proposition obtained as a result of 
this substitution is a theorem of S. In the opposite case, the consequent of 
the proposition obtained as a result of this substitution is an equivalence of 
two equiform expressions and hence a theorem of S. From this and from 
Theorem 3, Section 10, we conclude that Theorem 1 is true. 
THEOREM 2. The law of verification,formulatedfor Junctors of any semantic 
category, is a theorem of S. 
Proof By substituting in the proposition (c) for the variables I andg any of 
their verifiers we obtain a proposition which is a result of substitution applied 
to a theorem of the propositional calculus. From this and from Theorem 3, 
Section 10, we obtain Theorem 2. 
THEOREM 3. The theorem on the limit of a Junction, formulated for Junctors 
of any semantic category, is a theorem of S. 
Proof It can easily be seen that the propositions (c) and (d) are equivalent 
in S. From this and from Theorem 2, we obtain Theorem 3. 

126 
JERZY SLUPECKI 
In the next section we shall prove that also the law of the quantity of 
functions formulated for functors of any semantic category is a theorem of B. 
12. THE SYSTEM OF PROTOTHETICS IN WHICH THE 
RULE OF EXTENSIONALITY IS VALID 
We shall consider now a system of protothetics, equivalent to the system B, 
in which, however, instead of the rule of verification another rule, namely the 
so called rule of extensionality, is being used:34 
Rule of extensionality: Given any functor of one argument and of at least 
the second semantic order, the law of extensionality formulated for that functor 
is a theorem of that system. 
The system having implication as its only primitive term, including as its 
part the system E, and in which all the rules of inference of E, strengthened 
as specified at the beginning of Section 7, as well as the rule of extensionality, 
are valid will be called system B\ . 
The following theorem is a generalization of the rule of extensionality. 
THEOREM 1. The law of extensionality formulated for functors of any seman-
tic category is a theorem of B\. 
Proof From the theorem given in Section 8 we conclude that the laws of 
extensionality formulated for functors of the first semantic order are theorems 
of B\. By reasoning in a way similar to that followed in the proofs of Tl-4, 
Section 8, and T9-12, Section 8, we arrive at the conclusion that the laws of 
extensionality formulated for functors belonging to the same semantic order 
but having different numbers of arguments are equivalent in the system B\. 
From this Theorem 1 results. 
Our object now being the proof of the equivalence of the systems Band 
B\, we shall need the following: 
THEOREM 2. The laws of verification (c, Section 11) and of the quantity of 
functions (b, Section 11), formulated for functors of any semantic category, 
are theorems of the system B. 
Proof The proof will be carried out by induction on the semantic order of 
those functors for which these laws are formulated. 
For functors of the first semantic order Theorem 2 results from the theorem 
given in Section 8. 
Let n be any natural number ~ 1, and let 'P be a functor of the n + 1-st 
semantic order. We assume that the theorem holds for functors belonging to 
orders not higher than n. We may also assume, without affecting thus our 
proof in an essential way, that 'P is a functor of two arguments. Let f and g be 
the arguments of 'P. The semantic order of both these variables is not higher 
than n. Let, further, the sequences (7), (8), (9), Section 10, be the respective 

ST. LESNIEWSKI'S PROTOTHETICS 
127 
sequences of verifiers of the variables <p, 1, g. According to our inductive 
assumption the laws of the quantity of functions formulated as follows: 
Tl. [I]{(j == It} V ... V (j == 1m)}; 
T2. [g]{(g == gl) V ... V (g == gn)} 
are theorems of the system S. 
From Tl, T2 and the following theorem of the propositional calculus: 
[pI, ... ,Pm, ql,···, qn]{(PI V ... V Pm) . (ql V ... V qn) :J 
(PI . ql V PI . q2 V ... V Pm . qn) p5 
we may deduce: 
T3. [I,g]{(j == 11)' (g == gl) V (j == It)· (g == g2) v ... V 
(j == 1m) . (g == gn)}. 
T4. [1, g, <p]{[1, 1', g, g', <p]{ (j == 1') . (g == g') :J (<p(j, g) == 
<p(j',g'))}. <p(jI,gl)' <p(jI,g2)· ... · <p(jm,gn) :J <p(j,g)}. 
Proof (1) [1,1', g, g', <p]{ (j == 1') . (g == g') :J (<p(j, g) == <p(j', g'))}. 
(2) <p(h,gt}· <p(jI,g2)· ... · <p(jm,gn) :J 
(3) ((j == II) . (g == gI) :J <p(j,g)) . ((j == II) . (g == g2) :J 
<p(j,g)) ..... ((j == 1m)' (g == gn) :J <p(j,g)). 
(1; 2) 
<p(j,g) 
(T3; 3) 
In the last line of the proof we have applied the following theorem of the 
propositional calculus: 
[PI, ... ,Pm'n, q]{(P1 V ... V Pm.n) . (PI :J q) ..... (Pm.n :J q) :J q}. 
It follows from Theorem 1 that the following proposition is a theorem of S I: 
T5. [I,I',g,g',<p]{(j == 1')· (g == g'):J (<p(j,g) == <p(j',g'))}. 
T6. [I,g,<p]{<p(jI,gI)' <p(jI,g2)· ... · <p(jm,gn) :J (j,g)}.36 
(T4; T5) 
We have thus shown that from the assumption that Theorem 1 is true for 
functors of the n-th semantic order, it results that the law of verification 
formulated for a functor of the n + I-st semantic order is a theorem of S I. 

128 
JERZY SLUPECKl 
We shall now prove that from the said assumption it follows that the law 
of the quantity of functions, formulated for a functor of the n + I-st semantic 
order, is also a theorem of 8\. 
Let <Pk be any verifier of the variable <p, and let 
be the sequence of all propositions belonging to its characteristic. Let further 
(2) f3f,· .. ,(J:n.n 
be the sequence of expressions obtainable from the propositions (1) by sub-
stituting in them for the symbol <Pk the symbol <po 
It follows from Theorem 2, Section 10, that all the propositions 
T7. af, 
i = 1, ... ,m· n, 
are theorems of the system 8 1. 
T8. [<p]{f3f ..... f3~.n :J (f3f == at) ..... (f3~.n == a~.n)}· 
Proof (1) f3f ..... f3:n.n :J 
(f3f == an ..... (f3:n.n == a~.n) 
We introduce the following auxiliary definition: 
01. [j,g,<p]{<I>(<p)(J,g) == (<p(J,g) == <Pk(J,g))}. 
(T7; 1) 
T9. [j,g,<p]{(f3f == at)····· (f3~.n == a~.n):J (<p(J,g) == <Pk(J,g))}. 
(T6; 01) 
We have substituted in T6 the functor <I>(<p) for the variable <po Let us also 
note that the factors of the conjunction which is the antecedent of that theorem 
are obtainable from 01 by substituting in 01 for the variables f and 9 their 
verifiers. 
(T8; T9; 05, Section 10) 
Analogous theorems can be proved for every verifier of the variable <po 
Consequently, the following propositions 

ST. LESNIEWSKI'S PROTOTHETICS 
129 
TIL [cp ]{,at . . ... ,a:n.n => (cp == CPi)}, 
i = 1, ... ,1, 
are theorems of the system SJ, the propositions ,at, ... ,,a:n.n having been 
obtained from propositions belonging to the characteristic of the verifier CPi 
in a way analogous to that in which the propositions (2) were obtained from 
the propositions (1). Further, let us note that it follows from the definition of 
the characteristics of the verifiers that an alternative in which the antecedents 
of all the propositions TIl appear as components, is a result of substitution 
applied to a theorem of the propositional calculus which is a generalization 
of the following theorem: 
[p, q, r]{p . q . r V '" (P) . q . r V p . '" (q) . r V p . q . '" (r) V 
"'(P) . "'(q) . r V "'(P) . q. "'(r) V p. "'(q) . "'(r) V 
",(P) . "'(q) . ",(r)}. 
Hence the alternative of those antecedents is a theorem of SI. From this, 
from TIl and from the following theorem of the propositional calculus: 
[PI, ... ,Pl, qI, ... , qd {(PI V ... V Pl) . (PI => qI) ..... 
(Pl => qt) => (ql V ... V ql)} 
it follows that the proposition: 
is a theorem of SI. This theorem is the law of the quantity of functions, 
formulated for the functor cpo 
Thus the inductive proof of Theorem 2 is completed. 
THEOREM 3. The systems Sand SI are equivalent. 
Proof AI, Section 9, is the common axiom of Sand SI. Consequently, 
to prove the theorem it suffices to show that the rules of inference of either 
of the two systems S and SI may be derived from that axiom and from the 
rules of inference of the other system. The rules of inference of Sand SI 
are identical, except for the rules of verification and extensionality. From 
Theorem 1, Section 11 it follows that the rule of extensionality of SI may be 
derived from the axiom and from the rules of S. From Theorem 2 it follows 
that the rule of verification of S may be derived from the axiom and from the 
rules of SI. Hence Theorem 3 is true. 
THEOREM 4. The law of the quantity offunctions (b, Section II),formulated 
for functors of any semantic category, is a theorem of the system S. 
Proof This theorem is a direct consequence of Theorems 3 and 2. 

130 
JERZY SLUPECKI 
13. THE PROOF OF COMPLETENESS OF THE SYSTEMS SAND Sl 
We will show now that given any proposition of protothetics a, a has the 
following property (hereafter called property W): either a or the negation of 
a is a theorem of the system S. Systems all of whose propositions have an 
analogous property will be called complete systems. 
By proving the completeness of the system S we shall also prove the com-
pleteness of the system SI, which is equivalent to the former. 
LEMMA 1. If the propositions a and a' are equivalent in S, and if a has the 
property W, then a' also has the property W. 
Proof. This lemma results from the fact that the propositions 
[p, q]{(p == q) ::J (p ::J q)} 
and 
[p,q]{(p == q)::J (rv(p) ::J "'(q))} 
are theorems of S. 
We say that the propositional expressions a and a' are equivalent in a 
certain system, if the expression, built of the symbol of equivalence and 
of those expressions, and preceded by general quantifiers binding all free 
variables of the expressions a and a' is a theorem of that system obtainable 
by applying its rules strengthened as specified at the beginning of Section 7.37 
LEMMA 2. Let (3 and (3' be any two propositional expressions which are 
equivalent in S and are satisfying the following condition: every free variable 
appearing in one of these expressions is equiform to a certain free variable 
of the other expression. 
If a(3 is any expression of which a part is equiform to (3 and a(3' - an 
expression which may be obtained from a(3 by substituting in it for any of its 
parts equiform to (3 the expression (3', then the expressions a(3 and a(3' are 
equivalent in S. 
. 
Proof. This lemma will be proved by induction on the number (n) of 
non-equiform variables of the expression (3 bound by those quantifiers of the 
expression a(3 which are not quantifiers of the expression (3. These variables 
shall be called externally bound. 
If n = 0, which means that the expression (3 contains no externally bound 
variables, the lemma results from the rule of adding definitions to the system 
and from the fact that the law of extensionality (a, Section 6) is a theorem of 
S. 
Let now n be a natural number greater than 0. We assume that the lemma 
is true if the expression (3 contains less than n externally bound variables. We 
shall discuss two cases: (a) a(3 begins with a quantifier binding a variable of 
the expression (3; and (b) a(3 does not begin with such a quantifier. 

ST. LESNIEWSKI'S PROTOTHETICS 
131 
(a) Let a* (3 be an expression obtained from a(3 by cancelling the variable 
which appears within the brackets of the quantifier standing at the beginning 
of that expression and is equiform to a certain free variable of the expression 
(3; let a* (3' be an expression obtained from a(3' in the same way as a* (3 was 
obtained from a(3. According to the inductive assumption, the expressions 
a* (3 and a* (3' are equivalent in S. In view of the rule allowing to distribute a 
quantifier preceding an equivalence38 we conclude that also the expressions 
a(3 and a(3' are equivalent in that system. 
(b) Let us denote by ,(3 any propositional expression which is a part of a(3 
and which begins with a quantifier that binds the variable of the expression (3 
and is not a part of that expression. We also assume that (3 is a part of ,(3. It 
can easily be seen that in the case under discussion there exists an expression 
which possesses these properties. Let us denote by ,(3' an expression obtained 
from ,(3 in the same way as a(3' was obtained from a(3. On the basis of 
the inductive assumption or of part (a) of the proof we conclude that the 
expressions ,(3 and ,(3' are equivalent in S. From this and from the inductive 
assumption it follows that the expressions a(3 and a(3' are equivalent in that 
system. 
Thus the inductive proof of the lemma has been completed. 
LEMMA 3. Every proposition a which contains the free or bound variable r.p 
is equivalent in S to a proposition which contains neither the variable r.p nor 
any variable or constant that is not a verifier of the variable r.p or afunctor of 
propositional calculus, and that differs in form from any variable or constant 
of the expression a.39 
Proof This lemma may be easily obtained from Theorem 3, Section 2, 
from Lemma 11, and from the rule of adding definitions to the system. 
LEMMA 4. If the propositions a and (3 have the property W, then the negation 
of that proposition also has that property. 
Proof If the negation of a is a theorem of S, Lemma 4 is obviously true. 
If a is a theorem of S, Lemma 4 is proved by the fact that the proposition 
[P]{p :J '" ( '" (P) )} 
is a theorem of that system. 
LEMMA 5. If the propositions a and (3 have the property W, then the 
conditional sentence whose antecedent is equiform to a and whose consequent 
is equiform to (3, also has the property W. 
Proof According to the assumption of our lemma one of the four following 
cases holds: 
(a) a and (3 are theorems of the system S; 
(b) '" (a) and (3 are theorems of the system S; 
(c) a and", ((3) are theorems of the system S; 

132 
JERZY SLUPECKI 
(d) rv (a) and rv (f3) are theorems of the system S. 
In the cases (a) and (b) the lemma results from the fact that A2, Section 5, 
is a theorem of S. In the case (c) the lemma results from the fact that the 
expression 
[p,q]{p::::> (rv (q)::::> rv(p::::> q))} 
is a theorem of S. Finally, in the case (d) the lemma results from the fact that 
T8, Section 5, is a theorem of S. 
Let 'P be a functorial variable of any semantic category, and let i, ... , u 
stand for the variable arguments of 'P. Let further 'P', i', ... , u' stand for any 
verifiers of the variables 'P, i, ... ,u. The proposition 'P' (f', ... ,u') shall be 
called an elementary proposition. 
LEMMA 6. Every elementary proposition has the property W. 
Proof. This lemma is a direct consequence of Theorem 2, Section 10. 
LEMMA 7. Let a be any elementary proposition containing either the symbol 
1 or the symbol O. 
Every proposition which may be obtainedfrom a by substituting for all the 
symbols 1 and 0 in a any propositions which have the property W, also has 
the property W. 
Proof. Let f3 be any proposition having the property W. Since the proposi-
tions 1 and rv (0) are theorems of the system S (cf. T6 and T7, Section 7), it 
can easily be concluded that either the proposition I == f3 or the proposition 
o == f3 is a theorem of that system. 
From this, from the rule of adding definitions to the system and from Lem-
mata 1 and 2 it follows that Lemma 7 is true. 
LEMMA 8. Any proposition a of which every constant Junctor is either the 
Junctor of implication or the Junctor of negation or else a verifier of a certain 
variable and in which no free or bound variables appear has the property W. 
Proof. By induction on the number of symbols appearing in a: 
If a contains only one symbol, then it is equiform either to the proposition 
1 or to the proposition 0, both of which have the property W. 
Let us now assume that a contains k symbols (where k > 1), and that the 
lemma holds for those propositions which contain less than k symbols. 
We shall discuss four cases: 
(a) the proposition a is a negation; 
(b) the proposition a is an implication; 
(c) the proposition a is an elementary proposition; 
(d) the proposition a is a proposition which may be obtained from a certain 
elementary proposition by substituting in it the symbols 1 and 0 for any 
propositions. 

ST. LESNIEWSKI'S PROTOTHETICS 
133 
From the inductive assumption and from Lemmata 4-7 we conclude that 
in each of the above cases the proposition a has the property W. 
Thus the inductive proof of Lemma 8 has been completed. 
LEMMA 9. Every proposition a, which apart from functors of the proposi-
tional calculus contains only those constant functors which are verifiers of 
certain variables, has the property W. 
Proof In view of Lemmata 3 and 1 we may assume that the proposition a 
does not include any variables; moreover, since every functor of the propo-
sitional calculus can be defined by means of implication and negation, and 
in view of Lemmata 2 and 1, we may assume that the sole functors of the 
propositional calculus which may appear in a are the functors of implication 
and negation. 
From this and from Lemma 8 it follows that Lemma 9 is true. 
LEMMA 10. Leta standforany propositional expression containing the free 
variables j', ... , j(m) of any semantic categories and not containing any 
other free variables. In a special case the expression a may not contain any 
free variables. 
We assume that the definition 
Dl. [j', ... ,j(m)]{<I>*(f', ... ,j(m)) ::=a} 
is adopted in the system S. 
Let {3cp. be any proposition containing the symbol <I> * . {3cp. is equivalent in 
S to a proposition which does not contain a functor equiform to <I>* and whose 
every constant functor which is not a functor of the propositional calculus is 
equiform to a certain functor appearing in a or in {3cp •. 4O 
Proof Let {3cp be an expression from which {3cp. may be obtained by 
substituting in it the functor <I>* for the variable <I> , and which does not 
contain any functor equiform to the functor <I> * . 
We add to S the following auxiliary definition: 
D2. [<I>]{ w* (<I» ::= {3cp}. 
Since D5, Section 10, is a theorem of S, the expression 
Tl. [<I>]{<I>::= <I>} 
is also a theorem of that system. 
From Theorem 1, Section 11, we conclude that also the following expres-
sion is a theorem of S: 

134 
JERZY SLUPECKI 
T2. [<I>, <I>', W]{ (<I> == <I>') :J (W( <I» == W( <I>'))}. 
T3. [<I>, <I>', W]{W(<I» :J ((<I> == <I>') :J W(<I>'))}. 
T4. [<I>, W]{[<I>']{(<I> == <I>') :J W(<I>')} :J W(<I>)}. 
Proof (1) [<I>']{(<I> == <I>') :J w(<I>')} :J 
(2) (<I> == <I» :J W(<I». 
w(<I» 
T5. [<I>, W]{W(<I» == [<I>']{(<I> == <I>') :J W(<I>')}}. 
T6. [<I>,W]{W(<I» == [<I>']{[1', ... ,j(m)]{<I>(J', ... ,J(m)) == 
(T2) 
(1) 
(2; Tl) 
(T3; T4) 
<I>'(J', ... , j(m))} :J W(<I>')}}. 
(T5; D5, Section 10) 
T7. w*(<I>*) == [<I>]{[1', ... ,j(m)]{<I>*(J', ... ,j(m)) == 
<I>(J', ... , j(m))} :J w*(<I>)}. 
(T6) 
T8. (3cp* == [<I>]{[1', ... , j(m)]{ a == <I>(J', ... , j(m))} :J (3cp}. (T7; Dl; D2) 
According to our assumptions, no functors equiform to <I>* do appear in 
a or in (3cp. Consequently, no functors having that property appear in the 
expression to the right of the symbol of equivalence in T8. Moreover, every 
constant functor appearing in the latter expression is either a functor of the 
propositional calculus or is equiform to one of the functors appearing in a or 
in (3cp*. From this and from the fact that T8 is a theorem of S it follows that 
Lemma lOis true. 
LEMMA 11. Let a stand for any propositional expression which contains the 
free variables 1', ... , j(m), g', ... , g(n) of any semantic categories and no 
other free variables. 
We assume that the definition 
D3 [j' 
j(m), 
(n)]{",,*( , 
(n))(j' 
j(m)) -
} 
. 
, ... , 
,g, ... ,g 
':I:' g, ... ,g 
, ... , 
=a 
is adopted in S. 
Let g'*, ... , g(n)* be any expressions of the same semantic categories as the 
corresponding variables g', ... , g(n). Let (3cp* be any proposition containing 
the symbol <I>* (g'* , ... , g( n)*). (3cp* is equivalent in S to a proposition of 
which every Junctor dependent on parameters is equiform to a certain Junctor 

ST. LESNIEWSKI'S PROTOTHETICS 
135 
of the proposition (3ip*, and which does not contain any Junctor equiform to 
the Junctor ip*(g'*, ... , g(n)*). 
Proof In view of Lemmata 3, 2 and 1 we may assume that ip* (g'* , ... , 
g(n)*) does not contain free variables. 
Let {3ip stand for an expression from which {3ip* may be obtained by substi-
tuting in it the functor ip* (g'* , ... , g( n)*) for the variable ip, and which does 
not contain a functor equiform to the functor ip*(g'*, ... , g(n)*). 
We now introduce the following two auxiliary definitions: 
D4. [ip]{w* (ip) == {3ip}; 
D5. [1', ... ,j(m),g', ... ,g(n)]{ip**(f', ... , j(m),g', ... ,g(n)) == a}. 
T9. W*(ip*(g'*, ... ,g(n)*)) == [ip]{[!" ... ,j(m)]{ip*(g'*, ... ,g(n)*) 
(f', ... , j(m)) == ip(f', ... , j(m))} ::J w*(ip)}. 
(T6) 
T1O. (3ip* == [ip]{[j', ... , j(m)]{ ip**(f', ... , j(m), g'*, ... , g(n)*) == 
ip(f', ... , j(m))} ::J {3ip}. 
(T9; D4; D3; D5) 
Since the proposition to the right of the symbol of equivalence in T1 0 does 
not contain a functor equiform to the functor ip* (g'* , ... , g( n)*), and since in 
that proposition every functor dependent on parameters is equiform to one of 
the functors appearing in (3ip*, Lemma 11 is true. 
THEOREM 1. The system 8 is a complete system. 
Proof It follows from Lemma 11 that every proposition which contains 
functors dependent on parameters is equivalent in 8 to a proposition which 
does not contain such functors. From this and from Lemma 10 we conclude 
that in the system 8 every proposition is equivalent to a proposition every 
constant functor of which is either a functor of the propositional calculus or a 
verifier of a certain variable. From this and from Lemmata 9 and 1 it follows 
that every proposition of the system 8 has the property W. Thus Theorem 1 
is proved. 
THEOREM 2. The system 8 1 is a complete system. 
Proof This theorem is a consequence of Theorem 1 and of Theorem 3, 
Section 11. 
Let us also note that the completeness of the system 8) can be proved 
exactly in the same way as the completeness of the system 8. 

136 
JERZY SLUPECKI 
14. THE SYSTEM OF PROTOTHETICS WHICH HAS 
EQUIVALENCE AS ITS PRIMITIVE TERM 
We shall begin this section by proving that implication may be defined by 
using only the symbol of equivalence, the general quantifier and variables 
representing functors of one propositional argument. 
First of all, let us note that implication can be defined as follows in terms 
of equivalence and conjunction: 
(1) [p, q]{(P ::J q) == (p. q == p)}. 
Conjunction may be defined in two ways: 
D1. [p, q]{p. q == [f]{p == (f(P) == f(q))}}· 
(2) [p, q]{p. q == [f]{p == ([r]{p == f(r)} == [r]{q == f(r)})} }.41 
The following proposition 
D2. [p, q]{(P ::J q) == ([f]{p == (f(p) == f(q))} == p)} 
is a synthesis of the propositions (1) and D 1. 
Thus equivalence can act as the sole primitive term of protothetics. 
The antecedent of the proposition 
(3) [f,p,q]{(P == q) ::J (f(P) == f(q))} ::J [p,q]{p. q == [J]{p == (f(P) == 
f(q))}} 
is equiform to the law of extensionality (a, Section 6), and the consequent to 
D1. 
The following theorem implies that both definitions of conjunction given 
above are correct. One of its consequences is also the theorem (discussed in 
Section 8) stating that D 1 is a theorem of the system E. 
THEOREM 1. The propositions (2) and (3) may be derivedfrom theorems of 
the system discussed in Section 5 by applying the rules of inference of that 
system strengthened as specified at the beginning of Section 7. 
Proof We shall prove a number of theorems by applying the procedure 
described in the above theorem.42 
T1. [f,p,q]{p' q::J (p == ([r]{p == f(r)} == [r]{q == f(r)}))}. 
Proof (1) p. 

ST. LESNIEWSKI'S PRafafHETlCS 
(2) q :) 
(3) [r]{p == f(r)} == [r]{q == f(r)}. 
137 
(1; 2) 
(1; 3) 
p == ([r]{p == f(r)} == [r]{q == f(r)}) 
T2. [p]{",(P == as ("'(P)))}. 
(D 1, Section 6) 
T3. [p]{ "'([r]{p == as (r)})}. 
(T2) 
T4. [p, q]{[r]{p == as (r)} == [r]{q == as (r)}}. 
(T3) 
T5. [p,q]{[J]{p == ([r]{p == f(r)} == [r]{q == f(r)})}:) pl· 
Proof (1) [f]{p == ([r]{p == f(r)} == [r]{q == f(r)})} :) 
(2) p == ([r]{p == as(r)} == [r]{q == as (r)}). 
(1) 
p 
(2; T4) 
T6. [p, q]{(q == vr(p)) == q}. 
(T4; Section 7) 
T7. [q]{[p]{q == vr(p)} == q}. 
(T6) 
T8. [p,q]{[f]{p == ([r]{p == f(r)} == [r]{q == f(r)})}:) q}. 
Proof (1) [f]{p == ([r]{p == f(r)} == [r]{q == f(r)})} :) 
(2) p == ([r]{p == vr(r)} == [r]{q == vr(r)}). 
(1) 
(3) p == (p == q). 
(2; T7) 
q 
(3) 
T9. [p, q]{p. q == [f]{p == ([r]{p == f(r)} == [r]{q == f(r)})}}. 
TI0. [p, q]{[f]{p == (f(P) == f(q))} :) q}. 
Proof (1) [J]{p == (f(P) == f(q))} :) 
(2) p == (as (P) == as (q)). 
(T1; T5; T8) 
(1) 

13 8 
JERZY SLUPECKI 
(3) p == (p == q). 
(2; DI, Section 6) 
q 
(3) 
TIL [p,q]{[J]{p == (f(p) == f(q))} ::J pl· 
Proof (1) [J]{p == (f(p) == f(q))} ::J 
(2) p == (vr(p) == vr(q)). 
(1) 
p 
(2; TI, Section 7) 
TI2. [J,p, q]{((p == q) ::J (f(p) == f(q))) . p. q ::J (p == (f(p) == f(q)))}· 
Proof (1) (p == q) ::J (f(p) == f(q))· 
(2) p. 
(3) q ::J 
(4)p==q·. 
(5) f(p) == f(q)·· 
p == (f(p) == f(q)) 
TI3. [J,p, q]{ (p == q) ::J (f(p) == f(q))} ::J [p, q]{p. q == [J]{p == 
(2; 3) 
(1; 4) 
(2; 5) 
(f(p) == f(q))}}· 
(TID; Til; TI2) 
T9 and T13 are equiform to the propositions (2) and (3), respectively. Thus 
Theorem I has been proved. 
The propositions: 
AI. [p,q,r]{(p == q) == ((r == q) == (p == r))}; 
A2. [p, q]{(p == q) == [f]{J(p) == f(q)}}; 
A3. [p,q]{(p == q) == [J]{(f(p) == f(q)) == (p == q))}; 
A4. [J]{f([P]{p}) == (f([P]{p} == [P]{p}) == [q]{f([P]{p}) == f(q)})} 
have the following properties: 

ST. LESNIEWSKI'S PROTOTHETICS 
139 
As shown by Lukasiewicz, all theorems of the propositional calculus which 
are expressed in terms of variables and the symbol of equivalence result from 
A143; 
A2 corresponds to the law of extensionality (a, Section 6); 
The structure of A3 is similar to that of A2, and the intuitive meaning of 
both axioms is similar; 
A4 corresponds to AI, Section 9, the latter being the only axiom of the 
systems 8 and 8 1. 
DEFINITION. The system which has equivalence as its only primitive term, 
the propositions AI-4 as its axioms, and in which the rules of inference 
specified below are valid, shall be called the system 8 2: 
(a) the rule of substitution, 
(b) the rule of detachment: if an equivalence of two propositions is a 
theorem of 82, and the first of these propositions is also a theorem of that 
system, then the second proposition is a theorem of 82; 
(c) the rule for the distribution of a general quantifier preceding an equiv-
alence: if a is a propositional expression consisting of two propositional 
expressions connected by the symbol of equivalence and if the proposition 
which may be obtained from a by adding at its beginning the general quanti-
fier binding all the free variables of a is a theorem of 82, then the equivalence 
of two propositions which may be obtained from the expressions the equiva-
lence of which constitutes a by adding at their beginning general quantifiers 
binding all the free variables occurring in these expressions, is also a theorem 
of the system 8 2.44 
Let cp be a variable functor of one argument and of at least the second 
semantic order. The following proposition: 
[j,g]{(f == g) == [cp]{cp(f) == cp(g)}} 
shall be called the equivalentiallaw of extensionality. The symbol == occurring 
in the first parentheses of this law is the symbol of interfunctorial equivalence 
defined by DS, Section 10. Let us note that the functor of equivalence is the 
sole constant functor appearing in the definiens of DS, Section 10; 
(d) the rule of extensionality: any equivalentiallaw of extensionality is a 
theorem of 82; 
(e) the rule of definition: any correctly built definition is a theorem of 82. 
The definitions of 82 are, of course, equivalences. 
We shall now prove that every theorem of 8 1 is a theorem of 82. To do 
so we must show that AI, Section 9, is a theorem of 82, and that the rules 
of inference, valid in 8 1, may be derived from the rules of inference and the 
axioms of 8 2. 

140 
JERZY SLUPECKI 
LEMMA 1. The following propositions, which have the Junctor of equiva-
lence as their sole constant Junctor, are theorems of 82: 
T14. [P]{p == p}; 
T15. [p,q]{(p == q) == (q ==p)}; 
T16. [p,q]{p == (p == (q == q))}; 
T17. [p,q]{p == (q == (p ==p))}; 
T18. [p, q]{p == (q == (q == p))}; 
T19. [p,q,r]{(p == q) == ((q == r) == (p == r))}; 
T20. [p,q,r]{(p == q) == (P == r) == (q == r))}; 
T21. [p,q,r]{(p == q) == (r == (P == r) == q))}; 
T22. [p, q, r, s]{(P == (q == r)) == ((8 == q) == ((8 == r) == p))}. 
Proof. These theorems result from Al since all theorems of the proposi-
tional calculus noted by means of variables and symbols of equivalence result, 
as mentioned above, from that axiom.45 
We add to 8 2 the following definitions: Dl; D2; Dl, Section 6; D5, Sec-
tion 6; and 
D3. 1 == ([PJ{p} == [P]{p}). 
The following propositions: 
(4) 1·1 == 1; 
(5) 0·0 == 0; 
(6) 1·0 == 0; 
(7) 0·1 == 0 
may serve to characterize conjunction. The set of these propositions corre-
sponds to the zero-one matrix of that function. We shall now prove 
LEMMA 2. The propositions (4)-(7) are theorems of 82. 

ST. LESNIEWSKI'S PROTarHETICS 
Proof We shall prove further theorems of 82. 
T23. 1. 
T24. [P]{I == (p == p)}. 
T25. [P]{p == (1 == p)}. 
T26. 0 == (0 == 1). 
T27. [p, q]{[J]{p == (1(p) == f(q))} == p. q}. 
T28. 1·1. 
T29. 1·1 == 1. 
T30. 0 == [f]{O == (1(0) == f(0))}.46 
T31.0·0==0. 
T32. 0 == [f]{f(I) == f(O)}. 
T33. [J]{f(I) == f(O)} == [J]{I == (1(1) == f(O))}. 
T34. 0 == [J]{I == (1(1) == f(O))}. 
T35. 1·0 == O. 
T36. 0 == [f]{(1(O) == f(I)) == (0 == I)}. 
T37. [J]{(1(0) == f(I)) == (0 == I)} == 
[J]{O == (1(0) == f(I))}. 
T38. 0·1 == [f]{(1(O) == f(I)) == (0 == I)}. 
T39. 0·1 == O. 
141 
(TI5; D3; TI4) 
(TI6; T23) 
(TI7; T23) 
(TI8; T23) 
(TI5; Dl) 
(T27; T24) 
(TI7; T28; T23) 
(TI6) 
(AI; DI; T30) 
(TI9; T25; A2) 
(T25) 
(TI9; T32; T33) 
(AI; DI; T34) 
(TI9; T26; A3) 
(AI; T26) 
(AI; DI; T37) 
(AI; T38; T36) 
T29, T3I, T35 and T39 are equiform to the propositions (4)-(7), respec-
tively. Thus Lemma 2 has been proved. 

142 
JERZY SLUPECKI 
LEMMA 3. The proposition 
(8) [f]{j(O) == (f(I) == [q]{f(O) == f(q)})}, 
which corresponds to the law of verification (d, Section 6), is a theorem of 
S2. 
Proof We add to the system two auxiliary definitions: 
D4. [r]{J1(r) == [J]{f(r) == (f([P]{p} == [P]{p}) == [q]{j(r) == f(q)})}}; 
D5. [r]{v(r) == [J]{f(O) == (f(r) == [q]{j(O) == f(q)})}}. 
The following propositions are theorems of S2. 
T40. [r]{[j]{j(r) == (f([P]{p} == [P]{p}) == [q]{f(r) == f(q)})} == J1(r)}. 
(TI5; D4) 
T41. J1([P]{p}). 
T42. [P]{p} == O. 
T43. J1(0). 
(T40; A4) 
(TI5; D5, Section 6) 
(A2; T42; T41) 
T44. [f){j(0) == (f([P]{p} == [P]{p}) == [q]{f(O) == f(q)})}· 
(D4; T43) 
T45. [r]{[J]{f(O) == (f(r) == [q]{j(O) == f(q)})} == v(r)}. 
(TI5; D5) 
T46. v([P]{p} == [P]{p}). 
(T45; T44) 
T47. ([P]{p} == [P]{p}) == 1. 
(TI5;D3) 
T48. v(I). 
(A2; T47; T46) 
T49. [J]{j(0) == (f(I) == [q]{f(O) == f(q)})}· 
(D5; T48) 
T49 is equiform to the proposition (8), and thus Lemma 3 is true. 
LEMMA 4. If the implication ()i =:J /3 and its antecedent ()i are theorems of 
S2, then the proposition /3 is also a theorem of that system. 
Proof The propositions: 
T50. ()i =:J /3; 

ST. LESNIEWSKI'S PROTOTHETICS 
143 
T5I. 0: 
are theorems of 82 ex hypothesi. Hence the following propositions: 
T52. (0: ~ (3) == ([j]{o: == (f(o:) == f({3))} == 0:); 
T53. [j]{ 0: == (f(o:) == f({3))} == 0:; 
T54. [J]{o: == (f(o:) == f({3))}; 
T55. [fl{f(o:) == f({3)}; 
T56. as (0:) == as ({3); 
T57. 0: == as (0:); 
T58. as (0:); 
T59. as ({3); 
T60. {3 
(D2) 
(T52; T50) 
(T53; TI5; T5I) 
(T54; T5l) 
(T55) 
(TI5; DI, Section 6) 
(T57; T5l) 
(T56; T58) 
(DI, Section 6; T59) 
are also theorems of that system. Since T60 is a theorem of 82, Lemma 4 is 
true. 
LEMMA 5. AI, Section 9, is a theorem of 82. 
Proof The following propositions are theorems of 82: 
T61. [p, q, r]{(p· q == p) == (p ~ q)}; 
T62. 1 ~ 1; 
T63. 0 ~ 0; 
T64. 0 ~ 1; 
T65. [P]{O ~ p}; 
T66. [P]{p ~ I}; 
T67. [P]{p ~ p}. 
(T22; D2; Dl) 
(T61; T29) 
(T61; T3l) 
(T6I; T39) 
(T49; T63; T64) 
(T49; T64; T62) 
(T49; T63; T62) 
The proofs of T65, T66 and T67 have been given in abbreviated form. 
When giving complete proofs, certain auxiliary definitions and theorems are 

144 
JERZY SLUPECKI 
needed. This completion, however, does not involve any difficulties. In the 
proofs which are to follow we shall also omit auxiliary definitions and auxil-
iary theorems connected with them. 
T68. [P]{l := (p:) In. 
T69. [P]{ 1 :) (p :) 1 n. 
T70. [p,q]{q:) (p:) qn. 
T71. [p,q]{q:) (p:) pn. 
T72. [j]{f(I) :) (f(0) :) f(O)n· 
T73. [j]{f(1) :) (f(0) :) f(I)n· 
T74. [j, q]{f(I) :) (f(0) :) f(q)n. 
T75. 1 := [P]{p :) p}. 
T76. [j,q]{f([P]{p:) p}) :) (f(0) :) f(q)n· 
(T17; T23; T66) 
(A2; T68; T62) 
(T49; T65; T69) 
(T70; T67; Lemma 4) 
(T7I) 
(T70) 
(T49; T72; T73) 
(T17; T23; T67) 
(A2; T75; T74) 
T77. [j, q]{f([P]{p :) p}) :) (f([q]{q}) :) f(q)n· (A2; D5, Section 6; T76) 
T77 is equiform to AI, Section 9, and thus Lemma 5 has been proved. 
LEMMA 6. Let a and {3 stand for any propositional expressions, and let 
iI,.·. ,fn, g standfor thefree variables, of any semantic categories, appear-
ing in a and {3. We also assume that the variables iI,··· ,f m, g (where 
m :s: n) are all the free variables of the expression (3, and that the variable g 
does not appear in a as a free variable. 
If the proposition 
is a theorem of 82, then the proposition 
[iI, ... , f n]{ a :) [g]{{3}} 
is also a theorem of that system. 
Proof The following propositions are theorems of 82: 
T78. (1·0:= 1) := 0; 
T79. (1 :) 0) := 0; 
(T2I; T35; T23) 
(T20; T6I; T78) 

ST. LESNIEWSKI'S PROTOTHETICS 
145 
TSO. (1 :J 1) == 1; 
(T15; T6S) 
TSI. [P]{(I :J p) == p}; 
(T49; T79; TSO) 
TS2. [b, ... , fm]{O :J [g]{fJ}}; 
(T65) 
TS3. [b, ... , fm, g]{O :J fJ}; 
(T65) 
TS4. [b, ... , fm]{(O :J [g]{fJ}) == [g]{O :J fJ}}; 
(TI7; TS2; TS3) 
TS5. [b, ... ,fm]{(I:J [g]{fJ}) == [g]{fJ}}; 
(TSI) 
TS6. [b, ... , fm]{[g]{l :J ,B} == [g]{fJ}}; 
(TSI) 
TS7. [b, ... , fm]{(1 :J [g]{,B}) == [g]{1 :J fJ}}; 
(AI; TS5; TS6) 
TSS. [b, ... , f m]{ (p :J [g]{fJ}) == [g]{p :J fJ}}; 
(T49; TS4; TS7) 
TS9. [b, ... , fm]{[g]{p :J fJ} == (p :J [g]{fJ})}; 
(T15; TSS) 
T90. [b, ... ,fn]{[g]{a:J,B} == (a:J [g]{,B})}; 
(TS9) 
T91. [b, ... , fn, g]{ a :J ,B} == [b, ... ,fn]{ a :J [g]{,B}}. 
(T90) 
Since T91 is a theorem of 82, Lemma 6 is true. 
In view of Lemma 6 the rule of adding the general quantifier to the con-
sequent of an implication whose antecedent does not contain a free variable 
equiforrn to the variable bound by that quantifier may be derived from the 
rules and axioms of 8 2.47 
LEMMA 7. AI, Section 5, is a theorem of 82. 
Proof It can easily be noticed that to prove this lemma it suffices to show 
that all the zero-one tests of AI, Section 5, are theorems of 82. 
T92. (0 :J 0) :J «0 :J 0) :J (O:J 0)). 
T93. (1 :J 0) :J «0 :J 0) :J (1 :J 0)). 
T94. 1 == «1 :J 0) :J (0 :J 0)). 
T95. (O:J 1) :J «1 :J 0) :J (O:J 0)). 
T96. (O:J 0) :J «0 :J 1) :J (O:J 1)). 
(T70) 
(T70) 
(TI7; T23; T71) 
(A2; T94; T66) 
(TIl) 

146 
JERZY SLUPECKI 
T97. (1 :J 1) :J ((1 :J 0) :J (1 :J 0)). 
T98. 1 == ((0 :J 1) :J (1 :J 1)). 
T99. (1 :J 0) :J ((0 :J 1) :J (1 :J 1)). 
TlOO. (O:J 1) :J ((1 :J 1) :J (0 :J 1)). 
TlO 1. (1 :J 1) :J (( 1 :J 1) :J (1 :J 1)). 
(T71) 
(T17; T23; T71) 
(A2; T98; T66) 
(TIO) 
(T70) 
T92, T93, T9S-97, T99-lOl are all the zero-one tests of AI, Section S. 
Consequently, these tests are theorems of 82• From this and from the fact that 
T49 is also a theorem of that system, it follows that Lemma 7 is true. 
LEMMA 8. Let {3 and, be any propositional expressions, and let ft, ... , In, 
9 be all the free variables of {3 and ,. We further assume that ft,···, 1m, 
9 (where m ~ n) are all the free variables of {3, but we do not make any 
assumptions as to the semantic categories of these variables. 
If the proposition 
is a theorem of 82, then the proposition 
(9) [JI,"" In, g]{[g]{{3} :J ,} 
is also a theorem of that system. 
Proof The following propositions are theorems of 82: 
TlO2. [ft, ... , 1m, g]{[g]{{3} :J {3}; 
(T88; T67) 
Tl03. [ft, ... , In, g]{ ([g]{{3} :J (3) :J (({3 :J ,) :J ([g]{{3} :J ,))}; 
(Lemma 7) 
Tl04. [ft, ... , Im,g]{l == ([g]{{3} :J (3)}; 
(T17; T23; Tl02) 
TlOS. [ft, ... ,In,g]{l :J (({3:J ,) :J ([g]{{3} :J ,))}; 
(A2; TlO4; Tl03) 
TlO6. 1 :J [ft, ... ,In, g]{ ({3 :J ,) :J ([g]{{3} :J ,)}; 
(TlOS; Lemma 6) 
Tl07. [ft, ... , In, g]{ ({3 :J ,) :J ([g]{{3} :J ,)}. 
(Tl06; T23; Lemma 4) 
According to the assumption of Lemma 8 the proposition 

ST. LESNIEWSKI'S PROTOTHETICS 
147 
Tl08. [ft, ... , fn,g]{,8::J ,} 
is a theorem of 82. 
Further we have: 
T109. [ft, ... , fn, g]{1 == (,8 ::J ,n· 
(TI7; T23; Tl08) 
By applying to T109 and Tl07 the reasoning which was formerly used 
with reference to Tl04 and Tl03 we conclude that the proposition (9) is a 
theorem of 82. Thus Lemma 8 has been proved. 
According to this lemma, the rule of adding the general quantifier to the 
antecedent of an implication may be derived from the rules and axioms of 82. 
LEMMA 9. If the propositions 
(10) [ft, .. ·, fn]{ a ::J ,8} 
and 
(11) [ft,··· ,fn]{,8::J a} 
are added to 81 by applying the rule of definition which is valid in that system, 
then these propositions are theorems of 82. 
Proof We shall prove further theorems of 82. 
TllO. (0 == 0) ::J (0 ::J 0). 
Tlii. (1 == 1)::J (1::J 1). 
T1l2. (0 == 1) ::J (0 ::J 1). 
Tl13. (1 == 0) ::J (1 ::J 0). 
T1l4. [p, q]{ (p == q) ::J (p ::J qn. 
(T71) 
(T71) 
(A2; T26; T65) 
(A2; T25; T65) 
(T49; TlIO; Tl13) 
From the fact that the propositions (10) and (11) are added to 8, on 
the strength of the rule of definition valid in that system it results that the 
proposition 
[ft,··· , fn]{ a == ,8} 
is a theorem of 82, added to the latter system on the strength of the analogous 
rule, valid in 82. 

148 
JERZY SLUPECKI 
From this, from Lemmata 8, 6 and 4, and from the fact that T114 and 
TI5 are theorems of 82 it follows that the propositions (10) and (11) are also 
theorems of 82. 
Thus Lemma 9 has been proved. 
LEMMA 10. If tp is a variable functor of one argument and of at least the 
second semantic order, then the proposition 
(12) [j, g, tp]{(f == g) :=> (tp(f) == tp(g))} 
is a theorem of 8 2. 
Proof It results from the rule of extensionality which is vaild in 82 that the 
following proposition 
[j,g]{(f ==g) == [tp]{tp(f) == tp(g)}} 
is a theorem of that system. 
From this, from Lemma 4 and in view of the fact that TI14 and T8848 are 
theorems of 82 it follows that the proposition (12) is also a theorem of that 
system. 
Thus Lemma 10 has been proved. 
THEOREM 2. Every theorem of 8\ is a theorem of 82. 
Proof It follows from Lemma 5 that the axiom of 8\ (A 1, Section 9) is a 
theorem of 82. It follows from Lemmata 4, 6, 7, 9 and 10 that the rules of 8\ 
may be derived from the rules and axioms of 82. 
Consequently, Theorem 2 is true. 
It may be shown in a similar way that the axioms of 82 are theorems of 8\, 
and that the rules of 82 may be derived from the rules and the axiom of 81. 
Consequently, these systems are equivalent.* 
Let us also note that from the completeness of system 8\ (Theorem 2, 
Section 10), from Theorem 2, and from the obvious fact that 82 is non-
contradictory it results immediately that every theorem of 82 is a theorem of 
8\. 
THEOREM 3. 82 is a complete system. 
Proof The theorem results from Theorem 2 and from Theorem 2, Sec-
tion 10. 
Thus all the three systems discussed in this paper are complete. These 
systems are also equivalent. 
* [Ed. Note: This is shown in Tanaka (1969); cf. the Protothetic Bibliography.] 

ST. LESNIEWSKI'S PROTOTHETICS 
149 
NOTES 
I The term "protothetics" means approximatively: "basic statements". 
2 With the exception of Section 13 (proof of completeness of protothetics). 
3 As stated in the Foreword, this paper is based on the notes taken from Lesniewski's lectures." 
We shall quote them as "notes". 
4 Since no semantic category is assigned to quantifiers, Lesniewski did not [recreate] the 
theory of types, cf. Mostowski (1948), pp. 213ff. 
5 It is in this way that semantic categories are discussed in LeSniewski (1929), pp. 13ff. 
6 Since no semantic category is assigned to quantifiers LeSniewski did not include the general 
quantifier among the primitive terms of protothetics, although it is not defined in any of the 
systems of protothetics. The problem whether the general quantifier is a primitive term or not 
seems to be a terminological one and hence not essential. 
The terminology used further in this paper will follow that of Lesniewski. Thus we shall 
say that the system 8 2 has the symbol of equivalence as its sole primitive term although the 
general quantifier appears in theorems of that system and its definition is not added to it. 
Let us also note that as a matter of principle, Lesniewski did not introduce into his systems 
the existential quantifier. His reasons are, unfortunately, unknown to the author ofthis paper. It 
is true that in numerous theorems of Lesniewski's ontology the existential quantifier appears, 
but it can be replaced there by a system of symbols, consisting of the sign of negation and of 
the general quantifier. Thus, for example, from the expression [3a 1 {f (a)} we would obtain the 
expression", ([a 1 {'" (f (a))} ). The notes include no theorem of protothetics containing either 
the existential quantifier or a system of symbols that could be replaced by that quantifier. *" 
7 An analogous notion is defined in Tarski (1936), p. 69. 
8 Elementary protothetics has been defined here by the description of its language. Systems 
of elementary protothetics may differ in primitive terms, rules of inference and axioms. 
9 All the theorems in Lesniewski (1938b) are written in this symbolism. 
10 All the theorems in Whitehead-Russell (1925) are written in this symbolism. 
11 That is on the strength of such a substitution which permits to replace expressions of the 
type: f (x) by any expressions belonging to the category of propositions containing the free 
variable x and having a complex structure. 
12 The primitive rules of inference of the systems 8 and 8 1 concerning quantifiers will be 
discussed in detail in the next section. 
13 The primitive rules of inference of 82 will be discussed in Section 14. 
14 Cf. note 6. 
15 The system given here is obviously modelled on that given in Lukasiewicz (1929), pp. 154ff. 
16 It can easily be noticed that this rule is equivalent to the rule of omitting the general quantifier 
in the consequent of an implication. Let us also remember that the existential quantifier does 
not appear in the theorems of protothetics (cf. note 6), so that no rules for using that quantifier 
are needed in the systems of protothetics. 
17 These theorems are discussed both in the notes and in Tajtelbaum-Tarski (1923), pp. 73ff. 
Let us also remember that elementary protothetics was defined in Section 2. Theorems to 
be discussed here are theorems of every system of elementary protothetics, regardless of its 
primitive terms and axioms. 
18 The terms defined in DI-5 can also be defined by means of two implications simple and 
converse: e.g., D 1 can be replaced by the following definition: 
(0:) (p]{as (p) :J p}; 
* [Ed. Note: See Lesniewski (1988) in the Protothetic Bibliography, pp. 3-28.] 
H 
[Ed. Note: Concerning the problem of the absence of existential quantifiers in Protothetic, 
see Lejewski (1956) in the Protothetic Bibliography.] 

150 
JERZY SLUPECKI 
((3) [P]{P:J as (p)}. 
The definientia of 02-4 can also be replaced by expressions in which apart from symbols of 
implication no other constants of the propositional calculus appear. These expressions are as 
follows: 
p:J p, 
(p J p) J [P]{p}, 
[P]{p J pl· 
For the discussion in this and the two following sections the form of the definitions of the 
terms: as, vr,fl, I and 0 - is not essential. 
19 The terms: law of development and theorem on the limit of a function are taken from the 
algebra oflogic, cf. Couturat (1914). 
20 The proofs of these equivalences are given both in the notes and in Tajtelbaum-Tarski 
(1923), pp. 77ff. 
21 Let us note that in suppositional proofs we are not permitted to derive new formulae from 
formulae occurring earlier in the proof by applying substitution, since in this way we might 
obtain in our system propositions that would be obviously false. For example, we could obtain 
the proposition [p, q]{p :J q} by substituting the variable q for the variable p which is an 
assumption of the proof. 
22 In the proof we also distribute general quantifiers. 
23 These propositions are discussed in the notes and in Tajtelbaum-Tarski (1923), pp. 88-89. 
24 Like 01 in the preceding section, 01 and 02 are auxiliary definitions. As in many other 
auxiliary definitions of Lesniewski's systems, the definienda of these definitions are built of 
expressions belonging to other semantic categories than the expressions which appear in the 
definiens. In 01 and 02 variable functors of two propositional arguments appear to the right 
of the symbol of equivalence, whereas the functors which are being defined are functors of 
one propositional argument and are dependent on parameters. Moreover, it can easily be seen 
that these definitions are "creative". 
25 The notion of replacement was discussed in Section 7. 
26 This theorem was proved by Tarski in 1922, but the proof has not been published so far; it 
is mentioned in the notes. 
In giving here this theorem the author avails himself of Professor Tarski's kind permission 
to include in this paper any results of his research which refer to protothetics and which have 
so far not been published. 
27 In its structure this theorem clearly resembles the law of verification (d, Section 6) and has 
the same intuitive meaning. 
28 Cf. note 18. 
29 The system E has been defined in the preceding section. 
30 The supposition that these propositions do not result from the theorems of elementary 
protothetics, is formulated in Tajtelbaum-Tarski (1923), p. 80 . 
. I Mention is made in the notes that the term "verifier" was introduced by Kotarbinski. 
32 The definitions of these terms were given in Section 6 (04 and 05). Cf. note 18. 
33 The expression tp(/J, 91) . tp(fl, 92) ' ... ' tp(fm, 9n) is an abbreviation of a conjunction the 
components of which are all expressions of the form: tp(fi, 9j ), where the index i is a natural 
number :S m, and the index j is a natural number :S n. In this conjunction each component 
appears only once. 
34 The theorem that the rule of verification may be replaced by the rule of extensionality has 
been proved by Tarski. The proof has not been published. 
Rules of the same type as the rule of extensionality are called axiomatic rules. 
35 The expression PI . ql V PI . q2 V ... V pm . qn is an abbreviation of an alternative all the 
components of which have the form Pi . qj, where the index i is a natural number :S m, and 
the index j is a natural number :S n. In this alternative each component appears only once. 
36 Cf. note 33. 
37 The notion of equivalence of two propositions, as defined at the beginning of Section 7, is 

ST. LESNIEWSKI'S PROTOTHETICS 
151 
a special case of this notion. 
38 This rule may be derived from the primitive rules and the axiom of 8. 
39 We assume here that no two constant functors belonging to different semantic categories 
are equiform. This assumption, which does not comply with the rules of symbolism that have 
been used in this paper so far, will enable us to simplify the reasoning contained in this section 
without impairing its generality. 
40 Cf. note 39. 
41 These definitions are given in Tajtelbaum-Tarski (1923), pp. 70 and 73. 
42 Proofs of these theorems are given in Tajtelbaum-Tarski (1923), pp. 71-74. 
43 This axiom is quoted in Lesniewski (1938a), p. 31. 
44 As in the case of systems which have implication as their primitive term, we do not introduce 
the rules of 82 for using the existential quantifier (cf. note 6). * 
45 The respective proofs for most of these theorems are given in Rasiowa (1947), pp. 23ff. 
46 We have also made use of the rule of distributing the general quantifier preceding an 
equivalence. 
47 From the fact that T91 is a theorem of 82 it follows that the rule of omitting the general 
quantifier which precedes the consequent of an implication may be derived from the rules and 
the axioms of 82. The rules of adding and omitting the general quantifier in the consequent 
of an implication suffice to build a complete system of protothetics, having implication as its 
primitive term. It is, however, more convenient to base systems of protothetics on the rules of 
adding the general quantifier to the antecedent and to the consequent of an implication. The 
systems discussed in previous sections were built in this way. Let us also remember that the 
rules of adding the general quantifier to the antecedent and to the consequent of an implication 
were discussed in detail in Section 5. T91 was proved by Tarski, but the proof has not been 
£ublished so far. ** 
8 Let us note that T88 is a theorem of 82 regardless of the structure of the expression. 
REFERENCES 
This paper is based on the notes from Lesniewski's lectures: Principles of Protothetics. Sec-
tion 1 takes also into consideration notes from his other lectures, in the first place those on 
ontology. The notes from Lesniewski's lectures are referred to as "notes". t 
Couturat, Louis (1914). L'algebre de la logique, Paris. 
Lesniewski, Stanislaw (1929). 'Grundziige eines neuen Systems der Grundlagen der Mathe-
matik' , Fundamenta Mathematicae XIV, 1-81. 
Lesniewski, Stanislaw (1938a). 'Einleitende Bemerkungen zur Fortsetzung meiner Mitteilung 
u. d. T. "Grundziige eines neuen Systems der Grundlagen der Mathematik"', Warszawa. 
Lesniewski, Stanislaw (1938b). Grundziige eines neuen Systems der Grundlagen der Mathe-
matik, §12, Warszawa. 
Lesniewski (1938a, b) appeared as reprints of the first volume of Collectanea Logica, 
which was not published as a whole. 
Lukasiewicz, Jan (1921). 'Two-Valued Logic' [in Polish], PrzeglG,!i Filozojiczny xxm, 189-
205. 
Lukasiewicz, Jan (1929). Elements of Mathematical Logic [in Polish], authorised notes from 
lectures [at the University of Warsaw], prepared by M. Presburger, Warszawa. 
* [Ed. Note: For a clarification of this definition of the rule for the distribution of a general 
quantifier, see Lejewski (1956) in the Protothetic Bibliography.] 
** [Ed. Note: The proof of an analogue of T91 is given in Lesniewski (1929), pp. 40-41.] 
:j: [Ed. Note: See Lesniewski (1988) in the Protothetic Bibliography.] 

152 
JERZY SLUPECKI 
Mostowski, Andrzej (1948). Mathematical Logic [in Polish], Warszawa-Wroclaw. 
Rasiowa, Helena (1947). 'Axiomatisation d'un systeme partiel de la theorie de la deduction', 
Comptes rendus des Seances de La Societe des Sciences et des Lettres de Varsovie, Classe 
III 40, 22-37. 
Tajtelbaum-Tarski, Alfred (1923). 'On the Primitive Term of Logistic' [in Polish], Przegll1,!i 
Filozoficzny XXVI, 68-89. [Cf. paper III in this volume - Ed.] 
Tarski, Alfred (1936). 'Der Wahrheitsbegriff in den formalisierten Sprachen', Studia Philo-
sophica 1,261-405 (translation from the Polish original published in 1933). 
Whitehead, Alfred N. and Russell, Bertrand (1925). Principia Mathematica, Vol. I, Cam-
bridge. 

BOLESLAW SOBOCINSKI 
ON THE SINGLE AXIOMS OF PROTOTHETIC * 
In this paper I should like to present the results of my unpublished 
investigations 1 concerning axiom-systems of protothetic. Strictly speaking, 
only the system of protothetic called 65 will be considered here. It seems 
to me that this investigation may interest students of propositional calculus 
and the related subjects, since the deductions which will be used, sometimes 
unexpected and rather difficult, not only explain to some degree the structure 
of protothetic, but can also throw light upon several problems concerning 
various systems of propositional calculus. Because, generally, protothetic is 
still a little known theory, at the beginning I have to give several, possibly 
short, explanations concerning it. Without them the subject of this paper and 
the proofs presented below would hardly be understandable for the reader. 
Thus, in the first section a short description of protothetic and the necessary 
information about the rules of procedure of the system 65 will be given. 
There will also be added some history of the researches concerning the single 
axioms of protothetic and related problems. Especially, I shall discuss briefly 
the metatheorems L (of Lesniewski) and the stronger S (mine). In the second 
section I shall present a combined proof: (1) that my axiom An can serve as 
a single (and probably the shortest) axiom of the system 65 of protothetic, 
and (2) that the above mentioned metatheorem S is sufficient to check the 
completeness of any axiom system of protothetic. In the third and the last 
section it will be shown, in the shortest possible way, how the classical propo-
sitional calculus and the quantification theory for protothetical formulas can 
be obtained in the field of the system 65.** 
Instead of the authentic symbolism of Lesniewski2 introduced by him 
mostly in order to formulate the rules of procedure in the most precise way, 
I shall use here a more convenient Peano-Russelian symbolism modified in 
a manner which will satisfy the requirements of protothetic. Anyone who is 
familiar with [elementary] logic will understand these modifications without 
difficulty. Only to avoid possible misunderstandings I would like to note: 
* Bibliographical Note. This paper originally appeared in three parts in the Notre Dame 
Journal of Formal Logic I (1960), 52-73; II (1961), 111-126 and 129-148, by permission of 
the Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic. 
** [Ed. Note: The third section was never published by Sobocinski; its intended contents is 
discussed by Rickey in paper II of this volume.] 
 J. T. J. Srzednicki et al. (eds.), Leśniewski’s  Systems  Protothetic
© Kluwer Academic Publishers 1998

154 
BOLESLAW SOBOCINSKI 
(1) that the parentheses of the form "[" and "]" will be used here exclusively 
as the left and right scopes of the general quantifier, and (2) that if in a formula 
a quantifier is immediately preceded and followed by identical collections of 
dots, then the first collection is always considered as a stronger parenthesis 
than the second one. Concerning the terminology I would like to remark that 
the term "thesis" will mean throughout this paper a meaningful (i.e., well-
formed) formula which is either an axiom or a proved theorem of the system 
under consideration. 
It should be noted that in all systems of Lesniewski: (1) No thesis 
has free variables; (2) Vacuous quantifiers do not exist; (3) No formu-
la has a form "[XIJ[X2] ... [xn].¢>(XJX2 ... xn)", but always in such a case 
"[XJX2 ... xn].¢>(XJX2 ... xn)", where the quantifier "[XJX2 ... xn]" is con-
sidered as one unit; (4) If several free variables occur in a formula, they 
are not ordered in the quantifier. Thus, e.g. the expressions "[xy].¢>(xy)" 
and "[yx].¢>(xy)" are equiform formulas. But, obviously, "[xy].¢>(xy)" and 
"[xy].¢>(yx)" are different ones. A general quantifier preceding a mean-
ingful formula will be called its main quantifier. For the reasons which 
will not be discussed here, in protothetic we do not have the existential 
quantifier.3 Instead, any formula ofthe form "[:3x].¢>(x)" has to be expressed 
by ",,-, ([x]. "-' (¢>(x)))". 
In the authentic symbolism of Lesniewski any functor precedes its argu-
ments which must be enclosed by one or several pairs of symmetric paren-
theses. Thus, when using the said symbolism we do not have "p '= q" but 
",= (pq)". In this paper I shall retain this custom only in the specific proto-
thetical situations. Functors whose arguments are enclosed by several pairs 
of parentheses are called multi-link functors.4 For such functors each pair 
of parentheses must differ from the others. E.g., if "¢>" is such a functor, 
then ¢> with its arguments can have the form "¢>-{p+-fqt-(r)". The forms of 
parentheses which can occur in proto the tic are determined by the prescrip-
tions included in the formulation of the rules of procedure of this system. 
Because this subject is not related strictly to the topic of this paper I shall 
not further explain this point, remarking only that in any place where the 
parentheses (which are not dots) are used, it will be done in conformity with 
the requirements of the said rules. 
1.1 
A system ofbi-valued logic of propositions, called protothetic, was construct-
ed by Lesniewski in 1923. In the papers Lesniewski (1929, 1938a, 1938b) 
he described this theory, outlined a history (up to 1937) of its development 
and modifications, formulated in a very strict way the rules of procedure of 

ON THE SINGLE AXIOMS OF PROTOTHETIC 
155 
its final formalization, called the system 65, and showed how it is possible 
to deduce the propositional calculus from the original axiom-system (found 
by himself) of 65. Anyone who would like to become more familiar with 
this theory should study thoroughly the papers mentioned above. Besides 
Lesniewski's own writings a rather popular characterization of protothetic is 
given by Slupecki (1953). Unfortunately, in preparing his paper the author 
preferred to use the notes of former students of Lesniewski rather than the 
original papers. For this reason, in spite of several valuable remarks and proofs 
which can be found in Slupecki's paper, many important questions discussed 
by Lesniewski either are presented inadequately or are even omitted com-
pletely (e.g., the whole problem of the, so-called, computable protothetical 
systems). The brief descriptions of protothetic are given in Prior (1955) and 
in Church (1956). Grzegorczyk (1955) discusses some problems connected 
with this theory; it seems that several of his remarks are too hastily formu-
lated. The important results from the field of protothetic obtained by Tarski 
are published in Tarski (1923a, 1923b, 1924, 1956) and some contributions 
of Sobocinski in (1939, 1949a, 1954).5 
Here, I have no intention to give a full description of protothetic or to 
discuss problems unrelated to the topic of this paper. The sole purpose of 
the explanations in medias res which will be presented below is to introduce 
[protothetic to] readers unfamiliar with Lesniewski's system and his methods 
of deduction and to make the subject comprehensible to them. 
As far as I know, Russell was the first who in (1906) studied the possibility 
of introducing quantifiers binding the propositional variables into the calculus 
of propositions. But he did not develop this idea and made no use of it in 
Whitehead-Russell (1925). Then the propositional calculus with quantifiers 
was constructed by Lukasiewicz (cf. Lukasiewicz, 1929; Lukasiewicz-Tarski, 
1930; Tarski-Lukasiewicz, 1956), who not only formulated the adequate 
rules of procedure for such a system, but remarked also that it is a stronger 
theory than the classical calculus of propositions. But Lukasiewicz limited 
his investigations to the system based on implication as the sole primitive 
term, and up to now the systems with quantifiers are not elaborated as fully as 
the ordinary propositional calculi. In 1921, LeSniewski, having his two other 
theories (mereology and ontology6) ready, wanted to formalize his system 
of the foundations of mathematics by basing it on the strongest possible 
logic of propositions? To this end, he began to investigate the possibility of 
constructing a system of propositional logic which could be extended by the 
addition of not only quantifiers but also variable proposition-forming functors. 
I.e., in the simplest case he added to the propositional calculus variables which 
assume the values of four constant functors: negation (N), verum (Vr), falsum 
(PI) and assertium (As). As it is well known, in the bi-valued logic we have 
these and only these constant functors of one propositional argument. This 
is shown by the following matrix (where 0 represents a false and 1 a true 
proposition): 

156 
BOLESLAW SOBOCINSKI 
p 
Np Vrp 
Flp 
Asp 
M1 
0 
1 
1 
0 
0 
1 
0 
1 
0 
1 
These considerations and some results obtained by Tarski (1956) enabled 
Lesniewski to construct a system which is actually a subsystem of the proper 
protothetic and may be called the restricted system of it. 8 This theory for 
which Lesniewski formulated suitable rules of procedure can be based, e.g., 
on the following axiomatic assumptions: 
(a) An axiom-system of the complete implicational calculus of propositions, 
and 
(b) An additional axiom ZI: 
ZI [Pf]:.f([u].u}. :J: f([u].u. == .[u].u}. :J .f(P} 
The thesis ZI, called the principle of bivalence for propositions,9 has, 
obviously, the following meaning: Assume that an expression "f(q}" is a 
meaningful propositional function, in which "q" is a propositional variable; 
moreover, that "/" is not an abbreviation of a formula in which "q" occurs but 
a real variable for which any meaningful formula having q as a free variable 
can be substituted. Then ZI says that if "/" is satisfied by "[u]. u" (i.e., by 0) 
and by "[u].u. == .[u].u" (Le., by 1), then it is satisfied by any proposition. 
As it has been shown by Tarski,1O the axiom ZI in this axiom-system can 
be replaced by the thesis: 
Z2 [pq!] : p == q. :J .f(p} :J f(q} 
which, evidently, is nothing else than the law of extensionality for proposi-
tions. 
It is obvious that the restricted protothetic is not the strongest possible 
system of bi-valued logic of propositions, since it can be strengthened by 
the addition of other variable functors, e.g. of two or more propositional 
arguments or the variable proposition-forming functors at least one argument 
of which belongs to a higher type. In other words, the system can be evidently 
enriched in an analogous way to that which is known in the field of the 
functional calculi. Therefore, protothetic is a system of logic of propositions 
in which, besides the propositional variables, we have variable proposition-
forming functors of any type that is meaningful according to the theory of 
semantical categories for protothetic. II Moreover, the quantification theory 
and the laws of extensionality (in the systems <52-(55) for variables of any 
category are assumed in this theory. 
I shall entirely omit here the history of the transformation of the restricted 
protothetic into the full system or the gradual modification of the rules of 

ON THE SINGLE AXIOMS OF PROTOTHETIC 
157 
procedure which Lesniewski undertook for this end. 12 Also no explanations 
will be given concerning the reasons which induced him to adopt this or that 
position in the final formalization of protothetic. 
In 1922, Tarski showed 13 that in the propositional logic having quantifiers 
and variable functors it is possible to define conjunction by means of equiva-
lence, e.g. in the following way: 
Z3 [pq]:.p.q. ==: [f] : f(P) == f(q)· == p 
This fact guarantees that any constant functor belonging to propositional cal-
culus can be defined in terms of equivalence alone, since, clearly, negation 
can be obtained as follows: 
Z4 [P):."'p. ==: p == .[q].q 
For several reasons Lesniewski preferred to profit from this result and 
adopted equivalence as the sole primitive term of protothetic, although for 
this purpose we can take some other functors, such as implication, Scheffer's 
functions, etc. The successive formalizations of protothetic based mostly on 
this primitive term were named the systems 61 to 65, and the last of them 
was accepted as final. Besides this, Lesniewski constructed several systems 
of the so-called computable protothetic. These systems, whose foundations 
differ sharply from those used in the construction of ordinary protothetic, 
will not be discussed here. But it has to be noted that the construction of the 
computable systems of protothetic allowed Lesniewski to prove that 6s is a 
consistent and complete system.14 The completeness of protothetic requires 
that for any meaningful formula in which all variables are bound either this 
formula or its negation is a thesis of 65. 
1.2 
In order to understand a formalization of a theory belonging to Lesniewski's 
system we have to note that this system differs from others in that it gives no 
specification regarding the semantical categories (logical types) to which the 
expressions of the system may belong. Instead of such specification the rules 
of procedure establish how a new semantical category can be introduced into 
the system. Every expression occurring in a meaningful formula of a theory, 
with the exception of brackets and quantifiers, belongs to a defined seman-
tical category. The semantical categories to which the expressions occurring 
in an axiom-system belong are called the primitive categories of the system. 
According to the requirements of Lesniewski in a well-constructed axiom-
system of any theory the number of different primitive semantical categories 
should be as small as possible. IS This demand was fulfilled in the axiom-
system of 61 constructed by Lesniewski in 1922 which contains the following 

158 
BOLESLAW SOBOCINSKI 
three theses: 
Al [pqr]:.p:= r. := .q := p ::= .r := q 
A2 [pqr]:.p := .q := r ::=: p:= q. := r 
A3 [gp]:-: [f]:: g(pp).:= :.[r]: f(rr).:= .g(pp) ::= 
: [r] : f(rr). := .g(p := .[q].q,p) :::= .[q].g(qp)16 
It can be easily verified that in A I-A3 we have the sole primitive term, viz. 
equivalence. And, that in these theses there occur only expressions belonging 
to two semantical categories, viz. to the category of propositions (e.g., "p", 
"q", etc.) and to the category of proposition-forming functors of two propo-
sitional arguments, namely the variables "g" and "f" and the constant ":=". 
Hence, these two categories are primitive in the system 61. 17 
As proved by LeSniewski,18 the axioms Al and A2 together with the 
customary rules of substitution and detachment (adjusted only to the system 
without free variables) constitute a complete axiom-system of the bi-valued 
equivalential calculus of propositions. He called this theory the system 6. 
The axiom A3 comprises: 
( a) The principle of bivalence expressed in terms of equivalence and variable 
functors of two arguments. 
(b) Some forms of the law of extensionality for propositions which together 
with A I and A2 enable one to obtain a complete propositional calculus. 19 
It is rather easy to show that on the basis of the rules of 61, this axiom-
system is inferentially equivalent to the restricted protothetic, given in Sec-
tion 1.1. In order to obtain a complete system of protothetic Lesniewski did 
not have to change this axiom-system, but he had only to reformulate and 
to reinforce the rules of procedure of 61. It will become clear, if we remark 
that the restricted protothetic may be obtained by the addition of the principle 
of bivalence for propositions (i.e., the thesis ZI) to the complete proposi-
tional calculus. The addition to 61 of the analogous theses, guaranteeing 
bivalence for expressions belonging to other seman tical categories, carries 
similar results, giving a stronger and stronger system of protothetic. Theo-
retically, in the complete system any possible semantical category should be 
represented; this can be assured only by a suitable rule of procedure which 
under some conditions allows one to add theses expressing the principle of 
bivalence for semantical categories other than the category of propositions. 
The system 61 does not have such a rule, but the various formulations of it 
appear in the following systems. In the complete system of protothetic 65 the 
rules of procedure were given their final formulation. 2o Below, I shall describe 
briefly only such points concerning the rules of 65 as are indispensible for 
the purposes of this paper. No explanation will be given why this or that for-

ON THE SINGLE AXIOMS OF PROTOTHETIC 
159 
mulation was adopted by Lesniewski. But, I should like to remark here that 
Lesniewski, who tried to have as strong as possible a system of logic (except 
for existential assumptions), formulated his rules of procedure in an excep-
tionally constructive manner. This formulation permits one to check their 
operation by a simple inductive reasoning at any stage of the development of 
a theory. 
Strictly speaking, 65 has only one rule of procedure divided into five points. 
This rule is formulated in such a way that it becomes automatically adjusted 
to the last thesis belonging to the system. This means that any expression 
occurring in the axiom-system or in the already proved theses is meaningful 
with respect to this rule, when we are using it in order to prove a new thesis. 
The rule says that a formula A, which is meaningful with respect to the last 
thesis of the system, can be added to it as a new proved thesis when and only 
when A results from one and only one of the following five conditions: 
(a) A is a well-formed definition. 
(f3) There is in the system such a thesis B that A can be obtained from B by 
a distribution of its main quantifier. 
<,y) There are in the system theses B and C such that A can be obtained by 
the detachment of C from B. 
(8) There is in the system such a thesis B that A can be obtained from B by 
substitution. 
(E) A is a thesis of extensionality with respect to the expressions belonging 
to a semantical category which is not a category of propositions, but is 
already meaningful in the system.21 
In protothetic, as in all Lesniewski's systems, a definition is not considered 
as a pure abbreviation, but as a real thesis of the theory. Therefore, there are no 
prescriptions here concerning the use of definitions, but only the conditions 
of their construction. A well-formed definition added to the system becomes 
automatically a proved thesis. Speaking superficially, a definition has always 
the following form: 
where the equivalence is the main functor, if> a definiens and 1jJ a definiendum. 
The variables ai, a2, ... ,an from the main quantifier of the definition must 
belong to semantical categories which are already meaningful in the system, 
and they must occur in both if> and 1jJ. But there can be cases when a defin-
ition does not possess the main quantifier, e.g. "[u].u. == 0".22 A definiens 
must be a meaningful formula in which the variables bound by quantifiers 
belonging to it can also occur. The constants occurring in if> have to be either 
the primitive functor or previously defined terms. Any variable occurring in 
a definiendum has to belong to the main quantifier of a definition and can 
occur only once in 1jJ. No quantifier occurs in a definiendum which is either 
a new constant without arguments or a new constant followed by its variable 
arguments. The first case occurs when a definition does not have its main 

160 
BOLESLAW SOBOCINSKI 
quantifier. In the second case the variables are enclosed by one or several 
pairs of suitable parentheses.23 The first form does not require further expla-
nation. The second alternative gives the multi-link functors. In order to make 
these notions more familiar, I shall present here a concrete example. Let us 
assume that in our system an ordinary conjunction is already defined and that 
"/\" is its symbo1.24 Then, obviously, we can define a conjunction of more 
propositional arguments, e.g.: 
Z5 [pqrs] : /\(p /\ (q /\ (rs))). == . /\\ (pqrs) 
where a new constant "/\\" belongs to a new semantical category, viz. 
proposition-forming functors of four propositional arguments. But, besides 
the definition Z5, the rule allows one to construct also the following defini-
tions: 
Z6 [pqrs] : /\(p /\ (q /\ (rs))). == . /\2 -fpqr1-{s) 
Z7 [pqrs] : /\(p /\ (q /\ (rs))). == . /\3 -fpq1-{rs) 
Z8 [pqrs] : /\(p /\ (q /\ (rs))). == . /\4 {p:}-fqs1-{r) 
Z9 [pqrs] : /\(p /\ (q /\ (rs))). == . /\5 $p${s:}-fr1-(q) 
and other possible combinations. 
It should be remarked that the constants /\2-/\5 defined above belong 
to different semantical categories. For instance, the category of "/\2" is a 
functor of three propositional arguments which forms a proposition-forming 
functor of one propositional argument. But the whole expression" /\2 -f pqr 1-" 
belongs to the category of proposition-forming functors of one propositional 
argument. The multi-link functors were introduced by Lesniewski25 in order to 
have the fullest possible theory of logical types, i.e., his theory of semantical 
categories. Moreover, this kind of functors play an important role in the 
formulation of substitution in his system, as we shall see below. Ending these 
very superficial remarks about the definitions in protothetic, I should note 
that if a newly defined constant belongs to a semantical category which was 
not yet represented in the system, then by this very fact this new category 
becomes meaningful in the theory, and not only the defined constant, but also 
variables belonging to this category can be used in substitutions. 
The point concerning distribution of quantifiers says that having in the 
system a thesis B of the form: 
i.e., a thesis whose main functor is equivalence and the variables bound by 
its main quantifier occur either in ¢ or in 'IjJ or in both, we can distribute all or 

ON THE SINGLE AXIOMS OF PROTOTHETIC 
161 
some of these variables between the arguments of the [equivalence]. Hence, 
if there are n distinct variables in the main quantifier of B (which, evidently, 
can belong to various semantical categories), then we have 2n -
1 possible 
combinations obtainable from B: 
Al [a2 .. . an] : [ad·</>· = .[ad·1/; 
A2 [aIa3 .. . an] : [a2].</>. = 
.[a2].1/; 
A2n-l [ala2 ... an].</>. = .[ala2 ... an].1/; 
and every such formula can be added to the system as a new thesis. Applying 
this operation, we always have to remember that in protothetic there are no 
vacuous quantifiers, each variable can occur in the same quantifier only once, 
and any sequence of quantifiers is combined into one. The rule comprises no 
other points dealing with quantifiers. In Section 3 a proof will be sketched 
that the remaining operations with quantifiers are provable in protothetic as 
theses. 
The operation of detachment is formulated as follows: If in the system 
there are theses Band C having the forms: 
B 
</>=1/; 
C 
if; 
i.e., B is a thesis which has no main quantifier and equivalence is its main 
functor, and C is a thesis equiform with the first argument of [the equivalence] 
B, then we can add to the system a new proved thesis A: 
A 1/; 
which is to be equiform with the second argument of [the equivalence] B. 
It should, therefore, be noted, that in protothetic we do not have detachment 
under quantifiers. 
Roughly speaking, in protothetic the restrictions concerning substitution 
are analogous to those which exist in the functional calculi. However, there 
is one important difference, viz. in Lesniewski's system only meaningful 
expressions can be substituted for a variable occurring in the main quantifier 
of a thesis. This means that: (1) If there is a need to substitute for such a 
variable a formula which contains expressions belonging to non-primitive 
seman tical categories, then this can be done only if these semantical cate-
gories have been previously introduced into the system by way of suitable 

162 
BOLESLAW SOBOCINSKI 
definitions. I.e., only such constants can be used for substitution which are 
either primitive or previously defined, and also, that in the case of a substi-
tution in which a variable belonging to a non-primitive category is involved, 
an arbitrary constant of the same category must be previously defined in the 
system. (2) Since the so-called incomplete formulas do not belong to any 
semantical category and, therefore, have no meaning in the system, a substi-
tution of such formulas for the variable functors is not permitted. Instead of 
performing such forbidden operations in protothetic in order to get the same 
results as in the other systems, suitable multi-link functors must always be 
used. The following example will explain the matter briefly. Suppose that 
having the thesis: 
ZlO [fJ : f(f([uJ.u)). = .[qJ.f(q)26 
in which, evidently, "1" is a variable proposition-forming functor of one argu-
ment, we would like to obtain by substitution the thesis: 
Zll [PJ :: p =: p = .[uJ.u:. = .[qJ.p = q 
We cannot make this by substituting the incomplete expression "p =" for the 
variable "1", because "p =" has no semantical sense as a whole, but first of 
all we have to add to the system a definition such as: 
Z12 [pqJ : p = q. = . =1 -tpt(q) 
The expression "=1 -tpt" occurring in the definiendum of Z12 belongs to 
the same category as "1" and, therefore, we can substitute it for this variable 
in ZlO. Thus in this way we obtain the thesis: 
Z13 [PJ : =1 -tpt(=1 -tpt([u].u)). = .[q]. =1 -tpt(q) 
Now, if there are suitable theses at our disposal of the propositional calculus, 
and an operation of distribution of quantifiers, then from these assumptions 
and from Z13 and Z12 we can easily obtain ZI1, dismissing from Z13 the 
defined auxiliary term. 
The following final remark concerning substitution must be added. The 
rule does not allow one to change directly the variables which occur in an 
interior quantifier of a thesis. But, as will be shown in Section 3, this can 
always be achieved by appropriate deductions, provided that a new variable 
will be equiform with no variable occurring in the quantifiers of the thesis 
under consideration. 
As it was mentioned above, in order to obtain a complete system of proto-
thetic from 61, the latter system must be strengthened so that for any semanti-
cal category, either primitive or introduced by definition of a suitable constant, 

ON THE SINGLE AXIOMS OF PROTOTHETIC 
163 
an appropriate principle of bivalence is provable. Since in protothetic there 
can theoretically be an unlimited number of various semantical categories, 
this cannot be accomplished by a construction of an axiom-system having a 
finite number of theses. 27 On the other hand, due to the fact that equivalence 
is the sole primitive term of 61 the principle of bivalence for propositions 
formulated in this or that way must be included in any axiom-system of it. 
Otherwise, we are unable to obtain a full system of 61, or even of the complete 
propositional calculus, unless we would like to change the rules of procedure 
of protothetic in an unnatural manner.28 Hence, in order to obtain from 61 
a complete system of protothetic, Lesniewski at first strengthened 6 1 by the 
addition of a new rule allowing one to add to the theory a thesis expressing 
bivalence for any given semantical category, which is already meaningful in 
the system, other than the category of propositions. 
However, a strict formulation of such a rule appeared to be extremely com-
plicated and difficult. For this reason, using a remark of Tarski, Lesniewski 
later changed it entirely.29 Tarski had shown that in the field of the complete 
propositional calculus the principle of bivalence for any semantical category 
is inferentially equivalent to the law of extensionality for expressions of the 
same category. Therefore, having the complete propositional calculus includ-
ed in 61 , Lesniewski was able to replace the rule concerning the principle of 
bivalence by the rule of extensionality for variable functors. This modification 
did not change the range of protothetic, but merely allowed one to formulate 
the rule [of procedure] in a rather simple way. 30 
In the rule [of procedure] of 65 the point concerning the theses of exten-
sionality for variable functors is formulated as follows. Having equivalence as 
the primitive term, the law of extensionality for propositions can be expressed 
by the thesis: 
Z14 [pq]:.p =:: q. =::: [J] : ](p). =:: .](q)31 
As it was mentioned, this thesis cannot be added to the system by the rule, 
but has to be assumed or provable in 65 without direct reference to the point 
E. The structure of theses which this point permits to add is similar [to that of 
Z14]. Let us suppose that the variables] and 9 are variable functors (ordi-
nary or multi-link32) belonging to the same semantical category 0: and that 
the formula "] ~ g" expresses the equivalence between these two variables. 
Then, a suitable law of extensionality can be expressed by the formula: 
T1 []g]:.] ~ g. =::: [¢].¢(f). =:: .¢(g) 
where "¢" belongs to the category of proposition-forming functors of one 
argument which belongs to the same category as "]" or "g". Since, obviously, 

164 
BOLESLAW SOBOCINSKI 
the formula "f ~ gOO can be defined by means of quantifiers and equivalence 
in the following way: 
[ala2 ... an] : f(ala2 ... an}. == .g(ala2 ... an}33 
for the ordinary variable functors and: 
[ala2 ... an] : f-fal t(a2'" an}. == .g-fal t(a2'" an} 
etc. for the multi-link functors, the theses of extensionality which the rule 
allows one to add to the system have the forms always analogous to Tl, viz.: 
T2 [fg]:.[ala2 ... an] : f(ala2 ... an}. == .g(ala2 ... an} :==: 
[¢] : ¢(J). == .¢(g) 
or 
T3 [fg]:.[ala2 ... an]: f-falt(a2 ... an}' == .g-falt(a2 ... an} :==: 
[¢] : ¢(J). == .¢(g) 
a.s.o. for any possible similar combinations. 
A thesis of extensionality having one of these forms can be added to the 
system as its new thesis only under the condition that any variable occurring 
in its main and interior quantifiers belongs to a seman tical category which 
is already meaningful in the system. Hence, if there is a need to add such a 
thesis and not all the semantical categories involved are yet introduced into 
the system, then arbitrary constants belonging to these categories must be 
previously defined. 
The rule only says what theses of extensionality may be added to the sys-
tem, but gives no prescriptions concerning their applications. The situation 
is entirely analogous to that which we discussed in the case of definitions. 
A well-formed formula of extensionality added to the system automatically 
becomes a proved thesis which later can be transformed in any way permitted 
by the rule of procedure of 65. Thus, normally, in protothetic each application 
of extensional reasoning requires the use of a special definition. E.g., suppose 
that we have at our disposal propositional calculus, Z14, and theses of the 
form: 34 
(a) a == {3 
(b) ¢(a) 
and suppose that "¢(a}" is such that from (a) and (b) the formula "¢({3)" 
cannot be proved without Z14. Then, in order to obtain it, we have to make 
the following steps:35 

ON THE SINGLE AXIOMS OF PROTOTHETIC 
165 
(c) [f] : f(a). == .f((3) 
[From Z14 and a] 
(d) [P] : ¢(p). == Ql(p) 
[A definition] 
(e) Ql(a) 
[d; b] 
(f) Ql((3) 
[c;e] 
(g) [P] : Ql(p). == .¢(p) 
¢((3) 
[From d and propositional calculus] 
[g; f] 
The rule of 65, outlined above, may appear very heavy and inconvenient 
in its practical applications. However, its structure is determined by the con-
ditions which, according to Lesniewski's requirement, any well-formalized 
deductive theory belonging to his system must fulfill. And, if these conditions 
are taken into consideration, a formulation of the rule appears entirely nat-
ural. Moreover, as we shall see in Section 2, in practice a direct application of 
the prescriptions required by the rule is necessary only for the first few steps, 
when we are beginning to make the deductions from this or that axiom-system 
of 65. Later, it is easy to prove several metarules of procedure which allow 
one to obtain the really significant theorems in a short and secure way.3S 
1.3 
Having the complete system of protothetic properly constructed and the prin-
ciples of its rule of procedure established, Lesniewski began to make inves-
tigations concerning possible simplifications of the axiom-system of 65. 
These researches appeared to be difficult, often requiring long and compli-
cated deductions. Outlining here the history ofthese endeavors,36 I shall give 
no hints how it is possible to prove that this or that thesis (or a set of sev-
eral theses) is a single axiom (or an axiom-system) of protothetic, since a 
simple inspection of the proofs presented in the next section allows one to 
reconstruct the deductions without substantial difficulties. Also it is entire-
ly unnecessary to give here the proofs that any thesis, presented below, is a 
true formula of protothetic, because anyone can check this easily using the bi-
valued logical matrix. 37 The following methatheorem L, stated by Lesniewski, 
plays an important role in the investigations concerning the axiom-system of 
protothetic.38 
META THEOREM L: An axiom-system of protothetic having the rules of 
procedure inferentially equivalent to the rule of 65 constitutes a complete 
system, if in its field the following three conditions are satisfied: 

166 
BOLESLAW SOBOCINSKI 
(a) The system 6 (Le., the complete equivalential calculus of propositions) 
is provable. 
(b) The following four laws of the logical product for conjunction:39 
Kl 1 = 
1.1 
K2 0 = 0.0 
K30=0.1 
K4 0 = 
1.0 
(c) The principle of bivalence for propositions is provable as a metarule 
saying that if "</J{p)" is a meaningful formula in the system and the formulas 
"</J(O)" and "</J(1)" are already proved, then the formula "[P].</J(p)" is also a 
thesis of this system.40 
In fact, it is easy to be convinced that this metatheorem is correct. Having 
the rule of 65, the above mentioned conditions, and using a simple definition: 
Z15 [pq] : p = 
p.q. = 
.p :J q 
we can obtain at once the complete propositional calculus. Hence, we have 
obviously the logical laws of simplification and identity from which, by sub-
stitution and detachment, we get: 
Z16 [J]:·f(O). :J: f(I). :J .f(O) 
Z17 [J]:·f(O). :J: f(I). :J .f(1) 
In virtue of the condition c, the thesis ZI can be proved from Z16 and 
Z17 without any difficulty. Thus, the restricted system of protothetic is here 
provable and, since we have the rule of 65, so is the complete system. 
Therefore, in order to show that an investigated axiom-system of protothetic 
is complete, it suffices only to prove that this system satisfies the conditions 
of Lesniewski's metatheorem. This allows one to omit long and uninteresting 
deductions in many proofs. 
The first axiom-system of 65 contains, as we know, the following theses: 
Al [pqr]:.p = q. = .q = p := .r = q 
A2 [pqr]:.p = .q = r :=: p = q. = r 
A3 [gp] :-: [J] :: g{pp). = :. [r] : f(rr}. = .g{pp) :=: [r] 
: f(rr). = .g(p = .[q].q,p) ::= .[q].g(qp} 
Written in the authentic symbolism of Lesniewski, these axioms are 
expressed using 136 signs counting the variables, symbols of quantifiers 
and parentheses. In 1923 Lesniewski remarked that in this axiom-system Al 

ON THE SINGLE AXIOMS OF PROTOTHETIC 
can be substituted by the thesis:41 
Al* [pqr]:.p::::: q.:::::: r::::: q.:::::.p::::: r 
167 
which did not change the total length of the axioms, but showed the possibil-
ity of abbreviating the first single axiom of protothetic. This thesis, found in 
1923 and named Aa, contains 290 signs (in the authentic symbolism): 
Aa [Jp] :: f([Pq] : p ::::: q. ::::: .q ::::: p,p). ::::: :.f([hs] :.: h([pqr]:. 
p::::: r. ::::: .q ::::: p :::::: .r ::::: q, s). ::::::: h([kt] :.: k([pqr]:. 
p::::: .q::::: r ::::::: p::::: q. ::::: r, t). ::::::: k([gp] :.: [f] :: g(pp). ::::: 
:.[r] : f(rr).::::: .g{pp) ::::::: [r] : f(rr).::::: .g{p::::: .[q].q,p) 
::::::: .[q].g(qp), t). ::::: :.[pqr]:.p::::: .q::::: r ::::::: p::::: q. ::::: r, s) 
· ::::: :. [pqr]:.p ::::: r. ::::: .q ::::: p :::::: .r ::::: q,p). :::::: [pq] : p ::::: q. ::::: .q ::::: p 
In the same year, using Al * instead of AI, Lesniewski replaced Aa by a 
shorter single axiom (232 signs): 
Ab [hs] :.: h([pqr]:.p::::: q. :::::: r ::::: q. ::::: .p::::: r, s). ::::::: h([kt] :.: 
k([pqr]:.p::::: .q ::::: r ::::::: p ::::: q. ::::: r, t). ::::::: k([gp) :.: [J] :: 
g(pp). ::::: :.[r] : f(rr).::::: .g{pp) ::::::: [r] : f(rr).::::: .g{p::::: . 
[q].q,p) ::::::: . [q].g(qp) , t). ::::: :.[pqr]:.p ::::: .q::::: r ::::::: 
p::::: q.::::: r,s).::::: :.[pqr]:.p::::: q.:::::: r::::: q.:::::.p::::: r 
which in 1923 was replaced by the shorter (156 signs): 
Ac [fpqr] :: f{P::::: p, q). ::::: :.f([g] :.: g{pp).::::: :: g(r ::::: .p::::: r,p) 
· :::::: -: [h] :-: [k] :: [s] : k(ss). ::::: .h(pp) :::::: :.h{pp). :::::: [s] : k(ss) 
· ::::: .h{p::::: .[t].t,p) :::::: .[t].h(tp), q). ::::: :.p::::: q. :::::: r ::::: q. ::::: .p == r 
In 1926 Wajsberg found the first two single axioms for the equivalential 
calculus of propositions42 which enabled Lesniewski to find a shorter axiom 
(124 signs): 
Ad [fhpqrx] : : f([k] :: [s] : k(ss). ::::: .h{pp) :::::: :.h(pp). 
:::::: [s] : k(ss). ::::: .h(p:::::: [t].t,p), q). :::::: -: f([t).h(tp), q) 
:: p::::: .q ::::: r :::::: :.r ::::: x. ::::: x:::::: .p::::: q 

168 
BOLESLAW SOBOCINSKI 
In the same year, Wajsberg proved that, on the basis of the rule of 65, from 
the protothetical thesis: 
W** [pqrst]:.p == q. ==: [g] : g(r == s. == t, q). == .g(s == t. == r,p) 
the system 6 can be deduced, which enabled him to construct the axiom (120 
signs): 
Ae [fhpqrst] :.: f([g]:.h(Pp). ==: g(q h(Pp)) == .g(q h(p == . 
[t].t,p)), r) ==:: f([t].h(tp), r) == :.p == q. ==: [g] : g(r == s. 
== t, q). == .g(s == t. == r,p) 
which in turn was replaced by a shorter axiom of Lesniewski (116 signs): 
AI [fhpqrs] : : f([tJ.h(tp), q). ==:.: f([kJ :: h(Pp). == :. 
[s].k(ss). == :.[sJ : k(ss). == .h(p == .[tJ.t,p),q). ==:: 
p == q. == r :== s:. == :.s ==: p == .q == r 
Finally, in 1926, Wajsberg found the axiom (106 signs): 
Ag [jpJ : : : [sJ.f(sp). == : . : [gJ : . : f(Pp). == : : [t].g(tt). ==:.: [qrt] :.: 
g(t == t. == t, t). ==:: f(P == .[sJ.s,p) == :.p == .q == r :==: r == .q == p 
and Lesniewski constructed a single axiom, composed of only 82 signs: 
Ah [fpqrst] :.: p == q. ==:: [g] :: f(Pf(p[uJ.u)). == :. [uJ·f(qu). ==: 
g(r == s. == t, q). == .g(s == t. == r,p) 
This axiom, which Lesniewski used as a base for his formalization of the 
rule of procedure of 65,43 could not be substituted by a shorter axiom during 
the next eleven years in spite of the endeavors made by Lesniewski and sev-
eral of his students.44 Even a result of Lukasiewicz, who in 1933 proved that 
each of the following theses: 
L1 [pqr]:.p == q. ==: r == q. == .p == r 
L2 [pqrJ:.p == q. ==: p == r. == .r == q 
L3 [pqrJ:.p == q. ==: r == p. == .q == r45 

ON THE SINGLE AXIOMS OF PROTOTHETIC 
169 
is a single shortest axiom of the equivalential calculus of propositions, did 
not help to solve this problem. It only enabled Lesniewski to replace An by 
the axiom: 
Ai [fpqrst] :-: p == q. ==:: [g] :: f(Pf(P[u].u)). == :.[u]·f(qu) 
. ==: g(r == t. ==.s == r,q). == .g(s == t,p) 
which has the same length as Ah (82 signs), but from which the necessary 
deductions can be obtained in a shorter way. 
Only in 1937 was I able to advance this stubborn problem. Namely, ana-
lyzing the previous results and the contents of metatheorem L, I remarked 
that the following set of assumptions S: 
(a) System 6 (e.g., Lukasiewicz's axiom Ll) 
(b) The protothetical theses: 
S1 [Jp] :: f(P)· == :·f(P == .[u].u). ==: [q] : f(P)· == ·f(q) 
S2 [pq]:.p == q. ==: [f] : f(P)· == ·f(q) 
S3 [pq] :: p == q. == :·[f]:·f(P)· == ·f(q) :== .p == q 
constitutes a complete axiom-system of 65.46 In fact, these assumptions sat-
isfy metatheorem L. Namely: the point a evidently gives the condition a. 
Thesis S1, which is nothing else but the principle of bivalence for proposi-
tions expressed in terms of equivalence,47 fulfills, obviously, the condition c. 
And in virtue of the system 6 and the theses S2 and S3, the condition b can 
be obtained in a very easy way, if the thesis: 
Z18 [pq] :: [J]:·f(P)· == ·f(q) :== q:. == .p.q 
is adopted as a definition of conjunction.48 
In the same year 1937, I proved that the set of assumptions S is not mutually 
independent, hence either the thesis S2 or the thesis S3 is a consequence of 
the remaining axioms. In other words, I showed that in the condition b of 
Lesniewski's metatheorem either the thesis K4 or the thesis K3 is superfluous, 
because, in virtue of the remaining conditions, K4 is a consequence of {K1; 
K2; K3} and K3 of {K1; K2; K4}, provided that an adopted definition of 
conjunction is analogous to Z18. 
Applying this result to a thesis which I knew previously, viz.: 
Aj [pq] : : p == q. ==: -: [fst] :.: f(Pf(P[u].u)). ==:: [r]·f(qr). == :. 
s == t. == q :==: t == .s == p 

170 
BOLESLAW SOBOCINSKI 
I obtained at once a new single axiom of protothetic composed of only 72 
signs49 and immediately after that Lesniewski improved this result, showing 
that the thesis 
Ak [pq] : : p -= q. -=: -: [J] : -: f(pf(P[u].u)). -=:: [rs] :: f(qr). -= :. 
s -= r. -= q :-=: r -= .S -= P 
consisting of 71 signs can also serve this purpose. 
In 1938, using the point E of the rule, i.e., the point concerning the laws of 
higher extensionalities,50 I proved that in the axiom-system S both theses S I 
and S2 are superfluous. By this I showed that the condition b of Lesniewski's 
metatheorem can be dropped entirely, as the theses KI, K2, K3, and K4 are 
provable from the remaining conditions ofL. This result not only elucidated a 
role which the rule of extensionality plays in the inner structure of protothetic, 
but enabled me to remark that the thesis (66 signs long): 
Al [fpq] :-: f(pf(p[u].u)). -=:: [r] :: f(p -= q. -= q, r). -= :. 
p -= q. -=: r -= q. -= .p -= r 
can be adopted as a single axiom of protothetic. 51 
In the same year, starting from my aforesaid results and using my inciden-
tal remark that probably the condition a could be weakened too, Lesniewski 
established the thesis (62 signs): 
Am [pq]::p -= q. -=:-: [f]:-: f(qf(q[u].u)). -=:: [r]:: f(pr). -=:. 
r -=: q -=.r-=p 
as a single axiom. 52 
Finally, in 1945 I proved that the thesis: 
An [pq] :: p -= q. -= :.[fl:·f(pf(p[u].u)). -=: [r] : f(qr). -= .q -= p 
is a single axiom of the system 65 of protothetic. This thesis, whose length 
is 54 when expressed in the authentic symbolism of protothetic, seems to be 
also the shortest single axiom of the system 65, although I have not been able 
to prove this yet. 
In addition, I remarked that each of the following theses (54 signs): 
Ao [pq] :: p -= q. -= :. [f):·f(qf(q[u].u)). -=: [r] : f(pr). -= .q -= p 
Ap [pq] :: p -= q. -= :.[J):.f(pf(q[u].u)). -=: [r] : f(qr). -= .q -= p 

ON THE SINGLE AXIOMS OF PROTOTHETIC 
171 
Aq [pq] :: p::= q. ::= :.[f]:·f(qf(p[u].U)). ::=: [r] : f(pr)· ::= .q::= p 
can also serve as a single axiom of protothetic.53 
These axioms differ in some respects from the axioms Aj-Am. In order 
to establish that each of these theses can be taken as a single axiom of 65, 
it suffices to be acquainted with my afore named results and to apply this or 
that modification of the methods of deduction previously used for the same 
purpose in regard to the theses Aa-Ai. The proof of the sufficiency of An 
requires further deductions, rather long and elaborate, which will be presented 
in Section 2. 
Recollecting these problems in 1952, I found that the condition a of 
LeSniewski's metatheorem L can be replaced by a weaker assertion, viz., 
that the system 6 can be substituted by a small fragment of it. 
Hence, summarizing my researches from this field, I was able to formulate 
the following metatheorem S. 
METATHEOREM S: An axiom-system of protothetic having the rules of 
procedure inferentially equivalent to the rule of 65 constitutes a complete 
system, if in its field the following conditions are satisfied: 
I. The following two theses are provable: 
Fl [u].u. ::= .[u].u 
F2 [pq]:.p ::=: q ::= p. ::= q 
II. The principle of bivalence for propositions is provable as a metarule 
saying that if "¢(p)" is a meaningful formula in the system and the formulas 
"¢([u].u)" and "¢([u].u. ::= .[u].u)" are already proved, then the formula 
"[P].¢(p)" is also a thesis of this system. 
A question remains open whether the thesis Fl is indispensible or whether 
it can be proved from condition II and thesis F2. 
2* 
In this section I propose to present the proofs relevant to the preceding 
discussion of the single axioms of the system 65 of protothetic. First of all 
I will prove: (1) that thesis An mentioned in Section 1.3, and also each of 
the theses Ao, Ap and Aq, can serve as a single axiom of 65,54 and (2) that 
Lesniewski's metatheorem L, discussed in Section 1.3,55 can be replaced by 
my metatheorem S,56 whose conditions constitute a relatively small fragment 
of the original prerequisites set out by Lesniewski. In addition, a number of 
* Bibliographical Note. This part of the paper originally appeared in the Notre Dame Journal 
of Formal Logic II (1961), 111-126. 

172 
BOLESLAW SOBOCINSKI 
questions closely connected with the topics mentioned above will also be 
discussed. 
It is clear that if metatheorem S is true, then in order to establish that this 
or that protothetical thesis in which equivalence occurs as the only constant 
term can be adopted as a single axiom of 65, one must be able to prove 
that, relatively to the rule of procedure of 65, the thesis under consideration 
satisfies the requirements of S. It is evident too, that the truth of metatheorem 
S depends exclusively on whether or not it is possible, by applying the said 
rule, to deduce metatheorem L from the assumptions of S. Thus, from the 
methodological point of view, it would appear that thesis An should be dis-
cussed after metatheorem S has been established. There are, however, serious 
reasons for adopting a reversed order of presentation. For it so happens that 
the proof concerning An, though long and complicated, is much more ele-
mentary than the deductions required for the proof of S. Hence, it seems to 
me that in the beginning it is better to show that An (and also Ao, Ap and 
Aq) implies the conditions of S. This will enable anyone who is not familiar 
with the methods of deduction in protothetic to understand subsequent proofs 
better. Moreover, the proof of the main theorem, due to which metatheorem S 
holds and due to which almost all the results discussed here hold, is patterned 
on the idea underlying my 1937 investigations of the mutual relations among 
theses Kl, K2, K3 and K4,57 although, it must be said, these investigations 
do not involve deductions as complicated as those which establish metathe-
orem S. Although the results obtained by me in 1937 have been, in a sense, 
superseded by metarule S, I will present them here because they will make 
the proof of the metarule more understandable. 
The detailed plan of this section is as follows: In Section 2.1, I shall 
prove that thesis An implies the conditions a and c of metatheorem L. Hence, 
a fortiori it satisfies metatheorem S which (assuming the correctness of S) 
proves automatically that An can serve as a single axiom of 65. In Section 2.2 
a proof will be outlined that the same holds for Ao, Ap and A q. In Section 2.3, I 
shall show that, given the first four points of the rule of 65, the condition c of L 
and a small fragment of the theory 6, viz. theses F 1 and F2,58 imply the whole 
of 6, i.e., the condition a of Lesniewski's metatheorem L. Incidentally, several 
new metatheorems concerning the completeness of 65 will be established in 
Sections 2.2 and 2.3. In Section 2.4 a proof will be presented that without the 
application of the point E (concerning higher extensionalities) of the rule of 
procedure either thesis K4 is a consequence of Kl, K2 and K3 or K3 follows 
from Kl, K2 and K4, provided that we have the theory 6, the condition c of 
L, and the extensional form of the definition of conjunction.59 In addition, 
the axiom-system S, mentioned in Section 1.3,60 will be discussed in this 
section. Finally, in Section 2.5, it will be demonstrated with the help of the 
point E of the rule of 65 that the condition b of metatheorem L results from the 
condition c and the theory 6, which means that it follows from the condition 
c and theses Fl and F2 in virtue of deductions shown in Section 2.3. 

ON THE SINGLE AXIOMS OF PROTOTHETIC 
173 
Thus, Sections 2.3 and 2.5 will contain the proof of metatheorem 6, 
Section 2.4 will form an explanatory and historical introduction to Section 2.5, 
and Sections 2.1 and 2.2 will contain deductions concerning theses An-Ao. 
The rule of procedure of 65 allows us to add a new thesis to the system on 
condition that this thesis results from one and only one of the points which 
constitute the rule.61 Thus, e.g., if a thesis A is a consequence of two theses 
Band C (previously proved) in virtue of suitable substitutions in Band C, 
the distribution of the quantifier in B, and the subsequent detachment, then, 
in fact, four new theses have to be inscribed in the roll of the system. I shall 
follow this prescription only in the first few steps in Section 2.1 in order 
to show how it works. Later, I shall use combined proof lines in which the 
application of the points /3, 'Y and J of the rule will be indicated jointly. The 
applications of the points a and E will always be pointed out separately as 
the rule requires. Moreover, in the course of deductions, several metarules of 
procedure will be established and put to use. In this way about a thousand 
uninteresting steps will be omitted without affecting the rigorousness of the 
deductions. 
Concerning the proof lines, mentioned above, it should be noted that: 
(1) Each such line will end with parentheses of the form "[" and "]"; (2) An 
inscription, e.g., "[ B, p I q; C, r Is]" indicates that in B, which is a thesis of 
the system, a meaningful formula q is substituted for the variable p; similarly 
in C, which again is a thesis of the system, s is substituted for r; then the 
required distributions of the quantifiers are made in Band C, and, finally, 
the operation of detachment is performed; (3) Whenever a distribution of the 
quantifier is made as a separate step in the course of deductions, it will be 
indicated by the letter /3 (e.g., when this point of the rule is applied to a result 
of detachment); (4) The proof line of theses obtained in virtue of points a 
and E have the form "[a]" and "[E]"; (5) Symbols: SI, SIl, etc., occurring in 
the proof lines indicate the application of derivative metarules of procedure, 
whose validity has already been proved. 
Also, it should be noted that the symbols "0" and "1" are not defined 
constants, but typographical abbreviations of "[u].u" and "[u].u. == .[u].u", 
respectively.62 The use of these symbols allows us to present theses and proofs 
in a shorter, clearer, and more understandable manner. 
2.1 
As a single axiom of protothetic we assume: 
An [pq] :: p == q. == :·[J]:·f(pf(p[u].u)). ==: [r] : f(qr). == .q == p 
We then adjust to it the rule of procedure of the system 65.63 In virtue of this 
rule, so adjusted, we deduce from An the following theses: 

174 
BOLESLAW SOBOCINSKI 
01 [P].p == As (P) 
[In virtue of the point a of the rule] 
Al [P] :: p == As (p). == :.[J]:.f(Pf(P[u].u)). ==: [r] : f(As (p)r). == . 
As(P) ==p 
(An; in virtue of the point 8 of the rule] 
A2 [P].p == As (P). == :. [Pf]:.f(pf(P[u].u)). ==: [r] : f(As (p)r). == . 
As(P) ==p 
(A 1; in virtue of the point /3 of the rule] 
A3 [Pf]:.f(Pf(P[u].u)). ==: [r] : f(As (p)r). == .As (P) == p 
(A2; 01; in virtue of the point "( of the rule] 
02 [pq]:.p == q. == .As (p == q) :== Vr (pq) 
[By a] 
The proof of 01-02 shows clearly how the points a, /3, "( and 8 of the rule 
are to be used if we wish to add new theses to the system. In what follows, 
abridged proofs will be given which involve steps made in virtue of a joint 
application of /3, "( and 8. Care will be taken that this does not lead to mis-
understandings. It should be noted that 0 1 is a definition of "assertium" of 
one propositional argument and 02 is a definition of "verum" of two propo-
sitional arguments. Obviously, the defined constant functor "As" belongs to 
the semantical category of proposition-forming functors of one propositional 
argument. 01 introduces this new category into the system. On the other 
hand, no new category is introduced by 02, since the defined constant "Vr" 
belongs to the same category as the variable "f" or the constant "==" in An or 
A3, which are proposition-forming functors of two propositional arguments. 
A4 [pq].Vr(pq) 
A5 [prj : Vr (As (p)r). == .As (P) == p 
A6 [P].As (P) == p 
[By /3, 8, "(: 02; 01, pip == q] 
[A3, f I Vr; A4, q I Vr(p[u].u)] 
[A5; A4, p I As (p), q I r] 
Now, we are able to prove the following two rnetarules of procedure: 
SI. If in the field of our system we have a thesis of the following structure 
[a,b,c, ... ]: q,. ==.w 
(where either the main quantifier does not exist or a, b, c, ... are the variables 
which belong to this quantifier and occur as free in the formula "q,. == . w"), 
then we can always add the following thesis to the system: 
[a,b,c, ... ]: w. ==.q, 

ON THE SINGLE AXIOMS OF PROTOTHETIC 
175 
The proof is evident for anyone who understands how A6 is obtained from 
Dl. 
Dem.: 
(0) [a, b, e, ... ] : <P. == .w 
[The assumption] 
(b) [a', b' , e' , ... ] : <P. == . W 
[From the point 0; by means of substi-
tution we change the variables occur-
ring in the main quantifier of 0 so that 
none of them remains equiform with 
any variable occurring in any of the 
quantifiers in An.] 
(c) [a', b', e', ... , f] :: f(<pf(<p[u].u)). := :.[r]:.f(wr). :=: w. := .<P 
[An, pi <P, q I w; b] 
(D) [a', b', e', ... , r]:. Vr (wr). ==: W. := . <P 
( e) [a', b' , d, ... ] : W. == . <P 
(0 [a, b, e, ... ] : W. == .<P 
[c, f I Vr; A4, pi <P, q I Vr (<p[u].u)] 
[D; A4, p I w, q I r] 
[e; by means of substitution we return 
to the same variables which occur in the 
main quantifier of 0.] 
Q.E.D. 
SII./f in the field of the system we have two theses of the following structures: 
[a,b,e, ... ]: <P. ==.w 
and 
[a,b,e, ... ].w 
(where a, b, e, ... are variables which belong to the main quantifiers of these 
theses and occur either in "<p" or in "WOO or in both), then we can always add 
the following thesis to the system: 
[a, b, c, ... ].<p 
The proof of SII is obvious in virtue of SI and the points (3 and'Y of the rule. 
As a scheme of reasoning, SI says that although we have not yet obtained the 
thesis: 
[pq] . -
-
-
64 
.p = q. =.q =p 

176 
BOLESLAW SOBOCINSKI 
nevertheless, we can always transform any thesis of the form "[a, b, c, ... ] : 
<J?:::::::: .W" into a thesis of the form "[a,b,c, ... ]: W.:::::::: .<J?".Evidently,SlIis 
a sort of detachment rule working from right to left. 
We proceed by proving: 
A7 [Pf]:.f(As (p)f(As (p)[u].u)). ::::::::: [r] : f(pr). :::::::: .p:::::::: As (p) 
[An,p I As(p),q Ip;A6] 
A8 [pr]: Vr(pr).::::::::.p:::::::: As(p) 
[A7, f I Vr; A4, p I As (p), q I Vr (As (p)[u].u)] 
D3 [pqr]:.Vr(pr).::::::::.p:::::::: q::::::::: .<J?o:-tpt(qr) 
A9 [pr].<J?o:-tpt(As (p)r) 
AlO [pr]: <J?o:-tpt(pr).::::::::.p:::::::: As(p) 
[D3, q I As (p); A8] 
[A7, f I <J?O:-tpt; A9, r I <J?O:-tpt(As (p)[u].u)] 
All [pr].<J?o:-tpt(pr) 
Al2 [prj : Vr (pr). :::::::: .p:::::::: p 
A13 [P].p:::::::: p 
[AIO; DI; S1I66] 
(D3, q I p; All; SII] 
[AI2, r I q; A4] 
Now, we are going to prove two metarules of procedure which make clear 
that although we have not yet got in the system the thesis: 
[pq]:.p:::::::: q. ::::::::: [f] : f(p). :::::::: ·f(q)67 
or any other thesis which, at this stage of the [development of the] system, 
could allow us to make the extensional deductions directly, we nevertheless 
can reason in accordance with the law of extensionality for any expression 
which is a proposition. 
SIll. If two formulas 0: and /3 belong to the seman tical category of propositions 
and if in the field of our system we have two theses of the following structures: 
[a,b,c, ... ] : 0:.::::::::./3 
and 
[a, b, c, .. . ].<J?(o:) 
(where "<J?" is a constant or a multi-link proposition-forming functor of one 
propositional argument, and where the variables a, b, c, ... may occur as free 

ON THE SINGLE AXIOMS OF PROTOTHETIC 
177 
variables not only in "a" and "13" but also in "«1>"), then we can always add 
the following thesis to the system: 
[a, b, c, ... ].«1>(13) 
Dem.: 
(a) [a, b, c, ... ] : a. ::::: .13 
[The assumption] 
(b) [a, b, c, ... ].«1>( a) 
[The assumption] 
(c) [a',b',e', ... ]: a.:::::.f3 
[a; as in the point b of the proof of SI] 
(il) [a', b', e', ... ].«1>(a) 
[b; as in the point b of the proof of SI] 
(e) [a', b',e', ... , f] :: f(af(a[u].u)). ::::: :.[r]:·f(f3r). :::::: 13. ::::: .a 
[An,p I a, q I 13, c] 
(f) [a',b',e', ... ,p,q,r]:: Vr(<<1>(p)r).:::::: «1>(q).::::: .«1>(p) 
:. ::::: .wa-fqj-(pr) 
[In virtue of the point a of the rule. 
Thus, expression f is a scheme of a def-
inition. If any free variables occur in 
"«1>", "Wa" is a multi-link functor for 
these variables. E.g., "Wa" can have the 
following form "wa{a', b', e' , ... *,'] 
(g) [a', b', e', ... ,p, r].wa-fpj-(pr) 
[t, q I p; A12, pi «1>(p)] 
(I) [a', b', e', ... , r]:. wa-faj-(f3r). :::::: 13. ::::: .a 
[e, f I wa-faj-; g, p I a, r I wa-faj-(a[u].u)] 
(0 [a',b',e', ... ]: f3.:::::.a 
(j) [a', b', c', ... , r]. wa-faj-(f3r) 
(t) [a',b',e', ... ,r]:.Vr(<<1>(f3)r).:::::: «1>(a).::::: .«1>(13) 
(I) [a', b', e', ... ] : «1>(a). ::::: .«1>(13) 
(m) [a', b', c', .. . ].«1>(13) 
[c; SI] 
[I); i; SII] 
[t, p I 13, q I a; j; SII] 
[f; A4, p I «1>(13), q I r] 
[I; il] 

178 
BOLESLAW SOBOCINSKI 
(n) [a,b,c, ... ].<1>(/3) 
[m; as in the point f of the proof of SI] 
Q.E.D. 
SlY. If under the same assumptions as in SIll in the field of the system we 
have two theses of the following structures: 
[a, b, c, ... ] : a. = ./3 
and 
[a, b, c, ... ].<1>(/3) 
then we can always add the following thesis to the system: 
[a, b, c, .. . J.<I>(a) 
The proof of SIV follows at once from SI and SIll. 
It has to be noted that whenever we apply SIll (or SIV) we must introduce 
two auxiliary definitions into our system in order to perform the required 
deductions. We need one definition in order to transform the thesis, with 
respect to which we want to apply extensional reasoning, into a thesis of the 
form similar to our assumption b, i.e. into a thesis which is formed by means 
of a proposition-forming functor of one propositional argument. The other 
definition is required in order to apply the point f in the proof of SIll. It is 
not difficult to construct such definitions for any given case and I shall omit 
them when using SIll or SlY. Only for the purpose of illustration will I give 
the definitions when SIll is used for the first time. Namely: 
A15 [pq]:.p = q. = .As (p = q) := .p = p 
[A12, r I q; D2; SIll] 
In order to give a complete proof of A15, we must introduce the definition: 
D~ [pqr] :: p = q. = .As (p = q) := r:. = .Xa-tpq}(r) 
[a] 
From D~ and D2 we get: 
I [pq].xa-tpq}(Vr (pq)) 
[D~, r I Vr (pq); D2] 
Thesis I corresponds to our assumption b and thesis A12 (r I q) to o. Then, 
we can easily prove the theses corresponding to (-e. Next, we introduce the 
second definition corresponding to the point f: 
Ds.B [pqrst] :: Vr (Xa-tst}(p)r). =: Xa-tst}(P). = .Xa-fst}(q) 
:. = .x/3{st+-tq}(pr) 
[a] 

ON THE SINGLE AXIOMS OF PROTOTHETIC 
179 
and, subsequently, we get the theses corresponding to the points g-n, i.e., we 
finally obtain the thesis: 
II [pq].Xa-fpqt(p == p) 
which in virtue of OQl (r I p == p) and SII gives A 15. 
AI6 [pq]:.p == q. == .p == q :== .p == p 
AI7 [pq]:.p == p. ==: p == q. == .p == q 
04 [pq]:.p == p. ==.q == q:== .Vrl(qp) 
[AI5; A6, pip == q; SIll] 
[AI6; SI] 
Now, in order to make the formulas clearer and easier to read, I introduce 
the following two abbreviations: "0" will be used for "[u].u" and "I" for 
"[u].u. == .[u].u". We should always remember that these symbols ("0" and 
"I") are used here only as typographical abbreviations; they are not intro-
duced into the system by means of definitions although the definitions:69 
01 [u].u. == .0 
and 
011 [u].u. == .[u].u :== .1 
could be added to the system in accordance with the rule of procedure. Hence, 
e.g., the real form of A18, to be proved next, is: 
Vr 1 ([u].u, [u].u. == .[u].u) 
A18 Vrl(O 1) 
[04, p I [u].u. == .[u].u, q I [u].u; AI6, p I [u].u, q I [u].u] 
A19 1. == .VrJ(OO) 
A20 VrJ(OVrl(OO)) 
A21 [r]:Vrl(Or).==.O==O 
A22 [r].Vr 1 (0 r) 
A23 [P] : p == p. == .1 
A24 [P] : 1. == .p == p 
[AI7,p I 0, q I 0; 04,p 10, q I 0; SIll] 
[AI8; AI9; SIll] 
[AI4,p I 0, f I Vr 1; A20] 
[A21; A13,p I 0; SII] 
[04, q I 0; A22, rip; SII] 
[A23; SI] 

180 
BOLESLAW SOBOCINSKI 
A25 1 ::::: 1. ::::: .1 ::::: 0 ::::::: 1 ::::: .1 ::::: 0 
[A13,p 11:::::.1::::: 0; A23,p 11; SIV] 
A26 [P] :: 0 ::::: .0::::: 1 :::::: :.0 :::::: 0 ::::: .p ::::: p 
[A13, p I 0 ::::: .0 ::::: 1; A24; SIll] 
A27 [P] : -: 0::::: .0::::: 1 :::::: 1:. ::::::: 0:::::: 0 ::::: .p::::: p:. ::::: 1 
[AI3, pi 0::::: .0::::: 1 :::::: 1; A26; SIll] 
D5 [pq] :: p:::::: p::::: .q::::: q:. ::::: .Vr2(pq) 
A28 [P]:.O::::: .0::::: 1 :::::: Vr2(Op) 
[a] 
[A26; D5, p I 0, q I p; SIV] 
A29 [r] :: 0::::: .0::::: 1 :::::: 1:. :::::: Vr2(0 r). ::::: .1 
[A27, p I r; D5, pi 0, q I r; SIll] 
A30 0::::: .0::::: 1 :::::: 1:. :::::: [r] : Vr2(0 r). ::::: .1 
[A29; jJ] 
The proof of A30 deserves our attention, because A30 follows from A29 
by the distribution of the quantifier. Since we do not know any other way of 
obtaining A30 at this stage and since it is a necessary step to get A32 and, 
consequently, the important A37, it is clear that the point (3 of the rule plays 
an essential role in the deductions presented in this section. 
A31 0::::: .0::::: 1 ::::::: [r] : Vr2(0 r). ::::: .1 
[AI4, p I 0, f I Vr2; A28, pi Vr2(0 0); SIV] 
A32 0::::: .0::::: 1 :::::: :.0::::: .0::::: 1 :::::: 1 
D6 [pq]:.p::::: .p ::::: q :::::: .<P(3(qp) 
A33 <1>(3(10). :::::: <1>(3(10). ::::: 1 
A34 1>(3(1 <1>(3(10)) 
A35 [r] : <1>(3(1 r). ::::: .1 ::::: 1 
A36 [r].1>(3(1 r) 
A37 [P] : p ::::: .p ::::: 1 
[A31; A30; SIV] 
[a] 
[A32; D6,p I 0, q 11; SIll] 
[D6,p I 1>(3(1 0), q 11; A33] 
[AI4, p I 1, f I <1>(3; A34] 
[A35; A13,p 11; SII] 
[D6, q 11; A36, rip; SII] 

ON THE SINGLE AXIOMS OF PROTOTHETIC 
181 
[A37; SI] 
A38 [P] : p = 1. = P 
A39 [pq]:.p =: p = .q = q 
A40 [pq]:.p = q. =: p = 1. = q 
A41 [pq]:.p = q. =: p = 1. = .q = 1 
A42 [P]:.p = .p = 1 := 1 
A43 [P]:.1 =: p = .p = 1 
A44 [P]:.1 =.1 = 1 :=:p= .p= 1 
Now, although we have not yet got the thesis: 
[A37; A24, pi q; SIII] 
[A13, pip = q; A37; SIII] 
[A40; A37, p I q; SIII] 
[A23; A37; SIII] 
[A42; SI] 
[A43, p I 1; A43; SIII] 
[f] :: f([u].u). = :.f([u].u. = .[u].u). =: [P] : f([u].u). = .f(p)70 
or any other thesis which, at this stage of the [development of the] system, 
could allow us to make the deductions of generalization directly, we are in 
a position to prove a scheme of reasoning which says that in the field of the 
system we can always reason in accordance with the principle of bivalence 
for propositions. Viz., we prove the following metarule of procedure: 
SV. If in the field of the system a formula 
[a, b, c, ... ,p].CP(p) 
is meaningful, i.e., if it is a well-formed formula, in which "p" belongs to the 
semantical category of propositions, and if the variables a, b, c, ... are free 
in "cp" which is a simple or a multi-link functor belonging to the category of 
proposition-forming functors of one propositional argument, and, finally, if 
the following two formulas 
[a, b, c, ... ].cp([u].u) 
and 
[a, b, c, ... ].cp([u].u. = .[u].u) 
are already proved in the system, then we can always add to it as a new thesis 
the formula 
[a, b, c, ... ,p].CP(p) 

182 
BOLESLAW SOBOCINSKI 
Dem.: 
(u) [a, b, e, .. .].~(O) 
[The assumption] 
(b) [a,b,e, .. .].~(l) 
[The assumption] 
(c) [a', b',e', .. .].~(O) 
[u, as in the point b of the proof of SI] 
«() [a', b', e', ... j.~(I) 
[b, as in the point b ofthe proof of SI] 
(e) [a', b', e', ... ,pj : ~(O). == .p == p 
[A39, p I ~(O), q I p; c] 
(f) [a', b', e', ... ,pj : ~(1). == .p == p 
[A39, p I ~(1), q I p; b] 
(g) [a', b', e', ... ,p, qj:. ~(q). == .p == p :== . iJ! (3(Pq) 
[In virtue of the point a of the rule, as in the point f of the proof of SIll] 
(I) [a', b', e', ... ,pj.iJ!{3(pO) 
(i) [a', b', c', ... ,pj.iJ!{3(pl) 
(j) [a',b',e', ... ,pj: iJ!{3(pO). ==.1 
(e) [a', b', e', ... ,pj.iJ!{3(piJ!{3(p[uj.u)) 
(I) [a',b',e', ... ,p,rj: iJ!{3(pr). == .p==p 
(m) [a', b', e', ... ,p, rj.iJ!{3(pr) 
(n) [a',b',e', ... ,pj: ~(p). == .p==p 
(0) [a', b', e', ... ,pl.~(p) 
[g, q I 0; e] 
[g, q I 1; f] 
[A37, pi iJ!{3(pO); I)] 
[i; j; SIV] 
[AI4, f I iJ!{3; f] 
[I; A13; SII] 
[g, q I p; m, rip; SII] 
[n; A13; SII] 
(p) [a, b, c, ... ,pl.~(p) 
[0; as in the point f of the proof of SI] 
Q.E.D. 
The proof of SV shows that An satisfies the condition c of metatheorems Land 
S. Just as in the case of applying SIll (or SIV), whenever we use SV, we must 
introduce into our system two auxiliary definitions. Since the construction of 
such definitions is not difficult, I shall omit them when using Sv. Only for 
the purpose of illustration will I give the definitions, when SV is used for the 

ON THE SINGLE AXIOMS OF PROTOTHETIC 
183 
first time. Viz.: 
A45 [P]:.1 == p. ==: 1 == O. == .p == 0 
[A17, p 11, q I 0; A39, p 11 == 0, q I 0; SV] 
In order to have a complete proof of A45, we must introduce the following 
definition: 
DI! [P] :: 1 == p. ==: 1 == O. == .p == 0:. == .Xy(p) 
From DI! and A39 we get: 
III Xy(O) 
[DI!,p I 0; A39,p 11 == 0, q I 0] 
and from DI! and A 17: 
IV Xy(l) 
[DI!,p 11;A17,p 11,qI0] 
Theses III and IV correspond to our assumptions a and b, respectively. Then, 
an easy proof gives theses corresponding to the points c-f. Next, we introduce 
the second definition according to the point g: 
Dfl [pq]:·Xy(q)· == .p == p :== ·X5(pq) 
[0'] 
and, subsequently, we get the theses corresponding to the points ~-p, i.e., we 
finally obtain 
V [P]Xy(p) 
which, in virtue of DI! and SII, gives A45. 
Our deductions proceed as follows: 
A46 [P] :: 1 == .1 == p :== :.1 == O. ==: 1 == O. == P 
[A45, p I 1 == 0; A44, p 11 == 0; SV] 
A47 1 ==: 1 == .1 == 0:. == .1 == 0 
[A46, p I 1 == 0; A39, p I 1 == 0, q I 1 == 0; SIV] 
A48 [P]:.1 == p. == .1 == 0 :==: 1 == .p == 0 
A49 1 == :.1 == .1 == 0 :== 0 
[A25; A16,p 11, q I 0; SV] 
[A48,p 11 ==.1 == 0; A47] 

184 
BOLESLAW SOBOCINSKI 
A50 1::::: .1 ::::: 0:::::: 0 
[A49; A13,p I 0] 
A5I [q]:.I:::::.I::::: q:::::: q 
[A50; A42,p 11; SV] 
A52 [q]:.O::::: .0::::: q :::::: q 
[A38, pi 0; A42, pi 0; SV] 
A53 [pq]:.p::::: .p::::: q :::::: q 
[A52; A5I; SV72] 
A54 [pq]:.q:::::: p::::: .p::::: q 
[A53; SI] 
A55 [pq]:.q::::: 1. :::::: p ::::: .p::::: q 
[A54; A37, pi q; SIll] 
A56 [q]:.O::::: q. :::::: 1 ::::: .q ::::: 0 
[A55, p 11, q I 0; A37, pi 0::::: 0; SV] 
A57 [pq]:.p::::: q. :::::: p ::::: O. ::::: .q ::::: 0 
[A56; A45, p I q; SV] 
A58 [pqr]:.p::::: q. :::::: p ::::: r. ::::: .q ::::: r 
[A57; A41; SV] 
A59 [pqr] :: p ::::: q. ::::: :.p::::: .q ::::: r :::::: r 
[A58, r I q::::: r; A53, p I q, q I r; SIll] 
A60 [pq] :: p ::::: :.p ::::: .1 ::::: q :::::: q 
A6I [pq] :: p::::: .1 ::::: q :::::: q:. ::::: p 
A62 [pq] :-: p ::::::: p ::::: .1 ::::: q :::::: 1:. ::::: q 
[A59, q I 1, I q; A38; SIll] 
[A60; SI] 
[A60; A37, pip::::: .1 ::::: q; SIll] 
A63 [pq] : : p::::::-: p::::: .1 ::::: q :::::: 1:. ::::: 1 ::::::: q 
[A60; A37, pip::::: .1 ::::: q :::::: 1; SIll] 
A64 [P] : . : p ::::: .1 ::::: p ::::::: -: p ::::: .1 ::::: p :::::: 1:. ::::: 1 ::::::: p : : :::::: -: p ::::: .1 ::::: 
p :::::: 1:. ::::: 1 ::::::: p 
[A61, q I p; A63, q I p; SIll] 
07 [pq] :-: 0 ::::: .p::::: 0 :::::: .q ::::: 0:. ::::: .q ::::: 0 ::::::: .~"Y(pq) 
A65 0::::: .1 ::::: 0:::::: .~"Y(1 0) ::::: 0:. ::::: .~"Y(1 0) ::::: 0 
[a] 
[A64, p I 0; 07, p 11, q I 0; SIll] 
[07, p 11, q I ~"Y(1 0); A65] 

ON THE SINGLE AXIOMS OF PROTOTHETIC 
185 
A67 [r] : «P,(l r). == .1 == 1 
A68 [q].«p,(1 q) 
A69 [q] :: 0 == .1 == 0 :== .q == 0:. == .q == 0 
A70 0 == .1 == 0 :== .0 == 0 
A71 0 == .1 == 0 
[AI4, p I 1, f I «P,; A66] 
[A67, r I q; A13,p 11; SII] 
[D7, p 11; A68; SII] 
[A69, q I 0; A13, p I 0; SII] 
[A 70; A13, p I 0; SII] 
A71 constitutes a crucial point in this proof, since it gives: 
An [P] :p==.1 ==p 
A 73 [P] : 1 == p. == .p == 1 
A74 [P] :P== 1. ==.1 ==p 
A75 [P] : p == O. == .0 == P 
A 76 [pq] : p == q. == .q == p 
[A71; A37, p 11; SV] 
[A37; An; SIII] 
[A73; SI] 
[A13, pi 0 == 0; A73,p I 0; SV] 
[A75; A74; SV] 
Thus, we have proved that equivalence is symmetrical, and that from now 
on we can dispense with SI and SII. 
A77 [pqr]:.p == q. ==: q == r. == .p == r 
[A58; A76,p I p == r, q I q == r; SIII] 
A78 [pqr]:.p == q. ==: r == q. == .p == r 
[A77; A76,p I q, q I r; SIII] 
Since A 78 is Lukasiewicz's axiom L 1 of the classical equivalential propo-
sitional calculus and since the rules of procedure of that theory are, obviously, 
included into the rule of 65, I have proved that from An the system 6 can 
be obtained, which satisfies the condition a of metatheorem L. Condition c of 
that metatheorem is also satisfied by An as can be seen from metarule Sv. 
Since the condition b of L is superfluous, as will be shown in Section 2.5, 
we have a proof that An can serve as a single axiom of the system 65 of 
protothetic. It is worth noting that although we have not used the point E of 
the rule of procedure so far, we have been able to obtain very strong deductive 
results. On the other hand, I am unable to prove that An (or Ao or Ap or Aq) 
is a single axiom of 65 without the application of reasonings which will be 
discussed in Section 2.5 and in which the point E plays an essential role. 

186 
BOLESLAW SOBOCINSKI 
Evidently, FI and F2 (appearing in metarule S) can be derived from A78 
alone by substitution and detachment. FI has already been proved as it results 
by substitution from A13 (p I [u].u) while F2 is easily obtainable as follows: 
A79 [pq]:.p:::::::: q ::::::: p. ::::::: q 
[A54, pi q, q I p; A76, pi q, q I q::::::: p; SIll] 
2.2 
A simple inspection of the deductions presented in the preceding subsection 
will convince us that each of the theses: 
Ao [pq] :: p::::::: q. ::::::: :·[f]:.f(qf(q[u].u)). :::::::: [r] : f(pr). ::::::: .q::::::: p 
Ap [pq] :: p::::::: q. ::::::: :.[J]:.f(pf(q[u].u)). :::::::: [r] : f(qr). ::::::: .q::::::: p 
Aq [pq] :: p::::::: q. ::::::: :. [f]:.f(qf(P[u].u)). :::::::: [r] : f(pr). ::::::: .q ::::::: p 
can serve as a single axiom of the system 65. It is evident that the theses 
A I-A 14 and metarules SI and SII can be obtained from each of the discussed 
theses in exactly the same way as they were obtained from An. An entirely 
analogous proof of SIll exists for Ap. In the case of Ao and Aq a little modi-
fication has to be introduced in order to get this metarule. Viz., a scheme of a 
definition used in the point f has to have now the following form: 
(f*) [a', b', e', ... ,p, q, r] :: Vr (<I>(q)r). :::::::: <I>(p). ::::::: .<I>(q):. ::::::: . 
w*a-fqj-(pr) 
from which and the points o-e the analogues of the points g-n can be obtained 
without any difficulty. Now, metarules SIV and SV and theses A15-A78 are 
provable in each of these cases in exactly the same way as in Section 2.1, 
since no direct application of an axiom is used in order to obtain them. Hence, 
each of the discussed theses can serve as a single axiom of the system 65. 
A more penetrating analysis of the demonstrations given in Section 2.1 
allows us to establish the following metatheorem S*: 
META THEOREM S*: An axiom-system of protothetic having the rules of 
procedure inferentially equivalent to the rule of 65 yields a complete system, 
if in its field the following conditions are satisfied: 
l. Thesis A14 is provable. 
II. Metarules SI and SIll are provable. 
In fact in virtue of the rule of 65 alone we have DI, D2, A4; SII and SIV 
follow from SI and SIll. Hence, as an inspection of Section 2.1 shows, one 
can obtain A12, A13, SV and A15-A78 using only the conditions of S*. 

ON THE SINGLE AXIOMS OF PROTOTHETIC 
187 
Therefore, having A 78 and SV, we get the required conditions of S. It seems 
to me that without the application of the point E (concerning higher exten-
sionalities) it is impossible to prove An (or Ao, Ap, Aq) from the conditions 
of S*. But it is easy to deduce axiom Al mentioned in Section 1.3. 
Dem.: Obviously, in virtue of S* we have A 77 and A 78. Due to Lukasiewicz's 
proof, the following two theses can be obtained from A 78. 
Ml [pqrst] : -: s = .t = t :=:: s = :.p = q. =: r = q. = .p = r 
M2 [pq]:.p =: p = q. = q 
Therefore, we have: 
M3 [fpq] :.: [r] : f(pr). = .p = p :=:: [r] :: f(pr). = :.p = q. =: r = 
q. = .p = r 
[Ml, s I f(pr), tip; and the application 
of the point (3 of the rule with respect to r] 
M4 [Jpt] :: [r] : f(pr). = .p = p := t:. =: f(Pf(p[u].u)). = t 
[A77, p I f(pf(P[u].u)), q I [r] : f(pr). 
= .p = p, r I t; (3; A14, in virtue of S*] 
M5 [Jpq] :.: f(Pf(P[u].u)). =:: [r] :: f(pr). = :.p = q. = 
: r = q. =.p = r 
[M4, t I [r] :: f(pr). = :.p = q. =: r = q. = .p = r; (3; M3] 
Al [Jpq] :.: f(pf(P[u].u)). =:: [r] :: f(p = q. = q, r). = :. 
p = q. =: r = q. = .p = r 
[M5; M2; SIll, in virtue of S*] 
Q.E.D. 
On the other hand, there is no simple way of obtaining the conditions of S* 
from Al alone. Indeed, using elementary deductions we can get A 78 from 
it at once as, in virtue of the rule, we have D l, D2 and A4 at our disposal. 
Therefore, we have also SI (by A 78) and we can prove easily: 
Nl [Jpq] : f(Pf(P[u].u)). = .[r].f(p = q. = qr) 
But, Al4 and SIll cannot be deduced directly from A78 and Nl, as the last 
thesis gives only an extremely narrow possibility of extensional deductions. 
In order to obtain the discussed thesis Al4 and metarule SIll from those 
assumptions we have to use metatheorem S, i.e. we have to prove first that 
its condition c (SV) follows from A 78 and N1. This can be done only by 

188 
BOLESLAW SOBOCINSKI 
an application of the point f of the rule and the reasonings which mutatis 
mutandis are similar to those to be presented in Section 2.5. I will return to 
this problem in Section 3 of the present paper. 
To conclude these considerations concerning the structure of An, I would 
like to make the following historical remark. The methods of deductions 
applied to obtain SI and SV in the preceding subsection, had been established 
by Lesniewski and applied to axioms Aa-Am. On the other hand, the proofs by 
which A13, A37, A 71, and metarule SIll are obtained from An in Section 2.1 
were previously unknown. The "decompositions" of Aa-Am are much more 
simple than the decomposition of An and do not involve so complicated 
deductions. 
2.3* 
When in 1938 I proved that the condition b of metarule L follows from the 
remaining conditions a and c,73 I also remarked that probably the condition 
a of L could be weakened too. Viz., I thought that the system 6 could be 
substituted by a suitable fragment of it, and that this would certainly be done, 
if we had SIll at our disposal, which, as we remember, enables us to make 
extensional deductions for expressions belonging to the semantical category 
of propositions. This suggestion of mine and the result concerning the redun-
dancy of the condition b enabled Lesniewski to construct his axiom Am:74 
Am [pq]::p == q. ==:-: [fl:-: f(qf(q[u].u)). ==:: [r]:: f(pr). ==:. 
r ==: q ==.r == p 
In fact, starting from Am alone and using deductions in some respects sim-
ilar but less complicated than those presented in Section 2.1, one can easily 
prove: 
PI [pq]:.p ==: q == .p == q 
A13, and metarules SII, SIll and SV, which amounts to the condition c. Now, 
given the rule of 65, PI, A13, SII, SIll and SV suffice for the purpose of 
deriving A 78, i.e., the condition a. Moreover, this can be done in a very ele-
mentary way. These deductions of Lesniewski confirmed the correctness of 
my remark. For, obviously, in the set of assumptions {A13; PI; SII; SIll; SV} 
we can replace SII by A 76, but on the basis of the rule of procedure of 6 the 
theses A13, A76 and PI do not constitute a complete system of 6. We can 
prove this using the following matrix: 
* Bibliographical Note. Sections 2.3-2.5 originally appeared in the Notre Dame Journal of 
Formal Logic II (1961), 129-148. 

ON THE SINGLE AXIOMS OF PROTOTHETIC 
189 
1 
2 34567 8 
9 
* 
1 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
2 
2 
1 57314 1 
1 
3 
3 
5 
1 
6 
2 
4 
1 
1 
1 
4 
4 
7 
6 
1 132 1 
1 
M2 
5 
5 
3 211 119 8 
6 
6 
1 431 187 1 
7 
7 
4 
1 
2 
1 
8 161 
8 
8 
1 
1 
1 9 
7 
6 
1 5 
9 
9 
1 
1 181 I 
5 
I 
which is hereditary with respect to the system 6 and its rules of procedure, 
and in which the designated value is 1. This matrix verifies A 13, A 76 and PI, 
but falsifies A 78, for p = 2, q = 3 and r = 4. Viz.: [2 == 3. ==: 4 == 3. == .2 == 
4] = [5 == .6 == 7] = [5 == 8] = 9.75 
An analysis of Lesniewski's deductions connected with axiom Am allowed 
me to formulate the following metatheorem: 
META THEOREM L *: An axiom-system of protothetic having the rules of 
procedure inferentially equivalent to the rule of 65 yields a complete system, 
if in its field the following conditions are satisfied. 
I. Metarules SII (or the thesis A76), SIll and SV are provable. 
II. Theses A13 and PI are provable. 
My further investigations have shown that L * can be expressed in a more 
refined manner as metatheorem W or metatheorem W*. In metatheorem W 
the reference to A 76 in the condition I of L * is dropped while the condition 
II demands that the following theses should be provable: 
Gl 1 == 1 
G2 1 == O. == 0 
G3 0 ==.0 == I 
Metatheorem W* differs from metatheorem W in that SII is removed from 
the condition I of W, whereas the condition II demands that A76 and G2 
should be provable. All we have to do in order to show the correctness of 
these metatheorems is to obtain the theory 6 from their conditions. For the 
condition c of metatheorem L is guaranteed by Sv. Since SII is contained in 
W, we are able to apply detachment in both directions. This is indispensable 
since the application of SIll and SV involves the construction of suitable 

190 
BOLESLAW SOBOCINSKI 
definitions and the method of getting rid of the defined constants in the final 
result. As the function of these definitions was discussed in Section 2.1, I 
omit them in the proof that follows. 
On the basis of the rule 6 5 and assuming the theses GI, G2, G3, and the 
metarules SII, SIll and Sv, we obtain: 
G40=0 
G5 [P].p = p 
G6 1 =: 0 = .0 = 1 
G7 [P]:.p =: 0 = .0 = P 
G8 [P]:.O=:O=.p=p 
G9 1 = O. = .0 = 1 
G 10 [P] : p = O. = .0 = p 
Gll 0 =.1 = 0 
GI2 0 =: 1 = .1 = 0 
G13 [P]:.O = .p = p :=: 1 = .1 = 0 
GI4 [P]:.p =.1 = 1 :=: 1 =.1 =p 
[0; G2; SII; SIll] 
[0; G4; GI; SII; SV] 
[0; GI; G3; SII; SIll] 
[0; G3; G6; SII; SV] 
[G7, pip = p; G5] 
[0; G2; G3; SII; SIll] 
[0; GI; G9; SII; SV] 
[G 10, p I 1 = 0; G2] 
[0; GIl; SII; SIll] 
[0; G12; G8; SII; SIll] 
[GI3,p 11; G5,p 11 = .1 = 1; SII; SV] 
GI5 1 =: 1 = .1 = 1 
GI6 1 = .1 = 1 
GI7[p]:p=.p=1 
GI8 [P]:p =.1 =p 
G19 [P] :P= 1. =.1 =p 
G20 [Pq] : p == q. == .q = p 
[GI4,p 11 = I;G5,p 11 = 1] 
[GI5; G4] 
[0; G3; G16; SII; SV] 
[0; GIl; GI6; SII; SV] 
[0; G17; G18; SII; SIll] 
[0; GlO; G19; SII; SV] 
We can get G20, i.e. A76, directly from GI, G2 and G3 without the use 
of G 16, but this would not shorten the deductions, as G 16 is indispensable, 

ON THE SINGLE AXIOMS OF PROTOTHETIC 
191 
being, in fact, a crucial point in the proof. Having G20 we can dispense with 
SII. 
G2I [q]:.O == q. ==: 1 == q. == 0 
[a; G20,p I 0; GI8,p I q; SII; SIll] 
G22 [q]:.O == q. ==: 1 == q. == .0 == 1 
[a; G2I; G3; SII; SIll] 
G23 [qr]:.O == q. ==: r == q. == .0 == r 
[a; GI7, pi 0 == q; G22; SII; SV] 
G24 [q]:.q ==: 0 == q. == 0 
[a; G27,p I q; G20,p 10, q I 0 == q; SII; SIll] 
G25 [q]:.1 == q. ==: 0 == q. == 0 
[a; G24; GI8, pi q; SII; SIll] 
G26 [q]:.1 == q. ==: 0 == q. ==.1 == 0 
[a; G25; GIl; SII; SIll] 
G27 [P]:.p ==: p == .1 == 1 
[a; GI7; GI6; SII; SIll] 
G28 [qr]:.1 == q. ==: r == q. ==.1 == r 
[a; G26; G27,p 11 == q; SII; SV] 
A78 [pqr]:.p == q. ==: r == q. == .p == r 
[a; G23; G28; SII; SV] 
Thus, we have proved that W fulfills the condition a. It is evident that 
W*, too, satisfies this condition as SII and G I follow directly from A 76, and 
G3 can be obtained from A 76 and G2 by an application of SIll. A simple 
inspection of the proof of W shows the correctness of L * too. 
When in 1952 I analyzed once more these metatheorems and similar con-
structions (in several of them neither SII nor SIll occur), I found, finally, that 
on the basis of the rule of 65 and given SV it is possible to obtain the theory 
6 (i.e., the condition a) from the following two theses: 
FI [u].u. == .[u].u 
F2 [pq]:.p ==: q == p. == q 
which constitute a very small fragment of the complete equivalential calculus 
of propositions. This can be done not only without metarule SIll but also 
without an application of the point E of the rule of 65. 
The proof proceeds as follows. 
On the basis of the rule of 65 and thesis F2 one can establish the following 
two metarules of procedure: 
(1) Metarule SII formulated exactly in the same way as in Section 2.1. Its 
proof is apparent from thesis F2. 

192 
BOLESLAW SOBOCINSKI 
(2) Metarule SVI: 
SVI. If two formulas of the following forms: 
[a, b, c, .. . ].<p 
and 
[r, 8, t, ... ].w 
(in which the variables a, b, c, ... occur and are free in <P, and in which the 
variables r, 8, t, ... occur and are free in w), are theses of the system, then we 
can add to the system a new thesis of the following form: 
[a,b,c, ... ,r,8,t, ... ]: <P. ==.W 
Dem.: 
(a) [a, b, c, .. . ].<p 
(b) [r,8,t, ... ].W 
(c) [a,b,c, ... ,r,8,t, ... ]:.<P. ==.w :==: <P 
(il) [a,b,c, ... ,r,8,t, ... ] :<P.==.w 
We continue by deducing: 
F3 [q] : q == 1. == q 
F4 1 == 1 
F5 1 == .1 == 1 
F6 1 ==: 0 == .1 == 0 
F7 1 == 1. ==: 0 ==.1 == 0 
F8 0 == .1 == 0:== .1 == 1 
F9 [q]:.q==.1 == 1 :==q 
FlO [P].p == p 
[The assumption] 
[The assumption] 
[F2,p I w, q I <P; b] 
[c; a; SII] 
Q.E.D. 
[F2, p 11; Fl] 
[F3, q 11; Fl; SII] 
[Fl; F4; SVI] 
[Fl; F2, pi 0, q I 0; SVI] 
[F4; F2, p I 0, q I 0; SVI] 
[F2, p I 0, q I 0; F4; SVI] 
[F2, p I 1 == 1; F4] 
[a; Fl; F4; SIT; SV] 

ON THE SINGLE AXIOMS OF PROTOTHETIC 
193 
Fll [P] : p == .1 == p 
F12 [P]:.p == 1. ==: 0 == .p == 0 
F13 0 ==: 1 == 1. == 0 
FI4 [P]:.p ==: 1 == 1. == p 
[a; F2, pi 0, q I 0; F5; SII; SV] 
[a; FlO,p I 0 == 1; F7; SII; SV] 
[FI2, p I 1 == 1; F3, q 11] 
[a; F13; F2, p 11, q 11; SII; SV] 
F15 [P]:.p ==.1 == 0 :==: 1 ==.p == 0 
[a; F8; FI0,p 11 == .1 == 0; SII; SV] 
F16 [Pq]:.p == .q == 0 :==: q == .p == 0 
[a; F12; F15; SII; SV] 
FI7 [q] : 0 == q. == .q == 0 
[FI6, p I q, q I 0 == q; F2, p I q, q I 0] 
FI80==.0==1 
[FI7,qI0==I;F3,qI0;SII] 
F19 1 == 1. ==: 0 == .0 == 1 
[FI8; F4; SVI] 
F20 [P]:.I == .0 == p :==: p == .0 == 1 
[a; FI9; FlO, p 11 == .0 == 1; SII; SV] 
F21 1 == O. == .0 == 1 
[F20, p I 1 == 0; F6] 
F22 [q] : 1 == q. ==.q == 1 
[a; F2I; FlO,p 11 == 1; SII; SV] 
F23 [pq] : p == q. == .q == p 
[a; F17; F22; SII; SV] 
F24 [q] : q. == .q == 1 
[F23,p I q == 1; F3] 
F25 [q]:.q ==: q ==.1 == 1 
[F23,p I q ==.1 == 1; F9] 
F26 [pqr]:.p == p. ==: r == q. == .q == r 
[FlO; F23, p I r; SVI] 
F27 [r]:.1 == O. ==: r == O. == .1 == r 
[a; Fll,p 11 == 0; F25, q 11 == 0; SII; SV] 
F28 [qr]:.1 == q. ==: r == q. ==.1 == r 
[a; F27; F26,p 11, q 11; SII; SV] 
F29 [r]:.O == 1. ==: r == 1. == .0 == r 
[a; F24, q I 0 == 1; F14,p I 0 == 1; SII; SV] 

194 
BOLESLAW SOBOCINSKI 
F30 [qr]:.O = q. =: r = q. = .0 = r 
[a; F26,p 10, q I 0; F29; SII; SV] 
A78 [pqr]:.p = q. =: r = q. = .p = r 
[a; F30; F28; SII; SV] 
This concludes the proof, since A 78 is Lukasiewicz's single axiom of the 
theory 6. As it was mentioned in Section 1.3,76 I have no proof whether Fl 
is indispensable or whether it can be obtained from F2 and Sv. 
2.4 
My 1952 result, demonstrated in the preceding subsection, allowed me to get 
the final formulation of metarule S. Namely, it has shown that the condition a 
of L can be substituted by a much weaker one. The proof that the condition b 
of Lesniewski is superfluous had been obtained in two steps and several years 
earlier. In 1937 I proved without the help of the point E of the rule of 65 that 
the formulation of b given by LeSniewski is too strong. In 1938, with the help 
of the point E of the rule and using an idea of demonstration analogous to that 
which was applied in the proof of my 1937 result, I was able to establish that 
the condition b follows from points a and c of metarule L. 
In this subsection I shall present my deductions from 1937, since: (1) they 
not only allowed me to establish single axioms of protothetic shorter than Ah 
or Ai,77 but also explained several important connections in the field of pro-
tothetic, and (2) their analysis allows one to understand better the deductions 
which will be presented in the next subsection. To put it very generally, the 
result to be discussed now can be formulated as follows. 
THEOREM A 1. If 
(1) we have the theory 6 (i.e., the complete equivalential calculus of propo-
sitions), and 
(2) we can reason in accordance with the law of extensionality for propo-
sitions and in accordance with the principle of bivalence for proposi-
tions (i.e., no matter whether both these laws are given as theses or as 
metarules), and 
(3) we have three laws (out of possible four) of logical productfor conjunc-
tion, viz.78 
Kl 0 = .0.0 
Kl 0 = .0.0 
either K2 1 = .1.1 or K2 1 = .1.1 
K30=.0.1 
K40=.1.0 
(where conjunction is not a primitive term but is defined in terms of equiva-
lence by means of a definition which has an "extensional" form79), 

ON THE SINGLE AXIOMS OF PROTOTHETIC 
195 
then, by using only the first four points of the rule of 6 5, we can always obtain 
either K4 from Kl, K2 and K3 or K3 from Kl, K2 and K4. 
In order to prove this theorem let us assume only the first four points of the 
rule of procedure and that we have: 
(Qt) Theory 6. 
(SB) The possibility to make deductions in accordance with the law of exten-
sionality for propositions. 
(It) The possibility to make deductions in accordance with the principle of 
bivalence for propositions. 
(::D) The arbitrarily chosen "extensional" definition of conjunction in terms 
of equivalence, e.g.: 
Z18 [pq] :: [J]:·f(p)· == ·f(q) :== q:. == .p.q 
We need such a definition only for the purpose of making conjunction 
meaningful in the field of the rule of 65. 
(<e) The laws Kl and K2. 
Obviously, in order to prove Theorem A 1 we have to consider two cases 
separately: the first, when K3 is assumed and, the second, when K4 is chosen. 
It is evident that in both cases we are able to obtain theses A13, A37, A54, 
A 76 (by Qt) and, in virtue of points Qt, It and <e, the theses: 
K5 [P] : p == .p.p 
[Kl; K2; It] 
and 
K6 1.1 
[K2; A13, p [ 0] 
Hence, having A 76 we can establish that metarule SII holds for our assump-
tions. Moreover, in virtue of the point (\' of the rule of procedure of 65, we 
add the definitions Dl and: 
D8 [P] : p == p. == .Vr (p) 
Now, if we assume K3, then we can make the following deductions: 
B 1 [P] : 0 == .O.p 
B2 1.(1.(0 == 0)) 
[(\'; Kl; K3; It] 
[K6; K5,p [I; SB] 

196 
BOLESLAW SOBOCINSKI 
B3 0::= .0.(1.0) :::= .1.(1.(0::= 0)) 
[A54, pi 0::= .0.(1.0), q 11.(1.(0::= 0)); Bl, p 11.0; B2] 
B4 1.(1.0). ::=: 1 ::= .1.(1.0) 
[A54,p 11, q 11.(1.0); A13,p 1 0] 
B5 1 ::= .1.(1.0) :::= .1.(1.(0::= 1)) 
[a; A76, p 11.(1.0), q 11 ::= .1.(1.0); B4; A37, pi O;~] 
B6 [PJ:.p::= .p.(1.0) :::= .1.(1.(0::= p)) 
B7 1.(1.(0::= .1.0)) 
[a; B3; B5; It] 
[B6, p I 1.0; K5, P I 1.0] 
B8 [fJ:.f(I). ::= .f(1.(O::= .1.0)) :::= .1.(0::= .1.0) 
B9 [pJ.Vr (P) 
BlO [pqJ : Vr (p). ::= .Vr (q) 
Bll 1.(0::= .1.0) 
[ZI8,p 11, q 11.(0::= .1.0); B7; SII] 
[DS; A13] 
[A54,p I Vr(p),q I Vr(q);B9;B9,p I q] 
[BS, f I Vr; BlO,p 11, q 11.(0::= .1.0)] 
B12 [fJ:.f(I). ::= .f(O::= .1.0) :::=: 0::= .1.0 
[ZI8, P 11, q 1 0::= .1.0; Bll; SII] 
K4 0::= .1.0 
[BI2, f I Vr; BlO,p 11, q I 0::= .1.0] 
Thus, our theorem holds for the first case. Now, let us assume K4. We can 
deduce K3 as follows: 
Cl [PJ : 0 ::= .p.O 
C2 ((0::= 0).1).1 
C3 0::= .(0.1).0 :::= .((0::= 0).1).1 
[a; Kl; K4; It] 
[a; K6; K5, P 11; ~] 
[A54,p I 0::= .(0.1).0, q 1((0::= 0).1).1; Cl,p I 0.1; C2] 
C4 (0.1).1. ::=: 1 ::= .(0.1).1 
[A54,p 11,q I (O.I).I;A13,p I 0] 
C5 1 ::= .(0.1).1 :::= .((0 ::= 1).1).1 
[A76, pi (0.1).1, q 11 ::= .(0.1).1; C4; A37, pi 0; ~] 

ON THE SINGLE AXIOMS OF PROTOTHETIC 
197 
[a; C3; C5; It] 
C6 [P]:.p::= .(O.I).p:::= .((0::= p).I).1 
C7 ((0::= .0.1).1).1 
[C6, pi 0.1; K5, pi 0.1] 
C8 [J]:.f((O::= .0.1).1). ::= .f(1) :::= I 
[ZI8,p 1(0::= .0.1).1, q II; C7; SII] 
C9 As(l) 
[Ol,p II;A13,p I 0] 
ClO As ((0::= .0.1).1) 
[C8, f I As; A13, pi 0; SII; C9; SII] 
Cll (0::= .0.1).1 
[Ol,p 1(0::= .0.1).1; ClO; SII] 
CI2 [f]:.f(O::= .0.1). ::= .f(l) :::= I 
[ZI8,p I 0::= .0.1, q II; Cll; SII] 
C13 As (0::= .0.1) 
[CI2, f I As; A13, pi 0; SII; C9; SII] 
K3 0::= .0.1 
[01, pi 0::= .0.1; C13; SII] 
Hence, the theorem holds also for the second case and, therefore, the proof 
is completed. I do not know, however, whether a modification of Theorem A 1 
holds, viz. whether K2 can be obtained from KI, K3, K4 or whether KI 
follows from K2, K3, K4, provided of course that the other conditions of A 1 
are unchanged and that the definition of conjunction is adopted in such a way 
that KI or K2 cannot be obtained from it and the theory 6.81 
Now, consider the set of assumptions S: 
(a) System 6. 
SI [Jp] :: f(p)· ::= :·f(p::= .[u].u). ::=: [q] : f(p)· ::= ·f(q) 
S2 [pq]:.p ::= q. ::=: [J] : f(p)· ::= ·f(q) 
S3 [pq] :: p ::= q. ::= :. [J]:.f(p). ::= ·f(q) :::= .p::= q 
which, as we know, constitutes a complete axiom-system of 65.82 Theo-
rem A 1 shows at once that in this set of assumptions either S2 or S3 is 
a consequence of the remaining axioms. In fact, it is evident that the set 
{ 6, S I , S2} satisfies the first two points of A 1. Hence, if we assume 6, S I, 
S2 and adopt ZI8 as a definition of conjunction, then we have, in virtue of 6, 
the theses A39, A76, A77 and 

198 
BOLESLAW SOBOCINSKI 
S4 [pq]:.p ==: q == q. == p 
and we can proceed as follows: 
S5 [P) :: p == :·[f):·f(P)· == ·f(p) :== p [S4, q I f(P); point,8 of the rule] 
S6 [P] : p == .p.p 
[A77, q I (J) : f(P)· == ·f(p) :== p, r I p.p; S5; Z18, q I p] 
Thus, we have obtained Kl and K2, since they follow from S6 by substi-
tution. 
S7 [pqr] :: [f] : f(P)· == ·f(q) :== :.[f]:·f(P)· == .f(q) :== .r == r 
[A39, pi [f] : f(P)· == ·f(q), q I r;,8] 
S8 [pqr] :: p == q. == :.(J]:.f(P). == .f(q) :== .r == r 
S9 0 == 1. == .0.1 
[A77,p I p == q, q I (J] : f(P)· == ·f(q), 
r I [f] : f(p)· == ·f(q) :== .r == r; S2; S7] 
[A77,p I 0, q 10== 1, r I 0.1; S8,p I 0, q 11, riO; Z18,p I 0, q 11] 
K3 0 == .0.1 
[A77,p 10, q I 0 == 1, r I 0.1; A39,p I 0, q 11; S9] 
Since we have the law of extensionality and the principle of bivalence for 
propositions, and since we have Kl, K2 and K3, an application of Theo-
rem A 1 gives K4. Therefore: 
SlO [pq] :: p.q. == :·[J]:·f(P)· == ·f(q) :== q 
[A76, pi p.q, q I [J]:·f(P)· == ·f(q) :== q; Z18] 
Sll 0 == :.[f]:.f(I). :-= .f(0) ::-= 0 
[A77,p 10, q 11.0, r I [f]:./(l). == .f(O) ::-= 0; K4; SlO,p 11, q I 0] 
Having S 11, 6, S2 (i.e., the possibility to reason in accordance with the 
law of extensionality for propositions) and using A39, A76 and S4, we can 
establish without any difficulty: 
S12 0:-= 1. == :.(J]:.f(O). :-= .f(l) ::-= .0:-= 1 
[a; Sll; A39; A76; S2] 

ON THE SINGLE AXIOMS OF PROTOTHETIC 
199 
SI3 1::= 0.::= :.[1]:.f(I}.::= .f(O} :::=.1::= ° 
[a; Sll; A39; A76; S2] 
In virtue of 6 and SI, from S8 (p I 0, q I 0, riO), S8 (p I 1, q I 1, r I 1), 
SI2 and S13 one can obtain S3. 
On the other hand, if 6, SI and S3 are assumed and if definition ZI8 is 
adopted, then, in virtue of 6, we have A39, A 76, An, S4 and, therefore, also 
S5, S6 (i.e., Kl and K2), S7 and SIO. Moreover, due to A76 and S3, we can 
establish metarule SIII83 as follows: 
Dem.: 
(0) a ::= (3 
[The assumption] 
(b) 1>(a) 
[The assumption] 
(c) [1]:·f(a}. ::= ·f((3} :::= .a ::= (3 
[S3, p I a, q I (3; 0] 
(D) 1>((3) 
[A76, pi 1>(a). ::= .1>((3), q I a ::= (3; c, f I ¢; 0; b] 
Q.E.D. 
This shows that the conditions of the point 2 of Theorem A 1 are satisfied by 
6, SI and S3. Furthermore: 
S14 [pq]:.q ::= q. ::= p :::= p 
[A76, q I q::= q. ::= p; S4] 
The application of metarule SIll to SI4 (p I 0, q I 0) and S3 (p I 1, q I 0) 
gives at once: 
SI5 0::= :.[1]:·f(I}. ::= .f(O} :::= ° 
Hence: 
K4 0::= .1.0 
[An, pi 0, q I [1]:·f(I}. ::= ·f(O} :::= 0, r 11.0; SI5; Z18,p 11, q I 0] 
and, therefore, in virtue of 6, S 1, SIll and Theorem A 1, we have K3. We 
further have: 
SI6 0::= :·[1]:·f(O}. ::= .f(1} :::= 1 
[An,p I 0, q I 0.1, r I [f]:·f(O}.::= .f(I) :::= 1; K3; Z18,p I 0, q 11] 

200 
BOLESLAW SOBOCINSKI 
S17 fpqr] :: [J]:·f(P)· == ·f(q) :== .r == r:. ==: [J] : f(P)· == ·f(q) 
[A76, pi [J] : f(P)· == ·f(q), q I [J]:·f(P)· == ·f(q) :== .r == r; S7] 
S18 0 ==: [f] : 1(0). == ·/(1) 
[A76,p I [/]:·f(O). == ·f(l) :== 1, r I [I] : 1(0). == ./(1); S16; 
S17,p I 0, q 11, riO] 
Now, the elementary applications of A39, S4, A76 and A77 to S18 allow 
us to establish: 
S19 0 == 1. ==: [I] : f(O). == ./(1) 
and 
S20 1 == O. ==: [J] : 1(1). == ./(0) 
Besides, 6 gives: 
S21 fpq] : p == p. == .q == q 
From S21 and the points f3 and 6 of the rule we get at once: 
S22 fp]:.p == p. ==: [J] : 1(P)· == ·I(P) 
Therefore, without any difficulty we can deduce S2 from S22 (p I 0), S22 
(p I 1), S 19 and S20, in virtue of 6 and S 1. 
Thus, the proof that S3 follows from 6, S I and S2, and that S2 can be 
obtained from 6, S 1 and S3 is completed. 
A simple inspection of the above proof shows that Theorem A 1 can be 
applied mutatis mutandis to metatheorem L of Lesniewski, provided that a 
definition of conjunction which makes KI-K4 meaningful will be akin in 
its structure to Z18, i.e., it will be the "extensional" kind of definition of 
conjunction in terms of equivalence. 
2.5 
In 1938 I proved a theorem much stronger than A 1. Viz.: 
THEOREM A2. On the basis of the rule of65, the system 6, and the possibil-
ity of reasoning in accordance with the principle of bivalence for propositions 
(i.e., no matter whether this law is given as a thesis, e.g. S I, or as a metarule, 
e.g. SV) yield KI, K2, K3 and K4. 

ON THE SINGLE AXIOMS OF PROTOTHETIC 
201 
Evidently, a direct consequence of A2 is that (5 and S I imply S2 and S3, and 
also, that the point b of metarule L is entirely superfluous. The proof of A2 
is rather long and complicated, and since in some respect its idea is patterned 
after the proof of A 1, I shall stress carefully the analogous points. In the proof 
that follows, the theses which are consequences of (5 alone will be indicated 
by 11, 12, J3, etc., but the definitions will continue to be enumerated following 
the order established in Section 2.1. 
Proof We assume the system (5 and metarule SV. Therefore, in virtue of 
(5 we, obviously, have metarule SII and the following theses: 
11 [pqr] :: p == .q == q :== r:. == .p == r 
J2 [pqrs] :: p == r. == :.q == s. ==: p == q. == .r == s 
J3 [P].p == P 
J4 [pq]:.p ==: q == .q == p 
J5 [pqr] :: p == r. == :.p ==: q == q. == r 
J6 [pqr]:.p == q. ==: q == r. == .p == r 
17 [pqr] :: p == .q == q :== r:. == .p == r 
J8 [pq]:.p == p. == q :== q 
J9 [pqr]:.p == q. ==: r == p. == .r == q 
Now, we introduce the following definition: 
D9 [pq]:.p == .q == q :== .IB-fpt(q) 
HI [pq] : p == .IB-fpt(q) 
H2 [pqt]:.p == q. ==: IB-fpt(t). == .IB-fqt(t) 
[11, r IIB-fpt(q); D9] 
[J2, r IIB-fpt(t), s IIB-fqt(t); HI, q I t; HI, pi q, q I t] 
H3 [pq]:.p == q. ==: [t] : IB-fpt(t). == .IB-fqt(t) 
[H2; ;3] 
H4 [t].IB-f I t(t) 
[HI, p I 0 == 0, q I t; J3, p I 0] 

202 
BOLESLAW SOBOCINSKI 
H5 [qJ:.q ==: q == .[tJ.~-f I t(t) 
H6 [PJ : p == .[tJ·~-fpt(t) 
H7 [pqJ:.p ==: q == q. == .[tJ·~-fpt(t) 
[J4, p I [tJ.~-f I t(t); H4] 
HI, q I t; ,8] 
[J5, r I [tJ.~-fpt(t); H6] 
For purposes which will become clear later, I have to be able to use propo-
sitional variables as parts of expressions belonging to a semantical category 
higher than the category of propositions. The multi-link definition [D9] serves 
this end. It is evident that the logical value of "~-fpt(q)" is always the same 
as the value of "p". On the other hand, "~-fpt" belongs to the semanti-
cal category of proposition-forming functors of one propositional argument. 
And, as we shall see, expressions of this category play an essential role in our 
proof. 
DI [PJ.p = As (P) 
D10 [fJ:.[PJ : f(p)· == ·f(P) :== Vr (f) 
[a] 
[a] 
The sole purpose of D I is to introduce into the system expressions belong-
ing to the semantical category of proposition-forming functors of one propo-
sitional argument. Without DI we cannot add to the system D1O, where the 
variable "f" belongs to this category. The constant "Vr", defined in D1O, 
belongs to the semantical category of proposition-forming functors of one 
argument which belongs to the semantical category of proposition-forming 
functors of one propositional argument. Obviously, this constant is a kind of 
"Verum" and for this reason the symbol "Vr" is used. This leads to no mis-
understanding, since with this "Vr" parentheses of the form "(" and ")" are 
associated. Hence, we are able to distinguish "Vr (f)" from "Vr (p)", defined 
in D8, and due to this we know that the argument of the first "Vr" belongs to 
the semantical category different from the seman tical category to which the 
second "Vr" belongs. On the other hand, the use of the same symbol indicates 
that the terms, defined in D8 and D 10, are analogous.85 
H8 [JJ.Vr (f) 
H9 [fgJ : Vr (f). == .Vr (g) 
[DIO; 13, pi f(P)] 
[J4, pi Vr (g), q I Vr (f); H8, fig; H8] 
H10 [PJ :: p == :.[wJ:. w(~-fpt)· == .w(~-fpt) :== ·[t].~-fpt(t) 
[H7, q I w(~-fpt);,8] 
Although H10 follows directly from H7 by substitution and by the distribu-
tion of quantifiers, it cannot be obtained without D I 0 (or a similar definition), 

ON THE SINGLE AXIOMS OF PROTOTHETIC 
203 
since the variable "w" involved in the substitution belongs to the semantical 
category which is not primitive. The constant "Vr", defined in DIO, belongs 
to the needed category and, therefore, when making substitution in H7 we can 
use variables of that category. The formula "w (®-fpj-)" is meaningful, since 
the multi-link functor "®-fpj-" belongs to the same category as "]" in DIO. 
Concerning HIO, let us remark that in some respect this thesis is analogous 
to S6. 
EI [1gJ:. [tJ : f(t). ::= .g(t) :::=: [WJ : W{f). ::= .W(g) 
Thesis EI is the law of extensionality for expressions belonging to the 
semantical category of proposition-forming functors of one propositional 
argument. We can add EI to the system in virtue of the point E of the rule of 
procedure, since every expression which occurs in EI belongs to a semantical 
category already introduced into the system. In fact, besides the primitive 
categories, the variables "]", "g" and "w" are meaningful due to definitions 
D I and D 10. Thus, the point ofthe rule of procedure of 65 concerning higher 
extensionalities is used in the proof of A2. 
Hll [pqJ:.p::= q. ::=: [WJ : W(®-fpj-). ::= .w(®-fqj-) 
[16, plp::= q, q I [tJ : ®-fpj-(t). ::= .®-fqj-(t), 
r I [wJ : w(®-fpj-). ::= .w(®-fqj-); H3; EI, f I ®-fpj-, 9 I ®-fqj-] 
The assumptions of Theorem A2 give neither the law of extensionality 
for propositions nor metarule SIll. However, due to EI and D9, we obtained 
Hll which allows us to reason as follows: if the formulas: (1) 0' ::= 13, and 
(2) <l>(®-f0'j-) have been proved, then the formula <l>(®-ff3j-) is provable. 
Hence, H 11 can be considered as a kind of Ersatz of the law of extensionality 
for propositions. Indeed, it is a very weak form of this law, but, as we shall 
see, it suffices for our purposes. 
H12 [wJ : w(®-f0j-).::= .W(®-fO::= Ij-) 
[HI I, p I 0, q I 0::= 1; 14, p I 0, q I 0] 
H13 0::=: [wJ : w(®-f0j-). ::= .w(®-f Ij-) 
[J7,p I 0, q I 0, r I [wJ : w(®-f0j-). ::= .w(®-f Ij-); Hll,p I 0, q I 0::= 0] 
In some respect H13 is analogous to S18. 

204 
BOLESLAW SOBOCINSKI 
H14 [W]: W(QS-fOt-}. == .W(~-flt-}:== :.[W]:.W(~-fOt-}. ==. 
w(~-flt-}:== .[t].~-flt-(t) 
[H5,q I W(~-fOt-}. == .w(~-flt-};,B] 
H15 0 == :.[W]:. W(~-fOt-}. == .w(~-f 1 t-} :== .[t].~-f It-(t) 
[J6,p I 0, q I [w] : w(~-fOt-}. == .w(~-flt-}, r I [w]:. 
w(~-fOt-}. == .w(~-flt-}:== .[t].~-flt-(t);H13;HI4] 
Confront H15 with S16. 
Dll [jg] :: [w]:. w(j}. == .w(g} :== .[t].g(t):. == .1Jt(jg} 
[a] 
Dll is a definition of conjunction of two proposition-forming functors of 
one propositional argument. As far as its form is regarded, it is analogous 
to definition Z18. Obviously, the constants "1Jt" and "Vr" in DlO belong to 
different semantical categories, but we can associate with "1Jt" the same kind 
of parentheses, as are given in D lO, since in D 11 these parentheses enclose 
two variables, each of which belongs to the same category as "f" in D 1 O. 
Now, having 6, metarule SV, Hll, H15 and Dll we will be able to obtain 
formula H31 which, in some respect, is analogous to B5. Consequently, H31 
implies H38 which is indispensable for our purpose. 
H16 [P] : p == ·1Jt(QS-fPt-QS-fPt-} 
[J6, q I [w]:. w(QS-fpt-}· == .w(QS-fpt-} :== .[t].~-fpt-(t), 
r IIJt(QS-fpt-~-fpt-}; HlO; Dll, f I ~-fph 9 I QS-fPt-] 
Cf. K5, KI and K2. 
H17 1Jt(~-fIt-~-fIt-} 
[HI6,p I 0 == 0; Jl3,p I 0] 
Cf.K6. 
H18 [pw]: w(~-flt-}. == .w(~-fIJt(~-fpt-~-fpt-}t-} 
[Hll, q IIJt(QS-fpt-~-fpt-}; H16] 
Hl9 O. == .1Jt(~-f0t-~-f1t-} 
Cf. K3. 
[J6,p I 0, q I [w]:.w(~-fOt-}. == .W(~-flt-} :== . [t].QS-f 1 t-(t), 
r 11Jt(~-fOt-QS-f 1 t-}; H15; Dll, f I ~-fOh 9 I ~-f 1 t-] 

ON THE SINGLE AXIOMS OF PROTOTHETIC 
205 
H20 [PJ : O. ::::: .9t(~-fot~-fpt) 
[HI6, pi 0; H19; SV] 
In some respect H20 is analogous to B 1. It is clear that an application of SV 
involves an auxiliary definition and metarule SII. Since by now these steps 
have become rather trivial, I have omitted them. 
D12 [1] : 9t(~-f 1 t f). ::::: .8a(f) 
[a] 
D12 is an auxiliary definition needed for extensional deductions. 
H21 8a(~-f 1 t) 
H22 8a(~-f9t(~-f 1 t~-f 1 t) t) 
H23 9t(~-f 1 t~-f9t(~-f 1 t~-f 1 t) t) 
[DI2,1 I ~-f 1 t; HI7] 
[HI8, p I 1, W I 8a; H21] 
[DI2,1 I ~-f9t(~-fIt~-flt)t; H22; SII] 
Cf. B2. 
H24 [Pl:·O.::::: .9t(~-fot~-fpt):::::: .9t(~-flt~-f9t(~-flt~-fIt)t) 
[J4, p I 9t(~-f 1 t~-f9t(~-f 1 t~-f It) t); 
q I O. ::::: .9t(~-fot~-fpt); H23; H20] 
Cf. B3. 
D13 [J]:: 1.::::: .9t(~-flt~-f9t(~-flt~-fOt)t)::::::· 
9t(~-flt~-f9t(~-fltf)t):· ::::: .8(3(f) 
This is an auxiliary definition. 
H25 8(3(~-fOt) 
[a] 
[Dl3,1 I ~-fot; J8, pi 0, q I 9t(~-f I t~-f9t(~-f I t~-fot) t)] 
H26 8(3(~-f0 ::::: It) 
[HI2, W I 8(3; H25] 
H27 1. ::::: .9t(~-f I t~-f9t(~-f I t~-fot) t) :::::: . 
9t(~-f I t~-f9t(~-f I t~-fO ::::: 1 t) t) 
[D13,1 I ~-f0 ::::: 1 t; H26; SII] 
Cf. B5. Now, I am applying SV to H24 and H27. Since these formulas are a 
little complicated, I will introduce the required auxiliary definition, although 

206 
BOLESLAW SOBOCINSKI 
the construction of such a definition is a simple matter of routine. Viz.: 
014 [P] :: p. == .91(IB-fptIB-f91(IB-f H-IB-fotH-) :== . 
91(IB-f 1tIB-f91(IB-f 1tIB-fO ==pt)t):. == .8')'(p) 
[a] 
H28 8')'(0) 
H29 8')'(1) 
H30 [P].8')'(p) 
[014,p I 0;H24,p 191(IB-f 1tIB-fOt)] 
[014, p 11; H27] 
[SV; H28; H29] 
H31 [P]:.p. == .91(IB-fptIB-f91(IB-f 1 tIB-f0t) t) :== . 
91(IB-f 1 tIB-f91(IB-f 1 tIB-f0 == pt) t) 
[014; H30; SIl] 
Cf. B5. The derivation of H31 constitutes a crucial point in this proof. 
H32 91(IB-f 1 tIB-f91(IB-f 1 tIB-f0. == .91(IB-fltlB-fOt)t)t) 
[H31,p 191(IB-f1tIB-fOt); H16,p 191(IB-f1tIB-fOt)] 
Cf. B6. 
H33 [W]:.W(IB-flt). == .W(IB-f91(IB-f1 tIB-f0. ==. 
91(IB-f 1tIB-f0t)t)t):== .[t].IB-f91(IB-fltlB-f0. ==. 
91(IB-f 1 t<5-f0t) t) t (t) 
[011, f I IB-f 1 h 9 I <5-f91(<5-f 1 t<5-f0. == .91(<5-f 1 tIB-f0t) t) t; 
H32; SIl] 
H34 [t].<5-f 91 ( IB-f 1 tIB-f0. == .91( <5-f 1 tIB-f0t) t) t (t) 
[H33, W I Vr; H9, f I <5-f 1 t, 
9 I IB-f91(<5-f 1 t<5-f0. == .91(<5-f 1 tIB-f0t) t) t] 
H35 91(<5-flt<5-f0. == .91(<5-f1 t<5-f0t)t) 
[H6,p 191(<5-flt<5-f0. == .91(IB-flt<5-f0t)t); H34; SII] 
H36 [w]:.w(<5-flt). == .W(IB-fO. == .91(IB-f1t<5-f0t)t):==. 
[t].IB-f0. == .91(<5-fltlB-f0t)t(t) 
[011, f I IB-f 1 h 9 I IB-f0. == .91(<5-f 1 t<5-f0t) t; H35; SIl] 

ON THE SINGLE AXIOMS OF PROTOTHETIC 
207 
H37 [t].~-fO. == .9{(~-flt~-fotH-(t) 
[H36, '11 I Vr; H9, f I ~-f 1 h 9 I ~-f0. == .9{(~-f 1 t~-fot} t] 
H38 O. == .9{(~-flt~-fOt} 
[H6,p I O. == .9{(~-flt~-fOt}; H37; SII] 
In some respect H38 is analogous to K4. The derivation of H38 actual-
ly concludes the proof of Theorem A2, since we can define conjunction of 
propositions in the following way: 
D15 [pq] : 9{(Q;-fpt~-fqt}. == .p.q 
[a] 
which gives at once: 
B 1 [P] : p == .p.p 
[J6, q 19{(~-fpt~-fpt}, r I p.p; H16; D15, q I p] 
B 1 includes Kl and K2. 
K3 0 == .0.1 
[J6,p I 0, q 19{(~-fOt~-flt}, r 10.1; HI9; DI5,p I 0, q 11] 
K40==.1.0 
[J6, p I 0, q I 9{(~-f 1 t~-fot}, r 11.0; H38; D15, p 11, q I 0] 
Thus, Theorem A2 has been proved, since all the four laws of logical prod-
uct for conjunction have been obtained. It remains to note that definition D15 
shows that conjunction of propositions is a particular case of a more general 
term, viz. the functor "9{" which is defined in D 11. Obviously, from D 15 this 
functor can be dismissed easily: 
H39 [pq]:: [w]:.w(~-fpt}. == .w(~-fqt}:== .[t]·~-fqt(t):. == .p.q 
[J6,p I [w]:.w(~-fpt}· == .w(~-fqt}:== .[t]·~-fqt(t), 
q I ~(~-fpt~-fqt), r I p.q; Dll, f I ~-fph 9 I ~-fqt; D15] 
and we can even obtain a simpler formula, as follows: 
H40 [pq] :: [w]:.w(~-fpt}. == .w(~-fqt} :== .q:. == :.['11]:. 
w(~-fpt}· == .w(~-fqt} :== .[t]·~-fqt(t) 
[J9,p I q, q I [t]·~-fqt(t), r I w(~-fpt}· == .w(~-fqt}; H6,p I q; (3] 

208 
BOLESLAW SOBOCINSKI 
H41 [pq] :: [W]:. W{0-fpr}. == .W{0-fqr} :== .q:. == .p.q 
[J6,p I [W] : W{0-fpr}· == .W{0-fqr} :== .q, q I [W]:. 
W{0-fpr}. == .W{0-fqr} :== .[t].0-fqr(t}, r I p.q; H40; H39] 
It is obvious that D15, H39 and H41 are inferentially equivalent. These 
theses are analogous to Z18. The proof that under the assumptions of A2, 
D15 really defines the same constant as Z18, will be outlined in Section 3 
of this paper. Also, it should be noted that instead of D 11 we can adopt the 
following definition: 
Dll * [/g] :: [w]:. w(f}. == .w{g} :== .[t]·/(t):. == .'Jl.(fg} 
In this case the proof of Theorem A2 has to be patterned on the proof of 
the second part of Theorem A 1. 
Since Theorem A2 implies that condition b of Lesniewski's metatheorem 
L is superfluous, and the proof given in Section 2.3 of this paper shows that 
the system 6 follows from F1, F2 and SV, my metarule S is proved. Hence, 
each of the axioms An, Ao, Ap and Aq can serve as a single axiom of the 
system 65, because each of them, according to Sections 2.1-2.2 of this paper, 
satisfies the conditions of S. 
NOTES 
1 These results were obtained in the years 1937, 1938, 1945 and 1952. Some of them were 
included in my Polish paper "0 aksjomatykach prototetyki" (On the Axiom-Systems of Proto-
thetic) which was to be published in the first volume of Collectanea Logica. During the siege 
of Warsaw in September 1939, this almost ready volume perished when a printing office was 
burnt. Cf. the introduction to Sobocinski (1949a). In 1953 I published a short resume in Polish 
concerning these researches, cf. Sobocinski (1954). 
2 A description of this symbolism is given in Lesniewski (1938a), cf. pp. 21-23. Cf. also 
Lesniewski (1938b). 
3 Lesniewski maintained that any rule of procedure for his system must be formulated as fully 
as possible. Hence, a possible rule concerning quantifiers other than the general ones would 
have to be formulated in such a way that it would be possible to introduce into the system not 
only the existential quantifiers but also other kinds of quantifiers possible in the bi-valued logic. 
E.g., the quantifier saying that a formula holds for at least two different instances of a variable 
bound by it, etc. On the other hand, in Lesniewski's system the formalization of the rules of 
procedure is strictly constructive. This fact prevented a possibility to formulate such a general 
rule concerning quantifiers. Therefore, not wishing to have only partially formulated rule [of 
procedure of his system,] he dropped the existential quantifier from his system. However, we 
can always use it "unofficially" as a pure abbreviation. Cf. LeSniewski (1929), pp. 59-78, and 
Sobocinski (1934). Also cf. Lejewski (1956). 
4 The meaning of multi-link functors will be explained later. In Lesniewski's system the 
form of parentheses is determined by a constant functor to which this kind of parentheses was 
prescribed for the first time. Consequently, the same form of parentheses must be used for 
any other functor belonging to the same semantical category as the first one. Cf. Lesniewski 

ON THE SINGLE AXIOMS OF PROTOTHETIC 
209 
(1929), pp. 59-78. 
5 Cf. also Sobocinski (1949b), p. 257. 
6 Cf. Lesniewski (1929, 1938a), Sobocinski (1934) and Sobocinski (l949b), pp. 254-257. 
7 We can base ontology and mereology on the ordinary classical propositional calculus, but in 
such a case their rules of procedure must be strengthened by the addition of a rule concerning 
the operations with the quantifiers. 
8 A description of this system is given in Slupecki (1953), pp. 55-79. The restricted system 
of protothetic cannot be confounded with the extended propositional calculus constructed by 
Lukasiewicz, cf. Lukasiewicz (1951), Meredith (1951). In that system Lukasiewicz accepted 
much stronger rules of procedure than we have in protothetic. Besides, in the extended propo-
sitional calculus there are free variables. 
9 Concerning this principle, cf. remarks of Lukasiewicz in (1921) and (1952). Cf. also Sobo-
cinski (1956a), pp. 22-27. 
10 Cf. Tarski (1956) and Slupecki (1953). 
11 In Lesniewski's system this theory is adopted instead of a theory of logical types. It applies 
also to expressions belonging to protothetic. A short description of this theory is given in 
Slupecki (1953), pp. 45-47. Cf. a remark of Lejewski in (1956). 
12 The history of these modifications is given in Lesniewski (1929), pp. 30-59. 
13 Cf. Tarski (1956) and Lesniewski (1929), pp. 9-13. In Sobocinski (1939, 1949a) I presented 
the definitions of conjunction in terms of equivalence; their forms differ from the definitions 
of Tarski, although they are based essentially on his idea. E.g: 
(pq):.p.q. ==: [f) : f(pq)· == .f(qp == p) 
14 The computable systems of protothetic are discussed in Lesniewski (1938a), pp. 35-43. 
Lesniewski's proof was never published, but it can be easily reconstructed. The proof of com-
pleteness of protothetic, given in Slupecki (1953), pp. 90-97, is entirely different. 
15 Cf. Sobocinski (1956b), pp. 61-62. 
16 Cf. Lesniewski (1929), pp. 30-35 and Lesniewski (l938a), pp. 5-6. 
17 The quantifiers and parentheses do not have semantical meaning in Lesniewski's system. 
But in protothetic any meaningful propositional formula with bound or free variables belongs 
to the category of propositions, e.g., A3 or any meaningful propositional part of it. 
18 Cf. Lesniewski (1929), pp. 15-30 and Lesniewski (l938a), pp. 17-21. Cf. also Lukasiewicz 
(1939) and some remarks in Rasiowa (1947). 
19 A complete proof of it is given in Lesniewski (l938b). 
20 An exceptionally precise formulation of them is given in Lesniewski (1929), pp. 59-78. 
21 The formal properties of protothetic are such that either an axiom-system of 6 5 includes 
the law of extensionality concerning propositions or this law can be obtained from a suitable 
axiom-system by an application of the point E of the discussed rule. Hence, this point allows 
to add to the system only the "higher" theses of extensionality. See Section 2 of this paper, the 
proof of metarule S. 
22 A definition without the main quantifier is called an absolute protothetical definition; the 
definition with the main quantifier is called a relative protothetical definition. The forms in 
some respect similar to the absolute protothetical definitions can be found in Whitehead-
Russell (1925), p. XII. 
23 The forms of these parentheses are determined by the semantical category of a functor to 
which they belong. In the case of a multi-link functor, each pair of its parentheses has to have 
a form different from the other pairs. 
24 Ordinarily in this paper I use a dot as a symbol of conjunction, as in Whitehead-Russell 
(1925). However, a dot is very inconvenient when the parentheses are used. Although in Z5 
"/\" and "/\1" belong to different semantical categories, we can use the same form of paren-
theses for both functors because the arguments of"/\" and "/\1" belong to the same semantical 
category and the number of these arguments enclosed by parentheses indicates the category of 
a functor. 

210 
BOLESLAW SOBOCINSKI 
25 An idea of multi-link functors is akin to Schonfinkel's theory of superposition of functions 
(cf. Schonfinkel, 1924). Lesniewski introduced these functors to his system independently 
of Schonfinkel. He was rather influenced by some formulas in Whitehead-Russell (1925), 
e.g .. *31.14. Cf. Lesniewski(l938a), p. 44; Lesniewski (1929), p. 66, and Sobocinski (1934), 
p.159. 
26 Concerning this thesis cf. Tarski (1956), p. 17 and Lesniewski (1938a), pp. 30-55. In 
Meredith (1951) it is shown that this formula can serve as a single axiom of the extended 
propositional calculus of Lukasiewicz. Meredith's proof cannot be carried out in protothetic 
since in this theory the rule of substitution adopted by Lukasiewicz is not valid. 
27 Similarly as in the functional calculus of omega degree. 
28 This fact is connected with the properties of the possible definitions of conjunction by 
means of equivalence. 
29 Cf. Lesniewski (1929), pp. 41--44. 
30 Cf. T.E.IL in Lesniewski (1929), pp. 74-75. 
31 In Z14, obviously, there occur expressions belonging to three different semantical categories. 
Namely, "/" belongs to the category of proposition-forming functors of one propositional argu-
ment. 
32 Discussing this point, Slupecki omitted the case of multi-link functors, cf. Slupecki (1953), 
pp. 89 and 100. Cf. also Lejewski (1956). 
33 After Slupecki (1953), p. 81, a functor of a type "~,, can be called an interfunctorial 
equivalence. 
34 In order to simplify the situation I omitted in the formulas (a) and (b) the possible quantifiers. 
If they are present, we have to define in the point (d) a multi-link functor. 
35 Several such metarules will be established in Section 2. 
36 In Lesniewski (1938a), pp. 23-35, the history of the successive simplifications of the axiom 
system of 6 5 is discussed up to 1936. Here I repeat the essential points concerning this subject 
from that paper as only a few copies of that publication are preserved. The results obtained 
after 1936 are not discussed in Lesniewski (1938a). 
37 Cf., e.g., Slupecki (1953), pp. 79-84, where a method of verification of protothetical func-
tors by the bi-valued matrix is given. 
38 In Lesniewski's writings this metarule is not stated explicitly but he used it constantly. E.g., 
cf. Lesniewski (1938a), p. 34. 
39 
Here "0" and "I" are not defined constants, but the abbreviations of "[u].u" and 
"[u].u. == . [u].u", respectively. 
40 Obviously, in "<//' other variables can occur. 
41 Cf. Lesniewski (1938a), p. 24. Only in 1933 has Lukasiewicz proved that Al * is a single 
axiom of the equivalential propositional calculus. Cf. Lukasiewicz (1939,1948). 
42 Cf. Lesniewski (1938a), p. 27 and Wajsberg (1937). 
43 Cf. Lesniewski (1929), pp. 59-78, and Lesniewki (1938a), pp. 14-16. 
44 In connection with this problem, Lesniewski, preparing (1 938a) in 1937, made the following 
remark (p. 23): "Das von mir oben in dem Resume des § II meiner Mitteilung angegebene 
einzige Axiom der nach Direktiven des Systems 6 5 gebauten Protothetik stellte sich leider 
bisher "siegreich" seit schon elf Jahren von anderen Forschern und von mir unternommenen 
Versuchen entgegen, urn es wenigstens ein einziges Wort zu verkiirzen. Die Sachen haben 
sich hier jedoch so gestaltet, dass ich beinahe bis zum heutigen Tag wiederholt von immer 
neuen diese Aufgabe betreffenden Losungsideen horte. Alles dies bewegt mich, dass ich ohne 
zu warten, bis die mit der Entstehung des eben erwiilmten Axioms und mit seinen kleinen 
weiteren Umgestaltungen verbundenen Probleme eine angemessene Besprechung an einer 
passenden Stelle im Rahmen der Forsetzung meiner Mitteilung finden, hier im Interesse des 
Lesers, welcher sich mit selbstandigen Forschungen in diesem Gebiet beschiiftigen mochte, 
eine ganz allgemeine Ubersicht der wichtigsten theoretischen Positionen angebe, die zum 
Entwicklungsbild des einzigen Axioms der Protothetik beitragen und verschiedene auf diesem 
Boden angewandte nutzliche konstruktive Kunstgriffe illustrieren." 

ON THE SINGLE AXIOMS OF PROTOTHETIC 
211 
45 Cf. Lukasiewicz (1939), Sobocinski (l949a), p. 10 and Lesniewski (1938a), p. 31. 
46 In Slupecki (1953), p. 99 and Grzegorczyk (1955) the authors do not mention my name 
when discussing this axiom-system. Cf. Sobocinski (1956b), p. 60, note 17, and Sobocinski 
(1954). 
47 Thesis S 1 was established by Lesniewski. 
48 Obviously, ZI5 is inferentially equivalent to Z3. 
49 In the authentic symbolism of Lesniewski. 
50 In 1928, applying the rule of extensionality, I simplified the axiom-system of Lesniewski's 
ontology, cf. Sobocinski (1934). However, the proof given there has nothing in common with 
the deductions used in protothetic. 
51 
The thesis Al is not organic, while the axioms Ah-Ak are. Concerning the notion of 
"organic formula", cf. Sobocinski (1956b), p. 60. 
52 It was the last investigation made by Lesniewski before his fatal illness. From the notes he 
had left I prepared a paper concerning this result with the intention to publish it in Collectanea 
Logica. Due to World War II this was not accomplished. Cf. Sobocinski (1949a), the introduc-
tion. 
53 It was not mentioned in Sobocinski (1954). 
54 Cf. Section 1.3, pp. 170-171. 
55 Cf. Section 1.3, pp. 165-166. 
56 Cf. Section 1.3, p. 171. 
57 Cf. Section 1.3, pp. 169-170. 
58 Concerning this rule cf. Section 1.2, p. 159. Also, cf. Lesniewski (1929), pp. 59-78. 
59 It is well known, cf., e.g., Tarski (1956), pp. 1-8 and Slupecki (1953), pp. 97-100, that 
Tarski established that it is possible to define conjunction in terms of equivalence, provided that 
one is allowed to use quantifiers and variable functors. I.e., such definitions can be established 
in a system of the calculus of propositions in which variables of higher semantical categories 
are allowed, and in which quantifiers are used with appropriate rules to bind variables of any 
category. It is also known that definitions suggested by Tarski are of two different types. 
The following propositions can serve as examples of the first type of definitions: 
1. [pq] :.: [f] :: p == :. [r] : p == .f(r) :==: [r] : q == .f(r) ::== .p.q 
2. [pq] :-: [f] :: q == :. [r] : p == .f(r) :==: [r] : q == .f(r) ::== .p.q 
In this type of definitions the arguments of definiendum ("p" and "q" in the examples given 
above) do not occur as arguments of the variable functors in the definiens (we have "f(r)" in 
the definiens but not "f(p)" and "f(q)"). 
The other type of definitions can be exemplified with the aid of the following propositions: 
3. [pq] :: [f]:·p ==: f(p)· == ·f(q):· == .p.q 
4. [pq] :: [f]:·q ==: f(p)· == ·f(q):· == .p.q 
In 3 and 4 the arguments of the definiendum (i.e., "p" and "q" in 3 and 4) occur as arguments 
of the variable functor in the definiens (in the formulas 3 and 4 we have "f(p)" and "f(q)"). 
Only in the field of a theory of propositions which is enriched by the addition of the law of 
extensionality for propositions we are able to give a proof that both types of these definitions 
are inferentially equivalent. Cf. Tarski (1923a, 1923b); (1956), pp. 1-8 and Slupecki (1953), 
pp. 97-100. It is quite obvious that in the field of full systems of protothetic, such as 6 1-65, 
this equivalence holds. 
Definitions of both types admit modifications. Thus, for instance, we have Tarski's thesis: 

212 
BOLESLAW SOBOCINSKI 
5. [pq] :.: (f] :: p := :. [r]·f(r). :=: [r] : q := ·f(r) :::= .p.q 
cf. Lesniewski (1938a), p. 27, which belongs to the first type. On the other hand, the formulas 
established by Lesniewski: 
6. [pq] :: [f]:·p:=: f(q)· := ·f(I):. := .p.q 
7. [pq] :: [f]:·q :=: f(P)· := ·f(I):. := .p.q 
cf. Lesniewski (1938a), p. 24, and the definitions suggested by myself: 
8. [Pq]:·[f] : f(Pq)·:= ·f(ll) ::= .p.q 
9. [Pq]:·[f] : f(pl).:= ·f(1q) ::= .p.q 
10. [pq]:.(f] : f(1p)·:= ·f(ql) ::= .p.q 
cf. Sobocinski (1939, 1949a), belong to the second class. In Section 2.5 of this paper I shall 
use a definition of conjunction in terms of equivalence, which is of the second type but much 
more complicated than the formulas 3 or 4. The results discussed in Section 2.4 hold for such 
definitions of the second kind which possess strictly "extensional" form, as the theses 3 and 4 or 
their suitable modifications. Namely, in order to obtain the deductions presented in Section 2.4, 
we can adopt an arbitrary definition of conjunction by means of equivalence, but this definition 
must satisfy the following additional condition: Both arguments of the definiendum must occur 
as the n-th arguments (for n: 1, 2, 3, ... ) of the variable functor in the definiens. This additional 
condition is satisfied by the formulas 3 and 4, but not by the theses 6-10. 
The meaning ofthe symbol" 1", which is used in the formulas 6-10, is explained at the end 
of this introduction. 
60 Cf. Section 1.3, p. 169. 
61 Cf. Section 1.2, p. 159, Lesniewski (1938b) and (1929), p. 76. Lesniewski observed this 
requirement consequently in Lesniewski (1938b). 
62 Cf. note 39. 
63 The formulation of the rule of procedure of 6 5 requires to adjust this rule to each particular 
axiom-system of 6 5. There exists a method which we can use to make such adjustment 
automatically. Cf. Lesniewski (1929), pp. 59-76, especially p. 63, T.E.I-T.E.lY. 
64 This theorem will be proved later, viz. as the thesis A 76. 
65 In this and the subsequent definitions I am using the symbols "cI>a", "cI>j3", ... , "Ilfa", 
"1lfj3", etc. when the defined terms possess no important logical meanings, i.e., when the 
suitable definitions have purely auxiliary character. 
Obviously, the expression "cI>a-fpr" occurring in the definiendum of D3 belongs to the 
same semantical category as "I" in A7, and, therefore, we can substitute it for this variable in 
order to obtain AIO. 
66 Evidently, instead of SII we can use SI, but in such a case the deductions would be longer. 
67 Cf. formula Z14, p. 163. 
6R In this and the subsequent definitions I am using the symbols "VrJ", "Vr2", etc., in order 
to indicate that the defined terms are really the same as "Vr", introduced by D2. At this stage 
we are not yet able to show that these terms are the same. This will be possible at a later stage, 
when the system is sufficiently developed. Cf. the use of such symbols in Lesniewski (1938b), 
e.g. D9, p. 126 and DID, p. 130. 
69 The formulas DI and DII belong to the type of definitions which in Lesniewski's system 
are called the absolute protothetical definitions (in protothetic). Cf. note 22. 
70 In connection with this thesis cf. thesis SI. Obviously, if we have SI at our disposal, then 
the rule of 6 5 allows us to prove that these theses are inferentially equivalent. 

ON THE SINGLE AXIOMS OF PROTOTHETIC 
213 
71 Obviously, the symbols "0" and "1" which occur in the definiens of this definition are only 
typographical abbreviations. Cf. the introduction to Section 2 of this paper. 
72 The application of SV in this case requires, obviously, an auxiliary definition which must 
be multi-link, viz.: 
[pq] :: p = .p = q := q:. = ·X~-fqt(P) 
Similarly, in the proof of A57, etc. 
73 Cf. this paper, pp. 170-171, Sobocinski (1954), and the introduction to Sobocinski (1949a), 
f.' 17. 
4 Cf. Sobocinski (1954) and (1949a), pp. 9 and 18. 
75 The analysis of matrix M2 allows us to establish easily some interesting properties of the 
bi-valued equivalential propositional calculus, i.e., of the system 6. Namely, using M2 and 
Lesniewski's theorem which will be given below, we can prove that: 
1. A single axiom of the system 6 must be at least nine letters long (in Lukasiewicz's 
symbolism). 
and 
2. In any complete axiom-system of 6 at least one axiom must contain three different 
variables. 
The first point confirms a proof given by Lukasiewicz that each of his theses Ll (A 78), 
L2 and L3 is the shortest axiom of 6. See Section 1.3, pp. 168-169. Cf. Lukasiewicz (1939, 
1948), Lesniewski (1938a), p. 31, Sobocinski (1954) and (1949a), p. 10. The second point 
says that a known theorem ofWajsberg (which was later obtained independently by Diamond 
and McKinsey) holds not only for the complete bi-valued propositional calculus, but also for 
the system 6. Cf. Wajsberg (1931), Diamond-McKinsey (1947), Lukasiewicz-Tarski (1930) 
and Tarski-Lukasiewicz (1956), p. 47. A simple consequence of this point and Lesniewski's 
theorem mentioned below is that: 
3. The smallest number n such that the system 6 can be based on a set of axioms each of 
which contains at most n variables (counted with multiplicity) is equal to 6. 
This fact is rather interesting, since an analogous number for the complete classical propo-
sitional calculus is equal to 5, cf. Sobocinski (1955). It has to be noted that the related results 
were published by laskowski for the bi-valued propositional calculus or any fragment of it, if in 
these systems: (1) substitution and detachment (with respect to implication) are the only rules 
of procedure; and (2) the thesis CCpqCCqrCpr holds. Cf. la§kowski (1948) and Sobocinski 
(1955), p. 114. 
A proof of points 1-3 requires the use of a known theorem of Lesniewski which says that: 
Any well-formed equivalentialformula is a thesis of6 if and only if each variable occurs 
in it an even number of times. 
Besides Lesniewski's treatise Lesniewski (1929), §3, pp. 15-30, there are several papers 
in which this theorem and its modifications are discussed, cf. Rasiowa (1947, 1955), Gotlind 
(1946, 1951), Mihailescu (1937a, 1937b, 1938), Rose (1951), Stone (1937). 
Now, we can outline the proof of 1-3 as follows. 
A simple inspection of M2 shows that this matrix is symmetrical and that in its field the 
values of arbitrary meaningful equivalential formulas which have the following forms (in 
Lukasiewicz's symbolism): EaEa(3 and El"Y are equal to the values of (3 and "Y, respectively. 
Moreover, M2 verifies the following 16 theses: 

214 
BOLESLAW SOBOCINSKI 
1. Epp; 
2. EpEpEqq; 
3. EpEqEpq; 
4. EpEqEqp; 
5. EEppEqq; 
6. EEpqEpq; 
7. EEpqEqp; 
8. EpEEqqp; 
9. EpEEpqq; 
10. EpEEqpq; 
11. EEpEqqp; 
12. EEqEpqp; 
13. EEqEqpp; 
14. EEEqqpp; 
15. EEEpqqp; 
16. EEEqpqp 
and M2 falsifies the theses L1 (A78), L2 and L3. This being the case, an elementary proof 
by induction shows that the points 1-3 follow from these properties of matrix M2 and from 
Lesniewski's theorem. 
76 See p. 171. 
77 Viz. Aj and Ak • The axioms AI, Am, and An-Aq require the method proved in Section 2.5 
of this paper. 
78 Cf. note 39. 
79 Cf. note 59. 
80 The term "Vr" defined in D8 is a constant term different from "Vr" defined in D2, since it 
belongs to the semantical category of proposition forming functors of one propositional argu-
ment. In both cases we can use the same symbols and the same form of parentheses prescribed 
to these symbols in their definitions, since in the first case the parentheses enclose one variable 
and in the second two variables. Hence, no misunderstanding is possible. Such use of symbols 
is permitted by the rule of 6 5• 
81 If this modification of Theorem A 1 were valid, it would be possible to prove without the 
aid of the point € of the rule of 6 5 that each of the theses AI-Ap is a single axiom of 6 5• 
82 Cf. note 46. 
83 Cf. Section 2.1, pp. 176--177. 
84 The term "~" defined in D9 is a multi-link form of the functor Gpq whose logical matrix 
is: 
G 
0 
1 
M3 
0 
0 
0 
1 
I 
1 
* 
Letter G is used as a symbol of this constant in my paper Sobocinski (1953), p. 79. 
85 Cf. note 80. 
REFERENCES 
Church, Alonzo (1956). Introduction to Mathematical Logic, Vol. 1. Princeton University 
Press, Princeton, NJ. 
Diamond, A.H. and McKinsey, J.C.C. (1947). 'Algebras and Their Subalgebras', Bulletin of 
the American Mathematical Society 53, 959-962. 
Gotlind, Erik (1946). 'Om nagra ekvivalenssatser i tvaviirdelogiken (On Some Equivalence 
Propositions in Two-Valued Logic)', Norsk matematisk tidsskrift 28, 71-75. 
Gotlind, Eric (1951). 'A Lesniewski-Mihailescu Theorem for m-Valued Propositional Calculi' , 
Portugaliae Mathematica 10,97-102. 
Grzegorczyk, Andrzej (1955). 'The System of Lesniewski in Relation to Contemporary Logical 
Research', Studia Logica III, 77-97. 
Hiz, Henry (1952). 'On Primitive Terms of Logic' , The Journal of Symbolic Logic 17, 156--157. 
Jaskowski, Stanislaw (1948). 'Trois contributions au calcul des propositions bivalent', Studia 
Societatis Scientiarum Torunensis, section A, 1(1),1-15. 

ON THE SINGLE AXIOMS OF PROTOTHETIC 
215 
Lejewski, Czeslaw (1956). Review of Slupecki (1953). The Journal of Symbolic Logic 21, 
188-191. 
Lesniewski, Stanislaw (1929). 'Grundziige eines neuen Systems der Grundlagen der Mathe-
matik', Fundamenta Mathematicae XIV, 1-81. 
Lesniewski, Stanislaw (1938a). 'Einleitende Bemerkungen zur Fortsetzung meiner Mitteilung 
u.d.T. "Grundziige eines neuen Systems der Grundlagen der Mathematik"', Collectanea 
Logica I, 1-60. 
Lesniewski, Stanislaw (1938b). 'Grundziige eines neuen Systems der Grundlagen der Mathe-
matik, §12', Collectanea Logica I, 61-144. 
Lukasiewicz, Jan (1921). 'Logika dwuwartosciowa (Two-Valued Logic)', Przeglap Filo-
zoficzny XXllI, 189-205. 
Lukasiewicz, Jan (1929). Elementy logiki matematycznej (Elements of Mathematical Logic), 
Warszawa. 
Lukasiewicz, Jan (1939). 'Der Aquivalenzenkalkiil', Collectanea Logica I, 145-169. 
Lukasiewicz, Jan (1948). 'The Shortest Axiom of the Implicational Calculus of Propositions' , 
Proceedings of the Royal Irish Academy 52A, 25-33. 
Lukasiewicz, Jan (1951). 'On Variable Functors of Propositional Arguments', Proceedings of 
the Royal Irish Academy 54A, 25-35. 
Lukasiewicz, Jan (1952). 'On the Intuitionistic Theory of Deduction', Proceedings of Konin-
klijke Nederlandse Akademie van Wetenschappen 14A, 202-212. 
Lukasiewicz, Jan and Tarski, Alfred (1930). 'Untersuchungen iiber den Aussageukalkiil', 
Comptes rendus des Seances de la Societe des Sciences et des Lettres de Varsovie, Classe 
III 23, 30-50. Cf. Tarski-Lukasiewicz (1956). 
Meredith, Carew (1951). 'On an Extended System ofthe Propositional Calculus', Proceedings 
of the Royal Irish Academy 54A, 37-47. 
Mihailescu, Eugen Gh. (1937a). 'Recherches sur un sous-systeme du calcul des propositions', 
Annales Scientifiques de l'Universite de Jassy 23, 106-124. 
Mihailescu, Eugen Gh. (1937b). 'Recherches sur la negation et l'equivalence dans Ie calcul 
des propositions', Annales Scientifiques de l'Universite de Jassy 23,369-408. 
Mihailescu, Eugen Gh. (1938). 'Recherches sur l'equivalence et la reciprocite dans Ie calcul 
des propositions', Annales Scientifiques de I'Universite de Jassy 24, 116-153. 
Mihailescu, Eugen Gh. (1951). 'Cercetan asupra subsistemelor calculului propozitiilor 
(Researches on Sub-Systems of the Propositional Calculus)" Studii §i cercetari matemat-
ice. Academia Republicii Populare Romane. Institut de Matematica 2, 1-44. 
Prior, Arthur N. (1955). Formal Logic, Clarendon Press, Oxford. 
Rasiowa, Helena (1947). 'Axiomatisation d'un systeme partiel de la theorie de la deduction', 
Comptes rendus des Seances de la Societe des Sciences et des Lettres de Varsovie, Classe 
III 40, 22-37. 
Rasiowa, Helena (1955). '0 pewnym fragmencie implikacyjnego rachunku zdan (On a Frag-
ment of the Implicative Propositional Calculus)" Studia Logica III, 208-226. 
Rose, Alan (1951). 'The Degree of Completeness of a Partial System of the 2-Valued Propo-
sitional Calculus', Mathematische Zeitschrift 54, 181-183. 
Russell, Bertrand (1906). 'The Theory of Implication', American Journal of Mathematics 
XXVllI, 158-202. 
Schonfinkel, Moses (1924). 'Uber die Bausteine der mathematischen Logik', Mathematische 
Annalen 92(3/4),305-316. 
Slupecki, Jerzy (1953). 'St. Lesniewski's Protothetics', Studia Logica I, 44-112. [Cf. paper V 
in this volume - Ed.] 
Sobocinski, Boleslaw (1934). '0 kolejnych uproszczeniach aksjomatyki "ontologji" Prof. 
St. Lesniewskiego (On Successive Simplifications of the Axiom-System of Prof. St. 
Lesniewski's "Ontology")', in Fragmenty Filozoficzne (Ksh;ga pami~tkowa ku uczcze-
niu 15-lecia pracy nauczycielskiej w Uniwersytecie Warszawskim Prof. Tadeusza Kotar-
biIiskiego), Vol. 1, pp. 143-160. 

216 
BOLESLAW SOBOCINSKI 
Sobocinski, Boleslaw (1939). 'Z badaIi nad prototetykl\ (An Investigation of Protothetic)" 
Collectanea Logica 1,171-177. 
Sobocinski, Boleslaw (1949a). 'An Investigation of Protothetic' , Cahiers de l'Institut d' Etudes 
Polonaises en Belgique 5, Bruxelles. [Cf. paper IV in this volume - Ed.] 
Sobocinski, Boleslaw (1949b). 'L'analyse de l'antinomie russellienne par Lesniewski', Metho-
dosI,94-107,220-228; 308-316; 11(1950), 237-257. 
Sobocinski, Boleslaw (1953). 'On a Universal Decision Element', The Journal of Computing 
Systems 1,71-80. 
Sobocinski, Boleslaw (1954). 'Z badan nad aksjomatykl\ prototetyki Stanislawa Lesniewskigo 
(Investigations on the Axiom-System of S. Lesniewski's Protothetic)" Rocznik Polskiego 
Towarzystwa Naukowego na Obczyinie, t. IV za rok 1953-54, London, 18-20. 
Sobocinski, Boleslaw (1955). 'Note on a Problem of Paul Bernays', The Journal of Symbolic 
Logic 20, 109-114. 
Sobocinski, Boleslaw (1956a). 'In Memoriam, Jan Lukasiewicz (1878-1956)', Philosophical 
Studies (Ireland) VI, 3--49. 
Sobocinski, Boleslaw (1956b). 'On Well Constructed Axiom-Systems', in Rocznik Polskiego 
Towarzystwa Naukowego na Oba:yinie, t. VI, za rok 1955-56, London, 54-65. 
Stone, M.H. (1937). 'Note on Formal Logic', American Journal of Mathematics LIX, 506-514. 
Tarski, Alfred (1923a). 'Sur Ie terme primitif de la Logistique', Fundamenta Mathematicae 
IV, 196-200. 
Tarski, Alfred (1923b). '0 wyrazie pierwotnym logistyki (On the Primitive Term of Logistic)' , 
Przegla,rl Filozojiczny XXVI, 68-89. [Cf. paper III in this volume - Ed.] 
Tarski, Alfred (1924). 'Sur les truth-functions au sens de MM. Russell et Whitehead', Funda-
menta Mathematicae V, 59--74. 
Tarski, Alfred (1956). 'On the Primitive Term of Logistic', in Logic, Semantics, Metamathe-
matics, translated by J.H. Woodger, Clarendon Press, Oxford, pp. 1-23. 
Tarski, Alfred and Lukasiewicz, Jan (1956). 'Investigations into the Sentential Calculus', in 
Logic, Semantics, Metamathematics, translated by J.H. Woodger, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 
pp. 38-59. Cf. Lukasiewicz-Tarski (1930). 
Wajsberg, Mordchaj (1931). 'Aksjomatyzacja trojwartosciowego rachunku zdaIi (Axiomati-
zation of the Three-Valued Propositional Calculus)', Comptes rendus des Seances de la 
Sociere des Sciences et des Lettres de Varsovie, Classe III 24, 126-145. 
Wajsberg, Mordchaj (1937). 'Metalogische Beitrage. 1', Wiadomosci Matematyczne XLIII, 
131-168. 
Whitehead, Alfred N. and Russell, Bertrand (1925). Principia Mathematicae, Vol. I, Second 
Edition, Cambridge. 
Remarks: Tarski-Lukasiewicz (1956) is an English translation of Lukasiewicz-Tarski (1930); 
an English translation of Sobocinski (1939) is a part of Sobocinski (l949a); Tarski (l923a) 
and Tarski (1924) are French versions and Tarski (1956) is an English translation of Tarski 
(1923b). 

V. FREDERICK RICKEY 
AXIOMATIC INSCRIPTIONAL SYNTAX 
PART II: THE SYNTAX OF PROTOTHETIC * 
Part 1** of this paper presented an axiomatized theory of general syntax, 
defined the usual notions of general syntax, and proved some typical the-
orems of general syntax. We claimed that this system is strong enough to 
precisely state the formative and deductive rules of formal languages. In 
Part II we support this claim by formulating, in a very precise way, the rule of 
procedure of Lesniewski's Protothetic. Section 1 is an informal introduction 
to Protothetic and its rule of procedure. Our metalogical system is extended 
there to a theory MP which is concerned explicitly with the syntax of Proto-
thetic. This section is intended to motivate the Terminological Explanations 
of Section 2 which culminate in the statement of the rule of Protothetic. In 
Section 3 we sketch a proof that our formulation of the rule is equivalent to 
that given by Lesniewski (1929). This proof shows that our system is strong 
enough to conduct certain metalogical investigations. 
There are several reasons why we chose Protothetic as a test case for 
our syntactical system: (1) Since the rule of Protothetic is as complicated as 
the deductive rule for any theory it provides a good test of the usefulness 
of our system for formalizing theories. (2) Most papers on Protothetic only 
discuss the deductive rule from an informal point of view. It is hoped that our 
formulation of the rule, which is simpler than that given by Lesniewski (1929), 
will serve to make this aspect of Lesniewski 's work more accessible. (3) It was 
necessary, in order to make the comparisons that we do in Section 3, to use a 
theory whose deductive rule had previously been precisely stated. Protothetic 
is one of the few such theories whose rule had been formulated without making 
excessive use of ordinary language, set theory, or inductive techniques. And, 
as we stated in Part I, it is our conviction that the formalization of a system 
should be done using the weakest possible metalogic. 
* Bibliographical Note. This paper originally appeared in the Notre Dame Journal of Formal 
Logic XIV (1973), pp. 1-52, by permission of the Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic. 
** Part I of this paper appeared in the Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic XIII (1972), 
pp. 1-33. The author would like to thank Professor Boleslaw Sobocmski for considerable 
advice. 
 J. T. J. Srzednicki et al. (eds.), Leśniewski’s  Systems  Protothetic
© Kluwer Academic Publishers 1998

218 
V. FREDERICK RICKEY 
1.1. History and 1nformal Description of Protothetic 
In 1923 Stanislaw Lesniewski developed a bivalued system of logic which he 
called Protothetic. Besides including the full propositional calculus, Proto-
thetic contains variables of all semantical categories which can be generated 
from propositions. To explain, let us say that Protothetic is a type theory 
whose lowest type is that of propositions: 
p,q,r, .... 
These can be combined, using unary, binary, ... , functors, to form new 
propositions: 
f(P), g(Pg) , h(pqr) , .... 
Then we can form functors which take previously introduced types as vari-
ables, for example: 
<p[jp] , 'l/J(jgh) , .... 
This process is continued indefinitely. After a constant functor with a given 
number of arguments is introduced we can use variables of that type. This 
will be explained more fully in Section 1.3. 
Protothetic can be based on the law of simplification 
(l) [pq] : p ~ .q ~ p 
together with the principal of bivalence for each semantical category. These 
are theses of the form 
(2) [Jp] : .j(O). ~: f(1)· ~ ·f(p) 
(3) [F J] :-: F(N). ~:: F(FI). ~: .F(Vr). ~: F(As). ~ .F(j) 
There are, however, very grave difficulties with stating the rule of bivalence, 
for we must specify all the constants of a given semantical category before 
we can state the law of bivalence for that semantical category. This is not just 
a problem of specifying symbols for each of the constants, rather we must 
also state how they are defined or at least know that once the proper number 
have been defined that they are distinct. As this problem is still unsolved we 
use a different approach. 
Another way to formulate Protothetic is to accept simplification (1), biva-
lence for propositions (2) and extensionality for every other semantical cate-
gory. 
The simplest form of extensionality is that for propositions 

AXIOMATIC INSCRIPTIONAL SYNTAX. PART II 
219 
(4) [pq] : .p =:: q. =::: (f] : f(P)· =:: ·f(q), 
but this follows from (1) and (2). The theses of extensionality which are 
essential are those for all of the other semantical categories. These theses are 
of the form: 
(5) [fg] : .[p] : f(P). =:: .g(P) :=::: [F] : F(f). =:: .F(g) 
(6) [fg] : .[pq] : f(Pq)· =:: .g(pq) :=::: [F] : F (f) . =:: .F (g) 
Since we have a method of formulating the rule of extensionality 1 the difficulty 
is overcome. 
(5) and (6) are stated using only the constants of equivalence. (1) and (2), 
however, use implication. It is highly desirable to base Protothetic on a single 
primitive term. Tarski (1923) showed that conjunction could be defined in 
terms of equivalence and quantification:2 
(7) [pq] :: p.q. =::: .[J] : .p. =::: f(P)· =:: ·f(q) 
Since negation is easily defined: 
(8) [P] : . '" p. =::: p. =:: .[u].u 
we have all the connectives needed for the propositional calculus. This allows 
Protothetic to be based on equivalence (as sole primitive). This has the added 
advantage that definitions can be stated in the most natural form, 3 i.e., as 
equivalences: 
The successive simplification of the axiomatization of Protothetic was a 
long and complicated process. The details of this work and their history can 
be found in Lesniewski (1929, 1938), and Sobocmski (1960). The system of 
Protothetic which we will be concerned with is based on Sobocmski's 1945 
axiom: 
or, in the more familiar Peano-Russellian notation: 
(10) [pq] :: p =:: q. =::: ·[f] : ·f(Pf(PO)). =::: [r] : f(qr). =:: .q =:: p 
This axiom is a dead object without some rules for deducing its con-
sequences. We hinted above that we shall have rules of extensionality and 

220 
v. FREDERICK RICKEY 
definition. In addition, we shall need rules of detachment, substitution, and a 
rule for distributing quantifiers. 
The precise statement of these rules occupies the whole of Section 2. In 
order to make the Terminological Explanations of that section understandable 
we wish first to give an informal statement of the rule. But first we must discuss 
semantical categories. 
1.2. Semantical Categories 
In the axiom of Proto the tic (1, (9)) the basic unit is the biconditional4 
<}(pq) 
or in the Peano-Russellian notation 
p==q. 
Intuitively, equivalence is a functor which forms a proposition out of the two 
propositions which are its arguments. If we denote the semantical category of 
propositions by S then, using the notation of Ajdukiewicz (1935), we denote 
the semantical category of <} by 
SISS. 
In general, the symbol 
represents the semantical category of a functor with n arguments of categories 
Cl, C2, ... , Cn, respectively, which forms something of category C. For 
example, in the category SIS the only constant functors are the four unary 
predicates Vr, FI, As, N; in the category SISS we have the 16 binary functors. 
Semantically we want two functors to be in the same semantical category if 
they can be interchanged in all contexts without loss of meaning.5 So for 
example, the functors in 
1f1[fp] , 
<p(fp] 
should belong to the same category, but we cannot decide to which until the 
categories of f and p are known. Similarly, in 
[f] : f(P)· == . * (f) 
we want the two 1's to be in the same category, but we cannot say which one 
until we know the category of p or *. All that we can say is that f belongs to 
the category SIC and * to the category S I (SIC), where C is the category of 
p. 

AXIOMATIC INSCRIPTIONAL SYNTAX. PART II 
221 
Up to this point intersubstitutability has been the criteria for placing two 
functors in the same seman tical category. This method will not suffice for our 
syntactical investigations for it uses the semantical notion of meaning. 
Lesniewski was able to define semantical categories syntactically by let-
ting the shape of the parentheses in which arguments are enclosed reveal 
the semantical categories of the arguments and their functors. He used the 
parentheses (- -) to enclose two sentential variables. So when we see 
9-(pq) 
we know 9- must be of the type S / S S since the parentheses tell us p and q 
are both in the category S and that the functor is sentential. 
For the purpose of formalizing Protothetic we cannot use any semantical 
notions. Thus it is absolutely necessary to replace the semantical notion of a 
semantical category by some syntactical notion. 
Following the methods of Lesniewski we shall let the parentheses reveal 
the semantical categories of the arguments and functors involved. We admit 
that the motivation is completely semantical, but still, our presentation must 
be completely syntactical. Accordingly we shall speak in the future only of 
syntactical categories. We are using the term" syntactical category" instead 
of "semantical category" at the suggestion of Chomsky (1953) and Bar-Hillel 
(1950). This notion is defined in Section 2 by purely syntactical means. But 
since our motivation is semantical it agrees with the semantical categories 
presented above. 
Because it is necessary, if one wishes to understand what follows, to have a 
tentative notion of syntactical category we present the following "definition": 
We shall say that two functors are in the same syntactical category if they 
have the same number of arguments, corresponding arguments are of the 
same syntactical categories, and the functors together with their arguments 
form objects of the same syntactical category. 
1.3. Informal Statement of the Rule of Protothetic 
As mentioned previously, the rule of procedure of Protothetic consists of five 
parts, viz., detachment, distribution of quantifiers, extensionality, substitution 
and definition. Let us consider them individually. 
Detachment 
If, at a given stage of development, Protothetic contains the thesis 
(1) 9 (AB) 
and also the thesis 
(2) A 

222 
V. FREDERICK RICKEY 
then we can add to Protothetic a thesis equiform to B. This rule is well enough 
known from other systems but we should remark that in (l) there is no main 
general quantifier preceding the biconditional. If we had 
(3) LPq ... -, r 9 (A(Pq .. . )B(pq .. . )r 
as a thesis and also 
(4) LPq .. '-' r A(pq ... r 
then we would have to distribute the quantifier in (3) before detaching. 
Distribution of Quantifiers 
IfProtothetic contains a thesis (3) then we can distribute the quantifiers and get 
The rule is even stronger than this. It is stated so that we can distribute not 
only all, but any of the variables in the main general quantifier (MGQ) of (3). 
Thus we can also get 
(6) Lq ... -, 
r 9(LP-, r A(pq ... r LP-, rB(pq ... rr 
(7) LP",-, r 9 (Lq-, r A(pq ... r Lq-, r B(pq .. . rr 
(8) L"'-' r 9 (LPq-, r A(pq ... r LPq-, r B(pq,. ,rr 
Protothetic also makes no use of vacuous quantifiers so if A or B contains 
no free occurrence of p, then P is omitted from the quantifier immediately 
preceding A or B after distribution of p. For example, from 
we can get, among others, 
(10) Lqr-, r 9CP-, rVr (pr LPS-, r'ljJ(pqrsrr 
(11) 9 (LP-, rVr(pr Lpqrs-, r'ljJ(pqrsr) 
(12) LP-, r 9 (LP-, rVr(pr Lqrs-, r'ljJ(pqrsrr 
Notice that the stronger statement of the rule of distribution permits the 
simpler statement of the rule of detachment. 

AXIOMATIC INSCRIPTIONAL SYNTAX. PART II 
223 
The rule of quantification, as stated above, is strong enough so that we 
can derive the usual rules of quantification such as distribution of quantifiers 
through implication. 
Extensionality 
If the seman tical categories 
have already been introduced into Protothetic by way of definition (see below) 
then the rule of extensionality allows us to add the following as a new thesis 
of Protothetic: 
(14) L!q-, r ¢(L X \" 'Xn-, r ¢U=fX\ ... xn=l=g=fX\ ... xn=l=r 
L 7/J -' r ¢ (7/J-i:! 1-7/J-i;g1-rr 
where the variables Xl, ... ,Xn are of categories C\, ... ,Cn . To give a con-
crete example we state the law of extensionality for binary functors: 
The rule does not allow us to add extensionality for the semantical catego-
ry of propositions, since it is derivable from the axiom of Protothetic (cf. 
Sobocinski, 1960). 
The rule of extensionality allows us to add a thesis of extensionality for each 
semantical category (except for propositions), and not just those indicated 
above. We can also add extensionality when functors involving parameters 
(the so-called many link functors) are involved, e.g., 
Substitution 
The notion of substitution is well enough known from other systems of logic 
to need little comment here. The most important thing about substitution in 
Protothetic is that we never use incomplete symbols.6 In other systems of 
logic if one had 
and wanted to get 

224 
v. FREDERICK RICKEY 
he would just say "substitute <} (p-) for f." On semantical grounds this is 
absurd, for f and <} clearly belong to different seman tical categories; so we 
certainly cannot substitute <} for f. In Protothetic this substitution is accom-
plished via a definition: 
(18) LP.J r <}(<}(pp)Vr(p))' 
First substitute Vr for fin (16) to get 
This is clearly possible since f and Vrboth belong to the category S/ S. Then, 
using the logical basis so far developed, derive 
(20) LP.J r <} (<ll(Vr (P))<ll(<} (Pp)))' 
Now distribute the quantifiers and detach (19) from (20) to get the desired 
(17). 
Definition 
In Protothetic definitions are biconditionals or generalizations of bicondition-
als with the definiendum on the right. Moreover, the definiendum is either a 
term (when we are defining a constant) or a function (when we are defining 
a constant depending on several parameters). The variables in the MGQ are 
precisely those occurring free in the definiens and also in the definiendum. 
Hence definitions have the form 
The requirements imposed on definitions are similar to those in other sys-
tems of logic: 'ljJ(pq . .. ) must be well formed, * is a new constant, etc. We 
concentrate now on the choice of parentheses in the definiendum. 
The axiom of Protothetic contains only two semantical categories, the 
so-called basic semantic categories 
s, 
S/SS. 
All other seman tical categories must be introduced into Protothetic by defining 
a constant of that category. Once a semantical category has been introduced 
- and only then - does the rule of procedure allow us to use variables of that 
category. To introduce the categories 
SIS, 
S/SSS, 
S/(S/S) 
we could use, for example, the following definitions: 

AXIOMATIC INSCRIPTIONAL SYNTAX. PART II 
(22) LP..J r c}(c}(RU..J r u') "'(P))' 
(23) LPqr..J r c} (c} (pc} (qr))c} (pqr))' 
(24) Li..J r c}(LP..J r "'(J(P))' ",(J))' 
225 
These examples serve to indicate the freedom of the rule of definition. Notice 
that we have used equiform parentheses in 
c}(Pq), 
",(P), 
c}(pqr) 
We did this - but we would not have had to - to show that these three functors 
act on sentential variables. Also we chose the symbol c} in (23) since the 
functor defined there has several properties in common with equivalence. 
There is no chance to confuse the two for they have different numbers of 
arguments. 
In (24) we chose the symbolism", (J) to show analogy with '" (P). But here 
we could not have chosen the same kind of parentheses, for then we would 
have i and P in the same category. We were forced to choose a new kind of 
parentheses. Now if we wish to define Verum for one propositional argument 
we are forced to use parentheses equiform to those in the definiendum of (22): 
If we took different parentheses in the definiendum - say :{:-} - then Vr and '" 
would be in different categories; something we know is not true semantically, 
so we preclude it syntactically via the rule. 
At first glance one might think our analogous constants and parentheses 
would cause the semantical categories to coalesce. For example, if we define 
and then substitute c} from the Axiom for j, and c} from (23) for g, we would 
get: 
It might be supposed that *(99) contains two occurrences of the same con-
stant, but that is false. To see this we look at the categories of the symbols 
in (27). By looking at the definiens of (26) and then back to our Axiom 
and (23) we see that j is of type Sf SS, g of type Sf SSS, and hence * is 
of type Sf ( Sf S S, Sf S S S). Thus the two <?,s, although equiform, are not 
equisignificant. 
Once a semantical category is introduced by an axiom or definition a type 
of parentheses is forever assigned to it. The axiom assigns the parentheses 

226 
V. FREDERICK RICKEY 
(- -) to the category S/ SS. The definitions (22), (23), (24), (26) dictate that 
a functor in the category 
S / S is always followed by parentheses of the type (-) 
S / S S S is always followed by parentheses of the type (- - -) 
S / (S / S) is always followed by parentheses of the type (-} 
S / (S / S S, S / S S S) is always followed by parentheses of the type (- -}. 
In the future if we are defining a functor of one of these categories we must 
use parentheses of the indicated type. If a functor of a different type is being 
defined we must use different parentheses if the number of arguments are the 
same as one of those above. 
For the purposes of substitution it does not always suffice to choose just 
one pair of parentheses in the definiendum. If we wanted to substitute in 
(28) f(p) 
to get 
(29) » (pq) 
where» represents conjunction, then a definition is necessary: 
Then we could substitute »-fqt for f (they are both of type S/ S) in (28) to get 
(31) »-fqt(p) 
Then distribute the quantifier in (30), commute, and detach (31) to get the 
desired (29). This definition introduces a new category: 
(S/S)/S 
i.e., » is a functor of one sentential variable that forms a sentence forming 
functor of one sentential variable. Functors like» in (31) are called many-
link-functors. Many of the complications in stating the rule of definition arise 
from many-link-functors. We only remark here that a many-link-functornever 
has two sets of parentheses which are equiform, i.e., the links are enclosed in 
different shaped parentheses. 
These informal remarks have brought out how interconnected the five parts 
of the rule are. Before detaching we usually distribute quantifiers; before 
stating a thesis of extensionality we have to give several definitions; before 
making a substitution we sometimes have to give a definition, and then use 
distribution, detachment and sometimes extensionality before obtaining the 

AXIOMATIC INSCRIPTIONAL SYNTAX. PART II 
227 
desired result. This indicates why we speak of "the rule of Protothetic" rather 
than "the rules of Protothetic." 
The rule of Protothetic is formulated so that it automatically adjusts to 
the last thesis of the system. In any theory with definitions it is necessary to 
examine all previous definitions before adding a new one to make sure the 
constant has not been used before in that syntactical category. 
1.4. The System M P 
Chapters I and II [of Rickey (1972)] dealt with general syntax, whereas the 
next section is concerned with the syntax of Protothetic. Consequently, we 
must augment system M with terms applicable specifically to Protothetic.* 
Since the rule of Protothetic allows us to add (under certain conditions) a 
new thesis A immediately after thesis B, which is the last thesis of Proto the tic, 
and because the rule refers to some of the theses before B we need a syntactical 
term to express this. The term 
A c thp(B) 
which is read "A is a thesis of Protothetic with respect to thesis B," shall be 
used for this purpose. The general name thp(B) denotes those theses which 
have been derived before B. We use "before" here in the weak sense of 
"before or equal." This convention will save cumbersome phraseology later. 
U sing this notion it is easy to define "thesis of Protothetic." 
D3.4.1 [AJ : .A c thp. =: [3BJ.A c thp(B) : A c A 
It is important to understand that thp is a growing name.? At the beginning the 
Axiom is the only thesis. The rule then allows us to add another expression 
(actually it is one of many possible) as a new thesis immediately after the 
axiom. Then thp denotes the axiom and this new thesis. At this stage the rule 
allows us to add a new thesis. The number of inscriptions denoted by thp is 
always finite, but unbounded. In effect then a thesis of Proto the tic is either the 
axiom or something added in accordance with the rule. But the rule cannot 
be stated without the term thp(B) and so we take it as primitive in our system 
MP. The axioms which this term satisfies will be stated later in this section. 
As seen in the previous sections Protothetic makes heavy use of parentheses 
to indicate syntactical categories. Since the number of categories is unlimited 
we will need more than a fixed number of parentheses. Consequently we need 
a term to denote parentheses. One way would be to accept the general name 
prnt 
* [Ed. Note: For the definition of system M as well as of all the tenns used but undefined in 
this paper the reader is referred to Rickey (1972).] 

228 
v. FREDERICK RICKEY 
as a denoter of parentheses. We shall say each of 
(, 
[, 
(, {, t 
is a parenthesis. We are not too concerned about the shape of parentheses and 
can use most any symbol as a parenthesis. For example, we could write 
instead of the more customary 
but then 'p' and 'q' could never be used as variables. We are more concerned 
with availability, for (some) new syntactical categories require new kinds of 
parentheses. 
The term prnt does not suffice however, for we must be able to mate 
parentheses. Since the smallest things our syntax can refer to are words it is 
not capable of distinguishing left from right parentheses,8 nor is it possible 
to say that two parentheses are symmetric. We say that the parenthesis ( is 
symmetric to the parenthesis ), but not to any of the parentheses 
(, f, (, 
ct., 
t 
Each of the following pairs of parentheses are symmetric: 
(,); ], [; 
(,); f, t, 
so symmetry does not mean that the first is a left parenthesis and the second 
a right. Hence we shall take as primitive the term 
A c prntsym(B) 
which we shall read "A is a parenthesis symmetric to parenthesis B." Intu-
itively this means that A is a parenthesis and B is its mirror image. One easily 
sees that prnt can be defined in terms of prntsym: 
03.4.2 [A] : .A c prnt. =: [:JB].A c prntsym(B) : A c A 
Hence we can just take prntsym as primitive; and we do, even though it is less 
intuitive. 
Besides using these two primitive terms we will need to make explicit 
reference to the axiom of Protothetic. We give that axiom here and call it by 
the name 12l~: 
This axiom is an expression consisting of 54 words. In the next section we 
shall refer to the 1 st, 4th, 5th, 9th, 10th, 11 th, 12th and last of them. Moreover, 

AXIOMATIC INSCRIPTIONAL SYNTAX. PART II 
229 
we need to know that the 9th and 12th words are symmetrical parentheses 
and that certain words in the axiom are not equiform. Statements Q7-Q 11 
use vocabulary which is not defined until the next section, but we prefer to 
state them here. Our assumptions about the axiom - which could either be 
called axioms or empirical statements - can be summarized as follows: 
Ql m~ e expr 
Q2 9vrb(~~) e prntsym(12vrb(m~)) 
Q3 [:3B].B e Uvrb(m~).B e 54vrb(m~) 
Q4 1vrb(m~) e N(cnf(4vrb(~~))) 
Q5 5vrb(~~) e N(cnf(1vrb(m~))) 
Q6 5vrb(~~) e N(cnf(4vrb(~~))) 
Q7 6vrb(~~) e trm 
Q8 10vrb(~~) e trm 
Q9 11vrb(m~) e trm 
QlO Cmpl(9vrb(m~) U 10vrb(m~) U 11vrb(~~) U 12vrb(~~)) e prntm 
Q 11 1 Ovrb(m~) e arg( Cmpl(9vrb(m~) U 1 Ovrb(~~) U11 vrb(~~) U12vrb(m~))) 
We now state the axioms which our primitive terms thp and prntsym satisfy: 
PI m~ e thp(m~) 
P2 [B] : B e thp(m~). :J .B = m~ 
P3 [A] : A e thp(A). :J .~~ e thp(A) 
P4 [AB] : A e thp(B). :J .A e thp(A) 
P5 [ABC] : A e thp(B).B e thp(C). :J .A e thp(C) 
P6 [AB] : A e thp(A).B e thp(B).A e prcd(B). :J .A e thp(B) 
P7 [A] : A e thp(A). :J .A c expr 

230 
V. FREDERICK RICKEY 
P8 [A] : A c thp(A). :J .Fin{thp(A)} 
P9 [AB] : A c thP(B). :J .B c thp(B) 
P10 [AB] : .A c thp(B). :J: A c prcd(B). V .A = B 
Pll [AB] : .A c prntsym(B). =: A c vrb.B c prntsym(A). '" (A c cnf(B)) : 
[C) : B c prntsym(C). :J .A c cnf(C) 
The system MP consists of system M augmented by the terms 
thp(B) 
prntsym(B) 
and the axioms PI-PI I, QI-QII9 stated above. It is within this system that 
we formulate the rule of procedure of Protothetic in the next section. 
We now make several remarks about the axioms. The denotation of thp( B) 
cannot be axiomatically prescribed as this term has its precise meaning only 
after statement of the rule. The axioms stated here are all of the properties of 
thp( B) which will be used in Section 3. From PII we can derive the following 
theorems 
T3.4.1 [A] : A c prnt. :J .A c vrb 
T3.4.2 [AB] : A c prntsym(B). :J .A c prnt.B c prnt 
T3.4.3 [AB] : A c prntsym(B). :J .A i- B 
[D3.4.2, PII] 
[D3.4.2, PII] 
[PIl, T2.2.18] 
T3.4.4 [ABC] : A c prntsym(B).B c prntsym(C). :J .A c cnf(C) 
[PIl] 
T3.4.5 [AB] : A c prntsym(B). :J .B c prntsym(A) 
[Pl1] 
T3.4.6 [AB] : A c prntsym(B). :J . '" (A c cnf(B)) 
[PIl] 
T3.4.6 is the only one of these requirements on parentheses which is really 
useful. It prohibits symbols like 
+, 
8, 9 
from being used as parentheses. The other theses are all satisfied by any 
non-self-symmetric symbol, where for a symmetric parenthesis we take the 
mirror image. It should be remarked that if we take PII too seriously then 
variables and constants could only be self-symmetric symbols like 
A, 
V, 
T, 
+, 
U. 
Since we do not wish to observe this requirement in practice, we shall use as 
parentheses only those symbols which one normally calls parentheses. 

AXIOMATIC INSCRIPTIONAL SYNTAX. PART II 
231 
2 
To formalize a deductive theory is to stipulate directives for derivation of its 
theorems in purely syntactical terms. To do this it is necessary to give precise 
explanations (definitions) of the metalinguistic terms used in these directives. 
In this section we give, in the most precise way that we know, a formulation 
of the rule of procedure of Protothetic. The rule itself can be stated quite 
succinctly (cf. Section 2.6 below), but the explanation of the terms used there 
will require a long sequence of Terminological Explanations (TE. 's). 
Our Terminological Explanations are nothing more than definitions of 
metalinguistic terms which apply expressly to Protothetic, and as such shall 
use, besides the terms of system M, only those primitive terms which are 
peculiar to Protothetic, viz., thp(B) and prntsym(B), which were explained in 
Section 1.4. 
In order to make the TE.'s more perspicuous we shall include brief (and 
approximate!) renderings into English and shall give some of the semantical 
motivation behind these definitions. Finally, we shall prove several conse-
quences of the TE. 's which are either interesting in themselves or useful 
later. This material is intended to explain and supplement the TE. 's, but only 
what is in the TE.'s is necessary for the statement of the rule. 
The general methodology of the TE.'s is to delimit the possible senseful 
expressions by excluding certain undesirable expressions from consideration, 
rather than to use inductive techniques similar to those commonly used in 
propositional and functional calculi to build up senseful expressions (wffs). 
Since we wish to construct a language as free and rich as possible, all non-
essential choices are left open to the individual. Accordingly, we shall not use 
specific variables or constants which are prescribed ahead of time. 
2.1. Quantifiers and Variables (TE1-12) 
Most theses of Protothetic are generalizations, i.e., expressions of the form 
(1) LPq ... ~ r 'ljJ(pq ... )' 
which we customarily read "for all p, q, . .. ,'ljJ(pq . .. )." The first part of (1), 
viz., the part equiform to 
(2) LPg ... ~ 
is called a (general) quantifier (more precisely, the quantifier of generalization 
(1)), and the remainder, viz., the part equiform to 
(3) r'ljJ(pq ... )' 

232 
V. FREDERICK RICKEY 
is called a subquantifier (more precisely, the subquantifier of generalization 
(1». The words in the quantifier are called binders of the words equiform to 
them in the subquantifier which are called variables. Without further ado we 
give precise definitions of these, and some related, syntactical notions. 
TEllO [AJ : A c trm. == . 
A c vrb. 
A c N(prnt). 
A c N(cnf(1vrb(~~))). 
A c N(cnf(4vrb(~~))). 
A c N(cnf(5vrb(~~))). 
A c N(cnf(Uvrb(~~))) 
A term is any word which is not a parenthesis or corner, where by corner 
we mean any word equiform to one of the following words: 
r 
-, 
L '-J , 
, 
• 
It should be clear that corners are not parentheses, for otherwise the last four 
conjunctsll of TEl would not be necessary. 
TE2 [AJ : A c qntf. == . 
1vrb(A) c cnf(1vrb(!2l~)). 
Uvrb(A) c cnf(4vrb(~~)). 
Int(A) c Cmpl(trm n int(A)). 
A c non-rep 
A quantifier is a string of non-equiform terms enclosed in lower corners. 
Thus 
LPJ' 
LPj'ifJJ' 
Lq 0 j9 J 
are examples of quantifiers, but the following are not: 
JPJ' 
L J' 
By TE2.3 Int(A) is an individual and hence any quantifier contains at least 
three words. Note that the terms in a quantifier are neither repeated or separat-
ed by commas, as there is no need to do so. Variables of different syntactical 
categories may be in the same quantifier, thus eliminating the need of adjacent 
quantifiers. Later T.E. 's will prevent constants like 0 and 9 from occurring in 
quantifiers. 

AXIOMATIC INSCRIPTIONAL SYNTAX. PART II 
233 
When we say quantifier we always mean general quantifier. The particular 
quantifier is not definable in Protothetic. 
T4.1.1 [A] : A c qntf. ::J .[:3B].B c int(A) 
Hyp(1) . ::J . 
2. Int(A) c KI(int(A)). 
[:3B].B c int(A) 
T4.1.2 [AB] : A c qntf.B c int(A). ::J .B c trm 
Hyp(2) . ::J . 
3. Int(A) c Cmpl(trm n int(A)). 
4. Be vrb(lnt(A)). 
5. trm n int(A) C vrb. 
Be trm 
T4.1.3 [A] : A c qntf. ::J .A c expr 
[TE2, DI4] 
[2, T2.3.4] 
[I, TE2] 
[T2.3.9, 2, D13, T2.2.9, DI4] 
[TEl] 
[T2.5.1O, 5, 4, 3, T2.5.7] 
[TE2, T2.5.15] 
The next few lemmas are used to prove that overlapping quantifiers are 
identical. 
T4.1.4 [ABCD] : .A c qntf.B c qntf.D c pr(lvrb(B)).D c vrb(A). 
C c vrb(A) n vrb(B) : lvrb(B) c pr(C). V .1vrb(B) = 
C :::J .D c vrb(B) 
Hyp(6) . ::J . 
7. A c expr 
8. lvrb(B) c vrb(A). 
9. lvrb(B) eN (lvrb(A)). 
10. lvrb(B) c int(A) U Uvrb(A). 
[1, T4.1.3] 
[7, D4, 4, 5,3,6] 
[T2.1.33, 3,4] 
[D13, 8, 7, 9] 

234 
V. FREDERICK RICKEY 
11. 1vrb(B) c cnf(1vrb(QlJ:)). 
12. 1vrb(B) c N (trm). 
13. 1vrb(B) c Uvrb(A). 
14. Uvrb(A) c cnf(4vrb(QlJ:)). 
15. 1vrb(QlJ:) c cnf(4vrb(QlJ:)). 
Dc vrb(B) 
[2, TE2] 
[11, TEl] 
[T4.1.2, 1, 10, 12] 
[1, TE2] 
[11, 13, 14, T2.2.20, T2.2.21] 
[15, Q4] 
In the proof of this theorem the use of Q4 is essential. It states that the 
words Land ...J are not equiform. 
T4.1.5 [ABCD] : A c qntf.B c qntf.D c pr(C).D c vrb(A).C c vrb(A) n 
vrb(B). :J .D c vrb(B) 
Hyp(5) . :J: 
6. Be expr. 
7. 1vrb(B) c 1vrb(B). 
8. f"V (C c pr(1vrb(B))) : 
9. 1vrb(B) c pr(C). V .1vrb(B) = C : 
[1, T4.1.3] 
[2, T2.2.27, T2.2.30] 
[D3, 5, 7] 
[T2.2.16, 8, 5, 7, T2.2.9] 
10. 1vrb(B) c pr(D). V .D c pr(1vrb(B)). V .D = 1vrb(B) : 
[T2.2.16, 7,4, D3, T2.2.9] 
Dc vrb(B) 
[10,6, D7, 3, 5, T4.1.4, 1,2,4,5,9, D3] 
T4.1.6 [ABCD] : A c qntf.B c qntf.C c pr(D).D c vrb(A). 
C c vrb(A) n vrb(B). :J .D c vrb(B) 
[Sim., T4.1.5] 
T4.1.7 [ABCD] : A c qntf.B c qntf.C c vrb(A) n vrb(B). 
Dc vrb(A). :J .D c vrb(B) 
[T2.2.16, T4.1.5, T4.1.6, T2.2.9] 
T4.1.8 [ABC] : A c qntf.B c qntf.C c vrb(A) n vrb(B). :J .A = B 
[T4.1.7, T2.2.2] 

AXIOMATIC INSCRIPTIONAL SYNTAX. PART II 
235 
TE3 [Aj : .A E sbqntf. ===: 
A E expr-w-int : 
[Cj : C E hd(A). :) .C E Mtch(Uvrb(Ql~)5vrb(Ql~)) : 
[Cj : C E tl(A). :) .C E Mtch(5vrb(Ql~)Uvrb(Ql~)) 
A subquantijieris an expression enclosed by upper comers such that upper 
comers occurring in it are properly paired. TE3.2 stipulates that any initial 
segment of a subquantifier contains more left upper comers than right upper 
comers. Thus 
are subquantifiers, while 
r -, 
rr -, 
r 
-,r -, 
p, 
p q 
are not. Notice that there is no requirement about parentheses being matched. 
T4.1.9 [Aj : A E sbqntf. :) .A E expr 
[TE3, T2.5.13] 
Now we shall prove the first (last) word of a subquantifier is a left (right) 
upper comer and that a subquantifier contains the same number of left and 
right upper comers. 
T4.1.1O [AJ : A E sbqntf. :) .1vrb(A) E cnf(5vrb(Ql~)) 
Hyp(1) . :) . 
2. A E expr. 
3. A E N (vrb) . 
4. 1vrb(A) E hd(A). 
[T4.1.9,1] 
[TE3, 1, 015, T2.5.18] 
[T2.5.50, 2, 3] 
5. (vrb(1vrb(A)) n cnf(Uvrb(Ql~))) < (vrb(1vrb(A)) n cnf(5vrb(Ql~))). 
[TE3, 1, 4, 020] 
6. (1vrb(A) n cnf(Uvrb(Ql~))) < (1vrb(A) n cnf(5vrb(Ql~))). 
[5, T2.2.1O, T2.2.30, 03] 
7. ->. (1vrb(A) n cnf(5vrb(Ql~))). 
[Onto 9,4] 
8. 1vrb(A) n cnf(5vrb(Ql~)) E V 
[Onto 10, 7, 6] 

236 
V. FREDERICK RICKEY 
1vrb(A) E cnf(5vrb(Qt}:». 
[Onto 11,4, 8] 
T4.1.11 [A] : A E sbqntf. ~ .Uvrb(A) E cnf(Uvrb(Qt1=» 
[Sim., T4. 1. 10] 
T4.1.12 [AJ : A E sbqntf. ~ .(vrb(A) n cnf(5vrb(Qt1=») 00 (vrb(A)n 
cnf(Uvrb(Qt1=» ) 
Hyp(1) . ~ . 
2. A E expr. 
3. Uvrb(A) E cnf(Uvrb(Qt1=)). 
[:3B]. 
4. 
BE int(A). 
5. 
BE vrb(A). 
6. 
BE pr(Uvrb(A». 
[:3C]. 
[T4.1.9,1] 
[T4.1.11,I] 
[TE3, 1, T2.5.12] 
[4, DB] 
[T2.2.36, 5, 4, DB] 
7. 
C E KI(vrb(A) n pr(Uvrb(A»). 
[T2.1.1, 5, 6] 
8. 
Uvrb(A) E N(vrb(C»). 
[7, T2.3.1O, T2.2.13, T2.2.9, 3] 
9. 
C E expr. 
[T2.5.47, 2, 7] 
10. 
C E Cmpl(vrb(A) n pr(Uvrb(A»). 
[DI2, 7, 9, T2.2.9, T2.4.2, T2.5.2] 
11. 
C E hd(A). 
[T2.5.49, 10, 2, 3] 
12. 
vrb(C) n cnf(Uvrb(Qt1=» < vrb(C) n cnf(5vrb(Qt1=». 
[TE3, 1, 11, D20] 
13. 
(vrb(C) U Uvrb(A» 
0 vrb(A). 
[7, Dl, D5, T2.2.7, T2.2.36] 
14. 
Uvrb(A) U (vrb(C) n cfn(Uvrb(Qt1=») < Uvrb(Qt1=) U (vrb(C)n 
[12,8, Onto 12] 

AXIOMATIC INSCRIPTIONAL SYNTAX. PART II 
237 
15. 
(Uvrb(A) U vrb(C)) n (Uvrb(A) U cnf(Uvrb(~~))) < 
(Uvrb(A) U vrb(C)) n (Uvrb(A) U cnf(5vrb(~~))). 
[14] 
16. 
vrb(A) ncnf(Uvrb(~~)) < vrb(A) n (Uvrb(A) Ucnf(5vrb(~~))). 
[15, 13,3] 
17. 
vrb(A) n cnf(Uvrb(~}:)) < (vrb(A) n Uvrb(A)) U (vrb(A)n 
cnf(5vrb(~}:))). 
[16] 
18. 
vrb(A) n cnf(Uvrb(~}:)) ::; vrb(A) n cnf(5vrb(~~)). 
[17,Ont. 13,8, D5] 
19. 
vrb(A) n cnf(5vrb(~~)) ::; vrb(A) n cnf(Uvrb(~~)). 
[Sim., 18] 
vrb(A) n cnf(5vrb(~}:)) ::; vrb(A) n cnf(Uvrb(~~)) 
[18, 19, Onto 20] 
The following theorems, which are not used later, are stated without proof. 
T4.1.13 [AB] : A € sbqntf.B € sbqntf.1vrb(A) = 1vrb(B). ::J .A = B 
T4.1.14 [ABC] : .A € sbqntf.B € sbqntf.C € vrb(A) n vrb(B). ::J: 
A € ingr(B). V .B € ingr(A) 
This last theorem cannot be strengthened to identify for consider the sub-
quantifier 
which contains properly a subquantifier equiform to 
r 
, 
U. 
T4. 1. 14 rules out situations like 
A ---
r 
r 
., 
., 
~ 
... 
B 
TE4 [ABC] : A € Gnrl(B). == . 
Be qntf. 

238 
V. FREDERICK RICKEY 
C E sbqntf. 
A E Concat(BC) 
A is a generalization with quantifier Band subquantifier C. 
TE5 [AB] : A E Qntf(B). == .A E A.[3C].B E Gnrl(AC) 
A is the quantifier of generalization B. 
TE6 [AB] : A E Sbqntf. == .A E A.[3C].B E Gnrl(CA) 
A is the subquantifier of generalization B. 
TE7 [A] : A E gnrl. == .A E A.[3BC].A E Gnrl(BC) 
A is a generalization. 
A generalization is an expression of the form 
r 
-, 
i.e., it consists of a quantifer followed by a subquantifier. We will prove that 
every generalization has a unique quantifier and subquantifier. However, a 
generalization may contain many quantifiers and subquantifiers. Thus in the 
generalization 
the two expressions equiform to 
are quantifiers in the generalization, but not of the generalization. Hence "hav-
ing" must be distinguished from "containing." The following are examples of 
expressions which are not generalization. 
Instead of the second of these, Protothetic uses 
Hence adjacent quantifiers will never occur in Protothetic. 
T4.1.15 [ABCD] : A E Gnrl(BC).D E Gnrl(BC). ::::> .A = D 
[TE4, D16, T2.5.7] 

AXIOMATIC INSCRIPTIONAL SYNTAX. PART II 
239 
T4.1.16 [ABC] : A c: Gnrl(BC). ::J .A c: expr 
[TE4, D16, D12] 
T4.1.17 [ABC] : A c: Gnrl(BC). ::J .B c: ingr(A) 
[TE4, T2.5.30] 
T4.1.18 [ABC] : A c: Gnrl(BC). ::J .C c: ingr(A) 
[Sim., T4. 1. 17] 
T4.1.19 [ABC] : A c: Gnrl(BC). ::J .1vrb(A) = 1vrb(B) 
[TE4, T2.5.33] 
T4.1.20 [ABC] : A c: Gnrl(BC). ::J .Uvrb(A) = Uvrb(C) 
[Sim., T4. 1. 19] 
T4.1.21 [A] : A c: gnrl. == .[:1B] : B c: Ontf(A) 
[TE7, TE5, TE4] 
T4.1.22 [A] : A c: gnrl. == .[:1C].C c: Sbqntf(A) 
[TE7, TE6, TE4] 
T4.1.23 [AB] : A c: Ontf(B). ::J .A c: qntf 
[TE5, TE4] 
T4.1.24 [AB] : A c: Sbqntf(B). ::J .A c: sbqntf 
[TE6, TE4] 
After the rule of Protothetic is stated we will be able to prove partial converses 
of the above two theorems: If (sub )quantifier A is an ingredient of a thesis of 
Protothetic, then A is the (sub)quantifier of some generalization. 
TE8 [AB]: .AC:Essnt(B). ==: Ac:A: Aclnt(Sbqntf(B)).v.A = B.Ac:expr. 
A c: N(gnrl) 
A is the essence of B. 
The essence of B is the interior of the subquantifier of B if B is a gener-
alization, and B otherwise. 
T4.1.25 [A] : A c: gnrl. ::J .vrb(Essnt(A)) 0 int(Sbqntf(A)) 
HypO) . ::J . 
2. [B] : B c: Essnt(A). == .B c: Int(Sbqntf(A)) : 
3. Essnt(A) olnt(Sbqntf(A)). 
4. vrb(Essnt(A)) 0 vrb(lnt(Sbqntf(A))). 
[I, TE8] 
[2] 
[3] 
vrb(Essnt(A)) 0 int(Sbqntf(A)) 
[4, T2.5.22, T2.3.9, D13, T2.2.9, D14] 
TE9 [AB] : A c: bd(B). == .A c: int(Ontf(B)) 

240 
V. FREDERICK RICKEY 
A is a binder in B. 
A binder is a word in the quantifier of a generalization. This T.E. is purely 
abbreviatory yet frequently used. 
T4.1.26 [AB]: AEbd(B). ~ .AEvrb(B) 
Hyp(l) . ~ . 
2. A Eint(ontf(B)). 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
[:3C]. 
C E Ontf(B). 
A E vrb(C). 
[:3D]. 
BE Gnrl(CD). 
C E ingr(B). 
A E vrb(B) 
T4.1.27 [AB] : A E bd(B). ~ .[:3C].C E qntf.A E int(C) 
Hyp(l). ~ . 
2. A E int(Ontf(B)) 
3. 
4. 
5. 
[:3C]. 
A Eint(C). 
C E Ontf(B). 
C E qntf. 
[:3C].A E int(C).C E qntf 
T4.1.28 [AB] : A E bd(B). ~ .B E gnrl 
[TE9,1] 
[2,013] 
[2,3,013] 
[3, TE5] 
[5, TE4, T2.5.30] 
[T2.4.1O, 4, 6] 
[TE9,1] 
[2,013] 
[2,013] 
[4, T4.1.23] 
[3,5] 
[TE9, 013, T4.1.21] 

AXIOMATIC INSCRIPTIONAL SYNTAX. PART II 
241 
It is important to remember that binders are not just words in quantifiers, 
but words in quantifiers or generalizations. 
T4.1.29 [ABC] : A E bd(B).C E bd(B).A E cnf(C). ::) .A = C 
Hyp(3) . ::) . 
4. A E int(Ontf(B)). 
5. C E int(Ontf(B)). 
[3D]. 
6. 
DE Ontf(B). 
7. 
A E int(D). 
8. 
C E int(D). 
[1, TE9] 
[2, TE9] 
[4, D13] 
[4,6] 
[5,6] 
9. 
DE qntf. 
A=C 
[6, T4.1.23] 
[9, TE2, D19, 3, 7, 8, D13] 
TEIO [ABC] : .A E var(BC). =: 
BEbd(C). 
A E int( Sbqntf( C)). 
A E cnf(B) : 
[DE] : DE ingr(C).E E bd(D).A E cnf(E).A E vrb(D). :J .D = C 
A is a variable bound by B in generalization C. This very important notion 
will be used constantly, so we give several examples. Consider the following 
generalization 
B 
~ 
A: 
LP./9(Vr(p) LP}9(Ppff· 
t 
t t 
t,,\ 
BI 
VI B2 
113 V4 
In this example we have pointed to certain words to name them. This will 
avoid cumbersome descriptions like "BI is the name of the second word of 
A," "B is the name of the Complex of the 11th through 20th words of A." 
Referring now to this diagram we can say VI E var( B I A), and, moreover, Vi 

242 
V. FREDERICK RICKEY 
is the only variable of A. V3 c var{B2 B) and V4 c var{B2 B), so it should 
be clear that one binder can bind several variables. But neither V3 nor V4 is 
a variable in A. Since quantifiers contain no equiforrn words no variable can 
be bound by more than one binder. This prompts us to prove 
T4.1.30 [ABCDE] : A c var{DC).B c var{EC).A c cnf{B). :J .D = E 
Hyp(3). :J . 
4. Dc bd{C). 
[1, TElO] 
5. A c cnf{D). 
[1, TElO] 
6. E c bd{C). 
[2, TElO] 
7. Be cnf{E). 
[2, TElO] 
8. D c cnf{E). 
[3, 5, 7, T2.2.20, T2.2.21] 
D = E 
[T4.1.29, 4, 6, 8] 
T4.1.31 [ABC] : A c var{BC). :J .B c vrb{C) 
[TElO, T4.1.26] 
T4.1.32 [ABC] : A c var{BC). :J .C c gnrl 
[TElO, T4.1.28] 
TEll [ABC] : .A c cnvar{BC). ==: A c A.[:3D].A c var{DC).B c var{DC) 
A is an equiform variable with B in C. 
TE12 [AB] : A c var{B). == .A c cnvar{AB) 
A is a variable in the generalization B. As an example consider the general-
ization A: 
We have 
VI c cnvar{V4A), 
V2 c cnvar{V3A) 
Vi c var{B1A), 
V3 c var{B2A) 
Vi c var{A), 
(i = 1,2,3,4) 
The following theorems are obvious: 

AXIOMATIC INSCRIPTIONAL SYNTAX. PART II 
243 
T4.1.33 [ABC] : A E cnvar{BC). =:) .A E cnvar{AC) 
[TEll] 
T4.1.34 [ABC] : A E cnvar{BC). =:) .A E var{C) 
[T4.1.33, TE12] 
T4.1.35 [AB] : A E var{B). =:) .B E gnrl 
[TEI2, TEll, T4.1.32] 
T4.1.36 [AB] : A E var{B). == .[3C].A E var{CB) 
[TEl2, TEll] 
T4.1.37 [ABC] : A E cnvar{BC). =:) .B E cnvar{AC) 
[TEll] 
T4.1.38 [ABC] : A E cnvar{BC). =:) .A E cnf{B) 
[TEll, TElO, T2.2.20, T2.2.21] 
T4.1.39 [AB] : A E var{B). =:) .B E trm 
[T4.1.36, TElO, TE9, T4.1.2, TEl] 
2.2. Functions and Arguments (TE13-29) 
We previously remarked that almost all theses of Protothetic are generaliza-
tions of the form 
(1) LPq ... ~ r 7jJ{pq ... r. 
More precisely, the essence of (1) is usually a many-link-function, i.e., an 
expression of the form 
(2) iI>{:pq ... +-f fg .. · t .. · (fp ... ) 
In (2) the links, i.e., the expressions like 
(3) {:pq ... +, -ffg .. · t, (pf ... ) 
are called parenthemes and consist of an expression enclosed between sym-
metric parentheses. Each parentheme can be uniquely decomposed into an 
expression of the form . 
where each ai is a term, generalization, or another function like (2). These 
a's are called the arguments of the parentheme (4). Besides these notions we 
shall develop vocabulary for comparing parenthemes and the arguments of 
different parenthemes. 
TEl3 [A] : .A E prntm. ==: 

244 
V. FREDERICK RICKEY 
A E expr-w-int : 
[C] : C E hd(A). ::J .C E Mtch(Uvrb(A)1vrb(A)) : 
[C] : C E tl(A). ::J .C E Mtch(1vrb(A)Uvrb(A)) : 
1vrb(A) E prntsym(Uvrb(A)) 
A is a parentheme. In a parentheme the first and last word are symmetric 
parentheses, and those parentheses within A, which are equiform to either the 
first or last parentheses of A, are properly mated. As examples of parenthemes 
consider 
(p), 
{cp*}, 
(u~ r f(u)')O. 
One should also see the remarks concerning subquantifiers (TE3) as the T.E. 's 
are quite similar. The following theorems are analogous to those following 
TE3 and so no proofs are given. 
T4.2.1 [A] : A E prntm. ::J .1vrb(A) E prnt 
T4.2.2 [AB] : A E prntm.B E prntm.1vrb(A) E vrb(B). ::J .A E ingr(B) 
T4.2.3 [AB] : A E prntm.B E prntm.1vrb(A) = 1vrb(B). ::J .A = B 
T4.2.4 [AB] : A E prntm. ::J .A E expr 
We cannot prove yet that if two parenthemes have a word in common, then 
one is an ingredient of the other, for consider 
B 
~ 
-fp{qrs} 
---......-.-
A 
Here parenthemes A and B are not disjoint, yet neither is part of the other. 
TE14 [Aa] : .A E Fnct(a). =:: 1vrb(A) E trm : 
[C] : C E a. ::J .C E prntm: 
A E Cmpl(1vrb(A) U a) 
A is afunction with parenthemes a. 
TE15 [A] : A E Inct. =: .A E A.[3a].A E Fnct(a).!{a} 
A is ajunction. A function is of the form 
~{ ... }-f ···r··· ( ... ). 

AXIOMATIC INSCRIPTIONAL SYNTAX. PART II 
245 
The conjunct !{a} in TE15 prevents terms from being functions. Hence we 
know a function has at least one parentheme. The many-link-functions we 
spoke of earlier are functions with more than one parentheme. 
T4.2.5 [A] : A c trm. ::J .A c Fnct(A) 
Hyp(1) . ::J . 
2. A c vrb. 
[TEl, 1] 
3. 1vrb(A) c vrb(A). 
[1, T2.2.27, T2.2.30, D3] 
4. 1vrb(A) = A. 
[3,2, T2.2.lO] 
5. 1vrb(A) c trm. 
[1,4] 
6. 1vrb(A) c expr. 
[3, T2.4.2, T2.2.9] 
7. A c Cmpl(vrb(A)). 
[T2.5.8, 6, 4] 
8. vrb(A) 0 1vrb(A) U A. 
[4,3, T2.2.lO] 
9. A c Cmpl(1vrb(A) U A). 
[7, 8] 
A c Fnct(A) 
[TE14, 5, 9] 
T4.2.6 [Aab] : A c Fnct(a).A c Fnct(b). ::J .a 0 b 
[TE14] 
T4.2.7 [A] : A c fnct. ::J .2vrb(A) c prnt 
Hyp(1) . ::J . 
[3a]. 
2. 
A c Fnct(a). 
3. 
!(a). 
[3C]. 
4. 
Cca. 
5. 
C c prntm. 
[1, TE15] 
[1, TE15] 
[3] 
[2,4, TE14] 

246 
6. 
7. 
8. 
v. FREDERICK RICKEY 
[3D]. 
De int(C). 
C e ingr(A). 
De int(A). 
9. A e N(vrb). 
10. [3B].B e 2vrb(A). 
11. 2vrb(A) e vrb(A). 
[3B]. 
12. 
Be (1vrb(A) U a). 
13. 
2vrb(A) e vrb(B). 
14. 
Bea. 
15. 
1vrb(A) eN (vrb(B)). 
16. 
Be prntm. 
17. 
Be ingr(A). 
18. 
2vrb(A) = 1vrb(B). 
19. 
1vrb(B) e prnt. 
2vrb(A) e prnt 
T4.2.8 [A] : A e fnct. ::) .Uvrb(A) e prnt 
[5, TE13, T2.5.12] 
[4,2, TE14, T2.5.9] 
[6,7, DIO, DB] 
[8, T2.5.18] 
[9, T2.2.29] 
[10, T2.2.40, D4] 
[11,2, TEI4, D12, Dl] 
[11,2, TEI4, D12, Dl] 
[12, 13, T2.2.39] 
[12, 13, T2.2.39] 
[TEI4, 14,2] 
[14,2, TEI4, T2.5.9] 
[13, 15, 17, T2.2.41] 
[16, T4.2.1] 
[18, 19] 
[Sim., T4.2.7] 
TE16 [AB] : A e prntm(B). == .A e A.[3a].B e Fnct(a).A e a 
A is a parentheme of the function B. 
T4.2.9 [AB]: A e prntm(B). ::) .B e fnct 
T4.2.IO [AB] : A e prntm(B). ::) .A e prntm 
[TEI6, TE15] 
[TEI6, TE14] 

AXIOMATIC INSCRIPTIONAL SYNTAX. PART II 
247 
Clearly a function can have several parenthemes, but it is not so clear that a 
parentheme can be a parentheme of several functions. Consider the function 
A: 
c 
~ 
<P =€= pq of -f tj- (ps) 
~ 
B 
C is a parentheme of A and also of the function B. 
TE17 [Aa] : .A c p-arg(a). =:: 
A c prntm : 
[C] : C c a. ~ .C c trm U gnrl U fnct : 
Int(A) c Cmpl(a) 
A is a parentheme with arguments a. 
TE18 [AB] : A c arg(B). =: .A c A.[::Ja].B c P-arg(a).A c a 
A is an argument of parentheme B. The most important thing to remember 
is that arguments can only be terms, generalizations or functions. 
T4.2.11 [AB] : A c arg(B). ~ .A c trm U gnrl U fnct 
[TE18, TE 17] 
T4.2.l2 [AB] : A c arg(B). ~ .B c prntm 
[TE18, TE17] 
Only parenthemes have arguments. We will not speak of functions having 
arguments, but only of their parenthemes having arguments. We cannot prove 
that all parenthemes have arguments, for consider the parentheme: 
(r). 
r is the only thing which has a chance of being an argument, but it is neither 
a term, generalization nor function. So this parentheme has no arguments. 
The requirement that arguments be terms, generalizations or functions 
is quite natural from a semantical point of view; we certainly do not want 
comers, parentheses, quantifiers or any meaningless expressions to occur as 
arguments. Syntactically it is easy to say to which of these three classes an 
argument belongs. Terms are always single letters, but not comers or paren-
theses. Generalizations always begin with L and end with '. Because of the 
condition on matching comers we can always find the end of a generalization. 
Functions always consist of a term followed by a number of parenthemes. All 
of this is intended to convince one that we do not need commas between the 
arguments. Consider, for example, the following parentheme A: 

248 
v. FREDERICK RICKEY 
The first argument must begin with the first word in Int(A), i.e., q. Since the 
third word of A is a term, the first argument of A must be just the second 
word of A. As the fourth word of A is a parenthesis, the third word cannot 
be an argument by itself. So the fourth word is part of the second argument 
and, moreover, it begins a parentheme of the function which must be the 
second argument of A. This parentheme ends with the sixth word of A. As 
the seventh word is equiform to L, it cannot begin a new parentheme of the 
function which is the second argument and so begins the third argument. 
Since words equiform to L can only start generalizations the third argument 
can only be a generalization. Going to the end of A3 we find that the next word 
is a term and so is either an argument by itself or begins a function. Since 
the word after <I> is a parenthesis, we see that the last argument is A4. This 
argument should convince one of the plausibility of the following theorem 
which states that parenthemes with arguments have those arguments uniquely. 
T4.2.13 [Aab] : A c P-arg(a) : A c p-arg(b). :J .a 0 b 
We also have 
T4.2.14 [ABC] : A c arg(B).A c arg(C). :J .B = C 
We now begin a sequence of T.E. 's which will enable us to discuss corre-
sponding arguments of parenthemes and analogous functions. The semantical 
reason for these syntactic requirements is as follows: We want the number 
of arguments and shape of the parentheses of a parentheme to indicate the 
syntactical categories of its arguments. 
The idea is to say - and this is the purpose of the next paragraph - that 
corresponding arguments enclosed in the same type of parentheses are of the 
same syntactical category. Thus, for example, when we write 
we wantp and c.p, and also q and LU-, r U -, to belong to the same category. 
We avoid things like 
f(P), 
<I> (f) 
since we could conclude that p and f and also f and <I> are in the same cate-
gory. Hence f and p are in the same category. But a functor and an argument 
of its parentheme being in the same category smacks of the Russell Antinomy. 

AXIOMATIC INSCRIPTIONAL SYNTAX. PART II 
249 
TE19 [AB] : A C simprntm(B). == . 
A c prntm. 
Be prntm. 
1vrb(A) c cnf(1vrb(B)). 
arg(A) 00 arg(B) 
A is a parentheme similar to B. Because of T4.2.12, i.e., the only things 
with arguments are parenthemes, it seems TE19.2 could be dropped. This is 
indeed the case if we knew parentheme A had any arguments. Consider -fL 1-
and -f-fL 1-. The first of these is a parentheme with no arguments. The second 
also has no arguments, since it is not even a parentheme. This establishes the 
independenceofTEl9.2 (orTEI9.1). 
The following parenthemes are similar 
(pq), 
(LP-, r <}(Pp)'s), 
(f(t) iP(f)), 
but none of these is similar to any of the following 
(P), 
(pqr) , 
-fLP) 
T4.2.15 [AB] : A c prntm. :J .A c simprntm(A) 
[TEI9, ant. 14, T2.2.18] 
T4.2.16 [AB]: Acsimprntm(B).:J .B csimprntm(A)[TEI9, ant. 15,T2.2.20] 
T4.2.17 [ABC] : A c simprntm(B).B c simprntm(C). :J .A c simprntm(C) 
[TEI9, ant. 16, T2.2.21] 
TE20 [ABCD] : A c Anarg(BCD). == . 
A c arg(C). 
Be arg(D). 
(arg(C) n prcd(A)) 00 (arg(D) n prcd(B)). 
C c simprntm(D) 
A is an analogous argument to B, which are arguments of C and D, respec-
tively. Intuitively two arguments are analogous when they are both the n-th 
argument of their corresponding parenthemes. For example, in the similar 
parenthemes 
(Pf(q)LU-, r U ') 
and 
(hiP(f)) 

250 
V. FREDERICK RICKEY 
p is analogous to t, f(q) to * and LU~ r U -, to ip(f). 
T4.2.18 [ABeD] : A E Anarg(BCD). ::J .C E prntm.D E prntm [TE20, TEI9] 
T4.2.19 [ABCD] : A E Anarg(BCD). ::J .A E Anarg(ACC) 
[TE20,Ont. 14, T4.2.18, T4.2.15] 
T4.2.20 [AC] : A E arg(C). ::J .A E Anarg(ACC) 
[TE20,Ont. 14, T4.2.15, T4.2.12] 
TE21 [ABCDEF] : A E Anfnct(BCDEF). == . 
C E Concat(AE).A E A. 
DE Concat(BF). 
E E simprntm(F). 
C E tnc!. 
DE fnc! 
TE22 [ABCD] : A E Antnct(BCD). == .A E A.[::lEF].A E Anfnct(BCDEF) 
A is an analogous Junctor to B in C and D, respectively. By afunctor we 
mean either a function or term which is followed by a parentheme. Two 
functors are analogous when the parenthemes following them are similar. For 
example, in the functions 
the functors Vr and ip-f f t are analogous, but are not analogous to any functor 
of the functions 
f(p), 
Vr [jq], 
x-fpqt(stu). 
T4.2.21 [ABCD] : A E Antnct(BCD). ::J .A E Antnct(ACC) 
[TE22, TE21] 
TE23 [ABCD] : .A E An(BCD). ==: A E A: A E Anarg(BCD). V . 
A E Anfnct(BCD) 
A is analogous to B which are in C and D, respectively, iff A and B are either 
analogous arguments of parenthemes C and D, respectively, or analogous 
functors of C and D, respectively. 

AXIOMATIC INSCRIPTIONAL SYNTAX. PART II 
251 
T4.2.22 [ABCD] : A E An(BCD). =:J .A E An(ACC) 
[TE23, T4.2.19, T4.2.21] 
T4.2.23 [ABCD] : A E An(BCD). =:J .B E An(ADC) 
[TE23, TE22, TE21, TE20] 
TE24 [AB] : A E 1arg(B). =:: .A E Anarg(10vrb(l.2t;r) B Cmpl(9vrb(l.2t;r)U 
10vrb(l.2t;r) U 11vrb(l.2t;r) U 12vrb(l.2t;r))) 
A is the first argument of parentheme B. 
TE25 [AB] : A E 2arg(B). =:: .A E Anarg(11vrb(l.2t;r) B Cmpl(9vrb(l.2t;r)U 
10vrb(l.2t;r) U 11vrb(l.2t;r) U 12vrb(l.2t;r))) 
A is the second argument of parentheme B. It is important to remember that 
we are speaking of the arguments of very special parenthemes, viz., those 
similar to 
(pq) 
which is equiform to the Complex of the 9th through 12th words of our axiom 
l.2t;r. 
TE26 [AB] : .A E 1eqvl(B). =::: 1vrb(B) E cnf(6vrb(l.2t;r)) : 
[:lC].A E 1arg(C).B E Concat(1vrb(B)C) : A E A 
A is the first equivalence of B. 
TE27 [AB] : .A E 2eqvl(B). =::: 1vrb(B) E cnf(6vrb(l.2t;r)) : 
[:lC].A E 2arg(C).B E Concat(1vrb(B)C) : A E A 
A is the second equivalence of B. B is a function of the form 
9(--), 
where 9 is to be interpreted as the biconditional. 
T4.2.24 [AB] : A E 1eqvl(B). =:J .B E fnct 
Hyp(1) . =:J . 
2. 1vrb(B) E cnf(6vrb(2t;r)). 
[1, TE26] 

252 
V. FREDERICK RICKEY 
3. 1vrb(B) E trm. 
[3CJ. 
4. 
A E 1arg(C). 
5. 
BE Concat(1vrb(B)C). 
6. 
C E prntm. 
7. 
BE Fnct(C). 
BE fnct 
TE28 [ABJ : A E 1trm(B). == .A E 1eqvl(Essnt(B)) 
A is the first term of B. 
TE29 [ABJ : A E 2trm(B). == .A E 2eqvl(Essnt(B)) 
[2, TEl, Q7] 
[1, TE26] 
[1, TE26] 
[4, TE24, TE20, TEl9] 
[TE14, 3, 6, 5] 
[6,7, TE15] 
A is the second term of B. There are two cases to consider here. If B is a 
generalization, then it is of the form 
L···J '9(--)' 
where the first dash indicates its first term and the second dash its second 
term. If B is not a generalization, then Essnt(B) = B and hence is of the form 
9(--)· 
These forms are extremely important in Protothetic. All definitions have one 
of these two forms, although the second is used only in defining constants. 
All theses of extensionality have the first form. 
2.3. Syntactical Categories (TE30-33) 
No one today would consider the expression 
f(f) 
as meaningful, yet there is still considerable debate as to how to preclude such 
expressions from arising in formal languages. Lesniewski's solution was to 
introduce the concept of semantical category into his logical theories. The 
main semantical criteria for two expressions to be of the same semantical 
category is that they be intersubstitutable in all contexts. We cannot use this 
as a criteria for defining semantical categories, but it is the main motivational 
force behind what we now do. 

AXIOMATIC INSCRIPTIONAL SYNTAX. PART II 
253 
TE30 [AB] : A E ingrthp(B). := .A E A.[3C].C E thp(B).A E ingr(C) 
A is an ingredient of a thesis of Proto the tic with respect to B. This term is 
purely abbreviatory so we make no further comment. 
TE31 [AB] : .A E frp(B). :=: A E A: A E thp(B). V .[3C].C E ingrthp(B). 
C E sbqntf.A E Int(C). V . [3C].C E ingrthp(B).A E 1arg(C). V .[3C]. 
C E ingrthp( B).A E 2arg( C) 
A is a (propositional) phrase with respect to B. This is a start toward build-
ing up the syntactical category of propositions. Clearly, we should include 
all theses and essences of generalizations. We also include the arguments of 
parenthemes similar to 
(5) (pq) 
i.e., both p and q are to be called propositions. One should realize that frp(B) 
does not include everything which is in the syntactical category of proposi-
tions, for consider the definition of Verum: 
(6) LPJ r <}(<}(pp)Vr (p))' 
It is not the case that the pin Vr (p) is a phrase. Since we want it to be of 
the same category as the p's in <} (pp) we must enlarge our notions so that 
equiform variables are of the same category. 
Immediately after the above definition we could make the following defi-
nition. 
The question of what syntactical category f belongs to cannot be answered 
on the basis of equiform variables. It is the case that the f in f (p) is analogous 
(in the sense of TE22) to Vr in Vr (p) and hence it is natural to say they are in 
the same syntactical category. These two remarks motivate 
TE32 [ABC] : .A E 1homosemp(BC). :=: A E A: A f frp(C). 
B f frp(C). V .[3DJ.D E ingrthp(C).A E cnvar(BD). V . 
[3DE].D E ingrthp(C).E E ingrthP(C).A E An(BDE) 
A is a direct homoseme of B with respect to thesis C. This means that A and 
B are in the same syntactical category. 

254 
V. FREDERICK RICKEY 
The following theorems are easily proved. 
T4.3.1 [ABC] : A c thp(B).C c thp(B). :J .A c 1homosemp(CB) 
[TE32, TE31] 
T4.3.2 [AB] : A c thp(B). :J .A c 1homosemp(AB) 
[T4.3.1] 
T4.3.3 [ABC] : A c 1homosemp(CB). :J .A c 1homosemp(AB) 
[TE32, T4.1.33, T4.2.22] 
T4.3.4 [ABC] : A c 1homosemp(BC). :J .B c 1homosemp(AC) 
[TE32, T4.1.37, T4.2.23] 
These last two theorems show reflexivity and symmetry, but transitivity is 
still lacking. The following example shows why 
(8) 
LP-lr <}(<}(pp) Vr(p)f 
1/ \m 
(9) 
Lf -lr <} (LP-lr f(pf 4!(f} f 
t 
t 
II 
Vr and f are in the same category since they are analogous functors (arrow I). 
The two 1's in (9) are in the same category (arrow II) since they are equiform 
variables. But 1homosemps are connected by analogy or by equiform vari-
ables, but not by both. Hence, Vr and the second fin (9) are not 1homosemps 
(arrow III). 
In order to obtain transitivity, and hence arrow III, we must induct. As 
we have no recursive definitions we use the Frege-Dedekind technique of 
ancestral relations. Before giving TE33, let us see how it works. We want A 
and B to be in the same class iff there is a finite sequence 
A,Cl,C2, ... ,Cn,B 
such that adjacent terms are 1homosemps. We insure this in the following way. 
Let a be any class which includes B and which is closed under the relation 
of 1 homosemp, i.e., 
[DE] : Dc a.E c 1homosemp(DC). :J .E c a 
(this is the condition which guarantees transitivity). Now take the smallest 
class which satisfies these properties. (For a simpler example of how this 
works, see Lesniewski (1931).) 
Finally, we remark that the clause 

AXIOMATIC INSCRIPTIONAL SYNTAX. PART II 
255 
[D] : DE a. :) .D E 1homosemp(DC) 
is included in TE33 so that the intersection is finite. This is true since we 
consider only a's which are subsets of 1homosemp(DC). These sets are finite 
(for any given D and C) since, at any given time, Protothetic contains only 
a finite number of theses with respect to B and each of these contains only 
a finite number of expressions and hence 1 homosemps. If we were willing to 
take an unrestricted quantification we could drop this part of the T.E. 
TE33 [ABC] :: A E homosemp(BC). :::=: .A E A. 
BE 1homosemp(BC) : . 
[a] : .B E a: [D] : DE a. :) .D E 1homosemp(DC) : [DE] : DE a. 
E E 1homosemp(DC). :) .E E a ::) .A E a 
A is ofthe same syntactical category as B with respect to thesis C. 
T4.3.5 [AC] : A E 1homosemp(AC). :) .A E homosemp(AC) 
[TE33] 
We shall now prove transitivity. 
T4.3.6 [ABCDa] :: A E homosemp(BC).B E homosemp(DC).D E a: [E] : 
E E a.:) .E E 1homosemp(EC) : [EF] : E E a.F E 1homosemp(EC).:) . 
F E a : . :) .A E a. 
Hyp(5) . :):-: 
6. [a] : .D E a: [E] : E E a. :) .E E 1homosemp(EC) : [EF].E E a. 
FE 1homosemp(EC). :) .F E a : . :) .B E a : . 
[TE33,2] 
7. BE a. 
AEa 
[6,3,4,5] 
[1, TE33, 7, 4, 5] 
T4.3.7 [ABCD] : A E homosemp(BC).B E homosemp(DC). :) . 
A E homosemp(DC) 
[TE33, T4.3. 6] 
2.4. Special Terms (TE34-45) 
In this section we give several very technical Terminological Explanations. 
They are designed for special uses in the next section and, consequently, we 
shall discuss them in the context that they will be used. 

256 
V. FREDERICK RICKEY 
TE34 [ABCD] : .C e Antrm{DAB). :::::: C e C : C e 1trm{A).D e 1trm{B). V. 
C e 2trm{A).D e 2trm{A) 
This is used only in TE4 7, the rule for distribution of quantifiers. This gives 
us a method to relate analogous terms of generalizations where the essence is 
an equivalence. The following diagram may be useful. 
B: 
L ••• .J r 9{--f 
tt 
DD' 
t t 
C c' 
'" '" 
A: 
L ••• .Jr 9{--f 
TE35 [CDEa] : De corr{ECa). ::::: . 
DeD. 
Eea. 
(a n prcd{E)) 00 (int{Sbqntf{C)) n prcd(D)) 
This correspondence is used only in formulating the rule of substitution 
(cf. TE49 below). Taking advantage of some knowledge from TE49 we can 
say that Corr will be used only in the following situation 
C: L···.Jr 'lj;-f. . .. p ... 1-' 
11··· 1 ···1 
a a 
a 
a 
,--.,,--., 
A: L ••• .Jr 'lj;-f. ... ¢(t) ... -1- ' 
where D is one of the words in the essence of C and E is one of the a's in 
A; in particular, E is that a with the same number of a's preceding as D has 
words of Essnt( C) preceding. 
TE36 [AB] : .A e fnctgen{B). :::::: 
A e fnct. 
prntm{A) :::::; prntm{B) : 
[CD] : C e prntm{A).D e prntm{B).{prntm{A)nscd{C)) 00 (prntm{B)n 
scd{D)). :J .C IS simprntm{D) 

AXIOMATIC INSCRIPTIONAL SYNTAX. PART II 
257 
A is afunction generated by function B iff A has fewer links than B and each 
link of A is similar to the corresponding link in B. For example, if B is 
cI>{:p:}-fqt-(r) 
then it generates the following functions 
*{:p:}-fqt-(r), 
'I/J-fqt-(s), 
cI>(LU.J r u') 
but none of 
C}$p${:q:}-frt-(s), 
c}(pq), 
EB-fpqt-(r). 
This T.E. will be of great use in formulating the directive concerning sub-
stitution: The only functions which can be substituted are those which are 
generated by functions already in the system. We state without proof 
T4.4.1 [A] : A E fnet. ::::) .A E fnetgen{A) 
TE37 [ABCDE] :: C E eonstp(BADE). :=: . 
DE homosemp{EB). 
C E cnf(D) : 
[F] : FE ingrthp{B). ::::) .D E N(var(F)) : 
[3FG].F E ingr(A).G E ingrthp(B).C E An{EFG) 
TE38 [ABC] : C E eonstp{BA). := .C E C.[3DE].C E eonstp{BADE) 
C is a constant of Protothetic with respect to thesis B and (occurring in) A. 
We now state without proof 
T4.4.2 [ABC] : C E eonstp(BA). ::::) .C E vrb{A) 
This term is used only three times, in TE46.3, 4, and TE49.8. TE37.3 states 
that no word equiform to a constant C has ever served as a variable. Thus, 
once we quantify a letter it may never be used as a constant. Condition TE37.4 
guarantees that C is being used properly (if a functor, the right type of paren-
theme follows; if a variable, it occupies a spot which can hold something of 
that type) in expression A, which we intend to add as a thesis after B. 
TE39 [ABCDEF] : .A E q-homosemp(BCDEF). :=: 
E E homosemp(FC).A E A : 
[3GI] : G E ingr(D).J E ingrthp(C).A E An(EGI) : 
[3GI] : G E ingr(D).J c ingrthp(C).B c An{FGI) 

258 
V. FREDERICK RICKEY 
TE40 [ABDF] : FE q-homosemp(DBA). :::: .F E F. 
[::JGH].F E q-homosemp(DBAGH) 
It is meaningful to say two expressions are of the same syntactical category 
only when they are ingredients of theses of Protothetic. Hence, when we are 
considering an inscription A as a possible thesis, it is not meaningful to say 
certain parts of it are in the same syntactical category. The term q-homosemp 
is used to circumvent this difficulty. We say F and D will be of the same 
syntactical category when A is added as a thesis after B if F and D are 
analogous to ingredients of theses which are already of the same syntactical 
category. 
TE41 [ABCDE] : .C E fnctp(BADE). ::::: 
DE homosemp(EB). 
C E fnctgen(D) : 
[::JFG].F E ingr(A).G E ingrthp(B).C E An(EFG) 
TE42 [ABFGHI] : .F E varp(GBAHI). ::::: 
HE homosemp(GB) : 
[::JJK] : K E ingr(A).J E ingrthp(B).H E An(IJK): 
FE cnvar(IA). 
IE ingr(1trm(A)) 
TE43 [ABCDE] : .C E prntmp(BADE). ::::: 
DE homosemp(BB). 
E E prntm(D). 
C E prntm(2trm(A)). 
arg(C) 00 arg(E) : 
[FG] : FE arg(C).G E arg(E).(arg(C) n prcd(F)) 00 (arg(E)n 
prcd(G)). ~ .[::JHI].F E varp(GBAHI) 
TE44 [ABCDE] : C E 1prntmp(BADE). :::: . 
C E prntmp(BADE). 
Uvrb(D) E vrb(E) 
TE45 [ABCDEFG] : C E 2prntmp(BADEFG). == . 

AXIOMATIC INSCRIPTIONAL SYNTAX. PART II 
C c prntmp(BADE). 
Fe prntm(D). 
Uprcd(F) c ingr(E). 
G c simprntm(F) 
259 
These technical terms will be useful for choosing parentheses in definitions. 
They will be explained later when used. 
2.5. The T.E.'sfor Definition, Quantification, Detachment, Substitution and 
Extensionality (TE46-51 ) 
The previous forty-five Terminological Explanations were all in preparation 
for this section which is the key to Protothetic. 
TE46 [AB] :.: A c defp(B). =:: 
Rl 1vrb(Essnt(A)) c N (var(A)).A c A. 
R2 1vrb(2trm(A)) c N(var(A)). 
R3 1vrb(2trm(A)) c N(constp(BA)) : . 
R4 [C] : .C ctrm.C cvrb(1trm(A)). =>: [3G].C cbd(G).V.[3D].Dcingr(A). 
C c var(D). V .C c constp(BA) : . 
R5 [CD] : Dc ingr(A).C c bd(D). => .[3E].E c var(CD) : 
R6 [C] : C c bd(A). => .[3D].D c vrb(1trm(A)).D c var(CA) : 
R7 [C] : C c bd(A). => .[3D].D c vrb(2trm(A)).D c var(CA) : . 
R8 [DEF] : .F c vrb(Hrm(A)).D c vrb(1trm(A)).F c cnvar(DE). =>: 
D = F. V .F c q-homosemp(DBA) : . 
R9 [C] : C c gnrl.C c ingr(lnt(A)). => .[3DEF].D c homosemp(BB). 
E c ingrthp(B).F c ingr(A).D c Anarg(CEF) : . 
RIO [CD]: Ccgnrl.Ccingr(A).DcEssnt(C). =>: Dcvrb.V.[3E].Ecfrp(B). 
Dc fnctgen(E) : . 
Rll [C] : C c fnct.C c ingr(1trm(A)). =>: [3D].D c gnrl.C c Essnt(D). V . 

260 
V. FREDERICK RICKEY 
[3DE].C c fnctp(BADE) : 
R12 [CD] : Dc int(C).C c prntm(2trm(A)). ~ .D c var(A) : 
R13 2trm(A) c non-rep: 
R14 [CDE] : C c 1prntmp(BADE).Uvrb(2trm(A)) c ingr(C). ~ . 
C c simprntm(E) : . 
R15 [CDEFG] : C c 2prntmp(BADEFG).G c ingr(A).Uprcd(G) c 
ingr(C). ~ .C c simprntm(E) : . 
R16 [CE] : C c prntm(2trm(A)).Uvrb(2trm(A)) c ingr(C).E c ingrthp(B). 
C c simprntm(E). ~ .[3D].C c 1prntmp(BADE). 
R17 [CEG] : C cprntm(2trm(A)).G cprntm.G cingr(A).Uprcd(G) cingr(C). 
E c ingrthp(B).C c simprntm(E). ~ .[3DF].C c 2prntmp(BADEFG) 
A is a definition after thesis B. 
Several conjuncts of TE46 apply to any prospective thesis of Protothetic. 
They are TE46.4, 5, 8, 9, 10, 11. Let us ignore them for the moment and 
concentrate on the conjuncts peculiar to definitions. 
First remark that a definition need not be a generalization. But its essence, 
by TE46.2, must be an equivalence. The second term of A can contain no 
variables in this case (TE46.3) and is thus a term. In this case then, we are 
defining a constant without any parameters, or, as one usually says, a constant. 
The definition thus has the form 
where * is the newly defined constant and 'ljJ is a well formed formula (the 
other conjuncts guarantee this) which contains no free variables. 
As examples of this type of definition consider the following definitions of 
o and 1 (falsehood and truth) 
9(LU -,rU'O) 
9(9(LU -, r U' LU -, r U ')1) 
These are not the only definitions of constants possible, but any constant 
defined will be equivalent to either 0 or 1. 
Now we move to the more interesting case of where A is a generalization. 
From TE46.2, 5, 13 we can prove 2trm(A) c fnct and so A has the form 
L •••••• -' r 9(-- <I>=f ... +-f ... t( ... ))' 

AXIOMATIC INSCRIPTIONAL SYNTAX. PART II 
261 
The first term of A, since it is an argument, is either a term (TEl), generaliza-
tion, or function. All three cases can occur but if the definiens is a term then 
the definiendum has the shape 
As(x) 
i.e., it has only one parameter. The definition is precisely (up to change of 
symbolism) 
LX~ '9(xAs(x))" 
which is usually called Assertium. 
TE46.12 tells us that the words in the parenthemes of the function which 
is the definiendum are variables. Hence the parenthemes of the definiendum 
(2trm(A)) look like 
-tpq . .. S1--, 
and the definiendum looks like 
iP={=pq ... s}-f fg ... 1-- ... (uv ... ) 
where all the symbols are different (TE46.13). 
TE46.6, 7 tell us that every binder in A binds at least one term in the 
definiens and exactly one variable in the definiendum. These conditions are 
necessary to prevent contradictions (cf., e.g., Carnap, 1934). 
Combining all of this information we see that definitions have the form 
Lpqfguv ... ~ '9(1j;(pqfguv ... ) iP={=pq ... }-f fg .. · t.·· (uv .. . ))' 
It remains to show how TE46.14-17 govern the choice of parentheses 
in the definiendum. These conjuncts are very important for they insure that 
the syntactical categories are uniquely determined on syntactical grounds. In 
particular, if we know (1) the shape of the parentheses, and (2) the number 
of arguments of a parentheme, then we know the syntactical category of each 
argument and also the syntactical category of the functor which precedes this 
parentheme. 
Conditions 14 and 15 force us to use certain parentheses; 16 and 17 prevent 
us from using others. Conditions 14 and 16 govern the choice of parentheses 
for the last (i.e., rightmost) parentheme in the definiendum. Conditions 15 and 
17 govern the choice of the other parentheses in the definiendum in a manner 
akin to inductive definitions, but of course without using natural numbers. 
The explanations of conditions 14 and 16 which follow refer to the follow-
ing diagram: 

262 
T: 
T' : 
B: 
A: 
J 
~ 
( ... q ... ) 
V. FREDERICK RICKEY 
D 
+- prop. 
~ 
'Ij; ( .. r .. ) 
E 
t 
H. 
homosemp. G 
~I 
! 
~ 
L •.• p . .. Jr 9 ( ... ( ... p . .. ) ... 1> ( .. p .. ))' 
'-v---' 
t 
K 
F 
Condition 14 dictates that whenever there is a parentheme E, which is 
the last parentheme of a function D, which is in the syntactical category of 
propositions, and when corresponding arguments of E and C, which is the 
last parentheme of the definiendum (i.e., 2trm) of A, are destined to be in the 
same category, then one must use the same kind of parentheses for C as E 
has. 
We speak of an argument F of C as being "destined to be" in a certain 
syntactical category since inscription A, of which C is a part, is not yet a 
thesis of Protothetic and accordingly its part F cannot be in any syntactical 
category. What we intend is that if and when A is added to Protothetic as 
a new thesis according to the rule of definition, then F will be in the same 
syntactical category as E. 
The category to which F is destined to belong is established as follows: 
Relate F back to an equiform variable in the definiens, say I, which is in 
parentheme K (if I is a functor the argument is similar). Then I can be related 
to the variable H in parentheme J which is part of some thesis of Protothetic 
with respect to B. This is done in such a way that I and H are analogous 
arguments (or functors) in K and J, respectively. Now, since Hand G are 
both ingredients of theses of Protothetic, it is meaningful to say that they are 
in the same syntactical category. Since H and I are analogous they should be 
in the same category, and since I and Fare equiform variables they should 
be in the same category. Finally, by transitivity, F and G are destined to be 
in the same category. 
Condition 16 states that when the last parentheme C of the definiendum is 
similar to the last parentheme E of a function D which is in the syntactical 
category of propositions then corresponding arguments of the parenthemes 
C and E are destined to belong to the same syntactical category. In particular 

AXIOMATIC INSCRIPTIONAL SYNTAX. PART II 
263 
this says that if the n-th argument of E is of a different category than the 
n-th argument of C, then the parenthemes E and C are not similar, i.e., either 
C and E have different numbers of arguments or they have non-equiform 
parentheses. 
The following examples show how these two conditions govern the choice 
of parentheses in definitions. 
The axiom contains only parentheses of the shape (- --) and these are pre-
ceded by a functor in the category SISS. Condition 14 dictates that in any 
definition where we have a sentential function of two sentential variables, 
then the arguments must be enclosed in parentheses equiform to (- -). For 
example, in 
the choice of parentheses in the definiendum is forced by condition 14 since 
the arguments of 91 are destined to be in the category S, and there are two of 
them. Any other choice of parentheses would violate 14. 
(2) Lpqr~ r 9(9(P 9(qr)) *1 -fpt(qr))' 
Condition 14 forces the choice of the last parentheses of (2). But any type 
of parentheses, except (-), could be used for the second parentheme. Condi-
tion 14 is satisfied for the following since its hypothesis is false: 
(3) LP~ r 9(9 (pp) *2 -fpt)' 
However, this is unacceptable as a definition since the only parentheme in the 
definiendum is similar to the second parentheme in the definiendum of (2), 
which is not the last parentheme of (2) as is required by condition 16. The 
following is eligible as a definition immediately after (2): 
(4) LP~ r9(9(pp)Vr(p))' 
This satisfies both 14 and 16 vacuously, since there is no one argument 
parentheme in the system which is last in its definiendum. Actually, any 
choice of parentheses, except -f-t, could be made here. However, in all 
further definitions where the last parentheme contains but one argument and 
that of the syntactical category of propositions, we must use parentheses 
equiform to those in (4). The freedom to choose the type of parenthesis in (4) 
enables one to display analogy between defined terms through the notation. 
Both conditions 14 and 16 are necessary to keep the syntactical categories 
separate. If we dropped 14 then we could add 

264 
V. FREDERICK RICKEY 
and thus get the erroneous impression that Vr and *3 belong to different cat-
egories. If we dropped 16 then we could add 
(6) LjPJ r 9 (J(p) *4 (Jp))' 
which would give the impression that the functor *4, which should be of 
the category S/(S/S)S, is of category S/SS. Thus if 16 were omitted the 
categories would coalese while if 14 were dropped the categories would 
multiply needlessly. 
Conditions 15 and 17 govern the choice of parentheses for all but the last 
parentheme of the definiendum. The explanations which follow refer to the 
following diagram: 
D+-prop . 
.. 
T: 
B: 
C 
G 
r 
...----.....----..-, 
A:
L "' J 
9(--<P$ ...... ${ ...... :} .. ·) 
Condition 15 dictates that parenthemes C and E will have the same type 
of parentheses when they have the same number of arguments, when cor-
responding arguments are destined to be in the same syntactical category, 
and when the parenthemes following them (i.e., G and F, respectively) are 
similar. 
Conversly, condition 17 stipulates that when the parenthemes C and E are 
similar and when C is followed by a parentheme G, then there is a parentheme 
F following E which is similar to G and, moreover, C and E have the same 
number of arguments and corresponding arguments are destined to be in the 
same category. 
These conditions are very similar to 14 and 16 respectively and so we go 
right to examples. The following is a legitimate definition immediately after 
(1), (2), and (4) above: 
(7) Lpqr J r 9(9(9(pq)r) *5 -fp-Hqr))' 
To use another shape of parentheses on the second parentheme would vio-
late condition 15. This arrangement of parentheses was used in (2) and must 
always be used when a functor of type (S / S S) / S is involved. We can also 
add the definition 

AXIOMATIC INSCRIPTIONAL SYNTAX. PART II 
265 
(8) Lpqrs J
' 9(9(9(pq)9(rS)) *6 -fpqt(rs)), 
The use of the same shaped parentheses for the second parenthemes of (7) 
and (8) causes no confusion as these parenthemes contain different numbers 
of arguments. Both conditions 15 and 17 are satisfied as their hypotheses are 
false. 
(9) Lpqr J '9(9(P 9(qr)) *7 -fpqt(r))' 
This violates condition 17 since the second parenthemes of (8) and (9) are 
similar but the first parentheme of (8) is not similar to the first of (9). So a 
different choice of parentheses must be made for the second parentheme of 
(9). 
Condition 17 prevents us from taking 
as a definition since the second parentheme of (1 0) is similar to the first paren-
theme of (2), whereas condition 17 requires that if the second parentheme of a 
proposed definition is similar to any other parentheme then that parentheme, 
among other things, must be followed by another parentheme. In particular 
17 prevents us from having both -f - -t (. .) and ( .. ) -f - -t in the system. 
Finally, let us consider the inscription 
(11) Lpqr J 
' 9 (9 (p 9 (qr )) *9 (p) (qr ) r 
This satisfies conditions 14-17, but does not satisfy 13 since the would-be 
definiendum contains two equiform symbols. Thus it is not eligible as a 
definition of Protothetic. Sobocinski has remarked (orally) that Lesniewski 
would not have allowed this as a definition either. However, (11) does satisfy 
Lesniewski's formulation of the rule of definition as formulated in Lesniewski 
(1929). Thus it seems that Lesniewski's verbal statement ofthe rule does not 
agree with his printed one. This is the only point at which our rule differs from 
that given in Lesniewski (1929), and this point does not affect the deductive 
strength of the theory, but only the shape of parentheses in some theses. 
TE47 [AB] :.: A E cnqntf(B). =:: 
Rl Essnt(Hrm(A)) E cnf(Essnt(Hrm(B))).A E A. 
R2 Essnt(2trm(A)) E cnf(Essnt(2trm(B})) : 
R3 [0] : 0 E bd(A). ~ .[3D].D E cnf(O).D E bd(B) : . 

266 
V. FREDERICK RICKEY 
R4 [CDE] : .C c Antrm{DAB).E c var{B).E c vrb{D). :J: 
[31] : I c cnf(E) : I c bd{A). V .I c bd{C) : . 
RS [CDE]: CcAntrm{DAB).Ecbd{D).:J.[3H].Hccnf{E).Hcbd{C):. 
R6 [CDE] : .C c Antrm{DAB).E c bd(C). :J .[3H].H c cnf(E). 
H c ingr{D) : H c var{B). V .H c bd{D) : . 
R7 [CDEF] : C c Antrm(DAB).F c bd{A).E c bd(C).F ccnf{E). :J .[3G]. 
G c cnf(E).G c bd(D) 
A is a consequence of B by quantification. TE47.1, 2 tell us that both A and B 
are generalizations (admittedly both A and B could be equivalences but this 
case is both trivial and uninteresting since we are trying to distribute quan-
tifiers), and, moreover, that they are generalizations of equivalences. Also, 
corresponding terms have equiform essences. Let us extend the schematic 
diagram following TE34: 
B: 
A: 
D 
D' 
,,-A--,. _______ 
L ... ..Jr 9(L .. ..Jr .·.'L.·..J r ... ')' 
I 
cnf I 
cnf 
L .. ..Jr 9(L ... ..Jr ···'L···..Jr ... ')' 
~~ 
C 
C' 
TE47.3 says any binder in A is equiform to a binder in B. Semantically, 
this means any binder which was not distributed is a binder in both A and B. 
TE47.4 says that for every variable in B which occurs in D (D') there is 
a binder in A or C (C') which is equiform to that variable. This notation is 
quite cumbersome so we introduce the following. 
We say the binders of A are an equiformity subset of the binders of B iff 
for every binder of A there is an equiform binder of B. Then TE47.3 merely 
says that the binders of A are an equiformity subset of the binders of B. 
TE47.S says that if C (C') is an analogous term to D (D') in A and B, 
respectively, then the binders of D are an equiformity subset of the binders 
ofC. 
TE47.6 says any binder in C has an equiform binder in D or there is some 
occurrence of that binder in D which is bound in B. 
Finally, TE47.7 says that if the quantifiers of A and C contain equiform 
words, then there is a word in the quantifier of D equiform to it. 

AXIOMATIC INSCRIPTIONAL SYNTAX. PART II 
267 
Let us give several examples. If B is 
then A could be B or 
or a similar expression with p distributed or we could distribute both variables 
and get 
9 (LPqJ r 9(Pqf LPqJ r 9 (qpf) 
In this case the order of the binders in either quantifier could be altered. As a 
more complicated example consider 
LPqJ r 9 (LPJ r 9 (Pqf9 (PL UJ r U ') f 
Then A could be, if we distribute p, 
LqJ r 9 (LPJ r 9(Pqf LPJ r 9 (PLUJ r U 'ff 
or, if we distribute q, 
LPJ r 9 (LPqJ r 9 (Pqf9 (PLUJ r U ')f 
TE48 [ABC] : A c cneqvl(BC). == .C c cnf(1eqvl(B)). 
A c cnf(2eqvl(B)) 
A is the result of detaching C from B. 
Schematically, we have 
B: 
9(- -) 
i i 
+-- cnf 
CA 
N.B. We are not considering detachment under quantifiers, i.e., we do not 
want the rule 
L •• -...1 rei 
but the rule 
C 
9 (CA) 
A 

268 
V. FREDERICK RICKEY 
TE49 [ABCa] :.: A c cnsbst{BCa). =:: 
Rl Essnt{A) c Cmpl{a).A c A. 
R2 a 00 int{ Sbqntf{ C)) : . 
R3 [DE] : .D c int{Sbqntf{C)).D c corr{ECa). :J: 
D c var{ C). V .D c cnf{E) : . 
R4 [DE] : Dc int{Sbqntf{C)).D c corr{ECa). :J . 
E c trm U gnrl U fnct U cnf{D) : . 
R5 [DEFG] : D c cnvar{EC).D c corr{FCa).E c Corr{GCa). :J . 
Fe cnf(G) : . 
R6 [DEFGH1KL] : Dc ingr{Essnt{C)).E c bd{D).F c var{KC). 
Fe ingr{D).E c Corr{GCa).F c corr{HCa).L c ingr{A). 
Ie var{GL). :J .1 c N(ingr{H)) : . 
R7 [DE] : .D c bd{A).E c cnf{D).E c ingr{C). :J: [:3F].E c bd{F). V . 
[:3FG].F c ingr{C).E c var{GF) : . 
R8 [D] : .D c trm.D c vrb{A). :J: [:3G].D c bd{G). V . [:3G].D c var(G). 
G c Ingr(A). V .D c constp(BA) : . 
R9 [DE] : E c ingr(A).D c bd(E). :J .[:3F].F c var(DE) : . 
RIO [DEF] : .E c ingr(A).F c cnvar(DE). :J: 
F = D. V .F c q-homosemp(DBA) : . 
Rll [D] : Dc gnrl.D c ingr(A).D i- A. :J . [:3EGH].E c homosemp(BB). 
G c ingrthp(B).H c ingr(A).E c Anarg{DGH) : . 
R12 [DE] : .D c gnrl.D c ingr{A).E c Essnt{D). :J: E c vrb. 
[:3F].F c frp{B).E c fnctgen{F) : . 
R13 [D] : .D c fnct.D c ingr{A). :J: D = A. V .[:3E].E c gnrl. 
Dc Essnt(E). V .[:3EF].D c fnctp{BADE) 

AXIOMATIC INSCRIPTIONAL SYNTAX. PART II 
269 
TE50 [ABC] : A c cnsub(BC). == .A c A.[:Ja].A c cnsbst(BCa) 
A is a consequence of substitution in C with respect to thesis B. 
Contrary to the commonly held opinion that Hilbert and Bemays were the 
first (in 1934) to correctly state the rule of substitution for functional variables 
it should be noted that Lesniewski had already done it in 1929 (Lesniewski, 
1929). Lesniewski cleverly solves the problem of substitution by not say-
ing what is substituted for the variables. This paradoxical statement will be 
explained by means of an example. Suppose we have 
(12) LpqrJ r <}(cp(rqp)pf 
and wish to substitute Vr (P) for p. Everyone knows that we get 
(13) Lpqr J r <}(cp(rqVr(p))Vr(p)f 
We do not care how one divines this but only need to give a method to verify 
that it is correct. Look at the essence of (13) and break it up into 10 parts (= the 
number of words in the subquantifier of (12» in such a way that constants, 
comers, and parentheses in (12) correspond to equiform words in (13) and 
also so that variables in (12) correspond to expressions in (13). This nearly 
forces us to view (13) in the following way 
a 
(14) 
These ten expressions constitute a. The argument D c Corr( E C a) used in 
TE49.3, 4,5,6 corresponds words D in the subquantifier of C (i.e., (12) in 
our example) to expressions E c a. TE49.3 says corresponding things are 
equiform except (possibly) in the case when D is a variable in C. The only 
places which are not equiform are those for which we substituted. Naturally 
enough the a's all must be terms, generalizations or functions, or equiform to 
that to which they correspond. Semantically speaking this says we can only 
substitute terms, generalizations or functions (cf. TEI7). 
TE49.5 guarantees that we substitute equiform expressions for equiform 
variables in C. This requirement is so natural as to defy comment. 

270 
V. FREDERICK RICKEY 
TE49.6 is the famous and troublesome clause which states that interior 
quantifiers may never trap variables. If we have 
then we may not substitute p for q to get 
for then we have both VI and V2 bound in B whereas we wanted V2 to be 
bound by the MGQ and hence to be an equiform variable to V3. 
The remaining conjuncts of TE49 concern arbitrary theses and will be 
discussed at the end of this section. 
TE51 [AB] :: A E extp(B). =: . 
Rl Int(ontf(A)) E N(vrb).A E A: 
R2 [CD] : DE ingr(A).D E qntf.C E int(D). ::J . [:3EF].E E var(CF). 
E E N(cnf(1vrb(Essnt(A)))) : 
R3 [:3C].C E prntm( Hrm(2trm(A)) ).1vrb( 1eqvl(lnt( Sbqntf( Hrm{A))))) E 
cnvar(lnt{C)A). 
R4 [:3C].C E prntm(2trm(2trm(A))) .1vrb(2trm( Hrm(A))) E cnvar(lnt{ C)A) : . 
R5 [C] : .C E fnct.C E ingr(A). ::J: [:3D].C E Int(Sbqntf(D)). V . [:3DE]. 
C E fnctp(BADE) : . 
R6 [CDEF] : D E prntm{1trm{1trm{A))).E E prntm{2trm(1trm(A))). 
FE Anarg(CDE). ::J .F E cnvar(C 1trm(A)) : 
R7 [CDF] : C E ingr{A).F E cnvar(DC). ::J .F E q-homosemp(DBA) : 
R8 [CD] : DE cnvar{C 1trm(A)). ::J . [:3EF].D E Anarg(CEF) : 
R9 [CDE] : C E prntm(Essnt(2trm(A))).D E arg(C).E E Anfnct(EDD). ::J . 
E E var(lnt( Ontf(2trm(A)))2trm(A)) 

AXIOMATIC INSCRIPTIONAL SYNTAX. PART II 
271 
A is a thesis of extensionality with respect to thesis B. 
Let us begin with an example of a thesis of extensionality: 
LIg~ r 9(Lab~ r 9 (f-fat(b) g-fat(b))' LCP~ r 9(CP <I> cP <g>f,), 
and examine what the rule tells us about it. 
TE51.1 says that A is a generalization containing at least two binders. 
From TE51.3, especially from 
C c prntm( 1trm(2trm(A))) 
we have that the essence of A is an equivalence and that the 2trm of this 
equivalence has an essence which is an equivalence. The rest of this conjunct 
tells us that Int( C) is a variable in A and hence a word. Thus, the 2trm (A) has 
the shape 
L-~ r9(_<I> -
<g>)' 
TE51.9 implies that the three dashes represent the same variable (cp). 
TE51.6 and 8 tell us that the terms of the first term of A are equiform 
except for the first letter of each term. 
The remaining conditions, TE51.5 and 7, apply to any thesis. 
Finally, we mention several common conjuncts of the T.E.'s which are 
requirements we want any thesis to satisfy. 
TE46.4, TE49.8: Terms are binders, variables or constants. 
TE46.5, TE49.9: Binders actually bind variables. Hence every quantifier 
is part of a generalization. 
TE46.8, TE49.1O, TE51.7: This guarantees that equiform variables of 
inscriptions considered for addition to Protothetic as new theses will be in the 
same syntactical category. 
TE46.9, TE49 .11: Generalizations occupy argument places which are capa-
ble of having arguments from the category of propositions. 
TE46.1O, TE49.12: The essences of generalizations are either words or 
functions which have been generated by functions occurring in a previous 
thesis of Proto the tic (this prevents substitution from introducing new syntac-
tical categories). 
2.6. The Rule of Protothetic 
Under the assumption that B is the last thesis of this system of Protothetic 
one may add the expression A as a new thesis of Protothetic provided one of 
the following conditions is fulfilled: 
(1) A c defp(B). 
(2) [3C].C c thp(B).A c cnqntf(C). 

272 
V. FREDERICK RICKEY 
(3) [3CD].C c thp(B).D c thp(B).A c cneqvl(CD). 
(4) [3C].C c thp(B).A c cnsub(BC). 
(5) A c extp(B). 
3 
In this section we sketch the proof that our formulation of the rule of Proto-
thetic has the same deductive strength as that which Lesniewski presented in 
Lesniewski (1929), pp. 63-76. The reader should have Lesniewski (1929) at 
hand. 
3.1. Definability of Lesniewski's Primitive Terms in MP 
The first step toward proving equivalence of our rule and Lesniewski's is to 
show that his primitive terms are definable in system MP. The definitions 
seem obvious; but there are subtle difficulties involved. To bring these out we 
describe again how the rule of Proto the tic was formulated. 
Lesniewski formulated the rule by giving a number of Terminological 
Explanations which prescribed exactly what he meant by detachment, sub-
stitution, etc. He realized that his T.E. 's did not belong to the system itself, 
and so it was his practice - one fortunately thwarted in Lesniewski (1929) 
by space limitations - to express the T.E. 's in ordinary language. Hence it is 
understandable that the undefined terms which he used to express the T.E. 's 
were explained by only a few words of commentary. It is here that our dif-
ficulty lies - for we have no way of being certain that our definitions of his 
primitive terms agree with the intuitive meanings that he attached to them. 
What we do is to give definitions in MP of LeSniewski's undefined terms 
and then argue intuitively that we have captured the meanings which he 
intended. We shall use two devices for this: 
(a) We refer to theorems in M and MP which agree with Lesniewski's 
commentary on his undefined terms. 
(b) By examining Lesniewski's T.E. 's we deduce certain properties of his 
undefined terms which he must have intended if he was to be consistent with 
the remark (Lesniewski, 1929, p. 63) that the separate conjuncts of his T.E. 's 
are logically independent. 
The following is a list of Lesniewski's undefined terms: 
Acb 
Id(A) 
N(a) 
anbn ... nk 
prntsym(A) 
cnf(A) 
QU 
thp 

AXIOMATIC INSCRIPTIONAL SYNTAX. PART II 
aUbu ... Uk 
aoob 
a<b 
vrb 
expr 
prnt 
prntl 
ingr(A) 
prcd(A) 
scd(A) 
Uprcd(A) 
Uingr(A) 
Iingr(A) 
2ingr(A) 
273 
Of these E, Id (i.e., =), N, n, U, 00, < are tenns of Ontology. Their 
definitions can be found in [Rickey (1972),] Chapter 1.3. 
Of the remaining tenns QU holds a special place, for it as an individual 
name, viz., the name of the axiom of Protothetic for which Lesniewski stated 
his rule (cf., LeSniewski, 1929, p. 59). This axiom is not the same one that 
we have used. For this reason it will be necessary to adjust Lesniewski's rule 
to the axiom Ql~ which we use. These changes are minor and are necessitated 
by the different number of binders in the quantifiers of Ql[ and Ql~. 
We now proceed to define the rest of these tenns in MP. 
Df1.1 [A] : A E vrbL. == .A E vrb 
This definition states that Lesniewski's tenn vrbL corresponds exactly to our 
tenn vrb. We use the subscript L to indicate that the defined tenn is one 
of LeSniewski's undefined tenns. In support of this definition we mention 
T2.3.2, T2.4.17, T2.4.18, and T2.4.26 which are the analogues in M (and 
hence in MP) of LeSniewski's commentary in LeSniewski (1929) on his tenn 
vrbL· 
Dfl.2 [A] : A E exprL. == .A E expr 
The justification of defining Lesniewski's notion of expression as equivalent 
to ours is found in T2.4.2, T2.4.3, T2.4.4. 
Dfl.3 [A] : A E prntL. == .A E prnt 
Dfl.4 [A] : A E prntlL. == .A E A.[3B].B E prntm.A E 1vrb(B) 
The first of these definitions identifies Lesniewski's notion of parenthesis with 
ours. The second defines left parenthesis, a tenn which we eliminated from 
our system, but can easily define as the first word of a parentheme. Actually, 
the explicit use of left parentheses has been eliminated in our presentation. 
Dfl.5 [AB] : A E prntsymdB). == .A E prntsym(B) 
Hence our notion of symmetric parentheses agrees with Lesniewski's. 

274 
V. FREDERICK RICKEY 
Up to now there has been little doubt about Lesniewski's intentions; his 
terms clearly agree with ours. For some of the remaining terms this is not the 
case and so care must be taken to observe the subscripted L'S. 
Dfl.6 [AB] : A c cnfdB). ::= .A c cnf(B). 
A c expr. 
Be expr 
Lesniewski's notion of equiformity holds only between expressions, whereas 
ours is applicable to any inscriptions. He uses cnfL (A) as an abbreviation 
of "mit A gleichgestalteter Ausdruck" and later speaks of "Zwei miteinander 
gleichgestalteteAusdriicke" (cf. Lesniewski, 1929, pp. 60, 62). Together these 
show that he intends 
[AB] : A c cnfdB). :J .A c exprL 
[AB] : A c cnfdB). :J .B c exprL 
Together with Dfl.2 these justify the above definition. For further evidence 
of agreement, see T2.4.14, T2.4.1S. 
Dfl.7 [A] : A c thPL' ::= .A c thp 
It should be remarked that whereas LeSniewski took thPL as primitive we have 
taken thp(B). The reasons for this choice were explained in Section 1.4. 
Dfl.8 [AB] : A c ingrdB). ::=: A c A: [C] : C c vrb(A). :J .C c vrb(B) 
Remembering that our notion of ingredient can hold only between expres-
sions (cf., T2.4.7, T2.4.8) it is understandable that we can only prove 
TS.l.1 [AB] : A c ingrdB).A c expr.B c expr. ::= .A c ingr(B) 
[DlO, Df1.8] 
Although Lesniewski did not explicitly state it we know he did not intend 
[AB] : A c ingrdB). :J .B c expr 
for TEVI of Lesniewski (1929) contains the logically independent factors 
Be exprL and A c ingrdB). That he does not intend 
[AB] : A c ingrdB). :J .A c expr 
follows from TEXXII which contains the conjuncts A c exprL and 
A c ingrdB). That he does not intend this is also indicated by the com-
plexity of TEVII.4. Cf., also T2.4.6. 

AXIOMATIC INSCRIPTIONAL SYNTAX. PART II 
275 
It is understandable that Lesniewski did not restrict ingrL to expressions, 
for without this restriction we have just the usual notion of ingredient in a 
completely atomic Mereology. We used the more restrictive notion of ingre-
dient to simplify our presentation of the T.E. 'so 
Dfl.9 [AB] : A f prcddB). == .A f prcd(B) 
Lesniewski gives no commentary on his use of prcdL. It is clear that strict 
precedence is intended, i.e., 
[AB] : A f prcddB). :J .A i= B 
for TEXXXII contains the conjunct 
A f prcddB). V .A = B 
which would be redundant with weak precedence. At all other times prcdL 
is used in contexts like 
A f vrbL n prcddB) 
or 
A f exprL n prcddB) 
(cf., TEIX.3, XVI.3, XXY.4, XLVII.3, 4, 5, 6, IL.l) and so we cannot decide 
if he intends 
[AB] : A f prcdL. :J .A f expr.B f expr 
The interpretation of the rule does not depend on whether we consider prece-
dence as restricted to expressions, or holding for arbitrary inscriptions. We 
have opted for the latter. 
After similar argumentation we define 
Df1.l0 [AB] : A f sCddB). == .A f scd(B) 
We make no comments about the remaining definitions as there is no reason 
to question their correctness. 
Df1.11 [AB] : A f UprcddB). == .A f Uprcd(B) 
Df1.12 [AB] : A f UingrdB). == .A f Uvrb(B) 
Df1.13 [AB] : A f 1ingrdB). == .A f 1vrb(B) 
Dfl.14 [AB] : A f 2ingrdB). == .A f 2vrb(B) 

276 
V. FREDERICK RICKEY 
We now make the claim that Lesniewski's and our primitive terms are 
interdefinable in system M P, and hence our statement of the rule and his rest 
on the same logical basis. This claim is partly justified by the argumentation 
above, but mainly by intimate knowledge of Lesniewski (1929). The methods 
used above have followed, in spirit, Goodman's comments on constructional 
definitions in Goodman (1951). 
3.2. Methodological Scheme 
Each of Lesniewski's Terminological Explanations is in the form of an onto-
logical definition: 
(1) [A ... J : A c <p{ ... ). == .1/J{A ... ) 
where <P is the defined term.1/J{A ... ) is a well formed formula built up from 
Lesniewski's primitive and previously defined terms. As such, this is not a 
formula in MP. But since in Section 3.1 we defined Lesniewski's primitives 
in system MP, there is a natural translation of (1) into a formula (2) in MP: 
(2) [A oo.J : A C <PL{oo .). == .1/JdA 00') 
where the subscripted L'S indicate that we are using the analogues of 
Lesniewski's terms in MP. Thus whenever Lesniewski writes 
A c ingr{B) 
in Lesniewski (1929) we shall write 
A c ingrL{B) 
as its natural translation into MP. 
In Section 2 we defined what we wish to prove are terms equivalent to 
Lesniewski's. To do this we prove, in each of the following paragraphs, the-
orems of the form 
(3) [A oo.J : A c <pdoo .). == .A c <PR{oo,) 
where <PR is a term defined in one of the T.E. 's in Section 2. These theo-
rems establish that our terminglogical explanations are equivalent to those 
given in Lesniewski (1929). Only when our terms are proved equivalent to 
Lesniewski's will it be clear that our statement of the rule of procedure for 
Protothetic is equivalent to that stated in Lesniewski (1929). 
3.3. Concerning TEl (vrb1) 

AXIOMATIC INSCRIPTIONAL SYNTAX. PART II 
277 
A is a word of the first kind (in the sense of Lesniewski). This definition is 
the exact analogue of Lesniewski's TEl. Since we have not defined "vrb1" in 
Section 2 we cannot prove a theorem of the desired form (3) without first 
defining "vrb1." 
Of3.1 [AJ : A E vrb1. == .A E cnf(1vrb(Ql~)) 
Since our notion of equiformity differs from Lesniewski's we need several 
lemmas. 
T5.3.1 [ABJ : A E 1ingrdB). ::J .A E vrb 
T5.3.2 [AJ : A E vrb. ::J .cnf(A) 0 cnfdA) 
[Of1.13, 03, T2.2.9] 
[T2.4.2, T2.4.24, Ofl.6] 
T5.3.3 [AJ : A E vrbL 1. == .A E vrb1 
[Of3, OB.l, Of1.13, T5.3.1, T5.3.2] 
3.4. Concerning TEl/, III, IV (vrb2, vrb3, vrb4) 
Of4.1 [AJ : A E vrbL2. == .A E cnfd4ingrdQl~)) 
Of4.2 [AJ : A E vrbL3. == .A E cnfd5ingrdQl~)) 
Of4.3 [AJ: AEvrbL4. == .AEcnfdUingrdQl~)) 
These are Lesniewski's TEll, III, IV, adjusted to Sobocinski's Axiom. In 
complete analogy with Section 3.3 we need the definitions 
Of4.4 [AJ : A E vrb2. == .A E cnf(4vrb(Ql/-,)) 
Of4.5 [AJ : A E vrb3. == .A E cnf(5vrb(Ql~)) 
Of4.6 [AJ : A E vrb4. == .A E cnf(Uvrb(Ql~)) 
to prove the theorems 
T5.4.1 [AJ : A E vrbL2. == .A E vrb2 
T5.4.2 [AJ : A E vrbL3. == .A E vrb3 
T5.4.3 [AJ : A E vrbL 4. == .A E vrb4 

278 
DfS [A] : A c trmL' = . 
A c vrbL' 
A c N(prntd. 
AcN(vrbL1). 
A c N(vrbL2). 
A c N(vrbL3). 
A c N(VrbL4) 
V. FREDERICK RICKEY 
3.5. Concerning TEV (trm) 
TS.S.1 [A] : A c trmL' = .A c trm 
[TEl, DfS, Dfl.1, Df1.3, TS.3.3, TS.4.1, TS.4.2, TS.4.3] 
DfS is the exact analogue of Lesniewski's TEV. The theorem, which is of 
the desired form (3), proves that our TE 1 has the same strength as Lesniewski's 
TEV. 
3.6. Concerning TEVI (int) 
Df6 [AB] : A c intdB). =. 
Be exprL' 
A c vrbL' 
Ac ingrdB). 
A c N(1ingrdB)). 
A c N(UingrdB)) 
TS.6.1 [AB] : A c vrb(B). :::> .A c vrbL.A cingrdB) 
HypO). :::> • 
2. A c vrbL' 
3. A c ingrdB). 
A c vrbL.A c ingrdB) 
TS.6.2 [AB] : A c vrbL.A c ingrdB). :::> .A c vrb(B) 
[1, T2.2.9, Df1.1] 
[1, T2.2.7, Dfl.8] 
[2,3] 

AXIOMATIC INSCRIPTIONAL SYNTAX. PART II 
279 
Hyp(2) . ::) . 
3. A c vrb(A). 
A c vrb(B) 
TS.6.3 [AB] : A c vrb(B). := .A c vrbL.A c ingrdB) 
TS.6.4 [AB] : A c intdB). := .A c int(B) 
[1, On.1, 02] 
[2, Of1.8, 3] 
[TS.6.1, TS.6.2] 
[Of6, 013, Of1.2, On.13, Of1.14, TS.6.3] 
3.7. Concerning TEVII (Cmpl) 
0f7 [Aa] :: A c Cmp1dA). :=: .A c exprL : . 
[B] : B c vrbL.B c ingrdA). ::) .[3C].C c a.B c ingrdC) : . 
[BCD] : B c a.C c a.D c vrbL.D c ingrdB).D c ingrdC). ::) . 
B=C: 
[B] : B c a. ::) .B c exprL n ingrL(A) 
TS.7.1 [a] : .disj(a). :=: [BCD] : B c a.C c a.D c vrbL.D c ingrdB). 
Dc ingrdC). ::) .B = C 
[011, TS.6.3] 
TS.7.2 [ABa] : A c KI(a).B ca. ::) .B c ingrdA) 
[01,Of1.8] 
TS.7.3 [Aa] : .A c KI(a).a C expr. ::): [B] : B c a. ::) .B c exprLningrdA) 
[TS.7.2,Of1.2] 
TS.7.4 [ABa] : A c KI(a).B c vrbL.B c ingrdA). ::) . 
[3C].C c a.B c ingrdC) 
Hyp(3) . ::) . 
[3C]. 
4. 
Cca. 
S. 
B c vrb(C). 
[1,01, TS.6.3, 2, 3] 
[1,01, TS.6.3, 2,3] 

280 
V. FREDERICK RICKEY 
[=3C].C c a.B c ingrdC) 
[4, S, TS.6.3] 
TS.7.S [A a] : A c Cmpl(a). :J .A c Cmp1da) 
[012, on, Of1.2, TS.7.4, TS.7.I, TS.7.3] 
TS.7.6 [Aa] : .A c A: [B] : Be vrbL.B c ingrdA). :J .[:JC].C c a. 
Be ingrdC) : [B] : Be a. :J .B c exprL n ingrdA) ::J .A c KI(a) 
Hyp(3) . :J: 
4. [B] : Be vrb(A). :J .[:JC].C c a.B c vrb(C) : 
[2, TS.6.3] 
S. [BC] : C c a.B c vrb(C). :J .B c vrb(A) : 
[3,Of1.8] 
A c KI(a) 
[01, 1,4, S] 
TS.7.7 [Aa] : A c Cmp1da). == .A c Cmpl(a) 
[012, on, TS.7.6, Of1.2, TS.7.I, TS.7.S] 
3.8. Concerning TEVIII (qntf) 
0f8 [A] : .A c qntfL' ==: 
1 ingrdA) c vrbL 1. 
UingrdA) c vrbL2. 
[:JB].B c intdA) : 
[B] : Be intdA). :J .B c trmL : 
[BC] : Be intdA).C c intdA).B c cnfdC). :J .B = C 
TS.8.1 [A] : 1ingrdA) c vrbL1. == .1vrb(A) c cnf(1vrb(~~)) 
[Of1.13, TS.3.3, OB.I] 
TS.8.2 [A] : UingrdA) c vrbL2. == .Uvrb(A) c cnf(4vrb(~~)) [Sim., TS.8.1] 
TS.8.3 [A] : Int(A) c Cmpl(trm n int(A)). :J .[:JB].B c intdA) 
[014, T2.3.4, TS.6.4] 
TS.8.4 [AB] : Int(A) c Cmpl(trm n int(A)).B c intdA). :J .B c trmL 

AXIOMATIC INSCRIPTIONAL SYNTAX. PART II 
281 
Hyp(2) . => . 
3. Be int(A). 
4. Be vrb. 
S. Be vrb(lnt(A)). 
[3C]. 
6. 
C c trm. 
7. 
Be vrb(C). 
8. 
C c vrb. 
9. 
B=C. 
[2, TS.6.4] 
[3,013, T2.2.9] 
[T2.3.9, 3,4,014] 
[1, S, 012, 01] 
[1, S, 012, 01] 
[6, TEl] 
[7, 8, T2.2.lO] 
[6,9, TS.S.l] 
TS.8.S [ABC] : A c non-rep.B c intdA).C c intdA).B c cnfdC). => . 
B=C 
Hyp(4) . => . 
S. Be vrb(A). 
6. C c vrb(A). 
7. Be cnf(C). 
B=C 
TS.8.6 [A] : A c qntf. => .A c qntfL 
[2, TS.6.4, 013] 
[3, TS.6.4, 013] 
[4,Of1.6] 
[019,1, S, 6, 7] 
[TE2, OfS, TS.8.I-S] 
TS.8.7 [AB] : .B c intL(A) : [B] : B c intdA). => .B c trmL :=> . 
Int(A) c Cmpl(trm n int(A)) 
Hyp(2) . => . 
3. B cint(A). 
[1, TS.6.4] 

282 
V. FREDERICK RICKEY 
4. trm n int(A) 0 int(A). 
[2, T5.5.1, T5.6.4] 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
[3C]. 
C E KI(int(A)). 
C = Int(A). 
C E Cmpl(int(A)). 
C E Cmpl(trm n int(A)). 
Int(A) E Cmpl(trm n int(A)) 
[3, T2.1.1] 
[5, T2.3.1, D14] 
[6, T2.5.25] 
[4,7] 
[6,8] 
In Lesniewski's presentation TEVIII (qntf) contains the clause 
[BC] : BE intdA).C E intdA).B E cnfdC). ~ .B = C 
which is equivalent to 
Int(A) E non-rep 
In TE2 we used 
A E non-rep 
This is possible since a generalization begins and ends with (left and right 
respectively) comers, which are not tenns and hence not equifonn to any 
word in Int(A). 
From D 13 we obtain at once 
[AB] : .B E vrb(A).A E expr. ~: BE int(A). V . 
BE 1vrb(A). V .B E Uvrb(A) 
Hence when we take two words in (but not necessarily interior to) A we 
obtain the following nine possibilities: 
I. BE int(A).C E int(A) 
II. BE int(A).C E 1vrb(A) 
III. BE int(A).C E Uvrb(A) 
IV. BE 1vrb(A).C E int(A) 
V. BE 1vrb(A).C E 1vrb(A) 
VI. BE 1vrb(A).C E Uvrb(A) 
VII. BE Uvrb(A).C E int(A) 
VIII. BE Uvrb(A).C E 1vrb(A) 
IX. BE Uvrb(A).C E Uvrb(A) 

AXIOMATIC INSCRIPTIONAL SYNTAX. PART II 
283 
We wish to establish theorems of the form 
[ABC] : A E qntfL.B E cnf(C).Y. ::J .B = C 
where Y is one of I-IX. Taken together these yield 
[A] : A E qntfL' ::J .A E non-rep 
Of the nine cases IV, VII, VIII can be omitted by symmetry with II, III, VI, 
respectively. Case VI is impossible since Land ...J are not equiform. Cases V, 
IX are just T2.2.30, T2.2.31. So there remain three cases to consider. 
T5.8.8 [ABC] : .[BC] : BE intdA).C E intdA).B E cnfdC). ::J . 
B = C : BE vrb(A).C E vrb(A).B E cnf(C). 
BE int(A).C E int(A) :::J .B = C 
Hyp(6) . ::J . 
7. BE expr. 
8. C E expr. 
9. BE cnfdC). 
10. BE intdA). 
11. C E intdA). 
B=C 
[2, T2.2.9, T2.4.2] 
[3, T2.2.9, T2.4.2] 
[4, 7,8, Df1.6] 
[5, T5.6.4] 
[6, T5.6.4] 
[1, 10, 11,9] 
T5.8.9 [ABC] : .1ingrdA) E vrbL 1 : [B] : BE intdA). ::J . 
BE trmL : BE cnf(C).B E int(A).C E 1vrb(A) :::J .B = C 
Hyp(5) . ::J . 
6. BE intdA). 
7. BE trmL' 
8.BEN(vrb1). 
9. C E vrbL 1. 
10. C E cnf(1vrb(2l~)). 
[4, T5.6.4] 
[2,6] 
[7, Df5] 
[5, T2.2.30, Df1.13, 1] 
[9, T5.3.3, Df3.1] 

284 
11. B c cnf(1vrb(~~)). 
B=C 
V. FREDERICK RICKEY 
[3, 10, T2.2.I] 
[11,8, 15.3.3, DB.I] 
T5.8.1O [ABC] : .UingrdA) c vrbL2 : [B] : Be intdA). :J .B c trmL : 
Be cnf(C).B c int(A).C c Uvrb(A) ::J .B = C [Sim., T5.8.9] 
T5.8.11 [ABC] : Be 1vrb(A).C c Uvrb(A).B c cnf(C).1ingrdA) c vrbL1. 
UingrL (A) c vrbL2. :J .B = C 
Hyp(5). :J . 
6. Be vrbL 1. 
8. 1vrb(~~) c cnf(4vrb(~~)). 
[1, T2.2.30, Df1.I2,4] 
[2, T2.2.31, Dfl.13, 5] 
[T5.3.3, T5.4.3, 6, 7, DB.l, Df4.6, T2.2.20, T2.2.2I] 
B=C 
[8, Q4] 
Finally, we are able to state the desired theorem 
T5.8.I1.I [A] : .A c qntfL.B c vrb(A).C c vrb(A).B c cnf(C). :J .B = C 
Hyp(4). :J: 
5. A c expr : 
[1, Df8, T5.6.4, D13] 
6. Be int(A). V .B c 1vrb(A). V .B c Uvrb(A) : 
[2,5, D13] 
7. C c int(A). V .C c 1vrb(A). V .C c Uvrb(A) : 
[3,5, D13] 
B = C [6,7, Df8, T5.8.8, T5.8.9, T5.8.1O, T5.8.II, T2.2.30, T2.2.3I] 
T5.8.I2 [A] : A c qntfL. :J .A c non-rep 
[T5.8.I1.I, DI9] 
T5.8.13 [A] : A c qntfL' :J .A c qntf 
[Df8, TE2, T5.8.I, T5.8.2, T5.8.7, T5.8.I2] 
T5.8.I4 [A] : A c qntfL. == .A c qntf 
[T5.8.6, T5.8.13] 

AXIOMATIC INSCRIPTIONAL SYNTAX. PART II 
285 
We now continue in this fashion introducing definitions of Lesniewski's 
terms into our system and then proving that our terms are equivalent to his. 
In this way we obtain theorems which show that each of the terms used in the 
statement of the rule of Protothetic that we gave is equivalent to a term used in 
Lesniewski's statement. Hence the two statements of the rule are equivalent 
in the sense that they allow precisely the same deductions. These proofs, the 
details of which are too long to include here, can be found in Rickey (1968). 
CONCLUSION 
As we have stressed earlier the most important part of this work is the first, 
particularly Chapter II [of Rickey (1972)]. There we presented and developed 
a system M of metalogic. Our aim in constructing this system was twofold. We 
wished it to be adequate for the statement of procedural rules of formalized 
systems, and wished it also to be adequate for conducting some metalogical 
investigations. Our claim is that, with varying degrees of success, both of 
these aims have been accomplished. 
Clearly a proof that we can formulate rules for any formalized system in 
M, or even in extensions of M like MP, is out of the question at this time. To 
do so would require a precise notion of "rule of procedure" which is, to our 
knowledge, not available at this time. Probably if such a definition did exist 
we could easily establish whether all such rules were expressible in M. Since 
such a proof was beyond our grasp we adopted the following technique. 
Protothetic is a system with rules which are complicated to state precisely, 
and strong enough so that they encompass the rules of most logical theories. 
Thus there can be little doubt that the statement of the rule of Protothetic is a 
challenging test of the first part of our claim. 
For one familiar with Lesniewski's systems it should be clear that the rule 
of Ontology can be presented analogously to the rule of Proto the tic. Moreover, 
using the results of Section 2 we could simplify the statement of the rule of 
Ontology given in Lesniewski (1930). 
It seems almost banal to remark that system M is sufficient to state the rules 
for propositional calculi. If the only rules are substitution and detachment, 
then the statement of the rule is trivial; the propositional constants all occur 
in the axioms and so we can just specify all symbols not equiform to one of 
those to be variables. If the calculus contains definitions, then more care is 
required (cf. Lesniewski, 1931). 
By modifying the techniques of Sections 1,2 we can present the rules for 
functional calculi of any order and for set theories. For Gentzen-like systems 
it is not so obvious that we can use similar techniques. The main difficulties 
are the linearization of the language and allowing for expressions of arbitrary 
(even infinite) length. This would require us to drop the axiom concerning 
the finiteness of inscriptions. 

286 
V. FREDERICK RICKEY 
In regard to the other half of our claim we have shown in Section 2 that 
system M, orreally MP, is adequate for some metalogical investigations, viz., 
proof of the equivalence of different statements of rules. A most interesting 
question is what type of metalogical investigations can actually be carried 
out in system M. Probably consistency and completeness of propositional 
systems could be carried out completely in M, but it seems highly doubtful 
that incompleteness results could be established within M without the use of 
variables of higher types and new axioms involving these types. 
NOTES 
I Cf. TE51, Section 2.5. 
2 The following definition, due to Sobocinski (1949), is more perspicuous: 
[pqJ : .p.q. ::: [fJ : f(Pq)· :: .f(11) 
3 In systems of Protothetic based on implication definitions must be stated either as pairs of 
implications: 
or in the complicated form 
0: :J j3. :J: j3 :J 0:. :J P : . :J P 
where both the definiens 0: and definiendum j3 are free in p, cf. Lejewski (1958). 
4 The symbolism used here is that of Lesniewski. Once the key to the "wheel and spoke" 
notation is explained it is easy to remember. The symbol {> corresponds to the truth table 
o 
1 
o 
1 
0 
*1 
0 
i.e., to equivalence. In general a spoke at the top (right, bottom, left) means a 1 in the (O-O)-place 
Crespo (0-1), (1-1), (1-0)-place) of the truth table. Thus ~ is conjunction for it corresponds to 
o 
1 
o 0 
0 
*1 
0 
It should be understood that this symbolism, while very convenient, is not mandatory. Pro-
tothetic is formulated in a way which leaves all possible choices of symbolism up to the 
individual. 
5 Interchanging functors in the same category need not preserve truth, and generally it does 
not. 

AXIOMATIC INSCRIPTIONAL SYNTAX. PART II 
287 
6 One reason for rejecting incomplete symbols is that the rule of substitution has never been 
strictly formulated using them. 
7 Just like 'man' is a growing name. Every time a baby is born the name 'man' denotes one 
more object. 
8 Whether a parenthesis is called left or right is a matter of having a familiar looking notation. 
We could just as well write' )p(' as '(p)' . No confusion can arise as the introductory thesis for 
a new pair of parentheses determines which of the two is called left. 
9 We have used different enumerations on the axioms to indicate that they are of different 
natures. The P axioms concern the primitive terms of MP. The Q axioms are statements about 
the axiom 2t~ of Protothetic. They are of empirical origin, but must be introduced as axioms 
into system MP. 
to The Terminological Explanations stated in this section are different than those in Lesniewski 
(1929). They will be proved equivalent in Section 3. 
11 By the n-th conjunct of a T.E. we mean the n-th conjunct on the right hand side of the main 
equivalence of the T.E. More specifically, TEMn will denote the n-th conjunct of TEM. The 
conjuncts of the T.E.'s are independent. This claim implies that the 1st, 4th, 5th and Uvrb of 
2t~ are not equiform. 
REFERENCES 
Ajdukiewicz, Kazimierz (1935). 'Die Syntaktische Konnexitat', Studia Philosophica 1,1-27. 
Translated in McCall (1967), pp. 207-231. 
Bar-Hillel, Yehoshua (1950). 'On Syntactical Categories', The Journal of Symbolic Logic 15, 
1-16. 
Camap, Rudolf (1934). Logische Syntax der Sprache, Julius Springer, Wien. Translated as The 
Logical Syntax of Language, London (1937). 
Chomsky, Noam (1953). 'Systems of Syntactic Analysis', The Journal of Symbolic Logic 18, 
242-256. 
Goodman, Nelson (1951). The Structure of Appearance, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, 
MA (second edition 1966). 
Lejewski, Czeslaw (1958). 'On Implicational Definitions', Studia Logica VIII, 189-211. 
Lesniewski, Stanislaw (1929). 'Grundziige eines neuen Systems der Grundlagen der Mathe-
matik', Fundamenta Mathematicae XIV, 1-81. 
Lesniewski, Stanislaw (1930). 'Uber die Grundlagen der Ontologie', Comptes rendus des 
Seances de la Societe des Sciences et des Lettres de Varsovie, Classe III 23, 111-132. 
Lesniewski, Stanislaw (1931). 'Uber Definitionen in der sogenannten Theorie der Deduktion', 
Comptes rendus des Seances de la Societe des Sciences et des Lettres de Varsovie, Classe 
III 24,289-309. Translated in McCall (1967), pp. 170-187. 
Lesniewski, Stanislaw (1938). 'Einleitende Bemerkungen zur Fortsetzung meiner Mitteilung 
u. d. T. 'Grundziige eines neuen Systems der Grundlagen der Mathematik", Collectanea 
Logica 1,1-60. Translated in McCall (1967), pp. 116-169. [All the Lesniewski's papers 
are translated in Lesniewski (1992), see the Protothetic Bibliography - Ed.] 
McCall, Storrs, ed. (1967). Polish Logic 1920-1939, Clarendon Press, Oxford. 
Rickey, V. Frederick (1968). 'An Axiomatic Theory of Syntax', Ph.D. Thesis, University of 
Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN. 
Rickey, V. Frederick (1972). 'Axiomatic Inscriptional Syntax. Part I: General Syntax', Notre 
Dame Journal of Formal Logic XIII, \-33. 
Sobocinski, Boleslaw (1949). 'An Investigation of Protothetic', Cahiers de I' lnstitut d' Etudes 
Polonaises en Belgique No.5, Bruxelles. Reprinted in McCall (1967), pp. 201-206. 
Unfortunately, the reprint omits the "Introduction (pp. 7-27) of unusual expository and 
bibliographical interest, giving an account of the ill-fated Polish periodical Collectanea 

288 
y. FREDERICK RICKEY 
Logica." See the review by Church, The Journal of Symbolic Logic 15 (1950), 64. [See 
also paper IV in this volume - Ed.] 
Sobocinski, Boleslaw (1960). 'On the Single Axioms of Protothetic, I, II, III', Notre Dame 
Journal of Formal Logic I, 52-73, II (1961), 111-126, 129-148. [Cf. paper VI in this 
volume - Ed.] 
Tarski, Alfred (1923). '0 wyrazie pierwotnym logistyki', przeglO{l FilozoficV'lY XXVI, 68-89. 
Translated in Tarski (1956), pp. 1-23. [Cf. paper III in this volume - Ed.] 
Tarski, Alfred (1956). Logic, Semantics, Metamathematics, Papers from 1923-1938, translated 
by J.H. Woodger, Clarendon Press, Oxford. 

AUDOENUS LE BLANC 
INVESTIGATIONS IN PROTOTHETIC * 
In this article I present some results of five years' research into Lesniewski's 
protothetic.1 I outline deductions from the axiom An considerably shorter 
than those previously known (see Sobocmski, 1961a) and I derive the laws of 
implication from this axiom without using the rule of extensionality.2 Since 
this paper can best be read in the light of articles by Professor Sobocinski 
published in this Journal (see Sobocmski, 1960, 1961a and 1961b),** I have 
largely adopted his conventions of symbolism, and the following symbols in 
particular: 
a The rule permittin¥ definitions of new constants (see Sobocmski, 
1960, pp. 58-59). 
j3 The rule for distributing quantifiers (see Sobocmski, 1960, p. 59).+ 
° 
An informal abbreviation for' [u]. u' . 
1 An informal abbreviation for '[u].u. == .[u].u'. 
From the axiom 
An [pq] :: p == q. == :. [f]:.f(Pf(pO)). ==: [r] : f(qr). == .q == p 
we prove the following theorems: 
Dl [P].p == As(P) 
Ll [fp]:.f(Pf(pO)). ==: [r] : f(As(p)r). == .As(p) == p 
D2 [pr]:.p == r. == .As(p == r) :== .Vr(pr) 
[a] 
[An q/As(p); Dl] 
[a] 
* Bibliographical Note: This paper originally appeared in the Notre Dame Journal of Formal 
Logic 26 (1985), 483-489, by permission of the Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic. 
** [Ed. Note: Cf. paper VI in this volume.] 
t [Ed. Note: Cf. paper VI in this volume, pp. 160-161.] 
 J. T. J. Srzednicki et al. (eds.), Leśniewski’s  Systems  Protothetic
© Kluwer Academic Publishers 1998

290 
AUDONEUSLEBLANC 
L2 [prJ.Vr(pr) 
L3 [prJ: Vr(As(p)r). == .As(p) == p 
[D2; Dl pjp == r] 
[Ll f jVr; L2 rjVr(pO)] 
We can now establish the following four metarules of procedure:3 
S I. If we have in the system a thesis of the type 
[x,y, ... J : A. ==.B 
(with or without an initial quantifier), then we can add the corresponding 
thesis 
[x,y, ... J: B. == .A. 
(a) [x, y, .. . JA. == .B 
[The assumption] 
(b) [x', y', ... J : A'. == .B' 
[Substitution of a to eliminate any free 
variables of shapes of' or'r'] 
(c) [j,x',y', ... J :: f(A'f(A'O)). == :.[rJ:.f(B'r). ==: B'. == .A' 
(D) [r,x',y', ... J:.Vr(B'r). == .B'. == .A' 
(e) [x', y', ... J : B'. == .A' 
(f) [x,y, ... J : B. ==.A 
[An pjA', qj B'; b] 
[c f jVr; L2pjA', rjVr(A'O)] 
[D; L2 pj B'] 
[Substitution of e to restore the 
original variables] 
S II. If we have in the system two corresponding theses of types 
[x,y, ... J: A. ==.B 
[x,y, ... J.B, 
then we can add the corresponding thesis 
[x,y, ... J.A. 
This follows immediately from metarule S I. 
S III. If we have in the system two corresponding theses of types 
[x,y, ... J : A. ==.B 
[x, y, ... J.F(A) 

INVESTIGATIONS IN PROTOTHETIC 
291 
(where 'F(A) , represents any meaningful expression which contains at least 
one expression equiform with 'A' not falling within the scope of any internal 
quantifier), then we can add the corresponding thesis 
[x, y, ... ].F(B). 
(0) [x,y, ... ] : A. ==.B 
(b) [x, y, ... ].F(A) 
(c) [x',y', ... ] : A'. == .B' 
«()) [x',y', ... ].F'(A') 
(e) [x',y', . .. ]: B'. == .A' 
(f) [x', y', ... ].As(F' (A')) 
[Assumption] 
[ Assumption] 
[These substitutions of 0 and b 
eliminate any free variables of 
shapes 'f', 'p', 'q', or 'r'] 
[S I: c) 
[01 pIF'(A'); ()] 
(g) [j,x',y', ... ]:: f(A'f(A'O)). == :.[r]:.f(B'r). ==: B'. == .A' 
[An pi A', ql B'; c) 
(I)) [p, q, r, x', y', ... ] :: Vr(As(F'(p))r). ==: As(F'(p)). == .F'(q) 
:. == .G-fpx'y' ... t(qr) 
[0] 
(j) [x', y', ... ].G-fA'x'y' ... HA'G-fA'x'y' ... HA'O)) 
[I) piA', ql A', r IG-f A' x'y' ... t(A'O); 
L3 pi F' (A'), riG -f A' x' y' ... t (A' 0)] 
(t) [r, x', y', . . . ]:.G-fA'x'y' ... t(B'r). ==: B'. == .A' 
[g f IG-fA'x'y' ... t; j] 
(I) [r, x', y', . .. ].G-f A' x'y' ... t(B'r) 
[S II: t; e) 
(m) [r, x', y', .. . ]:.Vr(As(F'(A'))r). ==: As(F'(A')). == .F'(B') 
[S II: I) piA', qIB'; [] 
(n) [x',y', ... ].F'(B') 
[m; L2pIAs(F'(A')); fJ 
(0) [x, y, ... ].F(B) 
[Substitution of n to restore the original variables] 

292 
AUDONEUS LE BLANC 
S IV. If we have in the system corresponding theses of types 
[x,y, ... ]: A. ==:.B 
[x, y, ... ].F(B) 
(with 'F(B)' understood as in S III), then we can add the corresponding 
thesis 
[x, y, ... ].F(A). 
This follows immediately from S I and S III. 
Aided by these rules, we prove the following theses:4 
L4 [prj : Vr(pr). ==: .p ==: p 
L5 [p].p ==: p 
L6 [fp]:.f(pf(pO)). ==:: [r] : f(pr). ==: .p ==: p 
D3 [pq]:.q. ==: .q ==: p :==: .Fb(pq) 
D4 [prj : Fb(Vr(Or)p). ==: .Vrl (pr) 
L7 [r] : Fb(IO). ==: .Vrl(Or) 
L8 [r]:.Fb(lO). ==: .1 :==:: Vrl (Or). ==: .1 
[S IV: Dl; L3] 
[L4; L2] 
[An qlp; L5] 
[a] 
[a] 
[S III: L4 plO; D4 plO] 
[S III: L7; L5 pi Fb(lO). ==: .1] 
L9 Fb(lO). ==: .1 :==:: [r] : Vrl(Or). ==: .1 
[L8;.8] 
LID Vrl(OVrl (00)). ==:: Fb(lO). ==: .1 
[S IV: L9; L6 f IVrl, plO] 
LII Fb(lO). ==:: Fb(lO). ==: .1 
[S IV: L7 r IVrl (00); LID] 
LI2 Fb(IFb(lO)) 
[D3 ql Fb(lO), pll; LIl] 
LI3 [r]: Fb(1r). ==:.1 ==: 1 
[L6 f/Fb,pll; LI2] 
LI4 [P].Fb(lp) 
[S II: LI3 rip; L5 pll] 
LI5 [P] : p. ==: .p ==: 1 
[S II: D3 pll, qlp; LI4] 
LI6 [pq]:.q ==: 1. ==: .p :==:: q ==: p. ==: .1 
[S III: LI5 plq; LI5 plq ==: p] 

INVESTIGATIONS IN PROTOTHETIC 
293 
At this point we can establish the following metatheorem: 
S V. If we have in our system two theses of types 
F(O) 
F(I) 
which are substitutions of some meaningful expression 
[P].F(p) 
with the expressions '0' and '1' replacing the variable 'p', then we can add 
this latter expression to the system as a thesis in the following way: 
(n) F(O) 
(b) F(I) 
(c) [pq]:.F(p). ::= .q ::= q :::= .G(qp) 
«(')) [P] : F(p). ::= .G(Op) 
(e) G(OO) 
(f) G(OI) 
(g) G(OO). ::= .1 
(~) G(OG(OO)) 
0) [r] : G(Or). ::= .1 
(£) [P].G(Op) 
(0 [P].F(P) 
[Assumption] 
[Assumption] 
[a] 
[S IV: LI5 p/ F(p); c q/O] 
[(') p/o; n] 
[(') p/I; b] 
[LI5 p/G(OO); e] 
[S IV: g; f] 
[L6 f /G,p/O;~] 
[S II: j r /p; L5 p/O] 
[S 11: b; f] 
With the help of S V, we prove the following theorems: 
LI7 [pq]:.q::= p. ::= .0 :::=: q::= O. ::= .p 
[S V: L5 p/q::= o. ::= .0; LI6 p/O] 
LI8 [P]:.p. ::= .p ::= 0 :::= .0 
[S II: LI7 q/p, pip ::= 0; L5 pip ::= 0] 
LI9 0.::=.1::= 0:::= .0:. ::=.0 
[S III: LI8p/I; LI7 q/O,p/I::= 0] 
L20 [P] :: p. ::= .p::= 0 :::= :.0. ::= .1 ::= 0 :::= .0 
[S IV: LI9; LI8] 

294 
AUDONEUS LE BLANC 
D5 [pq] :.: p. =::.1 =:: O:=:: .q =:: 0:. =::.q =:: 0 ::=:: .Fc(pq) 
[a] 
L21 O. =:: .1 =:: O:=:: .1:. =:: .Fc(OO) 
[S IV: LI5 piO. =:: .1 =:: 0; D5 plO, qlO] 
L22 O. =:: .1 =:: O:=:: .Fc(OO) 
L23 Fc(OO. =:: .1 =:: 0) 
L24 Fc(OFc(OO)) 
[S IV: LI5 piO. =:: .1 =:: 0; L21] 
[D5 plO, qlO. =:: .1 =:: 0; L20 piO. =:: .1 =:: 0] 
L25 [r] : Fc(Or). =:: .1 
L26 Fc(OO) 
L27 O. =:: .1 =:: 0 
L28 0 =:: 1. =:: .1 =:: 0 
L29 1 =:: O. =:: .0 =:: 1 
L30 [P] : p =:: 1. =:: .1 =:: p 
L31 [PJ : p =:: O. =:: .0 =:: p 
L32 [pq] : p =:: q. =:: .q =:: p 
L33 [pqJ:.q =:: p. =:: .1 :=::: q =:: 1. =:: .p 
L34 [pqr]:.q =:: p. =:: .r :=::: q =:: r. =:: .p 
L35 [pqr]:.p =:: q. =:: .r :=::: q =:: r. =:: .p 
L36 [pqr]:.p =:: q. =:: .r :=::: p. =:: .q =:: r 
L37 [pqJ:.p. =::: q. =:: .p =:: q 
L38 [pqJ:.p. =::: q. =:: .q =:: p 
L39 [pq] : p. =:: .Fb(pq) 
L40 [pqrJ:.p. =::: Fb(qr). =:: .q =:: p 
[S III: L22; L23] 
[L6 f I Fc, plO; L24] 
[S II: L25 riO; L5 plO] 
[S II: L22; L26] 
[S III: LI5 plO; L27] 
[S I: L28] 
[S V: L28; L5 pll =:: 1] 
[S V: L5 p/l; L29] 
[S V: L31; L30] 
[S I: LI6] 
[S V: LI7; L33] 
[S IV: L32; L34] 
[S IV: L32 qlq =:: r; L35] 
[L36 rip =:: q; L5 pip =:: q] 
[L36 rlq =:: p; L32] 
[S IV: L38; D3] 
[S III: L39 plq, qlr; L38] 

INVESTIGATIONS IN PROTOTHETIC 
295 
L41 [pqr]:.Fb(pFb(pO)). =: Fb(qr). = .q = p 
[S III: L39 qIFb(PO); L40] 
L42 [pq]:.Fb(pFb(pO)). =: [r] : Fb(qr). = .q = p 
[L41; 13] 
L43 [Jp] :-:p. =:: f(pf(pO)). =: [r]: f(pr). = .p=p:. =.p 
[L37, qlp, pi f(pf(PO)). =: [r] : f(pr). = .p = p; L6] 
L44 [P] :-: p. =:: [J] :: f(pf(pO)). =: [r] : f(pr). = .p = p:. = .p 
[L43; 13] 
L45 [P] :: p. = :·[f]:·f(pf(PO)). =: [r] : f(1r). = .1 = p 
[S IV: LI5; An qlI] 
L46 [P] : -: [f]:·f(pf(pO)). =: [r] : f(Ir). = .1 = p:. =:: [J] :: 
f(pf(pO)). =: [r].f(Ir). = .1 = p:. = .1 
[LI5plf(pf(pO)). =: [r]: f(1r). =.1 =p;j3] 
L47 [P] : -: p. =:: [f] :: f(pf(pO)). =: [r] : f(1r). = .1 = p:. = .1 
[S IV: L45; L46] 
D65 [pq] : : p. =:: [f] :: f(Pf(PO)). =: [r] : f(qr). = .q = p:. = .q 
:-:= .p =:> q 
L48 [Pl. p =:> p 
L49 [Pl. p =:> 1 
L50 [Pl. 0 =:> p 
L511=:>I.=.1 
L52 1. =:> .1 =:> 1 
[a] 
[D6 qlp; L44] 
[D6 qll; L47] 
[S V: L48 plO; L49 plO] 
[LI5 pil =:> 1; L48 pl1] 
[S IV: L5I; L48 pll] 
L53 O. =:>.1 =:>0:=: 1. =:>.1 =:> 1 
[L37pI0. =:>.1 =:> O,qII. =:>.1 =:> I;L50pli =:> 0;L52] 
L54 1. =:> .1 =:> 0:= :.1. =:>: 1. =:> .0 = 1 [S III: LI5 plO; L5 pi 1. =:> .1 =:> 0] 

296 
AUDONEUS LE BLANC 
L55 [P] :: p. ::::> .1 ::::> 0:== :.1. ::::>: 1. ::::> .0 == p 
[S V: L53; L54] 
L56 1.::::> :.1.::::>: O. ==.1::::> 0 
[L55p/1::::> 0;L48p/1::::> 0] 
At this point we prove the metatheorem: 
S VI.6 Ifwe have in the system corresponding theses 
A::::>B 
A, 
then we can add to the system the thesis 
B. 
(a) A::::> B 
(b) A 
[Assumption] 
[Assumption] 
(c) A. ==:: [J] :: f(Af(AO)). ==: [r] : f(Br). == .B == A:. == .B 
[S II: D6 piA, ql B; a] 
(i'l) [f] :: f(Af(AO)). ==: [r] : f(Br). == .B == A:. == .B 
[c; b] 
(e) B 
We then use this rule to prove 
L57 1. ::::>: o. == .1 ::::> 0 
L58 o. ==.1 ::::> 0 
[i'l f /Fb; L42p/A, q/B] 
[S VI: L56; L5 p/O] 
[S VI: L57; L5 plO] 
This completes the proof that the laws of implication can be derived from 
An without using the rule of extensionality. Similar proofs may easily be con-
structed for Am, Ao, Ap, and Aq (see Sobocinski, 1960, p. 67 and Sobocinski, 
1961a, p. 122).* On the other hand, it seems that the deductions from axiom 
At and the proof of metatheorem A27 require the use of theses of higher 
extensionality. Observe the crucial use of the rule for distributing quantifiers 
at L9, L42, L44, and L46; it is largely this rule and the unusual definition of 
implication at D6 which allow us to prove the laws of implication L48, L49, 
andL58. 
It is well known that theses L32 and L36 are an adequate axiom sys-
tem for the E-ca1culus,8 and so replace the thesis A78 proved by Professor 
* [Ed. Note: Cf. paper VI in this volume, pp. 170-171 and 186.] 

INVESTIGATIONS IN PROTOTHETIC 
297 
Sobocinski. My research has concerned the axiom Ao, from which deduc-
tions are slightly shorter than those from An 9; even a slight simplification 
of the known proof of A 78 required 1,205 applications of the rule of infer-
ence of 65, including definitions. The proof ofL32 and L36 requires at most 
583 applications of the rule, while the proof of the related system L34 and L59 
L59 [pqr]:.r. ::::: .p::::: q ::::::: r. ::::: .q ::::: p 
requires at most 568 applications of the rule. Hence the deductions outlined 
in this paper reduce to less than half its length the proof that Ao is adequate 
for the E-calculus. 
NOTES 
I The basic sources describing protothetic are Lesniewski (1929, 1939a) and (1939b). The 
articles Sobocinski (1960. 1961a), and (1961 b) are indispensable for serious study ofthe theory 
[ef. paper VI in this volume - Ed.]. 
2 The proof given in L37 to L58 of this paper shows that derivations from this axiom need 
not rely on the theoretical considerations which led to its discovery. See Sobocinski (1953), 
p. 19; Sobocinski (1960), pp. 66-fJ7 [see also paper VI in this volume, pp. 169-170 - Ed.]; 
Sobocinski (1961b), p. 146, note 83 [see also note 81 on p. 214 in this volume - Ed.]; and 
especially Sobocinski (1961a), p. 122: "On the other hand I am unable to prove that An ... is a 
single axiom of (55 without the application of reasonings ... in which point (' plays an essential 
role." [See also p. 185 in this volume - Ed.] 
3 See Sobocinski (1961a), pp. 114--117 and 119-120 [see also paper VI in this volume 
pp. 174--178 and 181-182 - Ed.]. My formulation of these rules is slightly broader, as I refer 
to meaningful expressions instead of functors. 
4 My deductions diverge significantly from those in Sobocinski (1961a) from definition 04 
onwards. 
5 This unusual definition differs from any of those previously known, and from any of 
the related definitions of conjunction. For previous definitions see Lesniewski (1929), p. 12, 
and Lesniewski (1939a), 03 on p. 93 and 04 on p. 107. For definitions of conjunction see 
Lesniewski (1929), p. 13; Lesniewski (1939b), pp. 138, 141 and 147; Sobocinski (1939), 
pp. 202-203 [see also paper IV in this volume, p. 76 - Ed.]; and the discussion in Sobocinski 
(196Ib), pp. 134--144 [see also paper VI in this volume, pp. 194--208 - Ed.]. Compare the 
proof ofL58 with the theorem Al in Sobocinski (1961b), pp. 134--139 [see also pp. 194--200 
in this volume - Ed.], to which it bears a close resemblance. I do not know how to shorten the 
present definition of implication and still carry out the proof of L58. 
6 This rule is quite different from the SVI of Sobocinski (1961 b), p. 132 [see also paper VI in 
this volume, p. 192 - Ed.]. 
7 This axiom is found in Sobocinski (1960), p. 66, and discussed in Sobocinski (1961a), 
pp. 123-124 [see also paper VI in this volume, pp. 170 and 187-189 - Ed.]. The metatheorem 
appears in Sobocinski (l961b), pp. 139-144 [see also pp. 200-208 in this volume - Ed.]. 
8 See Lukasiewicz (1939), p. 91. Initial deductions from a closely related axiom system are 
§iven in Wajsberg (1937), p. 314. 
For example, the thesis L5 can be proved from Ao in only 44 applications of the rule, but 
its proof from An appears to require at least (and certainly at most) 48 applications. Even the 
initial deductions proving L32 and L36 from Ao would require about 100 pages of print, so 
that I cannot see any possibility of publishing them. 

298 
AUDONEUS LE BLANC 
REFERENCES 
Lesniewski, Stanislaw (1929). 'Grundziige eines neuen Systems der Grundlagen der Mathe-
matik' , Fundamenta Mathematicae XIV, 1-81. 
Lesniewski, Stanislaw (1939a). 'Grundziige eines neuen Systems der Grundlagen der Mathe-
matik (Fortsetzung)" Collectanea Logica I, 61-144. 
LeSniewski, Stanislaw (1939b). 'Einleitende Bemerkungen zur Fortsetzung meiner Mitteilung 
u. d. T. "Grundziige eines neuen Systems der Grundlagen der Mathematik"', Collectanea 
Logica 1,1-60. All page numbers cited are from the English translation in McCall (1967). 
Lukasiewicz, Jan (1939). 'Der Aquivalenzenkalkiil', Collectanea Logica I, 145-169. The 
citation refers to the pages of the English translation in McCall (1967). 
McCall, Storrs, ed. (1967). Polish Logic, 1920-1939, Clarendon Press, Oxford. 
Sobocinski, Boleslaw (1939). 'Z badan nad prototetyk'l', Collectanea Logica I, 171-177. 
The citation refers to the pages of the English translation in McCall (1967). An earlier 
translation appeared in Cahiers de l'lnstitut d' Etudes Polonaises en Belgique, no. 5 (1949), 
29-39. [Cf. paper IV in this volume - Ed.] 
Sobocinski, Boleslaw (1953). 'Z badan nad aksjomatyk'l prototetyki Stanislawa Lesniew-
skiego' , Rocznik Polskiego Towarzystwa Naukowego na Obczy inie 4 (1953-1954), 18-20. 
Sobocinski, Boleslaw (1960). 'On the Single Axioms of Protothetic', Notre Dame Journal of 
Formal Logic T, 52-73. [Cf., paper VI in this volume - Ed.] 
Sobocinski, Boleslaw (1961 a). 'On the Single Axioms of Protothetic' , Notre Dame Journal of 
Formal Logic 11,111-126. [Cf. paper VI in this volume - Ed.] 
Sobocinski, Boleslaw (1961 b). 'On the Single Axioms of Protothetic' , Notre Dame Journal 
of Formal Logic II, 129-148. The continuation of this article has not yet appeared. [Cf. 
paper VI in this volume - Ed.] 
Wajsberg, Mordchaj (1937). 'Metalogische Beitriige', Wiadomosci Matematyczne XLIII, 1-38. 
The citation refers to the page in the English translation in McCall (1967). 

PROTOTHETIC BIBLIOGRAPHY 
The abbreviations of names of serials which are used in the Protothetic Bibli-
ography are the same as those used in Mathematical Reviews or Philosophical 
Reviews. 
ANONYMOUS 
(1976) XXllnd Conference on the History of Logic, Krakow 1976. Abstracts 
of papers (J. Surma (?) ed.), J agiellonian University and Polish Acad-
emy of Sciences. 
BOUDREAUX, J.e. 
(1976) 'Set-Theoretical Models for Lesniewski's Logical Systems' , in Proc. 
of the XXIInd Con! on the History of Logic, Krakow 1976, pp. 2-5. 
Jagiellonian University and Polish Academy of Sciences. 
CANTY, J.T. 
(1963) 'Lesniewski's Terminological Explanations as Recursive Concepts' , 
Notre Dame J. Formal Logic X, 337-369. 
(1969) 'Ontology: Lesniewski's Logical Language', Foundations of Lan-
guage 5, 455-469. 
CHIKAWA, K. 
(1967) 'On Equivalences of Laws in Elementary Protothetics, I, II', Proc. 
Japan A cad. XLIII (1967), 743-747; XLIV (1968), 56-59. 
CHURCH, A. 
(1956) Introduction to Mathematical Logic, Vol. I, Princeton University 
Press, Princeton, New Jersey. 

300 
PROfOfHETIC BIBLIOGRAPHY 
CIRULIS, J.P. 
(1979a) 'Protothetic without Typical Ambiguity of Expressions', Latv. Mat. 
Ezhegodnik23, 166-178,275 [in Russian]. 
(l979b) 'Traditional Means ofInference in Protothetic' , Latv. Mat. Ezhegod-
nik23, 179-193,275 [in Russian]. 
(1982) 'On Axioms of Protothetic with an Extended Rule of Extensionali-
ty', Latv. Mat. Ezhegodnik 26,264-270 [in Russian]. 
(1985) 'The Rule of Parametric Substitution in Protothetic', Polish Acad. 
Sci. Inst. Philos. Sociol. Bull. Sect. Logic 14(4), 134-139. 
(1988) 'Definitions in Protothetic' , Latv. Mat. Ezhegodnik 32, 90-10 1, 241-
242 [in Russian]. 
CURRY,H.B. 
(1950) A Theory of Formal Deducibility, Notre Dame Mathematical Lec-
tures, No.6, Notre Dame, IN. 
CZEZOWSKI, T. 
(1949) Logika. Podrt?fznik dla StudiujOfych Nauki Filozojiczne (Logic. A 
Textbook for Philosophy Students), PZWS, Warszawa. 
GILES-PETERS, A.R. 
(1972) Nominalistic Philosophy of Logic, with Particular Reference to the 
Systems of Stanislaw Lesniewski, Master of Arts Thesis, Philosophy 
Department, La Trobe University, Bundoora, Victoria. 
GINISTI, J.-P. 
(1991) 'La cn!ativite des definitions dans les systemes para-Euclidiens', 
Math. Inform. Sci. Humaines 116,69-88. 
GRZEGORCZYK, A. 
(1955) 'The Systems of LeSniewski in Relation to Contemporary Logical 
Research', Studia Logica III, 77-97. 
GRENIEWSKI, H. 
(1950) 'Functors ofthe Propositional Calculus', Ann. Soc. Polon. Math. 22, 
78-86. 

PROTOTHETIC BIBLIOGRAPHY 
301 
HrZ,H. 
(1952) 'On Primitive Terms of Logic', J. Symbolic Logic 17, 156-157 
(abstract). 
(1960) 'The Intuitions of Grammatical Categories', Methods 12,311-319. 
(1965) 'Ontological Definitions in Augmented Protothetic', J. Symbolic 
Logic 31, 149-150 (abstract). 
(1967) 'Grammar Logicism', The Monist 51, 110-127. 
ISEKI, K. 
(1966) 'Algebraic Formulations of Propositional Calculi with Variable Form-
ing Functors', Proc. Japan Acad. XLII, 1058-1059. 
(1968) Kigo ronrigaku (meidai ronri) (Symbolic Logic (Propositional Log-
ic)), MaId Shoten, Tokyo. 
JORDAN, Z.A. 
(1945) The Development of Mathematical Logic and of Logical Positivism 
in Poland between the Two Wars, Polish Science and Learning, no. 6, 
Clarendon Press, Oxford. Modified version in McCall (1967). 
KEARNS, J.T. 
(1967) 'The Contribution of Lesniewski ' ,Notre Dame J. Formal Logic VIII, 
61-93. 
KOTARBINSKI, T. 
(1957a) 'La philosophie dans la Pologne contemporaine', Synthese 12(137), 
29-38. 
(1957b) Wyklady z Dziej6w Logiki (Lectures on the History of Logic), Soci-
etas Scientiarum Lodziensis 28, L6dz. 
(1964) Le(:ons sur L'Historie de la Logique, Press Universitaires de France, 
Paris. 
(1967) 'Notes on the Development of Formal Logic in Poland in the Years 
1900-39', pp. 1-14 in McCall (1967). 
KONG,G. 
(1977) 'Lesniewski's Systems', pp. 168-177 in Marciszewski (1981). 

302 
PROTOTHETIC BIBLIOGRAPHY 
LE BLANC, A.V. 
(1985) 'Investigations in Protothetic' , Notre Dame J. Formal Logic 26, 483-
489. 
(1991) Lesniewski's Computative Protothetic, Ph.D. Dissertation at the Uni-
versity of Manchester. 
LEJEWSKI,C. 
(1956) Review of Siupecki (1953), J. Symbolic Logic 21, 188-191. 
(1958) 'On Implicational Definitions', Studia Logica VIII, 189-211. 
(1969) 'Consistency of LeSniewski's Mereology', J. Symbolic Logic 34, 
321-328. 
(1989) 'Formalization of Functionally Complete Propositional Calculus 
with the Functor of Implication as the Only Primitive Term', Studia 
Logica XLVIII, 479-494. 
(1990) 'Stanislaw Lesniewski (1886-1939)', Wiadom. Mat. 28(2), 153-
182. 
(1995) 'Remembering Stanislaw Lesniewski', pp. 25-66 in Lesniewski 
(1995). 
LESNIEWSKI, S. 
(1929) 'Grundziige eines neuen Systems der Grundlagen der Mathematik', 
Fund. Math. XIV, 1-81. English translation: Fundamentals of a New 
System of the Foundations of Mathematics, in Lesniewski (1992). 
(1930) 'Uber die Grundlagen der Ontologie', Comptes rendus des Seances 
de la Societe des Sciences et des Lettres de Varsovie, Classe III 23, 
111-132. English translation: On the Foundations of Ontology, in 
Lesniewski (1992). 
(1938a) 'Einleitende Bemerkungen zur Fortsetzung meiner Mitteilung u.d.T. 
"Grundziige eines neuen Systems der Grundlagen der Mathematik"', 
Collectanea Logica I (offprint 1938), 1-60. English translation: 
Introductory Remarks to the Continuation of my Article: "Grundziige 
eines neuen Systems der Grundlagen der Mathematik", in McCall 
(1967) and Lesniewski (1992). 
(1938b) 'Grundziige eines neuen Systems der Grundlagen der Mathematik, 
§12', Collectanea Logica I (offprint 1938),61-144. 
(1985) Stanislaw LeSniewski's Ontology, Proc. of the Colloquium, Neuen-
burg 1984, Dialectica 39(3). 

PROTOTHETIC BIBLIOGRAPHY 
303 
(1988) S. LeSniewski's Lecture Notes in Logic, J.TJ. Srzednicki and Z. 
Stachniak, eds., Nijhoff International Philosophy Series, Vol. 24., 
Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht. 
(1992) Stanislaw LeSniewski: Collected Works, SJ. Surma, J.TJ. Srzednic-
ki, and DJ. Barnett, eds.; with an Annotated Bibliography by Y.F. 
Rickey, Nijhoff International Philosophy Series, Vol. 44, PWN -
Polish Scientific Publishers, Warsaw, and Kluwer Academic Pub-
lishers, Dordrecht. 
(1995) Stanislaw LeSniewski, Aujourd'hui, D. Mieville and D. Vernant, 
eds.; Recherches sur la Philosophie et Ie langage, Universite Pierre 
Mendes France, Grenoble, No. 16. 
LIPPERT, B.M. 
(1976) Rekonstruktionen zur LeSniewski 'schen Logik, Zulassungsarbeit zum 
Staatsexamen, Konstanz. 
LUKASIEWICZ, J. 
(1951) 'On Variable Functors of Propositional Arguments', Proc. Royal 
Irish Academy, Section A 54, 25-35. Reprinted in Jan Lukasiewicz, 
Selected Works, L. Borkowski, ed., North-Holland Publishing Com-
pany, Amsterdam, 1970, pp. 311-324. 
LUSCHEI, E.C. 
(1962) The Logical Systems of LeSniewski, North-Holland Publishing Com-
pany, Amsterdam. 
MARCISZEWSKI, W. 
(1981) Dictionary of Logic as Applied in the Study of Language. Concepts, 
Methods, Theories, W. Marciszewski, ed., Nijhoff International Phi-
losophy Series, Vol. 9, Martinus Nijhoff Publishers, Dordrecht. 
(1988) 'The Place of Stanislaw Lesniewski in Contemporary Logic-
Philosophical Thought', Wiadom. Mat. 28(1),65-68. 
MCCALL, S. 
(1967) Polish Logic: 1920-/939. S. McCall, ed., Clarendon Press, Oxford. 
MIEVILLE, D. 
(1984) Un developpement des systemes logiques de Stanislaw LeSniewski. 
Protothetique-Ontologie-Mereologie, Peter Lang. 

304 
PROTOTHETIC BIBLIOGRAPHY 
(1985) 'Un apen;u des caracteristiques et de l'esprit des systemes logiques 
de Stanislaw Lesniewski', Dialectica 39(3), 165-179. 
(1987) 'Axiomes et definitions chez Lesniewski: une maniere genetique de 
developper les systemes forme Is , , Theoria (San Sebastian) 2(5-6), 
285-307. 
POLl, R. 
(1992) Ontologia Formale, Marietti, Genova. 
PRIOR, A.N. 
(1953) 'On Propositions Neither Necessary Nor Impossible', J. Symbolic 
Logic 18, 105-108. 
(1955) Formal Logic, Clarendon Press, Oxford. 
(1965) Review of Sobocinski (1960), J. Symbolic Logic 30, 245-246. 
QUINE, W.v. 
(1940) Reviews of Lesniewski (1938a) and Lesniewski (l938b), J. Symbol-
ic Logic 5, 83-84. 
RICKEY, v.F. 
(1972) 'Axiomatic Inscriptional Syntax, Part I: General Syntax', Notre 
Dame J. Formal Logic XIII, 1-33. 
(1973) 'Axiomatic Inscriptional Syntax, Part II: The Syntax of Proto the tic' , 
Notre Dame J. Formal Logic XIV, 1-52. 
(1977) 'A Survey of Lesniewski's Logic' , Studia Logica XXXVI, 407-426. 
SCHARLE, T. W. 
(1971) 'Completeness of Many-Valued Protothetic', J. Symbolic Logic 36, 
363-364 (abstract). 
SCHOLZ, H. 
(1941) Review of Lesniewski (1938a), ZentralblattJiir Mathematik und Ihre 
Grenzgebiete 23, 98-99. 
SIMONS, P. 
(1982) 'On Understanding LeSniewski', Hist. Philos. Logic 3, 165-191. 
(1985a) 'A Semantics for Ontology', Dialectica 39(3), 193-216. 

PROTOTHETIC BIBLIOGRAPHY 
305 
(1985b) 'Lesniewski's Logic and Its Relation to Classical and Free Logics', 
in Foundations of Logic and Linguistics, G. Dorn and P. Weingartner, 
eds., Plenum Press, New York, pp. 369-400. 
(1989) 'Combinators and Categorial Grammar' ,Notre Dame 1. Formal Log-
ic 30, 241-261. 
(1993) 'Nominalism in Poland', in Polish Scientific Philosophy: The Lvov-
Warsaw School, F. Coniglione, R. Poli, and J. Wolenski, eds., Poz-
nan Studies in the Philosophy of the Sciences and the Humanities, 
Vol. 28, Rodopi, Amsterdam, pp. 207-232. 
(1995) 'LeSniewski and Ontological Commitment', pp. 103-119 in Les-
niewski (1995). 
SLUPECKI, J. 
(1953) 'St. Lesniewski's Protothetics', Studia Logica I, 44-112. 
SOBOCINSKI, B. 
(1939) 'Z badan nad prototetyk'l (An Investigation of Protothetic)" Col-
lectanea Logica I (offprint), 171-177. 
(1949) 'An Investigation of Protothetic', Cahiers de l'Institut d'Etudes 
Polonaises en Belgique 5, Bruxelles. 
(1954) 'Z badan nad aksjomatyk'l prototetyki Stanislawa Lesniewskiego 
(An Investigation of the Axiomatics of Stanislaw Lesniewski's Pro-
tothetic)" Polskie Towarzystwo N aukowe na Obczyinie (Polish 
Society of Arts and Sciences Abroad), Yearbook for 1953-1954, 
Vol. IV, London, pp. 18-20. 
(1960) 'On the Single Axioms of Protothetic. I, II, III' , Notre Dame 1. For-
mal Logic I (1960), 52-73; II (1961), 111-126 and 129-148. 
(1967) 'An Investigation of Protothetic', pp. 203-206 in McCall (1967) 
(English translation of Sobocinski, 1939). 
SOLONIN, J.N. 
(1969) 'The Main Features of St. Lesniewski's Logical-Mathematical 
Systems', Vestnik Leningradskogo Universiteta, ser. Ekonomika, 
filosofia, pravo 23, 93-103 [in Russian]. 
(1975) 'Propositional Calculus with Variable Functors', in Contributed 
Papers to the Fifth International Congress of Logic Methodology 
and Philosophy of Science, London, Canada, XII, pp. 53-54. 

306 
PROTOTHETIC BIBLIOGRAPHY 
STACHNIAK, Z. 
(1993) 'An Essay on Resolution Logics', Studia Logica LII, 309-322. 
SURMA, S.J. 
(1977a) 'On the Work and Influence of Stanislaw Lesniewski', in Logic Col-
loquium 76, Oxford, Studies in Logic and Foundations of Math., 
Vol. 87, North-Holland Publishing Company, pp. 191-220. 
(1977b) On Lesniewski's Systems. Proceedings of XXII Conference on the 
History of Logic, Krakow 1976, SJ. Surma, ed., Studia Logica 
XXXVI. 
SUSZKO, R. 
(1977) 'The Fregean Axiom and Polish Mathematical Logic in the 1920s', 
Studia Logica XXXVI, 377-380. 
TANAKA, S. 
(1969) 'Lesniewski's Protothetics 81, 82. I, II, III', Proc. Japan Acad. XLV, 
97-101,259-262, and 263-265. 
TARSKI, A. 
(1923a) 'Sur Ie terme primitif de la Logistique', Fund. Math. IV, 196-200. 
(1923b) '0 wyrazie pierwotnym logistyki (On the Primitive Term of Logis-
tic)" PrzeglO[l Filozojiczny XXVI, 68-89. English translation based 
on this paper, on Tarski (l923a), and on Tarski (1924) in Tarski 
(1956) and in Tarski (1986). 
(1924) 'Sur les truth-functions au sens de MM. Russell et Whitehead', 
Fund. Math. V, 59-74. 
(1956) Logic, Semantics, Metamathematics. Papers from 1923 to 1938, 
Translated by J.H. Woodger, Clarendon Press, Oxford. 
(1986) Collected Papers, Vol. 1-4, S. Givant and R. McKenzie, eds., Birk-
Muser Verlag, Basel. 
WATANABE, S. 
(1974a) 'On Many-Valued Protothetic', Ph.D. Dissertation, University of 
Manchester. 
(1974b) 'Many-ValuedProtothetic' ,J. Symbolic Logic 39,409-410 (abstract). 

PRafafHETIC BIBLIOGRAPHY 
307 
WOLENSKI, J. 
(1985) Filozojiczna Szkola Lwowsko-Warszawska (Lvov-Warsaw Philo-
sophical School), PWN - Polish Scientific Publishers, Warsaw. 
(1989) Logic and Philosophy in the Lvov-Warsaw School, Synthese Library, 
Vol. 198, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht. 

Ajdukiewicz, K. 10,15 
Bar-Hillel, Y. 221 
Barnett, D. vii 
Berkeley, G. 4 
Bernays, P. 93, 269 
Billich, 1. 27, 85 
Bochenski, I.M. 70 
Brentano, F. 13 
Cantor, G. 6, 18 
Canty, J.T. 9, 34 
Chang, C.C. 38 
Chomsky, N. 221 
Choynowski, M. xi 
Church, A 10 
Clay, R.E. 36--39 
Czelakowski, J. vii 
Davidson, D. 14 
Davis, C.C. 34 
Diamond, AH. 213 
Euclid 51 
Frege, G. 6--8, 11, 18 
Glibowski, E. 37 
Goodman, N. 1, 3,20,36, 38, 276 
GOdel, K. 18, 34 
Grzegorczyk, A. viii, 36, 38, 155 
Heyting, A 72 
Hilbert, D. 269 
Hiz, H. xii, 17, 26, 36 
Hobbes, T. 1 
Iwanus, B. 24, 33 
AUTHOR INDEX 
309 
Janiszewski, Z. viii 
Jaskowski, S. 37, 213 
Jordan, Z. viii, xiii 
Kant, I. 8 
Keisler, H.J. 38 
Kotarbinski, T. xii, 1, 13-20,85, 150 
Kowalski, J.G. 34 
Kruszewski, Z. 33 
Kubinski, T. 24, 37 
Kling, G. 5, 9 
Leibniz, G. 18 
Le Blanc, AV. xi 
Lejewski, C. xii, 18-20,31,32,34,37-39, 
209 
Leonard, H.S. 38 
Lesniewski, S. vii-xiii, 1,3-14, 16--19, 
23-25,30-36,38,43,50,67,68,70, 
72-75,78-81,85-91,119,149-151, 
153-161, 163, 165-172, 188, 189, 
194,208-213,217,218,221,252, 
265,269,272-278,282,285,286, 
289 
Lindenbaum, A. 78 
Locke,J.4 
Lukasiewicz, J. viii, xi, 4, 18, 19, 24, 28, 
30-32,43,50,67,69,71,78,79,89, 
93, 119, 139, 155, 168, 169, 185, 
187,194,209,210,213 
Luschei, E.C. viii, 38 
Machover, M. 26 
Mazurkiewicz, S. viii 
McCall, S. x, xiii 
McKinsey, J.C.c. 213 
Meinong, A 4,19 
Mereditch, C.A. 210 
Mill, J.S. 5 

310 
AUTHOR INDEX 
Nelson, L. 24 
Nicod, J.P.G. ix 
Peano,G.8,31,34, 75, 79,89,90 
Peirce, C.S. 67 
Plato 4,5 
Prior, A.N. 9, 10 
Quine, W.V. 1,3,8-10, 18, 19 
Ramsey, F. 24 
Rickey, V.F. vii, xiii, xiv 
Roscelin 1 
Russell, B.A.W. ix, 5,6, 8, 24, 43, 47, 50, 
66,67,75,79,89,90,155 
Scharle, T.W. 30 
Scholz, H. 78 
SchOnfinkel, M. 210 
SchrOder, E. 6, 19 
Sheffer, H.M. 43,67,81, 157 
Sierpinski, W. viii 
Simons, P.M. xiii 
Slupecki, J. xii, 27, 28, 32, 33, 74, 85, 155, 
210 
Sobocinski, B. x-xiii, 23, 24, 26, 28-36, 
38,71,219,265,277,286 
Srzednicki, 1.TJ. vii 
Stachniak, Z. vii 
Sullivan, T.F. 37 
Suppes, P. 17,20 
Surma, S.J. vii 
Tarski, A. ix, x, xiii, 17, 18,20,26,31,37, 
67,68,75,76,93,150,156,157, 
163,209,211,219 
Tarski, 1. 20 
Twardowski, K. 3, 4,19 
Wajsberg,M.x,75, 167, 168,213 
Welsh, P.J. 36 
Whitehead, A.N. ix, 6, 47, 50, 66, 67 
William of Champeaux 3 
Woodger, J.H. xiii 
Zermelo, E. 6, 7, 24 
Zylinski, E. 67, 81 

