HYLE – International Journal for Philosophy of Chemistry, Vol. 20 (2014), 141-163. 
Copyright  2014 by HYLE and Jean-Pierre Llored. 
Whole-Parts Strategies in Quantum  
Chemistry: Some Philosophical and  
Mereological Lessons 
Jean-Pierre Llored 
Abstract: Philosophers mainly refer to quantum chemistry in order to address 
questions about the reducibility or autonomy of chemistry relative to quan-
tum physics, and to argue for or against ontological emergence. To make their 
point, they scrutinize quantum approximations and formalisms as if they were 
independent of the questions at stake. This paper proposes a return to history 
and to the laboratory so as to emphasize how quantum chemists never cease to 
negotiate the relationships between a molecule, its parts, and its environment. 
This investigation will enable us to draw methodological conclusions about 
the role of history within philosophical studies, and to examine how quantum 
chemistry can clarify important philosophical and mereological issues related 
to the emergence/reduction debate, or to the way instruments and contexts 
are involved in the material making and the formal description of wholes and 
parts.  
Keywords: mereology, historicized epistemology, emergence, quantum chemistry, 
reduction, affordances.  
1. Introduction 
Philosophers mostly refer to quantum chemistry in order to address ques-
tions about the reducibility or autonomy of chemistry relative to quantum 
physics, or to argue for or against ontological emergence. In this respect, 
they mainly direct their attention to:  
(1) the status and legitimacy of approximations used in order to circum-
vent performing exact calculations (Hendry 1998, 1999);  
(2) conceptual problems in standard quantum chemical models of the 
electron configurations of atoms (Scerri 1991a, 1991b, 1997, 2007a);  
(3) configurational Hamiltonians, considering that they vindicate some 
ontological stance about emergence (Hendry 2006, 2010);  

142 
Jean-Pierre Llored 
(4) the epistemological meaning of emergence (Scerri 2007b, 2012, 2013; 
van Brakel 2000); or 
(5) the possibility of redefining the concept of emergence in terms of sin-
gular asymptotic expansions and time-rescaling – using a contextual 
topology that fits the higher-level description of the system while still 
being compatible with lower-level basic theory (Primas 1983, 1998).  
In this paper, we aim to report two complementary outcomes of a study that 
pays attention to the whole-parts strategies used by quantum chemists when 
they perform a calculation in order to determine a particular geometry or to 
quantify an energy. We would like to highlight the fact that the formalisms, 
theoretical tools, languages, and representations used within various chemical 
quantum methods were constitutively shaped by questions related to the rela-
tionships between a molecule, its parts, and the environment. In short, we 
would like to underline that the theoretical tools by means of which philoso-
phers use to think about emergence and reduction are not independent of the 
questions at stake.  
 
The later Wittgenstein clearly emphasized how relevant scrutiny of specif-
ic uses is for understanding a particular form of life, whether scientific or not 
(Wittgenstein 1953). Following Wittgenstein, our idea is to start from the 
study of chemical practices in order to identify what is at issue in a particular 
domain of chemical activities, and then to tackle the philosophical problems 
raised by chemistry. We envisage chemistry as a means to clarify philosophi-
cal issues that receive their meaning in other domains of knowledge, and 
sometimes to resolve them. 
 
In her Matière à penser: Essais d’histoire et de philosophie de la chimie 
(2008) Bernadette Bensaude Vincent advocated that chemistry can be ‘food 
for thought’, or in French ‘matière à penser’. This emerging question is the 
opposite of a more frequently-asked question, namely, what is the impact of 
philosophy on chemistry? Therefore, it merits fresh attention from both 
historians and philosophers. During the eighteenth century, the French phi-
losopher Denis Diderot already held that studying chemistry should mean 
querying what chemists do and what is going on when chemical know-how 
and knowledge spread. Diderot aimed at characterizing chemical, technical 
and scientific practices by considering their specific sites, instruments, and 
goals (Diderot 1754). He advocated an image of chemistry as constantly 
adopting new techniques and pushing at the frontiers of neighboring fields of 
sciences.  
 
That is what has been occurring for quantum chemistry since its begin-
ning. In Neither Physics nor Chemistry, Ana Simòes and Kostas Gavroglu 
make it obvious that quantum chemistry is a truly novel specialty. They say 
that “theoretical chemistry is first and foremost an enterprise whereby math-
ematical notions, numerical methods, experimental measurements, pictorial 

 
Whole-Parts Strategies in Quantum Chemistry 
143 
representations, and, above all, chemical concepts constitute an undivided 
whole.” (Gavroglu & Simões 2012, p. 184) In other words, quantum chemis-
try is neither physics nor chemistry nor applied mathematics but an emergent 
whole clearly not reducible to its ingredients taken in isolation, or to their 
mere sum! What matters in order to address molecular issues is the way in 
which the whole approach is reinforced through the cross-linking and cross-
fertilization of all these elements. In this respect, this recent book illustrates 
and widens the authors’ previous work (Simões & Gavroglu 1997; Simões 
1993) which established that the emergence of quantum chemistry is the 
convergent result of diverse scientific traditions.  
 
Following this line of reasoning, our idea is to investigate what quantum 
chemists actually do in their laboratories. Our approach does not consist in 
applying types of mereology – that is to say types of logic of propositional 
reasoning concerning relations between wholes and parts – or prior concepts 
of emergence to chemical activities but, in contrast, in identifying the prereq-
uisites that a concept of emergence or a type of mereology should have in 
order to address the questions raised by chemistry as it is practiced. It is in 
this sense that chemistry can become ‘food for thought’ and not just an ap-
plication of concepts taken from other areas.  
 
We divide our work into four parts. We first study how early quantum 
methods used orbitals – either molecular or atomic – in order to understand 
the formation and the reactivity of molecules. We will thus study how Robert 
S. Mulliken’s ‘Method of Molecular Orbitals’ describes a molecule in terms 
of nuclei and electrons, and how Linus Pauling’s ‘Valence Bond Approach’, in 
contrast, employs atoms or ions. Second, we will carefully examine a specific 
calculation based on Density Functional Theory (DFT) a method which re-
places orbitals by electron density. This “rotation to laboratory”, to use Roald 
Hoffmann’s terminology (Hoffmann 2007), enables us to clarify the way 
quantum chemists connect a whole, its parts, and its environment, within a 
single calculation. Third, we will summarize how the current debate between 
the main protagonists and antagonists of the Quantum Theory of Atoms in 
Molecules (QTAIM) resembles and restates the opposition between Mulli-
ken and Pauling as to whether a molecule is best considered an aggregate of 
atoms or a single, irreducible whole. We draw philosophical and mereological 
conclusions which could provide nourishment for the reflection of philoso-
phers. 

144 
Jean-Pierre Llored 
2. Whole-parts strategies in early quantum chemistry 
In the late 1920s, the aim of many researchers was to create a molecular mod-
el which accounts for the various empirical facts of spectroscopy and chemis-
try. Among them, Mulliken was primarily concerned with the assignment of 
quantum numbers to electrons in molecules. He carefully studied the various 
molecular states obtainable when two atoms are imagined to come together. 
This problem is more difficult than determining the molecular states ob-
tained from an atom if its nucleus were considered to be divided into two 
parts. Following Hund’s principle (1927) according to which “no state is 
lost” during the formation of a molecule from two atoms, Mulliken aimed to 
find out correct relationships among the quantum states of: two isolated 
atoms, ‘the united atom’ (a fictitious entity obtained by coalescence of those 
two atoms) and the molecule, in which those two atoms were chemically 
combined (Mulliken 1928). (A helium atom made by fusing two hydogen 
atoms would be a ‘united atom’.) 
 
By comparing sets of spectroscopic and thermodynamic data, Mulliken 
managed to compare molecular and atomic electron quantum numbers and 
states, thus gathering the molecules formed by the elements of the first two 
rows of the periodic table. At first he noticed that the nature of the dissocia-
tion products of a given molecular state depends as much on its position on 
the energy scale as on its electron configuration, i.e. the distribution of the 
molecular electrons in various orbits. Then he noticed that, during the for-
mation of a molecule from two atoms, some of the electrons must undergo 
rather radical changes in their quantum numbers – changes that Mulliken 
dubbed ‘electronic promotion’ – in order to satisfy the demands of the Pauli 
Principle regarding the molecule and the united atom (Llored 2010).  
 
The gradual connection between the two early versions of quantum theo-
ry, chemistry, and spectroscopic analyses gave birth to the correlation dia-
grams (Mulliken 1932a). The position of a molecule in this type of diagram 
made it possible to assess the degree of likeness between a molecule and its 
separated atoms – or between a molecule and its united atom – thanks to 
empirical knowledge concerning inter-nuclear distances and charges of nuclei. 
Knowing the experimental characteristics of a molecule, it was possible to 
represent the negative energy of ionization of the electrons in the diagram 
and to make predictions both of energy parameters and the bonding, non-
bonding, or anti-bonding function of the electrons in their different specific 
orbits around the nuclei of the molecule. In so doing, Mulliken proposed the 
curve representing the evolution of the molecular electronic state. This curve 
is an interpolation between two extremes cases: the electronic state of the 
united atoms on the one hand, and that of the separated atoms on the other. 
In this respect, he never reduced a molecule to atoms – either isolated or unit-

 
Whole-Parts Strategies in Quantum Chemistry 
145 
ed –, but, on the contrary, endeavored to elucidate the type of energy continuity 
between their respective states within a transformation (Llored 2010). 
 
Mulliken rejected the concept of valence as an intrinsic property of an 
atom. By contrast, he referred to the ‘binding capacity’ of an electron in a 
given molecular orbit; considering that each orbit is delocalized over all the 
nuclei – or over a part of them – and could contribute, depending on each 
specific case, a stabilizing or a destabilizing energy contribution to the total 
energy of the molecule. In this respect, the notion of orbit depends upon the 
molecule as “a self-sufficient unit and not as a mere composite of atoms.” 
(Mulliken 1967) The sum of the energy contributions of each electron in its 
orbit determines whether the electronic configuration allows for the exist-
ence of a stable molecule, i.e., whether its energy is stabilizing overall. For 
Mulliken, in a molecule the atom no longer existed. He stated (1931, p. 369):  
In the ‘molecular’ point of view advanced here, the existence of the molecule 
as a distinct individual built up of nuclei and electrons is emphasized, whereas 
according to the usual atomic point of view the molecule is regarded as com-
posed of atoms or of ions held together by valence bonds. From the molecular 
point of view, it is a matter of secondary importance to determine through 
what intermediate mechanism (union of atoms or ions) the finished molecule 
is most conveniently reached. It is really not necessary to think of valence 
bonds as existing in the molecule.  
The ‘electronic state’, the ‘binding capacity’, the ‘electronic promotion’, and ‘the 
energy-bonding-power’ are among the many theoretical tools that Mulliken 
built in order to explain the capacity of electrons to be linked to nuclei and to 
form a molecular whole. The language of his orbits approach is thus under-
pinned by a specific representation of the whole-parts relation. His challenge 
was to understand why the new molecule displays properties that the reactive 
reagents or the atoms do not, knowing that the decomposition of a molecule 
allows recovering the separate atoms in particular electronic states. This type 
of investigation is reminiscent of the questions raised by Aristotle concerning 
the difference between an aggregate and a true “mixt” (Bensaude-Vincent 
2005) or, closer to us, of the classical whole-parts discourses developed by 
the British emergentists (Llored 2013). From the outset, the approximations 
and the language developed by Mulliken were constitutively shaped by the prob-
lem of emergence. This remark remained relevant when, in 1932, Mulliken 
replaced the notion of molecular orbit by that of molecular orbital. We would 
like to point out that ‘the approximation of molecular orbitals’ modified the 
previous whole-parts strategy by introducing the environment into the calcu-
lation, often implicitly.  
 
The notion of ‘orbital’ took its meaning from Max Born’s probabilistic 
interpretation, according to which the square of the one-electron molecular 
wave function (orbital) in a region of space corresponds to the probability-

146 
Jean-Pierre Llored 
density of finding an electron in there. In addition, Mulliken (1932b, p. 50) 
asserted:  
By an atomic orbital is meant an orbital corresponding to the motion of an 
electron in the field of a single nucleus plus other electrons, while a molecular 
orbital corresponds to the motion of an electron in the field of two or more 
nuclei plus other electrons. Both atomic and molecular orbitals may be 
thought of as defined in accordance with the Hartree method of the self-
consistent field, in order to allow so far as possible for the effects of other 
electrons than the one whose orbital is under consideration.  
Mulliken explicitly interpreted this picture as a model on which to base calcu-
lations of the numerical values of chemically relevant molecular properties 
such as ‘bond strengths’ or ‘atomic populations’. Mulliken’s occasional onto-
logical remarks support the view that the formation of molecular orbitals as 
linear combinations of atomic orbitals, namely the LCAO-MO approxima-
tion, does not entail that molecules are additive conglomerates of independ-
ent nuclei. Let us consider the simple but, methodologically speaking, gener-
alizable case of a calculation involving a molecule made of two nuclei. The 
molecular wave function ψ can be expressed using two atomic orbitals φ1 and 
φ2: 
ψ = c1φ1 + c2φ2 
(A) 
The weighting coefficients c1 and c2 are determined using the variational prin-
ciple in order to reach the minimal electronic energy. This minimization tech-
nically implies that the determination of each coefficient depends upon two 
integrals: (1) the Coulomb integral which is related to the electron energy in 
a unique atomic orbital φ1 or φ2, and (2) the exchange integral which deals 
with the energetic coupling between the two atoms inside the molecule.1 As 
this type of coupling exists once the molecule is created, we can conclude 
that each coefficient depends upon the whole molecule, and not solely upon its 
corresponding atom or nucleus!  
 
In the same way, the determination of ‘atomic populations’ depends on 
the contribution of all the electrons belonging to all the molecular orbitals 
that 
are 
occupied. 
Indeed, 
Mulliken 
ascribed 
the 
‘net 
charge’, 
c1
2+1/2(2c1c2S12), to the atom corresponding to the atomic orbital φ1. This 
atomic charge depends upon the whole molecule through: (1) the ‘overlap 
population’2 S12 which expresses the part of the electronic density that refers 
to the two atomic functions at the same time, and (2) the coefficient c1 itself. 
The whole and the parts are thus co-defined. The atoms whose cores constitute 
the basic architecture of molecules are thus ‘parts’ insofar as they belong to 
the nuclear contribution of the global molecular wave function; but they are 
also ‘parts’ because calculations enable chemists to ascribe an atomic charge 

 
Whole-Parts Strategies in Quantum Chemistry 
147 
to each atom in the molecule in order to explain the reactivity and the selec-
tivity of the chemical reaction under study. 
 
Beyong this technical aspect, Vemulapalli (2003) clearly highlighted that 
the application of the variation principle in the calculation of the ground state 
of a molecule, strictly speaking, presupposes energy transfer with its envi-
ronment. As a consequence, the molecular whole, its parts, and the surround-
ings are required at the same time within the calculation. 
 
In contrast to Mulliken, Pauling developed a Daltonian scheme in which 
atoms are treated as the actual components of molecules, retaining their in-
tegrity in the compound they form. The use of accurate thermodynamic and 
crystallographic data enabled him to notice that the sum of the calculated 
covalent radii of the bonded atoms approximated the measured bond lengths 
well. He then linked the calculated binding energies with experimental heats 
of formation of gaseous molecules. The key step was to choose a set of mole-
cules that could supply the data necessary for extracting those binding ener-
gies. This approach enabled him to express the total energy of formation of 
the molecule as a mere sum of energy terms characteristic of the different 
bonds; assuming that the molecule was obtained from separate atoms (Pau-
ling 1932).  
 
To understand Pauling’s molecular description, one needs: (1) to connect 
the molecular structure to the properties of its constitutive atoms; (2) to 
study how those atoms interact from within the molecule. Each atom has 
stable atomic orbits, 2s, 2p for instance, that are used to form stable bonds 
inside a molecule or to induce ad hoc directed valence (Pauling 1931, Slater 
1931). He stated that bonds resulted from the overlapping of two atomic 
eigenfunctions: the larger the overlap, the stronger the bond.  
 
The study of diatomic molecules enabled him to propose the concept of 
‘normal’ covalent bond and to express what he called the ‘normal’ covalent 
molecular wave function as a mere sum of covalent and ionic terms. Such 
contribution enabled him to develop the quantum counterpart of his defini-
tion of electronegativity (Pauling 1932).  
 
The language and the theoretical tools developed by Pauling within the 
framework of his Valence Bond Theory are thus underpinned by a specific 
representation of the whole-parts relation. From the outset this work was 
shaped by questions related to the deduction of the properties of the whole 
from the properties of the parts. In addition, it is interesting to bear in mind 
that Pauling also used the variation principle in order to determine the 
weighting coefficients of each atomic orbital of the linear combination used 
to define a particular ‘hybrid orbital.’ As it was the case in Mulliken’s work, 
the whole, the parts, and the surroundings are thus implicitly interwoven in 
Pauling’s approach. 

148 
Jean-Pierre Llored 
 
To conclude, Mulliken’s and Pauling’s approaches are not mere applica-
tions of quantum physics to the domain of chemistry. It is the contingent 
connection between chemistry, quantum mechanics, and instrumentation 
which frames the content of a particular approach. The two basic methods we 
have described translate mereological questions into chemical language. In a 
nutshell, early chemical quantum methods, their logical relations, and their 
related languages have been concerned with the problem of emergence from 
the beginning. The relations between a whole and its parts – atoms of differ-
ent types, fragments, nuclei, electrons – are specifically at stake within those 
languages and formalisms. It is now time to turn to our second point and to 
return to laboratory in order to analyze a current calculation using DFT. 
3. Study of a current DFT calculation 
In 2010, we immersed ourselves in the workaday research activities of the 
French laboratory DCMR, the ‘Laboratoire des Mécanismes Réactionnels’ at 
the Ecole Polytechnique. Our aim was to study quantum chemists at work. 
This laboratory determines mechanisms which account for molecular reactiv-
ity, using quantum calculations, mass spectrometers, and fluorometers. Our 
starting question was: What do quantum chemists do when they calculate a 
molecular geometry or a molecular energy? We will present the summary of 
the key results of our investigation. Fine-grained developments can be found 
in Llored 2012. 
 
The researchers we worked with used Kohn-Sham density functional 
theory (Kohn et al. 1996). This method is different from quantum chemical 
methods based on wave functions. The molecular space is divided into grids 
of cubes, and researchers define an electronic density for each cube of this 
space. The total energy is calculated as a functional of the electronic density, 
i.e. a function having electron-density distribution as basic variable.  
 
Some researchers develop tailor-made functionals for each atom or for 
each specific physical effect within a molecule. To achieve this difficult task, 
they change the number and values of parameters thereby shaping a new 
mathematical functional form that is designed to take physical phenomena 
and chemical results into account. They then use databases to appraise the 
reliability of the new functional, and pragmatically modify it again and again 
until they stabilize the ‘best performers’ for a specific purpose, that is until 
they obtain a functional that is not further improved (for the purpose of 
interest) by variation in the number or value of parameters (Zhao & Trulhar 
2008).  

 
Whole-Parts Strategies in Quantum Chemistry 
149 
 
Choosing a functional of electron density depends upon: (1) the desired 
accuracy, (2) the chemical system, and (3) the time required for calculation. 
These calculations also require choosing a set of functions called a basis for 
each atom. The basis changes according to the type of atoms, three main 
types are available: (1) the Gaussian Type Orbital of the form exp(-ar2), (2) 
the Slater Type Orbital of the form exp(-ar), and (3) plane waves. Chemists 
can also use a linear combination of those three types if necessary. The basis 
also changes with other effects such as diffusion, polarization, pseudo poten-
tials for core electrons, and the size of functions depending on the circum-
stances. The functional and its relative basis set define a ‘level of calculation’. 
The calculation process depends upon the use of a computer program such as 
‘Gaussian’ type or ‘Turbomole’.  
 
The process of calculation then combines information about: (1) the 
whole system: its geometry that chemists first define from the outset of the 
calculation, often using X-ray crystallography determinations; (2) the parts: a 
functional for each atom or groups of nuclei, each molecular orbital, each 
particular physical effect, and so on; (3) and the solvent: what is outside the 
whole. The calculation uses the three levels – the molecular whole, its parts, 
and the environment – at the same time in order to: (1) minimize energy, (2) 
calculate an energy barrier, (3) determine a transition state, and (4) postulate 
a type of geometry by means of different levels of calculation.  
 
The model of the solvent is related to the solvation free energy of each 
compound. This quantity is defined as the required amount of energy neces-
sary to transfer a molecule of gaseous solute into the solvent. The crucial step 
is to appraise how the solvent becomes involved in a chemical reaction. Its 
action can be direct if some molecules of solvent take part in the chemical 
process, or indirect if the solvent – then labeled the ‘bulk medium’ – only 
modifies the reactivity of the reactants compared with that of the same mole-
cules in the gas phase. Chemists discuss the nature of the reaction pathway 
according to factors that influence solvation free energy – including the size 
and form of the cavity occupied by the solute, the solvent reorganization, the 
polarization between the solvent and the solute, and the entropic contribu-
tion (Llored 2011). 
 
An iterative calculation based on the variational optimization of orbitals 
can then start. Loops of calculations are carried out until the the energy of 
the whole system reaches a convergent minimum value. If calculations are 
not convergent, researchers can change the functional, the size of the grids, 
and convergence thresholds in order to optimize geometry or to calculate 
molecular energy. Each step requires know-how, chemical experience, and 
pragmatic compromises. The calculation always uses both the variation prin-
ciple and the molecular structure determined by experiments. The interaction 
with the environment may be either implicit, as it is the case with the use of 

150 
Jean-Pierre Llored 
the variation principle, or explicit when the specific interactions of the sol-
vent are taken into account.  
 
A particular level of calculation – a particular functional and its basis – is 
designed to answer a specific question only and excludes others. One cannot 
study all the molecular characteristics by means of a single calculation. When 
quantum chemists study the energy barrier of a chemical reaction, they have 
to choose a functional, its basis, and best estimates3 for each level – atoms, 
molecule, and the solvent. They thus tailor a useful tool to understand and 
predict a defined characteristic (a rate constant or activation energy, say) and 
not another one, such as the geometry of a particular active site within a pro-
tein. ‘Complementary’ levels of calculation are thus necessary to achieve a 
global molecular description. They cannot be used within a particular calcula-
tion at the same time, because of their incompatible parameters. The global 
method used is relative to a family of chemical compounds and depends upon 
the entanglement of inter-calibrated tools. The method is one way not the 
way to account for a characteristic of the whole from its parts and its envi-
ronment. In this respect, a quantum chemical method is a practice of articula-
tion which negotiates an explanation from a particular whole-parts-
environment strategy.  
 
To conclude, this typical calculation clearly illustrates what explaining a 
structure or a mechanism, or predicting a transformation amounts to. Quan-
tum chemists use many interrelated tools within a large and sophisticated 
network which combines mathematical functions and devices, empirical out-
comes, computer engineering, quantum and classical physics, and chemical 
knowledge and know-how. The molecule, its ‘parts’, and the environment are 
required at the same time. They are co-defined within the calculation. Investi-
gators negotiate what an explanation of the one from the others means. 
There is no room for deduction in this type of activities. Let us now study 
how recent debates in quantum chemistry summarize and modify those ques-
tions. 
4. Whole-parts and the reduction debates in the atoms-
in-molecules approach 
The point that we have defended so far can be extended to quantum chemical 
methods that deny any overlap between atoms, as it is typically the case in 
Richard Bader’s ‘Quantum Theory of Atoms in Molecules’ (Bader 1990). 
This approach is based on a topological description of the electronic density 
of the molecule. Chérif Matta (2002) states: 

 
Whole-Parts Strategies in Quantum Chemistry 
151 
It is the topology of the electron density that determines the boundaries of an 
atom which in turn determine its shape which in turn determines its properties 
inside a molecule [p. 28]. […] A consequence of this topological feature of the 
density is the association of an atom with a region of space, each region being 
dominated by a given nucleus, with boundaries evident in the minima that ex-
ist between the nuclear maxima. The boundaries are determined by the balance 
in the forces that the neighbouring nuclei exert on the density [p. 29]. […] 
The definition of an atom and its bounding surface are made both qualitatively 
and quantitatively apparent in terms of the patterns of trajectories traced out 
by the gradient vectors of the density. […] The gradient exhibits a maximum 
at each nucleus in any plane that contains the nucleus, the nucleus acts as a 
global attractor in the gradient vector field of density. As a consequence, the 
three-dimensional space of the molecule is divided into atomic basins, each ba-
sin being defined by the set of trajectories that terminate at a given nucleus. 
An atom is defined as the union of a nucleus and its associated basin. […] A 
bond path provides a universal indicator of bonding, linking all pairs of bond-
ed atoms, regardless of the nature of the interaction [p. 32]. […] Nuclear mo-
tions can induce topological changes in the density that correspond to the 
making and breaking of chemical bonds and to a change in molecular structure 
[p. 40]. [Emphasis added]. 
In this approach, an ‘atom’ is defined as the union of an attractor – the nucleus 
– and its associated atomic basin. Using its usual vocabulary, the atom has an 
‘inner’ structure expressed by the ‘intrinsic’ geometry of the gradient field 
vector. Bader goes on to say that “[t]he quantum theory of atoms in mole-
cules, QTAIM, demonstrates that every measurable property of a system, 
finite or periodic, can be equated to a sum of contributions from its compo-
site atoms.” (Bader 1990, p. 10) In other words, there are no gaps between 
atoms carved out of a given molecule: they perfectly match and compose the 
whole molecule. In this sense, the atoms literally add up to form the molecule 
they are part of. Matta and Bader thus define a reductionist program, accord-
ing to which the molecule becomes the sum of ‘topological atoms’. They 
assert that “[t]he time has arrived for a sea change in our attempts to predict 
and classify the observations of chemistry, time to replace the use of simpli-
fied and arbitrary models with the full predictive power of physics, as applied 
to an atom in a molecule” (Bader & Matta 2013, p. 253). 
 
The linguistic shift is clear. An atom in a molecule is now considered as a 
non-overlapping and bounded unit. As it seems, all is in the right place at the 
right time to deduce the whole from its parts. Nevertheless, Paul Popelier 
(2000), another leading expert of the field, qualifies this statement by claim-
ing:  
We recollect that the gradient vector field naturally partitions the molecules 
into atoms, i.e. the gradient of ρ carves the atoms by the term molecular atoms 
as opposed to free or isolated atoms. Thus, every molecule falls apart into non-
overlapping molecular atoms. […] Every type of nucleus appears inside thou-

152 
Jean-Pierre Llored 
sands of possible molecular atoms. In fact, there are millions of carbon (mo-
lecular) atoms because each atom is cut of a particular chemical molecular en-
vironment of which there are as many as there are molecules. In a manner of 
speaking, every molecular atom is endowed with properties it inherits from 
the molecule of which it is a part. In other words, the atom reflects the fea-
tures of its particular chemical environment (p. 35). […] There are literally 
many millions of molecular atoms because there are millions of molecules 
which all give rise to a set of constituent atoms. Nevertheless the sometimes 
bewildering shapes of atoms have been criticized as being contrary to chemical 
intuition. This should not be disconcerting, rather it could be interpreted as an 
expression of the richness of chemistry. Indeed, the amazing variety of atoms 
is a result of quantum systems cutting themselves into fragments, each leaving 
behind on the fragments detailed fingerprints of the total molecule. Is it pos-
sible, then, to find exactly the same atom more than once coming from differ-
ent molecules? (p. 49) [Italics in the original, emphasis by underlining added.] 
Chemists reply negatively to this last question, due to the dependence on the 
environment within the very definition of any part. Popelier prefers to use 
the expression ‘molecular atoms’ instead of that of ‘topological atoms’ in 
order to insist on this context-dependence. Once again, local density needs 
the whole molecule to be defined. In other words, the molecular level and the 
atomic level are co-defined. Following this line of reasoning, Popelier ques-
tions the transferability of atoms from one molecule to another. He adds 
(Popellier 2000): 
[I]t is not possible to cut an atom from on molecule and insert it exactly into a 
corresponding cavity of another molecule. Thus it is impossible to transfer 
perfectly an atom from one molecule to a different molecule. Transferability is 
possible to some extent. The ‘zoo’ of atoms does reveal subsets containing at-
oms with striking patterns of mutual similarity that can be analysed using 
mathematical techniques collectively known as cluster analysis. It should be 
emphasized, though, that transferability is something one observes in chemis-
try rather than imposes on it. Supported by the faith that a method reveals the 
correct degrees of transferabilities, this information can be used to set up a li-
brary of atoms, enabling a rapid and accurate construction of large ensembles 
of atoms such as proteins. It is important to realize that transferability is a 
continuous rather than binary (yes/no) concept for it depends on what errors 
in information transfer are allowed [p. 50]. […] Perfect transferability of at-
oms from one system to another is an unattainable limit but, if observed and 
present, a large degree of transferability will faithfully be revealed by AIM [p. 
51]. [Italics in the original, emphasis by underlining added.] 
The expression ‘the richness of chemistry’ used in the former quotation, and 
that of ‘the zoo of atoms’ present in the later remind us of the diversity of 
life forms which depends on the environment. This parallel to evolution and 
biology clearly drawn by Popellier is reminiscent of Diderot’s clear stand 
both in favor of the heterogeneity of matter (1754), and against Fontenelle’s 

 
Whole-Parts Strategies in Quantum Chemistry 
153 
proposal to derive chemistry from mechanics (Fontenelle 1669). Notwith-
standing their obvious differences, the debate between Popelier, Matta and 
Bader about the whole-parts strategy developed within QTAIM and the sig-
nificance of its main theoretical tools reminds us of the debate between Mul-
liken and Pauling as to whether a molecule is an aggregate of atoms or, by 
contrast, an irreducible whole. Furthermore, Bader and Matta also use varia-
tional methods for minimizing energy which, in turn, implicitly strengthens 
the co-dependence of the whole, its parts, and the environment.  
 
The research about the nature of chemical combination and the relation-
ships between a molecule and its components is like a thread which holds 
those chemical explanations together. Every method described in this paper 
expresses a particular whole-parts strategy, which refers, implicitly or not, to 
the environment in which these properties are displayed. In this respect, mer-
eological assumptions have always played an important role in the debates 
which frame the history of quantum chemistry. But we could have easily 
referred to many similar debates in other domains of chemistry at different 
periods of its history. Did not Pierre Duhem fight against atomism and mo-
lecular models by means of a holistic energy approach? In the same vein, did 
not Gaston Du Clos reject the corpusculian interpretation proposed by René 
Descartes and Robert Boyle using what he called ‘natural mixts’? Last but not 
least in this brief and non-exhaustive list of examples, did not Georges Ernst 
Stahl focus chemistry on the notion of the mixt against other reductionist 
interpretations of his time? According to Bernadette Bensaude-Vincent 
(2005), much more characteristic is the recurrence in the history of chemistry 
of those two possible interpretations of what a body must be: a mixture or an 
aggregate. The chemists were always confronted with this dichotomy and, 
according to the period and the problems at stake, they have opted for one 
interpretation or another, or even tried to reconcile the two. But the plural-
ism of possible interpretations does not cease to be present in chemistry.  
5. Concluding remarks: some mereological and philo-
sophical lessons 
We would like to insist on three main lessons which, among others, can be 
drawn from this investigation. 
 
The first one is methodological, and concerns the way one can study sci-
ence philosophically. From the 1920s to today, and from isolated or united 
atoms to topological ones, quantum chemical methods have always been 
constitutively concerned with, and shaped by, different questions about the 
relationships between the molecule, its parts – atoms, electrons, and nuclei –, 

154 
Jean-Pierre Llored 
and the environment. Researchers never cease to develop new languages, rep-
resentations, theoretical tools, algorithms, computerized methods, instru-
ments, and formalisms in order to explain and predict chemical transfor-
mation and molecular reactivity. The type of laboratory in which they work 
changed accordingly.  
 
Quantum chemists gradually proposed new methods and approximations 
in order to circumvent the impossibility of performing full analytical calcula-
tions, and to make the language of classical structural chemistry and that of 
quantum chemistry compatible. Those methods are not mere transpositions 
from quantum physics to chemistry: many translations – in the sense used by 
Michel Callon (1995) – and transformations occurred especially with the 
view to answering the whole-parts questions involved in research. Chemists’ 
starting point is not Schrödinger’s, but a contextualized problem of chemical 
reactivity to be solved in terms of the molecular structure at hand. As 
Gavroglu and Simòes (2012) show, the history of quantum chemistry is also a 
history of the attempts of chemists to establish the autonomy of their theo-
ries and methods with respect to physical, mathematical, and biological theo-
ries. Philosophers should bear in mind the role played by this quest for au-
tonomy in the constitution of the basic chemical tools to which they refer in 
order to illustrate or develop their philosophical perspectives.  
 
Even though further historical studies should be done concerning the 
autonomy and self-sufficiency of chemistry, quantum chemical methods 
always revolve around whole-parts-environment strategies. The debate be-
tween the practitioners of ab initio and semi-empirical methods has always 
involved underlying scientific and metaphysical assumptions about the possi-
bilities for reaching a complete description of the world. 
 
As we have pointed out, the mereology used by quantum chemists entan-
gles the whole, its parts, and, sometimes, its environment. It is not a classical 
transitive mereology. A careful study of the way quantum chemists work 
shows that their approaches are neither holistic descriptions within which the 
whole is necessary to define the parts, nor reductionist analyses that only 
need the parts to define a whole. Quantum chemical practices both need and 
interweave the whole, the parts, and the rest of the world at the same time. 
Quantum methods are neither purely holistic nor purely reductionist. They 
always negotiate the co-existence of different levels of description within a 
network which assembles chemistry, physics, computers, and mathematics. 
Chemists have contrived specific methods within which the whole and its 
parts are constitutively co-defined (Llored 2012).  
 
This mutual connection is a condition of possibility of chemical reason-
ing, in that it enables chemists to correlate chemical composition and struc-
ture with chemical reactivity and ‘properties’. Both analytic and historical 
studies of chemical language must be undertaken in order to understand what 

 
Whole-Parts Strategies in Quantum Chemistry 
155 
chemists actually do. It is of crucial importance to study chemical languages 
and their logical implications. But, insofar as the languages and formalisms at 
stake include mereological and philosophical assumptions, it is also of prima-
ry importance to consider them as deeply embedded in human life, that is to 
say, as being engaged in a particular practice which combines symbols and 
action in order to understand and transform the world (Hottois 1996). Un-
derstanding whole-parts strategies used in quantum chemistry and in other 
domains of sciences, and philosophizing from and about them require the 
connection between philosophy and a historicized epistemology of chemical 
activities. Each approach is appropriate and relevant. But their concerted and 
joint effort is far more fruitful than their separated contributions.  
 
We should ‘follow the process’ of scientific activities in order to grasp 
what is at stake within the work of scientists (Stengers 2000). In this respect, 
when philosophers aim at connecting the concept of emergence with quan-
tum chemistry using a careful study of theoretical equations, they should 
bear in mind that the formalisms under study are constitutively concerned 
with the problem of emergence. This is a methodological point that leaves 
questions about the role and status of history within philosophical studies 
open. 
 
The second lesson we draw from this investigation is about the relation-
ships between levels of organization. Parts may differ in quantum chemistry: 
they can be, for instance, atoms, electrons, nuclei, or groups of atoms accord-
ing to the group theory approach or to nuclear magnetic resonance (Llored 
2010). Methods can differ as well: they can be based on molecular orbitals, 
functionals of density, or even consist of a mixture of the two. The molecular 
‘whole’ can differ too, depending on the project involved: it can be either a 
protein or an active site within it. It can also be a local complex with includes 
some molecules of solvent into the site. Chemists can also study some parts 
with classical models while using quantum methods to investigate others. The 
synchronic use of incompatible models or methods depends both on the scale 
of the description involved and the problem at stake.  
 
In addition, a philosopher who carefully studies chemical activities cannot 
but highlight: (1) the co-definition of relations and relata (Schummer 1998), 
and (2) the constitutive role of the modes of intervention in the definition, 
always open and provisional, of chemical bodies (Bachelard 1940). Parts, 
wholes, and local environments are constitutively dependent on the mode of 
access – instrumental or cognitive. They are not ‘monadic’ but relational 
(Llored & Bitbol 2013). In other words, they are ‘affordances’, i.e. products 
of the interaction of equipment and the world (Harré & Llored 2011).4 Parts 
and wholes cannot be detached from the way chemists act upon or describe a 
sample of bodies in a particular context.  

156 
Jean-Pierre Llored 
 
Is there any ‘ground’ or ‘foundational level’ in this mereological scheme? 
The way quantum chemical methods are set up and used prevents us from 
attributing a unique basic ground from which the higher level chemical bod-
ies derive or emerge. There is no basic level to be found within those chemical 
activities but only co-dependent levels involving the molecule, what it contains, 
and the surroundings – solvents, other chemical bodies, photons, electromagnetic 
fields, or instruments. The ‘primary thesis’ according to which entities on the 
‘fundamental’ level are primarily real and the rest are at best derivative, if they 
are real at all, strongly needs to be qualified, and even to be put into ques-
tions as soon as chemistry is used as ‘food for thought’. All those mathemati-
cal tools, structural macroscopic characteristics, empirical outcomes, and 
auto-coherent computational devices are co-dependently arising and are, in 
turn, similarly connected with other events or phenomena by means of fine-
grained correlations. “The overall process of which we partake by our action 
and cognitive relations has no fundamental level on which everything else 
rests. It has no absolute fundamental level and no absolute emergent level 
either, but it has co-emergent order.” (Bitbol 2007, p. 303)  
 
This lesson drawn from chemistry already gave rise to philosophical de-
velopments and discussions. In agreement with Earley (2008), Banchetti and 
Llored (2014) propose that the ‘hard problem’ of consciousness (Chalmers 
1995) should be approached in a manner similar to that used to address paral-
lel problems in philosophy of chemistry. In this respect, they show how the 
co-dependence of levels in quantum chemistry can be of help in order to 
avoid a reductionist account of the relationships between physical phenome-
na, such as brain states, on the one hand, and experience, i.e. phenomenal 
consciousness, mental states, or events with phenomenal qualities or ‘qualia’, 
on the other. Other works took this lesson seriously and tried to move from 
an ontological emergence to a relational one in order to address the philo-
sophical, ethical, and political questions raised by the consequences of the 
actions of chemical bodies upon ourselves, the other forms of life, and the 
whole Earth (Llored 2013).  
 
This lesson taken from chemistry can help elucidate important philosoph-
ical concepts, considering that: (1) there is no asymmetric emergence of 
high-level properties out of basic properties, but symmetrical co-emergence of 
microscopic low-level features and high-level behavior; (2) there is no emer-
gence of large-scale absolute properties out of small-scale absolute properties, 
but co-relative emergence of phenomena. Those phenomena, in turn, are to be 
construed as relative to a certain experimental context, with no possibility of 
separating them from this context (Llored & Harré 2014). The notion of 
emergence thus gains credibility, at the very same time it loses ontological 
content (Bitbol 2010, Llored 2012). According to this approach, both ‘emer-
gent’ and ‘submergent’ properties are considered relational properties, and this 

 
Whole-Parts Strategies in Quantum Chemistry 
157 
leads to the proposal of an extended, non-classical mereology that accounts 
for the relationality, co-dependence, and mutual constitution of parts and 
wholes in quantum chemistry, but also in chemistry at large. In this respect, 
it brings new analytical tools pertaining to chemistry into the history and 
philosophy of sciences. 
 
The third and last main lesson is therefore related to some mereological 
consequences of our investigation. As soon as wholes and parts are co-
defined using, whether explicitly or not, the environment within a particular 
operative framework, two mereological fallacies endanger philosophical dis-
cussions and should be avoided (Harré & Llored 2013). It is sometimes a 
fallacy to ascribe to a part of an entity or chunk or mass a predicate that re-
ceives its meaning from its use for ascribing an attribute to the whole from 
which the part comes. A holistic predicate is not necessarily a part predicate 
insofar as those predications are context-sensitive. It is also a fallacy to infer 
that substantive products of an analytical procedure are parts of the sub-
stance on which the procedure was performed (though not in every case).  
 
Mereology is the general theory of the grammar of part-whole discourses, 
and so particularly apt for analyzing the discourses of chemistry as they have 
developed since the corpuscularianism of Robert Boyle. However, there are 
different conceptions of ‘part’ having distinctive grammars and distinctive 
roles to play in chemistry. There is mereology as the grammar for parts of 
mass substances, as explored by Needham in a deservedly well-known paper. 
He distinguished a distributive and a cumulative condition that underpin 
mereological discourse about the parts of mass substances, such as buckets of 
sea water with respect to the sea. Molecules are parts in a sense that is ex-
pressed by Needham’s distributive and cumulative mereological conditions 
(Needham 2005, p. 103).  
 
While this mereology is interesting for the most part, chemistry has 
drawn on a mereology of parts and wholes where the parts are capable of 
independent existence when abstracted from the whole in which they have 
been resident, and preserve their identity when related with other such parts 
in constituting the whole. Along with this part-whole layout has been devel-
oped a simple explanatory theory-style: the behavior of chemical wholes is 
explained by reference to constituents and the relations between them that 
create wholes. Some of these relations must be invariant if the whole is to 
count as a chemical entity, say a molecule. There is a further aspect of this 
Boylean mereology: the results of certain analytical manipulations conducted 
on samples of the substance in question are not only products of the manipu-
lation, but also constituents of the wholes from which they have been de-
rived. The physics of chemical states, entities, and processes nevertheless 
suggests that this mereology is overly simplistic.  

158 
Jean-Pierre Llored 
 
Remarks by Mulliken (1932a/b) suggest that he took ‘molecule’ to denote 
a bounded, material entity, localizable in space and having a self-identical 
trajectory in time and with a certain shape and volume – the technique of 
creating molecular orbitals as functions of atomic orbitals did not license the 
mereological principle that molecules are entities with atoms as their constitu-
ents. However, Mulliken did accept the mereological principle that nuclei of 
the atoms of the elements that entered into a molecule could be thought of as 
constituents standing in certain spatial relations to one another.  
 
We could express this insight in a mereological principle: Constituent 
atoms of molecules are not parts of those molecules when we look at the 
total entity in the light of molecular orbitals. Unlike chair parts which pre-
serve their material properties whether in the chair or on the bench. Nor are 
they parts in the sense that buckets of water are parts of the ocean. However, 
parts of chairs, atoms and the contents of buckets of water are extracted from 
the wholes of which they are parts by some procedure. Looked at from the 
point of view of the whole, chairs, molecules, and oceans afford things; 
looked at from the point of view of their constituent parts they are potential-
ities (Earley 2005), not the things that are thereby afforded.  
 
‘Molecule’ is one of the three main ontological categories in organic chem-
istry, the others being ‘atom’ and ‘electron’. All three words purport to refer 
to the mereological elements of material stuff. The relations between these 
apparent constituents include ‘part-whole’ and ‘structure-element.’ That 
these categories are not of the same status follows from the fact that as 
chemistry has developed via molecular orbitals, while ‘atom’ as ‘atom-core’ 
does function mereologically as the name of actual parts of molecules, ‘elec-
tron’ does not follow this pattern. If we do subsume them under the same 
mereology it can only be as a category of constituents of a certain long stand-
ing and powerful model, that is an iconic representation using spatial relations 
among imagined material entities. This situation seems to call for the use of 
the concept of ‘affordance’ to make the seemingly paradoxical role of ‘elec-
tron’ in chemistry intelligible (Harré & Llored 2013).  
 
At some point in the hierarchy of ‘constituents’ of entities in the standard 
chemical model, in which molecules are made of atoms related to one another 
in space, we pass from affordances as constituents to affordances as disposi-
tions. How does this affect the status of ‘molecule’ as referring to a structure 
of lower level ‘constituents’? If ‘proton’ is not a constituent of ‘atom’ but an 
affordance of a certain class of manipulations, appearing as a constituent only 
as part of the standard model of chemical structure, then the use of part-
whole mereological rules in sub-atomic discourse restricts it to descriptions of 
and reasoning about an iconic model. In this respect, whole-parts relationships 
in quantum chemical methods imply considering nuclei as parts of a heuristic 
iconic model which enable chemists to connect their classical representations 

 
Whole-Parts Strategies in Quantum Chemistry 
159 
of molecular structures with probabilistic sub-atomic electron density calcu-
lations. 
 
This example shows how the careful study of chemical quantum methods 
can ‘feed’ current debates in current metaphysics and mereology.  
 
Quantum chemistry points out the necessity for logicians and philoso-
phers to tailor new mereologies. Quantum chemistry, and chemistry alike, 
could stimulate the creation of new types of mereology. Using the concept of 
‘fusion’, Lewis refines the simple Lesniewskian scheme with alternative axi-
oms for a mereology of sets and subsets (Lewis 1991, p. 74), in particular by 
adding (c) below. 
(a) Transitivity: If x is a part of some part of y, then x is a part of y.  
(b) Unrestricted Composition: Whenever there are some things, then 
there exists a fusion of those things.  
(c) Uniqueness of Composition: It never happens that the same things 
have two different fusions. 
Philosophers who bear in mind whole-parts strategies in quantum chemistry, 
but also chemical works on stereo-isomers, non-stoichiometric compounds, 
eutectoïds, or the co-dependence of the internal structure, the size of grains, 
and the chemical device in nanochemistry, to quote but a few examples, will 
surely find the principle of uniqueness of composition unintuitive, and inad-
equate to those rules for chemical parts-whole reasoning that are required to 
accommodate the role of chemical entities in structures, such as atoms in 
‘polyatomic’ ions. They are likely to question the relevance of transitive mer-
eology whenever the whole molecule and the parts are co-dependent, and 
relative to a specific environnement or action. There is no doubt that they 
will aim to develop “an extended mereology applicable to chemical combina-
tions” (Earley 2008, p. 1) and to many others fields, including the philosophy 
of (nano)technology and material sciences, and the philosophy of mind.  
Notes 
1 
Using Paul Dirac’s notation, where H is the molecular Hamiltonian, dτ a volumic 
element, and ψi
* the conjugate of the complex function ψi: 
 
< ψi |H| ψi > =space∫ ψi
*Hψi dτ = Hii    is the Coulomb integral 
 
< ψi |H| ψj > =space∫ ψi
*Hψj dτ = Hij    is the exchange integral 
2 
With the same notation:  
 
< ψi | ψj > =space∫ ψi
*ψj dτ = Sij    is the overlap integral 
3 
A ‘best estimate’ is the best theoretical calculation available at the time of the 
calculation. It may be, directly or not, connected to an empirical value.  

160 
Jean-Pierre Llored 
4 
An affordance can be broadly defined as a disposition or capacity as ascribed to a 
certain material being to yield an observable effect when acted upon in a certain 
manner. It may be, for instance, a gas as the product of a chemical reaction when 
certain chemical bodies are acted on during a particular electrolysis. An affordance 
is relative to context, in particular to the specific interaction between some human 
beings and the material world. 
References 
Bachelard, G.: 1940, La philosophie du non: Essai d’une philosophie du nouvel esprit 
scientifique, Paris: Presses Universitaires de France [Engl. trans: The Philoso-
phy of No: A Philosophy of the New Scientific Mind, New York: Orion Press, 
1968].  
Bader, R.F.W.: 1990, Atoms in Molecules: A Quantum Theory, Oxford: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.  
Bader, R.F.W. & Matta, C.F.: 2013, ‘Atoms in Molecules as Non-Overlapping, 
Bounded, Space-Filling Open Quantum Systems’, Foundations of Chemistry, 
15(3), 253-76. 
Banchetti, M. & Llored J.-P.: 2014, ‘Reality Without Reification: Philosophy of 
Chemistry’s Contribution to Philosophy of Mind’, in: E.R. Scerri & G. Fisher 
(eds.), An Oxford Handbook on the Philosophy of Chemistry, Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, forthcoming.  
Bensaude-Vincent, B.: 2005, Faut-il avoir peur de la chimie?, Paris: Les empêcheurs de 
penser en rond.  
Bensaude-Vincent, B.: 2008, Matière à penser: Essais d’histoire et de philosophie de la 
chimie, Paris: Presses universitaires de Paris-Nanterre. 
Bitbol, M.: 2007, ‘Ontology, matter and emergence’, Phenomenology and the Cognitive 
Science, 6, 293-307. 
Bitbol, M: 2010, ‘Downward Causation without Foundations’, Synthese, 180, 1-23 
[republished in: J.-P. Llored (ed.), The Philosophy of Chemistry: Practices, 
Methodologies and Concepts, Newcastle: Cambridge Scholars Publishing, 2013, 
pp. 675-705]. 
Callon, M.: 1995, ‘Four Models for the Dynamics of Science’, in: S. Jasanoff, G. Mar-
kle, J. C. Peterson & T. Pinch (eds.), Handbook of Science and Technology 
Studies, London: Sage, pp. 29-64. 
Chalmers, D.: 1995, ‘Facing up to the problem of consciousness’, Journal of Con-
sciousness Studies, 2(3), 200-19. 
Diderot, D.: 1754, Pensées sur l’interprétation de la nature, Paris: Pissot. 
Earley, J.E.: 2005, ‘Why there is no salt in the sea’, Foundations of Chemistry, 7(1), 85-
102.  
Earley, J.E.: 2008, ‘How philosophy of mind needs philosophy of chemistry’, Hyle: 
International Journal for Philosophy of Chemistry, 14(1), 1-26. 
Fontenelle, B. le Bovier de: 1669, Histoire de l’Académie Royale des Sciences, vol. 1, 
Amsterdam: Pierre Mortier. 
Gavroglu, K. & Simões, A.: 2012, Neither Physics nor Chemistry. A history of Quantum 
Chemistry, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.  
Harré R. & Llored J.-P.: 2011, ‘Mereologies as the Grammars of Chemical Discours-
es’, Foundations of Chemistry, 13(1), 63-76.  

 
Whole-Parts Strategies in Quantum Chemistry 
161 
Harré R. & Llored J.-P.: 2013, ‘Mereologies and molecules’, Foundations of Chemistry, 
15(2), 127-44. 
Hendry, R.F.: 1998, ‘Models and Approximations in Quantum Chemistry’, in: N. 
Shanks (ed.), Idealization in Contemporary Physics (Poznan Studies in the Phi-
losophy of the Sciences and the Humanities, vol. 63), pp. 123-42. 
Hendry, R.F.: 1999, ‘Molecular Models and the Question of Physicalism’, Hyle: In-
ternational Journal of Philosophy of Chemistry, 5(2), 117-34. 
Hendry, R.F.: 2006, ‘Is there Downward Causation in Chemistry?’, in: D. Baird, E.R. 
Scerri & L. McIntyre (eds.), Philosophy of Chemistry: The Synthesis of a New 
Discipline, Dordrecht: Springer, pp. 173-90. 
Hendry, R.F.: 2010, ‘Ontological reduction and molecular structure’, Studies in Histo-
ry and Philosophy of Modern Physics, 41(2), 183-91. 
Hoffmann, R.: 2007, ‘What might philosophy of science look like if chemists built it?’ 
Synthese, 155(3), 321-36. 
Hottois, G.: 1996, Entre symboles et technosciences. Un itinéraire philosophique, Paris: 
Collection Champ Vallon.  
Hund, H.: 1927, ‘Zur Deutung der Molekelspektren. 1’, Zeitschrift für Physik, 40, 
S742-64 [English trans: ‘On the Interpretation of Molecular Spectra I’, in: H. 
Hettema (ed.), Quantum Chemistry: Classic Scientific Papers, World Scientific 
Publishing, 2000, pp. 214-34]. 
Kohn, W.; Becke, A.D. & Parr, R.G.: 1996, ‘Density functional theory of electronic 
structure’, Journal of Physical Chemistry, 100(31), 12974–80. 
Lewis, D.: 1991, Parts of Classes, Oxford: Blackwell. 
Llored, J.-P.: 2010, ‘Mereology and quantum chemistry: The approximation of molec-
ular orbital’, Foundations of Chemistry, 12(3), 203-21. 
Llored, J.-P.: 2011, ‘The role and the status of thermodynamics in quantum chemistry 
calculations’, in: J.C. Moreno (ed.,) Thermodynamics – Interaction Studies – 
Solids, Liquids and Gases’, Rijeka: INTECH, pp. 469-90. 
Llored, J.-P.: 2012, ‘Emergence and Quantum Chemistry’, Foundations of Chemistry, 
4(3), 245-74. 
Llored, J.-P.: 2013, Chimie, chimie quantique et concept d’émergence : étude d’une 
mise en relation (Chemistry, Quantum Chemistry and the Concept of Emer-
gence: Study of a connection), Ph.D. Dissertation, Ecole Polytechnique, Paris & 
Free University of Brussels. 
Llored, J.-P. & Bitbol, M.: 2013, ‘From Chemical Practices to a Relational Philosophy 
of Chemistry’, in: J.-P Llored (ed.), The Philosophy of Chemistry: Practices, 
Methodologies, and Concepts, Newcastle: Cambridge Scholars Publishing, pp. 
385-415. 
Llored J.-P. & Harré, R.: 2014, ‘Developing the mereology of chemistry’, in: C. 
Calosi & P. Graziani (eds.), Mereology and the Sciences, London: Springer, pp. 
189-212. 
Matta, C. F.: 2002, Applications of the Quantum Theory of Atoms in Molecules to 
Chemical and Biochemical Problems, Ph.D. Dissertation, McMaster Universi-
ty.  
Mulliken, R.S.: 1928, ‘The Assigment of Quantum Numbers for Electrons in Mole-
cules’, Physical Reviews, 32, 186-222. 
Mulliken, R.S.: 1931, ‘Bonding power of electrons and theory of valence’, Chemical 
Reviews, 9(3), 347-88. 
Mulliken, R.S.: 1932a, ‘Interpretation of Band Spectra, Part III. Electron Quantum 
Numbers and States of Molecules and their Atoms’, Reviews of Modern Phys-
ics, 4(1), 1-86.  

162 
Jean-Pierre Llored 
Mulliken, R.S.: 1932b, ‘Electronic structures of polyatomic molecules and valence II. 
General consideration’, Physical Reviews, 41, 49-71.  
Mulliken, R.S.: 1967, ‘Spectroscopy, Molecular Orbital and Chemical Bonding’ (No-
bel lecture), Science, 157, 13-24. 
Needham, P.: 2005, ‘Mixtures and modality’, Foundations of Chemistry, 7(1), 103-18. 
Pauling, L.: 1931, ‘The nature of the chemical bond. Application of results obtained 
from the quantum mechanics and from a theory of paramagnetic susceptibility 
to the structure of molecules’, Journal of American Chemical Society, 53(4), 
1367-400. 
Pauling, L.: 1932, ‘The Nature of the Chemical Bond. IV. The Energy of Single Bonds 
and the relative Electronegativity of Atoms’, Journal of the American Chemical 
Society, 54(9), 3570-82. 
Popellier, P.: 2000, Atoms in Molecules. An Introduction, London: Prentice Hall.  
Primas, H.: 1983, Chemistry, Quantum Mechanics and Reductionism, 2nd edition, Ber-
lin: Springer.  
Primas, H.: 1998, ‘Emergence in Exact Natural Sciences’, Acta Polytechnica Scandina-
vica Ma, 91, 83-98. 
Scerri, E.R.: 1991a, ‘Electronic Configurations. Quantum Mechanics and Reduction’, 
British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 42(3), 309-25. 
Scerri, E.R.: 1991b, ‘Chemistry, Spectroscopy, and the Question of Reduction’, Jour-
nal of Chemical Education, 68(2), 122-6. 
Scerri, E.R.: 1997, ‘Has the Periodic Table been Successfully Axiomatized’, Er-
kentnnis, 47, 229-43. 
Scerri, E.R.: 2007a, ‘The Ambiguity of Reduction’, Hyle: International Journal of 
Philosophy of Chemistry, 13(2), 67-81. 
Scerri, E.R.: 2007b, ‘Reduction and Emergence in chemistry’, Proceedings of the Phi-
losophy of Science Association (PSA), 74(5), 920-31. 
Scerri, E.R.: 2012, ‘Top-down causation regarding the chemistry-physics interface: a 
skeptical view’, Royal Society Publishing, 2(1), 20-5. 
Scerri, E.R.: 2013, ‘Philosophy of chemistry: Where has it been and where is it go-
ing?’, in: J.-P. Llored (ed.), The Philosophy of Chemistry: Practices, Methodolo-
gies and Concepts, Newcastle: Cambridge Scholars Publishing, pp. 208-25. 
Schummer, J.: 1998, ‘The Chemical of Chemistry I: A Conceptual Approach’, Hyle: 
International Journal for Philosophy of Chemistry, 4(2), 129-62. 
Simões, A.: 1993, Converging trajectories, diverging traditions: chemical bond, valence, 
quantum mechanics and chemistry, 1927-1937, Ph.D. dissertation, University of 
Maryland. 
Simões, A. & Gavroglu, K.: 1997, ‘Different legacies and common aims: Robert Mul-
liken, Linus Pauling and the origins of quantum chemistry’, in: J.L. Calais & 
E.S. Kryachko (eds.), Conceptual perspectives in quantum chemistry, Dor-
drecht: Kluwer, pp. 383-413. 
Slater, J.C.: 1931, ‘Directed valence in polyatomic molecules’, Physical Reviews, 37, 
481-9. 
Stengers, I.: 2000, The Invention of Modern Science, trans by D.W. Smith, Minnesota: 
University of Minnesota Press.  
Van Brakel, J.: 2000, Philosophy of Chemistry, Leuven: Leuven University Press.  
Vemulapalli, G.K.: 2003, ‘Property reduction in chemistry. Some lessons’, in: J.E. 
Earley (ed.), Chemical Explanation. Characteristics, Development, Autonomy, 
New York (Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, vol. 988), pp. 90-8. 
Wittgenstein, L.: 1953, Philosophical Investigations, Oxford: Blackwell.  
Zhao, Y. & Truhlar, D.G.: 2008, ‘Density Functionals with Broad Applicability in 
Chemistry’, Accounts of Chemical Research, 41(2), 157-67.  

 
Whole-Parts Strategies in Quantum Chemistry 
163 
Jean-Pierre Llored: 
Linacre College, Oxford University, St Cross Road, Oxford OX 1 3JA, 
UK; jean-pierre.llored@linacre.ox.ac.uk 

