LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 

FOUNDATIONS OF SEMIOTICS 
General Editor 
ACHIM ESCHBACH 
(University of Essen) 
Advisory Editorial Board 
Herbert E. Brekle (Regensburg); Geoffrey L. Bursill-Hall (Burnaby, B.C.) 
Eugenio Coseriu (Tübingen); Marcelo Dascal (Tel-Aviv) 
Lambertus M. de Rijk (Leiden); Max H. Fisch (Indianapolis) 
Rudolf Haller (Graz); Robert E. Innis (Lowell, Mass.) 
Norman Kretzmann (Ithaca, N.Y.); W. Keith Percival (Lawrence, Kansas) 
Jan Sulowski (Warszawa); Jürgen Trabant (Berlin) 
Volume 16 
Richard M. Martin 
Logical Semiotics and Mereology 

LOGICAL SEMIOTICS 
AND 
MEREOLOGY 
RICHARD M. MARTIN 
JOHN BENJAMINS PUBLISHING COMPANY 
AMSTERDAM/PHILADELPHIA 
1992 

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Martin, Richard M. 
Logical semiotics and mereology / Richard M. Martin. 
p. 
cm. -- (Foundations of semiotics, ISSN 0168-2555; v. 16) 
Includes bibliographical references. 
1. Semiotics. 2. Language and languages-Philosophy. 3. Logic. 4. Whole and parts 
(Philosophy) 5. Science-Philosophy. I. Title. II. Series. 
P99.M35 
1992 
302.2 - dc20 
91-41368 
ISBN 90 272 3288 1 (alk. paper) 
CIP 
© Copyright 1992 - John Benjamins B.V. 
No part of this book may be reproduced in any form, by print, photoprint, microfilm, or any 
other means, without written permission from the publisher. 
John Benjamins Publishing Co. • P.O. Box 75577 ■ 1070 AN Amsterdam • The Netherlands 
John Benjamins North America ■ 821 Bethlehem Pike • Philadelphia, PA 19118 ■ USA 

Other books by the same author 
Truth and Denotation 
The Notion of Analytic Truth 
Toward a Systematic Pragmatics 
Intension and Decision 
Belief, Existence, and Meaning 
Logic, Language, and Metaphysics 
Whitehead's Categoreal Scheme and Other Papers 
Events, Reference, and Logical Form 
Semiotics and Linguistic Structure 
Peirce's Logic of Relations and Other Studies 
Pragmatics, Truth, and Language 
Primordiality, Science, and Value 
Logico-Linguistic Papers 
Mind, Modality, Meaning, and Method 
Metaphysical Foundations: Mereology and Metalogic 

To the memory of 
Haskell B. Curry, 
with admiration and gratitude 
"Was vermied' ich denn die Wege, 
Wo die andern Wand'rer geh'n, 
Suche mir versteckte Stege 
Durch verschneite Felsenhöh'n? 
Einen Weiser seh' ich stehen 
Unverrückt vor meinem Blick; 
Eine Straße muß ich gehen, 
Die noch keiner ging zurück." 
W. Müller 

Contents 
Preface 
xi 
CHAPTER ONE 
On the positive power of negation 
1 
CHAPTER TWO 
On logical semiotics and logistic grammar: relations, roles, 
representation, and rules 
15 
CHAPTER THREE 
On Carnap and the origins of systematic pragmatics 
33 
CHAPTER FOUR 
On comparatives: P.T. Geach 
53 
CHAPTER FIVE 
On homogeneous logic, a quasi-Lesniewskian ontology, and 
type-theory 
65 
CHAPTER SIX 
On non-translational semantics and a quasi-Lesniewskian calculus 
of Names 
75 
CHAPTER SEVEN 
On Platonism, form, and number 
85 
CHAPTER EIGHT 
On relational couples and ordinal individuals: Peirce and Russell 
103 
CHAPTER NINE 
On ordinal nominalism: Goodman, Eberle, and Hempel 
115 
CHAPTER TEN 
On sets and individuals: Hao Wang 
123 
CHAPTER ELEVEN 
On the mainstream of science and Suppes's pluralism 
135 

X 
CONTENTS 
CHAPTER TWELVE 
On the semiotics of mathematical practice 
145 
CHAPTER THIRTEEN 
On relational domains, the algebra of relations, and relational-term 
logic 
159 
CHAPTER FOURTEEN 
On Husserlian parts and wholes 
173 
CHAPTER FIFTEEN 
On compound individuals and the languages of science 
187 
CHAPTER SIXTEEN 
On Weiss's early papers in logic 
203 
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN 
On Quine's "Facts of the Matter" 
225 
CHAPTER EIGHTEEN 
On collective terms, mereological sumf, and quantifiers 
237 
CHAPTER NINETEEN 
On the effectiveness of mathematics in the natural sciences: 
Wigner, Whitehead, and Carnap 
243 
CHAPTER TWENTY 
On ordinal acts and era III mathematics 
Appendix: a thumbnail sketch of ordinal mereology 
263 
Notes 
269 

Preface 
The various papers collected together in this volume are concerned with a 
variety of vitally important topics in philosophic logic, the philosophy of 
language, the philosophy of mathematics, the philosophy of science, and 
the application of modern logic to wider philosophical problems. All of 
them make fundamental use, in one way or another, of logical semiotics, 
the modern trivium of systematic syntax, semantics, and pragmatics, and 
some of them, of mereology, the general theory of parts and wholes. In syn­
tax the concern is with signs or expressions as such, in semantics, with how 
signs are related to their objects, and in pragmatics, with how signs are used 
in both linguistic and extra-linguistic contexts. In recent years, mereology 
has been showing itself to be of much greater importance than has hereto­
fore been thought, and interesting new advances are being made in the sub­
ject. The papers here seek to carry forward the systematic development of 
these various subjects, to show how intimately they are interrelated, and to 
illustrate their utility in specific applications in linguistics, mathematics, sci­
ence, and philosophy generally. 
Very roughly, the papers here may be described as follows. In I, many 
uses of negation in natural language are distinguished in such a way as to 
exhibit its extraordinary "positive" power. II contains a sketch of a logistic 
grammar of natural language as based on a process- or event-logic. Central 
to this is a systematic pragmatics, or logial semiotics, the historical origins 
of which are discussed in III, especially in relation to the seminal contribu­
tions of Carnap. In IV, P.T. Geach's recent work on comparatives in natural 
language is subjected to a careful scrutiny, and reconstruction, in the 
light of the material in II and III. 
In V, the author's pervious work on extended mereology, or the theory 
of part to whole, is given another interpretation along the lines of a 
homogeneous logic of individuals, somewhat in the manner of Lesniewski's 
Ontologie. In VI, the material of V is interrelated with the author's non-
translational semantics, a kind of semantics differing radically from the 

XII 
PREFACE 
usual formulations in containing no translation of the object-language part. 
In VII, still another interpretation of essentially the material of V and VI is 
given, a Platonic one in a certain sense. In V-VII fundamental use is made 
of the so-called ordinal entities, to provide for a full logic of relations and 
therewith the foundations of mathematics. In IX and X, the nature of ordi­
nal entities is discussed in connection with the relevant work of Peirce and 
Russell, and as contrasted with that of Goodman, Rolf Eberle, and Hempel. 
X is devoted to a critical discussion of Rao Wang's views concerning 
the notion of set. In XI, Patrick Suppes's views concerning pluralism and 
the "mainstream" of science are subjected to a careful scrutiny, as are the 
views of Philip Davis and Reuben Hersh concerning "mathematical experi­
ence," in XII. 
In XIII, it is shown how a quasi-combinatorial logic of relational terms 
can be formulated, once we become clear about the inner structure of the 
algebra of n-adic relations. XIV is devoted to a critical analysis of Husserl's 
theory of wholes and parts as contained in his Logische 
Untersuchungen. 
Further discussion of wholes and parts, and the role of "compound" indi­
viduals in the languages of science, is given in XV. XVI consists of a critical 
discussion of Paul Weiss's early logic papers, and XVII, of Quine's recent 
"Facts of the Matter" as contrasted with the views of the eminent physicist 
J.A. Wheeler. 
In XVIII an extensive theory of mereological sums is put forward with 
a view to showing how the quantifiers may be handled within it, and how 
the "collective" use of terms in natural language may be handled. The "mys­
tery" of the effectiveness of mathematics in the natural sciences is discussed 
in XIX, centering around the views of Wigner, Whitehead, and Carnap. 
Finally, in XX, a new approach to the foundations of mathematics is put 
forward, based on ordinal acts rather than upon ordinal entities. In this 
view, mathematics may be seen as of a piece — both ontologically and 
structurally — with physics and the rest of science, rather than as a subject 
apart in which some new realm of entities such as "sets" must be recog­
nized. 
The various papers here are to some extent independent of each other 
and for the most part may be read separately. Even so, they do, of course, 
help to reinforce one another, in detail as well as in general intent. 
The author wishes to thank the Boston University Center for the 
Philosophy and History of Science, Northwestern University, and the Nitram 
Foundation for support during the writing of these papers. Thanks are 

PREFACE 
Xlll 
due also the editors and publishers of the journal Krisis, the Journal of 
Chinese Philosophy, the series Pragmatik, and the journal Semiosis, respec­
tively, for kind permission to use here in a revised form the papers I, II, III, 
and XIII, originally published or to be published by them. 

CHAPTER ONE 
On the positive power of negation 
"Si antiquitatem species, est vertustissima, si 
dignitatem 
est honoriatissim, si juristic-
dionem est capacissima." 
The little word 'not', generally used to express negation, is one of the 
mighty, three-letter monosyllables in English. The logical analysis of it and 
its variants, as occuring in all possible contexts of use, has scarcely begun in 
a serious way. Professional linguists tend to have stayed clear of such 
analysis, on the grounds that it would become too "dangerously adulterated 
with formal logic."1 In its place linguists have tended to fall back on tradi­
tional methods in grammar, which is to say on "impressionistic, non-rigor­
ous" methods consisting mostly of illogicalities, incorrrect or at best vague 
modes of reasoning, in short, on horse-and-buggy, rough and ready 
techniques in this day and age of highly sophisticated methodologies. That 
this is the case is a near-scandal in linguistics, in linguistic philosophy, as 
well as in the newer "philosophical logic."2 
In this paper let us sketch the outlines of a broad logico-semiotical sys­
tem in which '~' for classical — as opposed to intuitionistic or some other 
— negation plays the fundamental role. From a formal point of view, 
nothing strikingly new will be attempted here, but it will be of interest to 
pull together various strands of work that have been done elsewhere — 
threaded together, it is hoped, into a rope, or at least a cord, of some 
strength. 
Given a sentence 'A', ~ 'A' is to express the negation of 'A'. Later we 
will observe how negation in this sense is intimately connected with the 
semantical notions of the truth and falsity of sentences. Even before doing 
this, however, we may note that the little sign '~', all by itself, has a 
remarkable role to play, so fundamental a one in fact that any serious 

2 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
logico-metaphysical or logico-semiotical view seems unthinkable without it 
or some surrogate for it. '~' together with the other familiar truth-func­
tional connectives V (corresponding roughly with some basic uses of 'or' in 
English), '.' (roughly for some basic uses of 'and'3), '' (very roughly for 
'only if), and '' (for 'if and only if), have been well-characterized in 
truth-functional theory, perhaps the most widely accepted part of modern 
logic. These several notions "interanimate" each other so intimately that 
one without the others is barren and of no avail. 
The full power of '~' comes to light best by considering successively 
various extensions of the basic truth-functional theory. Let us go on now, 
step by step, to reflect on the most important of these, in the sense of being 
relevant to the general aim of gaining an appropriate logico-semiotical 
framework. The first extension is of course into the theory of quantifica­
tion. Let us write '(x)' as the universal quantifier, or '(x)' or even '(Ax)' 
if you will. Then 
(1) 
'(x)-x--' 
is to express that all x are such that - x - , where '-x~' is a sentential form of 
the language. Immediately a new context arises in which '~' may occur. 
Thus 
(2) '~ (x)--x--' 
expresses that it is not the case that for all x, - x - . Another context is then 
(3) 
•(x) ~ --x--' 
expressing that for all x it is not the case that ~x-. And still another context 
is 
(4) 
' ~ ( x ) ~ . . x . . ' , 
expressing that not all x are such that ~ --x--. This latter will be recognized 
as expressing that there is something, perhaps even the null thing,4 such 
that —x—, and this is commonly expressed by 
(5) 
'(Ex)--*»'. 
We have then some additional contexts such as 
(6) 
'~ (Ex)--x-', 
equivalent to (3), 
(7) 
'(Ex) ~ ----', 

THE POSITIVE POWER OF NEGATION 
3 
equivalent to (2), and 
(8) 
'~ (Ex) ~ -x--', 
equivalent to (1) itself. 
What now is a "sentential form" of the language? it might be asked. 
Well, the language is presumed to contain suitable non-logical primitive 
predicates, each of appropriate degree, in terms of which the subject-mat­
ter of the language may be handled. Thus Ter' might be a primitive one-
place predicate for human persons, so that Ter x' would express that x is a 
human person. 'Older' could be a two-place relational predicate for being 
older than, significant in contexts of the form 'x Older y'. 
'(Per x . Per y . x Older y)' 
would express that person x is older than person y. And so on, for rela­
tional predicates of higher degree of or a greater number of places. And so 
on, also for all manner of different subject-matters no matter how intricate 
or complex. 
Suppose 'F ' is primitive one-place predicate. 
(9) 
' ~ F o x' 
then express that x is not an F . (But 'Fº ~ x' and 'Fº x ~' are of course 
meaningless.) Similarly for 
(10) 
' ~ x R o y ' , 
where 'R Q' is a primitive two-place predicate, expressing that x does not 
bear Ro to  (where 'x ~ R y', 'x RQ ~ y', and '(~ x) R Q y' are meaning­
less). 
(9) and (10) are of special interest in that they give us a new kind of 
negation. We may let 
(11) 
(-F0)x' 
abbreviate 
'~ F ºX' 
and 
(12) 'x (-Ro) y' 
abbreviate 
'~ x RQ y' 
thus gaining in context the notion of the negation or negative of F and of 
the negation or negative of R . 
These new kinds of negatives may readily be generalized to all defina­
ble predicates of the system. A convenient way of expressing such defin­
able predicates is by means of the notation for virtual classes and relations.5 

4 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
Let 
'{x  ----} )'' be an alternative notation for '--y--', where '--y--' 
differs from '--x--' only in containing free occurrences of 'y 
wherever there are free occurrences of 'x' in '--x;--'. 
'{x  -x-'} is a one-place abstract and the context '{x  ----} ' states that 
y is a member of the virtual class of all x'S such that --x--. 
Let F and G now be any virtual classes. We may then define the logical 
sums and products of them as follows. 
'(F  G)' 
abbreviates 
'{x  (Fx v G x)}', 
'(F  G)' 
abbreviates 
'{x  (Fx . Gx)}' 
And (10) may be generalized into the following, where F is any virtual 
class. 
'-F' 
abbreviates 
'{x  ~ F x}', 
And of course the universal and null virtual classes are then also 
immediately forthcoming by letting 
'V' 
abbreviate 
' { x ( F ^ v - F ^ ) } ' 
where 'F ' is a primitive predicate, and 
'A' 
abbreviate 
'-V'. 
These notions will be recognized as adaptations of the familiar ones of a 
Boolean algebra. 
In a similar way we can let 
'{xy  -x-y--} 
zw' 
be an alternative writing of 
'-z--w--', 
where (etc. as required), 
in order to gain a notation for saying that z stands in the dyadic virtual rela­
tion {xy  -x--y--} to w. We can then introduce logical sums, products, and 
negatives of dyadic virtual relations, essentially as above mutatis mutandis, 
and negatives and the universal and null dyadic virtual relations. And simi­
larly for triadic virtual relations, and so on. 
It is interesting to note that, if '~' and 'v' (for disjunction) are taken as 
the truth-functional primitives of the theory, then in familiar fashion we 
may define, using Quine's corner-quotes, 
¬(A . )¬ as ¬ ~ (~ A v ~ B)¬. 
Thus even conjunction, as construed in this way, is defined in terms of the 
basic negation. Usually the '.'for 'and' is regarded as a "positive" notion in 
some sense. However, as will be evident throughout, the '~' intertwines so 

THE POSITIVE POWER OF NEGATION 
5 
intimately with other notions, and in such deep and basic ways, that notions 
we would usually dub as 'positive' are seen no longer to be so in any 
genuine sense. Also there are always double negations of sentences, which 
are both positive and negative, albeit in different senses. Duplex negatio 
affirmat. 
The theory of n-adic virtual relations, for n ≥ 2, contains a motley of 
important concepts of the highest interest for philosophy. As an example, 
consider the converse of a dyadic virtual relation, defined by 
'R' for '{xy R yx}', 
or the relative product of two dyadic virtual relations, 
'(R/S)', 
defined as 
'{xy  (Ez) (R xz . Szy)}', 
The converse of the relation of being-older-than is that of being-younger-
than. The relative product of the relation of being-the-mother-of and of 
being-the-father-of is the relation of being-the-paternal-grandmother-of. 
Bear in mind that we also have converses of negatives, relative products of 
negatives, and negatives of a host of other notions that constitutes the 
theory of dyadic virtual relations. And similarly for triadic virtual relations, 
and so on.6 Already we see that we have arrived at a commodious infinity 
of uses of '~'. And even so, we have scarcely begun! 
The next extension to consider is into the so-called calculus of individu­
als, essentially Lesniewski's mereology or theory of the part-whole relation 
between individuals. Let 'x P y' express primitively that the individual x is 
a part of the individual y, in perhaps some spatio-temporal sense, although 
other interpretations are of interest also. In terms of 'P', logical sums and 
products of individuals may be introduced, as well as negatives, a universal 
or world-individual, and even the null one. This latter is essentially Les­
niewski's "one individual that does not exist," but should not be confused 
with the null class A. According to this theory, then, given any two indi­
viduals x and y, there exists a sum-individual consisting of x together with , 
no matter how disparate or scattered they may be. And similarly a product, 
which may of course be null if the two individuals have no common spatio-
temporal part — on the spatio-temporal interpretation of 'P'. The negative 
of an individual is then the rest of the world taken together as a whole. 
Thus the sum of an individual with its negative is the world-individual. If x 
is an ordinary object of daily experience, think how vast an entity its nega­
tive is!7 
In terms of 'P', identity of individuals may be immediately introduced, 

6 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
by letting 
'x = y 
be short for 
'(x P y . y P x)', 
or, in primitive notation, as short for 
'~ (~ x? y v ~ y P x ) ' . 
Note that, in view of this definition, identity, a most "positive" notion 
surely, turns out to be a negative one, even a triple negative one in a certain 
sense. 
Heinrich Scholz, in his remarkable little book Metaphysik als Strenge 
Wissenschaft8, regarded identity as the first notion we need the moment we 
leave logic to enter the portals of metaphysics proper. In view of the above 
definition of ' = ', however, it would seem more appropriate to regard a 
relation of part-to-whole as carrying this honor. The theory of part-to-
whole is perhaps no longer a theory of logic, but immediately one of 
metaphysics, embroiling us in deep problems concerning the inner structure 
of whatever things or entities are taken as individuals. Traditionally it is the 
study of ontology that has dealt with such problems. Logico-metaphysics, as 
conceived here, is essentially traditional ontology in modern grab. 
Thus far negation has been considered only at the object-language 
level. Modern logic and metaphysics, however, are unthinkable without an 
extensive development of metalogic. Metalogic, or logical semiotics, divides 
conveniently into syntax, semantics, and pragmatics. Although the sys­
tematic development of metalogic has taken place only in recent years, 
there have been important anticipations of it throughout the long history of 
logic, especially during the middle ages.9 Let us reflect for a moment upon 
a few of the great multiplicity of fundamental metalogical locutions. 
The basic notion of syntax is that of concatenation. Let a and b be any 
expressions of the object-language. Their concatenate (a∩b) is then merely 
a followed by b in the normal way in which letters or words follow one 
another on the printed page, or spoken phonemes follow one another in 
vocal speech or communication.10 Concatenation-theory might be regarded 
as an extension of mereology. It seems better, however, for present pur­
poses, to regard it as a new subject on its own, subject to its own vocabulary 
and laws. Thus we do not assign a negative to each expression of the lan­
guage, and there is no need to introduce logical sums and products of two 
expressions. Nor need there be a null expression nor a universal one. Even 
without these, the subject is one of remarkable power, enabling us to por­
tray the purely structural features of our language, i.e., features of lan-

THE POSITIVE POWER OF NEGATION 
7 
guage depending only upon the expressions and how they are interrelated 
with one another. The role of '~' in syntax is thus essentially what it is in 
the theory of quantification with given non-logical primitive predicates. We 
can handle concatenation as a triadic relation  so that 'a C b, c' may 
express that the expression a is the concatenate of b with c. Using a Russel-
lian description we may then define 
'(a∩b)', 
as used above, as 
'(i c . c C a,b)\ 
so that (anb) in the one and only expression that bears  to a and b in that 
order. 
Strictly we should distinguish here two kinds of concatenation, depend­
ing upon whether the expressions of the language be taken as shapes or 
sign-designs or as inscriptions or sign-events. Two very different kinds of 
syntax emerge. Both are needed for a full theoretical syntax, although for 
many purposes a syntax of one or the other kind may be made to suffice. 
Let us turn now for a moment to denotational semantics, the study of 
how language relates to the individuals or "things" or entities about which 
it speaks. Here 'Den' for denotation is taken as the basic notion, so that ' 
Den x' may express that the one-place predicate of the object-language 
denotes the object x.11 This notion may be taken as the fundamental one of 
semantics, just as 'C' is for syntax. Here again the role of '~' is primarily 
truth-functional and does not lead to essentially new material. 
The most important definable notion in denotational semantics no 
doubt is that of truth. Let a be a sentence of the object-language, i.e., a 
sentential form containing no free variables. More particularly let a be '----'. 
Under what semantical conditions is '----' true? Just where some one-
place abstract '{x -----}' bears Den to all objects. Let us consider the gen­
eral case. Let 'Ex b' express that b is the variable 'x'. Then we may let 
'Tr a' 
abbreviate 
'(Sent a . (Eb)(Ex b . () ¬{  a}¬Dn y))',. 
a is thus true just where a is a sentence (Sent) and there exists a variable 'x' 
such that ¬{  a}¬ denotes all objects. This definition seems deceptively 
simple, but a good deal of rather sophisticated theory is needed to place it 
in its proper ambiente.12 
Note that '~' may occur now in '~ Tr a' as well as in r ~ a¬ in the con­
text 'Tr ¬ ~ a ¬. It so happens that these contexts are equivalent, that 
(a)(Sent   (Tr ¬~ A¬ = ~ Tr a)), 
in view of fundamental semantical laws. In particular we have a semantical 
law of excluded middle, that every sentence is either true or its negation is, 

8 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
(a) (Sent   (Tr a v Tr ¬~ a¬)), 
and of course that 
(a) ((Sent a . Tr a)  ~ Tr ¬~ a¬), 
that no negation of a true sentence is true. Falsehood is merely the negative 
of truth, so that 
'Fis a' may abbreviate 
'(Sent a . ~ Tr a)', 
All of this is in accord with the classical conception of truth, and we must be 
careful not to conflate truth with any of its illicit surrogates.13 
When we turn to pragmatics we find that negation plays a much more 
exciting role than in either syntax or semantics. Pragmatics is taken here, 
following Carnap in essentials, to be the general area of linguistic study in 
which the user of language is brought in fundamentally. (See III below.) As 
a key notion let us consider that of acceptance. Let 
'p Acpt a, e' 
express that person p accepts the sentence a on occasion e, i.e., takes it to 
be true, or is disposed to take it as true if asked, is willing to act as if it were 
true, and so on. Acceptance is not to be confuted with truth, as it is fre­
quently. The notions are very different.14 In particular note that we do not 
have a law of excluded middle for Acpt. It does not in general hold that 
(p)(a)(e)(Sent a  (p Acpt a,e v p Acpt ¬~ a~¬,e)). 
Certainly not. We might have a sentence a such that p neither accepts it, on 
occasion e, nor its negation. We might then say that a is indeterminate for 
p at e. We could let 
'a Indet p,e' abbreviate '(Sent a . ~ p Acpt a,e . ~ p Acpt ¬~ a¬,e)', 
Or p might reject a in the sense of not accepting a at e. Let us call this 'rejec­
tion1. Then 
'p Rjct1 a,e' abbreviates 
'(Sent a . ~ p Acpt a,e)' 
as contrasted with rejection2, of accepting the negation of a sentence, 
where 
'p Rjct2 a,e' 
abbreviates 
'(Sent a . p Acpt ¬~ ¬,). 
Other pragmatical relations, for apprehending, for asserting, and so on, 
may be handled in similar vein and in which many further interesting uses 

THE POSITIVE POWER OF NEGATION 
9 
of negation emerge.15 
We have skipped from denotational semantics to pragmatics with no 
mention of an intervening semantics of intensions. Traditionally intensions 
are supposed to capture the "meanings" of terms as over and against their 
designata or denotata. Of course 'meaning' is highly ambiguous. One way 
of construing it technically might be as follows. Let 
'p Underex,a' 
express that person p in the cognitive act e takes, or is disposed to take, 
object x as falling under the one-place predicate (PredConOne) a. The use 
of 'under' here is based on Frege's Art des Gegebenseins or mode of presen­
tation16 — construed here as a mode of linguistic presentation. Here again 
we must distinguish between 
'~p Undere x,a' 
and 
'p Undere x,¬--a¬'. 
It should generally hold that 
(p) (e) (x) (a) (p Under x, a  ~ p Under xe ¬-a¬), 
but not of course in general that 
(PredConOne   (p Undere x,a v p Under ,¬a¬)). 
The "meaning" of a name or Russellian description of x for p at e might 
then be taken as the full array of PredConOne's under which p takes x at e. 
Let 
'p Des b,x' 
express that p correctly designates x by the proper name or Russellian 
description b at e. Then we may let 
'meaning (b,p,ey 
abbreviate 
'{  (Ex) (p Des b,x . p 
Under 
x,a)}. 
The meaning of b for p at e is then the virtual class of all one-place predi­
cate-constants under which p takes the designatum of b at e. (Note here the 
metalinguistic use of a virtual class of expressions as well as the relativity of 
'meaning' to both a person and an occasion.) Further reflections are needed 
to extend this kind of handling of 'meaning' to predicate-constants, includ­
ing relational ones. Note that although the treatment is pragmatic, there is 
no swallowing up of meaning into an abyss of subjectivity. Some "mean­
ings" easily generalize to the social group, so that the methods suggested 
form a basis for extensions into socio-linguistics and the study of intersub-

10 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
jectivity. Note, however, that nothing especially new here emerges about 
negation.17 
Already the use of 'occasions' and of special variables for them (V 
with or without primes or numerical subscripts) has crept into this discus­
sion. The use of these brings us at once into the heart of event-logic, in 
which the values for the variables are events or occasions, states, acts, pro­
cesses, and the like. The shortest contexts in which such a variable may 
occur are those containing an event-descriptive predicate. Let '<swim>' be 
such a predicate so that 
'<swim> e' 
express that e is an act of swimming. How long an act temporally? Well, at 
least long enough for e commonly to be reckoned as an act of swimming. 
The study of event-descriptive predicates turns out to be very helpful for 
the study of gerundives, of change, of adverbs, of tense, and of related sub­
jects. 
The study of adjectives and adverbs is of especial interest in its connec­
tion with negation. Many such words tend to be "fuzzy" and allow for much 
slack. For example, 
(i) 
'Henry is a kind man' 
allows of much leeway, in part depending upon speaker and occasion of 
utterance or assertion. It is convenient to handle such sentences in scalar 
terms somewhat roughly as follows. Let 'K' be the relation of being less-
kind-than as between human persons. The use of 'K' provides immediately 
for the comparative case of the adjective 'kind', the positive and superlative 
cases then being handled by definition. Let 
'h Mid K, 'Per" 
express that Henry (or h) is placed midway in the scale for  relative to the 
predicate 'Per' for human persons on occasion e. The assertion of (i), if 
tense is disregarded, involves in part the speaker's placing Henry some­
where in the middle of the scale for  relative to 'Per'. The scale is intended 
to be an objective one, depending not just upon your or my whim as to who 
is kinder than whom, but upon well-agreed upon types of attitudes and 
behavior. We may distinguish as many places on the scale as we wish, High, 
Mid, Low, VeryHigh, VeryLow, Very VeryHigh, Very VeryLow, and so 
on. Consider now the negation 
'~ h Mid K, Ter". 

THE POSITIVE POWER OF NEGATION 
11 
This cannot be read as 
'Henry is not a kind man', 
for he could be placed VeryHigh in the scale but not in the middle and yet 
would correctly be said to be kind. A law of excluded middle does obtain, 
however, in the sense that 
(h Mide K/Per' v ~ h Midg K,'Per') 
for appropriate e. Similar considerations obtain if  is construed as apply­
ing to acts rather than persons. 
The handling of scalar adverbs is similar, but it is now events, changes, 
acts, and so on, that are placed on appropriate scales. This handling of 
adverbs seems much simpler and more direct than those proposed by 
Reichenbach or Montague.18 
Metalinguistic considerations have been brought into the construction 
here or there, but thus far no metametalinguistic ones. At almost any point, 
however, it may be necessary to turn to a metalanguage of the metalan­
guage of whatever has been developed up to that point. This should cause 
no alarm, the hierarchy of languages of ascending level being open-ended. 
In this brief sketch of a logico-semiotical system, three kinds of entities 
have been admitted for the three kinds of variables respectively: individu­
als, linguistic expressions of the language or metalanguage at any level, and 
events, states, acts, and so on. Nothing fundamental de rerum natura is to 
be read into this trichotomy, and the three domains of entities may be 
unified if desired. Some may even be reducible to others in suitable ways. 
The sketch is merely of a system that seems to work rather well for the 
study of the logical forms of many kinds of sentences of a natural language. 
Also there is no neglect of mental phenomena, such being accomodated by 
means of appropriate event-descriptive predicates.19 The resulting theory is 
of extraordinary power of expressiveness, wider even than that of natural 
language itself. In all of this, as we have seen, the notion of negation '~' 
interanimates with the other truth-functional connectives, with the quan­
tifiers, with the non-logical predicates, and with special predicates such as 
'P' for part to whole, 'C' for concatenation, and so on, in so fundamental a 
way that almost nothing of import in the system can be said without it. Any 
basic distinction between positive and negative statements has pretty much 
vanished in thin air, as already noted — where by a positive statement one 
means a wholly positive one, so to speak, containing no inner occurrences 
of '~' when expanded into primitive notation. 

12 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
There are many alternative and "deviant" types of logic on the contem­
porary philosophical marketplace clamoring for attention.20 It is often 
thought that these involve kinds of negation differing radically from the 
classical one. Let us reflect upon a few of these to help decide whether this 
is the case, or whether the new types of negation are merely further special 
cases of the classical one. Let us first consider three-valued logic and 
intuitionism. 
The key problem to ask about three-valued logic is: What is the third 
value? A "value" intermediary between truth and falsehood, we may be 
told in answer. This is not much of an answer, however, unless we are told 
a good deal more. If the third value is taken as "neither known or 
unknown," or as something of the sort, the characterization is no longer 
semantical but pragmatical. Very well, let us then study three-valued logic 
in its proper pragmatical setting. But note that classical negation reigns 
there supreme, as we have observed above. The third value is then some­
thing like indeterminacy as discussed above — but we can now leave the 
human person out of the picture, in much the fashion that Husserl did.21 
We then have 'Tr' and 'Fls' as in semantics, and can let 
Tndet a' abbreviate 
'(Sent a . ~ (Ee)(<Kn> e . {e Of Object a v 
e OfObject¬~a¬))'. 
A sentence a is thus indeterminate — or has the third value — just where 
there is no act or state of knowing of either it or its negation. OfObject here 
is the prepositional relation of being-the-object-of.22 One can then go on to 
frame axioms about this third value, incorporating them within a semantics 
containing 'Tr' and 'Fis', achieving a kind of three-valued logic with a fixed 
interpretation. 
One can develop mathematical intuitionism, in a somewhat similar 
pragmatic fashion, by letting '<Constr> e' express that e is a mathematical 
"proof" or construction of a kind the intuitionist condones. Let then 
'e Constr a' 
abbreviate 
'(Sent a . <Constr> e . e Of_ . , a)\ 
v 
Object 
' ' 
expressing that e is an intuitionistically acceptable construction of the sen­
tence a — a being a sentence here of some portion of classical mathematics. 
The theory of intuitionism then becomes a theory concerning acts of con­
struction. The classical law of excluded middle holds in full generality, so 
that 
(fl)(e)(Sent  = (e Constr a v ~ e Constr a)). 

THE POSITIVE POWER OF NEGATION 
13 
This principle contrasts of course with one stating that 
(a)(e)(Sent a => (e Constr awe Constr r ~ à1)), 
which of course does not hold. Intuitionistic assertion of a is then to the 
effect that there is, or has been, a construction of a, and intuitionistic denial 
is that there is a construction of r ~ a?. The task of framing axioms for 
intuitionism on this basis remains, but is surely possible in principle. 
Somewhat similar considerations obtain with respect to epistemic 
logics, concerned with believing, knowing, and the like, with deontic logics, 
concerned with obligation and permission, with the logic governing percep­
tion and conception, with the logic of ostensiv e acts, and with the logic of 
assertion, 
questioning, 
exclaiming, 
subjunctivizing, 
and 
commanding. 
Modal and quantum-logics are of another ilk. The problem of interpreting 
the former within suitably formulated metalanguages raises its own special 
difficulties and seems not to have been faced up to sufficiently by modal 
logicians. Likewise the problem of formulating quantum-logic in full detail 
with full specification of all the non-logical predicates needed seems not yet 
to have been accomplished. When these tasks are squarely faced up to, it 
will very likely turn out to be seen that the metalanguages needed will be of 
the usual two-valued classical kind, with '~' playing its accustomed role 
therein. 
As goes '~', so goes many another negative word or phrase in natural 
language: no, never, nothing, nobody, hardly any, rarely, none, scarcely, 
seldom, and so on and on. Some of the logical features governing these 
words or phrases are well known23 and need now to be codified and integ­
rated within some over-arching theory.24 Work in this direction is of course 
partly empirical, but also depends to some extent on sheer logical analysis 
in terms of the logical forms of the sentences containing the given word or 
words. 
The unwary reader might be tempted to think that the foregoing sketch 
of a system is much too formal and remote from the commonalities of philo­
sophical parlance. All this formalism has nothing to do with my philosophi­
cal reflections or with the philosophical terms I use — it might be objected. 
In reply, it should be pointed out that the usual kinds of philosophical par­
lance are in sentences of natural language. The foregoing theory — if not 
just this one, then something like it — is more and more being shown to be 
able to provide logical forms for all natural sentences. To claim this is not 
to claim that all the terms a given philosopher uses are thereby subjected to 

14 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
analysis. The problem of the logical status of these terms is the responsibil­
ity of the given philosopher. All the philosopher or logician of natural lan­
guage can do is to provide logical forms for the sentences in which they 
occur. Each philosopher must supply the rest — the denotata or designata 
of his or her terms, and the basic meaning-postulates (in Carnap's phrase25) 
governing them. Logically speaking, this is the very first duty of every 
philosophical writer. Some meaning-postulates for the foregoing system 
have been suggested here and there, but many more are needed. Much 
work in supplying such remains ahead. 
As a matter of fact, it is an extremely difficult matter, in most areas of 
systematic thought, even to approximate an adequate listing of meaning-
postulates. There are usually boundary conditions, statements of empirical 
fact, that not only should be taken into account but determine in large part 
the very character of the inquiry. Here it is only a partially formalized lan­
guage-structure that is relevant.26 A partially formalized language is like an 
ordinary logical system, but with empirical statements of fact (taken as 
hypotheses where needed in deductions) playing a role quite as important 
as fundamental logical axioms and the non-logical meaning-postulates. The 
problem of accurately stating the matters of fact remains, however, as acute 
a one as stating the axioms and postulates. It is here also that the use of log­
ical forms steps in to be of genuine help. 
Let us close by extending an important off-hand remark by Frege in his 
famous paper "Negation"27 — extending it in such a way as to recognize the 
philosophical importance of only partially formalized languages. "In any 
science [or systematic inquiry] in which it is a question of conformity to laws 
[and accurate statement of boundary conditions], the thing that must always 
be asked is: What technical expressions are necessary, or at least useful, in 
order to give precise expression to the laws [and boundary statements] of 
this science [or discipline]?" We should not only ask this question but seek 
to answer it as best we may, given the logical and other means available at 
the time. "What does not stand this test", Frege concludes, "is from evil." 
To try to pass this test without giving the little '~' for negation its proper 
role would be an even greater evil still. 

CHAPTER TWO 
On logical semiotics and logistic grammar: 
relations, roles, representations, and rules 
"On ne jette des pierres qu'à l'arbre chargé 
de fruits." 
By a logistic grammar of a natural language let us understand what could 
also be referred to as the logic or logical semiotics of that language. The 
very phrase 'the logic of so and so' has a kind of tradition built into it and 
usually indicates an applied logic of the given subject-matter. Further, the 
study of logic and of the grammar of a natural language have developed 
more or less hand in hand over the centuries, so that "the logic of natural 
language" and a well-systematized grammar are almost one and the same. 
The two in fact have been so intimately associated historically, that it is 
astonishing they have become so dissociated in recent years. Logic itself, 
including logical semiotics, has taken tremendous steps forward, and the 
time seems now ripe to show how these steps are of interest for the gram­
marian. It might be thought that this has already been done, but, alas, it has 
not. This is not the occasion to attempt to explore why, which will have to 
be left for future historians and sociologists of knowledge to study the near-
scandal involved. 
It is now commonly accepted that "[a]s grammar originally grew out of 
logic, the former drew from the latter many of its terms," as a wise gram­
marian of yesteryear has noted.1 "There are, moreover, historical reasons 
why a thorough knowledge of grammar can not be obtained without a pre­
vious acquaintance of logic. Grammar grew up out of logic, and still retains 
some of the features of its origin. The early Greek grammarians transferred 
the terms of logic, many of them, to grammar. These same terms are still 
employed by some of the best German, French, and English grammarians. 

16 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
Thus the term predicate, used in grammar, was derived from logic. In 
order, therefore, to understand those terms in their full and exact meaning, 
the study of logical forms is a prerequisite." And a forteriori, of course, if 
the newer developments in logic itself are taken into consideration. 
In several of the author's recent publications, the beginnings of a 
logico-grammatical theory of wide applicability have been sketched.2 In his 
review of Logico-Linguistic Papers, the linguist Henry Hiz3, commenting 
on these beginnings, remarked that "Martin envisages that every sentence 
has its logical form. The logical form is in a language of elementary [or first-
order] logic augmented by mereology, i.e., a theory of part-whole relations 
and by such concepts as event, doing, agent,.patient, give, now, before, dur­
ing, person, etc. [italics added] for which one has to accept suitable mean­
ings postulates (as, e.g., that every event which is a giving is a doing). 
These are not English words event, do, give but concepts which are rep­
resented in the general logic. The universal logic is conceived as containing 
syntactical, semantical and pragmatical [—i.e., semiotical—] concepts and 
as representing all languages. There are transformations from the universal 
logical forms to actual sentences in the particular natural languages; from 
the same logical form there are different transformations to the sentences 
of different languages. It is a logician's version of the deep structure; it is 
perhaps sounder and certainly of much older origin than the popular ver­
sion." 
Hiz speaks here of the envisagement that "every sentence has its logi­
cal form" without calling attention to the enormous number and variety of 
types of sentences for which logical forms have actually been exhibited, in 
the volume under review and elsewhere. The use of 'envisages' here seems 
thus rather ill-chosen. Envisagement takes place only in the absence of 
achievement. Also Hiz speaks of merology as a "theory of part-whole rela­
tions" in the plural, whereas the use of only one suffices for most of the pur­
poses discussed. Others may be introduced for special purposes, e.g., for 
providing for atomic physics. Note also Hiz's highly ambiguous use of 'rep­
resents'. An English word is represented in the universal logic in a very dif­
ferent way from that in which natural languages are represented in it. As a 
technical term, 'represents' is often used by linguists in still a third sense, 
that in which a specific "reading" of a natural sentence is represented by a 
logical form. The first and third senses of 'represent' seem useful and may 
be retained, the second being somewhat vague and askew. And, of course, 
meaning-postulates must play their role überhaupt, even in the underlying 

LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND LOGICAL GRAMMAR 
17 
mereology. Meaning-postulates are needed to characterize the part-whole 
relation adapted (i.e., to lay down its salient properties) as well as to 
characterize all the other primitives needed. 
Hiz accepts mereology as a branch of logic, probably following his 
mentor Lesniewski in this respect. It could be argued cogently, however, 
that the part-whole relation on which any mereology is built is not a "logical 
relation" but rather an empirical or descriptive one. The meaning-postu­
lates lay down very general properties of it, e.g., its total reflexivity and 
transitivity. For a full theory of any part-whole relation, however, a great 
deal more is required. If it is to be regarded as involving space or time or 
space-time or whatever, in some way, a good deal of spelling out of this fact 
is needed in the theory. If mental events and states are admitted, this too 
should be spelled out. The resulting system must thus be a good deal more 
inclusive than what is ordinarily called 'a logic'; it is applied logic of a wide 
extensiveness. For all of this, further meaning-postulates are needed at 
every step of development. Hiz seems to speak disparagingly of these, as 
though they are not needed in grammatical studies. If he is correct in this, 
it behooves him to show, precisely and in explicit detail, how they may be 
dispensed with. 
Nor is a "logician's version" of deep structure to be lightly tossed aside. 
It is doubtful that any linguist has ever given an even remotely satisfactory 
account of what a "linguist's version" of deep structure is supposed to be. 
The logician's version has at least the minimal distinction of having been 
spelled out in some detail, at least in a preliminary fashion — as e.g., in the 
twenty-one desiderata laid down in the last chapter, "On the Very Idea of 
a Logical Form," of Semiotics and Linguistic Structure. To date no one 
seems to have questioned at any depth the desirability of any of these, nor 
does anyone seem to have added or subtracted from the list or to have 
come forward with an alternative one in its place. 
If the logician's version is "of much older origin" than the popular 
alternative, this is so much to the good. The greatness of tradition is not to 
be disregarded lightly, and we all have much to learn from it in most areas 
of inquiry. To disregard its merits is often merely to repeat the same old 
errors. The real secret is, of course, how to distinguish the merits of tradi­
tion from its defects and shortcomings. 
"The strictly logical part of the universal logic of Martin," Hiz goes on, 
"is weaker than the set theory and higher-order logic used by Montague4; 
the semantics and the pragmatics are stronger in Martin's theory. There is 

18 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
no point of arguing which choice is better in principle. If any of them suc­
ceeds to cover a large area of some natural languages in explaining their 
semantic nuances, our understanding of the phenomenon of language will 
be enhanced. If both succeed — so much the better. Martin's actual work is 
often of more interest to the linguist because Martin, mostly under the 
influence of Zellig Harris, examines more difficult grammatical problems 
than Montague did. This is more to the credit of Martin than of his theory, 
though the theory shows some of its applicability." 
Now the words 'stronger' and 'weaker' are notoriously tricky ones as 
used in comparing logical systems or theories. Surely Hiz's first contention 
here is correct, on almost any acceptable construal of 'weaker'. The second 
contention, however, is dubious. Montague's semantics is no doubt the 
stronger one, but the strictly pragmatical notions needed are pretty much 
the same. Hiz makes no reference to the detailed discussion of the interre­
lation of these two approaches to the exact study of language, in "Why I 
Am Not a Montaguean Grammarian."5 This is not the occasion to review 
the niceties involved or to discuss further ones, but merely to record Hiz's 
neglect of them. It is probably true, on the whole, that the "universal logic" 
approach can handle "more difficult grammatical problems" than Mon­
tague was able to. However, Hiz's reason for stating this are surely obscure 
— "more to the credit of Martin than of his theory." To give any point to 
this contention, Hiz should call attention to specific instances wherein he 
thinks the theory somehow fails and Montague's succeeds. Any such 
instances would be a welcome challenge to try to do better. 
Hiz goes on to note that "of course, Martin's and Montague's gram­
mars are not the only possibilites. While they translate sentences of a natu­
ral language into formulae of a logical language in order to perform reason­
ings, draw consequences according to the laws of logic, and then return to 
the natural language; logico-linguistics may proceed ... differently." Very 
well, let it do so. But how? Hiz sketches his own method as follows. "In­
stead of making a universal logic one can attempt to do the logic of a natu­
ral language in the language itself." Yes, but not without encountering the 
dangers of illicit self-reference presumably lurking therein. "After all, the 
logic of mathematics was done in the language of mathematics" — a com­
ment vague to the point of being meaningless. If by 'mathematics' one 
means numerical mathematics — the theory of functions of a complex 
number, say — and by 'the logic of mathematics' we mean the theory of 
truth-functions and quantifiers by means of which the language of 

LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND LOGICAL GRAMMAR 
19 
mathematics may be formalized, then the latter is surely "contained" in the 
language of mathematics. To contend that "the logic of mathematics was 
done in the language of mathematics," however, suggests that it was first 
done so. This is of course historically false. To describe just how the logic 
of mathematics was first "done" would require a careful historical study, 
and would most surely show that it was not done just "in the language of 
mathematics." Much more is involved, the logic of mathematics, no matter 
how construed, containing a logic simpliciter of wide applicability as a part. 
And in any case, no matter how Hiz's contention is disambiguated, it lends 
no support whatever, as he apparently wishes it to, to a contention that the 
logic of natural language should be "done" solely in natural language. 
"Martin makes a representation of English words in his logic, just as 
Montague did. This necessitates rendering of Adam as A and of book as B. 
And it necessitates resolution of ambiguities prior to the representation..." 
Well, ambiguities must be resolved somewhere along the line of course — 
the sooner, no doubt, the better. If 'Adam' is taken as a proper name of a 
person, a suitable subscript 'n' may be added, so that 'A ' is taken to desig­
nate just such and such a person, the person Adam intended in the given 
discourse. And similarly 'book' may be disambiguated into some of the 
many uses listed in the Oxford English Dictionary. 
This resolution of ambiguities, Hiz states, is such that the "English give 
will have many representations: one for give in Adam gives Ruth The Tem­
pest, another for give in My accent gave me away. ... And [one may add:] 
Give her my best wishes, Father gave him a spanking, The judge gave me 5 
years, It's give and take, I give up, and many more. Each of the uses of give 
here is different and Martin assumes that we can keep them apart. For each 
give some meaning postulates must be stated." But alas, these contentions 
are not quite correct. Not all of these uses of give need be "kept apart". The 
main types of usage are to be distinguished, essentially perhaps as in the lex­
icon. Some types may well be definable in terms of others. Expressions for 
some are to be taken as primitives, others then being definable. Ordinarily 
the meaning-postulates required will characterize primarily the primitive 
ones. 
We now come to the real nitty-gritty of Hiz's preferred method. "An 
alternative way to logico-linguistics may take all the grammatical constants 
(for English not only if-then, not, every, but also -s, the, a, re-, be, have, -ly, 
-tion, he, she, it, -ing, and all others with which grammars usually deal) of a 
language in the same way as logic takes the logical constants and supply 

20 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
some consequence rules based on them." In a logical system, of course, all 
the consequence-rules should be supplied, but not all the logical constants 
need be taken as primitive. And so in logico-linguistics also. Not all the 
grammatical constants need be taken as primitives, some being definable in 
terms of others. A few such definitions will be given in a moment. 
Let us consider Hiz's two examples of consequence-rules. "[1] If all a's 
are always ß's and v is a a, then y is ß; or, [2] for some specified class of a, 
ß, and y, if ßay, then a ¿5 ß and ay: for instance, if Old Martha flirts, then 
both Martha is old and Martha flirts." (Note that in the statement of this 
example there is confusion of use and mention. What is intended is: Old 
Martha flirts has both Martha is old and Martha flirts as logical conse­
quences,) 
[1] is a consequence rule containing — or "about" or characterizing — 
the grammatical constants if-then, all, are, always and, is, and a. It is stated 
solo presumbly as a completely general rule for a, ß, and y of a specified 
kind. But is not this merely another way of saying that 'a', 'ß', and Y must 
"represent" natural-language words or phrases of a specified kind? [1] 
seems to be similar to a familiar law of quantification-theory, but actually it 
is very different. We must think of it rather as a principle of grammar. Do 
all principles of quantification have to be provided for in the course of a full 
peroration of Hiz's theory? If so, we must be sure this is done. If not, just 
which ones may be dropped? And why? The second example, [2], is of a 
similar kind. The consequence-rule here too is not very informative without 
the explicit specification of the class to which a, ß, and y are supposed to 
belong. 
Of course Old Martha flirts is highly ambiguous. A few "readings" are: 
Old Martha (usually, frequently, habitually) flirts, Old Martha is (now) in 
process of flirting, OLD Martha flirts (but the other Martha or Marthas do 
not), Old MARTHA flirts (but old Beatrice and so on do not), Old Martha 
FLIRTS (but goes no further) — to mention only a few. To capture all of 
these, Hiz's rule [2] is of course not sufficient but must be supplemented for 
each reading. His rule thus, at the very simplest, will presumbly have to be 
a very lengthy disjunction. Also to spell out in full the restrictions on a, ß, 
and y in order for [2] to hold would be next to impossible. It is difficult 
enough to disambiguate the parent sentence ab initio before seeking a spe­
cial rule of consequence concerning it. 
Hiz's method seems to depend much on the fact that "instead of repre­
senting English or Italian words by symbols in logic, e.g., both give and 

LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND LOGICAL GRAMMAR 
21 
dona by G, one may apply logic to the language as it is, to English or Italian 
directly." Is not too much being made here of the notion of "a symbol in 
logic"? When doing Italian grammar, use 'dona' as a technical expression 
and when doing English grammar, use 'give'. The use of 'G' instead of 
'give' is quite beside the point. As in logic generally, the use of special sym­
bols is merely convenient shorthand. 
The chief defect of Hiz's "alternative" in logico-linguistics is that he 
virtually throws away nearly 2000 years of progress in the development of 
logic. He wants to start from scratch, taking all grammatical constants on a 
par with logical ones, and then frame consequence-rules for them en masse. 
To do this, nowhere along the line using the hard currency of logical princi­
ples as a helpmeet or guide, is so formidable a task as to be almost hope­
less. He does not "divide and conquer," studying simple kinds of linguistic 
phenomena first and then developing the extensions needed for more com­
plex ones. 
Just think for a moment how incredibly complicated and how numer­
ous Hiz's rules of consequence will have to be for even 'not', say, one of the 
simplest of the "logical" constants. We have seen, in I above, how remote 
the English 'not' is, in many of its uses, from the simple '~' of truth-func­
tional logic. Hiz's rules concerning 'not' will have to cover all of the uses 
considered there, together with all others. In I we have seen how some at 
least of the various uses of 'not' can be defined in terms of the basic '~' and 
hence that the various rules governing these uses are (in part) derivable 
from the basic logical rules governing '~'. Hiz does not wish to avail himself 
of these logical rules, but instead seeks rules of vast generality covering all 
uses of 'not' simultaneously. This is a grandiose undertaking doomed to 
failure. Similar remarks obtain for the other so-called logical constants. The 
real tragedy of Hiz's view is that so little has been done to substantiate it in 
detail. 
Let us go on now to review — in a little more detail than in I above, 
albeit somewhat synoptically — the essentials of the "universal logic" Hiz 
rejects in favor of "direct" analysis, in order to see how, in principle, it can 
provide the wherewithal for logical — including semiotical or metalogical 
— forms or deep structures for many types of sentences of English. First, 
we should remind ourselves of the character of the basic logical part of the 
theory before moving on to syntax, semantics (both designational and 
intensional), and pragmatics. A grammar of a language is of course in part 
a metatheory about — or a semiotics of — the language. It, therefore, on a 

22 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
par with other theories and metatheories, contains a basic logic by way of 
underpinning. The logic should be kept as simple as possible, so as not to 
intrude in any way upon the resulting theory. If the logic itself is not suffi­
ciently simple — as, e.g., with Montague — it will tend to assert itself 
excessively; it will dictate features of the theory that the latter neither needs 
nor should have. 
All the basic words of English, in a sense to become clear as we go on, 
are assumed to be present as non-logical words, as items in the vocabulary 
of the system. Since English contains its own metalanguages, the syntax, 
semantics, and pragmatics involved, at whatever level, become parts of 
English also. A full listing of this entire vocabulary needed will not be 
attempted here. Various fundamental types of English words, as viewed in 
terms of the theory, however, will be listed and typical ones within each 
type picked out. It turns out that these may all be handled as predicates, in 
addition to the connectives, quantifiers, and a few other syncategorematic 
expressions. The main types of predicates needed are those for the various 
categories of entities admitted, for some temporal relations, for some struc­
tural or "role" relations, for some scalar notions and relations leading to 
adjectival and adverbial modifiers, for some prepositional relations, for the 
various verbal "moods," and a few others. 
Home Tooke, in his famous The Diversions of Purley, contended 
apparently that the traditional doctrine of the parts of speech is "absurd and 
that there are in fact only nouns and verbs."6 The view here is that there are 
not even these at the level of deep structure. No, there are nothing but the 
non-logical predicates, the truth-functional connectives, and some method 
of handling the quantifiers. To make cogent so radical a contention — in 
modern terns — is in part the aim of the present discussion. 
By a rule, then, let us understand what is usually meant in discussions 
of logic systems, i.e., a meta-statement stipulating that any meaning-postu­
late (or formula of such and such a shape) is an axiom or theorem, together 
with meta-statements enumerating rules of inference. The representation-
problem, 
in contemporary linguistics, is concerned with assigning or 
generating logical forms for natural sentences. But each natural word has 
its sacred role to play in the natural sentences in which it can significantly 
occur. The total number of roles that need be recognized for any given 
word, and hence for all the words of the language, is finite. Hence there is 
hope that, in due course of time, a complete enumeration of them could be 
given. Of course, we are far from such an enumeration at the moment, but 

LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND LOGICAL GRAMMAR 
23 
it is in the offing. How now are roles to be talked about in the over-all 
theory? By means of suitable structural or quasi-grammatical relations. 
Some logico-linguists wish to speak of functions here instead. But functions 
are a special kind of relation. For linguists it is relatively unimportant 
whether a given relation be functional or not. Insistence on functionality 
rather than relationality has been the source of much unnecessary obfusca-
tion, and has tended to foist mathematical terminology on linguistics unwit­
tingly. In some such way as this, then, the four items of the sub-title are 
presumed to be interrelated. 
Let us presuppose now the usual first-order logic with virtual classes 
and relations.7 Proper names and even Russellian descriptions are to be 
handled predicatively. Thus 'Soc' may be taken as the one-place predicate 
'socratizes' so that 
'Socx' 
expresses that x socratizes, i.e., that x is the one and only person who soc­
ratizes. A postulate concerning 'Soc' is that 
KEx)(v)(Socy^y = x). 
And, similarly, for Russellian descriptions, so that 
'(i x . - - ) y' 
may be taken as short for 
'{ z  (x)(—x~ = x = 
z)} . 
('{z  ~ z - } ' here is the expression for the virtual class of all z's such that -
z~.) If in fact it holds that 
h(Ey)(x)(--x-- = x = y), 
then the definiendum here states that  is the one and only entity x such 
that ~x~. 
Another type of one-place predicate of importance for what follows 
consists of the gerundives. Consider the English word 'walk', and suppose, 
for the moment, that it is taken as a primitive of the language. Then 
'<Walk>' is taken as a predicate for being a walkzVzg, thus incorporating 
the suffix -ing. Let 
(1) 
'<Walk> x' 
express then that x is a walking, a complete occurrence of the kind we 
would normally call 'a walking'. And similarly 
(2) 
'<Think> x' 

24 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
may express that x is a complete act of the kind we would call 'a thinking'. 
And, similarly, for all manner of so-called "verbs." In general, in formulae 
such as (1) or (2), the x is to be regarded as an event, or as belonging to 
some species of events to be distinguished below. 
In terms of gerundives further suffixes and prefixes may be defined. 
Let us consider the s suffix, where '<Give>' is an event-descriptive predi­
cate for acts of giving. Then 
'gives' 
may be taken as short for 
'{e  (<Give> e . e During 
now)}', 
where During is a fundamental temporal relation and 'now' is the deictic 
expression for the present moment, to provide for some — "third-person 
singular" — context in which it may occur to express the present tense. This 
definition may of course be generalized to include all uses of '-s' that express 
the present tense. And, similarly, for all the other suffices and prefixes of 
Hiz's list. Hiz wants "consequence rules" given based on his primitives. 
When explicitly supplied, however, these rules will turn out to be either 
meaning-postulates or rules of consequence derived from them making use 
of suitable definitions. 
No theory of language could get very far without containing a syntax, 
a syntax of its own object-language part, of the syntax of this syntax, and so 
on. This syntax can be taken as of the familiar inscriptional type8, but now 
writ large for the entirety of the object-language part. For this purpose a 
full listing of the primitive lexical words of the language is needed. 
Although no such list is yet available, one ought to be forthcoming before 
too long. 
To form the shape-descriptive predicate for a given English word, let 
us follow the customary practice of putting that word in single quotes. Thus 
we may write "Soc" for the predicate 'Soc'. And similarly for the other 
predicates and the syncategorematica such as '(' and ')' and even the truth-
functional 'v', '~', and so on. The semantics may be handled in terms of 
'Den' for denotation in the sense that a one-place predicate denotes sever­
ally the objects falling under it.9 The other semantical relations needed are 
then definable. Intensional semantics may be handled in terms of the rela­
tion Under, where 
'P Under jc.fl' 
e 
' 
is taken to express that person p consciously, in an intensional act e, takes 

LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND LOGICAL GRAMMAR 
25 
the entity x under the one-place predicate a, i.e., regards a as denoting x 
(even perhaps where a does not correctly denote x in accord with the rules 
of the language).10 Theoretical semantics may in fact be regarded as the full 
theory characterizing 'Den' and 'Under' taken as the fundamental primi­
tives. 
Note that the relation Under is already a pragmatical one, not merely 
a semantical one in any narrow sense. In fact, intensional semantics, as con­
ceived here, is already a branch of pragmatics. (See III below.) Other 
important pragmatical predicates are 'Acpt' for acceptance, 'Appr' for 
apprehends, 'Asrt' for assertion, 'Utt' for utterance, 'Qstn' for questioning, 
'Cmnd' for commanding, 'Excl' for exclaiming, 'Sbjnct' for acts of sub-
junctivizing, and so on. The latter will be recognized as predicates for hand­
ling the various moods of assertion, questioning, and so on. Thus 'p Sbjnct 
A' may express that/?, in an intensional act e, entertains the declarative sen­
tence a subjunctively. There is no mystique about subjunctives not to be 
captured by the study of a certain way in which declaratives may be enter­
tained. 
The basic predicates needed for the fundamental categories of entities 
are to include the following: 'Ent' for all types of entities in general, 'Obj' 
for spatio-temporal objects, 'Abstls' for abstractuals or abstract objects in 
general, 'Ev' for events of all kinds, 'MentEv' for specifically mental 
events, 'Act' for acts or actions, 'Proc' for processes, 'Change' for changes, 
'Per' for persons, 'PI' for places, 'T' for times, 'Sh' for shapes or sign-
designs, and Tnser' for inscriptions or sign-events. These categories are not 
intended to be mutually exclusive or jointly exhaustive, but merely some 
useful ones to help get us started on the right track. 
The basic temporal predicate needed is 'BeforeTime' where 'e^ 
BeforeTime e ' expresses that the event ex occurs wholly before the event e2 
in a suitable temporal ordering. Some definable predicates are then 'Dur­
ing' where 'e During e9' expresses that ex takes place during the time-span 
of ev 'ThroughoutTime' where lel ThroughoutTime ej expresses that ex takes 
place throughout the duration of e2 in the sense that ex During e2 and e2 
During ev 'Mom' for being a moment, 'AtMom' where te1 AtMom e7' expres­
ses that e takes place during the moment e2, 'AgainTime' where ie1 AgainTime 
ev F' expresses that ex and e2 are both members of a virtual class of events 
F and en Before^. 
, and so on. And of course a suitable deictic 'now' is 
2 
Time 
1 ' 
needed for the present moment, or, alternatively where 'sp Now e' expres­
ses that the speaker takes e as the present moment. 

26 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
A leading feature of the grammar to be sketched will be that the 
semantical role of words in many types of sentences will be explicitly indi­
cated, as already noted. Typical roles are those of being a (or the) agent, 
patient, instrument used, goal, source or origin, location, duration, or 
result of an action. Ultimately a complete list of all such roles should be 
provided, all the roles, that is, which the language is able to distinguish by 
having separate expressions for. Normally these roles will be handled by 
means of certain relations, usually dyadic ones. For example, 
'p Agent e' 
is to express that person p is the or an agent of the act or action e. Such rela­
tions, 'role-relations' we might call them, will be useful in forming answers 
to questions made with the w/i-words: where, when, who, what, why, how, 
and so on. Some additional role-predicates are 'Patient' for being the 
patient or recipient of an action, 'Object' for being the direct object of, or 
the entity acted upon in, an action, 'Instrument' for being the instrument 
used in an action, 'Goal' in the sense that 'p Goal ev ev a' expresses that 
person p performs ex with the goal of having e2 take place as under the 
description a, 'Location' in the sense that an event takes place at such and 
such a space-time locale, 'Result' for the relation of being the result of an 
action or event or state — and so on and on. 
Very closely related to the role-predicates are the prepositional ones. 
In English there are about 75 prepositions in all, with many of them used in 
many different senses. On the whole prepositions are little mono- or bi-syl-
labic words of an importance in grammar way beyond their length. Many, 
perhaps most, of them may be defined away, but their grammatical impor­
tance is in no way diminished by this fact. A few prepositional predicates 
may be listed as follows: 'AtD .. 'in the sense that 'e At_ .. x' expresses 
J 
Position 
Position 
r 
that that e takes place at the place x, 'e T°AchievedDestination x' (as in, e.g., 
'Tom went to Cambridge'), 'Overpassa e' (as in 'He jumped over a ditch'), 
'BecauseOfCause' (as in 'The price of bread is high because of the drought'), 
and so on and on.11 
For the handling of what are traditionally called 'adjectives' and 'ad­
verbs', fundamental use is to be made of some comparative relations. Let us 
consider an example of each. First, let us reflect again upon Hiz's use of 
'old' in 'Old Martha flirts'. Let 
'p Younger-Than q' 
express that person p is younger than q. Consider now an intensional scale 

LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND LOGICAL GRAMMAR 
27 
a speaker of 'Old Martha flirts' has in mind when he asserts (or accepts or 
whatever) this sentence. 'Old' here has a good deal of slack built into it. 
How old must Martha be to be called 'old Martha'? 
Let 
'p Highe Younger-Than, 'HFLM" 
express now that p is taken in an intensional act e to be high in the scale of 
certain persons placed or graded with respect to being younger-than, the 
youngest at the bottom. To be graded High in such a scale is to be taken as 
old, to be graded low is to be taken as young, to be placed somewhere in 
the middle is to be taken as neither, to be graded very high is to be taken 
as very old, very low, very young, and so on. The "certain persons" here 
are those to whom the predicate 'HFLM' for human females like Martha 
(as to general health, social position, and so on) applies. 'Old' as used here 
is thus very different from 'old' as ascribed to elephants, to jets, and so on. 
Hiz's sentence in one of its readings may thus be given the form 
(3) 
'()(') (Martha Highg Younger-Than,'HFLM' 
. Martha 
Agent e'. <Flirt> e' . e' During now)'. 
From this, as Hiz wants it to, it follows both that Martha is old and that 
Martha flirts, in accord with the logic of quantification. 
Note that 'Old Martha doesn't flirt' cannot be given the negation of the 
form (3), but rather 
(3') 
'() (') (Martha High^ Younger-Than, 'HFLM' . Martha 
Agent e' . ~ <Flirt> e' . e' During now)', 
from which it follows that Martha is old and that Martha doesn't flirt. But 
consider 'It is false that old Martha flirts', where 'false' is taken not in the 
semantical sense but in the sense of Carnap's absolute concept.12 Here 
there is considerable leaway as to what determines the falsity. It may be 
that Martha is not old, that not she but somewhat else is the agent of flirting 
or of a non-flirting, or that a flirting does not now take place. If Martha is 
not old, one would not wish to accept Old Martha flirts as true. Consider 
the following dialogue. 
Mr. A. 
Old Martha flirts 
Mr. B. 
No, Martha is not old. She is only 25. 
Mr. A. 
Oh. I thought she was much older. Anyhow, she flirts. 
Hiz too should show us how to provide for such a dialogue, by citing suita­
ble consequence-rules. 

28 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
Note how pliable the method here is in providing for the various ways 
in which a sentence may be false. Sentences fail of truth in many ways. For 
Hiz, presumably, 'Old Martha flirts' may fail of truth only where Martha is 
not old or if Martha does not flirt or both. The form (3), however, may fail 
in (24-l) ways depending upon whether 3, only 2, or only one of the four 
conjuncts in (3) fail to hold. The case where all 4 fail would hold trivially. 
Adverbiais may be handled similarly, but with events or actions or 
changes or whatever arranged in appropriate scales. Let us consider 'Old 
Martha flirts subtly'. To handle this we need a definition of the suffix '-/y' 
in the appropriate context. Let 
le Les-Subtle-Than e , F' 
express that e is less-subtle-than e7 where both are members of the virtual 
class F of actions. Here again we need the notion of 'High', so that 
V High Less-Subtle-Than, '{<>  <Flirt> e,\" 
expresses that e' is graded high in the scale for being less-subtle-than as con­
fined to the predicate for acts of flirting. This clause we can use as a defi-
niens in a definition of 'subtly (for flirtings)'. That old Martha flirts subtly 
can then be captured merely by adding this clause as an inner conjunct in 
(3). 
Nothing has been said thus far about mereology or the calculus of indi­
viduals as a useful adjunct to the underlying logic. Mereology is the study of 
part to whole. It is useful to add 'P' for such a relation, if only for purposes 
of definition. The notion of being a moment, for example, mentioned 
above, may be regarded as any (non-null) time-slab that is a part of all its 
(non-null) parts. We thus let 'x P y' express that x is a part of v and add 'P' 
to the list of logico-linguistic primitives. 
The so-called mass-nouns such as 'water', 'oil', 'butter', and so on, may 
now be introduced. These too may be handled predicatively in two ways. 
We can let 'W x' express that x is a portion of water and then define 
'water' 
as 
'(ix . (y) (W p j P x))'. 
Or we may let 'Wx' express that x is all of the world's water (past, present, 
and future), and then express that  is a portion or bit of water by 
'(Ex) (y Px . Wx)'. 
And similarly — in broad outline — for other mass-terms. 
As Zellig Harris and Hiz have repeatedly emphasized, sentences do 
not in general come singly but in texts or whole discourses. Sentence "in-
teranimate" each other within a text and components of them cross-refer to 

LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND LOGICAL GRAMMAR 
29 
each other in various ways. A fundamental relation CrRef for cross-refer­
ence is needed, e.g., to handle 'he' in the following text. 
'Henry entered the room. He was angry.' 
Here 'he' is taken to bear CrRef to 'Henry'. Also punctuation marks must 
be provided for, so that 'Period', 'QstnMrk', 'Colon', 'Semicolon', and 
'ExclmPt' are needed as additional syntactial predicates. Some uses of these 
may be definable, e.g., some uses of a period may be defined away in terms 
of the truth-functional '.' for 'and'. Some contexts containing '?' may be 
defined, e.g., where 'Sent a' expresses that a is an object-language sen­
tence, 
'?' 
may abbreviate 
'(Sent a . () () (p Agent e . <Qstn> 
e . a Object e))\ 
so that a is questioned just where it is a sentence and an object of some act 
of questioning by someone. '-—?' may then be defined by disquotation. 
The logic of questions may take on a very explicit form when approached in 
this way. And similarly for the others. 
A host of further relations, of a somewhat special sort, are also needed 
in any logistic grammar. A few such are the following. We may let 'p Able 
e', A' express that e is a state of p's having the ability to do e' as described 
by a; 'p Oblgdg e',a,C' that e is a state of obligation for p to do e' as 
described by a in accord with some code C, moral or legal or whatever, and 
similarly 'p Prmtd^ e' ,a,C for permission; te1 Approp^ e¿ that e is a state of 
e^s being appropriate for e2; 'p Prfrs^ e ,a,e ,b' that p in an act or state e 
prefers  under a over e2 under b\ 'p Ref, e',a' that/? in act e refers to e' by 
means of a\ and so on. Each such predicate requires, of course, very special 
study and a full theory of each is needed. 
A word now about the lexicon. Only a few years ago, the mere sugges­
tion that a lexicon for a natural language should be based on some notions 
picked out as primitive was scoffed at. Recent work in lexicography has 
shown, however, that a lexicon should be essentially like that of a logical 
system — a non-circular list of definitions, or conventions of notational 
abbrevation,in terms ultimately of the primitives chosen. Of course, there is 
more to a lexicon than this. Important progress in lexicography is being 
made, however, and the subject promises to become an integral part of 
logico-linguistics in due time. 
Hiz's comment concerning the transformation rules is essentially cor­
rect. "There are transformations from the universal logical forms to actual 

30 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
sentences in the particular natural languages [and back again]; from the 
same logical form there are different transformations to the sentences of 
different languages." For the most part, transformations become merely 
further extensions of the underlying logical rules, making use of appropri­
ate definitions. If only one natural language, English, is considered, as 
above, the English words are themselves words of the universal grammar. 
If more than one natural language is considered, the natural-language 
words must be "represented" by appropriate special symbols, as Hiz cor­
rectly observes. 
It might appear to some readers that at some point in the development 
the underlying first-order logic will have to be strengthened. A second-order 
logic may be needed, or even a full theory of types. If so, the logic may be 
taken as the ordinal mereology of a previous paper, which still recognizes 
only individuals as values for variables but with the admission of ordinal 
individuals among them.13 Ordinal mereology can be given sufficient power 
to incorporate a full theory of types if needed. Thus no fear need arise con­
cerning the requirement that the underlying logic, with individuals and indi­
viduals only as the value for the variables, should be of first order. 
A further word of explanation is needed concerning the intensional 
notion 'Under', which may be interpreted in many ways, two of which are 
of especial importance. It may be taken normatively, so that Qp Under x,a' 
expresses that, in the intensional act e, person p takes x under the descrip­
tion a normatively, or in accord with the semantical rules of the system. 
Perhaps it would be better to express this by 
'p NorUnder 
x,a\ 
where the added 'Nor' is to suggest 'normative'. The other interpretation 
for 'Under' allows for greater play of usage onp's part, so to speak, reflect­
ing not normative usage only but also /?'s particular idiolect and noetic or 
even emotive state. For this we could use 
'p ActlUndergx,fl', 
to express that p, in e, actually takes x under a in accord with his or own 
whims, as it were. The restraints on this construal for 'Under' are of course 
much less severe than upon 'NorUnder', the former reflecting actual usage 
with its many deviations from the norms of the language. 
For example, for 'NorUnder' we have a Consistency Principle, that 
h(p)WW(fl)(p NorUnder x,a => ~ p NorUnder 
x,r-an), 

LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND LOGICAL GRAMMAR 
31 
where r-d? is the Boolean negative of the predicate a. Such a principle 
would be inappropriate for 'ActUnder'. Of course if it should obtain that 
(p ActulUnder x,a . p ActlUnder ,-) 
for given p, e, x, and a, and the inconsistency were pointed out to p, he or 
she might, immediately or after due deliberation, wish to make amends. If 
not, p's linguistic behavior could not be regarded as being in accord with 
normative standards and with the correct use of '-'. 
Rather similar considerations obtain for other pragmatical predicates, 
such as 'Acpt' for acceptance, 'Ref for reference, and 'Prfrs' for prefers. 
The distinction between the normative and the actual has perhaps not 
always been sharply enough drawn in some of the author's previous writ­
ings. Strictly, however, it is desirable to do so in order to differentiate 
between normative intensionality (with an 's') and actual intentionality 
(with a 't'). 
The intent of the preceding discussion has been merely to pull together 
into a unified framework a multitude of predicates needed in any attempt to 
provide a basis for a grammar of natural language on logical principles. Hiz 
himself, somewhere along the line, will have to face up to providing for, 
and handling, all of these predicates in some fashion or other. Of course 
much work remains concerning each predicate, the meaning-postulates 
needed, and so on. In carrying out details, the help of the professional lin­
guist will be needed. Enough has been shown, however, it is hoped, to see 
how, with further extensions and emendations, the notion of a logistic 
grammar is no longer a mere dream or vision, but a reality within actual 
reach with enough cooperative hard work. "Let many [alternative] theories 
succeed!" Hiz concludes, "We will have gotten that much more insight." 
But along the way we must try valiantly to keep on the right track, with a 
certain "logical simplicity" as our guide, lest we fall into the Montaguean 
morass and the Hizian complexity. 
On every item in the foregoing much detailed analysis is needed. Many 
philosophers and linguists over the years have been working on such 
analyses in one way or another. The work of Peirce, Reichenbach, Uriel 
Weinreich, Donald Davidson, George Llakoff, Raoul Smith, Randolph 
Quirk and associates, Helen Cartwright, William Cooper, James McCaw-
ley, and, of course, Zellig Harris and Hiz himself, inter alia, has been espe­
cially helpful in drawing up this list. The list is merely tentative and 
approximative, but even so, appears to be the most extensive of its kind yet 
attempted. 

32 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
Some readers may fear that a logistic grammar developed in the man­
ner of the foregoing, "might," in the words of George Hemphill in his A 
Mathematical Grammar of English14, "reduce a natural linguist disastrously 
to formulae. What kind of a monster would want to do that to the language 
of Chaucer, Shakespeare, Milton, the Book of Common Prayer of 1549, 
the Bible of 1611? The fear in understandable," he notes, "but I fear 
groundless. As with the Ransomian description of a poem as a structure 
AND a texture, so also with natural language generally. Grammar is con­
cerned almost wholly with structure; the texture is left almost untouched 
and can flourish undisturbed. The present writer came to linguistic studies 
slowly and via literary studies, and wishes to assure the reader that mathe­
matical grammar can only illuminate, not blight, the laurels of our true 
poets." The only difficulty with this admirable statement is that the bound­
ary between structure and "texture" is not sharp, and that texture itself has 
a structure we should try to understand and characterize. Texture and con­
text, both linguistic and non-linguistic, are yielding to logical analysis quite 
as much as structure is — but only, of course, where the logical notions 
used are, as here, of an extent and subtlety far beyond those of logic con­
ceived in the traditional, somewhat narrow sense. 

CHAPTER THREE 
On Carnap and the origins of systematic pragmatics 
"Opera illius mea sunt." 
In his seminal monograph Foundations of Logic and Mathematics of 19391, 
Carnap notes (pp. 3-4) that "three components have to be distinguished in 
a situation where language is used...: (1) the action, state, and environment 
[including "emotional, volitional, and other factors"] of a man who speaks 
or hears, say, the German word 'blau'; (2) the word 'blau' as an element of 
the German language (meant here as a specified acoustic (or visual) design 
which is the common property of the many sounds produced at different 
time, which may be called the tokens of that design); (3) a certain property 
of things, viz., the color blue, to which this man — and German-speaking 
people in general — intends to refer (one usually says, "The man means the 
color by the word", or "The word means the color for these people", or "... 
within this language")." 
Carnap goes on to note (p. 4) that "the complete theory of language 
has to study all these three components. We shall call pragmatics the field 
of all those investigations which take into consideration the first compo­
nent, whether it be alone or in combination with the other components. 
Other inquiries are made in abstraction from the speaker [and hearer] and 
deal only with the expressions of the language and their relation to their 
designata. The field of these studies is called semantics. Finally, one may 
abstract even from the designata and restrict the investigation to formal 
properties ... of the expressions and relations among them. This field is cal­
led logical syntax. ..." 
In these splendid paragraphs we encounter a characterization of the 
modern trivium of syntax, semantics, and pragmatics arising from the sea 
almost full blown like Venus herself. It is interesting to note that this 
characterization concerns natural languages as the languages under study. 

34 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
Immediately, however, Carnap goes on to consider (p. 5) a "fictious lan­
guage B, very poor and simple in its structure, in order to get simple sys­
tems of semantical and syntactical rules."  is taken as the object-language, 
and "the language in which the results of the investigation are formulated 
[is] the metalanguage." Only later does Carnap allow the object-language to 
be a logical system rather than a natural language, but he nowhere reflects 
in any detail upon the need or possibility of formalizing the metalanguage 
itself. 
In Carnap's trivium, it is also interesting to note, pragmatics comes 
first in order of comprehensiveness and the other two, semantics and syn­
tax, follow by "abstraction," i.e., by omitting consideration of certain fea­
tures of language or of language use. From a systematic point of view, how­
ever, the order of priority would seem to be the other way around. If 'sys­
tematic' here is taken to indicate procedures of language-construction — of 
formulating language-systems rather than analyzing a natural language in 
some sense already given — it would seem more natural to start with the 
simplest area of inquiry and work on to the more complex. 
Carnap suggests some pragmatical rules concerning the language B. 
These are of the form of empirical generalizations, made in a situation in 
which (p. 5) "we find a group of people speaking [or writing] a language  
which we do not understand; nor do they understand ours. After some 
observation, we discover which words the people use, in which forms of 
sentences they use them, what these words and sentences are about, on 
what occasion they are used, what activities are connected with them, etc." 
We then formulate pragmatical rules to record the results of these observa­
tions. We should note, however, how extremely complex such a procedure 
is. Only a thoroughly-trained field-worker in such study could hope to state 
any such generalizations with any accuracy. To trace out the path from the 
spoken phonemes to words to sentences, and from words to things, and 
from sentences to what they are "about," and from words and sentences to 
the typical occasions of utterance, and from such occasions to emotional 
and volitional factors accompanying such use — and so on — requires 
highly-developed techniques of study, which no amount of arm-chair "com­
mon-sense" or "regimentation" can take the place of. The pragmatics of a 
natural language, as Carnap conceives it, thus embraces the full gambit of 
what is best done nowadays by socio-linguists, psycho-linguists, and linguis­
tic anthropologists. 
The moment he speaks of semantical rules, rather than pragmatical 

CARNAP AND THE ORIGINS OF SYSTEMATIC PRAGMATICS 
35 
ones, in any detail, Carnap thinks of his language  as being transformed 
into a language-system B-S. "Strictly speaking," he writes (p. 7), "the rules 
which we shall lay down, are not rules of the factually given language B; 
they rather constitute a language-system corresponding to  which we will 
call the semantical system B-S. The language  belongs to the world of 
facts; it has many properties, some of which we have found, while others 
are unknown to us. The language B-S, on the other hand, is something con­
structed by us; it has all and only those properties which we establish by the 
rules. Nevertheless, we construct B-S not arbitrarily but with regard to the 
facts about B. Then we may make the empirical statement that the lan­
guage  is to a certain degree in accordance with the system B-S." 
This is an admirable statement of how "facts" are incorporated and 
expressed within language-systems. It echoes, with a certain difference of 
emphasis, the famous last paragraph of §2 of The Logical Syntax of Lan­
guage2, concerning the use in general of logical techniques in the analysis of 
natural language. This passage is so important for methodology that it 
should be quoted in full. Carnap states that logical methods and the use of 
symbolic languages "will not only prove useful in the logical analysis of sci­
entific theories — it will also help in the logical analysis of the word-lan­
guages... The direct analysis of these [the incredibly complicated word-lan­
guages], which has been prevalent hitherto, must inevitably fail, just as a 
physicist would be frustrated were he from the outset to attempt to relate 
his laws to natural things — trees, stones, and so on. In the first place, the 
physicist relates his laws to the simplest of constructed forms; to a thin 
straight lever, to a simple pendulum, to punctiform masses, etc. Then with 
the help of laws relating to these constructed forms, he is later in a position 
to analyze into suitable elements the complicated behavior of real bodies, 
and thus to control them. One more comparison: the complicated config­
urations of mountain chains, rivers, frontiers, and the like are most easily 
represented by the help of geographical coordinates — in other words, by 
constructed lines not given in nature. In the same way, the syntactical prop­
erty of a particular word-language, such as English, or of particular classes 
of word-languages, of a particular sub-language of a word-language, is best 
represented and investigated with a constructed language which serves as a 
system of reference." 
In his valuable but much-neglected Introduction to Semantics of 19423, 
Carnap reiterates the characterization of pragmatics of the earlier mono­
graph, but in a somewhat more precise and developed form. He calls atten-

36 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
tion to three chief factors in the study of language: the speaker, the expres­
sion uttered, and the designatum of the expression. The trivium of pragma­
tics, semantics, and syntax is explicitly referred to as semiotics, and semio­
tics is divided into pure and applied branches. Here Carnap is mainly con­
cerned with the difference between pure and descriptive semantics. This 
latter (p. 11) "is the empirical investigation of the semantical features of 
historically given languages," whereas the former is "the analysis of seman­
tical systems, i.e. systems of semantical rules. Syntax is divided analog­
ously." No such distinction, however, it is interesting to observe, is drawn 
in pragmatics. 
As examples of pragmatical investigations, Carnap mentions the fol­
lowing (p. 10): "a physiological analysis of the processes in the speaking 
organs and in the nervous system connected with speaking activities; a 
psychological analysis of the relations between speaking behavior and other 
behavior; a psychological study of the different connotations of one and the 
same word for different individuals; ethnological and sociological studies of 
the speaking habits and their differences in different tribes, different age 
groups, social strata; a study of the procedures applied by scientists in 
recording the results of experiments, etc." Observe that all such studies 
belong to descriptive pragmatics and fall within one or another of the sci­
ences mentioned a few paragraphs back, psycho-linguistics, socio-linguis-
tics, and so on. 
The concern of Introduction to Semantics is of course with semantics, 
and there are very few references to pragmatics in it. In a later paper, "On 
Some Concepts of Pragmatics," of 19554, Carnap turns his whole attention 
to pragmatics for the first time. This paper is in part a reply to Chisholm's 
critique of "Meaning and Synonymy in Natural Languages," also of 1955. 
In this latter paper Carnap reiterates that pragmatics is "the empirical 
investigation of historically given natural languages." He then immediately 
speaks of the theory of intensions — as developed in the main body of 
Meaning and Necessity (1947 and 1956) and foreshadowed in Introduction 
to Semantics — as dealing "with concepts like intension [as contrasted with 
extension], synonymy, analyticity, and related ones." These concepts are 
here regarded as belonging to pragmatics, but presuppose for their charac­
terization a special branch of intensional semantics. 
As an example, Carnap considers a certain German-speaking person 
Karl and the predicates 'blau' and 'Hund'. "It is generally agreed," Carnap 
writes, "that, on the basis of spontaneous or elicited utterances of a person, 

CARNAP AND THE ORIGINS OF SYSTEMATIC PRAGMATICS 
37 
the linguist can ascertain whether or not the person is willing to apply a 
given predicate to a given thing, in other words, whether the predicate 
denotes the given thing for the given person. By collecting results of this 
kind, the linguist can determine first, the extension of the predicate 'Hund' 
within a given region for Karl, that is, the class of the things to which Karl 
is willing to apply the predicate, second, the extension of the contradictory, 
that is, the class of those things for which Karl denies the application of 
'Hund', and, third, the intermediate class of those things for which Karl is 
not willing either to affirm or to deny the predicate. The size of the third 
class indicates the degree of vagueness of the predicate 'Hund', if we disre­
gard for simplicity the effect of Karl's ignorance of relevant facts...." 
The question that now rises is (p. 236): "Granted that the linguist can 
determine the extension of [or class determined by] a given predicate, how 
can he go about this and determine also its intension?" Carnap defends 
what he calls the intensionalist thesis, that it is possible for the linguist to 
assign to one and the same predicate different intensions. "For [p. 237] 
there are more than one and possibly infinitely many properties whose 
extension within the given region is just the extension determined for the 
predicate." Note here the key use of 'property', a term of intensional 
semantics, as contrasted with the extensionalist word 'class'. The inten­
sionalist thesis is thus not to be understood independently of a prior inten­
sionalist semantics, as we have already noted. To the linguist who has a 
hankering for the clarity of extensionalism and who does not think that the 
notion of property has yet been suitably characterized, the intensionalist 
thesis may not be convincing. The appeal to pragmatics, although welcome, 
does not supplant what he might regard as illicit reference to what he 
regards as an unanalyzed notion. (More will be said on this below.) 
Given the prior notion of a semantical intension, no great difficulties 
have to be faced to relativize it to a given speaker of a given language at a 
given time. Thus Carnap can readily offer the following definition: 
"Two expressions are synonymous in the language L for X at 
time t if they have the same intension in L for X at t." 
The real problem for pragmatics, it might be thought, is to achieve a suita­
ble definition for 'synonymous' altogether independent of the semantical 
notion of intension. 
Let us now turn to Carnap's reflections concerning a more systematic 
approach to pragmatics. In "On Some Concepts of Pragmatics," Carnap 

38 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
comments that "it seems that a more thorough analysis of intension, belief, 
and related concepts would require a conceptual framework of theoretical 
pragmatics." He goes on to mention "a few concepts that might come into 
consideration as a basis of such a framework," symbolizing them explicitly. 
He lets 
(1) 
(^ 
express "that the person X at the time t believes [the '¿proposition"] that p," 
understood "in a weak sense, as not implying either that X is aware of the 
belief or that he is able to verbalize it." Also he lets 
(2) 
'T{X,t,S,Ly 
express "that X at t takes the sentence S of the language L to be true (con­
sciously or not)." Also 
(3) 
'Int 
(p,S,L,X,t)' 
is to express "that the proposition p is the intension of the sentence S in the 
language L for X at i." Two additional symbolizations are introduced, for 
assertion and utterance. Let 
(4) 
'A{X,t,S,Ly 
express that "X at t wills deliberately to utter a token of S as a sentence of 
the language L in the sense of an assertion." And 
(5) 
'V(X,t,R)> 
means "that X at t produces with his speaking organs a series of audible 
sounds R," and, where "R is a token of S," 
(5') 
'U(JUS)' 
expresses that X utters S at t. 
The introduction of the forms (l)-(5') is already a step toward a sys-
tematiziation of pragmatics. Several features of these forms should be 
noted. All of them contain a parameter for a time. (1) and (3) contain a 
parameter for an intensional object such as a "proposition." (2), (3), (4), 
and (5') contain a parameter for sentences of the language. (2), (3), and (4) 
contain a parameter for the language, regarded presumably as a value for a 
variable. (4) and (5') are read in such a way as to require a "token" of a sen­
tence as well as a sentence regarded as a shape or sign-design. And, finally, 
in (5), "series of audible sounds" must be taken as values for variables. Any 
systematization of a pragmatics incorporating (l)-(5') as sentential forms 

CARNAP AND THE ORIGINS OF SYSTEMATIC PRAGMATICS 
39 
must thus have a very considerable internal complexity. It must utilize a 
syntax of both shapes and tokens or inscriptions, as well as semantics con­
taining intensions and no doubt extensions as well. This semantics in turn 
must be based upon a syntax dealing at least in part with inscriptions. 
By 1955 the beginnings of an inscriptional syntax were already avail­
able. The Goodman-Quine "Steps toward a Constructive Nominalism"5 
had already appeared in 1947 and the Martin-Woodger "Toward an Inscrip­
tional Semantics"6 had appeared in 1951. The basis for a systematization of 
some features of pragmatics was thus available to Carnap at the time. His 
main interest, however, had shifted to probability and induction, upon 
which he concentrated for the rest of his life. In 1958 inscriptional semantics 
was given a deeper and more rigorous formulation, in Truth and Denota­
tion1', in which, however, there was no concern with semantical intensions 
or Fregean Sinne. In Meaning and Necessity (1st ed., 1947) Carnap had dis­
cussed these latter rather extensively, but without aiming at a rigorous sys­
tematization of the metalanguages needed. The discussion there is for the 
most part semantical, with little ref erene to pragmatical matters. The ques­
tion thus remained as to the extent to which these latter can be made to 
play the role of the former. If a systematic pragmatics is available, can all 
reference to semantical intensions or Sinne in the underlying semantics be 
dropped without loss? 
For Carnap, pragmatics is concerned only with natural languages and 
not with constructed language-systems, as we have already noted. Perhaps 
a natural language is merely a language-system of a very great complexity. 
For the present, this is a thesis that must be left aside, resting as it does on 
the subsequent development of logico-linguistics.8 Carnap's object-lan­
guage, in Foundations of Logic and Mathematics, was already partially sys­
tematized or formalized, as we have noted. The natural next step is a sys­
tematization of the metalanguage. Carnap's very last paragraph of "On 
Some Concepts of Pragmatics" was thus a timely one: "There is an urgent 
need for a system of theoretical pragmatics, not only for psychology and lin­
guistics, but also for analytical philosophy. Since pure semantics is suffi­
ciently developed, the time seems ripe for attempts at constructing tentative 
outlines of pragmatical systems. Such an outline may first be restricted to 
small groups of concepts (e.g., those of belief, assertion, and utterance); it 
may then be developed to include all those concepts needed for discussions 
in the theory of knowledge and the methodology of science." 
In Toward a Systematic Pragmatics of 19599, the attempt was made to 

40 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
formulate several systems of theoretical pragmatics of the kind Carnap 
envisaged. The general conception of the nature of pragmatics was in close 
agreement with his but with some important differences. All the object­
and metalanguages considered were systematized, at least partially. No pre­
sumption of an underlying intensional semantics was made. In fact, one 
kind of pragmatics that was discussed presupposed only a syntax, and no 
semantics whatsoever. When a semantics was presupposed, it was pre­
sumed formulated in terms of a special semantical primitive, e.g., 'Des' for 
a Frege-like relation of designation. The point of view was thus wholly 
exten§ional, in a rather thorough-going sense, at both the object and 
metalinguistic levels. 
Let us review now very briefly the main content of Toward a Systema­
tic Pragmatics. Chapter I was merely prefatory. In chapter II a Tarski-like 
formulation of the simple theory of types was given. Let us refer to it as the 
system T. The syntax developed for T was based on shapes, as in Tarski's 
Der Wahrheitsbegriff10, but developed by means of Quine's method of 
framed ingredients}1 The result was a first-order handling of the syntax. 
The semantics was developed in terms of a primitive 'Des' for designation. 
The Rules of Syntax (pp. 22-23) given were essentially those of Tarski as 
adapted to the method of framed ingredients. There were three Rules of 
Designation (p. 30), a Specificity Rule stipulating that certain constants and 
abstracts designate certain type-theoretic objects, a Restrictive 
Rule 
stipulating that if an expression designates an object of type n, it is then a 
constant of type n, and the Principle of Uniques or Univocality, that expres­
sions designate at most one object. An especially simple definition of the 
semantical notion of truth was put forward (p. 31) in terms of vacuous 
abstracts. A sentence a of the object-language is true just where there is a 
vacuous class-abstract rx1d1 that designates the universal class of type 1, 'JC1' 
being a variable of type 1. This notion may easily be shown adequate in 
Tarski's sense and the usual principles concerning truth are immediately 
forthcoming. 
Incidentally, it is sometimes objected that taking 'Des' as a semantical 
primitive is a result of theft over honest toil. The Tarskian method in 
semantics, it will be recalled, is to define all semantical notions within the 
semantical metalanguage in terms of logical notions "essentially richer" 
than those of the object-language. These logical notions then play the role, 
in the Tarskian method, of 'Des' (or 'Den' for denotation, or whatever) in 
the kind of semantics used here. In either method, it should be noticed, 

CARNAP AND THE ORIGINS OF SYSTEMATIC PRAGMATICS 
41 
there is "theft" in the use of new primitives. Upholders of the Tarskian 
method, by parity of their method and for consistency of requirement, 
should demand also that all syntactical notions, as well as all pragmatical 
ones, be definable in terms of "logical" notions. However, this they do not 
do, being quite happy with new primitives for concatenation, for example, 
and presumably also for such pragmatical notions as they consider (e.g. 
Lesniewski's 'V' for the assertum). 
In Chapter III a primitive 'Acpt' for acceptance was introduced on the 
basis of the preceding framework. Acceptance here was construed in essen­
tially the sense of Carnap's T of (2) above, in the sense of "taking to be 
true." Thus 
(6) 
'JTAcpta/ 
was taken to express the person X accepts or takes at time t the expression 
a (of the given object-language) to be true (consciously or not). Because of 
the presence of the time-parameter, an elementary theory of time-flow was 
presupposed (p. 37). Let us reflect now upon the problem of axiomatizing 
a pragmatics for Acpt as thus conceived. 
Note that (6) was taken to express actual acceptance on the part of per­
son X, not normative or paradigmatic or "rational" acceptance in some 
sense. To establish a pragmatical sentence of the form (6) is thus to make 
use of suitable test-procedures of the kind employed in the empirical sci­
ences. The help of psycho- or socio-linguists would presumably be needed 
in order to carry out such tests in practice and even to characterize them in 
general — as Carnap noted. The results of such tests would be framed in 
some of the Rules of Acceptance (pp. 37ff.), more particularly, in Specificity 
Rules stipulating precisely what sentences a given person accepts at given 
times. The Specifity Rules are thus merely observation-statements stating 
boundary conditions. A Restrictive Rule for acceptance states that any 
expression accepted is a sentence of the language. A Continuity Principle 
states that X accepts a at t if and only if X accepts a at every momentary 
part of t. 
One might be tempted to think that some Rationality Rules should be 
available concerning negation, disjunction, conjunction, and the like. Thus 
one might expect a principle that if X Acpt a,t then it is not the case that X 
Acpt b,t, where b is ~ -1, the negation of a. Such a principle, however, 
would characterize normative rather than actual linguistic behavior. It 
seemed better, therefore, in Toward a Systematic Pragmatics, to consider 

42 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
some class (or virtual class) F of sentences of the language, to subject them 
to the testing proedures, and then to determine whether or not such a nor­
mative condition holds. 
Let F then be some class of sentences containing at least one sentence 
a and its negation, at least sentences a and b and their disjunction, and also, 
say, at least a and b and also (~ v by or (by definition) r(a = by. We can 
then define such notions as being a normal acceptance pattern for Xatt 
for 
tilde ('—')> for vee ('v'), and so on. 
In particular we can let 
'X AcptNor tilde,F, f 
abbreviate 
6(a)((F a 
■ F (tilde a)) => (x 
Acpt a,t = ~ X Acpt (tilde 
a)j))\ 
The definiendum here may be read: person X accepts tilde normally (or 
correctly) at t relative to F. We could also read this as: the sentences of F 
exhibit a normal acceptance pattern for X at t so far as regards tilde (or nega­
tion). And similarly for vee, where 
'X AcptNor vee,F,f 
abbreviates 
\a)(b)((F a . F b . F {a vee 
b)) = ((X Acpt a, t v X Acpt b, t) D I Acpt (a vee b) ,f)). 
And similar for many further types of normal acceptance patterns. 
The two definitions just given are weaker then those on pp. 40 ff. of 
TSP and provide for alternative notions. The definitions of TSP are like the 
foregoing but have '=' in place of the right-most occurences of '=>' in the 
definientia. The definitions of TSP require that Xs acceptances be biva­
lent, like truth itself. The definitions just given allow that X need not accept 
separately either a, say, or its negative r ~ ¿f. These latter definitions seem 
better to accord with actual usage in placing a less demanding requirement 
on "normalcy". 
It has already been suggested that in a systematic pragmatics we should 
be able to dispense with presupposing a theory of semantical intensions. 
What, after all, is an intension? Clearly, it would seem, an intension should 
be relativized to a person and a time and reflect in full the person's accep­
tances of sentences of a certain kind (pp. 40ff.). First, let us consider inten­
sions of an individual constant and all the sentences in a given class or vir­
tual class F containing that constant accepted by a given person at a give 
time. All such sentences would reflect the person's total knowledge of the 
entity designated by the constant. The intension of the constant — in the 
sense of its "meaning" — would not extend to the person's total knowledge, 
but would be determined only by the underlying logic governing that con-

CARNAP AND THE ORIGINS OF SYSTEMATIC PRAGMATICS 
43 
stant. This logic would include the full logic of truth-functions and quan­
tifiers. If the constant is a primitive, the logic would also include all mean­
ing-postulates governing it, in fact, all of the meaning-postulates of the 
object-language. If the constant is defined, the logic would include its 
abbreviatory definitions together with the meaning-postulates. Thus the 
subjective intension of a given constant a for person X relative to a class of 
sentences F at time t can be identified with the class of all classes a such that 
X accepts a logical theorem (LogThm) of F to the effect that the desig­
natimi of that constant is a member of a member of a. 
In a similar way, subjective intensions for constants of higher logical 
type may be introduced (pp. 46f.). And also intersubjective intensions, rela­
tive to a time and a class of sentences, as a kind of logical product (p. 48) 
of subjective intensions. And even objective intensions (p. 49), relative only 
to the class of sentences under investigation, may be introduced. And 
likewise, notions of subjective, intersubjective, and objective co-intensive-
ness may be introduced (pp. 50ff.) supplanting semantical notions of 
synonymy or sameness of meaning — supplanting them in the sense that 
once such pragmatical notions are available the semantical notions are no 
longer needed. 
In TSP all of these kinds of intensions were called 'quasi-intensions' in 
order to distinguish them from Carnap's type of semantical intensions. The 
use of the prefix 'quasi' has been dropped in the foregoing, the various 
intensions approximate so closely semantical ones. Especially to be 
observed is the strong sense of 'logical theorem' used in the definientia of 
the definitions of them. A rather broader kind of purely pragmatical inten­
sion arises if the clauses referring to logical theoremhood are dropped. Such 
intensions would reflect more closely actual linguistic behavior than do 
those depending on the logic and meaning-postulates of the language. They 
are thus of greater utility in the study of the logic of natural sentences, as 
we shall see in a moment. 
Of utmost importance here (p. 49) "is the requirement that intensional 
entities, whatever they may turn out to be, must have identifiable parts or 
members or components in some sense or other. One must be able in con­
crete cases to specify explicitly and clearly what the intension ... of a term 
is.... Given any constant a of T of given type, the experimenter can enum­
erate the members of the subjective ... intension of a relative to X, F, and 
t.... And this can be done in terms understandable to anyone who speaks or 
uses the language T, a clear-cut language-system of the kind commonly pre-

44 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
supposed in the sciences. The ... intension can thus be fully and explicitly 
specified [experimentally] in clear-cut terms in any concrete case. Surely 
nothing less than this should be required of any logical theory of intension." 
As a matter of historical fact, the theory suggested seems to have been the 
first to meet this requirement. And, moreover, the requirement has been 
observed more in the breach than in the keeping in most subsequent 
theories. 
What, now, about such intensional objects as propositions, 
needed 
fundamentally by Carnap but avoided altogether in the foregoing? "Most 
theories of intension ... [that] admit propositions as intensions of sentences 
[p. 53], admit them as a new kind of entity over and above the intensions of 
terms.... But this seems to be admitting too much, for such intensions as 
propositions are intimately related with the intensions of terms and should 
be definable in terms of them. Consider an atomic sentence of T, say 
'aj £ af 
[expressing that the individual aj is a member of the class a*]. The intension 
of this sentence should depend upon the intensions of 'a]' and 'aj\ and in 
fact should be uniquely determined by them. And similarly for the inten­
sions of more complicated sentences as well." 
By an atomic proposition corresponding to an atomic sentence of T, 
then, let us take the ordered pair of the intensions of its terms, There will be 
subjective atomic propositions, intersubjective ones, and objective ones, 
and further ones of mixed genre — nine kinds in all. By a disjunctive prop­
osition corresponding to a disjunction of atomic sentences, we can take a 
suitable Boolean sum of the atomic propositions corresponding to the dis-
juncts. By the negative of T, let us take the ordered pair of the intension of 
the first term with the intension of the negation of the second. And so on. 
These various notions may be extended to sentences containing quantifiers 
by various technical devices. By such means the hoary old notion of propo­
sition gives way to a multiplicity of respectable and clear-cut notions for the 
first time, pragmatical ones now of course, and suitably relativized to the 
system T. 
Many of the foregoing explanations are somewhat loose. They may all 
be made precise, however, within the pragmatical metalanguage for T, 
PMT, the full character of which may be summarized in the following infor­
mal stipulation concerning terms and formulae. The object-language is T 
with a type-theoretic 'e' as primitive; its syntax is handled by a primitive ' n' 

CARNAP AND THE ORIGINS OF SYSTEMATIC PRAGMATICS 
45 
for concatenation together with shape-descriptive names of the symbols of 
T; the semantics is based on 'Des' for designation; and 'Acpt' is the sole 
pragmatical primitive (for the moment) together with 'B' for a temporal 
before-than relation as between time-slabs. Then we have the following 
simultaneous recursion. 
1. 
Any variable or constant or abstract of T is a translational term 
ofT. 
2. 
If a is an expressional variable or constant, it is an expressional 
term of T. 
3. 
If t is a variable or constant for a time-slab, it is a term of T. 
4. 
If xn
m and y1^1 are respectively translational terms of type n and n 
+ 1, then  jc"+ln is a formula. 
' 
m  
5. 
If je" and V! are translational terms of type n, then rxn = y"-1 is a 
m 
J  
; r 
' 
m 
J 
formula. 
6. 
If a and b are expressional variables, ra = ZT1 is a formula and 
r{anby an expressional term. 
7. 
If t and t' are terms for time-slabs, rt  f1 and rt = i'"1 are for­
mulae. 
8. 
If a is an expressional term and xn a translational one, ra Des je""1 
is a formula. 
9. 
If A is a formula and xn a translational term, rxn A"1 is a transla-
m 
7 
m 
tional term. 
10. 
If A is a formula, so is r ~ A"1. 
11. 
If A and  are formulae, so is r(A v ß)"1. 
12. 
If a is a variable and A a formula, r(a)An is a formula. 
This informal recursion summarizes, unites, and extends those on p. 17, p. 
30, and pp. 34-35 of TSP. 
This metalanguage PMT is of course a classical one, with expressions 
construed as shapes. An inscriptional pragmatics (p. 65) would construe 
expressions as inscriptions. Also there can be pragmatical metalanguages of 
a mixed kind, having both shapes and inscriptions as values for two sorts of 
syntactical variables. A non-translational pragmatics (p. 66) is forthcoming 
if we assume the underlying semantics to be a non-translational one. (A 
non-translational one, it will be recalled12, contains no translations of the 
object-language expressions and is concerned solely with certain semantical 
relations between or among them. See VI below.) And a more restricted 
kind of pragmatics emerges if all semantical notions whatsoever are drop-

46 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
ped. In this way we gain a pragmatics presupposing only a syntax (p. 68). 
Such a pragmatics is a good deal more interesting and powerful than one 
might suspect at first glance. 
As goes the pragmatics of acceptance, so goes, mutatis mutandis, many 
another pragmatical relation. Utterance (p. 69) is a such a one. Let 
'XlJtla,? 
express that Gutters a at t. This form is essentially Carnap's (5'). Concern­
ing Utt we need a Restrictive Principle that only sentences (of some object-
languages) are uttered. Also some Temporal Principles are needed, that if 
X utters a at t he or she does not then utter A at a proper temporal part of 
t. Also if X utters at t a sentence containing two or more sentences as seg­
ments, then he or she utters the left segment prior to uttering the right one. 
And in general, the syntactic order of the sentences contained within some 
compound sentence a and the temporal order of utterance are to coincide. 
Assertion may be regarded as simultaneous utterance and acceptance. 
Also relations for believing, knowing, and other epistemic notions may be 
introduced. And also relations for commanding, exclaiming, and sub-
junctivizing. The latter, however, were not discussed in TSP. 
Why, now, we might well ask, are intensions important, more particu­
larly, the purely pragmatical ones? The best answer would seem to be that 
parts of them are of great help in describing logical forms or grammatical 
deep structures. It has been observed above how all the kinds of pragmati­
cal intensions consist of parts or components, and these are often of more 
interest than an intension in its totality. 
Let us consider an example, say, the sentence 
(7) 
'Henry admired Kempff s superb playing of the Waldstein\ 
'Admired' here is to be construed intensionally and 'playing' is to be han­
dled gerundively. The notions discussed in TSP do not suffice for a logic of 
gerundives. But we may forge ahead a little by letting 
'XAdmirer ,' 
express that person X admires with conscious awareness at time t the event 
(or happening or process or occurrent) e as described by the one-place 
predicate a — or, in Frege's phrase, as taken under the Art des Gegeben­
seins a.13 One rendition of (7) is, then, where 'h' represents Henry, 'k' the 
great German pianist Wilhelm Kempff, and 'w' the Waldstein, as 

CARNAP AND THE ORIGINS OF SYSTEMATIC PRAGMATICS 
47 
(7') 
'() (Efl) (E^) (Ee2) (h Agent e . <Admire> e . e  now .  
Object e . e Underg a . a = 'ê2 ( Agent e2 . Superb er <1> 
e2 . w Object e2)')'. 
Here 'Agent' represents the quasi-grammatical relation of being an agent 
of, 'Object' of being an object of, '<Admire>' and '<Play>' are event-
descriptive predicates for the gerundives admiring and playing (in the sense 
of playing a musical work, as in accord with entry IV. 16 under 'play' in the 
O.E.D.), Under is the Frege-like under-relation14, and 'e  now' expresses 
that e took place before the now of the present moment.15 'Superb e ' will 
be commented on in a moment. 
It might appear that in (7') we have lost all sight of a purely pragmati­
cal intension. But no, this is not the case. We have here merely a more 
developed form of one. The very notion 'Under', here in the context, may 
be defined away in terms of our pragmatical stand-by 'Acpt'. In fact, we 
may in general let 
'X Underg eva' abbreviate '(Per X . X Agent e . PredConOne 
a . (Eb) (Et) (EE2) (b Des  . e Throughout^ t. <X,Acpt, 
(anb),t> e2 . Z Cons Aware e ))'. 
Here 'Per' represents being a person, 'PredConOne' represents being a 
one-place predicate-constant, le ThroughoutTime f expresses that the dura­
tion of e extends throughout t, and (anb) is of course the result of con­
catenating a with some designator b of e . 'ConsAware' is a new predicate 
needed here to assure that X is consciously aware of e7 during t. Also 
'<Jf,Acpt,(tfn£>),i> e2 
here is merely short for 
\X Agent e2 . 
<Acpt> e2 . (anb) Object e2 . e2 Throughout^ t)\ 
With these notions in mind, we see that (7') is equivalent to 
'() (Efl) (E^) (h Agent e . <Admire> e . e  now .  Object 
e . h Undere eva . a = 'ê (k Agent e2 . Superb e2 . <Play> e2. w 
Object e2)')'. 
This is to the effect that Henry is an agent of a past act of admiring some e 
consciously taken by him under the description of its being a superb playing 
by Kempff of the Waldstein. Or, equivalently, that Henry admired some e 
such that, where b designates e , he consciously accepted a sentence to the 
effect that ex is (or was) a superb playing of the Waldstein by Kempff. 
In this way we see again that Acpt is a most fundamental pragmatical 

48 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
notion, the intensional predicate 'Under' being definable in its terms. It 
would be premature to say that all intensionality required in the study of 
logical form can be handled in terms of 'Acpt', although it might well turn 
out that this is the case. The serious study of the logical forms of natural 
sentences is still in its infancy, most of the forms given to date being mere 
rough first approximations. 
A word now about the adjectival 'superb', which may also be analyzed 
in terms of 'Acpt'. Let Less-Superb-Than be a comparative relation 
between entities of a given sort. The entities in the foregoing example are 
(full) playings of the Waldstein. Let 
(8) 
'e2 High Less-Superb-Than,W' 
express that e2 is placed high in the series of all playings whatsoever, W, of 
the Waldstein with respect to the Less-Superb-Than relation. The least 
superb are placed at the bottom of the scale, so to speak, the most superb 
at the top. We might parse 'Superb e2 occurring in the modes of description 
a in (7) merely as (8). (If it were not so occurring, some mode of intension­
ality should be built into (8) itself. Suppose in fact there are no e's of the 
kind required in (8). In place of 'W' here, we could then require the struc­
tural-description of 'W', and then interpret (8) in such a way that the 
speaker places e2 high in the Less-Superb-Than scale relative to 'W' even 
though W itself might contain no superb playings.) 
Note that the parsing of (7) as (7') is such that (7) is "read" so as to 
require that Henry is self-consciously aware of what he is admiring. This is 
in accord with the use of 'Under' here. Carnap's 'T' and 'Acpt' are taken so 
as not necessarily to involve conscious awareness on the part of the agent, 
however, it will be recalled. 
Of course, these are many other "readings" of (7). Suppose Henry lis­
tened to a recording but did not know who was playing what, although he 
did admire what he heard. Or (7) could be taken as expressing that Henry 
usually admired — or frequently or habitually — admired Kempff's usually, 
frequently, or habitually superb playing of the Waldstein, or that he 
admired (usually, frequently, and so on) just Kempff's playing of the 
Waldstein that he regards as superb. There are no doubt further readings 
also, all of which can be handled here on the basis of this kind of material. 
The chief value of the pragmatical intensions of TSP is thus probably 
that they lead by easy stages into a theory of logical form or grammatical 
deep structure. The same cannot be claimed of a theory of purely semanti-

CARNAP AND THE ORIGINS OF SYSTEMATIC PRAGMATICS 
49 
cal intensions in which the user of language plays no role. 
Let us return now to Carnap's discussion of 1955 in "Meaning and 
Synonymy in Natural Language," concerning Karl and the predicate 
'Hund'. Carnap urged that the extension of 'Hund' for Karl can be deter­
mined by a linguist studying Karl's linguistic behavior. In fact, we may 
accomodate what Carnap says about this in terms of 'Under'. Let 'H' repre­
sent the predicate 'Hund' and let 'k' be short for 'Karl'. Then 
ik Under x,'H' 
is the extension of 'H' for  throughout some period t of testing, "the class 
of things to which Karl is willing to apply the predicate;" 
i ~ k Under *,'H' 
concerns the negation of that extension, where "Karl is not willing to 
affirm" the predicate; 
ik Under x,'-H', 
where -H is the Boolean negation of H, is the extension of the negation of 
the predicate, where Karl "denies" the predicate; and 
i ( ~  Underrx,'H' .  Under, x, '-H') 
is "the intermediate class for which Karl is not willing either to affirm or to 
deny the predicate." All of these classes are of course relativized to Karl 
during the time t. All of these classes are subjective (or pragmatical) exten­
sions of 'H'. And, in similar fashion we can go on to distinguish intersubjec­
tive extensions, and even objective ones. In this way we see that the very 
notion of an extension, when looked at closely and taking into account the 
actual users of language and empirical testing procedures, subdivides into 
many kinds, some of which are pragmatical, not just semantical, in nature. 
Carnap's "intensionalist thesis," it will be recalled from Meaning and 
Necessity, pp. 237 ff., is to the effect that the linguist can "assign to one and 
the same predicate different intensions," there being "more than one and 
possibly infinitely many properties whose extension within the given region 
is just the extension determined by the predicate." The difficulty with this, 
as noted above, is that it utilizes an unanalyzed notion of property. But here 
too, if we bring in pragmatical considerations, we can make headway. 
Instead of speaking of properties we may bring in varying modes of descrip­
tion or Arten des Gegebenseins. Thus, to use Carnap's example, let us con­
sider the intensions of 'horse' ('H') and of 'horse or unicorn' (the Boolean 

50 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
'(H  U)'). Since there are no unicorns, the extensions of these two predi­
cates are the same. Yet a linguist, investigating someone's usage of these 
phrases, may find that they have very different intensions. 
Let us recall Carnap's characterization of being synonymous, that "two 
expressions are synonymous in the language L for [person] X at time t if 
they have the same intension in L for X at i." This we may handle here by 
letting 
'a Syn^ b,f 
abbreviate 
'(PredConOne a . PredConOne b . 
(x)(XUndertx,a 
= XUnder, 
x,b))\ 
Thus two one-place predicate-constants are synonymous for X at t just 
where everything X takes under the one X takes under the other and con- — 
versely. Sameness of pragmatical intension seems well captured by this 
definition. And, then, a subjective pragmatical intension as such, for X at t, 
of a predicate a is the class of synonymous predicate constants, so that 
lmt{a,X,ty 
is short for 
'ba Syn^ b,f. 
Clearly we have then that 
\-{a)(b){a Synxb,t 
= mt(a,X,t) = 
int(b,X,t)), 
so that the full content of Carnap's characterization of synonymy is taken 
care of here by this notion of a pragmatical intension. 
Note now also that although the semantical extensions of 'H' for 
'horse', and of '(H  U)' for 'horse or unicorn', coincide, their pragmatical 
intensions, for Karl, say, at t, need not. As Carnap points out (p. 238), in 
an empirical test situation the linguist could "simply describe for Karl cases, 
which he knows to be possible, and leave it open whether there is anything 
satisfying those descriptions or not. He may, for example, describe a 
unicorn ... [as] "a thing similar to a horse, but having only one horn in the 
middle of the forehead". Or he may point to a thing and then describe the 
intended modification in words, e.g.: "a thing like this one but having one 
horn in the middle of the forehead". Or, finally, he might just point to a 
picture representing a unicorn. He then asks Karl whether he is willing to 
apply the word ... ['horse' or, 'H'] to a thing of this kind." If the answer is 
affirmative, '(H  U)' cannot be taken as a member of int('H',k,i), whereas 
'(H  U)' is of course a member of int('(H  U)',k,í). Thus these two 
intensions do not have the same membership although H and (H  U) have 
the same semantical extension. Analogous considerations obtain for inter-
subjective and objective pragmatical intensions, although Carnap does not 

CARNAP AND THE ORIGINS OF SYSTEMATIC PRAGMATICS 
51 
mention these. It seems very natural, however, in the present context, to do 
so. 
With these various considerations in mind, we see that the material in 
TSP and the somewhat broadened pragmatical notions of extension and 
intension that grow out of it, carry forward, in a natural way, Carnap's sem­
inal suggestions concerning the foundations of pragmatics, but with added 
systematicity as regards the exact logical character of the metalanguages 
needed, and with all manner of additional detail concerning the many kinds 
of intensions, logical forms, and so on. Pragmatics itself is semper formanda 
with no end in sight. 


CHAPTER FOUR 
On comparatives: P.T. Geach 
"Sic agitur censura et sic exempla parantur: 
Quum vindex alios quod monet ipse facit." 
In an intriguing recent paper1, P.T. Geach has pointed out that "the com­
parative construction is not ... satisfactorily treated by modern linguists or 
by modern logicians." He calls attention to "intentional comparisons," 
which "have been considerably neglected by logicians, even in writings on 
intentional contexts, but are frequent in ordinary language. 'Jones is fatter 
than he was' might be accomodated to the treatment of 'is fatter than' as an 
unanalyzed binary relative term by taking it as a comparison between dif­
ferent temporal slices of Jones. But no such treatment will avail for 'Jones 
looks fatter than he is' or 'Jones is fatter than he looks'." 
Geach points out "that logicians have tended to analyze the positive 
degree in terms of the comparative rather than conversely," largely on the 
grounds that "the relation answering to a comparative is often much 
sharper than the concept expressed by the corresponding positive." In this 
tendency logicians have followed the lead of Carnap, in his seminal discus­
sions of classificatory, comparative, and quantitative concepts.2 As Carnap 
points out, "quantitative concepts are no doubt the most effective instru­
ments in the scientific arsenal," but comparative ones have their important 
role to play also. "Comparative concepts (sometimes called topological or 
order concepts) serve for the formulation of the result of a comparison in 
the form of a more-or-less statement without the use of numerical vari­
ables." 
Let us first reflect upon 
(1) 
'Jones is fatter than he was', 
but without splitting Jones up into temporal slices between expressions for 

54 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
which 'is fatter then' is significant, and without using numerical variables. It 
is important to note here the two tenses involved. Let us take the 'is' in the 
present tense — the most natural reading, surely — and parse this sentence 
in terms of Jones's states of being fat. At certain points in all linguistic work 
state-variables are needed, as well as variables for events, acts, processes, 
and the like. (The use of such variables with their attendant event-descrip­
tive predicates is the stock-in-trade of process- or event-logic.3) Using a 
more or less familiar notation, let us let 
(2) 
'Jones High Less-Fat-Than,'HM" 
express that the speaker places Jones high in the comparative scale of being 
less-fat-than as confined to the predicate 'HM' for human males (or for 
human males more or less like Jones in key respects). Then 
'< Jones, High, Less-Fat-Than,'HM'>e' 
expresses that e is a state of Jones's being so placed. There is also a relation 
Higher for being-higher-than as between human states of fatness, so that 'e 
Higher e', 'HSF" may express that e is higher-than e' in this sense. Then, 
During and Before 
being suitable temporal relations, our sentence (1) 
may be parsed as 
(1') 
'(Ee)(Ee,)(Ee1)(Efl)(<Jones,High,Less-Fat-Than,'HM'> 
e 
. 
<he,High,Less-Fat-Than,'HM'> e' . <Assrt>  . ex OfQbect a . 
(1) a . 'he' CrRefa 'Jones' . e During now . e' BeforeTime e . e 
Higher 
e','HSF')'.* 
Here 'now' is of course a deictic expression for the present moment of the 
speaker, and CrRef is the relation of cross-referentiality. '(1) ' expresses 
that a is of the form (1). This analysis avoids splitting Jones up into tem­
poral slices; it handles the positive in terms of the comparative — 'Jones is 
fat' taken timelessly is expressed by (2); it speaks of states of Jones in essen­
tially the same way that we would speak of his actions or occurrences that 
he undergoes or that happen to him; and so on. 
Note that it follows from our sentence (1) or () that Jones is now fat 
and also that Jones was fat. This is in accord with the "normal" reading of 
(1). However, (1) could be read in such a way as to allow that Jones is now 
fat but that he was not then, or even that he is not now fat nor was he then. 
Suppose he is and always has been thin. Our sentence still makes good 
sense, but in the logical form the two occurences of 'High' must be replaced 
by 'Low', where 

COMPARATIVES: P.T. GEACH 
55 
'Jones Low Less-Fat-Than,'HM" 
expresses that Jones is placed low in the Less-Fat-Than scale. (Similarly 
'Mid' is used for the form to express that he is placed somewhere in the 
middle, and the forms containing 'High', 'Mid', and 'Low' are then under­
stood to be mutually exclusive and jointly exhaustive.) And, similarly, 
where Jones is now fat but was not then, only the second occurrence of 
'High' is replaced by 'Low'. Another reading is where we do not wish it to 
follow that Jones either is or ever was either fat or thin. In this case we can 
use 'Mid' in the logical form. If (1) is read so as not to have any conse­
quences about his being fat or thin or either, a kind of disjunction can be 
used. For this, let 
'<Jones,(High  Mid  Low),Less-Fat-Than,'HM'> e' 
abbre­
viate 
'(<Jones,High,Less-Fat-Than> e v <Jones,Mid,Less-
Fat-Than,'HM'> ev <Jones,Low,Less-Fat-Than,'HM'> e)\ 
Our form would then be (1') with '(High  Mid  Low)' replacing 'High' 
both times. 
Can we make the foregoing sort of analysis work also for the kinds of 
intentional sentences to which Geach calls attention? Let us try. Consider 
first 
(3) 
'Jones looks fatter than he is'. 
This may be given the form 
(3') 
'(Ee)(Ee')(Efl)(Ee")(Ee1)(Efo)(Look e . e During now . e OfQbject 
e' . e' St Jones . e' During e . e' Under^ a . i{el  <Jones,(High 
 Mid  Low),Less-Fat-Than,'HM'> e j ' a . <he,(High  Mid 
 Low),Less-Fat-Than,'HM'> e" . <Assrt> ex . ^ OfQbject b . 
(3) b . 'he' CrRefb 'Jones' . e" During now . (e2)((e2 During now 
. e2 Undere a) => e2 Higher e",'HSF'))'. 
Here e is a present look of a state e' of Jones under the description of e"s 
being a state of Jones's being fat or not, e" is a present state of Jones's 
being far or not, and every e2 taken in e under that description is higher-for-
human-fatness-states than e'. The Under-relation here is that used in I and 
II above. 'Look e' expresses that e is a look (or result of an act of looking 
at), Of0b-ect is the prespositional relation of being the object-of, St is the rela­
tion of being a state of, and "{e  —- --}' Û' expresses that a is an inscrip­
tion of the given virtual-class form. From (3) it does not follow that Jones 

56 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
is fat. Jones might be thin but still look fatter than he is. 
Geach is surely correct in objecting to the transformational gram­
marian approach to 
(4) 
'Tom is taller than Bill is' 
in terms of transformations of some sort from 'Tom is tall' and 'Bill is tall'. 
He says that he does "not see how anything like a function from senses to 
senses can get us from the senses of these two sentences to the sense of the 
comparison, and will give the right result also in other cases." Quite. (4) is 
a relational sentence, for the handling of which a relational term is needed 
ab initio. 
Geach comments that "an even more objectionable bit of theorizing that 
I have come across in some linguists is explanation of comparatives by 
quantifying over degrees. For how are we to analyze (say) 'A is brighter 
than B' in terms of degrees of brightness? If the possession of a certain 
degree of brightness by A or by  excludes the possession by the something 
of any other degree of brightness, then presumably the analysis will be 'The 
degree of brightness of A is higher than the degree of brightness  has'; but 
'higher than' at least looks like one more example of the comparative 
degree we are trying to explain; this is not encouraging." No, it is not. Still, 
'higher than' could be construed as the '>' of real-number theory, say, so 
that we could presumably have that 
A is brighter than  = (Ea)(Eß)(NR a . NR ß . a = the degree 
of brightness of A . ß = the degree of brightness of  . a > ß). 
This kind of rendition might be suitable for some types of "things" A and 
B. Still, Geach is surely correct in not wishing to force this kind of analysis 
on all comparative terms. 
Geach comments that "it would be agreeable if comparisons could be 
all analyzed in terms of the relation greater than between real numbers, ...; 
but I fear this is impossible, in particular for intentional comparisons. A 
comparative adjective often gives expression to a clear method of rank 
ordering when we have no means of measurement with real numbers; and 
even when we have, A may believe that  is more so-and-so than  
although A is thoroughly innumerate and does not believe anything to do 
with real numbers." This last contention seems to rest on a confusion. We 
can parse a sentence of the form 'A believes  is more so-and-so than C' 
without ascribing any knowledge on A's part with the way in which we 
parse 'B is more so-and-so than C'. Consider 

COMPARATIVES: P.T. GEACH 
57 
Teter believes Jones is fatter than Smith', 
or, better, 
(5) 
'Peter believes Jones is fatter than he (actually) was', 
the '(actually)' here serving only to assure the cross-referentiality of 'he' to 
'Jones'. We — we logico-linguists — can give this the form 
(5') 
'(Ee)(Efl)(<Blv> e 
P e t e r A g e n t e 
e 0 f 
a 
a ThatComent 
where That0 
is the that-relation of content, '<Blv>' the gerundive for 
Content 
' 
ö 
believing, and Agent the relation of being the agent of. In place of '(1')' 
here, of course, the formula above thus labelled is to be inserted. In citing 
a form — or in "deriving" it by transformation rules from the parent En­
glish sentence4 — we do not ascribe any knowledge to Peter concerning the 
logical form () nor indeed concerning (5). Peter may be thoroughly igno­
rant of all the logical and metalogical theory involved. 
We must be careful not to confuse an "explanation" of "belief by 
innumerate A that  is fatter than  really is" with citing a logical form for 
a statement of such belief. The two are very different enterprises. To give a 
logical form is to give a meaning to the sentence. To explain a sentence, for 
Geach, is apparently to question A and his friends and acquaintances in 
such a way as to gain suitable grounds or evidence for the given sentence. 
Geach gives an analysis of 
(6) 
'Jones has become stupider than Jones used to be'. 
"in jargon that is (near enough) Fregean." Let us avoid all such jargon here 
in favor of the clear-cut notions of event-logic. In order to "scratch only 
where it itches" and to keep out irrelevancies, let us construe 'used to be' 
just as 'was'. Recalling () above, we see that a form for (6) can be some­
thing like 
(6') 
'(Ee1)(Ee2)(E^)(<Jones,Become,^2> el . ex BeforeTime now . e1 
Result e2 . e2 During now . <Jones,(High  Mid  Low),Less-
Stupid-Than,'HM'> e1 . <Jones, (High  Mid  Low),Less-
Stupid-Than,'HM'> e", e BeforeTime now . e2 Higher e,'HS'))'. 
We have had to scratch here to provide for the present perfect aspect of 
'become' by bringing in the result e2 of the becoming, and stipulating that it 
is to be a state now of Jones' being stupid or not higher than his past state 
of being stupid or not. Here too there are other possible readings. 

58 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
Geach invites us to reflect upon the validity of a "comparative catego­
rial syllogism" such as 
'Smith is stupider than Jones has become, 
Jones has become stupider than Jones used to be, 
Ergo: Smith is stupider than Jones used to be.' 
It is clear from the above how these sentences may be formulated, the val­
idity of this inference then being seen to be merely a special case of validity 
in first-order quantification-theory. 
After his first American tour, the great pianist Artur Schnabel com­
mented: 
(7) 
'The greater the music, the lower the fee.' 
Here there are two deleted or zeroed 'is's, one at the end of each clause, 
and (7) is no doubt intended as 
(7') 
'The greater the performance of great music is, the lower the fee 
for it is.' 
How now may this kind of comparative sentence be handled? Well, we 
may fix the non-logical vocabulary as follows. Let 'e Prfm ' express that e 
is a mereological sum of performances of a sum of scores of musical com­
positions, 'SGM A', that a is a sum of scores of great musical compositions, 
and 'x Fee e\ that x is the fee paid for such an e. Also '^ Gr e2,MP' is to 
express that  is greater-than e2 where e and e2 are both musical perfor­
mances or sums of such, and 'JC1 Gr x2,F' expresses that x is greater than x2 
is where xx and x1 are fees. A first approximation to (7) in the "reading" 
(7') is then 
(7") 
i(e1)(e2)(a)(x1)(x2)((e1 
Prfm a . e2 Prfm a . SGM a . j^Fee ^ . x2 
Fee e2) => (el Gr e2,MP z> x2 Gr x^F))'. 
Given any two performances of the same sum of scores of great music, if 
one is greater than the other in the appropriate sense, then the fee paid for 
it is less than the fee paid for the other. 
The difficulty with (7"), however, is that it does not capture the pro­
portionality that is no doubt intended. The difference in greatness in the per­
formances is presumably intended to be inversely proportional to the differ­
ence in the respective fees. Another reading is needed to capture this. Let 
tei VMGr e2,MP' express that ex is very much greater than e2 as MP's, 'e{ 
VVMGr <?2,MP', that ex is very very much greater than e2 is, and so on, as 

COMPARATIVES: P.T. GEACH 
59 
far as one wishes to distinguish.5 And similarly for 'x1 VMGr *2,F', and so 
on, for the fees. The desired form then becomes 
(7'") '(^1)(e2)(fl)(x1)(x2)((e1Prfm a . e2 Prfm a . SGM a . xx Fee  . x2 
Fee e2) z> ((^ Gr e2,MP => x2 Gr JC^F). (^ VMGr e2,MP  jt2 
VMGrx^F) . ...))'. 
Any further readings needed may no doubt be captured by suitable adjust­
ments in the details. 
Along with comparative categorical syllogisms, Geach calls attention 
to comparative hypothetical syllogisms, such as 
'The merrier our party becomes, the noisier our songs will be; 
The noisier our songs are, the madder the neighbors will get; 
Ergo: the merrier our party becomes, the madder the neighbors 
will get.' 
Geach comments that his "hunch" here is that the validity of "hypothetical 
syllogisms in the propositional calculus" is "involved" in the validity of syl­
logisms of this kind. Geach leaves the problem of justifiying such syllogisms 
"as an exercise to the reader," obviously without realizing how complicated 
these sentences are when looked at from the point of view of deep structure 
from close to. Oversimplifying somewhat, we have quantificational struc­
tures of the forms 
4e1)(e2)(e3)(e4)((A1 . Aj r, (BJ => BjT, 
4e3)(e4)(e5)(e6)((A2 
. A3)  (B2 = 
BJT, 
and 
r(e1)(e2)(e5)(e6)((A1 . A3) = (B1 = 3) 
for the two premisses and conclusion, respectively, with suitable restrictions 
on how the variables can occur in A , A , etc. The inference, to be valid, 
requires a tacit existence assumption, 
)(4)(2 . 2, 
roughly, that at least one song at our party is noisier than at least one other. 
Geach's "hunch" here is thus in a way correct but too simple to cover the 
full quantificational character of the inference involved. 
Geach cites another syllogism he apparently takes to be of the same 
form, namely, 
'The uglier a woman is, the more cosmetics she uses; 

60 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
The more cosmetics a woman uses, the less ugly she looks; 
Ergo: the uglier a woman is, the less ugly she looks.' 
He comments that this syllogism is invalid, but that "it would be following 
a false clue to look for the cause of invalidity in the intentionality of 'the 
less ugly she looks' ; for the syllogism remains invalid if we replace this with 
'the fewer people are repelled by her' both times." But 'repelled by' is surely 
to be handled intentionally, as well no doubt as 'ugly' is. Appeal to the 
intentional character of these notions would seem to be essential here. 
At the end of his paper, Geach considers "the logically disconcerting 
effect of having two comparatives or two superlatives together." He wor­
ries, for example, about the comparison involved in the statement of a "pol­
icy designed for the greatest happiness of the greatest number, i.e. intended 
to make more people happier than any other policy. Are we sure we under­
stand the logical import of this double comparison? I [Geach] am inclined 
to say that there is nothing to understand. 'The greatest happiness of the 
greatest number' is surely an immensely effective bit of rhetoric, like 
Churchill's 'Never was so much owed to so many by so few,' and if we take 
it just as that it is idle to seek to milk out a precise sense." Well, even a 
rhetorical sentence has its logical form, namely, the logical form of an 
appropriate, non-rhetorical, paraphrastic sentence. Of course 'the greatest 
happiness of the greatest number' is meaningless in isolation, but can be 
given meaning within the context of a theory, or within some suitable sub­
language of a natural language. One way would be as follows. 
Let 'policy A' express that A is a policy, i.e., a "text", and let 'b' be a 
variable over sentences, texts, and the like, just as '' has been above. Let 
'SG p' express that person p is a member of the social group under discus­
sion, '/? Able e,'MHH" to express that person p is able or capable at time t 
of being in a state e as taken under the description of its being a state of 
maximal human happiness, 'e Accord A' that e is a state in accord with A, 
'p Stf e' that person p is in the state e at time t, and 4 Approp p" that t is a 
time appropriate to or during the life-span of p. Happiness here is not taken 
as something external to the person, but as something he or she must in 
part work for and may or may not be able of achieving maximally. And 
some policies might be such as to exclude this maximal state for many. Con­
sider now the form 
'(O)O)(0((SGp . p Able, e,'MHH' . t Approp p) ZD (e Accord A 
. p Str e)) . ~ (Efe) (Policy b . ~ A = b . (p)(e)(í)((SGp . p Able, 
6,'MHH' . t Approp p) =) (e Accord b . e St 
p))))\ 

COMPARATIVES: P.T. GE ACH 
61 
expressing that every person is always in the state of maximal happiness of 
which he or she is capable at the time, this state being in accord with the 
policy A, but that this holds of no other policy. The greatest number' here 
causes no problem, designating the number of members of the social group 
SG, and is paraphrased away. And, of course, the hedonics of the theory is 
such that 'MHH' for the states of maximal human happiness is a meaningful 
notion. Rhetorical devices, along with extended usage, metaphors6, fic­
tional locutions7, and so on, have a logic all their own, which we must work 
hard to get at. 
How fares now 
(8) 
'Never was so much owed to so many by so few'? 
Here we must take seriously 'much', 'many', and 'few' with all the slack and 
"fuzziness" thereunto appertaining. Also the owing here is to be handled by 
a term taken collectively rather than distributively. To handle terms taken 
collectively8 it is convenient, again, to bring in mereology or the calculus of 
individuals. 
Let {px  2  ...  pn) be the mereological sum of persons p1 , ..., p . 
Any such sum is di fusion of persons. We may let, in general, 
'FuPer p' 
abbreviate 
'((Eq)(Per q . q Y p) . (*)((~ x = N . x 
Pp) z> (E<?)(Ey)(Per q.qPp.yPq.yP 
x)))' 
■ 
expressing that p is a fusion of persons in the sense that p has at least one 
person as a part and is such that every non-null part ofp has a part that is a 
part of some person that is a part ofp. And similarly 'FultComp x' may be 
defined to express that x is a fusion of the relevant items of compensation, 
i.e., of whatever is owed to the many by the few. Let lp Many Per' express 
that p is a fusion of many persons, 'q Few Per' that q is a fusion of a few 
persons, and 'x Much ItComp' that x is a fusion of many items of compensa­
tion (i.e., x is much compensation). Also we need comparatives 'More' and 
'Fewer' such that 'p More q' expresses that the fusion of person p has more 
persons as parts than q has, 'p Fewer q\ fewer, and 'y More x\ that the 
FultComp contains more items of compensation than the FultComp x does. 
Actually here we may let 
'p More q' 
abbreviate 
'(FuPer/? . FuPer q . qP p . ~ pF q)\ 
and similarly for 'y More x\ Also we may perhaps define 
'p Few Per' 
as 
l(Eq)(Er)(q Many Per . FuPer p . ~ p Many 
Per . (FuPer r v r = N) . (s)(Per s^>sP(qupu 
r)))\ 

62 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
so that a few added to a many, added perhaps to some other FuPer, is the 
totality. Owing is to be handled tetradically so that 'p Owe x,q' expresses 
that p owes x to q at time t, where p and q are either separate Per's or 
mereological sums of such and x is a separate ItComp or a sum of such. 
With all this, a form for (8) may be given as 
(8') 
'~ (EO(Ep)(E<?)(Ex)(FuPer p . FuPer q . FultComp x . p Many 
Per . q Few Per . x Much ItComp . t BeforeTime now . p Owef x,q 
. ~ {Ep'){Eq')ÇEx'){p' 
More/? . q' Fewer q . x' More :. p' Owe^ 
q',x))>. 
All of these forms are put forward tentatively and as first approxima­
tions subject to further refinement and improvement. The serious study of 
logical form, and of the logical semiotics needed for it, is still in its infancy, 
and much more thorough work than has yet been undertaken lies ahead. In 
the foregoing, the non-logical vocabulary used has been ad hoc for each 
sentence. Eventually, of course, we should hope to have a full primitive 
vocabulary, together with a non-circular lexicon, that would enable us to 
handle the full complexity of all sentences of the language. Recent 
advances in lexicography are such as to suggest that this hope is not a mere 
dream, but a goal to which we are coming closer day by day. 
A word now about St. Anselm's famous proof for the existence of God 
in the Proslogion. Geach gives no logical forms in terms of which the argu­
ment — whatever it is, and this is by no means easy to say — can be dis­
cussed in any logical detail. He thinks that the real "heart of the matter ... lies 
in the problem of intentional comparisons." Well, in order to make sense of 
the proof, we must surely distinguish between being an entity "greater than 
can be conceived" and just being an entity greater than all others. The gist 
of the argument is to show how to get from a suitable conception of an "un­
surpassable" being — to use Hartshorne's word for it — to the existence of 
such a being. A logical analysis of such a proof has been given previously.9 
The basic non-logical vocabulary needed is an intentional predicate 'Cncv' 
for conceiving, a predicate 'Able' for human ability (to conceive), and 'Gr' 
for a very general, Anselmic relation of being greater than. We can then 
frame premisses in accord with those of Anselm, reflect upon their sound­
ness, and proceed to the conclusion. Nothing here depends upon any prob­
lems of intentional comparison, although of course the intentional predi­
cates 'Able' and 'Cncv' and the comparative one 'Gr' play a fundamental 
role. Here, again, Geach's view is too simple. 

COMPARATIVES: P.T. GEACH 
63 
To get at an adequate logic of comparatives, we see that nothing can 
take the place of unearthing the deep logical structures of the sentences as 
used in a given context. For this, it is essential to press for the full non-log­
ical vocabulary needed and for the quantificational structure, or its surro­
gate in some sort of relational algebra, combinatory or otherwise, as, for 
example, in XIII below. Surface grammar is of little help here, except as a 
heuristic leading to problems at a deeper level. We are all much indebted to 
Geach for his often brilliant insights and for his depth of understanding of 
some aspects of the great tradition of the history of logic, and for the 
breadth and scope of his general philosophic outlook. We can only express 
regret that he has not seen fit to pay greater heed to the inner technicalia of 
modern logical semiotics, which would provide him tools more helpful for 
his work than those currently available in England. 


CHAPTER FIVE 
On homogeneous logic, a quasi-Lesniewskian 
ontology, and type-theory 
"On revient toujours à ses premiers amours." 
The very idea of a homogeneous logic is an attractive one. Everything 
whatsoever is construed as an entity of one and the same general logical 
kind or type.1 Such differences among entities as are to be distinguished are 
then differences to be accomodated within the theory. We live in one 
unified universe, after all, and everything whatsoever is contained therein. 
Whatever there is is thus like whatever there is, in just this sense; the 
entities of the homogeneous theory are just the entities that there are. Such 
entities we usually call 'individuals' but no philosophic profundity is to be 
attached to the term. It is merely a convenient rubric for the most funda­
mental entities admitted, all other entities then being constructs in terms of 
them. The individuals are the most basic, all other kinds of entities being 
constructible in terms of them. 
Let us reflect upon the extended or ordinal mereology OM, of the pre­
vious paper, by way of logical background. The net effect of the discussion 
here will be a reinterpretation of that system along somewhat more tradi­
tional lines. Let us recall the two fundamental primitives, 'P' for a dyadic 
relation of part to whole and 'Ord' for a triadic relation of ordination, so 
that 'x Ord v,z' expresses that x is the ordinal individual consisting of y and 
z in this order. In addition, an operation of unit summation is admitted so 
that \\~~ is regarded as a term for the sum of unit individuals such that 
--x—, where '~x-' is some sentential form of the system perhaps containing 
'x' as a free variable. What now, we should ask, is a unit individual? One 
construal is that of EM; another construal is now to be given. 
Let us refer hereafter to the system here as HL. 

66 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
In OM parts of individuals were admitted, including the null individual 
N. Here in HL an individual will have no parts — in the sense of 'P' — 
other than itself and the null individual. Recall the definition of 
DL 
'N' 
as short for 
'(xl ~ x P x)'. 
Then we may also let 
D2. 
'Unit*' 
be short for 
' ( - x P N . (y)((~ y P N . y P x) = x P 
y)Y, 
so that an entity x is a unit just where it is not a part of N but is a part of all 
non-null parts of it. This definition allows for both cardinal and ordinal 
units, as in EM. Here in HL, however, these latter are to be handled a little 
differently. 
Let now 
D3. 
'OrdEntx' 
abbreviate 
'(Ey)(Ez)x Ord y,z\ 
so that an ordinal entity x is any result of ordinating any entities  and z. A 
cardinal entity is then one of all of whose unit parts are non-ordinal entities, 
so that 
D4. 
'CardEnt x' 
may abbreviate 
'x P (yl ~ OrdEnt y)'. 
The notion of a cardinal individual can now be construed, within the 
theory, as any unit, cardinal entity. Thus 
D5. 
'Cardlnd x' 
now abbreviates 
'(Unit x . CardEnt x)'. 
And similarly 
D7. 
'OrdEnt(Card)^ x' 
may 
abbreviate 
i(Ey1)...(Eyn)(x 
Ord 
yv...,yn 
• Cardlnd yx 
Cardlnd y^)', 
where 
D6a. 
'x Ord y,z,w' 
abbreviates 
'(Ew)(w Ord z,w . x Ord y,u)\ 
and so on, as in OM. An ordinal entity of degree n whose ordinands are car­
dinal individuals is thus now any result of ordinating any n cardinal indi­
viduals. 
The unit cardinal entities, or cardinal individuals, are to be understood 
more or less as the "individuals" or "things" or "objects" of everyday life, 
just as the Urelemente of a set-theory may be. Ordinal entities, on the other 
hand, are something quite new and need not be regarded as "individuals" in 
any ordinary sense; hence we do not refer to them here as individuals. 
By a collective let us mean now any sum (xl~x—) of unit entities x such 

HOMOGENEOUS LOGIC, ONTOLOGY, AND TYPE-THEORY 
67 
that —-. Such a sum may be of either cardinal individuals, of ordinal 
entities, of further kinds of entities to be distinguished, or of any of these 
kinds of entities summed or ordinated in any way. For the moment, let us 
reflect upon just collectives of cardinal individuals, i.e., upon sums desig­
nated by expressions of the form '(;tl(CardEnt x . -je--))'. This notion may 
be defined by letting 
D8. 
'Coll(Card) JC' abbreviate 
'(y)((Unit y . y P x) => Cardlnd 
This definition is such as to allow for both null and universal cardinal col­
lectives. Of course, one might wish to exclude a null collective on the Les-
niewskian ground that there can be no collective if there is nothing to be 
collected. Here, note, there is no null cardinal individual, a null cardinal 
collective being admitted in its stead. Lesniewski apparently has it just the 
other way around — a null individual but no null collective — as we shall 
see in a moment. 
Relations are also to be handled here as collectives, relational collec­
tives. And of course there are many different kinds, depending upon the 
kinds of relata. First let us consider must relational collectives whose relata 
are cardinal individuals. For this we may let 
D9. 
'RelColl(Card)^' 
abbreviate 
'(y)((Unit y . y P x) => 
OrdEnt (Card) J'y)'. 
An entity x is thus a relational collective of degree n with only cardinal 
entities as ordinands just where every unit part of x is an ordinal entity of 
degree n whose ordinands are cardinals. Relational collectives (among car­
dinal entities) are thus built up here as sums of ordinal entities just as cardi­
nal collectives are built up as sums of cardinal individuals. 
By a sum, of course, throughout the discussion, is meant merely a Bool­
ean sum. The null individual has already been introduced as the Boolean 
sum of all unit entities x such that ~ x P x. The other Boolean notions are 
immediately forthcoming in full generality as follows. 
DlOa.'ixuyY 
as 
\zl(z 
P x v z P y))', 
DIOb. \x n y)' 
as 
'(zl(z P x . z P y))', 
DIOc. '-*' 
as 
' ( y l - y P * ) ' , 
and 
DIOd. 'U' 
as 
'-N'. 

68 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
These definitions introduce the Boolean sum of x and y, the Boolean pro­
duct of x and y, the negative of x or anti-x, and the universal or cosmic ele­
ment. 
As basic principles of the system, the following are needed, essentially 
as in OM. Clearly P is totally reflexive and transitive so that 
PrL 
\-(x)xFx, 
Pr2. 
Hx)(y)(z)((x 
P y . y P z ) i D x P z ) . 
Also we have Principles of Unit Summation to the effect that 
.  (y)((xl--x--) P v s (x)((Unit x . --) D I P y)), 
Pr4. 
f- (y)(y P (xl-x--) = ¿¿((Unit x . x P y) ID -x-)), 
where '--x--' is any sentential function perhaps containing 'x' as a free vari­
able. 
Concerning Ord we have the following basic principles. 
Pr5a. |- (x)(y)(z)(w)((x Ord y,z . w Ord y,z) => x P w), 
Pr5b. \- (x)(y)(z)(w)((x Ord y,z . x Ord w,z) ID y P w), 
Pr5c. |- (x)(y)(z)(w)((x Ord y,z . x Ord y,w) D Z P W ) . 
These principles stipulate in effect that Ord is a one-many-many, a many-
one-many, and a many-many-one relation in the sense appropriate for 
triadic relations. 
Identity may be regarded as merely mutual part-to-whole, so that 
DU. 
'x Id y' abbreviates 
'(* P y . y P x)'. 
We write 'Id' here rather than the more usual ' = ', in order to introduce this 
latter later (DL5) in its strict Lesniewskian sense. 
With Td' available, we note that Pr5a-5c also now hold with 'Id' 
replacing 'P' in the consequents. Also we have additional principles of iden­
tity as follows. 
Pró. 
\-{x)(y){x Id y =3 (z)(w)((x Ord z,u = y Ord z,u) . (z Ord x,u = 
z Ord ,) . (z Ord u,x = z Ord w,y))), 
Pr7. 
\- (x)(y)(z)(iv)(w)(v)((x Ord y,z . w Ord ,v) ZD (X Id w = ((y Id 
w . z Id v) v (Et)(y Ord M,Í . v Ord t,z) v (Ei)(z Ord t,v .  Ord 
* ' ) ) ) ) ■ 
The following special principles concerning Ord and OrdEnt are also 
needed. 
Pr8. 
h (x)(y)(z)(x Ord y,z ZD (~ x P y . ~ x P z)), 
Pr9. 
h (*)(y)((OrdEnt 
^ . ~ P N . ] > P I ) D Î P ) / ) , 

HOMOGENEOUS LOGIC, ONTOLOGY, AND TYPE-THEORY 
69 
PrlO. V-(x){y)(z)(x Ord v,z : ((y P x ID y P N) . (z P x => z P N))). 
These principles are to the effect that every ordinal entity is a part of all of 
its non-null parts, and that if x is an ordinal entity with y and z as its 
ordinands, x is not a part of either y or z, and y and z are not parts of x 
unless they are null. 
Thus far nothing has been said concerning Principles of Existence. We 
assume first an Axiom of Infinity for Ordinal Entities, to the effect that, 
given any entities x and y that lack a non-null part in common, there always 
exists an ordinal entity with them as ordinands. (This assumption is very 
strong, perhaps too strong in some respects. Cf. Pr8 and Pr9 inter alia in the 
Appendix below.) 
Prll. 
|-(x)(y)((Ez)(~ z P N . ~ z P x . ~ z P y ) ID (Ez)z Ord x,y). 
Clearly there could not be an ordinal entity y with U as one of its 
ordinands, for then y itself would have to be a part of one of its ordinands 
— which would violate Pr9, requiring (together with Pr8) that every ordinal 
entity be a unit. And similarly if the sum of x and y were universal. In a 
moment another principle of existence will be given, an Axiom of Infinity 
for Cardinal Individuals. 
Let us compare now — albeit very roughly — the foregoing framework 
with Lesniewski's so-called Ontology, the central part no doubt of his 
trivium of Protothetic, Ontology, and Mereology. A full understanding of 
Lesniewski's work is not easy to come by, and most of us must rely upon 
secondary sources for such meager understanding as we have. For the pre­
sent purposes, we shall rely on the valuable exposition of Czeslaw 
Lejewski, which is generally regarded as a highly trustworthy and reliable 
one.2 In Ontology the concern is with individuals and collectives, and rela­
tions are somehow to be provided for, it would seem, in terms of these. 
Lejewski, following Woodger,3 speaks of "shared", "unshared," and 
"fictitious" names. Shared names are taken to name more than one object; 
unshared names name one and only one object; and fictitious names are 
"expressions which as regards their syntax behave like shared or unshared 
names, but which do not name anything, e.g. 'Pegasus', 'centaur', 'object 
which does not exist'." Lejewski comments (p. 153) that Lesniewski's "On­
tology has been described as the most comprehensive logic of Names 
because its most characteristic expressions belong to the semantical cate­
gory of names, .... If, however, we take into account the contents of Ontol­
ogy then it would be more appropriate to describe it as a theory of what 

70 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
there is. Just as astronomy tells us something about heavenly bodies, the 
theses [or principles] of Ontology tell us something about things, or objects 
if one prefers, or individuals." 
Very well, let us take Ontology as a theory of individuals — and of 
how they are taken together to form collectives — and take its variables as 
ranging over such. Lejewski, however, writes in some passages as though 
the variables are to be taken as "standing for names." Thus, he explains 
that Lesniewski's 'e' or "functor of singular inclusion" is allowed to occur 
"in expressions of the form ' e ft' (to be read: a is ft)." A sentence of this 
form, we are told, is true just where "the semantical status for which the '' 
and the 'ft' stand" is such that '' is an unshared name, 'ft' is a shared or 
unshared name, and any individual designated or denoted by '' "is" or "is 
an" — in the sense of Lesniewski's 'E' — individual denoted by 'ft'; otherwise 
false. This sentence is a paraphrase of Lejewski's and seeks to capture its 
intent in the exact terms of the semantics of designation and denotation. 
Lejewski's explanation apparently fails to distinguish the use and mention 
of 'a' and 'ft'. On the one hand, these expressions "stand for" names, and, 
on the other, ' e ft' is read: A is ft — as though '' and 'ft' stood for objects, 
not names. 
For present purposes, let us think of a shared name as designating a 
non-null, non-unit cardinal collective (in the sense of D8 above), an 
unshared name as an individual constant designating an individual uniquely, 
and a fictitious name as designating either the null individual N or a null 
collective in the sense of D8. It was commented above that collectives in the 
sense of D8 are allowed to be null, and also they are allowed to contain a 
single individual. A Lesniewskian collective, however, cannot be null and 
cannot contain a single individual. To provide for this notion, we merely let 
D12. 
'LesColl(Card) x' 
abbreviate 
'(Coll(Card) x . ~ x P N . ~ 
Cardlndx)'. 
Also for fictitious entities, we may let 
D13. 
'Fictx' 
abbreviate 
'xPN'. 
The question now arises as to the extent to which the present 
framework contains the full Lesniewskian theory as sketched by Lejewski. 
To determine this let us refect upon Lesniewski's various "functors" of 
inclusion, exclusion, identity, and existence and see how they may be pro­
vided for here. We will then be in a position to see how they may be interre­
lated and the various Lesniewskian Axioms of Ontology accomodated. 

HOMOGENEOUS LOGIC, ONTOLOGY, AND TYPE-THEORY 
71 
The following definitions, if not actually capturing the fine pointe of 
Lesniewski's intent, would seem to come very close. 
DLL 
'x E v' 
for 
'((Cardlnd x . Cardlnd y . x Id v) v (Cardlnd x . 
LesColl(Card) y . x P y))', 
DL2. 
lx E y' 
for 
'x £ v v (LesColl(Card) x . LesColl(Card) y . (x Id 
y v x P y ) ) ) ' , 
DL5. 
': cz y' 
for 
'(x E  v (Fict x . Cardlnd y . ~ x Id y) v (Fiet x 
. LesColl(Card) y . ~ x Id y) v (Fict x . Fict y . ~ x Id y))', 
DL4. 'x A y' 
for 
'(x E y v (LesColl(Card) x . Cardlnd y . y P x) v 
(LesColl(Card) x . LesColl(Card) y . y P x) v (LesColl(Card) x 
. LesColl(Card) y . (Ez)(LesColl(Card) z . z P x . z P y)))'. 
The four relational expressions or "functors" introduced in these definienda 
are for singular inclusion, strong inclusion, weak inclusion, and partial 
inclusion, respectively. The "functors of exclusion" are the dyadic-rela­
tional negatives of these functors. 
The three "functors of identity" are as follows. 
DL5. 
'x - y' 
for 
'(Cardlnd x . Cardlnd y . x Id y)', 
DL6. 
'x D y' 
for 
'(x = y v (LesColl(Card) x . LesColl(Card) y . x 
 30)', 
DL7. 
'xOy' 
for 
'(x D y v (Fictx . Fict y . xldy))'. 
These definienda introduce respectively the functors of singular identity, 
strong identity, and weak identity. The "functors of existence" are intro­
duced contextually as follows. 
DL8. 
'Exx' 
for 
'(Cardlnd x v LesColl(Card) x)', 
DL9. 
'Solx' 
for 
'(Cardlnd xv Fictx)', 
DL10. 'Ob x' 
for 
'Cardlnd x'. 
The definienda are respectively, to the effect that x exists or that there is at 
least one x, that there exists at most one x, and that there exists exactly one 
x. 
Lejewski lists several "theses" concerning these various notions, which 
can be shown to hold on the basis of the principles of HL given above. He 
also lists several different single Axioms of Ontology, or axiom sets, that 
have been shown to suffice for Lesniewski's theory. Presumably all of these 
can be shown to hold here within HL also. It thus seems that Lesniewski's 
Ontology, as developed by Lejewski, can be mirrored here. The resources 
of HL, however, as is already evident, differ radically from those of Les-

72 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
niewski in the handling of relations. Relations are not regarded here as con­
stituting some new "semantical category," but are built up from ordinal 
entities in essentially the same way that cardinal collectives are built up 
from cardinal individuals. Let us reflect now upon how this may be done in 
such a way as to capture the full mathematical power of the simplified 
theory of types. First, however, a word about the arithmetic of finite cardi­
nals. 
Let us let 
D13. 
lx Sue v' 
abbreviate 
4(11(^) x 
. Coll(Card)  . 
(Ez)(CardInd z . ~ z P  . x = (  z))', 
expressing that the cardinal collective x is a successor of the cardinal collec­
tive  in the sense of being a sum of  with a cardinal individual not a part 
of y. We postulate now that every cardinal collective has a (cardinal-collec­
tive) successor. This is in effect an Axiom of Infinity for Cardinal Individu­
als. 
Pr.I2 \-(x)(Coll(Card) x ZD (Ey)(y) Sue x). 
It then immediately follows that 
KEx)CardInd x. 
How now can we handle collectives of collectives of cardinal individu­
als? We cannot merely form sums of them for the summands would then 
become "lost" in the sum, so to speak. In a sum of cardinal individuals, 
each ultimate summand, so to speak, is a cardinal individual. In a sum of 
cardinal collectives, the summands are either collectives or cardinal indi­
viduals, so that, given the sum, one cannot recover them as ultimate sum­
mands uniquely. To circumvent this situation, let us introduce the notion of 
an attributive relational collective, essentially as in OM for attributive rela­
tion-individuals. 
In D9 above the general notion of an rc-adic relational collective among 
cardinal individuals was introduced. In similar fashion, let us now introduce 
the general notion of an rc-adic relational collective among cardinal collec­
tives. We let 
D14. 
'RelColl(Coll(Card))w *' 
abbreviate 
'(j)((Unit y . y P x) =» 
(Ez1)...(Ez)(Coll(Ca"rd) zx 
Coll(Card) z 
. y Ord 
An entity x is thus an rc-adic relational collective with cardinal collectives as 

HOMOGENEOUS LOGIC, ONTOLOGY, AND TYPE-THEORY 
73 
relata just where every unit part of x is an ordinal entity with just n cardinal 
collectives as ordinands. An attributive relational collective of cardinal col­
lectives is now a dyadic relational collective of cardinal collectives of a spe­
cial sort. 
The familiar way of writing dyadic-relation formulae is to allow the 
relation term to occur in the middle flanked by argument-terms on either 
side. To achieve this for relations between cardinal collectives, we may let 
D15a. 6x y2 z' 
abbreviate 
'(RelColl(Coll(Card))2 y . Coll(Card) 
x . Coll(Card) z . (Ew)O Ord x,z . ív P v))\ 
In a similar fashion, we may define 'JC  z,w\ and so on, for triadic rela­
tional collectives among cardinal collectives, and so on. 
We now define 
D16. 
'x2 AttColl(Card) v' 
as 
' 0 x2  . (z)(w)(z x2 w ZD Z = w))\ 
so that x2 is an attribute of the cardinal collective v just where x2 is a 
RelColl(Card))2 that the cardinal collective v bears to itself, and such that 
any two cardinal collectives one of which bears it to the other are in fact one 
and the same. 
Given this special notion of attribute, we may introduce the relation 
*Suc of the ancestral of the relation Sue.4 (We write 'Att' here as short for 
'An 
' Ï 
Coll(Card) ') 
D17. 
'x *Suc y' 
abbreviates 
£(Coll(Card) x . Coll(Card) v . 
(u)((u2 Att  . (z)(w)((u 
Att w . z Suc w) = u2 Att z)) => u2 Att 
* ) ) ' ■ 
The definiendum expresses that the Coll(Card) x bears the ancestral of Suc 
to the Coll(Card) y, or equivalently, that x can be reached in a finite 
number of Sue-steps from y. 
Readers familiar with the notion of the ancestral, and of the notion of 
the ancestral for relations of higher degree n where n is an even integer, will 
recognize how easily we can go on, from this point, to develop the arithme­
tic of the finite integers. (See VII below and the Appendix.) 
Let us reflect now upon how a version of the simplified theory of types 
may be developed here within HL, merely by extending the definitions 
already at hand by giving further ones of similar kind. For this let us distin­
guish the level or argument-structure of the various kinds of collectives to be 
accomodated. Let 1 indicate the level of the cardinal individuals and collec­
tives of such, and let (1,1) indicate the level of structure of a dyadic ordinal 

74 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
individual with cardinal ordinands or any collectives (sums) of such, includ­
ing attributive relations. Similarly (1,1,1) is the level for triadic ordinal indi­
viduals with cardinal ordinands. Then ((1,1),(1,1)) indicates the level or 
argument-structure of dyadic relational collectives between dyadic rela­
tional collectives between cardinal individuals. And similarly for all the 
further kinds of -adic relational collectives of all levels and kinds of argu­
ment-structures, including all manner of further attributive relations. 
This is not the occasion to tarry with the development of the system 
into the foundations of mathematics. Such development may be carried out 
essentially as in EM, mutatis mutandis. Along the line a Multiplicative 
Axiom will be needed, as well as further notions and principles for exten­
sions into transfinite number theory and into the theory of infinitesimals. 
For purposes of application to non-mathematical material, suitable 
individual-constants may be added as primitives, and erstwhile predicate-
constants added as primitive constants for the appropriate kinds of collec­
tives. We thus have in HL a foundation for applied logic as extensive as that 
of PM itself. 
The underlying logic in the formulation of HL here has been that of the 
usual first-order quantification-theory. It is easy to see, however, how this 
could be transformed into a relational algebra, as formulated previously.5 
In place of '~', V , and the quantifiers as primitives, we now need the Bool­
ean notions '-' and 'u' for the negatives and sums of rc-adic relations, the 
notion 'x' for the Cartesian product of any fc-adic relation with an n-adic 
one, and the general notion of the relations affilateci with a given n-adic 
relation, i.e., all its domains, relational domains, and converses. The 
algebra of relations provides the needed logical background without the use 
of variables, truth-functional connectives, or quantifiers. The two non-logi­
cal primitives here are 'P' and 'Ord' and the whole of the theory of types 
now becomes a relational algebra rather than a logic or applied logic of the 
usual kind.6 

CHAPTER SIX 
On non-translational semantics and a quasi-
Lesniewskian calculus of names 
"On se persuade mieux pour l'ordinaire par 
les raison qu'on a trouvé soi-même, que par 
celles qui sont venues dans l'esprit des 
autres." 
According to Lejewski1, Lesniewski's so-called Ontology "has been 
described as the most comprehensive Logic [or Calculus] of Names because 
its most characteristic expressions of Protothetic belong to the semantical 
category of propositions." Protothetics, it will be recalled, is in essentials 
Lesniewski's rendition of the classical two-valued logic of the truth-func­
tional connectives. As Lejewski points out, however, Protothetic "goes 
beyond the classical Calculus of Propositions in allowing variables over 
functions upon propositions as well as over propositions themselves, 
together with quantifiers over both of these kinds of entities." Just as prop­
ositions are the values for variables in the logic of propositions, so, it would 
seem, should names be the values for variables in Ontology regarded as a 
Logic of Names. The sense in which Ontology is to be regarded as a Logic 
or Calculus of Names, however, is far from clear. 
Lesniewski's 'E' for 'is' is the basic context 'x E y' is not, prima facie 
anyhow, to be read in terms of names. To say that x E  is not to say that the 
name x is the name y, but rather that x is v. By a considerable circumlocu­
tion we might "read" 'x e ' in terms of names, perhaps to the effect that 
some suitable name of x bears a certain semantical relation to a suitable 
name of y. Or, if 'x' and 'y' are taken as variables for names, then 'x E ' 
may be taken to express that an object of which x is a name is an object of 
which  is a name. For either "reading" here, a considerable spelling out of 
the theory is needed. If we mistake not, no such theory for the reading in 
terms of names has yet been explicitly given in modern terms by Les-

76 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
niewski's commentators. 
It is not sufficient, in formulating a philosophical or scientific theory, 
merely to lay down a primitive and say that it is to be "read" in context in 
such and such a way. No, it is essential explicitly to spell out the "interpre­
tation" of that term in a well-formulated semantical metalanguage, which 
itself should be of a certain simplicity and acceptability. The standards for 
these latter may of course vary a good deal from philosopher to 
philosopher. But never mind: the more exacting our standards here, surely, 
the better. In any event, it behooves the Lesniewskian commentators to 
apprise us of the exact semantics needed for the "reading" of the basic con­
texts containing the primitive 'e' and the "characteristic expressions" of the 
theory, and to assure us that these meet certain minimal desiderata. Not to 
do so is to resort to older, informal techniques in an area where sophisti­
cated methodologies are now available. 
This present paper is not concerned with the niceties of how to inter­
pret Lesniewski. The attempt is made here, rather, to show that the quasi-
Lesniewskian theory HL of the preceding chapter, can be formulated as a 
genuine calculus of names by bringing in the devices of non-translational 
semantics. This latter, it will be recalled, is a semantic lacking the crucial 
feature that all other kinds of semantics have, namely, of containing the 
object-language in toto, or a translation of it, as a part.2 A non-translational 
semantics of the system HL will then turn out, as we shall see, to be a 
genuine calculus of names in a very direct sense. Its "characteristic expres­
sions" include those for the vocabulary of HL, and the whole theory is a 
theory about those expressions. The theory, however, is not a mere syntax, 
although it includes such as a part. A syntax is of course a "calculus of 
names," but only in a more restricted sense. 
There is no need here to go into laborious technical detail in the pre­
sentation. The formulation of HL presupposed is that of the preceding 
chapter, and the key items of non-translational semantics needed will be 
recalled one by one as we proceed. 
The first item on the agenda is to be clear about the shape-descriptions 
to be admitted in the syntax. The expressions of HL include, it will be recal­
led, primitive constants for any or all the kinds of entities admitted, cardi­
nal entities and ordinal ones of any complexity. The unit-sum terms include 
all expressions of the form '(*1--*--)' where '«*--' is a sentential form of HL 
perhaps containing 'x' as a free variable. Shape-descriptions for all of these 
will play a central role in what follows. 

NON-TRANSLATIONAL SEMANTICS 
77 
To keep tabs on the structure of HL and the metalanguage to be for­
mulated, let us recall the full syntactic character of the former by means of 
the following stipulation, by simultaneous recursion, of 'formula' and 'term' 
as relativized to that system. 
1. 
Any variable or primitive individual-constant is a term of HL. 
2. 
If x and v are terms, rx P y1 is a formula of HL. 
3. 
If x, y, and z are terms of HL, rx Ord y,zn is a formula of HL. 
4. 
If jc is a variable and A is formula of HL, then r(jtlA)n is a term 
of HL. 
5. 
If A is a formula of HL, so is r ~ A-1. 
6. 
If A and  are formulae of HL, so is r(A v By. 
7. 
If : is a variable and A a formula of HL, then r(jc)An is a formula 
of HL. 
The next item on the agenda is to give the full list of shape-descriptive 
names to be admitted in the syntax. These will include names for each of 
the primitive symbols of HL. These latter are just T', 'Ord', ', '~', 'v', 
left and right parentheses, variables, and the primitive individual-constants. 
In particular, then, let us let 'PEE' be the shape-descriptive name for 'P'. 
'ORD' for 'Ord', 'ONE' for '1', 'TILDE' for '~', 'VEE' for 'v', 'LP' for '(', 
'RP' for ')', 'EX' for 'x'. Let further variables be written as 'x', V , and so 
on. We let 'AC' be the shape-descriptive name for '". Similarly let all 
primitive individual-constants of HL be written as 'a', 'a", and so on. We 
then need 'AY' as the only additional structural-descriptive name for 'a'. 
Let 'o', 'ò', and so on, now be the syntactical variables for all the 
expressions of HL, and let ' n', the printer's ligature sign, be the sign for 
concatenation. (anb) is then the result of concatenating a with b. All con­
catenates of all the expressions of HL are assumed to be available as values 
for the syntactical variables. They are "available" in the sense of timeless-
ness, so to speak, as "potentials" or potential entities, if one likes, but not 
necessarily actual ones exhibited anywhere in space or time or written down 
or directly experienced by anyone in any concrete way. 
Let 'Sub' be the sole semantical primitive and significant in contexts of 
the form 'a Sub b\ expressing that the expression a is subsumed in the 
expression b. Within a semantics for HL based on the relation Des for 
designation3, we could define ' Sub b' as 
'(Ex)(Ev)(fl Des x . b Des y . x P y)'. 

78 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
Such a definition is not available here, however, the semantics being a non-
translational one in which there is no talk about parts and wholes and no 
designation-relation. No, instead, we use 'Sub' as the sole mode of semanti­
cal locution over and above those in the underlying syntax. This latter, inci­
dentally, is to include identity as a primitive. But we must then, of course, 
distinguish between ' = b\ stating that a and b are the same expression, 
and '( Sub b . b Sub )', stating that  and b are co-extensive in the sense 
of being mutually subsumed in each other. Thus we may immediately let 
' CoExt V 
abbreviate 
'( Sub b . b Sub )'. 
This metalanguage may be referred to as S M ^ , the semantical meta­
language for HL based on Sub, its non-translationality being assured by the 
conditions to be laid down for Sub. The full character of SM"1: can be sum-
Sub 
marized in the following stipulation by simultaneous recursion of 'term' and 
'formula', more particularly, of 'term of S M ^ ' and 'formula of S M ^ ' . 
1. 
Any syntactical variable or shape-descriptive name of a primitive 
sign of HL is a term. 
2. 
If a and b are terms, so is 
r(anby. 
3. 
If a and b are terms, ra = 6"1 and ra Sub b"1 are formulae. 
4. 
If A is a formula, so is r ~ A"1. 
5. 
If A and  are formulae, so is r(A v B)n. 
6. 
If A is a formula and a a variable, r(a)An is a formula. 
Concerning these various notions we may now assume the usual princi­
ples of classical syntax as based upon 'n'.4 And concerning 'Sub' we assume 
principles providing for a full Boolean algebra of names of a certain kind. 
Let 'PrNm ' be defined now within the syntax to express that  is a 
primitive individual-constant (or name) of HL. And let 'UnitSumTrm ' be 
defined to express that  is a unit-sum term, i.e., an expression of HL of the 
form r(jcl~jc~)"1 where x is a variable and ----~1 a formula containing JC as its 
only free variable if any. A unit-sum term containing no free variable is also 
a kind of constant, a defined name or constant, we might say. The only 
names we need recognize in HL are the primitive individual-constants and 
the unit-sum terms containing no free variables. Thus we may let 
'Nm ' abbreviate 
'(PrNm  v UnitSumTrm )'. 
As a basic Limitation Rule concerning 'Sub', we then immediately assume 
that 

NON-TRANSLATIONAL SEMANTICS 
79 
h(fl)(b)(fl Sub b => (Nm a . Nm b)). 
To see how a Boolean algebra of names may be supplied, let us note 
that we may let 
'UnivNm A' 
abbreviate 
'(b)(Nm fo =  Sub A)', 
'NullNm A' 
abbreviate 
'(fe)(Nm  = a Sub fe)', 
'A Sum b,c' 
abbreviate 
\b Sub A .  Sub A . (d)((b Sub d .  
Sub d) = A Sub d))', 
'fl Prod b,' abbreviate 
'fl Sub b . a Sub  . (d)((d Sub  . d 
Sub ) ZD d Sub ))', 
'fl Neg b' 
abbreviate 
'(c)(((c S u b a 
■ c S u b b) = NullNm c) . 
((A Sub c. 6 Sub c) = UnivNm c))'. 
It is not difficult to see that these definitions give us Boolean analogues of 
the semantical notions of being a universal name, a null name, the semanti­
cal sum of two names, the semantical product of two names, and the seman­
tical negative of a name. Suitable semantical principles concerning Sub may 
be laid down to assure that these defined notions have the Boolean proper­
ties required of them. The various axioms and rules needed for the underly­
ing syntax are of course presupposed. 
Let us note now how some of the key notions of HL may be mirrored 
here in the non-translational semantics. First, a unit name is as follows. 
'UnitNm A' 
for 
'(Nm a . ~ NullNm a . (b)((Nm b . ~ NullNm 
b . b Sub A) ID A Sub b))\ 
'ORDENT' 
for 
'(LP nEX nONE nTILDE°LP nEX nAC nRP n 
LP nEX nAC nAC nRP nLP nEX nAC nAC nAC nRP nLP nTILDE n 
EX nPEE nEX nAC nVEE nTILDE nEX°AC nORD nEX nAC n 
AC nEX nAC nAC nAC nRP nRP n)' [i.e 'xl - (*') (*") (*")(- x P 
x' v-x' 
Ord*',*'"))']'],5 
'OrdEntNm A' for 
'A CoExt ORDENT', 
'CardEntNm A' for 
'(¿?)((UnitNm b . b Sub a) ZD ~ OrdEntNm 
b)\ 
'CardlndNm A' 
for 
'(UnitNm a . CardEntNm A)', 
'Coll(Card)Nm A' for 
'(ò)((UnitNm b . b Sub A) Z) Car­
dlndNm b)\ 
'LesColl(Card)Nm A' 
for 
'(Coll(Card)Nm a . ~ NullNm A . ~ 
CardlndNm A)', 
'FictNm A' 
for 
'NullNm A'. 

80 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
Clearly the definienda here express that a is a name for the intended kind 
of entity. 
We have now the wherewithal with which to accommodate adaptations 
of the Lesniewskian "functors" of "inclusion", of "exclusion", of "identity", 
and of "existence". The functors of inclusion in the calculus of names are 
now as follows {mutatis mutandis, as in the preceding chapter.) 
' E ft' abbreviates 
'((CardlndNm a . CardlndNm ft . a CoExt 
ft) v (CardlndNm a . LesColl(Card)Nm ft . a Sub ft))', 
'a E ft' abbreviates 
'( e b v (LesColl(Card)Nm a . Les-
Coll(Card)Nm b . (a CoExt b v a Sub ft)))', 
'  ft' abbreviates 
'(  ft v (((FictNm a . CardlndNm ft) v 
(FictNm a . LesColl(Card)Nm ft) v (FictNm a . FictNm ft)) . ~ a 
CoExt ft))', 
'a A ft' abbreviates 
( D ft v '((LesColl(Card)Nm a . Card­
lndNm ft . ft Sub a) v (LesColl(Card)Nm a . LesColl(Card)Nm 
ft . ft Sub A) v (LesColl(Card)Nm a . LesColl(Card)Nm ft . 
(Ec)(LesColl(Card)Nm .  Sub a .  Sub ft)))'. 
In similar fashion the three "functors of identity" are provided here as 
follows. 
'fl =Les ft' abbreviates 
'(CardlndNm a . CardlndNm ft . a 
CoExt ft)' 
'A D ft' abbreviates 
'{a =Les ft v (LesColl(Card)Nm a . Les-
Coll(Card)Nm ft . a CoExt ft))', 
'a 0 ft' abbreviates 
'(A D ft v (FictNm a . Fict Nm ft . a CoExt 
b)). 
And the three "functors of existence" are then: 
'Ex a' 
for 
'(CardlndNm a v LesColl(Card)Nm a)\ 
'Sola' 
for 
'(CardlndNm a v FictNm a)', 
'Ob a' 
for 
'CardlndNm a\ 
With these definitions our play is about done, in the sense that a cal­
culus of names of a quasi-Lesniewskian kind is seen to be incorporated 
within a non-translational semantics for HL. Suitable rules governing Sub 
may of course be laid down and the various Lesniewskian Axioms of Ontol­
ogy then seen to be consequences of them. 
We should observe, however, that a non-translational truth-predicate 
is immediately forthcoming in terms of 'Sub'. In fact we can let 

NON-TRANSLATIONAL SEMANTICS 
81 
'Tr A' abbreviate 
'(Sent a . (Efo)(Ec) (UnivNm b . Vbl c . b 
Sub (cnONEnfl))\ 
'Sent A' here of course expresses that A is a sentence of HL, and 'Vbl c' that 
 is a variable. Thus a is true if and only if some universal name is subsumed 
in some UnitSumTrm (cnONE°fl), where  is a variable. 
The desired properties of Tr are now forthcoming, but of course no 
Adequacy Condition, of the kind occurring in a translational semantics — a 
generalized 'Tr 'snow is white' = snow is white' principle — is available 
here. Such a condition cannot even be stated, for it requires both the use 
and mention of the object-language expressions. In a non-translational 
semantics, there is no use made of the object-language expressions, the 
theory being solely one concerning their mention, so to speak. 
In the detailed development of the non-translational semantics of the 
unit-sum terms, however, we should along the way meet with some princi­
ples that would bring us close to an Adequacy Principle. Thus, at some 
point we would meet with principles to the effect that 
\- (fl)(fe)(c)((Sent a . UnivNm b . Vbl c) z> (b Sub (cnONEnfl) v 
b Sub (cnONEnTILDE°fl))), 
and that 
h (fl)(b)(c)((Sent a . UnivNm b . Vbl c) z> (b Sub (cnONEnfl) = 
~ b Sub (cnONEnTILDEnfl))). 
These are in effect (non-translational) semantical forms of laws of excluded 
middle and of non-contradiction. But also we would meet with more special 
principles, such as that 
h (fl)(b)(c)(d)((Nm a . Nm b . UnivNm  . Vbl d) ID (A Sub b = 
d Sub (dnONEnflnPEEnfc))), 
from which we could easily prove that 
|- (fl)(b)((Nm a . Nm b)  (a Sub b = Tr (flnPeenb))). 
And similarly for disjunctions, that 
h (fl)(b)(c)(d)((Nm a . Nm b . Nm c. Nm d) => ((A Sub b v c Sub 
d) = Tr (LPnflnPEEnbnVEEncnPEE°fl7nRP))), 
and for negations, that 
h(fl)(b)((Nm fl . Nm (b) z> (~ a Sub (b = Tr (TIL-
DEnfl°PEEnZ>))). 

82 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
And similarly for negations of disjunctions, disjunctions of negations, and 
so on. Although these principles are not strictly Adequacy Principles, they 
do show how the use of 'Sub' in the metalanguage can in a certain way take 
the place of 'P' in the object-language. They are special principles of ade­
quacy for object-language sentences containing only atomic and molecular 
formulae built out of 'P' without using 'Ord'. 
For sentences containing quantifiers, we have that 
h(fl)(b)((Vbl 
fl.Nmi)^ 
(Tr (LP na nRP na nPEE n£) = (c)(Nm 
c Z3  Sub b))), 
and, more generally, that 
K(^)...(^)((Vbl ax 
Vbl an) =>(Tr (LPn
fll
nRPn...nLPnfl 
n 
RP-B) s( C l)„(cJ((Nm  . ... " NmcJ => 
--C-...--C-W, 
where '-c^-.. -—cn-- is a formula of S M ^ containing only '~', 
'v', 'Sub', and the variables 'c^, ..., 'c ', and where in place of 'B' 
a shape-description is inserted of a formula of HL containing 'P' 
and HL-variables wherever there are occurrences of 'Sub' and of 
'c/, ..., 'c ' in '--C-...--C --'. 
1 ' 
' 
n 
1 
n 
The proviso here requires of course that the proper shape-description cor­
responds appropriately with the given formula of SM?j^. These principles are 
in effect principles concerning the so-called "substitutional interpretation" 
of the quantifiers, about which there has been a good deal of sound and 
fury in recent years without much clear-cut semantics for it by way of 
underlying theory. 
It should be noted that in the foregoing no use is made of Lesniewski's 
Protothetic, with its additional variables and quantifiers. The use of vari­
ables ranging over some mysterious realm of entities called 'propositions' is 
thought to be theoretically unsound. Whatever propositions are, they are a 
semantical kind of entity, to be accommodated — if at all — as suitable 
constructs in a semantical or pragmatical metalanguage.6 For Lesniewski, it 
seems, propositions are needed right at the beginning, and are in effect 
postulated as unanalyzed entities sui generis. Further, in Protothetic vari­
ables are admitted also, as already noted, over functions of propositions, 
i.e., over properties of and relations between or among them — not only 
truth-functional ones, but presumably all manner of intensional and prag­
matical ones as well. There is a too-muchness about this sort of a beginning, 
utilizing obscure items that do not become clarified even in the full perora­
tion of the system. 

NON-TRANSLATIONAL SEMANTICS 
83 
Also we should note that all the "semantical categories" needed in the 
system here are declared ab initio, and not seriatim in the development of it. 
As Stachniak has remarked, in a recent monograph, "the introduction of a 
new category to the system [of Ontology] causes every time the change of 
language alphabet, rules of inference and the sets of well-formed expres­
sions and formulas. This makes semantical investigations of the system 
more difficult."7 Indeed it does, for with a change of vocabulary (and hence 
of the formulae) and of rules of inference, one has a change of system — 
and strictly we are no longer dealing with the same system at all. The intro­
duction of a new semantical category requires a new system, an extension 
(in some sense) of the preceding one perhaps, but new nonetheless. By con­
trast, HL and S M ^ are fixed systems with all their "semantical categories" 
intact. Of course HL may be applied to new non-logical subject-matters — 
to physics, to angelology, or whatever — but this is another matter 
altogether. 
Another important point of contrast is of course in the handling of 
relations. The ordinal individuals supply the wherewithal within HL of 
building up a very general theory of relations, whereas the system of Ontol­
ogy proper contains no relations at all until some new "semantical catego­
ry" of them is declared with the attendant change of system required to 
handle them. 
It should be emphasized again that, although this paper revolves 
around the name of Lesniewski, the systems HL and S M ^ are not, in any 
strict sense, intended to capture his views. They merely approximate them 
to some extent and in some respects, and bear some family resemblance to 
them. Even so, the kindship between a calculus of names and non-transla-
tional semantics seems so striking that it is perhaps surprising that no Les-
niewski-commentator has pointed it out heretofore. 


CHAPTER SEVEN 
On platonism, form, and number 
"Periculosae plenum opus aleae Tractas, et 
incedis per ignes Suppositos cineri doloso." 
Platonism, or platonic realism, in logic and mathematics has been closely 
associated with the names of Frege, Zermelo, Russell, Carnap, Godei, Ber­
nays, and Quine. Mathematical platonism has popularly become identified 
with the acceptance of an ontology of sets and/or classes and/or relations as 
fundamental constituents of "the furniture of the world", to use Russell's 
famous phrase. The phrase is not a happy one, however, furniture being 
provided for — usually anyhow — only after the edifice has been con­
structed. Genuine platonism should, it might be thought, take sets and/or 
classes and/or relations as fundamental among the building materials of the 
cosmos and all that is therein. Usually, also, these entities are regarded as 
"abstract" rather than "concrete," but no one seems to have given us a 
detailed account as to just how this dichotomy is to be characterized. Sets, 
classes, and relations somehow are taken as the paradigm of "abstract" 
entities, as over and against something called 'individuals', which are then 
the paradigm for "concrete" ones. This is all very unsatisfactory and in need 
of much clarification. 
Another facet of platonism in mathematics was called attention to by 
Paul Bernays in his famous paper "On Platonism in Mathematics," back in 
1934, namely that of "viewing the objects [of mathematics] as cut off from 
all links with the reflecting subject."1 Strictly, however, mathematics, no 
matter how abstractly conceived, is never wholly cut off in this way. There 
is always a mathematician floating around somewhere doing the mathema­
tics, dreaming it up, proving theorems, applying them, and, above all, 
criticizing the mathematics done by others as either "false, trivial, or men­
tioned in a footnote in one of my [his or her] papers of several years back!" 

86 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
Bernay's point is, of course, that the mathematician is not mentioned by 
name and is not a value for a parameter occurring in the actual formulae. 
Pure mathematics in the classical sense is independent of the "reflecting 
subject" in this way, surely, whereas mathematical intuitionism, in some 
formulations anyhow, is not.2 Curiously, however, the formulations of 
intuitionism that are not, i.e., those that do contain formulae with paramet­
ers for the "creative subject" or subjects whose mathematical "construc­
tions" are under discussion, came on the market only years after Bernays 
wrote. The formulations of intuitionism prior to 1934 lacked this feature, 
however, and hence should be classified as platonistic according to Bernays' 
criterion — contrary presumably to his intent. 
If we are far from being clear as to how "abstract" objects differ from 
"concrete" ones and if mathematics — at least applied mathematics — is 
never wholly cut off from all links with the "creative" or "reflective" sub­
ject, what then is mathematical platonism? it may well be asked. Worse yet, 
sets and/or classes do not sans phrase appear to be prototypes of Plato's 
forms or idea or eidé, although they are commonly taken to be. A consider­
able argument and confrontation with the actual text is surely needed to 
establish that they are, if they are. Meanwhile we may be on rather shaky 
grounds, it would seem, if we assume that they are. Note that we have not 
spoken of relations in this context. Relations seem to be eminently platonic 
entities, it would seem, in a sense in which sets and/or classes are not. 
Goodness and justice are not to be construed as sets or classes yet are inti­
mately interrelated with each other. The numbers 1 and 2 need not be 
regarded a sets, yet arithmetic would be impossible were they not taken to 
stand to one another in certain relations. 
It is often said that Plato had no theory of relations in the modern 
sense. He made sophisticated use of them, however, in the sense of naming 
some of them and even of being aware of some of their key logical proper­
ties, such as symmetry or asymmetry. Be this as it may, it is the theory of 
relations that par exellence distinguishes modern logic from its ancient and 
medieval counterpart of syllogistics. Graft a theory of relations on to syl-
logistics in one way or another, and a respectable modern logic may 
emerge.3 Curiously enough, even up to the very moment the general theory 
of relations is rather neglected in most histories of logic and in almost all 
textbooks, yet, as Russell noted in Mysticism and Logic (1929, pp. 76-77), 
it was "invented [or formulated] to deal with topics that wholly surpassed 
the powers of the old logic, though they [these topics] form the chief con-

PLATONISM, FORM, AND NUMBER 
87 
tents of mathematics." Plato's sotto voce recognition of relations and his 
concern with mathematics are no doubt intimately intertwined. 
According to A.E. Taylor4, the text of the Epinomis 990c5-991b4, is 
"the most important mathematical passage in the platonic corpus," whether 
actually written by Plato or not. However, the text is "unfortunately uncer­
tain, in part probably corrupted, in part also probably never reduced to 
grammatical form by the writer." Even so, Taylor comments, "the sense is 
clear," although it is difficult to determine just what the sense is. As Taylor 
himself urges (p. 516), "it is time that we should make an end of the pre­
tence of understanding [Plato] by ignoring the [textual] evidence or by 
arbitrarily reading into ... [it] the views of our own favorite modern 
metaphysicians." At the same time we cannot hope to understand the 
mathematical portions of the Platonic corpus without taking into accont the 
full, broad historical context, including our modern knowledge of the sub­
ject. Without taking what we now know into account, we may be doing 
Plato grave historical injustice, by not recognizing the character of his "an­
ticipations" and the depth of some of his basic insights. To anticipate mod­
ern developments with depth and acumen is often as much a mark of histor­
ical greatness as full-bodied achievement is. (Peirce is in many respects as 
great as Frege, the former being a great anticipator, the latter a great 
achiever.) In any case, let us follow A.E. Taylor for the moment — an 
admirable Virgilian guide, surely, in spirit if not always in letter — in his 
general reading of the Platonic corpus, including the Epinomis, as being in 
principle harmonizable with the modern theory of number, stemming — in 
broad outline anyhow — from the work of Frege, Dedekind, and 
Whitehead-and-Russell, in which the modern logic of relations plays a fun­
damental role. 
Two items here are of especial importance. First, we must seek some 
clarity concerning the character and inner structure of the integers them­
selves. Then, secondly, we must understand the importance of Plato's 
"revolutionary demand [fn., p.501] that quadratic and cubic surds [e.g., 
V2, ^3] shall be recognized [also] as numbers in opposition to the tradi­
tional view that there are "irrational" magnitudes (length, areas, volumes), 
but no "irrational" numbers." 
Let us reflect upon the first first. According to Aristotle (Metaph. M 
1083a32), Plato is said to have said that "there is a first 2 and first 3, and the 
numbers are not addible [as units] to one another," And, somewhat simi­
larly in the Ethica Nicomachia (109617 ff.), we are told that there is no 

88 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
form (idea) of number, because "in numbers there is a before and an after" 
(a priority and posteriority). Taylor interprets these contentions as amount­
ing to the doctrine that numbers form a series. More correctly, we should 
say here that the relation of being-less-than as between numbers is a serial 
relation, i.e., a connected, asymmetrical, transitive dyadic relation. The 
sense of these contentions, according to Taylor, is then that "the series of 
numbers is not made by adding "units" together. E.g. we say that 3 + 1 = 
4, but we do not mean that 3 is three "units" or that 4 is 3 and 1 [where 
the 'and' is the 'and' of withness or of being accompanied by]; 4 is not four 
l's, or a 3 and a 1; it is one 4. What we really add together is not numbers 
but aggregates or collections," he goes on. "Thus it is true that if you have 
a group of n things and another group of m things, and form the two into 
one group, this new group contains m + n things, but it is not true that the 
number m + n contains a number m and a number n [as its parts. No, we 
should say rather that the numerical expression 'm + n\ where 'm and 'rc' 
are constants, has 'm' and 'rc' as its summands.] The importance of this view 
is that it leads to revision of the whole conception of number. The fifth-cen­
tury theory, still represented by Euclid's definition of arithmos (Elements 
vii, def. 2), is that a "number" isplethos monadon, a "collection of l's". On 
the new view," which Taylor seems to think present in Plato if only 
implicitly, "no number is a "collection"; the statement that 3 = 2 + 1 , 
which is the definition of 3, does not mean that 3 is "a 2 and a l , " but that 
3 is the term in the integer-series which comes "next after" 2." The intro­
duction of the relation of coming "next after" here is a very bold step and 
leads us at once to the portals of modern formulations of arithmetic, as we 
shall see in a moment. 
Let us now turn to Taylor's second contention concerning surds and 
irrational magnitudes, as discussed especially in the Philebus and the 
Epinomis. Taylor sees in the Dedekindian notion of a "section," or "cut," 
notions exhibiting the character Plato ascribes to, say, y/2. "We cannot find 
a rational fraction the "square" of which is exactly 2," Taylor reminds us (p. 
511) in modern terms. "But we can divide all [positive] rational fractions 
into two classes, those of which the "squares" are less than 2 and those of 
which the squares are not less than 2. We see at once that the first of these 
sets has no highest term, the second no lowest, and that no fraction can 
belong either to both sets or to neither; thus our "section" is unambiguous, 
i.e. every fraction falls into one and only one of the two sets thus consti­
tuted. We may then define the "square root of 2" either as this section 

PLATONISM, FORM, AND NUMBER 
89 
itself, or, if we prefer it, as the set of fractions whose squares are less (or, if 
we like, greater) then 2. ... [The "section"] involves an "indeterminate 
duality" (aoristos dyas) or "great-and-small," [namely,] the two sets, one of 
which has all its terms less than, the other all greater than, a specified 
value, and the duality is "indefinite" (apeiron) because one of the sets has 
no highest term, the other no lowest. The section is a determination of the 
"great-and-small" of the fractions by the "one" precisely because it makes 
an unambiguous "cut" just where it does. Other cuts can be made at other 
places in the series [of rationals], and each will define a different "real 
number."" 
Note the subtle way in which 'set' and 'class' have crept into Taylor's 
description of the modern view, but assiduously avoided in favor of the 
more innocent 'aggregate', 'collection', and 'group' in his direct discussion 
of Plato. This is not accidental, it would seem. Aggregates or collections or 
groups of things are somehow things summed together non-numerically. 
This may be done without reifying the result into some kind of entity of a 
fundamentally new logico-metaphysical kind, a set or class. To do this latter 
seems somewhat contrary to the general tenor of Greek thought. The 
notion of set or class as such seems to be a primarily Germanic invention, a 
Menge being some object of a kind altogether different than that of its 
"members." Taylor can thus slip easily into talk of sets and classes in speak­
ing of Dedekindian cuts, which are, after all, a product of German mathe­
matical inventiveness. If he were to have availed himself of the English 
approach, especially that of his great compatriot George Boole, Taylor 
could have made use of a notion of non-numerical summation, Boole being 
apparently the first person in all history to have done so in an approxima-
tively acceptable way. 
Taylor's contentions here constitute, it would seem, a brilliant piece of 
exegetical reconstruction. Can they be substantiated on the basis of the 
actual text? or upon the basis of the teachings of the Later Academy? These 
are very delicate questions. Perhaps the best we can say is that they seem to 
accord with them and hence are not an "arbitrary" reading into the text of 
some preferred modern logico-metaphysical view. No, the reconstruction is 
one within pure mathematics itself, but can be carried out in a number of 
different ways technically. The problem of harmonizing one or the other of 
these ways with one's favorite modern view then remains as one requiring 
its own inner technicalia. 
Let us go on now, in the present paper, to construct a Platonic theory 

90 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS A STD MEREOLOGY 
of forms without sets or classes, in which, however, relations between or 
among forms play a fundamental role. This will be done in such a way as to 
take forms and relations together as entities of the same logico-metaphysi-
cal type or order, but without introducing ad hoc devices to avoid the Rus­
sell and other paradoxes. The formal details of the theory are essentially 
those of the systems OM and HL previously formulated.5 The theory here 
in fact results from a reinterpretation of those systems in which the values 
for the variables are taken as forms or eidé, including relational ones, rather 
than as individuals (including relational individuals) and their parts as in 
OM, or as just individuals (including relational ones) as in HL. Further, we 
shall see how a theory of number emerges from the theory of forms, num­
bers themselves being of the same logico-metaphysical type. Numbers are 
thus seen to constitute a special subdivision or species of forms without 
invoking from without an artificial hierarchy for them. Such hierarchical 
subdivisions as are needed emerge from within the theory, so to speak, and 
depend upon the very natural way in which relational forms are provided 
for. All numbers emerge as forms, but not conversely. 
The main novelty here is to provide for relation in terms of relational 
forms. Suppose F and G are forms in the usual sense, i.e., monadic ones. 
Another type of form is immediately forthcoming by combining F and G 
into an ordinal form having F and G as the ordinands in that order, or, con­
versely, G and F. Let ' Ord F,G' express that H is the form consisting of 
F and G taken in that order. 'Ord' will figure as a primitive in the system 
along with a general Tncld' for being included in. 6F Incld G' will express 
that the form Fis included in the form G. Equality of forms is then merely 
mutual inclusion. In terms of inclusion, it is easy to show, a full Boolean 
algebra of forms may be developed. 
The introduction of ordinal forms seems a very natural step to take in 
the development of a general theory of forms. Forms are already presuma­
bly "abstract" in some sense, so that whatever additional "abstraction" 
might reside in an ordinal form should cause no alarm. The ordinal form of 
F with G is closely akin to the ordered couple of them, i.e., the unit relation 
that F bears to G. (We can also speak here of the virtual ordered couple of 
or unit relation between them.6) The use of the relation Ord will enable us 
to gain the effect of having ordered couples, etc., without introducing 
entities of a type higher than that of F, G, and so on. By iteration, of 
course, we can go on to accommodate ordinal triples, quadruples, and so 
on. 

PLATONISM, FORM, AND NUMBER 
91 
Although the technical development here follows closely that of OM 
and HL, the differences in detail, in interpretation, and in terminology are 
sufficient to justify presenting the system ab initio for the benefit of readers 
not familiar with those systems. 
As variables for forms let us use ' F , 'G', '', '', 'S', and ' , with or 
without primes or numerical subscripts, taken as ranging over forms includ­
ing relational ones. As the underlying logic let us presuppose the usual first-
order quantification-theory. In addition, let us presuppose an operation of 
unit summation so that '(FI—F— )' is a term for all unit forms F such that 
--F-, where '--F-' is a sentential form or function of the system containing 
' F as a free variable (if it contains any free variables at all). Just what a unit 
form is will be discussed in a moment. 
Clearly now we can let 
Dl. 
'F Eq G' 
abbreviate 
'(F Incld G . G Incld F)\ 
so that equality is merely mutual inclusion, as already remarked. 
The various Boolean operations on forms are immediately forthcoming 
in terms of unit summation. 
D2a. 
\F  G)' 
abbreviates 
'(1( Incld F v  Incld G))', 
D2b. 
'(F n G)' 
abbreviates 
'(1( Incld F .  Incld G))', 
D2c. 
'-F 
abbreviates 
'(Gl ~ G Incld F)\ 
D2d. 
'NFrm' 
abbreviates 
'(Fl ~ F Incld F)\ 
and 
D2e. 
'UFrm' 
abbreviates 
'-NFrm'. 
These definitions introduce, respectively, the Boolean sum and product of 
forms F and G, the Boolean negation of form F, and null and universal 
forms. 
What now is a unit form? A form in which one and only one "indi­
vidual" participates, we might answer, taking 'individual' as the blanket 
word for whatever there is in the Platonic cosmos that is not a form — sen­
sibles and other denizens of the lower realm — and taking 'participates' as 
naming the relation between individuals and the forms in which they 
inhere. For the moment we are considering only the theory of forms by 
itself, but later will add a new primitive 'Prtcp' for participation and a new 
domain of objects as "individuals." A unit form may be explained, how­
ever, quite independently of all talk of participation and individuals, as fol­
lows. We may let, namely, 

92 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
D3. 
'UnitFrm F 
abbreviate 
' ( - ^ Incld NFrm . (G)((~ G Incld 
NFrm . G Incld F) ID F Incld G))'. 
This definition is of course closely analogous to the corresponding defini­
tions in OM and HL.7 
Let us now distinguish between cardinal and ordinal forms as follows. 
D4. 
'OrdFrm ' 
abbreviates 
'(EF)(EG) H Ord F,G' 
and 
D5. 
'CardFrm H' 
abbreviates 
'(C?)((UnitFrm G . G Incld H) =) 
~ OrdFrm G)'. 
An ordinal form H is thus a form that bears Ord to any two forms F and G 
including, of course, the cases where For G or both are themselves ordinal 
forms. A cardinal form, on the one hand, is a form such that all unit forms 
included in it are not ordinal forms. The aptness of this terminology is 
surely apparent. 
The basic principles of the system are direct adaptations of those of 
OM and HL, and need not be given here, in spite of significant differences 
in meaning. 
Much of this material may seem rather remote from Plato. Any recon­
struction of the number-system in modern terms in the general manner of 
Frege or Whitehead-Russell, however, presupposes an extensive logical 
theory of some kind by way of background. Taylor followed these illustri­
ous writers in making full use of sets and/or classes, or rather of more fun­
damental intensional entities of some kind or other, or the like, in terms of 
which the numbers may be introduced definitionally. Here cardinal and 
ordinal forms, together with non-numerical Boolean sums of such, are paid 
overtime, so to speak, to play the erstwhile role of sets or classes. The use 
of such sums seems closer — does it not? — to the spirit of Plato and of 
Greek mathematics generally than do the Taylorian sets and/or classes. 
Let us turn now to the notion of a cardinal-unit collective, regarded as 
the NFrm or a Boolean sum of cardinal-unit forms. For this we may let 
D6. 
'Coll(CardUnit) F 
abbreviate 
'(G)((UnitFrm G . G Incld F) 
ZD CardFrm G)\ 
Similarly there are various kinds of relational collectives, depending upon 
the degree of the unit relations involved. To define formally the general 
notion of a relational collective of degree n, we first let 

PLATONISM, FORM, AND NUMBER 
93 
D7a. 
'F Ord G,H,H" 
abbreviate 
'(EF')(F Ord G,F' . F Ord 
H,H')\ 
D7b. 
'F Ord G,H,G',H" 
abbreviate 
'(EF')(F Ord G,H,Ff . F' 
Ord 
G',, 
and so on. Then 
D8. 
'OrdFrm(CardUnit)n F' 
may abbreviate 
'(EG^.^EGJCF 
Ord G13...,G . CardFrm G, . UnitFrm G, 
CardFrm G . 
1' 
' 
n 
1 
1 
 
UnitFrm G )'. 
F is thus an «-adie ordinal form with cardinal-unit forms as its ordinands 
just where F bears Ord to n cardinal-unit forms, so to speak. A relational 
collective of degree n whose ordinands are cardinal-unit forms may now be 
introduced by letting 
D9. 
'RelColl(Card(Unit)n F 
abbreviate 
'(G)((UnitFrm G . G 
Incld F) => OrdFrm(CardUnit)n G)'. 
Next let us introduce the notion of being a successor of as between car­
dinal forms. For this, we may let immediately 
DIO. 
'F SucCardFrm G' 
abbreviate 
'(CardFrm F . CardFrm G . 
(E#)(CardFrm H . UnitFrm H . ~ H Incld G . F = (G  ))'. 
This is not, of course, the successor relation of arithmetic. A cardinal form 
has many successors, whereas a natural number has one and only one suc­
cessor in its series — cf. D20 below. 
We should note now the need for two Existence Principles, as follows. 
h (EF)(CardFrm F . UnitFrm F), 
and 
KF)(CardFrm F  (EG)G SucCardFrm F). 
This latter will be recognized as a kind of Axiom of Infinity, assuring that 
every cardinal form has a successor. And the former, an unconditional 
Existence Principle, assures the existence of at least one cardinal-unit form, 
and hence of at least one cardinal form and of at least one unit form. 
We now need to provide in general for the familiar notation involving 
relations, in which the relation-term occurs after the first term but followed 
by the remaining argument-terms on its right. This may easily be achieved 
for dyadic relations between cardinal collectives by letting 
Dlla. 
'F H2 G' 
abbreviate 
'(RelColl(CardUnit)2 H . Coll(Card-

94 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
Unit) F . Coll(CardUnit) G . (EH')(H' Ord F,G . H' Incld 
my-
And similarly for triadic relations among cardinal-unit collectives, so that 
Dllb. 
'FH3G,F' 
abbreviates 
'(RelcoU(CardUnit)3 H . Coll(Card-
Unit) F. Coll(CardUnit) G . Coll(CardUnit) F . (')(' Ord 
F,G,F .'Incld ))'. 
And so on for relations of higher degree. 
A significant technical point about quantification is to be noted as fol­
lows. Quantification over ordinal and relational forms of cardinal-unit col­
lectives — these latter being merely Boolean sums of the former — is 
immediately forthcoming merely by quantifying the 'F' in contexts contain­
ing it in the context 'F2'. Thus 
Dlla. 
C(F2)-F--' is in effect short for '(/0(RelColl(CardUnit) ^ ^ 
--F--)', where the only free occurrences of 'F' in '--F--' are in the 
context 'F2', 
and 
Dllb. 
'(EF2)-F2~' for '(EF)(RelColl(CardUnit)2F . ~F~)\ where 
(etc.). 
And similarly for triadic relations, and so on. 
Suppose, however, we wish to quantify over a property or attribute of 
a cardinal-unit collective, and not just over a relation between or among 
such. Well, such properties here may be construed merely as attributive 
relations. Let 
D12. 
T 2 AttRelFrm(CardUnit) G' 
abbreviate 
\G F2G . 
(H)(H')(HF2H' 
ZDHEq 
H'))\ 
Then F2 is an attributive-relational form applying to G just where G bears 
F2 to G itself, and in general where any two forms are equal that bear F2 to 
each other. 
It is very important to distinguish here between saying that a given 
form F is included in some form G and that F is one of the forms to which 
such and such an attribute is applicable. If F is a unit then the two are the 
same: F is included in G if and only if F is one of the unit forms comprising 
G or to which G is applicable. If F is not a unit, however, the two are not 
the same: F may be included in G without G's being attributable to F. 
Let us think of individuals for the moment as cardinal-unit forms. The 

PLATONISM, FORM, AND NUMBER 
95 
persons Plato and Aristotle, say, thus become identified with the cardinal-
unit forms uniquely determinative of them. The compound form (Plato u 
Aristotle) then is included in the form Greek, but this latter is not attribut­
able to the former. (Plato  Aristotle) is not a Greek, even though Plato 
and Aristotle separately are. However, if F is a dyadic ordinal form with 
Plato as its two ordinands, then to say that Fis included in the form Greek 
(taking this latter now as an attributive-relational form in the sense of D12) 
is in fact to say that the form Greek is attributable to Plato. In effect 
'Greek' here can be read 'is the same Greek as'. Thus it holds that 
(Greek AttRelColl(CardUnit) Plato = (EF)(F Ord Plato,Plato . 
FIncldGreek)). 
Quantifiers over attributes can now be handled merely as special cases of 
Dlla and 
Dllb. 
We are now in a position to turn to the cardinal numbers, in the sense 
of the numbers of given collectives, so that, as with Taylor, if we "have a 
group of n things and have another group of m things, this new group con­
tains m + n things." What now is a group or collective of n things, accord­
ing to the present theory? Well, in terms of the adaptation of Frege and 
Whitehead-and-Russell here, we can say that it is a collective of cardinal-
unit forms one-to-one correspondible with some given collective of n cardi­
nal-unit forms. How now can this notion be introduced? 
We need the notion of a one-to-one correspondence or correlation 
between unit-cardinal collectives. For this, in more or less standard fashion, 
we may let 
D12. 
'One-Many F2' 
abbreviate 
'(G)(H)(G')((G F 2# . G' F2 H) 
ID G E q G ' ) ' , 
D13. 
'Many-One F¡ 
abbreviate 
'(G)(H)(tf')((G F2H . G F2 H') 
ID H E q t f ' ) ' , 
and 
D14. 
'One-One F2' 
abbreviate 
'(One-Many F2 . Many-One F2)\ 
A one-to-one relation F2 is thus both a one-to-many correspondence as well 
as a many-to-one one. 
What now do we mean by the equinumerosity (or similarity in essen­
tially the Whitehead-Russell sense, PM *73.01) of two cardinal-unit collec­
tives F and G? Well, again in the adaptation here, just where there is a suit­
able one-to-one correlation between their respective cardinal-unit com-

96 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
ponents. Thus we may let 
D15. 
'F Equinum G' 
abbreviate 
'(Coll(CardUnit) F . Coll(Card-
Unit) G . (EF)(RelColI(CardUnit)2 F 
. One-One F2' . 
()(')( F2' H' 3 (UnitFrm H . CardFrm  .  Incld F . 
UnitFrm ' . CardFrm ' . ' Incld G)) . (#)((UnitFrm .  
Incld F) ^ (EH')(UnitFim ' . ' Incld G . H F2' ')) . 
(H')((UnitFrm ' . ' Incld G) => (Efí)(UnitFrm  .  Incld 
F . H F 2 ' H ' ) ) ) ' . 
Finally now, we may ask, what is the cardinal number of a given collec­
tive F of cardinal-unit forms? Well, merely the Boolean sum of all ordinal 
forms consisting of  ordinated with itself where  is equinumerous with F. 
Thus in general we may let 
D16. 
'Nc'F 
abbreviate 
'(Gl(Efl)(G Ord H,H . H Equinum F))', 
and in particular then 
D17a. '0' 
abbreviates 
\F\)ÇEG)(F 
Ord 
G,G 
. 
G 
Equinum 
NFrm))', 
D17b. T 
abbreviates 
*(F1 (EG)(UnitFrm G . CardFrm G . F 
Ord G,G)y, 
and so on. 
Let us now consider the arithmetical sum of two cardinal-unit collec­
tives, Taylor's group of n things with another group of m things. For this let 
us let 
D18. 
'(F 0 G)' 
abbreviate 
,(JH1(EF)(EG')(F' Equinum F . G' 
Equinum G . (F' n G') Incld NFrm .  Ord ( F u G'),(F'  
G')))'. 
Then an expression for the arithmetical sum of two cardinal numbers 
D19. 
\F + G)' 
may be defined as 
'(itf . (EF)(EG')(FEq 
Ne' F . 
G Eq Nc'G' .  
Nc'(F 0 G')))'.8 
What we may now dub as Taylor's theorem (sic!9) is forthcoming as the 
principle that 
K^)(G)(F)(G')((Coll(CardUnit) F . Coll(CardUnit) G . F Eq 
Nc'F . G' Eq Nc'Gj z> ( F + G') Eq Nc'(F 0 G)). 
The before-after relation among natural numbers, mentioned earlier, 
is merely now that between any number n and its successor (n + 1). Thus 

PLATONISM, FORM, AND NUMBER 
97 
D20. 
'F SucNN G' 
is short for 
'(EF)(EG')(F Eq Nc'F . G Eq 
Nc'G' . F E q ( G + 1))'. 
Thus far in the technical development we have spoken only of cardinal 
numbers as constrasted with the natural numbers. The former include all 
numbers of given cardinal-unit collectives, even including transfinite ones 
— if such are appropriately provided for. The natural numbers, on the 
other hand, are the finite integers 0, 1, 2, and so, each a finite number 
although the number of them all is infinitely large. There would seem to be 
little hint in Plato of this difference, the finite cardinal integers being of 
primary concern. To introduce the very terms 'finite' and 'infinite' as 
applied to numbers requires a good deal more formal development of the 
theory than can be given here. 
Taylor's second contention, it will be recalled, concerns the develop­
ment of the real-number system in terms of Dedekindian cuts. This too may 
readily be carried out in the present basis, but with a good deal of addi­
tional formal material. 
One can also develop here a metalinguistic theory of relations in inten­
sion, essentially as in OM or HL, by means of which we can perhaps get still 
closer to the spirit of the Platonic corpus. 
Thus far we have concentrated exclusively on the theory of form and 
number but have neglected the status of sensible things, "concrete" indi­
viduals, and so on. The fundamental notion needed now is that of participa­
tion in the sense that a thing x participates in a cardinal form F How can we 
graft on to the preceding theory a theory of individuals and of participa­
tion? A full sketch of a theory of this will not be undertaken here, where we 
must be content merely with a few suggestions. 
Let us introduce another sort of variable 'x', 'y', and so on, for indi­
viduals and let 
'x Prtcpt F 
express primitively that x participates in F Immediately we should arrange 
that certain principles obtain, as follows. 
In the foregoing, a good deal has been made of cardinal-unit forms and 
these are in effect forms determinative of individuals. This we may now 
make explicit by letting 
'F Dtrmn x' 
abbreviate 
'(CardFrm F UnitFrm F . x Prtcpt 

98 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
to express that the cardinal-unit form F determines the individual x. It then 
should hold that every individual is determined by at least one form, 
|- (JC)(EF)F Dtrmn x, 
and that every cardinal-unit form determines one and only one individual. 
To express this latter we first let 
'x = y' 
abbreviate 
'(F)(x Prtcpt F =  Prtcpt F)' 
in more or less familiar fashion. Then it holds that 
h(jFX(CardFrm F . UnitFrm F) => (Ex)(F Dtrmn x . (y)(F 
Dtrmn v = y = x))). 
Also it should obtain that 
[- (x)(F)(x Prtcpt F zD CardFrm F), 
so that ' . CardFrm F can be deleted in the definiens of the definition of 
'Dtrmn'. Also a kind of extensionality law should obtain that 
h (x)(y)(F)((x Prtcpt F . y Prtcpt F . UnitFrm F) z> x = y). 
In sum, according to Taylor, in another context10, "the main ideas [in 
the discussion of number by Plato and in the Academy] are sound and fer­
tile, but the formulation of them involves illogicalities. The remedy for such 
a situation is neither, with Aristotle, to dismiss the theory on the ground of 
these illogicalities, nor, like rash admires of Plato, to pretend that the 
illogicalities are not there. It is to reconstruct the theory with a more exact 
and subtle logic, and to show that its apparent paradoxes are incidental 
excrescences; the only way to get bad logic out of a philosophical theory is 
to have more logic, not less" — and good logic rather than bad, it should 
be added. The attempt has been made, in the foregoing, to introduce more 
logic even than Taylor does, and, it is hoped, a more subtle one and one 
closer to the spirit of Platonism, than the set-theoretic ilk used in most 
recent discussions of the subject. 
Anders Wedberg, in his Plato's Philosophy of Mathematics11, dismisses 
Taylor on the grounds that he "seems unduly inclined to interpret Plato's 
statements as anticipations of late developments within mathematics." 
Plato as a great anticipator has already been commented on above, and 
Taylor does of course take later developments fundamentally into account 
in his discussion. But so too does Wedberg himself. Let us recall the salient 
points in Wedberg's "rationalization," as he calls it, of Plato's views on 

PLATONISM, FORM, AND NUMBER 
99 
number and then note how they accord or fail to accord with the recon­
struction above. 
Wedberg, it will be recalled, put forward several theses "on the nature 
of arithmetic that, ... [he believes] can be attributed to Plato." The most 
important of these, for present purposes, are that the "Mathematical Num­
bers" are characterized as follows. 
"(1) They are made up of certain ideal "units" or "i's". The Mathe­
matical Number n is the set [!] of N such units: 2 is a set of two, 3 a set of 
three, and so on. 
(2) Of such ideal units, or 7's, there exists an infinite supply. 
(3) There is no difference between the ideal units: two such units are 
completely indistinguishable. 
(4) An ideal unit does not contain any plurality of parts, or con­
stituents, or characteristics: from whatever point of view we consider such 
a unit, it is One and One only. 
(5) Of each Mathematical Number there are infinitely many copies. 
From the infinite supply of ideal units we may choose N units in infinitely 
many ways, and every choice gives us a representation of the Mathematical 
Number N. 
(6) The elementary arithmetical notions are simple set-theoretical 
notions. 
(7) Mathematical Numbers are the numbers studied by arithmetic. It 
is for them, and only for them, that the concepts of arithmetic are defined." 
Here, as is the case with those of A.E. Taylor, the problems connected 
with justifying these contentions on the basis of the actual text are formida­
ble, as Wedberg of course is fully aware. Even so, they may be accepted, 
for the moment anyhow, as containing some little glimmer of correct first 
approximation. 
The main point here is that Wedberg makes fundamental use of the 
modern notion of set, just as Taylor does. Unlike Taylor, however, he 
reads this very notion into Plato himself. In (1) a number is a set of units, 
and in (6) the elementary arithmetical notions are "simple set-theoretic" 
ones. This latter especially seems highly questionable, there being no 
explicit set-theoretic talk in Plato at all. How simple are the set-theoretic 
notions for addition and multiplication, for example, in modern formula­
tions? A casual glance at part III, Section B, of Volume II of Principa 
Mathematica — especially the definitions * 110.02 of the arithmetical sum of 
two cardinals, * 113.02 of the arithmetic product of two cardinals, and of 

100 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
*116.02 of the exponentiation of two cardinals — shows them to be rather 
elaborate. Thus they are by no means "simple" in type-theory. But they are 
no less simple in set-theory, and only slightly less simple if confined to just 
finite cardinals. Also, as in D16 above, the cardinal number of a collective 
may be construed as the sum of all ordinal pairs of forms of a certain kind, 
so that a closely allied notion of number is in fact available without the 
notion of set. 
The main content of (1) is that numbers are "made up of certain ideal 
"units" or "7's." To be "made up" of units is handled above in terms of 
Boolean sums. A Boolean sum is made up of the units that are included in 
it. The use of units here is absolutely fundamental, and Wedberg is surely 
correct in calling attention to it. It is natural to think of a unit as a " 1 " , and 
then to confuse the two. One of the biggest problems the Greek 
philosophers of mathematics had to face was how to distingish the two. The 
number 1 is not itself a unit but is closely associated with such — more spec­
ifically, with cardinal units. And similarly, the number 2 is closely 
associated with two cardinal units taken together to form a sum. The exact 
character of this close association we have seen to be as follows. Given a 
sum of two cardinal units, say, the cardinal number 2 is the sum of all 
dyadic-ordinal forms F whose ordinands are some form G with G, where G 
is equinumerous with a Boolean sum of distinct cardinal-unit forms H and 
H'. Thus we may let 
D17c. '2' 
abbreviate 
e(il(EG)(F Ord G,G . (Etf)(Etf')(CardFrm 
H . UnitFrm H . CardFrm H' . UnitFrm H' . G Equinum (  
That the units involved are "ideal" is merely to say that they are forms. 
Even a dual form is a unit in this sense, and similarly for triples, and so on. 
Thus, 2, according to the definition just given, is the sum of all ordinal 
forms F with a "dual" form G as its ordinands, where G is equinumerous 
with a sum of two cardinal-unit forms. 
Note that Wedberg's item (2) is essentially an Axiom of Infinity, 
supplied here by appropriate assumptions. Further — point (3) — the ideal 
units are alike as regards their character as forms. The theory above distin­
guishes many kinds of unit forms — "individuals" or cardinal units; dyadic, 
triadic, etc., ordinal relational individuals of cardinal units; and so on and 
on. For present purposes, we consider only cardinal units. Any two cardi­
nal-unit forms are "completely indistinguishable" as such, so to speak. In 
arithmetic, however, differences abound. There is only 1 table before me 

PLATONISM, FORM, AND NUMBER 
101 
with 1 top, at least 4 legs, billions of atoms whirling around within it, and so 
on. Here the notions of being a table, a leg, a table-top, and the like, are all 
taken as forms comprising different kinds of cardinal units. Cardinal units 
are all alike qua being cardinal-unit forms, however, and the theory is an 
ontological one (as in HL), in essentially Lesniewski's sense, rather than a 
mereological one (as in EM). Thus, an ideal unit — Wedberg's point (4) — 
"does not contain any plurality of parts, or constituents." 
Point (5) is that, given any Mathematical Number, there are infinitely 
many copies. This may be enunciated as a theorem. For a form to be "infi­
nite" here, we may mean a form equinumerous with a form properly 
included in it — the so-called "reflexive" rendering of the infinite (PM, 
*124). The notion of equinumerosity needed here is an extension of that of 
D15 above. Let us call it 'Equinum2', which may be presumed defined as 
between expressions for relational collectives of cardinal units. A cardinal 
number of F is such an entity, it will be recalled, being a sum of all ordinal 
forms of some  with itself where  is a collection of cardinal units and  
is equinumerous with F. Thus, our theorem is to the effect that 
\-(F)(~ N F r m F => (EG)( G I n c l d N c ' ^ ■ ~ Nc'FIncld G . Nc'F 
Equinum2 G)). 
To be a "copy" of a number Nc'F here is merely to be one of the ordinal-
unit forms of which Nc'F is a Boolean sum. 
A final comment. Let us dub the foregoing system for handling forms 
the system F. It amounts, as already in effect noted, to a formological or 
formtheoretic interpretation of OM or HL. The three interpretations may 
be summarized as follows. In the mereological one, the values for the vari­
ables are individuals including parts of them, the units being the minimal 
parts admitted. If parts of these minimalia are to be introduced, these must 
be handled in terms of additional primitives. The mereological interpreta­
tion can thus be brought into accord with physicalism, the individuals and 
their parts being taken as in some physical theory. The ontological interpre­
tation takes individuals in the sense of a Kotarbinski-like reism as the unit 
entities. If parts of them are to be recognized, this must be done in terms of 
additional primitives. Finally, the formological interpretation takes forms 
as the fundamental entities, cardinal-unit forms playing therein essentially 
the role of determining, but by no means being identical with, individuals. 
Here too, if individuals are to be accommodated as such, this is to be done 
in terms of some new primitive such as 'Prtcpt' for participation. 


CHAPTER EIGHT 
On relational couples and ordinal individuals: 
Peirce and Russell 
"I do not think it is possible to write the his­
tory of a science until that science itself shall 
have been understood, thanks to a clear, 
explicit, and decent logical structure." 
C. Truesdell 
In his The Principles of Mathematics1, Russell commented that "the logic of 
relations has a more immediate bearing on mathematics than that of classes 
or propositions, and any theoretically correct and adequate expression of 
mathematical truths is only possible by its means. Peirce and Schröder have 
realized the great importance of the subject, but unfortunately their 
methods, being based not on Peano, but on the older Symbolic Logic 
derived (with modifications) from Boole, are so cumbrous and difficult that 
most of the applications which ought to be made are practically not feasi­
ble. In addition to the defects of the old Symbolic Logic, their method suf­
fers ... from the fact that they regard a relation essentially as a class of 
couples, thus requiring elaborate formulae of summation for dealing with 
single relations." These comments seemed cogent no doubt at the time 
Russell wrote, but, even so, some of them are highly dubious. The methods 
of the algebra of relations have not proved to be "so cumbrous and dif­
ficult" as not to be practically applicable to mathematics and elsewhere.2 
Also, it is doubtful that Peirce regarded — in the papers to which Russell 
refers3 — (dyadic) relations as "classes of couples" and that the "formulae 
of summation" he used are any more elaborate than Russell's own 
methods. Nor did Russell know of mereology or the calculus of individuals, 
in which the only "formulae of summation" used are ordinary Boolean 
ones. If Peirce (and Schröder) were to have regarded unit relations or ordì-

104 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
nal couples mereologically, as entities on a par with their relata, they could 
have regarded relations as Boolean sums of such couples satisfying such and 
such conditions. Were they to have done so, the foundations of mathema­
tics could have stepped ahead in an important respect by almost a hundred 
years. 
Let us explore a little these various contentions, starting more or less 
from scratch. 
On p. 99, Russell commented — most interestingly for present pur­
poses — that "there is a temptation to regard a relation as definable in 
extension as a class of couples.... But it is necessary to give sense to the 
couple, to distinguish the referent from the relatum: thus a couple becomes 
essentially distinct from a class of two terms, and must itself be introduced 
as a primitive idea. It would seem, viewing the matter philosophically, that 
sense can only be derived from some relational proposition, and that the 
assertion that a is referent and b relatum already involves a purely rela­
tional proposition in which a and b are terms, though the relation asserted 
is only the general one of referent to relatum." 
Let us indeed view the matter philosophically, and in as simple and 
adequate a way as we can muster up. Russell thinks that this is to be done 
only in terms of a "relational proposition." Instead of following this well-
trodden path, let us reflect upon relations themselves, rather than upon the 
propositions embodying them — rather mysterious entities at best be it 
said.4 And let us take the notions of a couple seriously — in such a way as 
"to give sense [and order] to the couple" and thus "to distinguish the refe­
rent from relatum," to see it as "essentially distinct from a class of two 
terms," and, indeed, in such a way as to "be introduced as a primitive 
idea." 
Let us first reflect upon Boolean atoms or units in mereological terms, 
as in OM or HL above. Let 'P' be the primitive for the relation of part-to-
whole in terms of which the Boolean notions are introduced. A unit, then, 
relative to P, is any entity that is non-null and bears P to all non-null entities 
that bear P to it.5 A unit is thus an entity not further divisible, so to speak, 
in terms of P. In the merological interpretation of OM, the units are the 
minimal entities recognized, but still need not be "individuals" in any usual 
sense. No, they bear P to individuals, and individuals are regarded as Boo­
lean sums or "collectives" of these minimalia. In the "ontological" interpre­
tation, that of HL, however, the units are taken as individuals, and collec­
tives are then Boolean sums of individuals. In either interpretation, it is 

RELATIONAL COUPLES AND ORDINAL INDIVIDUALS 
105 
interesting to observe, we gain the effect of speaking of the membership of 
a unit in a class by saying that the given unit bears P to a given collective. 
A collective in general, it will be recalled, is any sum of units, and in 
particular any sum of units satisfying such and such a condition. In the sym­
bolism of HL, we have an Abstraction Principle, it will be recalled, that 
h ()(Unit x ZD   (yl--y--) = 
--)), 
that any unit is such that it is part of a collective of units satisfying a given 
condition if and only if it satisfies that condition itself. This principle corre­
sponds, of course, to a familiar kind of principle in class-theory, or even in 
virtual-class theory. Thus where 
'{  (Unit  . ----)} x' 
is defined merely as 
'(Unit x . --*--)', 
where (as needed), 
we have that 
h (x)((Unit x . x P (yl-y-)) 
= { (Unit  . 
-y-)}x). 
Let 'Coll(Card) y' express that  is a collective (of cardinal individuals). 
Then quantifiers over classes are gained in part by 
'GO(Coll(Card)  => --)'. 
Let us now turn to "couples," regarded now as the units, dyadic ordi­
nal individuals of HL. Let 'x Ord y,z' express that x is the "couple" of  and 
z with  as referent and z as relatum. We can then let 
'(y ord z)' 
abbreviate 
'(ix . x Ord y,z)\ 
so that the couple (y ord z) is the one and only one entity bearing Ord to  
and z. Note that everything Russell requires is provided for: the "sense" of 
the couple in terms of the distinction between referent and relatum, the dif­
ferentiation of the couple from "a class of two terms" — and also from a 
Boolean sum of two terms — and the introduction of it in terms of 'Ord' as 
a primitive notion. Triples, quadruples, and so on, can be handled by itera­
tion, so that 
'x Ord y,z,w' 
is short for 
'(Ew)(w Ord z,w . x Ord y,u)\ 
and so on. 
How is a couple related to its referent and relatum? Surely not in terms 
of part-to-whole. The couple is not a part of its relata any more than these 
latter are parts of it. No, the referent is the first ordinand of the couple, the 
relatum the second ordinand of the couple, and the couple is the couple of 

106 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
its referent and relatum — all of which is obvious enough and as it should 
be. (The only exception here is the null individual, which, being a part of 
everything, is allowed to be a part of the couple as well as of either its refe­
rent or relatum.) 
It is natural now to assume couples as entities along with the units, 
individuals, sums of them, and so on, already availabe. They are needed in 
order to move on to handle "relational propositions." The very essence of 
relationality, we might say, resides in couples, triples, and so on, and in 
how we handle them. In other words, we ought to be able to develop the 
full logic of relations in terms of them in some suitable way. And indeed we 
can. 
If, now, a couple (x ord v) does not have its referent x and relatum v 
as parts, what kinds of parts does it have? we may well ask. The answer is: 
it has only itself'as a part — and the null entity. Further, it is itself non-null, 
not being a part of either its referent or relatum. A couple is thus both non-
null and is a part of all its non-null parts. Ergo, couples are units. And simi­
larly for triples, and so on. Unit entities that are not couples, triples, and so 
on — together with Boolean sums of such units — are cardinal entities, 
already spoken of parenthetically above. 
Given couples, we can now form Boolean sums of them, and even 
Boolean sums of them satisfying given conditions, these latter being sums 
of unit couples the referents and relata of which satisfy given conditions. 
With all this in mind, we see how relations between cardinal entities may 
now be handled. A dyadic relation between cardinal entities becomes the 
sum of all couples the referents and relata of which are cardinal entities of 
which such and such a condition holds, this condition being the defining 
condition of the relation, so to speak. 
Let us consider an example, say, the relation of being larger-than, as 
between cardinal entities, in the sense of containing more units as parts. 
Thus x is larger than y, in this sense, just where y bears the equinumerosity-
relation Sm to some  and there is a cardinal-unit part of x not of u. Let 
'CardEnt w' express that w is a cardinal entity. Our relation is then merely 
the sum 
(1) 
(zl(Ex)(Ey)(CardEnt x . CardEnt  . z Ord x,y . (Ew)(Bu)(u Sm 
 . CardEnt w . Unit w . w P x . ~ w P u))). 
And similarly for any relation between cardinals that can be expressed in 
the notation of the system. (On 'Sm', recall D20 or D20' of OM, or D15 of 

RELATIONAL COUPLES AND ORDINAL INDIVIDUALS 
107 
the formological system F.) 
For applications of OM or HL to some non-logical subject-matter, suit­
able non-logical primitives may be added, together with suitable meaning-
postulates characterizing them. The means are at hand to give such con­
stants, relational or otherwise, appropriate designata within the general 
kind of ontology of the system. 
Thus far we have considered only relations between or among cardinal 
entities. By parity of construction, however, we can go on to built up other 
kinds of relations as well. Let rx and r2 be relations between or among cardi­
nals — of which (1) above is an example. Consider now the couple (r ord 
r2), with r as referent and r2 as relatum. This couple is also a unit — as all 
couples are — and thus we can form the sum of all units of this kind the 
referents and relata of which satisfy a given condition. Such a sum is a 
dyadic relation between relations between or among cardinal entities. And 
so on, for all manner of relations between or among relations of all manner 
of complexity. 
In all of this, we have gone way beyond anything envisaged by Russell. 
We have merely been following a suggestion that he put forward only to 
push aside and move ahead in a quite different way, as we have noted. Why 
did Russell not follow through on his suggestion concerning couples? The 
very next sentence on p. 99, directly following the quote above, gives us the 
answer. "There are, in fact," he wrote, "concepts such as greater, which 
occur otherwise than as terms in propositions having two terms; and no 
doctrine of couples can evade such propositions." Russell thought it "there­
fore more correct" to take another course in handling relations. Russell 
does not say, however, it should be observed, that no doctrine of couples 
could be formulated to handle occurrences of relational terms otherwise 
than as terms in propositions [sentences] having two terms." In the forego­
ing, we have seen how this may be done. Relations can occcur as referents 
and relata of suitable relations of higher order, so to speak, such relations 
also being handled in terms of a general theory of couples, triples, and so 
on. There is thus no neglect here of sentences in which expressions for rela­
tions can occur in all the ways required in a general theory. 
In all of this discussion, there has been no talk of classes, of classes of 
classes, and so on — other than virtual ones. Lovers of class-theory may 
object that a couple, after all, is merely a class of classes in disguise. Thus, 
where {a, ß} is the class whose only members are a and ß — no matter 
what kind of entities a and ß are — one might argue that (x ord v) is merely 

108 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
the class of classes 
{{*}, {>}}> 
in the manner essentially of Wiener or Kuratowski.6 Hence, one might say, 
the theories of OM and HL are merely a kind of class-theory in disguise. 
Such an attitude would seem to be rather obstinate and one-sided, it should 
be noted, and would seem to presuppose that the class-theoretic way of 
viewing couples is the one and only one. It would be like saying that identity 
is always to be thought of class-theoretically, that is, that 'x = y' means that 
v is a member of every class that x is, and that therefore if we take ' = ' as a 
primitive in some system without classes, that system contains a class-
theory in disguise. And similarly if ' = ' is defined in terms of the primitive 
predicates of the system in the manner of Hilbert-and-Bernays.7 Any such 
contention would seem rather ill-judged, and the person who made them 
we would tend to think rather class-theoretically arrogant, or at least brain­
washed, and rather intolerant of alternatives. And he would be committing 
the worst of methodological sins, according to Peirce, that of blocking the 
road of inquiry — more particularly, of inquiry into alternatives. 
The point of the theory of couples, as incorporated in OM or HL, is 
that with their help we can achieve what otherwise can be done class-
theoretically. This is methodologically interesting as a step toward 
economy, and helps to free us from the straight-jacket of the class-theoret­
ical point of view, which had become in recent years the one and only "re­
ceived system, considered as a standard of reference from which appeal is 
denied." One need not find anything objectionable in set- or class-theory in 
order to lament the organization-man kind of obsequiousness to it that pre­
vents interest in and tolerance of alternatives. 
It has been said of OM that an explanation is needed "of what makes 
entities abstract, and what are the features of sets that ... [are found] 
objectionable." And also that an account "should be provided to justify the 
claim that ... ordinal individuals are less objectionable than sets." Note how 
misguided and inaccurate both of these demands are. No claim was made 
that ordinal individuals are less "objectionable" than sets or classes. Nor 
were ordinal individuals claimed to be either more or less "abstract" or 
"concrete" than sets, classes, individuals, or what have you.8 
Russell's comments, quoted at the beginning, were first published in 
1903, long before Principia Mathematica and the Zermelo axiomatic set-
theory came on the market. Boolean theory was already available, how­
ever. Boole himself seems to have shown little explicit interest in relations 

RELATIONAL COUPLES AND ORDINAL INDIVIDUALS 
109 
as such, although probably more than is commonly supposed. Russell com­
mented, again in the important passages on pp. 23 ff., that "the calculus of 
relations is a more modern subject than the calculus of classes. Although a 
few hints for it are to be found in De Morgan, the subject was first devel­
oped by C.S. Peirce." This comment is surely not just to De Morgan, as has 
in effect been urged elsewhere.9 We should also query Russell's remarks, 
already quoted, concerning Peirce's "cumbrous and difficult" methods, 
concerning whether in fact he regarded "a relation as essentially a class of 
couples," and concerning the "elaborate formulae of summation for dealing 
with single relations." 
In the first of the two papers of Peirce to which Russell makes refer­
ence, the notation '(A:B)' is introduced to "denote individual relatives." 
An "individual" for Peirce is essentially the same as a unit cardinal of HL. 
Peirce comments that "every term [or rather collective] may be conceived 
as a limitless logical sum of individuals, or as a limitless logical product of 
simples." (A "simple" for Peirce is the negative of an individual. In the 
notation of HL, we may let 
'Simple *' 
abbreviate 
' ( - U P x . (y)((~ U P y . x P y ) = : y P 
x))'.io 
This is a kind of "dual" to the definition of 'Unit.) 
In Peirce's symbolism, where A is a "term" and the A.'s are individuals, 
we have that 
(PI) "a -  + A2 + A3 + A4 + A5 + etc. 
(P2) ã = Ã1 x Ã2 x Ã3 x Ä4 x Ã5 x etc. 
It will be seen that a simple is the negative of an individual." Yes, but from 
the definitions of 'simple' and 'individual', not from these two formulae. 
Given any individuals A and B, we may form dual relatives (A:A), 
(A:B), (B:A), and (B:B). And similarly, triples, given any three individu­
als. Given any n distinct individuals there are 2n triples of them. And simi­
larly for simples. And similarly there are dual relatives with an individual as 
one component and a simple as the other. Thus (A:B), (Ã:B), and so on, 
are also recognized as dual relatives. 
Can relatives involving simples be construed wholly in terms of rela­
tives involving only individuals? Yes, of course, although Peirce does not 
state this crucial fact. Let (A:A), (A:B), (B:A), (A:C), (B:B), (C:A), 
(A:D), (B:C), (C:B), (D:A), and so on, constitute an enumeration of all 
the individual dual relatives — note the Diagonalsverfahren involved. Then 

 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
any Ã, where A is an individual, is itself merely a sum of individuals, say A1 
+ A2 + .... How then are we to construe, say, (A:À) or (A:(A1 + A2 + 
...)? Peirce does not tell us, but he seems to need a kind of distributive law 
that 
(P3) 
(A:Ä) = (AIAJ) + (A:A2) 4- etc., 
and, more generally, that 
(P4)  = (B1 + B2 + etc.) => ((A:B) = ( A ^ ) + (A:B2) + etc. . 
(B:A) - (BjiA) + (B2:A) + etc.) 
And similarly for triple relatives, and so on. 
With these formulae in mind we can easily see that, as Peirce tells us, 
where oo is "the logical sum of all the relatives" in the enumeration, 
(D5) oo = (A:B) + (Ä:B) + (A:B) + (Ã:B). 
He also states that 
(P6) oo = A + Ã, 
so that the logical sum of all dual relatives must be the same as the logical 
sum of all individuals. And similarly these logical sums must be the same as 
the logical sum of all triple relatives of individuals, for we are also told that 
(P7) oo = (A:B:C)_ + (Ä:B:C) + (A:B:C) + (A:B:C) + (A:B:C) + 
(A:B:C) + (Ä:B:C) + (Ä:B:C). 
Prima facie, looks as though Peirce is equating here three quite differ­
ent kinds of sums. And indeed he is, for we are told that "it is needless to 
distinguish the dual universe, the triple universe, etc., because, by adding a 
perfectly indefinite additional member to the system, a dual relative may be 
converted into a triple relative. Thus for lover of a woman, we may write 
lover of a woman coexisting with anything. In the same way, a term of single 
reference is equivalent to a relative with an indefinite correlate; thus, 
woman is equivalent to woman coexisting with anything. Thus we shall have 
(P8) A = (A:A) + (A:B) + (A:C) + (A:D) + (A:E) + etc. 
(P9) (A:B) = (A:B:A) + (A:B:B) + (A:B:C) + (A:B:D) + etc." 
Strictly we should distinguish here an individual name from a general 
noun such as 'woman', and we shall wish to say very different things about 
them. Peirce does not introduce duals such as (woman:man) or even 
(woman:Helen) or the like. No, the theory centers around individuals and 
simples, duals, triples, and so on, comprised of them, and logical sums. 

RELATIONAL COUPLES AND ORDINAL INDIVIDUALS 
111 
Thus the example of the "equivalence" (in some sense) of 'lover of a 
woman' with 'lover of a woman coexisting with anything' seems ill-chosen. 
Let 'w' represent here 'woman' and 'c' 'coexisting with anything'. Then 
'woman coexisting with anything' would be best represented by 'w x c' and 
not by '(w:c)'> which is not — immediately anyhow — a dual relative of 
individuals. Peirce seems to be confusing here two very different kinds of 
things, a Boolean product of w and  with dual relatives of individuals. 
Another problem arises. Peirce should have noted that, if (P8) and 
(P9) are assumed, then for essentially the same reason it should be assumed 
also that 
(PIO) A = (A: A) + (B:A) + (C:A) + etc., 
(Pll) A - (A:A:A) + (B:A:A) + (A:A:B) + (B:A:B) + (C:A:A) + 
(A:A:C) + (C:A:C) + etc. 
and so on, for all quadruples, quintuples, and so on. 
To equate an individual with sums of dual relatives, sums of triple rela­
tives, and so on, seems somewhat counterintuitive. (The theory of relatives, 
it would seem, should be well-grounded in the individuals concerned, and 
wholly determined by them.) And, anyhow, what advantage is to be gained 
by blurring these all together in this fashion? And does it lead us into tech­
nical difficulties as the theory develops? Yes, it seems, it does. 
Peirce is not one to have worried much about the full systematicity of 
what he does — of the whole vocabulary needed, of the primitives, of the 
notions of 'formula' and 'term' needed, of precise definitions of all non-
primitives, of the axioms, and of the rule needed to go from axioms to 
theorems. The very notion of a "proof" or "derivation" in Peirce's theories 
is thus rather obscure. Even so, we may move ahead as follows, as he him­
self frequently does. 
Let us bring in the '—<' which plays the role in Peirce's theory that 'P' 
does in HL or EM. And identity for Peirce may be handled in terms of 
'—<', so that a = b if and only if a—< b and b—< a — recall 3.173. Thus, 
from (P8) we can infer that (A:A) —< A, (A:B) —< A, and so on. And 
similarly (A: A: A)—< A, and so on. And of course each of the summands 
of (PIO) and (Pll) also bears —< to A. 
But A is an individual, it should be recalled, so that A in turn bears 
—< to everything non-null that bears—< to it. Each of the summands of A 
is non-null, surely, although we are not explicitly told so. Hence A bears 
—< to each and every one of them. Let us consider now any distinct indi-

112 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
viduals A and  and observe that from what has just been said, we have that 
A—< (A:B) and ( A : B ) - < B. 
But—< is surely transitive, so that we have also that 
A — < B . 
Thus for any two individuals, one bears —< to the other. By a similar 
reasoning, it can be shown that the other bears —< to the one. Thus 
Peirce's theory, as developed in this American Journal of Mathematics 
paper of 1880, is such as to countenance just one individual — contrary 
surely to its intent. 
Another troublesome feature of Peirce's discussion is the vague use of 
'etc.' in the formulae. To make this use acceptable, to mathematize it in a 
precise notation, some device such as that of the unit summation of HL 
seems needed. Peirce's blurring of individuals, dual relatives of them, and 
so on, is then captured by the formula of HL that 
x = (vl(Ez)(Ew)(y Ord x,z v v Ord z,x v  Ord z,x,w)). 
But this formula is surely not acceptable and would play havoc with mereol-
ogy, just as (PIO) and (Pll) do with the Peircean form of theory. 
In place of unit summation or something similar, Peirce uses the 
unanalyzed '+ etc.' notion, as we have observed. This use involves two 
other undesirable features. The first is that all the individuals A, B, and so 
on, are presumed enumerable and, moreover, nameable. How many indi­
viduals are there? Perhaps only countably many, perhaps more. In any 
case, the logic of relations should not have as a presupposition that there 
are only countably many. Nor should it presuppose that each is nameable 
or, more specifically, actually named, as with Peirce. Note also that if there 
are non-countably many individuals, then several of Peirce's formulae must 
themselves be of infinite length. Languages containing expressions of infi­
nite length have been studied a little, but the general opinion seems to pre­
vail that they are of only minor mathematical interest and of no help in the 
study of natural language. In any case, the logic of relations should not have 
to depend for its formulation upon the use of such languages. 
We have already observed that Peirce does not distinguish the "uni­
verse" of individuals from that of dual relatives, nor neither of these from 
that of triple relatives, and so on. We have also seen that not to do so leads 
to unfortunate consequences. It is of interest to observe here how these 
consequences are avoided in OM (and, mutatis mutandis, in HL). In OM, 

RELATIONAL COUPLES AND ORDINAL INDIVIDUALS 
113 
where W is the total universal individual, and V , V , and so on, are the 
universal dyadic relation between cardinal individuals, the universal triadic 
relation among cardinal individuals, and so on, we have that 
h (~ w p v2. v2 p w. ~ w p v3. v3 p w 
~ v2 p v3. ~ 
V 3 P V 2 . ~ V 2 P V 4 . ~ V 4 P V 2 
~ V 3 P V 4 . ~ V 4 P V 3 . 
not all units being dyadic relations between cardinal individuals but all such 
relations being part of W, no dyadic relation between cardinal individuals 
being a triadic one, and so on. 
It should be observed that Peirce is no longer concerned with indi­
vidual relatives in the second Americal Journal of Mathematics paper, of 
1885, to which Russell made reference. Here the whole venue has changed 
radically. In this paper Perice was in full command of the logic of quantifi­
cation in essentially the manner of the Whitehead-Russell treatment in 
Principia Mathematica. In the Principles of Mathematics, as we have noted, 
Russell lumps these two papers together indiscriminately, apparently not 
aware of the difference. In this latter paper, surely, individual relatives are 
not regarded as "classes of couples" nor are "elaborate formulae of summa­
tion for dealing with single relations" required. Nor are relatives regarded 
as "classes of couples" in the earlier paper, as we have noted, but rather as 
Boolean sums of them. However, in that paper the formulae of summation 
are rather elaborate, and, moreover, some of them are incorrect. Also it is 
not clear that the theory is developed extensively enough to handle rela­
tions between and among relations in full generality, including relations of 
higher order. Some of Russell's strictures seem therefore, in the main, jus­
tified. But his positive suggestions concerning couples have had to wait 
eighty years for a proper airing. 
In his valuable review of Vol. Ill of Peirce's Collected Papers11, Quine 
pointed out many items of the utmost importance for a proper understand­
ing of Peirce's work in logic. It is unfortunate that this review has not been 
paid attention to by Peirce scholars. A careful appraisal of it is very much 
overdue. A minor point that Quine mentions is the need for the inner 
parentheses in (P8) and allied formulae that are missing in the printed text. 
It is interesting, however, that Quine does not call attention to the more 
fundamental error pointed out above, lurking in (P8) together with the 
other formulae and the definition of 'individual'. This error is fundamental 
and seems to infect all of Peirce's work on the logic of relatives until he had 

114 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
come to terms with the quantifiers in the paper of 188312 and the American 
Journal of Mathematics paper of 1885. 

CHAPTER NINE 
On ordinal nominalism: Goodman, Eberle, 
and Hempel 
"Nemo potest nudo vestimenta detrahere." 
Let us reflect for a moment of Goodman's much discussed principle of 
nominalism, to the effect that there is "no distinction of entities without a 
distinction of content."1 More specifically, "for a nominalistic system no 
two different things have the same atoms: only from different atoms can 
different things be generated; all non-identities between things are reduci­
ble to non-identities between their atoms." The use of 'content' seems 
vague and Goodman does not define it. Of course 'atom' is vague also 
unless suitably clarified. Goodman does specify it somewhat by bringing in 
a "generating" relation R between "things" in such a way that a thing x is an 
atom relative to P if and only if nothing bears R to x. 
The units of OM and HL, as discussed in V above, play the respective 
roles therein of Goodman's atoms. They are the ultimate entities out of 
which all others may be generated. And by 'content' or 'content of x', let us 
mean the unit parts of x. What then is the "generating" relation — or, bet­
ter, the generating virtual relation? Merely 
(1) 
{xy  (~ x P N . x P y . ~ y P x)} 
or, regarded as a relation of OM (or HL) itself, 
(zl(Ex)(Ey)(~ x P N . x P y . ~ y P x . z O r d x,y)). 
Let Gen be the virtual relation (1). Then clearly 
h (x)(Unit x = ~ (Ey)(y Gen x), 
so that "x is an atom relative to R [i.e., Gen] if and only if nothing bears R 
to x." Likewise 

116 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
h (*)(y)((~ x = y . ~ x P N . ~ y P N ) : D ~ (z)(w)((Unit z . Unit 
w . z Gen x . w Gen v) = z = w)), 
so that "only from different atoms can different things be generated;" and 
h MG0((~ * = y . ~ x P N . ~ y P N ) : D (Ez)(Ew)(Unit z . Unit 
w . ~ z = w . z Gen x . w Gen y)), 
so that "all non-identities between things are reducible to non-identities 
between their atoms." Ergo, the principle of nominalism is satisfied in OM 
and HL where the Units are regarded as the atoms relative to the genera­
ting virtual-relation Gen. 
But of course much more is dreamed of here than in Goodman's 
philosophy, namely, the ordinal individuals. These are regarded as units or 
atoms, with no non-null "parts" other than themselves. Recall that where x 
Ord y,z neither y nor z are parts of x unless they are null. Nor is x a part of 
y or z. We may say that x and z are ordinands of x, or segments of x, or 
something of the sort — but this is a very different matter and subject to 
very different logical laws. 
Hempel, in his review of Goodman's The Structure of Appearance2, 
commented on the principle of nominalism as follows. "The insistence ... 
that two entities cannot be different if they have the same content does not 
appear to me to be convincing so long as the notion of content is used in ... 
a vague and unspecified manner. Thus, e.g., the idea of different sequential 
arrangements of a given finite number of individuals — or, as a special case, 
the formation of two different ordered couples from two individuals — 
would seem to be quite clear, and yet we have here apparently several dif­
ferent entities with the same content." Well, Hempelian clarity is a high 
desideratum, surely, and what is "quite clear" for Hempel should be clear 
enough for the rest of us — provided the "couples" involved are charac­
terized by exact rules themselves having the requisite clarity, simplicity, 
fruitfulness, and so on. 
Goodman's rejoinder to Hempel, in "A World of Individuals" (p. 24), 
seems quite beside the point. "Normally," he writes, "we no more conclude 
that we describe different entities when we name two people in different 
order than we conclude that a house from top to bottom and the house 
from bottom to top are different entities, or that the capital of Mas­
sachusetts and the largest city in New England are different things. We do 
not take the varied histories of the Battle of Bull Run as recounting differ­
ent occurrences. In daily life a multiplicity of descriptions is no evidence for 

ORDINAL NOMINALISM 
117 
a corresponding multiplicity of things described." Certainly not, but we 
must not confuse a thing under a description with an ordinal individual as 
such. The pair Washington, Lincoln — to use Goodman's example — is not 
Washington taken under any description at all. As a matter of fact, how­
ever, Washington-taken-under-a-description-fl can be regarded as the ordi­
nal individual 
(Washington ord a), 
where a is a one-place predicate describing him. However, Hempel's point, 
as we have seen, does not rest upon this confusion in any way. 
It should be observed also that Goodman's reply here is such as to rule 
out the purported treatment of inscriptional concatenation in the Good-
man-Quine "constructive nominalism." If 'C abc' expresses that a is the 
concatenate of inscription b and c, a here must be distinguished from a d 
where  deb. It is essential to be able to distinguish these for any viable 
inscriptional syntax. Here both a and d are a special kind of ordinal indi­
vidual, and in fact may explicitly be handled as such.3 Any objection Good­
man might put forward against the notion of an ordinal individual could 
thus readily be transformed into an objection against the very handling of 
concatenation that is so fundamental to the kind of nominalism he 
espouses. 
It has often been said, and justly so, that the greatest weakness of 
Goodman's nominalism — an interesting and important view in many 
respects, be it said — is that it is not able to accommodate mathematics in 
any deep sense. Not to do so is of course to give hostage to fortune. It can­
not provide a syntax for it, as we have just noted, let alone a system in 
which mathematics may be expressed or a semantics in which it may be 
interpreted. Many other philosophies have also been shipwrecked in this 
way — the very kinds that Goodman most despises. If nominalism is 
broadened, however just to the extent of admitting ordinal individuals, in 
the manner of V above, a foundation for mathematics is forthcoming, as we 
have seen — on, of course, suitable assumptions. To admit ordinal indi­
viduals, moreover, is not to open the flood-gates to the morass of undesira­
ble entities to which Goodman objects. This is the important point. Ordinal 
nominalism is still a severe view, but one that does not close its doors to the 
stupendous achievements of mathematics throughout its long history. 
In spite of all this, it is unlikely that the general notion of an ordinal 
individual can be brought into accord with Goodman's brand of 
nominalism. Many philosophers regard this latter as too narrow anyhow4, 

118 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
and in need of a considerable extension in order to "make sense" — Good­
man's very phrase — of the languages of mathematics and of the sciences. 
Tant pis, then, for the narrow nominalism; let us welcome in its stead the 
more commodious kind of theoretical or ordinal nominalism that can per­
form these tasks as efficaciously as any set-theory can, and, moreover, in 
such a way as to satisfy Goodman's principle of nominalism suitably con­
strued. 
In his Nominalistic Systems5 Rolf Eberle has discussed several ways in 
which "sequential individuals" might be introduced within a quasi-Good-
manian framework. He comments (p. 82) that "in as Goodman appeals to 
everyday instances of things, rather than to a philosophically refined notion 
of an individual, his inability to discover such things [as sequential or ordi­
nal individuals] is somewhat surprizing. Whenever people speak of cloth 
patterns, flower arrangements, fleet formations, planetary systems, stellar 
constellations, clusters of berries, sentences, organisms, and so forth, they 
are naturally taken to speak of things which can differ just with respect to 
the arrangement of their parts." Yes — and a forteriori, surely, when we 
reflect upon the sophisticated modes of parlance in the theoretical sciences. 
Eberle goes on to discuss four ways in which sequential individuals 
might be introduced without losing sight of the fundamentals of the 
nominalist point of view. The one that he thinks the "most advantageous" 
is "the only one among the four which justifies any hope that relations can 
be characterized in terms of sequential individuals." In this method, a 
triadic relation L is introduced primitively in such a way that 'Lxyz' is com­
parable in some respects to 'y Ord x,z' in OM or HL, but with important 
technical differences. In particular the "links" he admits are only as 
between "atoms" and the method is apparently not able as it stands to 
handle relations between or among individuals in general, nor among rela­
tions of higher order — and therewith the foundations of mathematics. 
Also Eberle makes fundamental use of a model-theoretic (and hence set-
theoretic) metalanguage for the presentation of his view, such a metalan­
guage not satisfying even remotely the constraints of any brand of 
nominalism whatsoever. "We have not even begun," as he himself notes (p. 
198), "to solve ... problems which beset 'metanominalism'." Even so, the 
theory of "links" does appear to have some family resemblance to EM and 
HL and is perhaps worthy of further development. 
Finally, let us ask: Why is it that ordinal or sequential individuals are 
needed fundamentally for a viable, theoretical nominalism that takes 

ORDINAL NOMINALISM 
119 
mathematics and the sciences seriously? A suitable answer to this question 
is forthcoming by altering ever so slightly some valuable comments of Hem-
pel with respect to the languages of the sciences. "In order to obtain 
theories of great precision, wide scope, and high empirical confirmation," 
he writes6, "science has ... evolved, in its different branches, comprehen­
sive systems of special concepts [expressible in terms of relations], referred 
to by technical terms. Many of these concepts [or relation] are highly 
abstract and bear little resemblance to the concrete concepts [names, Rus-
sellian descriptions, and predicates] we use to describe the phenomena [and 
individuals] of our everyday experience. Actually, however, certain con­
nections [or relations] must obtain between [the objects of] these two clas­
ses of concepts; for science is ultimately intended to sytematize [and 
thereby interrelate] the data [and objects] of our experience, and this is 
possible only if scientific principles, even when couched in the most esoteric 
terms [usually for relations of higher order], have a bearing upon, and thus 
are conceptually connected [or related] with, statements reporting in "expe­
riential terms" available in everyday language what has been established by 
immediate observation. Consequently, there will exist certain connections 
[or relations] between the technical terms [and their designata] of empirical 
science and the [items of the] experiential vocabulary [and their designata] ; 
in fact, only by virtue of such connections [or relations] can the technical 
terms [and principles] have any empirical content." In fact, such terms and 
principles cannot even be stated other than by admitting expressions for 
these various connections or relations as part of the scientific and meta-
scientific vocabulary. In short — no individuals, no observables; no rela­
tions, no principles; no individuals or relations, no science; no science, no 
philosophical intelligibility. 
What does the "world" look like, according to ordinal nominalism? 
Again, a paraphrase of a comment by Hempel (p. 36) will be helpful by way 
of an answer. Hempel writes that a "scientific theory might ... be likened to 
a complex spatial network: Its terms are represented by the knots, while the 
threads connecting the latter correspond, in part, to the definitions and, in 
part, to the fundamental and derivative hypotheses [or principles] included 
in [and constituting] the theory. The whole system floats, as it were, above 
the plane of observation and is anchored to it by rules of interpretation. 
These might be viewed as strings which are not a part of the network but 
link certain points of the latter with specific places in the plane of observa­
tion. By virtue of these interpretive connections, the network can function 

120 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
as a scientific theory: From certain observational data, we may ascend, via 
an interpretative string, to some point in the theoretical network, thence 
proceed, via definitions and hypotheses, to other points, from which 
another interpretive string permits a descent to the plane of observation." 
A "knot" here, it should be noted, represents a term for either an 
observable or a theoretical construct. Let us now "ontologize" Hempel's 
picture by letting the knots represent only cardinal individuals (in the sense 
of HL), only some of which are observables. Given any two cardinal indi­
viduals y and z, a thread connects them (with an arrowhead indicating the 
direction from y to z) because there is an x such that x Ord y,z according to 
the postulates. And similarly threads connecting threads, if the postulates 
warrant such. And so on, resulting in a vast network of knots and threads 
of a very complicated kind. Even so, this picture does not even begin to 
capture the immensity of the "world", for all manner of Boolean sums, pro­
ducts, and negatives are also postulated to exist, which we have no conve­
nient way of picturing here. Also the world or cosmic entity U and the null 
entity must be given a place. For the ontology of ordinal nominalism, then, 
we need a vastly more complex array than Hempel's, an array, namely, for 
all the values for the variables of the system, whether named or not. 
If we assume now that some of the individuals are "observables," the 
"strings" tying them to the plane of observation may be described essen­
tially as Hempel does. However, it should be noted that the observables 
constitute only a very small fragment of the ontology here. The greater part 
of the cosmos floats about with no strings attached — i.e., directly, and if at 
all perhaps only very remotely indeed. Such is the cosmos if the high 
reaches of mathematics are to be taken seriously, as they most surely must 
in any attempt to characterize the languages of science. 
One final comment. Goodman's world of individuals is comparable to 
that of Leibniz's monads in being "windowless." Such relations as Good­
man allows may be handled merely as virtual ones and not therewith as val­
ues for variables. In the ontology of ordinal nominalism, on the other hand, 
the cardinal individuals are more like Whitehead's "actual entities" with 
their windows open to the entire cosmos, taken both distributively and col­
lectively. Each entity is threaded with each other entity, so to speak, includ­
ing its contemporaries — unlike Whitehead's in this respect — and these 
threads are in turn threaded with other threads and with other entities of all 
sorts, and so on and on. Again, nothing less than this is adequate if 
mathematics is to be given its proper setting in the modern theory of rela-

ORDINAL NOMINALISM 
121 
tions. We live, not in a "world of individuals" as with Goodman, but rather 
in a structured 
world-of-individuals-and-relations-in-indissoluble-union-
with-one-another. 


CHAPTER TEN 
On sets and individuals: Hao Wang 
Mathematica brevis, logica longa. 
A certain philosophical suspicion surrounds the notion of set, and hence the 
notion of a domain of sets as a part or whole of an ontology. An ontology 
consists of the entities taken as the fundamental or basic ones, or as the val­
ues for variables in a given system, if the system contains variables. Let us 
explore a little, in the present paper, the grounds of this suspicion against 
sets. Of course some suspicion may surround any ontology at all, quite 
irrespective of whether sets are included in it or not. That they must be 
included within the ontology of any theory of serious philosophical or math­
ematical interest is the prevailing view and is commonly dubbed 'Platonic 
realism', but quite erroneously so as we have seen in VII above. 
The truism 'No individuals, no sets' is so elementary and obvious as 
not to have invited comment in the philosophical literature. Sets, other 
than the null or empty set, are such as to have something as members. 
Some of these members may be entities other than sets; such entities are 
commonly called 'individuals' or 'Ut-elemente'. Sets themselves are such, 
then, as significantly either to be members or to have members, whereas 
individuals may be members but cannot significantly have members. If 
there are no individuals, the only set left is the null or empty set, which 
could not even be described as 'empty' if there were no individuals of which 
it is empty. Without individuals, the empty set appears at best to be a dubi­
ous, als ob kind of thing. In a real sense, then, it would seem, individuals 
are more fundamental than sets, and, in some fashion or other and how­
soever construed, are to be recognized as entities in any scientific or philo­
sophical scheme worth the bother. 
In a perceptive recent discussion1, Hao Wang has called attention (p. 
22) to the "privotal position of sets" in logic and the foundations of 

124 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
mathematics. "That we have an adequate formal system of pure logic (the 
completeness problem of the first order logic) depends for its very formula­
tion on the concept of arbitrary sets. And we have unique (categorical) 
characterizations of natural numbers and real numbers by axiom systems 
only if we use second order theories, i.e., presuppose a fixed comprehen­
sive concept of arbitrary sets of these numbers. Thus we see again and again 
that we appeal to a concept of set in order to justify absolute results in other 
areas. On the other hand, we do not have a similarly adequate characteriza­
tion of sets.... Another fascinating feature about set theory is the apparent 
paradox that doubts about its foundations are widespread yet we are capa­
ble of acquiring very strong intuitions to arrive informally at correct, 
interesting, and coherent concepts and theorems. More, philosophical 
problems on mathematical objects and on the inner resources of a given 
branch of knowledge come to a specially conspicious focus in the examina­
tion of set theory." 
What precisely is a set? we may ask. "A set is a collection of previ­
ously given objects," Wang writes (p. 181); "the set is determined when it 
is determined for every given object x whether or not x belongs to it. The 
objects which belong to the set are its members, and the set is a single 
object formed by collecting the objects together. The members may be 
objects of any sort: plants, animals, photons, numbers, functions, sets, etc. 
According to ... [this] iterative concept, a set is something obtainable from 
some basic objects (such as the empty [or null] set, or the integers, or indi­
viduals, or some other well-defined urelements) by iterated application of 
the rich operation 'set of which permits the collecting together of any mul­
titude of 'given' objects (in particular, sets) or any part thereof into a set. 
This process includes transfinite iterations. For example, the multitude of 
sets obtained by finite iterations is considered to be itself a set." 
This "iterative" notion of set, Wang notes, "involves at least four dif­
ficult ideas: the idea of 'given', the idea of collecting together, the idea of 
'part' or subset, and the idea of iteration." But not, note, the fundamental 
notion of 'object' or, equivalently, 'individual' or 'Urelement', which Wang 
presumes admissible independently of all talk of sets. Without some 
objects, or non-sets, however, Wang's charaterization of 'set' could not 
even be stated except where there is only one "basic" object, the null set. 
Wang does not go on to defend his use of the "difficult ideas" men­
tioned, and his characterization does not tell us much about what sets are as 
such so much as how we arrive at them in suitable epistemic acts. The 

SETS AND INDIVIDUALS 
125 
objects are "given" somehow and then we go about "collecting" them. But 
what then is the collection once the objects are collected? This we are not 
told, other than that it is "single object" formed by use of the "rich" opera­
tion 'set of'. None of these explanations have clarificatory value without 
our already understanding the very notion 'set of. 
Suppose we have an operation of Boolean summation of some kind 
upon the individuals admitted. We could then repeat one by one Wang's 
points for such sums. A sum is a collection of individuals; it is "determined" 
when it is determined for any given individual x whether or not x belongs to 
it in the sense of being a summand of it. The individuals that belong to the 
sum are just its individual summands, and the sum is a single object formed 
by collecting the individuals together. Further, the notion of sum is "itera­
tive" in the sense that sums of sums may be formed by means of an opera­
tion 'sum of — less "rich" than 'set of, be it noted — and this may be 
extended to infinity. Of course, the technical handling of sums will be very 
different from that of sets, so that the analogy between the two is not to be 
pressed too far. The point here is merely that Wang's informal characteriza­
tion of 'set' does not go far enough to differentiate between 'set' and 'sum' 
without presupposing the very notion 'set' that it purports to elucidate. 
Wang tells us nothing about the theory of acts needed for his charac­
terization. Some suggestions toward such a theory have been given 
elsewhere2, and are perhaps worth further developing. We could let, for 
example, 
'p Clasfy^ x,a' 
express that, in some intentional act e, person p classifies x as having the 
one-place predicate a apply to it. The result of all such acts, byp, would give 
the notion of the extension of the predicate a for p. This "result" would be 
something like a set, but with suitable restrictions built into it in view of the 
principles or meaning-postulates that would be needed to characterize 
'Clsfy' as a pragmatical primitive. 
Recall that Wang admits that we do not have "an adequate characteri­
zation of sets" of the kind that the use of sets provides "in order to justify 
absolute results in other [mathematical] areas." This is a strong indictment 
of set-theory of which more should be made. Doubts about "its foundations 
are widespread" and have become even more so in the 10 years since 
Wang's book was written. Our "intuitions" about it are now less strong than 
then, and it has always been dubious "that we are capable of arriving at cor-

126 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
rect, interesting, and coherent concepts and theorems" about it. Les-
niewski, for example, could find "no coherent meaning" to the 'e' of Zer-
melo and hence to no statement, mathematical, philosophical, or other, 
made by means of it. Similar grumblings have been made over the years by 
others. 
Let us recall also the contention that "philosophical problems on math­
ematical objects and on the inner resources of a given branch of knowledge 
come to a specially conspicious focus in the examination of set theory." We 
should distinguish here the examination of set-theory from its use in carry­
ing out an examination. Not all examinations need make use of a set-
theory. It is true that if we view mathematical objects as set-theoretical 
ones, they take on the very focus of that theory itself — perhaps a blurred 
rather than a clear one. If mathematical objects are not taken set-theoreti­
cally — but sui generis or in some other, perhaps mereological or homolog-
ical way — they also may be brought into conspicuous focus, clear or blur­
red. And, similarly, when we consider the "inner resources of a branch of 
knowledge." Set-theory may or not figure among these resources. It is 
important to know whether or not it does, if only to "keep tabs on our 
tools," to use Quine's phrase. It usually turns out that only very small por­
tions of set-theory are needed, in most applications, and often even these 
may be dispensed with altogether. It is in fact remarkable how little set-
theory is needed in extra-mathematical areas of inquiry, and the more one 
makes the effort to do without it the more one succeeds. 
Wang notes that "we understand this [maximally iterative] concept of 
set sufficiently well to see, after some deliberation, and in some cases even 
a great deal of deliberation, that the ordinary axioms of set theory are true 
for (or with respect to) this concept, and to be able to extend these 
axioms by proposing different axioms and recognizing some of them to be 
true for (or with respect to) it." Of course — but the same may be said for 
many another "concept." Throughout the ages human beings here become 
expert at convincing, or even brainwashing, themselves into believing all 
manner of statements about concepts of a highly dubious character. Intel­
lectual history is mostly the history of "the prevalence of humbug," to use 
Max Black's felicitous phrase. At first blush one thinks that of course the 
history of mathematics is an exception to this; but alas, this is not the case. 
And anyhow, Wang is not concerned with objective or even intersubjective 
truth here, but only with subjective truth relative to given persons and a 
given concept. This concept may be stated in terms of a primitive 'e' for the 

SETS AND INDIVIDUALS 
127 
relation of membership relative to a domain of sets howsoever taken. To 
"see that the axioms are true with respect to this concept" here should be 
construed merely in the sense that the person p — the mathematician or 
"creative subject" doing mathematics — accepts that the axioms are true of 
'e'. In saying this, we are merely reporting a subjective fact about p, and 
saying nothing whatsoever about the "truth" of the axioms independent of 
p's "seeing." The notion 'accepts as true' here is a pragmatical, not a 
semantical, one. 
Very well, then, let us let the mathematician have his iterative concept 
of set. And let him, as is now common, admit no Urelemente but only the 
empty set as the "basic" object. In doing this, mathematics is completely 
cut off from the world of actuality and allowed to float in thin air. The con­
cept of 'set' employed seems highly artificial and ad hoc and needs a consid­
erable epistemological founding for its intelligibility and a metaphysical one 
for the ontic status of its objects. 
Wang points out (p. 187) that "this iterative concept of set is of course 
quite different from the dichotomy concept [italics added] which regards 
each set as obtained by dividing the totality of all things into two categories 
(viz. those which have the property [— what property? —] and those which 
do not). Following Godei, one may speak of the two concepts as the math­
ematical versus the logical." This characterization of the dichotomy concept 
of 'set' is not very clear. Neither 'set' nor 'category' are in any strict sense 
words of logic. The theory of truth-functions and quantifiers (or its surro­
gate in relational algebra) does not contain these notions in any guise. At 
best, then, the dichotomy concept cannot be a "logical" concept, requiring 
for the very statement of what it is a mathematical word 'set' and a 
metaphysical one 'category'. 
Gödel's own statement, incidentally, of the dichotomy notion contains 
'existing' between 'all' and 'things', so that all existing things are divided 
into two categories.3 As a result, his characterization has a still more 
metaphysical flavor, logic not depending for its principles or notions upon 
"existing" things. Whatever the dichotomy notion is, it is thus not one of 
logic. Godei therefore seems in error in stating that the set-theoretic 
paradoxes "are a very serious problem, not for mathematics, ..., but rather 
for logic and epistemology." By 'mathematics' here he means a set-theory 
as based on the iterative concept in which the paradoxes are not supposed 
to arise. Of course, Godei is using 'logic' here in a broader sense than is 
now customary, a sense, be it said, that neither he nor anyone has ever 

128 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
made very clear, involving as it does unanalyzed intensions sui generis in 
such a way as possibly to lead to intensional antinomies (such, in the words 
of Wang, as "the concept of not applying to itself"). 
Godei also speaks of his broad sense of logic in his paper on Russell4, 
where he comments that "by analyzing the paradoxes to which Cantor's set 
theory has led, he [Russell] freed them from all mathematical technicalities, 
thus bringing to light the amazing fact that our logical intuitions (i.e. intui­
tions concerning such notions as: truth, concept, being, class, etc.) are self-
contradictory." Nowadays we are bit more fastidious in our terminology 
and we have learned — or at least we should have — that the formulation 
of acceptable principles is more important than subservience to our naive 
and undisciplined "intuitions." Most of our intuitions are wrong most of the 
time, anyhow, and should not be heeded until taken through the furnace of 
critical humiliation. Fastidious philosophers are now inclined to classify 
concepts more finely than Godei did: 'concept' itself is an epistemic term, 
'being' a metaphysical one, 'truth' a semantical one, and 'class' one difficult 
to classify properly (see below). None of these are "logical" notions, 
strictly, and none of them need be self-contradictory when suitable princi­
ples concerning them are properly formulated. Godei himself seems to rec­
ognize this point when he says, in a qualifying footnote (in Wang, p. 221), 
that "this observation by no means intends to deny the fact that some of the 
principles have been formulated quite satisfactorily, in particular all those 
that are used in the application of logic to the sciences including mathema­
tics as ... "defined" in terms of the iterative concept of set." These princi­
ples are presumably precisely those of first-order quantification-theory. 
It should be observed that the distinction between the "logical" and 
"mathematical" notions of 'set' is not very accurate. Wang himself, it will 
be recalled, speaks of a set as something "the members of which may be 
objects of any sort: plants, animals, photons, ... etc." If among the etc. 
entities here, the null set is included, we no longer have just the "mathe­
matical," iterative view of set (as based just on the null set). Or we might 
have only non-sets among the Urelemente, in which case we do not have the 
mathematical view at all. Also the "logical" view, on the Godei-Wang 
basis, makes fundamental use of 'the totality of all existing things' for its 
very statement. Is this totally itself a value for a variable in the formalism? 
Not in the original Zermelo view, although it may be so regarded in some 
reformulations of it. Also Wang's formulation of the dichotomy or "logical" 
concept of 'set' brings in "properties" also, so that it is presumably a prop-

SETS AND INDIVIDUALS 
129 
erty that is dichotomized into "those [things] which have the property and 
those things which do not." Strictly this view is a very different one from 
that of Godei, and remains rather mysterious unless 'property' itself is well-
defined or characterized, perhaps in terms of some 'e' for the membership-
relation of the system or even metatheoretically. It is to be feared that none 
of these views has been suitably spelled out with even the minimum of rigor 
now required in sophisticated philosophical study based on the new logic. 
Philosophical objections to the notion of 'set' might all be countered 
with the casual comments that mathematicians "use the notion all the 
time," that, in the words of Zermelo himself, "set theory constitutes an 
indispensable component of the science of mathematics," and that sets are 
whatever the axioms tell us they are. These lines of defence, however, will 
not pass muster. Politicians, especially in academe, lie and cheat all the 
time; but to say this is not to defend it. The greatness and high utility of 
mathematics, especially of the theory of functions of a complex variable 
and of the various kinds of geometry, in no way depends upon its being 
either formulated or formulable in a set-theory. Also there are alternative 
approaches to mathematics that reject the use of sets altogether, e.g., the 
approach via some forms of algebra, constructivistic number theory, some 
forms of intui tionism, and others. The mathematical seriousness of some of 
these is sufficient to falsify outright any claim that set-theory is an "indis­
pensable component" in mathematics. And, finally, the axioms of set-
theory do not suffice to tell us what sets "are," but only how they behave 
relative to one another once we have them. 
Wang himself is sensitive to these and related points. If we leave set-
theory to the mathematicians, the irksome question remains, in his words, 
as to "the precise meaning ... [of the axioms] and why we accept such prin­
ciples." This question "is incomparably more difficult" than the question as 
to "what, roughly speaking, the principles are by which we introduce the 
axioms." Wang comments that "it is my impression that Godei proposes to 
answer ... the former question by phenomenological investigations." It 
would be interesting to have been told precisely how, the relevant 
phenomenology itself being in need of careful logical formulation in terms 
of an exact pragmatics.5 Wang himself, however, is not friendly to the field 
of systematic pragmatics and pays no heed to the recent literature in it. As 
a result, he misconstrues (on pp. 383-384) its basic character and intent. 
Let us observe now that, if we view mathematics either mereologically 
or homologically, as in V above, we have no need of hypothecating sets in 

130 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
any way, shape, or form. To be sure, much must then be made of individu­
als, including ordinal ones, and of Boolean sums of them. But this is a very 
different matter. One might, of course, insist dogmatically that an ordinal 
entity is somehow a set in disguise. Thus one might insist that the ordinal 
individual (x ordy) is merely the set {x,{x,y}}, or {{x}, {x,y}} or {y,{x,y}} 
o r {{y)Áx>y}}- To insist upon any such identification would be like insist­
ing that any individual x is merely the set {x}. Such insistence would seem 
rather arbitrary, and would issue from the kind of set-theoretic arrogance 
bemoaned in VIII above. To all such talk one can now merely answer: Je 
n'ai pas besoin de cette hypothèse. 
There can be no doubt, then, as a result of these various reflections, 
that all is not well with the notion of 'set' within mathematics, and that all 
is extremely ill with it outside. To be sure, the notion of 'individual' remains 
to be charaterized. Wang uses the notion without analysis, but then goes on 
to complain (p. 416) that "Quine and Goodman's nominalistic position [is] 
unclear; and this is because they have not explained ... what, according to 
them, are the individuals or nonclasses." By pairity of argument, Wang's 
initial characterization of 'set', quoted at the beginning, is then also "un­
clear." To say this is not to deny that we all should use 'individual' more 
carefully than we do, in each context of its use, and that probably no even 
minimally adequate characterization of it has ever been given. 
The metaphysical attitude taken toward individuals in OM or HL 
leaves the matter open until we come to an explicative semantics of the 
object-language. An explicative semantics, it will be recalled6, is always 
richer than the object-language of which it treats, in having a wider array of 
expressions available in terms of which the object-language primitives may 
be explicated. Where 'P' is the primitive for a relation of part-to-whole, we 
may well ask: what, or which, part-whole relation? The answer to this will 
be given, to some extent anyhow, in the semantics in which spatio-temporal 
considerations must be brought in if the 'P' is interpreted as applying to 
spatio-temporal entities, a theory of mental events if it is also to be applica­
ble to such, and so on. The explicative semantics is open-ended in the sense 
that it need not be brought to a halt at any point, but it may be if we have 
gone as far as we can go on the basis of present knowledge or endeavor. 
The notion of 'individual', in a given context, is thus very much like any sci­
entific or philosophical notion in being as "clear" in the given context as we 
are able to make it up to the time. 
The important point here is that without some notion of individual, 

SETS AND INDIVIDUALS 
131 
however inchoate or undeveloped, we cannot have any scientific or philo­
sophical parlance at all. Nor can we have any "applied" mathematics. This 
point was well put years back by Josiah Royce. "For logical purposes," he 
wrote in 19147, "an Individual Object is one [— italics in the original —] 
that we propose to regard at once as recognizable or identifiable [not neces­
sarily just in sense experience] throughout some process of investigation, 
and as unique within the range of that investigation,...." 
Further, "without 
objects conceived as unique individuals," he continued, "we can have no 
Classes [or sets]. Without classes we can ... define no Relations, without 
relations we can have no Order. But to be reasonable is to conceive of order-
systems, real or ideal. Therefore, we have an absolute logical need to con­
ceive of individual objects as the elements of our [real or] ideal order-sys­
tems. This postulate is the condition of any theoretical conception what­
ever. The further metaphysical aspects of the concept of an individual we 
may here ignore [for the moment]. To conceive of individuals is a necessary 
presupposition of all orderly activity" — and aforteriori of all orderly or sys­
tematic thought. 
Royce's admirable statement here has been totally neglected by logi­
cians and metaphysicians. Rephrase it ever so slightly and we have a fine 
and thouroughly defensible statement. By 'class' for the moment, let us 
understand the relata of a relation. We then have the view that "without 
objects ... we can have no relata, without relata we can have no relations, 
without relations we can have no order-systems." But, of course, "the 
metaphysical aspects of the concept of an individual" must be faced up to in 
the underlying logico-metaphysical order-system at the meta-level. Differ­
ent features or aspects of the individuals are studied in more special "inves­
tigations." Logico-metaphysics abstracts from such study and, for example, 
need not ab initio deal with problems concerning how we know or are 
aware of individuals in perceptual, conceptual, or other experience. Also, 
at this point, let us take it as a truism that we do need order-systems for 
understanding mathematics, science, philosophy, and so on, and that "or­
derly activity" is in general a good thing. 
What now is a class, as over and against a set? There seems to be no 
commonly accepted answer to this question. As good a usage as any, and 
perhaps better than most, would be gained by taking 'class' in essentially 
the sense of the simplified theory of types and leaving 'set' to the set-
theorists (but allowing these latter, especially von Neumann and Bernays 
and their followers, also to use 'class' in a specialized mathematical way if 

132 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
they wish). If we do this, we could then use 'class' in a very exact way as a 
synonym for 'attributive relation' in either OM or HL. Such usage would 
accord well with custom and would provide for all extra-mathematical uses 
of the term. A relation R is an attributive relation relative to x, it will be 
recalled, if R is a dyadic relation such that 
(xRx.(y)(z)(yRzz>y 
= z)). 
Thus an erstwhile one-place predicate 'Englishman', say, for the class of 
Englishmen, may be handled here as an attributive relation 'is the same 
Englishman as'. 
Another suggestion is that weuse 'class' wholly in the sense of a virtual 
class. Outside of mathematics and its applications, we can usually get along 
with only virtual classes. It would be more correct to speak here only of the 
virtual-class notation, virtual classes being mere fictions. It is this that is 
useful and helps us to compensate for the lack of a theory of "real" classes 
as values for variables in a given formalism.8 
Another item to note concerning sets is the popular identification of 
them with Platonic ideas. It has been urged in VII above, it will be recalled, 
that this is erroneous and rests on an inadequate reading of the Platonic 
corpus. Father Joseph Owens, the eminent Aristotle scholar, in a recent 
review9, laments "the use of modern terminology to explain Aristotelian 
notions, for instance to present the Aristotelian universal as a "class" or 
"set" ... in a sort of "agreed metalanguage"." This lament may be made a 
fortiori for Platonic "ideas," of eidé, particularly in view of the widespread 
use of 'platonic' as almost synonymous with 'set-theoretic'. 
An interesting methodological argument against the admission of an 
ontology of sets is as follows. One's ontology, it may be thought, should be 
all of a piece. The fundamental ontology of mathematics should not differ 
in kind from that required in physics and the other sciences. It has been 
urged, in X above, that we live in a structured-world-of-cardinal-and-ordi-
nal-individuals-in-indissoluble-interrelationship-with-one-another. 
Such a 
general ontology suffices for the sciences and for mathematics alike. Each 
science will pick out special features for special study, as we have already 
noted, but the basic logico-metaphysical aspects of the individuals remain 
the same. These aspects are characterized in OM or HL, at least in a tenta­
tive, and exploratory first approximation. 
Another argument against sets is the celebrated principle of par­
simony, that frustra per plura quod per pauciora faciendum potest. The 

SETS AND INDIVIDUALS 
133 
methods of OM and HL show how this principle may be satisfied without 
loss: simply do away with all sets and use mereology or homology instead, 
bringing in such additional transfinite entities and axioms governing them 
as might be needed, for example, for mathematical theories of the infinitely 
large or the infinitely small. And bring in suitable non-logical constants to 
handle such scientific notions as may be needed for particular extra-mathe­
matical purposes. 
It is also worth observing that any set-theoretic rendition of mathema­
tics may be likened to a huge iceberg, the greater portion by far floating 
beneath the surface to support the visible mathematics above. The fact is 
that only a very small portion of set-theory is actually needed for the pur­
pose of providing for mathematics in the great classical sense. This seems 
rather odd: too inflated a price to pay, both as to ontology and axiomatic 
structure, for the pure mathematical gold to be gained. Let us go after the 
gold more directly. 
One might think that a similar objection could be made against OM or 
HL. But no. It should be recalled that the axioms of existence of these lat­
ter are rather restricted, and postulate the existence of just such entities as 
are needed for specific mathematical or other purposes. Of course, this 
method is open-ended, and one can add stronger existence assumptions 
when needed. It might be thought also that the type-theoretic rendition, 
used in the further development of OM or HL, would restrict mathematics 
to a good deal less than is contained in set-theory. This, however, seems not 
the case. Apparently nothing of mathematical significance depends on the 
use of set- rather than type-theory that cannot be provided for in this open-
ended approach. 
It has been remarked above that set-theory, when formulated in terms 
of the iterative notion of set with the empty set as the only Urelement, cuts 
mathematics off from the world. This is not the case if Urelemente other 
than the empty set are admitted. But if the latter are admitted, and a cal­
culus of individuals is introduced to help characterize them, we can elimi­
nate the sets altogether and still do mathematics. And we can also do 
logico-linguistics. Without individuals, or Urelemente other than the empty 
set, we could not give logical forms for natural sentences in any direct way. 
Of course we might force set-theoretic notions upon them, but this would 
be ad hoc and at best Pickwickian. It is especially interesting to note that no 
set-theoretic notions whatsoever are made use of in Zellig Harris's recent A 
Grammar of English on Mathematical Principles,^ a locus classicus where 

134 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
they might be thought needed fundamentally. 
One point made by Wang seems to be in favor of such methods as 
those of OM and HL, and in general helps to substantiate some of the com­
ments made above. "In my opinion," he writes (p. 422), "a comparative 
study of a calculus of individuals (with infinity assumed) and the ordinary 
class theories might lead to illuminating distinctions. Such an investigation 
is, I think, one direction which could perhaps make the position of rejecting 
everything except individuals significantly fruitful." 
To summarize. Several arguments against admitting an ontology of sets 
have been made in the foregoing. Set-theorists are in general unhappy 
about the subject, and so are many constructivists, intuitionists, and applied 
mathematicians. Too many dubious assumptions and entities are needed 
for it. Mathematics occupies merely the tip of the set-theoretic iceberg. 
One eminent mathematician, at the International Congress for Logic, 
Methodology, and Philosophy of Science at Bucharest in 1975, is often 
quoted as having said that "set-theory has been an utter failure in mathema­
tics." If so, there is little reason to think that it should be a success when 
applied elsewhere, where the use of virtual classes instead has often proved 
helpful. Simpler methods for handling mathematics are now available — 
'simpler' in the sense of involving a clearer ontology and less dubious 
assumptions. Such methods suffice also for logico-linguistics. The rejection 
of sets is not anti-platonic, and anyhow we should not read set-theoretic ter­
minology into the great philosophical writings of the past. For a unified 
logico-metaphysics, the only entities that should be needed are those that 
are needed überhaupt in science and elsewhere; the admission of sets is at 
best an ad hoc device within mathematics alone. The principle of parsimony 
remains a valuable methodological guide. Such counterclaims as "Nature 
loves a plethora and abhors a vacuum" miss the point entirely; the principle 
of parsimony commends precisely what nature contains, plethora and vacua 
alike. Set-theory has had the unfortunate effect of cutting mathematics off 
from the world and from the helpful role it has had traditionally, and 
indeed should have, in other domains of inquiry. 

CHAPTER ELEVEN 
On the mainstream of science and Suppes's pluralism 
"Ne depugnes in alieno negatio." 
In a provocative recent paper1, Patrick Suppes has put forward some chal­
lenging comments in response to a critique of his views.2 He centers his 
comments around (1) the problem of a unified language for science, (2) the 
role of set-theory in science, (3) the language of events in science and ordi­
nary talk, and (4) problems of intensionality. As usual in such replies to 
criticism, only a few of the substantive points raised in the original critique 
are considered; most of them, as well as the relevant literature concerning 
them, are passed over in silence. Let us not do likewise now, but instead 
consider Suppes's reply item by item, at about the same level of both gener­
ality and technicality as in his discussion. 
The most basic item seems to be (2), that of the role of set-theory in 
science. "One of Martin's points," he writes, "is that my use of a set-
theoretical framework is mistaken, for such an apparatus is not needed sci­
entifically. He proposes instead to use various philosophical variants, such 
as an axiomatized Boolean algebra or a language of part-whole as 
exemplified by mereology. I think he is flatly and unequivocally wrong. The 
idiosyncratic languages he talks about are of interest in philosophy but for 
very special reasons, and they cut off philosophical discourse about causal­
ity from the mainstream of scientific talk." Unfortunately for Suppes's 
argument, the first two statements quoted here, as well as the last, are not 
correct. His use of a set-theoretic framework was not said to be "mistaken," 
and the event-theoretic framework advocated consists of a great deal more 
than an axiomatized Boolean algebra or mereology.3 Nor does the use of 
the event-theoretic framework "cut off philosophical discourse" from the 
scientific mainstream. On the contrary, it seeks to give this latter a firmer 
and more unifed logical foundation than it would otherwise have. 

136 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
With this last observation, we come to the key point of disagreement. 
Suppes is interested, in the paper under review, in the scientific mainstream 
at the surface level, but not in the logical foundations needed as a basis for 
justifying it, criticizing and improving it where appropriate, integrating it 
where possible, and so on. No, Suppes accepts the status quo of the 
mainstream and of set-theory without qualms. (When it gets into trouble, 
all he can do is say: woops, sorry!) And the uncritical use of set-theory goes 
hand in hand with this acceptance. Suppes in effect defends the whole of 
set-theory whereas actually it is only a small fragment that he makes use of 
in his technical work. His position would be a stronger one if he were to 
argue for the acceptability of just the set-theoretic principles he actually 
uses for given causal-theoretic, learning-theoretic, and other purposes. 
In the Appendix to his paper, Suppes puts forward two general 
theorems in learning-theory. He remarks that "none of the more compli­
cated set-theoretical machinery I consider [in discussing these theorems] is 
duplicated in any way by Martin.... The kind of language moves that Mar­
tin proposes would lead to further isolation of philosophic talk about these 
matters, an isolation that has already been too noticeable in the literature 
on confirmation and the foundations of induction." It is true that the 
machinery needed for Suppes's theorems is not duplicated by me in the 
paper he is discussing, but this is not to say that it cannot be. All one needs 
to do to show that it can is to pick the proper framework — say OM or HL 
or even weaker theories4 — and get to work on the details. It is thus by no 
means the case that the use of these frameworks leads to the kind of isola­
tion Suppes laments. It is curious that he laments this isolation but yet 
espouses scientific pluralism, this latter being virtually tantamount to an 
extreme form of scientific isolation, as we shall observe in a moment. 
Suppes is "quite willing to accept that with enough effort, all of the 
standard machinery characteristic of modern probability theory, not to 
speak of statistical theory, could be built up in one of Martin's idiosyncratic 
frameworks. But this would seem to me a terrible waste of time, and at the 
same time would isolate the developments from the large and interesting 
literature in science, mathematics, and statistics on these matters." The two 
contentions here are not only incorrect but run counter to one another, it 
should be noted. The EM and allied frameworks are unifying ones, helping 
to bridge the gaps — indeed the chasms — between and among mathema­
tics, the sciences, natural language, exact philosophy, 
and 
even 
metaphysics. And why the terrible waste of time? Not much time would be 

SCIENCE AND SUPPES'S PLURALISM 
137 
required, once one got the hang of it, no more than is needed in going from 
ordinary set-theory to its applications. 
Suppes is one of our most distinguished philosophers of science and 
deserves high praise for having called attention over the years to the impor­
tance of the axiomatic method, particularly in set-theory and in empirical 
applications. The day of set-theory, however, seems to be waning. More 
and more the view seems to be that it has proved an "utter failure" — recall 
X above — in providing adequate foundations for mathematics. Suppes can 
easily — and indeed should — defend the axiomatic method without hitch­
ing it as intimately as he does to set-theory. As already noted, much less 
than a full set-theory can be made to suffice for many of his purposes. Also, 
many alternatives are on the market clamoring for attention — category-
theory, intuitionism in at least five or six versions and guises, various forms 
of constructive type-theory and of constructivism in general, and so on and 
on. In any partiular application of mathematics to empirical science, an 
interesting problem for Suppes is for him to "keep tabs on his tools" at each 
step, and to note at the end how much or how little of the far reaches of set-
theory he actually has needed. 
Let us turn now to (1) pluralism and the problem of a unified language 
for science in general and for scientific causal talk in particular. For 
pluralism to have any bite is for it to have an open attitude toward the mul­
tiplicity of alternatives, toward competing theories, toward theories incom­
patible with some favored one, and so on. Curiously, Suppes's attitude, in 
the paper under review, is not in accord with this key tenet. Theories other 
than his favored one or ones he presumably dubs 'idiosyncratic'. Just what 
he intends by this word he does not say, nor does he give us a list of theories 
to which it is to apply. Just which of the mathematical alternatives men­
tioned above are idiosyncratic, according to him, and just why? Also he 
seems to condemn by innuendo languages that "are of interest to 
philosophy but for very special reasons." But, surely now, all languages 
that are of interest to philosophy are so for special reasons, some perhaps 
for very special reasons. And these may be for good reasons, furthermore 
— perhaps even very good reasons. Pluralism should welcome these lan­
guages and seek to assess their relevance for given portions of science and 
mathematics, and above all reflect upon the cogency of the special or very 
special reasons put forward for their advocacy. Suppes fails to do this for 
any of the languages suggested, dismissing them without even a hearing. 
His remarks about pluralism here seem totally at odds with the content of 

138 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
his valuable and more serious discussion of the subject in "The Plurality of 
Science."5 
This is not the occasion to review at any depth the thesis of the unity 
of science of the Viennese positivists, but merely to call attention to some 
of its leading features that are still very much alive and kicking. As Max 
Black noted years back6, one feature of the view is that "speculative 
philosophy must be transformed into a new methodology, the analysis of 
linguistic forms," and that "the chief concern is to consolidate the achieve­
ments of scientific discovery by analyzing the limitations and essential struc­
ture of the language in which all knowledge must be expressed." In 1934 the 
limitations were as significant as the essential structure. During the fifty 
years that have elapsed since this passage was written, however, an enor­
mous develoment has taken place in both structural linguistics and in the 
logical study of natural language. The new science of logico-linguistics is 
developing in which more and more of "essential structure" can be accomo­
dated and in which the "limitations" no longer loom large. The thesis of the 
unity of scientific language has much greater cogency today than it has ever 
had. This again is an important fact totally neglected by Suppes. 
Let us turn now to (3) concerning the language needed to talk about 
events, both scientifically and in ordinary language. Here again Suppes 
takes the "pluralistic view that it is probably not possible to give a tightly 
unified account of these many different uses." We should distinguish here 
giving a unified account from employing a unified ontology in terms of 
which such an account, or indeed any account, could be given. It is this lat­
ter that Suppes thinks somehow suspect. On the event-logical theory, 
events themselves are taken as fundamental object, whereas for Suppes 
events are handled as "sets of outcomes." But the logical character of these 
latter is not fully characterized — a careful theoretical foundation for them 
being needed fundamentally. 
Suppes regards his view as the "standard" one among probability-
theorists and comments that this view is objected to in the critique. But this 
is not the case. The objection put forward is that Suppes provides no appro­
priate foundation for his view. (Also he seems not to have read the passages 
(pp. 201-2) in the original critique showing how his "sets of outcomes" may 
be handled within the event-theoretic framework.) At the same time, he 
admits that (p. 367) "reforming or changing the standard concepts of prob­
ability ... is a useful matter, but it is not even useful when it is idiosyncratic 
in the way that Martin's discussion is." Here again, it would be interesting 

SCIENCE AND SUPPES'S PLURALISM 
139 
to be told in just what way introducing event-variables, and distinguishing 
sharply events as such from "kinds" or sets of outcomes (or "attributive 
relations" in the parlance of OM or HL), is idiosyncratic other than as not 
being explicitly the method of Kolmogoroff, the one favored by Suppes. 
Again, Suppes urges that "adopting Martin's recommendations would 
isolate philosophical discussion of causality" and of probability, and he 
thinks that "a consequence of that isolation would be consideration only of 
the most elementary points about causality." On the contrary, Suppes's 
view here is the isolationist one, limiting probability talk to within the nar­
row confines in which sets of outcomes are of interest. And had Suppes 
read the relevant passage in which it is shown how these latter may be 
handled within the event-theoretic framwork — and a fortiori within OM 
or HL — he would have seen how all manner of non-elementary points 
about causality may be discussed. 
Suppes goes on to admit that "in a certain sense, the notion of event as 
having definite physical properties [a notion fully provided for in the EM-
framework, it should be noted] is treated in a rather cavalier fashion in 
standard probability theory." Quite, and this is one of the points of the 
original critique. "When we are concerned with more specific philosophical 
questions or more specific physical questions," he continues, "as for exam­
ple a discussion of how one should use the concept of event in relativistic 
physics, we may want to say a good deal more [than is provided by 
Kolmogoroff]. I certainly want to admit that such extensions are proper but 
I also want to make clear that I think the direction Martin takes the discus­
sion is mistaken." It would be interesting to be told precisely how and why. 
The only hint Suppes provides is to the effect that he thinks it "mistaken to 
tie down the concept of event [in general] by more detailed assumptions, as 
for example the kind that are easily suggested by physical theories." Quite, 
and no such tying down is made or in any way demanded in the event-logic 
framework. On the contrary, ample means are provided for handling all 
manner of social and economic phenomena, and the need for recognizing 
even a realm of mental events in some sense is particularly emphasized. 
Suppes seems to show so little understanding of key items in the original 
critique and of its background theory, that it seems a bit cavalier of him to 
be so sure — and to iterate so many times — that the direction it takes is 
"mistaken" and "idiosyncratic." 
Let us turn now to (4), concerned with intensionality. Suppes agrees 
that "the standard set-theoretical framework I [Suppes] adopt does not give 

140 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
a fully satisfactory treatment of intensional matters." Quite, as was 
emphasized in the original critique. Curiously he thinks also "that a full­
blown apparatus to handle these matters in completely explicit fashion will 
be another step toward the isolation I have already spoken of." At the same 
time he urges "a move from set-theoretical to [so-called] procedural seman­
tics," unaware apparently that the logical foundations of this latter can be 
handled in terms of a systematic pragmatics incorporating the event-theore­
tic framework. 
This is not the occasion to attempt to provide a formulation for Sup-
pes's procedural semantics7 in the full detail required — an attempt which 
he seems not even to have made himself. Instead, let us glance at it just 
enough to see how this could be done within the framework being advo­
cated here. The key items of Suppes's theory are that "the meaning of a 
word, phrase, or utterance is a procedure, or collection of procedures," 
that "the meaning of a word, phrase, or utterance is private for each indi­
vidual," that successful communication depends upon the possibility that 
some spoken (or written) words, phrases, or utterances may be identified as 
"being the same," or being appropriately "congruent," by speaker and lis­
tener, and so on. A procedure is thus presumably a kind of linguistic act 
involving speaker and listener, so that, for example, 
(1) 
'p UttL a,q,e' 
may express that person p utters the expression a of the given language L to 
person q on or during the occasion e. Utt here is a certain fundamental rela­
tion of systematic pragmatics. The many kinds of relations of "being the 
same," congruence-relations, may be handled, each in its own way, in 
terms of analogous locutions. Many such relations have been suggested in 
the relevant literature, beginning with Toward a Systematic Pragmatics. 
(Recall III above.) 
Suppes contends that "classical set-theoretic referential semantics can 
be obtained, where appropriate, by abstraction from procedural seman­
tics." The "abstraction" required here is of course very complex. A full 
characterization of it would involve several stages of methods of generaliz­
ing from sentences of the form (1) and allied forms, to sentences for some 
or all words or phrases (inscriptions) of similiar kind typographically, for 
some types of occasions e, and for suitable p's and g's in given idiolects, 
social groups, and so on. Some of these abstractions lead us into psycho-
and socio-linguistics, and some of them into standard semantics in which 

SCIENCE AND SUPPES'S PLURALISM 
141 
the designata and denotata of the various words are thought to be fixed 
once and for all. Abstractions of this last type are of course synchronic and 
thus highly artificial, and hold only for the language at an instant, so to 
speak. More important abstractions must be diachronic, so that a full 
theory of events, changes, procedure, and the like, must be built into the 
interlinguistic, comparative metalanguage needed for formulating the 
theory of procedures. 
Suppes contrasts procedural semantics with set-theoretical semantics 
rather too sharply, not realizing that the former itself, once properly formu­
lated, may be given a semantics either set-theoretically or otherwise.8 "It is 
a surprising and important fact," he writes, "that so much of the language 
of mathematics and science can be analyzed at a nearly satisfactory formal 
level by set-theoretic semantics, but the psychology of users is barely 
touched by this analysis." Of course not, this is not its intent. The psychol­
ogy of users is to be handled in a pragmatical metalanguage containing the 
requisite vocabulary, which metalanguage in turn can be given a semantics 
set-theoretically (or otherwise more simply).9 It is a grave methodological 
blunder to foist on semantics the whole burden of characterizing the voc­
abulary describing the psychology of the user, including "ordinary verbs of 
perception," "the many nouns and adjectives describing emotional states," 
and so on. 
Suppes comments that "in the case of ordinary language the set-
theoretical fare does not offer minimal nutritional content. True, we can 
have a certain amount of logic, but the gruel of quantifiers and connectives 
is too thin. Not only are the four-letter words missing (in the case of English 
[the Anglo-Saxon monosyllables, no doubt]), but also the much more 
important high-frequency two-letter words: to, in, of, on, at, by and as. The 
set-theoretical semantics of any of these seven two-letter words — or their 
functional analogues in other languages — is far from being satisfactorily 
characterized." Quite. But note the curious confusion here between what a 
semantics is supposed to do with what can be done in logico-linguistics with 
the introduction of suitable non-logical primitives for prepositional rela­
tions.10 Suppes seems unaware of these latter, and yet their use would seem 
quite essential for any rigorous presentation of procedural semantics. Of 
course they cannot be introduced just in terms of the 'e' of set-theory, the 
connectives and quantifiers, and semantical notions. No one would pre­
sume this any more than he would suppose he could get relativity-theory or 
quantum-physics out of such meagre fare. The prepositional relations are 

142 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
very exact ones, however, and may be characterized by suitable meaning-
postulates. And of course there are many more than just Suppes's seven — 
about 75 basic ones in English.11 
The whole field of logico-linguistics has been developing in recent 
years in such a way as to provide logical forms for all manner of natural sen­
tences concerning perception and emotional states. At any stage of develop­
ment, the theory of logical forms can be given a semantics in whatever fash­
ion is desired. Suppes seems unaware that the very methods of procedural 
semantics — or their event-theoretic counterpart — are helping to pave the 
way for an increasingly more rigorous and more extensive theory of logical 
form for natural sentences. Whether set-theory is needed anywhere along 
the line, or not, is a moot point. It is interesting to observe again that, in his 
early work, Zellig Harris made much of set-theoretic notions, but has found 
over the years that they are not needed. In his recent, monumental  
Grammar of English on Mathematical Principles, no trace of them is to be 
found. (On set-theory, recall X above.) 
In the original critique of Suppes it was suggested that causal talk, both 
in science and in ordinary language, be handled intensionally. Suppes 
thinks that the intensional treatment "is not important in the framework of 
developing a causal theory for scientific purposes.... On the other hand," 
he continues, "I think Martin is right in insisting that such intensional mat­
ters can be important in the sensitive analysis of causal concepts as they are 
referred to in ordinary talk." Well, Suppes is no doubt right in thinking that 
causality need not always be handled intensionally. The view taken here is 
that the non-intensional handling of causality is merely as a special case of 
the intensional one. Let 
'e ,a Cause e2,b\ 
express, as previously, that event el as taken under the one-place predicate-
description a is a cause of e2 as taken under b, 'cause' here being construed 
in the tense of timelessness. Then the non-intensional form 
' Cause e2' 
may abbreviate 
i(Ea)(Eb)(e1,a Cause e2,b)\ 
Similar definitions could be given construing the 'e's here as ranging over 
"sets of outcomes" rather than over procedures or events as such. Thus, it 
would seem, there need be no further quarrel as regards causality either in 
or out of science. 
Suppes closes his discussion by commenting that he hopes "to help 

SCIENCE AND SUPPES'S PLURALISM 
143 
keep future efforts at analysis from being too much diverted from the 
mainstream of science to idiosyncratic philosophical bayous." The attitude 
suggested by this is surely not in accord with an open-minded pluralism, as 
already noted. Nor is it tolerant of alternatives, being directly opposed to 
Carnap's much-espoused Principle of Tolerance. Also it places in the bay­
ous views concerning events stemming from Peirce, Whitehead, Russell, 
Carnap himself, Reichenbach, Uriel Weinreich and other linguists, Donald 
Davidson, and others — views that surely should not be labelled 'idiosyn­
cratic'. Also it places set-theory at the very source of the mainstream, thus 
blocking the road to inquiry concerning more constructive types of 
mathematics that occupy so much attention on the part of contemporary 
mathematical logicians. 


CHAPTER TWELVE 
On the semiotics of mathematical praxis 
"Nemo mathematicus genium indemnatus 
habebit." 
"At the turn of the century, the Swiss historian Jacob Burckhardt, who, 
unlike most historians, was fond of guessing the future, once confided to his 
friend Friedrich Nietzsche the prediction that the Twentieth Century would 
be the "age of oversimplification"," Gian-Carlo Rota tells us in his Intro­
duction to The Mathematical Experience.1 The prediction itself is no doubt 
an oversimplification, as are the comments concerning philosophy that 
Rota goes on to offer. "Philosophers have [after WW I] proposed daring 
reductions of the complexity of existence to the mechanics of elastic billiard 
balls; others, more sophisticated, have held that life is language, and that 
language is in turn nothing but strings of marble-like units held together by 
the catchy connectives of Fregean logic." To be sure, mechanism in one 
form or another is one of the enduring metaphysical views, modern forms 
of which are often subtle in the extreme, "elastic billiard balls" having been 
left far behind. And no serious philosopher, surely, has ever held that "life 
is language" in any reasonable sense of 'is'. Presumably sentences and texts 
are "strings of marble-like units" whose inner structure and semantics 
remain invariant when being used in normal ways. Does Rota wish them to 
melt away or to change substantially during their use? And why are the 
"catchy connectives of Fregean logic" in any way objectionable? No more 
or less so, surely, than numbers, differential equations, Lebesgue integrals, 
and so on, all of which manage to catch a good deal in their stride. More­
over, sentences concerning them contain the Fregean connectives in one 
way or another in their deep structures. 
Rota comments that Russell and Gentzen "command that mathematics 
become logic," as though this is in some way incompatible with the fact that 

146 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
"some mathematicians are more endowed with the talent of drawing pic­
tures, others with that of juggling symbols and yet others with the ability of 
picking the flaw in an argument." All such activity is to be welcomed and to 
be valued by its results. "Juggling" symbols is by no means the least valu­
able, as much of the history of mathematics attests. The juggling must, 
however, be done with great care in order to gain a result of any interest or 
value. Russell's fiat mathematica logica, if such it be, surely helped pave the 
way for something valuable, if only as one chapter in the history of mathe­
matical rigor in juggling. Drawing mathematical pictures has its rigor, too, 
let us not forget, as does picking flaws in arguments. Special gifts are 
required for each. 
Rota seems to object to the contention that mathematics consists 
mainly in "proving theorems" on the grounds that a mathematician's work 
rather "is mostly a tangle of guesswork, analogy, wishful thinking and frust­
ration, and proof, far from being the core of discovery, is more often than 
not a way of making sure that our minds are not playing tricks." Here there 
seems to be confusion between means and ends, between discovery and 
achievement, between discovering "facts" or theorems and proving them 
rigorously. Both types of activity are surely welcome and necessary. The 
wedge Rota forces here between them seems to be a misleading over­
simplification. "To master mathematics is to master an intangible view, it is 
to acquire the skill of the virtuoso who cannot pin his performance on 
criteria." He cannot perhaps, but we who listen can, provided we are prop­
erly trained listeners. The shallow, superficial, showy virtuoso is easily 
separated from the self-effacing master interpreter, even though it is very 
difficult to spell out in full detail the criteria for the latter. 
Rota's kind of oversimplification permeates much of the discussion by 
Davis and Hersh also. Let us examine, in what follows, the most important 
of these as far as concerns philosophical and logico-methodological matters. 
The authors seem unaware of the purport of logic, and also of certain newer 
developments, that would enable them to state more carefully and force­
fully some of the worthwhile points they make. 
Let us start with some comments on symbolization. The authors state 
(p. 123) "the principal functions of a symbol in mathematics are to desig­
nate with precision and clarity and to abbreviate." They quote Whitehead 
approvingly, from a famous passage, that "by relieving the brain of all 
unnecessary work, a good notation sets it free to concentrate on more 
advanced problems, and, in effect, to increase the mental power of the 

THE SEMIOTICS OF MATHEMATICAL PRACTICE 
147 
race." This cannot be done without at least some degree of precision, with­
out requiring (p. 123) "that the meaning of each symbol or each symbol 
string be razor sharp and unambigous." How is this achieved? The authors 
speak of "designating with precision and clarity," not realizing that they are 
thereby invoking semantical rules of the most basic kind, namely Rules of 
Designation. (Let us use capital letters here in accord with the dignity and 
high importance of what is under discussion.) Such rules state precisely 
what each (primitive) symbol (proper name or predicate) designates, and 
that it designates at most one entity.2 There are, to be sure, other types of 
semantical rules, but the authors, in their use of 'designating', have hit 
upon the most basic by far. And, similarly, the authors correctly realize the 
importance of abbreviations, of giving definienda for definientia, the 
former usually being shorter and more concise versions of the latter. "In 
point of fact [p. 124], without the process of abbreviation, mathematical 
discourse is hardly possible." Nor is any other kind of discourse. Nor, for 
that matter, is any kind of discourse possible without some fixed vocabulary 
subject to Rules of Designation — ambiguity, vagueness, and the like, then 
suitably to be handled within the wider context of the study of usage, com­
munication, and the like. 
What now do we do with symbols? "We act [p. 125] on mathematical 
[and other] symbols in two different ways: we calculate with them, and we 
interpret them." To calculate is to make use of "a standardized set of agree­
ments" enabling us to convert one or more strings of symbols into others, in 
other words, to use the Rules of Inference provided. "Interpreting a sym­
bol," however, the authors tell us, "is to associate it with some concept or 
mental image, to assimilate it to human consciousness ... [and] the rules for 
interpretation cannot be any more precise than the communication of ideas 
among humans." Some rules of "interpretation" are semantical, and some 
are epistemic or pragmatic. The former fix the "razor sharp and unambigu­
ous" features of symbols; the latter describe or characterize features of a 
very different kind. It is a pity the authors do not distinguish clearly these 
two types of rules, giving unto each the uses and merits thereunto apper­
taining. 
The authors go on to note that the "process of representing mathemat­
ical ideas in symbolic form always entails an alteration in the ideas: a gain 
in precision and a loss in fidelity or applicability to the problem of origin." 
Let us consider the finite cardinals and the problem of counting. What alt­
eration or loss is undergone when we symbolize seven as '7'? It would seem 

148 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
rather that there is alteration only in the direction of gaining more razor-
sharpness and unambiguity. In place of something we know not what we 
now gain something subject to the exact rulers of arithmetic. And what loss 
is undergone if we now say that 7 is the number correctly to be assigned to 
some class or set such as {x ,y ,z ,w ,v ,t ,u } , where x , y , and so on, are 
1 o v o ' 
o' 
o' o' o' 
oJ ' 
o' 
; o ' 
distinct objects in the domain of objects under consideration? On the con­
trary, there would seem to be gain here too. And as goes the numerals for 
finite cardinals, so goes the whole regalia of other mathematical symbols. 
The authors' point here, with equal justice, could be made about the words 
of a natural language, with the absurd follow-up that language is in no way 
faithful or applicable "to the problem of its origin," i.e., with what is 
intended to be said, say, in any given sentence. Language is not identical 
with the sentence or problem, of course, but we express this latter in the 
former, not always capturing every little nuance, of course. Wherein we 
fail, we go to try to do better or to find some other means of doing so. 
In discussing "the hierarchy of intellectual values," our authors com­
ment (p. 305) that "the level of intellectual acclaim [given to the solution of 
some problems] is proportional to the apparent complexity of the abstract 
symbolization.... Scientific education is often directed not to the solution of 
specific problems, but toward carrying on a discourse at the highest possible 
intellectual level." What is this level? And how do we attain it? It would 
have been good to spell out in detail of just what this highest discourse con­
sists. The Zermelo-Fraenkel-Skolem system, the Russell simplified theory 
of types, and many another system, might be thought to come fairly close, 
were it not for their internal complications, their ontic extravagance, and 
the conceptual obscurity of their basic notions. It is not the inner content of 
such theories that is to be extolled, but rather the attempt to formulate 
them, as deductive systems with explicitly stated axioms, rules, and defini­
tions, with about as much razor-sharp clarity and unambiguousness as we 
mortals have ever been able to achieve in any field of inquiry. Such systems 
should be looked upon as paradigms of methodology, not as paradigms of 
theory. The theories may be quite unacceptable, but the way in which the 
attempt has been made to formulate them is admirable and beyond cavil. 
The systematicity thereby attained is pure music to the intellect, and of the 
highest beauty, and mankind will probably never succeed in doing better 
methodology-wise. All science aspires to the condition of this music, to bor­
row a phrase from Walter Pater, and is never content until it attains it. 
We should not make too much of the "complexity of the abstract sym-

THE SEMIOTICS OF MATHEMATICAL PRACTICE 
149 
bolization." The symbolization is easy once one has thought out what it is 
that is to be symbolized. The most difficult material to think about clearly 
is usually the simplest in some sense. Think of the long, hard road that has 
had to be traversed — a 2000 (or so) year journey — to become clear about 
the truth-functional connectives, the quantifiers, and identity, to say 
nothing of whatever one wishes to add to this list. Only after some mod­
icum of clarity about these was attained have we been able to characterize 
the systematicity of mathematics, either in part or as a whole, with any even 
approximative exactitude. Without such systematicity, any axiom-set is 
something of a joke: Euclid's, Hubert's, Zermelo's, Russell's, E.V. Hun­
tington's, Tarski's, and so on and on. 
The authors make no effort to view systematic and epistemic matters in 
proper relation to each other. "The definition-theorem-proof approach to 
mathematics [p. 306] has become almost the sole paradigm of mathematical 
exposition and advanced instruction," they observe disparagingly. "Of 
course, this is not the way mathematics is created, propagated, or even 
understood. The logical analysis of mathematics, which reduces a proof to 
an (in principle) mechanizable procedure, is a hypothetical possiblity, 
which is never realized in full. Mathematics is a human activity, and the for­
mal-logical account of ... [it] is only a fiction; mathematics itself is to be 
found in the actual practice of mathematicians." But, surely now, no one 
has ever seriously maintained that "the definition-theorem-proof approach" 
is the one and only way mathematics is ever "discovered, propagated, or 
even understood." It may play a role in discovery and its propagation and 
be helpful for understanding. It is there as a backdrop, so to speak, in one 
form or another, in mathematical practice. It would have been interesting 
for the authors to spell out exactly and in detail precisely how. Here is part 
of the real subject-matter of their book, which unfortunately they never get 
to. Of course mathematizmg — doing mathematics — is a human activity 
consisting of an enormous variety of types of acts, mostly mental but not 
completely so, each type having its proper role and importance. To give a 
"natural history" of these types, of how they interrelate with each other, 
and of how they may relate to axiom-formulation, definition-formulation, 
theorem-statement, and to the carrying out of proofs, would be a valuable 
contribution to the study of mathematical praxis. 
Surely the statement of theorems, algorithms, and the like, should be 
regarded as a part of mathematical praxis; but even so, we should distin­
guish proofs as such from acts of actual and purported provmg. In some 

150 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
acts, or a succession of such, correct proofs are carried out or "given." 
These acts do not constitute the proof but are associated with it in a certain 
way.3 The authors state apodictically that the "logical analysis of mathema­
tics ... is never realized in full" and in fact "is only a fiction." If so, the 
appropriate response should be: what a fiction! let us have more like it! 
Even so, the use of 'fiction' here seems ill-chosen. 'Idealization' would be 
better, and we all know how hard it is to formulate ideals, and to stick to 
them once formulated. Just because they are difficult to attain is no reason 
whatsoever why we should abandon their pursuit. The authors, in some of 
their moods, seem to dislike this "formal-logical" ideal, as a result no doubt 
of their failure to understand it very deeply, its intent as well as its limita­
tions. 
The key chapter of philosophic interest in this book is the one entitled 
"From Certainty to Fallibility." Throughout this chapter we find the same 
confusion between theory and practice and between theory of theory and 
theory of practice. From the standpoint of logical analysis, we are told (p. 
344), "a problem of principal concern to the mathematician becomes totally 
invisible. This is the problem of giving a philosophical account of the actual 
development of mathematics, of preformai mathematics, ..., including an 
examination of how this preformai mathematics relates to and is affected by 
formalization." This problem is not "invisible" to the methods of logical 
analysis unless one wears blinders. Enter the hero, Imre Lakatos, who will 
set the matter straight by reiterating the Popperian commonplace observa­
tion that "mathematics too [in the sense of mathematizmg], like the natural 
sciences, is fallible, not indubitable: it too grows by the criticism and correc­
tion of theories which are never entirely free of ambiguity or the possibility 
of error or oversight." And so on and on, as though no one had ever said or 
thought such things before in the entire history of the subject. The authors 
seem ill-advised to extol Lakatos's Proofs and Refutations4 in the way in 
which they do. 
Lakatos contends that formalism, that school "which tends to identify 
mathematics with its formal axiomatic abstraction and the philosophy of 
mathematics with metamathematics ... disconnects the history of mathema­
tics from the philosophy of mathematics.... Formalism denies the status of 
mathematics to most of what has commonly been understood to be 
mathematics, and can say nothing about its growth." All of these conten­
tions are in error. Formalism, in the sense of Hilbert, did not "identify" 
mathematics with its "formal axiomatic abstraction." Formalism does, of 

THE SEMIOTICS OF MATHEMATICAL PRACTICE 
151 
course, make fundamental use of formal axiomatic systems, subjecting 
them to detailed analysis as to the consistency of their axioms, their inde­
pendence, completeness, and so on. This is not to deny the importance of 
all the pre-formal hard work leading up to the axiomatic system, however. 
This hard work is quite indispensable, but it is not the purport of 
metamathematics to describe it. If one steps out onto the stage to give a 
piano recital, he should not be expected then and there simultaneously to 
give a violin recital also. Nor should he be accused of "disconnecting" the 
latter from the former or of denying its proper status. Lakatos's blunder 
here is precisely of such a character. To instigate a programme of 
metamathematical investigations is not to do history, but it is not to rule it 
out either. 
Lakatos contends that "the formalist philosophy of mathematics ... is 
the latest link in the long chain of dogmatist philosophies of mathematics. 
For more than 2000 years there has been an argument between dogmatics 
and skeptics. In this great debate, mathematics has been the proud fortress 
of dogmatism.... A challenge is now overdue." This contention is based on 
a superficial reading of history and tends to confuse mathematics itself with 
popular, almost always erroneous, opinions about it. If mathematics has in 
fact been something of a "proud fortress" during these 2000 years, there 
may well be good reasons quite independent of any "dogmatism." What are 
these reasons? Have they ever been spelled out? Probably not. Any such 
spelling out would have to take account of the grandeur of the subject, of 
the deep inner certitude of its findings once understood, of the almost uni­
versal consensus concerning them, of the paradigmatic role and centrality it 
plays in all of our knowledge, of its enormous success in applications, of its 
unified character, and so on and on. It is a pity that Lakatos and our 
authors did not attempt to articulate these reasons, or to characterize the 
indisputable greatness of mathematics independent of "dogmatism," on the 
one hand, and skepticism, on the other, in such wise as to call for no "chal­
lenge" beyond calling for greater f actuality and refinement of detail. 
The authors think that derivations or proofs carried out in terms of 
"first-order logic" are "purely hypothetical activities." "The real situation," 
they write (p. 354), "is this. On the one hand, we have real mathematics, 
with proofs that are established by 'consensus of the qualified.' ... Even to 
the qualified there are normally differences as to whether a real proof (i.e., 
one that is actually spoken or written down) is complete or correct. These 
doubts are resolved by communication and explanation, never by transcrib-

152 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
ing the proof into first-order predicate-calculus." This is, of course, a dog­
matic contention and the presence of 'never' surely renders their contention 
too strong. And even so, the contention is misguided and beside the point. 
If one can "communicate and explain" what one sees without a telescope, 
say, all well and good. The discovery and use of telescopes has led to seeing 
all manner of new things and has widened the domain of the scientifically 
visible. And so with the predicate-calculus. It has helped to make our 
notion of "proof" more exact, to recognize different kinds of proofs where 
it was previously thought that there is only one, to see that what were previ­
ously called 'proofs' were not so at all, and so on. But "fallibilism" still 
holds with regard to proofs carried out in a logical formal way. We or the 
computer may well be in error at some point. The more logical tools are 
self-consciously used in mathematical praxis, the more the likelihood of 
such errors is reduced. We should distinguish here, as the authors do not, 
minor human errors from strictly logical or mathematical ones. The former 
are always with us; the latter we try to correct by continual improvement of 
our logical theories as well as of our mathematical ones. 
"Spokesmen for formalism," we are told (p. 356), "... never explain in 
just what sense formal systems are a model of mathematics. Is it in the nor­
mative sense — mathematics should be like a formal system? Or is it in the 
descriptive sense — mathematics is like a formal system." The answer is: 
neither. Mathematics can be shown to be "like a formal system." To say 
this, of course, is not to say that formal systems give us "ultimate founda­
tions." Nothing seems ultimate in human knowledge. But formal systems 
do give us foundations, nonetheless, and the search for satisfactory, and 
even "convincing," foundations will go on and on, if only for the dignity of 
the mind itself, in Hubert's famous phrase. 
The authors at one point (pp. 358-9) seem to recognize the inadequacy 
of much of what they have been saying. They comment that, after all, 
"mathematics is one single thing. The Platonist, formalist, and construc­
tivist views of it are believed because each corresponds to a certain view of 
it, a view from a certain angle, or an examination with a particular instru­
ment of observation." "Our problem," then, they continue, "is to find an 
understanding of the thing itself, to fit together the partial views [italics 
added] — each of which is wrong if taken by itself, just because it is incom­
plete and one-sided. Since they are pictures of the same thing, they are 
compatible. Their seeming incompatibility is created by our looking at them 
with an inappropriate preconception." Quite; with the spirit of these com-

THE SEMIOTICS OF MATHEMATICAL PRACTICE 
153 
ments one can agree whole-heartedly. We need, not a solo recital of just 
one instrument, but a trio. Let us add a constructivistic cello-part to the 
Platonic-piano and the formalist-violin ones. 
This is not the occasion to discuss our authors' view in any further 
detail, nor to argue for or against them. Rather, let us attempt now to 
sketch an integrated theory — in the form of a trio — in which what is of 
positive interest in the authors' account will be shown to be in harmony 
with the essential tenets of both logicism and formalism. And room must be 
made also for what is of pan-mathematical value in intuitionism. Let us dub 
the result 'constructive formal metalogicism,' for want of a better phrase. 
Let us consider the system of ordinal mereology, OM, or of homology, 
HL discussed in V above, and the representation of mathematics that can 
be developed therein. 
The first item to observe is that OM — or, mutatis mutandis, HL — 
without the addition of any non-logical constants, is itself merely a kind of 
mereological algebra, in which 'P' takes the place of the usual algebraic 
identity. OM is essentially a Boolean algebra of individuals extended to 
include ordinal individuals, Boolean sums of such, and so on. Two quite 
different axiomatic approaches to this theory may be taken. In one of them, 
an existence assumption may be adopted in which all the entities expressi­
ble in the notation are admitted. Thus we could assume a very strong exis­
tence principle, stating that, given any individuals x and y — with perhaps 
some exceptions — there is an ordinal individual z consisting of x ordered 
with y. All Boolean sums, negatives, and so on, are also assumed to exist, 
so that this existence principle, by iteration, would assure the existence of 
all manner of sums of ordinal individuals, of ordinal individuals whose 
ordinands are such sums, and so on and on. Note also that this principle 
assures the existence of triadic ordinal individuals, and so on, and hence all 
manner of triadic relations. And so on, in such wise that the theory would 
condone as individuals, what we would otherwise describe as entities within 
a simple theory of types. 
The other axiomatic structure would keep the assumptions of existence 
down to a kind of minimum, countenancing the existence of only such 
entities, ordinal and other, as are actually needed for specific mathematical 
purposes. This procedure was followed to some extent in OM, which may 
no doubt be improved upon to meet this demand more fully. Some such 
demand is appealing to those who think there is a "too-much-ness" about 
the set-theoretic or type-theoretic approaches to mathematics — too many 

154 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
entities that are never needed in mathematical praxis, too much assumed 
axiomatically. 
The next step in the development of OM is to extend it so as to include 
logical semiotics — syntax, semantics, and pragmatics — somewhat perhaps 
in the manner previously described. From there, we move on to event-
theory and from thence to a kind of more or less universal grammar. At 
each step new primitives and postulates are required to handle the new 
domain of theory. Especially important here, for the discussion of mathe­
matical praxis, are the gerundive predicates for human acts, especially 
those for the kinds of acts the mathematician actually performs in his day-
to-day work, even in the work of constructing formal systems. First, how­
ever, let us observe that the new postulates needed at any stage of develop­
ment of OM are in principle of the same kind as are needed at any earlier 
stage. All of them may be stated in terms of the truth-functions and first-
order quantifiers. Nothing more is needed by way of a logical underpin­
ning. A good methodological principle here might be: Let us make the best 
of what we've got. This principle would accord well with the advice of Sim-
mias in the Phaedo, 85. "I feel myself ... how hard or rather impossible is 
the attainment of any certainty about questions such as these, .... For [one] 
should persevere until he has achieved one of two things: either he should 
discover, or be taught the truth about them; or, if this be impossible, I 
would have him take the best and most irrefragable of human theories, and 
let this be the raft upon which he sails through life — not without risk, as I 
admit, if he cannot find some divine word which will surely and safely carry 
him." 
The view taken here is that first-order quantification-theory, or its sur­
rogates in relational algebra or combinatorie logic, are the "best and most 
irrefragable" of logical theories we yet have. If better ones are to come, 
splendid. Meanwhile, we must be wary of the many false pretenders that 
clamor to be proclaimed better. All of these, without exception to date, 
have turned out to be mere applications of the standard quantification-
theory in which new ideas — usually of a semiotical kind — are involved, 
these ideas in turn needing symbolization and axiomatization.5 
What kinds of acts does a mathematician perform in his daily profes­
sional chores? As suggested above, a full classification of these is needed 
and as much systematic interrelating of them as we can think up. As good a 
preliminary list as any, and probably better than most, is that of Polya.6 
"First: you have to understand the problem. Second: find the connection 

THE SEMIOTICS OF MATHEMATICAL PRACTICE 
155 
between the data and the unknown.... You should obtain eventually apian 
of the solution. Third: carry out your plan. Forth: examine the solution 
obtained." Each of these in turn can be further broken down: "... look 
around for an appropriate related problem, Work backwards, Work for­
wards, Narrow the condition, Widen the condition, Seek a counterexam­
ple, Guess and test, Divide and conquer, Change the conceptual mode." 
And so on and on. 
The important point to note here is that all of these activities can be 
expressed gerundively. To consider only the first, let 
(1) 
'<Und>e' 
express that e is an act of understanding, in essentially the sense no doubt of 
Frege's apprehension. We can then add a clause expressing the object of the 
act e of understanding. 
(2) 
'(<Und>e. eOf 0 b j e c tfl)' 
thus expresses that e is an act of understanding the statement a of the given 
mathematical language, a being the problematic statement, the statement 
concerning which a problem has arisen in the first place. Having an appro­
priate symbolization for acts of understanding, we can now move on to try 
to develop a logic of it. Of course this is very difficult to do adequately, and 
should take account of cognition-theory, a theory of concepts, and the like, 
about which, alas, we know much less than we would like. 
And similarly for each of the other types of mathematical acts and their 
interrelations. 
The reader may object that the symbolizations given by (1) and (2) 
accomplish little in the way of furtherance of theory. Of course it is the 
theory that needs developing. In set-theory the notation 
(3) 
'', 
purporting to express that x is a member of v, is of little interest aside from 
a theory characterizing it in some appropriate way. It is only after a suitable 
symbolization is achieved that it is fruitful to try to develop a systematic 
theory. Axiomatic set-theory would never have gotten very far without 'is 
an element of, 'is a member of, or 'e', or the like, taken as a basic notion. 
In similar vein, not much theory of mathematical praxis can be developed 
without a slew of symbolizations of the kind (1) and (2) or alternatives 
thereof. Most of this development remains of course for the future. The 
beginnings, however, are contained in some of the notions of event-logic. 

156 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
Just as the basic mereology of OM was extended to gain mathematics, 
and then further extended to gain syntax, semantics, and so on, so it may be 
further extended to gain given domains of mathematical physics. The tech­
nical problems here are often formidable, as indeed they are at every stage 
of development. The technical problems faced by Zermelo and Russell, by 
Hilbert and his followers, and by Brouwer and his, were also formidable. 
Nothing less than formidable difficulty should be expected when we turn to 
simplifications of or alternatives to their work or to an attempt to unify it 
within a single framework such as an extended OM. 
The greatest single feature of Hubert's program was no doubt that it 
called attention for the first time to mathematical problems of a 
metatheoretic nature — about a theory or system taken as a whole, or 
about features or items of a theory or system as a whole in their interrela­
tion with other features or items. What is of permanent value in this 
approach is now handled in terms of syntax and semantics, both of which 
can in turn be given systematic formulations. Without such formulations we 
never really know what the subject is supposed to amount to — what its 
objects are or what its assumptions are. There is thus no longer any need 
whatsoever for any quarrel between "logicism" and "formalism." The desir­
able features of both can now be incorporated within a unified framework 
such as the extended EM, or within an extended type- or set-theory. 
What now about Brouwerian intuitionism, still a highly controversial 
subject? Let us reflect upon this very briefly from the point of view of the 
event-theoretical part of OM. This will be in terms of specific kinds of 
mathematical acts, especially acts of construction. Constructibility, the 
notion of an act of constructing a number or function or proof, is no doubt 
the key notion of intuitionism. The problem for the intuitionist is for him to 
tell us precisely what types of constructions he finds acceptable or not. Thus 
we may let 
(4) 
'<Constr>e' 
express that e is an act of constructing something in accord with the criteria 
of acceptability adopted.7 The whole theory may then be viewed as built up 
in terms of expressions of the form (4), plus perhaps others to be supplied. 
The connection of intuitionism with the theory of computer-programming is 
also of interest and can presumably be handled from the point of view 
here.8 
If these various reflections are sound, we have then in the extended 

THE SEMIOTICS OF MATHEMATICAL PRACTICE 
157 
OM a systematic framework in which the trio of logicism, formalism, and 
constructivism may play together harmoniously, each contributing to the 
ensemble the needed ingredient not supplied by any other. 


CHAPTER THIRTEEN 
On relational domains, the algebra of relations, 
and relational-term logic 
"Mathematics is tricks." 
Henry Pollock 
"No, mathematics is thought." 
Abner Shimony 
Well, perhaps the appropriate addendum to the foregoing dialogue is to 
remark that mathematics is thought about tricks and the reasons for them 
— about the thousands upon thousands of minutiae that make up mathe­
matical language when stripped to its ultimate notions, in the manner, say 
of Principia Mathematica and allied systems. Of particular importance here 
are the technicalia of quantification-theory, as formidable a bag' of tricks as 
has ever been thought up. That this is the case becomes especially evident 
when that theory is looked at in the light of other theories that purport to 
take its place in some fashion or other — such as relational algebra, com­
binatory logic, or predicate-functor logic. 
In a previous paper1 a preliminary sketch of a pure algebra of rc-adic 
relations — call it 'RA' — was put forward, 'pure' in the sense that no set-
theory was made use of in any way at either the object- or metalinguistic 
level. This kind of formulation is in marked contrast with previous formula­
tions. A purported interpretation of the theory was given in the theory of 
virtual classes and relations as based on the ordinary first-order theory of 
quantification.2 No axiomatization of RA was given, however, and only a 
feeble attempt was made to show how quantification-theory itself is con­
tained within it in a kind of notational disguise. Let us attempt now, in the 
present paper, to formulate a simpler kind of theory as a surrogate for it. 
Let us recall, first, some basic features of RA itself and of the theory of 
virtual relations on which it is based. A supply of primitive non-logical rela­
tional constants, each of specified finite degree, is presupposed. The 

160 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
algebra RA is thus an applied one in this sense (but pure of course in pre­
supposing no set-theory). Boolean operations of forming sums, products, 
and negations of rc-adic relations are also presupposed, as well as the univer­
sal and null relations of each degree n, where n^l. 
Where n = 1, we speak 
of a monadic relation, as is more or less customary. In addition, an opera­
tion for the Cartesian product of two relations is needed, as well as a nota­
tion for all the domains of a relation. The notion of domain here is the 
generalized one appropriate for rc-adic relations. These latter two notions 
seem not to have been studied very much for their own sake and in 
generalized form, but are of the highest interest and importance philosophi­
cally. 
These various notions may be characterized in terms of virtual rela­
tions as follows. Let 
{*,...*  -X--...-X 
--} 
v \ 
n 
1 
n J 
be the virtual relation among : , ..., xn where '--*--...--*--', some formula 
of quantification-theory constructed in terms of the non-logical relational 
primitives, holds. We can then let 
r(R 
u S ) 1 abbreviate 
r{x,.jc 
 (R x,...x 
v S ...), 
v 
n 
n'n 
^ 1 
n 
v rc 1 
n 
n 
\ 
n'J 
r(R n S ) n 
abbreviate 
{,.  (R ... .S 
...), 
r-R n 
abbreviate 
{...  ~ R ... }, 
n 
^ 1 
n 
n 
1 
nJ ' 
'V ' 
abbreviate 
'{...  ( =  .  = ~ 
 =  )}' 
and 
' ' 
abbreviate 
'-V '. 
n 
n 
These abbreviations, within the theory of virtual classes and relations, 
introduce the respective Boolean notions. The Cartesian product may be 
defined by letting 
'( 
X S,nW 
a b b r e v i a t e 
{*"* 
 
 (RnXVXn 
■ 
sJv-ym)r-
Note that the Boolean operations are homeoadic in the sense that the result 
of the operation is of the same degree n as that of the operands, and that 
the two operands (of the sums and products) are of the same degree n. The 
degree of the Cartesian product, however, is cumulative in the sense that 
the degree (n+m) of the result of the operation is the (arithmetical) sum of 
the degrees n and m of the two operands. The notion of the identity of indi­
viduals used here may be taken either as a primitive (as in quantification-
theory with identity) or else defined, say, in the manner of Hilbert and Ber-

RELATIONAL DOMAINS 
161 
nays.3 Let it be represented here by Td2', no matter how introduced. 
The explanations in the foregoing paragraph are of course merely 
heuristic, and play no role in RA itself. They merely help us to see how its 
primitives are to be interpreted. And similarly now for the generalized 
notion of the domain of a relation. 
For a dyadic relation Rv the first domain is merely 
(1) 
{x9(Ey)R2xy}, 
and the second or converse domain is 
(2) 
{y3(Ex)R2xy}. 
For a triadic relation Ry we must provide not only for 
(3) 
{x3(By)(Ez)R3xyz}, 
(4) 
{y3(Ex)(Ez)R3xyz}, 
and 
(5) 
{zB(Ex)(Ey)R2xyz}, 
but also for 
(6) 
{xy  
(Bz)R3xyz], 
(7) 
{XZB 
(Ey)R3xyz}, 
and 
(8) 
{yz3 
(Ex)R3xyz}. 
The first of these we may think of as the domain, the third as the converse 
domain, and the second as the middle domain. The other three are rela­
tional domains, but no obvious terminology for them is available. In the 
case of tetradic (or quadratic) relations, the situation is still more compli­
cated. To provide for all these, and in general for all the domains including 
the relational ones, let us let 
r(D. 
UR j."
1 
abbreviate 
r{x....xu  (Ex.)...(Ex 
)R ... }n, 
4 
i,...,h 
n'j 
L i 
h 
v 
k' 
v 
m' 
n 1 
nJ 
' 
where /, ..., h, k, ..., m are any n distinct positive integers (each 
^ n),i, ..., h are just ƒ in number (ƒ è 1), and i, ..., h and k, ..., m 
are taken in any order of magnitude, for n è 2. 
We note now how (l)-(8) may be represented or symbolized in terms 
of 'D'. (1) in fact is merely (E>1R2)1 and (2) is (D2Ä2)r (3) is ( D ^ ) ^ (4) is 
(D2#3)15 (5) is (D3JR3)r (6), (7), and (8) are themselves dyadic relations 
represented by '(D12#3)2', ' ( D ^ / ^ y and (D23#3)2' respectively. And so 

162 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
on for relations of higher degree and their domains, relational and other. 
Let us note that expressions such as i(P123R3)3' 
a r e a^so significant, s o 
that a relation is allowed to be one of its own domains. But so is '(D1  2Ä3)3' 
significant, and '(D2 33)3', '(0 2 3 3) 3\ '(^3)\ 
and ' ( D ^ ^ V ' ' E a c h 
of these represents one of the converses of the triadic relation R3, just as 
'(D2 ^2)2' represents the converse of Rr And similarly for relations of 
higher degree, so that the general theory of converses included in the gen­
eral theory of domains. 
Note, by way of a few further examples, that 
(9) 
-{xB(y)R2xyY 
is represented here by 
r-(D fK 2r, 
(10) 
r{x  
(Ey)(z)(w)(Eu)(v)R6xyzwuvy 
by 
r(D1-(Dli2-(Dli2;3;4-(DUj34i5-R6)5)4)2);, 
(11) 
r{xwyz  R4 xyzwY 
by 
(12) 
{  (Ez)(Ew)(u)(Ev)R6 
xvyuwz}~" 
by 
r(Dl,2-(D
1,2,3,4-(D
1,2,3,4,5(Dl,6,2,5,4,3«6)6)5)4)2"1-
In the formulation of RA, all talk of virtual classes and relations is, of 
course, dropped, the effect of such being achieved by use of the Boolean 
notions, Cartesian products, and domains. In an algebra there is always a 
primitive ' = ' for identity, so that rR = S n is the only kind of atomic for­
mula admitted, but with '~' and 'v', say, available as truth-functional primi­
tives to provide for molecular formulae. The basic principles of RA — and, 
ultimately the axioms — must provide for the truth-functions, for identity 
as between n-adic relations, for the Boolean notions, and for Cartesian pro­
ducts and domains. A list of some of the principles needed was put forward 
in the previous paper. Not all of these are required as axioms, although 
some additional ones are. 
In the original presentation of RA in Mind, Modality, Meaning, and 
Method, the sentence 

RELATIONAL DOMAINS 
163 
(13) '(E*)(y)(Eu)(v)T4;cyMv' 
was said to be expressible by 
(14) '~-(D13-T4)2 = A2'. 
But unfortunately this is not correct. This latter states, in virtual-relation 
terms, that 
~ {xu  (Ey)(Ev)-T4xyuv} 
= A p 
or, equivalently, that 
(15) 
(Bx)(Eu)(y)(v)-T4xyuv. 
But of course (15) is not equivalent to (13), although it logically implies it. 
The form for (13) should be rather 
as may easily be verified. And, similarly, the Axiom of Pairs of set-theory 
has the form 
'(IV(D1A3-(((D1>4i2i3(E2 x V2)4)4 n ((Id, x V2)4  (Dx 
2fl (Id, 
x V2)4)4)4)4 u(-(D 1 A 2 3(E 2 x V2)4)4 n (-(Id2 XV2)4 n - 
( I d2 x ^4)4)4)4)4)3)2 = 
V
2'> 
and the given instances of the Aussonderungsschema 
the form 
r(D r(D 1 2-(((E 2 x Vj)3 n ((, x V2)3 n ( D „ , ( E 2 x V ^ ) ^  
(-(E2 x V ^ n (.(Äl x V2)3  - ( D w ( E 2 x Vj3)3)3)3)3)2)1 = V;. 
(Please note also that, on page 96 of Mind, Modality, Meaning, and 
Method, in the second lines of the definitions of 7' and ' # ' the r(u52)2
n 
should be replaced by Sr And on p. 95, r ~ Tm = ^1 should be added as a 
conjunct to the hypotheses of Pr28 and Pr29.) 
Given an rc-adic relation, for n ^ 2, the totality of its converses 
together with all its domains constitutes a family of closely affiliated rela­
tions. All of the affiliates are constructed from the given one and are recog­
nized as relations along with it. In some sense, they are "given" along with 
the original one, merely awaiting a proper notation, as it were. Once we 
have such a notation, RA is seen to be merely an extension of an essentially 
Boolean theory as augmented with Cartesian products. The admission of 
the relations affiliated with a given relation thus seems not only natural, but 
a small price to pay for the algebraic richness forthcoming as a result. 
Further, RA itself may now be seen to be wholly Booleanized, so to speak, 
all erstwhile relational notions — instrinsically relational or non-Boolean 

164 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
ones — being now assimilated in the theory of domains. 
It should be observed that ' = ' for identity as between n-adic relations 
in RA is a very strong primitive indeed, and the two axiom-schemata gov­
erning it are very strong principles. These are that 
\-R 
= R , 
1 
ti 
n7 
and 
\- R = S ZD -R 
- = - 5 - , where r~S ~n differs from the term 
1 
n 
n 
n 
n 
n 
r--JR ~n only in containing occurrences of S in one or more 
places where there are occurrences of R in r--R - 
1 
n 
n 
It is interesting to observe that the effect of having identity may be achieved 
in a much more economical.way. The result will no longer be an algebra, 
however, but a special kind of logic of relations. 
We should observe also that the truth-functional connectives may be 
eliminated as primitives of RA without loss. Recall the principles that 
|- ~ R = V = (DXV, X -R ) . 
 = V , 
1 
n 
n 
v 
l 4 
1 
nJ(n + \y\ 
1' 
\-(R 
= V . S =V) 
= (R nS) 
= V , 
1 
v 
n 
n 
n 
n' 
v 
n 
nJn 
n7 
and 
\-(~R 
= V v ~ 5 
= V ) = ( D r v x-(RnS))( 
^X 
= V15 
or, better, 
 ( = V„ v Sn = Yn) = (-(D l ( V l X -RJ 
p i u -(D1(V1 X 
■¿ » W i ) i = V r 
Whenever, in RA, we wish to use a truth-functional connective, we may 
elminate it in view of these equivalences. 
It should be observed also that the only atomic formulae we need con­
sider are of the form rT = V n in view of the Boolean principle that 
[-R =s 
=((-R 
u S ) n(R 
u - S ) ) 
- V . 
1 
 
n 
4V 
n 
n'n 
v 
n 
nJnJn 
n 
It is true that ' = ' occurs in this equivalence on the right-hand side. In place 
of rT = V n, let us now write merely 
r y 
r n 
n n 
to the effect that such and such an n-adic relation is universal in the sense 
appropriate to n-adic relations. No properties of identity as such need then 
be postulated, as we shall see in a moment. Actually, we can simplify RA 
in another respect also, by using primitively only Cartesian products of the 

RELATIONAL DOMAINS 
165 
form r(R 
x V ), , 1N"1, where V, is the universal monadic relation. We shall 
4 
n 
l'(n + l) ' 
1 
see how the full effect of having Cartesian products may be achieved in this 
way. 
Let us go on, now, to formulate the essentials of RA, but without using 
identity or the truth-functions. As primitives, let us take '-' for Boolean 
negation, 'u' for Boolean sums, 'x' for the restricted Cartesian products, 
and 'D' with suitable subscripts for relational domains. Erstwhile individual 
constants are to be handled predicatively, so that 'Soc', for example, may 
represent the predicate 'Socratizes'. At least one such primitive primitive is 
presupposed, say 'Soc' itself. 
The following recursive specification is of the general notion of being a 
relational term of degree n where n = 1. 
1. 
'Soc' (and any other primitive for an erstwhile proper name) is a 
relational term of degree 1. 
2. 
If R is a relational term of degree n, so is r-R n. 
3. 
If R and S are relational terms of degree n, so is r(R  S )  
n 
n 
° 
' 
 n 
n'n 
4. 
If Rn is a relational term of degree n, r(Rn x (Soc  -Soc)^ 
 
is a relational term of degree (n+1). 
5. 
If JR, , 
 is a relational term of degree (n+m), r(D. 
R, 
 nis 
(n+m) 
° 
 
/ ' V 
,... j 
(n+my n 
a relational term of degree n, where (as needed). 
To facilitate the notation, we may let 
DL 
'V^ 
abbreviate 
'(Soc  -Soc)^, 
and then 
D2a. 
'V2' 
abbreviate 
'(V1 x V ^ ' , 
D2b. 
'V3' 
abbreviate 
'(V2 x V ^ ' , 
and so on. In addition we may let 
D3a. 
r(R 
x VA ^ 
abbreviate 
((   ^ 
x V ) . +9/\ 
v 
n 
2J(n + 2) 
v v 
n 
lJ(n + \) 
V(n + 2) ' 
D3b. 
r(K x v ) , 
^ abbreviate 
r((K x V,). _ x V,). 
^ 
v 
n 
'(+3) 
 n 
2J(n+2) 
U(n + 3) ' 
and so on. Also 
D4. 
r(V x R V 
.n abbreviates 
r(D, +u 
, _,,, 
(R 
x 
v 
n 
m/(n+m) 
v 
(m + l),...,(m+n),l,...,mK 
m 
V ) 
) 
n 
n'(n+my(n+m) 
' 
D5. 
r(R x S ) , ^ ,n abbreviates 
r((K x V ), ^ , n (V x 
4 
n 
m'(n + m) 
4V 
n 
m' (n+m) 
v 
n 
S ) 
) 
 
m'{n+my 
(n+m) 
In this way we can achieve the full effect of having Cartesian products. 

166 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
By a formula let us now understand any expression of the form rV R n 
where Rn is a relational term of degree n. The formulae are to be under­
stood as saying that such and such a relation of degree n has the kind of uni­
versality appropriate to n-addic relations. The only expressions allowed in 
this kind of logic are the relational terms. Let us therefore call it 'relational-
term logic', or for short, 'RTL'. 
A few further abbreviations are useful. We may let 
D6. 
r(R nS)~] 
be short for 
r-(-R  -S ) , 
D7a. 
' / for 
'-V/, 
D7b. 
'2' for 
'(Aj X Aj)2\ 
and so on, 
D8. 
r(R  S ) n for 
r(-R  S ) n, 
4 
 
nJ 
 
 
 
11' 
' 
and 
D9. 
r(R D 5 ) 1 
for 
r((RuS) 
n (S =>R))~1. 
D6 and D7 are definitions of a familiar kind, D# and D9 less so. D# intro­
duces the notion of the Boolean implexion of rc-adic relations, and D9 that 
of the Boolean identification of such. In terms of these the notions of inclu­
sion and identity of n-adic relations may be introduced, by letting 
DIO. 
rR  5 n 
abbreviate 
rV (# => S )  
and 
Dii. 
 = 5 n 
abbreviate 
rV ( D S )  
Let us go on now to list some fundamental principles for RTL as fol­
lows. We first have some Boolean ones. 
Prl. 
\-{R 
 R )  R , 
Pr2. 
\-R 
c (Ä  5 ) , 
Fri. 
1- (R  S )  (S  R ) , 
Pr4. 
\-(R 
=> S )  ((  R ) =, (  S ) ) , 
1 
v 
n 
n'n 
v v 
n 
nJn 
 « 
nJnJn7 
MP. 
lì \-V 
R ŒS , then h V S . 
 
 
7 
' 
« 
 
These principles will be recognized as sufficient for providing for a Boolean 
algebra of n-adic relations — together with an existence assumption that 
will be given in a moment. MP is of course the adaptation of modus ponens 
needed for n-adic relations. 

RELATIONAL DOMAINS 
167 
The following principles govern the restricted Cartesian products and 
the relational domains. 
Pr5. 
h (-Ä x V V 
= -{R x V ) , _ , 
Pr6. 
\-((R 
 S ) x V ) , _ = (( X V ) , x1,  (S x V,), 
ì, _ , 
1 
 n 
' 
1'( + 1) 
v v 
n 
1'(+1) 
v n 
l'(n+ly(n 
+ iy 
Pria. f- (D, 
(R X V ) , i n ) = R , 
1 
v 
l,...,nv 
n 
ly(n + l) /n 
n' 
Pr76. |--(D. 
(-Ä X V ) . _,_,,) =2? , 
PrS. 
h -(D, 
-(R. „ , => S, xl.) x„)  (-(D, 
-, _ ) =>-(D. 
1 
v 
l,...,n v 
(n+1) 
(n+iyn+iyn 
  
1,..., 
(+1)' 
 
1,... 
"^(+iyJ/i' 
™>- 
h - ( ^ . . . ^ . ^ - ( , x ^)(+1))„ cz -(D1 
^...>(„.1)i(n+1)in-(Ä„ 
PrlO. |--(D, 
. ... -( x a . ) . J 
 -(D, 
(D, 
, , . . _ -( 
1 
 
l,...,(/î-l),(n + l) 
 n 
\'{n+\yn 
 
1,.../7 
1,...,(-1),( + 1), 
 n 
x ^i)(n+i))(„+i))„' w n e r e ! is  primitive for an individual 
constant, 
Gen. 
Iff-V 2? thenhV 1 -(D, ^.(-Ä x V I 
A . 
1 
 
« 
' 
1 
 
(rc + l) v 
n 
l'(/i + l)'l 
We have also some principles governing converses, as follows. 
Prll. 
f- (D. 
. R = -(D 
-# ) , where /, ..., j are any n distinct posi­
tive integers, each  n, 
Prl2. |-(D. 
(R u S ) ) 
c ( ( D . 
) u ( D . 
. 5 ) ) , where (etc.), 
Pri3. h ( => S ) <= ((D. 
. ) => (D. 
. S ) ) , 
Prl4a.^(D21(D21R2)2)2 
= R2, 
Prl4b.[-(D12(D12R2)2)2 
= R2, 
Prl4c- 
 a W D U , 2 R 3 ) 3 ) 3 = *> 
/V74d.h(D2>li3(D2ili3R3)3)3 = Ä3, 
M4e.h(D3il>2(D2i3ilR3)3)3 = Ä3) 
Pr/4/. 0231(0312)) = 3, 
Pri4g. h (D3A1(D3i23)3) = Ry 
and so on for relations of higher degree. 
Finally, we need a general principle concerning the uniqueness and 
existence of the monadic relation Soc and other relations representing 
erstwhile individual constants. 

168 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
Prl5. \-a = -(Dr((a x V ^ n (( D
2,i( a x Yi\ ^ ^ 
w h e r e a i s 
any primitive for an individual constant (and Id2 is the relation 
of identity of individuals). 
These principles are by no means exhaustive but are given as mere 
samples of principles that would be needed in any full axiomatization. 
We need not tarry here with the deductive development of RTL. Much 
work yet remains to be done to achieve the minimum axioms sufficing for 
the theory — to say nothing of stating precisely what it means to say this 
and then proving that it obtains. To do this last, in a satisfactory way, would 
require a semantical metalanguage, with its attendant axioms and rules, in 
which the proof could be carried out. A very considerable effort would be 
required to formulate such a metalanguage for such a proof, and many 
unforseen technical difficulties would no doubt arise. The same of course is 
to be said for all so-called "proofs" of consistency, completeness and inde­
pendence.5 
An objection that might be raised against the notation for domains 
used here is that it makes abundant use of numerical subscripts and there­
fore the theories here presuppose arithmetic. But no. The numerical sub­
scripts are used as mere notational markers, and their use here is as mere 
syntactical abbreviation, as would become pellucid if the syntax were spel­
led out in detail in terms of concatenation and shape-descriptions.6 Also it 
might be objected that, although variables such as 'x', 'y', and so on, are 
not needed in RA or RTL, abundant use is made of 'R \ and so on, as syn­
tactical variables. True, but if the syntax, again, were fully spelled out, it in 
turn could be viewed as an 'applied relational-term logic without syntactical 
variables. 
Let us note now relational domains are of use in giving logical forms to 
certain natural sentences. The first person ever to make use of them, or 
even to be aware of their existence, was probably C.S. Peirce. Let us turn 
therefore to an important paper of his of 1870.7 This was long before he 
became aware of the quantifiers, and it is interesting to note that he felt the 
need of generalized domains to handle certain natural noun-phrases. 
Consider, by way merely of an example, the sentence that "every lover 
of somebody who is a servant to nothing but a woman stands to nothing but 
women in the relation of lover of nothing but a servant of them." The two 
noun-phrases needed here may readily be symbolized in virtual-relation 
terms, and hence in RA or RTL. Let 'L ' and 'S ' stand for the dyadic rela­
tion of loving and being a servant of, respectively, and let 'W^ stand for the 

RELATIONAL DOMAINS 
169 
class of women. Then the required noun-phrases, in quantificational terms, 
are 
'{x  (Ey)((z)(S2yz 
z> W,z) . Ljcy)}' 
and 
In the symbolism of RTL, these become 
4D1-(D12-(((V1 x S2)3 = (V2 x W l) 3) 3 n (L2 x V l) 3) 3) 2); 
and 
,-(D1-(D12(D132(((L2 x V l ) 3 = (V, x S2)3)3 r> ( 
2 ^ ' . 
Another example from Peirce is the sentence "every lover of some­
body who is servant to nothing but a woman stands to nothing but women 
in the relation of lover of nothing but a servant of them." The two noun-
phrases here, in the notation of RTL, are respectively, 
4D r(D 1 ) 2(D U 2(((L 2 x V l ) 3 =, (Vx x S2)3)3n (Vx x W l x 
V)))))' 
and 
'-(Df(D12((L2 x V l ) 3 = ((V, x S2)3 n (V2 x W1)3)3)3)2)1)'. 
Peirce's two sentences are then formed by placing the inclusion-sign ' c ' 
between the two relevant phrases. The results, incidentally, are logically 
true statements, as Peirce in effect observes. 
To the uninitiate, these examples may seem somewhat far-fetched. 
These and similar noun-phrases, however, abound in natural language. It is 
therefore essential that a method for handling them be available in any gen­
eral theory of relations adequate for the normal tasks expected of it. It is 
interesting to observe also that it was for a notation for relational demains 
of any complexity that Peirce was struggling, in his early papers on the 
algebra and logic of relations, before coming to terms with the quantifiers 
in his papers of 1883 and 1885.8 
Let us go on now to show how RTL is but a step or so removed from a 
kind of combinatory logic of relations, one in which the combinators or 
operators apply to relations with relations as the result.9 We shall need just 
six such combinators, namely, 
S,N, P, C, I, andE. 

170 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
S will provide for Boolean sums of n-adic relations, N for negations, P for 
the restricted Cartesian products,  for conversion, I for inversion, and E 
for handling the construction of domains. Conversion and inversion may be 
explained — again — in terms of virtual relations. 
r(CR ) n 
is to represent 
{1-(-1)1--> 
and 
r(lR ) n 
is to represent 
{~... BR X....X y. 
L 2 1 3 
n 
n 
1 
nJ 
E functions as a combinator for forming relational domains. Thus 
4 
n'{n-l) 
is to represent 
r{jc1...jc. .  (Ex )R X....X 
y. 
L 1 
(/7-1) 
V 
nJ 
 
1 
nJ 
The use of 'E' here is to suggest the existential quantifier involved. 
To see how these combinators function, let us note that (1) above may 
now be expressed by 
(2) 
and (9) by 
-(-2) 
(11) above becomes 
(10) becomes 
-((-(-(-6)5)4)3)2) 
and (12) becomes 
r(E(E(C(C(I-(E-(C(C(C(E(C(C(C(CR6)6)6)6)5)5)5)5)4)4)4)4)4)3)2-, 
and so on. 
The other combinators are such that 
r(S(tf ,S ))  

RELATIONAL DOMAINS 
171 
rNR  
and 
represent the Boolean sums, negation, and restricted Cartesian products, 
respectively. 
Here, as in RTL, all our formulae may be taken to be of the form 
'"V R n, where 'V ' is defined as there. It is easy to see that the principles 
Prl-Prl5 may all be expressed as principles in the new notation. 
This quasi-combinatory logic of relations is really merely RTL in a 
kind of notational disguise. Even so, it is just interesting enough perhaps to 
be given a label of its own. Let us call it 'CLR', the combinatory logic of 
relations. The use of the letters 'S', 'N', 'P', and so on, is akin to uses of 
capital roman letters in Curry's formulations. It is interesting, too, to note 
that CLR, like RA and RTL, can be used as a surrogate for the quantifica­
tion-theory. In fact, it provides a kind of combinatory theory of quantifica­
tion. 
paper are sharply to be contrasted with the mereological and homological 
theories of them in V above. However, the theories there could readily be 
formulated as either an RA or RTL or a CLR, where 'P' and 'Ord' are 
taken as the only primitive non-logical relation-symbols. The mechanisms 
of RA or RTL or CLR would merely provide the underlying logic needed 
in place of the quantification-theory actually used. And similarly for any 
other theory formulable in quantificational terms. 


CHAPTER FOURTEEN 
On Husserlian wholes and parts 
"Ornare res ipsa negat, contenta docere." 
At the recent International Workshop on Parts and Wholes at the Univer­
sity of Lund in June, 1983, Barry Smith called attention to the seminal work 
on this topic by Husserl and Lesniewski.1 "The Husserl tradition ... deals 
not only with ('vertical') relations between parts and their wholes, but also 
with the ('lateral') relations amongst the parts of a single whole," especially 
relations of "necessary dependence." "There is an infinite variety of such 
lateral dependence relations giving rise to an infinite variety of different 
types of whole which the Lesniewski approach is simply unable to distin­
guish. Yet Husserl saw that the theory of lateral, part-whole relations can 
be embedded smoothly into a vertical mereological theory of the Les­
niewski type, producing a radical increase both in logical and descriptive 
power and in complexity of mathematical structure." 
In his contribution to the Workshop, Kevin Mulligan2 likewise claimed 
"that it is possible to provide a formal theory of part and whole, a theory 
adequate for the understanding of linguistic structure, as of all other real 
structure in the spatio-temporal world, and this without appeal to the alien 
and descriptively inadequate apparatus of set theory." Mulligan also makes 
obeisance to Husserl and Lesniewski. Of Husserl's theory of parts and 
wholes, he comments that it "is capable of being formalised, though not by 
any recourse to the standard formalisms ..." of "set theory or the predicate 
calculus." These latter are "demonstrably inadequate," we are told — but 
we are not told why. Of Lesniewski we are told merely that he "worked out 
an intuitively elegant formalisation of a fragment of Husserl's logical gram­
mar," which comprises "much of what is now regarded as belonging to the 
domain of semantics." 
Both of these comments seem somewhat "woolly," from a historical 

174 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
point of view, and not quite accurate. To "see" that such and such a theory 
is possible is, no doubt, a necessary precondition for an explicit formulation 
of it. It is true that Lesniewski's mereology is not concerned with "lateral" 
or "dependence" relations, but it is far from clear that Husserl saw how — 
or that — a theory of them could be "embedded" in a mereology of Les-
niewskian type. On the contrary, it cannot be, the Lesniewskian theory 
having no truck with intensions (or intentions) in the way the Husserlian 
theory requires. Nor can the latter be formalized without using the "predi­
cate calculus" or some surrogate thereof. In fact, no theory can be. Also it 
is much to simple, and indeed misleading, to claim sans phrase that "Les-
niewski worked out ... a fragment of Husserl's categorial grammar." 
The great defect of Husserl's approach to mereology3, and that of his 
followers, it would appear, is that it has been content with a mere "seeing" 
that a theory of it is possible, without the barest hint as to how an explicit 
formalization of it could be carried out. Let us attempt here to make some 
suggestions toward remedying this defect. In so doing, let us bear in mind 
the mereology and/or homology of V above, and concentrate attention on 
such additional notions as are needed for discussing "dependence" and 
allied relations. Fundamental here are the so-called event-descriptive predi­
cates used previously, together with the full resources of event-logic.4 (And 
of course much must be made of the relations determining the "depen­
dence" of parts.) Let us begin by following Husserl's discussion more or less 
step by step, in Investigation III, parting from it as required for rigor of 
theory and precision of presentation. The aim is thus not to formalize Hus­
serl, but merely to show how some of his salient insights may be accommo­
dated within the event-logic framework. Then, at the end, we will be in a 
position to see that what Husserl and his followers seek to accomplish in 
terms of "dependence" relations, may be more clearly and efficaciously 
provided by explicitly symbolizing many structural and quasi-linguistic rela­
tions that are more and more being seen to be essential for the logical study 
of language. 
Not everything that is said to be a "part" of something should be prop­
erly so regarded, once a rigorous sense of 'part' has been settled on. No 
"quality" or "property" is a part of a thing, nor (p. 435) a "Species, 
Genus..., Relation..., Collection, Unity, Number, Series, Ordinal Number, 
Magnitude, etc.," to cite some of Husserl's "categories." No, let us make 
no category-mistakes here, but be clear ab initio as to the categories we use. 
Let us think of a thing or "object" a a cardinal individual in the sense of V, 

HUSSERL'S PARTS AND WHOLES 
175 
i.e., as a unit cardinal entity or any Boolean sum of such. The units are the 
minimalia admitted in the theory, sums of which are ordinary individuals. 
"Objects can be related to one another as Wholes to Parts," Husserl 
writes (p. 436); "they can also be related to one another as coordinated 
parts of a whole. These sorts of relations [what sorts? we must ask] have an 
a priori foundation in the Idea of an object. Every object is either actually 
or possibly a part, i.e., there are actual or possible wholes that include it. 
Not every object, on the other hand, need perhaps have parts, and we have 
therefore the ideal division of objects into the simple and the complex." 
In the theory here the simples are to be the cardinal units, and are to 
have no parts other than themselves and the null object N. The basic part-
whole relation P here is taken in such a way as to allow every object to bear 
P to itself. Husserl takes the basic relation so as to exclude this. But we may 
readily define 
'x  y' 
as 
'(CardEnt x . CardEnt v . x P y . ~ x P N . ~ v P 
x)\ 
to express that x is an Husserlian part ofy. Also in admitting a null object, 
we follow Lesniewski rather than Husserl, who seems not to admit such. 
The relation of part-to-whole is P, that of whole-to-part is the converse 
of P, usually symbolized as 'UP'. Clearly it holds that 
And by 'actual or possible wholes' we mean all "objects" as spread out 
before us, as it were, in the Peirce-Frege tense of timelessness. 
Husserl is very explict that "the terms 'complex' and 'simple' are ... 
defined by the qualification of having parts or not having parts." Thus we 
can let 
'Simp x' 
abbreviate 
'(— (Ey)y PH x . CardEnt JC)' 
and 
'Comp x' 
abbreviate 
'(— Simp x . CardEnt x)\ 
What now about regarding "color and shape as the associated parts of 
a colored expanse?" Talk of such "goes against linguistic usage," Husserl 
notes (p. 437). "For in such wholes the parts have relative dependence as 
regards one another; we find them so closely united as to be called 'inter­
penetrating'. It is quite different in the case of wholes which are broken up, 
or could be broken up, into pieces. The parts are here not merely disjoined 

176 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
from each other, but relatively independent, they have the character of 
mutually-put-together pieces." Husserl seems willing to go against linguistic 
usage in noting that "every nonrelative 'real' (reale) predicate ... points to 
a part of the object which is the predicate's subject: 'red' and 'round', e.g., 
do so, but not 'existent' or 'something'." 
To speak of color and shape as "parts" of a colored expanse, either in 
a visual field or in natura, not only goes against linguistic usage but involves 
a category-mistake as well. The color and shape of an object seem best 
handled as properties or attributes — attributive relations, we can say here, 
in the sense of V — and not as "parts." It would thus seem best not to use 
'part' ab initio in the wide sense that Husserl does. 
Husserl remarks that "if we now try to pin down the limitations which 
mark off ... [the] ordinary [usage of 'part'], from our notion of part, we 
come up against the fundamental distinction ... of independent and non-
independent [or dependent] parts." Independent parts may readily be hand­
led by means of 'P'. What we should do now is to try to show, as sympathet­
ically as possible, that Husserl's dependent parts may also be fully handled 
on this narrower and more natural — and, be it said, more Lesniewskian — 
construal of 'part'. 
Let us now let, as previously5, 
(1) 
'<Evid> e' 
express that e is an act or "state of conciousness" of apodictic self-evidence. 
'<Evid>' here is an event-descriptive predicate, and expressions of the 
kind (1) are essential for accommodating Husserl's vocabulary. (1) could 
also be read: e is an act of not-being-able-to-think-otherwise. "Whenever ... 
the word 'can' occurs in conjunction with the pregnant use of 'think'," Hus­
serl comments (p. 446), "there is a reference, not to a subjective necessity, 
i.e., to the subjective incapacity-to-represent things otherwise, but to the 
objectively-ideal necessity of an inability-to-be-otherwise. This is by its 
essence such as to be given in our consciousness of apodictic self-evidence." 
(1) here is intended to state that e is just such an act or state. 
To (1) a clause can be added specifying the object of e, or what e is 
"about." Thus if e is an <Evid> and has as its "object" a statement to the 
effect that an object x has such and such a property, the property is in effect 
the very "essence" of x — a property that x must be thought to have, one 
without which x cannot be thought to exist. The use of (1) helps to capture 
much of what Husserl wishes to say about essence, laws of essence, species, 
and the like. 

HUSSERL'S PARTS AND WHOLES 
177 
As previously, also, let us let 
(2) 
lx Undere a' 
express that in the intentional act or state e the object x is taken under the 
one-place predicate-description a. 'Under' here may in fact be defined in 
terms of the basic pragmatical predicate 'Acpt' for acceptance and the 
semantical one 'Des' for designation.6 Thus we may let 
'x Under 
a' 
abbreviate 
'(PredConOne a . <Acpt> e . 
(Eb)(Ec)(b Des x .  = () . e OfQbject ))'. 
a here is to be a one-place predicate-constant of the language and b is some 
result of concatenating a with some designator of x so as to form a sen­
tence. If e is an intentional act of accepting such a sentence, then  is taken 
under e in that act. Undering, so to speak, is clearly a fundamental kind of 
act in all language-use. 
Apodictic self-evidence, Husserl points out, "is correlated with a defi­
nite pure law in each case. It is ... obvious that objective necessity is as such 
tantamount to a being that rests on an objective law.... The inability-to-
exist-by-itself of a dependent part points therefore to a law of essence,.... 
Dependent objects are objects belonging to such pure Species as are governed 
by a law of essence to the effect that they only exist (if at all) as parts of more 
inclusive wholes of a certain appropriate Species." 
Let 
'Sp JC' and 
'Gen JC' 
express now that x is a Boolean sum or collective of entities constituting, 
respectively a pure Species or a pure Genus in the sense Husserl intends. 
And let 
'Law A' 
express that a is a "law" of the appropriate kind (§11, pp. 455ff). These 
notions are quite fundamental to Husserl's discussion, and we could not get 
very far into his theory without them. Let also 
'Obj x' 
express that x is an "object" in just the sense Husserl intends. We may then 
define 
'CollObj JC' as 
'((Ev)(Obj  . y PH x) . (z)((Unit Z . Z P ^ ) D 
(Ew)(Obj w. wP * . z P 
w)))\ 

178 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
to express that x is a collective of objects, i.e., any entity having at least one 
object as a part and such that all unit parts of it are parts of some object 
that is a part of it. Every object consists of the sum of its unit parts, so that 
x here can contain only units that are parts of objects. 
All species and genera are collectives of objects, and to say that an 
object is a member of a species or genus is now merely to say that it is a part 
of one. Thus 
'x E v' 
could abbreviate 
£(Obj x . (Sp y v Gen y) . x PH y)'. 
What now is a "whole"? Let us let 
'Wfl x' 
abbreviate 
'(Ee)(<Evid> e . (Ey)((Sp y v Gen v) . a 
Des y) . ((Obj x . x Under a) v (CollObj x . (z)(z £ x = z Under 
«))))'• 
A whole, relative to some mode of description , is any object x taken 
under a in some evidencing-act e, or any collective of objects every member 
of which is taken under ame, 
where a itself designates either a species or 
a genus. The object x is then supposed to "depend" upon a, or to be 
"founded" upon or to "need supplementation" by a. 
Let us now turn to the key relations of dependence. There are several 
of them, each determined by what is taken to depend on what. Let us first 
define 
'x RelDep y' 
as 
'(((Sp x . Sp y) v (Gen x . Gen y) v (Sp x 
. Gen y)) . (Efl)(E6)(Ec)(Ee)(<Evid> e . a Des x . b Des y . 
Law .  = r(z)((a"z) => (") . e Of0bjcctc)))\ 
This definition is intended to capture — perhaps not altogether satisfactor­
ily — Husserl's comments (p. 406) that "a content A is relatively dependent 
in regard to a content  ... if a pure law, rooted in the peculiar character of 
the kinds of content in question, ensures that a content of the pure Genus 
A has an a priori incapacity to exist except in, or as associated with, other 
contents ... determined by 5." The pure law here is the c, which in effect 
states that all A's are 5's, and this with apodictic self-evidence. 
Clearly then 
'JC Rellndep y' 
may abbreviate 
£((Sp x . Sp y) v (Gen x . Gen 
y) v (Sp x . Gen y)) . ~ x RelDep y)', 
expressing that x is relatively independent of  in the absence of a law of 
dependency. Let also 

HUSSERL'S PARTS AND WHOLES 
179 
'x ObjDep a' 
abbreviate 
'(Obj x . Wfl x)\ 
and 
'x CollDep Ö' 
abbreviate 
'(CollObj x . (Ey)((Sp v v Gen v) . A 
Des y) . (z)(z e  =  ObjDep A)))', 
expressing respectively that x is an object dependent on a, and that x is a 
(generic) collective every member of which is an object dependent on a. 
Also we may let 
'x DepP y' 
abbreviate 
'(x PH y . x RelDep y)' 
and 
'x IndepP ƒ 
abbreviate 
'(x PR y . ~ x RelDep y . ((Sp x Sp y) 
v (Gen x . Gen y) v (Sp x . Gen y)))\ 
These provide us straightforwardly with the relations of being a dependent 
and independent part of. 
With these definitions in mind, we could attempt to state Husserl's six 
"propositions" in §14. Let us refrain, however, from so doing. The full con­
tent of these is not easy to fathom and they are not above ambiguity. And, 
anyhow, much of what they say involves the category-mistake pointed out 
above. As Findlay himself has remarked (p. 22): "Husserl does not con­
sider the possibility that it may be an ontological mistake to apply the 
notion of part to a non-independent moment, since a true part must argu­
ably belong to the same category as the whole it helps to form (a page and 
a book) whereas a 'moment', in virtue of its non-independence, is arguably 
not of the same category as the whole into which it enters. There is some­
thing misleading about treating the shape of a book as a part of it...." 
No doubt much of the foregoing material may be improved upon. 
Enough has been shown, however, to see how the root notions of Husserl's 
Investigation HI may be handled within the event-theoretic framework, 
with the addition, of course, of key Husserlian notions such as '<Evid>', 
'Law', and so on. And governing all of these notions, meaning-postulates 
must be given. Such postulates would "interanimate" most intimately with 
the six propositions, so intimately in fact that these latter are virtually unin­
telligible without them. Even so, the tentative definitions given above may 
be helpful to others who wish to probe the foundations of Husserl's theory 
more deeply than has been done here. 
What now, we might ask, is of permanent significance in Husserl's 
Investigation IIP. It contains little analysis of any specific part-whole rela-

180 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
tion as such, in the sense of laying down basic properties of it, defining 
derivative ideas in terms of it, and so on. In these respects, the subsequent 
work of Lesniewski represents a very considerable advance. Husserl's 
interest is mainly in relations of dependence, as we have seen. His discus­
sion of this is rather obscure, however, as we have noted, and cries out for 
a "clean" formulation in modern terms. For such a purpose, it would seem 
unwise to presuppose a theory of genera and species, nor a theory of 
<Evid>, which is too intimately dependent upon a very special theory of 
knowledge. What we want to get at is the full structure of a mereology inde­
pendently of all this; there will then be ample time to interrelate it with 
whatever theory of knowledge one wishes. Also, Husserl has no mereolog-
ical "units" other than "objects." And, strictly, he has no notion of a "col­
lective" in any clearly articulated sense. Without Boolean sums we are 
totally in the dark as to what a "complex" object is supposed to be. Even 
so, Husserl must surely be credited with having gotten the ball rolling, so to 
speak, and there can be no doubt of the considerable influence his work 
exerted on Lesniewski. 
According to Findlay, "Husserl's treatment [of dependence] can ... be 
defended on analogical grounds: 'moments' are not parts, but in certain 
respects they behave like parts, and the identities and differences of their 
logical behavior is what the Investigation III attempts to determine," 
Strictly, Husserl should have spelled out these identities and differences in 
detail by paying more attention to the multiplicity and character of the rela­
tions stipulating the dependences desired. The modern logic of relations 
was available at the time to have helped him do this. By 1900, when Hus­
serl's work first appeared, both Frege and Peirce had done much of their 
work, and Schroder's famous and much-used text-book7 had already 
appeared in 1895. In fact the full logic of relations was already in essentially 
its modern form in Peirce's great paper of 1885.8 It seems retardataire for 
Husserl continually to speak of genera and species and of "syllogistics" and 
syllogistic inference, when the full riches of modern logic were virtually at 
hand. 
Let us now return to Mulligan's discussion, which tends to upgrade 
Husserl at Lesniewski's expense. For him "constituency and dependence" 
relations are needed fundamentally for the analysis of linguistic structure. 
Unfortunately he does not spell out for us the exact behavior of either kind 
of relation. The question arises as to whether the kinds of "dependency" 
relations he uses are in fact of Husserlian type. Or can they all be handled 

HUSSERL'S PARTS AND WHOLES 
181 
in clear-cut way within a Lesniewskian kind of scheme — with of course 
suitable extensions in the manner of event-logic? We should not force too 
much out of the little words 'part' and 'whole' where and when more accu­
rate terminology is available. 
Let us recall that the notion 'Law' is fundamental to Husserl's discus­
sion of dependency. Instead of handling "dependence relations" mereolog-
ically, let us seek to handle them instead in terms of the particular laws 
determining the particular kinds of dependency needed in a given context 
of inquiry. Such a procedure would be more specific — more "scientific," if 
you like — and would place dependencies right where they should be, in 
the laws stating them, these laws being expressed in terms of the relations 
involved. 
Mulligan's discussion centers around an analysis of "the event which 
consists in John promising Mary that he wouldn't ever see Susan again. One 
of the parts of this event," we are told, "is John's utterance of the words 
(3) 
I promise that I will never see Susan again. 
This utterance consists of meaningful signs. And we can distinguish 
between the whole utterance and its constituent phonemes and also 
between the whole utterance and its syntactic parts." Mulligan claims that 
several "dependence relations" are needed for analyzing (3). "Firstly and 
most obviously: a relation of dependence at the level of pragmatics: an 
action of promising cannot occur without a use of the signs T promise ...' 
(or their equivalents in other languages) .... Secondly, ..., we can note that 
the event which is a promising always marks the beginning of two states, 
themselves mutually dependent, of claim and obligation." Also "there can 
be no promising event unless we can also identify that kind of interconnec­
tion of syntactic parts which we call a proposition or 'that'-clause.... 
Another necessary constituent of this complex is a certain sort of mental 
state or mental event, often referred to as the speaker's sincerity/inten­
tion." In all this, it should be noted, there is talk of dependency and inter­
connection, but not strictly of "parts" or "wholes." 
In the author's Semiotics and Linguistic Structure (pp. 237-238) an 
analysis of sentences of the general form (3) was suggested, which will be of 
help here. Let us recall this analysis and then note some of the "depen­
dency" relations required for it. 
Let us first note that an appropriate logical form for (3) is, with some 
simplification, merely 

182 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
(3') 
'(Ee)(Ea)(I Agent e . <Promise> e . e During now . e ThatContent 
a . '~ (E^)(I Agent ^ . <See> ^ . now BeforeTime  .  OfQbject 
Susan . ( ) e Again ev {e3  (I Agent e3 . <See> e3 . e3 OfQb 
ject Susan)})' A)'. 
Agent here is the relation of being the (or a) agent of, During, BeforeTime, 
and Again are suitable temporal relations, ThatContent is the that-relation of 
content, OfQbect is the of-relation of being the object of, and {e3  ~3~} is 
the virtual class of all events e3 (states, acts, processes, etc.) satisfying the 
sentential form '--e3--'. T' and 'now' are deictic expressions for the speaker 
and for present moment, respectively. 
(3'), it should be observed, is merely a logical form for (3). But no 
utterance of it is, as such, a promising. The promising takes place rather by 
means of such an utterance, provided the utterance is "sincere" or "truly 
intended", or something of the kind. Let '<Utt>' be the event-descriptive 
predicate for acts of utterance, and let T&' express that b is an inscription 
of the very form (3'). For me to make the promise intended here, is then 
captured by the form 
(3") '( )()(&)()(1 Agent e4 . <Promise> e4 . e4 During now . 
eA ThatContent a ■ ' ~ ( E e i ) ( J A ê e n t ei ■ < S e e > 
ei • n 0 W 
B e f 0 r e T i m e 
 .  Of_ . Susan . (Eeje, Again e„, {e^  (I Agent e„ . <See> 
1 
1 
Object 
v
2
/
l
° 
2 ' ^ 3
4 
° 
3 
e3 . e3 OfQbect Susan)}' a .  b . <Utt> e . I Agent e . e During 
now . e Of_. 
b . e ByX/r 
e . e High Less-Sincere-Than.' 
Object 
•'Means 
° 
' 
<Utt>')'. 
High here is the relation of being placed high in the scale of the compara­
tive relation of being Less-Sincere-Than as confined to (human) utterings. 
At first glance (3') and (3") might appear complex. Note how simple 
they are actually, however, with each structural component of (3) merely 
spelled out explicitly, the result being merely a conjunction with some occa­
sional quantifiers — all within a first-order metalogic.9 The spelling out of 
detail here is the important item, as essential in linguistic study as in 
mathematics or physics. 
(3") can be taken as a logical form for a so-called performative utter­
ance of the kind (3). Austin himself insisted, it will be recalled10, that per­
formative utterances "do not themselves report facts [whatever they are] 
and are not themselves true or false." In a way he is right, b being an occa­
sion sentence, not an eternal one. Occasion sentences, it will be recalled, 
are true only relative to the speaker (and perhaps act of utterance). 

HUSSERL'S PARTS AND WHOLES 
183 
Nonetheless Austin's account is too simple, for sentences of the form (3") 
can be true or false in a quite straightforward sense. Either my promise 
takes place or it does not. Just what the criterion for its taking place is, we 
are not told. "The words have to be said in the appropriate circumstances 
[p. 223].... But one thing we must not suppose is that what is needed in 
addition to the saying of the words in such cases is the performance of some 
internal spiritual act, of which the words are then to be the report." No, not 
the report, but the means. "It is better . . . to stick to the old saying that our 
word is our bond." Yes, but our bond is more than our word.11 
In addition to the event-descriptive predicates note the many relations 
needed in (3"): the relation for agency, the three temporal relations, and so 
on. Are all of these "dependency" relations? In one sense, yes — in the 
sense that they are all governed by law, i.e., by the meaning-postulates con­
cerning them. All non-logical relations are dependency-relations in this 
sense. And also in another sense: if e is said to take place now, i.e., to bear 
the relation During to the present moment, e depends upon the present 
moment for its temporal location. If I am the agent of e, e depends upon me 
for its character as something done by me. In general, if x bears R to y, x 
may be said to depend /?-wise upon y, and y to depend converse-7^-wise 
upon x. Of course, this broad sense of dependency is not the one of Hus­
serl, which requires additional factors. If at any point such factors are 
needed, they may be brought in. 
It looks as though Husserl, and Mulligan in his wake, is confusing 
dependency with relationality. Relations are indispensable in linguistics as 
elsewhere. And we must construe relations severally, not collectively as 
Husserl and Mulligan do, symbolizing each one and allowing it to do the 
work assigned to it. We must not lump vast congeries of relations together 
under some grand rubic. The analysis of the language of mathematics, as 
given, say in Principia Mathematica, could not have succeeded if Whitehead 
and Russel had not developed an extensive symbolism for various kinds of 
relations and then shown in detail how they are needed, over and over 
again, in the symbolization of mathematical notions. The same is true of 
linguistics, with the difference that the latter is vastly more complicated. 
The enumeration of the kinds of relations needed for it has just begun, 
although before too long we may well have the results of a first approxima­
tion. 
It is much to Mulligan's credit that he calls attention to the need for 
relations in the analysis of linguistic structure. In particular, relations for 

184 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
various syntactical (based on concatenation), semantical (based on Des and 
Under), and pragmatical notions are needed. Metalogic — logical semiotics 
— thus becomes an essential ingredient of language study, each natural lan­
guage containing its own metalanguages (according to Zellig Harris). It is 
also good for Mulligan to observe that "in most languages speakers distin­
guish, in their speaking and understanding, between (at least) enduring 
substances, punctual events, extended processes, and enduring states." He 
claims, further, however, "that these distinctions all rest on relations of 
constituency and dependence: events, procession and states on substances; 
the beginnings and endings of processes on events; any state or process can 
be fragmented into its constituent phrases or portions; substances have 
other substances and may also have events and processes as parts." And so 
on. Are there, then, no events, processes, or states not "depending" on 
substances? Pace, then, all process philosophy of Whiteheadian type. Are 
not the middles of processes also events? Are not all processes events? If a 
substance undergoes an event, is it not better to say that that event is of that 
substance, or an event occurring to it, rather than a part of it? Again, Mul­
ligan is stretching 'part' beyond its normal limits. Mereology has an impor­
tant enough role to play as is; it should not be forced to usurp the roles 
played by the general theory of relations. 
Are all "constituency" relations to be handled mereologically? By no 
means; each type should be given its own vocabulary. Thus, contrary to 
Mulligan, the letter 't' is not strictly a part of the word 'the'; rather it is a 
concatenate of it. No one would dream of calling 3 a "part" of (7-^3), say; 
no, it is the denominator or divisor. Nor is 7 a "part" of the number (7 + 3). 
Nor is an utterance of a sentence of the form (3) a "part" of a promising. 
No, it is rather the (or a) means by which the promising takes place. And so 
on and on. 
One final comment, concerning the "claim" and "obligation" involved 
in an act of promising. In what sense should these be regarded as "parts" of 
the promising? As temporal parts, perhaps, the two being "mutually depen­
dent", as Mulligan notes. In what sense? we may ask. Perhaps in the sense 
stated, that two such "states" always begin any act of promising. That this 
is the case could then be laid down in a meaning-postulate. 
Mulligan is surely correct in claiming that the "apparatus of set-theory" 
is both "alien and descriptively inadequate" for the purposes of founding a 
viable mereology and/or linguistic theory. It would have been interesting to 
have been given his reasons. In V above we have seen that set-theory is in 

HUSSERL'S PARTS AND WHOLES 
185 
a way even alien to mathematics, and in X that it contains so many internal 
difficulties as to be unacceptable outside of mathematics. And, of course, it 
is "descriptively" inadequate outside of mathematics, for any purpose what­
soever, without the addition of a very considerable supply of non-logical 
constants. 


CHAPTER FIFTEEN 
On compound individuals and the languages 
of science 
"It is evident that scientists and philosophers 
can help each other. For the scientist some­
times wants a new idea, and the philosopher 
is enlightened as to meanings by the study of 
scientific consequences/1 
Whitehead 
In a recent paper1, the eminent chemist Joseph Earley has pleaded in effect 
for an articulated metaphysics providing for the notion of a compount indi­
vidual. And well he might, for one must search far and wide for such, all 
done up with the necessary refinement of detail we now expect in any orig­
inal metaphysical writing. If we are content to let our metaphysics just 
revolve around the views of some great philosopher of the past or near-
past, we ordinarily seek no greater precision — or lack of it — than he did. 
And many metaphysicians do tend to rest content with the metaphysics of 
the past. When I was an undergraduate at Harvard, I remember asking Pro­
fessor Demos's permission to write a senior honors-paper on Whitehead. 
"No," was his answer, "the philosopher you write about must be well-
dead." What a pity, I thought; Professor Demos does not realize that 
metaphysics is a subject very much alive, and that the last word about it has 
not been said. And so it is with the notion of the compound individual. Not 
only has the last word about it not been said; we scarcely have a reliable 
first word to help get us started on the right track. And such first words as 
we do have seem to have been largely neglected, i.e., those provided by 
mereology or the calculus of individuals. 
Let us recall the extended mereology — or mutatis mutandis, homol­
ogy — of V, which, if we disregard for the moment the ordinal individuals, 
is a one-sorted theory, and the basic part-whole relation P has the cardinal 

188 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
entities as its relata. For purposes of application to the language of any 
branch of empirical science, however, it is usually convenient to subdivide 
the basic entities into many different sorts. As Earley notes: "Macroscopic 
entities of everyday experience (including ourselves) are made up of mic­
roscopic and sub-microscopic components: brain-cells, molecules, atoms, 
hadrons, quarks, ...." Do we wish this list to be arranged in a descending 
order, so that an entity of a given kind is a part of an entity of a kind men­
tioned earlier in the list? No, this would be much too simple. The various 
kinds of entities any science treats of bear very complex relations to each 
other — as indeed do the entities of any one kind. And what, anyhow, is a 
kind, and how do the individuals of a kind interrelate to constitute a kind? 
Following the eminent logician Hao Wang2, let us speak of a many-
sorted theory as follows. "Certain axiomatic systems involve more than one 
category of fundamental objects; for example, points, lines, and planes in 
geometry; individuals, classes of individuals, etc., in the theory of types. It 
is natural to use variables of different kinds with their ranges respectively 
restricted to different categories of objects, .... As an alternative way, we 
may also formulate a system involving several categories of fundamental 
objects by using merely one kind of variables which have the sum of all the 
categories as their range of values. The simplest way to bring in the distinc­
tion of categories is to introduce n one-place predicates 'S ', 'S ', ..., 'S ', 
[quotes added] such that x belongs to the z'-th category if and only if S x." 
Let us use Wang's notion here in reflecting upon a many-sorted mereology. 
The theory of V made much of unit entities, and these in effect consti­
tuted a sort. The units are the indivisibilia of the theory. From a general 
metaphysical point of view, the assumption of such entities might he 
thought dubious. Perhaps there are no indivisible elements; perhaps the 
most fundamental objects are continua of some kind, such as waves or 
forces or pulses of energy. In any case, it might be thought, a mereology 
adequate for the logical foundations of any science should not rule out the 
possibility of their being no indivisibilia at all. Let us therefore drop the 
units of the theory of V, and in their place allow for many sorts of objects. 
Let'S ', ..., 'Sn' be the primitive predicates for the many sorts, their precise 
character being studied in the given science. 
The various Boolean notions are still available in the mereology with­
out units. Thus, given any entity or "individual" of the sort S , Boolean 
sums of such individuals are available. Such sums are in effect "collectives" 
of individuals of the sort. Let us define 

COMPOUND INDIVIDUALS AND THE LANGUAGES OF SCIENCE 189 
'CollS. x' 
as 
'((Ey)(S. y . y P x) . (y)(y P x ID (Ez)(Ew)(S. z . z 
Px . vvPz . wPy)))', 
to express that x is a sum of individuals of the sort S. . This obtains just 
where some S is a part of x, every part of x having a part in common with 
some S. that is a part of x. The definiendum here also could be written as 
'CompSInd x\ 
expressing that x is a compound individual of the sort S.. Even the whole 
sort is a compound individual in the sense that that individual is the fusion 
(in the familiar sense of the calculus of individuals) of that sort, where 
'FuS. JC' is defined as 
\{y){S.  = y P x) . (y)(v P x ZD 
(Ez)(Ew)(S. z . z P x . w P z . w P y)))'. 
Clearly for each S it is assumed that 
\-(px)S.x', 
otherwise there would be not point of introducing 'S.' in the first place. It 
then follows of course that 
bO)(FuS.x => CollS. JC). 
Although no "units" have been needed in order to define these — and 
indeed other — Boolean notions, we could take S as the units if desired. In 
any case with or without units a many-sorted mereology gives us a way of 
aggregating individuals within a given sort so as form compound individuals 
of that sort. It is not clear that any other clear-cut method of forming com­
pound individuals has ever been put forward. To be sure, for centuries 
there has been loose talk, both in metaphysics and in the sciences, about 
parts and wholes, but with almost no background theory to provide for it. 
We should then, no doubt, welcome many-sorted mereology with open 
arms as giving us a foundation for something we thought we had had all 
along. 
Concerning each S., of course, a great deal has to be said, and some of 
this will be in terms of individuals of the other sorts. We could not get very 
far in a theory of physical atoms without a good deal of prior talk about 
protons, electrons, and so on. And in all this, of course, a great deal must 
be made of the relations needed. Relations are forthcoming in full supply as 
values for variables in ordinal mereology, so that the problem for each S is 
to pick out such fundamental or primitive relations as are needed to charac­
terize the S-individuals and their behavior relative to one another and rela-
i 

190 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
tive to individuals of the other sorts. 
All the compound individuals or collectives admitted thus far have 
been of entities of the same sort. Nothing rules out the admission of com­
pounds of entities of different sorts, however, which might be useful for 
some purposes. Let /  ;', so that S. and S. are mutually exclusive sorts. 
Then we may let 
'CompS.SInd x' 
abbreviate 
'((Ey)((S. y v S. y) . v P x) . (y)(y 
P I D (Ez)(Evv)(((S. z v S z ) . z P * . w P z . w P y)))', 
to express that x is a compound individual of individuals of the two sorts. 
And similarly for compounds of individuals of any three sorts, and so on. 
In a many-sorted, ordinal mereology we have the wherewithal now to 
talk of S-individuals and of compounds or collectives of such in the same 
breath, so to speak, and on the basis of a unified ontology. We are in a posi­
tion to interrelate the behavior of an individual with that of a compound in 
whatever way the science at hand requires. Consider biology, for example, 
and the problem of what the units of evolutionary selections are. As Earley 
points our, Dawkins takes the gene as fundamental, Lewontin the indi­
vidual, Wynne-Edwards the species. But all of these factors play some role 
or other, surely, as E.O. Wilson has emphasized. The problem of determin­
ing the precise role of these and other factors is not a metaphysical problem 
but one internal to evolutionary biology itself; it is a matter of specifying 
the appropriate relations each bears to each. 
A valuable, but much neglected, beginning toward formulating some 
of the notions needed in any language that talks of evolution, is to be found 
in Appendix  to J.H. Woodger's Tarner Lectures.3 There, it will be recal­
led, the notion of an "evolutionary relation" was introduced in terms of 
prior notions of a "taxonomie set," a "P-line," and a relation of "joining" P-
lines. P here is the relation of parent to offspring, a most fundamental one 
surely in all evolutionary study. A taxonomie set is any species, genus, fam­
ily, sub-genus, and so on. A P-line — finite, with a beginning and an end — 
is any sub-relation of P such that there is a one-one relation R whose final 
term (or relatum) is reached in a finite number of 7?-steps from its first term 
(or referent).4 For the relation of joining, we may let ^{R,X,Y)' 
express 
that R is a line, X and Y are taxonomie sets, and the beginner of R is a 
member of X but not of Y, and the end term of R is a member of Y but not 
ofX. 
A given taxonomie set X stands in an "evolutionary relation" E to a 

COMPOUND INDIVIDUALS AND THE LANGUAGES OF SCIENCE 
191 
taxonomie set  now, just where there is some P-line R such that 
J(R,X,Y). 
E would seem to be the fundamental relation of any theory of evolution, no 
matter what its details might be or what units of selection are taken to be 
the fundamental ones. The problem of formulating a theory of evolution is 
now one of laying down postulationally the specific properties E is sup­
posed to have. Such postulates would help to make precise the role that 
genes, individuals, species, and so on, all play in evolutionary development. 
Woodger suggests tentatively several such postulates, by way of a first 
attempt to supply such. 
Note that Woodger's work is couched in the language of set-theory. 
With only slight changes, the essentials of it may be reformulated in 
mereological terms. In place of a taxonomie set, let us speak of a taxonomie 
collective, and all talk of relations may be carried out in terms of ordinal 
individuals and Boolean sums of them, as in V. A "member" of a 
taxonomie compound S is then any S that is a part of it. Woodger's J in 
turn can be handled then as a Boolean sum of all triples (r9 ord (x ord y)), 
where x and y are taxonomie collectives and r2 an appropriate sum of ordi­
nal individuals the ordinands of which are collectives. And similarly, as 
needed, for the relation E. In this way we see that evolutionary theory can 
be handled as well in mereology as in the more usual set-theoretic mold. 
(Woodger himself, incidentally, who made much of mereology in his earlier 
work on embryology and cytology, would very much have welcomed the 
extensions of it that allow the simple treatment of relations needed here.) 
Woodger's work has opened the door to a kind of mathematical-logical 
theory of evolution. The work of M.B. Williams, Aristid Lindenmayer, and 
others, carries on where Woodger left off. For present purposes, let us 
reflect very briefly on the paper by Williams given at the Salzburg Congress 
in July, 1983.5 She discusses "the two most central philosophical problems: 
(1) what is the relationship of the various entities involved in selection (e.g. 
gene, organism, species) to the fundamental laws of the theory?, and (2) 
how are the 'levels of selection' related to the fundamental laws of the 
theory?" How good to focus immediately on the laws of the theory — with­
out which we have no theory — and upon the relations needed to frame 
those laws. "Biologists have frequently assumed that there is one funda­
mental entity {the unit of selection) such that the effects of selection on any 
other entity is the result of its effects on this fundamental entity." Williams 
thinks this assumption is an error. She goes on to speak of an "axiomatiza-
tion" of the theory and of various "models" of it, where it would perhaps 

192 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
have been more helpful to have developed a unified theory in which all the 
models are incorporated. Each can then be studied in its own terms and 
interrelated with the others. Situations in which the "group" or "deme" or 
"generation deme pool" (Wade), the "altrustic trait" or "kin-group" 
(Hamilton), the "gene" or "gene-pool" (Fisher), "chromosome", and so 
on, were relevant could all be handled separately, as well as jointly, within 
a unified theory. Every kind of selection-process can then be studied in its 
own terms and not confused with those appropriate for another. The ter­
minology used for any one is "relative to the evolutionary problem being 
investigated," as surely it should be. 
In speaking of evolutionary processes, 'process' should be taken seri­
ously. Processes should not be confused with the entities undergoing pro­
cess or change or whatever. For many purposes, it is convenient to recog­
nize events in general, including acts, states, processes, changes, and so on, 
as values for variables. Let 
'<BProc> e' 
express that e is a biological process, where '<BProc>' is an event-descrip­
tive predicate. Individuals, genes, chromosomes, and so on, all enter into 
biological processes in complex ways. The recognition of many types of 
such processes as fundamental entities of the theory would seem a useful 
adjunct, and enables us to express much that cannot be expressed otherwise 
— i.e., unless times themselves are admitted. (Woodger's own method was 
to include a special temporal relation T.) Among these the selection-process 
would be of major importance. Let 
(1) 
'<Sel> e' 
express that e is such a process. What entity selects what, when, and where 
along a given evolutionary line? The use of (1) would seem essential for any 
precise terminology in which such matters may be discussed. 
Let us reflect for a moment now on Werner Leinfellner's work on the 
evolution of intelligence.6 For this, fundamental use of processes must be 
made, even of mental processes, which cannot be "reduced" to brain-states 
— in any easy-going way anyhow. "Intelligence" Leinfellner regards as "the 
degree of efficiency of cooperation of four factors when solving problems." 
These are, roughly, a "sensorium or information input-device; a memory or 
storage device for input-output information and successfully played games, 
a computing or inferring system, and a motoricum or realizing device." The 
theory of all of these needs a careful looking at. It would seem almost 

COMPOUND INDIVIDUALS AND THE LANGUAGES OF SCIENCE 193 
unthinkable that it could be formulated without the linguistic resources of 
an event-logic. Any theory of "problem solving" is a theory of a kind of 
mental activity in which declarative sentences (concerning the "options" 
open) are compared with each other in various ways. Leinfellner makes 
fundamental use of game-theoretical methods, and these too seem best for­
midable in act- or event-theoretic terms.7 
Mention of mental events leads us back to Earley's paper. Especially 
important for him is "the problem of the compound individual." What, 
after all, is this problem? Presumably it is this: when is an individual of any 
sort to be taken as an indivdual simpliciter and when as a compound? Ear-
ley attributes to Whitehead the view "there is no univocal resolution to the 
problems of the compound individual. No entity is, simply, one. There are 
no 'elementary' entities: everything is, in some sense, composite. Every one 
is, somehow, many. There is no level of entity that is, univocally, funda­
mental.... If there is no one level (spatial or temporal) of entity that is non-
composite, is there some kind of interrelation of parts that gives rise to unifi­
cation that merits 'metaphysical status'?" But for Whitehead, surely, the 
"actual entities" are univocally fundamental, to say nothing of the eternal 
objects. Each and every AE is "one," but either prehends or is prehended 
by other AE's. Each EO is "one" but is prehended by AE's and bears var­
ious logical relations with other EO's. Prehension and ingression are 
Whitehead's wherewithal for providing the kind of unification of entities 
that merits metaphysical status. 
This, however, is not Earley's view. He contends, rather, that "an 
entity should be regarded, metaphysically, as one entity if, and to the extent 
that, it interacts with particular percipients as unified." The sun, for exam­
ple, he states, "is a structure, ... one that necessarily involves net produc­
tion of entropy, and concomitant interaction with the rest of the uni­
verse.... The sun has [as] much claim to be considered, metaphysically, as 
one entity as has any other candidate for the status (any human person, any 
miniscule space-time region). The sun, as a unified whole, makes a differ­
ence for the rest of the world in virtue of its output (which depends on its 
interpersonal processes): that output is sufficiently stable that other entities 
can adjust themselves to its existence...." But cannot similar contention be 
made of every physico-chemical entity whatsoever? All interact with "perci­
pients" as unified; all make a difference with the rest of the world; other 
entities adjust themselves to their existence. And what, anyhow, is a "perci­
pient," metaphysically regarded? Merely one of the relata of the relations 

194 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
expressing the interactions. 
In speaking of wholes and parts, much would seem to depend upon the 
context of discussion and the way in which given entities are spoken of. In 
a sentence of the form 
'M(S (/+1)* ^ ~x~)\ 
the S 
-individuals are spoken of as wholes. But suppose now that every 
S 
individual is a compound of S.-individuals. In the sentence 
c(x)(CompS.Ind x = 
-x-)\ 
the S 
-individuals are spoken of as compound S.-individuals. Both modes 
of locutions are useful, but one kind may be appropriate in one context, the 
other in another. If we wish to speak in both ways in one and the same sen­
tence, we may bring in the Under relation used previously.8 Where 
'x Under A' 
e 
expresses that x is taken under the one-place predicate a in the intentional 
act e, we might have both that 
(x Undere 'S,.+1 ' . x Undere, 'CompSInd'). 
x may be taken under both descriptions without contradiction in separate 
intentional acts e and e'. 
Another interesting use of the theory of mereological sums is in the 
handling of biological species, concerning which there has been much 
recent discussion. In several important papers9, David Hull has been urging 
that biological species be regarded as "spatio-temporally localized individu­
als," rather than as classes, expecially for the purposes of a theory of evolu­
tion. Hull does not quite say so, but such "individuals" are no common run-
of-the-mill things, but "compound" individuals in essentially the sense dis­
cussed here. The details needed to substantiate this contention remain to be 
worked out, as do the details for evolutionary theory generally. This latter, 
as Hull remarks, "is currently undergoing a period of rapid development. 
But in the process several problems have cropped up that are proving to be 
infuriatingly difficult to resolve.... In the present case, I think two assump­
tions are at fault: (a) the view that genes and organisms are "individuals" 
while populations and species are "classes," and (b) our traditional way of 
organizing phenomena into a hierarchy of genes, cells, organisms, kinship 
groups, populations, species, and ecosystems or communities." If species 
can be handled as compound individuals or mereological sums, then so 

COMPOUND INDIVIDUALS AND THE LANGUAGES OF SCIENCE 195 
surely can these other kinds of entities in the hierarchy. Here, again, the 
details remain to be worked out in terms of the entire vocabularly needed 
in which the full theory can be formulated. Here is another item to be 
added to Hull's list of faulty assumptions: (c) the view that the language in 
which evolutionary theory is formulated does not itself need a thorough 
logical overhauling from the ground up. On the contrary, it does, and the 
cogency of Hull's contentions can best be seen by incorporating them 
within the results of such an overhauling. The three faulty assumptions go 
hand in hand, each requiring the other two. 
Earley comments that "both Hull and Dawkins recognize what is at 
stake in the controversy of the units of selection. The issue here is not one 
of science, but of metaphysics. Dawkins points out that the issue is "not 
how you 'say' things, but how you 'see' things." Metaphysical differences 
have consequences." Yes, of course; but in science we "say" things to 
express as accurately as we can how we "see" them. It is not in general the 
business of the logico-semiotician or methodologist, or the metaphysician, 
to step in where working biologists themselves tread lightly. No, methodol­
ogy and metaphysics provide the logico-linguistic tools, but leave it to the 
practitioners to fight out among themselves the most theoretically advan­
tageous and empirically adequate ways in which they are to be used. And, 
surely, much in the units of selection controversy must depend upon 
theoretical as well as upon laboratory or field findings, expressed in appro­
priate sentences concerning <Sel>, the process of selecting, about which 
we know much too little. 
What "consequences" now do metaphysical differences have within the 
language or languages of science? Earley suggests that "metaphysical 
hypotheses are 'testable' but the timescale for the test is at the level of gen­
erations rather than [at] the level accessible to laboratory or field 
experimentation." This is an interesting contention, but is not talk of "the 
level of generation" too dangerously close to talk of "the long run"? How 
can we get around here Maynard Keynes' jibe that in the long run we will 
all be dead — which has an ominous ring to it in this day and age of the pos­
sibility of nuclear warfare and Wheelerian "black-holes." To contend that 
science makes metaphysical assumptions needs a careful examination. 
What assumptions? we may ask. Well, the existence of individuals to talk 
about in the first place, the use of truth-functional expressions and quan­
tifiers, which are metaphysically laden notions in each context of use — to 
speak of the very least. To contend this, however, is not to specify the pre-

196 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
supposition of any particular metaphysical view, but only the presence of 
fundamental metaphysical and semiotical ingredients in the very structure 
of scientific language. Perhaps it would be better to speak of pro-
tometaphysics here, the mere antechamber, as it were, rather than of 
metaphysics proper.10 The protometaphysics of science may be thought to 
consist of the semiotical theory governing the notation and the way in which 
the notation relates to the entities talked about. It is this sort of thing to 
which Whitehead was referring when he commented that "the philosopher 
is enlightened as to meanings by the study of the scientific consequences." 
Earley comments that "activity requires interaction; interaction 
requires transfer of components between parties to the interaction. 
Relationship requires some degree of constancy. Temporally-extended 
multi-party interactions are possible to the extent that other connections 
[relations] sustain participants of the interaction. Resources for interaction 
must be supplied by others. Structures depend for continued activity on 
tolerance, connivance and cooperation of other structures." Group-action, 
or the action of collectives or of compound individuals, has not received the 
attention it deserves from semiotics or logico-metaphysics. The key prob­
lem here is the way in which group-action involves the actions of the various 
members of the group. 
Richard DeGeorge pointed out, in his Presidential Address in 1983 
before the Metaphysical Society of America11, that "when it comes to 
actions of the corporations [for example] or of states or of nations, then a 
reduction sometimes makes sense; but it is not possible to reduce the action 
of such entities in every case to the action of such individuals simplicité?', 
and in no case to the actions of individuals without also including the 
agency relation and the organizational restraints and relations." The 
agency-relation first and foremost has persons in its domain and actions in 
its couter-domain. Let 
'x Agent e' 
express that person x is the agent of e, perhaps doing e with self-conscious 
intent or at least awareness. Two or more persons, however, can be the 
agents of one and the same action. Let us consider a simple example, a saw­
ing of a tree, say, and let (x  ) be the mereological sum of persons x and 
y. Suppose the sawing is with a two-man saw with two handles and of the 
kind that cannot be used by a single person, however strong or skilled. We 
then might well say that 

COMPOUND INDIVIDUALS AND THE LANGUAGES OF SCIENCE 197 
(2) 
(<Saw> e.(xuy) 
Agent e . e OfQbject (the tree) . e WithInstrument 
(the two-man saw)), 
where we would not say that x alone is the agent of such a sawing or that y 
is. No, the agent is the mereological sum (or team) of x and y. Such usage 
is common, in which agency can be correctly ascribed to a collective of 
some kind, but not to the individuals comprising it. In describing such 
agency, however a clause is usually needed giving the instrumentality or 
means involved, or some 'how'-clause giving the manner of the action. No 
difficulty should arise in ascribing agency and the like to collectives pro­
vided the means or instruments or whatever are described. A further 
description can also be given as to just what it is that the individual person 
does when he participates in the group action. In the sawing example, x and 
y face each other, one pulls the saw while the other pushes, and so on. The 
exact logic of joint actions, doings, agency, and the like, seems not to have 
been studied at much depth, as already noted. It is good that DeGeorge has 
called attention to it and emphasized its need for social theory. And of 
course any description of how individuals act in group action would run the 
risk of being "inaccurate if it ignores the structure and organization that 
informed their actions, and the fact that they acted together."12 
Let us turn now again to many-sorted mereology, and note how well it 
accords with Abner Shimony's plea for pluralism, in his contribution to the 
Lund Workshop on Parts and Wholes.13 "Epistemological and methodolog­
ical problems concerning parts and wholes should also be treated holisti-
cally, with attention to the great differences among types of composite sys­
tems." Shimony reflects upon four types of systems: "(i) composite mic-
rophysical systems in pure quantum states; (ii) microphysical systems 
undergoing phase transitions; (Hi) organic cells considered as cybernetic 
systems; (iv) typical human societies." He shows convincingly the many-
sortedness of each of these systems. The problem of formulating any such 
system mereologically is left open, but no doubt could be carried out with a 
suitable choice of primitive S.'s and relations concerning them and inter­
relating entities of one type with those of another. 
As over and against scientific pluralism, there is always the haunting 
problem of the unity of science — or at least of the unity of scientific lan­
guage. It is here, perhaps more than anywhere else, that metaphysics steps 
in. One of the great functions of metaphysics, throughout the ages, has 
been unificatory. Piece-meal systems are splendid for special scientific pur­
poses, but never quite suffice for an over-arching metaphysical scheme. The 

198 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
question arises as to whether a many-sorted mereological system can be 
envisaged to include the various special scientific ones. Envisagement is far 
from explicit formulation, and this latter is not easy to come by even in the 
special sciences. It is commonly assumed, however, in methodology and the 
study of the logic of the sciences, that such formulation is possible; and 
there is surely abundant evidence in support of it. Well, if so, why can we 
not then extend our many-sorted mereology to embrace the many-sorted 
theories required for the special sciences? The broad outline of such a 
theory is clear enough — merely let our sorts now be handled by a list Sv 
..., S , T , ..., T , U , ..., U^, and so on, together with the requisite primi­
tive relations. The envisagement of such a theory is no more or less specula­
tive than the envisagement of a unified theory for any special science; it is 
merely a kind of "summation" of such. The underlying ontology of any 
metaphysical, many-sorted mereology of this kind would then be wholly 
determined by the ontologies of the special sciences. And of course there 
would be much overlap here, and some "reduction" would be appropriate, 
both as concerns the basic sorts and the relations required. 
Once all this is said and done, it might be urged, the real problems of 
metaphysics have scarcely been touched. Metaphysical "holism" is the view 
that all the sorts of entities required in the sciences, and indeed in the study 
of values, the arts, history, and so on, are all "reducible" to some one basic 
sort or "stuff" or whatever. Holism in this strict sense is a view that tran­
scends all the special kinds of study it includes. If metaphysics is possible — 
as many of us believe it to be — it is an holistic enterprise differing in 
important ways from more special kinds of study. 
Shimony comments that "for many years Whitehead's philosophy of 
organism and the related monadology of Leibnitz seemed promising to me, 
but perhaps their obscurities outweigh their promise." And, again, in his 
sequel14, Shimony comments that "the program of physicalistic explanation 
of mental phenomena seems to me hopeless....Whitehead's philosophy of 
organism offers a possible solution to the problem.... [It provides] a theory 
which accounts coherently for both the manifestly animate and apparently 
non-animate sectors of the great chain of being, as the theory of evolution 
demands. Whitehead's account commands respect in spite of great difficul­
ties in it." Shimony himself has explored deeply some of these difficulties as 
regards quantum mechanics.15 
One of the most basic problems in the Whiteheadian scheme concerns 
the way in which the AO's, the actual occasions, form nexus, enduring 

COMPOUND INDIVIDUALS AND THE LANGUAGES OF SCIENCE 199 
occasions, multiplicities, societites, and the like. What now is a nexus? 
Recall Whitehead's comments (Process and Reality, p. 29) that "actual 
entities involve each other by reason of their prehensions of each other. 
There are thus real individual facts of the togetherness of actual entities, 
which are real, individual, and particular, in the same sense [italics added] in 
which actual entities and the prehensions are real, individual, and particu­
lar. Any such particular fact of togetherness among actual entities is called 
a 'nexus' (plural form is written 'nexus')...." Again, according to the four­
teenth Category of Explanation (p. 35), a nexus is "a set of actual entities 
[— a set, note —] in the unity of the relatedness constituted by their pre­
hensions of each other...." A multiplicity (a "pure disjunction of diverse 
entities") (p. 36) "consists of many entities, and its unity is constituted by 
the fact that all its constituent entities severally satisfy at least one condition 
that no other entity satisfies." A "society" (p. 50) is "a nexus with social 
order" and an '"enduring object', or 'enduring creature', is a society whose 
social order has taken the special form of 'personal order'." 
Let us not worry here about the characteristics of social and personal 
order — which may readily be handled relationally — but rather about the 
ontology status of nexus in Whitehead's scheme. We cannot identify them 
with "facts of togetherness" in any strict sense unless such facts themselves 
are fundamental in the cosmos for Whitehead, which they are not. Nor are 
they just AO's simpliciter, although they do consist no doubt of some AO's 
taken somehow as "together." They cannot be sets or classes — contrary to 
the fourteenth Category of Explanation — for these latter are presumably 
to be handled as EO's. (Whitehead's use of 'set' here is the common, naive 
one of mathematicians at the turn of the century before any sophisticated 
use of it came on the market. It should not be taken as a technical term in 
the present context.) The fact is, it seems, that Whitehead needs a new 
logico-metapysical notion here, in order to be able to form a nexus from its 
constituent AO's. A nexus must be "real, individual, and particular, in the 
same sense in wich actual entities and the prehensions are...." If a nexus 
were a "set" it would have to be "real, individual, and particular" in a very 
different sense. The Boolean sums of mereology can provide for these. 
Nexus thus become suitable sums of AO's, not just any sums, but those 
exhibiting a suitable togetherness "by reason of their prehensions of each 
other." Multiplicities are nexus of AO's satisfying some given condition. 
Let 
(xl-x-) 

200 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
be the mereological sum of all Boolean units x satisfying the condition that 
-x--. The AE's function in Whitehead's system as the Boolean units do in 
mereology so that (xl--x~) — for appropriate '--*--' — is a multiplicity. Its 
constituent units satisfy severally the condition that --x--, and no other units 
do — for if they did they would be unit parts of (xl~x~) and would thus 
satisfy the condition that —x--. Likewise societies and enduring objects may 
be handled mereologically by bringing in the relations determining the 
order involved. 
It might appear that we are forcing the modern calculus of individuals, 
or mereology, upon Whitehead's text. But no. It was my good fortune to 
have been a direct student of Whitehead during his very last year of teach­
ing. The calculus of individuals was being much discussed at that time. The 
Polish logician Lesniewski had already published his work on the subject in 
1927-1931.16 Independently of this, another rendering of the calculus of 
individuals was put foreward by Henry Leonard in his doctoral thesis in 
1930, a later version of which was published in 1940 by him and Nelson 
Goodman.171 recall mentioning this work to Professor Whitehead during a 
private conversation at his home. He expressed interest in it and clearly 
sensed its philosophic importance. My feeling was, moreover, that he 
thought it would have been useful for him in writing Process and Reality. 
He did not explicitly say this, but merely hinted at it. 
The logical scheme underlying the Whiteheadian cosmology can 
perhaps be best viewed not just in terms of the theory of types, as usually 
done18, but as involving a mereology as well. And, in fact, as we have seen 
in V above, even the theory of types itself can be viewed as contained 
implicitly in an extended mereology. In fact, the whole Whiteheadian 
scheme could now be construed as an extended mereology with suitable 
provision made for the other Categories of Existence. 'Prehension' for 
Whitehead is a kind of blanket term for all manner of relations, and these 
are well provided in the scheme here. And of course relations play a central 
role in modern mathematics, as Whitehead and Russell were the first to 
show in explicit form. In place of 'prehension', it is often helpful, in reading 
Whitehead, to ask: what prehension, what "fact of relatedness"? In Prin­
cipia Mathematica the types of relatedness are always well-specified, but 
not always so in Process and Reality. I once asked Whitehead; Why not? 
His answer was that he came to professional philosophy too late in his life, 
and that he must leave such quasi-mathematical details to younger scholars. 
We must thus never forget for a moment that, as Victor Lowe has put it19, 

COMPOUND INDIVIDUALS AND THE LANGUAGES OF SCIENCE 201 
"the only possible answer to the question, [Was Whitehead primarily a] 
Mathematician or Philosopher? is: At all times, both." And in fact, the 
two strands of Whitehead's thought were so intimately intertwined all his 
life, that we cannot understand one without understanding the other. 
In his concluding comments at the Lund Workshop, Patrick Suppes 
noted that "like so many other concepts in science and philosophy, the 
shimmering beauty of some clear and simple notion is forever appealing 
and seductive. In fact, in many cases it may remain an ideal always and 
everywhere, never to be realized but always to be sought after. I am for the 
delicate dance from parts to wholes and back again. We should not be cap­
tured at either end. The dance should go on forever." And indeed it will. In 
some choreographic contexts it is a solo or a pas de deux or trois that is 
appropriate, and in others the full corps de ballet. 
Another kind of delicate dance, implicit in the foregoing discussion, is 
the Whiteheadian one between "the 'genetic-functional' interpretation of 
first principles and the 'mathematical-formal' interpretation."20 "John 
Dewey has asked me to decide between [them] ...," Whitehead writes. 
"But I must decline to make this decision. The beauty of philosophy is its 
many facets. Our present problem is the fusion of the two interpretations. 
The historic process of the world, which requires the genetic-functional 
interpretation also requires for its understanding some insight into those 
[mathematical-formal] ultimate principles of existence which express the 
necessary connections [or relations] within the flux." Here too the dance 
between these two "interpretations" should and will go on forever. The sec­
ret is in achieving the appropriate balance to the neglect of neither. At the 
moment, in metaphysical writing as well as in the theory of parts and 
wholes, it is the mathematic-formal that is the more neglected. This is a 
pity, and indeed most contrary to Whitehead's own admonitions as well as 
actual practice. 
It must not be thought the mereological handling of compound indi­
viduals is a cure-all for all scientific and philosophic problems concerned 
with them. Not at all. The mereological treatment merely helps us to view 
them in clearer focus than heretofore and in terms of an exact framework 
where previously we had none. Like St. Augustine on time, we think we 
know what compound individuals are until we being to ask searching ques­
tions about them. The point of this paper has been merely to urge that the 
inclusion of mereology within our underlying logico-metaphysical apparatus 
is methodologically important and valuable. 


CHAPTER SIXTEEN 
On Weiss's early papers in logic 
"Nee temere, nee timide." 
In all logico-philosophical writing we must be careful to distinguish logical 
from epistemic matters. To be clear about the former is a sine qua non for 
becoming clear about the latter. Likewise a considerable mastery of mathe­
matical technique is needed for the former, without which little progress 
can be made. A pianist cannot hope to perform Beethoven's Opus 111, say, 
without years and years of patient, laborious practice, starting with scales 
and arpeggios and slowly working up to the mastery of delicate matters con­
cerned with pedalling, tone-color, phrasing, and so on. The logician's 
technique consists of mastery of symbolization and of how signs or symbols 
relate to whatever it is that is symbolized — in short, of logical semiotics. 
Very important here is the distinction between the use and mention of 
expressions and between a language and its metalanguages. Also the logi­
cian must have a robust sense of the character of the objects symbolized, 
lest all manner of will-o-the-wisps lure him into their net unwittingly. 
A remarkable fact about technique is that it reveals its secrets only to 
the initiate. The unwary listener may or may not be able to tell the differ­
ence between a performer with a technique adequate for the task at hand 
and one who lacks it. Sometimes one's aim may be far beyond what one's 
technique is capable of. The performer's aim may be admirable, but the 
means for achieving it may not have been sufficiently mastered. One may 
have an important idea, but not have tarried its "cleansing," in the tren­
chant phrase of the great dancer Hanya Holm.1 And after cleansing it must 
be transformed into what is appropriate in the context. This is all very easy 
to say, but very difficult to achieve in practice. 
Let us examine Paul Weiss's "Eighteen Theses in Logic"2 of 1957, with 

204 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
an eye to getting at their central content in order to cleanse them and to 
view them in the light of recent work in semantics, pragmatics, event or 
process-logic, and the like. We will then be in a position to cast a glance at 
Weiss's early papers in logic in order to assess them in similar fashion. 
Weiss is one of the most eminent contemporary metaphysicians, and an 
assessment of his work in logic is long overdue. 
Weiss's first thesis is that "a unique characterization is a predicate, not 
an attribute," and the discussion centers in part around * 14.02 of Principia 
Mathematica. This, it will be recalled, is that 
E!(U)(0JC) . = : (Eb):0x ,=x.x 
= b Df. 
Weiss takes this as an assertory "proposition" whereas actually it is merely 
a definition of notational abbreviation. Thus, strictly, it "asserts" nothing at 
all. Instead of upon *14.02, Weiss is reflecting upon *14.11, the theorem 
based on *14.02 with '=' replacing the ' = — Df sign. He comments that "if 
by a "value which satisfies a function" is meant an "existent value", the 
Principia Mathematica [*14.11] asserts nothing but a harmless tautology; 
but if it is intended to affirm that if there be one and only one value ... 
[satifying a given function], that value does in fact exist the way horses or 
tables do, it surely is in error." This contention seems to rest upon a misun­
derstanding. *14.02 and *14.11 are concerned with the "existence" of 
specific objects, not with horses or tables in general. We must distinguish 
between 
'()-' 
and 
'E!(IX)HJC', 
expressing, respectively, that there is at least one horse and that there is 
one and only one horse. *14.11 is in fact a harmless tautology of the system. 
'Exists', if used as a technical word, is to apply to the objects taken as val­
ues for the variables of that system in some given "interpretation." The 
logician's use of 'exists' is not to be distinguished from that of the 
metaphysician. That of the former is to indicate existence internal to the 
system, so to speak, that of the latter existence, howsoever construed, 
internal to the metaphysical system. 
By way of an example, let us reflect a little on Peirce's horse Cora, say, 
and let 
'Corap' 
abbreviate 
'(IJC)(HX . x Owned by P. in 1920)'. 
In PM-ese, if we assume that the requisite predicates are available, it holds 
that E!Corap, provided that Peirce's horse Cora is taken as one of the val-

WEIS'S EARLY PAPERS IN LOGIC 
205 
ues for the variables of the system. If not, not. Corap remains, however, in 
either case, a "real entity, existent in a hurly-burly universe, streaked with 
contingency." Weiss thinks that any such entity "will be distinct from itself 
as symbolized in logic or mathematics no matter how precise and inclusive 
the symbolized form be. A value, a logically proper name, a unique 
description applicable to a real being, are all distinct from what exists apart 
from them." But note here the failure to distinguish between use and men­
tion. The "value" here is the entity Cora, which is not the same as 'Corap', 
the name of Cora. Names and definite descriptions can, however, be applic­
able to and uniquely describe real, hurly-burly beings. And it is a mere 
truism that real beings "are all distinct from what exists apart from them," 
where 'exists apart from' is presumably equivalent to 'exists as distinct 
from'. 
"In language or logic," Weiss goes on, "predicates, values, etc., are 
not altogether determinate; outside language or logic their counterparts are 
attributes — determinate facets of existent beings." The word 'determinate' 
here is slippery, and anyhow predicates are linguistic expressions for attri­
butes and never to be identified with attributes themselves. Of course 
things are what they are, and in language we talk about them in certain 
ways, in ways that the predicates (including relational ones) of the system 
allow. If some desired predicate is missing, add it to the primitive roster of 
predicates in order to make the system capable of achieving greater determi-
nateness of expression than before. There is no limit to this kind of exten­
sion; and meta-logical systems may be formulated even to incorporate the 
very logic of 'determines' in whatever sense Weiss is taking it. There are no 
upper bounds here to prevent such formulation. 
Weiss goes on to point out that the Aristotelian use of 'all' refers to a 
general, or "actual totality of existents," whereas for the symbolic logician, 
"'all refers to a universal, a meaning." This way of wording the matter is 
somewhat misleading. We should consider, rather, 'all' in a context 'all F' 
or 'all F's', where 'i7' is a monadic predicate. Further 'all' is not a word that, 
in any strict sense, "refers" at all. It is rather syncategorematic, and if it is 
said to refer, this must be provided by definition.3 The existential quan­
tifier, within some system — and it has no meaning outside of some system 
or other — carries the import of what we vaguely express in ordinary lan­
guage as 'there is (or exists) at least one x such that', where 'is' or 'exists' 
are taken for just the entities that are the values for the variables of that 
system. The latter are stipulated by a semantical rule specifying the objects 

206 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
intended. If no such rule is supplied — or at least in the offing — we have 
no system in any strict semiotical sense. If the rule specifies that the objects 
include just "existent" objects, in whatever sense Weiss intends, so be it. Or 
it might also specify the inclusion of "nonexistent" entities, whatever these 
are — it is up to Weiss to specify here his intent. 
Weiss comments that the symbolic logician overlooks that from 
(1) 
'All (non-existent) gryphons at Yale are men' 
we can legitimately derive 
(2) 
'Some (non-existent) gryphons at Yale are men'. 
This is not the case, of course, if the values for the variables of the system 
include only existent entities and not gryphons. To see what Weiss intends 
here, let us return to his contention that, for the symbolic logician, "'all' 
refers to a universal, a meaning," or, equivalently, that "'all' refers to an 
intellectually distinguished part of an intension or meaning." Aye, here's 
the rub: to preserve the Aristotelian inference from 'all'- to 'some'-sen-
tences, we must bring in intensions. In terms of a clear-cut theory of inten­
sions utilizing the relation Under4, let us examine Weiss's desired inference 
of 'Some (non-existent) gryphons at Yale are men' from 'All (non-existent) 
gryphons at Yale are men'. 
Let us let 
';c Under A' 
e 
express metalinguistically, as previously, that x is taken or described under 
the one-place predicate a in the "intellectual" or intentional act e. Let 'G x' 
express that is a gryphon and 'x AtLocation Yale' express that x is at the loca­
tion Yale.5 The form 
(1') 
'(*)(«)((* Undere a . '{  (G y . y AtLocation Yale)}' fl) => M *)' 
expresses then that in the act e everything taken under the description of its 
being a member of the virtual class6 of gryphons at Yale is a man. To justify 
the Aristotelian inference desired, it must be assumed that at least one 
entity — perhaps only the null entity — is taken under this description in e, 
i.e., that 
(3) 
'(Ex)(Efl)(x Undere .'{(. 
AtLocation Yale)}'*)' 
holds. From () and (3), it follows by standard logic that 
(2') 
'(Ex)(ßa)(x Undere a .'{  (G y .  AtLocatkm Yale)}'fl . M *)' 

WEIS'S EARLY PAPERS IN LOGIC 
207 
holds. Weiss's rendition of the Aristotelian form of inference is thus seen to 
be valid when construed intensionally in terms of the metalogic governing 
the relation Under, even where there are no gryphons at Yale and even no 
gryphons at Yale that are men. 
The foregoing has been couched in terms of inference, and thus () 
and (3) have been assumed to be true of e. It would be better to contend 
here only that 
41') . (3)) = (2 
is a logical truth. We can then leave aside assuming either that someone 
does or does not perform an intellectual act e satisfying () and (3). 
Weiss's second thesis is that "a "collective" disjunction is distinct from 
a "distributive" disjunction." Let us recall Aristotle's famous discussion of 
the sea-fight tomorrow (De Interpretation, 
19a 30 ff.): "A sea-fight must 
either take place tomorrow or not; but it is not necessary that it should take 
place, neither is it necessary that it should not take place, yet it is necessary 
that it either should or not should take place tomorrow." (Weiss adds 
parenthetically that the gist of the problem raised by this passage may be 
seen "perhaps more evidently" as follows: "Although it is true that I will 
either die or not die tomorrow, it is not now true that I will die tomorrow, 
nor is it now true that I will not die tomorrow...." Thus, to begin with, let us 
speak of truth here rather than of necessity.) Weiss comments that "Aristo­
tle was here distinguishing between ' or not-x)' and f(x) or /(not-x)', 
although he did not provide the logical terms with which to do it." Nor, 
alas, does Weiss. He comments that "'fix or not-x)' makes use of a collec­
tive disjunction: here x and the non-x are not separated off from one 
another; they are so separated in 'f(x) or f(not-x)' which makes use of dis­
tributive disjunction." 
To handle all this let us let 
le Occ f 
express that the event e occurs at or during the time t, and let 'today' and 
'tomorrow' be deictic expressions for today and tomorrow, respectively. 
Similarly let 
'Tr A' 
t 
express that the sentence a is true-at-time-i in the sense of a temporahzed 
semantical truth-predicate.7 We may then give the following logical form to 
Aristotle's famous statement, construing 'necessary' as 'eternally or 

208 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
tunelessly true' (i.e., 'Tr' without the subscript '¿'): 
'(Ee)(Ea)(SeaFight e . a Des e . Tr r{a Occ tomorrow v ~ a Occ 
tomorrow)"1 . ~ (Tr^ , 
ra Occ tomorrow-1 v Tr , 
r ~ a Occ 
J 
v 
Today 
today 
tomorrown))'. 
The use of the event-variable '<?' is needed to handle the sea-fight, 'Occ' to 
handle its occurrence or lack of it, the temporal expressions for the times 
involved, 'Tr' (with or without the temporal subscripts) for the two kinds of 
truth needed, and the usual truth-connectives and quantifiers. 'Des' for 
designation, the expressional variable '', and the corner-quotes are needed 
in order to avoid confusion between use and mention, ('e' is a variable not 
a constant, so that 'Tr 'e Occ tomorrow", for example, could never hold, 'e 
Occ tomorrow' being a sentential form, not a sentence, and 'Tr' being 
applicable only to sentences.) 
Note that in all this there is no need for the distinction between a "col­
lective" and a "distributive" disjunction. Weiss's forms 'ƒ(* or not-x)' and 
'ƒ(*) or /(not-x)' are too simple. "The collective disjunction occurs in the 
realm of meanings, mind, logic," he writes; "the distributive occurs in the 
realm of existence, the discrete, the exclusive.... A good logic should use 
distinct symbols for different types of disjunction. It will then perhaps be 
more evident to extensional logicians that it is not possible to derive the dis­
tributive from the collective disjunction legitimately." The germ of truth in 
these contentions seems to be that the collective disjunction is to be handled 
metalinguistically, where we mention the disjunction sign, as in 
'Tr r(a Occ tomorrow v ~ a Occ tomorrow)"1'. 
In a metalanguage we speak of "meanings" and "logic" and perhaps of 
"minds." The distributive disjunction is appropriate at the object-linguistic 
level, the realm of "existence," of the discrete entities talked about. There 
is no need to distinguish the two disjunctions, however, as Weiss does, the 
distinction he has in mind being wholly captured at the metalinguistic level. 
A better way of handling Aristotle's sea-fight tomorrow would be in 
terms of 'LTr' for L-truth. Where 'LogThm ' expresses that A is a logical 
theorem in the sense of first-order quantificational logic, we may let 
'LTr A' be short for 
'(Tr a . LogThm a)\ 
'Necessity' can then be handled by 'LTr', so that the form for the sea-fight 
sentence becomes 
'(Ee)(E¿z)(SeaFight e . a Des e . LTr r(a Occ tomorrow v ~ a Occ 

WEIS'S EARLY PAPERS IN LOGIC 
209 
tomorrow)n . ~ (LTr ra Occ tomorrown v LTr ~   tomor-
rown))'. 
This is still too simple in some respects and can be improved upon. 
Weiss's third thesis is that there is a distinction between an "exten-
sional" conjunction and an "intensional" one. He comments that "nothing 
is so simple as 'and'. Yet it is a term used in multiple ways." Yes, indeed. 
Some of these have been studied in a previous paper.8 Such study is still in 
its infancy. Here again, Weiss's distinction between two kinds of conjunc­
tion is adscititious. Many, many uses of 'and' are to be distinguished, but all 
the them may be accommodated within suitable metalanguages — even 
wholly extensional ones — in which intensions of various kinds may be 
handled. 
Weiss speaks throughout of entities such as "propositions," as many 
another writer does and has done, but without giving an analysis of their 
internal structure.9 We do not make much progress in logical and metalogi-
cal matters until we give up talk of propositions sui generis and in its place 
make fundamental use of the semantical truth-predicate and its environing 
theory. 
Weiss's fourth thesis has to do with negation, that "a negation in 
thought is distinct from a rejection in fact." Of course it is, and there are 
many, many further types of negation also to be distinguished, as we have 
observed in I above. Weiss distinguishes only three. Simple negation for 
him seems to be essentially the usual one as symbolized by '~'. Infectious 
negation is that "in which the negating transforms the idea, meaning, or 
proposition to which it is applied (and therefore precludes the use of double 
negation as a device for getting back to the original)." This explanation 
seems in need of a considerable spelling out in an intensional metalogic. 
Surely, somewhere along the line, it can be handled in terms of the various 
devices discussed in I above. And, similarly, for Weiss's third kind of nega­
tion, relational, which is said to connect "opposing entities, p x q, where q 
has the form of either an infectious or simple negation of p." This too needs 
explication in specific cases, and is probably best to be handled metalinguis-
tically. 
"The transition from one type of negation to another requires transfor­
mations which should be (but have not yet been) made the topic of 
extended logical inquiry." True, but beginnings have been made, and the 
basic notions needed for such study — including syntactical, semantical, 
and pragmatical ones — are now available. But of course we must distin-

210 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
guish, as Weiss does not, sentential negation, class- or virtual-class nega­
tion, thing-negation (as in mereology), event-negation (as in event- or prog­
ress-logic), relational or virtual relation negation, and so on and on. For 
each kind, special principles are available to characterize them. We should 
not lump them all together under some grand rubric and neglect considera­
tion of the ontic specificities of the various kinds of entities needed. 
In the fifth thesis, a distinction between "formal" and "material" impli­
cation is made, the distinction not being the usual one. "A formal implica­
tion is a structure connecting a given item in mind or language with some 
required other. The two items it connects are "at the same time," even 
when they are assigned different dates.... A material implication, in con­
trast, expresses how a potentiality in a thing will, by virtue of the structure 
of a thing and the world in which it exists, be actualized.... The distance 
between the two types of implication is traversed when we go from pure 
mathematics to physics — from a non-extended connection between mean­
ings to an extended connection between times." These contentions are in 
need of a good deal of spelling out. 
A quite new domain of applied logical theory emerges when times are 
explicitly taken to be values for variables, either primitively or by a suitable 
use of definitions. Formal implications, in Weiss's sense, can perhaps be 
regarded as being expressed with temporal quantifiers. If so, we should be 
told precisely how these quantifiers are to be allowed to occur and precisely 
what the "structure" of a formal implication is supposed to be. The only 
hint that is given is in the remark that "the astronomer now implies that the 
eclipse will take place a thousand years hence; the eclipse as taking place 
then is now understood by him the very way that he understands the pre­
miss which implicates the consequence." The astronomer states now that on 
the given evidence expressed in such and such a premiss, such and such an 
event will occur a thousand years hence. (This statement is not, note, a for­
mula of pure mathematics nor does it appear to be concerned with a "non-
extended connection between meaning.") A "material" inplication, on the 
other hand, has something to do with potentiality and "extended connec­
tions between times." That the formulae of physics are of this character is 
far from clear. 
Weiss is not one to show much respect for accepted terminology. 
Would it not have been better for him to have accepted the usual way of 
understanding formal and material implication, in terms of the PM '=', say, 
and the quantifiers? He could then have gone on to characterize his distinc-

WEIS'S EARLY PAPERS IN LOGIC 
211 
tion by bringing in explicitly the additional notions needed — times, poten­
tiality, actualization, structure, and so on. Each new item here is fraught 
with its own problems and these must be faced one by one. Divide and con­
quer should be a guiding methodological maxim here — as indeed 
überhaupt — as well as Distinguer pour mieux unir. 
The next thesis, and indeed all the remaining ones, are concerned with 
acts of inference and thinking. "Thinking," we are told, "is an act of trans­
forming an idea or judgement into another" and "is a specialized act of the 
mind which makes use of rules." The study of such acts is not strictly a part 
of logic, but rather of pragmatics, in which the human person and his rela­
tions to language are brought into consideration.10 Let 
'<Think> e' 
and 
'<Inf> e\ 
respectively, express that e is an act of thinking or of inferring. '<Think>' 
and '<Inf>' are so-called event-descriptive predicates or gerundives. Using 
these will help us to see how Weiss's further contentions may be developed 
and clarified. 
The word 'idea' is so hoplelessly obscure that it seems better to avoid 
its use altogether. Hence, for the moment at least, let us think of thinking 
and inferring as having statements, or interpreted, declarative sentences, as 
their objects. "A soul inference is a thinking which terminates in the war­
ranted qualification of an idea," Weiss tells us. Why not speak here, 
instead, of the objects or "items" qualified and insist that the inference start 
with a warranted "qualification" of such an object? More precisely, we 
could say that an inference is sound if it accords with the rules of the logic 
being employed and if its premisses are warranted as true. 
Weiss is clear in his insistence, in the eighth thesis, that "inference is 
governed by rules, conformity to which determines the warrant of a trans­
ferred or transformed quality." "An inference may ... not only transfer [a 
truth-value from premises to conclusion] but also transform ... [it]; starting 
with p as true it can, to take the simplest case, end with not-p as false." 
There are also transformations involving modal values — or, as we would 
prefer to say here, involving LTr, LFls, and FTr and FFls (logical truth, log­
ical falsehood, factual truth, and factual falsity). 
After calling attention to these, Weiss skips on to some remarks about 
"the most productive modes of inference" being "found in the arts." It 
would be interesting to have been given some examples. It is difficult 
enough to characterize the modes of inference needed in the sciences, and 
also needed in discussion about the arts. But what rules of inference are to 

212 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
be found in the arts? The use of the term 'modes of inference' here seems 
out of place. Each art may well have "a form of warranted inference pecul­
iar to it," but this is not one of inference in the usual sense. Better to use 
some new terms here appropriate to the arts in question, rather than to 
force a technical word upon all of the arts willy-nilly. (It is often said that 
the greatest defect of Nelson Goodman's theory of art is his unsophisti­
cated, indeed, naive, use of 'denotation'.11) To paraphrase Weiss himself: 
"There is no point in trying to make one discipline conform to the rules 
[and terminology] of another. It is as foolish to demand that poetry con­
form to the canons of logic and to dismiss it as invalid or irrational because 
it cannot so conform as to demand that logic conform to the canons of 
poetry or to dismiss it as vapid or dead because of its failure to function as 
poetry does." Quite; let each have its own function, and let us develop a 
general vocabulary in which the various modes of functioning may be 
clearly described, individually as well as severally. At the same time, poetry 
has its hidden logic12, just as logic has its hidden poetry — neither being 
revealed except to the highly initiate. As John Berryman remarked to the 
present author on one occasion: a good poem has as exact an intellectual 
structure as has a mathematical theorem. 
Weiss remarks, in his ninth thesis, that "all thinking exemplifies rules 
and terminates in necessitated conclusions." And there are two kinds of 
rules, we are told: "contingent, alterable rules of transformation employed 
for some limited purpose; and necessary, unalterable rules.... A premiss 
and a contingent rule together suffice to give the conclusion. Given that 
'Socrates is a man' and the contingent rule that 'all men are mortal', we can 
rigorously deduce ... 'Socrates is mortal'.... "This example shows that Weiss 
is not using 'rule' just in the sense of a rule of inference in the usual sense. 
'All men are moral' is not a rule but a statement. Valid rules of inference 
are those studied in deductive logic. These are the "necessary, unalterable 
rules." A contingent rule of inference is of an altogether different ilk. Weiss 
comments that "the conclusions of the insane or of those who commit logi­
cal blunders are rigorously deducible by one who knows the premisses from 
which, and the manner in which, they think." A contingent rule is thus not 
strictly a rule, but is to be characterized in terms of a pattern of inferring 
which people might exhibit. (Recall III above.) 
Weiss's remaining theses may all be viewed as having to do with pat­
terns of inference and their accord or lack of accord with valid rules. To set 
the stage for the remaining theses, let us define 

WEIS'S EARLY PAPERS IN LOGIC 
213 
'p Inf a,b' 
as 
'(<Inf>e . p Agent e . e From b . e To a . Sent 
a . Sent b)\ 
The relation Agent here is that of being an agent of, To and From are the 
fundamental Russellian To- and From-relations previously discussed.13 The 
definiendum expresses that e is an act of person p's inferring sentence a 
from sentence b, where b is the premiss and a the conclusion. 
An inference may or may not accord with those of logic. For specific­
ity, let us take modus ponens (MP) and the rule of generalization (Gen) as 
the only logical rules — all others being derived ones, given the axioms of 
the system.14 Let 
'A Gen b' 
and 
' MP b,c' 
express that a results from b by one application of Gen, and that a results 
from b and  by one application of MP, respectively. The inferences of 
some people —'their official "on the record" ones, anyhow — will be found 
to accord with these rules. Those of other people may not, but still may 
exhibit certain patterns or regularities, that might be of interest to the 
psycho- or socio-linguist studying actual usage rather than paradigmatic 
correctness. Even the insane, as Weiss notes, may have a "logic" all their 
own. 
What does it mean to say that an act of inference accords with the MP 
and Gen of logic? Let us let 
' 1 £>,c' abbreviate 
\(a Gen b .  = b) v (a MP b, .  = r(b 
 ). 
expressing that a is an immediate consequence of b and c. We may then let 
'p Vallmlnf a,b' 
abbreviate 
'(p Inf a,b . ()(ß 1 b,c v  1 
,))', 
expressing that e is a valid immediate inference of a from b by person p. The 
definition of the notion of being a valid inference in general, as a sucession 
of 
steps of valid immediate 
inference, 
requires 
some 
additional 
technicalities that need not be given here.15 
Weiss's remaining theses, the tenth through the eighteenth, all seem to 
rest upon the distinction just drawn, between steps of valid inference in 
accord, say, with standard quantificational logic, and steps of inference that 
are not valid in this way — allowing however, that they might exhibit cer­
tain idiosyncratic patterns of their own and thus be "valid" in some Pick­
wickian sense. Thus Weiss contends that "a particular conclusion has con-

214 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
tent, meaning, implications beyond that expressed in the general rule." This 
seems to mean that "the process through which one goes in order to get a 
conclusion, connected with a premiss by a necessary rule of logic, has con­
tent, power, a meaning not altogether expressed in such a rule." Quite. The 
"content, power, meaning" of the conclusion is of especial interest, no 
doubt, to the agent of the inferring; his acts of inferring aim toward it, so to 
speak; to obtain it is the purport of his performing the acts. And what he 
arrives at may, of course, in given cases, surprise him, so that "a process of 
moving to a conclusion ends [or may end] with what is not wholly predicta­
ble," and thus "all inference is logically necessitated [in one sense or 
another] and creatively free." 
Clearly "[valid] inferences and productive processes [of moving to a 
conclusion] are distinct," but the latter may accord with the former on suit­
able occasions. Further, "inferences make a difference to what is implied," 
in the sense that "inference is an art in which one risks replacing a satisfact­
ory premiss by an unsatisfactory conclusion." Also, "processes [of carrying 
out the steps of an inference] add to what is materially implied," in accord 
with the Pickwickian "rule" of inference governing it. 
Inferring, whether valid or not, takes time. The successive steps suc­
ceed each other in such a way that the earlier ones bear the temporal rela­
tion of occurring before the later ones. Also there is a kind of "parallel 
between formal implications with their corresponding inferences and mate­
rial implications with their corresponding processes...." It is also noted 
that "there are invalid inferences, but not invalid processes." Processes take 
place just as they do, and, as already observed, "formal implications and 
processes are not necessarily in accord." 
All of these points — pragmatical ones, note — may be expressed in 
terms of 'Inf, 'MP', 'Gen', and so on, together with such additional expres­
sions as might be needed for stating any Pickwickian rules under considera­
tion. 
Let us glance briefly now at the salient points of Weiss's earlier papers 
in logic, those from 1928 to 1933, one by one. 
In "The Theory of Types"16 Weiss reiterates the well-known point 
that, on the basis of the Whitehead-Russell theory, "it is impossible or 
meaningless to state propositions which have an unrestricted possible range 
of values, or which, in any sense, are arguments to themselves." To bring 
Weiss's discussion up to date, we should have to avoid all reference to such 
hoary objects as "propositions." Such objects should be forbidden ab initio 

WEIS'S EARLY PAPERS IN LOGIC 
215 
in all logical and philosophical discussion, but perhaps introduced by defin­
ition step-wise.17 At best, propositions correspond with, or are expressed 
by, declarative sentences in some fashion. The analysis of their structure 
must thus presuppose a good deal of semantical (or pragmatical) theory in 
need of development. It will not do, therefore, to proceed as though we had 
any clear notion of proposition to begin with, as Weiss, following Russell, 
Lesniewski, and a host of others, has done. If we face up to semantical mat­
ters, we will find that propositions at best are very complex constructs, so 
complex in fact that the very purpose of introducing them at all seems best 
served by simpler means. 
Weiss does not distinguish clearly what has come to be known, follow­
ing Ramsey and Chwistek, as the distinction between the simple theory of 
types and the ramified theory. The latter is needed for handling the so-
called semantical paradoxes — that of Epimenides, heterologicality, and so 
on — from the purely logical ones — concerning inter alia the class of all 
classes that are not members of themselves. This distinction has become 
more or less standard and Weiss's paper seems to point toward it. He pur­
ports to draw a distinction, moreover, between "restricted" and "unre­
stricted" propositions in order to gain a kind of "restricted" theory of types. 
Even so, one would surely need to distinguish object-linguistic from 
metalinguistic matters, and to treat the two kinds of paradoxes quite differ­
ently. 
Thus is not the occasion to examine Weiss's resticted theory in its own 
terms. Much semantics would have to be accommodated in those terms, 
and many distinctions made, but all this would have to be carried out by 
someone friendly to self-reference. The view here is that the possibility of 
self-reference in natural language should not be taken as a guiding principle 
for logical investigation.18 At best, self-reference in natural language is 
severely restricted, and can perhaps be handled as extended usage in some 
suitable fashion. Methodologically, according to the view here, non-self-
referential logic comes first and the study of grammar must bow to its 
authority; and we should bear in mind that the scope of that authority is, 
almost daily, being extended in the exact study of logical form, in which 
self-reference plays no essential role. 
In "Relativity in Logic"19 it is urged that there are many logics, and 
types of logic, to be distinguished, each in some sense as good as any other. 
It is contended that "a logical system need not have an application and that 
non-applicable systems are as much the logician's study as the different pos­
sible geometries are the mathematician's, ... [and] the different systems of 

216 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
logic should be differentiated on some other ground than their possible 
application to our usual 'legitimate' trains of reasoning. It should be indiffe­
rent to a logician whether his system can be used." As opposed to this view, 
one can always insist upon some "interpretation," however bizarre or outré, 
some "model" however queer. All of these interpretations, however, are 
intended by the logician or mathematician to serve some significant intellec­
tual purpose or other, to help solve a practical problem, or to help some­
how in the enterprise of knowledge. 
Weiss invites us to consider "values" other than truth and falsity. 
Necessity, possibility, and contingency are hinted at, but a third value, 
intermediary somehow between truth and falsity in the sense of 
Lukasiewicz, is not. Nor any fourth value in the sense of four-valued logic; 
and so on. Weiss considers several ways of construing 'implication' truth-
functionally, other than in the sense of "material" implication. But since he 
does not care whether any of these are "applicable" or not, no constraints 
are at hand in the light of which to approve or not. Further, all of these 
types of "implication" may be introduced within the PM, two-valued 
framework, so that nothing essentially new emerges from the consideration 
of them. They all reduce to the same old thing, looked at in a slightly differ­
ent way. 
Fruitful research in logic is always governed by a certain sparseness: 
clearcut aims, sharp techniques, ontologies cut to the bone. Without such 
sparseness, there will be a too-muchness, aims that are not clear, ill-
worked-out techniques, ontologies that are too rich for the purposes at 
hand. With a too-muchness, one may fail to see problems that cry out for 
consideration. In this paper, Weiss is willing to speak of "entities" and 
notions of various kinds, without an analysis of them and without showing 
how they are interrelated. A few such are: propositions, entailment, truth, 
falsity, internal and external relations, assertion, contingency, necessity, 
necessary factual correlation, validity, property-value, categorical value, 
and so on. Weiss uses some of these terms in his own way. Some of them he 
generalizes to the utmost; but to what avail? He ends up with a notion of 
The Logic (with capitals) "which has an infinite [denumerable or non-
denumerable (?)] number of elements capable of an infinite number of 
property-values. It can never be expressed." Would it not be more helpful 
here to have put forward a sparser logic, of some significant applicability, 
capable of being expressed? Such a logic was given — rather well, be it said 
— in the monumental PM, which Weiss seems to reject much too 
peremptorily. 

WEIS'S EARLY PAPERS IN LOGIC 
217 
In "The Nature of Systems"20 many valuable points are made, but, 
again, without bringing in explicitly metalogical considerations to provide 
the wherewithal for doing so adequately. Historically speaking, this paper 
may be viewed as an attempt to develop a theory of systems, to "charac­
terize all possible systems, to justify their methodology," and thus to pro­
vide some headway "in an important though neglected [area of] study." 
Straightaway we are told that "a system is a set of propositions, some of 
which (the postulates and primitive propositions) are derived by means of 
substitutional and inferential rules." Here again we must be wary of propo­
sition-talk in the absence of a metalinguistic characterization as to how they 
are expressed in sentences. Also the use of 'set' here is unwise — although 
widespread — in view of the kinds of considerations addressed in V-X 
above.21 Further, Weiss is as much interested in uninterpreted systems as 
interpreted ones. As a matter of fact, historical and otherwise, uninter­
preted systems are not of much interest in either logic, mathematics, the 
sciences, or philosophy, as has already been noted above. Only so-called 
semantical systems are of such interest, those with explicit semantical rules 
giving some significant or interesting interpretation. Of course, a syntactical 
system may be at hand prior to the formulation of such rules, but then the 
system will have been formulated with a view to adding such rules. Even 
after such rules have been added, the resulting system might be "abstract" 
and descriptive of mere possibilities — but with the semantical rules we will 
be told at least what these possibilities are. 
In "Two-Valued Logic — Another Approach"22, Weiss makes some 
trenchant commments purported to bolster his general conception of The 
Logic (with capitals) as a subject-matter rather than as an instrument. That 
logic should be one or the other — or both, as with Avicenna, for example 
— has been a running debate for many centuries. "It is one of the 
paradoxes of modern logic that most symbolic logicians are not really 
interested in logic at all." (How can they be, in Weiss's sense, unless there 
is a special subject-matter for them to be interested in? It behooves Weiss 
to convince us that there is one.) "Their concern is with mathematics, epis-
temology, system, symbolism, language, etc.... They pay practically no 
attention to the question as to the nature of logical propositions. One would 
have difficulty in discovering from their writings what it means to say that 
logical propositions are necessary true." What are "propositions" anyhow, 
and what then in particular is a "logical proposition"? The urgency of the 
former question has been indicated above, and the latter surely cannot be 

218 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
answered except on the basis of some answer to the former. And, of course, 
logicians are interested in "mathematics, epistemology," and so on, as they 
should be — in fact logic takes all knowledge for its province, just as 
metaphysics does. We should not condemn logicians for the generality of 
the applicability of their subject, and withhold condemnation of metaphysi­
cians for the generality of theirs. At the same time, there may well be a 
sense in which metaphysics is a more general pursuit than logic. Perhaps 
The Logic is being forced here to take on the tasks of the latter. 
Weiss writes about 'necessarily true' as though he knows what it 
means. This was done prior to Quine's important paper "Three Grades of 
Modal Involvement" and to the present author's "Does Modal Logic Rest 
upon a Mistake?", which bring to the fore the difficulties connected with 
attempts to characterize that notion other than in clear-cut semantical 
terms.23 Weiss writes in the mode of "inarticulate certainty" on semantical 
matters, where we have, fifty-odd years later, only "articulate hesitency." 
Weiss contends that "all logical propositions are on the same level and 
are of equal generality." If this is supposed to say that all logical truths, in 
the sense of 'LTr', say, are of the same generality, it is not the case. Clearly 
'(B Corap v ~  Corap)\ 
where 'Corap' stands, again, for Peirce's horse, and 'B' for a shade of 
brown appropriate for horses, is not of the same generality as 
e(*)(B * v ~  *)', 
a more general form, for a law of excluded middle concerning 'B'. But the 
two are on the "same level" in the sense of both being LTr. 
Also, as a matter of historical fact, logicians have been paying consid­
erable attention to the problem of how validity, logical truth, necessity, and 
the like, are best to be characterized, in the years since Weiss wrote. But 
much of it has been done at the metalogical level. Weiss's paper has the 
merit of calling attention to such topics, which, however, can be adequately 
approached only with further notions or tools, so to speak, that were just 
coming on the scene in Europe at the time he wrote. 
In "The Metaphysics and Logic of Classes"24, Weiss puts forward four 
more objections to PM, as follows. The first is that the notion of class "is 
actually, though not symbolically, defined by using the notion of a class in 
the definition." Apparently Weiss fails to take into account the definition 
*20.01 in which symbols for classes are defined contextually. No symbol for 
class, however, occurs in the definiens. (The '0!z' that occurs there is used, 

WEIS'S EARLY PAPERS IN LOGIC 
219 
as Russell explains, "when we wish to speak of the function itself as 
opposed to its arguments.") To call attention to.this is neither to presup­
pose nor defend Russell's explanations, which are no doubt confused; it is 
merely to point out that Weiss's first criticism here seems not to be fully jus­
tified. 
The second objection is that "the notion of a class is reached through 
an analysis of the propositional function" and that "because he was domi­
nated by a metaphysical view that individuals are independent of and more 
basic than the universais supposed to qualify them ... Russell dealt only 
with those propositional functions which had variable subjects." (Strictly 
there are no such things as "variable subjects"; there are only subject vari­
ables. The very phrase 'variable subject' rests upon a confusion of use and 
mention.) But in '0x' or '0!x' the '0' is as much a variable as the '*' is, but 
is of one type higher than whatever the type of V is. Weiss seems to forget 
here the device of "typical ambiguity" that is used throughout PM. Also, 
surely it is not the case that Russell — at least in PM — regarded individu­
als as either "more basic than" or as "independent of" the "propositional 
function" they may or may not satisfy. Both kinds of entities have equal 
status as values for the variables of the system, albeit these variables are of 
differing types. 
The fourth objection also seems to rest upon a confusion of use and 
mention. "A class is held to be an incomplete symbol or a fiction, and a 
member of a class is related to its class by 8. But if the members of classes 
are real, in what sense can they be related to incomplete symbols or to fic­
tions? And if numbers are classes of classes similar to a given class, what 
are the objects of mathematics but incomplete symbols of incomplete sym­
bols, or fictions of fictions?" The answer is that a "class" is not an "incom­
plete symbol." Russell is explicit that "the symbols [italics added] for clas­
ses, like those for descriptions, are in our system, incomplete symbols, ..., 
[and] classes, so far as we introduce them, are merely symbolic or linguistic 
conveniences, not genuine objects as their members are if they are indi­
viduals." Classes are thus "fictions" for Russell only in the very special and 
harmless sense of being introduced by contextual definition. 
Weiss's third objection might be thought to fare rather better. It con­
cerns the duplication of the cardinal numbers at each type level ^ 3, where 
individuals are taken as of type 1. This duplication has often been remarked 
upon and thought objectionable. Weiss's description of his objection, how­
ever, is not quite accurate. According to him, in PM "any number can be 

220 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
said to be a member of members of any other number, as well as of itself." 
This latter is not quite correct — no number can ever be said correctly to be 
a member of itself, according to the theory of types. The former contention 
is correct only if we distinguish carefully the type of a given cardinal 
number. Thus 23 is the number 2 of type 3, 24 of type 4, and so on. Let {an, 
ß }f + n be the class of type n+1, its only members being an and ß^ each of 
type n. Then it is correct to observe, as Weiss does, that 
(Ea4)(23 e a4 . a4 8 15) . (Ea4)(23 8 a4 . a4 8 25) 
and similarly for  Ay and so on. And similarly for cardinals of higher 
type. But note that this adds up to saying only that cardinals of type n are 
members of members of cardinals of type n + 2. 
Weiss thinks that all this is "at best a monstrous doctrine." But why? It 
is rather a fact of life for the simplified theory of types, and one inherited by 
all modern set-theories in which type-theory may be imbedded.25 Further, 
an allied kind of duplication is a fact of life for other kinds of adjectivais in 
natural language. It seems generally accepted now that 'large', say, is to be 
parsed in terms of 'large for elephants', 'large for jets', 'large for porpoises', 
and so on. The admission of such a duplication is almost a necessity for 
gaining clear-cut logical forms for the appropriate natural sentences. And 
similarly, then, for natural sentences containing numerical modifiers. Even 
so, no account of these latter would be adequate without a theory of acts of 
counting and of measuring trailing along.26 
In the bulk of this paper Weiss puts forward a theory of his own, as 
based on unit classes, classes with one member, as fundamental, and "all 
classes having more than one member are defined [in terms of expressions 
for] ... sums of unit classes." A very considerable mathematical theory 
about such sums is then needed, in order to provide for denumerable sums, 
as well as all manner of non-denumerable ones. And, similarly, all manner 
of relations must be provided for, about which Weiss tells us singularly lit­
tle. The technical details here loom large, and perhaps would be similar in 
some respect to those of V above. Weiss does not develop his view even to 
the point of providing a notation in which a single mathematical principle 
could be proved or a single definition given. Even so, the hints he gives 
might well be worth developing in terms of an exact formulation, even now, 
fifty-two years after it was written — but without presupposing the notion 
of "proposition" unless given a full and adequate semantical analysis some­
where along the line. 

WEIS'S EARLY PAPERS IN LOGIC 
221 
In "The Metaphysical and the Logical Individual" of 193327, a distinc­
tion is drawn between a "logical" individual, taken as "an argument to a 
propositional function, such as "... is red" [and] a metaphysical individual 
... [as] the indivisible, existential unity from which both logical individuals 
and their characterizing predicates are derived by abstraction." The distinc­
tion, essentially that of the 1957 paper, seems adscititious. Why cannot a 
"metaphysical" individual itself be taken as "an argument to a propositional 
function" — provided we have a clear notion of this latter? For Weiss, "the 
logical individual is simple, unanalyzable, and non-existent," whereas a 
"metaphysical individual is a what imbued with existence, a that suffused 
with intelligibility, characters before they are shorn of their existence; exis­
tence before it has been sundered from that which exists; the source of the 
complex and of the simple." The "logical" individual is thus a sheer fiction, 
of no use anywhere, neither within nor outside of a logical system. Logic is 
not so much a subject-matter as a framework. Logica uteris, logic in the 
context of an applied system, as we have already in effect observed, is the 
only kind worthy of serious pursuit. Weiss's notion of a "logical" individual, 
it is to be feared, like a "proposition," and the like, must inhabit a Disney­
land of unreality far removed from, and of no help to, the common toil of 
trying to get our ideas clear, of removing the debris that stands in the way 
of gaining knowledge, and of keeping to the much-prized Einsteinian "logi­
cal simplicity that helps to keep us on the right track." 
In "On Alternative Logics"28 Weiss is concerned mostly with some 
comments by C.I. Lewis29 concerning implication and the multiplicity of 
alternative logics. Because this whole subject has become wholly swallowed 
up in the subsequent development of metalogic, semantics, pragmatics, and 
the like, the details of the discussion lie beyond present concern. It will be 
more interesting to comment on the last paragraph of the paper, which is in 
effect a plea for a single logic as somehow basic, an echo of Whitehead's 
plea for "one God, one country, one logic." 
Weiss points out that "there is no need for believers in multiple logics 
to invent interesting diagrams [or matrices] or novel symbols to 
demonstrate their point.... All they need to do is to analyse a single, valid 
logical proposition and show that when they take it extensionally, ..., or that 
when taken intensionally, the meaning of the antecedent does not contain 
the meaning of the consequent. Until this is done the whole case for the 
pragmatic choice of logics, for the untrammelled freedom of the mind, for 
the infinite logics to be uncovered by the man who can free himself from 

222 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
worldly worries, will remain a position stated and not a doctrine proved." 
What, now, does Weiss understand here by taking a logic extensionally 
as over and against taking it intensionally? The difference is perhaps related 
with his distinction between "formal" and "material" implication, which we 
have already met above. In any case, here we are told that "the error in 
believing that there are many logics because there are many truth-values 
[necessity, contingency, and so on, in addition to truth and falsity], has its 
roots in the confusion between an extensional and an intensional approach 
to logic. When we take the extensional approach we are interested in know­
ing what can be necessarily concluded from a knowledge of the truth-value 
of a proposition or set of propositions.... From 'this is red' an extensional 
logician would conclude 'this is red or this is not red' [or even 'this is red or 
this is blue'?].... He cannot conclude 'this is a color' from 'this is red' unless 
'this is red' is understood as 'this is red or green or blue, etc.' ... From the 
intensional side, our interest in logic is confined to knowing what proposi­
tions or concepts have their meanings contained in a given proposition or 
concept.... From 'this is red' we conclude 'this is a color', 'this is darker 
than pink', 'this is extended', etc...." 
The key item to observe here is that we can handle Weiss's "intensional" 
approach within an extensional system, by adding to the system meaning-
postulates in Carnap's sense.30 Let us first note that 'this is red' is ambigu­
ous, depending upon whether the 'is' is taken as the 'is' of predication or 
the 'is' of identity. Further, the presence of 'this' brings in all the difficulties 
concerned with ostensión. To simplify, let us construe the 'is' in the sense of 
predication, and think of 'this' as indicating some specific present object 
before us. We could then have meaning-postulates added to the system that 
{x)(x is red =5 x is colored), 
(x)(x is red zD x is extended), 
(x)(x is red =D x is darker than any pink object), 
and so on. The logic of 'this' would then be presumed to justify an assertion 
of 
'(this is red => this is colored)', 
'(this is red z) this is extended)', 
and so on, from the assumption of these meaning-postulates. In this way 
Weiss's "intensional" forms of inference could easily be handled. 
By the introduction of further devices, many of them metalinguistic, all 

WEIS'S EARLY PAPERS IN LOGIC 
223 
manner of other locutions, commonly called 'intensional' may be handled, 
giving support to the supposition of there being only one basic, two-valued, 
logic of which all "alternatives" are specializations in some fashion or 
other.31 The gist of Weiss's discussion here seems to point to this supposi­
tion. This one logic, however, is still to be distinguished from The Logic as 
being formulable or expressible and in not usurping the tasks of a 
metaphysics. 
Weiss's contribution to the Seventh International Congress of 
Philosophy, at Oxford, in 1935, was entitled "Entailment and the Future of 
Logic."32 It has been saved for the end here because it does to some extent 
summarize most of his work in logic. And recent developments have in fact 
taken place in just the areas to which Weiss called attention. 
The discussion of "entailment" and "implication" here, as in the other 
papers, may be carried out in terms of the standard, two-valued 
framework. Further, Weiss does not develop his ideas far enough to include 
explicit consideration of the quantifiers. Scarcely is a quantifier mentioned 
or even alluded to. He seems to think of logic as having to do only with the 
connectives 'and', 'or', 'not', and so on. This is of course a very serious limi­
tation. As a result, the strictures of PM seem unjustified here, as in Weiss's 
other papers. 
Here again attention is called to intensional logic as having to do with 
meanings and "with expressing the relationship of meanings to one 
another." The notion 'meaning' is notoriously slippery and must be handled 
with great delicacy and care as a technical notion. Weiss comments that it 
would be desirable in the future of logic, to develop "a complete intensional 
logic ... [that] would allow for the assertion of propositions not now [in 
1930] acknowledged, and for a possible derivation of and a detailed com­
parison with extensional logics." Yes, indeed, and much work has been 
done in this direction — whether successful or not being a matter of opinion 
— by Carnap and Alonzo Church and others, mainly in the wake of Frege's 
seminal "Über Sinn und Bedeutung" of 1892. It is a pity that Weiss was not 
familiar with the contents of this latter paper. 
Weiss's work in logic must be viewed in the light of the history of work 
done in this country just prior to the arrival on the scene of the metalogical 
contributions of Lesniewski and Tarski and of the work of Carnap and of 
the Hilbert school. As concerns philosophic logic — to be contrasted sharp­
ly nowadays with mathematical logic — the development of logical syntax 
and semantics was of high relevance, to which was added an approach to 

224 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
the systematic pragmatics and to process- or event-logic some years later. 
Weiss's work came along just a few years too early, before the newer Con­
tinental work had been absorbed. It inevitably must suffer in comparison. 
Even so, it contains many highly perceptive aperçus, the full character of 
which can best be assessed and seen in the light of these newer develop­
ments. In short, Weiss must be credited with having raised many interesting 
and important philosophical issues connected with logic at a time when the 
techniques appropriate for handling them were not available. 

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN 
On Quine's "facts of the matter" 
"On spécule sur tout, même sur la famine." 
Never has a philosophical paper started out more felicitously than Quine's 
"Facts of the Matter."1 At the beginning, the reader is tempted to agree 
with every point. The prose is perhaps the finest in philosophical writing in 
English since that of Gilbert Ryle. Quine recalls at the outset Home 
Tooke's The Diversions of Purley of 1786, in which it was urged that 
Locke's Essay would have fared better if only the word 'word' had been 
substituted throughout for 'idea'. Indeed, yes. The linguistic turn in 
philosophy might then have taken place more than 250 years earlier than it 
actually did. Of course a good deal of vital material in Locke's work would 
have been lost, but there would also have been much gain. "We think 
mostly in words," Quine notes, "and we report our thought wholly in 
words." Well, not quite — there are grimaces and gestures to be accounted 
for, works of art and other non-verbal media of communication, and so on. 
Even so, Quine is right, surely, in urging that we should "seek a firm foot­
ing ... in words" and thus should "take one leaf from the old-time [Loc-
kean] philosophy and another from John Home Tooke. Philosophical 
inquiry should begin with the clear, yes; but with clear words." 
How can we "begin" with clear words if in fact they are not clear to 
begin with? Quine outlines his well-known views about "the social charac­
ter of language and the use of language in communication," about how we 
come to accept occasion-sentences (or to reject them, or to abstain from 
either accepting or rejecting them), about subjective similarity or "similar­
ity by the subject's own lights," about how we build up an observational 
vocabulary, and so on. This is all set forward with admirable clarity. "And 
now what happens," Quine asks, "when at last we can be said to use some 
of these [observation] sentences or parts [segments?] of them as terms 

226 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
denoting some sort of supposed objects? The main thing to settle ... is their 
individuation; we have to fix standards of sameness and difference. [And] 
... at this point [in our learning] little or no attention will be paid differ­
ences of [the perspectives] ... from which they are observed.... What are 
posited as objects for the terms to refer to will be, primarily, objects that 
are accounted identical under changes of perspective. This explains the pri­
macy of bodies.... If inquiry is to begin with what is clear, then let us begin 
as physicalists." 
There is quite a leap in all this, it should be observed, from the learing 
of the observational vocabulary to the "positing" of objects. And quite 
another leap from positing objects to anything sophisticated enough to be 
labelled 'physicalism'. The first is akin to the leap from Berkeleyan "ideas" 
to the reism, say, of Kotarbinski, and the second, from this latter to a full-
fledged Carnapian physicalism. Neither leap is undertaken by the learner as 
such. Quine is forcing them upon cognition-theory, or the theory of learn­
ing, without ever so much as even mentioning or taking account of impor­
tant recent experimental and conceptual work in the field. The second leap, 
from reism to physicalism, he is more persuasive about, and we shall come 
to it in a moment. 
Along the way of mastering language we encounter general terms. 
"Grammatical analogy between general terms and singular terms encour­
ages us to treat a general term as if it designated a single object, and thus 
we come to posit a realm of objects for the general terms to designate: a 
realm of properties, or sets. What with the nominalizing also of verbs and 
clauses, a vaguely varied and very untidy ontology grows up." Indeed it 
does, and Quine, alas, seems not to face up to its full complexity. The var­
iation may not be so vague after all, and we should work to try to make the 
ontology more tidy. The language of science is an "object-oriented idiom," 
Quine contends, but he has in mind the stale science of yesteryear. Almost 
daily the languages of the sciences are becoming less and less "object-
oriented," as recent work in physics, chemistry, biology, neurology, and 
psychology are showing.2 In any case, the leap from Quine's "objects" to 
the positing of a realm of sets is a third leap, over a chasm that requires an 
enormous effort to bridge, both from the point of view of the learner and 
from that of the theorist of learning. 
Another stupendous leap in Quine's thought is from the notion of set 
to the "regimentation" of natural language. His views on this matter are 
familiar. "Language ... [as] regimented has a simple grammar [sic!]. There 
is a lexicon of predicates. Each atomic sentence of the language consists of 

QUINE'S "FACTS OF THE MATTER" 
227 
a predicate, say, an n-place predicate, adjoined to n variables. The rest of 
the sentences are built up of the atomic ones by truth functions and quan­
tification." But all this is much too simple. For no domain of science what­
soever, is an adequate "regimentation" of the kind Quine speaks — where 
its variables are taken to range over "objects" — forthcoming without a 
considerable ado, if at all. It is not clear that a fully adequate formalization 
for even classical particle-mechanics has been given, and surely none is 
forthcoming on the basis of present knowledge for quantum mechanics. 
Quine leaves this latter aside "in order not to complicate the picture." For 
similar reasons he must leave aside most portions of other areas of physics, 
and of the other sciences as well. And that natural language as regimented 
has a "simple" grammar is surely news to anyone who has worked on the 
subject at any depth. 
Quine has always seemed to be somewhat wary of positing sets. "Much 
of the positing of abstract objects [such as sets] that seems to go on in ordi­
nary language proves to be gratuitous and eliminable, but much of it also 
proves valuable." He comments, further, that "how sets can pay their way 
is classically illustrated by the definition of the closed iterate of a two-place 
predicate. Ancestor, for instance, is the closed iterate of parent." No, it is 
rather a two-place predicate, 'ancestor of, that is the closed iterate of the 
two-place predicate 'parent of. And, of course, sets can pay their way also 
by providing for mathematics, and this would seem to be the most defensi­
ble reason for positing them. 
Quine goes on to a paragraph that — really for him — is not clear. "It 
must be emphasized," he writes, "that when we reckon the ontology as 
comprising just the values of the variables, we are assuming the strictly 
regimented notation: just predicates, variables, quantifiers, and truth func­
tion. Admission of additional linguistic elements can upset this ontological 
standard. Thus suppose someone adopts outright an operator for forming 
the closed iterates of predicates, instead of defining it with the help of an 
ontology of sets. Are we to say that he has saved on ontology? I say rather 
that he has shelved the ontological question by switching to a language that 
is not explicit on ontology. His ontology is indeterminate, except relative to 
some agreed translation of his notation into our regimented one." 
The contentions here are curious. The person who adopts as a primi­
tive a notion "for forming the closed iterates of two-place predicates, 
instead of defining it with the help of an ontology of sets" will surely have 
"saved on ontology" provided he formalizes his theory without sets at all as 

228 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
values for variables.3 Here there is real gain in ontological economy — and 
he will of course give axioms or axiom-schemata governing that new primi­
tive. But if he introduces an expression for designating the operator as a 
primitive, in a theory in which sets are also available, he will not have 
changed the ontology at all. The situation is similar to taking ' = ' for iden­
tity as a primitive. If sets are available, there is no need to do this; if not 
there is.4 In either case, one has not "switched to a language that is not 
explicit on ontology." But if one has taken ' = ' as a primitive in a (first-
order) theory without sets, it is surely not correct to contend that one's 
ontology is thereby rendered "indeterminate." Is Quine stating here that 
one would be committed to sets in any such theory? He would seem to be 
by the added clause that the ontology is then indeterminate "except relative 
to some agreed translation of his notation into our regimented one." This 
last contention seems rather extreme, as though no alternative agreed-upon 
translation into any other theory or kind of theory is ever to be condoned. 
"Another way in which quantification over sets or numbers or other 
abstract objects can sometimes be avoided is by admitting a modal operator 
of necessity," we are told — with a footnote reference to Hilary Putnam's 
"Mathematics without Foundations"5 — "if we can see our way of making 
appropriate sense of the device. Here again we are presented not with an 
ontological saving, but with a question of foreign exchange." Quine seems 
to condone here Putnam's method for avoiding reference to abstract 
objects if sense can be made of the notion of necessity. That Putnam's 
method is unsound and highly dubious has been shown in detail elsewhere.6 
Here, indeed, we do seem to be presented with fraudulent currency, and it 
behooves Putnam to make good the exchange. 
If, as Quine tells us, "for some sentences there is no acceptable 
regimentation at all," is not the programme of regimentation doomed right 
at the start? Further, so we are told, "regiment as he will, he [the trans­
lator] cannot make do with just bodies;" he must admit sets also. This pro­
nouncement seems also to be rather ex cathedra, and runs counter to the 
contentions of V above. We shall reflect upon these later, in connection 
with the leap to physicalism. 
What matters for Quine's physicalism, is that "where positions and 
states of bodies do not matter, there is no fact of the matter." But even 
positions are states, states of being in such and such a position. Quine 
suggests that he should perhaps "better phrase the matter in terms of 
change', there is not change without a change in the positions or states of 
bodies." How are these best to be handled? In "latter-day" physics, Quine 

QUINE'S "FACTS OF THE MATTER" 
229 
points out, "there are indications that the utility of the particle model, the 
extrapolation of the primordial body into the very small, is now marginal at 
best. A field theory may be more to the point: a theory in which various 
states are directly ascribed in varying degrees to various regions of space-
time. Thus at last bodies themselves go by the board — bodies that were 
the primordial posits, the paradigmatic objects most clearly and perspicu­
ously beheld." 
Quine's "brave new ontology" is thus to consist of "real numbers, 
needed to measure the intensity of the various states, and ... [of] the space-
time regions to which the states are ascribed. By identifying each space-
time point with a quadruple of real or complex numbers according to an 
arbitrary system of coordinates, we can explain the space-time regions as 
sets of quadruples of numbers. The numbers themselves can be constructed 
within set theory in known ways, and indeed in pure set theory; that is, set 
theory with no individuals as ground elements, set theory devoid of con­
crete objects. The brave new ontology is, in short, the purely abstract 
ontology of pure set theory, pure mathematics." All of this, of course, 
harks back, in essentials, to Carnap's discussions of coordinate languages.7 
Let us accept it pro tern in its own terms, and abstain from questioning 
whether this kind of view can be harmonized with "latter-day" physics. It is 
to be feared that it cannot, but the point need not be pressed here. 
Quine thinks that "a lesson to be drawn from this debacle is that ontol­
ogy is not what mainly matters.... Sentences, in their truth or falsity, are 
what run deep; ontology is by the way. The point gains [— or does it rather 
lose? —] in vividness when we reflect on the multiplicity of possible 
interpretations of any consistent formal system.... The sentences of ... [our 
coordinate] language that are true under countless reinterpretations of the 
range of values of the variables.... Perhaps then our primary concern 
belongs with the truth of sentences and with their truth conditions [italics 
added], rather than with the reference of terms. If we adopt this attitude, 
questions of reference and ontology become quite incidental. Ontological 
stipulations can play a role in the truth conditions of theoretical sentences, 
but a role that could be played as well by any number of alternative 
ontological stipulations...." 
It is not that ontological stipulations "can" play a role in the truth-con­
ditions of a sentence, it is that they must if 'true' and 'false' are given any 
adequate definition in the semantics of the language. Of course, alternative 
ontologies will do as well, but qua physicists and philosophers of physics, it 
is some one basic, physical interpretation that is of interest to us. The ontol-

230 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
ogy of this interpretation is by no means incidental, but in fact as funda­
mental to the theory as the inner mathematics of the theory itself. Sen­
tences as true or false "run deep," of course; but in saying this we must 
understand 'true' and 'false' in the only "deep" sense of relevance, that of 
theoretical semantics. Moreover, the sentential forms of the language are 
"true of" or "false of" such and such objects. Quine is not proposing that 
we accept the system merely as a syntactical one; no, he surely intends to 
use 'true' and 'false' as semantical terms, so that the system envisaged is 
intended to be a semantical one. 
Bridgman was tireless, years back, in pointing out that "for a complete 
appraisal [and understanding] of what is contained in any [physico-] mathe­
matical theory an analysis of the text is just as essential as an analysis of the 
equations. In particular, the text contains the unanalyzables of the theory 
and thus involves its essential limitations" — including the limitation to a 
given ontology. The text gives "what the significance of the equations is." 
As Bridgman noted, "a complete mathematical formulation involves equa­
tions plus text.... The necessity of a text is almost always overlooked, but I 
think it must be recognized to be essential, and [italics added] a study of 
what it must contain is as necessary for an adequate conception of the nature 
of the [physico-] mathematical theory as a study of the equations them­
selves. "8 The modern way of providing for the "text" is within an explicative 
semantics, the explication giving the intended interpretation of terms of the 
intended ontology.9 
Let us recall the very statement of the Adequacy Condition — Tarski's 
paradigm (T) — concerning the semantical truth-concept as defined for a 
given system. This is, it will be recalled, that every sentence of the metalan­
guage of the form 
(T) 
rTr a = 
be provable (or true or at least "holds" in metalanguage), where ' 
' is a 
sentence of the language and a is a shape- or structural-description of it or 
of a metalinguistic translation of it. Where (T) holds, we say that ' 
' is a 
truth-condition for the sentence a. If the semantics is an explicative one, for 
Quine's kind of system, ' 
' will be equivalent to some statement of the 
system about points and space-time regions, even though these are not 
themselves values for the variables of the system itself. Informally, Quine 
"identifies" points with quadruples of real or complex numbers, but in the 
explicative semantics, the "text," this identification must be made fully 

QUINE'S "FACTS OF THE MATTER 
231 
explicit. The physics is not contained just in the equations but in the equa-
tions-cum-text. The conditions for the truth of the equations (or sentences 
within the "pure" set-theory with its roster of physical predicates) will have 
to contain variables over space-time points and regions. Without this, 
Quine's "physicalism," that "there is no difference in matters of fact with­
out a difference in the fulfillment of the physical-state predicates by space-
time regions," could not even be stated, and would indeed have to go by 
the way. 
In this present paper, it should be remarked again, we have neither 
accepted nor rejected Quine's theory, but merely tried to make sense of it 
in semantical terms. Let us go on now to show how the essentials of his set-
theoretic physicalism — let us dub it such — can be more appropriately 
accommodated within a given interpretation of the material of V above. 
Let us think of the "individuals" of the homology of V as being space-
time regions in Quine's sense. Of course 'space-time', 'space', and 'time' 
are not taken as technical terms — they become so as constructs only in the 
peroration of the theory. The part-whole relation is then the part-whole or 
inclusion relation between regions. The "cardinal units" of the theory 
become unit regions, not further divisible into smaller ones, and are such 
that physical magnitudes may be ascribed to them. In this respect they are 
unlike geometrical points, to which such magnitudes are not ascribable. In 
terms of the ordinal individuals and Boolean sums of them, attributive rela­
tions for physical states as applied to regions may be introduced, as well as 
non-attributive relations for relations between or among states. The various 
kinds of number may then be provided for essentially as in "On Mereology 
and the Heroic Course"10, quadruples of real numbers then being available 
to play the role needed. Whatever expressions for primitive predicates are 
needed in Quine's treatment may be introduced now as primitive names of 
relation-individuals. In this way the full expressive power of his system is 
achieved within a unified framework. Physics and mathematics are brought 
together. No grand leap is needed from one to the other, no unbridgeable 
saltation from space-time regions to some mysterious new kind of entity 
called 'sets'. For the first time ever, perhaps, physics and mathematics can 
live together harmoniously under the same roof without the assumption of 
a brave new — but foreign — ontology of sets. 
Quine's envisagement is, of course, mere programme. All kinds of dif­
ficulties are to be expected when one gets down to the real nitty-gritty of 
the details. One might think that this will all be a mere "routine" matter of 

232 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
smooth sailing. But no. There are the separate areas of physics itself that 
cannot be easily unified on the basis of present knowledge. And there are 
internal difficulties in each that must be faced up to squarely when an even 
partial formalization is attempted. Philosophers may step in where working 
scientists fear to tread — of course — but by carrying on where they leave 
off, in showing in detail how deeply philosophical notions permeate the lan­
guages of science and how awareness of logical matters helps in gaining bet­
ter formulations and greater clarification and hence understanding — in 
short, by cooperating in the enterprise of science from close to rather than 
from afar off. 
Suppose Quine's programme could be carried out successfully, at least 
to some extent. It might appear that this would be to the total neglect of so-
called "mental" phenomena. Among the state-predicates, however, he pur­
ports to include mental ones. "We have two species of predicates, mental 
and physical, but both sorts apply to bodies," or, in the "pure" set-theoretic 
rendering, presumably to space-time regions. Physics, in its present state of 
development, apparently has no need of mental state-predicates, although 
neurophysiology apparently does, as the work of Sir John Eccles and R.W. 
Sperry inter alia has apparently shown. The day may well come when the 
use of such predicates within the language of science will have become a fait 
accompli. Metaphysical idealists have devoutly been wishing for such a con­
sumaron all along. 
Quine makes a good deal of a dictum that "there is no mental differene 
without a physical difference," but he admits that this is a bit vague. 
Nonetheless, he does dispense with minds in favor of bodies, or, in the 
more refined version, of space-time regions. But "note that the situation is 
not symmetrical. The converse move of dispensing with bodies in favor of 
minds is not open to us, for we would not allow that there is no physical dif­
ference in the world without a mental difference — not unless we were 
idealists." This converse dictum is no doubt as vague as the original one, 
but, if we were idealists, we would seek to formulate it more carefully 
within a general metaphysical scheme. Where each body is an "embodi­
ment" of mind, in some sense, and differences in physical states are suitably 
provided for in terms of embodiments together with "manifestations" of 
mind, some such dictum could no doubt be made sense of. Whether it 
would be assumed to hold or not, in a given idealist system, may be left 
open for the moment. But no matter, a theory of "embodiment" and "man­
ifestation" must, it would seem, play a crucial role here.11 The possibility of 

QUINE'S "FACTS OF THE MATTER" 
233 
a critical, logical, metaphysical idealism remains an intriguing possibility, 
and one that can be harmonized with some of the desirable tenets of both 
logical positivism and scientific realism.12 This is, however, a possibility that 
Quine "would not allow." Nor would he allow the development of the kinds 
of metaphysical idealism especially appropriate for accommodating the 
kinds of lofty values highly cherished by much of civilized mankind, East 
and West, down the centuries.13 
A final comment. Let us reflect, a little more deeply than above, upon 
Quine's conception of "latter-day" physics. The eminent physicist J.A. 
Wheeler has pointed out that "Era I [in the history of physics] gave us the 
parabolas of Galileo and the ellipses of Kepler, motion [but] with no expla­
nation of motion. Era II gave us the mechanics of Newton, the elec­
trodynamics of Faraday and Maxwell, the geometrodynamics of Einstein 
and the chromodynamics of our day, law that explained change, but law 
with no explanation of law. Out of Era III, "meaning physics", we have to 
seek nothing less than the foundation of physical law itself."14 Of this latter, 
he comments: "How can anyone even dream of abandoning for the founda­
tion of existence a physics hardware located "out there" and putting in its 
stead a "meaning" software located who knows where? And how can the 
hard structure of hard science be moved over, solid as ever, onto this new 
and other-worldly foundation? Yet, despite all difficulties, and they are 
great, that must be the task and achievement of the coming Era III of 
physics." Quine's conception at best seems to be of a physics somewhere in 
the middle of Era II, but with quantum mechanics with its attendant 
"software" conveniently set aside to avoid complications. 
Wheeler's choice of 'meaning' to help designate the coming era is 
perhaps unfortunate. He takes the word in the sense of F0llesdal, that 
"meaning is the joint product of all the evidence that is available to all who 
communicate."15 Much depends here upon how 'evidence' is construed, 
upon how conflicts of evidence are handled, upon how evidence is related 
to what is evidenced, and so on. Also 'meaning' is taken here as a grand 
term — it should really be capitalized — for all meanings past, present, 
future, here, there, everywhere, so that 'the meaning of as applied to 
specific words and phrases is given no account. For quantum theory, it 
would seem, this grand construal of 'meaning' could be replaced by some 
narrower notion that can readily be handled within the kind of language-
system required. What sort of a notion could this be? 
In his paper given at the Fifth International Congress for Logic, 

234 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
Methodology, and Philosophy of Science16, Wheeler made a good deal of 
the notion of observership, which seems more specific for the intended pur­
pose. Of course 'observership' suggests an observer, and the logic of the 
term would seem to require this. Let 'Obs' be the predicate for observing as 
significant in the context 
(1) 
'p Obs x,a\ 
expressing that observer/? observes "entity" x as taken under the one-place 
predicate-description a.11 The variable 'x' here is to range over whatever 
the entities of the theory are and 'A' over the one-place predicates con­
structed out of its primitive terms. It might be thought that the form (1) 
would give us all that is needed. But no. The immediate acts of observing, 
the states of a proton as observed, and so on, must be provided for. The 
event- or process-predicate '<Obs>' is needed for this. Let 
'<Obs> e\ 
then, express that e is an act of event of observing of the kind quantum 
theory needs. 
In place of (1) we could then introduce — in familiar fashion in pro­
cess- or event-logic — 
'p Obsex,a' 
as short for 
'(<Obs> e . p Instr e . e OfQbect x . x 
Under'a)', 
where Instr is the relation of being the instrument — or agent — of the 
observing, x the object, and a the predicate-description giving the result of 
the observing (or the predicate-description under which a is taken).18 If this 
definition — or something like it — is feasible, the notion '<Obs>' can be 
incorporated within the language of quantum theory. Of course, to do this 
in detail would not be easy. In principle, however, to do so would seem 
eminently desirable. We would have to show how its use would help \.o pre­
cise the formulation of statements about the elementary quantum phenom-
enan, about complementarity, position, momentum, the wave-function, 
Bell's inequality, Wigner's notion of "amplification," probability ampli­
tudes, and so on and on. 
The question also arises as to whether '<Obs>', or something like it, 
is needed for a full schematization of the physics of Eras I and II. And even 
Quine's view can be stated only by making fundamental use of acts of iden­
tifying and explaining'. "By identifying each space-time point with a quad­
ruple of real or complex numbers according to an arbitrary system of coor-

QUINE'S "FACTS OF THE MATTER" 
235 
dinates, we can explain the space-time regions as sets of quadruples of num­
bers." Our acts of identifying and explaining, here, are fundamental to 
Quine's formulation, but do not therewith transform space-time points into 
quadruples of numbers as a fact of the matter. It is to be feared that a full 
statement of Quine's view — equations-cura-"text" — would require also 
the resources of Era II physics. 
In attempting to précisé the language of Era II physics, we must be 
careful to distinguish the roles of '<Obs>', say, from that of (some rep­
resentation of) 'consciousness', 'knowledge', 'information', and so on. 
Physicists tend to use these indiscriminately. Thus Eugene Wigner, for 
example, has commented that "physicists have found it impossible to give a 
satisfactory description of atomic phenomena without reference to con­
sciousness."19 And Heisenberg has commented that "the laws of nature 
which we formulate mathematically in quantum theory deal no longer with 
the elementary particles themselves but with our knowledge of this 
behavior."20 Many examples of such statements from eminent physicists 
could be given. The point here is not to call into question their general 
intent. Strictly, however, a logical reconstruction of the language of quan­
tum mechanics as such would presumably not make use of the whole gamut 
of epistemic words associated with 'mind', 'thought', 'knowledge', and so 
on. If the suggestion above is feasible, we should be able to get along with 
just '<Obs> e' and the full theory needed concerning it. A full epistemics 
would interanimate this notion with the others. Quantum mechanics, how­
ever, would seem to be a somewhat narrower enterprise, but still a much 
richer one than can be envisaged within Quine's narrow confines. 


CHAPTER EIGHTEEN 
On collective terms, mereological sums, and quan 
tifiers 
"Quae amissa salva." 
It has often been pointed out that the collective use of general terms may 
conveniently be handled in terms of mereological sums. Bertrand Russell's 
remark 
(1) 
'Americans are the unhappiest of people' 
does not lend itself easily to an analysis by means of quantifiers. It is not 
each and every American who is said here to be unhappy. No, the term 
'Americans' is to be construed collectively and the remark ascribes unhap-
piness to Americans as a whole or as a collective. It is the mereological sum 
(2) 
(pj u p 2 u ...), 
where p , pv etc., is the whole list of Americans to whom Russell intends 
reference, that is ascribed unhappiness in the way unhappiness is ascribable 
to collectives rather than to individual persons. A collective of people can­
not be said to be unhappy in precisely the same sense that an individual can 
be. The two meanings are interrelated, of course, and it is one of the func­
tions of a theory of hedonics to say precisely how. 
The sum (2) is spelled out above enumeratively, but in practice this is 
rarely done. In fact, in many instances it may not be possible to do so. 
Instead, where 'Amer p' expresses thatp is an American, in just the sense 
intended, we need a notation to give us the sum required. This sum is often 
referred to as the fusion of (the class of) Americans, where — recall the 
definition of 'FuPer p' in XV above — 
(3) 
'FuAmer p' 
could abbreviate 
'((Eg(Amer q . q Y p) . (x)(x P 
p z> (Ev)(E<z)(v P x . y P q . Amer q . q P p)))\ 

238 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
The fusion p of all Americans is then the one merological sum containing at 
least one American as a summand and such that every part of p has a part 
that is a part of some American that is a part of p. 
We could go on to speak of fusions of classes, or even of virtual classes, 
but the phrase 'mereological sum' seems more direct and more suggestive 
of what it purports to name. In general, then, let us speak of a mereological 
sum of entities x of which such and such holds, or satisfying such and such 
a condition. Let us let 
(4) 
\xo-x-y 
be significant as a primitive term, where '--*--' is a sentential form contain­
ing 'x' as a free variable and possibly free occurrences of other variables as 
well. (4) is to name the (generalized) mereological sum of all entities satis­
fying the condition that --*--. 
Note that (4) is akin to the expressions of the form 
\x\-x-y 
used in V above. These expressions are only for sums of unit entities. (4) is 
a much more general form, however, not confined just to units. The two 
forms are closely intertwined however, as we see by nothing that 
l(xo~x~) = (yl(Ex)(y P x . --*--))' 
and 
'(xl-x-) = (xo(Unit x . --*--))' 
would hold as theorems in any language containing both types of expres­
sions and having '--*--' as a sentential form in common. 
Note that in the definition (3) fundamental use is made of the quan­
tifiers occurring in the definiens, and such a definition is unthinkable with­
out them. If we take expressions of the form (4) as primitive terms of a new 
theory, we may provide for the quantifiers definitionally as well as for all 
the Boolean or mereological notions of the calculus of individuals. Let us 
show how this may be done by reflecting again upon the systems of V, but 
with the quantifiers dropped. The resulting system is of interest on its own 
account, and not only as providing a very simple and straightforward way of 
handling the collective uses of general terms.1 
Our primitive vocabulary, then, consists of 'P' for the part-whole rela­
tion, 'Ord' for the relation of ordinating, and '~' and 'v' as the primitive 
truth-functional connectives. In addition, all terms of the form (4) are 

COLLECTIVE TERMS, MEREOLOGICAL SUMS, AND QUANTIFIERS 239 
primitives, where '--*--' is a sentential form of the language. 
Let us note that '.', '=>', and '=' are immediately definable in familiar 
ways, and also that 
Dl. 
'x = y 
is short for 
' O P v . y P *)'. 
Also we have the two very immediate abbreviations, of 
D2. 
'W' 
for 
\xoxVx)\ 
and of 
D3. 
'N' 
for 
'(xo-xFxy 
Dl gives us identity, D2 the universal or world element, and D3 the null 
one. 
With 'P' and 'W' available, we may define the universal and existential 
quantifiers in context by letting first 
D4. 
'(*)--*--' 
abbreviate 
'(W P (xo--x~) . -N~)', 
and then, in familiar fashion 
D5. 
'(Ex)' 
may abbreviate 
'~ (x) ~'. 
Allowance is made here, it should be observed, for the quantifers to cover 
the null individual.2 
The remaining Boolean operators, together with relations of overlap­
ping and of being discrete, are now also definable. 
D6. 
'(jtuy)' 
for 
'(zo(zPjtvzPy))', 
D7. 
'(x n y)' 
for 
Ìzo(z P x . z P y))', 
D8. 
' x O y ' 
for 
' ( E z ) ( ~ z P N . z P x . zPy))', 
D9. 
' x D y ' 
for 
' ~ ; t O y ' , 
and 
DIO. 
c-x' for 
'(yoyDx)'. 
D6 introduces ordinary sums, D7 ordinary Boolean products, D8 the 
relation of overlapping, D9 that of discreteness, and DIO the Boolean nega­
tion. 
As a few basic principles of the theory we should note the following. 
Frl. 
yxYx, 
Pr2. 
\- (x P y . y P z) z) x P z. 
Also we would have that 

240 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
Pr3. 
| — - ID x P (yo—y—), where '--*--' differs from l—y-- only in 
containing free occurrences of V wherever there are free 
occurrences of 'y' in '—y--', 
Pr4. 
f- (xo—x--) P y = W P (xo(--x- =5 x P y)), where 'y' does not 
occur freely in '--x--', 
Pr5. 
h je P (yo--y~) = W P (yo(y P x => ~ (z o ~ (iva(z P y . z P w . 
--W--)) P N)) P N), where 'y' and 'z' do not occur freely in '--w--' 
and '--w--' and '--y--' differ from each other appropriately, 
Pró. 
(- (W P (jca-jc«) . - N - ) = ~y-, where (etc.), 
Pr7. 
\- (W P (xo(--x-- v 
)) . ("N-- v 
) . ~ 
) D W P (JCO-X--), 
where ' 
' is a formula not containing 'x' as a free variable, 
and that 
Pr8. 
\- (xo~x~) = (xo(~ x P N . - - ) . 
Prl-Pr2 give us two basic properties of P, and Pr3-Pr8 the same basic 
properties of generalized mereological sums. Presupposed, of course are 
principles yielding the truth-functional tautologies plus the rule of Modus 
Ponens. It should be noted that from Pro, in view of D4, we can prove that 
(5) 
|- (x)-x~ => -y-, where (as needed). 
Similarly we have from Pr7 that 
(6) 
(- (--*-- v 
) = ((JC)-X-- v 
), where (as needed). 
Also we must have a Rule of Generalization of the form 
Gen. 
If (- --*-- then h ( W P (xo-x-) 
. --N-), 
which of course gives us immediately by D5 that 
Gen'. If | — x - then |- (x)--x-. 
It is well known that Gen' together with (5) and (6) give us a viable rendi­
tion of the standard first-order quantification-theory as developed with the 
help of free variables. 
In the foregoing, fundamental use has been made of free variables. If 
these are to be dispensed with, we would proceed a little differently. In 
place of Prl we would have that 
PrV'. 
(-WP(xoxPx), 
providing that every element is a part of itself. Let now 

COLLECTIVE TERMS, MEREOLOGICAL SUMS, AND QUANTIFIERS 241 
Dlla. 
\~~~ abbreviate 
'(JCÖW P 
(yo~x~y--))\ 
Dllb. 
\xyzG-x--y--z-y 
abbreviate 
'(xyoW P {zo—x—y—z--))\ 
and so on. Then we would assume, in place of Pr2, that 
Pr2'. 
|- W P (xyzo(x P v . v P z ) ^ x P z)), 
providing for the transitivity law for P. And similarly for the other princi­
ples providing the other basic properties of P and of the mereological sums. 
And still further principles would be needed to assure that all laws of quan­
tification are forthcoming without the use of free variables. 
To provide for the theory ordinal individuals, further principles akin to 
those of V are of course needed, no matter how the quantifiers are handled. 
If any non-logical individual constants for specific cardinal or ordinal indi­
viduals (including collectives, attributive relations, relations of higher 
degree, as well as relation-individuals of higher logical type) are taken as 
primitives, appropriate allowance must be made for such in the statement 
of the laws and rules. And of course, suitable existence principles, as in V, 
are needed all along the line. 
The foregoing is not intended to provide a full formalization of the 
theory of generalized mereological sums, but only a rough sketch. It is not 
necessary to develop here an axiomatization or to exhibit the multitude of 
interesting theorems that would result. Such an enterprise would require a 
considerable technical development not needed for present purposes. The 
aim here has been merely to show that such a development is possible and 
to exhibit a few principles that should obtain. 
There are of course many alternative ways of providing for the quan­
tifiers currently on the market. Some make use of both free and bound var­
iables provided for primitively3; some of only bound variables4; some of 
only free variables but with bound variables allowed to form abstracts5 or 
special terms such as the Hilbertian e-expressions6, or the like; some with­
out variables at all, such as in predicate functor logic, relational algebra, 
relational-term logic, combinatory logic, and the like, as noted in XIII 
above. All of these methods have interesting features and good reasons are 
forthcoming for espousing them. The use of the expressions for generalized 
mereological sums above provides one more item in this arsenal of 
methods. It helps us to see that collective terms are quite as fundamental as 
distributive ones, and in fact the latter can be handled in terms of the 
former in view of D4 and D5. To say, for example, in virtual-class terms 
that 

242 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
(x)({v  --} x { ......} x), 
construed distributively, is merely to make a certain statement about the 
mereological sum 
(xo(—x— =3 ...x...)) 
and about N. 
Let us reflect for a moment upon some collective terms in English, as 
discussed in Fowler.7 "Fowler", according to Geach, "clearly had no 
proper logical education, but he shows a good nose for logical points."8 A 
good nose probably best reveals itself in being able to sniff out a reasonably 
good preliminary classification. Under 'collectives' Fowler writes: "The 
word is applied to many different things. What is common to all is that a 
noun singular in form is used with a plural implication.... Collectives may 
be roughly divided into the following groups. 1. Nouns denoting a whole 
made up of similar parts.... These are also called nouns of multitude. 2. 
Nouns that make no plural form but are used as both singular and plural.... 
3. Nouns that make plural forms in the normal way but whose singular form 
may also be used as a plural, sometimes with little if any difference of 
meaning.... 4. Names of materials used for a collection of things made 
from them.... 5. Words of number or amount that when used after definite 
or indefinite numerals have the singular rather than the plural form.... 6. 
Abstract singulars used instead of concrete plurals.... 7. Even nouns 
denoting substances of indefinite quantity such as butter and water are clas­
sed as collectives." 
Note that of these seven groups, only five are characterized semanti-
cally in terms of 'denotes' or 'names' or as explicitly denoted or named. We 
end up than with collective terms characterized as (1) nouns of multitude, 
(4) names of materials, (5) names of number or amount (6) abstract nouns, 
and (7) names of substances of indefinite quantity. Examples of (1) are 
'committee', 'firm', 'orchestra', 'soviet', of (4) 'china', 'linen', 'silver', of (5) 
'dozen', 'score', 'hundred', of (6) 'accommodation' (in the sense of 'rooms 
or lodgings'), 'kindling', 'royalty', 'pottery', of (7) 'butter' and 'water'. Sen­
tences containing these words may be given appropriate logical forms in 
terms of mereological sums.9 And, indeed, there appear to be no ways of 
doing this without the use of such sums. 

CHAPTER NINETEEN 
On the effectiveness of mathematics in the natural 
sciences: Wigner, Whitehead, and Carnap 
"Quae non valeant singula, juncta juvant." 
In a famous paper1, the eminent physicist and Nobel lauriate Eugene 
Wigner has commented "that the enormous usefulness of mathematics is 
something bordering on the mysterious and that there is no rational expla­
nation for it." Further, "it is just this uncanny usefulness of mathematical 
concepts that raises the question of the uniqueness of our physical 
theories." He ends his discussion with the cheerful observation that "the 
miracle of the appropriateness of the language of mathematics for the for­
mulation of the laws of physics is a wonderful gift which we neither under­
stand nor deserve. We should be grateful for it and hope that it will remain 
valid in future research and that it will extend, for better or for worse, 
to our pleasure, even though perhaps also to our bafflement, to wide 
branches of learning." As to this last, there need be no fear, as we shall try 
to show. And of course the gift of mathematics, along with much else in our 
human life, is a wonderful gift. And, no doubt, the appropriateness of 
mathematics for whatever it touches is a "miracle," along with the basic 
miracle of being or existence itself — to recall a notion due to Paul Tillich. 
For the present, let us leave the mystery, miracles, and gifts, as such, aside 
in order to ponder the reasonableness of them and hence to arrive at some 
modicum of philosophical understanding of them. 
Let us begin by reflecting, one by one, upon the items Wigner raises. 
Borrowing from Walter Dubislav, he comments that "somebody ... said 
that philosophy is the misuse of a terminology invented for just this pur­
pose. In the same vein, I would say that mathematics is the science of skill­
ful operations with concepts and rules invented for just this purpose. The 

244 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
principal emphasis is on the invention of concepts. Mathematics would soon 
run out of interesting theorems if these had to be formulated in terms of the 
concepts which already appear in the axioms." Clearly, now, mathemati­
cians are skillfull at operating with certain concepts or notions. Perhaps 
they "invent" them; perhaps they "discover" them. If we take the former 
view, we have the difficult task of explaining why what is invented is so "ob­
jective" and compelling and exerts such coercion upon all minds sufficiently 
trained to understand it. Once grasped, mathematical truths are of univer­
sal validity. Even so, it seems somewhat perverse to think that mathemati­
cal notions are "invented" or discovered just for the purpose of skillfully 
operating with them. By parity of phraseology, one would have to say that 
the great Bach fuges were written just for the purpose of playing them skill­
fully. Any such characterization would be one-sided and would leave the 
real heart of the matter out of account. 
We would hope, as we read on, that Wigner's account of mathematics 
would make up for this one-sidedness, but in this we are disappointed. Con­
sider, for example, the comment that "the rules for operations with pairs of 
numbers are obviously designed to give the same results with fractions 
which we first learned without reference to 'pairs of number.'" Let us be 
sure to distinguish here the contingency of how and what we happen to 
learn from the objectivity of what it is that is learned. Let us realize also 
that the logic of ordered pairs of numbers, or of pairs of anything else, is 
quite independent of any talk of fractions and owes its "validity" to the 
underlying logical principles governing them and not to those governing 
fractions. There would be ordered pairs even if there were no fractions. 
The laws governing ordered pairs are thus not "obviously designed" just to 
accommodate the fractions. How is it in fact that they do accommodate 
them so well? Because the notion of an ordered pair is of such vast general­
ity as to allow all manner of "entities" to be components of a pair. The 
"reason" for this latter is that it is an instance of a general principle implicit 
in the material of V above, this instance being that 
h(x)(v)((Nn x . Nn y) ID (Ez)z Ord x,y), 
that any natural numbers x and v are such that there exists a z that bears 
Ord to them. 
As a second example, Wigner notes that the "rules for the operations 
with sequences, that is, with irrational numbers, still belong to the category 
of rules which were determined so as to reproduce rules for the operations 

MATHEMATICS IN THE NATURAL SCIENCES 
245 
with quantities which were already known to us." Here, too, we should dis­
tinguish the general logic of sequences from the particular principles 
needed for handling sequences of numbers, and both of these from what 
happens to have been "already known to us." The logic of sequences, a part 
of the general theory of relations2, is a subject of immense importance and 
interest quite independent of its providing the foundation for the arithmetic 
of real numbers. It is surely a distortion to say that it was "determined so as 
to reproduce rules for the operations with quantities already known to us." 
It was determined by the discovery and explicit formulation of general log­
ical laws of universal validity concerning dyadic relations that are con­
nected, transitive, and contained in diversity.3 We shall try to show later 
just why such laws are helpful for gaining conceptual clarification in physjcs 
as well as elsewhere. 
Wigner writes that, "whereas it is unquestionably true that the con­
cepts of elementary mathematics and particularly elementary geometry 
were formulated to describe entities which are directly suggested by the 
actual world, the same does not seem to be true of the more advanced con­
cepts, in particular the concepts which play such an important role in 
physics.... Most more advanced mathematical concepts, such as complex 
numbers, algebras, linear operators, Borei sets — and this list could be con­
tinued almost indefinitely — were so devised that they are apt subjects on 
which the mathematician can demonstrate his ingenuity and sense of formal 
beauty.... The complex numbers provide a particularly striking example for 
the foregoing. Certainly, nothing in our experience suggests the introduc­
tion of these quantities. Indeed, if a mathematician is asked to justify his 
interest in complex number, he will point, with some indignation, to the 
many beautiful theorems in the theory of equations, of power series, and of 
analytic functions in general, which owe their origin to the introduction of 
complex numbers. The mathematician is not willing to give up his interest 
in these most beautiful accomplishments of his genius." 
Let us not deprive the mathematician of his interest in formal beauty, 
and there can be no doubt but that the long, slow, almost 2000 year 
development leading up to the theory of functions of a complex variable is 
one of the greatest achievements of the human mind in the whole of his­
tory. The reasons for this beauty and greatness are not so difficult to fathom 
as Wigner would have us believe. He omits to mention a crucial item con­
cerning the fundamental arithmetic operations of addition, subtraction, 
multiplication, division, exponentiation, and taking the roots of. In the sys-

246 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
tern of the positive integers, we have the closure principle for addition, 
that, given any two integers, the sum of them is an integer. We have also a 
closure principle for multiplication and exponentiation, but not fur subtrac­
tion, division, or taking the roots of. A closure principle is a thing of beauty 
and a desire forever, and the development of the signed integers, of the 
positive and of the signed rationals, of the real numbers, and of the com­
plex numbers was motivated, in part surely, by the desire to have closure 
principles — even if with certain restrictions — available for all of these 
fundamental operations. There is thus, indeed, something in mathematical 
experience, at each step of this development, to suggest the introduction of 
the new kind of number. 
Wigner makes much of the "invention of concepts," as we have already 
noted, and contends that "mathematics would soon run out of interesting 
theorems if these had to be formulated in terms of the concepts which 
already appear in the axioms." Here we should distinguish between primi­
tive and defined concepts, and between a "pure" mathematics and an 
"applied" one. The axioms need not all be stated just in primitive terms, 
although they could be if desired. Ordinarily some defined notions occur in 
the axioms along with the primitive ones. As the system is developed, more 
and more definitions are introduced and therewith more and more "new" 
concepts. It is often surprizing that such concepts become available in this 
way, and that "interesting" theorems are provable (from the axioms) con­
cerning them. In a pure mathematics, all the definable notions must be 
regarded as mathematical ones. In an applied mathematics, there must 
always be at least one non-mathematical primitive notion, usually a predi­
cate, applicable to the non-mathematical objects under consideration. Con­
cerning this predicate or these predicates, suitable non-mathematical 
axioms are given laying down the salient non-mathematical principles 
needed. But whatever we do here, if the system itself is of any genuine use­
fulness, there are always interesting theorems forthcoming. And ultimately, 
if all definitional abbreviations are eliminated, these may all be stated 
wholly in terms of the primitives, which already appear in the axioms. 
Mention of applied mathematics leads us at once to the portals of 
physics. "The physicist is interested in discovering the laws of inanimate 
nature," we are told, and such laws "contain, even in their remotest conse­
quences, only a small part of our knowledge of the inanimate world." As 
philosophers, we seek also to understand, or to make sense of, the state­
ments in which these laws are expressed, to see how they relate one to 

MATHEMATICS IN THE NATURAL SCIENCES 
247 
another, and to incorporate as many as we can within a systematic 
framework. The endeavor to understand, in this sense, may also serve as a 
heuristic for the discovery of new laws. Discovery and systematization are 
thus not to be thought of as separate enterprises; each may contribute to 
the other in fundamental ways. 
What, now, is the role of mathematics in physical theories? "Natur­
ally," Wigner observes, "we do use mathematics in everyday physics to 
evaluate the results of the laws of nature [which are always of conditional 
form], to apply the conditional statements to the particular conditions 
which happen to prevail or which happen to interest us. In order that this 
be possible, the laws of nature must already be formulated in mathematical 
language." For this remark to be cogent, we should construe 'mathematics' 
in a somewhat broader sense than Wigner intends. It should include also 
the Bridgmanian "text" (already referred to in XVII above), or rather, the 
text in a semiotically formalized format. The laws of nature are to be stated, 
not just in the language of pure mathematics but in the "mixed" language 
incorporating the text as well. And herein lies the difficulty. The languages 
of logic and pure mathematics are already formulated, but that embodying 
the text ordinarily is not. Wigner notes that "there are two basic concepts in 
quantum mechanics: states and observables. The states are vectors in Hil­
bert space, the observables self-adjoint operators on these vectors." This, 
of course, is only a part of the story, a full formalization of the whole text 
being needed before anything even remotely accommodating quantum 
mechanics in any intelligible sense is achieved. 
We are now in a position to attempt to answer — to some extent, any­
how — the question as to why logic and mathematics play so important and 
effective a rule in the natural sciences. For this, let us construe 'logic' in a 
wide sense so as to embrace mathematics as formulated, say, in the manner 
of V above, as well as a semiotics or metalogic, as essentially in II above, to 
provide for any relevant text. Logic may then be conceived as the most gen­
eral theory of mereology and/or "ontology" needed for natural language. 
Special scientific, technical terms may be added as new primitives as 
needed. The means are then at hand for expressing, in a concrete linguistic 
form, whatever is desired in a given context. This is the sense in which the 
laws of nature may be said to be "already ... formulated in mathematical 
language" — not explicitly written down, but formulable in terms of the lin­
guistic resources at hand. 
The connection between a formulated natural science and the underly­
ing ontological-semiotical framework is that between exempla and the 

248 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
underlying principia, between a specialized instance and a completely gen­
eral theory containing, in a certain sense, all possible instances. No account 
short of this would seem to shed much philosophical understanding on this 
complex interrelationship. In Wigner's view, the connection seems "un­
reasonable," bordering on the mysterious, and lacking in rationality. The 
real mystery here concern the nature of logic itself, our main source of 
rationality, without which mathematics, the sciences, and all serious dis­
course crumble to the dust. 
In another famous essay4, Whitehead, in speaking of algebra as the 
study of "patterns," comments that "mathematics is the most powerful 
technique for the understanding of pattern, and for the analysis of relation­
ships of pattern.... Having regard to the immensity of its subject-matter, 
mathematics, even modern mathematics, is a science in its babyhood. If 
civilization continues to advance, in the next two thousand years the over­
whelming novelty in human thought will be the dominance of mathematical 
understanding." Whitehead does not confine mathematics here just to the 
study of geometry and number, but regards it as the study of pattern in gen­
eral. And by a pattern here we can mean a relational structure in the sense 
of the modern logic of relations.5 Relations — to reiterate somewhat — are 
essential in delineating structures of sufficient complexity for mathematics 
and the sciences, and a fortiori for any systematic discourse in the human­
ities.6 
Earlier in his essay, incidentally, Whitehead has some rather harsh 
things to say about the theory of number as based upon the theory of types. 
Because the formulation of numerical mathematics presupposed in this pre­
sent paper contains a version of type-theory, as noted in V above, it will not 
be out of place to examine the points Whitehead raises in order to show 
that they are not applicable here. 
"Russell introduced the notion of "types" of entities," Whitehead 
writes. "According to that doctrine, the notion of number should only be 
applied to a group of entities of the same type. Thus the number "three" 
as applied to entities of one type has a different meaning to the number 
"three" as applied to entities of another type. For example, if we are con­
sidering two different types, there are two different meanings of the 
number "three." Russell was perfectly correct. By confining numerical 
reasoning within one type, all the difficulties [contradictions or paradoxes] 
are avoided. He had discoverd a rule of safety. But unfortunately this rule 
cannot be expressed apart from the presupposition that the notion of 

MATHEMATICS IN THE NATURAL SCIENCES 
249 
number applies beyond the limitations of the rule. For the number "three" 
in each type, itself belongs to different types. Also each type is itself of a 
distinct type from other types. Thus, according to the rule, the conception 
of two different types is nonsense, and the conception of two different 
meanings of the number three is nonsense. It follows that our only way of 
understanding the rule is nonsense." 
Let us broaden somewhat the notion of natural number as sketched in 
OM. The only entities assigned numbers there are the cardinal ones, 
although the numbers themselves are construed as infinite logical sums of 
certain kinds of ordinal entities. Let us put forward now a new notion of 
number, by broadening the key relation Sm of equinumerosity or similarity. 
For this, also, we must broaden the definition of 
'x u2 y' 
to be now short for 
'((z)((lJnit Z . Z P Í Í ) D (EW)(EV)Z 
= (w ord v)) . (je ord y) P )', 
so that u2 here is a dyadic relation-individual between any x and  and not 
just between cardinal entities. In OM, Sm is introduced as a relation signif­
icant only between cardinal entities. Let us weaken this requirement some­
what and let 
'x Sm y' 
abbreviate now 
'(>2)((1-»1)>9 . (z)(u)(z vv9  z> 
(Unit z . Cardlnd z . z P x . Unit  .  P y)) ~ (z)((Unit z . Card­
ine! z . z P x) ZD (Eu)(Unit  .  P y . z w2 u)) . (w)((Unit  .  F 
y) => (Ez)(Unit z . Cardlnd z . z P x . z >2 )))'. 
Thus x and  are similar if there is a one-one relation between their respec­
tive unit parts. Letting now 
'NC'JC' 
abbreviate 
'(yl(Ez)(y Ord z,z . Cardlnd z . z Sm x))\ 
we arrive at a notion of the cardinal number of x no matter what kind of an 
entity x may be. Also independently of this broadened relation Sm, we may 
let 
T 
abbreviate 
'(xl(Ey)(x Ord , . Cardlnd  . Unit ))', 
'T 
abbreviate 
'(1()()( Ord ( u z),(y u z) . Unit y . 
Unit z . Cardlnd y . Cardlnd z . ~ y P z))', 
and so on. The required properties of the natural numbers are then forth­
coming in the system, on the basis, of course, of appropriate axioms. 
Note that the cardinal number of x is taken here as the sum of dyadic 

250 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
ordinal individuals both of whose ordinands are the same cardinal entity, 
this entity bearing Sm to x. Why not take it merely as the sum of all entities, 
cardinal or otherwise, bearing Sm to xl If we did this latter, we would have 
the unfortunate consequence that 1 would equal 2. 1 would then become 
the sum of all unit entities, and thus W itself. 2 would become the sum of all 
dual entities, and thus W itself! The trick of the method used here is to 
require the notion of being a unit part of to play the erstwhile role of being 
a member of m set- or class-theory. To be a unit part of 2 here is to be a unit 
x determined by a dual entity (x  z), the way of determining this being to 
require that x Ord (  z), (y  z). If 2 were the mere sum of all duals, its 
unit parts would not be parts determined in some way by dual entities. The 
use of sums of unit parts — both cardinal and ordinal — is fundamental to 
the method here and enables us to avoid all reference to sets or classes. 
The method of introducing numbers here contrasts with that presented 
in the preliminary sketch of OM, in the Appendix below, which makes fun­
damental use of virtual classes and relations. The method here, on the con­
trary, avoids all such use, and is allied to the second method of OM (not 
mentioned in the Appendix). There are still further ways of introducing 
cardinal numbers, on the basis of either method, that are worth exploring. 
It is far from clear yet that there is any one method — even in set-theory — 
that is fully satisfactory from all points of view. 
Let us observe now that Whitehead's objections to the theory of types 
do not apply to the theory of cardinal numbers just sketched. Let us con­
sider the one number 3, as introduced by the definition that 
'3' 
abbreviates 
'(xl(Ey)(Ez)(Ew)(x Ord ( y u z u w ) , ( y u z u 
w) . Unit y . Unit z . Unit w . Cardini y . Cardlnd z . Cardlnd w 
. ~ y P z . ~ y P i v . ~ z P 
w))\ 
According to this, 3 is the infinite logical sum of all dyadic ordinal individu­
als whose two ordinands are some one and the same sum of three cardinal 
units. 
In Russell's theory, Whitehead observes, "if we are considering two 
types [of entities], there are two different meanings of the number 
"three"." Let a, b, and  by any three distinct cardinal units, say, and u*, u^, 
u^ any three distinct unit dyadic relations between cardinal entities. Clearly 
we have then that 
Nc'(a  b  ) = 3, 
and also that 

MATHEMATICS IN THE NATURAL SCIENCES 
251 
Nc'(u^  ]  ]) = 3. 
Both of these depend upon the principles that 
h (*)(y)(z)((Unit x . Unit v . Unit z . ~ x P y . ~ x P z . ~ y P z ) 
ZD (wl(Eu)(w Ord  .  Sm (x u v  z))) = (wl(E*')(E/)(Ez') 
(Unit x' . Unit y' . Unit z' . Cardlnd x' . Cardlnd y' . Cardlnd z' 
. ~ x' P y' . ~ x' P z' . ~ y' P z~' . w Ord (x' u y' u z'),(x' u y' 
uz')))). 
Whitehead also objects that "the number "three" in each type, itself 
belongs to different types," in Russell's account. In the theory here, how­
ever, 3 is of just one type but can be the cardinal number of any entity hav­
ing as summands dyadic ordinal entities whose ordinands are any triples of 
distinct units whatsoever. "Also each type is itself of a distinct type from 
other types. Thus, according to the rule, the conception of two different 
types is nonsense,..." But not here. Let V be the "type," so to speak, of 
cardinal entities, and V^ of attributive relations of cardinal entities. We may 
let 
'w2 Att x' be short for 
£(~  P N . (y)((Unit  .  P ) => (Ez)y 
Ord z,z) . (x ord x) P  . (z)(w)((z ord w) P  = z = w))\ 
expressing that u7 is an attributive relation of x no matter what the type of 
x is. Then, also, we may let 
'{z-.^z = x v z = y)}' abbreviate 
'(9 . (w9 Att x . u2 Att  . 
(Z)(M Att ZZD(Z = X V Z = ))))'. 
then, clearly, 
Nc' {z:(z = Vlvz 
= V])} =2; 
And similarly for any other two distinct "types." 
Note here that the use of '{z:(z = x v z = y)}' is an adaptation of the 
familiar notation for class-abstraction. Here it is taken as an expression for 
the attributive relation of applying to either x or y. In any full development 
of the system into the foundations of mathematics, such a notation, as well 
as one for relational abstraction in general, would be very useful. Rather 
than as classes of classes that correspond one-to-one with a given class (as 
with Whitehead and Russell), the cardinal numbers here are taken as infi­
nite sums of attributive relations of cardinal units, of cardinal duals, and so 
on. The restriction to cardinal units, duals, and so on, here is to use as 
counters, so to speak, the simplest kinds of entities available in the system. 

252 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
Incidentally, Whitehead himself, in 1934, published a paper purporting 
also to avoid the inadequacies of Russell's method.7 Unfortunately, this 
paper has been almost totally neglected by the Whitehead commentators. 
There is need for a careful appraisal of it that cannot be undertaken here. 
Prima facie, there seem to be some disconcerting features in the system put 
forward that would require a very considerable discussion. Fundamental 
use is made of unanalyzed propositions sui generis together with quantifiers 
upon them. At best such entities are obscure and cry out for a clear-cut 
semantical characterization. Also ' = ' is taken as a primitive as between 
propositons, a notoriously difficult and controversial notion in need of 
much explication. In the interpretation of 'p = q' much must depend upon 
the inner character of p and q. Unanalyzed propositional identity is a highly 
obscure notion on which to attempt to found mathematics. As a primitive, 
also, there is 'Ec!' in the context 'Ec!x' expression "aproposition aboutx ... 
which ascribes to x no intension other than that intension derived from 
purely logical notions. It is a proposition involving x in the extremity of 
abstraction from intension. This is what is meant by saying that it is a prop-
ositon involving x in pure extension. It expresses that recognition of indi­
viduality which is involved in counting." These comments need a good deal 
of further elaboration before any clear semantics for 'Ec!*' can emerge. 
Whitehead construes the unit class of x merely as the proposition Ec!x, 
therewith blurring the assertive or sentential character of a proposition with 
the entitival character of a unit class. And similarly for relations. Perhaps a 
fundamental category mistake is involved here. It is thus an open question 
as to whether a viable foundation for arithmetic is forthcoming in this 
paper. The matter needs a careful discussion, if only to place it properly 
within the whole Whitehead corpus. 
Let us return now to our main theme. 
In another important essay, presented at the Harvard Tercentenary8, 
Carnap reflected upon logic under the general rubric "Factors Determining 
Human Behavior." "To see clearly on the matter," he writes, "it is essential 
that we obtain an adequate conception of the province of logic," and this 
latter "is concerned with relations between factual sentences" — and 
between logically true ones also, as well as between sentences of both 
kinds, it should be added. He goes on to point out "the requirements which 
thinking must satisfy in order to be logical or reasonable," namely, "clarity, 
consistency, and adequacy of evidence." Let us glance briefly at these by 
way of a needed supplement to Wigner's account. 

MATHEMATICS IN THE NATURAL SCIENCES 
253 
Carnap discusses the condition of clarity by making much of the old 
positivist thesis of the meaningless of metaphysical sentences. It will be 
more to the point, for the present, to reflect upon the need for clarity in the 
language of science itself. 'Clarity' is a tricky word and can be made to 
cover much too much. Perhaps it should best be thought of in terms of a full 
delineation of relevant structure, both that between or among the sentences 
of the given language, and that which the various sentences themselves 
describe relationally of the objects the theory talks about. Concerning the 
former, we know now a good deal, thanks to the tremendous advances in 
modern logic. Concerning the latter, however, we know much less that we 
should like, thanks to the almost total neglect of these advances on the part 
of working scientists themselves. Quantum mechanics is a good case in 
point. The role of the observer, of the observations involved, and of the 
coding of these observations withing an appropriate symbolism, play a fun­
damental role. (Recall XVIII above.) A full logic of all this, which has not 
been supplied, would seem needed to provide for the semiotics of the 
"text" as well as to help us keep tabs on our tools. Whatever being "clear" 
about a given subject-matter is, surely explicit awareness of the relational 
structure involved and of the nature of the entities related is an essential 
ingredient. And the more detailed it is, the better. Like truth itself, Gott 
wohnt im Detail, as an old German adage has it. 
The condition of consistency surely needs no further elaboration or 
justification at this late date. Without it, science itself crumbles. We are 
assuming here the usual two-valued logic of the truth-functional connec­
tives, so that the law 
(L) 
^{^{~^) 
holds. Thus if A and r ~ A1 both hold, then any  does also, so that all sen­
tences of the science then hold; the difference between truth and falsity col­
lapses. 
Concerning what is essentially this argument, Tarski has remarked, 
interestingly, that he "has some doubts whether ... [it] contains an adequate 
analysis of the situation. I think that people who do not know modern logic 
are as little inclined to accept an inconsistent theory as those who are 
thoroughly familiar with it; and probably this applies even to those who 
regard (as some still do) the logical law (L) on which the argument is based 
as a highly controversial issue, and almost as a paradox. I do not think that 
our attitude toward an inconsistent theory would change even if we decided 

254 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
for some reasons to weaken our system of logic so as to deprive ourselves of 
the possibility of deriving every sentence from any two contradictory sen­
tences."9 Tarski is not here condemning those who accept (L) as a logical 
law, but rather is concerned with (i) those who "do not know modern 
logic," and hence in particular the classical logic containing this law, and 
with (ii) those who accept an alternative kind of logic in which (L) does not 
figure as a law. If Tarski is correct concerning those in (i), this is splendid. 
For those under (ii), it should be observed that we know a great deal more 
now about deviant systems of logic than at the time Tarski wrote, and that 
there is much more evidence now, than then, that such logics presuppose 
the classical logic (containing (L) as a law) within the metalanguage in 
which the deviant logic is formulated. The law (L) need not occur within 
the deviant logic itself, but only within the semiotics in which the "text" 
concerning the logic is formulated.10 Tarski's doubts here thus need no 
longer seriously detain us. 
Carnap's third condition, that of adequacy of evidence, is not quite so 
easy. This condition is "that there be a sufficiently secure empirical founda­
tion both for the universal laws we formulate and for the predictions we 
make with their aid." In the years since Carnap wrote this, it has become 
increasingly difficult to arrive at any satisfactory notion of adequacy of evi­
dence. Also, emphasis upon the purely empirical character of evidence has 
been questioned, concepts and non-empirical features looming to be of 
greater import than Carnap indicates. 
One more item concerning the effectiveness of mathematics in natural 
science should be mentioned before we close, namely the importance of 
quantitative concepts, without which the advanced sciences are unthinka­
ble. Carnap, again, has skillfully called attention to these. "Quantitative 
concepts," he writes11, "(also called metrical or numerical concepts or num­
erical functions) are those which serve for characterizing things or events or 
certain of their features by the ascription of numerical values; these values 
are found either directly by measurement or indirectly by calculation from 
other values of the same or other concepts.... Quantitative concepts are no 
doubt the most effective instruments in the scientific arsenal." Mathematics 
as the general study of relational structures does, after all, contain as a part 
the theory of quantity — let us not forget. This, together with the where­
withal needed for the formulation of the "text," give us two of the great pil­
lars, surely, upon which the edifice of the sciences rests. 
A final comment, in Wignerian style, concerning the gift of the myteri-

MATHEMATICS IN THE NATURAL SCIENCES 
255 
ous effectiveness of mathematics überhaupt. The mystery is that of rational­
ity itself. Whence does it come and to what avail? Its gift is one of the great 
treasures of life, and logic is the means of its use. Rationality is the key to 
philosophic understanding. We are free to reject it if we wish, just as we are 
free to reject other treasures. The real bafflement would seem to be the 
widespread proclivity for such rejection. The treasures are ours, not just for 
the asking but only as the result of much hard work and stern discipline — 
intellectual, moral, and aesthetic. Unwillingness to undergo these, but in 
their stead to put something easier and more obvious, and more conductive 
to immediate earthly gain, seems to be characteristic of our human lot.... 


CHAPTER 20 
On ordinal acts and era III mathematics 
"Kein Weg; ins Unbetretene!" 
In the original presentation of ordinal mereology, OM, it will be recalled, 
much was made of the predicate 'Ord' for the relation of ordination.1 The 
form 
lx Ord y,z' 
expresses that x is the result of ordinating y and z in this order, in other 
words, that x is the ordinal individual consisting of y and z taken in this 
order. Ordinal individuals were assumed to be individuals in rerum natura 
on a part with the non-ordinal, cardinal individuals. It was remarked, 
rather casually, that 'Ord' is "the kind of predicate that gives rise [— natur­
ally, we might add —] to an event-descriptive predicate.2 Let 
'<Ord> e' 
express that e is an act or process of ordinating. The ordinal indivdual {x 
ord ) is then the result of an act of ordinating x with y. Who or what is it 
that does the ordinating? It may be a human individual — the "creative sub­
ject'1 of intuitionistic mathematics (in one kind of rendition) — or a compu­
ter, or a social group of some kind, or whatever...." Let us take this casual 
remark seriously, now, to see whither it leads us. It will turn out to be a 
good deal more serious and interesting than was originally supposed. 
Where <Ord>e, we may think of e as a kind of constructive act on the 
part of the logician or mathematician when doing his or her offical work. In 
fact, it may be thought of as the most fundamental kind of act he or she 
ever performs, for out of such acts the relations may be constructed that 
provide the wherewithal for doing mathematics. Let On0bect and WithRes-
pectTo be basic propositional relations4, and let lx Result e' express that x 

258 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
is the result of, or results from, the act or process e. The x here might be a 
"concrete" object, but it need not be; it might be a state or even an act or 
process itself. In fact, the result could be taken as the very e such that 
<Ord>e, so that we may let 
'e Ord  
abbreviate 
'(<Ord>e . Act e . e On^u 
x . e 
,y 
 
Object 
WithRespectTo v . e Result e)\ 
Here, even if x and v are "concrete" objects, or of whatever kind of object 
is regarded as acceptable in the given context, e may itself be taken as (x 
ord v). 
We may go on to iterate Ord, as previously, so that 
'e Ord x,y,f 
may abbreviate 
'(')( Ord x,y . e Ord e',z)', 
and so on. Although two styles of variables have been used here, we see 
that they reduce actually to just one. Any differentiation intended between 
the 'e's, etc., and the 'x's, etc., is provided by the context. By further itera­
tion, all manner of ordinal individuals may be built up. These are to be the 
simplest, or "unit," ordinals. 
We have seen previously how, in terms of 'Ord' together with the basic 
'P' for a part-whole relation, we may go on to construct mathematical 
notions and to prove mathematical principles given suitable assumptions. 
But, of course, strong principles must be assumed concerning the existence 
of appropriate ordinal individuals. Instead of postulating strong existence 
principles ab initio, we may proceed more cautiously and assume just such 
principles as are needed for a given domain of mathematical theory. For the 
construction of the system of signed rational numbers, for example, a great 
deal more by way of existence is needed than for just the positive integers. 
The various Boolean operations, for sums, products, and negations, 
are assumed available as well as an operation of unit-summation, where 
\x\-x-y 
stands for the sum of all (cardinal or ordinal) entities x such that —x--. It is 
assumed that every e such that <Ord>e is a unit, in the sense that it is non-
null and is a part of all its non-null parts. There are several alternative ways 
of handling all these matters technically that need not concern us here. 
Given the simplest — i.e., unit — ordinal individuals, i.e., the e's such 
that 
(E^)(Ee 2>Orde 1 ? e2, 

ORDINAL ACTS AND ERA III MATHEMATICS 
259 
Boolean sums, products, and so on, of the term are also admitted. An n-
adic relation in general, then, is any Boolean sum of unit rc-adic ordinal 
individuals. These latter are any e's such that 
e Ord x,,...,x 
, 
where each x. is a non-ordinal individual. 
i 
What, now, are we to say about the agent of an e such that <Ord>e? 
Are we to assume that all such acts are available somehow sub specie aeter-
nitatis or are we explicitly to assume them to be performed by a human 
agent? or by a computer? or by an AI (artificial intelligence)? This too is a 
matter that may be left open for the moment, but very different concep­
tions of mathematics emerge depending upon how it is handled. The sub 
specie aeternitatis view is essentially that of classical mathematical 
"realism," with all its entities spread out before us in their pristine Fregean 
grandeur. If we relativize the acts to a specific person, say, to L.E.J. 
Brouwer himself, we have the means for building up an intuitionistic 
mathematics, depending upon just what <Ord>'s are taken as acceptable. 
And so on, for other views. 
Let us take another step and treat the part-whole relation itself in 
terms of an event-descriptive predicate. Let 
'<P>e' 
be an act of taking something to be a part of something. Then 
'x P y' 
is definable as 
'(Ee)(<P>e . Act e . e OnQb.ect x . e 
WithRespectToy)', 
so that x is a part of  just where there is some act of taking it to be such.5 
In this way mereology itself takes on an act-theoretic form. Of course, the 
original entities x, y, and so on, are still "concrete" entities in natura, but 
that one is or is not a part of another is not a "fact," so to speak, but the 
result of a human (or other) act of some kind. 
All of the Boolean notions can now be handled similarly, so that 
'<Sum>e' may be defined to express that e is an act of summing two entities, 
'<Prod>e', an act of forming the product, and so on. Boolean sums, pro­
ducts, and so on, are thus no longer assumed to exist independently of such 
acts, but only as the result of them. 
Governing 'P' and the Boolean notations, the very general laws previ­
ously assumed to hold concerning them need no longer obtain. For exam­
ple, we need no longer require that given any x and , there is Boolean sum 

260 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
(x  v) of x and y. Instead only such sums exist as result from e's such that 
<Sum>e. And so on. And similarly for principles governing 'P' and the ' 
of unit summation. 
We have, then, two methods here, depending upon whether we take 
'<Ord>' and 'P' as the primitives, or '<Ord>' and '<P>'. The first might 
well be thought preferable to the latter, the notion of '<Ord>' seeming 
perhaps more natural than that of '<P>'. 
Let us recall, from XVIII above, J. A. Wheeler's conception of Era III 
physics, "meaning physics," so called.6 How, now, is Era III physics to dif­
fer from its predecessors? By bringing in fundamentally acts of observation, 
or the like, to provide somehow for the factor of "meaning." "Existence," 
according to Wheeler, "is the closed circuit of meaning.... Physics supplies to 
the machinery for constructing meaning, and meaning supplies the machin­
ery for constructing physics. The first half of the "meaning circuit" is famil­
iar in the main. Physics gives sight and sound and all the other agencies of 
communication. It also gives the biology to make the communicators! And 
out of communication comes meaning. The other half, the "return portion" 
... is stranger. The demand for meaning we are to understand as the origin 
of probability and phase [in quantum mechanics], and phase we are to learn 
to consider as the definer of all fields, of all geometry, of all spacetime — 
and, in the end, therefore, of all particles and of all physics. Physics, on this 
view, is the child of meaning even as meaning is the child of physics." 
'Meaning' here is not to be construed in a vague Frege-Carnap — or 
Montaguean, for that matter — way, but in terms of physically specifiable 
acts of observation, the full structure of which remains to be characterized. 
Here is surely a salient point that physicists have been neglecting all along. 
The stage seems to have been reached when deep philosophical — more 
specifically, semiotical — analysis of the full vocabulary of physics becomes 
imperative. And this analysis is no longer to be carried out in the 
amateurish way that is customary among philosophers, but only on the 
basis of a deep mastery of the details of physics in their most recent setting. 
A full semiotical and event-logical characterization of every detail of the 
physical language is now needed. 
Further, meaning for Wheeler comes out of communication, which in 
turn presupposes communicators. A human agent seems thus needed, the 
physicist doing physics, in a way similar to that in which the "creative sub­
ject" is needed in some renditions of intuitionistic mathematics. Further, 
these doings are carried out at specific times and the results are usually 

ORDINAL ACTS AND ERA III MATHEMATICS 
261 
explicitly written down in some fashion on tablets, or with pen and ink, and 
so on, in terms of physical inscriptions. No inscriptions, no written 
mathematics or physics, and thus no communication of such — except 
perhaps with extreme difficulty. 
"No problem about "physics as meaning,"" Wheeler concludes, 
"strikes one as more immediate than time, and for no concept more than 
time are the implications more revolutionary. What about all those billions 
of years in the early universe when there were no communicators around to 
establish meaning? Were not those galaxies out there as real then as they 
are now? And equally real the galaxies which have not come into view 
today, but will swim up over the horizon tomorrow?" And again: "Essential 
in making headway into Era III physics is a reassessment of "time." Time is 
not a Heaven-sent concept. It is no luminous overarching sky supplied from 
outside for the benefit of physics. It is a human invention. The concept of 
"elasticity" is no more and no less a human invention. Elasticity fails, has 
no application, in the space between the electron and the atomic nucleus. 
Time likewise fails: fails at the Planck scale of distances, fails in the initial 
phase of the big bang, and fails in gravitational crunch. Both "time" and 
"elasticity" are not primordial entities in the description of nature, but sec­
ondary, approximate and derived (elasticity) or yet to be derived (time) 
from more primitive considerations. To supply that derivation is a central 
task — and opportunity — for Era III "meaning physics."" 
If mathematics is developed in the fashion sketched above, in terms of 
'<Ord>' and 'P', or, alternatively, of, '<Ord>' and '<P>', as the basic 
primitives, the result is an Era III mathematics. Era I mathematics is the 
long history from the ancients up to about a century ago, and Era II is the 
period of the emergence and development of axiomatic set-theory and its 
applications. Era III no doubt has its beginnings in the work of Kant and 
Brouwer, although it is only quite recently that it has been given a formula­
tion in terms of the "creative subject" — and, still more recently, seen that 
it could be formulated in terms of his or her explicit acts. 
From these remarks, we see that mathematics and physics are much 
more closely related than is usually supposed. They have a common sub­
ject-matter, a common ontology, the physical objects. One salient differ­
ence emerges, however. Physics must make use of a multitude of primitive 
predicates applicable to the physical objects, whereas in mathematics no 
such predicates are needed. No, the only ones needed for the latter, as con­
ceived here, are '<Ord>' and 'P' or '<Ord>' and '<P>'. Physics, how-

262 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
ever, needs these also, to provide its mathematical underpinning, as well as 
further ones, to provide for both the "meaning" and physical content. 
What, now, are we to say about the existence of physico-mathematical 
objects, notions, and laws prior to the big bang and after gravitational col­
lapse? Well, the very use of 'prior to' and 'after' here are undefined, and no 
definitions would seem forthcoming without a theory of time. There are at 
least two, quite distinct, ways of viewing the matter. We might regard the 
objects, notions, and laws as beginning their long evolution with the big 
bang and ending in the gravitational crunch — and that is that. Or, alterna­
tively, we can regard the event-descriptive notions as "Heaven-sent con­
cepts," in Wheeler's very phase, having a non-physical existence and con­
tent of some sort. Of course, there are no physical objects for them to be 
applicable to — unless physical objects themselves be handled in terms of a 
still further kind of event-descriptive predicate of a non-physical kind. Such 
a view is not so outré as it might appear. C.S. Peirce, for example, has 
espoused something similar — matter as mind "hidebound with habit" — 
and objective idealists throughout the centuries have spoken, in varying 
ways, of mind as "embodied" in material objects. Although this second 
view transcendends the limitations of what ordinarily passes as either 
physics or mathematics, the fundamentals of the Era III conception of them 
would seem to be in essential harmony with it. 

Appendix: a thumbnail sketch of ordinal mereology 
"Sets are central," Meyer and Routley have told us, "to extensionalist for­
mal ontology. It was not always so ... for many were the reductionist pro­
jects which sought to construct the whole World out of particulars of some 
kind or other. It is generally agreed, however, that these projects did not 
come off — at least they did not come off well enough to provide for 
mathematics, which everyone agrees should be provided for." Presumably 
the authors are referring to modern forms of nominalism that renounce sets 
and employ only extensionalist ontologies. Later they ask "Can the exten­
sionalist do without sets? This is, as they say, the heroic course." Some of 
us have resolutely been following the heroic course over the years, and 
moreover, far enough to provide for some portions of mathematics, por­
tions comparable to those provided by Brouwerian intuitionism in its mod­
ern forms. An example is the author's "A Homogeneous System [H] for 
Formal Logic" and the two papers that followed (J.S.L., vols. 8, 13, & 14). 
In the system H, it will be recalled, no use is made of sets, only of individu­
als being admitted as values for variables. Of course abundant use is made 
of virtual classes and relations, but this is a very different matter. The sys­
tem H consists essentially of a mereology or calculus of individuals based on 
a part-whole relation P and augmented with a theory- of ancestral quantifi­
cation. This latter is now dropped, in the present paper, in favor of a triadic 
relation Ord providing for the notion of an ordinal individual. The inclusion 
of this latter seems a very natural extension of mereology. 'Ord' is taken as 
a primitive significant in contexts of the form 'x Ord v,z', expressing that x 
consists of the individuals v and z taken in this order — in other words, that 
x is an ordinal individual, a kind of non-communicative quasi-mereological 
compound of v and z. The calculus of individuals is augmented with the 
theory of such ordinals, so that the ordinary Boolean sums, products, etc., 
of them may also be formed. In this way relations of various degrees 
between or among individuals may be accommodated, such relations being 
ordinary Boolean sums of ordinal individuals. And similarly for relations 

264 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
between relations. In this paper it is shown how such a framework can be 
made to provide a foundation for numerical mathematics up to and including 
the complex number-system. If these considerations — or something 
closely akin — are sound, we would see to be on the road to gaining the 
simplest, most straightforward, and ontologically most scrupulous founda­
tion for mathematics yet put forward. 
In addition to 'P' and 'Ord', let expressions of the form '(xl—x—)' be 
primitive as terms for the Boolean sum of all unit or atomic individuals x 
such that —--. Similarly, {—x--} is the virtual class of all individuals x 
such that ~x--\ and likewise for virtual relations. The following definitions 
and principles (with omissions) are then more or less self-explanatory. 
Prl. 
\-(x)x?x, 
Pr2. 
h 0 ) 0 ) 0 X 0 Pv . y P z) => x? z), 
Dl. 
lx = y' 
abbreviates 
' ( i P y . y P x ) 1 , 
Pr3a. h (x)(v)(z)(w)((x Ord y,z) . w Ord y, z => x P w), 
Pr3b. \- (x)(v)(z)(w)((x Ord y,z) . w Ord y, z ID y P w), 
Pr3c. h 0 ) 0 ) 0 X ^ X 0 Ord v,z) . w Ord y, z => z P w), 
Pr4. 
h 0 ) 0 ) 0 =  => 0 ) 0 X 0 Ord z, y = y Ord z,w) . (z Ord x,w = 
z Ord y,) . (z Ord w,x = z Ord w,y))), 
Pr5. 
h 0 ) 0 ) 0 ) ( ^ ) ( " ) 0 ) ( 0 Ord y,z . ÎV Ord , v) ZD (x = w = ({y = 
 . z = v) v (Ei)((y Ord ,t . v Ord t,z) v (z Ord i,v .  Ord 
*0)))), 
D2. 
'(x u y)' 
abbreviates 
'(zl(z P x v z P y))', 
£>3. 
' 0 n )' 
abbreviates 
'(zl(z P x . z P y))', 
£>4. 
'-x' 
abbreviates 
'(yl ~ y P x)', 
D5. 
'W' 
abbreviates 
'(xlxPx)', 
£>6. 
'N' 
abbreviates 
'-W', 
D7a. 
'Ordlndx' 
abbreviates 
'(Ey)(Ez)x Ord y,z', 
D7b. 
'Cardlnd x' 
abbreviates 
'x P (yl ~ Ordlnd y)', 
DS. 
'Unit x' 
abbreviates 
' ( - x P N . (y)((~ y P N . y P x ) = 3 x P 
))', 
Proa. [~ (x)(CardInd x ZD (X P (yl(CardInd  . --)) = (y)((Unit  . 
Cardlnd  . y P x) => --y--))), 
. h 0)(CardInd x z) ((yl(CardInd y . -y-)) P x = (y)((Unit y . 
Cardlnd y . -y--) => y Px)))3 
Pr7. 
h (Ex)(Cardlnd x . Unit x), 
D9fl. 
'x Ord y,z,w' 
abbreviates 
(()(( Ord y,z . x Ord u,w) 
v (w Ord z,w . x Ord y,w))', 

APPENDIX 
265 
etc., 
DlOa. '(x ord y) P z' 
abbreviates 
'(Ew)(w Ord x,y . w P z)', 
etc., 
Pr8. 
\- (x)(y)((CardInd x . Cardlnd y) ZD (EZ)Z Ord x,y), 
Pr9. 
h (x)(y).. .(z)((CardInd x . Cardlnd y 
Cardlnd z) ZD (EW)W 
Ord x,y,...z), for any number of quantifiers ^ 3, 
PrlO. h (x)(y)(z)(x Ord y,z ZD (~ x P y . ~ x P z)), 
Pr7i. h W(y)(z)(x Ord y,z ZD ~ (~ y P N . y P x) . ~ (~ z P N . z P 
m, 
Prl2. (- (x)(y)((OrdInd x . ~ y P N . y P x ) 3 x P y ) , 
DIL 
'x Sue y' 
abbreviates 
'(Cardlnd x . Cardlnd y . (Ez)(CardInd 
z . Unit z . (y n z) P N . x = (  z)))', 
PriJ. h (x)(Cardlnd x ID (Ey)y Sue x)), 
D12a. 'DyRel(Card) x2' 
abbreviates 
' ( - x P N . (y)((Unit y . y P x) 
ZD (Ez)(Ew)(y Ord z,w . Cardlnd z . Cardlnd w)))', 
£>72b. TriRel(Card) x3' 
abbreviates 
' ( - x P N . (y)((Unit y . y P x) 
ZD (Ez)(Ew)(Ew)(y Ord z,w,u . Cardlnd z . Cardlnd w . 
Cardlnd w)))', 
etc., 
D13a. 'x z2 y' 
abbreviates 
'(DyRel(Card) z2 . (x ord y) P z2)', 
D73Ò. 'x >3 y,z' 
abbreviates 
'(TriRel(Card) w3 . (x ord y ord z) P 
w3)\ 
etc., 
PrUa.y 
(x2)(DyRel(Card) x2 ZD (X2 P (zl(Ew)(Ew)(CardInd w . 
Cardlnd w . z Ord >, . -w-u--)) 
= (w)(u)(z)((CardInd w . 
Cardlnd  . z Ord w,u . z P x2) ZD 
-W~U~))), 
Prl4b. h (x2)(DyRel(Card) x2 ZD ((zl(Ew)(Ew)(CardInd w . Cardlnd  
. z Ord w,u . --VV--M--)) P x9 = (w)(w)(z)((CardInd w . Cardlnd 
w . z Ord w,w . — w—u—) ZD z P x2 ))), 
£>75. 'D'w2' 
for 
'{*  (Ey)x w2y}', 
D75Ò. 'D'w3' 
for 
'{x  (Ey)(Ez)x w3 y,z}\ 
etc., 
£>76. 'a'ìv; 
for 
'{y  (Ex)x w2y}', 
£>76. 'a'w 3' 
for 
'{yz  (Ex)x w3 y,z\ 
etc., 
£>77. 
'(l->Cls)w2' 
for 
'(x)(y)(z)((x w2y . z w2y) ZD x = z)', 
Z)7S. 
i(Cls->l)w2' 
for 
«(*)()(*)((* w2y .xw2z)zDy 
= z)', 
D19. 
'(1->1) w2' 
for 
'((l-*Cls)w2 . (Cls->l)>v2)', 

266 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
D20. 
'x Sm v' for 
'(Cardlnd x . Cardlnd v . (Ew2)((l->1) w2 . 
D'w2 = {z  (Unit z . Cardlnd z . z P x ) } . D'w2 = {z  (Unit 
z. Cardlnd z . zPy)}))', 
D27. 
'Nc'x' 
abbreviates 
'{   Sm x}', 
D22a. '0' abbreviates 
'Nc'N', 
D22b. T 
abbreviates 
' {x  (Ey)(Unit  . x Sm y)}', 
etc., 
D23. 
'u Att x' 
abbreviates 
'(x u2 x . (z)(w)(z u2w = z = w))', 
D24. 
'x *Suc y' 
abbreviates 
\u2)(u2 Att v . (z)(w)((w2 Att w . z 
Sue w) = w2 Att z)) =3 u2 Att x)', 
D25. 
'Finx' 
abbreviates 
'x*SucN', 
D26. 
'FinNc'x' 
or 'x' abbreviates 
'{  (Fin x .  Sm x)}', 
D27. 
'(x + y)' 
abbreviates 
'{z  (EW)(EM)(W 8 x .  e =y . (w n w) 
P N . z = (w u ))}', 
£)2£. 
'(x)--x--' 
abbreviates 
'(x)(Fin x = ----)', where (as needed), 
D29. 
'(Ex)--x--' 
abbreviates 
'~ (x) ~ -x--', 
D30. 
'(ix . ----)' 
abbreviates 
'{  (Ex)(---- . (z)(--z-- D z = î) . 
y 8 x)}', where (as needed), 
D31, 
'x,y,z Mult x',y' ,z" 
abbreviates 
'(Fin x . Fin y . Fin z . Fin x' 
. Fin y' . Fin z' . x = (x' + y') . y = y' . z = (z' + 1))', 
D32. 
'=x,=y,=z *Mult s x ' j ' , V ' 
abbreviates 
'(w3)((Fin x . Fin y . 
Fin z . Fin x' . Fin y' . Fin z' . x' w3 y', z' . (0(w)(v)(w/)(w')(V) 
((w' w3iï ,v' . =i,=w,=v Mult'w'/VjV) =3 í >3 w,v)) = x w3y,z)', 
£ . 
'fx x =y)' abbreviates 
'(i=z . =z,=x,=y *Mult 0,=x,0)'. 
Prl-Pr2 stipulate that P is a totally reflexive and transitive relation. 
Pr3a-Pr5 are Principles of Identity and Pr6a-Pr6b are restricted Principles 
of Unit Summation. Pr7-Pr9 are fundamental Principles of Existence. PrlO-
Prl2 are Principles of Ordination, and Prl3 is a kind of Axiom of Infinity 
for cardinal individuals. Prl4a-Prl4b are Principles of Unit Summation for 
Ordinal Units. The definitions D1-D6 are of a familiar kind, D2-D6 being 
of the basic Boolean notions. D7a introduces the notion of an ordinal indi­
vidual, as contrasted with that of a cardinal individual, in D7b. The com­
pletely general notion of being a unit individual in introduced in D8. In D9a 
et seq., a notation for (unit) triadic, tetradic, and so on, relational individu­
als is provided, and in DlOa et seq., a notation for '(x ord y)', '((x ord y) ord 
z)', etc., as terms occuring either side of 'P'. Dil introduces the successor-
relation as between cardinal individuals. D12a-D13b et seq. introduce the 
notions of being a dyadic relation-individual between cardinals, a triadic 

APPENDIX 
267 
one, and so on. 
D15a et seq. provide for the notions of being the domain of a dyadic, 
triadic, and so on, relation-individual, and D16a et seq., those for the con­
verse- or counter domain of relation-individuals. The converse domains for 
triadic, and so on, relation-individuals are construed, it should be noted, 
relationally. Note also that domains and counterdomains are provided for 
in terms of virtual classes and relations. D17-D19 give us the notions of a 
one-many, many-one, and one-one dyadic relation-individual or "corre­
spondence," preparatory to the definition, D20, of the notion of being simi­
lar to, or equinumerous with, as between cardinal individuals. D21 provides 
the notion of being a cardinal number of a cardinal individual, and D22a et 
seq. provide specifically for 0, 1, etc. 
The general notion of being an attributive relation, as applying to cardi­
nal individuals, is defined in D23, and that of the ancestral of the successor-
relation, in D24. The notion of being a finite cardinal individual is provided 
by D25, and a notation for finite cardinal numbers, in D26. D27 introduces 
a notation for the sum of two finite cardinal numbers. D28-D30 introduce 
the quantifiers and definite descriptions for finite cardinal numbers. Finally, 
D31-D32 introduce a product of finite cardinal numbers in terms of the 
ancestral of a certain hexadic relation Mult. 
After all of this, we can move on to the positive rationals, the signed 
rationals, the reals, and to the complex numbers in more or less familiar 
ways, on the basis, of course, of such further existence and other principles 
as are needed. Various areas of applied logic and mathematics may then be 
provided by the addition of suitable non-logical constants and principles. 
This Appendix is a slightly expanded version of the abstract of the 
paper "On Mereology and the Heroic Course," presented by invitation at 
the Vllth International Congress for Logic, Methodology, and Philosophy 
of Science, at Salzburg in July, 1983, and published in the Abstracts thereof 
(J. Hutteger OHG, Salzburg: 1983), pp. 178-180. It is reproduced here by 
kind permission. 


Notes to Chapter One 
1. 
The phrase is borrowed from Edward S. Klima, "Negation in English," in The Structure 
of Language, ed. by J.A. Fodor and J.J. Katz (Prentice-Hall, Incl., Englewood Cliffs, 
N.J.: 1964), pp. 246-323. 
2. 
On this latter, see the forthcoming Handbook of Philosophical Logic (D. Reidel Publish­
ing Co., Dordrecht: to appear), a work probably largely out-of-date even prior to publi­
cation, as such "surveys" tend to be. 
3. 
Recall Chapter 17, "'And'", in Pragmatics, Truth, and Language (D. Reidel Publishing 
Co., Dordrecht: 1979). 
4. 
Recall esp. Chapter VII, "Of Time and the Null Individual," in Pragmatics, Truth, and 
Language. 
5. 
Recall esp. Belief, Existence, and Meaning (New York University Press, New York: 
1969), Chapter VI, "The Philosophic Import of Virtual Classes," and Semiotics and Lin­
guistic Structure (State University of New York Press, Albany: 1978), Chapters I and II. 
6. 
On the theory of relations in general, recall Chapter XIII, "Some Phases in the History 
of the Logic of Relations," in Metaphysical Foundations: Mereology and Metalogic 
(Philosophia Verlag, München: to appear). On Quine's corners, see his Mathematical 
Logic any edition. 
7. 
For more on mereology, recall Metaphysical Foundations: Mereology and Metalogic, and 
see several of the papers below. 
8. 
(Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, Darmstadt: 1965). 
9. 
See esp. I.M. Bochénski, A History of Formal Logic (Notre Dame University Press, 
Notre Dame: 1961). 
10. 
See esp. A. Tarski, Logic, Semantics, Metamathematics (Clarendon Press, Oxford: 1956), 
pp. 165 ff., and the author's Truth and Denotation (University of Chicago Press, Chicago: 
1958), Chapter III, and Semiotics and Linguistic Structure, Chapter V. 
11. 
Recall Truth and Denotation, Chapters IV and V, and Semiotics and Linguistic Structure, 
Chapter VI. 
12. 
As in Tarski, op. cit., etc. See also Tarski's popular paper in Philosophy and 
Phenomenological Research IV (1944): 341-376. 
13. 
Recall Chapter I of Pragmatics, Truth, and Language. 
14. 
Cf. Chapter XVI, "On the Philosophical Challenge of Intuitionistic Logic," in Mind, 
Morality, Meaning, and Method (State University of New York Press, Albany: 1983). 
15. 
Many such relations were apparently first explicitly called attention to in pragmatical 
terms by Frege. Recall Chapter VII, "Frege's Pragmatic Concerns" In Peirce's Logic of 
Relations and Other Studies (Foris Publications, Dordrecht: 1980). 

270 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
16. 
See Frege's famous "Über Sinn und Bedeutung", the second paragraph, and Be­
griffsschrift, §8, in Translations from the Philosophical Writings of Gottlob Frege, ed. by 
P. Geach and M. Black (Basii Blackwell, Oxford: 1952), and the author's Mind, Modali­
ty, Meaning, and Method, Chapter III and IV, "On Being qua Being, Protometaphysics, 
and Epistemic Modality" and "On Actuality and Objective Modality." 
17. 
Note the kinship here with the objective quasi-intensions of Toward a Systematic Pragma­
tics (North-Holland Publishing Co., Amsterdam: 1959). See also III below. 
18. 
Recall H. Reichenbach, Elements of Symbolic Logic (The Macmillan Co., New York: 
1947), pp. 301 ff., and R. Montague, Formal Philosophy (Yale University Press, New 
Haven: 1974), esp. p. 191. 
19. 
Recall, e.g., Chapter XV, "On Minds and Their Brains: Sir John Eccles," in Mind, 
Modality, Meaning, and Method. 
20. 
Recall Chapter XIII, "The One and the Many: Logic1 and Logics,,," in Mind, Modality, 
Meaning, and Method. 
21. 
As in the Logische Untersuchungen (Max Niemeyer, Halle). Recall Chapter XI, "A Pro­
legomena to Husserl's Prolegomena," in Mind, Modality, Meaning, and Method, and 
Chapter XVIII, "On the Concept of Truth in Husserl's Logische Untersuchungen," in 
Metaphysical Foundations: Mereology and Metalogic. 
22. 
On prepositional relations, recall Semiotics and Linguistic Structure, Chapters X, XI, and 
XII. 
23. 
See, e.g., Otto Jesperson, Negation in English and Other Languages (Copenhagen: 1917). 
24. 
See Zellig Harris, A Grammar of English on Mathematical Principles (John Wiley and 
Sons, New York: 1982). 
25. 
See R. Carnap, Meaning and Necessity (University of Chicago Press: 1956), second edi­
tion, pp. 222 ff. 
26. 
Cf. Truth and Denotation, Chapters I and XIII. 
27. 
Op.cit.,?. 125. 
Notes to Chapter Two 
1. 
William Chauncey Fowler, The English Language in Its Elements and Forms (Harper and 
Brothers, New York: 1870), p. 238. 
2. 
Recall especially Events, Reference, and Logical Form (The Catholic University of 
America Press, Washington: 1978); Semiotics and Linguistic Structure; Pragmatics, Truth, 
and Language; and Logico-Linguistic Papers (Foris Publications, Dordrecht: 1981). 
3. 
In Language in Society 12 (1983): 286-287. 
4. 
See Richard Montague, op.cit. 
5. 
In Pragmatics, Truth, and Language. 
6. 
First published in 1786. 

NOTES 
271 
7. 
Recall "The Philosophical Import of Virtual Classes" in Belief, Existence, and Meaning, 
and Chapters I and II of Semiotics and Linguistic Structure. 
8. 
Recall especially Chapters XI of Truth and Denotation and V of Semiotics and Linguistic 
Structure. 
9. 
Recall Chapters IV and V of Truth and Denotation and VI Semiotics and Linguistic Struc­
ture. 
10. 
Recall especially Chapters III and IV of Mind, Modality, Meaning, and Method, and VII 
of Logico-Linguistic Papers. 
11. 
Recall Chapters XI and XII of Semiotics and Linguistic Structure. 
12. 
See R. Carnap, Introduction to Semantics (Harvard University Press, Cambridge: 1942), 
p. 90. 
13. 
Recall "On Mereology and the Heroic Course," in Metaphysical Foundations: Mereology 
and Metalogic, and see V and the Appendix below. 
14. 
(Mouton and Co., the Hague: 1973), p. 7. 
Notes to Chapter Three 
1. 
Encyclopedia of Unified Science, Vol. I, No. 3 (University of Chicago Press, Chicago: 
1939). 
2. 
(Harcourt, Brace and Co., New York: 1937). 
3. 
(Harvard University Press, Cambridge: 1942). 
4. 
Philosophical Studies, 6 (1955): 89-91, and reprinted in Meaning and Necessity, 2nd ed. 
(University of Chicago Press, Chicago: 1956), pp. 248-250. (The first edition was pub­
lished in 1947.) 
5. 
The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 12 (1947): 105-122. 
6. 
Ibid., 16(1951): 191-203. 
7. 
(University of Chicago Press, Chicago: 1958 and 1976). 
8. 
See, e.g., William Cooper, Logico-Linguistics (D. Reidei Pub. Co., Dordrecht: 1979), 
and Semiotics and Linguistic Structure, part B. 
9. 
(Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics, North-Holland Publishing Co., 
Amsterdam: 1959). 
10. 
A. Tarski, Logic, Semantics, Metamathematics, Chapter VIII. 
11. 
W.V. Quine, Mathematical Logic, any edition, Chapter VII. 
12. 
Recall Truth and Denotation, Chapters VIII and IX, and see VI below. 
13. 
Recall "Über Sinn und Bedeutung," second paragraph, and Begriffs schrift, §8. 
14. 
On Under, recall especially Mind, Modality, Meaning, and Method, Chapters III and IV. 
15. 
For further details, recall Events, Reference, and Logical Form; Semiotics and Linguistic 
Structure; Pragmatics, Truth, and Language; and Logico-Linguistic Papers. In the forego-

272 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
ing the notation 1 (or ) — for the real classes of PMT — is used rather than the rx[ 
 ¿f of TSP because {  a}-1 (or r{e  a}n) became the preferred one for virtual classes, 
in the books just mentioned and in I and II above. The 'e's are event-variables and of low­
est type. 
Notes to Chapter Four 
1. 
P.T. Geach, "Comparatives," Philosophia 13 (1983): 235-246. 
2. 
See esp. his Logical Foundations of Probability, pp. 8 ff. 
3. 
Recall Events, Reference, and Logical Form, Semiotics and Linguistic Structure, and so 
on. 
4. 
On transformations, about which nothing is said here, recall "On Some Protolinguistic 
Transformations" in Pragmatics, Truth, and Language, and "On Logico-Linguistics: 
Structure and Transformation" in Logico-Linguistic Papers. 
5. 
On the logic of 'very' recall Semiotics and Linguistic Structure, p. 159. 
6. 
Recall "On Metaphor and Logical Form," in Logico-Linguistic Papers. 
7. 
Recall "On the Logic of Fictive Locutions", also in Logico-Linguistic Papers. 
8. 
Recall Semiotics and Linguistic Structure, pp. 73, 176, and 200 ff., and see XVIII below. 
9. 
Recall "On the Logical Structure of the Ontological Argument," in Whitehead's Cate-
goreal Scheme and Other Papers (Martinus Nijhoff, the Hague: 1974). 
Notes to Chapter Five 
1. 
See "A Homogeneous System for Formal Logic," The Journal of Symbolic Logic, Vol. 8: 
1-23 and "On Mereology and the Heroic Course," in Metaphysical Foundations: Mereol-
ogy and Metalogic. The system of this latter paper is referred to as OM, an ordinal 
mereology, rather than as EM. For a thumbnail sketch of it, see the Appendix below. 
2. 
Czeslaw Lejewski, "On Lesniewski's Ontology," Ratio, 1 (1958): 150-176. Cf. also John 
T. Kearns, "The Contribution of Lesniewski," Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic 
VIII(l-2): 61-93. 
3. 
J.H. Woodger, Biology and Language (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge: 1952), 
p. 17, and "Science without Properties," British Journal for the Philosophy of Science II 
(1952): p. 196. 
4. 
Recall *90 of Principia Mathematica. 
5. 
In "On the Algebra of Relations and Their Affiliates," in Mind, Modality, Meaning, and 
Method. See also XIII below. 
6. 
Strictly, it should be noted, expressions \xl--x~y 
for unit sums are assumed now to be 
introduced by definition rather than primitively. 

NOTES 
273 
Notes to Chapter Six 
1. 
. Lej ewski, op. cit.. 
2. 
Recall Truth and Denotation, Chapters VIII and IX. 
3. 
Recall Chapter XVI of Metaphycical Foundations: Mereology and Metalogic. 
4. 
Recall Truth and Denotation, Chapter III. 
5. 
These are of course spelled out in primitive terms, with omission of the parentheses not 
needed due to the associativity of 'n'. 
6. 
Recall Belief, Existence, and Meaning, Chapter II, "The Elimination of Intensions Sui 
Generis." 
7. 
Z. Stachniak, Introduction to Model Theory for Lesniewski's Ontology (Acta Univer-
sitatis Wratislaviensis, No. 586, Prace Filozoficzne XXXI, Logika 9: Wroclaw (1981)). 
Notes to Chapter Seven 
1. 
L'enseignements mathématiques 34 (1935): 52-69. 
2. 
Cf. "Some Remarks on the Language of Mathematical Intuitionism" in Events, Refer­
ence, and Logical Form, and "On the Philosophical Challenge of Intuitionistic Logic" in 
Mind, Modality, Meaning, and Method. 
3. 
Cf. "On Eidos, Instance, and Aspect" and "Some Phases in the History of the Logic of 
Relations," in Metaphysical Foundations: Mereology and Metalogic. 
4. 
In his Plato, the Man and His Work (The Dial Press, New York: 1936), p. 50. 
5. 
In "On Mereology and the Heroic Couse," in Metaphysical Foundations: Mereology and 
Metalogic, and Chapter V above. 
6. 
On virtuality see "The Philosophic Import of Virtual Classes" in Belief, Existence, and 
Meaning, and Semiotics and Linguistic Structure, Chapters I and II. 
7. 
Cf. also CS. Peirce, Collected Papers, 3.492, and A. Tarski, Logic, 
Semantics, 
Metamathematics, p. 334. 
8. 
The V here is the familiar inverted iota and helps to symbolize Russellian descriptions. 
9. 
Not to be confused with the great and famous theorem due to Dr. Brook Taylor (1715) 
concerning the convergence of a power series as always at least so large as only just to 
exclude from the interior of the circle of convergence the nearest singularity of the func­
tion represented by the series. 
10. 
In "Forms and Numbers: A Study in Platonic Metaphysics," Mind XXXVI (1927): 12-33. 
11. 
(Almquist & Wiksell, Stockholm: 1955), pp. 65 ff. 

274 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
Notes to Chapter Eight 
1. 
(W.W. Norton and Co., New York: 1938 but first published in 1903), pp. 23 f. 
2. 
Recall "On the Algebra of Relations and Their Affiliates," in Mind, Modality, Meaning, 
and Method, and other relevant literature. 
3. 
CS. Peirce, "On the Algebra of Logic," Americal Journal of Mathematics 3 (1880): 15-
57, and "On the Algebia of Logic: A Contribution to the Philosophy of Notation," Ibid., 
1 (1885): 180-202. Both of these reappear in the Collected Papers, Vol. Ill, Papers VI and 
XIII. 
4. 
Recall "The Elimination of Intensions Sui Generis," in Belief, Existence, and Meaning. 
5. 
See A. Tarski, Logic, Semantics, Metamathematics, Chapter XL 
6. 
N. Wiener, "A Simplification in the Logic of Relations," Proceedings of the Cambridge 
Philosophical Society 17 (1912-1914): 387-390, and  Kuratowski, "Sur la Notion de 
l'Ordre dans la Théorie des Ensembles," Fundamenta Mathematicae 2 (1921): 161-171. 
The methods of these two authors are not the same. 
7. 
See their Grundlagen der Mathematik, vol. 1, §5. 
8. 
On the hoary distinction between the abstract and the concrete, recall some of the com­
ments in "On Metatheory-Formulation and the World in the Making," in Metaphysical 
Foundations: Mereology and Metalogic. On sets see also X below. 
9. 
Recall "De Morgan and the Logic of Relations," in Peirce's Logic of Relations and Other 
Studies. 
10. 
A definition not so very simple, be it said. 
11. 
Isis, XIX, 1: 285-297. 
12. 
"The Logic of Relatives," in Studies in Logic by Members of the Johns Hopkins University 
(Little, Brown & Co., Boston: 1883), reprinted as XII in Vol. Ill of the Collected Papers. 
Notes to Chapter Nine 
1. 
Nelson Goodman, "A World of Individuals," in The Problem of Universais (University of 
Notre Dame Press, Notre Dame: 1956), and The Structure of Appearance (Harvard Uni­
versity Press, Cambridge: 1951). See also Goodman and Quine, "Steps toward a Con­
structive Nominalism," The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 12 (1947): 105-122. 
2. 
The Philosophical Review, 62 (1953): 108-116. 
3. 
As in Chapter XX of Metaphysical Foundations: Mereology and Metalogic. 
4. 
Recall the author's "The Principle of Nominalism," Philosophical Studies, XIV (1963): 
33-37, and "Mathematical Nominalism" in Pragmatics, Truth, and Language. 
5. 
(D. Reidel Publishing Co., Dordrecht: 1970), pp. 81-99. 
6. 
Foundations of Concept Formation in Empirical Science {International Encyclopedia of 
Unified Science, Vol. II, No. 7, The University of Chicago Press, Chicago: 1952), p. 21. 

NOTES 
275 
Notes to Chapter Ten 
1. 
Hao Wang, From Mathematics to Philosophy (Humanities Press, New York: 1974). 
2. 
Recall "Set Theory and Royce's Modes of Action" in Peirces Logic of Relations and 
Other Studies, and "On Meaning, Protomathematics, and the Philosophy of Nature" in 
Primordiality, Science, and Value. 
3. 
Kurt Godei, "What Is Cantor's Continuum Problem?" in Philosophy of Mathematics, 
Selected Readings (Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: 1964), pp. 258-273 (p. 
287), reprinted from the American Mathematical Monthly 54 (1947): 515-525. 
4. 
In The Philosophy of Bertrand Russell {The Library of Living Philosophers, Vol. V; 
Northwestern University, Evanston and Chicago: 1944). pp. 123-153. 
5. 
Recall "A Prolegomenon to Husserl's Prolegomena" in Mind, Modality, Meaning, and 
Method, and "On the Concept of Truth in Husserl's Logische Untersuchungen" in 
Metaphysical Foundations: Mereology and Metalogic. 
6. 
Recall "Toward an Objectual Dynamics of Logical Systems," in Logico-Linguistic 
Papers. 
1. 
Royce's Logical Essays (Wm. C. Brown Company, Dubuque, Iowa: 1951), p. 350. 
8. 
Recall "On the Philosophical Import of Virtual Classes," in Belief, Existence, and Mean­
ing. 
9. 
In the Review of Metaphysics 35 (1981): p. 396. 
10. 
(John Wiley and Sons, New York: 1982). 
Notes to Chapter Eleven 
1. 
"Scientific Causal Talk: a Reply to Martin," Theory and Decision 13 (1981): 363-379. 
2. 
"On the Language of Causal Talk," in Pragmatics, Truth, and Language, pp. 192-205. 
3. 
For a full characterization, recall the material of Semiotics and Linguistic Structure; 
Events, Reference, and Logical Form; Primordiality, Science, and Value; and Logico-Lin-
guistic Papers. 
4. 
As in I above and "On Mereology and the Heroic Course," in Metaphysical Foundations: 
Mereology and Metalogic. 
5. 
"The Plurality of Science," in PSA 1978, Vol. 2, ed. by P. Asquith and I. Hacking 
(Philosophy of Science Association, East Lansing: 1981). 
6. 
In the Introduction to R. Carnap, The Unity of Science (Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner & 
Co., London: 1934), p. 13. 
7. 
"Procedural Semantics," in Language, Logic, and Philosophy, Proc. 4th Inter. Wittgen­
stein Symposium (Hölder-Pichler-Tempski, Vienna: 1980), pp. 27-35. 
8. 
As, for example, in Truth and Denotation. 
9. 
See XII below. 

276 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
10. 
Recall Semiotics and Linguistic Structure, the three chapters on prepositional relations 
and prepositional protolinguistics. 
11. 
Recall Semiotics and Linguistic Structure, p. 246. 
Notes to Chapter Twelve 
1. 
Philip J. Davis and Reuben Hersh, The Mathematical Experience (Birkhäuser, Boston, 
Basel, Stuttgart: 1981). 
2. 
Recall Truth and Denotation, pp. 167, 170, 172 and Semiotics and Linguistic Structure, 
pp. 107 ff. 
3. 
Recall Mind, Modality, Meaning, and Method, Chapter XI, for a discussion of an exam­
ple from Husserl. 
4. 
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge: 1976). 
5. 
Recall Mind, Modality, Meaning, and Method, Chapter XIII, "The One and the Many: 
Logic1 and Logics2." 
6. 
G. Poyla, How to Solve It (Princeton University Press, Princeton: 1945). 
7. 
Recall Chapter XVI, "On the Philosophical Challenge of Intuitionistic Logic," in Mind, 
Modality, Meaning, and Method. 
8. 
See P. Martin-Löf, "Constructive Mathematics and Computer Programming," in Logic, 
Methodology, and Philosophy of Science VI (Studies in Logic and the Foundations of 
Mathematics, North-Holland Publishing Co., Amsterdam, New York, Oxford and PWN-
Polish Scientific Publishers, Warszawa: 1982), pp. 151-175. 
Notes to Chapter Thirteen 
1. 
"On the Algebra of Relations and their Affiliates," in Mind, Modality, Meaning, and 
Method. 
2. 
Recall "The Philosophic Import of Virtual Classes" in Belief, Existence, and Meaning, 
and Chapters I and II of Semiotics and Linguistic Structure. 
3. 
Grundlagen der Mathematik (Springer Verlag, Berlin: 1934), pp. 164 ff. 
4. 
Cf. A. Church, Introduction to Mathematical Logic (Princeton University Press, Prince­
ton: 1956), §42. 
5. 
Cf. G. Frege, On the Foundations of Geometry and Formal Theories of Arithmetic (Yale 
University Press, New Haven: 1971), p. 112 and passim. 
6. 
Recall Truth and Denotation, Chapter III and VIII, and Semiotics and Linguistic Struc­
ture, Chapter V. 
7. 
Collected Papers, 3.45-3.149. See also "Of Lovers, Servants, and Benefactors", in 
Peirce's Logic of Relations and Other Studies, p. 41. 

NOTES 
277 
8. 
Collected Papers, 3.328-3.403A. 
9. 
See especially Haskell B. Curry and Robert Feys, Combinatory Logic I (North-Holland 
Publishing Co., Amsterdam: 1958), and Curry, J.R. Hindley, and J.P. Seldin, Combinat-
ory Logic II (Ibid.: 1972). 
Notes to Chapter Fourteen 
1. 
Parts and Wholes, Vol. I (Forskningsradsmamnden, Stockholm: 1983), pp. 123-128. 
2. 
Ibid., pp. 75-89. 
3. 
In the Logical Investigations (Routledge and Kegan Paul, London: 1970), translated by 
J.N. Findlay, Vol. II, Investigation III. 
4. 
Recall especially Event, Reference, and Logical Form and Semiotics and Linguistic Struc-
ture. 
5. 
Recall "A Prolegomenon to Husserl's Prolegomena" in Mind, Modalit)', Meaning, and 
Method, and "On the Concept of Truth in Husserl's Logische Untersuchungen" in 
Metaphysical Foundations: Mereology and Metalogic. 
6. 
Recall Semiotics and Linguistic Structure, Chapters V and VI, and III above. 
7. 
Algebra und Logik der Relative (Teubner, Leipzig: 1895). 
8. 
Collected Papers, Vol. III, XIII. 
9. 
Recall "The Very Idea of a Logical From," in Semiotics and. Linguistic Structure. 
10. 
J.L. Austin, How to Do Things with Words (Clarendon Press, Oxford: 1962), p. 224. 
11. 
The last three paragraphs are borrowed from Semiotics and Linguistic Structure, p. 238, 
with the kind permission of the publisher. 
Notes to Chapter Fifteen 
1. 
"Evolutionary Biology, Physiological Psychology, Process Philosophy," presented before 
the meeting of the Society for the Study of Process Philosophy in Evanston, Illinois, on 
March 15, 1984. 
2. 
Op. eit. , pp. 322-323. 
3. 
Biology and Language (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge: 1952). 
4. 
Woodger spells this out in terms of Rpo' Cf. Principia Mathematics, *91. 
5. 
Abstracts ofthe 7th International Congress of Logic. Methodology, and Philosophy of Sci-
ence (J. Huttegger OHG, Salzburg: 1983), Vol. 4, pp. 369-372. 
6. 
Also presented at the Salzburg congress, op.cit., pp. 302-372. 
7. 
Recall the author's "Truth and Its Illicit Surrogates" in Pragmatics, Truth, and Language, 
and the remarks on Hintikka in "On Weeding the Garden of Semantics" in Metaphysical 
Foundations: Mereology and Metalogic. 

278 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
8. 
Recall I, II and III above. 
9. 
See especially David L. Hull, "Individuality and Selection," Annual Reviews of Ecologi­
cal Systems, 11 (1980): 311-332. 
10. 
Recall "On Being qua Being, Protometaphysics, and Epistemic Modality," in Mind, 
Modality, Meaning, and Method. 
11. 
"Social Reality and Social Relations," The Review of Metaphysics XXXVII (1983): 3-20. 
12. 
This paragraph is borrowed, with kind permission of the publisher, from the author's "On 
the Metaphysics of Social Reality" in Metaphysical Foundations: Mereology and 
Metalo gic. 
13. 
"Some Proposals Concerning Parts and Wholes," Op.cit., pp. 115-122. 
14. 
"Further Proposals to the Workshop on Parts and Wholes," to appear. 
15. 
See his "Quantum Physics and the Philosophy of Whitehead," in Boston Studies in the 
Philosophy of Science (Humanities Press, New York: 1965), Vol. II, pp. 307-330. 
16. 
"O Podstawach Matematiky," Przeglad Filozoficzny, 30-34 (1927-1931). 
17. 
"The Calculus of Individuals and Its Uses," The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 5 (1940): 45-
55. 
18. 
Recall "An Approximative Logical Structure for Whitehead's Categoreal Scheme," in 
Whitehead's Categoreal Scheme and Other Papers. 
19. 
In his Understanding Whitehead (The Johns Hopkins Press, Baltimore: 1962), p. 291. 
20. 
A.N. Whitehead, Essays in Science and Philosophy (Rider and Co., London: 1948), p. 
94. 
Notes to Chapter Sixteen 
1. 
In a lecture given at Harvard University on 9 March 1984. 
2. 
The Review of Metaphysics XI (1957): 12-27. 
3. 
Recall the appropriate definitions in the author's "On the Semantics of Summer's 'Some 
5"," in Mind, Modality, Meaning, and Method. 
4. 
Recall Chapters III and IV of Mind, Modality, Meaning, and Method, and I-III above. 
5. 
To simplify, we omit all considerations concerning tense. 
6. 
On virtual classes, recall "On the Philosophic Import of Virtual Classes" in Belief, Exis­
tence, and Meaning, and Chapters I and II n Semiotics and Linguistic Structure. 
1. 
Recall Truth and Denotation, Chapters IV, V, and XI, and Semiotics and Linguistic Struc­
ture, Chapter VI. 
8. 
Recall '"And"' in Pragmatics, Truth, and Language. 
9. 
Recall the comments about "propositions" in III above, in Toward a Systematic Pragma­
tics, and also in Belief, Existence, and Meaning, Chapter II. 
10. 
Recall I-III above. 

NOTES 
279 
11. 
Recall "A Close Look at Goodman's Symbol Systems," in Mind, Modality, Meaning, and 
Method. 
12. 
Cf. George Hemphill, op.cit. 
13. 
Recall "On Some Prepositional Relations," in Semiotics and Linguistic Structure. 
14. 
As in the Hilbert-Ackermann Principles of Mathematical Logic, any edition. 
15. 
Cf. inter alia, Tarski, op.cit., and the author's Truth and Denotation, and Semiotics and 
Linguistic Structure. 
16. 
Mind XXXVII (1928): 338-348. 
17. 
Recall II above, Toward a Systematic Pragmatics, and Belief, Existence, and Meaning, 
Chapter III. 
18. 
Recall "Some Comments on the Insolubilia and Gödel's Proof," in Metaphysical Founda­
tions: Mereology and Metalogic. 
19. 
The Monist XXXVIII (1928): 536-548. 
20. 
The Monist XXXIX (1929): 281-319 and 440-472. 
21. 
Recall also "On Epimathematics and Formal Meta-Systems" and "Toward an Objectual 
Dynamics of Logical Systems," in Logico-Linguistic Papers. 
22. 
Erkenntnis 2 (1931): 242-261. ^ 
23. 
See W.V. Quine, The Ways of Paradox and Other Essays (Random House, New York: 
1966), pp. 156-175 and the author's Belief, Existence, and Meaning, pp. 44 ff. 
24. 
The Monist XLII (1932): 112-154. 
25. 
Cf. John Kemeny, "Type-Theory vs. Set-Theory," abstract in The Journal of Symbolic 
Logic 15 (1950): 78. 
26. 
Recall the discussion of Benson Mates in "On Mereology and the Heroic Course," in 
Metaphysical Foundations: Mereology and Metalogic. But see also XIX below. 
27. 
The Journal of Philosophy XXX (1933): 288-293. 
28. 
The Philosophical Review XLII (1933): 520-525. 
29. 
C.I. Lewis, "Paul Weiss on Alternative Logics," The Philosophical Review XLIII (1933): 
70-71. 
30. 
As in Meaning and Necessity, 2nd ed., Appendix B. 
31. 
Recall "The One and the Many: Logic1 and Logics2," in Mind, Modality, Meaning, and 
Method. 
32. 
Proceedings of the Seventh International Congress of Philosophy, ed. by Gilbert Ryle 
(Oxford University Press, London: 1931), pp. 142-150. 

280 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
Notes to Chapter Seventeen 
1. 
In American Philosophy: from Edwards to Quine, ed. by R.W. Shahan and K.R. Merrill 
(University of Oklahoma Press, Norman: 1977), pp. 176-196. 
2. 
Recall the paper by Joseph Earley discussed in XV above, and the literature cited 
therein. 
3. 
Recall "A Homogeneous System for Formal Logic," referred to in V above. 
4. 
We leave aside here the well-known Hilbert-Bernays way of introducing identity within a 
formal system. 
5. 
Journal of Philosophy LXIV (1967): 5-22. 
6. 
In Belief, Existence, and Meaning, pp. 5Iff. 
7. 
As in his The Logical Syntax of Language, p. 45, Introduction to Symbolic Logic and Its 
Applications, pp. 161 ff., and Logical Foundations of Probability, pp. 62 f. 
8. 
Percy Bridgman, The Nature of Physical Theory (Princeton University Press, Princeton: 
1936), pp. 59-60. 
9. 
Recall "Toward an Objectual Dynamics of Logical Systems," in Logico-Linguistic 
Papers. 
10. 
In Metaphysical Foundations: Mereology and Metalogic. 
11. 
Recall "The Logic of Idealism and the Neglected Argument" in Peirce's Logic of Rela­
tions and Other Studies, and "Toward a Constructive Idealism" in Primordiality, Science, 
and Value. 
12. 
Recall "On Metatheory Formulation and the World in the Making," in Metaphysical 
Foundations: Mereology and Metalogic. 
13. 
Recall "On the Language of Metaphysical Theology: Hartshorne and Quine," also in 
Metaphysical Foundations: Mereology and Metalogic. 
14. 
Cf. J.H. Wheeler, "Bits, Quanta, Meaning," to appear in the Caianiello Celebration vol­
ume, 1984. 
15. 
D. F0llesdal, "Meaning and Experience," in Mind and Language, ed. by S. Guttenplan 
(Clarendon Press, Oxford: 1975), p. 254. 
16. 
"Genesis and Observership," in Foundational Problems in the Special Sciences, ed. by R. 
Butts and J. Hintikka (D. Reidei Pubi. Co., Dordrecht: 1977), pp. 3-33. 
17. 
Recall "On Dialogism and Perception: Rivetti-Barbo" in Logico-Linguistic Papers. 
18. 
On 'Under' recall the material of I-III above. 
19. 
Eugene Wigner, Symmetries and Reflections (Indiana University Press, Bloomington and 
London: 1967), p. 172. 
20. 
Quoted in Wigner, loc.cit. 

NOTES 
281 
Notes to Chapter Eighteen 
1. 
The formal development here is akin to that of the system S(P,OS) in Chapter XVII of 
Metaphysical Foundations: Mereology and Metalogic and is in harmony with some sugges­
tions made in Chapter XVI of Primordiality, Science, and Value. 
2. 
On the null individual, recall "Of Time and the Null Individual," in Pragmatics, Truth, 
and Reference. 
3. 
As, e.g., in Church's Introduction to Mathematical Logic (Princeton University Press, 
Princeton: 1956), Chapters II and III. 
4. 
As in Quine's Mathematical Logic, Chapter II. 
5. 
As in Quine's "Logic Based on Inclusion and Abstraction," in Selected Logic Papers 
(Random House, New York: 1966). 
6. 
As in D. Hilbert and P. Bernays, Grundlagen der Mathematik, Vol. II (Julius Springer, 
Berlin: 1939), §1. 
7. 
H.W. Fowler, A Dictionary of Modern English Usage (Oxford University Press, New 
York and Oxford: 1965). 
8. 
Op.cit., p. 244. 
9. 
A few examples of such are given in Semiotics and Linguistic Structure, pp. 173, 176, and 
200 ff. 
Notes to Chapter Nineteen 
1. 
"The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Mathematics in the Natural Sciences," in Symmetries 
and Reflections, pp. 222-237. 
2. 
As discussed, for example, in XIII above. 
3. 
Recall Principia Mathematica, Part V, on the general theory of serial relations. 
4. 
"On Mathematics and the Good," in Essays in Science and Philosophy, pp. 75-86. 
5. 
Recall "Toward an Objectual Dynamics of Logical Systems," in 
Logico-Linguistic 
Papers. 
6. 
Recall "Of Spiders and Bees: One Logic, not Two," in Primor diality, Science, and Value. 
7. 
See his "Indication, Classes, Numbers, Validation," in Essays in Science and Philosophy, 
pp. 227-240. 
8. 
(Harvard University Press, Cambridge: 1937). 
9. 
A. Tarski, "The Semantic Conception of Truth," Philosophy and Phenomenological 
Research 4 (1944), pp. 367-368. 
10. 
Recall "The One and the Many: LogiCj and Logics2," in Mind, Modality, Meaning, and 
Method. 
11. 
Logical Foundations of Probability, pp. 8ff. 

282 
LOGICAL SEMIOTICS AND MEREOLOGY 
Notes to Chapter Twenty 
1. 
Recall V above and "On Mereology and the Heroic Course," in Metaphysical Founda­
tions: Mereology and Metalogic. Cf. also the Appendix below. 
2. 
Recall especially Events, Reference, and Logical Form; Semiotics and Linguistic Struc­
ture; Pragmatics, Truth, and Language; and Logico-Linguistic Papers. 
3. 
For contextual definition of l(x ord y)\ see DlOa, etc., in the Appendix below. 
4. 
Recall, especially, Semiotics and Linguistic Structure, Chapters X-XII. 
5. 
If an agent were always available we could write the definiendum here as lp 
Fx,y\ 
expressing that person p takes x to  a part of y in act e, defined as '(<P>e . Act e . e 
B>Agent^ • e °nobject x 
■ e WithRespectTo y)\ 
6. 
In "Bits, Quanta, Meaning." 

