
Logical Properties

This page intentionally left blank 

Logical Properties
Identity, Existence, Predication, Necessity, Truth
Colin McGinn
CLARENDON PRESS · OXFORD
2000

Great Clarendon Street, Oxford OX2 6DP
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford
It furthers the University's objective of excellence in research, scholarship,
and education by publishing worldwide in
Oxford New York
Auckland Bangkok Buenos Aires Cape Town Chennai
Dar es Salaam Delhi Hong Kong Istanbul Karachi Kolkata
Kuala Lumpur Madrid Melbourne Mexico City Mumbai Nairobi
São Paulo Shanghai Taipei Tokyo Toronto
Oxford is a registered trade mark of Oxford University Press
in the UK and in certain other countries
Published in the United States by
Oxford University Press Inc., New York
© Colin McGinn 2000
The moral rights of the authors have been asserted
Database right Oxford University Press (maker)
First published 2000
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
without the prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press,
or as expressly permitted by law, or under terms agreed with the appropriate
reprographcs rights organization. Enquiries concerning reproduction
outside the scope of the above should be sent to the Rights Department,
Oxford University Press, at the address above
You must not circulate this book in any other binding or cover
and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
Data available
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Data available
McGinn, Colin, 1950-
Logical properties : identity, existence, predication, necessity, truth / Colin McGinn.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
1. Logic. I. Title.
BC71 .M36 2000 160--dc21 00-056653
ISBN 0-19-924181-3 (alk. paper)

Preface
The ﬁrst philosophy course I ever taught was on truth, back in 1974. At that time I was primarily a philosopher of
language and logic. In later years I became drawn to topics in the philosophy of mind, as well as metaphysics and
epistemology. My interest in philosophical logic went into abeyance for a decade or so. The work in this book was
begun about ﬁve years ago, though some of the ideas date back to the 1970s and 1980s. For some reason I started
thinking seriously about these topics again, and I found that my thoughts on each of them shared some common
themes. Thus, after many years of not working on philosophical logic, I decided to put together a short book on the
subject.
It has been a pleasure to work on such abstruse, pure, and rigorous topics after spending so much time thinking about
messy subjects like consciousness (not to mention evil, beauty of soul, etc.). In philosophical logic it is possible to
achieve real results, develop sharp arguments, come to deﬁnite conclusions. It has also been a pleasure to write an
avowedly specialist book, without having to worry about accessibility to a wider audience.
I have written this book as clearly and economically as I can. I have not burdened the text with detailed discussions of
recent literature, preferring to maintain a smooth ﬂow of argument; the footnotes address some of the relevant
literature, as well as respond to possible objections.
Philosophical logic is perhaps a less thriving subject than it was in my student days. I think that this is in part because it
became too formalistic and divorced from philosophical concerns. The reader will observe that there are very few
formulas or symbols in this book, and I have strived constantly to keep the philosophical issues

in mind; my aim has been to bring philosophy back into philosophical logic. What makes topics like existence and
necessity so fascinating is the way they combine perplexing metaphysical concerns with issues of logical analysis and
linguistics. I hope it is apparent in this book that I have steered clear of the kind of formalistic fetishism and
scholasticism that has characterized too much philosophical logic in recent years.
The general theme of the book is a kind of realist anti- naturalism about logical properties. My tendency is to take
logical notions at face value, instead of trying to reduce them to something else. As elsewhere in philosophy, I believe
in respecting the appearances. One of my contentions is that the quantiﬁer has been overrated as a tool of logical and
linguistic analysis; another is that the urge to deﬁne the various logical notions dealt with here has not in general been a
successful project. Logical properties are what they are and not some other thing.
The book is intended for readers with some sophistication in philosophical logic, but I think it could be used in an
advanced undergraduate course if suitably supplemented with background reading.
I am grateful to E. J. Lowe and Andre Galois, who as referees for Oxford University Press gave me detailed comments
on the penultimate draft; many of the footnotes are responses to points they raised. I am also grateful to Stephen
Neale, with whom I taught this material in a graduate seminar at Rutgers, as well as to the students who attended.
C.McG.
New York
March 2000
vi
PREFACE

Contents
1. Identity
1
2. Existence
15
3. Predication
52
4. Necessity
69
5. Truth
Bibliography
109
Index
111

This page intentionally left blank 

1 Identity
My purpose in this chapter is to formulate a cluster of claims about the nature of identity. I shall not enter into an
elaborate defence of these claims, since they are generally uncontroversial and have been defended adequately by
others. My aim is to articulate a position that will be useful for later discussions of other topics. In many ways identity
is a paradigm for other logical notions, and it serves to focus thought in other areas to be as clear as possible about the
concept of identity. My general theme will be the simplicity and primitiveness of the notion of identity, and its
absolutely fundamental role in our thought.
My ﬁrst thesis is that identity is unitary. Frege writes: ‘Identity is a relation given to us in such a speciﬁc form that it is
inconceivable that various forms of it should occur.’1 I want to explain the import of this dictum and to spell out what
we are committed to denying if we take the dictum seriously. So let us ask: What kind of property or relation is not
unitary in the sense Frege intends? Take the property expressed by ‘x is blue’ or the relation expressed by ‘x is more
intelligent than y’: these do admit of various forms—shades of blue, types of intelligence. Frege's thought is that
identity does not in this way divide up into sub-varieties (one could not write a good book entitled The Varieties of
Identity2). There is no equivocation or vagueness in the notion of identity, and it operates as a determinate property not
a determinable one. It is, as Frege also said, that unique
1 Basic Laws of Arithmetic , ii. 254; quoted in Peter Geach, Logic Matters , 238. Geach cites Frege in order to disagree with him, holding that identity is relative to a sortal count
noun.
2 In the way that Gareth Evans's Varieties of Reference emphasized the very different ways in which different types of terms refer (despite some common themes).

relation a thing has to itself and to no other thing—period.3 Its logical properties are reﬂexivity, symmetry, and
transitivity. It is simply the relation x has to y when x is nothing other than y, when there is no distinction between x
and y, when xisy. And when we grasp the notion of identity we implicitly understand that it admits of no qualiﬁcation or
variation. That is the Fregean thesis.
In order to appreciate better what the Fregean thesis comes to, let us consider three ways in which it might be
challenged, noting the errors of these challenges. First, it might be said that identity divides into two basic sub-types:
numerical identity and qualitative identity. Numerical identity relates an object only to itself, while qualitative identity
can relate numerically distinct objects that share some number of properties—objects that are merely exactly similar.
Thus I am qualitatively identical to my twin, but not numerically identical to him. This distinction is allied to, indeed
equivalent to, the distinction between type identity and token identity: two occurrences of the letter ‘a’ are type identical
without being token identical—that is, they are similar enough to be declared qualitatively the same. Are there, then,
two types of identity relation at work here? Well, there is obviously a distinction between similarity relations and the
(numerical) identity relation, but it is confused to interpret this as implying that identity comes in two varieties. In fact,
a statement of so-called qualitative identity is really a statement of numerical identity (that is, identity tout court) about
the properties of the objects in question: it says in effect that the properties of x and y are (numerically) identical.4 My
properties (or many of them) are the same as those of my twin; the property the token ‘a’ has of being an instance of a
certain letter
2
IDENTITY
3 See ‘On Sense and Reference’.
4 Of course, I am assuming here that different objects can share the same properties, i.e. that there are genuine universals. A trope theorist will need a different account of
similarity between objects, since he will not be able to explain this in terms of the numerical identity of differently instantiated properties. But even for a trope theorist it should
be clear that so-called qualitative identity is really just similarity and not another species of identity. It would be better to drop talk of ‘numerical’ and ‘qualitative’ identity
altogether, speaking instead simply of identity and resemblance.

type is shared (that property) by this second ‘a’. In the limit, if x and y share all their properties, then this amounts to
the fact that every property x has is a property y also has: for any property F that x has there is a property G that y has
such that F is identical to G. So-called qualitative identity is just numerical identity of qualities on the part of possibly
distinct objects. Put another way, if you ﬁnd that for any property F that x has there is an identical property G that y
has, and vice versa, then x is qualitatively identical to y. Thus qualitative identity is analysable in terms of numerical
identity. And similarly for type and token identity: to say that x and y are type identical is to say that there is a single
type T that x and y both are, i.e. the type that x exempliﬁes is identical (numerically) to the type that y exempliﬁes.
There are not two identity relations at play here but merely a unitary notion of identity relating distinct kinds of entity.
It is not that ‘identical’ is an incomplete predicate until we are told whether it is to be preceded by the modiﬁers
‘numerically’ or ‘qualitatively’. When we use ‘identical’ to relate distinct objects we are simply saying that the objects
have the same properties or are of the same kind, where this latter is plainly an example of straightforward (numerical)
identity. When I say that this dog is the same breed as that dog I am simply afﬁrming the identity of their respective
breeds, not introducing a new kind of identity relation over and above the old one—as it were, a special non-strict kind
of identity that fails to obey Leibniz's law. It is not that we have to countenance a ‘looser’ brand of identity to be set
beside the original article. All identity is strict identity—or rather, the qualiﬁer ‘strict’ is pleonastic here.5
IDENTITY
3
5 I take it to be obvious enough that it would be a mistake to think that there are two modal kinds of identity, the necessary and the contingent. All identity is necessary, though
there can be contingently true identity statements —those that contain non-rigid designators: see Saul Kripke, ‘Identity and Necessity’. But even those who believe in contingent
identity should not be tempted to construe this as a new type of identity relation, any more than the adjacency relation should be taken to have two forms or be ‘incomplete’
because numbers stand in necessary adjacency relations while chairs do not. It is the same relation
that admits of the two modal qualiﬁcations. Compare the question of
whether there are two kinds of truth property, corresponding to necessary truths and contingent truths.

A second reason for questioning Frege's dictum might be the alleged sortal relativity of statements of identity. The idea
here is that to say that x is the same as y is not yet to express a complete proposition—we need to say what sort of
sameness is in question. Until we answer the question ‘same what?’ we have said nothing truth-evaluable.6 On this
view, ‘same’ is radically syncategorematic, like ‘er’ in ‘longer than’. A properly complete identity statement must have
the form ‘x is the same F as y’, for some sortal F. This view certainly entails the denial of Frege's dictum, in either the
view's strong form or its weak form. The strong form says that identity is relative, so that we can have instances in
which x is the same F as y but not the same G. The weak form denies such relativity but insists that identity statements
stand in need of sortal supplementation, where the various sortals generate distinct types of identity relation.7 Thus
‘same man’ is not composed of a complete relation word ‘same’ that may stand alone between singular terms,
combined with the common noun ‘man’; rather, the noun is required to complete the sense of the incomplete symbol
‘same’.
I would reject both the strong and weak versions of the sortal-dependence claim for familiar reasons. The strong
relativity thesis conﬂicts with the indiscernibility of identicals, since if x is the same F as y but not the same G then x
has a property y does not have, viz. being the same G as x. For if y has this property then it is the same G as x after all.
Identity of x and y under the sortal F tells us, by Leibniz's law, that y must have what x has; but then if x has the
property of being the same G as x, which it surely does, then y should have this property too—but this contradicts the
claim that x
4
IDENTITY
6 As Geach puts it in ‘Identity Theory’: ‘When one says “x is identical with y ”, this, I hold, is an incomplete expression; it is short for “x is the same A as y ”, where “A ”
represents some count noun understood from the context of utterance—or else, it is just a vague expression or a half-formed thought’ (Logic Matters , 238).
7 The strong position is defended by Geach, and the weak position sometimes seems intended by David Wiggins in Sameness and Substance , ch. 2 .

is not the same G as y.8 And once the thesis of relativity is abandoned the motivation for the incompleteness claim
vanishes: any force there is in the claim that ‘this is the same as that’ is incomplete is better explained by the
observation that the singular terms need supplementation in order to achieve determinate reference; once we know
which object is at issue it is completely determinate whether this object is or is not identical to some other determinately
speciﬁed object.9 Unsupplemented identity statements are no more incomplete than ‘x is blue’, where also we can raise
doubts about which thing is blue—as when I point in the direction of a mostly red car with a blue hood and say ‘that is
blue’. And really it is bizarre to think that identity could need supplementation in this way, since it is quite clear what
relation is expressed by the simple sign of identity: if you put ‘ ’ between any pair of determinate singular terms the
proposition expressed is as clear as a proposition could be.10
A third reason for denying that identity is unitary might issue from the recognition that objects come in many kinds
and that the conditions of their persistence vary depending upon what kind of object is in question. Here we encounter
the idea that objects have different ‘criteria of identity’, different conditions under which x may be said to be the same
as y. Sets are the same iff they have all the same members; material objects are the same iff they are ‘spatio-temporally
continuous’; times are the same iff the same
IDENTITY
5
8 See Wiggins, Sameness and Substance , ch. 1 , for this type of argument. Of course, the argument assumes the validity of the classical Leibnizian law, which a defender of relative
identity might opt to reject. But I think that this law is so fundamental to the notion of identity that rejecting it amounts to changing the subject. I also believe, though I will not
argue it here, that the thesis of relative identity enjoys no indispensable explanatory advantage over classical absolute identity; again, see Wiggins, ibid. 23 ff.
9 See John Perry, ‘The Same F ’, for a convincing defence of this line.
10 It seems natural when someone says ‘this is the same as that’ to press the question ‘same what ?’; but it is equally natural to respond ‘what
is the same?’ The bare
demonstratives leave the proposition underspeciﬁed, but the fault lies with them and not with the identity concept. Compare baldly asserting ‘this exists’, where the
indeterminacy clearly lies with the demonstrative and not with the concept of existence.

events happen at them; events are the same iff they have the same causes and effects; selves are the same iff they
exhibit appropriate ‘mental connectedness’ or have the same bodies. But, however plausible this idea of varying
‘criteria of identity’ might be, it is confused to believe that it shows that the identity relation itself admits of such
variation. Many different kinds of objects can be blue, too—solids, liquids, gases, rays of light, persons—but this does
not show that blueness itself reﬂects the differences in these objects. Similarly, though many kinds of objects stand in
the identity relation, it does not follow that this relation itself reﬂects or incorporates the kinds in question. We might
indeed allow that identity can be supervenient on a variety of bases in objects, depending upon the kind of object in
question, but this does not imply that what thus supervenes is not a unitary property.11 It is the same with existence,
which we shall discuss in the next chapter: many different kinds of object exist, and their existence ‘consists in’
different kinds of conditions, but it does not follow that ‘exists’ is equivocal or incomplete. Identity is always reﬂexive,
symmetrical, and transitive, and always obeys the indiscernibility of identicals, despite the fact that it applies to many
kinds of object. Identity is not a different relation when applied to concrete and abstract objects, say, despite the deep
differences between these types of object. We just have the same old identity concept applied to a variety of objects,
that is all.
I take it, then, that Frege's unitary thesis is not threatened by these kinds of consideration. Identity is such a speciﬁc
relation, as speciﬁc (say) as the successor relation in arithmetic, that it is indeed inconceivable that it might fall into a
variety of forms loosely classiﬁed together under ‘same’. The concept of identity is quite unlike the family resemblance
concept expressed by ‘game’,
6
IDENTITY
11 Compare the property of goodness: it supervenes on a variety of descriptive bases, but this does not compromise its conceptual integrity. Similarly, identity might be
constituted by different things for different types of object, but it does not follow that identity itself shifts its identity from case to case (identity does not suffer from identity
problems).

which is given to us in a highly unspeciﬁc form and admits of many subvarieties. Objects that fall under ‘game’ are not
linked by a single common feature, but ‘identical’ expresses a quite deﬁnite concept that remains rigidly the same (!)
from case to case.
The next question I want to ask is whether identity is deﬁnable: is its speciﬁcity the result of a sharp deﬁnition or is it
conceptually primitive? In particular, can identity be deﬁned by Leibniz's law, namely ‘x y iff for all P, Px iff Py’? There
are three main problems with this proposal, which again I will simply summarize rather than defend. First, the
sufﬁciency of the right-hand side notoriously depends upon whether we include identity-invoking properties in the
range of the second-order variable: that is, do we include the property of being identical with x as one of the properties
y has? If we don't, then the condition looks insufﬁcient; if we do, then it involves a circle. It is certainly sufﬁcient for x
to be identical to y that x have the property of being identical to y! We don't want the deﬁnition to succeed only by
embroiling it in such a gross circularity.
Second, and less familiar, the deﬁnition presupposes the notion of property identity. This is because we are saying
precisely that x and y have the same properties: if x has all the same properties as y, then x y. So we are using one
application of identity to explain another application. We could, of course, go up a stage and try to deﬁne property
identity by means of Leibniz's law: properties are identical iff they have all the same (second-order) properties. But this
brings in the idea of identity again; and obviously the regress is vicious here. The point is even clearer if we formulate
the deﬁnition in terms of parts or classes: x y iff x and y have all the same parts or belong to all the same classes. Here
it is obvious that we are presupposing the idea of identity for parts and classes, so we cannot claim to be giving a
general deﬁnition of identity. It might seem that the biconditional does not employ the notion of identity for properties
or parts or classes, since it does not explicitly use the word ‘same’; but the concept of identity is implicit in the use of
IDENTITY
7

variables, since we must assume that the same properties are assigned to the variables. In the same way, if we say ‘for
some x, x is F and x is G’ we are making tacit appeal to the idea of identity in using ‘x’ twice here: it has to be the same
object that is both F and G for this formula to come out true. In fact, this point about Leibniz's law just restates what
we have already noticed about so-called qualitative identity, namely that it involves the numerical identity of properties.
The case is really no different, in respect of circularity, from deﬁning sameness of property by way of the condition that
properties are the same iff they apply to the same objects: clearly this presupposes identity for the case of objects.
Third, any deﬁnition must presuppose the notion of identity precisely because a deﬁnition afﬁrms the identity of two
concepts. What Leibniz's law says, construed as a deﬁnition, is that the concept of identity is the same concept as the
concept of indiscernibility. So the deﬁnition could never convey the concept of identity to someone who lacked it; it
assumes that we grasp the notion of identity as it applies to concepts, and then proposes to extend this understanding
to identity as it applies to objects. This may seem like a pedantic objection, but in fact I think it cuts deep: it shows that
the notion of identity is too deeply embedded in our basic conceptual practices to admit of any illuminating deﬁnition.
The very idea of deﬁnition itself presupposes it. A deﬁnition can always be rewritten in the form ‘the concept F the
concept G’, and here it is clear that identity is being presupposed—even when the concept in question is the concept
of identity.12
Oddly enough, Frege himself afﬁrms that Leibniz's law deﬁnes identity, saying: ‘Now Leibniz's deﬁnition is as follows:
“Things are the same as each other, of which one can be substituted for the
8
IDENTITY
12 I am being strict about deﬁnability here, and there are looser notions of deﬁnition that would not be subject to the circularity I am alleging. But my essential point is that the
concept of deﬁnition as sameness of sense between deﬁniendum and deﬁniens itself contains the notion of identity—which is not the case for the vast majority of concepts we
might hope to deﬁne. Truth, meaning, and identity are implicated in the notion of deﬁnition; but the same could not be said for the concepts of redness or justice or pain.

other without loss of truth”. This I propose to adopt as my own deﬁnition of identity.’13 Perhaps he fails to notice the
circularity in this because of the substitutional formulation he borrows from Leibniz, but this becomes apparent once
we observe that the principle has to mean substitutivity in the same contexts (compare sharing the same
properties)—not to mention the other two points I have made. It is, of course, true that identity obeys Leibniz's
principle of the indiscernibility of identicals; but this is a far cry from the claim that the principle provides a non-
circular deﬁnition of identity.
Let me also note the oddity of supposing that a singular statement should be analysable by means of a universally
quantiﬁed statement. If I say that Hesperus is identical to Phosphorus, I seem to be making a singular relational
statement about a given object, logically on a par with (say) ‘Hesperus is brighter than Phosphorus’. But according to
the Leibnizian deﬁnition I am doing no such thing: I am quantifying second-order-wise over properties and making a
statement of generality. The two-place relation word turns into a quantiﬁer and a biconditional—hardly what the
surface grammar would suggest. On this view, identity statements are not really relational statements after all; in logical
grammar they express a higher-order condition on properties, and are replaceable by quantiﬁed statements that do not
have a relational form at all.
The upshot is that identity is not only unitary, it is also indeﬁnable (assuming that Leibniz's law is the only plausible
attempt to deﬁne identity). Identity is a primitive concept, and a concept that exists in only one form.
When a concept is primitive it is apt to be basic relative to other concepts. What I want to suggest now is that identity
has a universality and basicness that is hard to overstate; concepts don't get more basic than this—or more
indispensable. Every object (or any
IDENTITY
9
13 Foundations of Arithmetic , 76.

other entity—property, function, you name it) is self-identical; identity is not a relation an entity can fail to stand in to
something. The concrete, the mental, the abstract—all instantiate the univocal concept of identity. In this respect, as in
others, identity resembles existence; but it is even more universal than existence, since it holds even of non-existent
objects. Sherlock Holmes does not exist, but he is self-identical; he is certainly not identical to Dr Watson, who enjoys
his own identity relation to himself.14 Even if these ﬁctional entities are impossible objects they are still self-identical.
Identity is a very undemanding relation; it holds even of objects that are purely intentional, not even denizens of some
possible world. This is presumably one of the reasons it is typically counted a logical notion—its extreme generality.
‘No entity without identity’, Quine says; we might add, ‘Identity with or without (existent) entity’. Whenever we have a
subject of predication—existent, merely possible, non-existent—we have an application of the concept of identity to
that subject. Identity is ontologically generous.
Second, the notions of identity and distinctness are given in the very idea of predication. When we predicate a property
F of an object x two types of multiplicity are involved: that it is x and not some other object y that we are saying is F,
and that F is but one of many properties that might be predicated of x. We are singling x out from a multiplicity of
possible subjects of predication, and we are selecting F from among a range of properties that might be ascribed to x.
So we have the thought of a plurality of at least possible objects that might or might not be F, and we have the thought
that x may instantiate a range of other properties while not instantiating all other properties. But both these thoughts
involve the idea of identity, since they bring in the idea of objects and properties that are not identical to x and F. The
embedded notion of plurality is deﬁned in terms of the notion of identity. The very idea of
10
IDENTITY
14 I am here assuming that non-existent objects can have properties, such as being a detective and being self-identical. This assumption will loom large in the next chapter.

the extension of a predicate incorporates the identity concept. So even to venture the thought that some object is some
way is to introduce the twin ideas of identity and distinctness. And if predication is the most basic structure of thought,
then identity is right there at the foundations.
Third, the logical law of identity has some claim to be basic among the traditional logical laws. The law of identity is
banality itself: ‘everything is identical to itself ’, or ‘for all x, x x’. Now consider the law of non-contradiction: ‘nothing
can be both F and not F’. What this says is that no single object can have a property and its contradictory. Of course
distinct objects could be both F and not-F, since one could be F and the other be not-F. What is logically impossible is
that one object should have contradictory properties. But to formulate this thought we need the concept of identity:
the same object cannot be both F and not-F. In other words, if ever we have a case in which x is F and y is not-F then
we can deduce that x is not identical to y; negating a property that x has always takes us to another object, not identical
to the ﬁrst. Understanding the way negation works here involves grasping the role of the concept of identity in ﬁxing
this law. The law of excluded middle works similarly. This law says that everything is either F or it is not-F. Take any
object, you will ﬁnd that it either has some property or it lacks that property; there is nothing in between. But this
involves a cross-reference that signals a use of the notion of identity: x is either F or x (the same thing) is not-F. The
thought is not that either x is F or some other object is not-F; it is that either x is F or it—that very object—is not-F. But
this cross-reference involves the thought that we are dealing with an identical object at the two occurrences of the
variable or pronoun. In other words, the apparatus of variable-binding, or pronominal anaphora, invokes the notion of
identity.15 This is equally true, of course, of the law of identity itself, so that the concept of identity is needed
IDENTITY
11
15 I cannot recall now where I ﬁrst encountered this point about variables and identity, but I think it is generally appreciated.

to understand it also. My point is that we need this law to understand the other two laws; and if anyone failed to see
that identity obeys the classical law then that would be a reason to doubt that they knew what they were talking about.
Maybe it could also be argued that we need the other two laws in order to understand the law of identity, in which case
we should rest with the weaker conclusion that identity is presupposed in the other laws—and not the stronger claim
that it is more basic than those laws. In any case, the law of identity will be presupposed in the other two laws: without a
grasp of the law of identity the other two laws are not even so much as intelligible.
The very ubiquity and indispensability of identity has sometimes worked as an incitement to declare it a pseudo-
relation. Thus Wittgenstein wrote in the Tractatus: ‘It is self-evident that identity is not a relation between objects’
(5.5301); and ‘Roughly speaking, to say of two things that they are identical is nonsense, and to say of one thing that it is
identical with itself is to say nothing at all’ (5.5303). He goes on to refer to standard identity sentences as ‘pseudo-
propositions’ (5.534), stipulating a notation in which they cannot even be formulated; he prefers to express identity by
sameness of sign, not by a special sign for the identity relation (5.53). The feeling that identity is a pseudo-relation is
doubtless connected to the apparent triviality of the relation: it comes too cheaply, being found in every object
whatsoever. It is therefore felt to be a redundant concept, a mere ﬂourish. But consider the concept of distinctness,
which is deﬁned simply as the negation of identity. We might characterize distinctness, parodying Frege, as ‘that
relation which any object has to every object except itself ’. Does this relation have the look of a pseudo-relation? Well,
certainly not because it only relates an object to itself! On the contrary, it relates an object to a vast range of other
objects. Surely it is clear that distinctness is a genuine relation between things; but then identity must also be, since it is
simply the negation of distinctness. Negation cannot take us from a genuine relation to a pseudo-relation.
12
IDENTITY

Both relations are important simply because we don't always know the truth about distinctness and identity; and it can
be a matter of great moment whether or not it is the same or distinct things that are both F and G (e.g. whether two
crimes were committed by a single person). If we were omniscient about identity, then indeed identity truths would not
inform us of anything; but the same could be said of any kind of truth. Identity propositions are not always analytic or a
priori, as Frege long ago taught us, so there is nothing trivial about such propositions. The claim of redundancy ignores
the epistemic role that the concept of identity plays. (We shall encounter more such redundancy claims in later
chapters.)
But what kind of relation is identity, metaphysically speaking? This is one of those loaded philosophical questions of
which the ontologically anxious are so fond. Is it physical or mental? Is it causal or functional? Is it spatial or non-
spatial? Where does it ﬁt into our preferred set of allowable categories? Clearly, the answer is that it is none of the
above. It is, for want of a better word, a logical relation. It is not a perceptible relation, since there is no sense-
impression of self-identity. Nor is it a relation that generates causal powers—unlike, say, ‘being of greater electrical
charge than’. We might say that it is an abstract relation, if we insist on trying to categorize it; but then we must
remember that it holds of concrete objects and that ‘abstract’ is little more than a label reserved for what is agreed to
be neither mental nor physical. We shall be encountering several more such logical properties as we proceed, and I
shall have more to say about their metaphysical status pari passu. For now, we can simply conform with tradition in
classifying identity as a logical relation. And let us note that it is the only relation that is counted as a logical constant.
All the other standard logical constants—the connectives and quantiﬁers—are operators on closed and open
sentences. This makes ‘ ’ semantically quite unlike the other logical constants. The reason for so counting it is,
presumably, that identity is the only relation that has a claim to topic-neutrality, which is to say universality:
IDENTITY
13

identity holds of every entity in every possible world, and is part of our very framework of thought.16
I have endorsed four main theses about identity: (i) it is unitary, (ii) it is indeﬁnable, (iii) it is fundamental, (iv) it is a
genuine relation. I do not suppose that any of this is very controversial, putting aside some details of the ways I have
chosen to state these theses. My aim has been to set out a general conception that will be useful later when we
approach more difﬁcult and controversial topics. This is the ﬁrst instalment in a series of studies of what we might call
logical ontology—the ontological character and standing of certain (broadly) logical notions. I shall be defending views
of our other topics that mirror what I have said here about identity.
14
IDENTITY
16 Identity is also bound up with the apparatus of quantiﬁcation, since variables are interpreted by means of it, as I noted earlier.

2 Existence
Consider these sentences: ‘Bill Clinton exists’, ‘Superman does not exist’, ‘Vulcan exists’, ‘Hillary Clinton does not
exist’—the ﬁrst two true, the second two false. It is extremely natural, going by surface syntax, to interpret these
sentences as simple predications, having the same logical form as ‘Bill Clinton runs’, ‘Superman does not drink’,
‘Vulcan spins’, ‘Hillary Clinton does not breathe’. Putting it in the material mode, it is natural to regard existence as a
property that things may have or fail to have. Of course, this formulation is only as clear as the notion of a property,
which is not altogether clear. About the best that can be said to deﬁne the relevant notion of property is that a property
is something that objects have or instantiate. But if we ask what an object is we are soon driven back to the idea that an
object is what has or instantiates properties.17 The two notions are woven inextricably together. We should certainly not
adopt some tendentious criterion, such as the idea that a property is what, when instantiated, makes a causal difference
to how the world works, or be perceptible, or not be instantiated by everything that exists. Nor is it any help to fall
back on the grammatical form of sentences, as when we say that a property is what a predicate expresses. Aside from
being dubious in itself, this presupposes the notion of a predicate, which threatens to be deﬁned as a term that
expresses a property. Perhaps all we need to say, for present purposes, is that a property, in the intended sense, is what
is instantiated by an object in a way analogous to the
17 Additionally, we cannot informatively characterize the notion of property by using the notion of instantiation, since that notion is itself parasitic on the notion of property.

way in which (say) redness is instantiated by an object: that is, choose a paradigm property and declare a property to be
anything that resembles this paradigm.18 In any case, the traditional opposition to the idea that existence is a property
has not relied upon the charge that the whole notion of a property is too unclear to make the claim well-formulated, or
that the notion is being stretched too far when made to include existence. Indeed, it has typically been assumed that the
claim is clear enough to be known to be demonstrably false: we know what it means to call existence a property; it is
just that it is no such thing. Existence is nothing like redness or maleness or evenness, according to one tradition. But
this, as I say, is not how statements of existence naively appear.
Assuming, then, that we have an adequate grip on the notion of property, and allied notions, we ﬁnd it natural to talk in
the following way. Not everything that we refer to exists: Venus does, Vulcan doesn't; horses do, unicorns don't. There
are merely ﬁctional entities as well as things that really exist. To exist is to have a property that only some of the things
we refer to have—those that exist as opposed to those that are merely ﬁctional. Thus existence is a property that is
universal to entities that exist, unlike (say) the property of being blue (which is, however, universal to entities that are
blue19). This universality is shared by certain other properties—such as self-identity and logical properties like not being
blue and not blue at the same time. But despite the universality of the property of existence over existent things, the
word ‘exists’ still does important distinguishing work, since not everything we talk about exists. Since there are objects
of reference that don't exist, it is useful to have a word that ascribes the property of existence to a subset of what we
refer to. This word has the logical role of a
16
EXISTENCE
18 This is surely how the debate about whether existence is a property has been traditionally conceived: the question has always been whether ‘exists’ belongs with paradigm
property terms like ‘red’ or ‘fast’ or ‘prime’.
19 In fact, there is no very clear sense in which existence is more universal than blueness: every blue thing is blue, as every existing thing exists; some existing things are not blue,
as some blue things do not exist. More
things exist than are blue, perhaps—but that is all.

predicate in statements of existence, so that ‘Venus exists’ and ‘Venus spins’ have the same logical form: they are both
singular sentences involving a proper name and a property-ascribing predicate. Just as we say of Venus that it spins, so
we say of it that it exists. The ontological status of existence as a property of objects has its semantic counterpart in the
grammar of statements of existence: ‘exists’ is a predicate. It is a predicate that singles out the existent entities we talk
about from those that are merely ‘intentional’—ﬁctitious, wrongly reiﬁed, hallucinatory, dreamed up, mistakenly
posited. This sounds like a mere articulation of the common-sense view of existence, but of course it has been widely
rejected, and its very coherence has been doubted. In this chapter I shall defend the naive view against the main rival
position. The rival position, I shall argue, has severe and unﬁxable problems, while the naive view remains
unthreatened. Let me ﬁrst lay out the rival view as clearly as possible, before arguing against it.
It is extremely important to state as clearly as possible what it is that the orthodox rival view maintains, so that we ﬁx in
our minds exactly what the doctrine is. It is only too easy to miss the import of the doctrine in a formalistic haze. The
thesis is that when you say that Bill Clinton exists you do not attribute to a certain object the property of existence, since
there is no such property; what you do is say that some property is instantiated—where this property is not the property
of existence itself but some other property to which you are alluding. Instead of attributing a property to an object you
attribute a property to a property—the second-order property of having an instance. When you think of an object as
existing what you are really thinking is that some property has an instance. You may try your hardest to focus on
Clinton himself and ascribe to him the property of existence, but you cannot succeed in that endeavour, since the
thought in question must always be to the effect that a certain property has an instance—as it might be, the property of
being a US president who was once governor of Arkansas. It cannot be that two conceptual ingredients make up
EXISTENCE
17

your singular existential thought—the concept of Clinton and the concept of existence; rather, there must be a third
ingredient, corresponding to the property to which instances are ascribed. When you think that Clinton is male you can
make do with just the two ingredients, but when you attribute existence to him you are driven to introduce some
further property that Clinton has. Your thought is thus really about that property, not about Clinton, though it may
seem otherwise to you.20 The same goes for general existential thoughts: when you think that tigers exist you do not
think of certain feline objects that each has the property of existence; rather, you think, of the property of tigerhood,
that it has instances—no mental act of predicating existence of any object takes place. The orthodox doctrine gives the
very analysis of the content of your thought—what the concept of existence intrinsically involves. The concept of an
object existing simply is the concept of a property having instances. To think that Clinton exists is to think that the
property of being a US president who was once governor of Arkansas has an instance.
Russell is the main architect of the orthodox view, or at least its most unﬂinching proponent. He fully grasped exactly
what the doctrine says about what he would call the structure of an existential fact; he wasn't simply offering a
notational reformulation of ordinary existential sentences. His clearest statement of the view runs as follows:
When you take any propositional function and assert of it that it is possible, that it is sometimes true, that gives you
the fundamental meaning of ‘existence’. . . . Existence is essentially a property of a propositional function.
18
EXISTENCE
20 Imagine checking off a list of assertions about Bill Clinton, to the effect that he is president, that he smiles a lot, that he is intelligent, that he is imprudent, that he exists. For
the ﬁrst four items your thought is a subject–predicate thought about a certain concrete entity, but when it comes to the ﬁfth item your thinking suddenly goes second-order as
you mentally invoke some suitable propositional function to pin your existential thought upon. But doesn't it seem that you engage in the same kind of singular predication for
the ﬁfth case as for the ﬁrst four? What, one wants to ask, is to stop
you thinking singularly about Clinton when you essay an existential thought about him?

It means that the propositional function is true in at least one instance. . . . We have got to have some idea that we
do not dene, and one takes the idea of ‘always true’, or of ‘sometimes true’, as one's undened idea in this
matter. . . . It will be out of this notion of sometimes, which is the same as the notion of possible, that we get the notion
of existence. To say that unicorns exist is simply to say that ‘(x is a unicorn) is possible’.21
Russell goes on to compare ‘exists’ with ‘numerous’, saying that neither can be meaningfully predicated of individuals;
we can only attach ‘numerous’ to a term expressing a propositional function, as in ‘dogs are numerous’. He says:
‘Exactly the same applies to existence, that is to say that the actual things that there are in the world do not exist, or, at
least, that is putting it too strongly, because this is to utter nonsense.’ The correct thing to say is that ‘it is of
propositional functions that you can assert or deny existence.’22 It is a logical category mistake to ascribe existence to
objects.
We can divide Russell's position here into three sub-theses: an ontological thesis, a semantic or logical thesis, and a
deﬁnitional thesis. The ontological thesis has a negative and a positive part. Negatively, the claim is that existence is not
a property that individuals instantiate. Positively, the claim is that for something to exist is for some property
(propositional function) to have instances. In the metalinguistic terms Russell prefers, existence consists in a predicate
yielding a truth under certain substitutions into its argument-place: there are true sentences containing that predicate
and a substituted name. For example, ‘tigers exist’ means ‘there are true sentences of the form “a is a tiger’ ”, where ‘a’
is a name of some tiger. So to say that an individual exists always involves a reference to some property or predicate of
which it is said that it holds of something. Thus we have the semantic thesis
EXISTENCE
19
21 ‘The Philosophy of Logical Atomism’, 232–3.
22 Ibid. 233. Actually, this is a misformulation on Russell's part: it is not that you can predicate
existence of propositional functions; rather, all statements of existence are
equivalent to statements saying of propositional functions that they have instances. Propositional functions have the property of having instances, not the property of existence
(there is no such property, for Russell).

that statements of existence are really higher-order statements involving reference to a property or concept or predicate
or propositional function. The subject of the statement is never a term for an individual but always a term for a
property, with the notion of existence being carried by a predicate that attaches to that other predicate term. Statements
of existence are always and necessarily second-order statements, analogous to ‘blue is delightful to the eye’. And now
the deﬁnitional thesis is that ‘exists’ can be deﬁned in these terms: when ‘exists’ occurs in a statement it can always be
paraphrased in terms of the notions of a propositional function and being ‘sometimes true’ or ‘possible’. Presumably
Russell intends this deﬁnition to be non-circular, so that we are not compelled to explain the deﬁniens by recourse to
the deﬁniendum; as he says, we ‘get the notion of existence’ out of these other notions. The notion of existence gets
swallowed up into these other notions, no longer to masquerade as a predicate of individuals. In a perfect language the
word need never occur, its job always being done by ‘sometimes true’ and its adjuncts.
Nowadays this Russellian position is routinely put by saying that existence is what is expressed by the existential
quantiﬁer and only by it. All natural language sentences that speak of existence can be translated into sentences that
employ only the existential quantiﬁer, with no use of ‘exists’ as predicative. The existential quantiﬁer is conceived,
following Frege, as a function from ﬁrst-order concepts to truth-values, so that nothing corresponding to a ﬁrst-order
predicate is involved in its semantics.23 So the assumption is that the Russellian conception of existence receives its
canonical formulation in the thesis that ‘exists’ always means ‘there is an x such that’. The thesis is that we can always
translate existential statements into this form of words. This is how a perfect language expresses the idea that existence
consists in a property having instances.
20
EXISTENCE
23 For the Fregean view of quantiﬁcation as a second-level function see Michael Dummett, Frege: Philosophy of Language , ch. 3 .

I take it all this is familiar enough, even to the point of tedium. But I think that almost none of it is right: the Russellian
thesis and its customary Fregean formulation are riddled with problems.
I shall consider four kinds of objection to the orthodox view. First, let us enquire into the innocent-seeming phrase
‘has instances’. What does it mean? It can be taken in an objectual or a substitutional sense. In the objectual sense, the
doctrine is that for something to exist is for there to be objects that are instances of some suitable predicate. Here are
some objects, and they are instances of F. But that can only mean that these objects exist, so that we are saying that
there exist instances of F, for some F. If they did not exist, then the existential statement would not be true after all. But
how is that use of ‘exists’ to be analysed? Clearly it will be no help to say that they are instances of ‘instances of F’, since
these will again need to be existent instances. The notion of existence is presupposed in the analysis, so the analysis
does not settle what kind of notion it is. It might even be a predicate as it occurs in that use: for there to be instances of
F is for there to be objects that exist, predicatively, and are instances of F. The instances have to be existent objects, so
we are presupposing the notion of an existent object in our account of what an instance of a predicate is. We can put
the objection this way: Consider ‘planets exist’ and ask whether Vulcan is an instance of ‘planet’. If it is, then we have
not correctly analysed existence, since Vulcan doesn't exist, and hence its planetary instancehood doesn't show that
planets exist. But if it is not, then that can only be because it doesn't exist—thus demonstrating that the relevant notion
of instance must import the concept of existence. If we say that ‘planets exist’ is true because ‘Mars is a planet’ is true
and ‘Vulcan is a planet’ is not, that can only be because ‘Mars’ refers to an existent object while ‘Vulcan’ does not. The
reason we get a truth in the one case and not the other is precisely that existence is ascribed to the reference of one
term and not to the other. Why else would the one be true and the other not be? Nor will it help to introduce a
distinction between ﬁctional
EXISTENCE
21

truth or ﬁctional instance and literal truth or literal instance in order to rule out this kind of case, since this also
presupposes the notion of existence. The point is that paraphrasing existence statements into statements about the
instantiation of a property does not establish that existence is not a predicate, since the notion of instantiation must be
taken to have existence built into it—it must be existent things that instantiate the property. It is this circularity that
prevents the orthodox view from claiming to have established that existence is not a predicate.
I think Russell was at least subliminally aware of this problem, which is why he tended to formulate the doctrine in
more substitutional terms. He preferred to say that there are true singular propositions or sentences that are instances
of the propositional function in question, rather than say that there are instancing objects that satisfy that function. And
what he liked best of all was the formulation in terms of possibility—‘(x is a dog) is possible’—because that put him as
far as possible away (he thought) from the concept of existence. It makes it look as if we are analysing—non-circularly
analysing—the notion of existence in terms of modal notions and propositional functions. But this does not really help
with the underlying problem. In the ﬁrst place, it is necessary to assert the existence of certain propositions or
sentences on this analysis, and the question must arise as to what this is supposed to amount to. It had better not mean
that certain propositions or sentences have the property of existence.24 But, more obviously, there is the problem of
how to analyse the singular propositions themselves: what are their truth conditions? Clearly we cannot allow ‘Vulcan
is a planet’ to be a substitution instance corresponding to ‘planets exist’, but that can only be because the referent of
‘Vulcan’ does not exist. For a singular statement to be true in the sense needed is for there to be an object referred to by
the singular term and for that object to satisfy the attached predicate. So, again, the
22
EXISTENCE
24 I return to this later when I discuss what it means to ascribe existence to properties or propositional functions.

notion of existence is smuggled in unanalysed. It is perfectly consistent with the higher-order paraphrase that existence
is actually a property of objects: we can paraphrase existential statements that way if we like, but we are tacitly assuming
that existence is a property of objects, for all that the paraphrase tells us. What is really being said, according to the
paraphrase, is that among the objects that have the property of existing at least one of them is F—hence F has
instances. Of course, this does not yet prove that ‘exists’ is a predicate—though it might incline us to think that—but it
does show that the orthodox view has not refuted that doctrine, or made it redundant, simply by providing a plausible-
sounding paraphrase in terms of properties and their instances. For the question precisely is what it is for a property to
have instances—if not for objects that exist to instantiate the property.
We must here guard against adopting a formalistic approach to the issue. Russell did not make this mistake, but those
in the tradition he initiated (with others) have tended to think that the issue could be settled simply by seeing whether
existence statements could be translated into statements employing the so-called existential quantiﬁer. But that cannot
be right, because it is possible to interpret the quantiﬁer by using a predicate of existence, along the lines of ‘for some
x, x exists and x is F’ (I will come back to this). The question is whether the fundamental notion of existence can be
explained in such a way as to avoid predicating it of objects, and merely giving a quantiﬁcational paraphrase does not
show this, since it depends upon how the terms in the paraphrase are to be interpreted. The question can only be
settled by direct philosophical argument, not by offering some purely formal translation of existence statements. We
need to know whether the concept of existence contained in the symbol for the existential quantiﬁer is or is not the
ﬁrst-order concept of predicative existence.25
EXISTENCE
23
25 It is perfectly consistent to hold that ‘x ’ is a second-level expression, so that it forms sentences from ﬁrst-level expressions, and that ‘ x ’ abbreviates a condition containing a
ﬁrst-level concept of existence—as is evident from the conjunctive paraphrase of ‘; x ’ that I suggest in the text and to which I will return.

The second problem has more of the character of a proof that the orthodox view cannot be a general analysis of the
notion of existence, and not just a challenge to the adequacy of the account. Consider the existence of properties or
propositional functions or predicates themselves. These exist in the same sense that other things exist, despite their
being (presumably) abstract and non-individual. Thus we can say, ‘the property of being a planet exists’—as we might
if insisting (rightly or wrongly) upon the truth of realism as opposed to nominalism about universals. But how might
this statement be analysed? On the orthodox view, we must make reference to some property that the entity said to
exist is an instance of. It plainly cannot be the property of being a planet, since the property of being a planet isn't itself
a planet. But what else could it be? We might try ﬁnding some true description of the property and inserting that into
the analysis—say, the property of being currently under discussion; then for the property of being a planet to exist is
for that property to have instances. But the difﬁculties now are obvious. First, there is the problem of securing
uniqueness. But second, and worse, we are now launched on a vicious inﬁnite regress, since we must ask what the
existence of the higher-order property consists in, thus requiring a further property to be a property of that property.26
The problem, evidently, is that to analyse the existence of a property we need another property that the ﬁrst one
instantiates, and so on ad inﬁnitum. Not only is it doubtful that there always are these further properties, but also we will
not succeed in getting any of them to exist without the existence of further ones that raise the same question.
Intuitively,
24
EXISTENCE
26 We don't avoid this regress by invoking the property of being identical to a certain property and then using this as the needed propositional function. That is, suppose we want
to know what it is for property P to exist, and we suggest that it is for the propositional function ‘P ’ to have an instance. This still refers to P , of course, but it jumps up a
level by forming the higher-level function ‘P ’, so that when we ask what it is for the referent of ‘P ’ to exist we will need a function that expresses identity with that higher-
order property—to wit, the property of being identical to the property of being identical with P . And so on up. Invoking identity in this way does not work to conﬁne the
generated properties merely to the property P
we started out with.

the existence of a property is intrinsic to it; it is not a matter of some relation that the property stands in to some other
property of which it is an instance. And if we construe it as such a relation, then we generate a vicious regress, as each
new property raises the question of its own existence.27
Matters look less troublesome when we are considering the existence of individuals, since they always have properties
to instantiate, and their existence doesn't require the existence of other individuals; but with properties themselves we
ﬁnd that we have to postulate extra properties for them to fall under, and we are then being faced with the question of
their existence. No property will be able to exist unless a whole inﬁnite series exists. But there is no such series, and
anyway it would never get off the ground because of the regress. In effect, the orthodox view makes it impossible to
attribute existence to properties; this would have to be declared ill-formed and meaningless (not merely false). And it is
noteworthy that Russell never attempts to extend the analysis to this area of existence. One suspects that he (and
others) simply take the existence of properties for granted, as if it needs no analysis. But this is no better than
defending the thesis that existence is to be analysed as occupancy of space simply by declining to consider the existence
of abstract entities like numbers. Any good theory of existence needs to be able to handle the full range of uses of
‘exists’. In fact, this difﬁculty about property existence acts back on the analysis of individual existence, since the
property the individual instantiates must itself exist, and this cannot be explained in terms of the orthodox view.
Individuals cannot be said to exist if the properties (or predicates) they instantiate
EXISTENCE
25
27 The problem here is not that the existence of any given property requires the existence of inﬁnitely many other properties. There is nothing inherently objectionable about
that—indeed, something like this appears to be manifestly true for the existence of numbers. The point I am making is rather about the analysis or explanation of what it is to
exist: the viciousness comes in when we try to analyse or explain what it is for X to exist and ﬁnd that we must presuppose that we already know what it is for Y to exist
(where X
and Y are both properties here). In general, regresses are only vicious in the context of some explanatory aim, not in themselves.

cannot be said to exist, since the former requires the latter: for x to exist is for there to exist some property (or
predicate) F such that x instantiates F.
The third objection arises from a family of sentences that resist the orthodox paraphrase. Some of these have become
familiar, though their polemical power has been underestimated. In view of the existence of these sentences, there has
been a tendency to declare that ‘exists’ has two sorts of interpretation, predicative and higher-order. But this
bifurcating view is unworkable and we are compelled to take all occurrences of ‘exists’ as predicative. Thus it has often
been pointed out that singular attributions of existence are hard to slot into the orthodox schema, on pain of distorting
the semantics of singular terms like demonstratives and proper names: we get pushed towards a description theory of
reference for these terms that has internal problems.28 The point I want to make is that accepting this problem about
singular statements cannot but affect the way we view ‘exists’ in general statements. Consider ‘Venus exists and is a
planet’ and ‘at least one planet exists’: the former entails the latter. But how can that be if ‘exists’ in the singular
sentence is predicative while in the general sentence it is not? We simply have no term common to premises and
conclusion if we bifurcate ‘exists’ in the suggested way; we must either take the singular sentence to be analysable in the
orthodox style or we must revise our views of the general sentence. As I will explain below, I favour treating ‘Fs exist’
along the lines of ‘for some x, x exists and x is F’, which allows me to ﬁnd the common term with the predicative
‘exists’ in ‘a exists’. But my point now is that the orthodox view has to do something to save the entailment—it can't
just declare that ‘exists’ is sometimes predicative and sometimes not. And of course it is deeply unattractive to suppose
that ‘exists’ has the kind of ambiguity the bifurcating account proposes.
26
EXISTENCE
28 See Kripke, Naming and Necessity . Kripke discussed the topic of existence and names extensively in his 1973 John Locke Lectures in Oxford, which I attended, but which have
not yet been published.

The problems of analysis for the orthodox view are made vivid by the sentence ‘something exists’. This is a perfectly
meaningful and true sentence, which follows from such sentences as ‘Venus exists’, but it should itself not exist
according to the orthodox view. For it is not paraphrasable within the terms of that view, there being no predicate
around to pin the instances on: what property are we saying is instantiated here? The problem is worse than with
proper names and demonstratives because at least in their case we could try to appeal to a description theory of
singular reference; but there isn't even any reference going on with the word ‘something’. If we try to translate the
sentence in the standard way we get the gibberish, ‘ x(x)’, with no predicate to write down. You might think we could
do better with 'x(Thing x), but this is pleonastic, given the usual meaning of ‘x’. Also, it is unclear what the predicate
‘thing’ is supposed to mean here if not ‘exists’.29 The natural translation is I think the right one: ‘x(Exists x)’—‘for
some
EXISTENCE
27
29 A tempting alternative suggestion is that ‘something exists’ means the same as ‘something is self-identical’ or ‘the property of self-identity has at least one instance’. Thus the
formula that captures our recalcitrant sentence is ‘(x )(x x )’, where ‘ ’ plays the role of the missing predicate. But is this really what ‘something exists’ says ? Where is the sign
of identity in the original sentence? There is no name to extract it from, as with classic description theories, and it is hard to see how it could plausibly be taken to be expressed
by ‘something’. Moreover, ‘something exists’ follows from ‘Venus exists’, so presumably it will have to be held that the latter sentence means ‘(x )(x Venus)’, thus construing
singular existence statements as asserting the identity of something with a named entity. The problem here, in addition to the previous objection, is that such a paraphrase
looks irremediably circular, since it presupposes that we already understand what it is for Venus (say) to exist. The invoked predicate ‘ Venus’ embeds the name ‘Venus’, and
the condition will only work to secure existence if this term is taken to refer to an existent entity. Consider ‘ Vulcan’: satisfying this predicate will not secure existence (Vulcan
clearly satisﬁes it!), and the reason is simply that Vulcan does not exist. Satisfying ‘ Venus’ secures existence only because of the existence of Venus, which we were meant to be
analysing. I think Russell was aware of this point, which is why he never chose the likes of ‘ Venus’ as the propositional function on which to pin existence. In the case of other
predicates, such as ‘planet next to Mars’, the existence of the property does not depend upon the existence of Venus itself, and hence is not straightforwardly circular in the
way ‘ Venus’ is. And there is also the point that bringing in identity in this way undermines a central motivation for the Russellian view, since self-identity has precisely the kind
of universality Russell found objectionable in a predicate of existence.

x, x exists’ (see below for more on this view of ‘ x’). In any case, it is difﬁcult to see how ‘something exists’ could
succeed in being meaningful on the orthodox view, because it lacks the kind of reference to a property that is required
for that view to get a foothold (the same goes for ‘nothing exists’). I would regard such unspeciﬁc existential sentences
as test cases for any theory of existence (they also block metalinguistic analyses along the lines of “ ‘Venus” denotes’,
since ‘something’ is not a denoting term). Again, the orthodox view does not have the generality we should expect of a
theory of existence.
The fourth objection focuses on the requirement that any existent thing should fall under some property or other. This
implies that nothing could exist that failed to fall under some property—other than existence, obviously. To exist is to
be an instance of a property, so necessarily whatever exists has at least one property. This rules out, as a matter of the
meaning of ‘exists’, the possibility of what we might call ‘bare existence’—a thing that exists without having any (further)
properties. What should we think of this alleged possibility? The question seems to be a substantive metaphysical
question, open to rational debate. Maybe bare existence is actually a metaphysical impossibility, though how one might
argue for that is not clear.30 But, in any case, it does not appear to be analytic or tautological to assert that bare
existence is impossible—which it would have to be according to the orthodox view. It would have to be equivalent to
saying, ‘there could not be an instance of a property that was not an instance of a property’. That is, it would have to be
contradictory to assert the possibility of bare existence, as in ‘an instance of a property could be an instance of no
property’. This is simply because existence is being analysed
28
EXISTENCE
30 Again, we have the question of what to say about self-identity: is it contradictory to suppose that an object exists and lacks even the property of self-identity? This does seem
to me quite impossible, but I am not convinced that it is actually formally contradictory. In any case, it is of no real help to the defender of the Russellian thesis, since this
seems precisely the wrong kind of property to invoke in order to analyse what it means to say that something exists, for the reasons mentioned in the previous footnote.

as property instantiation, so we could not then go on to say that the existent thing has no properties. But it seems to me
that there is no actual contradiction in the idea of bare existence, even though it may well be some sort of metaphysical
impossibility: ‘x exists and x has no properties’ certainly does not appear to be a straightforwardly self-refuting sentence.
I think the idea of an object that has only the property of existence is not intrinsically self-defeating, but it would have to
be if existence simply consisted in property instantiation.
Actually, the problem here spreads, because the orthodox view requires, not merely that every existent object have
some property, but also that it have some property unique to it. For the existence of an individual object is said to
consist in the instantiation of a property sufﬁcient for that object to exist and not some other object. Thus the theory
characteristically claims that some deﬁnite description or individual concept is instantiated, this serving to single out
the individual in question. But this implies that in every possible world in which an individual exists that individual has
some property that no other individual has. Surely that is a very strong claim, and not one that we ought to be obliged
to accept just by the simple analysis of the concept of existence.31 The analysis of existence ought to be neutral on the
point. On the face of it, there seems no logical bar to a range of individuals existing in a world without there being a
property that singles each of them out uniquely—as it might be, a collection of indiscernible red steel spheres. We
surely don't want our theory of existence to settle the vexed question of
EXISTENCE
29
31 Of course, identity with an object is always a property unique to it, as with ‘ Venus’; but as we have seen, this is not the right kind of property to use in characterizing existence:
the individuating property must be one that does not itself presuppose the existence of the entity in question. There is also the point that if we insist on using self-identity as
the property that is uniquely instantiated in the case of assertions of singular existence, then we disconnect such assertions from assertions of general existence, as with ‘tigers
exist’. We don't want to end up saying that the existence of each individual tiger consists in its instantiating identity with itself but that the existence of tigers in general consists
in instantiating the property of being a tiger. The restriction to the self-identity property looks ad hoc, designed simply to secure uniqueness.

the necessary identity of indiscernibles. And why should existence necessarily attach to the property, if there is one,
which the object happens uniquely to instantiate, instead of all the other properties the object has? It certainly does not
seem contradictory to insist that an object could exist that differed in no respect from a numerically distinct object. Yet
it would have to be contradictory according to the orthodox view of singular existence statements.
Taken together, these four objections imply that the orthodox view simply has not got hold of the concept of
existence. It only seems to have done so for certain limited cases because it presupposes the notion of existence, as
when it employs the locution ‘has instances’. But the theory cannot deal with property existence, it cannot handle the
full range of existential statements, and it links the possibility of existence too intimately to the idea of (uniquely)
instantiating a property. In short, the concept of existence is not identical to the concept of property instantiation (even
though this concept itself invokes the concept of existence). Let me now work out the ﬁrst-order property view more
thoroughly, responding to some questions that might be raised about it.
The property view says that every occurrence of the word ‘exists’ is logically predicative, just as ‘man’ and ‘blue’ are. It
also says all existential statements can be analysed by means of this predicate. And this is just the semantic counterpart
to the ontological thesis that existence is always and everywhere a property of objects. It is a property universal to all
objects that exist, somewhat like self-identity; but it is less universal than identity because (as I noted in the previous
chapter) that relation holds of all conceivable objects, not merely those that happen to exist.
What problems might be raised by this simple view? Why has it been so consistently rejected? It is surprisingly difﬁcult
to ﬁnd any worked-out objections to it, despite the suspicions it arouses. The only point that Russell makes, and it is a
recurrent theme, is that existence is, so to speak, too universal to be a property: ‘There is no
30
EXISTENCE

sort of point in a predicate which could not conceivably be false. I mean, it is perfectly clear that, if there were such a
thing as this existence of individuals that we talk of, it would be absolutely impossible for it not to apply, and that is the
characteristic of a mistake.’32 There are two problems with this argument. First, it proves too much, since self-identity
and logical properties (such as the property of not being both red and not red at the same time) are counter-examples
to it: these apply to all conceivable objects, but we should hardly wish to analyse them as higher-order properties. And
why should there not be such absolutely universal predicates? Can't there be features that all objects share (such as
being an object)?33 There may not be much point in speaking of such properties, given that they have no complement
class, but that is not to say that they are not true of everything: there are many truths that are not worth mentioning in
ordinary contexts. Second, it is just wrong of Russell to say that ‘exists’ applies to all conceivable objects and hence has
no utility. It precisely does not apply to all conceivable objects, since some of the objects we conceive do not exist. Of
course, it applies to all objects that exist, but we have a good use for the word simply because we make mistakes about
existence. The word ‘exists’ indeed applies to all existent objects and to nothing else, but sometimes we take it to apply
when it doesn't.34 It can be extremely useful to be told that something exists
EXISTENCE
31
32 ‘The Philosophy of Logical Atomism’, 241.
33 Or ‘having properties’, or ‘standing in relation to something’, or ‘being nameable’. In fact, Russell himself has to invoke such a universal property to make his theory work,
namely ‘being an instance of some property or other’: since existence consists in instantiating some property, he has to presuppose that every existent object has some property
or other to which its existence attaches. Indeed, it is hard to see how such universality could be avoided if we are to ﬁnd an analysis of existence that applies to every case.
34 This is why it is a mistake to think that true singular statements of existence must be trivial and false ones contradictory, on the grounds that reference itself presupposes
existence. The reason this is a mistake is simply that the audience for existential assertions may not know that a given singular term refers to something that exists, so that it is
informative to couple such a term with a predication of existence. If we are discussing planets and I say, ‘Venus exists but Vulcan does not’, this can be informative to you
precisely because you do not know which of ‘Venus’ and ‘Vulcan’ is the empty term. Of course, I know, because I am aware of the existential facts, and so the statement is not
informative to me —but no statement is informative to me in that sense, because I already know the fact I am stating. My audience may be clueless about matters of existence,
so they are unapprised of the semantic status of the singular terms I use; what they learn from my existential assertions is that those terms either refer to something that exists
or not, as the case may be. See David Pears, ‘Is Existence a Predicate?’ for a formulation of the kind of argument I am here rejecting.

when you had supposed that it does not (and vice versa). So this objection from generality fails to cut much ice.
There are two main areas in which the predicate view needs careful handling and where it might be thought to run into
trouble: the interpretation of the quantiﬁers and the nature of non-existence. I shall deal with these in turn.
We have become accustomed to speaking of the ‘existential quantiﬁer’ and to supposing that it conveys existence in a
nonpredicative fashion; thus we suppose that existence is not always expressed as a predicate. As I pointed out, this
divided position is unstable, especially in view of the entailments that need to be captured. But, more fundamentally,
the view is misconceived at root: for it may be that ‘x’ is rightly deﬁned by using the existence predicate, so that it is not
an alternative to the predicate view. And I think it is easy to show that it can be deﬁned in this way; also that this is
intuitively the right way to think about it. Take the formula ‘for some x, x is F and x exists’, and take this to translate
‘Fs exist’. The point here is that the preﬁx ‘for some x’ does not itself carry existential import; it simply conveys how
many things are being said to be thus and so. Now I claim that this formula conveys the sense of the existential
statement, and it expresses existence predicatively. What the preﬁx does is indicate the quantity of Fs in question—it
says that some are; it is left up to the predicate ‘exists’ to express existence. The word ‘some’ by itself is existentially
neutral, on this view, much as ‘all’ is usually taken to be35—and I
32
EXISTENCE
35 I mean here that it is customary to take ‘all men are mortal’ as existentially neutral on account of the material conditional embedded in it. It is true that in standard
logic ‘(x )(Fx )’ implies ‘(x )(Fx )’, but it is deemed correct to regard typical universal statements as lacking existential import in virtue of the possible vacuous truth of the
embedded conditional. What I am suggesting, then, is that a similar leniency should be applied to our use of ‘some’. I will happily accept that ‘all’ implies ‘some’, as in standard
logic, but I deprive ‘some’ of existential import: if all the gods are tyrannical, then indeed some are—but of course no gods exist.

would say the same for ‘most’, ‘many’, ‘a few’, as they occur in statements of existence, as in ‘most superheroes exist’.
To defend this view I need to suggest a plausible semantics for the conjunctive formula and to motivate this way of
thinking about quantiﬁer words.
I can think of three possible sorts of interpretation for the formula, which are not unfamiliar. First, we could introduce
a Meinongian ontology, letting the variables range over subsistent as well as existent entities. Then the conjunction says
of these entities that some both exist (as opposed to subsist) and are F. On this interpretation, ‘for some x’ has
ontological import but not existential import, since not everything in our Meinongian ontology exists; ‘exists’ then
narrows down the ontological ﬁeld among all the Fs there are. Second, we could go substitutionalist and deprive ‘for
some x’ of any objectual function: the formula then says only that ‘x’ can be replaced with a term ‘t’ such that ‘t exists
and t is F’ comes out true. That is, we interpret ‘some’ purely substitutionally in the standard way, then we introduce
existence by means of an explicit predicate. On this interpretation, ‘ x’ simply abbreviates the substitutional quantiﬁer
plus its appended existence predicate; we thus break apart the existential and the quantitative aspects of the complex
symbol ‘ x’. Third, we could introduce a special quantiﬁer expression that is equivalent to ‘some of the things we talk/
think about’ (what we might call the ‘intentional quantiﬁer’) and then append existence in the usual way. Thus ‘Fs exist’
means: ‘some of the things we talk/think about are both F and exist’; symbolically, ‘I x, x is F and x exists’, where ‘I x’
is the intentional quantiﬁer.36 The function of ‘some’, again, is purely to convey the
EXISTENCE
33
36 As I have deﬁned it here the intentional quantiﬁer ranges only over objects of reference. If we want to include objects that exist and have not been referred to, then we can
simply make the quantiﬁer disjunctive and include in its domain both intentional objects and those ordinary objects that exist without ever being referred to. In this way the
universal intentional quantiﬁer can range over real and ﬁctional objects in ‘all men are mortal’—in which case that statement turns out false by dint of immortal ﬁctional
characters. We can then rely on conversational context to convey suitable implicatures when we want to speak only of real people.

quantity of things that we talk about that both exist and are F. We could thus quite meaningfully say, ‘for some x that
we talk about, x does not exist’: this would follow, for example, from the truth that Vulcan does not exist. On this
interpretation, to be (to exist) is emphatically not to be the value of a variable. The idea here is to interpret the variable
so that its values are both existent entities and merely intentional ones, where a merely intentional object does not even
subsist (I shall have much more to say about nonexistent intentional objects shortly). So it seems that we can assign a
coherent and plausible interpretation to our formula and hence show that the ‘existential quantiﬁer’ is analysable in
terms of the predicate of existence. I think this is intuitively right, and it solves the problem of the univocity of
existence statements. We also see that in adopting the predicate view we can preserve our usual logic of quantiﬁers,
suitably interpreted; we don't need to go back to old-fashioned logic in which ‘Fs exist’ is a subject–predicate statement
with ‘Fs’ ﬁguring as the subject. In ‘some men exist’ it is not that ‘some men’ is the subject and ‘exists’ the predicate,
which gives rise to notorious absurdities with ‘no men exist’; we can hang on to the standard paraphrase that treats
‘some’ as a second-order predicate, not as a singular term.37 Existence is always predicated of individuals, not of
mysterious pluralities.
But is this a good way to think about ‘some’? Does ‘some’, taken by itself, really lack existential import in ordinary
language? This is quite a big question, but I think there are clear considerations in its favour—it is not merely that it is
required by the correct theory of existence. To begin with, quantiﬁer words are precisely that—they tell you how many,
what proportion. But that is not an inherently
34
EXISTENCE
37 Notice that ‘some’ is treated as second-order while ‘exists’ is treated as ﬁrst-order; so it is wrong to reason that since ‘some’ is a second-order concept ‘exists’ must also be. The
question of the semantic level of quantiﬁer words is orthogonal to the issue of whether existence is predicative.

existential concern. We do better to call ‘some’ the partial quantiﬁer, on analogy with the universal quantiﬁer—neither
logically implies existence. The same should be said of the non-standard quantiﬁers, ‘most’, ‘many’, etc. In the
orthodox notion expressed by ‘x’ we have conﬂated two distinct linguistic functions into the x’ symbol—the function
of saying how many and the function of implying existence (and the name ‘existential quantiﬁer’ only captures this
latter aspect). But, as we have separated these functions for ‘all’, so we should for ‘some’.38 And this ﬁts the linguistic
data, because we do use ‘some’ in contexts in which existence is not implied, even conversationally. Thus we can say,
‘some of the things you're talking about don't exist’, ‘some superheroes are entirely ﬁctional’, ‘some cities are purely
imaginary’. In these sentences ‘some’ expresses a proportion, but it does not imply that this proportion exists—quite
the opposite, since the predicates negate existence. If you try to translate these uses of ‘some’ into the existential
quantiﬁer, so called, you get outright contradictions. Better to take ‘some’ neutrally and then leave it to ‘exists’ to do
what it does best—assert existence.
On this view, ‘some’ only acquires existential force as a matter of conversational implicature. But this implicature can
be cancelled without contradiction, as when one annoyingly says ‘some of the things I've just been referring to don't
exist’ or (less annoyingly) ‘some of the gods are tempestuous, but of course no gods exist’. A similar point can be made
about the word ‘object’: it can seem that this word carries an implication of existence, so that speaking of non-existent
objects sounds contradictory, especially when you lay stress on the word ‘object’. But I think it is clear that this is a
mere implicature, since we do use the word quite correctly to speak of
EXISTENCE
35
38 So I am going further than free logic in stripping quantiﬁcational logic of existential assumptions. Where free logic gives up existential generalization, I give up the existential
import of the sign for partial quantiﬁcation itself, i.e. ‘some’. We therefore can infer ‘someone is a detective’ from ‘Sherlock Holmes is a detective’, even though Sherlock
Holmes does not exist. As a matter of strict logic, then, it is never possible to infer existence from anything (except existence itself, of course), not even a sentence of partial
quantiﬁcation.

‘objects of thought’. When we use the word in this kind of context all suggestions of existence are cancelled. If I speak
of the object of your search as the fountain of youth, there is no implication of existence here. It is the same with
‘some’: most of the time the implicature is in force, since generally we mean to be speaking of existent things, and this
is common knowledge between us; but the general implicature can in principle be cancelled, and then ‘some’ shows its
true semantic colours as a device of pure quantiﬁcation, with no existential entailments.39 This is why we can quite
happily say, ‘some objects (of thought) do not exist’. On this view, it is not that when ‘some’ occurs without existential
force it is always somehow embedded in an intentional context which erases its customary existential punch; rather, it
packs no such punch as a matter of its semantics (as opposed to its pragmatics) but serves purely to express quantity or
proportion—just like ‘all’. If you want to get existence semantically into the picture you have to say so. This is why it is
not pleonastic to say ‘some tame tigers exist’, and not contradictory to say ‘some superheroes do not exist’. In other
words, the linguistic appearances are a true guide to semantic reality: ‘some’ does not in fact contain ‘exists’, implicitly
or explicitly, which is just how it appears. Accordingly, we need ‘exists’ in the language in addition to ‘some’—which is
exactly what we ﬁnd. What quantiﬁer words do is abandon singularity; what ‘exists’ does is attribute the property of
existence to objects that are either denoted or quantiﬁed over. It invites confusion to try to merge these two functions
together into a single primitive symbol ‘x’. The phrase ‘existential quantiﬁer’ obscures this point: think how odd it
sounds to call ‘all’ the existential quantiﬁer just because you
36
EXISTENCE
39 Imagine teaching a literature class in which various ﬁctional characters are being discussed (I do this quite often). You say, ‘some of the characters in Lolita are despicable’, and
go on to discuss their personal failings. This is perfectly good English and clearly the context excludes existential implications. Now imagine switching to a context of real
criminal investigation; here it will be assumed that you are talking of real people when you say, ‘some of these car thieves are pretty smart’. But surely the word ‘some’ does not
shift its literal meaning from one context to the next; it is simply a matter of the implicatures carried by the context of utterance.

believe, as some have, that it too implies existence. To label ‘some’ the existential quantiﬁer is not simply to describe its
function but to impose a tendentious theory upon it, a theory that we have seen to be false to the linguistic data.
Matters would be much clearer if we spoke of the universal quantiﬁer and the partial quantiﬁer. We can, of course, just
deﬁne an expression ‘x’ that contains both notions, as we have in effect traditionally done; but we should be aware of
what the correct semantic analysis of such a stipulated expression consists in—and we should be wary of taking this
symbol to translate the natural language ‘some’.
The topic of non-existence engages more purely metaphysical concerns, and it is true that the topic can quickly
generate bewilderment and confusion; truisms turn into absurdities in the blink of an eye. The problem, put crudely, is
to make sure that things that don't exist don't end up existing after all. The predicate ‘exists’ fails to apply to some
things—what we have to ensure is that these things don't turn out to exist in some attenuated or second-class way:
they simply don't exist. I think it is essential, in avoiding this danger, to acknowledge a crucial asymmetry between
existence and non-existence, namely that non-existence is representation-dependent, while existence is not. That is, the
complement class of ‘exists’ is purely intentional—its esse is concipi. The Meinongian ontology of non-existence
implicitly denies this, holding that merely subsistent entities could have Being even though they have never been
conceived. But I want to say that there are no mind-independent non-existent entities—though there are plenty of
mind-independent existent entities. Compare a predicate like ‘blue’: there can be blue things we have not encountered
cognitively, but there can also be non-blue things we have not encountered—and similarly for every other ordinary
predicate. If we think of the complement class of ‘exists’ in this way, then we will hold that there could be objects that
don't exist and have not been thought of, since their nature does not consist in their being conceived. But this strikes
me as a fundamental misconception: there are no non-existent things that transcend our cognitive acts;
EXISTENCE
37

all non-existent things are objects of thoughts, as a matter of necessity.40 And this marks a deep contrast with typical
predicates. Not that this shows that ‘exists’ is not a predicate after all, but it does tell us something important about
how the concept works. When we say that an object does not exist we are ascribing nonexistence to a purely intentional
object; indeed this is precisely what its non-existence consists in. If it were any other type of object, then it would have
existence after all.
This raises the question of the relation between existence and possibility—in particular, whether merely possible
objects exist. It seems wrong to insist that all possible objects must be conceived, because this makes possibility into a
mind-dependent matter; yet in some sense merely possible objects are ontologically lacking. So are possible objects
non-existent and yet mind-independent? And are not ﬁctional objects at least possible objects? Here I side with Saul
Kripke's view of non-existent entities like unicorns and Sherlock Holmes: these are not genuinely metaphysically
possible objects.41 The central problem with the possibility interpretation of talk about unicorns and Sherlock Holmes
is that there are too many such possible objects, all the ones that answer to the descriptions given in the stories—and
which of these is really Holmes or
38
EXISTENCE
40 The fundamental reason for this is that non-existent objects are individuated only by the ideas we associate with them. If we are told that a particular something doesn't exist,
we need to know which thing is being said not to exist—we need a suitable individual concept. The notion of an entity not existing that has no individual concept associated
with it is ill-deﬁned: what is it, precisely, that does not exist? Fictional characters are the paradigm here: Sherlock Holmes only comes not to exist because he is a character
created by Arthur Conan Doyle—it is not that there was a well-deﬁned fact of Holmes's non-existence before Conan Doyle ever created the character. As it were, thought and
language are what bring non-existent objects into being. Even in the case of general statements of non-existence, such as ‘tigers with ten legs do not exist’, we cannot say which
particular
such tigers suffer from non-existence without invoking some conceptual individuation. In the case of unconceived existent objects the object itself operates to
individuate it, but in the case of alleged unconceived non-existent particular objects there is simply nothing to give them individuation conditions—there is nothing speciﬁc that
fails to exist in such a putative case. This is why particularized non-existent objects are always intentional objects.
41 Naming and Necessity , 156–8.

the unicorns? But this only tells us that ﬁctional entities are not metaphysically possible entities; it does not tell us
whether there are other possible entities that are non-existent and also mind-independent, contrary to the principle I laid
down earlier. To this I reply that merely possible entities, such as the younger sister I might have had, really do exist,
and did exist before I ever formed the concept of them—though they do not actually exist. Such entities exist in the
realm of the merely possible; their ontological deﬁciency consists just in the fact that their existence is not actual. When
we think that they fail to exist we are confusing existence with actual existence, and it is their want of the latter that
explains their difference from ordinary objects like the people around me. But I think that ﬁctional entities, like
Sherlock Holmes, are not correctly viewed as possible objects analogous to the possible people that would have
actually existed had the reproductive facts been different. Of course, such non-existent objects are epistemically possible,
but they are not metaphysically so. So nonexistence is an essential property of Holmes and unicorns, while it is not an
essential property of my possible sister. On the other hand, existence is not an essential property of Venus and Clinton.
This asymmetry shows that existence, though a genuine property, is different from properties in general: generally, if
Fness is a contingent property of objects, then so is non-Fness—but not so in the case of existence. In sum, then,
genuinely possible objects do exist, though not actually, while genuinely non-existent objects have that status
necessarily.42
EXISTENCE
39
42 I am not intending here to persuade the reader that it is correct to view possible objects as existing; I am simply stating what I take to be a familiar view. My purpose is to
indicate how the representation-dependence of non-existence can be made consistent with the mind-independence of possibilia—namely, by recognizing that possibilia exist.
There may be an element of stipulation in this way of talking, but it serves to protect what otherwise seems a compelling thesis, namely the identiﬁcation of nonexistent with
merely intentional objects. Note that none of this is directly relevant to the question of whether existence is a property; the representation-dependence of non-existence is a
logically separate thesis.

It might help if I restate my position by considering three different theories of the truth conditions for ‘Vulcan does
not exist’. First, it might be held that ‘Vulcan’ stands for a possible object and that possible objects don't exist. Second,
it might be held that ‘Vulcan’ stands for a possible object and that possible objects do exist, and what the statement is
really saying is that this existent object does not actually exist—thus ‘the existent possible object Vulcan is not actual’.
Third, it might be held that ‘Vulcan’ stands for no possible object at all and that the predicative part of the sentence
simply ascribes non-existence to this non-existent object. My proposal, then, is to go with this third view, thus cleaving
to the thesis that all non-existence is representation-dependent. Possible objects are not counter-examples to this thesis
since they involve existence.
But is impossibility a counter-example to the thesis? It might be thought both that impossible objects don't exist and that
they are not representation-dependent. Round squares don't exist, it may be said, but they are not necessarily objects of
thought. Didn't round squares fail to exist in the universe before thinkers ever came along to conceive of them? Aren't
there many impossible objects that we have never thought about? This is a puzzling and subtle issue, but I am inclined
to take the following line: impossible objects, like possible objects, do exist, but what they lack is the possibility of
actuality—they are existent entities that could not be actual. They have the property of existence but they have it in such
a way that they could never have this property actually. Their essence is to exist in modal limbo, necessarily closed off
from actualization. This explains our sense that they are fundamentally lacking ontologically, but it is not because they
have no existence—it is because their existence is necessarily non-actual. Nor could anything like them actually exist,
whereas in the case of Holmes and the unicorns, though they lack existence entirely, at least things like them could
exist. Distance from actuality, as measured by modal status or dissimilarity to actual things, is not the same as non-
existence. Impossible objects are not, then, counter-examples
40
EXISTENCE

to the thesis that non-existence is always representation-dependent.43
It may now be asked how we can ascribe any properties to purely intentional objects, including the property of non-
existence. Here we need to heed carefully the way we actually talk and not impose misleading models on our concepts.
For we simply do ascribe properties to non-existent objects—we make remarks about them. Thus we say that Pegasus
is a horse not a pig, that Zeus is the senior god, that Sherlock Holmes is a brilliant detective. These statements are all
true and they contain predicative expressions; so, yes, we can predicate properties of non-existent entities. Not all
predication involves referring to an existent entity and ascribing a property to it; sometimes we take a non-existent
entity and ascribe a property to it.44 This, as Wittgenstein would say, is what we do. Our theories
EXISTENCE
41
43 Again, I do not expect to persuade the reader of this conception of impossible objects, and the issue is certainly highly debatable. By way of nudging intuitions, think of a
conversation about whether there are impossible objects as well as possible ones: no one in the conversation has ever thought of such things as round squares, and then
someone says, ‘yes, there are impossible objects—think of objects that are both round and square!’; there follows general agreement among the discussants that indeed there
are such things, after all. Haven't they just agreed that impossible objects do exist, though it was hard to think of any examples for a while? These objects are certainly not
merely ﬁctional, since the impossibility of round squares obtained independently of anyone conceiving of them or telling a story about them.This raises the question of
whether Sherlock Holmes might be such an existent impossible object. I have said that Holmes is an impossible object, now I say such objects exist, so might not Holmes be
one such? My answer is that impossible objects come in two varieties: the existent and the non-existent. We already know that Holmes does not exist, and his impossibility
does not disturb this knowledge; but in the case of round squares the matter is up for discussion, and there seem to be grounds for allowing existence to these entities. We at
least know what it would be for round squares to exist—they are well-deﬁned entities. But in the case of ﬁctional entities we have the problem, noted by Kripke, that there are
too many candidates for being Holmes in the space of possible (and impossible!) worlds—his individuation is too underdetermined by the content of the stories. So: some
impossibilia exist and some do not. (Of course, I am aware that these are very delicate issues, and that it is not altogether clear what to say about them; I am presenting what
seems to be the best overall conception of the ontology of these matters.)
44 Compare ascribing properties to merely possible objects: my possible sister Edith (the one that would have resulted from the combination of a particular sperm and egg) has
the property of being female. So it is not only actual objects that have properties. In the case of ﬁctional objects the origin and foundation of their properties is the story that
refers to them; hence we can say quite correctly that Holmes is a detective, thereby predicating a property of Holmes. And clearly the predicate ‘detective’ is not ambiguous in
factual and ﬁctional contexts.

need to respect this fact not deny it. And if so, there is no bar to ascribing the property of non-existence to some of the
things we talk about. Just as Zeus fails to be mortal, so he fails to exist; just as Vulcan fails to be a cactus, so it fails to
exist; just as unicorns fail to be two-horned, so they fail to be exist. Imagine someone overhearing a conversation you
are having about Vulcan and wondering what you are talking about. ‘What is this Vulcan thing anyway?’ they ask, and
you reply, ‘Oh, Vulcan is a planet that some astronomers mistakenly thought to exist.’ ‘So it's not a cactus you're
referring to with the name “Vulcan”?’ ‘Deﬁnitely not, Vulcan is a planet not a cactus—and moreover it doesn't exist.’
Here we see properties asserted and denied of a non-existent entity, among them existence itself. As a general rule,
intentional objects have just those properties our mental acts confer on them; this is why it sounds so odd to suggest
that Pegasus is really a ﬂuffy poodle not a winged horse.
But there is another approach to assertions of non-existence, which might be prompted by disquietude at the idea that
nonexistent objects can be genuine subjects of predication, at least in a primitive way. We want to ask what it is for an
object to fail to exist; we want some analysis of this. To exist is to have the simple property of existence, but non-
existence seems to be a matter of our failed intentionality, if I may put it thus. Given that non-existence is
representation-dependent, we should be able to explain it in those terms. Thus we might suppose that there is some
complexity in such statements, and that they make reference to cognitive acts in some way. There are two main cases to
consider: ﬁction and empirical postulation. The idea, then, is that when I say, ‘Holmes does not exist’ I am saying
something like this: ‘it is just a ﬁctional pretence that Holmes exists’; and when I say, ‘Vulcan does not exist’ I am
saying something like this: 'it was a mistaken postulation
42
EXISTENCE

that Vulcan exists'. In these paraphases ‘exists’ occurs only in its positive form, and the denial of existence is carried by
the implication that cognitive acts of make-believe or mistaken postulation have occurred. Putting both together, the
basic truth condition of the negative existential is that there was only an entertaining of existence. And we cannot
further explain this by saying that the object of the entertaining does not exist; the end of line comes with the statement
that this was a case of mere entertaining. Nonexistence is essentially and constitutively failed intentionality, whereas
existence is not deﬁnable as successful intentionality. Existence is having a mind-independent property, but
nonexistence results from the occurrence of a certain kind of mental act—a pretence or an erroneous postulation of
existence. Assertions of non-existence really are statements about mental acts, just as the representation-dependence
thesis suggests.45 This makes non-existence very different from non-squareness, say: to assert
EXISTENCE
43
45 When I say this I do not mean to be asserting that statements of non-existence mean the same as statements about failed intentionality; I am speaking rather of the basic truth-
maker for negative existentials. Analogies are always potentially misleading, but we can compare this to the secondary quality conception of colour: what makes it true that an
object is red is that it is disposed to look red to perceivers, but it is not that ‘red’ means (is synonymous with) ‘disposed to look red’; rather, the disposition is what redness
ontologically consists in—or redness supervenes on such a disposition (see my ‘Another Look at Colour’ on this). Similarly, the non-existence of Holmes depends upon the
occurrence of certain creative mental acts that have no target in the real world; if you like, such non-existence is supervenient on mental acts that have no real world reference.
This view is quite compatible with acknowledging that the concept of failed intentionality must be analysed by invoking the concept of nonexistence—failed intentionality is
precisely a case in which the intentional object does not exist. In the case of colour ‘looks red’ contains the word ‘red’, but that does not show that redness is not supervenient on
dispositions to look red. My claim about nonexistence is not that failed intentionality is conceptually prior to non-existence; it is the claim that facts of non-existence obtain in
virtue of failed intentionality, in the sense that there is no non-existence without failed intentionality. This marks the difference between existence and non-existence, since
existence is not supervenient on successful intentionality. Existence is like a primary quality; non-existence is like a secondary quality. So we don't have to regard the non-
existence of an object as a bedrock fact with no further articulation; we can say what is involved in an object's (so to speak) coming not to exist.Alternatively, we could stick
with the simple idea that non-existence is just primitively one of the properties that Sherlock Holmes has in addition to being a detective.

that an object is not square is not to assert that it was mistakenly taken to be square, since that may not be so and
anyway is not what the statement means. There is no allusion here to erroneous mental acts. But to say that an object
does not exist is to allude to mistaken suppositions or acts of make-believe. I think this asymmetry is entirely intuitive:
non-existence really does have a lot more to do with misﬁrings of the mind than do other kinds of property lack. I
suspect that it is the nature of non-existence—its difference from other kinds of property lack—that is at the root of
the old feeling that existence cannot be a property like any other. The negation of existence works differently from the
negation of other properties, because of the underlying representation-dependence of nonexistence; but we should not
infer from this that existence itself is not a simple ﬁrst-order property of objects. Thus we can explain the feeling that
existence is a peculiar sort of property while not withdrawing the claim that this is nevertheless what it is. To be a
peculiar or even unique kind of property is not to fail to be a property.
There is a further reason someone might have for doubting the predicate view, which is epistemological in character:
namely, that existence is not a perceptible property of objects. If we hold to the empiricist principle that the only
properties of objects are perceptible properties, at least in principle, then we get the result that existence isn't a
property, at least on some plausible assumptions. (Russell, of course, was strongly empiricist in his general outlook, so
he may well have been inﬂuenced by this consideration: where in my sense-datum of a table, he might have asked, is
the quality of existence?) Why is existence not a perceptible feature of objects? Because regardless of whether or not an
object exists it will still present the same sensory appearance: hallucinated pink rats look an awful lot like existent pink
rats. A non-existent object can appear just as an existent object does. Being blue, say, makes a difference to how
something looks, so that blue rats look quite unlike pink ones: but existing makes no qualitative difference—there is no
impression of existence (as Hume in effect said). This is really why
44
EXISTENCE

scepticism about the external world is possible: you can never build existence into the appearances, so it must always
be inferred or assumed. If existence were like colour, you could know that the external world exists just by inspecting
your sense-data: but that is exactly what existence does not allow. I know that my current intentional object is blue and
circular, but I have nothing sensory to guarantee that it also exists.
The right response to this point about imperceptibility is to concede the premiss but deny that the conclusion follows:
true, existence is not a perceptible property, but it does not follow that it is not a property—it is just a rather special
property. Is self-identity a perceptible property of objects, or logical and modal properties? Apparently not, but then
why should existence be? Empiricism of this kind is just mistaken, a misguided assimilation of everything real to the
perceptible. To deny that existence is a property on account of its imperceptibility is just a hyperbolic reaction to its
speciﬁc character. It is a property that is universal to what exists, whose complement class is representation-dependent,
and which is not perceptible: that is its nature. So there is no cogent objection here to the view that existence functions
as a ﬁrst-order property of objects.
I now want to consider three speciﬁc contexts in which the concept of existence is essentially invoked; my purpose is
to show the superiority of the predicate view over the orthodox view in handling these contexts.
(i) The Cogito. Consider the statement ‘I exist’: how should we analyse it? On the face of it, this is a subject–predicate
statement consisting of an indexical singular term and a term that ascribes a property to the referent of that indexical
(in a context). And I maintain that this is precisely what it is, logically speaking. This is the default position, barring
arguments to the contrary. But how does the orthodox view handle it? It needs to ﬁnd a predicate for ‘exists’ to attach
to; but no such predicate apparently ﬁgures there;
EXISTENCE
45

so one has to be contrived. Thus we are pushed towards a description theory of ‘I’, which will enable us to say that the
proposition that I exist is equivalent to the proposition that a description D has a unique instance. But there are well-
known problems with this, since any natural description will fail to have the force of the indexical.46 I can know, for
example, that the description ‘the author of The Mysterious Flame’ has a unique satisﬁer without realizing that I am that
author, so indexical and description do not mean the same.47 The only remotely workable description will be
metalinguistic, like ‘the referent of this (token of) “I’ ”, so that the Cogito is saying in effect that ‘x is a referent of this
(token of) “I’ ” is uniquely instantiated. Now that does not look much like what the original statement says: the Cogito is
less convoluted than that; it is not metalinguistic; it could be stated by someone incapable of semantic ascent; it has a
transparent certainty the paraphrase lacks. But there is also a clear logical problem, because we are now referring to two
things—the self and a token of ‘I’—and both have to exist for the statement to be true. So we are presupposing the
truth of ‘this token of “I” exists’, which contains an indexical referring to a word token—and how is that to be
analysed? We will need another deﬁnite description: but that will either contain an indexical or it won't. If it does, then
we need another description to explain the existence of its referent; if it does not, then we fail to produce something
with the semantic force of the original, since indexicality cannot be captured non-indexically. The same point applies if
we replace ‘I’ with ‘the bearer of these mental states’,
46
EXISTENCE
46 What about invoking self-identity again in the shape of the predicate ‘ I’? Then we could say that ‘I exist’ means ‘(x )(x I)’, which latter inherits the semantic properties of the
original indexical. But, again, this presupposes my existence, since the term ‘I’ must be taken to refer to an existent entity—me—in the context ‘ I’. We do not explain what it is
for me to exist by stating that someone is identical to me. Nor, intuitively, is this what I mean when I say that I exist—where is the identity sign to be found in that sentence?
And there is also the point I made at the beginning, that the idea of an instance of ‘ I’ already builds in the notion of existence, since Sherlock Holmes cannot be allowed to
count as an instance of self-identity if this is to be sufﬁcient for existence.
47 See John Perry, ‘The Problem of the Essential Indexical’.

referring to my own mental states: this presupposes the truth of ‘these mental states exist’, and this cannot be analysed
nonindexically. The point here is that the irreducibility of indexicals, especially the ‘I’ of the Cogito, is inconsistent with
the orthodox analysis of singular existentials in terms of descriptions. If the only way to preserve the special semantic
properties of ‘I’ is to introduce some new indexical, then we need to explain the corresponding existence statement,
which presents the same irresolvable dilemma. So the case is even worse here than for existence statements containing
proper names. The lesson is that the Cogito cannot be formulated using the orthodox analysis of existence; it needs the
predicate treatment.
(ii) Essentialism. A natural way to express essentialist claims employs the notion of existence: for Clinton to be
necessarily a man is for it to be the case that Clinton could not exist without being a man. Generally, ‘x is essentially F’
means ‘necessarily, if x exists, x is F’. Now let us ask how the orthodox view would analyse this latter sentence. There
are two possibilities: either we use ‘F’ itself as the predicate to which existence attaches, or we introduce a new
predicate. Suppose we use ‘F’ itself: then we get ‘necessarily, if x is an instance of Fness, x is F’. This would be a way of
formulating the claim that (say) every man is such that, necessarily, if he exists, he is a man; and it says that every man
is such that, necessarily, if he is an instance of manhood, then he is a man. But this, of course, is a plain tautology,
which the original statement is not—so they cannot mean the same. We thus need to ﬁnd some predicate distinct from
that which is being declared essential to the objects in question. That will not in general be impossible to do: Clinton,
say, satisﬁes the predicate ‘US president in 1999’. This raises Kripkean problems about whether we can preserve modal
status under such an analysis, but the point I want to make is different and parallels the point I made earlier about bare
existence. It is that the orthodox doctrine now entails that nothing can have an essential property F unless it
instantiates other properties (not including existence). But is that really a metaphysical necessity?
EXISTENCE
47

Couldn't an object have just one property and have it essentially? More to the point, is the denial of this something that
an essentialist claim entails? Is it contradictory to say ‘x is essentially F and x has no properties other than F’? I don't see
that it is, but the orthodox analysis implies that it must be, once the tautological translation is ruled out. If we take
‘exists’ to be a predicate, on the other hand, then we can say simply that for Clinton to have the property of existing he
must also have the property of being a man, and this is neither tautologous nor committed to the idea that Clinton
must have some further property. But if we take existence to attach to a property, in the orthodox way, then we are
committed to Clinton having properties other than that of being a man. He does, of course, but my point is that this is
not something that the essentialist claim should logically imply, since it is not contradictory to say that an object is
essentially F and yet has no further properties. I therefore conclude that the orthodox analysis cannot properly handle
the use of existence in expressing essentialist claims, while the predicate view has no trouble with this.
(iii) The Ontological Argument. The standard objection to the ontological argument (OA) is that it assumes that
existence is a property. Clearly, I am committed to saying that this is a bad objection; so the question for me is what to
say about the claim that the deﬁnition of God implies his existence. Now I think it was always suspicious to pin the
fallacy of the argument on treating existence as a property instead of as a second-order concept, as if we just hadn't
noticed that ‘exists’ is logically on a par with ‘numerous’. That is like saying that the argument depends upon a scope
confusion or afﬁrming the consequent or some such logical howler. But surely the argument is more interesting and
substantive than that diagnosis allows; it is not some simple logical fallacy—pleasant as it might be to think this.
Second, it seems to me quite unclear that the argument cannot be reformulated using ‘exists’ in the second-order way.
Thus we can ask whether it is part of God's deﬁnition that his attributes must have at least one instance. Does ‘being
all-powerful and all-knowing and all-good’ have to have an instance?
48
EXISTENCE

For if it did not, then wouldn't it fail to express the concept of the most perfect being? The concept ‘being a perfect
being’ has to have an instance or else it would not be the concept it purports to be. Third, we should note that the
argument can be deployed in the opposite direction to prove the non-existence of the most imperfect being. Call that
being ‘Satan’: then Satan cannot exist because he is the most imperfect conceivable being, and existence is one of the
perfections. To exist and be imperfect is to be less imperfect than a maximally imperfect being who fails to exist. Thus
the most imperfect conceivable being cannot exist. Whatever is wrong with these arguments is independent of whether
existence is a property; the logical status of ‘exists’ is irrelevant.
How can the OA and its Satanic counterpart be resisted? I don't need to answer this in order to defend the property
view of existence, but I will make some observations about it anyway. One might think that the weakness lies in the
assumption that existence is a perfection and non-existence an imperfection. That is certainly questionable on any
natural interpretation of the notion of perfection. But actually we can formulate the argument without using this
premiss, by appealing to other aspects of God's deﬁnition. He is also the most impressive and most powerful being, by
deﬁnition. But surely, it will be argued, you cannot be the most impressive and powerful being conceivable if you fail to
exist; another being who was just like you but did exist would have to be more impressive and powerful. Thus
existence is part of God's deﬁnition by virtue of these attributes and not merely by virtue of the notion of perfection.
Equally, we can prove that the least impressive and powerful being conceivable could not exist (he will not be the devil,
as traditionally conceived), since if a being is deﬁned as the most minimally impressive and powerful being conceivable
he could not exist given that existence augments one's impressiveness and power. It is true that this argument sounds
strange and sophistical, but it is hard to put one's ﬁnger on what exactly is going wrong.
My own suspicion, which is outside the scope of the topic of existence, so I won't try to pursue it here, is that the fault
lies in
EXISTENCE
49

taking notions like ‘the most perfect, impressive and powerful being conceivable’ to be well-deﬁned. We can make
sense of being the most perfect being that exists, and we know what conceivability is, so we think we know what is
meant by combining them. But we are lapsing into disguised nonsense here, analogous to the idea of (say) the most
perfect conceivable triangle or piece of music or meal. Here too we may know what it is to be the most perfect triangle
to exist (construed as an actual drawing), or the best piece of music, or the best meal—and we also know what it
means to conceive of one of the things as being superior to another. But it does not follow—and it looks peculiar—to
say that there is then a well-deﬁned concept of the most perfect conceivable item of any of these types. Suppose I call the
most perfect meal conceivable ‘Bill’: can I infer that Bill exists because if it did not then there would have to be a meal
that was conceivably better than Bill? We just don't know what it would be to be the most perfect conceivable meal or
piece of music. Similarly, the notion of, say, the most powerful conceivable mouse makes little sense; or the most
impressive conceivable daisy. This seems to me the place to look for the error in the OA, not in some supposed
mistake about the logical character of existence. We can let God have that property so long as his deﬁnition really
warrants it—but that is what is not at all clear. The problem with the OA, then, is that it trades on notions of the
maximal forms of certain attributes, particularly perfection, that are inherently ill-deﬁned.
I conclude that ‘exists’ is a predicate and that it expresses a property just as other predicates do (whatever properties
are and whatever it is for predicates to express them). There is no good objection to this view, and the alternative to it
is full of difﬁculties. It is a word we can correctly apply to individuals, which is just what the surface form of our
existential sentences suggests. It has its peculiarities, of course, but they merely tell us what kind of property it is. As so
often, the way a word is semantically turns out to be the way it appears to be syntactically (compare proper names).
50
EXISTENCE

This is quite compatible with maintaining that ‘tigers exist’ says that ‘tiger’ has instances, since the relevant notion of
instance is simply that of an object that has the (ﬁrst-order) property of existence. The orthodox view has inﬂated a
correct point about general statements of existence into the incorrect denial that existence is a property. So we can keep
all that is good and wholesome in the logical tradition while not rejecting the obvious. By all means analyse general
statements of existence in terms of the ‘existential quantiﬁer’, but do not make the mistake of inferring that existence is
not a predicate just because this analysis works. The existence of tigers consists in the fact that tigers severally have the
property of existence; this is what grounds the fact that the concept tiger has instances and hence makes true ‘(Lx)(x is a
tiger)’.48
EXISTENCE
51
48 Thus singular existential facts are basic relative to general existential facts, as we generally suppose for singular and general facts: ‘a is F ’ is what makes true ‘something is F ’.
The Russellian doctrine, by contrast, does not allow this obvious parallelism with singular and general facts in general.

3 Predication
Predicates, we are taught, have extensions—the class of objects of which the predicate is true. That seems hard to
deny, putting aside special issues like vagueness: if predicates can be true of objects, then there ought to be a set of
objects of which the predicate is true. But a stronger claim is commonly made: that these extensions constitute a
semantically relevant feature of predicates. A sentence formed from a predicate and a name is said to be true if and
only if the object referred to by the name is a member of the set that forms the extension of the predicate (and
similarly for other types of sentence structure). Thus it becomes natural to say, as Quine does, that a predicate has
‘divided reference’ or ‘multiplicity of reference’: it refers in a plural manner.49 As a name refers to a single object, so a
predicate refers severally to the members of a collection of many objects. Predicates refer to each of the many objects
they are true of; so there are as many references for a predicate as there are objects of which it is true. The sense of a
predicate may possess a unity or singularity, but its reference is a scattered and multiple affair. Since a predicate is true
of many dispersed things, its reference is a distributed totality. On this conception, then, a predicate is not a singular
term in Quine's sense: ‘a singular term names or purports to name just one object. . . while a general term is true of
each, severally, of many objects’.50 Predicates are classiﬁed as general terms precisely because they do not refer uniquely
to a single entity but generally to a range of entities. It is the multiplicity inherent in predicate reference that is held to
mark predicates off from names and other properly singular terms.
49 See Quine, Word and Object , 90 ff.
50 Ibid. 90–1.

This conception has become so ingrained that we are not apt to notice that it is in fact a substantive theory about the
semantics of predicates and their distinction from naming devices. But there is another way of looking at predicates
that gives a very different picture of their semantics, namely that predicates refer singularly to properties. The predicate
‘red’ refers to the property of being red, not to the many red objects the world happens to contain. Iventureto suggest
that this is the natural way to conceive of predicates, as opposed to the standard extensional view. On this natural view,
then, predicates are taken to refer to properties or qualities or attributes—universals in the traditional sense. These
properties are not to be identiﬁed with extensions: they are not sets of objects but the attributes that form such sets.
Thus ‘red’ refers initially to the property of redness, and those objects that have this property constitute the set of red
things. According to this conception, a predicate does not divide its reference at all, since its reference is a property that
is just as ‘singular’ as the object referred to by a regular name. The truth conditions of simple subject–predicate
sentences are given accordingly: a sentence of the form ‘Fa’ is true if and only if the object referred to by the name has
the property referred to by the predicate. There is then no reason to withhold the title of singular term from predicates:
they name (refer to, designate) just one entity—the property they are used to ascribe to objects. There is no multiplicity
or division of reference here—just a unique entity of the universal kind. Predicates do not refer to what they are true
of, but to the properties that are instantiated by the things they are true of: the ‘true of ’ relation and the ‘refers’ relation
are distinct relations.
Which of these two views is preferable?51 It might well seem that the standard view has this advantage—that a
predicate at least has
PREDICATION
53
51 It might be said that we do not need to choose: predicates refer both to the property they express and to the members of their extension. But, as I will argue below, we could
say the same of names, and hence could equally claim that names have ‘divided reference’, thus losing their semantic distinctness from predicates. In any case, once we allow
properties as referents we hardly need to reckon with extensions. This is why the two conceptions of predicate reference are traditionally taken to be rivals—considerations of
semantic redundancy.

an extension distinct from any other reference it might be supposed to have, while a name has no extension over and
above the object it refers to. So, putting aside ontological worries about properties for now, the semantics of predicates
differs crucially from that of names: even accepting properties as the reference of predicates, there is another semantic
level that needs to be acknowledged—the extension of the predicate. With names there is just the named object (and
possibly also the sense of the name), but with predicates there is the named property and the class of things that have
this property. So predicates differ fundamentally from names in virtue of the multiplicity inherent in their extensions.
Quine is right even if predicates refer to properties, since there are still extensions to reckon with; he has still put his
ﬁnger on what marks predicates off from names. Suppose we agree that predicates express senses and refer to
properties; then there is still their extension left over as an extra layer of semantic reality. But in the case of names, it
appears, once we have distinguished their sense and reference we have exhausted their semantic description.52 Herein
lies the basic distinction between the name and the predicate. And if we need extensions anyway why bother to invoke
the properties that allegedly mediate between a predicate and what it is true of?
I am going to argue against this position. Ultimately, I wish to defend the natural property view against the standard
extension view; but my immediate aim is to undermine the argument just offered. My strategy will be to show that
names have the same kind of semantic duality that predicates are taken to have, once the matter is viewed impartially.
To establish this I shall present what may well look like a formal trick, using this to argue that the entire
54
PREDICATION
52 Thus names have a two-level semantic analysis corresponding to sense and reference, while predicates are taken to have a three-level analysis, corresponding to sense,
reference, and extension. In Fregean terms, predicates are taken to express a sense, refer to a (ﬁrst-level) function (‘concept’), and have an extension. I shall be arguing that this
common distinction between two- and three-level semantic analyses, held to distinguish names from predicates, is arbitrary and unmotivated.

standard framework of extensional semantics is unmotivated and deeply ﬂawed. We have been hoodwinked by a
prejudice, not seeing what is really an arbitrary stipulation for what it is. I intend to loosen the hold of some familiar
and unexamined assumptions by setting up an alternative semantic framework in which the usual picture is totally
inverted.
Take the name ‘Bertrand Russell’: this name refers to a certain concrete individual, now dead, who is customarily
reckoned to be the extension or reference of the name. This object is taken to be the ‘semantic value’ of the
name—the entity invoked in giving the truth conditions of sentences containing the name. Now consider the
properties instantiated by that object—everything that holds of Russell. Form the set of these properties, and then
assign this set to the name, calling the assigned set the ‘second-level extension’ of the name. Evidently there is such a
set, assuming there are properties at all (we shall return to this), and clearly there is a function that takes each (non-
empty) name and yields such a set for that name. If the ﬁrst-level extension exists (Russell, in this case), then the
second-level extension also exists (the totality of properties of Russell). Now consider a sentence formed using this
name, say ‘Russell was bald’, and interpret the predicate by assigning a property to it, viz. baldness. Then we can say
that the sentence is true if and only if the following condition holds: the property assigned to the predicate is a member
of the set that forms the second-level extension of the name. That is to say: ‘Russell was bald’ is true if and only if
baldness is one of the properties Russell had. It is quite evident that this truth condition is correct and is in some sense
equivalent to the standard truth condition formulated in terms of objects and predicate extensions. If Russell belongs
to the extension of ‘bald’, then baldness belongs to the second-level extension of ‘Russell’. But the two truth conditions
employ quite different ontologies; in particular, the extension of ‘bald’ is not referred to in the new style of truth
condition. Instead of objects and sets of objects we have
PREDICATION
55

properties and sets of properties. We have, in effect, inverted the usual rule for constructing truth conditions, now
treating the predicate as having a singular reference and the name as having a multiple extension. And the implicit
question I am thus posing is: why is this new way not just as good as the old way? Why do it with regular extensions
rather than with our newfangled second-level extensions? Why not treat the predicate as making speciﬁc reference and
the name as having a referential plurality, referring severally to each of the properties that constitute its second-level
extension?
An immediate reply from those of Quinean inclinations will be that the new truth condition invokes an ontology of
properties, and these are ‘creatures of darkness’. I have no sympathy for this rejection of properties, for reasons I will
not discuss here, but the important point for present purposes is that such an ontology is quite incidental to the moral
I am after. We could, if we like, stipulate instead that our sentence is true just if the predicate ‘bald’ is a member of the
set of predicates true of the referent of ‘Russell’, thus dispensing with properties; we simply take the second-level
extension of the name to be a set of linguistic items. Then again, we could also proceed as follows: take the extensions
of each of the predicates true of Russell, assign these to the name, and formulate the truth condition thus: the
extension of the predicate ‘bald’ should be a member of the set of extensions (themselves sets) assigned to the name.
Suppose one of these extensions is the set of bald things; then the sentence would be true, since the predicate ‘bald’ has
an extension that is identical to one of the extensions assigned to the name. Though this truth condition is somewhat
less intuitive to grasp, it will be seen on reﬂection to be equivalent to the truth condition stated in terms of
properties—for the simple reason that each property has its corresponding set of objects that instantiate it. So we can
ask again: why not use this style of truth condition instead of the standard one? Actually, it is simpler in one sense to do
it this way, since we are now dealing with a uniform ontology of sets at all points in the semantics. We
56
PREDICATION

need sets of objects under the Quinean dispensation anyway, so why not do the whole thing in terms of such sets?
It may also be complained that the second-level extension of a name is not known or grasped by the speaker—is not
part of his understanding of the meaning of the sentence in question. That is true, since someone who understands
‘Bertrand Russell’ is not required to know all of Russell's properties; but it is equally true that the standard extension of
a predicate is not known or grasped by the speaker either, since someone who understands ‘bald’ is not acquainted
with all the things that are bald. Neither type of semantics meshes naturally with speakers' understanding. The type of
semantics that works best in this regard is the type I am working towards defending—that in which we assign an object
to the name and a property to the predicate. My point at present is that the standard approach enjoys no advantage in
this respect over the contrived alternative I am constructing. Both approaches are faulty for much the same reasons.
Enthusiasts of Tarskian semantics might make the following point: the standard axioms for names and predicates
differ in that the former assign denotations to names, while the latter specify satisfaction conditions simply by using the
predicate (or its translation) in the metalanguage. Thus it is usual to have clauses like the following: “ ‘Hesperus”
denotes Hesperus’ for names, and ‘x satisﬁes “man” iff x is a man’ for predicates. In the latter clause no entity is
ascribed to the object-language term, while in the former this is the case. Doesn't this familiar asymmetry support the
denotational view of names and undercut the parallel view of predicates? The answer to this is that we can easily invert
the Tarskian treatment for names and predicates. Nothing stops us from writing: “ ‘man” denotes the property of
being a man’, and then formulating truth conditions by saying, “ ‘Socrates is a man” is true iff the denotation of
“Socrates” has the property denoted by “man’ ”, using the denotation axioms for name and predicate to derive the
standard truth conditions. Once we have properties to play with we can write such things as: ‘x satisﬁes “man” iff x
has the
PREDICATION
57

property of being a man’ and ‘x has the property of being a man iff x is a man’. These conditions are all logically
connected in the predictable way. There is nothing in Tarski to preclude a denotational approach to predicates, even
though the standard axiom takes the familiar mention–use form.
But can we also give a non-referential disquotational axiom for names? The answer is that this is perfectly easy once we
allow an ontology of properties or sets. Let us say that a property P fulﬁls an open sentence of the form ‘a_’ iff Pa, for
some name ‘a’; or a set X completes an open sentence ‘a_’ iff a is a member of X. For example, P fulﬁls ‘Socrates_’,
where the blank takes properties as values (or takes predicates as substituends), iff Socrates has P; intuitively, a property
fulﬁls a name ‘a’ just when a has that property. Here we have a treatment for names that assigns them no reference,
ofﬁcially speaking, and works by employing an ontology tailored for a predicate variable. It is exactly parallel to the
usual method that employs an ontology of objects and interprets predicates by using them in conjunction with this
ontology: instead of saying ‘x satisﬁes “man” iff x is a man’ we say ‘P fulﬁls “Socrates” iff Socrates is P’; in both cases
we just disquote the object-language term and attach it to the variable, thereby eliminating the semantic terms ‘satisﬁes’
and ‘fulﬁls’. The Tarskian scheme by itself imposes very light constraints on the way we interpret names and
predicates, so it cannot be invoked to justify the asymmetry in question. In point of getting the truth conditions right
we can proceed either denotationally or disquotationally, depending on prior semantic convictions; just as we can get
truth conditions right either by regular extensions for predicates or second-level extensions for names. Truth
conditions by themselves underdetermine semantics.53 My own view would be that we know antecedently that
58
PREDICATION
53 I am thus opposing the whole (recent) tradition of trying to work back from truth conditions to semantic analysis: getting truth conditions right radically underdetermines
assignments of semantic values to terms. In particular, Tarskian constraints can be fulﬁlled in far too many ways. Our conception of the semantic properties of terms should
dictate the assignment of truth conditions, not the other way about.

names denote objects and predicates denote properties, so we would want to write our Tarskian semantics so as to
respect this fact. The illuminating and correct way to write an axiom for a predicate is then: “ ‘man” denotes the
property of being a man’, and we reach the disquotational truth condition by using the principle that something has the
property of being a man iff that thing is a man. In any case, there is no impartial way to motivate the standard
asymmetry deriving from Tarskian considerations.
Returning to ﬁrst- and second-level extensions, we can note a further symmetry between them. The extension of a
predicate typically varies over times and worlds, as new things become bald at later times or exhibit baldness in other
worlds; but the same is true of the second-level extension of a name, since new properties will hold of the individual as
time goes by or as different worlds are considered. If extensions must be such as to vary with these parameters, then
our new extensions pass the test just as well as the old ones. Indeed, they pass it for the very same reason that standard
extensions pass it, namely that objects change their properties with time and possibility. What does not vary in this way
are the objects and properties that names and predicates are naturally taken to denote (they are rigid designators,
temporally and modally, of these entities). The name ‘Russell’ invariably denotes Russell, while the predicate ‘bald’
invariably denotes baldness.
Is there any reason to prefer the method of second-level extensions? Well, there is if you harbour a certain kind of
metaphysical outlook about objects and properties, to the effect that objects are analysable as ‘bundles of qualities’. On
such a view, Russell just is the set of his properties, so the regular extension of the name is identical to its second-level
extension as I am deﬁning it. This metaphysical view makes properties ontologically basic, and so it is natural to
formulate truth conditions accordingly: the property expressed by the predicate is among those that enter into the
‘bundle’ that constitutes the object denoted by the name. Of course, you can use this type of truth condition even if
you don't subscribe to this sort of ontology,
PREDICATION
59

but if you do it will seem the natural and obvious way to go. So it is not as if second-level extensions have no
conceivable motivation in general ontology. Someone like Russell himself, who disliked the notion of substance or
continuant particular, might well favour the property-based truth condition. It is certainly there to be favoured.
It is easy enough to see that the new method can readily be extended to quantiﬁed sentences and other sorts of
complex sentence. The variables now range over sets of properties and the truth conditions are generated in the same
fashion as before: the set assigned to the variable (as its value under an assignment) contains the property expressed by
the predicate. The second-level extensions do all the work that an orthodox domain of discourse can do. As far as I
can see, no purely formal test distinguishes between the two sorts of approach; and this is not surprising in view of the
power of the ontology of properties (the usual logical theorems will surely go through, mutatis mutandis).
If we were to adopt the new approach, we would come to see names and predicates in a very different light. Where
now we are apt to ﬁnd singularity in the name and plurality in the predicate, we would make the opposite dispensations
under the revised framework. The predicate would have the job of picking out a unique property, thus asserting its
singularity, while the name would be assigned a multiplicity of items—the many properties had by the object
named—to which it dividedly refers. The name would be distinguished from the predicate by virtue of its inherent
semantic plurality. In our chosen sentence, ‘bald’ would be the singular term, while ‘Russell’ would refer severally to the
many properties had by that philosopher. Some might argue, on this basis, that we may as well dispense with the
ordinary reference of the name altogether, rather as now some dispense with the property expressed by a predicate;
after all, we don't need to mention it in stating truth conditions. We require only that the membership relation hold
between the property expressed by the predicate and the set of properties assigned to the name; the bearer of the name
60
PREDICATION

drops out, semantically speaking.54 (Of course, we need to regard Russell as more than the sum of his properties if we
are to abandon him while embracing the set of his properties; just as we now regard a property as more than the sum
of the objects that have it when we reject properties in favour of extensions. Both distinctions are of course correct;
and the symmetry between them is instructive: objects are no more bundles of properties than properties are bundles
of objects.) Some may even go further and announce that this gives the true ontological picture of the world, since
semantics is the royal road to metaphysics: there are really just sets of properties, despite our usual assumptions about
the existence of objects.
What is alarming here is how close to certain standard moves such arguments would be. The methodological point I
am making is that there are far too many degrees of freedom at the semantic level of truth conditions to warrant such
inferences and constructions. But I shall pursue the question of signiﬁcance and morals after a brief metaphysical
interlude.
The world has a certain interlocking structure, generated by the relation of instantiation. Take a single object, say my
coffee cup: it instantiates a number of properties—it is blue, cylindrical, fragile, etc. These do not exhaust all the
properties there are, obviously, since no object instantiates all properties. Now take all the objects that instantiate the
aforementioned properties—all the blue things, all the cylindrical things, all the fragile things. We obtain a large
explosion of objects from this simple operation, but still not all the objects there are. But now iterate the process and
consider all the
PREDICATION
61
54 Can it be argued that we still need the bearer of the name to ‘tie together’ the various properties that compose its second-level extension? At an ontological level that seems
true, but semantically the bearer still does not need to be cited in formulating truth conditions. And, signiﬁcantly, the same can be said about the role of the property denoted
by a predicate in ‘tying together’ the various objects that compose its extension. Again, there is no relevant asymmetry to justify the usual differential treatment of names and
predicates.

properties possessed by all the objects in these classes—a colossal number! Now again take all the objects that
instantiate this huge set of properties. And when you have done that you can repeat the procedure and get all the
properties instantiated by that enormous class of objects. If you go on this way you may not exhaust all the objects and
properties the universe contains, but you will certainly generate a very large totality out of just a few iterations—and all
starting from a simple coffee cup. Perhaps some traditional metaphysicians will see in this a sign of the essential
Oneness of creation—the inextricable organic Unity of Being. Be that as it may, what we do have is a branching
structure that links objects and properties in a chain (as you will see if you draw a diagram of the steps involved): there
is a fanning out of objects and properties as we trace the instantiation relation from the initial object out along its axes.
I ﬁnd this chainlike structure rather beautiful in its simplicity and power, but I do not mention it solely for aesthetic
reasons (not that these are insufﬁcient reasons to mention something). I mention it because it is the fundamental
ontological structure underlying the equivalence of truth conditions I have been indicating. Just as we can move from
the property expressed by a predicate to the set of objects that instantiate it, so we can move from the object denoted
by a name to the set of properties that object instantiates. We are simply travelling in opposite directions along the line
of instantiation. No direction is any more legitimate than the other; both are written into the structure of the facts. In
particular, there is nothing privileged, seen from the metaphyscial standpoint just adumbrated, about choosing the
extension of a predicate as the way to state truth conditions (or conceive of the structure of facts). The contrary
method of forming second-level extensions simply proceeds in the opposite direction—by starting with the object and
considering the properties it instantiates. We could just as well conceive of the structure of facts in that way: every fact
consists in the membership of a property in some set of properties—instead of the membership of an object in some
set of objects. Then, too, there is a third view, that facts consist in the instantiation of properties by objects—the
62
PREDICATION

view I favour. Thus we could depict facts in three different ways: [x, {x, y, z}]; [P, {P, Q, R}]; [x, P]. In the ﬁrst,
Quinean, way a singular fact is an ordered pair of an object and an extension, a set of objects; in the second way such a
fact is an ordered pair of a property and a second-level extension, a set of properties (or we could do the whole thing
with extensions and sets of them); in the third way a fact is simply an ordered pair of an object and a property. My
point is that there is no particular reason to prefer the ﬁrst of these to the second, and the third is really the natural
view to adopt. When we appreciate what the underlying ontological structure is we can understand why both sorts of
conception work—and how little reason there is to favour one over the other. At the risk of sounding airily
metaphysical, we can say that every unity (object or property) has its corresponding plurality (set of properties or set of
objects)—with these correspondences setting up a great chain of interlocking objects and properties stretching as far
as the eye can see. The chain allows us to formulate our semantics in equivalent ways, by selecting the sets we fancy
and assigning them to the various parts of speech in ways that preserve the requisite instantiation relations. How we do
this is essentially arbitrary, unless some further constraints can be found and motivated. As it turns out, I don't think
this is terribly difﬁcult, but the necessary constraints rule out the standard Quinean approach, and hence determine a
quite different semantic conception of the function of predicates. Extensions will no longer be in the picture.
One possible response to the availability of second-level extensions in formulating truth conditions is to declare deep
semantic indeterminacy. A name indeterminately refers either to its bearer or to the set of properties possessed by its
bearer; a predicate indeterminately refers either to the property it expresses or to the members of the set of objects that
instantiate this property. There is simply nothing to choose between the standard approach and the alternative
approach—no ‘fact of the matter’. This would be quite a strong result, showing that there is nothing privileged about
the standard
PREDICATION
63

approach and the conception of predicates it engenders; it really is arbitrary which way we choose to go. Names can be
treated as having multiple reference to properties (or sets of extensions), just as well as predicates can be treated as
having multiple reference to objects. Either approach delivers semantic values that work to ﬁx truth conditions.
Presumably this would not please Quine, despite his predilection for indeterminacy theses, since it undermines his
general conception of what a predicate distinctively is.55 But I can see how it might be tempting for some to draw such
a conclusion.
However, I don't think we are forced to accept semantic indeterminacy here; there are other constraints that can be
mobilized. The obvious, and familiar, move is to introduce epistemic considerations: roughly, we require that the
speaker be acquainted with the semantic values that are invoked. This certainly rules out second-level extensions as the
semantic value of names, since a speaker cannot be expected to know all the properties of the objects he refers to. But
it also rules out regular extensions, since the speaker will not be acquainted with all the objects that make up the
extensions of the predicates he understands. Such knowledge requires, intuitively, knowledge of facts, not merely
semantic knowledge. What is not ruled out by this constraint is the simple view that I prefer: that names denote objects
and predicates denote properties. When a predicate is understood what is known is precisely the identity of the
property expressed by the predicate; just as understanding a name involves knowledge of the identity of its bearer.56
64
PREDICATION
55 So two Quinean sentiments are in tension: a penchant for semantic indeterminacy theses, and use of the singular–plural distinction to distinguish names from predicates. If
what I have argued is correct, then that latter idea is nulliﬁed through indeterminacy considerations. In a way it is surprising that the kind of indeterminacy I am alluding to did
not occur to Quine, given his ingenuity with contrived alternative semantic schemes.
56 The kind of view of name understanding defended by Gareth Evans in The Varieties of Reference , in which individuating knowledge and causal relations are blended, could be
extended to predicate understanding: we understand a predicate when we have individuating knowledge of the property it denotes, mediated by causal relations in which that
property is involved. Or again, Russell's idea that understanding predicates involves acquaintance with universals mirrors the idea that understanding a name involves
acquaintance with its bearer: see The Problems of Philosophy , ch. 5 .

So we can construe what I have said so far as an argument along the following lines: if you don't accept this view, then
you are forced to accept indeterminacy as between the standard approach and the second-level extension approach.
The simple view abandons extensions (of either sort) as semantically relevant and thereby relinquishes the idea that
predicates are general terms in Quine's sense—predicates do not have multiple reference but rather are singular terms
denoting properties. In effect, the ‘true of ’ relation between predicates and objects is not semantically relevant. Of
course, predicates are true of many things—but it is equally the case that objects satisfy many predicates: and we don't
say that names of objects have plural reference simply on account of this. The underlying ontological structure always
gives us a plurality for any unity, no matter from which direction we approach the instantiation relation.
The singular term view of predicates is conﬁrmed by a well-known point, namely that predicates can be nominalized
so as to give terms that feature in subject position—as with ‘redness’, ‘mortality’, ‘baldness’, etc. Here they clearly do
not designate extensions, and so it is natural to assume semantic uniformity and take the corresponding predicates to
designate properties when occurring in predicate position. Thus predicates are as much singular terms as their
nominalizations are. Of course, that is not to say that they are names, in the sense of terms referring to particulars; the
entities they purport uniquely to denote are properties or universals, not particulars. The singularity consists in their
not denoting the members of a set of objects via the ‘true of ’ relation; they do not ‘divide their reference’. It is true
that they are satisﬁed by many objects, but these objects are not components of their semantic value; just as a name
refers to an object of which many properties hold without its semantic value being those many properties. A predicate
refers to a property with many instances; a name refers to an object with many properties: that is all. The meaning of
each category of term stops at its ordinary reference without reaching out further into the non-semantic world of
PREDICATION
65

property instantiation. Extensions of both kinds are ﬁxed by the facts of the world, not by the meaning of the terms.
They are extra-semantic items.
The asymmetry between names and predicates is not then a matter of singularity versus plurality of reference. Then
what does it depend upon? Two things: grammatical position and the ontological type of the reference. Predicates
occur in predicate position, ascribing properties to objects thereby. But they also denote a special class of
entities—universals. It is not the way they refer that marks them off from names but what they refer to—and the
sentential position they refer from. So it is not that no asymmetry can be found between ‘Russell’ and ‘bald’ in the
sentence ‘Russell was bald’ once the idea of multiple reference is abandoned. We can account for the difference
between subject and predicate without employing the singular–general distinction to do so.57
I would say that the idea of ‘multiple reference’ is a kind of oxymoron, once you really think about it. An ambiguous
word like ‘bank’ or ‘John’ indeed has multiple reference, but an unambiguous word like ‘red’ has a unique reference.58
We can always ask ‘What does that word refer to?’ and expect to be given a single answer—that is how the word ‘refer’
is used. The contortions of ‘multiple reference’ stem from a desire to avoid properties for (misplaced) ontological
reasons; the notion has nothing otherwise to recommend it. It is certainly not the case that ‘refers’ is synonymous in
English with ‘true of ’. Saying that ‘bald’ refers to the set of bald
66
PREDICATION
57 Frege, of course, accounted for the difference in terms of his notion of incompleteness: names of objects are complete expressions, names of concepts are incomplete
expressions. He does not account for the difference between subject and predicate in terms of singular versus divided reference. I do not say his account is unproblematic; I
am simply pointing out that rejecting Quine's account of the distinction does not leave us without resources of other kinds.
58 Of course, there are also plural nouns like ‘The brothers Grimm’ which have multiple reference; but predicates like ‘red’ are not plurals, so there is no basis here for declaring
them multiply referential. The idea of non-plural terms having multiple reference is what strikes me as oxymoronic.

people instead of to each bald individual severally is no help in restoring a measure of singularity, since the predicate is
clearly not true of the set of bald men (no set is bald!). The predicate is supposed to be true of the members of its
extension not of the extension itself. The extension of a predicate (a set) is not supposed to be the reference of the
predicate; rather, the extension is made up of the many objects that are each referred to by the predicate. Quine's talk of
division of reference would not be appropriate if the reference were the extension, since that object is as singular as you
could wish. If the reference were literally the extension, then predicates would be singular terms by Quine's own lights,
purporting uniquely to denote a single object, a set. We need to keep this distinction clear if we are to appreciate the
force of maintaining that a predicate has plural reference: ‘bald’ refers severally to this man and that man and the other
man, according to the Quinean conception, not undividedly to the set of bald men. My complaint then, once this point
is clariﬁed, is that this is not a natural use of the word ‘refer’, suggesting ambiguity where there ought to be univocity.
Frege had it right in not assigning a semantic role to extensions for predicates: he assigned only a sense and a reference,
where the reference is a function from objects to truth-values. A predicate does not for him refer to the objects of
which it is true, but to the function that maps these objects onto the True and the False—something close to the
notion of property in the intuitive sense. For Frege a predicate is a name (singular term) for this function, just as I am
maintaining.59 The Quinean idea of multiple reference is distinctly unFregean, a product of conﬂating the ‘refers’
relation with the ‘true of ’ relation.
PREDICATION
67
59 Predicates are also rigid designators for me, as they cannot be if taken to designate their extensions, since these vary from world to world. I say that ‘red’ designates the
property of redness in every possible world, as ‘Bertrand Russell’ designates Bertrand Russell in every possible world. Here again names and predicates are semantically
analogous. See my ‘Rigid Designation and Semantic Value’.

The general upshot is this: semantics should not employ the relation of set-membership between objects and
extensions, but rather the relation of instantiation between objects and properties. A singular sentence is true when an
object (or sequence of objects) instantiates some property, not when objects are members of certain sets. Set theory is
therefore not the right format for stating semantic truths. Semantics is not about classes of objects unless it appears to
be, as when we speak overtly of classes. In effect, Quine brought classes into semantics in order to oust properties, but
he failed to see how far this could be pushed, notably in the direction of second-level extensions and their set-theoretic
counterparts. The lesson, I suggest, is to return to the naive view of how predicates work: they function to ascribe
properties to objects. This view of predicates is to the Quinean view what the usual view of names is to the second-
level extension view—the natural precursor of monstrous offspring. Extensions are creatures of darkness; or at least
lumbering monsters lost in the semantic wilderness.
68
PREDICATION

4 Necessity
Philosophers have been infatuated with the quantiﬁer. Understandably so, since logicians showed the power and
elegance of the predicate calculus. And it is always tempting to want to put shiny new tools to use. If we can translate
some idiom of natural language into quantiﬁer form we feel we know how it works; we feel we have tamed it. This is
notably so for idioms of existence, as I discussed in Chapter 2: to make an existence statement is to make an
existentially quantiﬁed statement; the word ‘exists’ disappears into its quantiﬁcational paraphrase. But I rejected such a
view of existence, arguing that existence is best expressed as a ﬁrst-order predicate. Similarly, it has been attractive to
many to regard identity as deﬁnable quantiﬁcationally, by means of Leibniz's law: identity statements say that every
property of x is also a property of y, and vice versa. Apparently singular statements thus get recast in quantiﬁcational
form. I also rejected this view of identity, taking identity to be a primitive relation expressed by a two-place predicate.
In the case of modal idioms we ﬁnd a similar appeal to the quantiﬁer, in the standard possible worlds semantics. To
make a statement of necessity is to say that all worlds are thus and so; to make a statement of possibility is to say that
some worlds are thus and so. Thus ‘Socrates is necessarily a man’ translates into ‘in every world, Socrates is a man’ and
‘Socrates is possibly a wise man’ translates into ‘in some world, Socrates is a wise man’. Again, what look like singular
sentences turn out to be general quantiﬁed sentences. In the case of identity and existence the corresponding idioms of
natural language have the grammar of predicates, two-place and one-place respectively, while in the case of modality
the idioms involved look adverbial or operator-like. But they all turn

out to be quantiﬁcational in their underlying logical form. Not surprisingly, I shall also be rejecting this view of
modality. The infatuation has gone on too long.
According to possible worlds semantics, we can replace any occurrence of a modal word with a suitable
quantiﬁcational translation.60 We take what looks superﬁcially like an operator and interpret it by means of an
existential or universal quantiﬁer over ‘worlds’—however exactly these entities are to be construed. Most of the debate
has then been over what sorts of entities worlds are. But the objection I want to make to this is that such a translation
is either circular or inadequate; speciﬁcally, we need to use the modal notion being translated in order to get the
translation to come out right. The point is parallel to one of my arguments against the quantiﬁcational treatment of
existence in Chapter 2, namely that the required notion of ‘having instances’ has existence built into it in an unanalysed
form. So let us consider some proposition of the form ‘possibly p’: this is meant to go over into ‘there is a world in
which p’ or ‘for some world w, p in w’. Now the question I want to ask is: does the notion of ‘world’ here invoked
include or exclude impossible worlds? Suppose it includes them. Then ‘possibly p’ will be true if ‘p’ holds in an
impossible world. But that is clearly not the truth condition of ‘possibly p’: a proposition that is necessarily false is true
in some impossible world! If I say ‘possibly water is not H
2O’ or ‘possibly 2 2 5’ I speak falsely, but the embedded
statements are true in some impossible world. So clearly the notion of ‘world’ must be taken to exclude impossible
worlds. There seem to be two and only two ways in which this result can be ensured. First, we might say outright that
‘possibly p’ is equivalent to ‘in some possible world, p’ or ‘for some w, w is possible and p in w’. But this now
70
NECESSITY
60 I will be limiting myself to this semantic claim in what follows; nothing I say here will bear on the use of an ontology of possible worlds for other purposes. The idea I will be
criticizing is just the idea that modal expressions can be successfully paraphrased by means of a quantiﬁer over worlds. Nor do any of my criticisms depend upon which
speciﬁc ontology of worlds is adopted; they are intended to apply to all such semantic theories, from the most ‘realist’ to the most ‘constructivist’.

contains an explicit use of the word ‘possible’, which we claimed to be reducing to a quantiﬁer over worlds. In effect,
we are now treating ‘possibly’ as a predicate of worlds, not as a quantiﬁer over them. We are not replacing ‘possibly’ with
a suitable quantiﬁer but using it to limit the scope of the quantiﬁer. So no analysis has been given of the force of the
modal notion concerned. It might be thought that this is no problem, since we can always translate the offending
occurrence of ‘possibly’ into quantiﬁer form. So let's do that: ‘w* is a possible world’ now becomes ‘for some w, w* w’,
where ‘w’ is simply a variable over worlds and ‘w*’ is a name of some particular world; we are saying that w* is possible
iff it is identical to some world w. But now the problem is whether w is a possible or an impossible world. If the latter,
then the truth conditions are wrong; if the former, then we have a new occurrence of ‘possible’ that has not been
analysed. And obviously it won't help to bring in a new variable over worlds to express that w is a possible world. The
underlying point here is exceedingly simple: when we say that ‘possibly p’ is true we must be saying that ‘p’ is true in
some possible world, but then we have the quantiﬁer ‘some world’ and the word ‘possible’; it is not that the latter has
vanished into the former—on the contrary, the former needs the latter. What we really have in the standard variable ‘w’
is a restricted quantiﬁer embedding the word ‘possible’, analogous to ‘some man’ (which clearly does not analyse the
notion expressed by ‘man’). We cannot allow the world variable ‘w’ to remain neutral between possibility and
impossibility, on pain of making the truth conditions of modal sentences come out wrong. We have to mean possible
world or else there will be no necessities and too many possibilities.
The second way to rule out the impossible worlds objection is to append to our truth condition the stipulation ‘there
are no impossible worlds’. Then we will be saying that ‘possibly p’ is true iff ‘p’ is true in some world w (not explicitly
stipulated to be possible) and there are no impossible worlds in which ‘p’ might be true. There are two problems with
this. First, we are again using a modal term that we have not analysed, viz. ‘impossible’. We are taking
NECESSITY
71

‘impossible’ to be a predicate of worlds and then saying that it has null extension. But the question is what this use of
‘impossible’ means for a possible worlds theorist for whom all modal terms are analysable as quantiﬁers. If we have to
take it as primitive, why don't we do the same for modal idioms generally? The second problem is that the suggested
truth condition fails to capture the force of the original proposition: it is no good saying that ‘possibly p’ is true iff ‘p’ is
true in some world, neutrally understood, and as a matter of fact there are no impossible worlds. That does not give us
the idea that ‘p’ is genuinely possible, since it leaves open the thought that ‘p’ might hold in some impossible world; and
that thought is not closed off by simply saying there are no such worlds. That just makes the proposition true by a kind
of metaphysical accident; and it is no less accidental if we add ‘and there could not be any impossible worlds’, as well as
introducing another unexplained modal term ‘could’. No, the obvious point is that we must be meaning possible world
when we say that ‘possibly p’ is true iff ‘p’ is true in some world, or else this condition does not add up to what we
need. We have to be ruling out the case in which ‘p’ holds impossibly. Of course, we get the same kind of problem for
‘necessarily’: if we say that ‘necessarily p’ is true iff for all worlds w, ‘p’ is true in w, we again have the question whether
we are including impossible worlds. If we are, then the condition is too strong, because no necessary proposition is true
even in the impossible worlds: even ‘2 + 2 = 4’ is not true in the impossible world in which 2 + 2 = 5—but it is a
necessary truth none the less.61
The point becomes even clearer if we switch from ‘world’ to ‘state of affairs’ or ‘maximal state of affairs’, since these
terms wear
72
NECESSITY
61 This is assuming that in the impossible world in which 2 2 5 it is not also true that 2 2 4, so that this world is at least consistent. In any case, if there is a world in which it is not
true that 2 2 4, then that proposition fails to hold in all worlds. Similarly, if there is an impossible world in which 2 2 5, then that proposition comes out possible under the
stipulation that possibility is truth in some world, possible or impossible—which it plainly is not. Obviously, then, we must require that our world quantiﬁer range only over
possible
worlds.

their neutrality on their sleeves. If we say that ‘possibly p’ is true iff ‘p’ is true in some state of affairs, we immediately
invite the question what kind of state of affairs—are we including a state of affairs in which, say, water is not H
2O? We
have to mean ‘possible state of affairs’, but then we are using that modal word again. We have become so accustomed
to using ‘world’ as shorthand for ‘possible world’ that we don't notice that the notion we need must be construed this
way: but then the problem is that we can't explain this occurrence of ‘possible’ by means of a quantiﬁcational
paraphrase—there is always a residual occurrence of ‘possible’ that refuses to be translated into the ‘for some w’
quantiﬁer. Ironically, it is the very use of ‘possible’ in the context ‘possible world’ that resists the possible worlds
treatment. And notice that my point here is not that this treatment takes modality as primitive and that this is
objectionable per se; my point is that the quantiﬁcational approach claims not to be taking modal words as primitive and
yet in the end it has to. Just as the quantiﬁer treatment of existence claims to be able to give an account of the notion of
existence wherever it may occur, so the quantiﬁer treatment of modality claims such coverage. But in both cases it is
only a disguised use of the very notion in question that gives the would-be analysis an appearance of working. The
locution ‘has instances’ must mean ‘has existent instances’ and the locution ‘in some world’ must mean ‘in some possible
world’. And the question is what these words mean in these occurrences, with the threat of regress that ensues.
The standard parallel with temporal discourse masks this problem for the quantiﬁcational treatment of modal terms.
Suppose we say that ‘occasionally p’ is true iff for some time t, ‘p’ is true at t, and ‘eternally p’ is true iff for all times t, ‘p’
is true at t. Then certainly we are using the notion of a time here in a way we are not analysing; but that is no problem,
since that notion is neutral with respect to the notions of ‘occasionally’ and ‘eternally’—and the claim is not that we can
always replace temporal locutions such as ‘a time’ by quantiﬁers. The trouble with the modal case is that we have the
notion of impossibility to contend with, which forces us
NECESSITY
73

to reintroduce the locutions we are trying to paraphrase; there is no analogue for this in the temporal case. It is not as if
we have to say ‘for some occasional time t’ in analysing ‘occasionally p’. But we do have to say that 'possibly p'is true iff
‘p’ is true in some possible world. The point about excluding impossible worlds simply makes vivid the need to speak
of possible worlds in specifying modal truth conditions quantiﬁcationally; the supposedly neutral word ‘world’ cannot do
the job. To be modally neutral in the use of ‘world’ simply leaves it open whether ‘p’ is really possible.
This objection has nothing to do with the ontological status of possible worlds—what kind of entities they are, whether
they are merely useful ﬁctions, and so on. It applies no matter what view of possible worlds you choose to adopt. It is a
strictly semantic objection concerning the project of translating all occurrences of modal words into quantiﬁers. And as
far as I can see, it is consistent to hold that there are possible worlds in as strong a sense as you like and also accept my
argument, so long as you don't go on to hold that modal terms are reducible to quantiﬁers over such worlds.62 The
semantic role of modal terms cannot be that of quantiﬁers, since such terms have to be taken as unanalysed even given
the quantiﬁcational paraphrase. As so often in philosophy, the price of sufﬁciency is circularity.
What alternative might be offered? There seems little prospect of a straightforward predicate treatment of modal
expressions, since this is not how they function in natural languages; they seem far more adverbial or operator-like.
One approach that has been developed is that modal words function as predicate modiﬁers, like
74
NECESSITY
62 So David Lewis can keep his possible worlds, so far as my argument is concerned, just as long as he does not employ them as the domain for quantiﬁers intended to translate
modal expressions: see his On the Plurality of Worlds . And there are clearly other uses to which an ontology of possible worlds may be put. For a further critical discussion of
this ontology see my ‘Modal Reality’.

‘large’.63 I think this approach is on the right lines, but I want to modify it in a small but crucial respect. Consider
‘Socrates is necessarily a man’. On the predicate modiﬁer theory, the logical form of this sentence is that the modal
adverb operates on the predicate to produce another predicate, as with ‘Socrates is a large man’. Modal words express
functions from properties to properties: they take a non-modal property as argument, and they produce a modal
property as value. Just as there is the property of being a man, so there is the property of being necessarily a man or
contingently a man. Accordingly, we can say that our original sentence means something like ‘Socrates has the property
of necessarily having the property of being a man’. In addition to there being all the usual properties there are the
modal properties that can be generated from them. Now I am a little suspicious of there being all these extra modal
properties in addition to the usual ones—this seems like an extravagant way to handle the data—but I do not want to
object to the predicate modiﬁer treatment on that ground alone. My objections have more to do with explanatory
adequacy. First, I believe there is another treatment that better captures the intuitions behind the predicate modiﬁer
treatment, which I will outline soon. Second, I don't think the predicate modiﬁer treatment quite captures the intended
force of the sentences it sets out
NECESSITY
75
63 See David Wiggins, ‘The De Re “Must”: A Note on the Logical Form of Essentialist Claims’. There are also operator approaches that treat modal expressions as one-place
sentence operators, modelled upon the operators standardly employed in modal logic: see, for example, Christopher Peacocke, ‘Necessity and Truth Theories’. I won't have
much to say about this approach here, except to indicate later why I ﬁnd the view I favour preferable. Let me just remark that there is nothing sacrosanct about the formulas
of modal logic as a framework for a theory of the semantics of natural language, or as the basis of a good metaphysical account of modality. In fact, I think that modal logic,
modelled as it is on the sentence operators of propositional logic, distorts our understanding of modal thinking. We should certainly not automatically suppose that the
structures of modal logic properly represent the nature of modal thinking; they embody a theory like any other. Similarly, the standard treatment of ‘not’ as a sentence operator
is itself a tendentious theory of the semantic functioning of ‘not’; it is not the inviolable touchstone for the correctness of any other semantic proposal about negation. (I say all
this to loosen the hold of any prejudices that might come naturally to someone steeped in the forms of classic propositional calculus.)

to analyse—and which the other view captures perfectly. So I am going to modify the predicate modiﬁer treatment
slightly, while sticking to its general spirit. The reason the predicate modiﬁer treatment does not quite capture the force
of a modal proposition like ‘Socrates is necessarily a man’ is this: it leaves open the way in which Socrates has the
property predicated of him. What we are told is that Socrates has the property of being necessarily a man, where the
copula here is modally neutral: that is, Socrates is said to have a modal property in a modally neutral fashion. So we can
intelligibly ask whether Socrates has this modal property necessarily or contingently. But the original statement looks as
if it already settles that question: Socrates has the property predicated of him in the mode of necessity.64 But on the
predicate modiﬁer treatment the sentence says merely that Socrates neutrally has a certain (modal) property. As it were,
the modality of the predication gets absorbed into the modality of what is predicated. But, intuitively, that is not how it
is with the original sentence; it does not leave open the modality of the ascription. What this suggests is that
‘necessarily’ modiﬁes what precedes it in our sample sentence and not what follows it—the copula ‘is’, not the
predicate ‘a man’. By modifying only the predicate the modality of the ascription is left open, but by modifying the
copula the modality of the attribution
76
NECESSITY
64 My point here is not that ‘necessarily’ implies the iterated ‘necessarily necessarily’; it is that ‘Socrates is necessarily a man’ settles the question of the mode of instantiation of
manhood in Socrates. The predicate modiﬁer treatment limits the scope of the modal expression to the predicate term that it modiﬁes and leaves the copula unaffected;
whereas the approach I favour brings the copula into the scope of the modal expression, thus settling the question of mode of instantiation. On my approach, the predicate
itself isn't strictly within the scope of the modal expression at all, any more than the name is; we could therefore as well write ‘concerning Socrates and the property of being a
man, the former necessarily has the latter’. Of course, if the predicate modiﬁer position is interpreted to mean that the predication , including the copula, is what is modiﬁed,
then the view is virtually indistinguishable from the copula modiﬁer theory. What I am opposing is the idea that modal expressions modify predicates , i.e. property terms , as
‘large’ surely does. The lambda abstraction notation clearly suggests this latter type of view, since ‘necessarily’ here operates on a singular term (deﬁnite description) of a
property, as in ‘Nec[(λ x )(Man x )]’: see Wiggins, ‘The De Re
“Must”: A Note on the Logical Form of Essentialist Claims’.

is pinned down. If we indicate the scope of the modal modiﬁer with a dash, then we can parse the sentence either as
‘Socrates is necessarily-a-man’ or as ‘Socrates is-necessarily a man’. The ﬁrst way of parsing it ascribes a modal
property to Socrates but in a neutral way, while the second ascribes a non-modal property in a modally committed way.
Thus the second parsing settles what the ﬁrst leaves open, and hence corresponds more closely to the sense of the
original. My proposal, then, is to develop the approach that settles what ought to be settled by any good paraphrase.
This approach I shall call the copula modiﬁer theory, as opposed to the predicate modiﬁer theory.
I can sum up what I just argued by saying that in a modal sentence the copula is not modally neutral. And isn't this
exactly the way we read such sentences? Don't they precisely say that a property is had in the mode of necessity or in
the mode of contingency? We start by remarking that Socrates is a man and then, when our thoughts turn modal, we
want to know whether this property inheres in Socrates in the necessary way or in the contingent way: how is he a man?
What we are interested in is mode of instantiation. Modals are modes. To say that modal words modify the copula is the
linguistic counterpart of the ontological doctrine that modality is a matter of the strength of the instantiation relation:
does the object in question instantiate the predicated property only accidentally or is this a matter of logical or
metaphysical necessity?65 Thus, according to the copula modiﬁer theory, we do not work with an ontology of modal
properties; rather, we take the stock of non-modal properties and think of them as possessed in different modes. If you
like, the instantiation relation is the only thing that gives rise to modal properties—the properties of being instantiated
necessarily or contingently. There are two modes of instantiation and a fund of non-modal properties
NECESSITY
77
65 What of ‘a is possibly F ’, where this can be true even though the object doesn't actually have the property? In this case, obviously, we cannot be saying in what mode the
object has the property, since it doesn't have it. Instead, we are saying that the object possibly instantiates the property, where again the modal expression modiﬁes the copula,
as in ‘Socrates possibly-is a man’.

instantiated in these two modes, instead of there being a collection of speciﬁcally modal properties corresponding to
the original non-modal properties. On this conception, modality is really not like ‘large’ and other predicate-modifying
adjectives and adverbs. These expressions do not work by modifying the copula but by generating new properties. It is
not that ‘that is a red kayak’ is tantamount to ‘that reddishly instantiates being a kayak’; rather, the former means
something like ‘that has the property of being a red kayak’. Similarly for attributive adjectives like ‘large’: they don't tell
us how something instantiates the property they modify; they tell us what (complex) property something has—as it
might be, the property of being a large bee. The metaphysical picture here is that there are objects and their properties,
including being a red kayak and a large bee, and then there is the modality with which these properties are possessed.
The copula modiﬁer theory is meant to answer to this picture.
There is clear linguistic support for the theory, since grammatically we often express modal claims precisely by
modifying the copula. Thus we say ‘Socrates must be a man’ and ‘Aristotle could be a farmer’ and ‘Plato happens to be a
philosopher’. But there are no parallel constructions for ‘large’ and ‘red’ etc. When we convert ‘is’ to ‘must’ we
incorporate the modality right into the copula grammatically, and this is the natural way to express modal claims
outside of stilted philosophical usage. Just as we express tense by copula modiﬁcation, as with ‘was’ and ‘will be’, so we
express modality this way. The ease and naturalness with which we do this is evidence that modality is conceived as
mode of instantiation. Incidentally, this also shows that the copula is not semantically redundant, since it exists in
surface structure to be modiﬁed: given that there are modal words in the language, we would expect that predicative
copulation would rise to the surface to serve as a lexical item to be modally qualiﬁed—and this is exactly what we ﬁnd.
We have the modally neutral copula ‘is’ and alongside it the modally committed copula words ‘must’, ‘could’, etc.
Natural language is thus in favour of the copula modiﬁer theory and the metaphysical picture it implements.
78
NECESSITY

It might be objected that this account works smoothly enough for de re uses of modal words, but how does it handle de
dicto uses? What about ‘it is necessarily true that bachelors are unmarried males’ and ‘the statement that 2 2 4 is
necessary’? Surely in these sentences the modal word is not functioning to modify the copula in the de re style. My
answer to this is that all such uses should be taken as modifying the copula as it attaches to the truth predicate. The
canonical form of these uses is: ‘the proposition that p is necessarily true’—consisting of a singular term for a
proposition, the copula, the copula-modifying modal, and a predicate ‘true’ ascribed to the proposition denoted. The
logical form of this is exactly the same as that of ‘the teacher of Plato is necessarily a man’; the difference lies in the
kind of entity denoted—individual or proposition—and the nature of the predicate. So on this account ‘necessarily’
works in exactly the same way in de re and de dicto occurrences. When we say of a proposition that it is necessary we are
predicating truth of it in the mode of necessity; just as when we say of an individual that it is necessarily thus and so we
are predicating a property of that individual in the mode of necessity. The difference is semantic ascent, with the
accompanying need for the truth predicate. Truth is a property that can be possessed by propositions in the mode of
necessity or contingency, just as regular properties can inhere in ordinary objects in these two modes. I think this is
intuitively right and it uniﬁes the de re and de dicto in a pleasing way. In a certain sense both uses come out as de re, since
they serve to attribute properties to objects in different modes—it is just that in the case of de dicto necessity the object
is a proposition and the property is truth. There is only one ‘must’, but it can govern different types of property; in all
cases its logical function is copula modiﬁcation. Thus we can say of the proposition that bachelors are unmarried males
that it has the property of being true essentially—where this gets glossed as having the truth property in the mode of
necessity.
It follows, of course, that such uses of modal words do not work as sentence operators. Superﬁcially operator-like
occurrences get
NECESSITY
79

translated into one or other of the two forms mentioned, most likely into the meta-propositional form with the
attached truth predicate. Syntactically, we can still employ modal words as if they were sentence operators, functioning
like negation in classical logic, but semantically they are copula modiﬁers always. I take it the needed translations are
readily produced and entirely natural. Indeed, it is hard to know what it could mean to say that necessarily bachelors
are unmarried males except that the corresponding proposition is necessarily true—and this lends itself directly to the
copula modiﬁer treatment. There is a clear sense, therefore, in which the standard formulas of modal logic, with their
one-place sentence operators, are not a good representation of natural language modality—if the present account is on
the right lines.66 Not only are modal words not quantiﬁers over worlds; they are not operators on open and closed
sentences—unless this is taken to be semantically equivalent to the copula modiﬁcation translations I have proposed.
We certainly should not simply assume that the sentence operator treatment of modality enshrined in modal logic is
sacrosanct—that is a theory of natural language like any other. However, the two theories are clearly similar in spirit, at
least as contrasted with the quantiﬁer theory; I view the copula modiﬁer theory as a more explicit and ﬁne-grained
expression of the intuitions that also encourage the sentence operator theory.
According to the view I am defending, instantiation comes in modes, the necessary mode or the contingent mode. It is
always one or the other, though a predicative statement might be neutral about which it is. If I just say ‘Socrates is a
man’ I do not commit myself to the mode of instantiation involved—the copula is modally neutral here—but the
instantiation itself is always either necessary or contingent.
80
NECESSITY
66 Note that Quinean worries about opacity, quantiﬁcation, and modal operators are sidestepped on the present approach, since modal expressions never generate intensional
contexts—they never have scope over terms or predicates or sentences, even for so-called de dicto
modality. Only the copula is governed by modal modiﬁers. Treating
modality in terms of sentence operators obviously does court these objections, however.

The statement is well-formed and truth-evaluable, despite its modal neutrality. Thus we can say two things here: (a) it is
not that ‘is’ is an incomplete symbol when it occurs unmodiﬁed, since the sentences in which it occurs have perfectly
determinate truth conditions; but (b) instantiation itself comes in (at least) two forms, depending upon the modality
involved. This may remind us of the topic of identity, where it has been held that ‘ ’is an incomplete symbol and that
identity itself (the relation) does have many forms. I rejected both of these doctrines about identity in Chapter 1, but it
would not be incorrect to say that I hold a version of the latter doctrine for instantiation. Whereas, as Frege said,
identity is given to us in such a speciﬁc way that various forms of it are not conceivable, it seems to me that
instantiation is given to us in such an open-ended way that various forms of it are conceivable. If we are told that x
instantiates F, we can always ask how x instantiates F—in what mode. The mode is, as it were, internal to the
instantiation. Instantiation is a kind of determinable whose determinate forms are the modal modes. The linguistic
counterpart of this is the fact that the copula admits modal modiﬁcation in the form of ‘must’ and ‘could be’. The
identity sign admits of nothing corresponding to this.
I have suggested that modal words function as copula modiﬁers: but how does this work out in the semantics? What
kind of semantics is appropriate for this general conception? More speciﬁcally, how do we contruct a Tarski-style
semantics for this view? (I am not saying that the proposal stands or falls with the availability of such a semantics, but it
is worth asking what the general form of a Tarskian semantics might be.) Without undertaking a rigorous treatment, I
think it is clear enough what the general form of the account will look like. The basic shape of the axiom will be simply
this:
x satisﬁes ‘is necessarily F’ iff x necessarily satisﬁes ‘F’.
And the axiom for ‘possibly’ will follow suit. Just as with the standard axioms in a truth theory, we simply disquote the
object-language expression and then use it in the metalanguage in the same way it is used in the object-language, except
that now it is combined
NECESSITY
81

with semantic vocabulary. Given the methods that have been developed to handle modal operators disquotationally, as
well as predicate modiﬁers, there seems no difﬁculty of principle about extending these methods to the copula modiﬁer
account.67 Basically, we use the disquoted modal words as copula modiﬁers in the metalanguage, combined with the
semantic term ‘satisﬁes’, in order to interpret the object-language modal terms. This is really the easy part. The
problems, if there are any, lie with the Tarskian paradigm—particularly, whether it is revealing enough about the idioms
it seeks to interpret. But my aim is not to defend Tarskian semantics, only to show that the present theory can be
slotted into this general framework.
Finally, what should be said about the iteration of modal locutions? Evidently it is well-formed to say such things as
‘Socrates is necessarily necessarily a man’ and ‘Socrates is necessarily possibly a philosopher’—and indeed these
sentence types exemplify the characteristic axioms of modal systems. I have said that modal expressions modify the
copula, but is this true of iterated modal expressions? Well, if we take the view literally, then we would have to say that
each iteration requires its own copula to modify—as in ‘Socrates is necessarily is necessarily a man’. But this is patently
ill-formed; so we had better not take the view quite so woodenly. The natural amendment, then, is simply that the
modal word most proximate to the copula modiﬁes it, while the iterated modal words modify the result of this
modiﬁcation—as in ‘a nec nec-is F’.68 This is essentially the same conception that is standard for the sentence operator
view of modal words, except now we are applying it to the copula modiﬁer view. We regard the embedded modal
words as within the scope of the outer modal words, so that changes of scope can induce changes of truth-value. So
far as I can see the semantics is straightforward and the underlying conception sound. In fact, there is very little to
choose, in the present respect, between
82
NECESSITY
67 See Peacocke, ‘Necessity and Truth Theories’.
68 If we view the initial ‘necessarily’ as forming a modal copula, as with ‘must’, then we can still say, simply, that all modal expressions modify the copula, since a new modal
copula is formed by successive iterations of ‘necessarily’.

this view and the predicate modiﬁer view; both will handle iterated modalities in the same general way.
I now want to address some more metaphysical issues about modality, using the view just sketched as background.
Since my aims in this book are primarily logical and semantic, I shall not pursue these broader questions at any length;
but I think it is worth alluding to the implications for metaphysics and epistemology, so that we don't run away with
the mistaken impression that the present topics are cut off from broader concerns. For the most part, I shall simply
state, without much in the way of argument, what I think the broader implications are.
(i) According to the present view, modality belongs to a special ontological category: it consists neither in objects
(unlike the possible worlds theory) nor in properties (unlike the idea of modal properties that goes with the predicate
modiﬁer view), but rather in items I have called modes. Intuitively, these modes are ways of binding objects to their
properties, where the binding can be hard or soft, rigid or pliable. So an inventory of the ‘furniture of the world’ needs
to include these sui generis items and not insist that they belong to antecedently recognized categories of entity. There are
objects, properties, and modes in which objects have properties. Presumably, these modes are neither mental nor
physical, but rather ‘logical’, for want of any better term. We might say they are topic-neutral, like causal relations,
though this is not to say very much. They are logical in somewhat the way identity is logical—highly general, not
speciﬁc to any particular category of objects. And of course they are the subject-matter of what we call modal logic.
They are as logical as instantiation itself, the ontological counterpart to predication. They are also objective, in the
sense that they do not depend upon minds for their existence (there were essential and accidental properties before
human minds ever existed). Modes are objective, logical, real: they are what they are and not some other thing.69
NECESSITY
83
69 See my ‘Modal Reality’ for more on the metaphysics and epistemology of modality.

(ii) These modes give rise to epistemological perplexity. How do we know that a property is necessary or contingent?
We can know that Socrates is a man by ordinary empirical means, but how do we come to know that he is necessarily a
man? We certainly do not come to know this by sensory perception of the necessity in question. Such knowledge
appears a priori if any knowledge is, and hence a problem for empiricist (and causal) epistemology.70 There are many
ways of responding to this problem, which I will not attempt to go into; what is clear is that modality is a prima-facie
threat to the usual kind of naturalistic–causal–empiricist theory of knowledge. This is not, however, in itself a reason to
doubt that modality is real; it simply locates a genuine gap in our understanding of human knowledge.
(iii) Do the modal modes have a hidden essence, in the way natural kinds like water do? I think it is clear that they do
not—any more than identity and existence do. It is not that modal words pick out modalities by superﬁcial marks, so
that we might go on to discover what their underlying essence is. Modes are not natural kinds in this sense. They are
transparent in the sense that their nature is given in the concepts we have of them. We might be able to go on and give a
metaphysical account of their nature, but we cannot go on to give a scientiﬁc account of it: we are not going to
discover the truth of ‘necessity X’, for some empirical essence X, in the way we have discovered the truth of ‘water
H
2O’. Modal concepts are not labels waiting for an empirical theory of their reference. This is generally the case for the
logical concepts investigated in this book.
(iv) Modal truths seems to be supervenient on non-modal truths. If x and y are exactly alike in all non-modal respects,
and x is necessarily F, then y is also necessarily F. For example, if x is necessarily human, and y is non-modally
indistinguishable from x (say, a molecular duplicate with the same evolutionary origin),
84
NECESSITY
70 On the analogous problem in philosophy of mathematics see Paul Benacerraf, ‘Mathematical Truth’; also my ‘A Priori
and A Posteriori
Knowledge’.

then y is also necessarily human. And this holds as much for de dicto modality as for de re modality, since the logical form
and conceptual content of a proposition determine its modal status. Any proposition indistinguishable from ‘bachelors
are unmarried males’ in non-modal respects is also a necessary truth. The modal is not reducible to the actual, but it is
strongly dependent on it. In this respect, the modal resembles the moral, where we have a comparable supervenience
of the evaluative on the descriptive. This means that there is no analogue in the case of the modal for the alleged
possibilities of zombies and inverted spectrum in the case of the mental. That is, we cannot conceive of a non-modally
speciﬁed duplicate y of a modally endowed object x that wholly lacks any modal properties, and we cannot conceive of
such a duplicate that inverts the modal properties of its non-modal twin. For example: there could not be a duplicate of
me with no essential properties at all, given that I have many such properties; and there could not be a duplicate of me
that was (say) contingently human and necessarily a philosopher, given that I am actually necessarily human and
contingently a philosopher. So there can be no ‘conceivability argument’ for something like ‘modal dualism’: here
supervenience is written into our understanding of the concepts.71 We reel at the thought that the modal might ﬂoat
free of the actual in these ways. And such supervenience is quite surprising when you reﬂect on it, since the modal is
no mere restatement of the actual; modal truths are genuinely a new class of truths.
NECESSITY
85
71 There is thus no Kripke-style argument suggesting some sort of contingent link between modal and non-modal facts, unlike with the link between mental states and brain
states: see Naming and Necessity , 144 ff. When God created the non-modal facts he thereby ﬁxed the modal facts too. For example, when God created me a human being it was
already settled that I be necessarily
a human being; he could not make something of a certain natural kind and then be free to decide whether being of that kind is to be
necessary or contingent. This is analogous to creating a situation with certain descriptive characteristics and asking about the moral characteristics of the situation: once God
does the non-moral work he is not free to decide what the moral status of the situation is—any more than creating bachelors leaves him free to decide whether bachelors are
unmarried or not. In these cases, supervenience seems assured a priori.

There is no possibility of reduction here, but the supervenience looks solid as a rock, scarcely in need of argument.
(v) From a causal point of view, modality is epiphenomenal. My weighing 146 lb. affects my causal powers in obvious
ways, but whether I weigh 146 lb. necessarily or contingently makes no difference at all to my causal powers. Thus the
modality cannot make any contribution to the explanatory force of my having that weight. And similarly for all my
other properties. Only the actual can be causal.72 In this respect, also, the modal resembles the moral. Anyone who
took causal potential to be a test of reality would therefore have to declare modes unreal; better, I think, to abandon
that test. It is an objective fact about me that I am necessarily human, but that fact makes no difference to my causal
proﬁle; so some objective facts are non-causal. The modal is not part of the causal order, though it is no worse off for
that. And this is the underlying reason that modalities are not perceptible: they cannot cause themselves to be sensorily
perceived.
(vi) Given all this, it is not surprising that modality is often suspected of being ‘non-natural’ and hence a potential
candidate for ‘elimination’. Without trying to argue the point here, my own position would be that modality is simply a
counter-example to this type of naturalism, so that the project of elimination is unwarranted. The ‘queer’ is here, and
we need to learn to live with it—even if we may not be able to bring ourselves to love it.73 Modalities are part of what
there is, problematic as they may be to certain philosophical perspectives.
86
NECESSITY
72 What about dispositions? Aren't they modally characterized and yet causally efﬁcacious? This is a difﬁcult question, but I am not intending to take a stand on it here; I am
discussing so-called metaphysical necessity. My claim is that which of my properties is essential to me makes no difference to how the world works causally.
73 For this general point of view, as applied particularly to ethics, see my Ethics, Evil and Fiction , chs. 1
and 2 . My position here, as elsewhere, is that certain phenomena
generate mysteries that we have no inkling how to solve—but that this is not a sufﬁcient reason to deny their existence. It may be that the mystery stems simply from our
conceptual and theoretical limitations: see my Problems in Philosophy , especially ch. 6.

5 Truth
Disquotation is the essence of truth. This much is widely accepted.74 It is less clear quite what this tells us about the
concept of truth. My aim in this chapter is to articulate exactly what the disquotational insight implies, and does not
imply, about what it is for a proposition to be true—what follows from it and what it reveals about the inner nature of
truth. I think the disquotational property of truth has been widely misinterpreted, and that the correct interpretation of
it shows truth to be a far more interesting concept than has been recognized. Speciﬁcally, I am concerned with the
question of whether disquotationalism entails something deserving the label ‘deﬂationism’. The view I shall defend,
which I call thick disquotationalism, holds that there is something importantly wrong about the deﬂationary
interpretation. Truth is a more robust property than deﬂationism allows, despite its disquotational essence.
Truth can be predicated of both linguistic items (sentences) and what they express (propositions). This difference will
not concern me in what follows. For convenience and purity I will take truth to apply to intensional items like
propositions or beliefs, so that the
74 See Quine, Philosophy of Logic , 10 ff. As Quine famously writes: ‘No sentence is true but reality makes it so. The sentence “Snow is white” is true, as Tarski has taught us, if and
only if real snow is really white. The same can be said of the sentence “Der Schnee ist weiss”; language is not the point. In speaking of the truth of a given sentence there is
only indirection; we do better simply to say the sentence and so speak not about language but about the world’ (pp. 10–11). Many writers have given voice to the same
sentiment: Frege, Wittgenstein, Tarski, Ramsey, Strawson, and others. For a useful collection of readings see Simon Blackburn and Keith Simmons, Truth . I will glide lightly
over this large literature in this chapter, assuming that the reader is familiar with the general shape of it.

question of their semantic interpretation is irrelevant. Given this, ‘disquotational’ isn't quite the right word, since only
words can be quoted or disquoted: ‘dis-intensional’ or ‘dis-representational’ might be more accurate. But I will stick
with ‘disquotational’, warning that it must not be taken too literally. Using roman ‘p’ as the name of a proposition,
then, we can express the disquotational property of truth in the following familiar way: ‘p is true iff p’, i.e. ‘the
proposition that p is true iff p’. Thus the truth predicate takes us from something referring to a proposition to
something referring to what that proposition is about. Analogous general principles can be formulated for satisfaction
and reference, as in: ‘F is true of x iff Fx’ and ‘a refers to b iff a =b’, where again the roman letters refer to concepts.
My question, then, is exactly what the signiﬁcance is of the truth—indeed the analytic truth—of these biconditionals:
what do they tell us about truth, satisfaction, and reference? Focusing on truth, what is the concept of truth such that
the disquotational principle holds of it? What is it about truth that makes disquotationalism true? But before I get to
this, I want to make a few remarks about competing theories of truth and how they run afoul of the disquotational
property of truth.
It can be quickly seen that the classic coherence and pragmatist theories of truth are committed to idealism of some
sort by the disquotational character of truth, and idealism is not something one wants to be commited to just by virtue
of one's analysis of the concept of truth.75 This is because it is facts about beliefs or desires and actions that constitute
truth according to these theories. Thus the coherence theory says that p is true iff the belief that p coheres with other
beliefs, and the pragmatist theory says that p is true iff the belief that p leads to the satisfaction of desires or to
successful
88
TRUTH
75 I mean here, not the nature of truth, but the meaning of the word ‘true’. Possibly, as some have argued, notably Michael Dummett, the nature of truth dictates an ‘antirealist’
conception of the world. I am not intending to rule this out here (though I have criticized it elsewhere: see my Knowledge and Reality ); my point here is that the ordinary sense of
the word ‘true’ should not dictate an idealist philosophy—on pain of making idealism excessively easy to establish.

action. But now if we substitute in these biconditionals the disquoted sentence licensed by the disquotation principle
we get the result that facts about the world are constituted by beliefs and desires. For example, we start by saying: ‘the
belief that snow falls from the sky is true iff the belief that snow falls from the sky coheres with one's other beliefs’.
Then, by disquotation, we can substitute to derive the following: ‘snow falls from the sky iff the belief that snow falls
from the sky coheres with one's other beliefs’. But this makes snow's falling from the sky consist in something about
one's beliefs—which is a form of idealism. Snow could surely fall from the sky even if there were no beliefs in the
world to cohere with each other. So the biconditional cannot possibly express an analytic truth, and it needs to if it is to
claim to be a deﬁnition of truth. Similarly for the pragmatist theory: it makes snow's falling from the sky consist in a fact
about human desires and actions—which it does not. To say that snow falls from the sky is not, failing idealism, to say
that the corresponding belief coheres with other beliefs or that it leads to desire satisfaction. There is simply no analytic
connection here.
That was the simple way to make the point, but it is open to a natural reply: why not make the two theories conditional
on the existence of beliefs and desires? Thus we might say: ‘given that there is the belief that snow falls from the sky,
that belief is true iff it coheres with other beliefs’, and similarly for the pragmatist theory. Then we only get the result
that, given the existence of an appropriate belief, snow falls from the sky iff the belief that it does coheres with other
beliefs—and this does not commit us to idealism. No longer are we making the existence of the fact depend upon the
existence of the corresponding belief. But this only postpones the problem, because we are still saying that snow's
falling from the sky consists in the coherence of beliefs, or the satisfaction of desires—and these are still mental facts. We
are still committed to supposing that snow cannot fall from the sky unless there is coherence among beliefs or
satisfaction of desires—even though we have made the disquotational biconditionals conditional on the
TRUTH
89

existence of beliefs and desires. Of course, proponents of these theories often had an idealist agenda; what I am saying
is that this is built right into their theory of truth, once we take notice of disquotation. And we surely don't want
idealism to follow directly from our deﬁnition of truth alone.76
The correspondence theory has a different kind of problem. Suppose we say, ‘p is true iff p corresponds to the fact
that p’. Then the question is why it is only the fact that p that p corresponds to, and not, say, the fact that not-p. For
example, we naturally say, ‘the proposition that snow falls from the sky corresponds to the fact that snow falls from the
sky’, taking the correspondence relation to relate that proposition to that fact and to that fact alone. But why not say
that there is another correspondence relation that relates the proposition that snow does not fall from the sky to the
fact that snow does fall from the sky? There surely is such a relation: it is the relation, not of truth-maker, but of falsity-
maker. For any truth-making correspondence relation there is a falsity-making relation—the one that maps facts onto
the negations of the propositions that they make true. So we can say that the proposition that snow does not fall from
the sky corresponds to the fact that snow does fall from the sky—in the sense that there is a mapping from fact to
proposition according to the making-false rule. Just as there is a function from facts to true propositions, so there is a
function from facts to false propositions. But clearly that is not the correspondence relation we need when we afﬁrm
the correspondence theory of truth: we need the correspondence relation that takes us from propositions to their truth-
makers, not their falsity-makers. So let us amend the theory as follows: ‘p is true iff p corresponds to a fact that makes
p true (not false)’. But of course now this is blatantly circular, since it uses the concept of truth on the right-hand side.
The trouble is that the neutral notion of correspondence lets propositions and facts stand in the wrong kinds of
90
TRUTH
76 In any case, my main point is that such theories of truth are committed to idealism, like it or not.

relations to serve the purposes of the correspondence theory; but if we tie the correspondence relation down in the
right way we have to stipulate that it is the relation that holds when a fact makes a proposition true—which uses the
concept of truth again. Correspondence has to be understood as truth-making correspondence or else it won't work.
This explains the air of triviality that surrounds the correspondence theory, and hence its apparent undeniability: it
implicitly builds the idea of truth into the notion of correspondence. Of course, if we read the correspondence theory
as simply a windy way of asserting disquotationalism, then there is no problem; but if the notion of correspondence is
to do real work then we cannot avoid the question which sort of correspondence—and it will have to be deﬁned as the
truth-making kind.77 But there is no interest in a theory that says ‘p is true iff p corresponds to the fact that p in such a
way that that fact makes p true’. To put the point more generally: if we say that p is true iff pR x, for some relation R
and entity x, then we need to know that R maps p onto the right x, since there are many relations that map
propositions onto entities (e.g. the proposition that snow falls from the sky maps onto the fact that I am sitting at my
desk, since there is the relation of being typed by a person sitting at a desk that relates that proposition to that fact). But
what is it that selects the relation that intuitively constitutes the truth of the proposition in question? If we say it is the
truth-making relation, we have a circle; but it is hard to see what else we can say to avoid this circle. Certainly the
correspondence theorist owes us an answer to this question or else his theory is quite unexplanatory.
TRUTH
91
77 Other types of theory have advertised themselves as correspondence theories—those that make use of a notion of representation, by way of either the reference of terms or
the expression of states of affairs by whole sentences. I am not trying to dismiss all
such theories by means of the argument given in the text; I am speaking only of
correspondence theories that invoke a correspondence relation between sentences and facts in the way speciﬁed. I have no objection to invoking reference relations in giving
truth conditions; nor am I objecting to theories that say such things as that a statement is true if and only if the world is as it is represented as being.

In the light of these problems, and many others I have not mentioned, but which are only too familiar, we do well to
explore the prospects of the disquotational theory. Maybe registering the disquotationality of truth is all we need to say
about truth to have a satisfactory account of its nature. This is a view that has been widely held and I am very
sympathetic to it; but I think that the real import of the view has never been properly articulated—the task to which I
now turn.
There has been a standing tendency to suppose that the right and left sides of ‘p is true iff p’ express the same
proposition, that they say the same thing. This has fuelled a number of conceptions of truth that go by such names as
‘the redundancy theory’, ‘the reassertion theory’, ‘the pseudo-property/predicate theory’, ‘the disappearance theory’.
The thought behind these slogans is obvious: if ‘p is true’ and ‘p’ express the same proposition, then the former
expresses no more than the latter, and the latter contains no predicate whatsoever that is applicable to propositions.
The concept of truth gets swallowed up by the proposition to which we apply it. Thus we get the idea that to apply this
concept to a proposition is simply to afﬁrm the proposition, that ‘true’ is redundant, that it does not express a genuine
property, that it disappears under analysis. To use the concept of truth is just an indirect way to say something you can
say without it—something not about propositions but about what propositions are about. When I say that the
proposition that snow falls from the sky is true I am simply saying something about snow, namely that it falls from the
sky; the reference to a proposition cancels out, as does the impression of a special kind of property expressed by ‘true’.
Truth is simply a way to go from outside a proposition to inside it (so to speak)—a device of semantic descent:
disquotation entails disappearance. My argument will be that this thesis is mistaken: disquotation does not entail
disappearance. If we call the disappearance thesis ‘thin disquotationalism’, then my own position
92
TRUTH

can be called ‘thick disquotationalism’: disquotation with a robust truth property.
What I primarily want to claim is that the left side expresses something logically stronger than the right side, so that
they cannot be synonymous. The ﬁrst reason for saying this is straightforward and I think uncontroversial, though its
implications are sizeable (as I shall argue): the logical form and ontological commitments of the left are different from
those of the right. The left side has the logical form ‘F a’, a one-place predicate ‘true’ attached to a singular term for a
proposition (or other truth-bearer); whereas the right—though it may have this logical form—typically does not. The
left refers to a proposition and thus is ontologically committed to such, while the right makes no such reference and
has no such commitment: it refers to snow and whiteness and suchlike things.78 Therefore they cannot express the
same proposition: for if propositions p and q have different logical forms and different ontological commitments, then
they cannot be the same proposition. The plain fact is that the left side ascribes a property to something that the right
does not; as I would put it, the left contains a predicate that denotes a property that the right does not contain, even
implicitly. Thus the left has entailments that the right does not have; it is logically stronger in that it entails the right
while entailing other propositions that the right does not entail. And this already shows that adding the truth predicate
to a language expands the expressive power of that language; it increases the entailments of the language. As Tarski
would put it, the
TRUTH
93
78 What about formulating the disquotational biconditional with an operator-like truth concept, as in ‘it is true that p iff p ’, where ‘true’ does not (allegedly) occur as a predicate
at all? Two problems with this: (i) it is not clear that ‘true’ fails to be a predicate here, since ‘that p ’ is naturally interpreted as a singular term; and (ii) we need a grammatical
truth predicate to capture general statements about truth, as in ‘everything the Pope says is true’. If we want to view instances of the truth schema as instances of such
generalizations, as they seem to be, then we need a suitable predicate. Besides, the predicate version of the schema is clearly just as correct as the (putative) operator version.

metalanguage is always logically stronger than the (truth-free) object-language.79
Second, there seem to be cases in which the right side does not entail the left. Take any example of a proposition that
suffers from truth-value gaps, according to your philosophical predilections—ﬁctional propositions, counterfactuals,
ethical propositions, vague propositions. Now it is not that I am myself particularly wedded to truth-value gaps for
these types of propositions; my point is that the very concept of a proposition does not seem to imply that substituting
it into the truth schema yields a truth.80 Consider the sentence ‘the proposition that Sherlock Holmes is a detective is
true iff Sherlock Holmes is a detective’. Can't we quite comfortably afﬁrm that Holmes is a detective without having to
be committed to the claim that this proposition is true? For it to be straightforwardly true, ‘Holmes’ would have to refer
to something real, but it does not, so the proposition cannot be true. There is nothing to make this proposition true,
but it still seems to be a proposition; even if it cannot be properly asserted, it can at least occur as the antecedent of a
conditional, so it can function propositionally. Or consider the view that ‘the king of France is bald’ is neither true nor
false and yet expresses a proposition; if so, what propositions bearing the properties of truth or falsity does this
proposition imply? It seems to imply nothing about the truth or falsity of itself; certainly it does not imply that it is
true—if it did it would imply its own falsity, since it is not true (and not false either)! Propositions suffering from truth-
value gaps cannot entail that they are true propositions, so they cannot entail the left side of a truth schema in which
they occupy the right side. Most propositions are true or false, so this disparity does not show up in their case—we can
94
TRUTH
79 Note that Paul Horwich, for one, unhesitatingly accepts this point about the logical form of the truth schema: see Truth , 38. Whether he sees that admitting this casts doubt
on minimalism is less clear; witness his remark: ‘it is not part of the minimalist conception to maintain that truth is not a property’ (p. 38).
80 Dummett makes this point about truth-value gaps and the disquotational schema in ‘Truth’.

generally say ‘if p, then p is true’. But this does not seem to be guaranteed by the very idea of a proposition, so it is not
analytically the case that, for all propositions p, if p, then p is true. The notion of truth is more demanding than the
mere notion of proposition—of what can be intelligibly said. We want to leave conceptual room for the idea of
propositional speech acts that fail of truth and falsity. Calling a proposition true elevates it above merely uttering it. So
there is no entailment from the right to the left of an arbitrary instance of the truth schema.81
Let us agree, then, that the left side is richer expressively than the right; and let us agree that ‘true’ really does express a
property, just as much as any other meaningful predicate expresses a property. The truth predicate of a language is a
genuine semantic predicate, ascribing the property of truth to what instantiates it. Now the point I want to insist upon
is that this is consistent with the thesis that truth operates disquotationally. I want to put together these two claims—that
truth is a robust property, and that it is disquotationally deﬁnable—and ask what conception of truth emerges. Here,
then, without further ado, is the essence of the concept of truth: truth is a property whose application conditions can
be stated without making reference to that property—moreover, it is the only property of which this can be said. Let us
accordingly say that truth is a self-effacing property in the foregoing sense. The ﬁrst part of the claim that truth is self-
effacing is easy to grasp: the right side gives a necessary and sufﬁcient condition for truth to apply to a proposition but
it makes no reference whatever to the property of truth—the application conditions of ‘true’ are given without alluding
to the property this predicate denotes in any way. We must be careful to understand this claim correctly: the
TRUTH
95
81 There is, however, an entailment from the left to the right, which I take to be the heart of the disquotational analysis of truth. But since the entailment is only one way (though
analytic in some sense) the schema cannot express an equivalence or synonymy, and hence cannot be used to underwrite a redundancy theory of truth. My overall position
could be put by saying that the left-to-right entailment is what captures the essence of truth, once this is combined with the admission that the left is stronger than the
right—that is what I mean by ‘thick disquotationalism’.

claim is not the trivial one that the application conditions of ‘true’ can be given in other words or in other concepts.
Obviously, we can give the application conditions of ‘bachelor’ in other words, like ‘unmarried male’, and obviously
too we can give the application conditions of ‘water’ by using the concept H
2O. But in these cases we are still referring
to the same property we started out with, though using other words to refer to that property. My point is not that ‘true’
can be non-circularly deﬁned—for that is true of many concepts. It is that truth can be deﬁned without even making
reference to the property ‘true’ denotes—or using any predicate equivalent to it. That is what is special about the
disquotation principle: it explains truth without referring to it in any way, under any description.82 As we might put it, a
shade paradoxically, truth applies to a proposition in virtue of something other than itself. I also claim, and will soon
argue, that only truth is self-effacing in this sense, so that we can deﬁne truth as ‘the self-effacing property’ and pick it
out uniquely. More exactly, I will argue that no other property sustains disquotation: only truth allows the kind of
semantic descent it warrants.
I am now in a position to spell out the essence of the disquotational nature of truth as I see it. There are two parts to
this: First, truth is a property of a proposition from which one can deduce the fact stated by the proposition.83 Second,
it is the only such property.
96
TRUTH
82 This is quite unlike the classic coherence, pragmatist, and correspondence theories, which all seek to analyse ‘true’ by means of some predicate deemed to be intensionally or
extensionally equivalent to ‘true’. That is why the right side of such analyses always contains a reference to the proposition mentioned on the left side. Seeing that this is the
wrong format to explain truth is really the central insight of the disquotational conception: this conception differs in the logical form of its analysis, not just in the substance of
it.
83 This is shorthand for: truth is a property of a proposition from which one can deduce that the state of affairs represented by the proposition is a fact. Of course, not all
propositions state facts, since not all are true. Rather, if a proposition is true, then the state of affairs it represents is a fact. No heavy ontology of facts is intended by this
formula; it is just a convenient way to say that if p is true then one can deduce that p , for any proposition p. To say that one can infer from the truth of ‘snow falls from the
sky’ that it is a fact that snow falls from the sky is just to say that from that premiss one can infer that snow falls from the sky. This is what I mean by talking of inferring facts
from propositions with the aid of truth. I am merely locating the disquotational property of truth in an epistemic context.

Together: truth is that (unique) property of a proposition from which one can deduce the fact stated by the
proposition. In other words, truth is the only property of a proposition which entails the fact that makes the
proposition true. Propositions can have many properties—they can be believed, justiﬁed, denied; they can entail other
propositions; they have constituent structure—but none of these properties entails the very fact stated by the
proposition. They entail other facts, to be sure, but not the fact stated. This point is really quite self-evident: If you
know that p is true you can thereby deduce that p. But if you merely know that p is believed or justiﬁed you cannot
deduce that p—though you may be able to deduce some other proposition q. It is as if the property of truth enables
you to look through the proposition right to the fact it states. In saying that truth is disquotational we are saying that it
is reality-implying in this sense.84 By knowing that truth applies to a proposition you come to know, not just facts about
propositions, but facts about the world. And this is a remarkable thing once one takes the measure of it: who would have
thought that there is a property propositions have that points beyond them to the extra-propositional facts? All the
other properties of propositions stay at the level of propositions—whether they are believed or justiﬁed or entail other
propositions or what elements make them up. But there is this one property that takes us outside propositions and
down into the world beyond them. And this is directly related to the self-effacing character of truth: because its
conditions of satisfaction make no reference to it, but only to objects and properties in the world, via the non-semantic
right side of the truth schema, we can infer worldly facts from the application of ‘true’ to propositions. If the
satisfaction conditions of this property were correctly stated by referring to it, then we would still be at the level of
propositions; but because it is self-effacing in the way it is we can
TRUTH
97
84 This is my gloss on Quine's ‘No sentence is true but reality makes it so’, quoted in n. 1 . As he later remarks, ‘By calling the sentence [“snow is white”] true, we call snow
white’ (Philosophy of Logic , 12).

move from its application to a proposition to a fact about the world. It is not that ‘true’ expresses no property, so that
‘p is true’ means ‘p’; rather, it expresses a genuine property that has the characteristic of being self-effacingly fact-
implying. This is not then a trivial result of a synonomy, as it would be if we thought both sides of the schema said the
same thing, but a substantive fact about a real property.85
How does it work with falsity? Falsity is not, strictly speaking, disquotational: we have the schema ‘p is false iff not-p’,
and the right side is not a disquotation of the left, since it contains ‘not’ and p lacks this word. But we can easily modify
the rule to accommodate this: if a proposition has the property of falsity, then you can deduce its negation—if you
know that p is false, then you thereby know that not-p. Falsity is simply disquotation plus negation. When you know
that a proposition has this property you can deduce the opposite fact to the one it states—so we have the same semantic
descent and world-directedness for falsity too. And we can similarly assert that falsity is the only property of a
proposition that licenses the inference to the negation of the fact it states (or purports to state).
Let us now consider some alleged counter-examples to the uniqueness claim. We should note that this claim is crucial
if we are to have deﬁned the notion of truth, since if truth is not the only disquotational property then this property
does not individuate truth. (No one ever seems to concern themselves with establishing the uniqueness claim, being
content to show that truth is disquotational—but this is clearly not enough if we are to have succeeded in ﬁxing upon
what distinguishes truth from all other concepts.) Consider then the concept of knowledge: we have it that if x knows
that p, then p. So knowledge disquotes: you can infer the fact stated by a proposition from the property a proposition
98
TRUTH
85 Clearly, if the two sides were synonymous, then the inference would simply be an instance of ‘p entails p’—we can infer a proposition from itself. I am saying, quite differently,
that if we know that p is true we can infer that p , where premiss and conclusion are distinct propositions.

has of being known. Similarly for the property of following from something true, or the property of being believed by
an infallible God. These are all distinct properties from truth, it may be said, but they all license the inference I am
saying is distinctive of truth: so how can truth be uniquely disquotational? I take it the answer to this question is
obvious: each of these properties includes or embeds the notion of truth, and it is this embedded truth element that is
doing all the disquotational work. Knowledge, omniscience, and entailment-by-a-truth all imply that the proposition in
question is true. So these are no more counter-examples to the uniqueness claim than the property of being both true
and written in red ink is.86
Yet it does not seem self-evident that no other property could license disquotation. Take the property of being
intelligible as applied to propositions. Certainly we cannot infer that grass is green from the fact that the proposition
that grass is green is intelligible. But what about a proposition that says of itself that it is intelligible—the proposition
expressed by the self-referential sentence ‘the proposition expressed by this sentence is intelligible’? This proposition
does have the property of intelligibility (just about!), and from its having that property we can infer that it is
intelligible—but isn't that exactly what it says? So we can deduce that that proposition is intelligible, which is what it
says, just from the fact that it has the property of intelligibility—we can therefore deduce the fact stated by the
proposition from the property ascribed to the proposition. The proposition states that it has the property of
intelligibility, and we can infer this fact from the knowledge that it has the property of intelligibility. Or consider the
sentence ‘this sentence is written in English’. That sentence has the property of being written in English, so we can
trivially infer that it is written in English: but that is what the sentence says; so we
TRUTH
99
86 Indeed, these alleged counter-examples are all analysable as conjunctions in which truth is one conjunct; truth is a necessary condition for each of the complex concepts in
question.

can infer the fact it states from the knowledge that it has the property of being written in English. Or suppose I have a
belief that is realized in my brain by state S, and suppose this belief has that very content—that it is realized in my brain
by state S. Then the fact stated by the proposition I believe can be inferred from the property my belief has of being
realized by state S. So here we have three cases in which there is a convergence between the property possessed by a
proposition and the fact it states.
But I hope it is obvious that these contrived cases are extremely special and do not really threaten the claim I am
making. My claim is that for any proposition truth licenses the inference in question; no matter which proposition you
choose you can always make this move. But the properties just contrived are not such that for any proposition they
permit the move—the move works only in these strange self-referential cases. It is not in general true that intelligibility,
being-written-in-English, and being realized by a particular brain state allow one to infer the fact stated by the
propositions or sentences with these properties. In the vast majority of cases such an inference would be lamentably
off the mark.87 So these are not counter-examples to the general claim I am making—that truth always permits the
inference and nothing else has this power. Still, the putative counter-examples may serve to indicate why it is that my
claim may not seem totally self-evident, since there is a kind of local violation of it in special cases of self-reference.
The uniqueness claim is not trivial, though it is I think virtually unassailable. In fact, I think it is sufﬁciently obvious
that no one (to my knowledge) has ever thought to defend it before—or even to formulate it explicitly. But it does
need to be made explicit and evaluated, as I have done here, if we are to
100
TRUTH
87 Obviously, establishing the truth of a proposition generally requires more than scrutinizing the proposition and employing logical reasoning; we have to investigate the subject-
matter of the proposition. So the examples cited in the text are quite different from standard cases. Truth is reality-implying because knowledge of truth is reality-involving,
one might say.

assure ourselves that we have captured the essence of what truth distinctively is.
It might help to bring out the role of the concept of truth if we try to imagine doing without it. Imagine being a
member of a community of propositional beings who think and communicate but have no concept of truth. Someone
says something to you and you register it, but you cannot apply the concept of truth to what is said. It seems, in these
circumstances, as if you are in no position to form beliefs about the world as a result of what people say to you: all you
know is that the speaker said that p, not that p is true. You cannot disquote on p and hence form beliefs about the
world as a result of testimony, since you lack the device of disquotation that is the essence of truth. But now suppose
you suddenly acquire the concept of truth, perhaps with the help of a friendly alien. All at once you can apply this
concept to what people say and hence infer facts about the world. If you take what someone says to be true, then you
can infer that p, for some p—you can acquire knowledge of facts. Of course, you can also come to know facts about
the world directly without deploying the concept of truth, as when you simply see (say) that grass is green; in such
cases there is no detour through other people's speech acts. But if you are to acquire knowledge of the world on the
basis of testimony, then you need the truth concept. Truth thus comes into its own when we start using other people's
beliefs to acquire knowledge of the world. This is the pragmatic side of the disquotational property of truth; it explains
why we care about this property, what it does for us. Without the concept of truth we could not learn from others; no
truth, no education.88 Education is one long exercise in
TRUTH
101
88 When I speak of ‘learning’ here I mean making a rational inference from belief-expressing speech acts to propositional knowledge of the world; I don't mean the kind of
learning that results from imitation or conditioning or some such. We can imagine having a mechanism in our heads that causes us to form knowledge of the world as a mere
causal upshot of hearing speech acts, where the concept of truth plays no cognitive role in this process; but this would not be a case of rational inference from speech act to
knowledge. My claim is that this latter is what requires deployment of the concept of truth.

disquotation, using the teacher's beliefs to acquire knowledge of the world, this being mediated by the concept of truth.
Without truth we would be condemned to be complete autodidacts.89
From this point of view, truth is essentially a device of inference. When I learn that a bird is yellow by seeing it I learn
something about that bird, and what I might infer from this is incidental to acquiring that knowledge. But when I learn
by testimony that a proposition is true the interest of this lies in what I can infer from this knowledge, namely the fact
stated by the proposition. When I learn by testimony that the proposition that a certain bird is yellow is true what I
learn is something I infer from this, namely that the said bird is yellow. I make a transition from proposition to world,
and this transition is the whole point of the notion of truth. In saying that truth is a device of disquotation, then, we are
also saying that it is a device of inference—inference to the disquoted form. It is not the mere fact that a proposition is
true that is interesting; it is what can be inferred from this about how the world is that is important. Truth is essentially
a method for deducing facts from propositions.
To bring out how special the inferential powers of truth are, let us formulate these powers abstractly. Suppose you are
told that there is a certain property P such that when P applies to an object x it is logically implied that some other
object y has some distinct property Q; and further that this property P is a non-relational monadic property. This
would be like being told that the property of being yellow is such that when it holds of an object x it logically follows
that some other object y is (say) square. That would
102
TRUTH
89 Let me not be misunderstood: I don't mean autodidact in the sense of someone who is self-taught from books instead of from actual teachers; I mean the idea of acquiring all
one's knowledge ﬁrst-hand, from direct investigation of the world. Obviously, learning from books is an instance of education in the intended sense, and involves the usual
process of disquotation: one reads the sentence, predicates truth of it, and then forms the corresponding belief about the world. You can pick up quite a lot of useful
knowledge this way, and most of it has nothing to do with words and books at all. (I hope my reader has been engaged in the disquotational act steadily throughout this book.)

seem like a very remarkable claim: how can this object's being monadically P possibly imply that that object is
monadically Q? Surely that is impossible: what has the condition of the one object got to do with the condition of the
other, logically speaking? But this is precisely how truth works. From the fact that one object, say the proposition that a
certain bird is yellow, has the property of truth we can deduce that another object, a particular bird, has the property of
being yellow: we can jump between entities and properties using truth as our springboard. Moreover, we are moving
from properties of abstract or linguistic entities to properties of concrete things: and that sounds like saying that the
number 2's being even logically implies that a particular bird is yellow! But that is precisely what truth allows: from the
fact that an abstract proposition has a (non-empirical) property, viz. truth, we can deduce that the world of concrete
objects instantiates certain empirical properties. This should strike us as more remarkable than it does; we are so
familiar with this property of truth that we fail to appreciate how anomalous it is. Truth is not just a device of
disquotation; it is a device of ontological leapfrog—or rather, that is what disquotation really amounts to, properly
understood. Truth forms a logical bridge between the world of propositions and the world of objects and properties; it
enables us to travel from propositions to the objects and properties they are about.90 No other concept can cross this
ontological and deductive gap; truth is the only disquotational concept.
In the light of all this we can now state a ‘deﬁnition’ of the concept of truth, i.e. a condition that truth and only truth
satisﬁes.
TRUTH
103
90 Of course, reference is what mediates the link that takes us from proposition to fact. What truth does is enable us to move from a sentence to a fact by way of the reference of
the terms in the sentence: if we know what ‘snow’ refers to and what ‘white’ refers to, then we can put this together with the knowledge that ‘snow is white’ is true in order to
derive the conclusion that snow is white . Without reference we wouldn't know which fact to infer from a sentence's truth. And of course the involvement of reference here
makes the leapfrogging power of truth perfectly unmysterious (though still remarkable).

Truth is to be deﬁned as that property of a proposition that entails the fact (purportedly) stated by the proposition.
This deﬁnition focuses on the disquotational aspect of truth and is intended to be a reformulation of that idea. But we
can also deﬁne truth by employing the related notion of self-effacement introduced earlier: truth is to be deﬁned as the
self-effacing property, i.e. that unique property whose application conditions can be stated without reference to the
property. Thus we can say ‘p is true iff p has the self-effacing property’ and offer this as a deﬁnition. These deﬁnitions
do not compete with other deﬁnitions, say Tarski's; rather, they home in on certain features of truth, features that
distinguish truth from other concepts. But the deﬁnitions themselves are far less important than grasping the unique
(and remarkable) way that truth operates: it performs the miraculous feat of taking us from language and thought, on
the one hand, to the world of objects and properties, on the other. No other concept has this power: truth is the
adhesive that binds mind and world, to put it metaphorically and portentously. More soberly, when a belief has the
property of truth (as opposed to any other property it might have), then the world is guaranteed to be a certain way, the
way the belief represents it as being. If this remystiﬁes the concept of truth, then so be it.
I shall now discuss the metaphysics of truth more directly. Again, I will be brief and dogmatic. The concept of truth
seems simple in the following sense: it has no conceptual decomposition, and no empirical essence or nature.91 We
cannot analyse it into conceptual constituents, and we cannot expect to discover a hidden underlying empirical
structure for it. Truth is primitive, in this sense (which is not to say that nothing illuminating can be said about the
concept). In this respect, I would say it is like the other logical concepts investigated in this book: identity, existence,
predication, necessity. These concepts form a conceptual bedrock; they stand, as it were,
104
TRUTH
91 See Horwich, Truth , especially ch. 1 .

underneath all our other concepts. They have no analysis.92 But, despite the unanalysability of truth, it is possible to give
a non-circular deﬁnition of the concept. This is peculiar: one would have thought that if a concept was simple and
unanalysable then no account could be given of it in other terms. One would think, that is, that all we could say about
‘true’ is that it applies to a proposition iff that proposition is true. That is surely what one would say about ‘blue’ if one
took this concept to be analogously primitive: ‘blue’ applies to an object iff that object is blue. But the peculiar thing
about truth is that we can deﬁne it by means of the disquotation principle, even though it is primitive. Truth is a simple
unanalysable property that can be deﬁned: that is to say, non-circular necessary and sufﬁcient conditions, of an
analytically warranted kind, can be given for the instantiation of this property by a proposition. This is because truth is
self-effacing: its application conditions can be given without referring to it under any description, and so its
primitiveness does not stand in the way of providing these conditions. Truth is thus both deﬁnable and primitive (in
the sense of having no conceptual decomposition and no underlying empirical nature). It is as if blueness could be the
simple property it is and yet have application conditions given by reference to something quite other than blue objects.
Put simply, the primitive property of truth applies to the proposition that snow falls from the sky in virtue of the fact
that snow falls from the sky—and not in virtue of the proposition meeting some condition
TRUTH
105
92 I mean this in the speciﬁc sense that these concepts have no sort of conceptual decomposition; this is not to say that we can have no theory of them, and indeed I have offered
theories of all these concepts in this book. What I am denying is that these concepts can be deﬁned in any illuminating non-circular way. Similar sentiments are expressed by
Donald Davidson in ‘The Folly of Trying to Deﬁne Truth’, 320: ‘Let me suggest a diagnosis of our aporia about truth. We are still under the spell of the Socratic idea that we
must keep asking for the essence of an idea, a signiﬁcant analysis in other terms, an answer to the question what makes this an act of piety, what makes this, or any, utterance,
sentence, belief, or proposition true. We still fall for the freshman fallacy that demands that we deﬁne our terms as a prelude to saying anything further with or about them.’

that analyses (or simply reuses) the concept of truth. The predicate ‘is true’ holds in virtue of a condition not speciﬁed
by the use of some (intensionally or extensionally) equivalent predicate. Yet it is still itself a genuine predicate standing
for a real property—as much as ‘blue’ is. Therein lies the essential character of the truth concept, making truth an
oddity in our conceptual scheme. Truth is really a very exotic property indeed, when viewed in the right light. And it is
precisely the disquotational aspect of truth that lies behind this oddity. To call the disquotational view ‘deﬂationary’
therefore strikes me as wide of the mark: truth turns out to be very interesting in its workings, not the banality some
people suppose.93 Of course, it would be fair enough to use the term ‘deﬂationary’ if one held that ‘p is true’ says
nothing different from—is synonymous with—‘p’, but we have seen that that is the wrong way to interpret the
disquotational character of truth. Truth becomes interesting precisely when one accepts this principle and yet
recognizes that ‘p is true’ says something stronger than merely ‘p’—in particular, that the former refers to a property
the latter does not refer to. This is why I call the view I am defending thick disquotationalism, unlike the thin
disquotationalism implied by the synonymy thesis. Truth is a substantial, robust property, as thick as any property, not
the disappearing pseudo-property it is sometimes said to be. Or, putting the point in the formal mode, ‘true’ is as
genuine a predicate as ‘blue’ or ‘square’. What makes it unique is that it is a predicate that applies to an object (a
proposition) in virtue of something other than a predicate of that object.
Does any version of supervenience hold for truth? I think it does: if you ﬁx all the non-semantic facts, and you ﬁx all
the propositions, then you ﬁx the application of the truth concept, analytically so. That is, if two possible worlds are
exactly alike in the facts obtaining in them, and they contain the same propositions (which on reasonable assumptions
they will), then exactly the same
106
TRUTH
93 On the doctrine of deﬂationism see Anil Gupta, ‘A Critique of Deﬂationism’, and Hartry Field, ‘Deﬂationist Views of Meaning and Content’.

propositions must be true and false in the two worlds. This is indeed a simple consequence of the disquotational
biconditional, read from right to left. If snow falls from the sky in a world, and there exists the proposition that snow
falls from the sky in that world, then that proposition must have the property of being true in that world. In short, the
truths are supervenient on the facts. Here, supervenience is trivially assured. Yet it would be a mistake to say that truth
is nothing over and above the facts on which it supervenes. Truth does not collapse into facts and propositions, since it
is an irreducible property—though one whose instantiation is ﬁxed by conditions that make no reference to it. Such
supervenience may remind us of a familiar position with respect to moral goodness. G. E. Moore took goodness to be
simple, unanalysable, and non-natural, but he also took it to supervene on the descriptive and natural.94 I would say the
same of the concept of truth, and I would adopt the same kind of realism about truth that Moore adopted for
goodness. The truth property is a constituent of reality as much as blueness or electric charge or goodness is (though it
is what we have been calling a logical property). It is a primitive constituent that nevertheless supervenes on facts that
do not involve the notion of truth.95 But there is a signiﬁcant disanalogy with goodness, namely that there is no
counterpart to the naturalistic fallacy for truth. We cannot deduce that something is good simply from information
about its non-moral properties—there is always a logical gap here. There is always an ‘open question’ as to whether
something is good, given that it has such-and-such descriptive properties. But nothing like this holds of truth with
respect to its supervenience base: you can deduce that p is true given the information that p and the existence of p.
There is no logical gap whatsoever here, thanks to the disquotational biconditional. So the irreducibility of truth does
not result from a
TRUTH
107
94 See Principia Ethica ; also my Ethics, Evil and Fiction , chs. 1
and 2 .
95 Compare the modal and the actual, discussed in Ch. 4 . I defend a similar view of colour as supervenient yet primitive in ‘Another Look at Colour’.

non sequitur analogous to the naturalistic fallacy—there is no fallacy involved in inferring truth from fact. And yet the
property of truth is not reducible to its supervenience base.
Where there is still an analogy with goodness (and the other concepts discussed in this book) is on the ‘non-natural’
status of truth. Truth is not a property that has causal powers or can be perceived by means of the senses; it is an
object of intellectual cognition. It ﬂouts naturalistic epistemology. It is ‘queer’. But, as I remarked earlier, sometimes we
just have to learn to live with the ‘queer’: denial and denigration are not sensible responses. What does seem clear, in
the light of this non-naturalism, is that ‘deﬂationism’ is not remotely the right word for the kind of thick
disquotationalism I have defended, if this is taken to imply that this view of truth is philosophically unproblematic or
somehow ‘tame’. If anything, my conception of truth deserves to be labelled inﬂationary. As I am conceiving it, truth
raises many ontological and epistemological perplexities—but I do not regard this as an objection to the view I am
defending. It is just the way things are.96 Often the right view in philosophy is the one that identiﬁes accurately just
where the problems lie; evading real problems can never be the route to philosophical understanding.
This book has sided with what might be called ‘logical realism’, though that has not been the prime focus of my
enquiries. Generally speaking, the concepts I have discussed have turned out to be more primitive and fundamental
than has commonly been supposed. Reality has its logical properties too—basic, irreducible, real properties. This
position raises many questions, ontological and epistemological, but I believe they are the right questions.
108
TRUTH
96 I take the same kind of view of ethical properties in Ethics, Evil and Fiction , and the general metaphilosophy behind the view is set out in Problems in Philosophy . Ontological
diminishment or evasion is not in general the right response to philosophical perplexity.

Bibliography
Benacerraf, Paul, ‘Mathematical Truth’, in Paul Benacerraf and Hilary Putnam (eds.), Philosophy of Mathematics, 2 nd edn.
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983), 403–20.
Blackburn, Simon, and Simmons, Keith (eds.), Truth (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999).
Davidson, Donald, ‘The Folly of Trying to Deﬁne Truth’, in Blackburn and Simmons, Truth, 308–23.
Dummett, Michael, Frege: Philosophy of Language (London: Duckworth, 1973).
——‘Truth’, in P. F. Strawson (ed.), Philosophical Logic (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1967), 49–69.
Evans, Gareth, The Varieties of Reference (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1982).
Field, Hartry, ‘Deﬂationist Views of Meaning and Content’, in Blackburn and Simmons, Truth, 351–91.
Frege, Gottlob, Basic Laws of Arithmetic, trans. Montgomery Furth, 2 vols. (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of
California Press, 1967).
—— Foundations of Arithmetic, trans. J. L. Austin (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1950).
——‘On Sense and Reference’, in P. Geach and M. Black (eds.), Translations from the Philosophical Writings of Gottlob Frege
(Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1980).
Geach, P. T., Logic Matters (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1972).
Gupta, Anil, ‘A Critique of Deﬂationism’, in Blackburn and Simmons, Truth, 282–308.
Horwich, Paul, Truth (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1990).
Kripke, Saul, ‘Identity and Necessity’, in M. Munitz (ed.), Identity and Individuation (New York: New York University
Press, 1971), 135–64.
—— Naming and Necessity (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1972).
Lewis, David, On the Plurality of Worlds (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1986).
McGinn, Colin, ‘Another Look at Colour’, in McGinn, Knowledge and Reality, 298–313.

McGinn, Colin, ‘A Priori and A Posteriori Knowledge’, in McGinn, Knowledge and Reality, 36–49.
—— Ethics, Evil and Fiction (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1997).
—— Knowledge and Reality (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999).
—— ‘Modal Reality’, in McGinn, Knowledge and Reality, 65–110.
—— Problems in Philosophy (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1993).
——‘Rigid Designation and Semantic Value’, Philosophical Quarterly, 32/127 (Apr. 1982), 97–115.
Moore, G. E., Principia Ethica, rev. edn. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993).
Peacocke, Christopher, ‘Necessity and Truth Theories’, Journal of Philosophical Logic, 7 (1978), 473–500.
Pears, David, ‘Is Existence a Predicate?’, in P. F. Strawson (ed.), Philosophical Logic (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1967), 97–102.
Perry, John, ‘The Problem of the Essential Indexical’, Nous, 13 (1979), 3–21.
——‘The Same F’, Philosophical Review, 79 (1970), 181–200.
Quine, W. V., Philosophy of Logic, 2nd edn. (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1986).
—— Word and Object (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1960).
Russell, Bertrand, ‘The Philosophy of Logical Atomism’, in R. C. Marsh (ed.), Logic and Knowledge (London: George
Allen & Unwin, 1956).
—— The Problems of Philosophy (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1912).
Wiggins, David, ‘The De Re “Must”: A Note on the Logical Form of Essentialist Claims’, in Gareth Evans and John
McDowell (eds.), Truth and Meaning (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1976).
—— Sameness and Substance (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1980).
Wittgenstein, Ludwig, Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, trans. David Pears and Brian McGuinness (London: Routledge &
Kegan Paul, 1961).
110
BIBLIOGRAPHY

Index
analysis of orthodox view of existence 22–3, 24–5; problems
of 27–8
asymmetry between names and predicates 66
‘bare existence’ 28–30
basicness of identity 9–10, 11–12
classic coherence theory of truth 88–9
Cogito 45–7
copula modiﬁer theory 76–9, 80, 81
correspondence theory of truth 90–1
criteria of identity 5–7
deﬁnability of identity 7–9
deﬁnition of identity 7–9
deﬂationism 87
disquotationalism 87–9, 92, 106; disquotational biconditional
107
distinction between sub-types of identity 2–3
distinctness and identity 11, 12–13
entertaining of existence 43
epiphenomenality of modality 86
essentialism 47–8
excluded middle, law of 11
existence:; the Cogito 45–7; deﬁnitional thesis (Russell) 20;
essentialism 47–8; existential quantiﬁer 20, 23, 32–7in-
terpretation of formula 33and use of ‘all’/’some’ 36–7; and
imperceptibility 45; and impossibility 40–1; of individu-
als 25–6; negative existential 43; non-existence 32, 37–8;
not perceptible property of objects 44–5; objections to
orthodox view 21–30‘bare existence’ 28–30instantiation
21–6proof that it cannot be general analysis of notion of
existence 24–6sentences that resist orthodox paraphrase
26–8; Ontological Argument 48–50; ontological status of 17;
ontological thesis (Russell) 19; and possibility 38–40; as a
property 15, 16; semantic/logical thesis (Russell) 19–20
‘exists’:; complement class of
37as predicate 16–17, 37–8,
50–1two sorts of interpretation of 26–8 see also ﬁrst-order
property view
extensions see names; predication
falsity 98
ﬁctional entities 38–40, 42–4
ﬁrst-level extension of names 55–6, 59
ﬁrst-order property view 30–1

112
INDEX
Frege, G.:; and existence 20, 21; and identity 1–2, 4, 6, 8, 12,
13; and predication 67
God 48–50, 99
goodness 108; property of 6n11, 107
Horwich, Paul 94n6
Hume, David 44
idealism and theories of truth 88–90
identicals, indiscernibility of 6, 8, 9
identity:; basicness/fundamentality of
9–10, 11–12, 14;
challenge to Fregean thesis
2–7; criteria of
5–7;
deﬁnability of 7–9; denying that it is unitary 5–7, 13;
and distinctness
11, 12; fundamentality of
11–12, 14;
indeﬁnability of 9, 14; is unitary 1–2, 6, 9, 14; Leibniz’s
law 3, 4, 7, 8, 9, 69; logical properties of 2; as logical
relation 13–14; necessary and contingent 3n5; notion of
property identity 7–8; numerical 2; propositions 13; as
psuedo-relation
12; qualitative
2, 8; self-identity
31;
sortal relativity of statements of 4; statements 9; ubiquity
of 12; universality of 9–10
identity indispensability of 12
imperceptibility 45
impossibility:; and existence 40–1; including/excluding im-
possible worlds 70–4
indeterminacy, semantic 64–5
indiscernibility of identicals 6, 8, 9
indispensability of identity 12
individuals, existence of 25–6
instantiation of properties 17–18, 21–3, 61–3; interlocking
structure of world 61–3; mode of 77–9, 80–1
intelligibility, property of 99–100
intentional entities 17
irreducibility of truth 107–8
iteration of modal locutions 82–3
Kripke, Saul 38, 47
Leibniz’s law 3, 4, 7, 8, 69
make-believe, cognitive acts of 43
Meinongian ontology of nonexistence 37
mistake, characteristic of a 31
modality 69–70, 73–4; copula modiﬁer theory 76–9, 80; de re
and de dicto use of modal words 79; epiphenomenality of
86; iteration of modal locutions 82–3; modal truth
84–5;
modes
83–4; predicate modiﬁer treatment
74–7; in
special ontological category 83
modes 83–4
Moore, G. E. 107
multiple references 66–7
names:; asymmetry between names and predicates 66; non-
referential disquotational axiom for
58–9; second-level
extensions of 56–7

INDEX
113
; singularity and plurality 60–1 see also predication
necessity 69; modality 69–70; quantiﬁers 69–70; use of term
‘necessarily’ 75–7
negation and pseudo-relation 12
negative existential 43
non-contradiction, law of 11
non-existence 32, 37–8, 42–4
non-referential disquotational axiom for names 58–9
‘object’, use of word 35–6
objects:; conceivable 31–2; purely intentional 41–2
Ontological Argument (OA) 48
ontology:; logical 14; Meinongian 33, 37; of properties 56,
58, 60, 62
‘p is true iff p’ 92–6
plurality of objects 10–11
possibility:; and existence 22, 38–40; making a statement of
69
postulation, mistaken 42–4
pragmatist theory of truth 88–90
predication:; asymmetry between names and predicates 66;
‘Bertrand Russell’ as example
55–7; denotational ap-
proach to predicates 57–8; identity and distinctness in
10–11; natural property vs. standard extension view 53–5;
predicate modiﬁer treatment 74–7; predicate reference
52–3; predicates and extensions
52, 54; properties
53;
semantics of 53; singular term view of predicates 65–6;
singularity and plurality
60–1; truth
87–8; universal
predicates 31 see also names
pronominal anaphora 11
property:; of all existent things
28–30; ﬁrst-order property
view 30–1; identity of 7–8; instantiation of 17–18, 24–5;
of intelligibility
99–100; logical properties
31; name
‘Bertrand Russell’ as example 55–7; notion of 15–16; and
purely intentional objects 41–2; self-effacing
95–6; of
truth 95–6; uniqueness of a 29–30
proposition, truth as property of a 96–8, 104
quantiﬁers 69–70; intentional 33–4; interpretation of existen-
tial 32–7; quantiﬁcational treatment of modal terms 73–4
see also individual quantiﬁers e.g. ‘some’
Quine, W. V. 10, 52, 63, 64, 65, 67, 87n1
references for predicate 52–3; multiple 66–7
reﬂexivity of identity 2, 6
relativity of statements of identity, sortal 4–5
Russell, Bertrand:; structure of existential fact 18–21, 25 three
sub–theses of 19–20
‘same’, meaning of term 4

114
INDEX
Satan 49
second-level extension of names 56–7, 59–60, 62, 63–4
second-order variables 7
self-identity 31
semantics:; epistemic considerations 64–5; extensional 55–7,
64, 68; indeterminacy 64–5; modal words as copula modiﬁers
81–2; possible worlds 70; Tarskian 57–9, 82
sentences:; quantiﬁed
60, 69; sentence operator theory
79–80; that resist orthodox paraphrase (existence) 26–8
singular statements, analysis of 9, 18
‘some’, use of term 34–7
sortal dependence of identity 4–5
‘state of affairs’, use of term 72–3
supervenience 106–7
symmetry of identity 2, 6
Tarski, A. 57–9, 82, 93–4
topic-neutrality 13–14
Tractatus Logico–Philosophicus (Wittgenstein) 12
transitivity of identity 2, 6
truth:; classic coherence theory of
88–9; correspondence
theory of
90–1; counter-examples to uniqueness of
98–100; ‘deﬁnition’ of concept of 103–4, 105; as device of
inference
102–3; and disquotationalism
87–9, 96–8,
105–6; essence of concept of 95; and falsity 98; irreducibility
of 107–8; metaphysics of 104–8; modal 84–5; pragma-
tist theory of
88–90; role of concept of
101–2; and
supervenience 106–7; theories based on proposition ‘p is
true iff p’
92; unanalysability of 105; uniqueness of
97–101
truth condition:; availability of second-level extensions 63–4;
disquotational 59, 87–9; and impossible worlds 71–2;
inverted rule for 55–6; ontological structure underlying
equivalence of 62; of singular propositions 22–3
ubiquity of identity 12
uniqueness:; problem of securing 24; of truth 97–101
universality of identity 9–10
universality of property of existence 16
variable-binding 11
Wittgenstein, Ludwig 12, 41
‘world’, use of term 72–3

